FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10602
1 JUNE 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM
FOUO 3/82

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/1060:
21 June 198:

WORLDWIDE REPORT
Teaaoatsn
9000 3/82

CONTENTS

NEAR EAST AID NORTH AFRICA

mm muss ‘

List of 'Arnanian Revolutionary Operations'
(WA. App” 82)....OOIOOOOIQOOOIOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Clandestine Radio on Assassination Attemt
(Voice of Lebanese Arnenisns, 9 Apr 82)..

Clandestine Radio Co-ents on People's Support For ASALA
(Voice of Lebanese Annenians. 22 Apr 82).....................

Clandestine Radio Urges Amenians to 'Arise'
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 22 Apr 82)..

Clandestine on 2h April Posters in BurJ Bamud
(Voice of Lebanese Arnenians, 22 Apr 82).

Clandestine Reports 2h April Denmstrations
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians. 2h Apr 82)....................

ASALA Calls on International Public Opinion
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 21‘ Apr 82)..

Clandestine Radio on ABALA Call to Stuggle
(Voice of Lebanese Amnians. 2!: Apr 82).....................

Clandestine on French Minister's Statement
(Voice of Lebanese Arnenisns, 27 Apr 82)

Clandestine Condemns Destruction of 2'. April Posters
(Voice of Lebanese Amnians, 27 Apr 82).....................

Clandestine Opposes Arnenian Inisration
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 29 Apr 82).....................
IOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

Clandestine Radio Assails 'Reacticnaries'
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians. 29 Apr 82)....

Clandestine on Cypriot Parliament Decision
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 1 My 82)

Armenian Clandestine Assails Western Media
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 1 May 82)............

Clandestine on Turkish Diplomst's Assassinatia.
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 6 May 82).

ASALA Leader on Arm Smuggling
(Voiceof Lebanese Armenians, 6 May 82)

ASALA Asks for Assistance Hon Armenian SSR
(Voice of Lebanese Amnias, 7 M 82).

Jordanian Committees Support ASALA
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, T May 82).....

Workers League Advocates ASALA-Arab Front
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 7 May 82).

Bahrain Popular front Supports ABALA
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, T May 82)

Km'dish Revolutignary Committees Support ASALA
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 8 May 82)...................

Clandestine on Franc-t. Socialist Party Announcement
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians. ll May 82)

Clandestine Raiio on Armenian Popular Movements
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians. 18 May 82).

Clandestine Calls For Revolutionary Struggle
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians, 19 May 82).

ASAJ.A's Clandestine 'Voice of Manese Armeniims' Repon
(Voice of Lebanese Armenians,various dates)

0n Madiro DJamgochian's Letter
On South American Armenians
End to Disputes Urged

Briefs
Amenians Party Cltb Activity
Killings in Bur.) Hammund
Anti-Turkey Poster
Murder Attempt on ABALA Member
Turkish Center Closures in Jordan

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL LB! om
FOR OFFICIAL 1.53 ONLY

WEST EUROPE

FEDERAL REPLBLIC 0F GEMANY

SPAIN

Alleged Yugoslav Agents Murder Plots Subject of Trial
(DIE BIT, T W 82)ooooa...aooaoooaoosooaaooooﬁoeooout

Communiques of ETA To Basque People
(zlzm’ 1981) IOOOOOOIIOOOO0.00000IIOIOOUOOIOOIDOO..00.

ETA-M Leadership, Organization Outlined
(mac, 2!. Jan 82)

ETA Tries To Reorganize, by A. Semprun Gtﬂlen

BIA Organization, Leadership, by Pilar Urbano
Fighters for Democracy, by Carlos Devils

Admiral Orkunt Writes on Armenian Terrorism
(Sezai Orkunt; TERCUMAN, 12-15 May 82).................

ASALA, High-level Officials Linked To Smuggling Ring
(Kamil Basaran; HURRIYET, 9 May 82).

Columist Alleges Soviet Instigation of Armenian Terrorism
(Ergun Goze; TERCUMAR, 10 May 82)......................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AWIAN AFFAIRS

L191 01’ 'ARHBNIAN REVOLUTIONARY OPERATIONS'
Beirut [1] ARMENIA in Armenian, English, Arabic, French Apr-May 82 pp 52-55

[List of Operations of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia
from 1 January 1980 to 31 Decoder 1981]

[Text]
1- Ian/‘9” Janice co-ndoe to: the u»
Ienien Genocide Grout), hosting
of Diana Bebenn mum in
mu, mminl dome.

2- 12/1/1989 Juuce We to: the An-
neninn Genocide Out-p, to.“
or Ieu Get-en mm in»

3- 12/1/1900 Janice Woe to: the us
union Genocide Om, boom
oi’ ariueh Aime, 1 wooded
end uteri“ due, in Me.

4- 18/2/19” Juoeioe Oo-nudoe to: the Ar-
union Genocide Group, boom
01‘ Ierueli :1 A1 Aitlinee in
Bone, 3 ended I mtetiel den-

‘6.-

5- 26/2/1900 Junior Goon-Moe for the u-
neninn Genocide Group, boom
of due-nix- in Bone. 1 wounded
& n: rill den-3e.

5- 13/2/1980 Juan We to: the Ar-
neni‘: Genocide Oren), honking
of test den-n Liﬂhnnee Air-
Zinee in lime. mum: dense.

:- 10/3/1980 Merm- am: 1mm eon-nan.
bosom; 0: Mn»: Airline. in
lose. 2 deed t 11 Iounded.

o- ash/19m ma April an"h M. no.
ket etuok ox tux-non coneuleu
in meeme.

9- 31/7/t9w lonken Ynniﬂnn cone-nee, on
“teen on Tux-hen diploma end
(“in in Am. 2 deed d 2
”MCdo

FOR omcum use ONLY
10- 5/0/19”

11- 26/9/N

12- 3/10/00

v!

1}- 5/10/00

10- 3/10/00

15- 4/10/00

16- 6/ 10/00

17-12/10/W.-

15-12/10/80

19-12/10/80

20-10/11/60

2141/11/00

22-19/11/00

23-11/1U80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yunnan & Suoounnn Conn-noon,
poo-tutu: uul ottock 0t Turb-
loo cum“. 1.0 1.700, a wound.

um: um 24“, 00-01100, gun
ottaox on turn-h “plant an
M0, wound“ haul).

Ammo Organization for and
Strugglo Group, mum 0: Mi-
tch Alt-non u mono. nus-m

“II...

21" con-ado in Run”, hum
of new»; 1.11 mm», nor. can
1 ulllon dollar. «also.

Explosion u a canon 3101.01, 2
cunt“ cocoon.

21” con-Mo 111 Mp0, ham

0: anus. to that“. one woun-
ded L tutorial m0.

Ila-tar Rum 3:11:11 comm,
Ito-bu; ox Turn-h Conoulou an
1.00 ma... tutorial dun-‘0.

Anonhqﬁuluco mutt", bol-
up; 0: 20:11.10): 'i‘nvol n In. An-
gelou. ntcrlJ Lingo.

mom Jutlco Count“, 00.-
bua of Turkish 1:10.10: to 1.110
United :3 1.10M 1n Sn York. 35
wounded I: lateral don-co.

Anti-m; huh: con-undo, balm
of Turn-l1 Alrllnu 1.: 1001100,

nun-ml cameo.

Ass.“ Unit and an out, 30-0103
at much con-unto tn amateurs,
n.2hl don‘t.

$1.1 Unit mm m nut, 00.01.05
0: mush mm. 10 Rollo. ult-
oran. «use.

Alox renunciation 00310360, boo-
hun‘ 0: Turkish Airlines in 30-0,
00-0 wound“.

no: tomb-own: M. 3111
3303.811 much “plant 21 80-0.

3331 02mm: -

21-13/1/1901

25- 0/3/1981

26-12/3/1901

Ala 10mm 00mm,
“momma utt-pt on furi-
uh “plant. Ln Porto. mun
voundcd.

Shah-n $010.11 81110“. col-undo,
Anonnn pooplo'o Judy-0m ox-
ocuua on 2 much uncut.
(0: :12) in Parts.

Attupt to tab-on: mu»: 5-

27- 3/6/1981

20- 9/6/1981

29-16/9/1961

30-24/9/1981

31- 15/10/01

1- 0/10/1980
3- 8/10/19”
)- 8/10/19”

4- 9/10/1900
5-12/10/19w
6-12/10/1980

1-20/10/1900
8.23/10/1900
3- 4/11/1980

10-9/11/1980

11-25/11/1900
12-15/12/1980

19-25/12/1900
14-29/12/1900

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be": in tun-u. 2 gun-do 8111011
t 2 team capture (later nurtu-
rod by tho "not: 31 mm
Boat-o). ..

Anomu Pooplo'o Wat-Mutton,
gun attack on turn-h nylon“ 13
_coponl1o5u, and]; wounded.

Antrung rub Buleldo mm.
mama pooplo'o amount 0&-
touted on mush ”co-consul u
Gonna, 1 1011311 capturod.

Ill-tn My Mk)!“ 00mm,
00-010; of Mun: All-11.no- 1.11
Copenhagen. 1 do“ a 00-0 Ioundod.

"Von Operation", hum. loom-Mu
Suicide Mo, into-our at tho '
frurldoh Consulate 10 Put. tor 15
bou.o

2‘“ or sum-m auto“. M,
gun attack 0:1 mm 00001111 000-
roury u loco, «plant haul;
wounded I 1 {.6011 round.

mm; or Swin- hhuq 1.0
Donut.

Dent-1101100 of am. nut-“03%
house an “nut.

30.01.03 0: on: of tho 3m.
“to: secretory in Donut.

Eli-blag of smut:- 13 some.
Dam 01‘ 8'1““: u: 103603.

30:01:14; 0: sun burnt Inter-
ntson 022100 In hr“.

Daub on tum to tutu-m
Sutton-ad.

noun»; or Swlu eon-mt 1.0
nor-01.110.

Two bomb. 089101100 1.0 the nun
dc Justice or 6000".

but: uctaol. or the 5111-0 hurt-t
womuon ornoo Ind smu-
tn am.

30.01.05 of an» hunk 1.3 Bonn.

noon-wan of am. hurt“ Inton-
utlon 03100 no unnu- to
10“”.

mm or lunch All-port nut.

Mun. mm of “A CM 8m
a ham.
15-30/12/1980
16-27/1/1981
17-21/1/1981
18-3/271981
19-6/2/1981
20-20/8/1981
21-22/8/1981
Operations of
1-26/6/1981
2-28/6/1981
3-1/7/1981
4-1917/1981
5-20/7/1981
6-21/7/1981
7-22/7/1981
8-22/7/1981
9-11/8/1981
10-20/8/1981
11-16/8/1981
12-27/10/ 1981
l3-3/lll1981
14-3-11/1981
15-3-11/1981

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bombing of Credit-Suisse in Beirut.

Destruction of SwissAir in Hilano.

Destruction of Swiss Consulat in Hilsno.

Bombing of Swiss Consulst in Los Angeles.

Double bombing of IRA and Air France in Paris.
Destruction of Alitalia in Paris.

Bombing of Olympic Airways in Paris.

the June Ninth Organization Until 31 December 1981
Bombing of Swiss bank in Los Angeles.

Bowing of SwissAir in Tehran.

Bombing of SwissAir in Baghdad.

Bombing of Swiss Parliament in Bern.

Destruction of inner department of Zurich Airport.
Destruction of department store in Lausanne.
Destruction of one of the major stations in Geneva.
Destruction of Cornavin, Geneva.

Bombing of SwissAir in Copenhagen.

Bombing of Swiss watch company in Los Angeles.
Bombing of Swiss Embassy in Tehran.

Bombing of Swiss bank in Geneva.

Bombing of SwissAir in Madrid.

Double bombing of Palaia de Justice in Geneva.

Bombing of post office in Geneva.

FOI‘0l1ﬂt1Al.lﬁﬂE(HVLY
Operations of the Orly Organization Until 31 December 1981

1- 12/11/1981
2- 12/11/1981
3- 12/11/1981
4- 13/11/1981

5- 14/11/1981

6- 15/11/1981
7- 15/11/1981
8- 15/11/1981
9- 15/11/1981
10-15/11/1981
11-15/11/1981
12—16/11/1981

13-21/11/1981

14-21/11/1981

Bombing of Air France in Beirut.

Bombing of French Consul's hone in Beirut.
Destruction of the French Cultural Center in Beirut.
Grenade attack on a police car in Paris.

Grenade attack on "Vedette de Paris" boat in the Seine
near the Eiffel Tower.

Delay of flight from Beirut to Paris for 16 hours.
Bombing of AirFrance in Jomich (Beirut).

Bombing of Banque Libano-Francaise in Dora (Beirut).
Bombing of Fransa Bank in Zouk Michael (Beirut).
Bombingof Banque Union de Paris in Bourj Hamoud (Beirut).
Destruction of MacDonald's Restaurant in Paris.

Destruction of one of the most important train stations in
Paris, Gare de l'Est.

Bombing of AirFrance in Tehran.

Bombing of the French Embassy in Tehran.

15- Interruption of all flights at Orly Airport for three hours.

Operations of the September France Organization

1— 25/10/1981
2- 25/10/1981

3- 27/10/1981

4— 27/10/1981
5- 28/10/1981
6- 28/10/1981

7- 29/10/1981

Cafe on Champs d'Blysees destroyed.
Bombing of car on Champs d'Elysees.

Destruction of main elevator of central building of
Charles DeCaulle Airport.

Bombing of parking,lot of Charles DeGaulle Airport.
Bombing of a car parked by the Eiffel Tower in Paris.
Bombing of police car in Paris.

Five wounded in the bombing of a cinema in Paris.

h
FINI¢DFFICJAI.I£SEZ(NVLY
FOR Oil-1C1“. USE ONLY

Miscellaneous Operations by Various Armenian Groups from 1 January 1980
to 31 Decanber 1981

1- 19/1/1980 Justice Comandos of the Armenian Genocide group bod) TWA,
SuissAir and British Airlines in Madrid.

2- 2/2/1980 New Armenian Resistance bombs Turkish Airlines in Brussels.
3- 2/2/1980 New Armenian Resistance bombs Aeroflot in Paris.

lo- 6/2/1980 Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide group wound
the Turkish ambassador in Bern in an assassination attenpt.

5- 18/4/1980 Justice Comndos for the Armenian Genocide group wound
Turkish diplomat at the Vatican.

6-17/12/1980 Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide kill Turkish
Consul with his bodyguard in Sydney.

7-20/11/1981 Justice Conandos of the Armenian Genocide bod) the Turkish
Consulat in Los Angeles.

C30: 6000/0011

5

ma MAI. USE ONLY
CLAN’DBSTINE RADIO on ASSASSINATION Am

CPl9lh05 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 011'
9 Apr 82

[Excerpts] The vanguard of the Armenian people struck once again yesterday
morning at one of the fascist Turkish Government's representatives, confirming
that the struggle will never cease so long as Armenian lands remain usurped
and so long as the rights of the Armenian people are being trampled upon.

Yesterday morning, Canada time, the cosmercial attache of the Turkish Elbassy
in Canada, Kemal Kani Gungor, was subjected to an armed attack. The Armenian
Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA], based in Ottmaa, Los
Angeles, Athens and Beirut, has claimed full responsibility for the operation
carried out against Gungor, the agent of the fascist Turkish Government. The
Turkish diplomat is currently in the hospital in extremely critical condition.
He underwent surgery yesterday and there is a possibility that he will have

a second operation today.

How did the event occur? Yesterday, that is Thursday, 9 April 1982, ASALA
fedayeen fired at agent Kemal Kani Gungor, the conercial attache of the
Turkish Enbassy in Ottawa, when the agent was in his car in the garage of
his apartment preparing to depart for his embassy. The shots fired at the
car window penetrated the agent's chest and leg, wounding the Turkish
diplomat seriously.

Yesterday, that is Thursday morning, a statement by the Turkish Embassy in
Ottawa reported on ASALA's operation, saying that the comercial attache of
the elbassy, Kemal Rani Gungor, had been transferred to the hospital in very
serious condition and his condition remained serious. The Turkish Embassy
state-ant accused what it termed as ASALA terrorists of being responsible
for the operation.

After referring to the serious condition of the commercial attach, the Turkish
asbassador to Canada, Turgot Sunslp, announced that the authors of the assassi-
nation attempt were vile Armenians who would claim complete responsibility
very soon. The Turkish massador added that Turkish diplomats have been
attacked in 16 countries since 1975.
The Canadian secretary of state for external affairs, Hark Haccuigan announced
that the operation had shocked him. He added: I can do nothing except ex-
press my condolences and smathy to Gungor‘s wife and fanily.

Regarding the sane event, APP reported that initial police investigation had
shown that Rani Gmgor was hit by nulcrous bullets through his car window.-
The report added that the assailant or assailants succeeded in escaping fro-
the site of the operation without leaving any trace.

ASALA's operation in Ottawa yesterday has been reported by international and
Turkish nedia. During its noon broadcast today. the fascist Turkish Govern-

ment's official radio referred extensively to the operation in Oct-Ia yester-
day.

After expomding on the details of the attack. the Turkish announcer explained
the history of the Armies arned struggle and stated that since 1973 the
Armenians have been continuously attacking Turkish diplomatic envoys and
representatives and Turkish interests throughout the world. The Turkish
radio also cemented that since 1973 Armenian revolutionaries have (?murdered)
13 high-ranking Turkish diplomats] 6 diplomats of secondary status, 2 repre-
sentatives, 1 [word indistinct] and 7 Turkish employees.

cso: 6133/2001
CLANDESTINB RADIO COMMENTS ON PEOPLE'S SUPPORT FOR ASALA

GPO31627 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 GMT
22 Apr 82

[Unattributed comentary]

[Excerpts] The Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Amnia [ASALA]

has already (?begun) the eighth year of its activity. In order to further
the work for the liberation of Armenia and the just cause of our people, the
Secret Army of the Armenian People has always been independent throughout

the 7 years of its exiatance. The army has never been the agent of any foreign
organization or government. It has never received any assistance from foreign
organizations or governments. ASALA has only been the agent of the Armenian
people and it will keep on being so. The army's every operation and [word
indistinct] in the interest of our people's and endeavors to defend these
interests. ASALA has operated independently until the present. It will
keep on operating independently until the final victory, that is, the return
of our people to the lands of our ancestors, and the liberation of our father-
nad. ASALA does not redeive any financial aid from foreign govemnents or
organizations. It is very natural that it should have financial needs and

it is also natural that the needs of the Armenian People's Army be taken care
of by the Armenian people. In fact, that is what has happened. For 7 years,
since the founding of the army, the Armenian people have taken care of the
army's financial needs and have financed the army's operations. For 7 years,
aid from rich Armenians has greatly assisted the army's activities and its
successes. For 7 years, the Armenian laborers have donated their money to the
secret army and have contributed to its successes. For 7 years, the Armenian
people have been devotedly donating all they could, physically, financially
and morally to help ASALA.

They are [word indistinct] for the armed struggle waged for the liberation

of the fatherland. The fortification of ASALA today, the expansion of its
operations. the success of the Armenian armed struggle and the new Armenian
revolution in thrusting itself on the international political stage, the
further success of the Armenian cause, the deep alarm of the ITurkish Govern-
ment over the Armenian cause and its (7development), the fascist Turkish
representatives and Turkish diplomst's fear and treialing before the righteous
bullets of the Arnenian cobatants have all been achieved by the devotion of
the Armenian people, the [word indistinct] aid of the prosperous Armenians and
the hard rock of the Armenian laborers and their [word indistinct].
The Armenian people‘s unlinited devotion to the armed Armenian struggle, their
solidarity with the new Armenian revolution and their unlimited physical,
financial and moral assistance will be recorded in the pages of Armenian
history. Because of this help, we will return to our fatherland and will
liberate our lands. History has already recorded and will keep on recording
the names of all those worthy children or the Armenian people who have helped
the armed Armenian struggle and are still helping to further the cause of

our just struggle.

ASALA is the rebirth of our Arnenian people and their [word indistinct].

The progressive and independent Armian Any will continue to enploy all its
means to liberate the fatherland and pronote the Armenian cause.

There is no doubt that the final victory will be ours. Arnenia will certainly
be liberated and scattered Armenians will certainly come together in their
fatherland. All this will happen because of our people who have helped our
army to develop and have been supporting our armed struggle.

CSO: 6133/2001
WSTINB RADIO URGES AWIANS T0 'ARISE'

Gl'051lo36 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13!) GMT
22 Apr 82'

[Unattributed conentary]

[Excerpts] It is the 67th anniversary of the April massacre. The Armenian
people [word indistinct] an unforgettable grave wound 67 years ago. The
largest part of the Amnian lands were usurped by Turkey. Re last one and a
half million lives. However, loss of land and fatherland is not [word indis-
tinct] and could never be so. Even the April massacre—the most horrible in
Arnenian history—has not been able to crush our will for revolution and ran-
deavors for freedom.

It is April. On 26 April 1982 the Armenian 88!! still exists. and the Armen-
ians are still in Diaspora. The memory of our innocent martyrs is innortal.
The unquenchable love for our fatherland is [word indistinct] in our hearts.
Moreover, the Armenians in Diaspora are alive and struggling. They are strug-
gling and will keep on doing so. The Armenian calamities everywhere are
arising and initiating new liberation struggles.

The 4 million Armenians in Diaspora today are certainly demanders. There is
no doubt at all that the la million will unite and struggle together in the
near future. The results achieved since the 7~year-old struggle began up to
24 April 1982 prove this point. The human losses cannot be retrieved. How-
ever. the same cannot be said about the land.

He assert that we will struggle only through our own means. Today's April
once again confirms that the innocent Armenian victims have not been forgot-
ten. Today's April proves that the Armenian liberation struggle is continuing.

Arise 0 you Armenians for the sake of your one and a half million mrtyra.
your hold land and your riylt to live. The thousands-year-old Ararat is

looking yearningly at you. Your deliverence depends upon the liberation
struggle and the liberated lads.

cso: 6133/2001
W811"! ON 21. APRIL POSTERS IN BURJ amen)

GPOSllolob (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian l3!) GIT
22 Apr 82

[Unattributed comentary]

[Excerpts] The efforts to preserve the Armenian race are still in a success-
ful stage indeed. The protectors of Armenian race, who risk their lives for
the supreme interests of the Armenian people, are continuing to retain firm
in their constructive convictions. For sometime now, a new method has been
used to protect the Armenian race. However, the drama to deceive the Armen-
ians in Burj Flat-sud is continuing.

A few days ago, Turkish video tapes could be heard fron houses in Burj "mud.
It seemed as if there was a Turkish video-tape festival in progress in that
district. Moreover, after a few days, the Armenian posters were ripped off
the wells. These posters were not only Armenian, they were also the posters
dedicated to 26 April. Hell, were those posters that cherish the memory of
our one and a half million martyrs, Turkish by any chance?

This is how during these April days the Armenian posters, which are dedicated
to our martyrs. are being torn down in the Armenian streets. After organizing
a (7caIpaign) of Turkish video tapes and feasts in the clubs, the so-called
protectors of Armenian origin are tearing down the 21. April posters and T-
shirts in Burj lla-ud and other districts. Is it disgusting for the commit-
tees engaged in distributing lottery tickets in these April days to see

April 24 posters, which comments our one and a half million martyrs, on

the walls, replaced by posters of Indian and other movies? Are the 24 April
shirts being sold at Armenian shops so ugly to look at?

Nothing is Unbelievable). Destruction of the posters dedicated to the un-
forgettable menory of our one and a half million martyrs was certainly ex-
pected from the so-called protectors of the Armenian origin who have been
lost for 60 years in the swamps ends with their own hands. There is nothing
to feel surprised at. However, the most pitiable are the sinle Armenian
youths who are following these traditional protectdrs‘of the Armenian race.
These youths know not how to respect their own martyrs and are tarnishing
their menory on their own. These youths are hopeless cases.

11
However, the conscientious Arnenisn youths are certainly keeping their eyes
open. They are perplexed by these [words indistinct] tsets. They are match-
in; the Armisns snd sre getting [word indistinct] by the way their people
live. Instead of destroying the 2!. April posters and shirts, these knowing
youths will destroy the pretense of protecting the Arnenisn people and the
conspirators involved.

cso: 6133/2001
CLANDBSTINB REPORTS 26 APRIL DEMONSTRATIONS

[Excerpts] Today at 1000, a large national denonstration was held in Athens
to commute the nemry of the April martyrs and ear]: the day for the per-
severence of the struggle. The delonstrators marched toward the Turkish
Blbaasy in Athens and condemed the fascist Turkish Governnmt. The details
will be broadcast to you in our next programs.

Moreover, yesterday. Friday 23 April 1982. at 1&0, a large national demon-
stration was held in Nicosia. The demonstration was attended by the prriot-
Armenians and progressive organisations. The Cypriot newspapers today re-
ported on the large national demonstration and the meeting held in Nicosia
yesterday and published nuurous photos in which the banners of the Armenian
Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA] are clearly seen being car-
ried by the Cypriot-Armenian masses.

The demonstrators marched fron (Wessily) Square in Nicosia to Independence
Square, erected ASALA's red burners along the road and chanted revolutionary
slogans. The slogans particularly stressed the joint struggle to be waged
for the liberation of the usurped Cypriot and Armenian lands from the cones
enemy, the fascist Turkish Government. The oppressed Cyrpiot people and
their progressive organizations fully supported the Armenian people and their
just cause. The demonstration of the Cypriot-Armenians yesterday was also
attended by progressive Cyrpiot organizations, mainly by BBB! representatives;
Zahr el-Khatib, the revolutionary Lebanese deputy and the loyal friend of the
Armenian people and Abu Sultan. the representative of the Jordanian National
(Martian) Conittee [name as heard].

A neeting was held after the groups erriwd at Independence Square from
(Wassily) Square. A true atmosphere of international revolutionary solidar-
ity (7prevailed) in the meeting. The nesting was addressed by (‘llladi
Dillitriu) the representative of m. and Zahr el-Khatib, the revolutionary
deputy and the representative of the Workers League. Moreover, cables sent
by the Jordanian National (Martian) Coulittee addressed to mm and the
National lbvenent Sympathising with ASALA, were read during the nesting.

l3
(Cerebed Paahabezian). the representative of Hagop Darakjian Benevolent
Union. and Comrade Minas, the representative of the National Movement Sym-
pathizing with ASALA. also addressed the meeting. We will broadcast the full

contents of the speeches during our next programs. Meanwhile, we will brief
you on the speeches that were delivered.

(Yﬂadi Dimitriu), the representative of .3! stated the following: "On the
occasion of the memory of the genocide, we user: that this is the memorial
day of ‘the genocide carried out against all the people. The Turkish fascism
executed a genocide against the Armian people, believing that it could own
the Armenian lands. However, today, after 60 years of that genocide, the
Armnian people are struggling. Revolutionaries are struggling to liberate
Armenia. We Condemn the genocide carried out against the Armenian people and
demnd the liberation of Armenia, Cyprus, Palestine, Kurdistan and El Salvador.
He demand freedom for all the oppressed people. Dear Cypriot-Armenians.
strengthen your struggle beyond our skies. He will take your hands in ours

to liberate the Armenian lands. We will side with you in order to liberate
the Armenia .and Cyprus."' .. -

Comrade Mines, the representative of the National lbvement Sympathizing with
ASALA noted: "Today, the anhag, Ramgavar and Oomunist parties are all pres-
ent at this meeting. There are no absences whatsoever. except for the agent
of imperialism, the Tachnak Barty. Tachnaka are unable to comprehend that

the United States is the enemy of all the people. They forget that it was

the United States that impelled Turkey to occupy Cyprus and the arm that
converted Cyprus into a graveyard were American. Compatriots, we believe that
26 April is the day of struggle. The united struggle of the Armenian and the
Cypriot people is the path to victory."

(Garabed Pashabezian), the representative of Hagop Darakjian Benevolent Union
stated the following: "This is the day of struggle and revolution. The
Armenian people today fully support the Cypriot people and their legal and just
cause. Despite all the hindrances, ASALA has existed for 7 years in order to
struggle for the liberation of Armenia and the restoration of the Armenian
rights."

Zahr el-Khstib. the revolutionary deputy and the representative of the Workers
League asserted that 2!: April is one of the darkest pages in the human his-
tory. It is a page that is full of blood and tears and contains the memory

of the suffering of a people who decided to live with dignity or to die. These
people who were deported by force and dispersed throughout the world after

the 1915 massacre, that aimed for their annihilation, are still surviving
today. Long live the Armenian people; long live the Qpriot people; long

live the Arab people and long live the solidarity of the people who struggle
for freedom, liberation and peace."

The. Jordanian National (Martian) Conuttee's cable addressed to the National
Movement Sympathising with ASALA, noted: "The memory of 24 April must never
be forgotten or perish, in order that you strengthen your revolutionary

1h
struggle and increase your ranks againat the Turkiah faacien which is the
ally of international inperiﬂiu. we convey our greetings to all the revolu-
tionary cotatante of the atruggling Irmian people who are headed by ASALAu
our firm ally. Long live Aracnian and Arab. revolutionary eolidarity. Long
live international revolutionary aolidarity. The victory ﬁne for our united

struggle."

CSO: 6133/2001

15
ASALA CALLS ON INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC OPINION

GFO91215 (Clandestine) Voice of lebanese Armenians in Armenian 131) (HT
24 Apr 82

[The call of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia (ASALA)
to international public opinion on the occasion of 2!. April]

[Excerpts] Once again we find ourselves in front of 26 April. April 26 sig-
nifies events that became meaningful for the Amenisn people. The Turkish
fascist authorities organized the massacre of the Armenian people 67 years

ago so that the occupied Armenian lands would be devoid of their genuine
inhabitants and nobody would demand lands from Turkey. In order to make cer-
tain of this aim, the Turkish authorities ussacred are than 1 and 1/2 mil-
lion Armenians. The [‘Isurvivors] among our people were deported from their
fatherland and were dispersed throughout the world. Our people today continued
to suffer the consequences of the massacre organised by Turkey and have be-
come the victim of the contradictions of Diaspora. The Turkish fascist
regime today continues to extort and pressure our cowstriots living in Turkey.
Moreover, the Turkish authorities are attewting to destroy our historic land-
marks. sydaols of Armenian civilization and our past, so as to finally erase
the traces of the Armenian people‘s existence. Those chiefly responsible
ﬁorthis situation are the imperialist governments who support and defend Turkey
by all means. Imperialist forces are encouraging the Turkish policy of
exploitation and oppression. The Amnian people could no longer remain
silent against all these said injustices. This is why our people determined
to struggle with all their power in order to liberate the occupied lands ‘and
regain the Armenian people's right to self-determination.

Moreover, the vanguards of our people are not only struggling against Turkey
but are also forced to struggle against the imperialist allies of the fascist
Turkish Government, who are pursuing our revolutionaries and pressuring our
commities in the Diaspora. Last year was full of evidences which served

to clarify the firm relationship between the imperialist forces and the Turkish
Government. however, whatever difficulties come across the path of our strug-
gle, the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA] once

again reveals its firm conviction that the Armenian people will continue to
struggle and the Armenian armed struggle will continue to achieve new victories.
The Armenian people by their solidarity with all the oppressed people will
succeed in striking at the fascist Turkish Government and the imperialist
forces. The Amnien people will succeed in thrusting forward the Armien
and various other oppressed people's causes. The previous operations of our
fedayeens are the best emles of the achieved successes. The climax of
these successes use the historic Van operation during which our revolutionar-
ies occupied the Turkish Messy in Paris for 15 hours, proving that the
Arsenien people's struggle will never cease until the restoration of our just
rights.

0n the occasion of 26 April. seam cells on all the peoples and international
ptblic opinion to support all the just causes. We denand that international
public opinion conden the Turkish [words indistinct] government. Long live
the solidarity of the people who are deprived of their riQIts. Long live
the just causes of all the people. (mountsll for) inerisliss, the Turkish
fascist government and all those fascist governments who exploit the peoples
and ravish their rights. Freedos for all the oppressed people in the world.

[Signed] 24 April.l982. ASALA

C80: 6133/2001

17
CLANDBSTINB RADIO 0N ASAIA CALL TO STRUGGLE

61'081955 (Clandestine) Voice of lebanese Armenians in Armenian l3!) GHT
2!. Apr 82

[The call of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, ASALA,
to the Armenian people on 2‘ April l982-read by announcer]

{Excerpts} Armenian people. on the occasiowof the 2!. April struggle day,
we recall the menory of our 1 and 1/2 million martyrs who died during the
massacre organized by the Turkish authorities 67 years ago.

Sixty-seven years after the massacre, a large part of the Armenian people
today are facing the harsh and difficult truth of the Diaspora. They are
livinsdeprived of their fatherland and rights. Moreover for scores of years
they have been suffering the consequences of local regional and international
political crises and various other cowlications merely because they are de-
prived of their fatherland and are living away from it. On the other hand.
while the Armenians in Diaspora are living in this sitation, the Armenian
identity is forming on the east banks of the Arax. On this day of struggle
which evokes the memory of the most violent genocide in human history, we
look at our small fatherland, the Armenian $88. which rose from the ruins.
While dispersed throughout the world, we are watching with eyes which are
yearning for a fatherland how the progressive public in mother Armenia are
furs“ ahead every day and every year and how the Armenian identity is becom-
ing enlightened. The Armenian SS)! is flourishing alongside the ruins of Ani
and Kara. The Armenian 58!! is the sole hope and foothold of all the Armenians
in the world. Let us fortify our small fatherland and the bright future will
be ours.

Armenian people, after 60 long years of silence and [word indistinct] we have
initiated a struggle to regain cur rights and establish our own government.

The 7—year-old struggle of our people is aimed at the fascist Turkish Govern-
nent which is supported by imperialism. Our 7-year-old struggle has developed
and been popularized. It has currently entered into a new stage. a stage in
which the children of the Armenian people are gathering aromd the struggle.

are supporting the conbatants of our vanguard and donating all their capabili-
ties and decisivenesa to these fighters. 0n the occasion of the 26 April

18
struggle day. He call on all the Armenians throud‘nout the world to join the
struggle being waged and further strengthen the national liberation struggle
by all possible sens. He call on the Armenian masses to support and aid the
armed struggle financially, physically and mrally.

It is up to the Araenian people to sessile on a large scale around the
armed struggle, may from all types of polarization and divisiveness.

Let us congregate around our revived fatherland. the Armenian $81!, and defend
it decisively against all dangers and threats. Let us defend our small father-
lend with all our power so that it becomes the basic center and the starting
point for our struggle to liberate our occupied lands in Hester-n Amnia. 0n
the 26 April struggle day, the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of
Armenia [ASAIA] assures the mquenchable spirits of our 1 and 1/2 million
martyrs, the nsrtyrs of our 7-year-old struggle and all the Armenian people
that it will continue thesrmed struggle waged for the liberation of Armenia
until our people achieve the riﬂlts for self-determination in our fatherland
and until final victory. Let us renew our vow. with the [word indistinct]
blood of our thousands of martyrs—the vow for struggle and perseverence.

let us enbrace and (Welcome) the promising future together through a united
front and one word. Eternal memry for our thousands of martyrs. Eternal
memory for our Pedayeens who died during the 7-year-old armed struggle. Long
live the revived Armenian revolution. Long live the Armenian youths who are
constantly alert and conscientious. Long live the solidarity of the Armenians
who are asseﬁled around the national liberation struggle.

[Slated] 21. April 1982, ASALA.

080: 6133/2001

19
CLANDBSTINB on men HINISTBR'S swarm

67101732 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Amnian 13:!) GMT
27 Apr 82

[Unattributed col-entary]

[Text] Following French Interior Minister Gaston Defferre's announcennt in
front of the mom-cut to our 1.5 million martyrs of April in Marseille,
French-Turkish state and diplosmtic relations are gradually deteriorating.
Yesterday, 26 April 1982, the Turkish Foreign Ministry issued a conunique
protesting Interior mister Defferre'a statement as creating an encouraging
atmosphere for Armenian terrorism.

On 24 April Gaston Defferre announced in front of the monument to our martyrs
in Marseille that France will follow up the Armenian cause. However. at the
same time he called on the French Armenians not to employ harsh methods in
expressing the demands of the Armenian people.

In October French Defense Minister Charles Hernu said: An FRG prime minister
kneeled before the crimes of the Nazis. Hill the Turks perform a similar
[word indistinct]?

The Turkish Foreign Ministry communique added that it has kept President

Evren informed about the French announcenent regarding the alleged genocide and
Armenians. The con-unique noted that during its recent session the Turkish
cabinet had discussed the issue. The commique also said that so-called
Armenian terrorists had killed six Turkish diplomats in France and launched
nmserous attacks on Turkish elbassies.

The Turkish communique noted that despite frequent warnings by the Turkish
Government, the French Government continues with its policy in favor of
Armenians. It added that Gaston Defferre's recent announcements are the
latest proof of this policy.

It should also be mentioned that on 25 April Adnan Bulak. the Turkish asbes-
sador to France, warned ﬁance that observance of Armenian genocide day in
France would strain French-Turkish relations.

20
The 67th anniversary of the Armenian massacre was marked on a very high level
in Paris. )bre than 7,000 Armenians attended a rally. may carried 1,000
flags displaying the amorial ensigcs of the Armenian Secret Am for Liber-
ation [ASALA]. The rally was organized by the Armenian National Assedaly
aromd ASALA organization [as heard]. The demnstrators rallied in front of
the Turkish Embassy and condoned the massacre of the Armenians.

Pbrveover, Ara Koranian, one of the leaders of the ArunimaNational Assexbly
around ASALA organization in France, delivered s ZS-Iinute speech on 23 and
2‘ April on (hannel 2 of the French television. Koranian expounded on the
Armenian massacre, Turkish fascism, the Armenia cause and ASAIA. He also
clarified the army's political aim and spoke of the new liberation struggle
of the Armenian people.

Although it is true that Gaston Defferre's statement will result in a deter-
ioration of French-Turkish relations, Defferre's announcement included nothing
in favor of the Arnenian people and their just cause. Gaston Defferre's
statement is unacceptable. Defferre openly stressed that the Armenian people
must end the armed struggle. He even advised m to abandon the struggle so

that the Arnenian people would return to the same passive state that they were
in before 1975.

Let us also not forget Defferre's deceptive proudses. It is already known to
all of us that during the Van operation he has promised the Yednia Keshishian
suicidalcol-andos the status of political refugees if they withdrew from the
elbassy. However, the four heroes are still inprisoned in French jails.

It is also clear that Defferre contradicted himself regarding the successes
of the Amenian people's armed struggle. If the Armenian people had not used
so-called harsh means, Defferre could not have made such announcements and
French-Turkish relations need not have deteriorated. Defferre and all his
kin must know that it is because of so-called harsh action that the Armenian
came today is progressing and the Turkish Government is facing difficult
times.

680: 6133/2001

21
CLANDESTIN'B CONDEHNS DESTRUCTION 0F 24 APRIL POSTERS

GFlllZI) (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 (HT
27 Apr 82

[Unattributed com-eatery]

[Excerpts] The condemable disputes among the parties in Diaspora over the
past 50 years have been deeply abhored by those who are not party meters.
These disputes not only retarded the progress of the Armenian came but also
resulted in inorality for pure-spirited Armenians. The situation was

so bad that the-killing among brothers became a daily fact. We do not wish
to recall the details of those dark days once again.

Yes, we are ashamed to recall even a single event that occurred during those
50 years. Instead of blessing us. our 1.5 million martyrs are cursing us from
their graves. because you, 0 traitors, converted their prayers into curses.

Because of your selfish interests. you forgot the revenge of the Armenians
and the massacre by the fascist Turks. All of us rejoiced and forgot the
shameful deeds when we decided to mark the 50th anniversary of our martyrs to-
gether. O unfortmate 50th, 60th, 67th anniversaries; 0 unfortunate Armen-
ian martyrs, open your eyes for a moment and watch your Armenian children

who just a short while ago vowed to band together and convert your curses

into blessings.

Immortal and holy Armenian martyrs, we are not worthy of your blessings.
We are not even worth being called your heirs because the ones that you had
forgiven are once again plotting against their own brothers.

0 worshipful Armenian martyrs, once again look around and see how Armenian
Cains are pursuing their own brothers Abel. They have begun to destroy
monuments which represent your inortal memory. 26 April. These shameful
deeds were witnessed in Athens, Beirut, Leon, Cyprus and Los Angeles where

the Armenian Cains tore down the 26 April posters representing our 1.5 million
martyrs set up by the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia.

Yes. dear conpatriots, we deserve our martyrs' insults and not their blessings.

cso: 6133/2001

22
CLANDESTINB OPPOSBS ARMENIAN IMMIGRATION

GPlZOSé? (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13!) CHI
29 Apr 82

[Unattributed com-entary]

[Excerpts] The Turkish [word indistinct] has always been the aggressor in
history. It is enough to recall the events which have occurred over the past
20 years, such as the occupation of Syrian lands, the attack on Cyprus, the
(7aggressions) against Greece, and the violent pressure on the Kurdish re-
volutionary movenents. The Turkish Governnent has not been content with all
this. It has continued Tal'at's and Ataturk's anti-Aramaian policy. Just
because the said policy is pursued covertly. our people believe that Turkey
has left the Armenians alone.

Following the 1915 nassacre, during 1920-25 [word indistinct]. Turkey played
its great and ('lundeniable) role in the Nakhichevan's [word indistinct] in
Armenian SSR and has continued its anti-Armenian policy under the cover of
foreign and Arnenian establishments.

For mnaerous years the Arneniena in Diaspora were engaged in the rehabilir
tation work in the countries they settled in. Meanwhile, the leaders of the
Turkish tyranny were very well aware of the fact that the Armenian people's
revival would seen the revival of the Amnian cause. In particular there
was the possibility that the Armenians who settled in the Arab world could
become stronger and pose a threat because they were near the occupied lands.

The Turkish plan was obvious. It was necessary to destroy the Armenians in the

Middle East. In carrying out this plan, the main role was played by the
United States. aided and guided by Turkey. The UNCIIR offices were established.
It was alleged that these offices would aid the Armenians. In fact, they

were engaged in the traitarous mission of transporting the Armenians in the
Middle East to the United States. On the other hand, the Armenian reaction-
aries cooperated with 0.8. imperialism and gave [word indistinct] excuses
regarding the plan. They did not wish to see the revival of the Armenian
revolutionary movements in the Middle East. They were opposed to these move-
ments and threatened Armenian commities. There are other exasples. Until
(21952) there were 50,000 Armenians residing in Egypt. Due to the reasons

23
already mentioned, these Arnenians i-igrated to the United States and today
there are only 15,000 Armenians in Egypt. 111s Syrian-Armenians in that
period had nuiaered 200,000, while today there are only 150,000 Armenians

left there. There were 35,000 Armenians in Iran. Today there are only 10,000
left. There were 70,000 Armenians in Greece, which was one of UNCHR's [word
indistinct], while today there are 15,000 Armenians there. He can also con-
sider the state of the Armenians in Iran and Lebanon during the war when they
were in need of leaders. In peacetine these leaders nade speeches; in war
they deserted the people and left for places of peace and security.

What [words indistinct] the revival of the Armenian cause. It was never dead
and is not dead even today. The inigstionz of the 1/2 nillion Armenians
from all over the world including the Aruenian 88!! was advantageous to the
United States. But for how long? Until our people discover this plan. This
state of affairs still continues. It can only be stopped by the (?aware) and
clever Arnenisns waging their codined struggle against everything that
threatens our people's interests in the Middle East and the Arnenian SSR.

How long will we keep on feeding Turkish (Nationalism) and that of the
Armenian reactionariea who have anti-Armenian aim? How long will we keep on
celebrating the anniversaries of the Turkish (Iagency) UNClln, which is the

(1butchershop) of imperialists in the United $tates--the graveyard of Arlen-
ians? So much depends on the answers to these questions.

CSO: 6133/2001

2b
CLANDESTINE RADIO ASSAIIS 'RBAGI'IOIIARIBS'

cnusm (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13:!) our
29 Apr 82

[Unattributed co-entary]
[Text] How long and how far? Certainly, until suffocation.

The Armenian reactionaries are drowning in the [word indistinct] created

with their own hands. (Heeling their end near), they have come out with
their final yellow poison. The reactionaries are employing all types of means
to erase the hardly cleared path of Armenia. 0n the occasion of the conemora-
tion of the 67th anniversary of the genocide. the Arnenian reactionary
Tachnak party leaders have begun killing their own people. Armenian youths
who sympathize with the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Amie
[ASALA] are being run down. The national masses are being pressured. The
dying leaders are hitting their [word indistinct] in Los Angeles, Lyon,
Beirut, Tehran, Athens, Nicosia and Bruj lla-md. Due to the continuous action
and pressures against the Armenians, the situation is becoming grave.

An Armenian youth was shot in Los Angeles because he was sticking ASALA
posters on a wall. Similarly, four Armenian youths were tortured in Lyon for
the same reason. A wreath laid in front of the Armenian mnument in Tehran
has been torn apart because it bore ASALA's name. The 26 April posters and
shirts have been destroyed in Burj Harmsd for the same ('Ireason). Moreover,
cruelty was also practiced in Burj llamud against a h‘dale Armenian family.
We criminals, high on narcotics supplied by their party leaders, entered

the house of an Armenian family and shot at their two sons, pretending a dis-
pute over 130 Lebanese pounds. They kidnapped the third son and took him to
their gambling center, the party chm. The violence did not and there. The
crusader of the district arrived on the site and, after being informed that
the dispute was among Armenians, shot at the family's house. This is how
those act who preach that their only enemies are the Turks. The knidlts of
darkness [words indistinct] have been able to convert word into action. The
[word indistinct] is by genocide. violence and killing of the Armenians.

The Armenian reactionaries are living their final moments. They have in-
creased their intrigues against the Arnenian people. Still. it is up to the
Armenian people to unite and liberate themselves fron all types of vile deeds,
actions and tyranny.

CSO: 6133/2001
CLANDBSTINB ON CYPRIOT PARLIAMENT DECISION

CF151553 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians: in Armenian 13:!) (341‘
l Hay 82

[Text] The Armenian people and the 7-year-old arned political struggle of
their vanguard. the Arnenian Secret Arly for the Liberation of Armenian
[ASAIA], achieved a new success yesterday. The muot parlianent adopted

a decision in favor of the Armenians and unanimously condemed the massacre
executed by Turkey 67 years ago. The decision also denuded the full restor-
ation of the Cyrpiot people's rights. Horeover, it assailed the occupation
of southern Cyprus by the Turkish forces in 1976.

In fact, the Cypriot parliament maninously accepted the legitimacy and
righteousness of the Armenian cause by adopting a decision advantageous to the
Armenian people. The points of the decision are as follows:

1. It assails the massacre executed against the Arnenians which resulted
in their deportation from their lands.

2. It defends the Arnenian people's just rights to return to their lands.

3. 1t notes the longlasting fraternal relations between the local Cypriots
and the Arnenians, and the Arlenian participation in the country's political,
econonic and cultural life.

4. 1t accepts this attitude of solidarity as the best proof that all
Cypriot people are able to live united without discrimination by race.
religion or nationality.

5. 1t condemns the crine executed by the Turks against the Cypriot people
in 19710.

[words indistinct] was unaninously adopted by the Cypriot parlianent follow-
ing Armenian Deputy Aran Kalajian's 15 minutes speech. The speech influenced
the parliament greatly. The resolution was prepared and represented by m
and Deputy Aran Kalajian. After being adopted by the foreign relations
comittee, the resolution was dispatched to the parliament. and as we have
eentioned, was adopted unanimously.

0n Aras KalaJian's request, the parliament will dispatch the said decisions
to all the parliaments throughout the world.
C80: 6113/2001

26
ARMENIA“ CLANDES‘I'HW ASSAILS WESTERN MEDIA

GP151616 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 (if! 1 May
82

[Unattributed co-entary]

[Excerpts] when Western nedia report on the operations of the Armenian revo-
lutionaries. they often call then extremists. However. we are never surprised
when these sources define us as extremists. 0n numerous occasions we have
proved the western media's [words indistinct] to ieperialisn.

We are only surprised by the political (Huturity), military perversity

and the ignorance of the last. We, the Armenian revolutionaries are very well
aware of the Heat's mean and diabolic (fplot). By calling the Arnenian revolu-
tionary novenents extremist, they want to establish a (7gap) between the
Armenian people and-their revolutionary organization. He believe that the
Arnenian people because their majority are convinced of the purity of the
Armenian revolutionaries; struggle and their [words indistinct].

lhe Western inerielist countries are very well aware of the legitimacy of
the Armenian struggle. however, they believe that the Arnenian people's
struggle will hinder their inerialist plans.

Finally we want to explain who is the noderate and who is the extremist. If
the western media understand that a noderete Armenian is the opportunist who
neglects the Armenian rights and plots against the Armenian revolutionary
organization, then we have only one definition for such a person: a traitor
who deserves death. If they understand the Arsenian extreaist as the one who
is devoted. defends Armenian rights, struggles for Armenian unification and the
achievement of Armenian rights [words indistinct], then we have only one de-
finition for such a person: a devoted fighter who is worthy of [words in-
distinct].

We are not only extremists in this struggle, we are even ready to become
fanatics if we become convinced that such a step will be advantageous to our

people .
cso: 6133/2001
CLANDES‘I'INE (ll TURKISH DIPWHAT'S ASSASSINAIION

cnsouo (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armian 13!) GMT
6 lhy 82

[Text] Orhan Gmduz, a Turkish honorary consul. was ('lassassinated) on
Tuesday night in Somerville. As is known, the Justice Gomndoa of Arnanian
genocide have clained responsibility for the killing. u.s. President Ronald
Reagan condemed the operation and stated that no quarter will be provided
to terrorists in the United States. hanwhile, the "hits House. which con-
sideres itself the friend of the Turkish Government, announced that it joins
the Turkish Government and weeps over this foul deed.

On the occasion of the said killing, Alec Yenikomahian, matter of the Cen-
tral Committee of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia
[ASAIA], in response to a question from the English international newsman.
said yesterday that ASALA supports the operation by the Justice Comndoo

and at the sane tine demands that they lake their political view clear and not
becone prey to the intrigues by reactionary leaders.

Let us hear Alec Yenikouushian's answer to NEWSWEEK: [Passage indistinct].
We, ASALA, fully support the action in (Tboaton) yesterday by the Justice
Commdos of the Armenian genocide during which Orhan Gmdm. the Turkish
honorary consul in Boston, was ('Ikilled). We fully support that action
because it was within the franework of our people's struggle against our basic
enemy and [word indistinct].

Armed struggle is one of the basic means to liberate our people and land.
We believe that military operations are not enough. The political path mast
be clarified. He believe the political course of the Justice Comndos has
not been clarified enough because it does not (7specifically) define the
main eneniea of our people. Consequently. our friends the Justice Co-aandos
must clarify their political aim and take care that they are not exploited
by certain reactionary Arnenian elements.

680: 6133/2001

28
ASALALBADBRONARIBWG

(:le428 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Arseniana in Armenian 131!) GHT
6 Nay 82

[Su-ary fro. poor reception] Based upon intonation received from Turkish
security sources, the Turkish reactionary daily 30mm reported yesterday
that 800 people have been arrested in southern Turkey for being involved in a
nsjor arse snuggling operation. According to mm. the am were destined
for the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Annie [ASALA]. NURRIYBT
notes that the operation was organised by the (TOcerco) Northern Cyprus Con-
pany, located in the Turkish part of Cyprus, and adds that the company had
supplied ASALA all types or arm manufactured in Europe and the Middle East.
Turkish security forces stated that the company was directed by (Hovses
Keuleian). a Cypriot-Athenian, and had branches in the Netherlands, Iraq,
Syria and Lebanon and agents in southern provinces of Turkey.

According to the sale sources, the custom director of Panagusta Port in
Cyprus disappeared 2 days ago after being discharged by the interior minister
of the Turkish part of Cyprus. According to the Turkish sources, the customs
director, in league with the director of the (TOcerco) Northern Cyprus Comany.
has been snuggling area to the Greek part of Cyprus tron where they were
dispatched to a Middle Eastern country and then handed to ASALA. Two years
ago (1’63) carriers caning fron Europe disappeared after entering Turkish
territory and delivering goods to the (TOcerco) Northern Cyprus Conpany.

On this occasion Alec Yenikonushian, neier of ASALA Central Co-ittee, made
this announcemt to an international news agency today: "In response to the
news concerning the arrest of people in southern Turkey who were smggling
area for ASALA, we, the ASALA, announce that such arrests will not be able
to hinder our struggle against the fascist Turkish Govern-eat. Meanwhile,
matemly warn the Turkish authorities that our reply is near at hand and
that our blow will be very hard."

cs0: 6113/2001
ASALA ASKS FOR ASSISTANCE PRO! WAN SSR

6P181930 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 M
7 May 82

[Unat t ributed col-entary]

IBxcerpts] The Arnenian revolution organized during the past years has per-
turbed the Armenian bourgeoisie. These individuals who were helped by the
protectors of Armenian origin. the [word indistinct] constitutions in Diaspora
and led by the conservative organizations. have begun a campaign against
Armenian revolutionary organizations and [woods indistinct]. However, it is
expected that through the progress of the revolutionary struggle and the ex-
pansion of the revolutionary organization [words indistinct] will increase.

The Armenian SSR is in the Soviet Union. This clear truth is avoided by our
conservatives. Regarding this fact, we will try to explain the strong ties
between the Armenian revolution and the Arlenian 88R and the stand of the
Armenian revolutionaries in Diaspora and their feelings toward the Soviet
Union in general and the Armenian 58R in particular.

Owing to the socialist revolution. the Armenian 88! adopted the most econonic-
ally and socially progressive constitution in human history. At a time when
the Third Horld countries are being [word indistinct] socially and economically
torn apart by international imperialism. the Armenian SSR is making progress.

There is no comparison between Armenian lands occupied by Turkey and the Ar-
menian SSR. After the socialist revolution took place in tsarist Russia.
human society has Imde much progress in the Soviet Union. This fact is proved
by Soviet history. Is their system the best? Or are there faults? Should
there be any reformation in the Soviet Union and the Armenian 8811‘! Yes,
absolutely. It is not possible to expect otherwise, because no force exists
which can resist the [word indistinct] of human history.

The Arnenian revolution is [word indistinct], progressing and swelling its
ranks. This is what the young nan have proved in the Middle Bast, Europe and
the United States. Consequently, the Armenian revolution should qualify as a

struggle waged for human progress. The Armenian revolution should be able
to analyze the [word indistinct] of history and not stick to obsolete

30
attitudes such as the traditionalists have. The traditionalists still do
not understand that it is not possible to return the Armenian SSR, which was
established through a socialist revolution, to the bourgeoisie ranks.

‘Ihere remains only one way for our revolution. This way has two parts:
1. Developing the socialist and econouic system of the Armenian $83.

2. Gathering the Armenians in Diaspora in the liberation lands and creating

an econonic and social systen that will not contradict the constitution of
the Armenian 333 and which should not hinder any future mion.

The Armenian revolution should be able to make the Armenian SSR a strong
revolutionary foothold. That is why the Armenian Secret Army for the Libera-
tion of Armenia [ASALA] regards the Armenian 883 as an already liberated
territory, and the Soviet Union a friend of our revolution. 11119 is why

we call for assistance from our tatherland, the Arnenian SSR.

cso: 6133/2001
JORDANIAN ms SUPPORT ASALA

M81451 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Arunian 1330 GMT
7 may 82

[Sn-nary from poor reception] Friends of the Political Bureau of the Armen-
ian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA], on the occasion of the
coinemoration of the genocide carried out by the fascist Turkish Government
against the heroic Armenian people, we, the leaders and nenbers—in the name
of the struggling Jordanian people-wow to continue our united struggle
against our enenies. “me menory of the 26 April must be an imtus for the
Armenian people and for the mobilization of their revolutionary struggle.

“me vanguard of this struggle is ASALA. Due to your revolution the whole
world has come to know about the Armenian cause; a cause which Turkish fas-
cism, imperialisl and its agents are attempting to hide. Our friends, the
imperialist hostility is manifest against the Arab world and Jordan. The
revolutionary struggle of the world's peoples is a united struggle for liber-
ation. progress and recovery of the fatherland. ASALA represents the Armenian
people's struggle being waged against Turkish fascists who have occupied their
lands and have annihilated 2 million Armenians. We are certain that the
Armenian people will come out victorious at the end of their struggle. We
are convinced that the Armenian people will return to their fatherland one
day and decide their own future. Our friends, in the nane of the Jordanian
Popular (Martian) Gouittees and our people 's struggling sons, we vow to
struggle together for the freedom and independence of our people. we stress
the necessity of solidarity among all the revolutionaries in the region, aimed
at resisting schemes of imperialist, Zionist. reactionary and fascist Turkish
plots. Once again we confirn our solidarity. The struggle people will win
in the end.

[Signed] Jordanian Popular (fhartian) Cos-ittees

CSO: 6133/2001
WORKERS hm ADVOCATIS ASALA-ABAB FRONT

[Text of the telegra from Workere League organization Central Coll-ittee to
Aruenian Secret Army for the Liberetion of Arnenis of the anniversary of 26th

of April]

[Salary iron poor reception] Priende of the Political Bureau of the Arm-
ian Secret Array for the Liberation of Arnenin [ASALA]. the 67th anniversary

of the Areenian genocide by the Turks coincides with the etage when the Ar-
nenian people'e cause is mdergoing a cowlete revival and is entering a

new phase, owing to the efforts of Amino people's vanguard. The anniver—
sary of the genocide renews the eolidarity of the Armenian and Arab people,

and proves the inportmce of the strategic alliance of the Armenian and Arab
revolutionaries for the establishing of a )liddle Beater-n Revolutionary Front.
This front will reaiet the inerieliata. Zionists and reactionaries and will
further the struggle of the people in the Middle Beat. The workers League
regards the Armenian cause a one of the noet vital ceusee in the world. It
supporte the Araenim people's cause and their right to aelf-deterninetion

and their return to their fatherlend. ASAIA has started a etruggle for the
liberation of the Armian lande and for the eatebliehaent of a united Amenia.
My friends, accept our were greetings. He will rennin your revolutionary
friends until Arnenia lande in the Arab world are liberated. Death to the
iuperialiet, Zioniat. and the reactionary front. Down with Turkish occupation.
Long live ASALA. Long live the united Armenian-Arab movement. The victory

is ours.

[Signed] workers League Central Codttee

050: 6133/2001

33
BAHRAIN POPULAR MT SUPPORTS ASALA

GPlOlMO (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13!) GMT
7 Hay 82

[Text] 0f the telegran by the Central Col-ittee of the Bahrain Popular Front
to ASALA.]

[Text] Friends of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia
[ASALA]. revolutionary greetings to you. On the occasion of the 67th annivers-
ary of the Armenian genocide By the fascist Turks, the Central Connittee of

the Bahrain Popular Front expresses its solidarity with your struggle and

the Armenian people's cause. It supports the Armenian fighters who are

doing their utnost to further the Armenian cause for the return of the Ar-
menian people to their lands. Your cause is a cause of oppressed people who
have been subjected to nationalistic sill (land is one) with the Palestinian

and Arab struggle.

The Zionists and isperialists are attenpting to [word indistinct] the Pales-
tinian people's lands and convert Palestine into a 0.8. imperialist base and
make it a constant and staunch [word indistinct] against the peoples of that
region, including the [word indistinct] of the Armenian people. However. the
present heroic struggles that these peoples are waging against imperialism
for the determination of their national future, confirm that justice certain-
ly succeeds when it is supported by a struggling people who remain righteous.
The past heroic struggles have proved that a just cause is supported by all
the socialist forces and governments of the world who are the defenders of
freedom and progress. Once again we express our solidarity with the Armenian
cause. We rightly believe that the Arnenisn people will come out victorious
(if) they continue the path of [word indistinct] and struggle.

[Signed] Bahrain Popular Front Central Co-Iittee

C80: 6133/2001
RUBBISH REVOLUTICNARY (1mm SUPPORT ASALA

617191601. (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13!) our
8 my 82

[Text] of the telegram from the Kurdish Revolutionary Conittees to ASALA
on the occasion of the anniversary of 26 April]

[Text] Friendsmﬁthe-.Amtian SecretAnlybrdteLiheratiou of Armenia [ASALA].
greetings on your struggle. It is the 67th anniversary of 26 April 1915
when the Turkish fascists cornitted genocide against 1 and 1/2 nillion Ar-
menians. and those who lived were deported from their fatherland. Friends
of the united struggle and cos-on fate, all of us are full of hope that the
Armenian people will achieve their sin and determine their own future under
the leadership of the revolutionary ASAIA. Friends, our fate is one.

After annihilating the Armenian people, the Turkish fascists massacred

{0,000 Kurds. We foresee the further ratification of our struggle. Similarly.
an 2’4 April 1974, the Iraqi Government carried out a [word indistinct]
slaudlter in Kurdistan in which 4,000 Kurdish uomen, old people and children
were killed. we, the Kurdish Revolutionary Co-Iittees, call on you to let

26 April be the starting point for the solidarity of the Armenian and Kurdish
people throughout the world for the liberation of Kurdistan and Armenia.

Long live the struggle of Armenians for their right to self-determination.
Long live world liberation movements. Long live international solidarity.

[Siped] Kurdish Revolutionary (bmittees, Lebanon

cso: 6133/2001

35
CLANDESTINB (N FRENCH SOCIALIST PARTY ANNOUNCEMENT

GP221830 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 GMT
11 May 82

[Text] The Politburo of the French Unified Socialist Party [PSU] has issued
an announcement in which it fully supports the Armenian people. It is worth
mentioning that this is the first French political party to officially and
honestly adopt a stand in favor of the Armenian people. The announcement of
the PSU is as follows:

Victims of the massacre organized by the fascist Turkish Government. the
Armenian people have been dispersed throughout the world for 60 years and

have been deprived of their most basic national rights and their fatherland.
After 60 years of silence, the Armenian people have succeeded in reviving their
Just national cause in international [word indistinct] through their strug-
gling organizations.

The PSU supports the Armenian cause and will endeavor to find a permanent

and just solution for the struggle waged by the Armenian people against Turk-
ish fascism and imperialism. Regarding President Francois Mitterrand's state-
ments about human rights, the PSU demands that the French Governunt (?open-
ly) and decisively recognize and condemn the 1915 massacre of the Armenians.
The PSU will strive to have the French Socialist Government assail the fascist
Turkish (2Government) in international courts and recognize the historic truth
about the Armenian genocide, so that the Armenian people achieve their national
rights and return to their fatherland, which is occupied by Turkish fascism.

CSO : 6 133/2001

36
CIANDBS‘I'INB RADIO ON .AWIAN POPULAR mvmrs

CF3llSlO (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 our 18 May
82 .

[Article published in (HAYASTAN HAY BAYKAR) magazine—no date given]

[Sum-nary from poor reception] The first popular movement to sympathize with
the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA] was established
in Iran. Similar movements were established later in five Canadian and 0.8.
cities and cities in South America, England, France and India. Bach week we
hear about the establishment of similar movements in a new country or city.

Many people are unable to understand the meaning of this new development.

we must take into consideration the fact that for the first. time in life in
Diaspora such political movements are being established in individual Armen-
ian communities. The second fact is the political awakening of the Armenians
in Diaspora. Never before have such popular demonstrations, meetings, poli-
tical activities, newspapers, pamphlets and posters been organized by the
widely scattered Armenian people. The Armenians in Diaspora, who have been
politically inactive to date, are beginning a new life.

In one of his books in 1966, Levon (Tornigian), who had been a prominent
Tachnak leader in France for a long tiem, stated that out of 1 million Armen-
ians living abroad the number of party mesmers did not exceed 20,000, that

is to say, they constituted 2 percent of the total. However, the picture was
different in 1980, prior to the establishment of new political novements.

Out of 2.5 million Armenians, only 0.2 percent were party meders.

This fact suffices for people of whatever political or party tendency to glad-
ly welcome the establishment of new movements—fact is that these movements
established in Diaspora are asaeabled around a struggling organization, ASALA.
This cannot be said for the parties that led the Armenians to political death
and neglected the struggle for a return to the homeland and for self-deter-
mination.

Furthermore, whatever the differences among the various Armenian comaunities,

the problem of an Armenian in Beirut or in boa Angeles remain the same. The
column problem is land. The lack of a land is such a dominating factor that
the rest of the problem becone secondary. ASALA activities are aiasd at
achieving the restoration of Armenian land. The struggle for land is the
aim of the army and the people assetbled around it.

The Arneniana in Diaspora are waking up after a long sleep and are fir-1y
progressing toward a new phase-«the organization of a new Arsenian revolu-
tionary party to be the sole party in Diaspora. It will be the only party
that will undertake full responsibility of the struggle for liberation. This
is the path laid down by the Arlanian Army. This is the target of the

newly established Armenian political movements.

CSO: 6133/2001

38
amas'rmr CALLS FOR REVOLUTIM STRUGGLE

GPJllS-‘os (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13!) GMT
19 May 82

[Unattributed conentary]

[Smary] The progress of the armed struggle coincides with the corrosion of
the conservatives in Diapers. The conservatives can keep on preaching their
futile revolution; it is their achievements that count in the end. Their
achievements display the tragic picture of Diaspora. The revolutionary liber-
ation struggle of the Armenian revolutionaries will «senile the Armenians

in one place.

Our struggle and our people have spread throughout the world. The genocide,
the deportation and the current inigration brought Armenians face to face
with a difficult situation. The only way out of this state of affairs is
revolutionary struggle. Revolutionary struggle cannot be separated from
armed struggle.

ungraphic basis, and in our situation our geographic basis is our usurped
lands and the Middle East. we are aware that our lands are devoid of their
true inhabitants and that the struggle must be waged on our lands. However,
awareness alone is not enough; it met be converted into deeds. hareness is
meaningless if further futile years are added to the past 67 years.

In order to avoid this, revolutionary struggle for the liberation of our
usurped lands is a necessity. There are Armenians in the United States.
Therefore, we have to struggle in that country. The same applies to Canada.
Ike-aiding indifferent to this fact deadlocks our struggle. Our aim is to
break the 61-year-long conservative deadlock.

Our scattered state is an inconvenience. Our existence away fron our lands
is s calanity. This is the truth which cannot be avoided.

We agree that the 'Hiddle Bast nuet be the geographic basis of our struggle.
We agree that our sin is not to wage a struggle in the United States or
Europe. However, we are also aware that the majority of our people are found
in these regions. Therefore. starting from these regions, we will return to
the Middle East and then to our lands.

cso: 6113/2001
ASALA'S CLANDBSTINB 'VOIQ 0F LBBANBSB Amms' REPORT
0n Hadiro Djamgochian's Letter

617011650 (clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 CHI
22 May 82

["Text of letter from Hartiros Djamgochian, arrested in Geneva on 9 July 1981
for assassinating a Turkish diplomat, sent on 26 April from a Swiss prison]

[Text] Dear friends, a year has passed and I am still in prison in Geneva.

I watched with great interest the 24 April programs on the Armenian genocide
on French and Swiss television. Swiss television twice relayed the "Present
Times" program during which a [word indistinct] reporter was interrogating
my (?father) about me before I came to Geneva. I was deeply moved. A se-
cond program on Swiss television was aimed at acquainting Swiss citizens with
the Armenian cause. It was very interesting.

Some Swiss Armenians have no idea about the Armenian cause and are doing
nothing to understand it. It is disappointing that they have forgotten their
lost fatherland which we want to refind. If the Armenians wish to refind
their fatherland, return to it and live there, the most isportant thing for
then is to acquaint themselves with our history, the genocide and its con-
sequences.

We. the young Armenians who want a free Armenia for ourselves and our families,
are accused of being terrorists. This is totally wrong. The real terrorists
who have spread terror and fear and are still doing so are those responsible
for the genocide and its consequences. They handed Western Armenia to [words
indistinct] in order to establish their bases there. The best solution for
us, the Armenians. is alliance with Turkish and Kurdish revolutionaries and
joint struggle until our final victory.

I saw a new program on Swiss television today during which a discussion was
held between a Swiss Armenian and Turk. It was very interesting. The Turkish
professor did not know that a genocide had been carried out against the Arb
menians by the Turks. he had forgotten. he talked like the Turkish Govern-
ment.

I send my warmest regards to all my friends. I hope that our victory will
be verified as soon as possible and that I and my friends will be freed.
I am well physically and mentally. Do not worry about me. Everything is
going well. I am waiting the review of the verdict issued against me, but
I still do not know when it will take place.

[Signed] Hardinos Djamgochian, Geneva, 26 April 1982
On South American Armenians

61011566 (Clandestine) Voice of labanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 our
20 Hay 82

[Article from April issue of (EAYASTAII AZAD KAY), organ of Population Hove-

ment of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia ' in South
America]

[Sullnry] 0n 2!. April 1981, 100,000 Armenians rallied in Tehran displaying

the armorial ensigns of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Ar-
menia [ASALA] and picture of’its cowatants. On 24 Septedyer 1981 the Yeghia
Keshishian suididal calmndos of ASALA seized the Turkish Messy in Paris.
Armenians throughout the world followed up the developments of the operation
with great anxiety. On 2:3 October 1981 a great popular demonstration by 10 .000
Armenians was held in Paris. On 19 Noveder 1981 a large political meeting
dedicated to the four heroes of the van operation was held in Paris by 2,000
Armenians.

ASALA. which is an organization established on a healthy and positive basis,
and is supported by the Armenian people, is striking at the enemy. Further-
more. in South Anerica. where the largest Armenian comity exists. are
seven branches of the popular movsmnt of ASALA. In order to achieve the
full participation of South American Armenians in the armed liberation strug-
gle, we, the medaers and leaders of the popular movement of ASALA, must stop

worrying about our personal problem and allocate more time to popularize the
struggle. Let us carry out our serious responsibilities and tasks by united
endeavors. The Armenian people will certainly emerge victorious.

3nd to Disputes Urged

01’011250 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 13:!) M 19 May
82

(ﬂoat: ributed col-entary]

[Sn-nary from poor reception] Genocide and deportation cannot be accepted.

It is iqossible to remain silent and not struggle. It is impossible to
approve of the imperialist and expansionist policy toward our lands. Those

lands must be liberated.

The Armenians in the Armenian 883 are struggling within the limits of their
possibilities; so are the Armenians-in Diaspora. He must end our internal
disputes. The moment this is achieved we will be able to confirm the form

101
and direction of our struggle. There are many who are aware of the Diaspora's
role in our revolutionary struggle but are attenpting to put an end to it.
Sons say there is no need for an arsed struggle. Others, particularly the

conservatives, are criticizing the present arsed struggle because it is strik-
ing at imperialist interests.

We are waging our struggle to retrieve our usurped lands and free the Arnh-
isn people fro- all types of exploiting forces. we do not sin our guns at
any Arnenian, only at our enenies. We will cooperate with any Arnenisn who
wants to struggle for our murped lands, even if he is a conservative.
unether the conservative leaders wish the establishment of cooperation along
Amish youths or not, the Armenian revolutionaries will create this co-
operation.

CSO: 6133/2001

1:2
WAN PARTY CLUB ACTIVITY-41w (Arakatr) Cosllittee in Burj Hammad has de-
cided to work strenuously to construct an additional floor over its two-story
club building. In order to cover construction costs for the club's third
floor, the conuttee has begun to sell lottery tickets in the market for 125
Lebanese pounds each. This conittee is working hard to sell the tickets

to the huliale residents of the district. [Text] [Gl'190516 (Clandestine) Voice
of bebanese Armenians in Armenian 1330 on 1 Apr 82]

KILLINGS IN BUIU END—Further violence by “protectors" of Armenian origin:
This violence has been comIitted against Armenians in Burj ﬂan-Id. At 211:5
yesterday the blood of Arsenian youths flowed in their own houses in front of
their parents. In fact. two criminals, “sweep and Bratch, on the pretext of a
dispute over 150 Lebanese pounds, entered the Keahishian family's house near
ibssrobian College and shot at Simon and Bagop. two sons of the fanny. The
16-year-old Simn Keshishian is in serious condition while Bagop, 22, has been
taken to (Karsssun Hsnoug) hospital. After shooting the two Armenian youths,
the criminals kidnapped 20-year-old llarout, the third son of the family, and
took him to their gawling center. ﬂarout is currently imprisoned in the
party club. During the dispute one of the district's smart slacks, the
brigand Gsrbis. was told that the dispute was among the Arnenians. This en-
couraged him to shoot at the Keshishians' house. After the said crime by pro-
tectors of Armenian origin, Armenians in Burj Ila-Ind were angry and condemned
the deed. Do these criadnal party members believe that struggle against the
Turks means destroying an Armenian family? Do they think that by keeping the
Armenians in Burj Hamid frightened they are waging a struggle against the
Turks? [Text] [$111336 (Clandestine) Voice of. Lebanese Armenians in Armen-
ian 1330 011' 27 Apr 82]

ANTI-TIM! POSTER--[Text of 26 April poster prepared by the National Hove-
ment Sywathizing With the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia
in lndia]-0n 2!: April 1915 the Turkish Government (2cruelly) perpetrated the
massacre of the Armenians and their deportation from land on which they had
lived for more than 3,000 years. Turkey is once again Europe's "sick nan" to-
day. It is maintaining its disreputable existence through huge military and
economic aid from international imperialist forces. With the aid of Europe
and imperialists, Turkey is continuing to keep western Armenia occupied. The
solution of the Armenian problem does not depend on the imperialist countries;
it depends on our own people's struggle. History has proved that a nation,
even if it is a small one, can be (?victorious) and can arise courageously..
Down with the fascist Turkish Government and international imperialism, led
by the United States! Long live the struggle of oppressed peoples against
imperialism! Long live the Armenian liberation struggle. [Text] [GNOME
(Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 131) GIT 6 May 82]

MURDER ATTEMPT cu ASALA MEMBER—Last niylt at 1930, a murder attempt was made
against Hardiros, son of the (Zanji) restaurant owner, and three other per-
sons. Unknown armed men shot at and wounded Hardiros, who is a meaber of the
Armenian Secret Any for the Liberation of Armenia [ASALA]; Dikran Djamgocbian,
an uncle of Hardiros Djaagochian who is currently iaprisoned in Switzerland;
(Main), who is Jwadallah's brother, and other person. The four wounded
people are currently at Her Yusuf Hospital and their condition is improving.
[Text] [67191334 (Clandestine) Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian

1330 our 8 May 82]

TURKISH CENTER CLOSURES IN JORDAN—Last Friday, 23 April and Saturday,

24 April 1982, the Turkish Cultural Center of Jordan in Jabal 'Amman, the
Jordanian-Turkish Coueroe Center in Wadi 'Abdun and the Turkish “easy in
Jabal 'Amnan were closed. Since the closure of the Turkish centers, strict
security measures have been taken and the Jordanian authorities have (2for-
bidden) any traffic in the areas of the Turkish centers. After inquiries were
made, it was discovered that the Turkish Embassy, and the Turkish cultural
and comercial centers were closed because the Turkish authorities feared
Armenian attacks. The guards at the Turkish Messy and the remaining Turk-
ish centers, the Turkey; secret agency, and the Jordanian security forces
have discovered posters of the Armian Secret Army for the Liberation of
Armenia [ASALA] posted on the doors of the Turkish centers. However, Turkish
officials state that the Turkish Cornercial Center was closed because of rats,
and the elbassy and cultural center were closed for vacation. It is also
worth mentioning that 9 months ago, explosives were discovered within the
premises of the Turkish Embassy in Ann. [Text] [$190630 (Clandestine)
Voice of Lebanese Armenians in Armenian 133) M 8 May 82]

CSO: 6133/2001

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? cm

ALLEGED YUGOSLAV m5 WEBER PLOTS SUBJECT OP TRIAL
Hamburg DIE ZEIT in Ger-an 7 Hey 82 pp 33-35

["Dossier" feature by Claus Bisnfait: "Belgrade's bong Reach-ﬁnder of Yugo-
slsvs in the PRC: Are the Killers of migrants Acting on Behalf of the Govern-
ment?"]

[Text] It has been suspected for many years that the
Yugoslav secret service is directing assassinations of
enemies of the regime on Ger-an soil. This week a

trial is starting in Frankfurt which nay prove this to

be a fact.

As he saw the two strangers put their hands into their pockets, the owner of
the apartment could snell danger. He ran into the bedroon, threw himself on
the bed, tore his pistol from under the pillow, and while turning around, fired
through the door's frosted glass pane. Surprised by this determined defense,
the attackers fled; one of then had caught a bullet in the lung.

This is not an excerpt fron a movie scenario; it was for real. The apartment
dweller whose fast reaction saved his life goes by the name of Pranjo Goreta
and he had killed sonsone himself once: in August 1966 he shot Yugoslav Vice
Consul Save Hilovsnovic in Stuttgart's Bofbraeukeller because the latter had
requested him to assassinate leading nenbers of a Croat emigrant organization.
Serving 8 years in an no jail was not enough punish-eat; after his release
the foraer agent was put on the hit list of his former bosses. He has been a
fugitive from the government's revenge ever since.

Several hundred enemies of the Yugoslav regime like Goreta are presently living
in the man-oat Croats, a few Serbians and a growing umber of Albanians.

They are not linked by coIIon objectives, but only by their hate of the Bel-
grade goverueent and their fear of the long era of the Yugoslav secret service.
These people have been recognised as refugees from political persecution, have
asked for asyllls. which was granted, and sale of the: have even become Ger-an
citizens. But none of this constitutes a guarantee for their safety; dozens of
assassinations have thinned their ranks and have destroyed the illusion of
effective protection in their host country.

Anyone working against the regime in exile, distributing pamphlets, organizing
demonstrations and who incites his comatriots to resistance nust count on the

us
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

worst. Such was the situation in Tito's times and it has not changed under his
successors.

Not even the methods have changed; they are as awkward as ever: observation,
assassination attempt, flight, and then an outraged denial as soon as the accu-
sation is made that the responsibility lies with professional killers or paid
amateurs on official business. No apparent efforts are made to provide a false
alibi or a pretended motive to disguise the political background.

higrant activists have long since adopted James Bond-type safety precautions.
They frequently change domicile, automobile and habits; as a matter of princi-
ple, they distrust all strangers and, to be on the safe side, their friends
also; they carry weapons and practice using them. Adversaries of the Yugoslav
regime are not suffering from paranoia—they are indeed being persecuted.

The question arises why Yugoslavia is pursuing its enemies in such a bloody
manner in foreign countries as well. what is involved is the very existence
of the nation. The mltinational Balkan state is an artificial oongloneration,
not an ethnic unit. Yugoslavia is a product of the poker gale of the great
powers after World "at II. Ever since then, it has held together by virtue of
a fading socialist ideology which has its roots innational resistance: first
against Hitler, then against Stalin. The country cannot afford to put up with
component nationalism; the danger of disintegration is too great for that.

About 600,000 Yugoslavs are living inthe FRG. The any of guest workers, which
has for many years been outside its goverrasent's control and which in addition
is familiar with the advantages of a market economy, has just about the ideal
configuration of a revolutionary reserve army--a catch basin for dreamers,
reformers and revolutionary activists.

Nevertheless, the emigrants are not always hungering after lilywhite dasocratic
dreams. Nor are their methods—violence, sabotage, terrorism. An independent
Croatia, still mourned by one part of the antiregime group, existed only by

the grace of Hitler. Its president, Ante Pavelic, whose fascist "Ustasha"
(Croatian for "Uprising") mrdered Yugoslavia's King Alexander I during his
vacation in Marseilles, was condemned to death after the victory by the com-
munist partisans. He fled to Italy in the garb of a priest and later on to
Argentina.

Pavelic never gave up on his murderous struggle against his rival Tito. It
was his followers who during the 1950's initiated an underground war against
Yugoslav embassies and consulates and with bullets against diploaats; the war
is still continuing.

When this terrorism finally entered Yugoslavia itself, especially after the
massive explosion at Belgrade's central railroad station in the early 1960's,
the regime caunterattacked. Agents of the secret service Sluzbe Drasvne
Bezbednosti (SDB), better known under its former naae of Unutrashya Bezbednosta
(Ubda), sought out undesirable compatriots, their contacts and their everyday
activities. Constantly using the same methods, they attempted to recruit in-
formers from emigrant circles. When promises of money and protection were not

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sufficient, threats of revocation of passports and interference with their
jobs brought wavering individuals to heel.

The struggle escalated. In the F86 and a few neighboring countries, violence
against Yugoslavs dominated statistics of criminality by foreigners. To be-
gin with, it appeared that the secret service agents were exclusively avenging
attacks by Croatian extremists. But soon their actions assumed dynamics of
their own: Belgrade's minions no longer needed any justification; they sys-
tematically checked off a hit list which continued to grow.

Prominent emigrants were found shot to death, beaten to death or strangled.

Clues to the perpetrators were found also, but, as one Munich member of the

criminal police complained on one of those occasions: "What good is that to
us, when those guys can take the next flight to Yugoslavia and get a hero's

welcome there?"

In those delicate cases, the Yugoslav authorities ignore requests for investi-
gation by Interpol. And even if the whereabouts of a suspect could be deter-
mined by German sources, requests for extradition or even arraignment have
always remained without result.

The main problem for the German police remains the easily accessible refuge for
the perpetrators of such crimes and explains the miserably low ratio of their
solutions for these crimes of violence. "A governmentally sponsored murderer,"
says an official of the PRC Ministry of the Interior, "only needs to bridge the
time gap between the crime and the moment in which the state affords him its
protection."

An assassin has the element of surprise on his side; he can plan the location
and the time of the crime and, if he is particularly clever, he can sometimes
even delay its discovery. The perfect assassination is committed near the
airport shortly before a flight to Yugoslavia departs, or at the railroad sta-
tion of a border town just prior to the departure of a train. The body of a
victim is hidden or disfigured so as to make identification more difficult.

If the victim had not even been acquainted with the murderer, this deprives
the criminal police additionally of the most important point of departure for
its investigation.

The killer almost always has the advantage of a decisive lead time. And with-
out his interrogation no light can be shed on the people behind the scenes.

It is reasonable to assume that this is of particular importance to the pre-
sumptive employers of the killers so as to protect Yugoslavia's international
reputation.

This procedure appeared to be working for many years. while the Balkan repub-
lic's secret service always appeared implicated automatically, its involvement
could never be legally proven by witnesses' statements or evidence. Even in
those cases where Yugoslav newspapers reported the violent death of an enemy
of the regime, there would always be talk about the criminal milieu in which
the crime had been committed or, if political motives were all tooevident,
about rivalry among the emigrants. In any case, it was stated, official
Yugoslavia was uninvolved and all statements to the contrary were mere defama-
tion.

in
m omen use onw
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

None of this has ever been credible. But now evidence to the contrary has
come to light: something went wrong in two recent cases. Twice the victims
were lucky and the criminals unlucky and the evidence was unequivocal.

Fateful mishaps, from the Belgrade viewpoint, occurred for the first time in
the Goreta case, 2 weeks before Christmas 1980 in Saarbruecken. Not only was
the husky butcher able to defend himself against the attack and to appear in
court as an adjunct complainant. Since the near-fatal injury of one of the
attackers had to be treated in a hospital, it was possible to arrest the
other two unsuccessful assassins as well, in addition to their backup, a man
named Dragan Barac. During the trial he admitted having commuted with false
papers and a prepaid airline ticket between Yugoslavia and the F30 in the
service of the SDB. Even more embarrassing, that he had received instructions
for liquidating Goreta from a deputy minister for interior matters of the
Croatian component republic. He had passed the murder contract on to two
Germans whom he had met in karate training. The hit fee of 1 million dinar
(at that time the equivalent of about DH 100,000) was to be split three ways).

After a trial lasting 10 days last year in the Saarbruecken criminal court,
Barac and his accomplices were sentenced to jail terms of 8 to 14 years. There
was nothing sensational about the length of the sentences. Attention was
caused several months later by the written justification for the sentence, in
which presiding judge Franz Priester vented his anger. The statement, barely
couched in legal terms, went as follows: "After all, the sentences given were
necessary also from the standpoint of general deterrence so as to make it per-
fectly clear that it is unacceptable on our national territory for foreign
murder contracts to be executed and for internal problems of another country

to be resolved here through murder."

However. relations between Bonn and Belgrade remained unimpaired. At the very
moment where the trial in Saarbruecken's criminal court reinforced suspicion
of official sanction of assassinations, FRQ Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich
Genscher and his Yugoslav opposite number Josip Vrhovec were meeting infor-
mally on Starnberg Lake. The German minister told the Yugoslav that between
the two states "not a single bilateral issue was dramatically unresolved."

Anyone willing to consider the attempted murder of Goreta as a unique case
found out different by way of the Zenelay case. At the time the ministers met
last July, the secret service background of the attempt upon the exiled Alban-
ian had been long known to the police and the law. The fact that two members
of the Yugoslav consulate general in Frankfurt were involved in it had been
made known to the district attorney's office by the criminal police; that
information had been passed on to the Ministry of Justice. But nothing
happened at the political level; no protest was made to Belgrade.

Specifically, the attempted murder of Rasim Zenelay, which this week is the
subject of a trial in courtroom 20 of the Frankfurt Land criminal court,

would have been an excellent subject for issuing a warning in principle. The
reason being that in this particular stage play the roles played by each actor _
are more evident than ever before.

ha
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
IN)R 0FF1C1AI.IJSEI(NVLY

Because of a series of coincidences there is a good chance that for once causes
and connections will be completely cleared up. miraculously, the victim sur-
vived the murder attenpt and while he will be forever hemiplegic, his mental
functioning is unimpaired. The presuaed crimimal was caught while trying to
flee back to-her country. She and one of her controls confessed during pretrial
detention. An independent witness reinforced the statements about the murder
contract. And early publicity about the case prevented district attorneys and
defense counsels from forning an alliance for the purpose of downplaying the
case for political reasons.

The attempt on Zenelay's life deserves a detailed description because it points
up the methods of secret service terrorism, its unscrupulous brutality as well
as its poor organization. All details are taken from interrogation records and
court records, or else they have been confirmed by at least two sources.

Zenelay grew up in a small village on the Yugoslav-Albanian border. In 1970 he
came to Germany and was given political asylum. He joined the "League of
Albanian Faith," which works for the incorporation of the Kosovo area into a
democratic Albania, and soon became a leading figure in it. In contrast to the
coarse Goreta, he has always pursued his political objectives in a nonviolent
way and has no prior convictions.

"hen riots broke out inKosovo in early l98l--the first such event after Tito's
demise--Zenelay received some anonymous threatening phone calls. And while the
Belgrade goveruent accused "separatist elements in imperialist foreign coun-
tries" of fomenting antiregime demonstrations from afar. the Frankfurt police
learned from an informant inside the consulate that an assassination attempt
was being planned against the exiled Albanian.

The criminal police took this seriously. Zenelay was fitted out with a bullet-
proof vest and several officers took him for a walk in front of the consulate
general in the ‘rhueringerstrasse to make it clear that he was being given
protection. Two men followed the group through the nearby zoo and were in
turn shadowed by other policemen in civilian clothes.

But the comedy missed its nark. Zenelay's hunters knew too much about him
not to have found out about his weakness for beautiful women. And thus he
voluntarily removed his bulletproof vest on 14 May when he took darkhsired
Zorica Aleksic to his apartment. The woman went to the bathroom, removed the
safety from a 7.65 caliber "Ceska" pistol and started shooting ilmaediately
upon reentering the room. Zenelay. hit by five bullets, collapsed in front
of the washbasin. That was the statement of the accused to the police; she
has since kept her silence.

The fact that the alleged attacker had in her excitement forgotten to close
the apartment door became her downfall. Zenelay was found barely alive by a
neighbor and before lapsing into a coma was able to say two words to the
attending physician, which sounded like "Zorica" and "Heststadt." The fact
that these neager clues led to a hot trail are a credit to a clever criminal
inspector who knew Zenelay and some of his friends from the conedy in front
of the consulate. He investigated. drew some conclusions and reacted quickly:
Flight .10 351 to Belgrade had already been called when the would-be assassin

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UIK UI'MLIAI. Uhl‘. UNI.‘

was arrested at the passport control desk at Rhine-Hahiairport. In her pocket-
book there were DH 2,100 which she had received from her bosses after the
attack, presumably as a downpayment for the kill fee.

In her first shock, the then 24-year old Aleksic did a lot of talking. She
admitted that she «as to have killed the enemy of the regime Zenelay under
orders and that she had agreed to do so after being intimidated by threats.
A quote from the next day's police transcript: "It did not matter to me where

I would go tojail. If I killed him, it would be here; if not, then in Yugosla-
via."

Zorica Aleksic's statements implicated two men who are now accused along with
her: 130 Dautovski, who has to date remained stubbornly silent, and Hiroslav
Illic who in the hope of receiving a reduced sentence decided to cooperate and
who is now expected to serve as a star witness for the prosecution. Both of
them were working for Rade Surla, owner of a small construction firm in Frank-
furt and, according to information received. the security service agent in
residence. He took a hasty departure to France on the evening of the assassi-
nation attempt, was later sought on an international arrest warrant and can now
once again be contacted by his wife at a Yugoslav address.

The politically most explosive part of the story results from the involvement
of two officials of the consulate. Svetozar Hirjacic, who is officially in
charge of dealing with customs matters, and the alleged janitor Salih Salihi
came under suspicion as being the controls and true initiators of the assassi-
nation attempt. They were incriminated not only by the accused Illic but also
by several pieces of evidence.

Additionally, a young guest worker is slated to appear as a witness, to repeat
what he has already stated last December before the TV cameras: that two men
from the consulate general had wanted to hire him to commit Zenelay's murder,
offering him lots of cash, a fast car and a lovely apartment. "Only when the
police later showed me some pictures did I find out that one of the men was
Hirjacic and the other Salihi."

In accordance with normal procedure, the police recommended "criminal trial
procedures" against the officials of the consulate in its final report to the
public prosecutor: "observation, arrest warrant, search." When he neverthe-
less failed to proceed against them, Public ProsecutorRainer Schilling faced
criticism which he tried to fend off with the weak statementthat "no suffi-
cient evidence" was in existence. He denied that there was any truth to the
assumption that he had restrained himself by direction from above. However,
he admitted, "this is hot stuff, no doubt about it."

Before the public prosecutor could change his mind, consulate officials Hirja-
cic and Salihi managed to evade German justice; one shortly after the attempt
on Zenelay, the other however not until a few months later. Their superior,
the consul general, declined prior to his "routine" transfer last December to
take any position in the Zenelay case and merely declared that he had nothing
to do with "terrorist activities of fascist organizations." The Yugoslav gov-
ernment lodged an official complaint with the Foreign Ministry about the re-
quest by the Second German Television Program (20?) for an interview.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zorica Aleksic is no longer talkative either. During the 8 days of the first
two trials which were declared mistrials due to procedural reasons in January
and March, she would mt talk. Her attorneys unsuccessfully atteqted with all
legal tricks at their col-land to prevent the reading of her initial confession.
The accused makes no secret of her fear for her own life, probably for good
reason. The same informant who earlier had sounded the alert for the attempt
on Zenelay's life, recently warned the authorities about a circus-type plan by
the Yugoslav secret service to shut up Hrs Aleksic in the courtroom forever:
by way of a knifethrower among the audience.

The judge thereupon ordered a further tightening of security measures which had
been quite stringent even before: personal protection for the accused and
adjunct complainant Zenelay, who not every time be brought from home in a
wheelchair. The trial is taking place in the so-called state security court-
room, where the audience is seated behind bulletproof glass after having under-
gone body searches.

Should the testimony result in symbolically placing the Yugoslav govert-ent
among the accused, this will become a subject of conversation during the perio-
dic German-Yugoslav consultations which take place between Belgrade's Director-
ate General for Public Safety and the PRC Criminal Police Bureau [Bundeskrimi—
nalamt, 310.] in Hiesbaden. One of the German participants describes the pro-
ceedings: "He certainly confront them with the murder incidents, but not even
a judynent like that in the Goreta trial can move them to seem responsibil-
ity. We are fully aware of the fact that the managers of the event are facing
us, and they know that we know. But all it amounts to is a cardgame with
hidden cards."

Every reproach is being met with a counterreproach, no matter how farfetched:
legalistic manipulation or the initiation of defamatory press campaigns. An
additional difficulty is the fact that the most important concepts are subject
to different interpretations. In a totalitarian state even the writing of
pamphlets or organizing a demonstration constitute active terrorism; in a
Western democracy they are comonly accepted civil rights. The Yugoslav police
officials frequently demand acknowledgement from their German colleagues for
infractions which are not even covered by a paragraph in the FRG's criminal
code.

Thus there is a vague borderline between Yugoslavia's justifiable interest in
thwarting punishable offenses on its own soil and its continuing intention of
preparing actions against critics of the regime on the basis of information
obtained in Germany. BKA Director Dieter Walther finds himself on the horns
of a dilemma. "It certainly is our duty," he emphasizes, "to inform the other
side when we have knowledge of planned attacks in Yugoslavia," especially in
those cases when not all weapons or explosives have been seized. 0n the

other hand. he shies away from providing names: "We don't want to contribute
to finding another body lying in the street.“

The working climate in the joint comission leaves a lot to be desired anyway,
since arguments broke out in the sunset of 1978 concerning the subject of ex-
tradition. Yugoslavia had set free four mulbers of the Red Army Faction (RAF)
after German courts had prohibited the requested exchange for eight exiled

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Croats. Bonn considered thepsckage deal as blackmail; Belgrade was outraged
over two different standards being applied to judging terrorist activities.
Until today the Yugoslav authorities have even refused to furnish any informa-
tion as to the destination and thenature of identity papers used by Brigitte
Hohnhaupt and her three male companions when they left Yugoslavia at that time.
On the other hand, extradition is no longer necessary for one of the eight
enemies of the regime: Nikola Hilicevic died in Frankfurt in a hail of
bullets.

"hen German-born Ilse Bilandzic arrived in Zagreb early this year, she was
arrested and accused of spying. She is the upright sister-in-law of Croat
leader Stjepan Bilandzic, Yugoslavia's public enemy number 1, whose extradi-
tion the FRG government had refused for formal reasons. It is not too far-
fetched to suspect a connection with the recently initiated Zenelay trial,
because an interesting precedent exists for "rescuing" an 803 agent prior to
his sentencing in the PKG. Even before arraignment, Michailo Ilya Svilar,

who had been involved in 1977 in the planning of a prior attempt at killing
Franjo Goreta, was deported after 6 months in detention pending trial. The
Yugoslavs had used Eberhard de haan, an expert adviser for foreigners' welfare
in the Federal Association for Horkers' welfare, as a bargaining chip. He was
arrested during a meeting in Belgrade and was not sent home until blackmail
had succeeded for release of the secret service agent.

Ilse Bilandzic was probably spared from a similar fate only because her case
was reported early on; a few weeks ago she was released unconditionally.
Frankfurt attorney Helmut Rosebrock, who specializes in representing Yugoslav
emigrants and who knows his way around in the political underground, recoup
mends public exposure as being the best means of counteracting secret service
activities. "No state will acknowledge its killers. A detailed newspaper
story or a TV broadcast therefore provides as much protection as do 100
policemen," he says. "And the chancellor could calm things down with a sin-
gle sharp word-—it would save human lives."

The fact that the politicians are nevertheless lying law cannot be explained
simply with Yugoslavia's delicate location at the edge of the East bloc.
Greater impact may derive from the fear that German citizens or property
could be harmed if German authorities were to proceed strictly by the letter
of the law.

This constitutes the only sensible explanation for a confidential agreement
between FRG Minister of the Interior Gerhard Baum and Yugoslav Minister of the
Interior Franjo Herljevic, according to which the Yugoslav secret service
drastically reduces its activities in thsFRG in return for the German author-
ities' curbing the liberty of the exile groups. An indication of the fact
that the Germans have complied with their promises is the prohibition of
several organizations and the restrictions imposed upon the leading‘activists,
starting with Croat leader Bilandric who is not permitted to leave his apart—
ment in Cologne without making a report, let alone engage in any political
activity.

Even trifles are being investigated, among them a pamphlet which accuses the
German police of giving aid to SDB agents. It was written by former student

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-Z ONLY

leader Damir Petric, whose name was one of the eight on Belgrade's wish list.
What is more remarkable than the fact that a higher court sentenced him to a
fine of DH 600 for defamation, is what happened beforehand. The Bochum pub-
lic prosecutor's office did not intend to prosecute but wanted to dismiss the
case as being insignificant. The reason: the passages in question "were with-
in the limits of constitutionally guaranteed freedom of expression."

But then-BRA President Horst Herald would have none of this decision. Under
his office's letterhead he made it known that "the intended dismissal is firmly
disapproved," and added a clear legal criticism: "It is unacceptable for the
police or individual officials to be accused of terrorist measures and that a
public prosecutor considers this as being nothing more than a critical dis-
agreement." This intervention appeared to show results: Petric went on trial.

The Yugoslav emigrants do not get much sympathy from the Germans. They cannot
always choose their friends. Their need for practicalsolidarity might consti-
tute a slight base for cooperation with leftwingers on the PRC. The police and
the Office for the Protection of the Constitution have recently learned that
antiregime pamphlets written by exiles have lately been printed on the presses
of the German Communist Party (RFD) which, since its breach with the People's
Republic of China, has developed ideological ties with Albania. The three vic-
tims of the murder incident at Untergrappenbach had been interviewed by members
of the KPD newspaper's editorial staff shortly before their deaths in the mid-
dle of January.

Orders Prom Belgrade: "Cleanup of the Terrain"

A more than 10-year old secret paper reinforces the suspicion that Yugoslav
agents are instructed by the state to proceed against enemies of the regime in
foreign countries, and that in doing so they can count on support from embassy
and consular officials. In addition, it hinted at the fact that the Yugoslav
government was speculating on receiving F86 cooperation in curbing exile
organizations. The letter originated in the Foreign Ministry in Belgrade, was
addressed to the Yugoslav military mission in West Berlin, was dated

28 August 1970 and was classified "strictly confidential." It was signed by
then department head R. Nedeljkovic.

Excerpts from the translated text:

"with reference to Instruction No 3827 of 7 May 1970, the following instruc-
tions are given at the request of the state secretary and in connection with
the recommendation of the cabinet of the president of the republic and the
Federal Executive Council:

Embassies and other auxiliary offices of the Socialist People's Republic of
Yugoslavia are advised to take supplementary measures designed to enhance con—
trol over Yugoslav citizens and hostile emigrant organizations. This refers
particularly to the so—called Croat National Committee with offices in Munich
and Best isrlin....As a result of cooperation with a foreign power, this or-
ganization has lately been successful...in making a certain amount of headway
(in foreign countries, Ed.). The above named organization has also contacted

some groups of the class enemy in this country.

53
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is therefore the duty of Yugoslav representative offices to investigate ten-
dencies for political reorientation among emigrants and to attempt to encourage
those elements which resist giving support to Stalinist forces in the USSR.

For its own part, the state security service will initiate certain technical
measures and will publicize the requisite disinformation along with them.

To implement the above mentioned measures, close cooperation with appropriate
authorities in the hostcountry, with the various organizations and informants
is recomended....A particularly good working clinte has been created in the
PRC, with whose authorities we have agreed on the closest collaboration for the
purpose of liquidating emigrant organizations. The government in Bonn, and
particularly representatives of the Social Democratic Party, have promised to
undertake additional concrete measures to make the functioning of the so-called
Croat National Committee impossible.

Labor union representatives have for their part promised to conduct a "cleanup
of the terrain" in west Berlin....

In connection with the above subject matter. the representative offices are ad-
vised not to permit input from organs of individual republics. Such attempts
have been made by some organs of the Socialist Republic of Croatia in dealing
with the military mission in Heat Berlin and the consulate in Stuttgart...."

The Underground War: 60 Dead Since 1967

In reply to an inquiry by the opposition, the PRC Government recently stated
that during the past 12 years a total of 14 Yugoslav emigrants had died a vio-
lent death in Germany. A SKA spokesman gave a ballpark figure of 60 for the
number of victims of obviously politically motivated killings since the start
of the bloody battles between the Yugoslav secret service and self-declared
enemies of the regime during the mid-1960's. Added to this number are about
one dozen people who incurred severe injuries in surviving nurderattempts.

13 September 1968: Croat restaurant owner Hirijan Simundic was killed in his
car by eight bullets at the periphery of Stuttgart. He was an important wit-
ness for the defense in the first Goreta trial.

30 September 1968: The body of Hrvoje Ursa was pulled from the Fulda River in
ﬂutzdorf, Hesse. Three days earlier, the Croat had been abducted in handcuffs
from his Frankfurt apartment.

26 October 1968: During an attack on the office of the underground organiza-
tion "Federation of United Croats" (UHNJ), in Munich, Mile Rukavina, Kresimir
Toj and Vid Haricic were killed with handguns.

9 April 1969: Croat restaurant owner Hirko Curic was blown up by a bomb
hidden in a plastic envelope in front of his establishment.

17 April 1969: Radko Obradovic, editor of the emigrant newspaper ISKRA: was
killed on a Munich street.

28 June 1969: Nahid Kulenovic, editor of another Croat newspaper, was found
beaten to death in the bathtub of his Munich apartment.

5h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

7 January 1971: The Croat Mirko Sinic died in West Berlin under uysterious
circulatances.

9 March 1972: Josip Senic. leader of the "Croat Revolutionary Brotherhood,"
was killed in his sleep by two pistol shots in a hotel room in Hiesbach near
Heidelberg.

16 Septeﬁer 1973: The Croat Josip Buljan-Hiholic was shot to death in Korn—
westheil.

8 July 1974: Serbian editor Jakov Ljotic, successor of Obrsdovic, who had
himself been murdered 5 years earlier. was strangled with his own necktie in
his apart-cut in Munich.

5 March 1975: The body of Hato Jozak. a Croat having Australian citizenship,
was washed ashore on the bank of the Rhine near Cologne-ﬂorringen. His death
had occurred 3 months earlier in Neuss.

6 June 1975: Ilija Vucic. who had participated in the 1962 occupation of the
Yugoslav mission in Bonn-Hehlea, was shot three times as he was leaving his
apartment in Stuttgart. lb died of his injuries 5 days later.

19 April 1979: The body of Croat Jozo Milos. shot twice. was found in a wooded
area of the Kerpen-Sindorf precinct near the Cologne-Aachen autobahn.

15 Septenter 1979: The Seribian Salih Hesinovic was shot dead during an alter-
cation in a Frankfurt restaurant.

13 January 1980: Rikola Milicevic, one of the leaders of the "Federation of
United Crostians," was killed in his car by three shots on the bank of the
Main in Frankfurt.

16 April 1980: Dusan Sedlar, chairman of the "Serbian National Federation,"
was shot dead on a busy street inDuesscldorf. '

9 October 1981: Antun Kostic, forlerly active in the "National Croatian Con-
nittee." died in Munich as a result of being shot.

17 January 1982: Kosovo Albanians Bardhosh and Jusuf Cervalla and Kadri Zeke

were fired at in their car with machine pistols as they were leaving a garage
in Untergruppenbach near Heilbronn. One of than survived a short time and was

able to identify Yugoslav agents as the killers.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GGSUCM MmmaBiIC
“we!“ Bade SUM
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

[Photo Captions]
Top 1eft--Accused: Hiroelev Inc

Top right--Confeaaion under detention. then silence: Zorice Aleksic
Center left—Accused: Iao Deutoveki

Center rightnbeperted: Constdnrofficial Svetozer Hirjecic

Bottom 1eft--Under suspicion: Consular lie-her Salih Selihi

Bottom right-—Sought: Prat-ted Secret Service resident Rude Surla

9273
080: 6100/0003

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

COHMUNIQUBS OF ETA T0 BASQUE PEOPLE
ZUZEN in Spanish I98] pp l-IO

[Text] ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty] Communique to the Basque
People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
is claiming responsibility for the bomb attack on 7 May in Madrid

on the armored vehicle of Lt Gen Joaquin Valenzuela, commander of

the King's Military Squad, and his escort, an attack that left the
comamnder gravely wounded and a lieutenant colonel, a noncoumissioned
officer and the escort driver dead.

0n I9 April and I May the Basque working people have once again commemorated
two historic dates that symbolize the long and trying road of our

oppressed and exploited people towards their total national and social
liberation. But on this occasion, as on so many others under the

Franco dictatorship, we have once again seen in the southern Basque

Country the element that is common to both periods of our struggle

of grassroots resistance: repression.

A brutal and savage repression on the day of Aberri Eguna, with Guernica
under siege and occupied militarily by the police, which prevented

any sort of peaceful demonstration, clearly reminiscent of that

26 April I937 when the Nazis and Francoists bombed the town and reduced
it to ashes.

An arbitrary and indiscriminate repression of the worker demonstrations
staged on I May in the four historic Basque regions, with dozens wounded

and detained.

These were, in a word, two days of united struggle marked by the common
denominator of repression and symbolizing the two aspects (national

and class) of the historic confrontation between the Basque working
people and the oligarchic Spanish State.

But the police massacres on Aberri Aguna and l Hay are mere reflections
of an everyday reality suffered by the most combative and consistent

segments of our people. The fact is that hundreds have been detained,
more and more people have been jailed, tortured at police stations

58

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
and coerced and threatened both physically and psychologically. The
fact is that although this repression has been a constant, anguishing
and humiliating fact throughout the past few years, it has grown more
intense and expanded in the wake of the farcical military coup on

23 February. we are now seeing the upshot that we warned about when
we analyzed the controlled maneuver of the “takeover of the Congress
of deputies" in Madrid. The Spanish Armed Forces, whose generals

are the only ones in Europe who have not yet lost a war, decided to
directly take the reins of government for the basic purpose of eliminating
through repressive andconstitutional means the ETA and the National
Liberation Movement waging our armed struggle. He can thus understand
the subsequent police measures ordered by the Council of Ministers

and now in force, the transfer of additional Civil Guard and Armed
Police troops to the southern Basque Country and stationing special
and regular Army and Navy units on Basque territory.

But ETA has not let itself be tricked by the farce on 23 February,

nor is it prepared to give ground in light of its consequences, no
matter how disagreeable they might be. Our duty is to the Basque
working people, to serve their interests and to attain the political
objective of the democratic break and self-government. This is why

BTA has struck a blow in Madrid against one of the highest raking
military officers attached to the crown, in a move that reaffirms

our determination to keep struggling and to do whatever we can to
support the Basque people in their aspirations of democracy, sovereignty
and freedom and to force the Spanish regime to put reason ahead of

force and to accept the "ceasefire" that we offered in the KAS [Patriotic
Socialist Coordination] tactical alternative.

Gora Euskadi Askatuta!
Gora Buskadi Soziolista!
Basque Country, 9 May I98|

ETA Connmnique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for the bomb attack on l4 May in Lemons on a

Civil Guard military convoy in which one of its vehicles was destroyed,

two of its occupants slain and a third seriously wounded.

The ferocious and arbitrary upsurge in repression by the Spanish Government
against the Basque Liberation Movement is eloquent proof of the clearly
centralist and fascist nature of the monarchical regime's current

policy. This is obviously an all-out offensive ordered by the military
brass that has had political control over the Spanish State for the

last 65 years and that has taken advantage of the military farce on

23 February to order emergency measures of intimidation and repression
against the Basque working people and their legitimate aspirations

for democracy and freedom.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The people's response to this intensified escalation of aggression
must take two forms: resistance and organization.

Resistance, to continue showing the Spanish State that the Basque
people are proceeding with their struggle for their rights and freedoms
and that neither reformism nor repression will succeed in swaying us
one bit in our search for what is rightly ours.

Organization, to coherently and effectively lay the groundwork for
action to resist the attempts at reformist integration and reaccionary
annihilation unleashed against the Basque National Liberation Movement,
thus making possible the continuation of the civil and armed resistance
that will result in the definitive democratic break set forth in the
KAS tactical alternative.

In this connection, ETA reaffirms its pledge to stand firm and alert
in the grassroots battle, supporting the people's grievances and
sharpening as much as possible the contradictions within the enemy
camp until they realize that our people will not surrender and until
they accept the honorable alternative of the armistice that we have
publicly offered them.

Cora Buskadi Askatuta!

Gora Buskadi Sozialista!
Basque Country, 16 May I981
ETA

ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for blowing up a transformer and a water hoist

in an estate owned by the heirs of the Duchess of Albuquerque on l6 Hay

in Cadreita.

The intransigent stand by the heirs of the Duchess of Albuquerque
(the Osotio, Diez de Rivera family). with overtones of feudal rule
at this point in the 20th century,onceagain highlights the bossist,
antipeople and fascist approach that it has taken throughout the
"land sale" dispute.

Stands like this are all too well-known throughout the Ribera zone,
where "bigwigs" and "families of great renown" amassed their dominions
and fortunes under Franco and are now hiding their centralist-Spanish
faces by calling themselves "Navarrists" in a bid to continue lining
their pockets.

Everyone knows that the conditions proposed by most of the sharecroppers
and tenants, backed by the people's assembly of Cadreita, are just
and reasonable:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR Ul‘l'lblﬂh 031-. URL!

--Collective bargaining for the purchase of lands.

--Compensation per "robada"l8.98aresl. in consideration of both the
continuous outlays that they have had to lake to improve access roads
to the fields, irrigation systems, etc, and the natural right they
acquire by working the land.

These proposals would spoil the fat profits that these heirs expect

to make if they can hammer out a separate sales agreement with each
farmer and thus impose the high price that they want through blackmail
and intimidation after dividing the people.

He should emphasize the ambiguity and indecisiveness that the Foral
Parliament has so proudly displayed, a parliament that had been chosen
to mediate these disputes at the behest of the Delegation, that was
accepted by most of the Cadreita locals and that has now given in
after the dukedom's refusal. The saying "big dogs never bite each
other" would aptly describe the thumb-twiddling that the Right has

and is stubbornly engaged in in these institutions, with the servile
backing of the PSOE [Spanish Socialist Horkers Party].

It is under these conditions of total and absolute disdain of the
Cadreita workers' interests by the ducal family, that ETA stepped in

with the revolutionary armed struggle to support the people's just
aspirations. It seems that the other warnings to all those who are
indirectly (UCD [Democratic Center Union], UPN, "moles," etc) or directly
helping to keep the people of Cadreita under the heel of the feudal

lord, have not been taken seriously. We are therefore asserting that

to the extent that we can we will continue to attack both the economic
and the personal interests of the ducalfamily,and we might even undertake
action that could cause irreparable damage to their physical integrity,
in support of the demands for the just ownership and control of the

land that the people are working, in keeping with the aspirations

of development and social improvements that we all want as the Basque
working people.

Gora Euskadi Askatutal

Cora Euskadi Sozialista!
Basque Country, 16 Hay I98!
ETA

ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
claims responsibility for the the bomb attack on 5 June in Donostia

on a six-vehicle convoy of the Armed Police, during which one of the
vehicles was destroyed, one corporal killed and four agents wounded

to various degrees. The convoy belonged to the General Reserve Companies
based on Coruna and which have been transferred to the southern Basque
Country for the particular purpose of taking part in operations of
punishment and reprisal against the grassroots mobilization struggle.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the time of our attack, the convoy was returning to its barracks
in Loiola after having brutally put down a grassroots demonstration
in Donostia calling for the release of Tomas Linaza and against the
extradition of political refugees in the northern Basque Country.

The repression in the southern Basque Country has become extremely
severe in the wake of the 23 February coup attempt. Everyone is

being repressed and for every reason, everyone who represents and
defends a political option to attain the people's true aspirations

of democracy and freedom. The antinuclear movement in its struggle
against Lemoniz is being repressed. The citizen movement with its
basic urban and grassroots grievances is being repressed. The women
advocating amnesty in their consistent eagerness to serve the cause

of the imprisoned and exiled are being repressed. The feminist movement
in its struggle against the three-pronged oppression that women suffer
is being repressed. The Herri Batasuna coalition in its alternative
of democratic break and Basque self-government is being repressed.

In a word, every kind of working class and grassroots mobilization
backing the struggle of the Basque working people to see their most
immediate demands met is being repressed.

The Spanish occupation forces have received orders from Madrid to
divide the southern Basque Country into squares and in each square
to draw up organizational charts showing the individuals and groups
that belong to the civil and armed resistance movement. This is the
reason for the countless detentions and the chilling use of torture
to obtain information.

Concurrently, they must repress in our streets any sign of the breadth

and strength of the political option advocated by the consistent patriotic
Left. This is the reason for the intolerance and brutality with which
they proudly put down any form of public expression or demonstration

by these groups backing the break.

Therefore, ETA sees the armed struggle as more necessary than ever
to offset the campaign of repression unleashed by the Spanish Government
and its military leadership against the Basque people.

Our national and class enemies are being forced to wage an open war
against the Basque National Liberation Movement, which is conclusive
proof of their inability to settle the conflict through political
reform. This is tantamount to saying that history will again prove
us right about the true underlying nature of the so-called "Spanish
democracy."

Moreover, this tactical move chosen by the Spanish State does not
at all represent a definitive solution to the problem and could in

the relatively short run turn out to be very dangerous to its own
overall interests.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In any event, the important thing at the moment, from the standpoint

of the grassroots struggle, is to realise, above all, that the situation
has entered an irreversible phase in which the fascist measures of
repression will undoubtedly create periods of flux in the mobilization
but in which the political measures set forth in the KAS tactical
alternative will truly be able to.settle the conflict underlying the
current violent confrontations.

This is the framework of analysis that should guide the Basque people
in bolstering their confidence of our inevitable victory. At the
same time, it should make the political parties shirking their duty
stop and think about their anachronistic course of conduct and the
culpability that they are incurring by action and omission.

Gora Buskadi Askatuta!

Gora Euskadi Sozialista!
Basque Country, 7 June I981
ETA

ETA Communique to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization of National Liberation,
in its campaign of intimidation against Iberduero S.A., the company
building the Lemoniz Nuclear Powerplant, claims responsibility for

the following armed actions:

I9 April I981: Blowing up of the Hundaiz substation in Donostia

22 April l98l: Blowing up of a substation in Eibar

24 April l98l: Blowing up of a transformer in Ayete-Donostia

26 April I98]: Blowing up of the Intxaurrondo-Donostia substation

27 April I981: Blowing up of a substation in Donostia

20 April l98l: Blowing up of the Berri: substation

2 May 198]: Blowing up of two power transmission towers for the Santursi
Thermal Powerplant

3 May l98l: Blowing up of two transmission towers in Calahorra (Logrono)
8 May l98l: Blowing up of a transformer in Bergara

8 May l98l: Blowing up of the Oiartzun substation

l5 Hay I98]: Blowing up of a transmission tower in Legazpia

26 Hay l98l: Blowing up of a PENSA substation in Orcoyen

28 May I98|: Blowing up of a substation in Lemons

3| Hay I98]: Blowing up of a transformer in Bergara

a June I981: Blowing up of three transmission towers in Orcoyen

7 June l98l: Blowing up of s FBNSA transmission tower in lruina

With each passing day we see the increasingly obvious need to renew
our efforts to frustrate the plans of Iberduero S.A. and the Spanish
Government to put the Lemoniz Nuclear Powerplant into operation, for
the simple reason that the faitaccompli maneuver that the two want
to pull on the Basque people is all too clear. The ideal thing in
their undemocratic and antipeople logic would be to complete

the construction as soon as possible, secretly bring in the enriched
uranium and surprise us all with the then inevitable startup of the
plant.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, the grassroots mobilization struggle waged through the
appropriate committees and organizations, combined with the consistent
armed intervention of ETA, have caused these plans to fail resoundingly
and the foul machinations behind them to come to public light. The

wall of silence and secrecy has been broken, and the grassroots struggle
has won the important battle to raise the awareness of the Basque

people in general about the contradictions and dire consequences of
the nuclear powerplant.

But this by itself is not enough. The war continues, and Iberduero
S.A. and the Spanish Government are still determined, in spite of
the tragedies that the Lemoniz conflict has led to, to move forward

with the project, using every institutional, police and military recourse
they have.

The new image that the new president of Iberduero S.A. has tried to
project in r'nnection with this matter has been a crude, farcical
lie. The goal that Mr Gomez de Pablos is pursuing is the same as

Mr Areitio's, the only difference being the subtle or direct language
that one or the other has used to try and impose his decisions.

We are warning once again that the Basque Country must remain on the
alert against the illegal and high-handed imposition of the nuclear
monster in Lemoniz. Many of the apparently "democratic" options that
have been emerging for a decision by the people are merely delaying
or manipulative approaches in support of the nuclear plant project,
in a bid to gain time to secretly bring in the enriched uranium or
to confuse the people, most of whom are against the plant.

For our part, we will continue to wage the armed campaign against

the holdings of Iberduero S.A. The intensification of this campaign
and the widening of its range of targets will depend directly on the
stand that the company takes regarding Lemoniz from this point on.

Cora Euskadi Askatuta!

Cora Euskadi Sozialista!
Basque Country, 8 June I98!
ETA

Fermin Ancizar Tellechea, a 28-year old bachelor who is originally
from Legasa (Navarre) and who now lives at l6-4 right Recoletos Street
in Pamplona (Navarre), wishes to state the following about his detention:

I was detained on Io Hay I981 at around midnight by the San Sebastian
Civil Guard in Eibar (Guipuzcoa) at No IO-a left B Street in the Amana
District. A woman tenant answered 'ne door, and some 30 Civil Guards
and plainclothesmen came in and proceeded to ask for our identification.
They grabbed Comrade Angel Rekalde out of a room and took him into

the hallway, while I was brutally kicked and beaten all over with

guns and objects that were in the apartment.

6h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
svu vaagvssaa; was. van-a

Then a shot rang out in the hallway, and we heard them comment among
themselves that he would be dead in 5 hours. A policeman then told

me that he was going to kill me. Another one told him not to so that
they could question me, because killing the other guy was enough.

I must state that we never offered resistance and were not carrying
any weapons, which were in an adjacent room. So they fired at Comrade
Angel Rekalde at point-blank range.

I was then transferred to the Csmpazar intersection (Guipuzcoa) because,
they told on, our "hole in the ground" (zulo) was there. I was tortured over
and over. For example, I was beaten all over my body. They put

a plastic bag over my head so that I had trouble breathing and lost
consciousness, and they beat my head against a tree until I fell to

the ground. Once I told them exactly where our "zulo" was, they called
in reinforcements; the Civil Guard arrived, and they began beating

me again with their weapons ("cetme," sawed-off rifles [subfusill,
pistols and "lanzapelotas”). They then took me to where I told them

the "zulo" was. About 200 meters away there was a newly built chalet,
which they said had to be destroyed. All of the Civil Guards (about

300 of them) then began firing helter-skelter into the house. The
officer in command then ordered a tank to break down the front door

and two hand grenades tossed inside, which completely destroyed the
chalet. He then moved on to the "zulo," which was some 200 meters

away. I have to say that the chalet had notllng to do with the "zulo"
and that it was destroyed because the officer in command just felt

like it.

Once the "zulo" was uncovered, they took me to the Blgoibar Barracks

in Guipuzcoa. They threatened to kill me and my comrade on the way,
reminding me about the three dead people in Almeria and that if they

did the same to me, nothing would happen. We got to the barracks,

and right there they began torturing me in indescribable ways. For
example, they laid me flat on a table with half my body hanging over

it and began beating me all over until 1 lost consciousness several
times and started bleeding from the head and ears. I never received any
medical care.

I was then taken to the Civil Guard Headquarters in San Sebastian
(Guipuzcoa). Here I was again tortured. I was beaten on the head
with an iron-tipped club until I was all swollen and lost any sense
of where I was or what time it was. I was also beaten all over the
body.

When I was taken down to the dungeon, the guards forced me to kneel
while they stepped on me, beat me and even started pulling my hair
out.

Two or 3 days later, two inspectors arrived from the Civil Guard Head-
quarters in Pamplona (Navarre) to interrogate me too. They tortured
me the same way as their compansions. They also grabbed me by the
ears, threw me against the wall and then the door and threatened to
kill me when I was released.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After being detained for l0 days, I was taken, with a hood on, to

a courtroom to make a statement before a trial judge. 0n the way,
I was beaten and threatened. After I made my statement, I was put
in a room against a wall and beaten and kicked hard. They told me
that I better not get put in jail that same day because I would get
transferred back to the Civil Guard Headquarters, where they were
going to beat me to death and rip my guts out.

In light of all the above, I would like to state that the individuals
arrested after I was detained are completely innocent, inasmuch as

I was pressured and tortured into signing, and that the charges against
me are totally false because they have been unable to prove then.

Madrid, 25 Hay I981

8743
080: 6000/0005

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ETA-H LEADERSHIP, ORGANIZATION OUTLINBD

ETA Tries To Reorganize

Madrid ABC in Spanish 2h Jan 82 pp 6-9
[Article by A.Semprun Guillen]

[Text] Several residents of Deva considered to be supporters of the Spanish
Government, the councillor delegate of the Discount Bank, a nember of the “CD
[Democratic Center Union] and his followers, a Vitoria industrialist who had
refused to pay "revolutionary extortion," the owner of a Vitoria bar
frequented by the National Police, a member of the Navarre Foral Alliance,

an aristocrat with large holdings in Tudela. a director of Navieras Letasa,
the chief of the Baracaido Municipal Police and a retired civil guard from

the San Ignacio de Loyola district of Bilbao were sane of the persons targeted
by ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] in 1981. Intervention by the
police prevented the attacks fron being carried out.

The ETA terrorist organization, particularly its military branch, has for the
first tine in its history lost the initiative in the dirty "war" it is
encouraging. "They are going crazy. They are disoriented, and all they do
is meet, argue and patch up the openings made by police action. In addition,
they are feeling the effects of the weariness of the Basque people. who are
already fed up with violence. denagoguery and bloodshed," said an observer
who is very close to ETA circles.

In the past year, the Executive Committee of the military arm of the ETA has
had to deal with the defection of 51 of its comnandos--37 of them in
"intelligence“-and the arrest of 600 members, activists and collaborators.
Its intelligence infrastructure has been the most damaged, in some respects
irreparably, by the combined action of the security forces. The "battle for
information," a key part of the antiterrorist struggle, is being won by the
state.

New Basque Attitude

ETA no longer has the same support in the streets that it had a few years ago.
In years past its actions were supported by planned street disorder. which
ensured "continuity." That is, an ETA attack was followed, within a more or
less short time. by a "popular" demonstration in the form of a pro-amnesty
march, municipal memorials "glorifying" the dead militants or protest
gatherings against some specific police action. Now the organizers of these
demonstrations are unable to mobilize anything more than scattered groups.

The "organization" also suffers from lack of clarity in its goals. It used

to use terrorism to pressure the government and achieve its objectives through
parallel political action. This is what has been called "the use of
negotiations to advance the process."

Its only form of pressure was the reaction caused by its attacks on the armed
and security forces, with which it created fear within the government. But
after 23 February the ETA was accused by the people themselves of "provoking
the coup." The Executive Conittee—its head untouched for the moment—knowa
that a "high level" attack creates tensions which are unpopular in the long
run and that, unfortunately, murdering a civil guard or a policeman does not
arouse the same "fear" in the government. They find themselves, then,
without any goslsf increasing the level of attacks would make them unpopular;
not doing so would render them harmless.

The ETA military arm is realizing that it is carrying on terrorism with no
hope for success, no prospects for the future. chaos out of chaos. Its great
expectation of "military intervention" in the Basque Country is unlikely, and
it knows that atpresent it does not have sufficient means to provoke such
intervention.

Problems of ETA

0n the "practical" side, ETA's military arm has many other problems. Its
economic situation is not all that good and it is being forced to restructure
its entire organization "in the interior."

The “fall of Hadariage" in Madrid, with the resulting defection of the entire
intelligence structure in the capital city was the spark for the police
offensive to intensify in the last 6 months of the year. Thanks to that
offensive, Spain did not dress in mourning on 18 November 1981. Thwarted on
that date was a "savage commando operation" composed of Ignacio Apilanez
Olalde, Antonio Garica del Holino, Salvador Breiraga Arozamena, Maria Adoracion
Lecuona Oyarzabal, Jose Miguel Lerranaga Handiri, Hifuel lsic/ Francisco
Solaun Angulo, Rafael Bonilla Gutierrez and Angel Gomez Uria. who were going
to blow up the Civil Guard Barracks in Algorta (Vircaya) on the day of its
dedication. The attack would have cost the lives of the interior minister
himself, the high-ranking officers of the police and the Civil Guard and

many wives and children of guard personnel. Manuel Ballesteros and the entire
Operations Brigade are convinced that a possible coup d'etat was averted that
day. The Civil Guard, they believe, would not have been able to take such

a tragedy in stride.

Action by the security forces is at the same tine causing an "exodus" of
members and sympathizers to the south of France. The ETA is forced to "find
a place" for these people and is trying to place them in small businesses in
Venezuela. Mexico and Colombia. Some of than can be reactivated in the
future so that they may take part in "commando operations" as "free agents."
The majority cannot.

At this time they are changing their system of organization. They have found,
particularly, that their structure is vulnerable, and they are making it
impenetrable. The ETA military arm's technique of "compartmentalization" has
always been one of its best tricks. Normally the commandos maintain contact
with the "head" without intermediaries, through the postal service or special
travel. There is no so—called ”area chiefﬂ,as in ETA-pm; this way they avoid
the risk of a "general collapse" of the commandos should one of them be
arrested.

Economic Sources

It has several economic sources, although the one we call "revolutionary
extortion" is the basic one. Lately, because of the ETA's loss of prestige
this year, many industrialists have refused to pay. The Lipperheide kidnapping
is a serious warning to the rest. The police believe that the ETA military

arm has a hand in several businesses in the south of France, from the profits
of which it rounds out its funds. For the moment, lack of cooperation on

the part of French Government officials prevents anyone from getting to the
bottom of this matter.

Relations between the ETA and the French Government are complex and have
undergone some slight changes. There is no doubt that since Hitterrand's
arrival in power, ETA members feel they are being "watched" more closely.
There is even speculation about the existence of certain agreements signed

in Burdeos after a meeting between Regis Debray and the ETA Executive
Committee, by which the “organization" promised to slow down its activities

in "key moments" of Spanish-French relations. In addition, France‘s autonomy
problems. with the new socialist policy toward Bretons and Corsicans, has
created strong ill feeling within the Gallic police, which is translated into
a hardening of its position with regard to separatist groups. The French

will leave the ETA men alone as long as they keep their promise not to create
difficulties in the French Basque country, and ETA knows this. It also knows
how to prolong this situation. Thus, just days after Mitterrand assumed the
presidency. the Arabs Commando Operation, which was dissolved on 3 March 1981,
had as its principal mission "to prepare an action against trains transporting
vehicles of French manufacture, in case the government should take some
measure against the Basque refugees in that country."

However, in spite of the problems of the "organization," it must not be
forgotten that the "head," the Executive Committee, remains intact. The
police have no legal means of getting to it. The security forces are aware
that if they relax their pressure there will be a setback of several years.
While France continues to grant asylum to its members, ETA has a safe place
from which to launch its activities again. In view of this state of affairs,

our security forces have only one course of action: to eliminate the infra-
structure in Spain and maintain constant vigilance to prevent it from being

reorganized.
Change of Strategy

The Executive Oosmittee is well aware of its present situation. Its "rank and
file" members react with sharp criticism, and discipline is resented. The
"leaders" held a meeting in August about this problem. There it was agreed to
reduce the nuIber of indiscriminate mrders, replacing them with "selective"
action. The reasons given were of a "political" nature, but now, given the
drastic situation, many of the members are beginning to think there was
something more. Thus it is thought that the ETA can no longer maintain the
pace of its actions and that it is making political excuses for its impotence.
Even the murder of a policeman or a civil guard has ceased to be a simple
matter. ﬂashers of the security forces have adopted more and more effective
methods of protecting themselves, even in their barracks and at home.

In spite of all this. ETA goes on killing-32 murders between 1 December 1980
and 27 October 1981--and at any moment it may deal a blow with incalculable
consequence. The 23 February trials and the Horld Cup games are not far off.

ETA Organization, beadership
[Article by Pilar Urbano]
[Text] The Six Brains Behind ETA-pm

Since the Arrest of ETA-pm "liberado" Juan Gregorio, who had custody of Dr
Iglesias during the latter's kidnapping, the police have been able to confirm
the membership of the "Executive Committee" of the ETA's political-military
organization: Abrisketa Corta ('Tmtxo"). Aulestia Urrutia ("Zotxa"), Atxega
Aguirre ("Fiti"), Lara Fernandez ("Etxepe"), Otegui Hondragon ("Gordo")

and Hugica Arregui ("Josean"). [They have also learned] that the commando
group that took part is not "an ETA faction," that it was not a question of
breaking the ceasefire, but rather of remedying the economic insolvency of
the ETA political-military organisation; that "there was no contact between
the Iglesias family and the ETA organization" and that it was decided to
kidnap Dr Iglesias "not for the spectacular effect of the 'coup,‘ but because
it was an easy way to get money--1 billion pesetasnand send it to some South
American country."

Ea lles te ros ' Conf idan ts

ETA is alive. The entire leadership, with residential iI-Iunity in the France
of Hitterrand's socialist "freedoms." But it is going blind. Its "eyes,"
the "intelligence connsnds," are being drained, dismantled and crushed
persistently by the Spanish police. "We must leave ETA without eyes, without
hands, without weapons..., and them, without a head. And if we do not succeed
in severing its head..., at least we will fix it so they have no one to
co-and," I was told by Coulissioner Ballesteros, chief of the Unified Command
for the Antiterrorist Campaign. ETA is alive. But the terrorist who watches
a "marked" person from a distance. who tries to dig a hole along a highway

to place a charge of explosives. who builds a "people's prison," who has to
have an "organic contact" to transmit a slogan, or who is willing to take part

70
in a "bloody action," will feel the noose of the "chakurras," the dogs--that
is what the "organization" call the Spanish police-~closer, tighter and
more oppressive every day.

ETA is alive and is killing, kidnapping and extorting with its "revolutionary
tax"--life or death blackmail“, but its actions have a slower rhythm, fewer
successes and a larger number of botched jobs.

ETA is killing less. "Pour were arrested today; two the day before yesterday;
they end up "singing" about s long of things: small details which are
extremely important to us." Thus Harcelino Oreja was prevented from being
blown to bits in his car. 0r such and such a lieutenant general, a newsman,
a minister and a comissioner from receiving the deadly caress of a bullet in
the neck. Thus they arrived in time to prevent the Algorta barracks from
being blown up: that would have involved the "total destruction" of an area
30 meters in diameter, and the deaths of the entire col-hand of the nation's
security forces. The detonation of 52 kilos of "gems-2" was satanically
calculated and planned to be activated by remote control "at the time of the

dedication." This human carnage, born of anger, would have destroyed
democracy. Very impressive.

What has changed? The government, with Minister Roson leading the struggle,
has taken over and has made the campaign against ETA murder its very own:
with more dedication, men and training, more training courses within and
outside Spain. more and better weapons and more money. More money—how glad
we are to spend it for thisluso that the "polis" spend hours, days and weeks
of hope and vigilance in this or that area. Kore money so that "Ballesteros'
sources and confidants" will name names, warn of the arrival of some co-nando,
quote chapter and verse on some short-term action. Every police agency in

the world which has terrorism in its backyard pays for such information.

It is a key instrument in the struggle. The brilliant entrance of the "geo's"
into the Trasmoz house, where Dr Iglesias was being held, would not have

been possible without the patient and laborious "Operation Parish," including
investigation and surveillance directed by Omissioner Domingo Hartorell.

And "Operation Parish"--so-called to disguise the name "Iglesias"-would not
have gone after the ETA-pm without the reliable information supplied by

Ballesteros. "However, this time no money was paid out for the "singing" or
for the infiltration," he asserts.

Are there other leads not being followed? Ilow many? There are citizens and
residents who (finally) have decided to overcome their fear and "tell what
they know, what they have seen." There are French police agents "who think
as we do, regardless of what their government decides politically, and they
cooperate by informing." There are ETA members who on certain occasions have
"turned coward," "sold out their comrades" or "failed through negligence."
The police know how to turn these "errors" against them: such an ETA member
finds himself between a rock and a hard place: either he "cooperates" with
trustworthy information or the ETA is informed of his actions, and sooner or
later he will be face up 6 feet under. Finally, some information costs
millions, some thousands, of duros, while acne can be had for an appreciable
"gift": a passport. a paragraph suppressed in the police report, a ticket to

71
South America with no probleas. Eyerything has its price. Nobody expects to
launch and win a "dirty war" with spotless weapons.

But it is not so easy. The fate of the industrialist, Lipperheide, involves
sole risk. The ETA "nilis" who have been arrested have told all they know--
Just their part in the episode. At this time the police are operating in an
information vacuum. They believe the industrialist is being held somewhere
in Gran Bilbao. The Civil Guard is "coding" the area, but as yet there are
no clues. And the ETA-pm "truce?" On Thursday at 9:20 in the evening Mario
Onaindia and Bandres were having a drink. along with a third man. in the bar
of the Riofrio coffeehouse. Too "openly," or too "close" to the Ministry of
Interior. Later on I found out that they case from there. The governnent
does not dialogue with ETA. But ETA-pa has its political arn, Euskadiko
Ezkerra [Basque Left], which does not take up arms, but supports their use;
which does not murder, but deifies its own dead. And one should not be
scandalized because Roson talks with Onaindia. If Onaindia can sake his
"advice" worthwhile, when "in private" (as polinili "libersdo" Juan Gregorio,
who was arrested while he was holding Dr Igleaias, said) Txutxo. Zotxa, Fiti,
Etxepe, Gordo and Josean, the organization's provosts, "are discussing the
ceasefire: whether to keep it or break it," everything has its price.

Now political and police action is directed at two areas where there is a
possibility of a "sensational attack" or a "desperate operation": the 23
February military trials and the World Cup soccer festivities. This is the
crucial moaent for activating the "intelligence network." But this tine the
threads have to reach siaultaneously to the "vital centers" of our four
terrorist groups: the anarchist-libertarian group, the ultrarightists,

GRAPO [First of October Armed Revolutionary Group] and ETA. "To date ay best
sources have not given any danger signals. Nothing serious is being planned.
If it were, I would know it by now," Ballesteros told he.

Executive Col-litres of the ETA Military Organization

This is a diagram of the Executive Connittee of ETA-n, the highest organ of
leadership in the terrorist organization. Each of its sembers is in charge
of a specific area which he oversees with a certain amount of autonomy. The
diagram was supplied by police sources.

1. Political Office--Eugenio Echeveste Arizguren
2. Propaganda 0ffice--Juan Ila-on Wm Garnendia (a) "Juanra"
3. Logistics and Support—Isidro Maria Garaide Bedia Launeta (a) "Hanna"
lo. Intelligence Infrastructure-dose Luis Ansoia Larranaga (a) "Pello El Viejo“
«Eloy Uriarte Diaz de Guereno (a) "Senor Robles"
5. International Relations-dose Maria Ganchegui Arruti (a) "Pelio"
--Carlos Ibargure Aguirre (a) "Nervios"
6. Military Apparatus--Domingo Iturbe Abasola (a) "Txonin"
«Francisco Hugica Garnendia
7. Special Operations--Juan Lorenzo Santiago Lass Hichelena (a) "Txiquierdi"
8. Weapons and Explosives Training-~Isidro Maria Garaide Bedia Launeta (a)
'Mmarru"
9. Hugalaris—Jose Miguel Lujua Gorostioia (a) "Mikel"
Fighters For Democracy
Madrid ABC in Spanish 24 Jan 82 pp 6-9

[Article by Carlos Davila]

[Text] For barely 100,000 pesetas per month, 130 men, the pick of the Spanish
police, risk their lives daily in the Basque Country. They belong to a super-
specialized antiterrorist brigade in which, according to Manuel Ballesteros,
"not just anyone is accepted." All are under 30 years of age, and they live
their personal and collective adventure against terror and death in the north.
They are the men that the Unified Command has sent to Viacaya, Guipuscoa,
Alava and Navarre to destroy the ETA, an objective in which these men, who can
never sleep in hotels, who prudently avoid cameras and who receive minimal
rewards for brilliant service, fervently believe.

They are, in the words of Ballesteros and Dopico, "the police of the 21st
century," a slogan coined by Minister Roson just after he took over the most
difficult department in the Spanish Government. Hbrking behind them are their
comrades in the Central Investigation Brigade, the most famous brigade,
mythologized these days after the freeing of Dr Iglesias and the confiscation
of 5,000 kilos of ETA weapons. now can theyfigure the weight? How can they
be sure that this is 95 percent of the arsenal of the "poli-milis?" These
questions have a single reply: they have calculated the number of robberies
and figured to the last millimeter the recent losses of materiel; in the
former, in spite of appearances, there was never a real truce with ETA-pm,
the supposedly "good" branch invented one day-and his cleverness probably
cost him his life-by Moreno Bergareche, alias "Pertur." guitarist, rock
singer and disciplined student at a college run by monks, one of whom he
encountered later on in ETA.

No Truce

Actually, the "polis" have never rested. Nor does it seem certain that the
alleged truce was adopted in a disciplined manner with a single dissenting
vote. Mario Onaindia, "the politician with the best armed leadership in the
Basque Country," according to a police source, has "sold.“ since 27 February
l98l--4 days after Tejero Holina's attack on the Cortes-pacification, truce
and negotiation. Only the last has been real: in Madrid, Juan Jose Roson

and Onaindia no longer hide in secret meetings that nobody mentions afterward.
Roson and Onaindia have dined together on many occasions, even in a restaurant
near the ministry frequented by distinguished members of the State Security
Forces. No one, however, among the leaders of the antiterrorist struggle,
will admit that there has been the slightest agreement, the minimal trans-
action between the two. The story goes that in order to ensure the Spanish
democratic primary elections, Martin Villa circulated among the ETA political-
military organization, the result being the silencing of the automatic weapons
and the presence of Juan Maris Bandres in the Senate.

The antiterroristsdistrust,suspect and fear Bandres: for example, they fear
the mounting of antipolice campaigns based on torture stories which have never

been proved. on the psychological and physical pressures which used to be used
on ETA members who were arrested. Torture was the principal charge on which

73
the ETA based its "reasons" for murdering Commissioner Hanzanas. the police

agent so widely criticized for his methods, who died the same day that those
who attended a meeting in a convent in Vizcaya decided to kill him. Echave.
the priest arrested with Kalzada and tried in Burgos, said later: "A priest
must commit himself politically and arm himself to defend the Basque people

against the police."

Juan Maria Bandres is not acceptable to the State Security Forces. However,
the opposite is true of Onaindia, and they value his useful statements
condemning the kidnapping of Dr Iglesias. a kidnapping planned and practiced
a thousand times, with which ETA-pm, according to then, "returned" to the
terrorist society. But fear has definitely changed its slogans. The
campaign of the two ETA branches has a single goal: to contradict publicly
the motives which give rise to police euphoria, to assert that "we are more
united than ever," and to ask the people to continue supporting the armed
struggle. who is right? The security forces, who optimize the results and
say that the beginning of the end has come for the ETA, or the spokesmen for
the terrorist gangs themselves, who say the security forces will soon be
hearing from them? Probably the answer is somewhere in the middle. But one
thing is certain: never before have we had so much information about the ETA,
about the two ETAs.

Manuel Ballesteros is not giving out any information about the nunber of
infiltrators working for him in the north or even in France. There are
infiltrators--many of them. They are low-paid collaborators who have been
recruited over the last 2 years and are classed as "special envoys" in the
organization. Periodically they pass reports identical-the similarity is
astonishing--to those supplied by ETA men "working for us," who were arrested
at some point in their terrorist careers and agreed to join the intelligence
game.

Ballesteros is, perhaps, the architect of this intelligence network.
construction of which began barely 2 years ago. Prior to that there was no
coordination. It is tragic to say so, but Spain had lost a lot of time in
the national struggle against terrorism. When General Saenz de Santamaria
arrived in the Basque Country. sent by the Adolfo Suarez government, there
were no maps of area highways or local roads. In that steep country the ETA
literally scoffed at the valiant members of the security forces. With the
intelligence network in place, something else has happened. Today things
appear to have changed definitively. In many villages in industrial Vizcaya
or in coastal Guipuzcoa there are peaceful citizens who form a solid part of
the social fabric, who are trying to get the ETA to pay attention to them and
begin to sympathize with them and who, after a few trial months. catch them
in the terrorist net. These are Ballesteros men, who show special signs of
being "abertzale" [patriotic]. If they succeed in infiltrating they will
become efficient allies of those 130 superspecialists who are working in

the four Basque provinces and in Navarra.

The success of recent police actions depends in large part on the intelligence
network that functions with precise timing, on the analysis made by technicians

of each and every piece of information that arrives in Madrid and on the
service's agents, who are responsible, in the last analysis. for carrying on
the fierce struggle against the terrorists. Every car belonging to the Central
Intelligence Brigade travels more than 125,000 kilometers annually; they carry
experts who do not live in the Basque Country, but "go north" once a week.

The agent-officials know more about ETA than the members themselves: during
interrogations, astonishing situations arise in which police and terrorist
discuss a certain action, decision. report or simply a bit of information.

The two use the same language: "Re are," they say, "playing the same game,
but on different teams." It is not strange, than, that some experts, most of
them, are contaminated by the ETA vocabulary and use the same expressions
which have been, in Iy opinion, a source of confusion for the uninitiated.
Just a few days ago, the well-liked Commissioner Hartorell was speaking of

the "armed struggle." the concept which euphemistically involves attack,
treacherous murder or economic and psychological blackmail. All the ETA
"argot" should, however, be carefully destroyed; this is the only way to
ensure that the true orientation of the bloody terrorists is not disguised.

The Spanish police are prepared for any kind of terror. They spend many hours
of their training in scrutinizing and studying documents, reading between the
lines the news organs which lean toward extremist groups of both persuasions.
'These newspapers are, for us, working material," one expert in the anti-
terrorist struggle told me. They have the phraseology of the ETA comnmniques
down pat, and they also know how to interpret the keys to certain ultrarightist
activities which appear in some of the newspapers. They have tapes of many

of the programs aired daily by the outstanding Radio Popular de San Sebastian,
a station which is supported, at least in theory, by the bishop of Guipuzcoa,
Setien, but which in practice behaves with absolute autonomy. The two
branches of ETA use Radio Popular de San Sebastian to broadcast their claims,
manifestos and communiques. Nobody within the Spanish church seems to be
surprised by this collaboration--the simple broadcasting of a message--between
a radio station close to the church and the professional terrorists. COPE,
the Spanish Popular Radio Network, over which the church has obvious decision-
making power, this year edited a program for all the provincial stations
except the Basque stations, and this, "simply because the latter did not
accept it." Bishop Estepa, who is head of the communications media for the
Bishops' Conference, should give definite reasons for this refusal and also
explain the true role of the church's radio station in San Sebastian.

Twenty-first Century Police

Just as this negative "collaboration" still exists, another, positive
collaboration is being strengthened and is directly responsible for current
successes. But the big question continues to be: Is the Basque Nationalist
Party collaborating with the Spanish Security Forces? The experts shrug
their shoulders at the question. It is true, however, that the brave reaction
by the chief nationalist leaders against economic blackmail (we shouldn't
call it a revolutionary tax) has contributed to the fact that the financial
campaign imposed by ETA to collect funds is doomed to failure. Javier
Arzallus, president of "Euskaki Buro Batzar " [Basque Executive Committee of
the thlycomplains in surprise that the ETA does not want to sit down at the
negotiating table, but offers "assurances" to the mayor of Guecho that even

75
though he does not pay, nothing will happen to him. The PNV [Basque
Nationalist Party] is now trying a more productive type of struggle against

the terrorist "abertzales" ("abertzales" in its purest sense means all the
nationalists), which consists in returning fear for fear and threatening the
murderers. On another occasion, the Aranists of Bermeo, who hate the followers
of Arzallus and Garaicoechea, have intimidated ETA with a similar strategy.

A few days after sending the message and notice to the Other side of the
Pyrenees, it appeared that the conservative industrialist, Garabillas, was

"clean“ and had not given a single peseta to the ETA military arm's minister
of finance.

The greatest possibility is that this organization is undergoing a process of
progressive debilitation. The chief leaders of the gang are still in France:
from the aging "Txomin," "Iturbe Abasolo," who helped in at least two attacks,
to the bloodthirsty "Txiquierdi" and "Txapela," the latter with more than 20
killings to his credit as a terrorist carved from granite, unaffected and
unmoved by sentiment. The situation of older ETA members may be one of

moral crisis: they have spent many years in the armed vanguard without
achieving any apparent successes, and opinion is largely against them. No
one knows exactly how politically coherent the Herri Batasuna (United People)
coalition is at present, which received 17 percent of the vote in the last
election and in which there is only one minimally solid group: HASI, the
People's Revolutionary Socialist Party. Nor is it easy to predict what will
be the electoral future of "Euskadiko Bakerra," the party which resulted from
the fusion of EIA [Basque Revolutionary Party] with some of the Basque
communists. The impression is that the merger has encountered resistance
among the rank and file and that this will show up at the polls.-

Today's victories have an old explanation. The police now have an image of
efficiency which they lacked under the autocracy. The "let century police
agent" is more than an aspiration: it is a plan on the way to becoming
reality. The professionals are, as Manuel Ballesteros. director general

of the Unified Antiterrorist Command, puts it, "fighters for democracy,"
It is an admirable warranty.

8735
C80: 6000/0007
ADMIRAL ORKUNT URITES 0N ARHENIAN TERRORISM
Istanbul TBRCUHAN in Turkish 12-15 May 82

[Article in four installments by Admiral Sezai Orkunt: “International Terrorism
and the Armenian Question"]

[12 Hay 81 p 2]

[Excerpts] Each year. as 26 April [Armenian Hartyrs' Day] and 28 Hay [Armenian
Proclamation of Independence Day] draw nearer, militants of the world Armenian
community—-said to be spread over 60 countries--step up their propaganda and
demonstrations. They use the murder of Turkish diplomats and their families as

a means of attracting attention to their claims. The purpose of this century-old
propaganda effort is to indoctrinate the Hestern world and Russia against Turkey
and, through such pressure. to set up an Armenian republic in Eastern Turkey.

Armenian claims are based on two points:

I) The Turks carried out the first genocide in history between 1915 and 1918
and massacred 1.5 million Armenians.

2) A large part of the Armenian homeland has remained within the borders of
Eastern Turkey. These lands must be returned to the Armenians.

Those who make these claims and who run the street demonstrations and the
propaganda campaign are Marxist organisations who say they are acting in the name
of the large Armenian communities in Europe and America. but who really are not
linked with those communities.

France as well as other Western governments--with the exception of the Greek
Cypriot Administration and Greece--have ended their support for Armenian terrorism
which is functioning as a branch of international terrorism. Isolated shows of
sympathy are motivated by the ambitions of some politicians in certain electoral

districcs.

Russia's Role

It is well known that the strongest support for the Armenian militant forces
comes from the Soviet Union. Middle-aged citizens will recall how the Soviet
Union oiiicially demanded in 1956-l9h7 that the provinces of Kara and Ardahan be
turned over to Russian control and how certain Georgian and Armenian historians
and writers tried to rationalize that demand. Subsequent Soviet administrations
did not broach this issue openly again, but they never lost sight of their
ultimate aim.

A pro-Armenian article published in the Moscow NEH TIMES in December 1981

accused Turkey of attempting to have the past forgotten in connection with the
Armenian genocide. The "Voice of the Turkish Communist Party" broadcasting from
East Berlin has urged the "acknowledgement of historical crimes committed against
the Armenians in Turkey.“ At an anti-Turkish demonstration held in Athens, a

young militant woman openly demanded the incorporation of Turkey's six Eastern
provinces in the Soviet Socialist Republic of Armenia.

Even these few small examples show that the Armenian question is kept alive as
part of a well-defined policy and propaganda campaign rather than as a result of
the aspirations of a great majority of the Armenian community around the world.

Turks and Armenians, as social groups, are not each other's foes either in Turkey
or anywhere else around the world. Both sides deplore the terrorizing murders

no matter what their purpose is. No rational person can justify the murder of
innocent people on the pretext of unproven events supposed to have happened
between 1915 and 1918.

Power of Government
There is one concluaicn that must interest the Turkish public:

The Armenian question and terrorism emerged during the final years of the

Uttoman Empire: the Turkish and Armenian communities turned against each other

at a time when the state had disintegrated and lost its authority and power inside
the country.

During the Republican period, the interval between 1973 and 1980 was a time when
the authority and the power of government was weakened while anarchy and terrorism
escalated. During that interval, Armenian militant organizations. with limited
means of action inside Turkey, tried to achieve their historical aims by murderous
activxties abroad. Today, they continue their murders encouraged by the possible
weaknesses of a multiparty system that will follow the present military
administration. Therefore, the strength or weakness of the state is an important
factor.

This means that as long as there is a strong government no propaganda campaign
Can he oiiective. A weak government, on the other hand, opens new doors of hope
Inr forces determined or intending to destroy the state.

Armenian terrorism. as a branch of international terrorism, is a tool of a plan
prepared at certain centers of power to cause Turkey's collapse. Uhat they want
is to annex some of Turkey's Eastern provinces into the Soviet Socialist Republic
oi Armenia. is the Soviet Union behind these moves! A documented proof of such
a case is so hard that it might as well be considered impossible.

78
A diagnosis that will be close to the truth can only be arrived at by looking at
the course of the events and by putting together the dispersed links of the
chain.

He know that our Armenian citizens living in Turkey are disturbed by the murders
and fanatic acts carried out by Armenian terrorists abroad. These citizens have,
on various occasions, openly condemned these incidents. Therefore, the problem
is not inside Turkey, but abroad. We want to examine this problem abroad under
the following main groupings:

1) International terrorism and its links with Armenian terrorism.
2) Examples from the Armenian terror propaganda.
3) The stance of governments against political terrorism.

4) Possible effects of Armenian terror abroad on the lives of Armenians living
in Turkey.

The Palestine Liberation Organization is currently the largest anti-Israeli
organisation and is officially recognized by the United Nations.

Armenian terrorists would, perhaps, like to draw parallels between the
[Arab-Israeli] issue and the Armenian question in the following manner:

1) In the establishment of the Israeli state, terrorist groups operating in
foreign countries had an important share in the success of the propaganda effort
to prove the legitimacy of the Israeli cause.

2) The Israeli state was established by the decision and support of the United
Nations.

3) Although, at present, there is no Armenian population living in Eastern
Anatolia, it is possible to weaken and destabilize the Turkish state through the

application of terror in cooperation with organizations of other ethnic groups
abroad. Even if this cannot be done, the buildup of sympathy around the world
may force the establishment of an entity in Eastern Anatolia.

[13 May 82 p 2]
[Text] The general aim and purpose of terrorist groups can be stated as follows:

a) To force governments into bargaining situations with demands of release of
political prisoners and ransom by hijacking airplanes, taking hostages and
kidnaping important personalities.

b) To secure necessary popular support in order to show themselves stronger and
more important that they really are, to increase their recruitment and to have

their cause publicly endorsed.

c) To force governments into taking broad oppressive measures and a position of
state terrorism in order to create the impression that the people's real enemy

79
is the government and the police state and to indoctrinate the people such
that they will eventually rebel against the government or stand by the side of
terrorist groups in future conflicts.

d) To avenge the terrorists' failure to have their demands accepted and their
ideas endorsed; to kill persons they declare to be guilty in order to scare and
force into submission individuals. institutions and groups who do not cooperate.

The terrorist methods listed above have all been used in Turkey.

Nodern terrorist groups are also products of social conditions. They grow very
fast in suitable environments. Therefore, this issue must also be examined from
a social and economic viewpoint.

Economic and Social Conditions

Social and economic factors related to terrorism can be summarized under five
categories:

a) Socioeconomic environment.

h) Possibility of legalization of terrorist groups.

c) Possibility of foreign support for terrorist groups.
d) Results of terrorist acts.

e) Possible future of terrorist groups.

3) Studies show that there is a direct correlation between economic imbalances

in a society and terrorist activities. The extent and the effects of this
correlation varies from one society to another. This correlation manifests itself
in several ways.

First, there are the movements which emerge in an environment of insecurity
created by extreme economic imbalances in a society, faults in the system,
inadequacies in the bureaucratic machinery, large gaps between the rich and the
poor, economic problems that affect and threaten the middle class and the failure
of a political administration to institute social justice.

Then there are the terrorist groups who want to exploit the situation to destroy
the state and lay the foundations of a communist system under the philosophy of
a worker revolution.

There are also problems arising from the condition of workers sent from poor
countries to high-growth countries. When migrating workers cannot adapt to the
society in which they are working, the resulting adverse living conditions lead
to the formation of terrorist groups by the younger generation.

when givernments cannot meet the demands of these ethnic groups, terrorism is
adopted as a means of securing certain rights. Such incidents are observed
everywhere around the world. The case of the Federal Republic of Germany is the
one that interests Turkey.
b) The legitimization of terrorist groups depends on the support they find within
a given society.

If a terrorist group finds sympathy for its cause, its legitimacy can be discussed.
A good case in point is the Palestine Liberation Organization.

c) Terrorist groups may be supported by certain governments or they may find
sympathy or toleration for their acts among the national grouping or minority

they belong to. Such support and sympathy plays a significant role in the spread
and strengthening of terrorism. Support can also come from other terrorist groups.

An example of the first case is the tolerance shown to Armenian terrorists in
France, Lebanon and some states of the United States.

Examples of the second case are the sympathy shown by the Japanese Red Army to
the Palestine Liberation Organization and the cooperation between Palestinian

organizations, the Japanese Red Army and the Baader-Heinhof gang as manifested
in the Munich massacre.

d) Results brought about by the acts of a terrorist group can cause certain
problems for a country both domestically and internationally.

--li, within the environment of insecurity it creates and maintains, a terrorist
group succeeds in bringing about the social change it desires—-such as cause a
change of government, or get concessions from an existing government--certain
results will emerge both within the country where these events take place and

in the international arena. A good example is the formation of the Israeli state.

—-A terrorist group may not find the reaction it desires either from the people
or the government. when that happens, they try to make themselves heard by
helping other terrorist groups abroad and by attempting to gain an international
identity. Good examples are the Japanese Red Army and the Baader-Heinhof gang.

--In some societies terrorist acts get exactly the opposite reaction the terrorists
expect. The activities of the Popular Revolutionary Army in Argentina caused

the formation of a rightist terror organization called the Argentine Anticommunist
Alliance. In Turkey, too, leftist terror gave birth to rightist terror.

--A terrorist group may also meet with complete failure and be routed by government
forces. Examples can befound in Latin American countries.

e) The future of terrorist groups depends on whether these groups expect better
successes in the future, whether their organizations will disband or whether
their ranks will thicken.

In this respect, the future of Armenian terrorism will depend on how badly their
dreams are broken around the world, how little sympathy and tolerance they find
from the governments and politicians of the countries they live in and how far
governments adhere to international agreements.

ll proper steps are not taken, terrorism will hurt the countries it is based in
as well as international relations.
Examples of Armenian Terrorist Propaganda

Based on Foreign Hinistry bulletins summarizing worldwide press reports supporting
terrorist activities in various countries, the following conclusions can be made:

a) The killing of Turkish diplomats is not presented as an act of murder, the
murderers are presented as heroes and Armenian communities as well as sympathizers
are urged to contribute to the material and moral support campaigns launched
during the murder trials.

Thus, not only are fanatic young men and women encouraged to commit murders, but
also they are made to believe that even if they are caught and tried they will
either be set free or given very light sentences. The actual results observed
lead to the intensification of this propaganda campaign.

b) Allegations about an Armenian genocide in the period 1915-1918 are reiterated
on every occasion; films, radio and television programs are prepared on the issue;
hooks and articles are written; personal memoirs are published; and people are
encouraged to write letters to newspapers and magazines for publication.

what is said is similar to the following excerpt taken from the December 1981
issue of ARMENIA, a newspaper published in Marseilles:

"Armenians who could escape the 1915 genocide have for years demanded, through
peaceful means, the admission and condemnation of the genocide. The laxity of
the international justice system has led the Turkish authorities to deny and
distort historical facts. Let us not discourage the representatives of countries
like France who support us. Let us also emphasize that we are not terrorists,
but a national resistance organization."

Our version of history is based on documents in government archives. There are
also archives on Turkey kept by other governments. It is well known that all
Turkish government archives were at the disposal of the Allied forces during the
occupation of Istanbul, that the Turkish government of the time would do anything
to help the British and to slur the rebel government of Union and Progress, that
there is not a single document in British or 0.8. archives to indicate the
occurrence of a genocide and that, despite all the special efforts, not a single
document has been found to implicate persons exiled to Malta in organizing a
genocide.

Therefore, Turkish archives represent nothing but the truth. They contain
neither denials nor distortions. impartial Armenian historians will also testify
to this fact.

During the war, Armenian armed gangs and revolutionary committees working behind
the hack of the Turkish army and Armenian forces fighting on the side of the
Russian army caused a large number of casualties among Turkish soldiers and
peasants and in the process suffered casualties of their own. It was for this
reason that Armenian families in the war zone were forced to migrate. But the
Armenians want to show their war losses and migration as genocide. They have
indoctrinated their young with this fanatical idea and turned them into today's
terrorists. One must not forget that 3 million Turks met their deaths during
the war at the hands of Armenian armed gangs. Hho shall we ask to account for
our losses?

c) An article entitled "Armenians and Turks" rejects an explanation given by
Turkish communists that the 1915 events were part of a class struggle. The
article claims that at the time 80 percent of the Armenians lived in rural areas.
that they suffered the same poverty as the Turks around them and that the reasons
behind the alleged genocide are rather linked to differences of religion,
language and culture between the two nations.

If Turkish communists have really given such an explanation, this is a good
example of how their ideology leads to absurdities.

The other mistake concerns the linkage between the alleged genocide and
differences of religion, language and culture between Turks and Armenians.

If that were true. Fatih Sultan Hehmet would not have set up the Armenian
Patriarchate in Istanbul and would not have defended the Armenians against the
Catholic Church; during the five centuries that followed this event, that is until
the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, there would exist no Armenian churches, schools,
hospitals and foundations in lstanbul and Anatolia. If there were religious
animosity between Turks and Armenians there would not be i.b million--by our count,
2.5 million by their count--Armenians living in Turkey in 1915 because they

would have been wiped out in the course of centuries. If these allegations were
true, Armenians would not be able to live in peace with the Turks in rural areas.

d) He see in press reports how Armenian terrorism is supported in countries like
France.

[16 May 82 p 2]

[Text] Twenty French socialist deputies, who assume that Armenians have really
been subjected to a genocide and who claim that "even today the Turkish government
oppresses the Armenians living in Turkey," recently submitted to the European
Parliament a draft resolution which brings heavy charges against Turkey and which
makes certain demands from the BBC Council of Ministers.

Addressing representatives of Armenian societies from the Bouches de Rhone region,
French Ninister of State for Interior Gaston Defferre, who is also a deputy from
Marseilles, said it was he who suggested the draft resolution--which calls on the
"Turkish government to admit the 1915 genocide"-to the French socialist group

in the European Parliament, that if the resolution is endorsed, an important step
will have been taken in the international field and that Armenians may expect
further such actions at the level of UNESCO and the United Nations.

in another speech on 26 April 1982, Defferre declared that he stands in total
support of the Armenian cause. To quote [Turkish Foreign Minister] the Honorable
llter Turkmen, "those who bring accusations against Turkey must remember the

dark and shameful pages of their own history."

This truly opportunist French minister has resorted to lies for political
purposes and to secure a vote base for forthcoming elections. The fact that he

83
has promised to have a monument built in Champs Elysee in Paris to commemorate

and immortalize the Armenian genocide goes beyond political opportunism and shows
that he is afraid of the terrorists' acts.

0) There was another incident in France that attracted our attention.
ASALA and Dashnak Supporters

0n 6 November 1981, a ceremony, presided over by the Deputy President of the

French National Assembly, Guy Ducolonne, was held in Marseilles to commemorate

the 61st anniversary of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic. Speaking at the
ceremony, Ducolonne said that "France has for years supported Armenian aspirations,
most importantly the acceptance of the genocide" and that "the French government
must make efforts toward the recognition of the first genocide of the 20th
century." he made a bigger gaffe when he said: "It is the tradition of our
country to make efforts to preserve the existence of the Armenian minority in
Turkey."

f) in Lebanon, Armenian young men and women publish newspapers and magazines

in universities. Some of these publications support the Dashnak Party, the
Armenian Revolutionary Federation, and some support the ASALA [Armenian Secret
Army for the Liberation of Armenia], which is an extension of the Dashnak Party.

Academicians Threatened

The Lebanese-Armenian youth has now reverted to intimidating historians. The
second volume of a two-volume history work written by Stanford J. Shaw--a history
professor at the University of California in Los Angeles--and his spouse in 1976
states that an Armenian genocide did not take place. Armenian terrorists do not
like this work at all. As a result, Professor Shaw, who teaches Turkish history
at the University, was forced, through student boycotts, to leave his job
temporarily and was even threatened with death. This is a tactic used by people
who are afraid of their own lies and who would like to prevent impartial people
from learning the truth.

Recently. two history teachers and students from the Haigazian University in
Lebanon have begun pressuring the authors of the book entitled "History of the
Modern Horld Since 1815" published by the Yale University in the United States.
The authors have been criticized for not mentioning the "first genocide of the
20th century" in the chapter on World War I and the publishers have been asked
to include this in the new edition of the book. The two professors who wrote
the book have stated that they find this request justified and that they will
make the necessary amendments to the new edition.

This may seem to be a simple incident, but is worrisome from an academic point

oi view. when a history researcher does not write about an issue which he cannot
determine clearly during his research, he is committing an act which is related
to his academic ethics. If history will assume a new identity in the face of
demands and pressure, neither the historians nor the history of the western world
will be trusted.

8b
g) In an interview with LB FlGARO correspondent Laconetre, head of State Gen
Kenan Evren said: "An Armenian question does not exist in Turkey. An Armenian
state has never existed on the lend within the borders of Turkey and will not
exist in the future." HERALD, a magazine published by students in Lebanon,
criticises this statement and sakes the following prediction: "History books of
the future will show how an Armenia was born before Turkey's eyes.“

How will this be done? Some believe that a Marxist-Leninist government will

come to power in Turkey and, as a manifestation of international brotherhood

--that delusive concept used by all the worker regimes around the world--will
permit the establishment of a Greater Armenia on the Eastern six provinces of
Turkey.

Others believe that the United States must bring about this state of affairs.
A Fanatic clergyman

Archbishop Yeprem Tabakian, the Armenian spiritual leader for the western United
States appointed by the Armenian Catholicate in Antilles, Lebanon, has sent an
open letter to American politicians and government institutions in connection
with the murder of our Los Angeles Consul Kemal Arikan and the trial of the
suspect in the murder. The letter was published in ASBAREZ, the press organ of
the Dashnak Party in the United States. Following are the concluding remarks of
the letter:

"Our desperation is a reflection of our determination to return to our ancestral
lands. After 600 years of enslavement by the Turks, we were able to regain part
of our homeland in 1918. It is for this reason that our young are not hopeless.
He would like all American citizens to understand the nature of this sacred and
just cause which is leading to this kind of acts (killing of Turkish diplomats).

"As a spiritual leader of the Armenians, 1 would like to convey to you the lofty
objectives of the Armenian national liberation struggle.

"He went the return of our occupied lands to their historical owners.

"Who else but the United States, which has led the world in the defense of human
rights, can help us to win our just cause?

"Lastly, let me reiterate the slogan that shook Europe for a long time: Serving
Armenia is serving civilisation."

A clergyman is trying to convince the United States that some of Turkey's lands
must be turned over to the Armenians by the use of force. Examples of such
absurdities stemming from church fanaticism are abundant in history.

Hisled by the clamor raised by Britain about the establishment of an Armenian
state, President Hoodrow Wilson was inclined to accept a U.S. mandate over
Armenia [in 1918]. But subsequent fact-finding missions sent to Turkey proved
the hollowness of Armenian claims over Eastern Anatolia, and the 0.5. Senate
refused the responsibility of establishing an Armenian state. If this dream
could not be realized at a time when Armenians constituted 18 percent of the
population of Eastern Anatolia, how can anyone expect that current revolutionary
and warlike objectives could be realized today when Armenians constitute 0.009
percent of Turkey's population? Today. there are A? million Turks living in this
country. Let us assume that the six provinces claimed were given to the Armenians
by some power. How many Armenians are expected to come to these lands? From
what corners of the world are they expected to come? "he will guarantee the
security of Armenians who come to Eastern Anatolia on a hostile footing? who

will be able to force 67 million Turks to accept such a fait accompli?

Can they find answers to these questions?
A Communist Regime

Some groups envisage an exceptional situation where Turkey's current national
identity is destroyed by a communist coup, Turkey becomes a supporter and vassal
of Moscow's and Armenians are permitted to settle in the East within a federal
framework.

what illusions! Can anyone expect that even a communist regime, with any sense
of identity, would do something like that?

Now Turkish voices are also being heard against the propaganda campaign being
waged abroad. Turkish-American societies in the United States are waging
successful countercampaigns of their own. A well-prepared brochure entitled
"Setting the Record Straight Against Armenian Propaganda" was recently distributed
and advertising space was .ought on high-circulation U.S. papers. The 0.3.
government, meanwhile, d01§ not appear to be taking a soft stand against the
murders.

This 20 April produced a lig propaganda wave just like the others before it. Now
as 28 May-the anniversary of the proclamation of the Armenian state in 1918--
approaches a new propaganda wave may be expected.

[15 May 82 p 2]

[Text] Having looked at France. let us take a brief look at Greece, which,
together with the Creek sector of Cyprus, has become a staging area for Armenian
terrorist organizations.

Armenians in Athens were given the opportunity to organize when the military
novernnent was in power in Greece and have maintained close links with Armenian
terrorist organizations in France and Lebanon. Now, Armenians in Athens have
found an ally in [Greek Prime Minister Andreas] Papandreou, and they can work
comfortably under a tolerant government and police organization. The ultimate
aim of Armenians living in Greece is to divide and disintegrate Turkey.

Right before September 1980, all terrorist groups in Turkey thought, on the basis
of the support they received from leftist political parties and labor unions, that

a leftist coup was possible in this country and that a leftist government could be
brought to power.
in line with this impression, the Armenian murder organization which martyred
Galip Osman in Athens in August 1980 issued the following communique:

"The fighters of the Armenian Secret Army assume the responsibility of killing
the Turkish diplomat.

"Our struggle is a new step taken against reactionary forces in Turkey, against
NATO and all imperialist forces and against Armenians who do not support us and
want to stall progressivism.

"He will continue our struggle, hand in hand with Kurdish forces, until we
liberate our homeland and the Turkish people living under oppression."

Russian Support

One branch of this organization is believed to be the Athens Armenian Youth
Organisation which is headed by an Armenian woman known as Red Agavni. In an
address to a gathering of Armenians, she raised her left fist and said:

"we are grateful to the Soviet Union which supports our cause. Our objective is
to divide Turkey and to make Eastern Anatolia part of Soviet Armenia."

A statement by the "Armenian Revolutionary Committee," which hides behind the
name "Pan-ﬂellenic Armenian Organization" to win the sympathy of Creeks, says:

"The struggle of the Armenian people continues to liberate its lands from Turkish
occupation. The ultimate aim of our struggle is to recover these lands from the
Turks and make them part of Soviet Armenia.

"Armenians of the diaspora feel sympathy and allegiance toward Soviet Armenia
which is the most democratic republic in the Soviet Union."

These statements must make the Turkish people think again why there have been
"liberated zones" in Fatsa--a small staging port on the Black Sea-—Kars and Artvin.

As long as Armenian terrorism and terrorists and animosity against Turks are
supported in Greece and other countries, it will not be possible to stop
international terrorism and its arm, Armenian terrorism. The situation will be
even more difficult if the Soviet Union continues providing political support for
these organizations as evidenced by the statements mentioned above.

All this means that Armenian terrorism is one of the tools used by the Soviet
Union to bring about the collapse of Turkey.

Support From America
It is known that currently there are 500,000 Armenians living in the United

States, most of them being in Massachusetts, Michigan, Illinois and California.
Not surprisingly. the latest murder was committed in Boston.
Consequently, the dependence of candidates running for the Senate and the House
of Representatives on Armenian votes in these states has created the environment
desired by terrorist groups.

On 24 April 1982, California Governor Jerry Brown ordered all state flags to be
flown at half mast to commemorate the 67th anniversary of the alleged Armenian
genocide. Brown's published statement said:

"History is our interpretation of past events. One of the darkest periods in
history was lived during the massacre of 1.5 million Armenians in 1915. When
Hitler ordered the destruction of the Jewish race. he pointed to the Armenian
experience and questioned whether anybody remembered that catastrophy."

Governor Brown also spoke at a dinner reception given in his honor in Hontebello
by the Dashnak Party, a revolutionary organization. Brown said: "i will do my
best as Governor and, if elected, as U.S. Senator to help the Armenian cause."
His words were aimed at securing votes for the forthcoming elections.

Congressmen and senators from the states mentioned above repeatedly state that
the first genocide in history was committed by the Ottoman government in 1915,
that 1.5 million Armenians were killed in the process and that modern Turkish
governments must assume responsibility for what happened, pay reparations and
return the lands Armenians claim to be theirs. Hassachusetts Governor E. J. King
has joined these congressmen and, on 2 April 1982, the House of Representatives
of that state passed a resolution condemning the alleged Armenian genocide.

Thus, the Armenian isSue has become a political investment opportunity in the
United States resulting in an environment which supports and protects terrorism
in certain states.

Those Who See the Truth

Meanwhile, pro—Turkish congressmen and senators condemn the murders of Turkish
diplomats and their families and demand that the federal government take serious
measures to prevent these acts. They state that the recognition of the terrorists
claims will mean a return to the law of the jungle, that young people from
middle-class Armenian families in Lebanon are indoctrinated with Harxist-Leninist
ideOIOgy and sent to France and the United States to commit murders and that all
terrorist networks. with no exceptions, have pro-Soviet sympathies.

North Carolina Senator John P. East says that the Soviets are behind every
terrorist movement around the world. Noting that Soviet support for terrorism
is not a fabricated allegation, Senator East says that the Soviets supply all
politically motivated terrorist groups with training, arms, logistics and
propaganda assistance through direct or indirect means.

Turkey's Importance for Europe

The motives of these terror incidents abroad are very clear as stated several
times previously. Armenian terrorism has its place within this general framework
and has its own motives: To attract the attention of the Western world to the
Armenian question through the sensational environment created by the murders and
use the West to force Turkey to make concessions.

This same thing has been tried for a hundred years. How can this dream have any
chance of success against a strong Turkey when it could not be realized at the
time of the collapse of the Ottoman Empire and the occupation of Anatolia?

Turkey is a great country. Hith its rising population, Turkey will. within the
next 20 years. become the country with the largest population and strongest
potential in Europe next to the Soviet Union.

The loss of Europe may mean serious economic difficulties for Turkey, but if
Europe loses Turkey its political independence may be jeopardized.

Europe now seems to be inclined to present Turkey with the threat of a new
crusade. There is only one spectator applauding this great political tragedy:
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Conclusion

The conclusion that can beédrawn from what was said so far is that terrorism is
directed against not only individuals, but also the stability of government systems.

if anarchy and its violent tactics cannot be stopped in time, significant damage
may result to the machinery of government. its relations with the people and the
sensitive structure of the economy.

According to one estimate, there are around 50 significant terrorist groups around
the world. According to another estimate there are around 300 violent action
groups around the world if all the splinter factions are counted in.

These groups have a broad range of ideologies. mostly derivatives of Marxism.
All Armenian terrorist groups are ideologically Marxist-oriented and can
comfortably link their objectives with Moscow's foreign policy.

The contradiction within the Western alliance is that the acts of terrorist groups
which make no secret of their ideology are greeted with sympathy. The speedy
escalation of anarchy and terror in Turkey which brought the government to the
brink of collapse was the result of the tolerance shown by Turkish political
parties in viewing and interpreting the events.

This tolerance and the political opportunism which helps the election of certain
government or party officials are loopholes which are exploited very well by
terrorists.

Consequently. it is very hard-almost impossible--to wipe out movements similar
to Armenian terrorism within the framework of the western world.

When a terrorist group which has given its cause a national identity and a
sympathetic form murders foreign individuals or damages foreign institutions in

a given country, the government of that country is generally not inclined to move
against the terrorists. As long as the citizens of that country and their
property are not hurt, the terrorists will be looked upon with tolerance. This

89
is a type of collaboration and is the most important factor in the failure to
curb international terrorism.

The UN convention on the "prevention and punishment of crimes against
internationally protected individuals" adopted by the General Assembly in
December 1973 and the European convention on the "annihilation of terrorism"
adopted in 1°77 have not been effective in the prevention of crimes against life
and property. The reservations expressed by some of the signatories of the
European convention show that political murders will not be easily ended.

As long as a government does not take serious internal and external measures. it
is impossible to bring an end to acts of violence by newspaper articles and
commentaries, radio and television programs. books and academic seminars.

It is impossible to wipe out terrorism especially when a group is considered
terrorist by one government and a freedom fighter organization by another.

0588
CS": 6l33/2601
ASALA, HIGH-LEVEL OFFICIALS LINKED TO SHUGGLING RING
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 9 May 82 p 17
[Report by Kamil Basaran]

[Text] Five years ago we proved by documents and warned the authorities that
"Overco," a company set up and operated by our mortal enemy. ASALA [Armenian
Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia], in Holland. Iraq. Syria and Lebanon,
was bringing smuggled arms and goods into Turkey. Do you know what happened?
Our reports were covered up. "A TIR [International Highway Transport] truck
driver who cooperated with the Armenians and who could give ua important leads
was permitted to escape by high-level Turkish officials."

l was talking to official people. Thinking that I did not believe what they said,
they added: "Here are the documents. They are documents of shame about the
bribery addicts and the phony patriots of the pro-12 September period. You can
look at them." The documents before me had "Very Important-Urgent" stamped on
them.

The persona l talked to tried for years to attract attention to the biggest
smuggling operation in the history of the republic organized by the Armenian
secret terror organization. ASALA, but their voices were subdued in the
environment existing before 12 September [1980]. They still hold high-level
government positions. Their reports said: "The Armenians want to dynamite the
foundations of the Turkish Republic. Here is their true identity, here is their
phony company and here are the Turkish officials helping that company." These
reports were not heeded and their authors were frustrated.

when HURRIYET published reports that "Overco" was operated by ASALA and that
there were important personalities involved behind the scenes. these officials

said: "Those who covered up those reports must be ashamed of themselves." Now
they were showing these 5-year-old "important documents to set an example."

Driver Escapes
I looked at the documents they gave me. They said:

"The Dutch Embassy has reported that Overco is owned by an Armenian, that the
company's Kuwait representative may also be an Armenian and that this company is

91
smuggling arms into Turkey.

"Dutch truck driver Adrianus Van Hijk has stated that he works for Overco in
Holland and that he has received instructions from a company official named
Luthart to unload the goods in his TIR truck, license number 60-66-23, at a
location near Caziantep in Turkey. This snuggling incident has also been
confirmed by the Dutch Interpol."

i asked:
"ls the Dutch truck driver now in jail?"
The officials smiled bitterly:

"He is not in jail; he is abroad. He escaped from our hands. He escaped in a
Mercedes car from a customs area. The driver had dual nationality; he gave us
very useful information. "is account was confirmed by the Dutch Embassy.

"Let us tell you the incident mentioned in those documents from the beginning.

"Adrianus Van Hijk was a truck driver working for Overco, a company owned by
Armenians. He told us where he unloaded smuggled goods and how he got around
customs formalities without leaving Turkey. He also told us that a fresh shipment
of arms was on its way aboard a truck.

"There were some interesting developments while we were waiting for that truck.
Van Hijk was spirited out of the customs area. He did not even have his passport

with him.

”While the investigation of the incident continued there were even more interesting
developments. Another truck driver attempted to run away with the captured TlR
truck. This driver, a Yugoalav citizen, inflated the tires of the truck, refueled
it, found the ignition key and started the engine. A colleague of ours who was

not even on guard duty caught him. This driver told us that he unloaded three

truckfuls of arms in Turkey.

"Report No 10, dated 29 December 1978. and Report No 2, dated 25 January 1979.
written by Inspector Necati Can. explain the other tragic facts about this

incidents. You can read them."
How Can This Happen?

An interesting section in one of the Inspector's reports attracted my attention.
It said:

"According to my investigation of the truck with license number 66-66-28, the
Dutch lnterpol, acting on tips provided by the Dutch Embassy, has uncovered the
activities of a smuggling organization in Holland. It has determined that
Adrianus Van Hijk would carry one half of a ZS-guilder banknote the other half of
which would be carried by the person who would meet Van Hijk in Turkey. Thus,
the two would be able to identify each other. The Dutch Interpol has also

92
reported to the Dutch Embassy that weapons are kept in the spare tires of the
truck with license number 29-A5-ZB and that this truck is supposed to be at the
Turkish-Bulgarian border. This last fact was also the conclusion of our office.
Although the investigation was being handled by our office and although this
fact was known to the Dutch Embassy, relevant information which should have been
reported to us was sent to the Ministry of the Interior.

"The note sent to the Ministry of the Interior specifically mentioned our office
as the authority in charge of the case. In spite of that, the Ministry chose

to pass the information on to the Edirne Security Directorate by phone, in a
manner that could compromise the secrecy of the investigation. After receiving
this important information, the Edirne Security Director promised the
Undersecretary of the Ministry of the Interior that he would get in touch with
us, but that information never reached our office.

"It was later determined-who the Edirne Security Director-who was appointed to
that post in December 1977-—got in touch with after receiving the information
from the Ministry. The information in question reached our office 2 months
after the Ministry of the Interior received it. Meanwhile, the Ministry of the
interior complained to the Ministry of Customs and Monopolies that our office
would not release any information on the case."

Smugglers Benefit From Unexpected Recall

The 5—year-old investigation reports stamped "Very Important-Urgent" are filled
with hair-raising accounts. In one report, Ministry of Customs inspector Necati
Can says:

"in our previous investigations we had determined that the firm named 'Overco
ﬂolland B.V.' and reportedly owned by Armenians was smuggling goods by TIR

trucks through entry ports in the Thrace and that two containers belonging to the
firm had been dispatched through Turkey to a bank in Kuwait.

"It was believed that these goods, supposedly destined for (Aiahli) Bank in
Kuwait. would be unloaded at a convenient location [in Turkey] after moving out
of the port of Mersin. Therefore, a watchdog group was instructed to keep an
eye on who was in charge of the containers and to keep track of the containers
if they were permitted to leave the port."

And then there is a big "but“ which may cause a lot of faces to turn red.
inspector Can's report continues:

"But when Feramuz Durmusoglu who was appointed to run the shadowing job was
suddenly recalled to Ankara for unknown reasons, the pursuit operation could not
he carried out. The Middle East international Freight Company, which on

5 January 1979 filed Application No 138820 to save the containers in question
out of the port, later wrote to the Directorate General that they had changed
their mind on grounds of foul methods practiced by Overco."

93
Female Spies
Let us listen again to the high-level officials who want to remain anonymous:

"The smuggling incidents which provided sweet profits to ASALA assumed new
proportions in the pre-l2 September Turkey; many people occupying important
positions were busy filling their pockets. Only Turkey and its deceived sons
were losing because the Armenians were giving assistance to every right-wing
and left-wing illegal organisation in Turkey.

"How were they doing it?

"The Armenians were smuggling goods into Turkey and selling them here. Imported
merchandise addicts were snatching these goods. Smuggled television sets, radios.
jeans and cosmetics left sweet profits for the Armenians. Hith their earnings
they bought narcotics and traded in hashish and heroin. Of course, they employed
puppets in Turkey to do their work. These unconscientious traitors, who are
supposed to be Turkish citizens, knowingly or unknowingly helped the Armenians.
The Armenians made even more profits from the sale of narcotics. With those
profits they would smuggle arms into Turkey and make even more money. Later,

they gave this money to right-wing and left-wing illegal organizations in Turkey
as well as ASALA. The foundations of the Turkish Republic were being undermined,
Turkish blood was being shed and Turkish diplomats and citizens were being killed
with money earned in Turkey. There was also a desire to undermine our intelligence
organizations through influential people employed by the Armenians. In such
operations female spies like Mata Hari were being used. Bribery and women always
work like magic keys."

Jeans Uncover Armenian Smuggling

Customs Inspector Necati Can, who wrote the reports mentioned above, did not wish
to talk about the issue. He only said: "I wrote those reports tirelessly despite
the death threats and I turned them over to the authorities concerned." lle added:

"My suspicions about Armenian smuggling were aroused by a shipment of blue jeans.
I could not understand why one would ship blue jeans to Arab countries. Who
would want to wear blue jeans in a hot country? There was something wrong and
my suspicions turned out to be well-placed. Unfortunately, many things that
should have been done could not be done in time.

"There are many things to be told, but I am a civil servant; i cannot talk."

Faces To Be Unmasked

But the high-level officials who talked to me did not remain silent. They told
me other things which they did not want published at this stage. They said:

“Many snake heads were crushed in the aftermath of 12 September. Some managed
to hide. Now we will uncover those snake heads and crush them. He will unmask
the traitors who collaborated with our mortal enemies, the Armenians. and who

enriched themselves with their dirty money. we will do this even if they have

occupied important positions in the
past. it is time that these
people account for their crimes before Turkish justice." unconscientious

9588

C80: 6133/2600 9"
COLUMNIST ALLEGBS SOVIET INSTICATION 0? ARMENIA" TERRORISM
Istanbul TERCUIIAN in Turkish 10 May 82 p 6
["Street Corner" column by Ergun Core: "The Real Purpose of Armenian Terrorism"]

[Text] Armenian terrorism has not stopped. It continues with more insolence and
defiance. Now they have murdered our Honorary Consul in Boston. The cowardly
slaying of Turkish diplomats certainly saddens the Turkish nation and causes
problems for the Turkish government, but it does not create definite results
which would be against the Turkish nation and the government.

Then we ask: that is the purpose of killing Turkish diplomats on the pretext of
completely distorted events that happened 70 years ago? How has an "organization"
named ASALA [Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia] sprung up so
sudde:.ly and why is it working within a plan so persistently?

ll-e purpose of these acts is very clear. The objective is to arouse the Turkish
public to take retaliatory action against Armenians living in Turkey. Especially
if such action assumes the proportions of the 6-7 September [1955] incidents,
those who are instigating a few Armenians will have achieved their final aim.
Then they will blame the responsibility of their crimes on our nation and plot

a conspiracy against Turkey which is becoming an increasingly strong factor of
stability in the Middle East.

The plot is not new; it is quite old.

For the past 100 years, the Russians, the French and the British have been
cruelly and senselessly inciting the Armenian minority in Turkey to cause the
collapse of our state from within. Naive Armenians who have become tools for
this criminal act have brought disaster upon their nation.

The some play is being staged again. ﬁve days ago, the Honorable Celal Bayer,
the third President of the Republic, was reported as saying: "Russia is the
instigator of Armenian terrorism." His statement is a reflection of comon sense,
experience and patriotism. The Soviet Union has lost its extensions, anarchy
centers and "DER" or "TUH" organisations in Turkey. The 12 September [1980]
operation brought an end to the divisive activities of these organizations in

Turkey.

95
Armenian terrorism and the unrest it may cause in Turkey are the only trump cards
left in Soviet hands.

But the agitators who sit in s room in the Kremlin to decide how to divide and
dismember Turkey, what slogans to suggest to certain writers, what logos to give
to certain cartoonists and how many roubles to pay to treason networks are
forgetting one important factor: The humanity of the Turkish nation.

The Turkish nation has shown an exemplary level of humaneness toward members of
different faiths it has lived with and will do so even in the 25th century, if
this world is still alive.

The sadist passions of a few mercenary Armenian terrorists are alien to the
Turkish nation. There is not a single Turk who would attribute the responsibility
of crimes comitted by a few perverted and confused Armenien terrorists to
innocent Armenian citizens living in this country. But this nation end its
government have the power to force the Armenian terrorist hyenas who have shed
the blood of so many Turkish diplomats out of their dens and make them pay for
their crimes.

this is the right and duty of this nation and government—just as long as they
want to do it.

9588
cso: 6133/2600 in