FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10562
3 June 1982

Worldwide Report

LAW OF THE SEA

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
ME

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Rords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT W8 AND REGULATION GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOR
0? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lC
3 June 19

HORLDHIIE REPORT
LAN or THE SEA
(moo 3/92)

CONTENTS

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

004610 ISLANIE

Briefs
Japanese F1 thing Aid

SENMAL

New honing Agrement 311th Spain Concluded
(W335 TROPICAUX ET mums, 26 Feb 82) .......

Establibhment of Senegal-Seafood of 'Special Importance'
(“WEISS TROPICAUX BT WW8, 5 Mar 82).........

HBSTEUROPE

UNITED KING“

'THE TIMES' Urges Diplomacy on ms Conference
(Melvyn Heatlake; THE TIMES, 16 Apr 82) ................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm ISLANDS

BRIEFS

JAPANESE FISHING AID--On 10 May. Japan and Comoros signed at Horoni an agree-
lent to: 360 million Conoro francs to aid the government purchase a number

of snail fishing boats and equipment. [Excerpt] [Paris HARCBES TROPICAUX

ET mammm in French 14 May 82 p 1291] women: Rene Horeux at Cie
Paris 1982]

(:80: 5200/5658

1
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

NEH FISHING AGREEMENT UI‘l’Il SPAIII CONCLUDBD
Paris meats TROPICAUX ET animals in French No 1894. 26 Feb 82 p 615

[Text] Senegal and Spain have concluded a new fishing agreement following
negotiations held in Dakar by both countries' state secretaries for fishing.
Under the terns of this agreeaent, which is valid for 2 years. the financial
coupenaation which Senegal will receive in return for fishing rights granted
to Spanish ships will be raised from 30 to 60 percent.

The text stipulates the ntnber of Spanish ships which can fish in Senegalese
waters: 21 fresh-fish trawlers (as opposed to 13 in the previous agresnent).
15 shriapboats (as opposed to 39) and 42 tunaboats (sale umber as in the
previous agreeaent). Fishing zones are also the ease. except for a restriction
of the southern part of Senegal. which is considered a reproductive area for
sasll fish.

The nest significant innovation concerns fees; the price to be paid will no
longer depend solely on the boat's capacity. Pros now on. 3 factors will be
considered in assessing license prices: the size of the boat (with a limit:

no sore licenses for boats of more than 1,000 tone). the products fished end
their destination. Thus this price will vary according to whether "yaboye"

or shriap are caught and whether all of this catch is to be shipped abroad or

to Dakar. thus providing work for processing plants. The licensing rate has
also been raised for all types of fishing. as well as all-inclusive compensation.

Article 7. which has been renegotiated, will also allow Senegalese products
to penetrate the Spanish market. In the case of deepwater shrisp. Spain has
agreed to purchase Senegalese production on the basis of prices set according
to category.

The sgreeaent also provides for the presence of a Senegalese observer on board
Spanish ships to nonitor whether the fishing zones assigned to then are being
respected, the count of the catch and the nesh size of the nets used.

According to the agreement. Spain will also provide Senegal with the means to
obtain a training ship for training fishersen-sailors and to finance a fishing
research prograa in Senegal for 150 sillion CFA francs.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith this agreenent, Senegal viil begin noving toward tighter restriction of
fishing zones and the amber of fishing licenses granted to foreign ships.
according to Mr Robert Sagna. Senegalese state secretary for fishing. The
secretary added that this new policy is intended to protect Senegal's fishing
resources and to open the fishing sector to Senegalese.

Rather than granting fishing licenses, he said. Senegal prefers to establish
seninational corporations with foreign countries or companies. Such corpora-
tions, which will be based in Senegal. vill help to create jobs and will con-
tribute to the full-tine operation of local seafood processing infrastructures,
Hr Sagna concluded.

oomma'r: Rene noreux et Cis. Paris 1982

11915
(:80: 5200/5640

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

ESTABLISH!!!“ 0P SENEGAL-8m 0P 'SPBCIAL IMPORTANCB'
Paris mom TWPICAUX B‘l’ Hummus in French “0 1895. 5 Her 82 p 679

[Text] Large-scale Senegalese fishing should soon undergo significant develop-
nent as a result of the establiabent of the Senegalese-Danish Senegal-Seafood
0onpeny. The project is intended to dauhle industrial production and thus
nake up partially for its lag behind small-scale fishing.

The Senegal-Seafood project is intended to manage the entire process. from
production to exportation and transportation. as well as refrigeration and
processing. This will therefore be an integrated unit of exceptional importance,
with an estimated production of 100,000 tone of fish annually when fully
operational.

Industrial fishing produced only 40,000 tone in 1930. out of 360,000 tons.
Pour stages of developnent are planned, each with a goal of 25,000 tons.

Eighty percent of production will be nsrketed in Africa (market needs are
estimated at 1 million tons, of which only 10 percent will be satisfied by
Senegal-Seafood) and 20 percent in Europe and the United States, according to
LB SOLEIL of Dakar. The creation of nore than 1.000 direct jobs is planned,
not to nention derivative effects.

Financing of the four stages is estimated at 20 billion CPA francs and is fully
provided by the Danish side. without a request for a guarantee from the Senegalese
Goverment. Each stage of the project will have to be profitable before the

next stage is started. Such profitability is determinable only after 9 nonths

of operation.

According to Mr Knud Schierbeck. president of Senegal-Seafood. the experimental
stage, which has just begun with the first boat being put into service. will
test new fishing methods in cooperation with Senegalese fisher-en for improved
results.

The company's boats will fish nainly in deep water—about 600 meters-which.
according to the president. rules out any competition with national fishermen.
who fish mainly in coastal areas at relatively shallow depths. During the
experimental stage. using their experience the Danes will try out new fishing
methods which they have used in their own country and which they believe can
be adapted to Senegal.

1;
me omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lnitiel conclusions will soon be drawn concerning the actual start of operations.
which involves establishing refrigeration. processing. transportation and export
structures in Dakar and Casanance (where shipyards are planned), with a lateen
yard in Abidjan, Ivory Coast.

Private Senegalese stockholdere. who have been asked only to mobilize their
part of the capital. hold 51 percent of the stock as opposed to 49 percent held
by the Danes.

Hr Sogui Diouf, director of oceanography and fishing. stated that between now
and 1985 industrial production's share of Senegalese fishing will amount to
50 percent, which can only have a favorable effect on export revenues.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie, Paris 1982

I 1915
C80: 5200/5640

5
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

UNITED am

"1'3! TMS' GROSS DIWCY on IDS CONFBRDICB
M61631 London 11!: TIMES in Engliah 16 Apr 82 p 6

[Article by Melvyn Weatlake: "Hill Reagan Toke the Law of the See into
Ilia Own Randal")

[Text] lvente in the Palhlenda have focueed attention on the potential for conflict where
nineral wealth ie found on or under the aeebed. They have alao aerved no a minder that
Britain ie etill a nejor naritine nation which will gain fro. clear new lawn governing the
aea routea. Yet while the South Atlantic occupiea world attention. deaperate diplonacy

ia needed in new York to prevent the Law of the Sea Conference fro- being acuppered.

The threat to the conference hae cone juat when yeare of painatalting negotiationa by 150
countries had appeared to be moving towardo a eucceoaful concluaion.

if the conference ia a failure there to a danger that we will aoon witneee the biggeet
carve-up of the earth'e treeauree eince the ecraeble by luropea: powere for black Africa
in the second half of the nineteenth century. Oceana night then effectively be etaked
out by a handful of rich and technologically advanced nationa. with the all of aecuring
a clain to the vaat atorehouae of atrategic netela that lie on the deep on bed.

The proapect of such n carve-up hae been brought very ouch cloeer aince Preeident Reagan
took office in the United States and ordered a review of the draft convention to laboriously
negotiated at the Law of the Sea Conference during the preceding aeven years. The reault
of this review in a eubetantial book of anendnente. net of which are rejected by the Third
Uorld netione. There in now a very real danger that if the United Statea preeeee theee
enendnenta the whole delicately balanced package of interlocking agree-ente, which for. the
backbone of the draft convention. will atart falling apart.

It the convention in ever concluded it will repreeent the lergeat body of international law
ever eetabliahed covering not only eeabed nining. but nerine navigation. eovereign righta
over continental ehelvee. excluaive econonic some up to 200 nilee froe ahore. end eea
pollution control.

The danger that the whole convention light cone unravelled doea not appear to be worrying
Uaahington. However. A-erican officiale are concerned that the United Staten ahould not
appear to be etanding out againat the reet of the world. If the Auricane alone are
reeponaible for the collapee of the Law of the Sea Conference. ﬂoacow would acore a pro-
paganda coup by putting thee in the dock of world opinion ea rapacioue apoilere.

That in why the Reagan adniniatration haa been lobbying eo hard to get llritain. Heat
Cemny and none other countriee to join it. end why eone voicee in Britain can be heard
urging the governnent to throw in ita lot with the Anericena. Hr Janet “alone. the United
Statea chief negotiator. cone to London juet before the atart of the leteet union of

the Law of the See Conference. which ie due to run until April 30. and argued hie country’e
ceae before an audience at Chathen ﬂouee.

6
FOR omcm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even those Usatern countries that syapathize with the Anerican position have been
eabsrrassed by the naked self-interest that the Reagan sdainistrstlon is displaying and

by its heavy-handed tactics.

britain is in a bind. Like the United States. it is worried that the Beat any have given
away too such to the Third Horld nations over seabed lining. and that burdensone inter-
national restrictions will be iaposed on its aining activities. North Sea oil installations
also nake it i-portant to get agreement over continental shelves.

Yet a Law of the Sea Convention without the United States would probably be a blunt instru-
aent. One alternative is for the key industrial nations -- the so-called "like-ninded
states” -- to fornulate a nini-treaty of their own.

These countries are the United States. britain. Heat Ger-any. France. Italy. Ielgiun.

The Netherlands and Japan. Several of then have now passed donastic legislation to regu-
late and license exploration and col-arcial recovery of hard ninerals fron the ocean floor
by their own citizens. Alaost unnoticed. britsin has passed a deep sea lining (taaporary
provisions) set. supposedly to provide a legal frenework for our nining coapanies until
the Law of the Sea convention cones into effect in the late 1980s.

These national pieces of legislation all have reciprocal arrange-ants recognizing one
another's claian and have all the appearances of coordination. So, if the Law of the Sea
Conference collapses. the way would be clear for a llondyke-style ruah. Six consortia
have already been for-ed. Nost are led by Anerican coapanies. although one is chiefly
French. and another nostly Japanese. Shell. SP. Rio Tinto Zinc and Consolidated Gold
Fields are along the lritish conpanies that have joined international consortia.

Their quest is for the potato-sized nodules. lying half-buried in the and of the seabed.
containing 30 or 60 percent sanganese and vary such sasller quantities of copper. nickel
and cobalt. The najor industrial countries are all dependent to a greater or lesser
degree on iaports of those ninerala which are found in seabed nodules. The 0.8. inports
aore than 95 percent of its supplies of cobalt and nanganese. which are used in the pro-
duction of high-grade steel. frequently with nilitary application. As the nodules are
often fourd at a depth of three siles. only a few countries heva the necessary technology
to nine then. eaploying. for era-pie. deep sea hoovers - a techniQue enlikened to sucking
up peanuts through a piece of nacaroni iron the top of the Inpire State building.

The situation over seabed aining has all the characteristics of a classic struggle between
the world's rich and poor nations. Sons poor countries have nsde no secret of their belief
that it represents a najor test of their crusade for a "new international econoaic order."
Their view that the seabed beyond the linita of present national jurisdiction is nan's
"connon heritage" has now becone largely accepted as a legal concept.

but this leaves open the question of how seabed ninarala can be exploited in a way that

is fair to all, when only a few countries are in a position to undertake nining operations.
The fornula used is that proposed by Dr Henry Kissinger when he was 0.5. secretary of
state: Uhat became known as the "parallel systen.” Under the draft convention an inter-
national seabed authority would conduct its own nining operations-through an organization
called the “enterprise." on behalf of all nations. It would also license and regulate

private ventures.

Private coapanies would put up to the authority an area of the seabed they regarded as
having coanercial possibilities. Half of this would then be worked by the private contrac-
tor and half by the enterprise. Apart iron the enterprise. which would be based on Jessica.
the authority would have several other specialized organs. including an international
trihunal of the Law of the Sea. based in Hanburg. To prevent the enterprise being at a
persenent technological disadvantage. the private aining coapsniea could also be obliged

to share their technology with it. receiving coapensation for doing so. The general
policies of the authority would be fixed by an asseably of all nations. but real power
would reside in a 36-nenber executive council.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A-erican opposition hae eeaentially focuaed on six points. which have been harshly suarited
by its critics aa representing a deuand that the United States should have ”virtually unres-
tricted accese to deep seabed ninerala reaourcee for itaelf and a right of veto over the
activity and develop-ent of the proposed international seabed authority."

In country has been guaranteed a place on the authority's 36 tuber aecutive council.
but it is inconceivable that the United States would not have a seat. Its vote. however.
would count for no lore than, say. that of Malawi. Iir Halone denies that he in seeking
veto powers for the United Statea. but there is no doubt that what he does want is to

ensure there is a sufficiently large group of nations cyepathetic to America who would
block any unacceptable action by the authority. '

The fear is that any of these questions are becoming clouded by ideology. Hr Elliot
Richardson. President Carter's chief negotiator in this fieldand a for-er abeseador to
Britain. has publicly auggeated that none Reagan officials are less interested in getting
a good treaty than in acuttling any treaty. Even the lining conpanies have belatedly
realized that they stand to gain lore from the eetablieluent of a legal and etable regime

for the seabed -- with its many faulta —- than fro- a free-for-all with the consequent
lack of invest-ent security.

If the rich countries were to adopt a mini-treaty of their own. and unilaterally begin
lining what doea not belong to tho. the effect on international relations could be
devastating. The Iilitary inferiority of the Third ﬂorid atatea rules out any reaort
to gunboata. but anarchy would reign over virtually every aspect of uritine activity.

080: 5200/2072 BID

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY