FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10175
10 December 1981

South and East Asia Report

(FOUO 6/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itemI or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/101'IE
10 December

SOUTH AND EAST ASIA REPORT
(9000 6/81)

CONTENTS
BANGLADESH

Bangladesh’s Brahad Interviewed on Military'e Role
(Peter Niesewandx m GUARDIAN, 8 Oct 81) .....................

INDIA

Report on 'ASAHI SHIMBUN' Interview with Indira Gandhi
(Indira Gandhi Interview: ASABI salmon, 23 Sep 81)...........

- e - [III - ASIA - 10'

me nannu NSF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BANGLADESH

WWESH'S ERSHAD INTERVIEW!) 0N HILITARY'S ROLE
PMDBlllS London THE GUARDIAN in English 8 Oct 81 p 10
[Peter Niesewand Dispatch: ”Bangladesh Army to Seek Greater Role in Politics“)

[Text] Dacca-The chief of staff of the Bangladesh Army, Lieutenant-General B. H.
Ershad, has called on politicians to consider important constitutional changes which
will actively involve the military in the country's affairs and ward off the possi-
bility of future coup attempts.

In a forthright interview at his home in the Decca Cantonment. General Brshad point-
ed out that sections of the army had assassinated two Bangladeshi presidents-Shaykh
Mujibur Rahman in 1975, and Ziaur Rahman in May this year. There had also been
other coup attempts.

"My army has got involved," General Brshad said. "It is my responsibility. Obvious-
ly, we have to approach the next president. In a developing nation, the army does
play a very high role in the stability of the_country. To stop further coups, if

the army participates in the administration of the country, then they will probably
have a feeling they are also involved. and they will not be frustrated."

General Brshad stressed that while he was prepared to take an initiative after the
presidential elections on 15 November. any constitutional changes that resulted have
to be endorsed and carried out by the civilian government.

Although General Ershad said that morale in the army was “absolutely all right." it
is now clear that last month. in the final weeks before the hanging oi 12 officers
for mutiny leading to the assiasination of President Zia, a dangerous situation had
arisen within the ranks.

On 7 September, General Brshad ordered that a message he read to soldiers assuring
them that the officers would be executed.

The chief of staff maintains that his "order of the day" was not a challenge to the
high court or the supreme court, which at the time were considering petitions asking
them to rule that they had jurisdiction over the fate of those tried and sentenced
by the secret court martial.

However, restless Jawans who listened to his message would have been forgiven for
thinking that General Ershad was promising to hang the officers, regardless of the
findings of the civilian judiciary. '

1

FOR 0FF1ClAl.USEi0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his message, General Ershad said: "I want to assert again that we consider it
against our constitution that a matter concerning military affairs should be dragged
into the high court, and we consider it also a threat to the discipline of the armed
forces. He really hope that law will take its own course. I would like to tell our
soldiers in all ranks that the sentences given by the court martial will be imple-
mented. Let there be no doubt of suspicion about it."

The message also said he would not permit “the activities of the armed forces to be
used for political purposes. The wrongdoers must be punished," he added. "We hope
God will give us courage to perform our responsibilities."

In the event the courts ruled that they had no jurisdiction to intervene, and heli-
copters immediately took off from Dacca to the different gaols where the condemned

officers were being held, carrying with them signed death warrants. The hangings
were over in 12 hours.

In his interview General Brshad explained: "It was my internal problem. It was an
order of the day to say 'just have patience, I am sure the high court and the supreme
court will give the correct verdict, and whatever judgment is passed by the army they
will not do anything against it.’"

Asked if he would have hanged the officers anyway if the courts had ruled differently,
the chief of staff laughed and said: "This is a very difficult question.”

Informed sources said that "the basis of the Jawans' unrest was not only their love
for the assassinated president, but also the feeling that if ordinary soldiers had
been responsible they would have been executed with little ceremony, and possibly-
as has happened before--not even a court martial.

And the chief of staff told me: "I had to give them this message. This was an
'officers versus the other ranks.’ Host of the people punished were officers, and

there was a feeling that just because they were officers we were going to protect
that."

General Brahad defended his decision to try the officers for mutiny--which allowed
him to hold a secret court martial--rathsr than for murder, which would have been
dealt with by an open civilian court.

"A trial in a civil court takes a very, very long time," General Ershad said. "A
trial for murder would have taken months and months and months, and I would have had
a great problem with the army. Ultimately it would have been very dangerous for

the country. The president was very much loved by the troops, and naturally

the feeling of the troops was very high."

On a possible future constitutional role for the army in Bangladesh, he said that he
had discussed the merits of the Turkish system with the late President Zia. "But
ultimately we discarded it," he said. "We are a different nation. Our people are
politically very, very conscious. I should say it is a volatile nation."

General Ershad said that the military was "absolutely neutral" in the presidential

election, although he did admit having intervened personally to persuade the sick
and reluctant acting president, Justice Abdus Sat Tar, to stand as a candidate.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He said he had done this merely to ensure that, during the vital interregnun, the

ruling Bangladesh nationalist party did not fall apart while bickering over rival
candidates.

It would have been possible for the army to have declared martial law. General
Brshad went on, but they wanted the constitutional process to continue.

"Martial law is never the manor," General Brahad said. "Pakistan of course is con-

tinuing with one after another. But does it ultimately pay? It does not. The

army's role is different free running an edninistration. If you get involved in
this, ultimately you destroy the army."

COPYRIGHT: Guardian ugwspgpgxs Limited, 8 Oct 1981

C80: 4220/23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. l‘SF OS! \

INDIA

REPORT ON 'ASABI SllniBUN' INTERVIBH ma INDIRA GANDHI
M51215 Tokyo ASAHI SHIHBUN in Japanese 23 Sep 81 Morning Edition p 7

[Sunny of an "exclusive" interview with Prime Minister Iiidira Gandhi by Teruo
Kunugi. chief of ASABI sanmm Asian General Bureau and hmishige Yoshimra. chief
of the daily's New Delhi bureau, on 21 Septeﬁer in New Delhi]

[Text] Question: It is said that because of the Reagan Administration's hawkish
posture, the era of detente is now dead. that is your view?

Answer: It is true that an atmosphere of tension and confrontation is building up,
but I do not think that detente is dead or abandoned.

Question: You have lately often referred to an international crisis, prime minister.
By that you mean that detente is on the decline, do you not?

Answer: Detente is indeed on the decline. If one side makes an advance, the other
side will do the sale in response so as to counter it.

Question: You have just mentioned a response to cope with the other side's action.
Theindustrialized nations of the West at their Ottawa nut neeting noted the
Soviet threat and agreed to take a fin- stand against it. That was their response
to Soviet policies.

Answer: “no is responding to whom? The Soviet Union sees itself encircled. The
Rest European countries were on the side of the United States. Even Iran was closer
to the United States. In addition. the Nixon administration established friendly
ties with China. The Soviet Union, thus finding itself encircled. was coqelled

to respond.
A superpower is increasing its presence in the Indian Ocean. An act of a superpower
would naturally invite a response froa the other superpower. It is like clidung

a ladder, each trying to climb a step higher than the other. The eventual outcoee
will be a war and nothing else.

Question: In your view, how firm are the foundations of China's modernisation
policy?

Answer: China is in a state of confusion. Both the people and the party are di-
vided and polenics are continuing. The leaders may be laying emphasis on economic

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.H‘ .——H __._,__ _,_,_‘—-————_— -_——-—
and technical development but not all the people seem to be in raccord with the new
position of the leadership. China has entered its lost difficult phase now. Per-

sonally, I wish it success but I do not want to see Chins drawn into something like

an alliance.

Question: But the United States and Japan are promoting China's modernization and
some people have come up with the "China-U.S.-Japan axis" concept. What do you
think of that?

Answer: I prefer the word 'ﬁlliance" to "axis" but it is a dangerous one. If one
alliance is created. it will be followed by another to resist it. However modernized
China may becone, it cannot expect future national developments so long as it forgets
the principle of self-reliance, relies on other countries or keeps itself pre-
occupied with disputes.

Question: Nevertheless, we think that China has chosen the West European type of
development for itself. "hat is your view?

Answer: China may be headed in one direction today but in another direction tomor-
row. It nay not be as bad as that, but I do know that each nation should explore
its own path and no other nation should meddle in it.

Question: "hat do you think is the best way to prevent nuclear proliferation?

Answer: The only way is to press for general disarmament, particularly nuclear
disarmament. The continuing buildup of nuclear arms attests to the failure of the
nuclear nonproliferation treaty.

India conducted a nuclear explosion test once in the past, solely for peaceful pur-
poses. Scientists wanted to find out if nuclear power could he used in building a
large den or sane such project. It was an underground test and a clean one.

The reason why India is not a signatory to the nonproliferation treaty is that the
treaty is of discriminatory nature.

Question: "hat is the possibility of further nuclear testing?

Answer: If it becomes necessary, that is, if a scientific need arises. I will con—
sider it. India will conduct no nuclear testing for political reasons.

Question: If Pakistan should possess nuclear arns, will you consider nuclear arming
for India. too?

Answer: Our policy is not influenced by what Pakistan does. If there should be a
war between India and Pakistan--although we do not want to see it happen--it would
be fought with conventional weapons.

Question: Would you comment on India's foreign policy.

Answer: India has consistently strives for world peace, for promoting friendly re-
lations and alleviating hostilities wherever they emerge. Nonalignmsnt is also one
of the major features of our foreign policy.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

International confrontation and the arm race are dangerous to world peace; the
widening gap between the rich and poor nations is equally dangerous. Therefore.
North-South dialogue is inportant. The role of the nonalignsd movenent is to con-
centrate on the basic question. that is the question of war or peace, and to tackle
problems relating to the economic development of developing nations. This is a
contribution to peace.

Question: You say that "India is not pro-Soviet." but many natims regard it as
being pro-Soviet rather than pro-0.8.

Answer: India is neither pro-Soviet nor pro-11.8.; it is neither anti-Soviet nor
anti-0.5. It is not anti-Chins either. If is Western media and leaders that are
painting a "pro-Soviet" image of India.

At the tine of independence, the United States refused to give assistance to an iron-
works construction project in India, saying that it could not aid enterprises under
public management. However. the Soviet Union aided us. India will never allow
Soviet aid to influence its thinking. judgment and behavior.

Question: You seen that there is a difference between the present view among nations
and reality. Are you going to leave the mistaken view as it is?

Answer: mat sore can I do about it? India has been striving to diversify the
sources of aid in its industrial development program and it has been successful in
this area. Even in its purchase of arm, it has been buying them from various coun-
tries so that it is not dependent solely on the Soviet Union.

Question: India's aim in its recognition of the Bsng 8min regime of Kapuchea was
to play the role of a mediator, was it not?

Answer: I only fulfilled a campaign pledge. There was no hidden intention whatso-
ever.

Question: World public opinion and feelings over the issues involving Afghanistan
and Kanpuchea have it that they camot support a regins created by the military
force of a foreign country....

Answer: They say so but Destern nations have been continuing their interventions
in Central and South Alerica. Asia and Africa, changing governments there. It is
unreasonable to use a different yardstick under a different circlnstance.

When the Soviet Union entered Afghanistan, most of the countries condemned it. They
got nowhere, however, but made a settlement more difficult. The stationing of
troops is not in the interest of the Soviet Union. The USSR want to withdraw its
troops. The important thing is to create an environment for the withdrawal.

Question: What is the basic philosophy of India about economic development?
Answer: India pursues a so-called mixed econony. Capitalism cannot solve our
problem. India must develop its mm socialism, not the kind of socialism in the

USSR and other countries. Socialism means equal opportunity for the people and
bringing an end to old economic and social injustices.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These goals cannot be attained if the econon is left to be controlled by the prin-
ciple of the market. If political awareness is enhanced in the course of develop-
ment. if development results in an increasing isbalance between the rich and the
poor. the poor people will not tolerate the development itself. In that case. we
will have to slow down the economic development.

Question: What do you expect Japan to do in the area of economic relations?

Answer: Japan is India's second largest trade partner. It is the third largest
country in terms of assistance. We are deeply grateful to it for the assistance.
It is encouraging that Japan takes a positive stance on North-South dialogue. I
think that India and Japan can cooperate in the energy field, too.

Question: Re are sorry to say that no Japanese prime minister has visited India
for some 20 years. Prime Minister Gandhi's visit to Japan was back in 1969. Por-
eign Minister Sonoda in one of his recent remarks referred to the possibility of
Prime Minister Suzuki visiting Indis....

Answer: If Prime Minister Suzuki visits India, we will extend the highest level of
velcome.

Question: we hope that you also will visit Japan to realize a mutual visit by the
prime ninisters....

Answer: I will be happy to visit Japan. I visited Japan three tin in the past
since I first acconpanied my father (the last Prime Minister Nehru). I an all for
mutual visits by the prime ministers.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinhun Tokyo lionsha, 1981.

C50: 6220/7125 END

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY