FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10313
9 February 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODCCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l

9 Pebrua

JAPAN REPORT

(P000 9/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOG ICAI.

Japan To Endorse Disarmament Treaties at UN
(ASAHI EVENING NEWS, 1 Feb 82) ..........................

Japan's DSP Adopts 1982 Action Program
(KYODO, 20 Jan 82) ......................................

Suzuki Diet Speech Vieved as Evasive
(Editorial; mm mm: 3mm. 26 Jan 82)

'YOMIURI' “its. 'Lackadaisical ' Diet Proceedings
(Editorial; THY. DAILY YOHIURI, 31 Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Suzuki Defends Defense Spending Plan in Diet
("000. lyeb 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOIIO5......0.00.0000...

HITI's Goals, Policies, M-iniatrative Methods Busined
(T.d.hide xkuta; mo mac". 1981) I...’...O..C....0.0.CO

MILITARY

'HAINICHI': Release Contents of Japan-".8. Arms Memorandum
(Editorial; MINICHI DAILY ms, 31 Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SD? Maps on New 5-Year Defense Program
(31.11. 7 J.“ 82) cc.oonnosoo.ssoo-oosaeoaaooaaasssossasoo

Briefs
View of Japan's Defense Minister

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Reprocessed Plutonium for Light Water Reactor Power Generation
(MINICﬁI SHImUN’ 31 Dec 81) OOIOOOOCODOO...OOUCOOOOOOI.

-a- [III-ASIA-lll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UII'HL'IAI. USE ONLY

Strengthened Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Budget Emined
(om! 8mm. 9J‘n 82) 0.00....00.0.0000...00.000.00.00.

Ultra nigh Perforlance Inertial Guidance Syaten for 11-1

Rocket Being Developed
(cqwmnDIcEsT’ J.“ 82) O0.00.0.0...OOOCCCCOIOOCCOUCIOOOO

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JAPAN to mouse museum mamas “ rm
011021633 Tokyo ASAHI svenmc news in English 1 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] In response to the growing interest in disarmament in connection with the
second United Nations special General Assembly on disarmament in June, the govern-
ment will submit to the current diet aesaion bills to approve the ratification of,
or Japan's participation in. three international disarmament treaties in non-nuclear
areas.

The three pacts are:

(1) The treaty on the prohibition or restriction of the use of "certain conven-
tional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indis-
criminate effects": Weapons to be controlled under this pact include plastic
bombs, mines and booby traps which could cause injuries to the civilian population,
and napalm and other incendiary weapons.

Japan and 64 other countries. including Britain, France, West Germany. the Soviet
Union and China, have signed the treaty, which was adopted in 1980 by the United
Nations. The United States has not yet signed it, saying its disarmament policy
is still under review by the new Reagan Administration.

(2) The treaty on the prohibition of the production and stockpiling of "bacterio-
logical and toxic weapons," which was established in April 1972 and signed by 88

nations including Japan and the two superpowers.

(3) The treaty rn the prohibition of the use for military purposes of technologies
to cause natural hazards such an earthquakes, tidal waves, sudden changes in the
currents of the seas and other changes in the natural environment, which was adopted
in December 1976 and signed by the U.S., the Soviet Union, Britain and other major
countries. Tokyo has not yet signed it.

Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki has made it clear that he will go to New York in June
to attend the U.S. conference to appeal for a ban on nuclear and chemical weapons.
Japan has signed the first two of the above three treaties but has not yet ratified
them. and it has yet to become n signatory to the third one.

I'D! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The govcrment feels Japan should boom a party to the three treaties to give more
weight to its appeal for disarlmnent. With the 0.5. conference scheduled in June,
now is the best time for Tokyo to take such action. No objection is expected to
be raised by either the ruling Liberal-D-ocratic Party or the opposition parties.

work is now being conducted hurriedly on coordinating the provisions of these
treaties and those of related domestic laws.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

650: 6120/139

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ARI) SOCIOWICAL

JAPAN'S DSP ADOPTS 1982 ACTION PROGRAM
0P201145 Tokyo KYODO in English 1134 GMT 20 Jan 82

[Text] Tokyo, 20 Jan KYODO-—Jspsn's Democratic Socialist Party. the moderate No ‘
opposition party, Hednesday decided its 1982 action program, stressing the need to:
Japan to strengthen the existing Japan-0.8. security partnership and bear greater
responsibility for its own defense.

The plan. to be submitted to a 08? regular party convention scheduled to start
17 February. said the party would promote Japan's greater role in defense and
closer Japan-U.S. defense cooperation in concrete terms.

Such closer defense ties between Japan and the United States are needed particular-
ly in view of the current global situation which the party said is forcing Hashing-
ton to adOpt the "swing" strategy involving rapid transfer of forces from one area
to another.

Behind the DSP's thinking on defense is increasing world tension. the party‘s
advocacy of greater preparedness against what it calls the "threat" from the
Soviet Union, and the party's receptivity to America's mounting calls for greater

Japanese defense efforts. observers commented.

The DSP action plan calls for a well-balanced Japanese defense buildup while
promotion a peace strategy, sticking to the framework of the war-renouncing
constitution and paying due consideration to tr ndition of government finances.

1t urges Japan to make effective use of its defense budget and upgrade quality in
an effort to achieve its responsibility as one of the western bloc nations.

The DSP plan declares that the party upholds the current security partnership
between Tokyo and Washington and calls on the Japanese Government to conduct a
general reassessment of the national defense progrua outline, adopted in 1976 as
a basic buildup plan.

The DSP proposes unified parlisaentary action by the four Ioderate opposition

parties--the DSP, Kameito, New Liberal Club and United Social Democratic Party-
through a liaison between their diet policy and election policy cmumittees.

FOI.OF1WCIAL.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This proposal is less ambitious than one for a more outright political alliance
of the four parties within the diet, advocated by DSP Chairman Ryosaku Sasaki
last June. The for-er proposal failed to work.

The 08? also calla on the three other opposition parties to agree to run joint
candidates for the house of representatives in 39 electoral districts.

C50: “120/138

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0H311409 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 26 Jan 82 p 2
“Editorial: "Prime Hinister Suzuki's Speech Unappealing, Unimpressive"1

[Text] Why are the government's policy speeches delivered at the diet so boring?
We are not satisfied that U.s. President Reagan endlessly expounds changes of ideas
or philosophy in his speeches and, thus, gives us the impression that what he is
saying must still be given the finishing touches to be called concrete policies.
Frankly, in speeches by our prime minister, Suzuki, we cannot find anything to be
called a philosophy or any detailed explanations on policies.

We are sure that the prime minister has government policies to dwell on but, per-
haps, because of the need to make prudential replies during diet interpellations,
he steered clear of elucidating or expounding his policies in that important speech
in which he should have personally appealed to the nation. For instance, he did
not even mention the question of an income tax reduction which, by its very nature,
will be the focus of debates at the current diet session.

The question of a tax cut is not the only which the people wanted to know more about
but which was left untouched in the government speeches. In his speech Prime Hin-
ister Suzuki did cite the implementation of administrative reforms and the elimina-
tion of economic frictions with foreign countries as the immediate, urgent tasks
facing Japan. However, he only put perfunctory words in order regarding them, thus
making us unable to find what course the government is planning to take from his
speech. What we do find is the attitude toward administrative reforms that the
government will wait for the provisional survey council on administrative reforms

to come up with recmmnendations. Regarding the elimination of economic frictions
overseas, he did no more than "express his resolve" to settle the issue.

As far as administrative reforms are concerned however, what the nation wants to
learn from the government at this stage is what kind of Japan the highest person in
the administrative authority aspires to build through administrative reforms, or
the "philosophy behind the administrative reforms" and a rough direction of the
reforms eyed by the government. This notwithstanding, the prime minister persisted
with a posture of entrusting everything to the deliberative council and only await-
ing its recommendations. Consequently, this means that political leadership is of

no use .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prime minister's reference in his speech to the elimination of external economic
friction was too short. He said only: "It is Japan's obligation to contribute to
preserving and expanding free trade and making the world economy active" and "we
will voluntarily work out measures to further open up the Japanese market and strive
to make trade relations with other countries smooth." Does this suffice in making
other countries understand Japan's resolve and sincerity?

Nowhere in the government's policy speeches can we feel the tension which we should
naturally feel for the nearing expiration of the time limit on the resolution of
this issue.

In the first place, speech is an act for conveYing one's will to his audience and
for influencing it. As a rule, the meaning in political science that violence is
the "last reason" is understood in conjunction with this. However, prime minister
Suzuki abandoned the best opportunity to make the most of his speech. In Japan where
things are mostly done through behind-the-scenes maneuvers and dealings rather than
the utilization of the power of the public speeches, Prime Minister Suzuki is not
the only one who does not make the most of speech. However, we are afraid that
national interests may be impaired if leaders fail to say something timely which
should be said with regard to affairs involving external relations. In this sense.
the prime minister's speech which is too ambiguous and too simple is open to ques-
tion in too many areas.

The portion of the policy speeches dealing with the defense question--which is
expected to be one of the focal issues at the current diet session along with admin-
istrative reforms, economic friction with other countries and tax reductions--seemed
as though it was bound with hoops two- to three-fold. In this we can perceive the
rulers' evasive attitude of giving consideration to the safe steering of diet delib-
erations first, instead of influencing the people through speech. This is regret-
table.

We believe the prime minister's concern lies in the opposition's criticism of the
government for increasing the fiscal 1982 defense budget by 7.75 percent over the
preceding fiscal year. Neverthrless, unlike the general perception prevailing at
home, it has become the seed of international criticisms against Japan that Japan
is not spending money for defense. To uur regret, the government's policy speeches
only showed an evasive posture in all areas.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizsi Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 4105/53

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'YGIIURI' HITS 'LACKADAISICAL' DIET PROCEEDINGS
09011030 Tokyo THE DAILY YGIIURI in English 31 Jan 82 p 2
[YWIURI SHDIBUN 30 January editorial: "Diet Shadow Play")

[Text] We are not only deeply disappointed but infuriated by the lackadaisical
proceedings in the lower and upper houses. We have to feel that the ruling and
opposition parties are not delving deeply enough into such important national
issues as administrative reform, financial rehabilitation, income tax reduction,
defense and political ethics.

Prime Minister Suzuki is apparently playing a safe hand. for his replies to inter-
pellators have been merely a reading of drafts composed by government officials.

Hhere has the passion of political debate gone? [low can we get to the core of
problems when our representatives are acting out a shadow play?

The people are calling for a tax cut. But the heart of the problas is how to
reconcile financial rehabilitation with a tax cut. All the parties urged the
goverment to carry out a tax cut, but none of them went into the matter in great
depth.

This onission is regrettable. But what the people deplored more was the pr-ier's
heming and having. He ducked the issue by saying that the goverment would con-
sider a tax out if it was the national consensus, as if the matter had nothing to
do with his. This smacks of an evasion.

Socialists Skimp Also

The opposition parties also showed inconsistency in questioning the government's
plans for adninistrative retort-s. The people must particularly remark that
Socialist Party (.15?) Chaimn Ichio Asukata hardly touched the subject, which
concerns the people as such as a tax reduction. Perhaps Asukata became tongue-
tied because his ears were attuned to union opposition.

As long as the JSP fails to lead, but is led, it can never become a national party.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meanwhile, we sensed some subtle change in the premier's replies on administrative
reform. Although we do not know yet the contents of the report to be compiled by
the administrative reform council this July, it is certain that the recommendations
will be strongly resisted by various quarters.

The premier's duty is to break through such resistance, he should not be looking
for a way out in anticipation of difficulties.

Other Evasions

When the debates focused on defense spending. the premier parroted the 1976 cabinet

decision that defense spending each year shall be set so as not to exceed one percent
of the GNP [gross national product].

we have to be dissatisfied when debates on defense focus only on percentage margins.
The core of the defense problem is a proper appreciation of the current reality that
a balance of power actually serves to maintain world peace and security.

An objective assessment of the status quo must be the basis for Japan to contribute
to disarmament efforts. We hope for penetrating debates in the upper and lower
house budget committees.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1982

C50: “120/139

8
FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI DEPENDS DEFENSE SPENDING PLAN IN DIET
0H011301 Tokyo KYODO in English 1156 ONT 1 Feb 82

[Text] Tokyo, 1 Feb KYODO—Priue Minister Zenko Suzuki said Monday he has "no plan
at all" of building up Japan's defense strength to the extent that it poses a
military threat to its neighbors.

Speaking at a house of representatives connittee meeting, Suzuki noted that there
are people who fear that Japan's defense spending may grow "unchecked" in the
future.

"Such fears are unwarranted." Suzuki said.

He also rejected as "absurd" allegations that his Liberal-Democratic Party (L0?)
is trying to put Japan again on the road of nilitarisn.

This refers to an objection by opposition parties to the government-proposed 7.75
percent defense budget increase in fiscal 1982 to yen 2.6 trillion (dollar 11.7
billion) at the expense of educational and social welfare outlays, each held to
less than a 3 percent budgetary hike.

"We have no plan at all to pose a threat to our neighbors by expanding defense
strength," Suzuki said.

Earlier in the comittee session, Suzuki said he wants the 1976 defense buildup
plan completed "a year or even 6 months ahead" of its target completion year of
fiscal 1987.

The plan naps out Japan's defense power in terms of nunber of tanks, aircraft and
ground combat units.

But many LDI' diet members as well as 0.5. Government officials maintain that the
plan is outdated, saying it was compiled during the detente between the "eaten
and Eastern blocs and that it does not take into account the recent Soviet military
buildup in the Western Pacific.

Concerning the goverment policy to hold its defense spending to less than 1 per-
cent of the gross national product (GNP), Suzuki said in the connittee nesting;
"GNP is subject to fluctuations of the international economy."

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Though he did not elaborate, the remark suggested that defense expenditures may
go beyond the 1 percent level in time.

The 1982 defense spending is expected to equal 0.93 percent of the GNP projected
in the fiscal year starting in April, up free 0.91 percent this year.

Last week, Suzuki said the government will keep its defense budget below 1 percent
of the GNP "for the time being."

CSO: 6120/138

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL All) SOCIOLOGICAL

MITI'S GOALS, POLICIES, ADMINISTRATIVE METHODS EXAMINED
Tokyo CHUO KORON in Japanese Pall Issue 1981 pp 187-204

[Article by journalist Tadahide Ikuta: ”The Ministry of International Trade and
Industry: The Most Powerful Govermaent Agency's Secret"]

[Text] Is The Ministry of International Trade and Industry Necessary?

On 10 June, several middle-level bureaucrats of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry (MITI) net in the Secretariat's Planning Section chief's roo-
on the third floor of the new MIT! building. beginning at dusk.

The youngest of them, Director Monouchi of the General Affairs Section, Agency
for Natural Resources and Energy (who joined the ministry in 1956 and is presently
chief of the MITI Petroleum Departnent. Years in parentheses hereafter indicate
entry of officials into respective ministries). and Minister Tsnaka of MITI
arrived late because they were attending a dinner for foreign guests. Meanwhile.
the others were engaged in an animated discussion of such questions as "what is
MITI?" and "why does a govern-ant agency which handles industrial sdlinistration
such as MITI exist only in Japan?"

In addition to Monouchi. six other participants were: Planning Section Chief
Kosuke Yananoto (1959), Automobile Section Chief shinjiro Nishinaka (1960) of the
Machinery and Information Industries Bureau. Aircraft Hespons Section Chief
Yoshihiro Sakanoto (1962) of the sane bureau. North Asia Section Chief Akihiko
Hayashi (1962) of the International Trade Policy bureau, Technical Research
Section Chief Norikazu Matsuda (1965) of the Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology, and energy planning official Katsusada llirose (1966) of the Energy
Agency.

It is customary at MITI to begin lively shop talk while drinking beer after 7 pa,
but alcohol was omitted on this particular day. The reason was that Yananoto
had rejected a proposal by one participant to "talk over beer."

The discussion centered on each individual's experiences and continued late into
the night. The points emphasized could be boiled down into the following: "MITI
has an aversion to controls, while its forte lies in the pro-otion of projects.
But the Diet and society demand the strengthening of various kinds of controls.
Nevertheless. throughout its history, MIT! has done its utnost to free itself

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁ

from exercising controls through licensing and subsidizing, and we HITI bureau-
crats are taking pains to administer without the use of controls" (Nonouchi).

Of course, the participants had high praise for HITI's role in Japan's economic
development and stressed the future expansion of that role. One participant
declared: ”When I observe HITI as an ordinary citizen, dissociating myself from
my position as a bureaucrat. I still rate its existence highly." The atmosphere of
the discussion indicated a kind of narcissism concerning HITI.

Toward the end of the discussion, I posed the question: "How would you define
MITI. using an easily understandable metaphor?" While various opinions were
expressed, Nonouchi used the metaphor of the firefighting system of the Edo
period and said it was like "the leader of the 'Me' squad." There was also a
comparison with the leader of the neighborhood mutual assistance system. In
other words, whenever a problem occurs in the industrial world, M171 is seen as
the agency to consult for a solution to the problem.

Testimony of Concerned Outsiders

Several days later, I met a member of the Industrial Structure Council (Chairman
Yoshihiro Inamaya, who is also chairman of the Federation of Economic Organiza-
tions). the advisory organ of the “III minister which plays an important role in
drafting policy for the ministry. When I explained the content of the above-
mentioned discussion. he responded with severe criticism.

While appraising HITI's achievements in developing Japan's industries in the
export field and its flexible administratin posture in avoiding the use of such
authoritative powers as licensing held by the postwar bureaucracy, the council
member said: "The term 'leader of the Me squad' is a self-denigrating expression
used by bureaucrats, but I believe that they have adroitly used the 'carrot and
stick' policy to maintain consistent control over industry. The difference lies
in their highly complex and complicated methods."

The council member went on to say that MITI's role in the development of Japan's
economy cannot be ignored, but it was due basically to the astuteness of the
people and the business enterprises, and evaluation of the true worth of HITI
prohnhly must await the future.

He also pointed out some dangerous signs concerning MITI which preclude optimism,
such as its increasing adhesion to political parties like the Liberal Democratic
Party. from which it previously kept a certain distance, and HITI's impotence
concerning structural changes in the sluggish pulp and cement industries.

Sense of Crisis Among Young Bureaucrats

incidentally, there is a strong sense of crisis among the younger bureaucrats. I
met a number of yOung assistant section chiefs (who joined the ministry in 1972-73)
of the various bureaus, who invariably said: "Section chiefs think only about
associating with politicians and do not seriously study the industries, so they
end up becoming naive optimists." "How can we give guidance to a business concern
which singlehandedly records sales totallinn several trillion yen? Also, within

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROI.0F10CJAL.USE‘ONIM

the government structure itself, we often penetrate the jurisdiction.of other
ministries and agencies, but in most cases we lose out." The assistant chiefs, who
have been given first-line management responsibility truly believe that the founda-
tion of HITI is unmistakably sinking. There is a clear gap between the previously
mentioned contention of the middle-level bureaucrats and the opnions of the younger
bureaucrats.

What is the actual state of HITI administration and its industrial policy? And
what are HITI's goal and direction?

HITI Is a Product of Japanese Soil

when LDP parliamentarian Yoshiro Haysshi. former MITI bureaucrat (his last post in
1950 was chief of the Industrial Machinery Section), visited France immediately
after the French presidential election. the newly elected President Hitterand's
special assistant reportedly said: "France would like to organize a ministry like
MITI and embark on a full-fledged industrial policy." Also, the United States

has promoted the "MITI-zstion" of the Department of Ommmerce since the Carter
administration. There is strong interest abroad concerning MITI, and there are
some Japanologists who are making special studies of HTTI.

The reason is perhaps berause they believe HITI has played a large role in Japan's
miraculous resurgence and remarkable economic development. According to Vice
President Yugoro Komatsu of the Kobe Steel Corporation (administrative vice
minister in 1944), HITI was labelled the "notorious MIT!" in the late 1950's by
the United States and European countries for resisting the liberalization of car
imports. Does this mean that their appraisal has changed?

The 0.8. Commerce Department has 36.000 employees (HITI has about 14,000
employees). Its main functions are centered on compilation of statistics.
including industrial statistics, economic growth rates. direct overseas invest-
ments, and procurement of supplies and materials. In addition. it handles
licensing of exports to communist-bloc countries, but it handles very few so-called
policy matters.

However, due to administrative reforms late in the Carter era, there was a sudden
move to strengthen the functions of the Commerce Department as a means of building
U.s. industry. It was a notable turnabout from a laissez-faire policy to
government intervention in trade and industrial policies.

As the first step in the reform: 1) industrial protection operations (antidumping
and contravening duties) handled by the Finance Bureau were transferred to the
Commerce Department; 2) the bureau was expanded to promote exports; and 3) the
control center for conmercial attaches assigned to the State Department's overseas
missions was transferred to the Commerce Department.

However, with the advent of the Reagan administration. the tempo in the buildup

of the Commerce Department slowed down. This is probably because the Reagan
policy of fostering the growth of free enterprise is incompatible with an increase
in government controls. in addition, Americans with outstanding potential have
traditionally aspired to employment with major private enterprises or to the

13
INDR OFIHCIAL USIICNULY
CV“ UI‘I'IVII‘I- U§L UI‘LI

professions, such as lawyers, but not to government agencies like the Commerce
Department. This follows the fact that although the government bears legal
authority, private enterprises do not heed its instructions.

Osamu Hatanabe (1964), public relations chief of the Hill Secretariat (who returned
in July from an overseas assignment in the United States). explained: "Perhaps the
groundwork for industrial policy and administrative guidance could be created in
America. but as a premise the American enterprises would probably decline further."
Natanabe thinks that the reasons for the absence of industrial policy in the

United States in the past are, in addltion to the social environment which rejects
governmental intervention and the social status of bureaucrats: l) the seriousness
of the confrontation between management and labor, and 2) the posture of enter-
prise managers in emphasizing, for example, short-term profits for each quarter

and their inability to adopt a long-range perspective. He says that as the 0.8.
economy becomes increasingly critical. there will probably be a recurrent move

toward solidarity between the government, private enterprise and labor, similar to
the movement last spring.

Sakamoto (previOusly mentioned) was assigned to Australia as an industrial
investigator under JETRO (Japan Economic and Trade Recovery Organization), before
he was chief of the Aircraft weapons Section of HITI.

According to Sakamoto. Australia has a Ministry of Industry which has the protection
of industry as its mission. As in the United States, there is a feeling of distrust
toward the government and, because of the labor unions and a conflict of social
interests. the ministry apparently daes not conduct industrial policy as Japan's
HIT] does. Therefore. many Australians believe that "HITI, which has taken the

lead in reforming Japan's industrial structure, probably has performed some kind

of magic.

In other words, there are government agencies similar to H111 in foreign
countries. but none handles industrial administration through administrative
guidance. In that sense. HITI is truly a Japanese mechanism which was nurtured
in Japanese economic and social soil. It could be said to be a Japanese social
invention which promotes "modernization from the top downward."

From Controls to Administrative Guidance

If so. why is it possible for an organization like HITI to exist in Japanese
society? One middle-level bureaucrat said: "In the United States and Europe,
especially, company managers take the risks of management into their own hands.
Profit gain is considered a merit and they must accept responsibility for risking
company operations through losses. Conversely. in Japan the larger the company
the less likely is the basis for judgment among company managers to be centered
on profit galns. As is evident by the fact that Japanese culture is sOmetimes
referred to as the 'culture of shame.‘ company managers cannot afford to be
thinking constantly of profitmaking. They tend to believe that 'their thinking
mnv perhaps be a bit clouded' and this probably causes them to look to MIT! for
guidance.

of course, the relationship between HITI and industry has drastically changed in
accordance with the growth stage in anan's economy. Rather than the

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INNRCHNﬂCJAl.USEGDNLN

"gemeinschaft" type of relationship in the foregoing explanation, it has probably
been a continuation of an interdependence based on cold calculation.

On 26 Hay 1969, HITI dissolved the old Ministry of Commerce and Industry, as well
as the Agency of International Trade. and combined the two to make a fresh start.
The progress of the new ministry subsequently became identified with the recovery
and growth of Japan's economy. and the administration of international trade and
industry passed through two pivotal phases to reach its present stage. One
phase took place in 1962 and 1963. and the other in 1970 and 1971.

In 1963, during the first phase, HITI submitted a "draft proposal for the
strengthening of international competitiveness" (later known as the "emergency
measure bill for the promotion of special industries”) and managed to obtain a
cabinet decision. but it was eventually aborted because of resistance from opposi-
tion parties and other government agencies.

Up to 1963, the administration of international trade and industry could be said.
in effect. to have centered on controls. Direct postwar controls began to be
relaxed in 1950 during the special procurement boom of the Korean Her, but the
subsequent foreign currency shortage continued to impede economic growth. and HITI
effectively used the foreign currency control act to implement its policy. Also,
the pretection of industry and direct controls were strong traits of domestic
industrial policy. while priority for capital distribution was given to electric
power. coal and transportation. and a preferential tax system was introduced.
including special depreciation allowances, to foster the growth of heavy chemical
industries.

Meanwhile, with regard to the "emergency measure bill for the promotion of special
industries." a strong demand was mounted by foreign countries for trade liberali-
zation. MITI, which foresaw difficulty in resisting it. endeavored to strengthen
competitiveness by concentrating Japan's key industries and encOuraging competition
against foreign enterprises. The abortion of this bill meant the end of MIT!
"controls" over industry which had continued after the war and it became a mile-
stone in the transition of Japan's economy toward a full-fledged open system.

At the time, Shigeru Sahashi. chairman of the Leisure Development Center (1937;
administrative vice minister). who was the promoter of the emergency measures bill
as chief of the Business Enterprise Bureau (equivalent of the present Industrial
Policy Bureau). discussed the details in his private office in Roppongi District.

"It appears to have been misunderstood. but the emergency measure bill did not
contain any intention of 'controls.’ Controls ended in the early 1950's. and the
industries grew strong and sound in the mid-1950's, when the GNP surpassed prewar
levels. Nonetheless. most of Japan's heavy chemical industries were still weak
in international competitiveness.

Therefore, the goVernment, private industry and related financial institutions
cooperated in a joint effort to concentrate the industries, such as aligning the
car makers, into three groups. He stressed concentration and workable competition.
Moreover, we proceeded to reorganize them under a legislated 5-year limit.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O'Uﬂ Ul’l‘lklf‘h UJI’. Vl‘hl

A master plan was drafted, based on discussion, and it was agreed that if each
industry presented a concrete plan. the government would provide tax-exempt
measures for mergers. Also, since the antimonopoly law banned collusion among
industries, HITI would incorporate exceptions into the bill in the for: of admin—
istrative guidance."

It was the Fair Trade Commission (FTC) which objected most strenuously to the bill.
Sahashi remarked in an angry tone: "If the obnoxious PTC's words had been heeded,
I wonder where Japan's economy would be today."

However, one FTC source said that, from 1950-51 when the postwar controls were
phased out until about 1963, one of the thl's traits was "to draft exceptional
provisions to the antimonopoly law and to leave things half done." The discord
between MITI and the FTC over administrative guidance is still continuing today.

Meanwhile, the second pivotal phase of MIT! administration took place in 1970-71.
As a result of the sharp rise in the economic growth rate beginning in the 1960's,
the viability of Japan's industries and business enterprises increased rapidly
during this period and the Japanese economy strengthened its international
competitiveness to the point where the MITI itself was perplexed. The goal of
"catching up with the advanced nations" was achieved. The U.s.-Japan textile
negotiations, which lasted from late 1968 until 1972. symbolized HITI's
disorientation.

President Yoshihiko Horozumi of the Agency for the Development of Power Resources
(1942), who was the negotiator for the U.s.-Japan textile talks as the Industrial
Policy Bureau chief and administrative vice minister, reminisced about the
negotiations. "The Japanese textile leaders considered themselves the injured
party and not at all the perpetrators of injury. As for us, we could not say for
sure that we were truly aware of Japan's international po ition. We were merely
critical of American protectionism.

HoweVer. in retrospect, beginning about 1971, Japan's economy had grown to the
point of having a considerable international impact in a number of phases. The
oil shock of 1973 was strictly an energy problem, but the qualitative change in
Japan's economy beginning in 1971 remains an important element in the solution of
foreign affairs issues."

"Sell Thread and Buy Rope"

Although the U.S.-Japan textile talks reportedly terminated in a secret deal
between Sato and Nixon, and an exchange of "rope" (non-nuclear return of Okinawa)
for "thread" (a major concession by Japan on the textile issue), a government-
to—government agreement was concluded on 3 January 1972. In form, the Japanese
Government's legal authority was invoked and the Textile Industrial Federation
brought a suit against the government. but it was withdrawn several years later.
The matter was eventually solved by a distribution of payments to textile circles
by the government.

Following the 1970-71 pivotal phase, HITI was no longer able to continue its
simple policy of increasing industrial production by protecting and nurturing the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industries. With the 1973 oil shock as a turning point, the energy problem
suddenly came to the fore. But. as Hororumi explained, the elimination of trade
frictions arising from a globalized Japanese economy and the fulfillment of Japan's
international responsibilities became the prime issues.

Criticism has welled up both within and outside HIT! regarding "a MIT! without a
money policy" (young HIT! bureaucrat) and "a haphazard administration without any
philosophy" (government source). This probably indicates that. even today, more
than 10 years later, HITI administration is unable to cope with a new environ-
ment.

He are thus able to see major changes which divide the postwar HIT! administration
into four periods: the period of direct controls (1965 to 1960-1961), the period
of protection and cultivation of industires (to 1962-1963), the period of rapid
growth (to 1970-1971) and the period of globalization (1970-1971 and later).
Administrative methods have accordingly become complex and highly sophisticated,
based on direct controls, indirect controls and induction, and administrative
guidance respectively.

Compared to the other ministries. HIT! exercised less licensing authority and
subsidizing at less cost. and it is characterized by administration without direct
legal authority. Its administrative methods are considered administrative
guidance, but Horozumi offers the following definition: "Administrative guidance
means discussion of administrative affairs. Administration employing legal means
results in a controlled economy. Therefore, from the standpoint of the national
economy and gross capital, the private sector comes forth with opinions represent-
ing the private enterprises. while the government acts in a coordinating role and
seeks an adjustment."

However. administrative guidance is actually accompanied by certain risks.
Naohiro Amaya, HIT! consultant (1968; MIT! councilor), stated: "Since there is
no inherent legal enforcement authority in administrative guidance, it should be
left to the Judgment of private enterprise whether it wishes to abide by it or
not. However, during former Prime Minister Miki's directorship of the Environ-
mental Agency, the administrative guidance tended to be regarded as arbitrary.

In those days, there was strong criticism regarding the manufacture of mercuric
caustic soda. and Niki gave administrative guidance to halt its production and
closed down the plants. Of course, such legal enforcement was accompanied by

compensatory measures."

Such administrative practices are not confined to the Environmental Agency, but
cOuld also happen in HIT! administration. Whenever HITI gives guidance to the
industries in connection with a bill or budget, LOP Diet members, industrial
representatives and MIT! bureaucrats meet daily to exchange opinions and informa-
tion until late into the night. expressing their true intentions. This becomes

the "secret" of HITI's administrative guidance. Notwithstanding, the reason

why private industry accepts HITI's administrative guidance is because there cannot
be any discussion whereby a means of coordinating interests between the national
economy and private industry is agreed upon.

17

Ftﬂl(”ﬂﬂ(1AL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A middle-level cadre of a certain auto maker gave other reasons why private
industry accepts administrative guidance. They are: l) historic relationships--
for example. in the case of the auto industry, protective measures were provided by
HITI during the mid to late 1950s; 2) the fear that. if the industry were to
antagonize KITI, which has wide-ranging administrative authority, there might be
some form of retaliation; and 3) "insurance" in the event that the operation of
_private industry runs into trouble some day and requires government support. As
these cases indicate. there are not a few instances where administrative guidance
is accepted hilly-willy.

Effective Use of Japan Bicycle Promotion Institute

Therefore, HITI uses not only overt "persuasion" but every means to compel the
industry to accept its will. For example, “III has used the Japan Bicycle Promotion
Institute (NISSHIN), which controls bicycle racing, to considerable effect.

Bicycle racing has developed into a giant gambling sport with gross sales of about
1.27 trillion yen in 1980. It is supervised by the HITI minister and operated by
the NISSBIN. The NISSHIN's business aims are "a fair and smooth bicycle racing
operation" and "the registration of cyclists. judges and bicycles, as well as the
licensing of inspectors "(NISSRIN pamphlet). Meanwhile, it receives a certain
percentage of sales receipts from the sponsors, from which subsidies are
distributed to cycling-related interests and various public works projects. It is
similar to the Japan Shipbuilding Industry Foundation (Ryoichi Sasagawa, chairman)
which operates boat racing.

Moreover, the distribution of NISSHIN subsidies is also said to include funds
used to employ HITI 03's [old boys] in industrial organizations. The vice
chairmanships and managing directorships of industrial organizations under HITI
jurisdiction are practically monopolized by former HITIers. They have penetrated
almost every industrial organization. such as the Iron and Steel Federation (vice
chairman), the Plant Association (Ianaging director), the Trade Association
(ditto), the Petroleum Association (ditto), the Textile Association (ditto), the
Coal Association (vice chairman). the Chemical Industrial Association (ditto),
the Electrical Manufacturers Association (ditto), the Machinery Federation (vice
chairman) and the Gas Association (ditto). In not a few cases, subsidies
equivalent to their salaries are provided by the NISSHIN. And when HITI provides
guidance to the industries, these organizations serve as pipelines. Therefore, it
is not inaccurate to say. the NISSRIN is a "lubricator for HITI administration."

However, even HITI administration has an Achilles heel. HITI is quite conscious
of the presence of the Diet and public opinion, but it must be further aware of
the antimonopoly law and the Fair Trade Cosmdssion. In some cases, enterpreneurs
have been subjected to criminal penalty because they "took advantage" of HITI's
administrative guidance.

The 1973 incident involving adjustment of oil production figures is an example.
A person affiliated with the Petroleum Association gave an order for the adjustment

of production figures while under HITI's administrative guidance on the basis of
the Petroleum Industry Law. He was indicted for violating the Antinonopoly Law.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 26 September of last year. the decision handed down by the Tokyo Higher Court
regarding the incident was interpreted as iwosing a strict limitation on
administrative guidance. A ruling was made concerning indiscriminate guidance
for individual enterpreneurs to the effect that "when such guidance is offered,
it is difficult to find only the act of the entrepreneur at fault." and "such a
method has a strong coloring of state control, raising the suspicion of an
invasion of freedom of trade." It thus raises the question of the illegality of
administrative guidance from a constitutional standpoint.

It also points out that "administrative guidance involving quantitative limita-
tiOns lust be considered as being generally impermissible."

MITI appeared to be shocked because the decision was a strict ruling against
administrative guidance. which constitutes the basis of MIT! administration.
Nonetheless, under the "administrative guidance for individual entrepreneurs" in
the ministry‘s "Concepts on Administrative Guidance" issued in March this year,
HITI stresses the legality of administrative guidance on the basis of the court
decision on oil cartels, and points out: The decision clearly states that 'aa
long as such guidance is given separately to individual enterprises. it cannot
formally violate the provisions of the antimonopoly law,‘ and this is identical
with the concept of this ministry."

Nonetheless. the restriction of administrative guidance is reaffirmed in the sense
that such guidance accompanied by quantitative and price limits is legitimate "as
long as it is administered separately to individual entrepreneurs." Therefore.
such guidance mat now be handed down in a sophisticated and subtle unner through
the application of regulatory provisions under the Organisation Control Law.

The reason is that it is dangerous to administer guidance to an industry as a
whole.

In still another case concerning oil-~during the first oil crisis-administra-
tive guidance applied to suppress kerosene prices was a successful case from HITI's
standpoint. At the time. the price of kerosene. which was indispensable for the
people's daily life. rose sharply from about 250 yen to 600-700 yen a can.

At that point, invoking the Price Control Law, which was enacted by imperial
decree before the war. was reportedly considered because of the absence of any
MIT! price control legislation. However, while there may have been other
reasons, resorting to forceful measures was not considered becoming to HITI
administration. The use of persuasion was the most desirable method, so the
decision was made to use administrative guidance.

The aforementioned Komatsu. then chief of the Industrial Policy Bureau,

recalled the conversation at the time. When I discussed the matter with the me
before providing administrative guidance, one comissioner said: 'anorcement

of prices by the stronger side (wholesaler) to the client (retailer) is a
violation of the antimonopoly law.’ whereupon I replied that, if so, the
commission should file against the wholesaler and appeal to public opinion. As

a result, the matter was brOught to ministerial and cabinet decisions."

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This exemplifies HITI'a method of administrative guidance. The criticism is
often heard that "HITI bureaucrats are weak vis-a-vis the Diet and public
opinion." And in this case they apparently went ahead with administrative
guidance expecting public support.

Meanwhile, HITI has historically been characterized by its adroit response to
changes in the outside environment and by its adjustment of policy and policy
methods. depending on the conditions. Amid the increasing globalization of
Japan's economy. what new policy goals would HITI prepare. and through what
polity methods would it attempt to realize those goals?

Clever Holding of Public Opinion

In March last year. the Industrial Structure Council. which is an advisory organ
to the MIT! minister. submitted a "reply (to the Diet) concerning the direction
of trade industrial policy in the 1980's." This is included in a book published
for sale to the public entitled. "Vision of HITI Policies in the 1980's." The
council and HITI cooperated in a joint project with the purpose of reflecting the
results in MITI administration and creating a broad national consensus.

The "Vision" is prepared once every 10 years, and since no other ministry
prepares such a document, HITI is sometimes referred to as the "vision ministry."
But since very little of the vision is ever realized, the ministry is also called
the "1,000 and 3 ministry."

In addition to all MITI personnel. a large number of private citizens participated
in drafting the "Vision of the 1980's." First. an opinion survey on pertinent
items was conducted among some 1,500 persons, including foreigners. With this as
reference data, some 50 committee members were asked to deliberate on the

content .

The members were canvassed from a wide range of citizens in various fields,
including scholars; financiers; editorial writers of such leading dailies as
ASAHI. HAINICHI. YOHIURI and NIKKEI; women's suffrage leaders such as Director
Hatoko Shimizu of the Housewives Federation Secretariat; labor leaders such as
Director Hitsuo Tomizuka of the SOHYO Secretariat; and Governor Seiji Tsunematsu
of Shimane Prefecture. Even writers such as Sakyo Komatsu participated.

Incidentally, MITI is noted for hiring a large number of "affiliated" scholars
and cultural leaders.

When the late Prime Minister Ohira formed private thematic study groups, every
group included "HITI-affiliated cultural personalities," which surprised the
other ministries. Committee members of the "Vision of the 1980's" also included
personalities such as Prof Tadno Uchida of Tokyo University, Prof Tsuneo Iida of
Nagoya University. Prof Kenichi Tominaga of Tokyo University and Prof Shoichi
Hatannbe of Sophia University. Of course. HITI is effectively using "NISSHIN
funds" in daily contacts with scholars and cultural leaders to form a "people's
consensus." And because of a violent protest by economists regarding the merger
of the Yawata Steel and Fuji Steel companies, HITI realized the urgent need for
daily contacts with scholars and cultural leaders, which has reportedly resulted
in stepped up activities.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is a hidden merit in the drafting of the "Vision." The entire ministry
worked as .1 team for .1 considerable time and was able to escape from its label as
.I "department store.” which rrsuited from its tendency to compartmentalise the
employees into the narrow framework of individual responsibilities. One might say
that, once every decade, the entire ministry goes through a ritual of seeking a
unified policy.

Also. it helps to build sympathy toward MITI, form public opinion in support of
HITI administration, and create a consensus and vision. In that sense, it might
be described as a ministry which is skilled in opinion technology.

In any case, the “new national goals" established by the drafting of the "Vision
of the 1980's" are: 1) international contribution as an "economic power";
2) transcending the constraints of a "resource-poor nation"; and 3) compatibility

between "vitality" and "leisure."

The five principle policies for the attainment of these goals are: I) maintaining
a free trade system and evolving general economic cooperation; 2) establishing
goals for energy development and boldly investing government funds; 3) building

a technological state: lo) qualitatively improving living conditions with increased
living space and free time. and forming attractive comnities; and S) concen-
trating knowledge on industrial structure through the exercise of creativity

and cultivating viable smll and medium enterprises.

The “Vision of the 1960's" was characterized by the development of heavy
chemical industries. while the "Vision of the 1970's" was noted for the problems
of pollution and high comdity prices, with both "Visions" emphasizing "concen-
tration of knowledge." But, in the "Vision of the 1980's." general national

security has come to the fore.

With Japan becoming a nation with "10 percent of the world's GNP." the era

in which it was permitted to mve facilely within the framework -f the free trade
system has ended. Japan Itself oust now share the burden of building such a
framework. Responsible sources stress that Japanese policies nust have an
optimm nix toward that end, not only from an economic standpoint. but also

from the general standpoint of national security.

In fact, a general security subcommittee has been formed within the Industrial
Structure Council and broad studies are in progress, including the defense issue.

How then does HITI view the quvstion of general national security?

Chief of the HITI Secretariat Kiichi Konaga (1953) says: "As long as trade is
MITI'x jurisdiction. peace if preferred. From a policy standpoint, HITI probably
belongs to the dovish group." And rhief Yamamoto of the Planning Office
(previously nentioned) is responding to the Reagan administration's request for
Japan's military buildup by persuading the United States of the accuracy of
Senator John Glenn's statement that "it was good that Japan did not become a
military power. Otherwise, no: only the Soviet Union, but also the ASEAN
countries would have taken a different attitude."

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One middle-level bureaucrat emphasized: "A nation with an inherently fanatical
streak like Japan should center on its economy. A child who is given a weapon
might want to use it." "By the way, it is difficult to understand why the Foreign
Office goes along with the theory of a nonexistent 'Soviet threat.’ Reagan's aim
is apparently to go along with the will of the industrial-military complex and
include Japan in the American weapons arsenal. That would not be desirable from
the standpoint of Japan's concept of self-defense." ”After all, the defense
industry depends on the government's budget and it is not a business. It would

not be good for the defense industry to become a major part of the industrial
structure."

I have talked with many HITI bureaucrats, and their posture toward general national
security is what has been described so far. Some like Amaya (previously mentioned)
are of the opinion that: "It is not good to take the easy path of a merchant
state with a dovish posture. If it is necessary for the national security, we
nust spend money wherever it is needed." Nonetheless, they all stressed an
"economy-centered" policy, which has been Japan's basic direction.

Meaning of the Issue of Car EXports to the United States

Now that MITl has begun to treat general national security as the new national
priority, where does it actually plan to concentrate its efforts? If general
national security constitutes its policy and principle, where is the emphasis of
its real intent and strategy as an agency?

The issue of car exports to the United States has vital significance in this
sense. Amaya, who conducted negoriations with the United States as a trade
industry councilor, stated: "I have warned that MITI must not fall into self-
intoxication or spiritualism like the prewar army and navy. It must View things
with detachment. However. the auto industry has only the sense of the old army
and navy. Although it is wrong to merely concentrate on sales, it doesn't
understand that it is wrong. Hr have therefore decided to urge voluntary controls
through administ to t ive guidance . "

However, the issue of car exporls to the United States took a sudden turn on

5 February this year with the submission of a bill to restrict Japanese imports
by Senators Danforth and Bentzen (to 1.6 million cars annually for 3 years, from
1981 to 1983).

On the following day, 6 February, MITI Minister Tanaka announced the outlook for
car exports to the United States (under 450,000 cars. which is less than the
460,000 during the same period of the previous year) for the first quarter of
1981. In late March. then Foreign Minister Hassyoshi Ito visited the United
States and met with President Reagan and his cabinet members, and affirmed that
the negotiations would continue. On 26 April. Amaya again visited the United
States and met Trade Representative Brock and Justice Department representa-
lives. And on 1 May, a "measure pertaining to the export of passenger cars to
the United States" was announced as a step toward solution of the issue.

The auto industry was greatly dissatisfied, but MITI forced the issue in the form
of "administrative guidance backed by the enforcing authority of the Export
Trade Control Law."

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There was much speculation. not only from the auto industry, regarding such forceful
measures by "III and its real intent. Meanwhile, HI'rI persisted in its explanation
of the principle of "maintaining the free trade ayatu and evolving general economic
cooperation" set forth in the "Vision of the 1980's," as well as in its realistic
argument of the danger that the longer the solution is postponed, the more severe
import regulations will become.

Hegemony in Trade Diplomacy

However, regardless of its validity as a policy argtment, there is a strong view
within HITI that strong pressure was exerted by MIT! leaders. using the car issue
as a lever, to "wrest the economic and trade diplomacy initiatives away from the
Foreign Office."

In fact. a number of middle-level cadres in the International Trade Policy Bureau
who are most closely involved with economic and trade diplomacy are saying: "He
have won in the struggle with the Foreign Office. HI‘II will be the future center
of trade diplomacy."

As a backdrop for such confidence on the part of HITI bureaucrats, there is the
fact that only MITI could lead the industry on international trade issues.
Concurrently. MI’I‘I's global network of overseas representatives is being completed
and the ministry has also trained a large number of experienced overseas
representatives .

According to figures quoted by the chief of the Secretariat, Konaga, the career
employees who entered the ministry from 1968 to 1981 total 316, and 1.2 of them
-or more than 13 percent of the tota1--have overseas experience (210 were
assigned to embassies and legations, l to JE'l'RO, 1 to an international organiza-
tion and 1 was a student overseas) Moreover, as a result of the rotation system
for overseas personnel, for examle, all 18 careerists who joined the ministry in
1967 have overseas experience, while 17 out of 21 entrants in 1969 and 15 out of
20 entrants in 1971, or practically all careeriata, have had overseas

experience.

Looking at HITI as a whole (HITI Handbook of 1981), 62 were assigned to embassies
and legations, 55 to JE‘I’RO offices and 31 to international organizations and
industrial associations, while 26 were overseas students. In other words, a total
of 17!. were on overseas duty at the time of the survey. This included technicians
and general category employees. and the rate of those assigned overseas was

about 1.2 percent of all HITI employees, or one-tenth of the aboVementioned 13
percent career officers. It indicates the degree of preferred treatment accorded
careerists. It also indicates that JE‘I'RO and industrial organizations (electronic
machine industry association. electric power research association, etc) are key
components in the buildup of HITl's overseas network. Perhaps the "internationali-
zation" of MITI will be realized through the effective use of these organizations.

Moreover, the cost of dispatching Hl'l'l employees overseas through JETRO and the
industrial organizations is actually compensated by subsidies from the aforemen-
tioned Bicycle Promotion Institute. The institute is effectively utilized in
this aspect also.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the basis of such achievements overseas, MITI is attempting a full-fledged
evolvement of international trade diplomacy. The issue of auto exports to the

United States is of significance from the standpoint of HITI's future organiza-
tional strategy.

Control of Key Industries

However, it does not mean that HIT! will become "trade-oriented" and give second
priority to domestic industrial policy. The reason HITI has managed to consistently
pursue its basic direction through concrete policies, while competing with the
Foreign Ministry, Economic Planning Agency and Environmental Agency, is because

it has had the authority to give administrative guidance to the industries. If

it were to lose its power to administratively lead the key industries, MITI's
foundation would sink rapidly.

Meanwhile, the areas of industry where HIT! has been able to exercise its strongest
influence has been the materials industries of steel and paper pulp. In fact,

MITI 03‘s (old boys) have “occupied" the management field of the top five steel
' blasr furnace companies.

Consultant Yoshihiko lnayama (1928) of Nippon Steel Corporation. cansultant Kinzo
Hatsuo (1934; administrative vice minister) of Nippon Kokan, President Norifumi
Kumaya (1940; administrative vice minister) of Sumitomo Metal Industries, Vice
President Chihaye Kawade (1939; director of the Patent Agency) of Kawasaki Steel,
and Vice President Komatsu of Kobe Steel are some of the HITI 08's.

However. although the steel industry ranks high among Japan's industries, one
cannot ignore the fact that its relative importance has declined with the
expansion of the economy as a whole.

If so. what industry wath an important role in the Japanese industrial world could
ex-HITl-ers take over in place of the steel industry? HITI 03's are losing their
influence in such key industries as electric power and electric appliances, and
may eventually become insignificant.

The buildup of a "strategic industry" for MIT] as a successor to the steel
industry is unmistakably the cost important task in the ministry's domestic
strategy. The effective way is to secure a beachhead and expand its influence.
In the past. its control over the steel industry gave it a big advantage in
guiding the other industries.

There are more HlTl 03's hired in the oil industry than in the steel industry.
with presidents of such concerns as Nippon Oil, Showa Oil, Maruzen Oil and Kyodo
011 companies. But there is little solidarity among them, which has prevented
them from controlling the industry as a whole.

However, today, because of the sharp decline of the yen Value caused by high u.s.
interest rates, the import price of oil has risen steeply, and also because of

the continuing oversupply in the domestic market. the entire industry is suffering
from an operations crisis. Meanwhile, the entire MIT! is moving to rescue the

oil industry, but this entails a latent possibility of drastically changing the
power relationship between MITI and the oil industry.

2‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Energy Planning Chief Hirose (previously mentioned) emphasized: "HITI's policy

of building a 'Japsnese major' with Kyodo Oil as its nucleus has clearly

failed. Japan's oil conditions today night not require a Japanese major, but HI‘II
is still seeking to stabilize the oil industry despite the danger of getting
muddied in the process." One wonders whether the time is approaching for a
reorganization of the industry under the guidance of HITI. If this is realized,
the oil industry might become HITI's "strategic industry."

Is HITI an Invader?

Meanwhile, there are noteworthy aspects in HIrI's posture toward the information
industry, although it is different from the posture toward the oil industry.

The information industry subcommittee of the Industrial Structure Council
announced in its reply (to Diet interpellations): "The imct of information on
society in general has a breadth and depth equal to the Industrial Revolution. It
is not an overstatement to say that the manner of the response to it will decide
the positive or negative aspects of human society." Certainly. the information
industry has come to occupy a strategic position vis-s-vis industries as a

while.

Moreover, Japanese technical progress in this field has been remarkable. It is
linked to the further rationalization of industries and this guarantees the
relatively superior position of Japan's industries internationally over a
considerably lengthy period.

At present. MIT! and the Telecommications Ministry are sharply opposed over
control of the useof data comunicstions circuits. Hhereaa the Teleconunica-
tions Ministry wishes to retain as much of its licensing functions as possible
on the basis of the present public telecommicationa law, HI‘II is striving to
win the support of the industries and to remve all controls over the use of
circuits which obstruct "information-union."

Chief Sosaburo Okamatsu (1960) of the Electronic Policy Section of the Machine
Information Industry Bureau sharply criticized the Telecon-mications Ministry
as follows: "I believe there is a residue of the old Communications Ministry's
sense in the present Teleconmmnications Ministry. which takes the attitude that
'we are permitting the private sector to handle this.’ There is absolutely no
feeling for technical development."

Meanwhile. HIT! has been undertaking research and development on systems and
budgets on a broad scale in order to nurture and build up the information
industry. It has formed four subcomittees on key problems. visions for infor-
mationization, the data processing industry and the electronic calculating machine
industry under the Industrial Structure Council's Information Industry Comittee.
lt has gathered together scores of scholars, industrial leaders and intellectuals.
But it remains to be seen whether the information industry will become MI‘I'I's
"strategic industry."

On the other hand. as these examples show, whenever HITI promotes its strategy
as a ministry. it almost always clashes with other central ministries. In fact,

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to trade diplomacy and data communications circuitry. it often is in
sharp confrontation with other ministries regarding the leisure industry (against
the Transportation Ministry). the technopolis concept (against the Construction
Ministry). the import of agricultural products (against the Agriculture Ministry),
industrial education (against the Education Ministry) and pollution (against the
Environmental Agency). One middle-level bureaucrat said: "MITI is trying to wake
up the other ministries which are asleep with their narrow responsibility of
granting licenses." On the other hand. the other ministries retort that "MIT!

is like an 'invader' who moves around wtihout any definite plan." They view MITI
with increasing suspicion.

In order to counter MlTl. the other ministries have often used their "rooting
sections" (for example, the Diet member group called the agriculture and forestry
group) to the hilt and succeeded in retaliating, for example. on the raw silk
import issue.

Actually. compared to the other ministries, MITI has few 03 Diet members who can
form the nucleus of its ”rooting section." At one time, there were leading
statesmen like former Prime Minister Nobusuke Kishi (1920; vice minister of
Commerce and Industry) and former LOP Vice President Etausaburo Shiina (1923;

vice minister of Commerce and Industry), but aside from Yoshiro Hayashi (previously
mentioned) at present there are only four Lower House members and one Upper House
member. This is because there are few functions at MITI which are linked to vote-
getting. and also because there are few political aspirants at MITI.

However, it is reported that recently the young bureaucrats with political
aspirations are increasing. Since MITI itself wishes to bolster its "rooting
section," those with political aspirations are given opportunities to work on
temporary duty or be assigned to regional MITI offices or local communities where
local elections are scheduled to be held.

Nonetheless. the thought occurs that perhaps the reason MITI has had a freer
atmosphere and has been able to adopt a more flexible posture than other
ministries was because there was seldom any interference by a "rooting section."
One wonders if the basic posture of MITI, which has emphasized economic rationali-
zation, might not be lost thrOugh adhesion to politics.

we have thus far observed mainly the behavior of MITI toward the other ministries,
but what abOut the conditions within MITI itself?

Chief of the Secretariat Konagu (previously mentioned) emphasized that "MlTl
administration is developing every day and the young bureaucrats are collecting
information either on foot or by reading documents. It is important to maintain
a posture of listening and evaluating the information."

Undoubtedly. the target of MITI administration is a living existence in the form
of an industry and. as we have seen, it operates with more flexibility than the
other ministries and delegates authority earlier to its young bureaucrats. The
reason for its comparatively free atnosphere, similar to the general trading
companies with their decentralization of authority in management, is because of
the similarity in organizational operations.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Although the delegation of authority to the substructure is a plus from the
standpoint of mobility, it is conversely a shortcoming in that it results in a
disnnity of the organization as a whole. While this may occur in any type of
organization, HZTI is said to actively pursue a management policy of picking out
such contradictions within its structure and sublating them.

From the standpoint of form, hITI seeks unity within its organization through a
three-stage schedule of weekly meetings: the minister's staff meeting (attended
by the minister, bureau chiefs and above, three secretariat section chiefs and
related section chiefs), the secretariat liaison meeting (attended by the
minister's staff except the minister himself) and the general affairs section
chiefs meeting (attended by the general affairs section chiefs of the various
bureaus). In addition. the related bureau chiefs meeting and related general
affairs section chiefs meeting are held as necessary. The method is generally
similar to that of other ministries and central agencies.

However, HITI has a unique committee called the Statutes Inspection Commission.
Its members include "the top councilors of the various bureaus" (assistant chiefs
of the general affairs sections in the various bureaus) and a plural number of
councilors of the minister's secretariat, and it meets regularly on a twice weekly
basis. At present. its key nwmbers consist of careerists who joined the

ministry in 1969.

The commission reviews important issues from the standpoint of the entire ministry,
makes judgments and presents opinions. The systematic priority given to opinions
of the young bureaucrats is unheard of in Other ministries. Of course, not all

of the opinions presented at these meetings are necessarily adopted, but the
majority are. Also. HITI appears to adopt flexible methods regarding the hiring
and training of careerists, which is unheard of in other ministries. In particular.
a unique method of personal evaluation is applied regarding training of personnel.

Horozumi (previously mentioned) declared: "The final selection of cadres is
narrowed down to officers with stability, who have been trained to negotiate and
deal with the industries and politicians." Nonouchi (also previously mentioned)

states more bluntly that the individual's "reputation" throughout the ministry is
decisive.

Desired Changes in Personnel Policy

There is an increasing trend within MITI to evaluate the activist type of
bureaucrat more highly than the idealist. In the past. three traits--innovative
ideas. implementation and persuasion-~were emphasized. but more recently "imple-
mentation" has become the focal point of evaluation.

However, there is an unwritten rule that the appointment of an individual in a
given Post cannot exceed 3 years. This is based on the principle of cultivating
talent with broad vision gained through a variety of experiences, but in reality
it is an opportunist means used to evade the criticism of "adhesion to industry.”

Sahashi (previously mentioned) described this personnel policy as follows: "If
HITI is said to be sinking because of its relationship with industry, it is

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

probably due to its personnel system of reassigning posts every 1 or 2 years.
HITI should always place people on the front line who can easily 'sniff out' the
industries."

Nonetheless, it is clear from what we have mentioned thus far in discussing HITI
'personnel policy" that only career types are given attention, while the
technicians and general category types are ignored from the beginning.

HIT! has emphasized its organization, a flexible personnel policy and a liberal
policy as its "selling points." but it actually maintains a conservative class
system. It is an exceptional case, and only happens once in many years, that an
employee in the general category is appointed as a section chief in the central
ministry. and it is unthinkable for such an individual to be appointed as bureau
chief in the central ministry. as practiced in the Finance Ministry.

Therefore, HITI is reportedly cited as an example of a low working ethic among
general category employees, and talented employees who are denied advancement
opportunities are said to be uncommunicative about their work and do not report
details to their superiors. "This is their form of protest against the policy of
permitting the 'privileged class' (meaning the careerists) to monopolize the
three powers of authority pertaining to information, budgeting and persOnnel
policy" (general category employee).

Meanwhile, the career section chief is mostly concerned wtih Diet policy and the
preparation of data for submission to the Diet, and it is actually the general
category employees who prepare the drafts on issues concerning industry. When
the MITI minister replies to Diet interpellations, the draft is checked in advance
by the responsible general team leader (career official), the section chief, the
general affairs section of the bureau, the general affairs section chief of the
secretariat, the chief of tne secretariat and the minister's private secretary,

in that order. There are some irresponsible employees who deliberately prepare
imperfect drafts.

One general category employee stated: "The quality of careerists has declined
recently. They don't see the overall situation and they don't receive technical
training. for example. in the written expression of ideas. Although a draft may
be imperfectly prepared, they are unable to make corrections."

It is obviously imperative that in order to eliminate such shortcomings HIT!
should establish a personnel system which provides incentives for the general
category employees, who make up more than 80 percent of the entire ministry.
Also. if technical ability is to be emphasized as a principal policy in the
"Vision of the 1980's." there should be an end to the present discriminatory
practice, and a new beginning should be made by treating at least the higher
level of technicians on an equal basis with career officials.

Can the Desired Goal Be Met?

MITI is a government agency which regulates international industry and trade with
the "national mandate“ as a premise. [s HITI adequately fulfilling that mandate?

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First 01 all. as it was previously pointed out in the Diet, in essence, MlTl
"should not act against the will of industry"; of the nearly 100 price investiga-
tion officers appointed to check spiralling cammodity prices after the first oil
shock. there is at present only one control officer left.

This seems to indicate at least the failure of HITI to fulfill the "national
mandate."

Also, one Defense Agency cadre said: "It is difficult to work with HETI people,
because we immediately face criticism of 'adhesion' to the major enterprises."
This is merely one example of the common image of HITI among the people as a
"friend of the major enterprises."

Of course. I don't mean to imply that "major enterprises are evil," but in reality
there is a frequent confrontation between the consumer and the major enterprise
or medium and small enterprises. In this case, it is the responsibility of the
government agency to arbitrate fairly between the interests of opposing parties.
but when METI is seen. as in the past. as leaning toward the major enterprise.
such arbitration becomes difficult.

Several young bureaucrats have said: "Future HITI administration must give broad
consideration to the state and the nation. within the framework of a relationship
of tension with the major enterprise." Meanwhile, there is the dilemma that if
it loses the trust of the industries, MITI's foundation itself will become
"unstable."

In fact, future HIT! administration will probably broaden the area of contact with
the people. Moreover. if it is not the exercise of power but “arbitration based
on a consensus" which is demanded of HITI administration. HIT! should act to win
the trust of the people while accomplishing one concrete achievement at a time.

How can the deep-rooted concept that "the economy equals industry, and the
industry equals the business enterprise," which has characterized MIT! in the
past, be changed? This is an era in which the true worth of "171, which prides
itself on its visions and ideas, will be questioned.

COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha 1981

5886
cs0: 4105/ 31

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IlSl-I ONLY

MILITARY

'HAINICHI': RELEASE CONTENTS OF JAPAN-U.S. ARMS MEMORANDUM
0H011104 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 31 Jan 82 p 2
lEditorial: "Arms Development Hemo"]

[Text] He have learned that the Japanese Defense Agency and the 0.5. Defense

Department exchanged a memorandum on the joint research and development of weapons
in June 1966. The existence of the memorandum was disclosed in a defense magazine
article in October 1980 by a professor of the Defense Academy and was recently con-

firmed by the Defense Agency.

In regard to the content of the memorandum, Defense Agency officials said that it
was nothing but a memorandum recorcing the exchange of views among experts and
added that they were studying the passibility of publicly disclosing it. We
strongly hope that the content will be disclosed.

we demand the disclosure because we believe that the contents seem to be closely
related with the military technology exchange program between Japan and the United
States, which is being discussed among the officials concerned, and also the three
principles on the ban of Japanese arms exports. We have heard that the Defense
Agency and the foreign ministry want to promote arms technology exports to the
United States but the ministry of international trade and industry is reluctant to
do so.

If such an agreement exists, we can surmise that the United States and Japan earlier
paved the way for the bilateral exchange of military technology. Japanese and
American officials reach an agreement in December last year for their joint efforts
to conduct research and development. what are the relations between the said agree-
ment and the latest agreement?

According to the article. the memorandum said: 1) Weapons to be developed would

he limited to those which are required by the U.S. Army, Navy and Air Force; 2)

The two countries would equally share the development expenses; and 3) Patent rights
and rights to possess know-how resulting from research and development would in
principle belong to the United States. If this is true, the memorandum one—

sidedly favors the United States.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The three principles banning arms exports were established in February 1967 by

Prime Minister Eisaku Sato who pledged in his diet statement that Japan would not
export weapons to the communist bloc and countries engaged in military conflicts.
In February 1976. Prime Minister Takeo Niki expanded the sphere of the principles

when he said that Japan would refrain from exporting arms to areas hitherto not
covered by the principles.

The memorandum was exchanged between Japanese and U.S. officials well before the
coming into force of the three principles. Does the memorandum have binding power
from the viewpoint of diplomatic interest and obligation? "hat is the relation
between article 1 of the U.S.-Japan mutual defense treaty, which is believed to

be the base enabling the exchange of governmental military material and information,
an: this memorandum? Many points remain obscure.

Moreover, we are strongly impressed by the Defense Agency's apparent determination
to go it alone in disregard of the various disputes in Japan since the United States
sought Japan's offer of military technology in June last year.

Needless to say, Japan's national policy is to follow the path of a peace-loving
nation and the three principles banning arms exports, together with the three
nonnuclear principles. are the basic policy to clearly show Japan's determination
to the world. The United States may make strong requests on this specific issue
but it is the Japanese people who must decide Japan's own policy and the Defense
Agency must have talks with U.S. officials within the limit of the Japanese policy.

In particular, defense problems will become important disputes between the govern-
ment party and opposition parties in the current diet session. Accordingly. the
government must be prudent in having talks with the United States.

Everybody will agree that. in an open society, disputes on national defense must
be conducted in a fair manner. This is a salutary way in democracy. Problems
related with the removal of the arms exports ban to the United States have attracted

attention not only from politicians but also from the general public. He renew our
request for the Defense Agency to publicly disclose the memorandum.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, 1982

C50: 4120/139

31

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£1DNLY
FOI.OFTIC1AL USEiMVLY

MILITARY

SDF MAPS OUT NEH S-YEAR DEFENSE PROGRAM
0N071403 Tokyo JIJI in English 1337 GHT 7 Jan 82

[Text] Tokyo, 7 Jan (JIJI PRESS)--The tri-service self-defense forces (SD?) have
mapped out a draft fiscal 1983-87 defense program estimate. envisaging organizing
two new mechanized divisions in Hokkaido, northermost Japan, arming all the 32
escort flotilla destroyers with missiles and purchasing 95 F-lS fighters and 65
P-3C antisubmarine patrol aircraft. The estimate, designed to achieve a defense
capability target provided in the 1976 defense program outline. calls for a total
cost of nine trillion yen (about $40.9 billion), of which funds for procurement of
front-line equipment account for 4.5 trillion yen (about $20.5 billion).

As a result, the five-year overall defense spending, including personnel and other
expenses, is expected to reach 15 trillion yen (about $68.2 billion). indicating
annual spending could exceed one percent of Japan's gross national product (GNP),
the current government-fixed ceiling on defense expenditures, in fiscal 1985.

The draft estimate worked out by uniformed officers of the SD? is to serve as the

basis for the Defense Agency's full-scale work on the new five-year program esti-
mate. The agency will prepare its final program estimate by April for authorization
by the National Defense Council in July or August.

According to the draft program estimate, the ground self-defense force (650?) plans
to reorganize the second division in Asahiknwa and the 11th division in Sapporo,
both Hokkaido, into mechanized divisions with strength increased from 9,000 men to
10,500 men each.

The number of tanks for each division would double to 125 units. Each division
would also have 70 self-propelled guns for an artillery regiment and 270 armored
personnel carriers to accommodate all infantrynen.

GSDF expects the two mechanized divisions, together with the only armored division
with 230 tanks in Chitose, would be able to cope with a limited, small-scale
aggression on Hokkaido, which the service sees as the most probable region to be
invaded first in case of war.

But Defense Agency sources said the agency's civilians are cautious of adopting the
CSDF plan.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omaAL us: ONLY

The maritime self-defense force (MSDF) plans to build 65 ships totaling about
80,000 tons under the 5-year program estimate.

They include 19 destroyers which will increase the service's such vessels to 64
as provided in the defense program outline.

MSDF intends to equip all the new destroyers with surface-to-surface or antiaircraft
missiles, while also mounting such missiles on four existing destroyers under a
fleet rehabilitation and modernization program. As s result. all the 32 destroyers
forming four eight-ship escort flotillaa for sea lane defense would be armed with
missiles.

Submarines for building under the estimate total seven to achieve a target of 16.
Other ships include five auxiliary ships and as many new-model missile patrol boats.

As to aircraft, HSDF plans to procure 65 P-JC antisubmarine patrol planes under the
estimate in addition to 25 planes for which funds have already been earmarked. Thus
the P-JC fleet would comprise 90 planes for nine air antisubmarine squadrons.

The service also intends to purchase about 60 ass-23 antisubmarine helicopters and
15 CH-53 minesweeping helicopters. As a result. MSDP's operational aircraft would
reach about 220 as envisaged in the program outline.

The air self-defense force (A50?) in the estimate gives top priority to achieving
the outline's operational aircraft inventory target of about d30--250 fighter-
interceptors, 100 support fighters, 40 transports, 30 reconnaissance planes and
10 airborne early warning aircraft.

It plans to purchase 95 F-lSs besides 80 planes budgeted so far so that F—lSs would
account for 175 of the 250 fighter-interceptors. The remainder would be P-éEJ's
purchased already.

The AO—transport fleet is planned to consist of 16 new C-l30ﬂ’s and 2‘ existing
c—ls. ASDF intends to procure 12 C-l30ﬂ's under the estimate because four have
already been budgeted. In addition. three C-lSOﬂ's would be introduced to serve
as Ec-lJO electronic reconnaissance planes.

For ASDF. the program estimate also envisages completion of a new badge (base

air-defense ground environment) system, development of the HTX new intermediate
trainer and selection of a replacement for the Nike surface-to-air missile system.

cso: a120/139

33

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

BRIEFS

VIEW OF JAPAN'S DEFENSE HINISTER--Tokyo. 18 Jan KXODO-Vice Defense Minister Toru
Hara said Monday Asian countries understood Japan's defense efforts but they
differed in nuance on the perceived Soviet threat. Hare made the statement to
reporters on the basis of discussions at a meeting of Japanese military attaches
stationed in nine Asian countries which he attended in Bangkok last Thursday. The
officers are stationed in South Korea. China. the Philippines, Thailand. Malaysia,
Indonesia, Burma. India and Pakistan. Hare said Asian nations believed Japan's
defense buildup would not pose a threat unless it overstepped the framework of the
postwar "peace" constitution. The Defense Agency vice minister said he was told
the Philippines did not want Japan to sacrifice defense spending. is also said
there was considerable difference in nuance in views among the Asian countries
about Soviet threat. Indonesia, anong others, believed China could pose a threat
if it became a great power as a result of its current economic modernization drive.
[Text] [0H181061 Tokyo KYODO in English 0900 GMT 18 Jan 82]

C80: 0120/138

34

IN}! OFFICJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

REPROCESSED PLUTOUIUH FOR LIGHT WIIER REACTOR POUER GENERAIION
Tokyo MAINICBI SBIHBUN in Japanese 31 Dec 81 p l I

[Articlex '?lutomiul Extracted Through Re-Proceseing To Be Used for Light-
water-Reactor-Type Nuclear Power Generation; As Early as First Half of Next
Year; "111 Seek US Consent on Occasion of Negotiations in Hatch"]

[Text]

According to what was clarified by a nuclear energy policy official
on the 30th. Japan has decided to use the plutonium which is extracted
through the re-pnocessing‘ofspent nuclear fuel at nuclear power plants, as
fuel for light-water-reactor-typo nuclear power generation now in operation.
as early as the first half of 1982, ahead of the rest of the world. For
this purpose. it will resume Japan-US nuclear energy negotiations as early as
March and obtain US agreement.to use plutonium. 0n the other hand, it will
obtain final confirmation on such problems as the construction of a second
re-processing plant in Japan. As a result, commercialization of the
Japanese nuclear energy industry will begin to move on a full scale toward
completion of the nuclear fuel cycle.

Two Committees for Commercialization: thl's Policy

The fear is strong that use of plutonium as a fuel (pluthermal) in light-water
reactors, which account for nearly 80 percent of the reactors at the nuclear
power plants in the-world at present. will make the manufacture of plutonium
atomic bombs easy. Therefore, it has been strictly restricted from the
standpoint of preventing nuclear proliferation. However, plutonium is
accumulated every day in nearly 270 reactors in the world, which are already
in operation. Even in the light of the economic feasibility inherent to
nuclear energy. to the effect that fuel once spent can be used again, the
necessity for pluthermal has been pointed out.

0
In Japan. too, plutonium as a fuel for light-water reactors is in a
state where it can be used at two nuclear power plants -- the Mihama Nuclear
Power Plant of Kansai Electric Power and the Tsuruga Nuclear Power Plant '
of the Japan Atomic Power Company -- and a go sign for imports from the US
is being awaited. It is said that an international political decision and
timing as to social environment are the only remaining problems.

33

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE<JNLY
I'UK UI‘I‘ILIAL U3: UNLI

In this situation, Japan has a bitter history of being the only A-bomb
Victim country, and therefore, both it control and surveillance structures
are relatively complete in the world, as to nuclear non-proliferation. It
has accumulated actual records as generally the only advanced nation as to
nuclear energy, which has never been suspected of nuclear proliferation to
the Middle East and South America. On such occasions as the ZNFZE (Inter-
national Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation) Conference, which was held under
the CARTER Administration. Japan opposed the plan of the US. Britain and _
France for international monopoly of nuclear energy in the commercial field.
Therefore, Japan has received the international evaluat-on that at present,
there is no other country except Japan that can start using plutonium-use
light-water reactors. with importance attached to economic feasibilit'.

Especially, Japan depends upon foreign countries for uranium resources,

too, and when plutonium created through re-processing of spent uranium fuel
is used again as a fuel for reactors, it can be regarded as a semi-home-produoed
fuel. Its meaning of security in the fields of economic feasibility and
energy is very oig. Therefore, tne Science and ?echnology Agency, 3172. and
electric power industry circles h we been ai.ing at using plutonium as a
nuclear fuel for nuclear power generation, from early on. In the case
of "Fugen" (output: l65,GGG KW), a protocype reaCtor for the new-type
converter reactor (A73 -- advanced thermal reactor), the first power generation
wit: the plutonium-uranium nixed fuel entered a demonstration stage :hi

fall, and it is being tentatively operated at present. As to "Joyo"

not used for power generation), an experimental reactor for the fast breeder
reactor (333), too. experiment will be Started witiin l??? to increase the
out;ut from the 75,00C KW at present to ioo.oco KW. ?hus. preparations

for that purpose ere being completed steadily.

 

._. —-

Taking such actual records into account, nuclear energy policy officials
e asserting that nuclear proliferation can be fully prevented,by attaching
e condition tn t "Cnly the countries having high—level technology on the
R. P33, etc., can use plutonium as a fuel in limited, specific li ht-water
reactors." They are schedule to obtain the final agreement of the REAGAN
AdminiStration, which has already made a nearly lSO-degree policy change
from the prohibition measures under the CARTER Administration to easing
measures.

3"! In
'13"!

in pushing commercialization, on the other hand, MITI will inaugurate,
early in January, two committees as advisory organs for the ITI Minister --
a "Plutonium Re-CycleCommittee" Chairman: Japan Atomic Energy Research
institute Adviser Hiroshi MURATA) and a "Fast Breeder Reactor Practic ‘ Use
Committee" (Chairman: Tokyo University Professor Yoshitsugu MISRIMA). Its

policy is to establish strategy for development and commercializ tion up till
the year 2000. at these Committees.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These Committee: will give long-term prospects for huge amounts of
inVestmeats and a plan for constructing nuclear energy-connected facilities,
which will require a period of more than 10 years each. The Ministry intends to

urge private capital to participate in a positive way in the nuclear energy
industry. which has already become a market amounting to ’12 trill.» annually.

COPYRIGHT: Hninichi Shinbunshl 1982

C80: 6106/ 39

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UI'IIILIAL use URL!

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

STRENGTHHED NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE, BUDGET mum

Tokyo DENKI SHUMBUN in Japanese 9 Jan 82 p 1

[Article: 'Thmnentun To Be Given to Strengthening of Nuclear Fuel Cycle;
Construction of 'Solidification Pilot Plent' Takes One Step Forward; Science
and Technology Agency's Nuclear Energy Budget; Location Heasuree Office Also
To 8e Established")

[Text]

The Science and Technology Agency on the 8th clarified the details of
its nuclear energy budget for fiscal 1982. According to this, the characteristic
feature of the budget is that emphasis was given to the improvement and
Strengthening of the nuclear fuel cycle which is reaching the stage of
demonstration, as well as to the continuation of large-scale projects for
nuclear fusion, nulti-purpose high-temperature gas furnaces, etc. As to
downstream. in particular, detailed designing of a high-level waste liquid
solidification pilot plant was approved, and one step forward has been taken
as to the start of construction. In regard to low-level waste liquid, too,
new measures are to be developed. As to upstream, adjusted designing of
a uranium enrichment prOtotype plant and other matters were approved by the
Finance Ministry. and the start of conscruction is to be awaited. Also,
establishment of a Nuclear Energy iocationRegionalMeasures Office in the
Agency was approved. This is designed for comprehensive promotion of location
as to nuclear energy facilities from the standpoint of the State. It will
check into PA (public acceptance) astolocation at the first stage and what
regional promotion should be. and put it into practice.

Efforts to Be Made for PA at First Stage and Regional Promotionz Too

The said Agency's nuclear energy appropriations amount to V176,2OO
million (up 0.7 percent over fiscal l981) in the general account, and to
866,300 million (up l2.2 percent over fiscal i981) in the electric power
special account, totaling vzua billion (up 3.6 percent). The appropriations
in the general account exceeded the demanded amount by V1.100 million. This
means a slight increase in the amount of cash, because the limited amount of
liabilities on the Treasury was curtailed on a wide scale. The increase rate
of the demanded amount, including that in the electric power special account,
is 3.8 percent, and the amount of appropriations is somewhat smaller than
that.

38
FOR OFFHJA1.USEGDNLY
mos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristic feature of the contents of the nuclear energy budget-
is that new measures were worked out in the field of the nuclear fuel cycle,
which is reaching the stage of demonstration, in addition to the continuation
of medium- and long-range,large-scale projects for nuclear fusion, multi-
purpose high-temperature gas furnaces, FDR's (fast breeder reactors). etc. , as
before.

In regard to downstream, detailed designing (11,500 million) of the
high-level waste liquid solidification pilot plant by the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation was approved. following the basic
designing. The policy of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development
Corporation is to push detailed designing in fiscal 1981‘ and 1333, start the
construct-on of the plant in fiscal l98u, and start the operation thereof in
fiscal 1987.

The demonstration of glass solidification techniques will be carried out.
following the start of the operation of high-level radioactive materials
research facilities (CP!-‘) in the spring of this year. Development of
techniques on the disposal of radioactive waste (V200 million) and research on
the standards for the disposal of radioative waste (”0 million) are also new
meaSures. In the case of the former. development of new techniques for the
decrease of low-level waste, elimination of contamination, solidification, etc. ,
will be publicly invited from private circles, and subsidies will be granted.
In the case of the latter. research on standards will be carried out so that
perf~rmauce and so forth can be checked, in preparation for the practical use
of new solidified plastics, as well as research on the so-called "batten outs"
of low-level waste.

In the field of upstream, the uranium enrichment prototype plant is a
star item. An appropriation of V960 million. including an adjustment
expense (V500 million) to prepare for the construction, has been earmarked.
the sharing of funds between the Government and private circles has been
decided, and the early start of the construction will be awaited. Also, an
expense (VlOO million) for publicity measures concerning the nuclear fuel cycle
to promote location as to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the second
re-processing plant for private circles, uranium enrichment, and the "Monju"
BR, has been newly budgeted, and PR activities will be embarked upon from
the standpoint of the State.

In the field of organizetion, on the other hand, it has been decided that
a Nuclear Energy Location Regional Measures Office will be established. This
Office will check cross-sectionally and coaprehensively, from the standpoint
of the State, into the nuclear fuel cycle, PA as to first-stage location
of nuclear energy facilities including new-type reactors. regional promotion,
etc. , and put them into practice. Nuclear energy liaison co-ordinators
(numbering 8) under the Office Chief will also be assigned to this Office. and
co-cperaticn with local self-governing bodies also will be made close.

COPYRIGH: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982
C50: b106/ 39
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AVA Vbl‘VOIH 09h Vﬂua

SCIBKB AND WIDGY

ULTRA HIGH PERFUME INBRTIAL GUIDANCE 828134 FOR 5-). MRI-1T BEING DMIDPED
Tokyo cmPUTBR DIGBST in Japanese Jan 82. p 73

{Xrticlu 'Ultra High Performance Inertial Guidance System Being Developed in
Japan; A Rocket Has 60 Percent Probability of Hitting a Circle 1.5 km in Diameter
9,000 km Away:/

(Text; Ultra high performance inertial guidance system is being developed in
Japan. With this guidance system, a rocket launched frat Tokyo toward Los Angeles

has a 60 percent probability of hitting a circle 1.5 km in diameter. This guidance
system is to be carried on board Japan's first liquid hydrogen propelled H-l

rocket which is scheduled to be launched in 1986 by the National Space Development
Agency (NASDA). An outline of this project was revealed at the 6th Symposium of

Space Development Industry held on 29th at the Federation of Econcnic Organization
Hall in Tokyo. Although the accuracy of the system is difficult to compare inter-

nationally. the accuracy of its sensor which detects, among other things. the
acceleration is said to be No l in the world, according to its manufacturer.

The guidance system which guides artificial satellite into its orbit consists of
two basic formats; radio guidance format and inertial guidance format. Radio
guidance format consists of a ground radar which keeps track of the rocket, a
ground computer which processes the data, and a radio transmitter which transmits
radio comand to the rocket. This type of guidance system was used in the N-l

rocket which launched Japan's artificial satellites I'Ulae," an ionosphere observa-
tion satellite and "Ayame." an experimental stationary cormunications satellite.
However, this guidance format becomes ineffective when the rocket disappears
beyond the horizon.

In contrast. the inertial guidance format is independent of the ground. An
electronic computer carried on board the rocket calculates the deviation in its
position from the predetermined orbit and makes corrections. This guidance system
consists of a sensor assetbly comprising of three units each of gyros for the
detection of the flight angles and accelerometers for the detection of acceleration,

a computer for processing the data, and an electronic control device which controls
conbustion and nozzle angle of the rocket engine.

Bntrusted by NASDA, Nippon Avionics is in charge of the development of the sensor
assembly: Nippon Electric Canpany. the electronic control device: and Mitsubishi

Space Software. the program

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The key to an improvement of guidance accuracy lies in the sensor assembly. The
accuracy of gyros is the most important example. Gyros are tops spinning at the

rate of 24,600 rpm. Changes in the flight angles can be detected from an appli-
cation of one of the properties of a top spinning at very high speed; e.g.. it
maintains a fixed direction in space. The accuracy of gyro performance depends on
how well the heat generated in gyro is dissipated synmetrically left and right by
the thermal design. how well the friction effect is minimized by a precision
machining of the gyro bearings, and how accurately the parts are assembled.

According to the director of planning department, Kikuo ﬂimeshima. of Nippon

Avionics, the ballbearings used on the gyros were chosen from among the top grade
dcnestic products, and the balls, 1.5 mm in diameter, were raground to an accuracy

of within one-millionth of one millineter.

'Only one out of two units assembled by the most skilled technician passes the
rigid accuracy test. Nevertheless, its accuracy is approximately two orders of
magnitude higher than that of similar gyros used on the American missiles.‘ said
Himeshima. The accuracy of an experimental model of the guidance system completed
so far is said to have a 57.6 percent probability of hitting a circle one nautical
mile in diameter after 1 hour‘s flight. This accuracy is equivalent to a 60 per-
cent probability that a rocket launched from Tokyo will hit a circle 1.5 km in
diameter at Los Angeles after flying over a distance of approximately 9,000 km.

The hitting accuracy of the military missiles is much higher. because the missiles
are not only guided by the inertial guidance system. the errors of the inertial
guidance system are also continuously being corrected by such means as loran
navigation or reference to a digitized terrain map carried on board.

Himeshima regrets that “this technology cannot be exported as of now, because of
various restrictions placed on it. on account of the fact it is applicable to the
intercontinental ballistic missile in addition to the aircrafts and ships.”
(Asashi Shimbun 30 Oct)

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1982

9113
C80: 8129/0645 EN”

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY