FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10698

29 July 1982

USSR Report

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(Fouo 6/82)"

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain intonation primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
(P000 6/82)
CONTENTS

CONSTRUCTION
Evaluation of Efficiency in Construction
(A. S. Narinokiy and L. F. Petukhova; BUKIIGAL‘I'BRSKIY UCIIE‘I

“at 82) cooon.oo.cocooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo.

Hays of Improving Efficiency in Consttuction Discuaud
(E. Golland and S. Pinkek VOPROSY momma. Kay 82)

METALHORKINC BQUIPHBNT

Problems in Industrial Robotics Technology
(I. Yutevich; VBSTNIK HASBINOSIRDYBNIYE. Aug 81) . . . . . . . . . .

- a - [III - USSR - 36a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cmsmcuou

EVALUATION OF EPIC!” III cmsrwcnou

Hoecow 3mm 06113? in Rueeion lo 3. Her 82 (oigned to prooo
10 Her 82) pp 32-35

[Article by A. s. Norinekiy. profeoeor ond doctor of econonic eciencoe. end
1.. 1'. Potuhhovo. lecturer ot the nohorovek Institute of tho Notionol Econo-y:
"Recording end Anolyring the Efficiency of Construction Hork"]

[Text] The tooko of roioing production efficiency end inproving the quality
of work deter-inc the forne ond nothode of ocononic activity in ell hronchoo
of production. "... The porty'o couroe toward roieing efficiency end quality
neodo to be iwlonented with doubled ond tripled onorgy. there in no alterna-
tive to thot couroo." Conrodo 1.. I. Brezhnev enid ot the Roveﬁor (1979) Plo-
nun of the CPS!) Control Co-ittee.

A roliohlo oyoton for recording end onolyoing the procoeeoo of roioing produc-
tion efficiency hoe to ho orgonirod eo thot thooo proceooee con he nonegod.
'lhe principol ehortconing in thio effort in in our opinion tho ohoonco of eye-
tonotic recordkeeping on tho octuol efficiency of conotruction end tho orien-
tation of ouch colculotione prodoninontly toword potentiol efficiency. ‘ro do-
tornino production efficiency one needo to eoloct opocific indicotoro which
can he ueod to plon tho rioo in tho love]. of econonic porfornonce end to none-
uro tho rooulto ochieved.

Although often tho tern efficiency "indicotor" ond "criterion" ore confueod.
oince they ore related to one onothor in their content. they do differ oeeon-
tiolly in their purpooo. Hhereoe on indicotor of efficiency ie o noth of
nenouring proceeeoe of tho oono kind. only tho one noet inportont or ot-ory
indicator. tho one need no the booie for oolving the problon thot hoe been oet
or for conperotive evaluation of tho porfornonco of different entorprioee or
euhdivieiono. con ho o criterion.

Creating a oinglo efficiency indicotor oiuplifiee the toting of nonogoriol do-
cioione on tho hoeie of on unonhiguouo roprooontotion of tho proceooee end
phenoneno being etudiod. But oo o procticol letter it in not poeoihlo to pro-
pooe on indicotor oo univerool that it can reflect oll tho groot diveroity of
proceooeo determining the efficiency of production. And that ie why oeverol
couple-eatery indicotoro hove to he need to nooeuro the efficiency of produc-
tion. end the noet important or our}: indicotor. one which ie forned on the
hooio of tho prinory indicotoro. io deoipotod on the criterion of efficiency.

1
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The peculiarities of the sector. and the uniqueness of its product and its
production process have to be taken as points of departure in selecting indi-
esters of efficiency.

The product of capital construction are the buildings and structures erected.
expanded and rebuilt and the conleted installation of equipment. Construc-
tion projects are attached to the ground and make up an indivisible whole with
it. There are two important circmtencea related to these peculiarities:
projects finished and delivered to clients are turned over to other enter-
prises and economic organisations as fixed capital; it is assumed that the
construction product will be used over s lengthy period of tine. For that
reason meeting deadlines for activation of completed projects. on which the
increase in the volume of production in other sectors of the economy and the
output of products depends. has decisive importance to the performance of en-
terprises. especially to indicators of their production efficiency. The in-
troduction of s new economic concept. the marketed output of construction.
which is the value of construction and installation work on enterprises. proj-
ects and independent complexes prepared for output of products and delivered
to clients. is related to this indicator (see: A. N. Kosygin. "An Important
Stage in Improving the Planned Management of the Economy." MIST. llo 12.
1979. p 23).

Fulfilling the assignment for activation of projects can be described by using
a set of several indicators: fulfillsent of the plan for the nerketed Output
of construction and the average construction time of projects completed and
delivered as compared to the standard time allowed.

Figures on the asrketed output of construction indicate the estimated cost of
projects prepared for operation. and they are entered in the ledgera of pro-
duction recordkeeping and in report forms. Hatters are more complicated in
checking adherence to the established (standard or planned) deadlines for ac-
tivation of completed projects. This requires above all that figures on the
standard and actual construction time in months he entered in the cost lodgers
of the principal production operation (Ledger No 10 or the respective "comput-
ergrama"). where they are indicated on the lines set aside for each of those
projects.

Table l. in thousands of rubles

Project Runner
Indicator 1 3 lo _5_ Total

 

 

Estimated project cost [.260 680 1.650 620 2.l80 5,970
Construction time in months
Standard 15 10 20 8 20 -
Actual 20 8 18 10 16 -

Product of the estimated cost
and the construction time

Standard 18.600 6.800 29.000 3.360 43 .600 101.360
Actual 26.800 5.460 26.100 6.200 30.520 91.060
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI; USE ONLY

The dates of co-sncensnt and conpletion of work. confiruad by job orders for
co-sncenant of operation and docusnts on activation of cowleted projects.
should be entered in the ledgers as the basis for determining the actual dura-
tion of construction work.

He propose that the average construction tine of coqleted projects for the
reporting period be calculated according to the mule given in Table 1.

Since ahead-of-schedule activation of projects for production purposes and
also delay of their activation create conditiona for a respective increase or
decrease of the output of products and the profit of enterprises which are the
construction clients. the figures given above can be need to calculate the ef-
ficiency of activation of construction projects (Table 2).

Table 2
Project binder
Indicator 1 _2_ 3 3 2 Average
Construction tine
in nontha

Standard 15 10 20 0 20 17
Actual 20 8 18 10 14 15.3
Difference (4». -) +5 -2 -2 +2 -6 -2.7

Increaae or decrease
Output. in thou-
eande of rubles
Daily plan 32.000 19.500 21.000 16.200 52.000 total
Total depar-

ture fron the
output plan -160.000 +39.000 “2.000 48.600 +312.000 488.600

 

+393.000
Profit
Percentage
plan 12 8 ll 8 10 Total
Sun total of
discrepan-
cies. in
thonaandn of
rubles -19.200 +3.120 “.620 -2.292 +31.200 41.1692
408.950

This computation is based on planning aoeiments for output and the average
profit to be earned per day of operation of newly added capacities.

The average construction tins of projecta delivered cannot aerve so an exhaus-
tive description of fulfillment of the plan for activation of projects. aince
in that indicator the constructive and adverse departurea fron standards can-

cel one another out. It ehould be supplenented by data on the nuﬁer and es-
tinated cost of projecta delivered ahead of schedule and behind achedula and
on their relative share in the total volune of operations cowleted. mese

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

figures are contained in the table presented above. ﬂoreover. to measure the
efficiency of construction work we propose that the following indicators be
used as well: profit fron delivery of work itens. the output-capital ratio.
utilization of labor resources and labor productivity. and the quality of work
item.

Use of profit as an indicator of production efficiency is nsde easier by the
peculiarities of construction. which to a considerable degree elininate divi-
sion of work itsns into "profitable" and "unprofitable." The iqortant thing
is that the planned accmlation be included in exactly the sane percentage in
the estimated cost (i.e.. release price) of the work itees completed. In ad-
dition, reduction of the production cost of construction and installation work
is planned and recorded for the construction organisation as a whole. which in
turn eliminates these differences between types of work itens and the project
where they are perforned. The attachment of each construction project to the
site of its future operation elininstes the factor of product shipment. and.
by contrast with industrial activity. nkes the tine of delivery of the work
items to the client coincide with their sale.

In evaluating production efficiency on the basis of the profit indicator it is
advisable to eliminate from the sun total of profit free delivery of work
itens interest paid on bank loans covering unfinished construction in cases
when that interest was collected by the bank at higher rates because of tardi-
ness in repaying the loans.

The cutput-capitsl ratio is ordinarily computed as an indicator of the utili-
zation of productive capital by dividing the voluaa of work its-a performed in
the reporting period with the organisation's own resources by the average
amount of fixed and working capital employed. The volume of work itsns is
given at their estinsted cost and taking into account changes in reminders of
work in process.

In conputing the indicator of the return on fired productive capital in con-
struction difficulties arise which are related to the organisational peculi-
arities of the sector: various organizations which possess economic indepen-
dence and have a separate balance sheet participate jointly in performance of
the work items. The fixed capital whose return is to be computed is recorded
on the various balance sheets. The most substantial portion of that capital
belongs to construction nachinery adninistrations and transportation organiza-
tions.

This means there is a need for recording the sun total of all the disparate
capital assets participating in the production process; to that end we should
deternine the average value of fixed assets enlisted from outside and ensure
that they are regularly reflected in records outside the balance sheet. This
can be achieved without creating additional doculentation or adding to the
complexity of the existing docunsntation by relying exclusively on the bills
of machinery adninistrations and transportation organizations and on the shift

reports of machinery operators and truck drivers' trip logs appended to those
bills. For the purpose of deternining the average nutter-of construction ms-
chines and trucks enlisted and of later assigning then reference prices per

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unit. we propose that the following coaputationa be made: the total nunber of
machine-shifts worked in the reporting period should be divided by the number
of work shifts according to the production schedule in effect; the total nun-
ber of ton-kilometers of trucking in the reporting period should be divided by
the planned standard nuﬂer of ton-kilolseters established per shift of the .-
chine's operation.

These conputations should be done separately for types. nodels and takes of
machines and trucks. and the number of each of then should be assigned a unit
price according to the prices in effect. Aside from the informtion contained
in bills from those furnishing services. the following reference data have to
be available for this purpose: the nunher of work shifts in the reporting pe-
riod according to the established production schedule. the planned nutter of
ton-kiloneters per nachine-shift of each model (mks) of truck. unit prices
for each type. nodal and asks of construction machines and trucks.

The recording of the enlisted fixed capital outside the balance sheet should
be organised in the forts of an annual report with cumlative totals.

In analysing the general contractor's production efficiency it is advisable to
use the indicator of the total return on own and enlisted fixed capital per
ruble of their value on the basis of the estiaated cost of the work iteas per-
formed.

This will make it possible to eta-arise the results of work of all the ma-
chines used.

It is also important to constantly monitor the indicator of the total return
on capital (relative to fixed capital) because the division of the functions
of the supplier of services from the functions of the consumer of those ser-
vices weakens the monitoring of the reliability of shift reports on the opera-
tion of nachines. In addition. the localietic interests of machinery adminisv
trations sake it difficult to codaat padding of the mﬂer of nachine-shifts
worked. And that creates the conditions for a drop in the return on capital.
That is why monitoring the return on capital will at the same tine involve
monitoring the reliability of figures on the use of machines. Rented property
should also be included among enlisted fixed capital on the basis of the ac-
counting figures on the capital of others. confirmed by documents. should also
be included among enlisted fixed capital.

The nethod recouended for computing the return on capital is siwle in and of
itself and relies entirely on the existing documentation.

The culinary indicator of the use of labor resources and of labor productivity
should be computed by dividing normative net output by the average roster
staff of the construction organisation in the reporting period. This indica-
tor syntheeizes the influence of several interrelated factors: the relative
share of the work force in the principal production operation in the roster

work force of the construction organisation. the percentage of appearances for
work and output per worker. In analyzing an indicator like this one can de-
termine the influence of each of these factors. Constant inforlation on use

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of labor resources needs to be organized on the basis of these indicators as a
part of statistical recordkeeping of the construction organisation and included
in reporting on fulfill-lent of the labor plan and the wages plan.

Along the indicators of the efficiency of construction the quality of the work
perfomd has extrenely greet iwortance. though in the practical keeping of
economic statistics these natters are still not paid the inortance they de-
serve. The quality of work iteas is not planned. nor is it reflected in book-
keeping. A deterioration of the quality of work its-s night bring about a
substantial reduction in the reliability of profit as an indicator of produc-
tion efficiency.

The present procedure in which work items are paid for according to estab-
lished stable prices regardless of quality has the result that in certain
cases. when the work has not been done conscientiously. conditions nay be cre-
ated for an unjustified growth of profit because certain operations were onit-
ted, others were sisplified. and its-s were not coepleted. That is why profit
indicators should in our view be unfailingly exanined so as to take into ac-
count the quality of construction.

The following data should be used to describe the quality of construction:
asseesnent of quality of work its-s delivered to clients according to a three-
point system; the estineted cost of deficiencies recorded in the relevant doc-
uaenrs appended to the docunent for transfer of construction projects after
acceptance; and the sun total of losses free rejects.

The need for inforastion on the quality of work perforned can be satisfied by
using various types of records: technical operation records (the log of work
item) concerning the anount and quality of work done at specific projects on
a three-point scale; records on work done by others in a grouping according to
quality categories for the entire construction organisation. internal records
on rejects and especially of deficiencies recorded in the account "Rejects."

The indicators given above cannot serve as criteria of efficiency. which un-
failingly should have an inherent unity and should be emery in their nature.
In accordance with the peculiarities of planning and recording construction
cost. profit fron delivery of work itens after deduction of increased (pen-
alty) interest paid on credit to finance construction in process is neat suit-
able as a sole criterion of production efficiency. At the seas tine a correc-
tion should be made if the quality of the work itens delivered drops to the
grade "satisfactory." For this purpose it is best to establish sound coeffi-
cients whereby profit fron delivery of the work items would decrease as a
function of the level of quality indicators referred to above.

The lost radical solution to the problen of the relationship between the qual-
_ity of work itens and profit from their delivery would be to establish legis-
latively quality-dependent supplements to and discounts free the estinated
cost of work itens perforned.

The effectiveness of production cost lay be expressed not only by the absolute
our total of profit. but also by the ratio of profit from delivery of work

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iteea to the value of such itena (at estiuted cost). Profitability. defined
as the ratio of profit to the eun total of productive capital. an indicator
adopted in industry. is unacceptable for the construction sector for two rea-
sons: first. because capital is scattered among different balance sheets. as
noted above. and second. because in contraction accuuilation is planned in
percentages of eatieeted production cost of the planned enounts of work.

Another approach to solving this problem in also possible: counting the sun-
nary indicator of efficiency in the points established for evaluating the par-
tial indicators. This requires establishing a point ayaten and totaling then
up for the construction organization. The value of every indicator could be
eetinated as a function of its relative inortance. For angle. for active-
tion—fro. 0 to 100 points. for profit—fro- 0 to $0. for the quality grade of
work item delivered--froe 10 to 30. for deficiencies—fro- S to 20. for labor
productivity-fro- 0 to 30. for return on capital investedufron O to 10. The
specific scale of ratings ought to be established as a function of the level
of every indicator for each branch of construction and on the basis of the
conditions mder which the work is done.

The eu-aery estieate of the efficiency of construction work is important to
conpsring the performance of different construction organisations st different
levels. for commutation of the perforaance indicators of a single organiza-
tion in different periods of tins. and also for planning the ansignnent for
raising production efficiency and for checking its performance.

COPYRIGHT: "Bukhgalterekiy uchet". 1982

7065
650: 1821/136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.\'

CONSTRUCTION

HAYS 0P IMPROVIN EFFICIBICY 1N OONSTRUCTION DISCUSSED

Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 5, Hey 82 (signed to press 27 Apr 82)
pp 54-62

[Article by E. Golland and S. Pinkel': "Inproving Construction Efficiency")

[Text] The technical level of contraction in our country has improved sub-
stantially and its laterisl and technical base has been strengthened over the
last decade. At the sane tine unfavorable tendencies are being observed in
construction that negatively affect its economic efficiency. The greatest
negative factor is the insufficient growth in labor productivity. As a result
construction tines are 1.8 to 2 tines greater than the standard level, and a
growth in inionpleted construction and an increase in the estimated coat is
being noted.

The economy of the USSR is being developed according to the laws for expanded
socialistic scans of production. "A steady growth in production necessitates

constantly grgwing capital investments for the fornstion of new production
capacities." During the current decade, when the influx of labor resources

will decline, ensuring that the growing volume of capital investments will be put
. to use without increasing the nunber of workers will become the main goal.

0n the basis of an analysis of the annual rates of growth for labor productivity
in construction and industry over 30 years (fron 1951 through 1980) four periods
can be singled out. Such a division into periods was caused by the dependency
of the rates of labor productivity on the technological reorganization in
construction production during these years which was associated with adopting
and categorizing prefabricated reinforced concrete.

In 1951-53 a reduction from 109.9 percent to 104.3 percent in the annual rates
of growth for labor productivity in construction is observed with a lag of 1.6
points behind labor productivity in industry on the average for the period.

 

J‘According to an estiute by scadenician 1‘. lanacheturov, the increase in the cost
of construction in comparison with the initial estinate of the cost is reaching
50 to 100 percent (VOPROSY EKONOHIKI No 7, 1979, p 129).

2‘1. S. Khachaturov, "Intensification and Efficiency Under the Conditions of
Developing Socialism." Izdatel'stvo "Nauks". 1978. p 227.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l
1951- 1950- 1961- 1966-
1953 1960 1965 1980
lndustry...... 108.1 107.1 106.7 102.7
Construction‘ 106.7 109.5 105.7 100.9
*Labor productivity in construction excluding
construction-re- ir or:-nizations.

Beginning with 1956 a substantial reorganization took place in the construction
industry associated with the adoption of prefabricated reinforced concrete which
created the preconditions for accelerating the rates of labor productivity and
surpassing their growth compared to industry. At this stage the rates of growth
for labor productivity in construction exceeded analogOus indicators in industry
by 2.4 points.

    

    

From 1961 a decline in the effect of prefabricated reinforced concrete on the
intensification of construction production is observed. At this time a reduction
occurredin-theannual rates of growth in comparison with the preceding period but,
on the average, the rates of growth for labor productivity in construction sur-
passed the average annual rates of growth in industry for the years from 1961-1965.

Since 1966 the rates of growth for labor productivity in construction have tended
to steadily decline and lag behind analogous indicators in industry. It would
seem that the renovation of fixed assets, which was accomplished at more rapid
rates in construction than in other sectors of the national economy, could have
prevented the decline in the rates of growth for labor productivity (in 1980 the
fixed assets in construction grew by a factor of 2.6 in comparison with 1970; for
the sane time it was by a factor of 2.2 for industry, 2.3 for agriculture and

2 for transport.) However, this did not occur. In our View the increase in fixed
assets for the given period was caused by an extensive growth in the technical base
of construction. The chief technological factor that stimulated the growth in
labor productivity from 1954 to 1966 was the expanded use of prefabricated rein-
forced concrete and on the basis of it an improvement in the degree of standard-
ization for construction elements, in the proportion of factory prepared products,
and in the level of prefabrication at the construction site.

From the moment that the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers
decree on the production of prefabricated reinforced concrete was approved its
output increased by a factor of more than 20 and exceeded the level in the USA,
France and PRC combined. The growth in the technical and economic indicators
declines to the degree that the sector is saturated with prefabricated rein-
forced concrete components and, at the present time, eephasizing the further
expansion of demand for prefabricated reinforced concrete is in conflict with
the requirements for scientific and technical progress. At present the tendency
of prefabricated reinforced concrete enclosure components for buildings and
structures to become heavier is manifesting itself which leads to an increase in
the weight of load-bearing components and. consequently, to an increase in
material consumption—~most of all for metal consumption in construction.* The
USSR Minister of Construction, 0. Karsvayev, writes: "Over the span of the sixth

*See BKONOMICHESKAYA GAZETA No 7, 1981, p 7; V. Tolpygin. "Technical Progress
in Construction Production."

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to ninth five-year plans the primary precondition for growth in labor productiv-
ity in the sector was an increase in the volume of usage of components made from
prefabricated reinforced concrete and an increase in the relative proportion of
completely prefabricated construction. At present this possibility is almost
exhausted. Expenditures for prefabricated reinforced concrete per 1 million
rubles of construction and installation work is almost not increasing. The
relative proportion of completely prefabricated construction has reached a high
level and therefore the effect of the prefabrication factor on the gros 'h of
labor productivity is also coming to an end. It should be frankly stated that
at the existing level at which builders are equipped with machines and provided
with new materials that reduce labor consmption it is impossible to provide

a growth in output of more than 2 to 3 percent per year. The extensive use of
new advanced components could become a source of further growth for labor
productivity...."*

One of the indicators of the intensification of social production is the coef-
ficient of the level of technology which is calculated on the basis of a produc-
tion function. It makes it possible to fix the influence of the totality of
production factors. The results of calculations of productivity indicators,

the capital-labor ratio, the yield on capital and the level of technology are
presented in Table 2 (see next page).

Labor productivity is calculated as the relationship of the total amount of
construction and installation work (SHR) that is completed by the contract and
cost accounting methods to the number of workers that are engaged in construction
and installation work, taking into consideration capital repairs. The relative
proportion of capital repairs that are carried out by the cost accounting method
of the total amount of SHR is determined in a manner similar to the relative
proportion of capital repairs that are carried out by the contract method. The
capital-labor ratio is calculated as the relationship of the annual cost of

fixed production assets for construction to the average annual number of workers
engaged in construction and installation work.

Numbered among the fixed production assets for the "construction" sector are

funds that are used for construction and installation work and capital repairs

and also production funds of other sectors that are calculated on the balance
sheet of construction organizations' basic activities. The latter portion of
funds is not associated with completing construction, installation and repair work.

The fixed production assets that are for construction purposes are determined
according to the "USSR National Economy" handbooks for the corresponding years
where indicators were taken for the "construction" sector and multiplied by a
coefficient of 0.8. However. the derived conditionality does not distort the
tendency of the phenomena being examined. The level of technology is calculated
as the effect of labor productivity on the yield on capital. The indicator for
the amount of fixed production assets that are associated with construction,
installation and repair for all "construction" is calculated in accordance with
the distribution of workers that are engaged in construction according to the
types of production: about 80 percent in construction, installation and subsidiary

*KOH'HUNIST No 16. 1980, p 65. 10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000600080072-9

2007/02109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

£8: a. II!- 152... 83 2F. 33 .
st: 3 al.8- 1821 :8 3r 3!

nun-pa: JO [us-1

    

"an ”col-lulu

an a: 1...»; .o .3..-

   

   

aauSquu: Qua-.uou-Vn— 1...! 3 .5». g 18::- car. 70.03.52. 5 8: {1:03.31 Q’s-331':
A :04 Iguana.- o'unLuro-u 32.2 3 £— 163».- 88 car. a; can 3 .533. conﬁne-no

      

           
  
 

            
 

     

 

 

)l ) ) I V Gill )1
"m "m "m n um ”mm "m
w. t w. . a E- m.
z. x... n. . n “2m n
u, an um .. m. (.un um
I“ I" In M "h" hw~ 3
W.- M3 “H u ”I D 0 al
In .- uA I I l lw
.x m... an n Mum um .
( (u 1 us a-“ «m
4: mm m-

.n a: 30.. r. {.3 WW my.“ -

 

loans-.299 5 9.3133." 3.1:)... C32.
0-6..—

11

ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080072-9

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production and approximately 20 percent in service and similar sectors.

An analysis of Table 2 shows that labor productivity in construction grew by a
facotr of 1.5 over 16 years, the capital-labor ratio for one worker engaged in
construction and installation work increased by a factor of 3.2 and the yield
on capital declined. An increase in the output-capital ratio was one of the
consequences during the particular period with the intensive development of

the sector and the accelerated substitution of machines for manual labor. In
this instance a growth in the output-capital ratio for labor that exceeds its
productivity is inevitable. However, an increase in funds and a transition to
another technological base creates the preconditions for accelerating the rates
of growth for labor productivity. From 1965 to 1980 a decline took place in
both the absolute growth of labor productivity and in the rates that it increased.
The decline in the funds' effectiveness was accompanied by a drop in the level
of technology by a factor of 1.3.

A drop in the level of technology is one of the chief factors for the decline in
the growth of labor productivity. The growth in the capital-labor ratio for
construction workers has substantially surpassed the growth in the level of
technology and labor productivity in recent years. Nonetheless, the capital-labor
ratio level for workers that are engaged in construction and installation work

is still insufficient and it is substantially lower than the capital-labor ratio
for industrial workers. (See Table 3).

Industry‘ 6,872 8,071 11,305 11,959 12,621 16,083 14,936
Construction 1,689 2,516 3,531 3,900 6,272 5,104 5,382

*The capital-labor ratio for workers that are engaged in industry is
calculated as the relationship of industry's fixed production assets
to the average annual number of industrial and production personnel.

 
  

     
     
     

       

From table 3 it is evident that the capital-labor ratio for industrial and pro-
duction personnel in 1965 exceeded the capital-labor ratio for construction
workers by a factor of a; in 1980 the substantial growth in construction's fixed
assets reduced this correlation to a facotr of 2.8, but despite these positive
improvements the construction industry has still not secured the highly effective
funds that are necessary. An increase in the amount of funds has still not led
to a growth in the level of technology'inconstruction.

Accelerating the scientific and technological progress depends in many ways on
the adoption of advanced technological processes, and an improvement in equip-est,
materials and devices. At the same time, of the new types of nachines, equipment,
apparatuses and devices that are intended for various sectors of industry the
relative proportion of technical innovations that were created in the construction
materials industry occupies one of the last places.

Over the span of the eighth to tenth five-year plans the relative proportion of
new labor means in the construction industry amounted to just one percent. As a

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

result many enterprises are characterized by a high level of havy manual labor.
For example. 35 to so percent of the workers at enterprises in the Ministry of
Construction Materials in Moldavia were engaged in manual labor.

The level of scientific potential in construction, as in any other sector. depenﬁ
on expenditures for NIP [scientific research work]. At present the relative
proportion of scientific workers in the comtruction materials industry is one

of the lowest.

_m----

Construction Materials........ 40.0 lo.0
Capital Investeents........... 6.0 4.8
Number of Scientific Horkers.. 1.7 1.3
*As a percentage of the total voluse of industrial production.
As is evident from the table all indicators are tending to decline; along with
this the relative proportion of the under of scientific workers that serve the

construction naterials industry declined at greater rates than the relative
proportion of its products against the total volume of industrial production.

 
   
 

  
 
 

       
    

The construction naterials industry and other sectors that produce them lag behind
other industrially developed countries in the output of up-to—date components
(alminum, glued, wood. and polymer components. those made fro. high strength
aetals and others) while at the sane time surpassing then in the amount of
prefabricated reinforced concrete used by a factor of 5 to 7. This is, in our
view, one of the reasons for the lag in labor productivity and for the increase
in the length of tine for construction. At the same time our country occupies

a leading position in the world in the production of steel and rolled metal and
stocks of wood which makes it possible to organise the production of up-to-date
components fro. them in the aaounts needed by capital construction.

An increase in the efficiency of the construction complex requires a fundamental
change in construction technology and that the construction complex be saturated
with new technological systems and equipped with the appropriate technology
along with organizational measures.

At the present time a basic principle in designing and erecting buildings and
structures is oriented towards using overhead cranes to transfer cargo. The
load-lifting capacity of an overhead crane is determined by the maximum weight
of a unit of equipment almost irrespective of the frequency of its transfer.
with an increase in the individual power of equipment is weight grows and the
load on a building's framework increases which leads to a growth in the sizes
and uses of columns. the beams under the crane and the footings. As a result
the load from the effect of the crane's gantry reaches 65 to 90 percent while
the buildings' slabs are only 10 to 35 percent. It should also be noted that
the use of overhead cranes (originating with the conditions under which they

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are used) leads to an increase in the size of buildings by 35 to 1.0 percent,
irrespective of the dimensions of the equipment that is installed and produced.

Haas production of ground type means of transportation-gantry, sci-gantry

.and boom cranes, crane-stackers, and conveyor and monorail types of technology.
will make it possible to abandon the use of overhead cranes which will change
the approach to constructing buildings. Separate structural approaches for the
construction and technological sections of a future enterprise will become

a chief principle.

Freeing the frames of buildings from crane loads leads to a reduction in structural
bulk and reduces the loads. mass and weight of a building's elements. The possi-
bility emerges of more fully utilizing the effect of lightweight components,

shaped sheets, three layer and monopanels, glued wooden components, etc.

Reducing the mass of buildings and structures by mans of using lightweight com-
ponents that are completely prepared at the factory provides a substantial reduc-
tion in labor consumption durim erection, in the estimated cost of construction.
in the specific capital investments and in the length of construction.

A solution to the problem of producing lightweight building components is linked
with the use of the most up-to-date materialsh metal load-bearing components
from economical shapes of rolled metal (hollow rolled metal, cables. wide shelf
beams. high strength, thermally treated and low alloy rolled metal and rolled
metal protected by coverings); metal enclosure components from shaped steel or
alaninum sheets with light polymer insulation (foam plastic, polyurethane, slag
cotton slabs). The use of alt-inum load-bearing and enclosure components from
glued wood, glued plywood, and polymer materials and components using building
materials made from the wastes of local industry, including pneumatic ones with
or without a frame, are economical in a number of cases.

Native experience in the use of lightweight components which has been accumulated
over the past years has shown their high level of effectiveness. compatibility and
ability to be used in a majority of cases during construction of industrial and
agricultural buildings that are intended for production purposes and civil
construction structures.

The use of load-bearing metal "structure" type components in hollow shapes with
lightweight "sandwich" enclosure panels and monopanels for the roof have made it
possible to obtain substantially higher economic and operational indicators in
comparison with traditional components from prefabricated reinforced concrete
which is evident from the report data during construction of an industrial con-
struction components combine in Krasnoyarsk.

A small increase in the cost of materials occurs chiefly for the following reasons.
The elements of the "structure" cosponent are made from comnon carbon steel. The

use of low alloy or thermally strengthened steel makes it possible to reduce the
consumption of rolled metal by 25 to 30 percent. The calculations for the rein-
forced concrete columlu were done by starting with the assumption that reinforced
concrete panels and slabs with girders are used whose weight was overstated by
approximately 30 to 35 percent and the consqution of reinforcing by 10 to 15
percent. The thickness of the shaped floors amounts to 1.9 us instead of the

0.6 to 0.7 - required. The extra margin of strength in the "structure" components

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that was used in the calculations was overstated by a factor of 1.5 (which is
confined by tests). If one assume that all of the factors indicated are

node to correspond to those that are required then, in our estinate, direct
expenditures will be reduced by ?3,000 to 26,000 rubles, that is 28 to 30 percent
lower than with the use of traditional reinforced concrete components.

Prinary Indicators for 100 Square Meters of Production Area
"Structure",
Prefabricated "Sandwich".
Reinforced Concrete honopanels

Duration of work (in days)..............
Labor Expenses (in nan/days)............
Direct Expenses (in rubles).............
Including:
uteruhOOC'OO‘OOCOOVOOOIIQOOOVOO'II
Basic wages..........................
Overhead Expenses depending on the labor
consuption for the work (in rubles)...

 

An analysis of the construction of shops at a mnber of aetallurgicsl enterprises
(a wide shelf blooming aill at the Niahne-‘l‘agil'sltiy Metallurgical Plant, blast
furnace No 9 at the Krivorozhstal" plant, oxygen converting shops at the
Zapadno-Sibirshiy and Novolipetskiy plants and at Mobstal', a "2000" mill at the
Cherepovets plant) has shown that with a weight of 20 to 25 kilogram for 1 square
meter of the three-layer panel having polyurethane insulation, and 60 to 60 kilo-
grams for the roof panel the total weight of the building was reduced by a factor
of 4 to 10, and the length of construction by a factor of 1.5 to 2 in comparison
with keransit concrete. According to acadeaician N. Hel'nikov's data the use of
elm-in:- load-bearing and enclosure conponents, under the construction conditions
at Chukotka, Hirnyy, Dikson and other regions of the Far North, reduces the mass
of buildings by a factor of 20, the nuaber of load transfers by a factor of 10
to 15, labor consumption by a factor of 5, the length of construction by a factor
of lo and the estinated cost of building 1 square meter of production area by

a factor of 2.‘

The construction of agricultural, civil and industrial buildings and structures

f roa glued wood is being extensively developed at the present tine. In agricul-
tural construction these are chicken coops, cow barns, warehouses for mineral
fertilizers, sheds for agricultural nachinery and others; in civil comtruction—
concert halls, light athletics arenas, swimim pools, narltets, etc. A conparison
of the construction indicators for light athletic arenas in Minsk, Gonel' and
Uruch'ye, calf barns in Lithuanian SSR, and aineral fertilizer warehouses in

*See N. P. Hel'nikov, "Bcononisiu Metal. The Gain Over Tine (BRO No 9, 1980,
p 11).

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Belorussia testify that the use of glued wood coepOnents reduces the weight of
walls. frames, and floor and roof slabs by a factor of 2 to 6 at various

structures in agricultural and civil construction.

The econonic effectiveness of glued wood components (KDK) is especially high
when erecting buildings and structures with large bays. The erection of two
light athletics arenas with 1.9 ester bays in Hinsk and Gonel‘ has shown that
the consusption of saterials was reduced and the cost of construction corres-
pondingly lowered in coeparison with a similar sports arena in Uruch'ye (388R)
which was made free metal components. The use of K0! when erecting buildings
and structures that have aggressive agents (mineral fertilizer warehouses,
production shops with chenical technology and others) increases their longevity

The use of all types of lightweight conponents requires a fundamental recon-
struction of the technology for construction production. the forestion of s
technological and organizational production line is needed that would include
the mechanized process and the process of preparing components at the factory
and all the coeplensntary parts, specialized transport. warehousing, storage
and installation. The propagation of new technological systees in construction
which are based on the use of lightened conponents that are coepletely prepared
at the factory gives rise to the necessity of forning net subsectors in the
construction industry- shaped floor slab plants, enterprises for producing setal
components, shops and individual enterprises for turning out KDK and air bearing
components-and of supplying them with resources. These are chiefly thin steel
sheets with a thickness of 0.6 to 1.2 on. low alloyed and thersslly strengthened
steel, coniferous wood, glues, paints, etc. Even with construction saturated
to the maxim with the new components the densnd on resources will not be excessive.

In our opinion the use of structure and enclosure panels for 50 percent of the
area that is constructed when erecting buildings and structures in industry
requires 11 to 12 percent of the amount of rolled metal that is expected to be
turned out in 1985. Along with this the proportion of thin galvanized sheets
will increase substantially. the production of which should be developed by

To build 50 percent of the agricultural production space and civil construction
structures fron wood components requires that coniferous wood be supplied in
aeounts that will not exceed 3 to 4 percent of all the wood that is being

Replacing traditional reinforced concrete and wood products will lead to a
savings of metal and wood so that the total asomt of these types of products
that are used will not increase. The basic require-ant of the sectors that
supply construction is an ieprovenent in the quality of a product that is being
sanufactured. For this it is necessary that the production of thin sheets,
sheets with protective coverings, low alloy steel and thernally strengthened
steel in ferrous metallurgy, and special stocks of wood in the logging industry
be increased and that the quality of glues and paints be improved in the

chemical industry.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Originating with the experience in building plants that sake metal components,
wall "sanchticb panels" and nonopanele, components fro- glued wood, and shops
and section for producing glues, paints and other lightweight components the
capital investment required to form nu capacities was deternined which would
amount to no more than 3 to 6 percent of the capital investnents that were
utilized in 1900.

The use of lightweight components will prove to have a significant effect on
solving transportation problems. Up to the present tine the aunt of hauling
involved in just ninersl construction materials reached one-third billion tone
or 30 percent of all shipping.‘ More than one fourth of the cargo hauled on
railroads is for construction purposes and it reaches more than 60 percent on
rivers. Along with this the amount of cargo being hauled for construction
purposes is growing faster than the amount of all freight. The proportion of
transportation expenses in the cost of a construction product is about 60 per-
cent for the construction nsterials industry as a whole end it is even higher
for wall materials.

Relative Proportion Relative Proportion
of Cargo Shipped by of Cargo Shipped by
Railroad Transport River Transport

     
    
   
     
  

  
  

 

  

  

l96$...........
1970eeeeeeeeeee
1975...........
1980eeeeeeoeeee

 

   
     

Based on the handbooks "The USSR National Economy in 1979."
lzdatel'stvo "Statistika" 1980 pp 325,328; “The USSR National
Economy in 1980," Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy i statistika" 1981.
pp 296, 302.

During the 10th Five-Year Plan rail transport reduced the growing shipping
indicators but even with this the relative proportion of construction cargo
hauled increased. If industry continues to turn out materials having the
existing technical characteristics then. considering the rates of growth for
capital construction in the country. the transportation of construction materials
will become a difficult problem for transport to solve. A reduction in the
amount of cargo hauled will in turn prove to have an effect on reducing the

cost of construction eateriels. Thus. freeing substantial labor resources in

the area of loading. unloading and transportation work depends on reducing

the mass of buildings and structures.

The development of new principles and technology for designing buildings and
structures, the most up-to-date coeponents and materials, the construction of
plants for producing them and lastly, the development of construction technology,

 

'*Ilailroad. river and sea transport are what are meant.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the baaia of which could be the highly accurata installation of unnatural
coqaonenta that are coupletaly prapared by tha factory. will awatantially
improve technical construction in the USSR.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekomiki", 1982.

9695
080: 1821/1103

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FETALHORKING EQUIPMENT

UDC 621:6”.516.007.52
PROBLEMS IN INDUSTRIAL ROBOTICS TBCWLOGY

Hoscow VBSTNIK MASBINOSTROYBNIYB in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (signed to press 31 Jul 81)
pp 3-5

[Article by Ye. I. Yurevich. doctor of oechnicml sciences: "Problems of Unification
and Standardization in Industrial Robotics")

[Text] Through exploitation of advances in science and technology:
develop the production and insure the extensive application of auto-
matic manipulators (industrial robots) and integrated automatic con-
trol systems incorporating microprocessors and microcomputers. build
automated shops and plants....

(Basic Directions for the Economic
and Social Development of the USSR
during the Years 1981-1985 and for
the Period Extending to 1990)

The future 1 sediately ahead will see industrial robots and nanipulators become the
east commonly employed and universal means of integrated automation of all spheres of
the national econony. including nachine building. mining. metallurgy. agriculture, con-
struction. transportation. services etc. Today industrial robots and manipulators are
enployed in machine building primarily to attend production equipment independently to
perforn a number of operations (welding. asssnhly. painting. testing. control. trans-
port).

"Basic Directions for the Bconoaic and Social Development of the 088R during the years
1981-1985 and for the Period Extending to 1990" provides for further development of the

production and insuring extensive application of this promising new means of integrated
automation of production. According to branch estimates, the requirement for the sin-

plest industrial robots with program control and manipulators with manual and automated
control alone is calculated to run into the many tens of thousands. The number of
types of these machines required already is many tens. a figure which in the innediste
future will number in the hundreds. timely and full unification and standardisation

of both the robots. nanipulatora and their conponents themselves and of standard ro-
botized production systems therefore constitutes one of the most important and urgent
problems in the field of robotics.

19

non omcur use on“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work in this area in this country has from the very beginning been based upon Gosstan-
dart SSSR's [USSR Council of Ministers State Committee on Standards] unified program
for full standardisation of industrial robots. According to this program. the end of
the Eleventh Five-Year Plan is to have seen the preparation of nine GOSTy [all-Union
state standards-~TR] [five for industrial robots: terms and definitions (1980), classi-
fication (1981); basic indicators (1981); type-size series by lifting capacity (198!)
and safety rules (1982) and four for program-control devices: general specifica-

tions (I983). noise stability. general requirements (1983), programming and coding
methods (1980) and symbols and designations (1982)] and some 50 other normative tech-
nical documents [among then a set of directives concerning methods (l980~l982); sets
of branch normative technical documents (1981-1985). a set of specifications (1980-
1983) and others]. The most important GOSTy on terminology and classification have
already been prepared (by OKBTK LPl) [Special Design Bureau of Applied Cybernetics.
Leningrad Polytechnical Institute imeni M. I. Kalinin].

equipment or devices. The presence of one or more manipulators is a distinguishing
characteristic of an industrial robot.

Let us note in this connection that the term "automatic manipulator." frequently used
in place of the term "industrial robot." is obviously to be considered a synonym only
in the case of robots having only one manipulator. As far, too. as the term ”automatic
manipulator with program control." a term extensively employed in our domestic litera-
ture. is concerned. it has an even narrower meaning. since it refers only to industrial
robots with wired-in programs. that is. to first-generation robots (without sensitiza-
tion and adaptation).

Because work on the development and fabrication of industrial robots and manipulators
in Our country has been organized in a timely manner by the USSR State Committee on
Science and Technology into an integrated program. it has been possible from the very

beginning to base their development upon the principle of interbranch unification.
0n the basis of an analysis of requirements undertaken in the course of the Ninth

Five-Year Plan by the major machine-building branches. OKBTK LPI, as the primary orga-
nization in the field of industrial robots. jointly with primary branch institutes of
design and technology has worked out interbranch series of basic unified components.
drives and control devices primarily. prepared technical assignments for developing
them and coordinated these assignments with the branches involved.

Minstankoprom's [Ministry of the Machine-Tool and Tool Manufacturing Industry]
VNIIGidroprivod (All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydraulic Equipment)
(Khar'kov) is carrying out work on unified hydraulic and pneumatic equipment.
Mlnpribor's [Ministry of Instrument Manufcaturing. Automation Equipment and
Control Systems] LEMZ [Leningrad Electrical Equipment Plant] is working on uni-
fied control devices jointly with OKBTK LPI.

The hydraulic and pneumatic equipment which has been developed for the most part nea-

surea up to the requirements of industrial robot and manipulator developers. what we
are talking about here runs to some 200 individually designated peices of hydraulic

hydraulic stations. etc.) from which a variety of closed circuit (servo) and open-

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ahead of Minatankoprom in the Eleventh Five~Year Plan is the task of organizing the
series production of all this equipment (some 50 per cent is now in series production),
continuing efforts to improve its quality (the quality of its electrohydraulic servo-
drives in particular) and extending its product list (developing positional pneumatic
drives. among other things). .

As far as unified electric drives are concerned. we can see a certain amount of progress
after a long period of lagging behind--the first seties of 25-2200 H dc drives has now
been developed. But neither the technical level. nor. especially, the product list of
electric drives manufactured by Hinelektrotekhpron [Ministry of the Electrical Equip-
ment Industry] are today suiting the needs of industrial robot developers (there are no
sets of servodrives. to include digital drives; their weight and dimensions are unsatis-
factory and they cost too much).

The unified control devices for industrial robots with prograa control (cyclical, posi-
tional and loop) manufactured by Hinpribor are. on the whole, good technically. But to
the end of further improvement of reliability and reduction in cost. Eleventh Five~Year
Plans call for a changeover to the next generation of components. to include micropro-
cessors [1].

As these unified components go into series production they will be employed as well in
the conversion of the models of industrial robots and manipulators the various branches
have already developed. and this process is already under way.

The development of unified basic components for industrial robots was the first phase
of the unification effort in the field of industrial robots. The next phase will be to
make the transition from the unification of basic functional robot components to the
unification of their structural components in the form of modules. This is to be taken
to mean a transition to a fundamentally new way of designing and building robots and

manipulators. to modular structures which will in the future make it easy to make nu-
merous modifications of industrial robots and manipulators on the basis of the same
structural components. This will offer the possibility in each specific instance of
selecting the optimum degree of kinematic and program redundancy. cost and distribu-
tion of functions between a robot and the production equipment involved (to the pos-
sible extent of structurally integrating individual robot components with the equip-
ment to be served). These modules should serve as a basis upon which to develop in-
terbranch series of robots and manipulators. this in turn as a basis for developing
branch series of these devices.

Studies indicate that approximately 10 pneumatic. 20 hydraulic and 15 electromechanical
nodules would be enough to build all the basic types of industrial robots required to-
day. Let us draw up a rough list of unified structural modules involving the mechanics

of industrial robots and manipulators [2]:

Mbdule and level of complexity Mbdule characteristics
Honoblock (pneumatic. hydraulic, electro- Performs structural. drive and information
mechanical). 1 functions for one (two) degrees of motion

of a robot. Includes lower-level modules.

Drive module (pneumatic. hydraulic, elec- Performs structural and drive functions

tromechanical). 2 for one degree of motion. Robot design
requires use of an information module and

4th- and Sth-level modules.

21

F138 OIWHCIAI.IISEZ(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Module and level of oanpleeity Module characteristics

Servo nodule (pneunatic. hydraulic. elec- Perforns functions of a servonechanisn
tronechanical). 3

Equipnent nodule. 3 Performs functions of drive control unit
for 1st- and Zd-level nodules

Information module. 3 Perforna information functions.

Mechanism. 4 Designed to transmit and convert motion.

Conponents (asssnbly. part) The sinplsst nondrive mechanical or equip-
ment components. Nondetachable parts of
robot.

   

Figure 2. HP-ll nodular pneumatic in-
dustrial robot. load capacity 0.2 kg:
Figure l. HP-IZ nodular electronechanical l. 2. 3. lo. 5 - rotational (Hn-V-l. Mn-
industrial robot. 20 kg load capacity: 1, ~V-Il). horizontal translational (Mn-Pr-
2.3 - rotation (Me-V-l, Hell-II) and trans- -I, Hn-Pr-Il) and vertical translational
lation (He-lI-ll) nonoblocks; 4,5,6 - ro- (Mn-Pv-II) nonoblocks; 6. 7. 8. 9. 10 -
tation (Ie-B—l. le-V-II) and translation - rotational (Ip-V-I. Pp-V-ll), horizon-
(Ie-II-II) servo units; 7. 8 - equipnsnt tal translational (Ip—Pg-I, Ip-Pg-II)
modules (A-l, A-Il); 9 - infornation nod- and vertical translational (Ip-Pv-II
ule (A); 10 - base module (0); ll - nodu- servo nodules; ll - equipment nodule
lar counterpoise device (Ur); 12 - nodular (Ap); 12 - base nodule (0); l3 gripper.
connecting component (K); 13 - gripper.

He can enunerate in general terns the
following advantages to be derived fron
the euploynent of series-produced. unified nodules:
— sharp reductions (fron two-three years to two-four nonths) in the periods of tins
required to develop. then to fabricate and introduce new nodels of industrial robots
and manipulators since they will be assembled fron proven series-produced cosponents;
- the technical level. reliability most inortantly. inproves. while robot costs de~

crease;
- outlays for the introduction and operation of industrial robots and manipulators

are reduced and their operation made sispler;
- the economic gain from a changeover to nodular designs runs to at least 1.5 million

rubles per thousand robots nanufactured.

22

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An analogous modular principle must now be realised in our robot control devices. as
well as in the computer software employed in robot control systems. In addition to
the advantages enumerated above. this will also solve the problem of providing not
only the robots themselves, but robotized production systems as a whole (sections.
lines. shops) with control systems. This will make it possible sharply to accelerate,
simplify and reduce the cost of building these systems. which essentially is the ul-
timate objective of the application of robotics in branches of the national economy.

Building a system of modules for control devices will require the development and
organization of series production on the part of Hinelektronprom [Ministry of the
Electronics Industry] of Hinpribor's set of the necessary special microelectronic
components and sensing equipment.

OKBTK LPl has developed a unified system of modules which will make it possible to
solve a number of problems. to include that of group and adaptive control using con-
ventional computers integrated into automated production control svstems.

work on the first modular industrial robots and modular control devices for them has
already been begun in a number of branches. A basic model for a series of suborsaaoo
modular hydraulic robots has now been developed. for example. Figure l is a diagram
of the HP-lZ modular electromechanical industrial robot. Figure 2 a diagram of the
HP-ll robot. a modular version of HP-9c pneumatic robot. OKBTK LP! has now developed
the first YeSH-OZ modular industrial-robot positional control device.

As we can see. the problem in robotics does not reduce simply to building the robots
themselves; the ultimate objective is to develop robotized production systems. these
primarily for basic types of production processes. In addition to unification of the
robots themselves. this will therefore also require unification of these systems them-
selves. including their standard components.

Timely preparation of a full set of normative documents for the field of robotics and
consistent development of the modular principle in process of designing all robotics
systems and components will lay a firm. scientifically based foundation upon which to
base our own domestic robot industry and from which to proceed with a sell-planned
program of introducing industrial robots and manipulators in all branches of the na-
tional economy with the objective of fully automating production on an extensive
scale and achieving an essential solution to the problem of labor resources.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Yurevich. Ye. 1. "Industrial Robot Components." in "Nauchnyye problemy roboto-
tekhnika" [Scientific Problems in Robotics]. Hoscow. Nauka. 1980. pp 12-19.

2. Yurevich. Ye. 1.. Avetikov. B. 6.. Korytko. 0. B. et a1. “Ustroystvo promyshlen-
nykh robotov" [working Principles of Industrial Robots]. Leningrad. Hashinostroye-
niye, 1980. p 71.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stov "Mashinostroyeniye", "Vestnik mashinostnoyeniys", 1981

8963
CSO: 1821/76 END

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY