FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10287
28 January 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 11. November 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Englishelanguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/1 028 7
28 January 1982

USSR REPORT

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 11, Rovember 1981
Translations or abstract: of all articles of the Russian-language

monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat .

CONTENTS

Influence of Upper-Level Clouds on Atmospheric Thermal Regine and Circulation.. 1
*Dendrocliaatology Methods in Studying History of Climte....................... 16

Empirical Analysis of Influence of 002 on lbdern Changes in Mean Annual Air
Surface Temerature in Northern Hemisphere...”............................... 17

”temperature Distribution in Turbulent Near-Wall Currenta Hith Allowance for
“filo“ stratific‘cionOOOOO00.00.000000.00.00...OOIODOOIOOIOOOOIOOOOQIOOOOOOOO 35

“Evaluation of Statistical Interrelationship of horizontal and Vertical
Resolutions 1n cwwtentnl FieldOOOOOIOOOIODOODO0.000000000000000QOOOOO00.... 36

Charge Separation Hith Partial Coaleacanca of Droplets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

*
Evaluating Spatial-Toward Variability of neat and water Balance Couponen;s
in Eastern Sector of Baykal-Auur Railroad Route............................ .... 43

N" mthoda for Ice Forecalts for the Northwestern Atlantic. . a e o a a a e e o e e o o o e o o o 64
Mechanisna of Formation of Upper Quaaihonogeneoua Layer in Ocean. . . . ... . . . . . . . . . 51

*Dcrivation of Expressions for Predicting Maxim- Ice Jan (Ice Run) Water
Levels in the Breakup of Siberian R1Ver.aoaaeae aeoeeooeooeoaooaoeoooooeoeaa-o. 59

Rate of Growth and Development of winter "heat During "inter Thawa. . ..... ... .. . 60
'Conputing Hind Velocity During Guata in Harrow Gold Front Zones. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

1“Interaction of Swell Haves With Head HindQ..................................... 67

'Denotea items which have been abstracted.

- a - [In - ussn - 33 351' P0001

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0F31CJAl.lEﬂE(NNLY

*Joint Evaluation of Intraannual and Long-Term Probability of Exceeding of Mean

Daily Hater DischanCSs.oooeeo-ese-ueosssoossesoooooosoooesoooeosooosoeoeeeoosoo

*Some Problems of Visibility Through Clouds and Pogs............¢... ............

*Experimentcl and Synaptic Studies of Atmosphere in Publications of 0. G.

Krichak (0n the Seventieth Anniversary of His Birth)...........................

Review of Monograph 'Barth's Atmosphere From the 'Sslyut-6" (Atmosfers an11

s 'Selyuta-o'), by A. I. Lszarev. V. V. Kovalenok, A. s. Ivsnchenkov and
S. V. Avakyan, Leningrad; Gidrometeoizdat, 1981................................

*Seventieth Birthday of Boris Crigor'yevich Rozhdestvenskiy......................

Activities at the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental

mnitorinSoooooooosossassessessasselm-ooesoseooooooooooosoeossossosooeosooooees

Conferences, Meetings, Seminars.................................................

*

*Obituary of Yovgen‘lyn samylom Rub1nahteyn (1891-1981). e o s s o s o o s o o o s e e s o o o s s s 0

Notes From Abroad-see0.000000000000000!oooooeos0.000.000.0000...oesossesseeeseee

*Hemorial to Feofan Farneyevich Davitays (l9ll-l979).............................

*

Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- b -

FINIG)FIIC1AI.IEHE(HVLY

68
69

70

71
74

75
78
91
93
96
F0!‘0FﬁKJAl.UBB¢lVLY

UDC 551.576:551.511+551.513
INFLUENCE OF UPPER-LEVEL CLOUDS ON AIHOSPHERIC THERMAL REGIME AND CIRCULATION

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 81 (manuscript received
23 m, 81) pp 5-17

[Article by Ye. P. Borisenkov. professor, V. P. Heleshko, candidate of physical and
mathematical sciences, and A. P. Sokolov, Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the response of
components of the radiation balance of the
earth-atmosphere system to changes in cloud
cover at different levels. Numerical experi-
ments were made with use of a model of general
circulation of the atmosphere in which there
was no upper-level cloud cover and its forma-
tion in the region of an anticyclonic disturb-
ance was reproduced. A detailed analysis was
nude of the changes caused by cloud cover, the

”thermal regime and atmospheric circulation.
Computations show that during the formation of
upper-level cloud cover there is a change in
the thermal regime of the atmosphere, which re-
sults in an attenuation of the anticyclonic dis-
turbance in the lower half of the troposphere
nmi its insignificant intensification in the
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere.

1. Introduction. As is well known. the developnent of a number of negative phenomena
over great areas and over the course of a prolonged time is related to the formation
of a stable anticyclonic circulation. Over the territory of the USSR quasistationary
anticyclonic formations in winter lead to the setting-in of anomalously cold weather,
nod in summer the development of arid conditions is associated with them. Cloud cover
In usually absent in a region of anticyclones. .G

The nuthors of [2] mentioned some factors of natural and anthropogenic origin which
are capable of leading to the formation of an upper-level cloud cover over an anti-
cyclonic formation and causing its evolution. In this connection it is of interest
to investigate to what degree these pressure formations are responsive to possible
changes in the thermal regime caused by the formation of a cloud cover over them.

FilliDF!ICIAI.llIE(NVLY
“ll “0“;th 05!; ONLY

There are a great many studies in Which an attempt has been made to evaluate the
effects caused by the influence of cloud cover and radiation both on individual
meteorological elements and on the thermal regime of the atmosphere as a whole
(for example, see [1, 13] and others). In most of them the evaluations have been
made without allowance for feedback mechanisms between the principal interacting
physical processes and this circumstance makes very difficult the interpretation
of the results applicable to the real atmosphere.

As is well known, cloud cover exerts a dual effect on radiation transfer in the
atmosphere. As a result of the fact that the albedo of clouds on the average for
the earth is considerably greater than the albedo of the underlying surface, an
increase in cloud cover leads to a great reflection of solar radiation into
space, a decrease in its absorption by the atmosphere and the underlying -urface.
This favors a cooling of the earth-atmosphere system. On the other hand. an in-
crease in cloud cover causes a decrease in long-wave radiation passing into uni-
versal space as a result of a decrease in the effective temperature of radiation

from the boundaries of clouds in comparison with a cloudless case. Thereby the
second effect favors a relative heating of the atmosphere.

In the example of a one—dimensional radiational-convective model of the atmosphere
Hanahe and Hetherald [20] demonstrated that an increase in cloud cover of the lower
and middle levels, having a relatively high radiation temperature and high albedo
values, causes a censiderable cooling of the atmosphere and underlying surface. With
an increase in cloud altitude this dependence weakens and can even change sign.
Thus, if upper-level cloud cover radiates as an ideally black body, its decrease
can cause even heating of the troposphere and underlying surface as a result of a
decrease in radiation into universal space by the atmosphere and an insignificant
weakening of the solar radiation flux.

Roewe and Kun [21] evaluated the influence of a cirrus cloud cover of different
thickness on the rate of long-wave cooling of the troposphere and lower strato-
sphere. According to their computations, even very thin cirrus clouds substantial-
ly attenuate cooling of the lower troposphere. With the formation of clouds of
considerable thickness the cooling of the troposphere in the middle latitudes de-
creases by 602 in comparison with cloudless conditions and increases in the strat-
osphere, especially in the tropics.

Qualitatively similar evaluations were obtained somewhat earlier by Fleming and
ﬂax [18] on the basis of the results of measurements in the tropical atmosphere.

ny means of computations using a relatively simple stationary model of the thermal
regime in the atmosphere Ye. P. Borisenkov and L. K. Yefimova [2] made evaluations
of the influence of upper-level cloud cover on the dynamics of an anticyclone. The
rumpuiuilnns indicated that a change in long-wave radiation as a result of the for-
mntlun nl u cloud cover causes a decrease in descending movements in the middle

troposphere, which should favor an attenuation of anticyclonic circulation.

The objective of this investigation was a study of the possible thermodynamic evo-
lution of an unticyclonic disturbance as a result of formation of upper-level
cloud cover. The investigation is made using a model of general circulation of

FIIICIWHCIAl.lHiE(NVLY
INII<0511€1AI.II§IZ(NNLY

the atmosphere taking into account the principal physical processes transpiring
in the atmosphere and the feedback mechanisms between them.

2. Atmospheric Model

In the experiments we used the model of general circulation of the atmosphere de-
veloped at the Main Geophysical Observatory imeni A. I. Voyeykov. A detailed de-
scription of the numerical algorithm. methods for taking physical processes into
account and the results of modeling of the climatic state of the atmosphere for
January is given in [7. 8]. Therefore, below we will describe it only briefly.

In the model use is made of a system of full equations in hydrothermodynamics in
a CY-coordinate system (C7 - p/p.; Pa is the pressure at the earth's surface):
the equations of motion for the horizontal velocity components. the equations

for heat influx, moisture transfer and continuity equation for dry air and also
a number of diagnostic relationships. The model is hemispherical. the intesta-
tion region is represented on a plane by means of a stereographic projecticn hav-
ing the principal scale at 60‘. The mean interval of the square grid is 625 km.
Vertically the model has three layers with a uniform 0’ interval.

In solving the system of equations we used a finite-difference scheme having a
second order of approximation in space variables. For the adopted boundary condi-
tions and in the absence of energy "inputs" and ”outputs” the scheme ensures the
' conservation of mass, total energy and momentum.

The model takes into account the principal energy "inputs" and "outputs" operative
in the real atmosphere.

a) Macroscale condensation and convection. Allowance for heat influaes associated

with phase transformations of water in the atmosphere was introduced by the para-
neterization of two processes: water vapor condensation caused by ordered ascending
movements and convection arising in moist unstable layers of the atmosphere. Con-
densation occurs if the moist air attains a critical relative humidity kc, - 0.9.

. In computing the heat influxes caused by mesoscals convection use is made of a
convective adaptation scheme in which the equilibrium gradient is assumed to be
dependent on relative humidity and the moist adiabatic gradient [14].

h) Turbulent influxes of momentum, heat and moisture. In the model use was made
of a scheme for computing the corresponding gains and losses of energy, based on

empirical relationships derived by Deardorf [17]. The vertical exchange coef-
flclent is dependent on temperature stratification in the atmospheric boundary lay-
er.

in the model four types of underlying surfaces are distinguished:

-- surface of the continents, free of ice and snow; the air temperature at the sur-
face is computed from the heat balance equation;

-- surface of the continents, covered with snow and ice; the temperature is also
computed from the heat balance equation, but the heat flux into the soil and evap-
oration are considered negligible;

- ocean surface, cOVered with ice; the temperature at the surface is computed

from the heat balance equation, in which the heat flow through the ice is taken

3

F0! OFFKJAI.USEIMNLY
FINICIHNC]AI.[EHECHNLY

into account with a stipulated water temperature beneath the ice;

- uurFaCe «r the oceans and sons, free of ice; the temperature at the surface is
considered known, whereas the air is saturated.

c) Radiation and cloud cover. In this model the radiation heat influx caused by the
transfer of short- and long-wave radiation in a cloudy atmosphere is computed [7].

In the computations of the transfer of short-wave radiation an allowance is made
for its absorption by water vapor, carbon dioxide and clouds and scattering by

air molecules and clouds. Absorption is taken into account in the near-IR region
(1)0.7P-m) by means of the integral transmission function proposed in [(0]. In the
UV region (1<O.7'i m) an allowance is made only for scattering by air molecules.

In the computation of the transfer of long-wave radiation use is made of the inte-
gral transmission function proposed in a study by Gradus, et a1. [3]. This function
takes into account absorption (emission) by water vapor and carbon dioxide.

The model describes two-layer cloud cover with fixed boundaries:1363 0.667-0.833
for lower-level clouds and £303 0.333-0.667 for upper-level clouds. Upper- and

lower-level clouds are opaque for long-wave radiation and emit as ideally black
bodies at their boundaries. The optical properties of clouds applicable to the
transfer of short-wave radiation are indicated in Table 1.

it is assumed that the horizontal distribution of clouds in each layer is random,
so that the fraction of the sky simultaneously covered by the clouds situated in
two layers is equal to the product of the corresponding fractions of each layer.
Computations of cloud cover are made from the fact of condensation in each inte-
gration interval. If condensation occurs at the levels O‘- 0.833 or O'- 0.5, the
the cloud cover in the corresponding layers of the atmosphere was assumed to be
complete. In other cases it was absent. By means of summation of the quantity of
clouds during the preceding 4 hours it was possible to compute its mean values

separately for clouds of the upper and lower levels in each grid square. These
values were used in computations of the radiation heat gains and losses.

Table 1

Optical Properties of clouds in Relation to Transfer of Solar Radiation

Clouds Albedo Absorption
A<0.7'.un 120.7)“:
Upper level 0.25 0.0 0.01
lamvr level 0.50 0.0 0.03

d) horizontal diffusion. In the model use is made of a nonlinear diffusion scheme,
the basis for which is the hypotheses of the theory of two-dimensional turbulence

[6]. The coefficient of eddy viscosity is assumed to be proportional to the absolute
value of the eddy gradient. This scheme quite effectively suppresses disturbances

with a characteristic scale close to 2-3 grid intervals.

FOI‘OFFKJAI.UBE¢NNLY
FOIIOIIICIAI.IEIE(MVLY

In the Integration of the system of equations macroscale condensation, convective
transfer of heat and moisture and diffusion are computed in each interval. The radi-
ation and turbulent influxes of heat and moisture are again computed each 0 hours.

3. Formulation of Experiment

The problem of evaluating the influence of the external thermal effect on synoptic
formations is quite complex and has not been solved at the present time. Our ob-
jective was to understand the mechanism of interaction between cloud cover and
radiation as a result of formation of upper cloud cover over a region in which
there is a predominance of anticyclonic weather conditions and to evaluate the in-
fluence of this interaction on the thermal regime, circulation and moisture cycle
in the atmosphere. The models of general circulation of the atmosphere used in
such an investigation must satisfy the following specific requirements: '

-- the model must include the principal physical processes which can exert an in-
fluence on the studied synoptic object;

-- the model must correctly describe the amplitude and phase velocity of the stud-
ied disturbance.

The model of general circulation of the atmosphere presented in 02 fully corresponds
to the first requirement. "1th respect to the second. it will be discussed below.
It is also important to note that the statistical reliability of the experimental

effect can be evaluated only on the basis of a major series of numerical computa-
tions with independent synoptic situations. The conclusions drawn from a limited
set of synoptic situations must be regarded as preliminary.

The horizontal extent of the region selected for the experiment and its specific
position were determined by two factors:
- the grid interval used in the model of general circulation of the atmosphere;

- the distribution of total and upper cloud cover in a region of an anticyclonic
.iormstion.

As is well known, the minimum scale of the disturbance, which can be described by
the equations of the model, corresponds to a horizontal dimension 2As (As is the
horizontal grid interval). The error in determining the amplitude and phase of
such a disturbance can be 1002.

For an adequate description of the disturbance caused by the cloud effect, the
characteristic dimension of this disturbance must include b-S grid squares. As in-

dicated by estimates, the error in determining the phase velocity of such a dis-
turbance can be 20-252. Since the grid interval for the model in the middle lati—

tudes is 500 km. the region in which the effect of upper-level cloud cover was
considered had an area of 2500 x 2500 km (S x 5 grid squares).

If the atmospheric model reproduces a considerable quantity of clouds over an anti-
cycloniv disturbance. then evidently it does not make sense to evaluate the effect

of the additional cloud cover since its influence on the thermal regime of the at-
mosphere will be known to he small.

FOI‘OFFIJAI.USEGIULY
DUI W'ILIAL UM UNI-Y

As the initial state of the atmosphere we selected the synoptic situation for 1
July 1972. A detailed description of the weather conditions during this period
is given in a number of publications [5, 11].

In the integration of the system of equations in hydrothermodynamics it is neces-
sary at the initial moment to know the wind velocity, temperature and specific
humidity at the principal Cf-levels used in the model ((75 - 0.167; 0.5; 0.833),

pressure at the earth‘s surface. water temperature in the oceans and cloud cover.
In constructing the initial fields the basis used is data on the field of geo-

potential at the standard isobaric surfaces (100, 200, 500, 700 gPa) and pressure
at sea level. The algorithm for computing the initial fields, adjusted in a quasi-

solenoidal approximation. was described in [7]. Since we did not have information
on humidity, its distribution at the initial moment was assumed to be mean zonal

for July conditions. In the integration of the system of equations with allowance
for the mechanisms describing the gains and losses of moisture in these processes

the distribution of humidity is adapted to the thermodynamic state of the atmo-
sphere during the first day [23]. Cloud cover was absent at the initial moment.

The distribution of water temperature at the surface of the oceans, albedo of the
underlying surface and extent of the ice cover in the polar basin were taken from
the climatic atlases for July.

The region in which upper-level cloud cover was stipulated was situated over the

European part and the southeastern regions of the USSR. The results of the prelim-
inary computations indicated that during the first 10 days there was a high-pres-
sure ridge over this region with almost total absence of cloud cover (see Fig. 2).

Two numerical experiments were carried out in which the system of equations was in-
tegrated from the initial state to 10 days. In the first experiment. which we

will call the control (CEX),two-level cloud cover was computed during the entire
time of the forecast. In the second experiment, which we will call the cloud ex-
periment (CIEX), over the selected region we stipulated the total upper-level cloud
cover during the caurse of the entire forecast period. An analysis of the results
of computations was made for the last 6 days. that is, beginning with the 5th day,
when the influence of the heat influxes becomes substantial.

a. Response of Radiation balance at Boundaries of Atmosphere to Cloud Cover Changes

In the studies of Ccss [151, Ellis [19], Schneider [22] and others an evaluation was
made of the response of the radiation balance of the earth-atmosphere system to
changes in total cloud cover. The evaluations obtained by these authors differ sub-
stantially from one another not only qualitatively, but also in sign. These dif-
forcncos are caused by a number of factors and the most important of these are:

-- the resultant effort of interaction between cloud cover and radiation consti-
tutes a small difference of two large values -- radiation into universal space and
absorption by the earth-atmosphere system and therefore the total radiation balance

is dependent on the accuracy with which each of the components is determined;

-- the nature of change of cloud cover at different levels relative to the change

in total cloud cover, adopted in the investigations, is not the same. This is one

of the principal factors responsible for substantial differences in evaluations of
the influence of cloud cover on the radiation balance of the system.

IMHICIWWCIALIJSEIMNLY
F0!‘0€Fﬂ!Al.USEiMNLV

   

  

II
\ Ina-ups!

\ a
~ I "

M II
Latitude,° louse. ml

Fig. l. heridional distributions of change in reflected solar radiation (a), outgo-
ing long-Have radiation (b) and full radiation balance (c) in the earth-atmosphere
system (Him?) with a change in cloud cover at the upper (l) and lower (2) levels

in the "clear - total cloud cover" interval for July conditions.

In this investigation, using a radiation scheme which was included in the model of
general circulation of the atmosphere, we evaluate the changes in the radiation
balance as a function of changes in only one cloud cover level. The computations
'uere made using zonal climatic data on temperature and humidity at the standard
isobaric surfaces [16]. The albedo of the underlying surface was taken from a study
by Hukhenberg [10].

if _ ts :1
Assume that 37,-. —m 'I- M.

is the change in the radiation balance of the earth-atmosphere system relative to
change in cloud cover of the k-th level; 3 is the algebraic sun of the fluxes of
solar radiation reaching the upper boundary of the atmosphere and ascending fluxes
of scattered and reflected radiation; R is the long-wave radiation escaping into
universal space; “k (k - l. 2) is the cloud cover (the part of the heavens covered
by cloads in tenths).

Changes in the radiation balance were cosputed for the conditions of July and vari-
ations of cloud cover within the limits of the ”clear-total cloud cover" interval,
that is, 6 nk - -l.0.

Plgnre 1 shows the aeridionul distributions of changes in the balance of short- and
long-wave radiation separately and the total balance of the earth's surface-atmo-
sphere system as a function of change in upper- and lover-level cloud cover with-
In the "clear-total cloud cover" interval.

It follows from Fig. In that an increase in cloud cover leads to a greater reflec-
tion of short-wave rndlutlon into universal space as a result of an increase in
planetary albedo. This effect causes a loss of thermal energy by the system and
leads to a decrease in atmospheric temperature. The losses are greater in value
with a change in lower-level clouds as a result of their greater albedo. 0n the
other hand, an increase in cloud cover decreases the heat losses by the system due
to the lesser radiation into universal space (see Fig. lb),_since the temperature
of clouds on the average is lover than the temperature of the underlying surface.

IOIlOIFKJAI.USEGINLY
I‘llllﬂﬂilAi.lEﬂE(MNLV

The changes in long-wave radiation for upper-level cloud cover are approximately
three times greater than the corresponding changes for lower-level cloud level.
With respect to changes in the total balance of the earth's surface-atmosphere
system (Fig. 1c), an increase in upper-level cloud cover in general causes some
heating of the system at all latitudes, whereas an increase in lower-level clouds,
on the contrary, causes its cooling.

The heat balance at the underlying surface is determined not only by the_balance
of short-wave radiation and effective radiation, but also by the turbulent flux
of apparent and latent heat into the atmosphere and the heat flux into the soil
(in the absence of thawing). however, with changes in cloud cover the total radi-
ation balance is the principal factor determining the thermal regime of the under-
lying surface. Such computations were made for evaluating the change in the radi-
ation hulunce near the underlying surface (figure not shown).

with an increase in cloud cover of any level the decrease in absorption of short-
wave radiation at the underlying surface is greater than the increase in the flux
caused by counterradiation of the clouds. As a result. with an increase in cloud
cover the total radiation balance is reduced, which should lead to a decrease in
temperature at the underlying surface. The only exception is the region of the
high latitudes in which due to the small differences in the albedo of clouds and
the underlying surface the absorption of short-wave radiation changes insignif-
icantly and the dominant factor causing an increase in the radiation balance of
the underlying surface is the counterradiation of the atmosphere and clouds. It
must be emphasized that such a variation in changes of the radiation balance at
the underlying surface is by no means always observed. For example, computations
made for winter conditions show that an increase in cloud cover at the upper and
lower levels favors an increase in the radiation balance over the greater part of
the northern hemisphere due to exclusion of the zone to the south of 30°N. In the
middle latitudes this increase is approximately 75 ﬁlm2 with a change in cloud
cover at both levels.

We note in conclusion that in the interpretation of the results it is necessary to
take into account the circumstance that the cited estimates were made neglecting

the feedback mechanism, taking into account the influence of changing radiation
fluxes on the characteristics of the atmosphere itself.

5. Results of Numerical Experiments

Upper-level cloud cover is the principal external parameter whose change causes a
corresponding rcdistrihutlun of the heat sources in the atmosphere. Accordingly,

we will begin the discussion of the results with the distribution of cloud cover.
As a convenience in the further discussion the region over which a total upper-

icvel cloud cover is stipulated in the ClEX experiment will be called a polygon.

Figure 2 shows the mean values of total cloud cover computed in the CEX and CIBX
experiments for the last 6 days of the forecasts, that is, from the 5th to the
10th days. The polygcn is outlined with a thick broken line. In the control experi-
mont an insignificant cloud cover is formed in the region of the polygon (see

Fig. 2a). Moreover, u high-pressure ridge was situated over the polygon during
the 10 days of the forecast.

FOI(HHHIIA1.USE(NNUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\5-‘

‘ .. gr"

V j ., )4
‘ylg“\é\x\

\.~‘~ ‘ \ME%2\\ ‘\ , 4
k V " i:7/'N’."'..‘r‘ V0
‘6, , («wrist
I f
I

i
' ‘ﬁ
4

Fig. 2. Distributions of total cloud cover (in tenths), computed using data for six
days of the forecast (Sch-6th days) in CFJi (a) and CE)! (b) experiments

 

 
 
   

 
  
  

    
   

Vichy/Ye? ‘
J‘ 0‘?" f/‘"ki\\“"
‘.‘/."g: ~

  
   
 
    

'1
.5!

'\
k1 ;

v ‘ \rﬁl- ‘ 1'4

it;
3;
,.

.2

  

A

to.

Hg. 'l. Distributions of differences between reflected solar radiation (a), long-
wnvo radiation (h) and total radiation balance (c) of earth-atmosphere system (w/

'12) obtained using darn from the experiments cux and Clint (ClEX-CEX) for Sch-10th
.luyu nl‘ forecast.

:1) Thermal regime of ntnoaphuru and underlying surface. Figure 3 shows the distrib-
utions of differences in reflected solar radiation, outgoing radiation and the total

radiation balance, computed using data for two experiments (CEX-CIEX) for the 5th-
IOth days of- the forecast.

FOR OFFICIAL [’8‘ ONLY
run UI'I'ILIAI- UM UNI-Y

it follows from Fig. 3a that as a result of formation of total upper-level cloud
cover the re lection of short-wave radiation into universal space was increased

by 30-60 w/m , which is approximately 50% of the total radiation balance of the
system over the polygon in the control experiment. 0n the other hand, the long-
wave radiation changed by a value approximately twice as great as the reflected
radiation (Fig. 3b). Since these two effects have different signs, the resultant
influence of upper cloud cover on the radiation balance is somewhat less and causes
a heat influx to a column of the atmosphere equal to 60-65 H/m2 (Fig. 3c), which
corresponds to a change in the radiation heat influx by 0.3'C/day. With an in-
crease in cloud cover there is a decrease in the value of the radiation balance

at the earth by approximately 10 H/nz.

Table 2

Mean Changes in Radiation Heat Influxes ('c/day) in Atmospheric Layers Caused by
Change in Upper-Level Cloud Cover in "Clear-Total Cloud Cover" Interval

Atmospheric layer Change in heat influxes
due to solar due to long-wave full
radiation radiation influx
Above-cloud layer 0.09 -0.86 -0.75
Cloud layer 0.59 -l.10 -0.Sl
Under-cloud layer 0.16 2.02 2.13
Entire column of atmosphere 0.28 0.03 0.31

Thus, analysis only of the components of the radiation balance at the boundaries of
the atmosphere without allowance for mechanisms with feedbacks shows that an in-
crease in upper-level cloud cover should cause heating of the atmosphere.

Now we will examine how heating of the atmosphere is distributed vertically and
what contribution to it is made by heat influxes as a result of short-wave and

long—wave radiation in the polygon region. For this purpose we made computations
of heat infiuxes in three layers of equal mass for the conditions of cloudless

skies and a complete upper-level cloud cover. The computations were made using data
on temperature, humidity and albedo of the underlying surface characteristic for
the considered region. The upper layer of the atmosphere is situated above the
cloud cover, the middle level is situated in the cloud layer and the lower layer

[5 In the region below the clouds.

Table 2 gives the mean changes in the heat influxes caused by an increase in upper-
level clouds. With an increase in cloud cover the heat influx due to short-wave
radiation increases in all layers: in the upper layer -- as a result of the addi-
Llonal nthrpcion of reflected radiation; in the middle layer -- due to the ab-
sorption of radiation scattered by the clouds; in the lower layer - as a result

of additional absorption of scattered radiation. With respect to change in heat

influxes due to long-wave radiation, in the cloud layer and in the layer above
the clouds there was an increase in cooling: in the first case -- as a result of

an increase in radiation from the upper boundary of the layer (the cloud emits as

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
an Ideally black body and the fluxes in it change linearly from the upper to the
Inwvr boundary). in the second - due to a decrease in radiation from the underly-
lng layers of the atmosphere and the underlying surface.

, v33.)

- a‘rfétwtbs. -
"Q‘Ju \‘ii
‘3'”;ng

90

g

 

Fig. 6. Distribution of differences between temperatures ('0) at the level (f- 0.833
(a) and at the earth's surface (b), surface pressure (gPa) (c) and velocity vectors

at level (7- 0.5 (d) obtained in the 63X and Clxx experiments (Cle - csx) during
Sth-lOth days of forecast.

The considerable heating of the layer under the clouds caused an increase in coun-
terradiation from the lower boundary of the upper-level cloud cover. With an in—
crease in the altitude of the lower boundary of these clouds the heating will be
decreased because the descending flow becomes less.

Figure 6a gives the dlstrlhutlun of the differences between the temperatures com~
puted 1n the experiment and the control experiment at the surface cf- 0.833. It
follows from the figure that at this surface the temperature over the polygon is
increased by b-S‘C. At the level 0'- 0.5 this increase averaged 1°C, and at the
level O’- 0.167 the temperature was decreased by 1-2°c. Due to the existence of
oust-west transfer in the middle latitudes the heat received by an air mass over
the polygon is continuously transported by the main flow to the east. As a result,
the region with a warmer air mass (relative to the control experiment) has a con-
figuration elongated in an eastward direction.

Figure 6 shows the distribution of the temperature differences at the earth's sur-
face between the two experiments. It is interesting to note that although the
total radiation balance at the underlying surface decreases somewhat in the ClEx

11

FOI1OFFKJAI.U§E(HNLY
IIUI ”DONAL US}; ONLY

experiment the temperature nevertheless increases on the average by 2-3‘. The rea-
son is evidently that the heating of the lower layer of the atmosphere leads to a
decrease in the temperature difference "upper boundary of the boundary layer -
underlying surface" and thereby a substantial decrease in turbulent heat transfer
into the atmosphere. If the change in this transfer in absolute value is greater
than the change in the radiation balance, as follows from the heat balance equa-
tion, air temperature near the surface should increase.

b) Changes in pressure and wind velocity. Some temperature increase in the entire
column of the atmosphere in the c1ax causes a decrease in density of the air
case and a pressure decrease near the earth's surface.

Figure 4c shows the distribution of changes in surface pressure as a result of
formation of upper cloud cover. The region of pressure decrease extends far to

the east and its configuration agrees with the region of temperature increase at
the level of- 0.833. The altitude of the 500 gPa surface increases by 1-2 dam
over the considered region and to the east of it. and this agrees with the earlier
noted temperature increase in the layer situated below this surface. Hith respect
to mean vertical movements, their changes were very small (6w <1 cm/sec), and
the spatial distribution has a mottled unordered structure. In general, there is

a tendency to an attenuation of descending movements over the polygon and to the
east of it.

Figure ad gives this distribution of the mean differences between the velocity vec-
tors at the level 0': 0.5. The region of changes in the wind field is somewhat dis-
placed to the east of the polygon. This is evidently attributable to the fact that
adaptation of the wind field to changes in the field of mass occurs with some time
lag equal to approximately one day. During this time the air mass can be displaced
by 800—1500 km to the east. The changes in the velocity field have a somewhat ir-
regular character and on their basis it is impossible with certainty to establish
the character of evolution of circulation in the neighborhood of the polygon. It
must be remembered that a considerable influence on the velocity vector field

and its change in this region can be exerted by the peculiarities of relief. Sim-
ilar irregular changes in the field of difference of the velocity vector occur at
the level O'- 0.833.

c) Atmospheric moisture cycle. Since atmospheric moisture content and moistening

or the underlying surface are small in value over the polygon. considerable

changes in the intensity of precipitation can occur only in a case when sufficient-
ly moist air arrives from other regions of the northern hemisphere. An analysis in-
dicated that changes in the intensity of precipitation are very insignificant and

have the character of white noise. This fact seems natural and agrees with the al-
ready noted insignificant change in the vertical velocity field.

Hlth an Increase in upper-level cloud cover the quantity of lower-level clouds de-
creases by 2-3 tenths. This is attributable to the fact that some heating of the

Inwcr troposphere and the absence of a moisture influx into the atmosphere cause a
decrease in relative humidity over the polygon.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. Summary

In this study we investigated the influence of upper-level cloud cover on the ther-
mal regime and circulation of the atmosphere in the region of an anticyclonic forma-
tion. The evaluations were made using a model of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere which takes into account the principal physical processes transpiring in

the atmosphere. Two numerical experiments were carried out with integration of

a system of equations for a time up to 10 days. An analysis of the results of com-
putations for the last 6 days of the forecast indicated that the formation of
upper-level cloud cover over the specially selected region causes the following
changes in the thermal regime and circulation of the atmosphere. '

a) the radiation balance of the earth-atmosphere system increases, which corresponds
Lo an influx of thermal energy to the system. This influx, constituting approx—
imately 501 of the total balance, is attributable for the most part to a decrease

in long—wave radiation into universal space;

b) the changes in the radiation influx of heat are not the same vertically: the upp-
er layer of the atmosphere, situated above the cloud. is cooled by l-2°C; there is
some heating of the middle troposphere; the layer under the clouds is subjected to
considerable heating, attaining 4°C;

c) since the entire column of the atmosphere over the polygon on the average re-
ceives additional heat in the ClEx, pressure at the earth's surface decreases by
5-6 gPa; the region of falling of pressure to some degree in its configuration
duplicates the region of an increase in temperatures at the level (7- 0.833. 0n
the other hand, in the upper troposphere there is formation of a high-pressure re-
gion (but weaker);

d) the changes in the thermal regime and pressure cause corresponding changes in
the velocity field. The region of these changes is somewhat displaced to the east
of the polygon. In the lower half of the troposphere there is a poorly expressed
tendency to an attenuation of descending vertical movements;

e) there are no appreciable changes in the field of precipitation; lower-level
cloud cover decreases by 20-302 from the total cloud cover, which is associated
with a decrease in relative air humidity in the neighborhood of the polygon.

Our analysis reveals that the formation of upper-level cloud cover leads to an at-
tenuation of the anticyclonic formation in the lower half of the troposphere and
its Insignificant intensification in the upper troposphere and stratosphere. In
general, however. the development of the process is such that favorable conditions
are created for the appreciable attenuation of the anticyclone if the region in
which the cloud cover is formed has sufficiently great dimensions. In the comput-
ations it was assumed that cloud cover is opaque for long-wave radiation. If the
clouds transmit part of the radiation from the underlying layers of the atmo-
sphere. the influence of upper-level cloud cover on the thermal regime of the at-
mosphere can be less. If the altitude of the c10uds increases, whereas their al-
bedo decreases, this leads to some intensification of the influence of clouds on
the anticyclone in comparison with that considered.

13

FORIOFFIJAI.USEIIHLY
FUI'UFFKJAI.U§£(HVLY

The extent of the region with cloud cover and the time interval during which it
persists are also exceptionally important circumstances in evaluating the influ-
cuts of clouds.

This investigation must be regarded as preliminary because the experiments were
carried out for one synoptic situation and the influence of cloud cover on the
anticyclonic disturbance was studied over the course of a relatively short time
interval.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Belov, P. N. and Kivganov, A. P., "Changes in Temperature and Geopotential Caus-
ed by the Radiation Heat Influx," TRUDY HHTs (Transactions of the Moscow
Meteorological Center). No 8, 1965.

2. Borisenkov, Ye. P. and Yefimova, L. K., "Theoretical Evaluation of the Influ-
ence of Cirrus Cloud Cover and Albedo of the Underlying Surface on Dynamics

of Anticyclones." TRUDY GOO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory),
No 407, 1978.

3. Gradus, L. I., Niilisk, Kh. Yu. and Peygel'son, Ye. H., "Integral Transmission
Function for Cloudy Conditions," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AIHDSFERY I OKBANA (News
of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), No 4,
1968.

4. Yevseyeva, H. G. and Podol'skaya, E. L., "Integral Transmission Function in the
Near Infrared Spectral Region," TRUDY LGHI (Transactions of the Leningrad Hydro-
meteorologicsl Institute), No 49, 1976.

5. Kate, A. A.. NEOBYCHNOYE LETO 1972 GODA (Unusual Summer of 1972), Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat, 1973.

6. Leys, K. Ye., "Two-Dimensional Coefficients of Turbulent Viscosity," TRUDY
VTOROGO TOKIYSKOGO SIMPOZIUHA P0 CHISLENNYM HBTODAH PROGNOZOV POGODY (26
NOYABRYA-b DEKABRYA 1968) (Transactions of the Second Tokio Symposium on Numer-

ical Heather Forecasting Methods (26 November-4 December 1968)), Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat, 1971.

7. Neleshko, V. P. and Shneyerov, a. Ye. (et a1.), "Hydrodynamic Model of General
Circulation of the Atmosphere," TRUDY GOO (Transactions of the Main Geophys-

icnl Observatory), No 610. 1980.

3. Hclcshku, V. P. and Shneycrov. B. Ye. (et 01.), "hodeling of Atmospheric Cir-
culation for January," TRUDY 660, No 410, 1980.

9. Husnyclynn, Sh. A., 0 PRIRODE NEKDTORYKH SVERKHDLITEL'NYKH ATHOSPBRNYKH
PROTSESSOV (Nature of Some Superlong Atmospheric Processes), Leningrad, Cidro-
meteoizdnt, 1978.

10. Nukhcnberg, V. V., "Alhvdu of the Earth's Land Surface," TRUDY GGO, No 193,
I967.

14

FOR OFFICIAI.USEGDNLY
llr

12."

13.
11..
15.
16.
17'.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

lilltﬂﬂﬂllAl.USE‘0Nlﬂ

OSOBBNNOSTI ZASUKHI 1972 NA UKRAINE (Features of the Drought of 1972 in the
Ukraine), edited by K. T. Logvinov, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1973.

Fbygel'son, Ye. H., LUCHISTYY TEPLOOHBN V OBLAKAKH (Radiant Heat Exchange in
Clouds), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1970.

Santova, N. N., "Influence of Cloud Cover on Atmospheric Dynamics," IZV. AN
SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA, V01 14, N0 10, 1978.

Benvell, C. R. R., et al., "The Bushby-Tinpson 10-Level Model on a Fine ﬂesh,"
SCIENTIFIC PAPER, No 32, london, 1971.

Cess, R. D., ”Climate Change: An Appraisal of Atmospheric Feedback Mechanisms
Employing Zonal Clinatology," J. AINDS. SCI., Vol 33, 1976.

Crutcher, N. L. and Neserve, J. N., "Selected Level Heights, Temperature and

new Points for the Northern Heaisphere," NAVAIR 50-1c-52, 1970, U.S. Navy
Heather Serv., Nashington, D. C. '

Deardorf, T. H., "Empirical Dependence of the Eddy Coefficient for Heat Upon
Stability Above the Lowest 50 n," J. APPL. HBTBOROL., Vol 6, No 6, 1967.

Planing, J. R. and Cox, 8. K., URadiative Effects of Cirrus Clouds,“
J. ATHOS. SCI., Vol 31, 1976.

Ellis, J. 8., CLOUDINESS, THE PLANETARY RADIATION BUDGET AND CLIMATE, Ph.D.
TNESIS, Colorado State University, 1978.

Nanabe, S. and Hetherald, R. T., "Thermal Equilibrium of the Atmosphere Hith a
Given Distribution of Relative Runiduty," J. ATHDS. SCI., Vol 21, 1967.

Roeve, D. and Kuo-Nam Lion, "Influence of Cirrus Clouds on the Infrared Cool-
ing Rate in the Troposphere and Lower Stratosphere," J. APPL. HBTEOROL., Vol

17, No I, 1978.

Schneider, 8. N., "CIoudiness as a Global Climatic Feedback Mechanism: The Bf-
fects on the Radiation Balance and Surface Temperature Variations in Claudi-
ness,” J. ATNDS. 801., Vol 29, 1972.

Smngorinsky, J., et a1., "The Relative Iaportance of Variables in Initial Con-

-ditions for Dyna-icnl Heather Prediction," TBLLUS, Vol 22, 1970.

15

FOR‘OIFKJA1.USIIINLY
l‘lltlﬂﬂtlhl.0§liDNLY

UDC 551.583.2:58

DBNDRDCLIHATOLOGY METHODS IN STUDYING HISTORY OF CLIMATE

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 81 (manuscript received
11 Mar 81) pp 1.8-29

[Article by A. Kh. Khrginn. professor, Moscow State University]

[Abstract] In this article an attempt has been made, in a few examples, to evalu-
ate the contribution which climatologists can make in the interpretation of data

on tree rings and the growth of cellulose. The author felt it necessary to ascer-
tain what available climatic information can serve as a basis for dendroclimatol-
ogy and how strong this basis is. This study is not so much an effort to ascer-

tain new relationships between tree growth and climate as a desire to broaden the
interaction between historical climatology and the study of tree rings. The fol-
lowing sections are included: research material; periodicity of growth; tree growth
and sunspots; growth of cypress and some other data on climate of past centuries;
tree growth and eruption of volcanoes: tree rings and modern changes in climate.

The limited experience in the field of dendroclimatology indicates that the basis
for this branch of science is a comparison of tree growt' and climatic data for

the modern period (period of instrumental observations). There is a clear, but small
positive correlation between the growth of cypress and precipitation and a negative
correlation with summer temperature. The physical reasons for these correlations
are clear. The correlations between tree growth and climate can be made more de-
tailed by using trees of different species growing near observatories with long ob-
servation series and in climatic regions where modern changes in climate have al-
ready been well studied. This will help in overcoming the principal difficulty in
dendroclimatology - the still limited volume of initial independent data needed

in establishing the principal numerical correlations. A study of the changes oc-
curring after volcanic eruptions and investigation of the atmospheric turbidity
caused by them could serve as an experiment for clarifying the "radiation-tree
growth" correlation. A comparison with climatic events of past centuries, known
from historical chronicles, is also important for dendroclimatology. It was not pos-
sible to find a reliable dependence between tree growth and an increase or decrease
in solar activity during the period between 1969 and 1920. Tables 10; references 12:
8 Russian, 4 Western.

16

INDI‘OFIWCJAl.llﬂ§(N1LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 551. 510.6:551.524. 34(215-17)

MIRICAL ANALYSIS OF IRWCB OF 002 ON mom CHANGES IN MEAN ANNUAL AIR SURFACE
TEMPERATURE IN NORTHERN HMSPHERE

Moscow MEMROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 30-103

[Article by K. Ya. Vinnikov and 1’. Ya. Groysmsn, candidates of physical and mathe-
matical sciences. Stat- Hydrological Institute]

[Text] Abstract: A very simple nonstationary model
of the energy balance in the hemisphere which
takes into account the thermal inertia of the
climatic system, changes in albedo caused by
variations in atmospheric transparency (turbid-
ity). the influence of the 002 concentration
on lonrwave outgoing radiation and the feed-
back between albedo and temperature is used
in studying the determinacy in change in the
global thermal regime of the northern hemi-
sphere during the period 1883-1977. The em-
pirical estimates of the response of global
air surface temperature in the northern hemi-
sphere to a doubling of the 002 content in the
atmosphere fall in the range froa 2 to 3°C,
which agrees satisfactorily with the most prob—
able theoretical estimates of this parameter
and confirms them as being realistic.

Introduction. It has been postulated in a number of studies that the principal fac-
tors in modern changes of global climate are the natural variations in the para-
meters of the aerosol layer of the stratosphere associated with volcanic activity
and an anthropogenic increase in the carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere [3,
and others]. Several attempts have been made to check this hypothesis on the basis

of empirical data on climatic changes during the period of instrumental meteorolog-
ical observations [3, 11., 33 and others].

The reality of the influence of changes in aerosol turbidity of the atmosphere, as-
sociated with volcanic activity. has been most convincingly demonstrated in the stud-
ies of H. I. Budyko [2]. Lamb [22], Hitchell [27], Oliver [29] and Robock [33].

17

[OIOI'FIOALUSBONLY
INJE‘UIQWC]AI.II§II(HVLY

Serious arguments indicating that in addition to data on atmospheric transparency
it is necessary to invoke the concept of a global anthropogenic warning as a re-
sult'of an increase in the content of atmospheric carbon dioxide for explaining

the changes in mean air temperature in the northern hemisphere during the period

of instrumental observations were obtained in the investigations of H. I. Budyko
[3], Baldwin, et al. [15], Miles and Gildersleeve [26]. However, no climatic effect
of C02 was discovered in the studies of Robock [33] and Madden and Ramanathan [24].

The'authors of [24], on the basis of the conclusions drawn in [25] and [32] on the
nature of the seasonal variation of the response of the zonal thermal regime to
change in atmospheric C02 content, without precluding an influence of variations
of atmospheric transparency, substantially increased the intensity of the present
"noise" against whose background they could detect no ”signal." (The conclusions
in [32] contradict both other theoretical [25. 36, and others] and empirical [6]
estimates.)

The reasons for the negative conclusion concerning the role of 002 in climatic
changes during the last century in [33], in the light of the results presented be-
low, involve the use of an inadequately responsive model, inadequately reliable
information concerning changes in atmospheric turbidity and exaggeration of inertia
of the climatic system.

The purpose of this study is an empirical analysis of the determinacy of changes in
the global thermal regime of the northern hemisphere during the period from 1883
through 1977, for which the most reliable evaluations of global climatic variables
are available.

Description of Model

We will examine a very simple nonstationary model of the energy balance of the north-
ern hemisphere for variables having an annual averaging period on the assumption of
absence of energy exchange between the hemispheres:

4% = -'."-|1 -¢(P(t). Tn — For. w»: (1,

Here T is the mean annual air surface temperature in the northern hemisphere in
'C; t is time in years; q is a parameter characterizing the integral heat capacity
of the climatic system; I0 is the solar constantgac is the albedo of the earth-
ntmosphere system; P(t) is a characteristic of atmospheric aerosol turbidity; P is

long-wave outgoing radiation;
C(t) is the C02 concentration in the atmosphere, co - const.

We will use the following parameterization for albedo of the earth-atmosphere sys-
tem. ‘

"A __ a
c(P.T)=¢+§£(P—P)+'a7‘(r' T, (2)
In this expression the line at the top denotes time averaging, 301/3? and 34/5?

are parameters characterizing the response of albedo to change in atmospheric aero-
sol turbidity and the global thermal regime of the atmosphere.

l8
FOIiOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By analogy with [2, 3], the outgoing radiation will be represented as a linear
function of temperature

F (7. “mm”; ' ' ' (a)

 

‘ ..
"he" 1(g)=(l + Ar nu jam I") "

AT is a parameter of model response characterizing the change in mean annual air
temperature with a doubling of the atmospheric (:02 content, estimated without al-
lovance for the feedback between temperature and albedo of the system.

The expression for 7’(g) was derived on the assumtion that the additional heat in-
fltn: caused by the co; greenhouse effect is proportional to the logarithm of its
relative concentration. that is, 1n 3.

um. allowance for (2)-(3), expression (1) is an ordinary linear differential equa-
tion for 1', whose coefficients are dependent on the choice of the four parameters
of the model q, act/31', arr/3 P, A ‘1' and on the variables P(t) and g(t).

Its solution is written in the following form:

Tm—T-m. (0+ ﬁnanmuop -- (a)
where To - 7(0) - f,

l
A.(h=exp[— (’° $4»)??- ++ja -1(‘))4‘].
l
A.(0--J%(P(*)—57exp[- (15%? “H '"'+

!
+—:-‘[(I -1(s))ds]dc

I
I

M); Wexp[-(%%+b): +

(
+ﬂ'u -—1(s))ds]d:

19

summon“
HUI DONKJAL.USEIDNLY

Characteristics of Enpirical Data

(75). Two independent evaluations of this global climatic variable can be obtained
when using the materials of studies by K. Ya. Vinnikov, et a1. [7] and Yamamoto
[37, 38]. The correlation coefficient between the series, equal to 0.87, can be
considered quite high, especially if it is taken into account that in [7] January
is considered the first month of the year, whereas when obtaining the mean annual
values from the seasonal data for the second series the first month of each year
was December of the preceding year. The series [7], not characterizing the entire
northern hemisphere, but its extraequatorial region 17.5-87.5'N, has a standard
variability of 0.23'C. Comparison of the series [7] with the materials in the
study of Ye. S. Rubinshteyn [11] and some theoretical evaluations reveals that

the standard variability of the mean annual air temperature of the northern hemi-
sphere, most probably is 201 less and is about 0.19'C. In turn, use of the optimum
interpolation in the investigation of Yamamoto [37, 38] leads to an understatement
of the standard variability of the evaluations hypothetically by a factor of 2,
which is a consequence of inadequate coverage of a considerable part of the north-
ern hemisphere with meteorological data.

ern hemisphere [7, 37, 38] were reduced to one and the same dispersion value,

equal to 0.0344 degree2 for the period 1883-1977(75). The true value of the dis-
persion can differ from the adopted value in any direction.

Two instrumental series were used in describing changes in the optical characteris-
tics of the atmosphere in the short-wave spectral region. The first of these (1)
represents the data published by z. I. Pivovarova on the secular variation of the
relative anomalies of the mean annual intensity of direct solar radiation in a
cloudless sky based on measurements of approximately 13 actinometric stations loc-
ated in the zone 40-62'N [10]. The second -- (2) - gives similar data obtained in
a study by Bryson and Goodman [15], who evaluated the secular variation of the mean

annual aerosol optical mass of the atmosphere according to data from 42 actinomet-
ric stations luCatcd in the latitude zone 20-65'N.

in addition, as auxiliary characteristics we analyzed series of indices of volcanic
dust content of the atmosphere obtained by Lamb [22] -- (3) and similar estimates

of dust content made by Mitchell [27, 33] - (4). Both Lamb and Mitchell proceeded
on the basis of the concept that the decrease in atmospheric transparency is asso-

is not played by volcanic dust, but by stratospheric aerosol, consisting of very
tiny droplets of sulfuric acid forming primarily from the gas components of vol-
canic effluent. There is also evidence indicating that the quantity of background
stratospheric aerosol at the present time is rapidly increasing under the influ-
ence of anthropogenic discharge of some chemical substances into the atmosphere.

tical mass of stratospheric aerosol, the discrepancies between the indices of vol-

20
liﬂ!(ﬂﬂﬂllAl.USEiﬂVLY
'0! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

characteristics of atmospheric transparency obtained using data fro: neaaurenents
of direct solar radiation in the network of actinonetric stations, on the other
hand, are very substantial.

Table 1 gives a matrix of the correlation coefficients of the enmerated transpar-
ency. (turbidity) characteristics of the atmosphere.

Table 1

Matrix of Correlation Coefficients and Mean Square Values of Characteristics of the
Mean Annual Atmospheric Transparency (Turbidity) Given in Text

lluaber of characteristic 1 2 3 lo

1 ‘ 1 -0.68 -o.37 -o.3a

2 l 0.43 0.31

3 l 0.87

.. lo 1
Standard 0.035 0.016 67. 3 8.2
deviation --- --- ---
Dilension-
---- -—- 106 tons

ality .—

The correlation coefficients. evaluated using data for the period 1883-1977, are
rather low and indicate an inadequacy and inaccuracy of the information at our
disposal. Giving preference to the characteristics of atnospheric transparency

l and 2, independently obtained on |the basis of actinonetric observations, we

will represent the. in Fig. l and will select then as a basis for further analysis.

r-f

  

a
w
“

 

M I!” ”I! W "W

Fig._l. Secular variation of characteristics of atmospheric transparency (turbidity)
P - P. a) Data from 2. I. Pivovarovs [10], b) According to Bryson and Goodnan [15].

For describing the changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide in the atmaphere during
the period from 1883 through 1977 use was node of the following approximating ex-
pression proposed by B. K. Byutner

21

“WWWLY
PW W'ILIAL UM UNL'

(no—29044. 533x

chp (o. mam-1860)). (5)

where t is the number of the year, C is the volunetric concentration of C02, ex-
pressed in millionths, million'l.

The basis for this expression is materials from modern monitoring of the atmospher-
ic 002 content [30 and elsewhere] and the assumtion that C (1860) - 290 mill‘ ,
which corresponds to the mean value obtained on the basis of measurements made in
the 19th century [23].

Choice of Parameters of Model

The model contains a whole series of parameters whose choice is unrelated tg the
introduction of additional errors and whose values ge know quite well: IO, 0(, T,
:2 b. we use the following values: Io - 1380 u/n2,d - 0.31, T - 14. 4°C, a - 208 H/
b - 2 "/01!2 '°C). If we select Co - 305 million' 1, the indicated parameters en-

sure a closeness of the mean air surface temperature of the northern hemisphere
obtained from (1) for the period from 1883 through 1977 to the indicated value
16.4'0. The determination of these parameters for the northern hemisphere is bas-
ed on materials from studies [1, 9, 12, 18]. The results of the subsequent analy-
sis are influenced only by the appropriate choice of the required h parameter value.
Evaluation of thermal inertia parameter. The parameter q -- the heat capacity of
the global climatic system of the northern hemisphere -- can be determined empir-
ically in accordance with the method proposed by H. I. Budyko [2]. For this we
will use empirical data on the annual variation of the mean air surface tempera-
tures for the northern hemisphere T(t), its albedo oL(t) and the influx of solar
radiation at the cuter boundary of the atmosphere Q(t).

In accordance with the well-known definition, we introduce the radiation tempera-
t ure

T» (1)-=0 (l)[l--u (nub—cl”. (6)

which would be realized on the assumption that q . 0, Y‘l, and we will write the
equation for the energy balance of the northern hemisphere in the form

.‘L"... . ..T’;-{1'(t) - rum‘. (7)

I"

where 1 is a parameter characterizing the lag in changes in the heat content of
the global climatic system of the northern hemisphere from the changes in surface
air temperature.

we will represent TR(t) in the form of a periodic function with the annual period:

T» (t)—- T; -= An sln2" .,l (8)
where AR is the amplitude, t is time in years.
Then
T (Q—T-ui sin (2:11-49). (9)
22

F0!‘0’FKJAI.U§I¢NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where A, the amplitude, and 5", the phase, are determined by the system of equa-
tions

= l2 - .- ‘
(is? (an "+b/2rq) 'toszn (10)

A esqﬁkﬁ? ' +1 + a sinner“. '

Using (6), (8) and (9), on the basis of empirical data in [12, 18] we find AR -
60'6, A - 6.7‘C and 'f - 0.53 rad - 31'.

Substituting these values into (10), we obtain an eapirical evaluation of the par-
ameters of the model q - 1.7 w-year/(mzo'C) and ‘6 - 0.15 year.

Henceforth we will use the rounded-off value q - 2 w-yearl(m2-'c). Taking into ac-
count that t is substantially less than a year, in equation (1) this value was
aaslmned equal to zero.

The problem of the thermal inertia of the global climatic system and allowance for

it in computations of modern changes in climate has been discussed in a number of
studies.

According to the empirical estimates made by H. I. Budyko [2], the inertia time
during which the difference between '1' and TR in the case of a jumplike change

1:21.11 decreases by a factor of e is 2.5 years, which corresponds to (13¢ 5 H-year/
( ‘ .C).

According to the estimates made by Oliver [29], the inertia constant is from 6.5
to 10 years, and accordingly, 1; varies from 13 to 20 H‘year/ (m2-°C).

A lower q value for the global climatic system, of the order of 2.5-3 w-year/(mzv
'C),‘ can be obtained from materials of studies by Hanabe and Stouffer [25], which
takes into account the upper quasihomogeneous layer of the ocean with a constant
thickness 68 m. A planet similar to the earth, consisting only of an ocean with
such a quasihomogeneous layer, would have not 9-10 Hoyear/(m2-°c).

A convincing explanation of the fact that the integral value q for the global cli-
matic system is several times less than the mean weighted value of the heat capac-
ities of the ocean-atmosphere and land-atmosphere systems was given in a study by

Thompson and Schneider [3‘].

A whole series of studies [21, 31c and others] used different hypotheses concerning
the nature of heat exchange between the upper quasihomogeneous layer and the deep

layers of the ocean and drew the conclusion that there was a substantially greater
inertia of the climatic system. On the basis of the hypotheses we do not feel that

it is possible to .neglect the refined ewirical evaluation qu Hoyear/ (mz-‘C).

Choice of parameter Jot/3 '1‘. This parameter characterizes the feedback in the glo-
bal climatic system between temperature and albedo, realised primarily through the
change in area of sea polar ice and the continental snow cover. There are no em-
pirical evaluations for this parameter and therefore, for determining it, we will
use the results of numerical experiments with models of the theory of climate on
the basis of a study of response of the global climatic system.

23

”WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if we introduce a new parameter. the amplification factor K, equal to the ratio
of the evaluation of response of the globally averaged air surface temperature,
obtained with this feedback taken into account, to the evolution of response

obtained without taking this feedback into account. it is possible to write the
approximate expression

03"; -__‘- I I
we. ”(I ”KM. (11)

The authors of [16, 35] gave the most complete analysis of the theoretical evalua-
tions of response of climate to the change in atmospheric 002 content. Watts [35]
cites the value K - 1.25 as the soundest. The report [16] gave the most reliable
evaluations of the response of mean temperature with a doubling of the atmospheric
602 content, equal to 3.0 and 2.4'6 respectively. Their ratio also gives the value
K - 1.25. Substituting this value into (11), we obtain the evaluation Jdla 1‘s:
-0.0012 (°C)"1, which is also used in the subsequent computations. Then it was es-
tablished that the choice of this parameter in a very broad range exerts no influ-

ence on the collected empirical evaluations of response of the global climatic sys-
tem.

A priori evaluations (301/3 P. If as P(t) we use the data of Z. I. Pivovarova [10],
we can obtain an a priori all? P evaluation, proceeding on the basis of simple
reasonings similar to those presented in [5]. Assume that P(t) are the relative
changes in direct solar radiation. He will assume that the changes in total radi—
ation in the case of a cloudless sky constitute on the average 0.16 of the changes
in direct radiation [13]. Neglecting the changes in albedo caused by changes in
the aerosol layer of the stratosphere over clouds, we have an evaluation of the
order of 301/) P x -0.0~’o.

If P(t) is the aerosol component of the optical mass of the atmosphere, which is
observed with use of the data from Bryson and Goodman [15], the approximate Jd/a P
evaluations can be obtained using data from the studies of Pollack. et a1. [31]
(dd/a Pz 0.07), 0hring [28] (2d/3P50.057-0.081) or can be found in a study by
Harshvardnn [20] (act/a P - 0.110), etc.

Below we will attempt to obtain empirical 3“/3 P evaluations the same as evaluations
of the AT parameter. As already mentioned. theoretical evaluations of the latter
have been subjected to broad discussion and analysis in [4, 16, 35].

Empirical Evaluation of Parameters of Response of Global Climatic System

Evaluation method. Having at our disposal empirical data on the variables T(t).
P(t) and g(t) for 188%1977, we will evaluate the unknown parameters Jo'la P and
AT, assuming the K and q parameters to be known precisely. Equation (4) is lin-
ear relative to To, ear/3 l‘ and almost linear relative to AT. The AT parameter
enters into the functions A1. A2 and A3 only through 7(t) -- a value differing
little from unity in the course of the considered period. A statistical evalua-
tion of the parameters To, ad/aP and AT was made in two stages. In the first
stage it was assumed that 7’(t) I 1 and the first approximation of the unknown
parameters was determined. In the second stage the determined AT evaluation was
substituted into 7(t) and the evaluation procedure was repeated. The results
were final and did not change in subsequent iterations.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL {8! ONLY

with fixed q and K values the functions_A2(t) and A (t) constitute the result of
smoothing of the tine series of P(t) - P and 1n g(t values. In the absence of
other reasonable alternatives we will assume that the function g(t) is known

to us precisely. A similar hypothesis is obviously not suitable for P(t), as is.
indicated by the comparison lads above of different evaluations of; this variable.
He will therefore assume that by using the empirical evaluations P(t) we can con-
pute A2(t) - A2(t)+ 6(t), that is. the function A20), differing from the true
”(0 value by J (t), the error su-ing all the errors in the empirical evaluation
P(t). These errors are large, both at the beginning of the studied period, when
the number of the actinometric stations was small, and at its and. when the meas-
urements of many long-series stations were unsuitable for use as a result of local
anthropogenic contanination of the atmosphere. ‘

In this situation the evaluation of the parameters To. 301/ JP and AT from (lo) ac-

cording to empirical data by the least squares method (1.8!!) is incorrect since the
LSM evaluations of the sought-for parameters will be biased. Asymptotically unbias-
ed evaluations can be obtained only when using not only A2(t), but also additional
information concerning the A2(t) function, which would make it possible to reduce
the influence of the function of errors 5(t). We have such information since we

had at our disposal two, if not completely independent. then independently obtain-
ed series of characteristics of atmospheric transparency P(t).

~ A!
we will assure that the errors J(t) for A2(t). computed from the P(t) series from
[10] and [15], are independent, whereas the similar errors in A3(t), caused by the
inaccuracy in determining g(t), are small or zero. Then the justifiable asymptotic-
ally unbiased evaluations for To, 301/) P and AT can be obtained by using the meth-
od of an instnnental (auxiliary) variable (NH) [6, 8, l7. l9].

‘1? will use the subscripts “P" and "B" in denoting the series :2“) and J (t) for
P(t)_, obtained from [10] and [15] respectively. We will rewrite equation (10) in
the fore " ' ' ‘ '

I"? ,1 m) - 1“- m. (0 + $42... to — 3n w) —A mm. (12)

where T(t), A1(t), etc. (t - 0, 1, 2...., N - 1) are vectors of the dimensionality
N and we will multiply scalarly by the vectors A1(t), A230) and A3(t). '

Taking into account that
[11 - P, 5- B] “’V (3a. A.) -=' cov ('71:. 41):. tnv (3n. 21‘) =0. (13)
we obtain

c0v(T, A.) =- T,cov (A.,A.) + Z—gcovama.) + a Tcov(A..A.)
. - - - - ~ (11.)
cour. A...» « 'r.cov (4.. Mr.) + gicovummnw

+5T¢°V(An A25)
cov(T.A,) - T.cov (A,.A,)+ gﬁcov (inhAQ + A Tcov (A3. 11.).

25
roe WWW!”
I'UI WIILIAL OBI; Wt!

Since the errors in empirical data on air temperature and atmospheric transparency
are uncorrelated, all the covaristions in (14) can be evaluated, and accordingly
it is possible to obtain evaluations of the parameters To, Jot/2P angAT. which
are the IV" evaluations. We note that if in (16) it is assumed that A23 . A2?

we again return to the Lsu evaluations.

If as the basic characteristic of atmospheric transparency we use the series obtainr
ed by Bryson and Goodman [15]. sag,as the instrumental variable we use the function
A2P(t), computed from the series P(t) published by Z. I. Pivovarova [10], we obtain
another evaluation of the parameters To, 3W3 P and AT. In this case the evaluations
of the parameters To and (ST'may not coincide as a result of selective variability.
The value of the To parameter in all the evaluation parameters changes little and
varies around the value -0.2°C. The evaluation of this parameter is of no value for
this investigation.

Empirical evaluations of the parameters 3W7? P and AlT. Table 2 gives the results of
the IVH evaluations of the parameters of response of the global climatic system of
the northern hemisphere. The evaluationgvare based on a temperature series [7]. The
evaluations obtained with the use of a P(t) series obtained by Pivovarova [10] as

basic (but the series in [15] for computing the instrumental variable) are denoted
by the letter A, whereas the evaluations based on the P(t) series obtained by Bry-
son and Goodman [15] (series [10] - auxiliary) are denoted by the letter B.

The evaluations I relate to the hypothesis that both factors and changes in trans-
parency and C02 content in the atmosphere exert an influence on the thermal regime
of the hemisphere. The evaluations II represent an alternative hypothesis in which
it is postulated that the C02 concentration exerts no influence on climate, that
u,Arnm

Taking into account the increase in response of the model to the feedback mechanism
between albedo and temperature as characteristics of the response of the global

climatic system it is necessary to use the val;gg_£3Tc - KllT and
den,

6 7": — aka-,1?
where U} is the standard variability of the P(t) value represented in Table l.

The evaluations of response were accompanied by computation of a number of statis~
tical characteristics: [3 is the correlation coefficient between the empirical
series Tkt) and the series T(t). reproduced using the model (a) on the basis of
the IVM evaluations of the parameters; at" is the standard variability of the
T(t) series reproduced by the model; d is the standard variability of the series
£(t) - T(t) - T(t) of nonclosures between the empirical data and the evaluations
of mean temperature of the hemisphere reproduced by the model; 1:8 is the rank cor-
relation coefficient of the series of nonclosures £(t) with a natural series of
numbers; r1 is the first serial correlation coefficient of the series of nonclos-
ures £(t).

The latter two characteristics serve for evaluation of the measure of randomness

and unordered nature of the series of nonclosures €(t). In particular. if there
is a monotonic trend in 5 (t). r, differs significantly from zero. In our case
with |r,l $50.2 the £(t) series can be considered unordered and does not contain
a trend at the 952 significance level.

26

IN3I10IWHCJAI.IJBI2(MVLY
Table 2

Empirical Estimates of Parameters of Response of Model and climatic System “hen
Using Series rm and P(t) From [7, 10, 15]; k - 1.25 q - 2 Hoyear/(mL'Ii)

llapauerpu "us-m lan-
. ”0M 1). ' rm
A“3| I’m/6P yr

Cranmsmat xapaureparma

 

l. Hypothesis 4. Parameters of climatic system
2. Variant 5. Statistical characteristics
3. Model parameters

For the evaluations IA and 13 the rs and r1 values, and also the results of the an-
alysis of the correlation and spectral functions indicate that the nonclosures of
the 8 (t) model have the character of red noise. The principal reason for the
gytocorrelation nature of the £r(t) series is a smoothing of the errors of the

P(t) series as a result of the inertia of the climate system. Thus, statistical
extrapolation of £(t) is unthinkable.

Analysis of the data in Table 2 indicates that hypothesis II on the absence of the
influence of changes in the atmospheric 602 concentration on climate is refuted by
the F test with a probability exceeding 992, regardless of which of the P(t) ser-
ies [10] or [15] is used as basic. In addition. with A1." 0 and an IVH evalua-
tion of the parameters To and JUVJ P. as indicated b the data given in the lines
IIA and IIB of this table, the nonclosures £;(t) - (t) - T(t) are nonrandom time
series. The r. - 0.6-0.7 values indicate the presence of a powerful monotonically
increasing trend in £(t). This means that there is another factor still not taken
into account causing a systematic change in temperature fit).

The inclusion in the model, in addition to the influence of changes in atmospheric
transparency. of the influence of carbon dioxide increases the fraction of the
dispersion of the T(t) series described by the model by 25-30%. In this case the
nonclosures of the 6 (t) model represent unpredictable noise. These conclusions
apply to an identical degree to the variants A and B. The [ST parameter in these
cases was equal to 2.5° and 1.7'C.

Estimates of theA'l‘c value. equal to 3.1' and 2.1’, agree extremely satisfactorily
with the theoretical evaluations of the influence of doubling of the atmospheric

€02 content on the global thermal regime and indicate that the latter are realis-
'tic.

The empirical evaluations of the Jul/2 P parameter are of independent interest. A
comparison of these evaluations with the theoretical evaluations cited earlier is
extremely difficult due to the great uncertainty in the theoretical evaluations.

27

FOIIIHNCIAI.U§B(NULY
INJI‘UD}1L1AI.US£(HVLY

At this stage it is evidently possible to be content with the observed coincidence
of orders of magnitude. TheIATpI evaluations IA and In are close to one another
and average 0’0.2'c. They characterize the temperature change caused by the change

in atmospheric transparency (turbidity) P by a value equal to the standard varia-
bility of the git) series.

All these computations were repeated for data on the change in air temperature in
the northern hemisphere obtained by Yamamoto [37, 38]. With these same qualita-

tive conclusions the evaluations of the response of AT and 301/3? were 20% lower
than those presented in Table 2.

Similar computations with the use of the series of z. I. Pivovarova [101 and Bryson

and Goodman [15] as characteristics of atmospheric transparency, and the series of
Lamb [22] or Mitchell [27] as instrumental variables,give evaluations of the re-

sponse parameters not differing substantially from those given in Table 2, but
having greater selective variability.

0n the other hand, the use of the Lamb [22] and Mitchell [27] series as the princ-
ipal characteristics of change in atmospheric transparency leads to a qualitative-
ly opposite conclusion - on the absence of an appreciable influence of 602 on cli-
matic change during the last 100 years. But in these cases an analysis of series

of errors of the £,(t) model reveals the presence of systematic components in

them which do not disappear even when taking into account the influence of carbon
dioxide, which forces us to refute these estimates.

Due to the fact that the descriptions of the changes in atmospheric turbidity by the
data in [22, 27] are considerably less realistic and accurate than the data in [10,
15] we will give preference to the conclusions obtained when using the latter. The
use of the data in [27] probably was one of the reasons for the conclusion drawn

by Robuck in [33] that there is no appreciable influence of C02 on cliusLe during
the period of instrumental meteorological observations.

However, for the data in [10] and [15] the conditions cov (JP, 53) - cov (SP, A3)
- cov (J 3, A3) - 0 probably are not satisfied precisely, but instead approximate-
ly. The authors of these investigations could use coinciding actinometric stations;
in addition, it is impossible to exclude the hypothesis that the local anthropogen-
ic contamination of the atmosphere did not identically and simultaneously distort
the FYt) series from [10] and [15]. This could introduce a systematic error into

3p and 6 3, disrupt the mmdition cov (5 , A3) - 0, and accordingly, distort the
[3T evaluation. The use of the series [22] and [27] as an instrumental variable re-
vealed that the influence of violation of this condition is small.

A confidence evaluation of the parameters of response of the climatic system was

made taking into account the autocorrelation nature of a series of errors of the
£(t) model and the absence of precise information on variations of atmospheric
transparency. For the two point evaluations of the parameter (STc - 3.1° and 2.1°c
which are of the greatest interest (see Table 2) the 95% confidence intervals were
(2.0'; 4.3') and (l.l';3.0°) respectively. Since the most probable value [STC should
fall in the region of intersection of these intervals it can be concluded that with
a doubling of the atmospheric €02 content the mean annual air surface temperature

28

F0.‘0¥FKJA1.USB¢HNLY
for the northern hemisphere varies by a value from 2.0 to 3.0.0.

Influence of choice of other parameters on evaluations of 3078 P and Ar. Figure 2
shows the results of evaluation of the influence of choice of the inertia para-
aster q on evaluations of the response of the climatic system. with K - 1.25 the

q values vary in the range from 2 to 20 H-year/ (m2-’c). Figure 2a gives the esti-
mates obtained when using as the main at) series that obtained by Pivovarova [10],
and in Fig. 2b -- that obtained by Bryson and Goodmn [15]. At the same time, the
figure shows the dependence of the standard variability ’9'“ of the T(t) evalua-
tions and the correlation coefficientP of the T(t) and T(t) series on q.

We note the fact that an increase in q leads to an increase inP to values close

to 0.8 with 11le H-year/(mzo'c). This does not mean that the value q - 2 H-yaar/mz-
degree was selected incorrectly. The P(tL data simply include such great random
errors that the strong smoothing of the P(t) series creates in A2(t) the illusion
of an increase in model accuracy. This effect evidently explains the high empirical

value of the inertia parameter found by Oliver in [29]. The standard variability
of the T(t) series decreases considerably with an increase in q, and with large q
the dispersion of the T(t) series is greatly understated.

When using as the basic series the 2. I. Pivovarova series in [10], the AT para-
meter has little dependence on the choice of q and all/J P doubles in absolute value
with an increase in <1 by an order of magnitude.

0n the other hand. in the results of an analysis based on use of the Bryson and
Goohan series [15], the Ar evaluation decreases rapidly with an increase in q.
whereas ant/3? is not dependent on the choice of q, and therefore this value is
not represented on the graph.

Thus, the choice of the inertia parameter q can exert a strong influence on the em-
pirical evaluations of response of the climatic systen and cannot be arbitrary.

; I J 9
L“ 4 0n the other hand, as indicated by com-
' \ putations, the choice of the amlifica-
(9 2 tion parameter K, exerting an influence
on the evaluations of ant/a? and Ar
07 , with all q, leaves virtually constant the
evaluations of the ATC and ATP values,
. that is, the total response of the model
4" 0 with allowance for influence of the feed-

Ml' I ' \
l ’1——.V\ ’ ”5
y.

5 H-ye‘ar/(aZ-'c) I
.._l_a—-|—a—L——J
I 5 II If ”Ir-MW”

 

back between albedo and the thermal re-
gime. Similarly exerting an influence on
the evaluations is the dispersion of the
empirical series T(t), inadequately well
known. Evaluations of the response para-
meter are directly proportional ,_to the
mean square variability of the Mt) ser-
1950

Fig. 2. Dependence of UN evaluations of parameters of model on choice of q with
K . 1.25. The figures over the y-axes correspond to the numbers of the curves.

29

momaatussouu
I'UI WHLMI. USE UNI-Y

Computation of Changes in Surface Temperature of Northern Hemisphere During Period
1883-1977

Figure 3 shows the results of reproduction (by means of a model) of the change in
surface air temperature in the northern hemisphere during the period 1883-1977
with allowance for the Joint influence of changes in (D2 content and atmospheric
transpa rency .

’ '0.
49

4: V ‘
' f1. "“ $|yimi . I "i?

|
' ——1
—.—1

.q‘

\

'J I!” I!” I”! I'll M

Fig. 3. Reproduction of secular variation of mean annual air surface temperature in
northern hemisphere with allowance for the influence of changes in atmospheric

002 content. 1) empirical data according to data in [7], 2) computations using
data on changes in atmospheric transparency (turbidity) published by Z. I. Pivo-
mrova [10], 3) computations using data by Bryson and Goodman [15].

Without having precise values of the T(t) series we are unable to judge where the
truth lies, but the closeness of the curves represented in Pig. 3 is without ques-
tion. An encouraging fact is an unquestionable increase in the "accuracy" of the
model in the second half of the period, when, it can be hoped. the accuracy of
data on all climatic variables substantially increased. The somewhat exaggerated
variability of the T(t) series, obtained from the ?'(t) series of Pivovarova [10],
is probably evidence of an exaggerated variability of the characteristic of atmo-
spheric transparency. not evidence of an understatement in the determination of
the parameter of inertia of the climatic system in our model. On the other hand,
the excessive smoothness of the shape of the T(t) curves reproduced in the stud-
lea of ()1 iver [29] and Robock [33] is evidence of an exaggeration of the inertia

In their models.

Assuming that P(t)- coast and in (lo) using the evaluations ATc - 2.1-3.1’C,
we draw the conclusion that an anthropogenic increase in atmospheric 002 content

caused an increase in the mean annual air surface temperature in the northern hemi-
sphere by 0.10-0.6‘C in comparison with the mid-1880's. This warming is partially
masked by the influence of variations of atmospheric transparency.

30

MWLUSBONLY
mammaomx

Sun—ry

Our analysis of the eqirical data indicated that the time series for mean annual
air surface tewerature in the northern hemisphere during the last hundred years
contains definite coaponents governed by variation of atmospheric transparency and

an increase in atmospheric 002 content. Our empirical estimates of the response
of the global surface thernal regiae of the atmosphere in the northern hemisphere

to a doubling of the atmospheric 002 content are in the range from 2 to 3°C.

The first aspirical estimates of the response of air surface temperature to
change in ataospheric 002 content were obtained in the studies of Miles and Gil-
dersleeve [26] and H. l. Budylto [3]. These estimates, obtained by simpler methods,
are close to the estiaates in our study. The good agreement of known theoretical
estimates of the Arc value with the mirical values indicates that they are
realistic and on their basis it is possible to examine the impending changes in

the global thermal regine in relation to the anthropogenic increase in atmospher-
ic 00; content.

For this purpose the diagnostic nodel (1)-(lo) can be used as a prognostic aodel
on the assumtion that the variations in atmospheric transparency are unpredict-
able and are a source of noise. It is necessary to refine the role of heat ex-
change between the upper quasihonogeneoua layer and the deeper layers of the
ocean.

The authors express appreciation to H. I. Budyko and B. K. Byutner for discussion
of foraulstion of the problem and the first results. They also express great ap-
preciation to Z. I. Pivovarova and R. Yananoto, who in digital fora presented data
on the secular variation of atnospheric transparency and surface air temperature
in the northern heniaphere.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Beyeva, I. H. and Vinnikov, K. Ya., "Dependence of Outgoing Radiation of the
Earth-Atmosphere System on Temperature and Cloud Cover," TRUDY CCI (Transac-
tions of the State Hydrological Institute), No 271, 1981.

2. Budyko, H. I.. IMNBNIYA KLIHATA (Climatic Changes), Leningrad, Gidroneteo-
irdat, 1974. '

3. Budyko, H. 1., KLIHAT V PROSHW I BUDUSHCHEH (Climate in the Past and Future),
Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1980.

lo. Budyko, M. 1., et a1., "Anthropogenic Changes in Global Climate," HBTBOROIDGIYA
I CIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 8, 1981.

5. Budyko, H. 1., et 31., KLIHAT I VOZDEYSTVIYA NA AEROZOL'HYY SDOY s'mmsnmr
(Climate and Effects on the Aerosol Layer of the Stratosphere), Leningrad,
Cidrometeoisdat, 1976.

6. Vinnikov, K. Ya. and Croysnan, P. Ya., "Empirical Hodel of Modern Changes in
Climte." HETBOROLOCIYA I CIDROLOCIYA, No 3, 1979.

31

uncommon“
7.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

I9.

20.

21.

I‘ll WIILIAL I)". UNI-Y

Vinnikov, K. 1a., et al., "Modern Changes in Climate in the Northern Hemi-
sphere," METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 6, 1980.

Kendall, N. J. and Stuart, A., STATISTICHESKIYB VYVODY I SVYAZI (Statistical
Conclusions and Correlations), Moscow, Nauka, 1973.

North, 6. P. and Koukli, J. L., "Simple Seasonal Models of Climate," METEORO-
LOGIYA I GIDROWIYA, No 5, 1978.

Pivovarova, 2. 1., RADIATSIONNYYB KHARAKTERISTIKI KLIMATA SSSR (Radiation
Characteristics of USSR Climate), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

Rubinshteyn, Ye. 8., STRUKTURA ROLEBANIY TEMPERATURY VOZDUKHA NA SEVERNON POLU-
SNARII (Structure of Air Temperature Variations in the Northern Hemisphere),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1973.

Spirina, L. P., "Latitudinal Norms of Atmospheric Pressure and Air Temperature
in the Northern Hemisphere," TRUDY GCO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical
Observatory), No 258, 1970.

Shifrin, K. 8., "Radiation Effect of the Dust Layer," AKTINONBTRIYA I ATMO-
SFERNAYA OPTIKA (Actinometry and Atmospheric Optics), Leningrad, Gidrometeo-
izdat, 1969.

Baldwin, 8., Pollack, J. B., Summers, A., Toon, O. 3., Sagan, c. and Van Camp,
H., "Stratospheric Aerosols and Climatic Change," NATURE, Vol 263, 1976.

Bryson, R. A. and Goodman, B. H., "Volcanic Activity and Climatic Changes,"
SCIENCE, Vol 207, 1980.

CARBON DIOXIDE AND CLIMATE: A SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENT, Nat. Acad. of Sci., Wash-
ington, D. C., 1979.

Durbin, J., "Errors in Variables," REV. INST. INTERNAT. STATIST., V01 22, No
1-3, 1954.

Ellis, J. 3., Vonder Near, 'r. 11., "Zonal Average Barth Radiation Budget Ness-
urements Prom Satellites for Climate Studies," ATHOS. SCI. PAPER No. 240, Col-
urndo State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, 1976.

Geury, R. 8., "Determination of Linear Relations Between Systematic Parts of
Variables with Errors of Observation the Variances of Hhich Are Unknown,"
BCONOMETRICA, V01 17, No 1, 1999.

Nnrshvardan, --, "Perturbation of the Zonal Radiation Balance by a Stratospher-
ic Aerosol Layer," J. ATMOS. SCI., Vbl 36, 1979.

Hunt, B. C. and Hells, N. C., "An Assessment of the Possible Future climatic
Impact of Carbon Dioxide Increases Based on a Coupled One-Dimensional Atmo-

. spheric-Oceanic Model,” J. GEOPHYS. RBS., Vol 80, No C2, 1979.

32

IN3310FIICIAI.(IBI1(NULY
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.

MWLWONLY

Ind), u. IL. "Volcanic Dust in the Atmosphere; With a Chronology and Assess-
ment of Its Heteorological Significance," PHIL. TRANS. ROY. SOC. 1.0300“ A,

Vol 266, No 1178, 1970.

Hachta, I... ARDSPEERIC HEASURDIENTS OF CARBON DIOXIDE. CONE-770385, Workshop
on the Global Effects of Carbon Dioxide Fro- Possil Fuels, edited by P.
Elliot and 1.. Hachtn, 1979.

Madden, R. A. and Ramthan, V., "Detecting Climate Change Due to Increas-
ing Carbon Dioxide," SCIENCE, Vol 209, No 41058, 1980.

Hanabe, S. and Stouffer, R. J., "Sensitivity of a Global Climate Model to an
Increase of 002 Concentration in the Atmosphere," J. GEOPIiYS. RES., Vol 85,
No cm. 1980.

Miles, N. R. and Gilderaleeve, P. 3., "A Statistical Study of the Likely
Causative Factors in the Climatic Fluctuations of the Last 100 Years,"
METEOROL. HAGAZ., V01 106, 1977.

Mitchell, J. 11., Jr., ”A Reassessment of Atmospheric Pollution as a Cause of

long-Term Changes of Global Temerature," THE CHANGING GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT,
edited by S. 1’. Singer, Holland, 1975.

0hring, G., "The Effect of Aerosols on the Temperatures of a Zonal Average
Climate Ibdel," PAGBOPH., Vol 117, 1979.

Oliver. R. C., "0n the Response of Hemispheric Kean Teaperature to Strato-
spheric Dust: An Empirical Approach," J. APPL. METEOROL” Vol 15, No 9, 1976.

Pearnan, G. 1., "Atmospheric C02 Concentration Measurements. A Review of
Methodologies, Existing Program-es and Available Data," HMO Project of Re-
search and Honitoring of Amospheric 002, 1980, "MD, Report No 3.

Pollack, J. 3., Toon, O. 3.. Sagan, C., Su-ers, A., Baldwin, 3., Van Gag),
H., ”Volcanic Explosions and climatic Change: A Theoretical Assessment,"
J. GEOPlle. 1138., Vol 81, No 6, 1976.

Rananathan, V., Lian, H. S. and Ceas, R. 1)., "Increased Atmospheric 002,
Zonal and Seasonal Estimates of the Effect on the Radiation Balance and
Surface Tewerature," J. GEOPHYS. 1138., Vol 86, No CO, 1979.

Rohock, A., "Internally and Externally Caused Climate Change," J. A1105. SCI.,
Vol 35, No 6, 1978.

Thompson, S. L. and Schneider, 8. 8., "A Seasonal Zonal Energy Balance c11-
Inte Model Hith an Interactive Lower Layer," J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 86, No
C5, 1979.

Watts, R. G., "clinate Models and (mg-Induced Climatic Changes," CLIMATIC
mums, V01 2, Ho 1.. 1980.

33

MWLUSEONLY
36.

37.

38.

run Vl‘l’MI‘h WE Vl‘lo'

Hethereld, R. T. and Nanabe, 3., "Influence of Seasonal Variation Upon the
Sensitivity of a Model Climate." J. cmrmrs. 388., Vol 86, No C2, 1981.

Yamuoto, 11., "Variability of Northern Hemisphere Neon Surface Air Tapere-
ture During Recent 200 Years," presented at Int. Meeting on Statistical Cli-
mtology, Bechioji, Nov 29-Dec 1, 1979.

Yul-unto, R. end Noshiei, H., "Fluctuations of the Northern Bel-isphere Mean
Surface Air Tapereture During Recent 100 Years, Estimated by Optimum Inter-
polation," J. MBTBOROL. SOC. JAPAN, Scr II. Vol 58. No 3, 1980.

”OFFICIALLBEONLY
UDC 532.526.h:536.262

TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION IN TURBULENT NEAR-HALL CURRENTS WITH ALLOWANCE FOR
AIRFLOH STRATIYICAIION

norm mosewclu I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript rereived
9 Her 81) pp lob-as

[Article by A. G. Yurov, Hydroeechanics Institute. Ukrainian Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] One of the characteristics of the turbulent boundary layer. to a con-
siderable degree determining the interaction between the atmosphere and ocean,

is the temperature distribution in the air flow over a water surface. Specialists
at the Hydromechenics Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, have carried out
experimental laboratory investigations, uhose results are presented here, for in-
vestigating this characteristic under conditions of a very umstably stratified
boundary layer forming during the interaction of the surface of a heated evapor-
ating fluid and an oncoming flow of cold air. The experiment was carried out in

a low-velocity wind tunnel with a low level of initial turbulence in which cells
with heated water served as the lower Hall of the working sector. The wind velo-
city use varied in the range 0.5-1.‘ mlsec. (The design and description of the
laboratory apparatus and the method employed in such work have been described by
the author in earlier papers.) 0n the basis of use of a Reynolds analogy and em-

ploying a semismpirical two-layer model of turbulent near-Hall currents the auth-
or vaa able to derive expressions for the temperature distribution, with allow-

ance for stratification, for the currents at smooth and slightly rough surfaces.
Figures 2; references 16: 1s Russian, 2 western.

3S
FOIICINWCIAI.USEIIULY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. 509. 31‘: 551 . 54

EVALUATION OF STATISTICAL INTBRRELA'I'IONSIIIP OF BORIZWTAL AND VERTICAL RESOLUTIONS
IN GBOPUI'BNTIAL FIELD

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
9 Her 81) pp 109-53

[Article by V. I. Hartem'yanov, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
Central Asian Regional Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] In describing atmospheric processes within the framework of different
models it is necessary to take into account the interrelationship of horizontal
and vertical resolutions in the fields of meteorological parameters. It can be
governed both by the physical nature of the considered process and by its mathe-
astical model and comutation procedures employed. The shortest wave which can

be resolved has the length As (Ap), equal to double the size of the interval

in a regular grid 6 s (5p). In this article the author examines the interrela-
tionship of horizontal and vertical resolutions only relative to some properties
of the statistical structure of the fields of meteorological paraaeters. The con-
cept of statistical equivalence of these resolutions is introduced under the con-
dition of an equality of the corresponding values of the correlation coefficients
“(A s) and “(A p). 0n the basis of this approach, for the winter and sxmner sea-
sons in the middle and tropical latitudes it was possible to estimate the neces-
sary vertical corporation levels in hydrodynaaic schemes for predicting the geo-
potential field as a function of the horizontal interval 3a of a regular grid of
points. The method proposed here is not tied in to any specific prediction scheme.
The special features of a specific scheme may require a set of computation levels
which is optimal for it and which differs soaewhst from the set of levels used in
in this paper. Figures 2. tables 1; references 8: 6 Russian, 2 Western.

36
POI ML USEONLY
NI OMCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.596.253:537.241
CHARGE SEPARATION WITH PARTIAL OOALESCBNCB 0P DROPLBTS

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (nanuscript received
31 Mar 81) PP 55-57

[Article by S. V. bopatenko and S. H. Konrush, candidate of physical and aathenat-
ical sciences, Odessa State University]

[Text] Abstract: The authors modeled the charging
process accompanying collisions of uncharg-
ed droplets of unlike sizes in the presence
of a "bridge" between then and its subse-
quent breaking, which in the absence of an
external electric field makes it possible
to generate charged droplets. This requires
use of the nethod of breakdown of a jet in-
to nonodisperse droplets. 0n the basis of a
great quantity of experinental data it is
concluded that in the investigated ease the
nechanisn of charging of droplets is aiailsr
to the aechanisa of charging in the presence
of external electric fields.

Nuerous investigations have established an extra-sly ilportant role of collision
of droplets in the development of atnospharie electric processes [6, 7. 11]. When
droplets collide with one another, in addition to coalescence and recoil there is
also an internediate case — recoil with partial coalescence [8, 16]. The separa-
tion of charges accompanying the collision of droplets in an electric field was

investigated in [13, 15]. It is of interest to investigate charging during the col-
lision of droplets with partial coalescence in the absence of external electric

fields and in weak electric fields because such conditions are frequently observed
in the atnosphere.

Recently quite detailed investigations have been made of the phenonenon of partial
coalescence of droplets in the range of sizes and velocities corresponding, for
cxaaple, to the falling of raindrops [3, 16]. These studies have revealed that
with partial coalescence a temporary "bridge" is formed between droplets and there
is a redistribution of their masses. Then this bridge is broken and the sire of
the escaping droplet is reduced. However, the patterns of such charging of drop-
lets have not been investigated due to the short lifetine of the partial

. 37
FOR OFFICIAL USIONLV
Hll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coalescence phenomenon itself, because in this case it is difficult to use tradi-
tional methods of charge measurement.

In the modeling of hydrodynamic and electric processes transpiring with the partial
coalescence of droplets and reproduction of the modeling process over the course
of a sufficiently long time it is possible to use the phenomenon of breakdown of
‘a jet into droplets. The possibility of such modeling can be substantiated by in-
troducing a similarity criterion. The parameters of the process of forming and
charging of droplets are: (71.8 the surface tension of the solution, kg°sec'2;

n is the dynamic viscosity of the solution, kg-m'l‘sac‘lg v is the rate of elong-
ation of the bridge, m-sec'l; r is the radius of the forming droplet, m; t is

the time of droplet formation, sec; Pia the bulk resistivity of the solution, see;

)6 is the surface potential of the solution, kgl/Z-ml/Z-sec' , Q is droplet charge,
k8]. 2'm3/2’88C-1.

From these parameters it is possible to write the following similarity criterion:

rip—7‘11, n,= ’

_, O
'7. [1,..7!

The first of these criteria quite clearly describes the process of fragmentation
of a fluid into droplets [6, 16] and accordingly, establishes the similarity of the
mechanical fragmentation processes. The second gives the inportant relationship
between the characteristic times of the processes of charging and formation of a
droplet, determining one or another degree of disruption of the electrical state
of the fluid at the time of its destruction. The last criterion describes the
process of charging of a droplet of a particular size to some charge with the pres—
ence of u surface potential at the surface of the fluid. The equality of the cor-
responding similarity criterin is the condition of similarity of two phenomena,
that is

VII": = Mun £_£ 0m __ O.
[H - model; H - real scale] 0- 0n ’ 9- " h’ In... - fun"

For one and the same solution de - "real: O'md . areal' pmod - Preal' 7md -
anl. Accordingly, it follows from the derived equalities that Vmod - Vrealu

tmd - rm“; and if rmd - 'real it can then be assuned that the charges of the
forming droplets are also equal, that is, de . Qreal~

Numerous investigations (for example, see [1, 2, 12]) confirm that the process of
formation of an escaping droplet is similar to the process observed during the
disintegration of a jet in the generator of monodisperse droplets (Gun) and that
the times of formation of droplets in both cases can become comensurable by
selecting n suitable frequency of CHD operation. In addition, the possibility of
model lng or the charging of droplets in the case of recoil with partial coal-
escence hy the process of disintegration of u jet in the absence of external e1-
vctric fields is based on the experimental investigations described below which
demonstrated that:

a) the charge of the droplets remains constant for particular concentrations of el-
ectrolyte and droplet size and is not dependent on the method for droplet forma-
tion and breaking of the "bridge";

b) the principal processes responsible for the electrification of the droplets
transpire at the discontinuity of the fluid-gas phases, that is, electrokinetic

38

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOIllﬂﬂ(lAl.USE(MVLY

processes at the fluid-solid state discontinuity exert no substantial influence
on the charging process.

 

Fig. l. Diagran of experimental apparatus. 1) capillary, 2) flexible metal plate,
3) needle, 4) electromagnat with netal core. 5) 1.! signal generator; 6) droplet
collector (Faraday cylinder); 7) electroneter.

“ v . .
mm. n ,g" "1'"! K1

   

Fig. 2. Dependence of droplet charge on Pig. 3. Influence of electrolyte con-
their surface area. Frequency of gen- centration on droplet charge. Droplet
eration of droplets -- 34 sec-1. copper diameter 1.5.1045. Nichrome needle, fre-
needle. 1) artificial charge, C - 10'“ quency of generation of droplets 31 sec"1
.01 KC], U - 20 V; 2) natural charge. C - 1) NaCl; 2) Hal.

10'1 mol Km; 3) natural charge C - 10'5-

nol haCl. ~

In order to realize the proposed nodeling method we assembled an experimental ap-
paratus whose diagram is shown in Fig. 1. As the apparatus creating the monodis-

perse droplets we used n can with a vibrating needle periodically iuereed in the
fluid and upon emergence front it drawing out a fluid bridge from which the droplet

39

“MUSEMY
run UPPILIAI. 03!. ONLY

ls formed [I]. The chain of droplets from the GHD was directed into an electrical-
ly insulated collector. Between the collector and the ground the electric current
was measured with a sensitive electrometer. He found that the droplets have an
identical charge and therefore the charge of one droplet is found by dividing the
measured current by the number of droplets entering the collector in a unit time.
By feeding a regulated potential difference from a d-c source to the solution and
the needle it is possible to accomplish artificial charging of the droplets. The
size of the droplets was determined using a microscope after their precipitation
on a backing covered with a thin layer of vaseline and transformer oil. In order
to avoid the influence of external electric fields the apparatus was carefully
screened and grounded. The error in measuring the magnitude of the charge of the
droplets in the process of their generation did not exceed 32. In the experiments
we used aqueous solutions of salts present in cloud and rain droplets.

The following conclusions can be drawn from the numerous experimental data collect-
Cd.

1. With the feeding of a d-c voltage to the needle and fluid the droplet acquires
a charge proportional to the product of the density of the surface charge x and
the area of the droplet surface S (Fig. 2. curve 1), which agrees with the re-
sults from studies [5. 9].

2. The charge of the droplets forming as a result of disintegration of nonstation-
ary bridges of aqueous solutions of inorganic electrolytes in the absence of exter-
nal electric fields is negative and its value is described by a dependence of the
type Q - 7-08 (Fig. 2, curves 2, 3).

Although the charging of the droplets in both cases is described by one and the

same law, the density of the surface charge of fluid is governed by different fac-
tors: ia the first case -- by the separation of charges in the fluid under the in-
fluence of a d-c voltage fed to the fluid and needle, and in the second case -- by
the adsorption of ions and the orientation of dipoles at the moving discontinuity
of the fluid-gas phases. Accordingly, the mechanism of development of charge sur-
face density is not of decisive importance for the process of droplet charging.

3. The variation of dependence of droplet charge on the concentration of solution

of electrolyte in the case of natural charging of droplets (Pig. 3) agrees com-
pletely with the variation of the dependence of the potential jump at the discontin-
uity of the solution-air phases on the electrolyte concentration [10] of one and
the same type.

A. The feeding of the potential difference from a source of d-c voltage to the
needle and solution indicated that the absolute droplet charge is determined by

Its capacitance C multiplied by the surface potential value U. that is, Q - CU. The
determined dependence agrees with the results of studies [5, 9].

Accordingly, the value of the droplet charge is proportional to the fluid surface
potential at the time of droplet formation.

It follows from the above that:

40

itll(lﬂﬁ(1Al.USE(NVLY
- both the artificial and the natural charging of droplets conforms to the in-
duction theory of charging;

-- the charging at the time of collision of droplets with partial coalescence can
be interpreted as the charging of a fluid with some natural potential jump at the
moving solution-air discontinuity.

Thus, with the collision of two droplets of noncomparable size (with diameters of
10'3 and 10" m respectively) with partial coalescence there is a redistribution
of masses. The diameter of the smaller, escaping droplet is approximately 7-10‘5 m
[3]. The lifetime of the bridge between the droplets at the time of their col-
lision is commensurable with the time of formation of droplets at a given fre-
quency of cum operation. Accordingly, the charge of a droplet can be estimated by
knowing its size, chemical cowosition of the fluid or the surface potential I.
An estimate of the charge of the escaping smaller water droplet with y- -0.1 V
[10] gives a value of about «lo-10"16 K1.

The results may be useful in computing the electrification of precipitation because
the collision of uncharged droplets of a particular chemical composition with the
formation of a bridge and its subsequent breaking leads to the generation of
charged droplets. 0n the basis of the collected data and further investigations

it is possible to give recommendations on the artificial stimulation of sane pro-
cesses leading to a change in the state of clouds.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vol'f, V. 3.. "Investigation of the Vibrator Method for Producing Homogeneous
Small Droplets and Solid Particles," PRIDORY DLYA RAUCHNYKH ISSLBDOVANIY (In-
struments for Scientific Research), No 10, 1961.

2. Kolpakov. A. V. and Kontush, S. H.. "Anomalous Type of kecoil in the Collision

of Hater Droplets of Noncomparable Size," PIZIKA ABRODISPERSNYKH SISTBH (Phys-
ics of Aerodisperse Systems), No 12, 1975.

3. Kolpakov, A. V. and Kontuah, S. H., "Some Laws of Interaction of Droplets,"
FIZIKA ABRODISPERSNYKB 31812“, No 16, 1976.

4. Krasnogorskaya, N. V., BLEKTRICHESTVO NIZHNIKH SLOYEV ATHDSFERY I HBTODY YBGO
IZHBRENIYA (Electricity of the Lower Layers of the Atmosphere and Methods for
Measuring It), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1972.

5. Lab, L., STATICHESKAYA ELBKTRIZATSIYA (Static Electrification). Moscow-Lenin-
grad, Gosenergoizdat, 1963.

6. Lipatov, G. N. and Kontush, S. H., "Operation of a Generator of Honodisperse
Droplets With a Vibrating Needle," PIZIKA ABRODISPBRSNYKB SISTEH, No 9, 1973.

7. Huchnik, V. H.. FIZIKA GROZY (Thunderstorm Physics), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat,
1976.

8. Solov'yev, A. D., "Conlescence of Droplets During Collision." TRUDY TsAO
(Transactions of the Central Asrological Observatory), No 89, 1969.

41

InliolFIJAI.USI(lVLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15‘

16.

um WPI‘LIAI. UM URL.

Taunet, Kh. P., "Induction Electrification During Spraying of Fluids,"
UCH. ZAPISKI TARTUSKOGO GOSUNIVERSITETA (Scientific Notes of Tartu State Uni-
versity), No 140, 1963.

Prunkin, A. N., Iofa, Z. A. and Gerovich, H. A., "On the Problem of the Poten-
tial Difference at a Hater-Gas Discontinuity," ZHURNAL FIZICHESKOY KHIHII
(Journal of Physical Chemistry), Vol 30, No 7, 1956.

Chalmers, J. A., ATMOSPERNOYE BLEKTRICHESTVO (Atmospheric Electricity), Ign-
ingrad, Cidroneteoizdat, 1974.

Abbott, C. E. and Cannon, T. H., "A Droplet Generator With Electronic Control
of Size. Production Rate and Charge," REV. SCI. INSTR., Vol 63, No 9, 1972.

Al-Saed, S. H. and Saunders, C. P. R., "Electric Charge Transfer Between Col-
liding Hater Drops," J. GEOPHYS. RES., V01 81, No 15, 1976.

Hidy, G. H. and Brock, J. R., THE DYNAMICS OF AEROCOLLOIDAL SYSTEMS, Pergamon
Press, 1970.

Jennings. S. G. and Lathes, J., “The Charging of "star Drops Falling and

Colliding in an Electric Field," ARCH. METEOROL. GEOPHYS. BIOKL. SBR. A, V01
21, 1972.

Uhelpdate, D. H. and List, 3., "The Coalescence Process in Raindrop Growth."
J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 76, No 12, 1971.

42

FOI1OIFKJAI.UBE(HVLY
MOFFICIALISEONLY

UDC 551.52(571.62)

EVALUATING SPATIAlr-TEHPORAL VARIABILITY 01' HEAT AND HATER BALANCE mama's 1!!
EAST!!! SECTOR 01' BAYKAIr-AHIIR RAILROAD ROUTE

Hoscow WOWIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 81 (manuscript received
31 Her 81) pp 58-70

[Article by V. N. Adanenko, doctor of geographical sciences, A. 1.. hogdanov and
P. V. IIovorotskiy, Limnological Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, and Khsb-
arovsk liultidiscipline Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] On the basis of route methods for measuring albedo and temperature of
the underlying surface it was possible to estimate the spatial variability of a1-
bedo, radiation tenerature and the radiation balance for characteristic types of
landscapes in the eastern part of the route of the Baykal-Anur Railroad line. The
field studies'were node in aid-August 1977 using a helicopter. The surveys were aade
at midday at an average height of 50-100 s. Between 10 and 100 measurements were
made foreach of .the selected landscapes in order to ensure the collection of repre-
sentative data. (Fig. l is a schematic map of types of underlying surface in the
area; Table 1 gives the radiation and theraal characteristics of these different
surfaces.) The study revealed that allowance for changes in albedo and temperature
of the underlying surface determined by renote nethods makes it possible to eval-
unto the radiation balance components in moderately rugged areas. The highest radi-
ation balance for the eastern part of the area is characteristic for water surfaces
and the minimum is characteristic of rocky areas. During the wan season the nitro-
and neeoscale spatial inhomogeneity of conponents of the heat and water balances

is constable with or close to the macroscale inhomogeneity. Allowance for their:-
fluence of exposure in an evaluation of the spatial inhomogeneity of heat and water
exchange is especially inortant for northern slopes, whereas on the s0uthern slopes
under the considered conditions it is close to lowland conditions. the energy flutes
on the eastern slopes are 3-8! greater than on the western slopes. A study of the
supplies of heat and moisture in this area revealed that the nature of the underly-
ing surface substantially changes the structure of the heat balance. Figures 5,
tables lo; references: 20' Russian.

103

mammal!“
INTI‘OIIWCJAI.IEHECH'LY

UDC 551.467.03(261)
NEH METHODS FOR ICE FORECASTS FOR THE NORTHHBSTBRN ATLANTIC

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
11 Feb 81) PP 71-76

[Article by n. A. Kogan and N. F. Orlov. candidates of geographical sciences,
Murmansk Affiliate, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute]

[Text] . Abstract: The article gives the results of
investigations for finding new methods of ice
prediction for the Devi: and Denmark Straits

_and Labrador Sea. The basis iv: the propos-
ed methods is the physicostatiscicsl relation-
ships between individual ice characteristics
and hydrometeorological factors. The features
of these methods and the possibilities of
their use in solving different problems in
the national economy are pointed out.

The regions of the Northwestern Atlantic have long been zones of active naviga-
tion and fishing. The success and safety of marine work in this region are depen-
dent to u great extent on the ice conditions prevailing here. Ice prognostic in-
formation is of special importance for fishing organizations under the modern
conditions of introduction of ec0nomic tones and licensed catching. Until recent-
1y there were extremely few methods for predicting ice conditions in the consid-
ered region. For the winter months there are no such methods, whereas for the
summer season they are in need of improvement. The hydrometeorological support

of fishing work in the Labrador Sea and Davis Strait has been accomplished pri-
marily by the method developed in 1965 [3], which makes it possible to obtain
prognostic information on the ice content and the position of the ice edge in

the region in April-July. However, the guaranteed probability of these data does
not always satisfy the increasing demands of practical work. The individual de-
pendences recently proposed for evaluating the Baffin Day ice mass area [6] can
be used only in refining the principal March forecast.

It follows from a brief review of the studies that the considered problem required
further development. In this connection, during the last five-year period a number

of investigations have been carried out in which on the basis of more complete ob-
servntional data there has been an analysis of the processes of development of ice

44

ltlltlﬂﬂKJAl.lﬂil(lILY
IOI103FKJAI.UUEIINLY

conditions in seas of the Northwestern Atlantic and new methods for sea ice
forecasts have been proposed.

The principal results of these investigations are discussed in this article.

 

 

Fig. 1. Region of investigations and zone covered by ice in cold season of year.
Boundaries of regions (a): l) Labrador Sea, 2) Davis Strait. 3) Denmark Strait,
b) mean and c) maximum boundary of occurrence of floating ice.

The basis for the developed methods was the asynchronous physicostatistical rela-
tionships (established by correlation analysis) between individual ice character-
istics and the hydroseteoroiogical processes responsible for the redistribution

of ice in the Northwestern Atlantic. Among these. in particular. we should mention
the peculiarities of change in the thermal state of the ocean and atmosphere in
the near-lying regions during the aonths preceding the ice period. variations in
the circulation of air masses and the transport of ice from the polar regions in-
to the North Atlantic. '

The selected nost informative predictors make it possible to predict the mean
monthly ice content values and the position of the ice edge in the seas of the
Northwestern Atlantic with an advance period freq 2 to 8-10 nonths, and for the
Labrador Sea - also provide aean 10-day information on the distribution of ice.
The probable success and guaranteed probability of the recommended regression
equations is 70-90:, and their advantage over climatic forecasts attains 15-201.

For the practical use of the new aethods detailed reconnendations have been prepared
on the preparation of initial data and the carrying out of prognostic computations.
It east be eaphasised that as the initial infatuation use is made only of actual

b5

IKIICIHNCIAI.USI(NILY
FOIIOFFKJAI.05840NLY

values without data from background meteorological forecasts and all computations
are made on an electronic computer. Such an approach not only favors an increase
in the reliability of the results, but also accelerates their output, not requir-
ing great expenditures of labor. Thus, with use of the proposed methods it be-
comes possible to predict the ice content and position of the ice edge for three
important regions: Davis Strait, Denmark Strait and the Labrador Sea, and for sea-
sons for which forecasts had not been previously prepared. Now we will discuss

in somewhat greater detail the features of each of the methods mentioned above.

The proposed method for forecasting ice conditions in Davis Strait and the Labra-
dor Sea [5] makes it possible to compute the mean monthly ice content of these
regions for the entire ice period from January through July with an advance period
from two to ten months. As the predictors use is made of the coefficients of ex-
pansion of the fields of air temperature, water temperature and atmospheric pressure
for optimally defined regions of the northern hemisphere and for weather ships, and
also the characteristics of the ice content of the region during the preceding per-
iod. The optimum grid region was selected after a preliminary investigation of the
features of regional atmospheric processes during the formation of the ice cover
and the history of their development in the hemisphere. It was found. for example,
that a positive surface atmospheric pressure anomaly in the Spitsbergen region fore-
shadows severe ice conditions in the Northwestern Atlantic in the next cold season.
The localization of positive air temperature anomalies over the Pacific Ocean dur-
ing the preceding year is characteristic for favorable ice conditions in the consid-
ered zone of the ocean for the future season, etc. Such regions, in which the
changes of meteorological elements occurred sooner and were expressed more apprec-
iably, were used as a grid region for the reading of data and the discrimination

of informative predictors. In the algorithm of the computation scheme for determin—
ing the mean monthly ice content of the region provision is made for correcting the
coefficients of the regression equations prior to each preparation of a forecast,
allowance for the influence exerted on ice conditions by hydrometeorological fac-

tors at different time scales and adaptation of the scheme to the climatic trends
in the form represented in Pig. 2.

  
  
   

Data input

Data conversion

Computation of parameters of-
regresaion equations

klonitori of unlit of
diction 0 total iceycontgng-

  
  

lac-pun um I a; mean
num ohn’ elm-emu

Prediction of monthly ice content
Printout

Pig. 2. Block diagram of forecast of ice conditions in regions of Northwestern At-
lantic Ocean.

46

F0.‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI¢0FFKJAI.USE(H‘LV

In block I there is magnetic tape registry of infatuation on the predictors x and
ice content L for the entire observation period. The values of the predictors and
ice content are averaged with a period of 3 months.

Prior to each forecast the information X and L is supplemented by current observa-
tions. At the sane time provision is made for the possibility of eliminating fro-
the X and L masses all information for the earlier years. Such a procedure will
note it possible to optimize the volume of the sample for the forecast and in
part to exclude the influence of long-period changes in climatic conditions on

the coefficients of the prognostic equations.

A transformation of the data occurs in block 11. The data masses are sorted in two
stipulated classes. This is followed by computations of the covaristional R and
covariant ll* matrices, an equation of the form (3* -)R)M- 0 is solved and the
secondary indicators of T are found.

In block III there is solution of a system of normal equations with a free term
in the form 6 - (T'T)'1T'L, where as the variable L use is made of data on the
ice content of the region and T are secondary indicators corresponding to the
maxi-um eigenvalue of the-correlation matrix .11.

In block IV computations are made of the total ice content of the region for the
stipulated period Lpred and the nonclosure of the prognostic equation £(t)_-
Lact ~ Lpred and the multiple correlation coefficient f’are determined.

In block V there is an approximation of ice content by months for the period of

growth (destruction) of the ice cover. The total ice content for the entire per-
iod, mean monthly ice content of the region and the parameters of the prognostic
equation are printed out.

however, the prediction of the ice content of the Northwestern Atlantic gives only
a general idea concerning impending ice conditions in the region without reveal-
ing the boundaries of occurrence of floating ice. Accordingly. thereafter a method

was developed for the long-range forecasting of the position of the ice edge in
the Labrador Sea during the winter months from December through March, that is,

during the period of ice formation when the ice attains its most easterly position
and in many respects governs the success of fishing and navigation. For prognostic

computations by this method use is made of actual data on water and air tempera-
ture in the region of weather ships A, B, c, I, J, air teaperature and pressure
anomalies for individual regions and air temperature at three shore stations:
Baker Lake. Eureka and Prince Christiansund for February-October of the preceding
year. The advance time of the forecast is 4-5 Ionths. Accordingly, already at the
onset of September it is possible to prepare a forecast of the ice edge position
in the Labrador Sea for December-January, and early in November - for February-
March. All the computations on a "Minsk-32" computer are made in 10-15 minutes.
The predicted position of the ice edge for each month is plotted on a digigraph
for each month and the results of the computations are fed out in a tabulated
fora convenient for practical use.

47

FOI¢0FIIJAI.UBBIHNLY
itlltlﬂﬂtlAI.lliE(MNLY

The program provides for annual correction of the regression equations by the re-
ceipt of new hydrometeorological and ice information. Thus, the proposed method
for predicting the mean monthly position of the ice edge for the first time makes
it possible to obtain necessary information on the occurrence of ice in the Lab-
rador Sea during winter. This can be useful in solving various problems of impor-

tance to the national economy. The mean guaranteed success of these forecasts
for 1979-1980 was 812.

In addition to study of the physicostatistical means for long-range forecasting of
the ice edge position in the Labrador Sea, a study was made of the possibility of
using the dynamic-statistical method proposed by Yu. M. Alekhin. In solving the
formulated method use was made of a lO-lS-year series of observations of the ice
edge with a forecast advance time of 5-8 months. The computations were made sep-
arately for each parallel each degree of latitude in the zone 50-60'N. The guaran-
teed success of the results was 80-902; the mean guaranteed probability of the ex—
perimental forecasts of the ice edge for the winter months of 1979-1980 was 92%.

In addition to the considered methods. for the Labrador Sea a method was also de-
veloped for the short-range forecasting of the position of.the ice edge for an ad-
vance time up to 10 days [a]. It takes into account ice inertia, ice drift along
the Labrador Current and the dynamic state of the atmosphere over the region. In
order to decrease the influence of observational errors and short-period varia-
tions the mean 10-day anomalies of ice edge position were smoothed by the moving
averages method with an averaging period of 30 days. The autoregression equations
which were written initially make it possible to evaluate the fluctuations of the
edge caused by macroscsle processes.

Then computations were made of the differences between the actual position of the
ice edge and its position determined using the autoregression equation. The non-
closures of the autoregression model of the forecast were adopted as a variable
value subject to prediction. As the principal predictors in this stage use was made
of processes on a synoptic scale, in particular, the values of the Laplacian of
atmospheric pressure over the region and the mean 10-day ice edge position, taken
at the distance of the spatial correlation radius of the edge in the direction of
the source of the Labrador Current. The autoregression equation for the ice edge
and the determined relationships between the nonclosure and the indicated synoptic
scale indices constituted a scheme for predicting the position of the ice edge for
a 10-day period. A forecast of the mean lO-day ice edge position was made for the
zone 50-56°N. Tests of the method on the basis of independent materials indicated
its adequate reliability (guaranteed success 88!) and it has now been adopted for
routine hydromcteorological support.

The northern regions of the Atlantic, such as the zone of Denmark Strait. for which
ice forecasts were not earlier prepared. are poorly studied but important for nav-
igation and fishing.

As a result of the investigations made it was possible to define the principal fea-

tures of the ice regime in the strait and a method was proposed for long-range

forecasting of the ice content and ice edge position for April-August [1]. As in-
dicated by an analysis, the great variability of ice conditions in this region

48

FOIioiflJAl.U§BlMULY
INJI‘OIINCJAL.UBIZ(HVLV

In determined to n great extent by the simultaneous influence of the waters of

the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans, variations of atmospheric circulation and a nun-
bcr of other factors. in particular, in the method for predicting ice content

and ice edge position as the initial information use is made of data On water tem-
perature in the neighborhood of weather ships A, B, K, E, intensity of the Iceland-
ic Low and air temperature at the shore stations Barentsburg, Cape Tobin and Jan
Hayes for the autumn-winter period. These predictors make it possible to predict
ice conditions in the strait for each month of the spring-summer season (April-
August) with an advance time of 2-6 months. Prediction of the edge is printed

out for six parallels for the zone 65-70'N. Operational tests of this method have
shown that it can be used in practical work. Similar work was also carried out for

predicting the ice content and the ice edge position in Denmark Strait in the aut-
umn-winter months [2].

The availability of new prognostic ice information for the regions of the North-
western Atlantic will assist marine and fishing organizations in correct planning
of the distribution of the fishing and transportation fleets, in planning the

safest crossing routes, in evaluating the desirability of buying licenses for the
taking of fish, etc.

For example, in the Labrador Sea the greatest concentration of fish schools is
usually noted in its shelf zone.

An eastward movement of the ice boundary leads to a reduction of the regions of
fishing and makes it necessary to move the ships beyond the limits of the shelf.
Accordingly, tisely information on the possible position of the ice edge in the
sea can favor the adoption of a sound decision concerning relocating of the fleet
or carrying out licensed catching.

For most fishing and transport ships ice also constitutes a direct danger, espec-
ially under conditions of storms, fogs and poor visibility frequently observed in
the northwestern regions of the Atlantic. Accordingly, timely knowledge concern-
ing ice conditions in the considered zone of the ocean will also favor a decrease
in damage to ships and an increase in the effectiveness of navigation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Kogan, B. A., Nikol'skaya, N. A. and Zuyev. A. N., "Prediction of Ice Content

and Position of Ice Edge in Denmark Strait in Spring-Summer," PROBLEHY ARKTIKI
I ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the Arctic and Antarctic), No 52, 1977.

2. Kognn, B. A. and Zuyev, A. N., “Possibilities of Predicting Ice Content and
Position of the Ice Edge in Denmark Strait During Autumn—"inter," TRUDY
'AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute),
Vol 368, 1980. '

3. Lebedev, A. A., "Variability of Ice Conditions in Northwestern Atlantic,"
TRUDY GOIH (Transactions of the State Oceanographic Institute), No 87, 1965.

49

FOI‘OFFKJA1.UBI(IVLY
DUI ”I'I'MAL WI WIN

lo. Orlov, N. F., "Method for Predicting Position of the Ice Edge for Ten Days in
the Labrador Sea," TRUDY AANII, Vol 348. 1980.

5. orlov, N. 17., "Experience in Applying Image Recognition Theory for Long-Range
Forecasting of Ice Conditions in the Northwestern Atlantic," TBZISY DOKLADOV

IV VSBSOYUZNOY KONPERENTSII P0 PROHYSLOVOY OKEANOLOGII (Sumries of Reports
at the Fourth All-Union Conference on Cosmology of Fisheries), Murmnsk, 1977.

6. Snirnov. V. I., "Patterns in the Redistribution of Ice in the Waters of the
Foreign Arctic," RETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology),
No 11, 1979.

50
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.456

MECHANISMS OF FORMATION OF UPPER QUASIHOMGENBOUS LAYER IN OCEAN

Hoscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
26 Feb 81) PP 77-82

[Article by V. D. 2holudev, Kabardino-lalkarskiy State University]

[Text] Abstract: Within the framework of the proposed
similarity theory for the upper layer of the
ocean it was possible to establish a correla-
tion between a laboratory study of the upper
quasihomogeneous layer (UQL), observations of
its state under the conditions prevailing in
the open ocean and numerical modeling using
one-dimensional models. The article gives an
example of cosputstions of the characteristics
of the U01. for a storm situation observed in
the middle latitudes. taking into account the
intradiurnal variability of insolation.

The investigations of Garwood [l9] and the method which he proposed for dimension-
less comparison of different integral models of the upper quasihomogeneous layer
(UQL) of the ocean cast light on many unclear problems relating to the theory of
one-dimensional oceanic models. Below we describeone of the approaches to formul-
ation of a similarity theory for the upper layer of the ocean which can be used
in a study 'of the layer of convectivedwind mixing for the conditions prevailing

both in the open ocean and in a laboratory experiment.

Mechanical mixing. He will seems that the set of determining parameters describing
the nonstationary state of the 001. is as follows: thickness of the UQL h. scale of
turbulent velocity, equal to the friction velncity in the water va, intensity of
turbulence b, vertical turbulent kinematic heat flow from the fluid surface into
the depths F0 (positive if the flow is directed downward), velocity of entrain-
ment we, temperature jump AT - To - Th (To and Th are water temperatures in the

UQL and at the upper boundary of the thermocline). Coriolis parameter f and buoy-
ancy parameter at g ( of is the coefficient of thermal expansion of water, 3 is the
acceleration of free falling). It follows from the Tr-theorem [2] for the dimen-

sionless velocity of entrainment we ' Ug/ve that

”1:0(aghl‘.'uj. ¢gh$TIvf. ”“9” blot). (1)

51

MWWONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where é is a universal function of the similarity parameters: Richardson flow num-

ber Rio, global Richardson number Rig” the parameter Ro‘l, inverse of the Rossby
number for the boundary layer, and the dimensionless parameter 8*.

The theory of dimensionalities does not give a specific functional correlation for
the relationship (1) and therefore it is first necessary to examine self-similar
cases of this general correlation, studied by different researchers. If the for-
mula derived in [21] is refined for the dimensionless velocity of entrainment as
a function of the Richardson number Rf___ - weRi* - cup thus [13]:

Rt. :wc(Riu’cA'P + E.:’Cl) = '0 (2)

then on the assumption that for well-developed mechanical mixing b - cm v2 [11], we
arrive at the expression derived and checked applicable to the data of Kato and
Phillips in [3]. It better describes the results of the mentioned experiments with
mixing of a closed volume of fluid under the influence of the imparted shearing
stress and also correctly takes into account the self-similar regime of propaga-
tion of the turbulence front in a homogeneous fluid when with a temperature (to be
more- precise, density) jump equal to zero at the lower boundary of the UQL we have
we - cE/CH [1, 23].

The self-similar case for purely wind mixing Ro'1 . cR, following from (1) on the
assumption of a complete self-similarity of the function giand the expression Ro‘l
- 91“,, Rfo, Rik, 3*), following from (1) with respect to t a similarity para-
meters enclosed in the parentheses, and the correlation of the velocity scale with
the Ekman theory of drift currents have been studied in Illa, 24], whereas the case
Rfo - cm- was studied in [9, 17, 22].

It is confirmed by observations in the open ocean [20, 25] that the h values cor-
relate statistically well with the scale v*/f for the moments of a purely wind ef-
fect on the ocean. 0n the other hand, the periods of decrease in the thickness of
the QHL correlate with the values of the Honin-Obukhov oceanic scale vé/d g ro,de-
creasing simultaneously with h [17, 18], so that the correlation

I — Ro-I/cR — Rule“. = o, (3)

following from these investigations should reflect the periods of antientrainment,
that is, when dh/dt$ 0. It is possible to derive a formula from (3) for computing
the minimmn thickness of the U31. hm with heating in a quasistationary case [12]:
cRVvk/f = h...(1 + cROtg ro/cKvaQ.

The generalizing expression, not contradicting (2) and (3),

we (Rh/CK» + EJCc') = l - RO‘VCR — P'o/t'kr (la)
represents the equation for the balance of turbulent energy in the UQL in integral
form. (Everywhere in the text the parameters designated with the subscript C are
constants.)
Convect ivc mixing. Assuming an invariance of expression (lo) relative to the para-

meters determining tho. dynamics of mixing in the UQL in the case of well-develop-
ed turbulence, regardless of what its cause may be - mechanical or convective

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1ICJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

factors, introducing the convective scale of turbulent velocity v0 - (nigh lbe)1/3
and assuming that b - ccczvg, we obtain

:3 :5th +cc ____, “.019...
‘3 "o‘xnc oo‘xrc (5)

Here the difference 1 - Ro‘llck is neglected because it is assumed that being in the
field 05 free convection, with large negative values of the stability parameter Rfo

the role of mechanical turbulence in the vertical transfer of momentum and heat can

be neglected; in this case the va parameter drops out of the similarity formulas
[11] and it follows from observations that the scale V2318 important [20]. The non-

dependence of the thickness of the planetary boundary yer on the Coriolis parab
meter under free convection conditions indicates absence of any appreciable correl-
ation between the thickness of the oceanic surface layer of mixing and latitude [10].

A. Penetrating convection. Neglecting the additive constant cc in (5) and assuming
c1 - expo/CKTC, from [13, 26] we derive that

_ = A T10. :: — C, r,. (6)
where f‘_ is the entraining heat flow at the lower boundary of the UQL.

If cc is taken into account, then with CcCKPC ' crz the following expression fol—
lows from (5)

5 Tu. = - e, F. (l + tr, 0. l‘:".-’C, F. (2:10“). (7)
which is equivalent to the expression for free convection derived from energy con-
siderations [13, 27].

B. Nonpenetrating convection. With AT - 0, from the equating of the expression in
parentheses on the right-hand side of (7) to zero, we derive an expression for the
velocity of the downward movement of the lower boundary of the UQL in the presence
of free convection in a homogeneous fluid [4]. but the heat flow r:_ from the deter-

mination of (6) is equal to zero, as is described by [7], but, we emphasize, CT 7‘
0.

A self-similar surface of the balance of turbulent energy in the system of self-
similar coordinates Rf_, Ro‘l, Rfo, proposed in [19], can be constructed on the
basis of equations (4) and (5); in this case it is necessary to neglect the con-
stants cH/Cg, cc and take into account that the entraining heat flow and the Ro‘l
parameter are nonnegative. The line of intersection of these two planes will rep-
resent the boundary of transition of the mixing process from forced to free con-
vection. The points exp. CKTo ex and the segments of the straight lines connecting
them represent cases of complete self-similarity of the process with respect to
the corresponding similarity parameters. Part of the plane CKPCKTCR should reflect
the mechanical mixing (with heating in a case Rfo:>0). The segment CRCKT is the
"antientrainment trajectory," and it can be used in processing observational data
in the ocean in order to find, in particular, the ca and our values (see Fig. 1).
Cases of forced convection with cooling will be given by the part of the surface
CRCKTCKP extending into the region of negative Rfo values.

53

FOI‘OFFIJAL.USE(INLY
FOI!0'Iﬂ(1Al.USEi0NLV

 

" 0 h)

PP-

 

syn/ha

Pig. 1. Thickness of UQL as function of wind velocity. a) computations using for—
mula hR - cgv*/f with a variable drag coefficient for computing wind shearing
stress: 10303 - 0.77+0.068 U13 [6] and on - 0.15 (l), and also computations with
constant on - 1.5-10”3 and with coefficient CR equal to 0.2 (2); 0.3 (3); 0.4 (4)
and with CD - 1.3.10"3 with c - 0.2 (5). Regression dependences [25]: linear 0.2+
1.92 Ole-(6) and quadratic 0. +0.120 U28 (7). The dashed line represents the stan-
dard deviation (6.1 m) from the straig t line 6, b, c) methods for determining

the coefficients ck and CKT from results of in situ observations.

 

Fig. 2. Storm, station Papa, 21-23 June 1970 [16]. a) stipulated atmospheric para-
meters: wind velocity, specific humidity and air temperature and also resultant
heat flow through water surface with allowance for sought-for temperature of UQL
and intradlurnnl change of insulation; b) observed values of temperature and thick-
ness of UQL (l), and also computed from model of upper layer with allowance for ro—
tation with cg1.- exp - 3.0: cu - 0.2; cr - 0.3 (2). Note the jumplike decrease in
thickness of UQL at time B -- transition from free nighttime convection to daytime

heating.

54

FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY
INJI OIWWCEAL llli¢ﬂVLY

Evaluation of constants. The described similarity theory makes it possible to con-
clude that the constants entering into the deternining relationships (6) and (5)
can be determined in an experinental and (or) theoretical study of special cases
of the process of nixing in the UQL.

In order to evaluate the constant c3 we will use the results [25] of determination
of the thickness of the QHL as functions of wind force at a height of 18 m at the
weather station Papa (SO'N, laS'U). Tigure 1 shows the dependencea Ro'1 - CR in
comparison with the results in [25]. fron which it is obvious that the use of en
values greater than 0.2 can lead to overestimates of the thickness of the UQL or
to erroneous conclusions concerning the influence exerted on the dynamic state

of the UQL by other parameters.

From the observations in [17] it is possible to estimate the value ex! - 2.7.

Due to the paucity of the data in the numerical experiments for the time being we
will use cKT - exp [22] and the value of the latter was evaluated by the authors
of [21] with a 301 scatter: cKp - 2.5. Adhering to [23], we select cH/cz - 3.6.
He will assume the constant c7 to be equal to 0.3 and CTZ - 2.6 [27].

Reaction of ocean to atmospheric effects. As an illustration of the presented theory
in Fig. 2 we give the results of computations of the temperature and thickness of
the UQL for a storm situation for weather station Papa on 21-23 June 1970 (see
[16]). In the computations we used the known equations of a one-dimensional inte-
gral model of the upper layer of the ocean with parameteriaation of temperature in
the thersocline by a linear profile [13]. The entrained heat flow at the lower ‘
boundary of the QHL (f:_) was determined from (6) and (5) during entrainment and

it was assumed equal to zero in the case of antientrainment. In order to determine
the resultant heat flow at the ocean surface ['0 from the sought-for temperature of
the ocean surface and atmospheric characteristics we made use of the equation for
the heat balance at the ocean surface; the turbulent flows of apparent and latent
heat were found from integral aerodynamic formulas [10] with coefficients of tur-
bulent exchange equal to the drag coefficient of the sea surface, linearly depen-
dent on mean wind velocity at the anemomater level [6]. The figure shows that the
results are encouraging. Using a similar model of the upper layer of the ocean, the
author of [7] studied the seasonal cyclic variability, whereas in [5] use was made
of expression (2) and with application of the equations of motion a study was made
of the reaction of a stratified ocean to a tropical cyclone.

Figure 3 shows computations of the thickness of the UQL in the case of purely wind
sixing (‘_0 - 0) for a wind force with a normal distribution in time. For compar-
ison with the aodel computations of Dennan [15], who used a model of the not not
taking rotation into account, we selected the following initial values for temper-
ature and thickness of the UQL: To - g,5°c, h . 10 I, and a temperature at the
upper boundary of the thermocline of a.o°c. The temperature profile in the thermo—
cline is linear, with a vertical gradient of -0.0385'C°m‘1. It can be seen from the
results of computations that by an adjustment of the empirical constants it is en-
tirely possible to achieve a satisfactory agreement of the results for essentially
different models of the UQL. In a study of the real interaction between the ocean
and the atmosphere the heat flows at the water-sir discontinuity, having a masking
influence on evolution of the upper layer of the ocean, are highly important. so
that it is difficult for researchers to separate the factors causing a particular

55

IIIICIﬂﬂC1A1.USB¢MVLY
tillilﬂﬂtlAl.USE(lVLY

rhuruvtcr of behavior nr the UQL, and therefore it is difficult to select a proper
physical model.

ag'uk

m/sec
A“

 

Fig. 3. Purely wind sizing (f'o - 0). a) change in wind velocity at lO-m level in
conformity to law U o/U. - exp(-0.5((t - a)/aec)2) with DB - 15 mlsec, a - 2 days.
c - 0.75 day; b) thickness of UQL. Computations taking rotation into account (f -
10"sec'3); stationary case hR . 0.2v*/f (l), computation using sodel with c -
2.0 (2) and “KP - 6.0 (3). Hith rotation neglected: “KP + 2.0 (h) and “KP - Ego (5).
According to the model with rotation the initial moment corresponded to point A,
when - 10 I. We note the almost complete coincidence of the results for differ-
ent no els over the course of two days (segnent AB). At the times 8 and c there is
a change in the entrainment process to an antiantrainment process within the frame-
work of a model with rotation taken into account, whereas for a model with f - 0
during the entire considered period there is a deepening of the UQL.

Conclusions. The proposed approach to formulation of a similarity theory for the

upper layer of the ocean makes it possible to establish a relationship between lab-
oratory investigations for study of mixing of the fluid under the influence of

a source of turbulence, make observations of the behavior of the UQL under the con-
ditions prevailing in the open ocean and model the local interaction between the
ocean and the atmosphere. The values of the empirical constants determined in an
examination of self-similar cases must evidently differ not too greatly from

their values for a general case.

56

IVIICIHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
l.

2.

3.

4.

Se

6.

7.

8'

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

' FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

BIBLIOQAPHY

Barenblatt, G. I., "Strong Interaction of Gravitational Haves and Turbulence,"
12V. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATMOSFBRY I OKBANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 13, No 8, 1977.

Barenblatt, c. I., PODOBIYB, AVTOMODBL'NOST'. PROMBZHUTOCBNAYA ASIMPTOTIKA
(Similarity, Self-Siadlar Behavior, Intermediate Asymptotic Behavior), Lenin-
grad, Gidrometeoisdat, I978.

Belevich, M. Yu. and Chalikov. D. V., "Development of the Turbulent Boundary

Layer in a Stratified Fluid," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA amosmmr I OKEANA,
V01 14, Mo 5, 1978.

Voropayev, S. 1., Gavrilin, B. L.. Zatsepin. A. G. and Pedorov, K. N., "Labor-
atory Investigation of Penetrating Convection in a Stratified Fluid Cooled
From the Surface," ISSLBDOVARIYB IZMENICHIVOSTI FIZICBBSKIKH PBDTSESSOV V

OKEANB (Investigation of Variability of Physical Processes in the Ocean),
Moscow, IO AN SSSR, 1978.

Ginis, I. D. and Dikinov, Kh. 2h., "Slow Relaxation of the Thermal Track of a

Tropical Cyclone in the Ocean," DOKLADY AN 8883 (Reports of the USSR Acadeay
of Sciences), 1981 (in press).

Dikinov, Kh. lb. and Zholudev, V. D., "Computations of the Drag Coefficient and

Wind Stress at the Ocean Surface," OKEAMOLDGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 20, No 5.
I980.

Zholudev, V. D., ”Generalized One-Dimensional Model of the Upper Layer of the
Ocean. Part I: Preliminary Results,” Nal'chik, 1980. Manuscript deposited at
the All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information, 27 Oct 80,
No 6522-80.

Zubov, N. N., L'DY ARKTIKI (Arctic Ice), Moscow, Izd-vo Glavsevmorputi, 1965.

Kitnygorodskiy, S. A., "Computation of Thickness of the Hind Mixing Lav): in
the Ocean,“ IZV. AN SSSR: SBRIYA GEOFIZICH., No 3, 1960.

Kraua, Ye. B., VZAIMODEYSTVIYE AIMOSFERY I OKEAMA (Interaction Between the At-
aoaphere and Ocean). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, I976.

Monin, A. S. and Yagloa. A. M.. STATISTICHBSKAYA GIDROMBKHANIKA (Statistical
Hydrosechanica), Part 1, Moscow, Nauka, 1965.

Resnyanekiy, Yu. 0., ”Parametcrization of Integral Dissipation of Turbulent
Energy in the Upper Quasihoaogeneous Layer of the Ocean," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZ-
IKA ATMOSPERY I OKEANA, Vol II, No 7, 1975.

nzum 0mm. 1‘ 1. cmaonzru 0mm (Oceanic Physics. Vol 1. Oceanic Hydro-
physics), Moscow, Nauka, 1978.

S7

FOI1OFFKJA1.USI(HVLY
1‘.

15.

16.

l7.

18.

19‘

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

FOR10FFKJAI.USEIMHLY

Caunady, G. T. and Shaw. P. T., "The Evolution of a Turbulent Eknan Layer."
J. GEOPHYS. 333., Vol 85, "0 C3, 1980.

Dennan, K. L., "A Tine-Dependent Model of the Upper Ocean," J. PHYS. OCEANOGR.,
Vol 3, Ho 2. 1973.

Den-an, K. L. and Hiyake, H., "Upper Layer Modification at Ocean Station Papa:
Observations and Simulation," J. PHYS. OCBAHOGR., Vol 3, Ho 2, 1973.

Pedorov, K. N., "On the Sumner Daily Heating and Diurnal Heat Budget of the
Upper Ocean Layer," STUD! IN 08083 DI GIUSBPPINA ALIVBRTI, Napoli, 1972.

Gallacher, P. c.. "A Description of the Oceanic Mixed Layer at Ocean Station P
During August and September," 308, TRANS. AMER. GEOPHYS. UNION, Vol 59, Ho 12.
1978.

Garwood, R. H., Jr.. "An Oceanic Mixed Layer Model Capable of Sinulating Cyc-
lic States," J. PHYS. OCBAHOCR., Vol 7. No 3. 1977.

Garwood, R. H., Jr., "Evidence of Planetary Scale Dissipation in the Sunner-

tine Oceanic Boundary Layer." BOS, TRANS. AMER. GEOPHYS. UNION, Vol 59, No
12, 1978.

Kato, H. and Phillips, 0. H., "On the Penetration of a Turbulent Layer Into
Stratified Fluid," J. FLUID HECH., V01 37, Pt 4, 1969.

Kraus, B. B. and Turner, J. S., "A One-Dinensional Model of the Seasonal
Thermocline. II. The General Theory and Its Consequences." TBLLUS, Vol 19,
Ho 1, 1967.

Lundgren, T. S. and Wang, P. C., "Eddy Viscosity Models for Free Turbulent
Plovs," PHYS. FLUIDS, Vol 16, No 2, 1973. ‘

Rossby, C. c. and Montgomery, 3. R., "The Layer of Frictional Influence in
Hind and Ocean Currents," PAPS. PHYS. OCEANOOR., Vol 3, No 3, 1935.

Tnbata, 3., Boston, N. E. J. and Boyce. P. H., "The Relation Between Hind
Speed and Summer Isothermal Surface Layer of Water at Ocean Station P in
the Eastern Subarctic Pacific Ocean," J. GEOPHYS. RBS., Vol 70, No 16, 1965.

Tennekes, ﬂ., "A Model for the Dynamics of the Inversion Above a Convective
Boundary Layer," J. ATHOS. SCI., Vol 30, 1973.

Tennekes, ﬂ., “Reply." J. ATMOS. SCI., Vol 32, 1975.

58

FORIOFFIJAI.USE(N‘LY
'FOR10FEKJAI.USE(NVLY

UDC 556.535.5:556.06

DZRIVATION 0F EXPRESSIONS FOR PREDICTING MAXIMUM ICE JAM (ICE RUN) VATER LEVELS IN
THE BIBAKUP 0P SIBBRIAN RIVERS

Moscow HETBDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
2 Mar 81) Pp 83-87

[Article by I. Ya. Liser, candidate of geographical sciences, Rest Siberian Region-
al Scientific Research Institute]

[Abstract] On the basis of a generalization of long-term hydrological observations
it has been possible to determine the sites of the most frequent formation of ice
jams, estimate the frequency of recurrence and severity of ice jams and other char-
acteristics. All these data have been included in a published catalogue. However,
it is most important to predict the maximum ice jam level (Runs 1 ). For many years
this problem has remained unsolved due to the complexity of the phenomenon, its poor
study and the diversity of natural conditions. The increasing use of rivers and the
needs of the national economy make it essential to provide such forecasts. During
recent years much has been done along these lines by R. A. Nezhikhovskiy (METEORO-
LOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA. No 5. 1977; TRUDY IV VSBSOYUZNOGO GIDROLOGICHESKOGO S"YEZDA.
Vol 7, 1977). Be demonstrated the decisive importance of the volume of water dis-
charge during the breaking-up period on height (Hmax 13). Nezhikhovskiy in a number
of examples gave a dependence in the form

“max 13 ' f(Qbreakup)° (1)

The forecast of "max 13 in no way takes into account such ice characteristics as
strength of the ice cover (y’h) during the breakup period, the height of levels
during the winter period. etc. Nezhikhovskiy cites the existence of a correlation
between Qbreakup and yhlduring the breakup, as a result of which allowance for SP h
is superfluous. Use of his expression has yielded positive results, but it seems
clear that it is necessary to consider still another important factor: the level of
the preceding freezing (“fr) or the maximum level at the beginning of winter

(R‘s, yin). Hf: or "ﬂax win are directly related to the volume of ice material sc-
cumulatcd in the channel by the time of the breakup end this naturally exerts a
direct influence on the character of the ice jam. Hf, (or “.33 win) governs the
level height at which the ice begins to go out in the coming spring. The freezing
level also characterizes the degree of compaction of the ice masses during freez-
ing, which exerts an influence on the intensity of ice growth in winter. Hf, or

ll.ax win) is an integral characteristic which includes the influence of a number of
factors. The following expressions are therefore more valid:

ﬂmax ii ' f(Qbreakup» Hfr) (2)

ﬂmax 13 ' f<°breakupv llmax win' (3)
Figures 2; references: 10 Russian.

59
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(I'LV
FOI10FFIJAI.USE(HVLY

UDC 551.50:633.11

RATE OF GEOWTH AND DEVELOPMENT 0? WINTER “HEAT DURING WINTER TRANS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian “0 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
6 Apr 81) pp 88~92

[Article by l. V. Svisyuk, candidate of geographical sciences, Northern Caucasus
Territorial Adainistration of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring]

[Text] Abstract: A study was made of the problem
of the rate of development of winter wheat
during the period of winter thaws and a
method is proposed for predicting the ap-
pearance of sprouts, the third leaf and
tillering of this crop in dependence on
the nature of the thaws.

It is well known that in the southern part of the European USSR due to the in-
stabilities of winters in periods of thaws winter crops frequently renew their
growing, forming new leaves and stems, and in individual years experience entire

interphase periods.

Already the first investigations of this problem indicated that the occurrence
of interphnae periods during the time of winter thaws does not conform to the
regularities observed during the regular growing season.

"hat is the process of growth and development of winter wheat during the period of
winter thaws? There is no clear answer to this question. The fact is that the study
of the winter period in the life of winter crops has proceeded in virtually only
one direction, that is, in the direction of a study of the influence of low tem-
peratures on the course of wintering of plants and the role of thaws in this pro-
cess has been investigated only indirectly [2, 3, 5]. In this same connection

there has been some discussion of the problem of change in bushiness against a
background of reduced positive temperatures during the period from the cessation
of the autumn to the renewal of the spring growing season of winter crops [1, 3].

Some discussion of the problem of change in the state of fields of winter wheat
during the period of winter thaws was presented in our studies [6, 7] in connec-
tion with the develop-ant of a method for predicting the optimum times for the sow-
ing of this crop. But in these studies as well it was examined indirectly.

He began direct observations and study of the influence of winter thaws on the

growth and development of winter wheat with an investigation of the influence of
a reduced background of positive temperatures on the course of germination of seeds

60

FOI:0lll€1Al.lﬂﬂE(lﬂLY
t-S’c) Alternating With Cold Periods on Duration of "

Winter 2; t>0'c [ﬂu-bar of days with Level 0

' t<0'c between thaws tempera
10d of

1971/72 120 70

1972/73 205 . 49

1972/73 207 ‘5

1971/72 135 56

1972/73 200 52

1971/72 170 56

1972/73 160 ‘6

1971/72 72 I 31

1972/73 _ 167 14

1971/72 152 65

1972/73 167 55

1971/72 126 55

1972/73 157 26

1971/72 160 28

1971/72 133 22

1971/72 130 38
PW W'KIAL WI UNLI

and the appearance of sprouts, and also on the degree of activity of the growing
season for winter crops during the time of thaws [8, 9]. As a result of the in-
vestigations it was found that at the beginning of almost every thaw with an in-
crease in air temperature the renewal and intensity of the growing season of win-
ter crops are dependent not only on the positive air temperature value, but also
on the state of the soil during the period preceding the thaw, its depth of free:-
ing and moistening. Interesting biological characteristics of winter wheat plants,
whose growth transpired with a positive mean daily air temperature from 2 to 5'
during the time of thaws, alternating with periods of freezing temperatures, were
revealed. Under such temperature conditions the rate of development of the plants
remains approximately identical, regardless of the air temperature level. For ex-
ample, the period from the sewing to the sprouting of winter wheat plants always
transpires in a close number of days (36-44 days, on the average 41.5 days), re-
gardless it whether the mean daily temperature is close to 2°C and the accumulated
temperature sum during this period is 75-80'c or whether it is close to 5°C and
during this period the accumulation is ZOO-205°C (Table 1).

Table 2

Increase in Sums of Positive Temperatures During "Sowing-Sprouting" Period During
Thaws in Dependence on Intensity of Prosts (Zt<0’c) Preceding Thaws

Observation point or source Winter 2 t) 0°C 2 t (0°C
of collected data '

[4] Growing season 120 0
Novoaleksandrovskaya 1971/1972 152 -577
Ust'-Lab1n8k 1971/1972 156 -557
Ksnevskaya 1972/1973 138 -3b
Ust'-Lab1nsk 1972/1973 132 -32
Zernograd 1972/1973 123 -20
Cherkesek 1972/1973 125 -27

The development of winter wheat at reduced mean daily positive temperatures from
2 to 5°C during winter thaws, alternating with coolings, is always delayed. For
example, the "sowing-sprouting" period on the average lasts 61-42 days, even at
temperatures close to 5°C, whereas in autumn, with a mean daily temperature 5°C,
but without alternation of days with positive and negative air temperatures, it
only continues for 24 days [A].

With a mean daily air temperature above 5°C during thaws the growth and development
of winter wheat conform to known patterns, when with an increase in air temperature
there is a shortening of the interphase period, but the sum of temperatures neces-
sary for the transpiring of this period remains constant, provided there are no
temperature decreases to negative values.

During coolings between thaws there is an increase in the sum of positive tempera-
tures for the transpiring of the interphase period. The more intense the cooling,
the greater is the sum of positive temperatures necessary for transpiring of the
interphase period. During coolings of an identical intensity, all other conditions
being equal. the sum of positive mean daily temperatures necessary for the trans-
piring of the interphase period is approximately identical, but always is greater
than during the growing season (Table 2).

62
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(MNLY
90.40'FIJAI.UEEGNNLY

Table 3

Influence of Intensity of Prosta (2t<0'c) Preceding 'l'bavs on Duration of the
"Sowing-Sprouting." "Sprouting-Third leaf" and ”Third Leaf-Tillering" Periods
During Winter Thaws

Heteorological Hinter Z t< o'c Nader of days 2 t >0’C Duration

station with tenpera- of inter-
ture from O to phase per-
S'c iod, days

“Sowing - Sprouting"

Araavir 1972/73 ~265 26 173 . b3

Kanevskaya 1972/ 73 -47 25 155 38

Zernograd 1972/73 - -20 25 123 34

Kanevskaya 1971/72 -296 19 138 32

Slavyanak-na- 1972/73 -32 18 132 28
Kubani

"Sprouting-Third Leaf"

Otradnaya 1976/77 '-325 53 +389 85
Korenovsk 1973/76 -213 55 +168 70
Otradnaya 1972/73 -336 36 +206 56
Talan' 1970/71 -67 36 +133 , 45
Labinak ' 1972/73 ~268 26 +256 62
Arnavir 1969/70 -89 25 +123 35

"Third Lasf-Tillering"

Divnoye 1969/70 -326 66 215 66
'Zelenokulak 1969/70 ~162 66 139 51
Novoaleksandrovskaya 1976/77 -308 30 177 64
Budennovsk 1969/70 -2 29 169 36

In the investigation of cases of repeated cessation and renewal of the growing sea-
son of winter wheat during the tile of winter thaws it was found that the influ-
ence of the intensity of negative tenperatures on the rate of development of win-
ter wheat is retained in any phase of crop develop-ent. The stronger the freezing
before the thaws, the greater is the sun of positive temperatures required for pas-

sage of any interphaae period and the longer will this period be (see Table 3).
The lengthening of the.interphase period after stronger frosts is attributable to

two factors: first, the stronger frosts cause deeper freezing and cooling of the
soil._1ts stronger cenentation, and therefore more heat is expended for thawing of
the soil and this lengthens the interphase period; second, the stronger cooling
causes a more intense restructuring of the organism of the wintering plant, and

it is natural that with the onset of thawing the plant requires sore tine to un-
dergo the transition fron a state of forced rest to renewal of the growing season.

63

FOI4OIHK1A1.UBI¢IHLY
IOU WIMAL 036 ONLY

Taking Into account all the above—mentioned peculiarities in the development of
winter wheat during the period of winter thaws, it can-be concluded that in the
development of a method for predicting the onset of the phases of development dur-
ing the period of winter thaws in addition to the sums of positive mean daily
temperatures it is also necessary to take into account the intensity of the frosts.

       

     

f 00 ﬂ? 0

me u m m m o u 1» mm;
Fig. 1. Dependence of duration of interphase periods (y) on the number of days
with a mean daily temperature from 0 to 5'6 (x1) and sum of positive mean daily
temperatures (:2). n) "sowing-sprouting" interphase period; b) "sprouting-third
leaf" interphase period; c) "third leaf-tillering" interphase period.

He investigated two variants of the relationship between the duration of the in-
terphase periods with the number of days with a positive mean daily air tempera-
ture in winter. One variant takes into account all days when in a period without
snow the mean daily air is above 2'c; in the other variant all days are taken
into account when in the absence of snow the mean daily air temperature is above
o'c.

In the two variants the correlation was linear, but it was closer in the second
variant when allowance was made for all days with a mean daily temperature above
0°C. This variant was adopted for further investigations.

The correlation between the duration of the "sowing-sprouting," "sprouting-third
leaf" and "third leaf-tillering" periods with £c>o°c and the number of days

with an air temperature from 0 to +5'c was quite close: the multiple correlation
coefficient (R) with different combinations of the predictors varies from 0.78 to

0.98.*

As a result of a regression analysis it was possible to establish a quantitative
dependence of the duration of the interphase periods for winter wheat growing in
winter on the number of days with a positive air temperature and the sum of posi-
tive air temperatures during these periods (see Fig. 1).

The correlation equations have the following form:

£120.79 .n |- DJ“) x, --0.47:
R-OﬂB-L-ODOI; u- 50'. S’.‘-:t'.l.5 days (1)

 

*
The introduction of the intermediate third leaf phase was associated with the

need for computing the areas which were in this phase during the wintering period.

64

FOIGHHHCIALIHNIOhﬂx'
POROFFICIALUSEONLY

For the ”sprouting-third leaf" period

y-0.86 x.+0.lO x,+0.99;
R-o.99=o.om; n=46: s, .. 11.57 4879 (2’

Por the "third leaf-tillering" period
y-0.88 x.-| -0,l0 “+0.76;
R=o.9s:o.oon; “=13; s,==2,3 “a" ‘3’

In the indicated equations y is the duration of the interphase period ["sowins-

sprouting" (1), ”sprouting-third leaf" (2), "third leaf-tillering" (3)]. The dates
of ass onset of the phases are used for the beginning and end of the interphsse

period; x1 is the number of days with a mean daily teqerature from 0 to S‘C dur-
ing the interphase period; x2 is the sun of positive lean daily air teqeratures
during the interphasc period.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Crudeva. A. Ya., "0n the Problem of Tillering of Winter Crops at Reduced Teln-
peratures," 11!le 1m (Transactions of the Institute of Bxperinental Heteor-
ology), No 13, 1970.

2. Lichikaki, V. IL, "Method for Predicting the Critical Temperature of "inter
"heat," METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROIJJCIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). Ho 6. 1955.

3. Honseychik, V. A., AGRMTBOROWICBBSKIYB "SLOVIYA I PEREZDGOVKA 02mm
KUL'TUR (Agroneteorological Conditions and wintering of Winter Crops). unin-
grsd, Gidroneteoizdat, 1975.

lo. Nosatovskiy, A. I., Psnmrsa (wheat), Moscow, Kolos, 1965.

5. Petunin, I. It, "Method for Preparing a Forecast of Conditions for the Winter-
ing of “inter "heat and Rye," SBORNIK HBTODICHESKIIGI WI? P0 MALIZU 1
mm SLOZBIVSIIIKHSYA I OZHIDAYMKH AGRGIBTBOROIDGICHESKIKB USLOVIY (Col-
lect ion of methodological Instructions on Analysis and Evaluation of Prevail-
ing and Anticipated Agroneteorological Conditions), Leningrad, Cidroneteoiz-
dnt, 1957.

6. Svisyuk, I. V.. "Dctersinntion of the Duration of Autumn Tillering of Winter
wheat." SBORNIK MBOT ROSTOVSKOY Q40 (Collection of Papers of the Rostov Hy-
dronetcorolouicul mwcrvatory), No 5, 1967.

7. Svlsyuk, I. V., POCODA I SROKI SBVA OZIHOY PSHENITSY (Heather and ﬁnes of
Sowing of Winter intent), Rostov-na-Donu. Rostizdst, 1969.

8. Svisyuk, I. V., "Degree of Activity of Growing of “inter Wheat During "inter
ﬂaws," HBTBOROWIYA I GIDROWIYA, No 11, 1979.

9. Svisyuk, I. V., POCODA I UROZIIAYNOS‘I" OZIHOY PSIIENITSY NA 5mm KAVKAZB I
V NIZIINEH POVOLZH'YB (Heather and Yield of "inter wheat in the Northern
Caucasus and in the Lower Volga Region), Leningrad, Cidroneteoizdst, 1980.

65

FOR OML USE ONLY
I'UI OI'I'IUAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509. 322+551.515.8
COMPUTING WIND VELOCITY DURING GUSTS IN NARROW COLD FRONT ZWBS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 81 (manuscript received
23 Jan 81) pp 93-91;

[Article by H. A. Hasterskikh, candidate of geographical sciences, USSR Hydrometeor-
ological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] In many studies attempts have been made to find a statistical dependence
between wind velocity and different thermodynamic parameters of the atmosphere in
frontal zones. But no close correlation has been established between these values.
Few data are available on the actual distribution of temperature, humidity and oth-
er meteorological elements in narrow zones of cold or warm fronts. The best formula
for computing wind velocities on cold fronts is

Vsutf -M + VE. (1)
where Vsurf is the maximum wind velocity at the surface, V1,; is the horizontal com-
ponent of wind velocity at some altitude governed by the pressure gradient, V2 is
the vertical component of the air flow arising under the influence of Archimedes
force. However, it is difficult to compute Vsurf in this way. Therefore, the author
proposes that VsurLbe computed from expression (1) with allowance for the pressure

gradients and mean vsurf values in narrow (up to 50 km) cold front zones. Substitut-
ing into (1), with allowance for the friction coefficient K - 0.7

Vsurf ' 0'7 ‘/ (gig? Apeff)2 +72. (2)

where $0 is latitude, Ape” is the pressure gradient in a narrow (up to 50 km) cold
from: zone (in tab/111 km), V2 is the mean value of the vertical wind component. The
vertical component (V2) can be determined using the formula

vz - / 2gh T1 ‘ T2 (3)

_'l'—
where g is the acceleration of free falling, 1‘2 and T1 is the temperature of the

subsiding air volume in the surrounding medium. However, comgtation of v, in each
specific case. is difficult and therefore it is proposed that V238 m/sec be used.

A working equation is derived for computing wind velocity in gusts in narrow cold

front zones

 

vsurf'ﬂ' 0'7 1: [fl - frontal line;

(“8 2 2 2 2 f2 - frontal zone]
(my) (4 pf1 +at Ac” ) +66. (4)

Figures 1; references: 9 Russian.

66

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE¢HVLY

UDC 551.466.3
INTERACTION OP SNELL UAVES WITH HEAD "IND

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
6 Feb 81) pp 95-97

[Article by V. K. Hakin, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, Leningrad
Division. Institute of Oceanology]

of wave development v*/c. In the case of a strong wind the interaction between the
wind andawcllis deter-ined by different mechanisms (such as overturning of the

istence of a self-similar dependence ofjs on ve/c. The/9 parameter increases fro-
105 in the case of a weak wind to 2.5le‘5 in the case of a moderate wind. §Gent,
extrapolating the results obtained for short waves, obtained a value 3.5'10‘.,

which agrees with the results obtained here by direct numerical computations.) The

loses its energy after 2 days. For swell with a length 300 m the attenuation time
is 18 days. The results of this investigation show that for short swell it is nec-
essary to take into account its interaction with a head wind. A table gives the
results of numerical computations for swell waves with a length of 100 m when

the direction of the wind and the propagation of swell coincide. In the case of
low friction velocities the waves impart energy to the wind. The energy flux
changes sign with a value Us/c - 0.9. Figures 1, tables 2; references 7: 3 Russian,
I'UI UII‘I'LIAI- use. UNLV

UDC 556.048

JOIRT EVALUATION OF INTRAARNUAL AND LONG-TERM PROBABILITY 0P EXCEEDING 0P MEAN
DAILY HATER DISCHARGES

Moscow HBTBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
11 Dec 80) pp 97-100 '

[Article by A. H. Koalcv, professor, Perm' State University]

tion of water levels and a number of other elements of the hydrological and meteor-
ological regimes. In hydrological and water management computations it is most com-
non to use curves averaged over a long-term period in the form of an absolute or
generalized curve of the duration of discharges, and also in the form of a mean
curve. However, averaged duration curves do not reflect the nature of the distrib—
ution of discharges in many specific years, especially those which are anomalous in
one respect or another. For this reason it is extremely desirable that in addition
to an averaged curve the discharges of different guaranteed probability be used for
the required duration value. Accordingly, the author has developed a method for
solving this problem. The method is illustrated in the example of data for the

Kama River at Bondyug village. The water discharges with durations of 30, 90, 180,
270 and 355 days are taken from hydrological yearbooks. Adding to these data the
annual values of the maximum and minimum water discharges, seven statistical series
are obtained which are used in constructing empirical guaranteed probability curves.
By taking from these curves the discharges for stipulated guaranteed probability
values, it is possible to construct curves of the duration of equally guaranteed dis-
charges. A nomogram is given which makes it possible to carry out a joint evaluation
of the features of the intraannual distribution of runoff and the long-term varia-
bility of discharges with equal probability in the course of the year. The method
makes it possible to estimate discharges of any guaranteed probability for any par-

ticuinr duration. Figures 2; references: 11 Russian.

68

F!“l()FFI(1Al.lﬂﬂE(HULY
WOI1OFFRJA1.USE(HNLY

Ila

UDC 551.521.3
80H! PROBLEMS OF VISIBILITY THROUGR CLOUDS AND P008

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 (manuscript received
31 Mar 81) pp 101-109 ‘

[Article by A. s. Drofa and I. L. Katsev, candidates of physical and mathematical
sciences, Institute of Experimental Meteorology and Physics Institute, Belorussian
Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] This is a review of theoretical and experimental investigations for study
of the visibility of objects through clouds and fogs (the authors draw upon 38 pub-
lished sources). Expressions are derived for evaluating the optical transfer func-
tion of the cloud medium and the signal-to-noise ratio in the image of the object
observed through the medium. A detailed examination is made of the influence exert-
ed on these characteristics by the light-scattering properties of the cloud medium
and their distribution along the visibility path. The conclusion is dravn that there

make evaluations of the quality of transmission of an optical inage in the atmo-
sphere, taking into account the broad range of changes in its optical properties.
However, there are a number of problems which require priority solution. For ex-
anple, for an analysis of the possible variations in visibility conditions there is
still an extreme inadequacy of experimental data, especially data obtained in the
atmosphere with monitoring of its principal optical and microphysical characteris-
tics. There is a need for simple formulas describing visibility characteristics in
different wavelength regions. There are no simple expressions for computing the
scattering function, which is necessary for evaluations of the background level of
scattered light and contrast when making observations of small self-luminescent ob-
Jects. There is need for detailed work on the nature of image transfer through a

scattering medium with-a randomly inhomogeneous distribution of light-scattering
characteristics. Figures 2; references 38: 36 Russian, 2 Western.

69
FOI‘OFNKJAI.08810NLN
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

Hoscow monomem I crmowcru in Russian No 11,
9 Apr 81) PP 110-113

Nov 81 (manuscript received
[Article by S. 0. Krichak, candidate of

N. Z. Finns, professor, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center. and
Central Aerologicel Observatory]

Moscow. At this time he became interested in polar research. He was particularly

he was respon~
ral Institute of Pore-

inniug made extensive
FOI1OFFNHAI.USE(MVLV

REVIEW OF MONOGRAPH 'EARTH'S AEROSPBBRE FROM THE 'SALYUT-G" (ATMOSPBRA ZBHLI S
'SALYUTA-6'), BY A. I. LAZAREV. V. V. KOVALENOK, A. S. IVANCHBNKOV AND
S. V. AVAKYAN, LENINGRAD, CIDROHBTEOIZDAT, 1981

Moscow HBTBOROLOGIYA l CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp llk~ll$

[Review by A. G. Nikolayev, candidate of technical sciences. USSR flier-cosmonaut]

tions of the earth's atnosphere carried out by the main crew of the second exped-
ition of the "Salyut-6" orbital scientific station. During the prolonged lac-day
flight the USSR flier-cosmonauts V. V, Kovalenok and A. S. Ivanchenkov carried
out systematic investigations of the atnosphere and etsospheric-optical phenomena
making it possible to detect sole new patterns observable in the earth's atno-

gations of the phenomena visually observable from space are emphasized. During the
prolonged flight the cos-ensure. with the assistance of consultations of special-
ists carriedoutduring the course of conmunication sessions, begin to systematize
and analyze the registered phenomena and independently carry our individual experi-
ments for investigating the environment. This enabled V. V. Kovalenok and A. S.
Ivanchenkov to obtain extensive material on many atmospheric-optical phenomena.

The book begins with a chapter devoted to the peculiarities of optical investiga-

utrunents and systens necessary for observing and registering extended and point
sources of radiation under real flight conditions. Extensive use is made of the
tool of frequency-contrast characteristics of the visual system and the transfer
functions for the earth's atmosphere and spaceship windows. The reliability of

visual system under conditions of a prolonged space flight. For that reason it
is entirely legitimate to include in the book a section on the principal para-
meters of vision in space. Emphasis is on the contrast characteristics of the via-
DUI ”I'll-IA]. 08L URL!

in the book a considerable place is devoted to investigation of emissions of the
earth‘s nighttime and twilight atmosphere. A detailed examination is made of the
emission of the earth's upper atmosphere on the nighttime side and in the twilight
zone. Much attention is devoted to an analysis of the spatial-temporal distribu-
tion of emission of the upper atmosphere under different geo-heliophysical con-
ditions, including during solar flares and during magnetic storms. Separate consid-
eration in given to the spatial-temporal Variations of intensity of radiation of
the first and second emission layers of the nighttime atmosphere. There is a de-
tailed expositiOn of the results of observations of global bursts of the second
emission layer from space by V. V. Kovalenok and A. S. Ivanchenko.

The third chapter is one of the most important in the book and is devoted to aur-
oras. The authors give a detailed description of the history of observations and
the spatial-temporal distribution of regions of appearance of auroras. In an
analysis of the results of visual ohservations of auroras in the course of flight
it was confirmed that auroras in the auroral zone exist at all times. Cases of the
observation of auroras at a global scale up to latitudes t25° are described.

There is a very detailed presentation of the results of visual registry of the
color and spatial characteristics of the powerful aurora of 29 September 1978 when
rayed forms were observed at the orbital altitude of the "Salyut-6" and above. All
the cases of observations of strong auroras are compared with data from Surface ob-
servations of auroras over the territory of the USSR and geomagnetic investigations
at different world observatories. Also examined are the prospects for visual and
Instrumental optical investigations of auroras from manned space vehicles and or-
hltai scientific stations.

The book gives the results of observations and registry of cloud formations in the
troposphere. stratosphere and mesopause. There is a detailed description of the
pattern of generation and development of cyclonic disturbances observed from space
and an attempt is made to investigate the interaction of tropospheric clouds and
powerful oceanic currents. V. V. Kovalenok and A. s. Ivanchenkov for the first
time observed from space, in the direction of the shadow from the station, a sort
of "rainhow spot" moving along the surface of the cloud cover. which is attrib-
utable to the interference pattern arising in water droplets, known under the name
gloria. in late August 1978 the cosmonauts for the first time observed ”rainbow"
vI-nnls l‘rmn spare. These were of mustard and violet colors.

Particularly interesting reSuits were obtained in the observation of noctilucent
clouds and aerosol layers in the mesopause during flight of the "Salyut-6" orbital
station on the sunny side or the orbit in late June-early July 1978. These observa-

tions of v. V. Kovaleuok and A. S. Ivanchenkov were made together with members of
the International visiting crew -- P. l. Klimuk. USSR flier-cosmonaut and H. Hermr
anvvnki. fllcr—cosnunuunt of the Polish People's Republic. The cosmonauts discovered
noctilucent clouds or aerosol formations in the mesopause in the region of the low
.ouliuumlorial latitudes. The results of these observations after a year were con-
firmed hy the crew members of the third expedition on the "Salyut-b“ orbital sta-
tion, V. A. Lyakhov and V. V. Ryumin.

72

FOR!0FFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Original results were obtained in observation of the phenomenon of "hanging" of
the twilight radiation of the upper atmosphere over the earth's horizon, which

was given the name "whiskers" effect; this was observed for the first time by V. l.
Sevast'yanov and the author of this review from the spaceship "Soyuz-9" in June
1970.

The authors carefully analyze the results of systenatic investigations of zodiacal
light. It was possible to trace the relationship between the rayed structure of
the zodiacal light and neteer streams and associations. The materials cited in the
book on the investigation of luminescent dust particles, arising during operation
of the spaceship engines, are of definite scientific and practical importance.

The book is written well, In literary language, and will be useful to specialists
in the field of geophysics and space optics. It will be used extensively in the
training of cosmonauts for carrying out optical investigations from space.

73
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USIINVLY
we 0"“.th USO. UNI-Y

SHVRNTIBT“ BIRTﬂDAY 0F BORIS CRIGOR'YEVICH ROZHDESTVENSKIY
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 p 116
[Artlcle by personnel of the Scientific Research Institute of Instrument Making]

[Abstract] Boris Grigur‘yevich Rozhdestvenskiy, a well-known designer of meteoro—
logical radar sets, has marked his 70th birthday. The many-sided activity of Boris
Crigor'yevich is associated with the development of machine building, aviation and
radioelectronics. In 1939 he began his work at the Central Aerohydrodynamic Insti-
tute, but beginning in 19b8 became affiliated with the All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of Electromechanics, where he directed a major section and was
chief designer of meteorological stations. he not only created new instruments-
tion, but took an active part in implementing a program of scientific research in
collaboration with the Central Aerological Observatory. In 1966 B. G. Rozhdestven-
skiy became head of the Technical Administration and was named a board member of
the Main Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service. The talents of Boris
Grigur'yevich Rozhdestvenskiy as an engineer, inventor and scientist are well known
abroad, where he has worthily represented the USSR Hydrometeorologicel Service.
anhdestvenskiy has headed expeditionary groups for implementing scientific re-
search programs on scientific ships during Antarctic expeditions. Since late 1978
he has been a senior scientific specialist at the Scientific Research Institute of
Instrument Making. At present he is busily engaged in exploring the possibilities
of various technical means for the collection of hydroneteorologicel information
for studying processes transpiring in the atmospheric surface layer.

76

FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

ACTIVITIES AT THE USSR STATE (101411133 on HYDROIETBOROIDGY AND EIWIRMTAL
nomronmc

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 116-118
[Article by c. K.‘ Veselova]

[Text] On 15 June the Central Methodological Coulission on Hydrometeorological
Forecasts (CHCllNP), under the direction of Ye. I. 'rolstiltov, heard reports of
representatives of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center. All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of Agricultural Meteorology and Arctic and Antarctic Scientific
Research Institute on the results of tests and introduction of new nethods for

forecasting and adopted the following decisions concerning then.

A comparative evaluation of the accuracy of objective analysis of the pressure
field, based on the optinun interpolation method (A. ll. Bagrov scheme) and spec-
tral objective analysis (I). H. Sonechltin) was given. An analysis of the pressure
field made by the weather-an in the Division of Analysis of World Heather at the
USSR Hydrometeorological Center was adopted as a standard in the conparison. This
conparison revealed that objective analysis using the A. N. Bagrov scheme corres-
ponds better to the analysis made by the weather-an. For ennle, according to

the Bagrov schae the differences in the position of the pressure centers at the
earth's surface were about 280 ltm and at the 500 gPa level about 270 In. The pres-
sure (geopotential) values at the centers of the pressure formations at the earth's
surface and at the 500 gPa level differed by 1.8 gPa (dam). The spectral analysis
had differences exceeding those indicated by a factor of 1.5-2.

The CHCIIHF approved the work on carrying out operational testing of objective an-
alysis methods and recon-ended the A. N. Bagrov objective analysis scheme used in
the (nu-rational practice of the USSR llydroneteorological Center for the purposes
of niatomnted conpllntlon of an archives of hemispherical data in the Data Support
laboratory. At the sane tlme the USSR llydroneteorologicsl Center proposed an exam-
lnatlon of the problem of the use of automated objective analysis of the northern
hemlsphero Instead of an analysis prepared manually.

A description at the rccomendcd objective analysis scheme was given in the 111le
CIDRGlBﬂSﬁN'I'M SSSR, No 196. 1978.

The (:40an agreed with the decision of the USSR Hydroseteorological Center that
until 1983 work be continued on testing of the method for predicting najor weather
anomalies over the pastures of the northwestern Caspian area, developed by 1'. N.
Bochlwva, taking into account the inadequate number of cases with dangerous Heather
phenomena. This method is based on parametric linear discriminant analysis and

75 9
ms omcm. 1.88le
OUR WOMAL USE ONLY

multiph- n-grmmlon equations. For all month» of the year it makes it possible to
predict the mean monthly air temperature. and for December, January and February
predict glaze and blizzarda in stochastic form.

The tests were carried out from December 1979 through February 1981. The success of
forecasts of mean monthly temperature in the considered period was characterized

by f’ - 0.42 and Q - 0.66. The guaranteed success of forecasts of glaze in differ-
ent months was only 43—711 and for blizzards was 50-60:. although the prevention
of these phenomena was rather high, 67-1002.

The method was published in METEOROLOCIYA I CIDROLOGIYA, No 1, 1978. and TRUDY
VNIICHI-HTSD, No 36, 1977.

'l'lu' CHCIIHP granted permission to the USSR ilydrometeorological Center for using in
its operational practice a method for predicting temperature for natural synoptic
seasons (spring and the first half of summer) (author Kh. Kh. Rafailov) as an aux-
iliary to the fundamental seasonal forecasting method. This method is based on al-
lowance for the patterns of general circulation of the atmosphere. The forecasting
computation scheme takes into account the following principal factors: state of
the phases of the quasi-two-year cycle of the prevailing flow in the equatorial
zone of the middle stratosphere and its influence on the change in the pressure
field of the stratosphere and troposphere in the intratropical latitudes, stability
of long waves for the hemisphere in time and space, characteristics of the thermal
regime of the oceans and the peculiarities of circulation during natural synoptic
seasons. The forecast is computed on an electronic computer. Operational tests of
the computation scheme were made fron 1976 through 1981. The guaranteed probabil-
ity of forecasts of the air temperature anomaly with respect toP for the natural
season of spring was 0.32 and for the first half of sumer was 0.24 with a guar-
anteed probability f3>0 equal to 802.

The principles of the. method were published in TRUDY GIDROHBT'TSBNTRA SSSR, No 198,
i978. and No 151), 1971., and in METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOCIYA, No i. 1973.

The method for predicting the air temperature anomaly for natural synoptic seasons
in the warm part of the year in the eastern part of Siberia and in the Far East was
developed by N. N. Zakharova (USSR iiydrometeorological Center) and tested at the
Far Eastern Scientific Research Institute in 1978-1980. The methOd is based on
regularities in chama- or mu-roprocesses from season to season and is formulated
with allowam-o for the precursors of natural synoptic seasons and interseasonal

rlmnges in Il5&;u. As additional indications use is made of the gradients of
lilo. T100. t to ozone distribution in the northern hemisphere and in the second nat-

ural synoptic region, as well as changes in the thermal state of the northeastern
purL of the Pacific Ocean.

Taking into account that when carrying out operational tests of this forecasting
method at the Far Eastern Scientific Research Institute there were deviations from
the program, the CHCIIHF considers it desirable to continue its testing in 1981-1982
in accordance with the program. The content of the method was published in TRUDY
cnmrmmssmm SSSR, No 213, [979.-

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OFFIOAI. WONLY

113t- aetliod fur agronetwrniogicai forecasting of the gross yield of winter wheat
and rye for the principal econonic regions of the USSR (author A. N. Derevyanko,
USSR iiydroneteorological Center) is based on allowance for the tendency in the
grou yield which is attained by iaprovenent in the level of agricultural tech-
niques and also an allowance for deviations froa the trend caused by variations
in weather conditions. The principal points in the nethod were published in TRUE!
CIMETI‘SI'M'RA SSSR, Nu 253, 1981.

The testing of the nethod was carried cut during 1978-1980. The scan guaranteed
success of the forecasts for all econonic regions in 1978 and 1979 was 752, in

1980 - 801.

The connission reconended for practical use at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center
a aethod for predicting the gross yield of winter wheat and rye over the entire
winter-sowing zone of the Soviet Union: Donets-Dnepr, Southwestern, Southern,
Northern Caucasus, Volga, Ural, Central Chernozen, Central, Volga-Vyatka, North-
western. Baltic, Nest Siberian and also Central Asian regions, and also over the
Moldavian, Belorussian and Kazakh SSRs.

The 0400"? summarized the results of testing and introduction of new nethods for
hydro-eteorological forecasts for the period fron July 1980 through June 1981. Dur-
ing this tine the emission exuained b6 forecasting nethods, of which the follow-
in were recommended for adoption: 7 short-range forecasting methods, In long-range
weather forecasting nethods, 16 agroneteorological and 2 narine weather forecast-
ing aethods—631 of the total. Despite the high percentage of introductions, as
basic aethods the co-ission reconended only objective analysis of the pressure
field (author A. N. Bagrov, USSR Hydro-eteorological Center) and nethods for pre-
dieting the anonly of five-day air tenperature over the territory of Kazakhstan
and on the Kola Peninsula (authors 0. K. Turulina, Kazakh Scientific Research In-
stitute and N. N. Bezukh, liar-ans]: Affiliate of the Arctic and Antarctic Sci-
entific Research Institute). The renaining nethods have an auxiliary character.

The mat significant work on testing of the methods and introducing new and iaprov-
ed forecasting methods during the report period was carried out by the USSR Hydro-
neteorologicul Center, Central Asian Scientific Research Institute, Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, Far Eastern Scientific Research Institute,
Host Siberian, llkrainlan, Upper Volga, Belorussian, Northwestern, Northern Cauca-
sus, Central Chernozen Oblasta, Volga, Kazakh, Latvian, Estonian and Far Eastern
Adaiulatrntiuns of the ilydroaeteorological Service.

77

”WNW!”
I'UI 00"”th U“ Ul‘la'

CONFERENCES, MEETINGS, SEMINARS
Moscow HBTEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian NO 11, NOV 81 pp 118-125
[Article by V. G. clazunov and L. I. Petrova]

[Text] During the period 21-22 April at the USSR Hydrometeorological Center there
was a conference-seminar of scientific workers of the scientific research insti-
tutea of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Honitoring,on
the theme "Status and Prospects for the Development of Measurement Instruments and
Methods for Predicting Hind Shear in the Lower Layers of the Atmosphere." The con-
ference was attended by more than 100 specialists of the State Committee on Hydro-
meteorology and Environmental Monitoring, USSR Hydrometeorological Center, Cen-
tral Aerological Observatory, Main Geophysical Observatory. Institute of Experi-
mental Meteorology, Central Volga Hydrometeorological Observatory, Scientific Re-
search Inatitute of Instrument Making, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Hydrometeoroiogical Information-World Data Center, Ukrainian Scientific Research
Institute, Rest Siberian Scientific Research Institute, Central Asian Scientific
Research Institute, Main Aerometeorological Center, Kazakh Scientific Research
Institute, Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, Far Eastern Sci-
entific Research Institute, and also a number of scientific research institutes

of other departments.

The conference examined the interdepartmental (State Committee on Hydrometeorol-
ogy and Environmental Monitoring. USSR Ministry of Civil Aviation and USSR Hia-
iatry of the Aviation Industry) complex plan on the wind shear problem, heard and
discussed 20 reports and communications of representatives of 14 scientific re-
ncarch institutes. - ”

In his opening remarks the chnirman of the organizing committee for the conference-
aemlnnr, V. A. lvanov. head of the Administration of Meteorological Support of
Avlullnn of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring,
noted the great timeliness and importance of the problem of supplying aviation
with information on wind shear» in the lower layers of the atmosphere for increas-
ing the safety of tnkeoffs and landings of aircraft.

A. A. Vasil'yev (USSR Hydrometeoroiogical Center), in a review report entitled
"RequlruMHWn on information on Hind Shear and the Possibility of Such Support,"

reported tint the ICAO has indicated the need for furnishing pilots with data on
wind Velocity and direction at the beginning of the airstrip, at the landing point

78

FOR!0F1N(1AI.IMNE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and on considerable i-hangvu In the wind along the strip and on the takeoff path,
as well as at the point of aircraft landing. Since for the time being there are
no instruments which could directly satisfy these requirements, for a long time
there will be a need for developing methods for the qualitative determination of
the wind shear on the basis of the nature of the synoptic situation and the
search for quantitative criteria for specific conditions.

A group of reports devoted to the means and methods for measuring the wind para-
meters in the lower layers of the atmosphere applicable to the problems involved in
meteorological support of aviation was presented at the conference.

M. Yn. Yurchak and B. S. Orlov (Institute of Experimental Meteorology). in a re-
port entitled "Possibility of Measurement of Wind Shear by the Radioacoustic
Method," demonstrated that on the basis of measurement of the speed of sound in
the lower layer or the :Itlunspllcrc by means of a Doppler radar it is possible.
with an accuracy and routineness adequate for practical purposes, to obtain the
wind shear values in the lower layers of the atmosphere.

In a report by 0. A. Volkovitsskiy, Ye. K. Garger, A. V. iiaydenov and D. B. livarov
(Institute of Experimental Meteorology) entitled "Determination of Wind Velocity
Shear and Turbulence llainy, Vertical Smoke Plumes" it was demonstrated that this
method makes possible. a routine determinationof the wind profile and shear by
means of stereophotography and an evaluation of turbulence in the lower 300-m
layer of the atmosphere during daytime. ‘

G. B. Avrushchenko, C. S. Gershenzon and S. V. Lebedeva (Scientific Research In-
stitute of Instrument Making), in a report entitled "Technical Characteristics of
Foreign Anemometric Instruments," pointed out that there are great possibilities
for creating improved wind detectors and systems for the processing. registry and
display of the corresponding information.

Above and beyond the program for the sessions of the conference-seminar a number
of brief communications were presented: C. A. Smirnova (Central Aerological 0b-
servatory) -- "Possibilities of Using Meteorological Radar Data for Detecting
Zones of intensification of Hind Shear"; Yu. P. Baykov, V. M. Zaldiarov and c. M.
.;ruchei 'nitskiy (Central Aerological Observatory) -- "Correlation Anemometric
l.idar": and a paper by N. P. Krasnenko (Institute of Atmospheric Optics, Siberian
Department, USSR Academy of Sciences) and V. l. Sid'ko (Khar'kov Institute of
R.-nlloelerlrun li‘ﬁ) entitled "Acoustic Soander as a Means for Measuring Turbulence
and llimi Velocity." 'l'hese communications and the planned reports demonstrated that
tlw corresponding devolopments, successfully continuing at a number of scientific
research Institutes, can give meteorologists servicing aviation new and more ef—
iu-tlw- remte means and methods for measuring the wind field at low altitudes

in the airport. Zone.

A second group of reports was devoted to the problems involved in creating methods
for predicting wind shears in the lower layers of the atmosphere in the airport
zone and study of the meteorological conditions for their intensification.

A report by l.. R. Orlonko (Main Geophysical Observatory), entitled “Status and

l'ruspm‘tu for DeVeloping a Method for Computing Vertical Hind Shears in the Sur-
i'aoc layer of the Atmsphere on the Basis of the Synoptic Situation," proposed

79

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI W‘Ihl. USE ONLY

that computation methods developed by the author for determining wind shears in
the lower layers of the atmosphere based on use of some common parameters (velo-
city of the gradient wind, etc.) be used for airports situated in the open in the
absence of orographic effects and a well-expressed nonstationary character of the
processes (especially excluding zones of passage of fronts).

N. l.. liyzrwa, 7.. I. Volkovitskaya and ii. F. Hazurin (Institute of Experimental
Meteorology), in a report entitled "Turbulence and Wind Shears in the Lower Layer
of the Atmosphere," on the basis of computations of the statistical characteris-
tics of the instantaneous wind shear values, proposed a method for evaluating the
fluctuation component of vertical wind shear. tested on the basis of initial mat-
erial, which can he used in practical work.

A report by V. G. Glazunov (USSR iiydrometeorological Center). entitled "Recommenda-
tions on the Prediction of Wind Shear in the Lower Layers of the Atmosphere in an
Airport Zone and Prospects for Creating a Forecasting Zone," evaluates the possib-
ilities of determining wind shear on the basis of parameters of the synoptic situ-
ation. Parameters are discriminated which can be used in evaluating the wind

shear under different conditions and acne prognostic recommendations are formulat-
ed whirh can be used in the practice of meteorological support of flights in the
airport zone.

V. A. Shoaydman and S. V. Pavlenko (Odessa ilydrometeorological Institute) presented
a report entitled "Theoretical Model for Computing the Vertical iiind Velocity
Shears Using Standard Aerosynoptic Data" in which on the basis of a three-parameter
model of the planetary boundary layer the authors proposed a method (in two vari-
ants -— "mnual" and using an electronic computer) for computing vertical wind
shears and some examples of computations are given.

in a report by R. S. (ioiubov (Kazakh Scientific Research Institute) entitled "De-
termination of Zones of Intensive Turbulence on Cold and Warm Fronts" it was in-
dicated that there is a relationship between the intensity of turbulence in the
frontal zone and the computed slope of the frontal surface; an empirical graph
with the disrrimination of zones of increased turbulence was constructed. R. S.
Culubov also presented a report entitled "Vertical iiind Shears in the Neighbor-
hood of the Alma-Ilia Airport" in which. on the basis of data from pilot-balloon
nun-usurements. information was given on the frequency of recurrence of wind shears
to an altitude of Sill) an under different conditions (wind direction, character of
nn-teorologienl conditions, etc.).

Kh. I.. Lutriyev (Central Asian Scientific Research Institute), in a report entitl-
ed "Hind Shears in the Atmospheric Surface Layer According to Data From Balloon
Summllnp, :Iml liazw l'ilor Ilalloon Observations," examines the frequency of recurr-
('lll‘i‘ of wind sin-an: a! the principal stnt ions of Soviet Central Asia and discrim-
inates the regions in which strum; shears are encountered more frequently; he
demnstruted that the strongest shears are discovered mst frequently in the

zones of storm winds In motmtain valleys.

A report by I). A. i.y:npina and Yo. I. Sol'iyev (Central Asian Scientific Research
iostilole) entltl “some Results of Experimental Investigations of Wind Shears
.ut Krnsznovmlsk Airport" nave an analysis of the results of measurements of- wind
shear which indicated a dependence of wind shear intensity on the thickness of the
layer at whose boundaries the wind was measured and also the relationship between

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l1)!‘0FF1C]Al.USII(M‘LY

shears and aircraft accelerations in a zone of orographie turbulence. It has been

established that single-point pilot-balloon observations do not suffice in deter-
mining wind shears.

I. I. Tsigel'nitskiy (Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute) presented
a report entitled ”Vertical Hind Shears in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer Over the
Aretle Ocean" in which, on the basis of numerous aerologieal data for the first
time it was possible to examine the conditions of formation, annual variation and
altitudinal change of wind shears in the lower layers over the Arctic Ocean. The
dependence of shear on velocity of the gradient wind and stratification was demon-
strated.

V. N. Barakhtin and E. A. Horozova (Heat Siberian Scientific Research Institute),
in a report entitled "Methods for the Diagnosis and Prediction of Turbulence in
the Lower SOO-m Layer of the Atmosphere," proposed a method based on use of the
equations of linear multiple regression relating the turbulence value and a number
of predictors. The method makes it possible to evaluate the background level of
turbulence and the prohahility of a maximum vertical gust in the selected layer.

A report by V. A. Shnaydman and S. A. Stepanenko (Odessa Hydrometeorological Insti-
tute) entitled "Theoretical Model of Computation of Turbulence Parameters in the
Surface Layer of the Atmosphere" proposed a method for computing the mean square
wind fluctuations near the earth's surface using standard aerosynoptic information
on the basis of a three-parameter turbulence model. The authors demonstrated the
probability of routine use of the method.

V. N. Barakhtin (Best Siberian Scientific Research Institute), in a report entitled
"Results of Investigation of Turbulence in the Lower Layer of the Atmosphere on the
Basis of Materials Prom Flight Experiments in the Territory of Siberia and Kazakh-
stan in 1973-1978," gave information on the statistics of the standard deviation

of the vertical wind velocity component at altitudes up to 500 m under different
conditions and on the relationships of this parameter and weather conditions; these
data served as a basis for the method of diagnosis and prediction of turbulence
exerting an influence on aircraft flight developed by the author.

it is noted in the resolution of the conference-seminar that at the scientific re-
aeareh institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeoroiogy atd Environmental
Iainltorlog speeiallsts have earried out a number of investigations for developing
measurement apparatus and a method for predicting wind shear in the lower layers
of the atnmsphere; some of the results can be recommended for practical use in the
meteorological support of civil aviation.

The dlseuaslon of the prospects of investigations indicated that in general the
sohjeet matter of the work which has been carried out and which is planned cor-
responds to the prohlems of meteorological support of aviation with data on wind
shears and tnrhulenee in-the lower layers of the atmosphere and corresponds to
implementation of the tasks of the Interdepartmental Complex Plan on the Wind
Shear Problem. At the same time, the conference noted that it is necessary to ex-
pand and intensify work in the following principal directions:

-— development of technical apparatus and methods for remote measurement of wind
and turbulence parameters in the lower layers of the atmosphere in the airport
area (radioaeoustic. acoustic, laser, etc.);

81

INJR10f11CJA- USII<HHLV
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- implementation of experimental investigations of wind shear and turbulence in
zones of takeoff and landing of aircraft, especially at the time of passage of

atmospheric fronts. under conditions of temperature inversion and active convec-
tions

-- theoretical modeling of the characteristics of the wind profile and turbulence,
exerting an influence on the takeoff and landing of aircraft for the conditions of
advection, strong nonstationarity of processes, convection and complex orography;
-- continuation of investigations for developing methods and prognostic recommenda-
tions for determining wind shears and turbulence in the lower layers of the atmo-
sphere in the airport zone on the basis of the synoptic situation;

-- study of meteorological conditions causing a strong wind shear and turbulence

in the zone of takeoff and landing of aircraft at airports with complex local re-
lief;

-- creation and adjustment of standard-produced industrial production of improved
mechanical wind-measuring apparatus and wind detectors (including three-component
:nnnlnntns) and recorders for them for the purpose of their mass use for the out—
fitting or meteorologiral masts, towers and beacons, and also tor installation at
airports;

-- Investigation of the possibility of using data from measurements of meteorolog-
ical paramwters on masts, towers and beacons for operational meteorological support
of the nearest airports;

-- investigation of the possibility of use of meteorological radars for routine de-
termination of zones of turbulence and wind shears in the airport region.

The conference proposed the preparation of methodological recommendations for anal-
ysis of data on the wind shear in the lower layers of the atmosphere.

It was noted in the resolution that the implementation of work under the Interde-
partmental Complex Plan is one of the principal tasks of the scientific research
institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Honitoring.
In this connection the conference called upon the key and regional scientific re-
search institutes of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental
Monitoring to take an active part in the broadening of studies of the wind shear
problem.

V. G. Clazunov

During the period 15-21 June 1981 a Soviet-American conference was held in Lenin-
grad for studying the influence oi an increase in the quantity of carbon dioxide

in tho atnnsphert' on rlimate. Below we give a summary of this u-onferemte, whose
vumpilers were: from the PQSR -- M. i. Budyko, V. N. Adamenko, E. K. Byutner,

i2. Y1. Vlnnlkov, (3. S. (inllt‘syn, G. V. Cruzn, V. P. Dymnikov, I. L. Kurol', S. S.
thmolovtsov; from the United States -- w. A. Gates, J. Angell, H. McCrscken, F. Mac—
kenzie, N. Ramannthnn, M. Steiver, E. T. Sundquist.

Introduction
Since the signing of the bilateral Soviet-American agreement on preservation of the
onvironmcnl, within the framework of Working Group VIII under this agreement there

has been discussion of the problems of carbon dioxide, changes in its atmospheric
conventration, Its effects on climate and the possible influence on man. Initially

82

FOIIOFFKJAL.USE(NULY
FIIICHNNCJAI.USE(NNLY

there was discussion of problems related to study of the air temperature trends,
the used observational data and the interpretation of the results of model comput-
ations. in order to comprehend better the scientific points of view of the differ-
ent parties a number of symposia were held: at Tashkent (1976), Leningrad (1977).
Dushanbe (1978) and Tbilisi (1979). The results of the symposia were of consider-
able scientific interest. They enabled scientists of each country to exchange in-
formation on the results of their studies. Unfortunately, the principal unclear
aspects of the 002 problem were not entirely solved.

in October 1979 a protocol was signed at Tbilisi containing a recommendation on
creation of a group of scientists for discussing important problems relating to
the influence of the increase in C02 content on climate. The idea of such a confer-
ence was raised again at a symposium in Leningrad in 1977. It was understood that
the existing differences in opinion can be eliminated only when specialists from
both countries meat and in a working session discuss the prevailing disagreements.
The conference, held in June 1981 at Leningrad, attained this purpose: eight Amer-
ican and nine Soviet scientists, representing a wide range of disciplines, in the
course of a week discussed in detail the problem of change in 002 atmospheric con-
tent in the past, present and future, and also possible consequences of these
changes.

The summary or the_cunfcrence contains a detailed exposition of the results attain-
ed. The principal conclusions were compiled so that the interested parties eculd,
in general, become familiar with the results of the conference and evaluate their
importance and significance for future economic activity in both countries.

Principal Scientific Conclusions

1. Change in the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide. From the beginning
of the organization of monitoring of atmospheric carbon dioxide (1958) to 1980

its concentration increased by 22 mill-1. During this same time interval the in-
dustrial discharge of carbon was 39 mill'1 (which corresponds to 82 Gtons). The
data obtained at Hauna Loa station during the entire observation period agree well
with the values for the industrial discharge of 002, multiplied by the coefficient
22/39. The observations and computations made using different models of the carbon
cycle show that the remaining part of the anthropogenic carbon dioxide is absorbed
by the ocean. The rule of the biota for this time interval was not significant.
The influence of changes in the biota on the concentration of 002 in the atmosphere
is small, at least for this time interval.

An analysis of the results of direct measurements of the 602 content carried out

in the I9th century reveals a preindustrial concentration of about 290 mill‘l.

In order to refine this quantity computations were made of changes in the content

of rudiounrhln in the atmosphere arising due to the industrial discharge of 602

from 1860 to IQSO. These take lntn account the natural variability of the content

nf '46 during this period or time as a result of variations of the geomagnetic field
and the intensity or the solar wind. A good agreement of the results of computations
and the experimental data is obtained with values of the preindustrial concentration
of C02 of 280-297 miil'I if it is assumed that the changes in biomass are also in-
significant for this time interval.

83

FINICNHHC]AI.USE¢NVLY
I'UR INHI'IAI. WI ONLY

If the rates of development of world energy during the course of the next 20

years remain the same as they were in the preceding 20 years, the concentration
in 1990 will be 360:6 min-1. and in the year 2000 - 39419 min-1.

Computations of the distribution of anthropogenic carbon dioxide between the atmo-
sphere, ocean and continental biomass for the time interval up to the year 2050,
carried out for different scenarios of development of power production in the fu—
ture, show that independently of the choice of scenario not less than 602 of the
industrial effluent of €02 will remain in the atmosphere. According to most scen-
arias of development or electric power, a doubling of C02 should set in during the
let century, in all probability in the interval between 2030 and 2060.

2. Puleoclimatic analogues of modern changes in climate. One of the possible ways
to evaluate the consequences of global warming is related to study of the climates
of the past. Particularly important is a clarification of the effects of the an-
ticipated warning on other climatic variables, such as precipitation, on the nat-
ural and agricultural ecosystems, the stability and distribution of glaciers, sea
iee and the level of the seas and oceans.

An example of such an approach can be the study of the climatic optimum of the Pli-
ocene (3-5 million years ago). A paleogeographic reconstruction indicates that at
this time in the extrutropical part of the northern hemisphere there was a consid-
erable difference in the distribution of temperature and precipitation in compar-
ison with modern conditions. The permanent sea and continental glaciers in the
northern hemisphere were probably nonexistent at that time.

These data can be useful for an understanding of the regularities of the anticipat-
ed climatic warming.

It is postulated that the warmer climate of the past could be associated with a
higher C02 concentration. it is therefore necessary to continue further the in-

Vestigations of climatic changes in the past, the global cycle of carbon and their
relationships to the atmospheric C02 content.

3. Empirical investigations of modern climatic changes. There is an excellent agree-
ment between the asthmlivs or ehangc in surface air temperature in the northern
hemlxphvrc obtained by the scientists of the USSR and the United States. The con-
siderable warming observed from the late l9th century approximately to 1940 was
replueed by a cooling continuing to the mid-1960's, which was followed by a warm-
lug whieh has continued in the present time (1981). Thus, the surface air temper-
nturc of the northern hemisphere has increased during the last hundred years; more
than 302 of the dispersion of the series is related to a linear trend. The warning
between the end of the l9th century and approximately the 1940's to a considerable
degree determined this linear trend. The modern warming at the earth's surface was
evidentky more sharply expressed in the southern hemisphere than in the northern
hemisphere.

This nudorn warming is manifested in data on the mean temperature of the troposphere
in both hemispheres. There is reliable evidence that the warming of the troposphere
was aeeompanied by a cooling of the stratosphere. Evaluations of the climatic

84

FOIlOFFKJAl.US£(NULV
trends cannot be used In the prediction of climate of the future by extrapolation,
but can be useful in understanding the observed temperature changes.

Using a statistical analysis of data from meteorological measurements in the past
it was possible to obtain estimates of the change in local climatic conditions in
the processes of global warming and cooling of the northern hemisphere. These esti-
mates can be used for the range of changes in mean annual air surface temperature
of the northern hemisphere t0.5°C.

Attempts have been undertaken to interpret the observed changes in surface air tem-
perature of the northern hemisphere for the purpose of detecting changes caused by
the influence of C02 on climate. The analysis made on the assumption that the
changes in atmospheric transparency and CO; concentration are the basic reasons for
the modern changes in mean temperature indicated that during the period 1883-1977
the northern hemisphere warmed by 0.6-0.6'6 as a result of the influence of 002.
This increase In temperature, caused by the observed increase in C02 content by
ISZ, corresponds to the estimates obtained from models of climate. In some invest-
igations for an explanation of the changes in temperature in addition to atmo-
spheric turbidity it was necessary to take into account some other factors. There
are some empirical investigations in which it was not possible to detect the influ-
ence of C02 on temperature.

A spectral analysis of the observed changes in air surface temperature in the zone
50-70‘N indicated that the temperature signal caused by the influence of 002 is more
easily detected in summer because the noise level in summer is lower than in the re-
maining seasons. Such statistically significant temperature changes were not dis—
covered for the time up to 1977 either due to the thermal inertia of the climatic
system or as a result of the compensatory cooling caused by the influence of other
factors. The mentioned investigation does not preclude the possibility of a warm-
ing due to the influence of 602.

At the present time it does not seem possible to conclude with absolute assurance
that warming due to 602 has been discovered. although there are definite indica-
tions confirming this fact. Progress in undeling, together with an increase in the
volume of measurement data in time and in space, in the near future should provide
an adequately clear answer to this important question.

6. Model Investigntlons of cllmatic changes caused by carbon dioxide. Different
types of model Investigations show that an increase in the 002 concentration in
the atmosphere leads to a general warming of the troposphere and a cooling of the
stratosphere. The mean annual global warming at the earth's surface is from 2 to
1' with a doubling of the 602 concentration. In this process the intensity of the
hydrological cycle increases by several percent. The warming in the high latitudes
should be several times greater than in the low latitudes. These effects can be

increased as a result of the influence of small admixtures of anthropogenic origin
by a Value of approximately 502.

The principal knowledge concerning these effects is obtained from three-dimensional
dynamic models of climate which reproduce modern climate well. More realistic ex-

periments with these models can give the geographical and seasonal distributions
of a number of climatological elements important for many practical investigations.

85

INDI'OIFICIAL UGIZIHVLY
PIM WPKIAL UM UNI-I

But in order to obtain more precise knowledge, and for a comprehension of the rea-
sons for the differences between individual models there must be additional re-
search. Numerical experiments must be carried out with allowance for a gradual in-
crease in the C02 concentration. The models must include allowance for the ocean,
interacting with the atmosphere, real topography, seasonal and diurnal variations

or insulation, the complete hydrological cycle, variations in the quantity of clouds
and changes in the concentrations of small components. Such computations require

an enormous amount of computation time but they are necessary in order to obtain
statistically significant realistic results. These investigations are also neces-

sary for the earliest possible detection of climatic changes caused by the influ-
ence of C02.

Simplified models of climate were necessary for understanding different physical
mechanisms operative in the climatic system. They are also capable of giving real-
istic values of the global and zonally averaged distributions of changes in the
climatic elements. Studies with such models should be continued, especially for
invvstigating such problems as the influence of small components on climatic
change.

5. Summary. The anthropogenic effects on the atmosphere are increasing at such a
rate that their influence on global climate is becoming inevitable. This espec-
ially applies to an increase in the atmospheric content of 002 as a result of the
combustion of fossil fuel. The influence of this increase in C02 on climate will
evidently lead before the end of the let century to a general global warming
with an increase in mean air temperature by several degrees. Such a warming may
occur between 2030 and 2060. Using the best available estimates from model and em-

pirical investigations it can be concluded that the greatest warming will evident-
ly occur in the high latitudes.

Such a warming and the changes in the precipitation regime and other climatic ele-
ments associated with it will have important consequences for the biosphere, for
agriculture and other types of economic activity. In order to foresee these conse-
quences with adequate completeness it is necessary to continue investigations
which must be well coordinated with the work being done in the shortest possible
time. in this connection the continuation and strengthening of Soviet-American
cooperation in this field of climatic research will be especially important.

*ti

An International symposium on tropical meteorology was held at Nul'chik during the
period 9-Il March. It was attended by Scientists of the USSR, Cuba and Vietnam.

Forty-eight reports on the following subjects were presented and discussed: numer-
irnl and laboratory nmdeliug of tropical cyclones (TC); experimental investigations
or the conditions for the development of a TC and its structure; convection, cloud
cover, prcvlpiLutlon; boundary layer; predicting TC trajectories; interaction be-
tween the atmosphere and ocean at different scales; tropical zone; measurement
instruments and methods.

Two reports were disrusaed at the plenary session. The review report of V. N. Ivan-

ov (Institute of Experimental Meteorology) contained a generalization of experimen-
tal investigations carried out during recent years both in the USSR (expeditions

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Tayfun-75," "Tayfun-78" and others) and abroad relating to the conditions for the
generation of TC, their structure in different stages of development. It was empha-
sized in the report that the dynamic characteristics of the troposphere play a
decisive role in the tropical cyclogenesis process. In particular, it was noted
that the following spatial distribution of the vertical wind shear is favorable
(together with a number of other conditions) for the intensification of a disturb-
ance: a small shear in the central zone of the disturbance and a considerable ver-
tical shear of opposite signs on the periphery. The speaker emphasized the impor-

tunce of further investigations of the central part of a TC, especially its meso-
scale structure.

In a report by Ye. E. Dobryshman (Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere), devoted
to nonlinear problems of dynamics of the atmosphere in the low latitudes, there was
emphasis on the need for creating and studying simple models of circulation of the
equatorial atmosphere. Such models can be useful not only for study of processes in
the tropical zone, but also in formulation of models of general circulation of the
atmosphere. The subject of atmospheric circulation in the low latitudes (especial-
ly gyroscopic movements of the atmosphere) was also the content of a report by
Nguen Suan Sui (Vietnam). An interesting approach to the problem made it possible
to obtain some analytical results. Despite an inevitable schematization, a compar-
ison of the theoretically determined trajectories of air particles with the results

of field experiments with neutral buoyancy spheres indicated their qualitative
agreement.

numerical modeling of tropical cyclones was discussed in a paper by A. P. Khain
(USSR Hydrometeorologlcal Center) and an investigation by V. Ye. Zakharov and Yu.
T. Japronov (Institute of Experimental Meteorology). Both models are axially sym-
metric. The author of the first of these endeavored to describe a number of phys-
ical processes transpiring in TC and in particular modeled the mutual influence
of a moving cyclone and the ocean and the penetration of a cyclone onto the land.
The second model had a more methodological character and was characterized by the
use of a numerical method of an increased order of accuracy. which, in the opinion
of the authors made it possible to a considerable degree to avoid the effects of
computed viscosity and study the influence of different methods for stipulating
the turbulence eoefflolent on the evolution of a model cyclone.

laboratory modeling served as u basis for a report by a group of authors (0. G.
Hurtynenko, V. l. Knliiets uud A. V. Solodukhin, Institute of Theoretical Meteor-
ology, Belorussian Academy of Sciences, 3. Perez, Cuba) entitled "One Variant of
a Laboratory Model of Eddy Formations." The authors told about an eddy created

In a special apparatus by means of a multiblade fan. The velocity field charac-
teristic for a TC was obtained.

Eleven reports were devoted to experimental investigations of the conditions of
devolopment of a TC, its structure and energetics, and also the structure

of the troposphere in the zones of generation of a TC. These included three joint
reports (USSR and Cuba). These studies were based on field data from Soviet exped-
itions to the lropieui zone, and also on the results of observations of hurricanes
occurring in regions surrounding Cuba. in all the reports in this group there is
emphasis on the considerable spatial and temporal variability of different charac-
teristics in a Tc. Expeditionary investigations also made it possible to detect

87

FOI‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
I‘UI WI'ILIAI. 03!. UNI-I

a number ol new peeullurlties of TC structure. In particular, it is demonstrated
in a report by L. l. Petrova (institute of Experimental Meteorology) that the
thick inflow layer, up to the level 200 mb (with discrimination of two maxima:
in the boundary layer and in the middle troposphere) is a characteristic feature
of TC circulation.

An interesting fact was noted in a study by L. S. Ninina and Ye. N. Arabey (USSR
ﬂydrometeorological Center) and R. Parrado (Cuba): in typhoon Carmen (1978) there
was a lower tropospheric warm nucleus. It is necessary to emphasize the work of

A. Pene (Cuba), devoted to the synoptic conditions for the development of TC, in

which it was demonstrated that about 301 of the total number of hurricanes origin-
ating in the North Atlantic develop on cold fronts.

The influence of centers of action of the atmosphere on the generation and inten-
sity of typhoons was examined in a report by N. I. Pavlov (Far Eastern Scientific
Research Institute). The possibility of the formation of a cyclonic eddy in the
zone of inter -tion of three anticyclones was examined in a report by M. Portela
(Cuba) eatit' ! "A Tropical Cyclone From the Voint of View of Thermodynamics

As a System c 'ddies." Also examined was the influence of the wind field in anti-
eyclones on the "ovcmcnt of a TC.

The problems involved in parameterization of convection were examined in reports
by A. P. Khain and H. G. Yarmolinskaya (USSR Nydrometcorological Center) and A. I.
Fal'kovlch (USSR ﬂydrometcorological Center). The first of these studies discussed
two schemes for parameterization based on the representation of a cloud in the
form of a central nucleus and a shell of mixed air entrained from the sides. In
the first scheme convective heating is determined on the basis of computations of
precipitation in the nucleus and shell and in the second the distribution of heat-
ing is proportional to the temperature difference between the cloud and the ambient
atmosphere. A report by A. I. Fal'kovich dealt with a new principle for the para-
meterization of moist convection based on the idea of expansion of the solution

in a small parameter. The author also investigates the problem of allowance for
radiation cooling in the parameterization of moist convection in the model of a
uwﬂmdcmlmm

A study by A. P. Khuln and Ye. A. Agrenich (USSR Hydrometeorological Center) en-
titled "Characteristics of the Surface and Boundary Layers in a Tropical Cyclone"
examined a model of the layer under the clouds with allowance for interaction with
the free alumsphert.

A mulur group or reports was devoted to study of the interaction between a tropical
ryrlunr and the ocean. Theoretlrnl and experimental (based on data from the exped-
illuns "lhyfuuv7b" and "Tayfuu-78") studies in this direction dealt with the reac-
tion u; the ocean to the passage of a Tc and also the problems involved in the ex-
rhange or energy and moisture between the ocean and the atmosphere. Among the
theoretical studies we should mention a report by I. D. Ginis and Rh. Zh. Dikinov
(Kahardino-Balkarian State University), giving the results of numerical modeling
of the nonlinear reaction of a stratified ocean to a Tc. Allowance for the nonlin-
our terms in the equations of motion made it possible to investigate the problem
of relaxation or the thenmnhnnmiu disturbance in the ocean. Caused by the wind
Hirvxa eharuetetistle for a TC, after cessation of the wind effect. The detailed

88

ﬁOlioffkﬂAl.US£(HNLY
ﬁOIiHﬂﬁCJAl.USE(NVLY

thermal structure of the track of typhoon Virginia (1978) was examined in a report
by V. N. lvanov, V. D. Pudov and s. A. Petrichenko (Institute of Experimental
Meteorology). The authors for the first time on the basis of field data demon-
strated the possibility of initiation of an eddy of a synoptic scale in the ocean
by a tropical cyclone.

In a report by R. S. Bortkovskiy and B. G. Vager (Main Geophysical Observatory) en-
titled "Structure of the Boundary layer" it was demonstrated that the change in
conditions for turbulent and radiation exchange of energy between the ocean and

the atmosphere in the region of the track of a TC has a stable character. The var-
iability of the flows of heat and moisture entering from the ocean in the tropical
zone, including during the passage of a TC, is illustrated in the reports of A.
Rodriguez and R. Parrodo (Cuba). R. S. nortkovskiy (Main Geophysical Observatory)
and A. Rodriguez and 0. Padilla (Cuba), as well as A. N. Msdgurnyy (Arctic and Ant-
arctic Scientific Research Institute). The numerical experiments on interaction
between the atmosphere and ocean under stormy conditions, set forth in a report by
Ye. M. Borisenkov and M. A. Kuznetsov (Main Geophysical Observatory), indicate the
considerable contribution of spray in moisture exchange of the ocean-atmosphere
system in a tropical storm.

The "prognostic direction" in investigations of tropical cyclones was represented
by three studies of Cuban specit‘ists. A report by R. Parrado, entitled "Method
for Predicting the Maximum Level Rise Due to a Tropical Cyclone," was of great in-
terest. He proposed a statistical method for predicting the maximum level rise in
dependence on the maximur pressure at the center of a TC. A checking of the equa-
tion on the basis of an independent sample gives an 801 guaranteed probability. A
refinement of the prognostic equation was achieved by taking into account the angle
between the TC trajectory and the shoreline. A report by M. Bal'ester and 0. Car-
sin dealt with prediction of the intensification of tropical disturbances. They
proposed a method for predicting the intensification of tropical waves and depres—
sions with the use of cloud cover photographs taken from meteorological satellites
and also a number of computed parameters. The method gave satisfactory results in
702 of the eases when It was checked in practical work. The second report of the
mentioned authors, devoted to application of the method for predicting the direc-
tion of movement of a TC developed by Pett and Brand, demonstrated the possibil-
ity of using this method for 12 hours, as well as 24 hours.

Two studies were devoted to the modeling of movement of a tropical cyclone: 8. Ya.
Shmorlin (Institute of Experimental Meteorology) and A. V. Mesterova (Institute of
Expvrlmoniul Meteorology), as well as A. V. Mesterov (Moscow State University).
The two models are based on the replacement of a TC by a solid rotating cylinder
and investigation of the motion of this cylinder in a stipulated flow. In the
first of these studies, on the basis of an analytical solution, obtained for a
simple case, a study is nmde of the stability of trajectories of TC in a zonal
flow. The second model is more complete (includes nonstationarity, variability of
the (mriollu parameter. etc.) and is solved numerically.

Among the studies of lustrumwnts and measurement methods presented at the symposium
mention should be made of two reports from the Pacific Ocean Institute, Far Eastern

Seientliie Center, USSR Academy of Sciences, the authors of which were L. .. Hit-
nlk, M. L. Mitnik and I. A. Alekseyeva, Ye. P. Dombkovskaya and L. M. Mitnik.

89

lili¢lﬂﬂC1AI.USE(HMLY
PW WPILIAL UM UNLI

Thvuv reports erv dovolcd In an vvnltmtion of the parameters of the tropical nt-
unqﬂwre on the basis of the spectrum of ascending SNF radiation. It was demon-
strated that the present-day status of satellite SHF radiometry makes it possible
to investigate the humidity field, cloud cover and pressure fields in such zones
as zones of tropical cyclones inaccessible for experimental study.

A report by 0. N. Bukina, U. Kh. Kopvill' and 5. Yu. Stolyarchuk (Pacific Ocean In-
stitute, Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences) dealt with the

use of picosecond lidars for selective resonance sounding of aerosols in the at-
mosphere in tropical cyclones at a distance up to 90 km. V. s. Korelev (Institute

of Experimental Meteorology) and A. A. Barannikov (Khar'kov Aviation Institute) pre—
sented a report on the the use of radio-controlled small flightcraft for studying
the boundary layer of the atmosphere. The developed measurement complex can find
extensive use in different investigations, especially in the study of clouds.

The report of V. P. Crukovich, Ye. A. Kopot' and Yu. V. Kopylov (Central Aerolog-
lcoi Observatory) gives some idea concerning the possibility and prospects of use
of microcomputers aboard an aircraft-laboratory. An interesting approach was used
in a study by U. Kh. Kopvill', u. I. mvlgyy and A. H. Pavlov (Pacific Ocean lnst-
ltute. Far Eastern Scientific Center, USSR Academy of Sciences). It gave a descrip-
tion of a system anklng It possible to register the interaction between a tropical
cyclone and the ocean by means of an optical deformator In combination with u scis-
mia- channel .

The reports of Ye. P. Veselov. R. Perez, 2. Gonzales. D. Arcia, I. Diaz, P. Perez
and N. Hernandez (Cuba) and P. Parrado and E. Oria (Cuba) proposed methods for
computing the maximum veloeity Vmax in a tropical cyclone. In the first study it
was possible to derive regression equations for evaluating Vmax on the basis of
the diameter of the cloud masses, evaluated on the basis of satellite photographs.
The second study proposed an expression for computing Vmax, including a correction
to the cyclostrophic wind, taking into accOunt the frictional force and local lat-
itude.

In conclusion special mention should be made of a report by H. T. Abshayev and

H. Ch. Zalikhanov :High-Mountaln Geophysical Institute) devoted to investigations
of the dynamics and structure of cloud systems. These results were obtained by cre-
ating a complex twasuremcnt system, making it possible to obtain the spatial ther-
modynamic structure of well-developed convective cloud cover. This study is char-
acterized by a high Irvvl of formulation of a complex experiment and interesting
plays lt'nl rush I l s .

L. I. Petrova

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘D! OFFICJAI.IEIE(MVLV

NOTES FRO“ ABROAD

Moscow HETEDRDanIYA l GIDROLOOIYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 125-126
[Article by B. I. Siikin]

[Abstract] It has been postulated that the reason for the recurrence of glaciations
at the scale of thousands to hundreds of thousands of years is changes in the
earth's orbit. But a wcnkness in the hypothesis is the excessively sharp onset of
cycles in comparison with the relatively weak astronomical effect, assuming that
it is the sole factor in the onset of glaciations. However, specialists at the
Lamont Geological Observatory and New York State University have proposed supple-
mentation of this hypothesis in order to explain such a phenomenon. The greatest
area of glaciation usually occurs when as a result of astronomical factors ex-
tremely cold summers and relatively warm winters occur in the northern hemisphere.
A rapid retreat of glaciers occurs under conditions of a stable warm summer and a
cold winter in the same hemisphere. Evidently the physical mechanism leading to
this is that the greater part of the thermal energy participating in the forma-
tion of the earth's climate is stored in the world ocean and ignoring this in any
model of change in climate leads to spurious results. This new research has demon-
strated that the phase of a cold summer on the earth, favoring the spread of
glaciers on the land surrounding the North Atlantie.coincides with a drawn-out
warming of the ocean, intensifying evaporation from its surface. This saturates
the atmosphere with an excess quantity of moisture. The latter falls in the form
of snow which feeds the glaciers. Paradoxically, the glaciers increase more rapid-
ly during a period when the ocean is relatively warm. During the final period in
the cycle of onset of glaciers the northc" part of the Atlantic Ocean is covered
with ice. It is maintained by acti: ----.ng as a result of icebergs entering the
sea. With a change in the characteristics of the earth's orbit in the direction

of onset of a warm summer the glaciers begin to retreat, forming a still greater
number of icebergs. as a result of which the ocean temperature drops still more
and evaporation from its surface becomes minimum. Despite the setting-in of cold
winters. the glaciers are no longer able to restore the mass of ice which they

have lost-in susmer due to the lack of the necessary quantity of precipitation{

t**

The process of accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in the distant -
past has usually been investigated by an analysis of the content of carbon iso-
tapes In tree rings. An Australian specialist has now concluded that tree rings

91

lﬂDl'OliﬂCJAl.lEli(ﬂVLV
I'Ul UH'ILIAI. USE UNLY

mmnnl servo .13 rcllulvlu Indicators of 002 content in the atmosphere of the past.
IL hm: been assumed that the anthropogenic increase in atmospheric CO; is clearly
manifested in the tree rings studied in the northern hemisphere. However, a study
of trees' on 'l‘asnania has failed to reveal the existence of long-term deviations

from the mean level during the last 200 years. This suggests that in the northern
hemisphere trees growing near sources of industrial contamination have probably

reacted to local effects, rather than to a real change in atmospheric composition
on a global scale. Until the reasons for the discrepancy between findings for the
northern and southern hemisphere have been explained this whole question must be

regarded as still open. Projections for the future must take into account this
unresolved problem.

92
F0! OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR‘OFINCIAL.US£4NNLY

OBITUARY 0P YEVGENIYA SAHOYLOVNA RUBINSHTEYN (1891-1981)

Moscow Ml-Z'l'l-I()R()l.0GIYA l (:mmmxnvn in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 126-127

[Article by staff of the Order of the Red Banner of Labor Main Geophysical Observa-
tory imeni A. I. Voyeykovl

[Abstract] Professor Yevgeniya Samoylovna Rubinshteyn, an outstanding Soviet climat-
ologist, the oldest worker of the lwdrometeorological Service, died on 6 April 1981.
During the years 1914-1930 this outstanding woman worked in various subordinate
posts at the Main Physical Observatory. Beginning in 1930, at the Main Geophysical
Observatory, for aany years she headed climatological subdivisions and during the
prewar years was director of the Institute of Climatology. She was granted the title
professor in 1936 and was awarded the degree of Doctor of Geographical Sciences in
1937. The sphere of her scientific activity over the course of more than a half-
century was solution of major problems in climatology, fundamental climatographic
generalizations, solution of such highly important problems in the activity of the
Hydrometeorological Service as the rational operation of the meteorological net-
work, the creation of a unified group of climatologists both at the Main Geophys-
ical Observatory and at outlying institutes and administrations. A number of major
climatic atlases of the USSR and the entire world were created and were published
with her participation or under her direction. Her name is linked to fundamental
generalizations of actual data on the climate of the USSR in the form of the series
CLIMATIC IMNDBOOKS. During the years of the Great Fatherland "or she was engaged in
meeting the needs of the Soviet Army. Her svlentific publications, numbering over

100, are known both in the USSR and abroad. They include well-known texts on climat-
ology for colleges.

93

ENJI¢001WCJAI.IISE1(HWLY
run VI ."‘v.~.‘ vua. Vi‘bl

MEMORIAL T0 FEDPAN FARNEYEVIC" DAVITAYA (1911-1979)

Moscow METEOROLOCIYA l (:HMNHAX:IYA in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 127-128

[Article by H. I. Budykol

[Abstract] This year marks the 70th anniversary of birth of the late Peofan Parneye-
vich Davitaya. Outstanding Soviet agrometeorologist, climatologist and geographer.
He graduated in 1932 from the Institute of Subtropical Crops in Tbilisi and in 1936
defended his candidate's dissertation. In 1950 he was awarded a doctor's degree and
in 1960 was elected a full member of the Academy of Sciences Georgian SSR. During
the period 1945 through 1951 F. F. Davitaya headed a laboratory at the All-Union
Institute of Plant Cultivation. In the years 1951-1959 he was deputy head of the
USSR Main Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service. Thereafter, to the end
of his life (June 1979) F. F. Davitaya was director of the Geography Institute of
the Georgian Academy of Sciences. Beginning in 1963 F. P. Davitaya headed the Div-

ision of Earth Sciences and was a member of the Presidium of the Academy of Sciences
of the Georgian SSR. Me was repeatedly elected to key posts of different Soviet and

international scientific organizations. In 1969 he was elected President of the
Georgian Geographical Society and in l972 and 1976 was elected Vice President of the

International Geographical Union. He was the author of about 300 publications, in-
cluding a series of monographs on a broad range of aspects of the earth sciences.
Particularly important was the work of P. P. Davitaya in the field of the agroclimat-
ology or viticulture, which exerted a great influence on the development of grape
production in the USSR. He also developed a method for predicting the thermal re-

gime of the growing season. He was chairman of the editorial board preparing the
CLIMNTIC ATLAS OF THE USSR and he directed work on an extensive treatise devoted

to study of the climate in the region of the virgin lands. Among other important
contributions which he made was work on the ATLAS OF THE GEORGIAN SSR. the NATIONAL
ATLAS 0P CUBA and his investigations of the influence of economic activity on the
biosphere.

memmﬂ:'MmeMon:lgMnﬂmﬂwW.1%l

5303 - END -
CSU: i86h/5

94
FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(HVLY