FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS-L/10616
25 JUNE 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 36/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily frOn foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the origir‘l phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, viewa or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
01’ 11118 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRSI

25 Jun

JAPAN REPORT
mono 36/821

Canaan's

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIm ICAI.

Possibility of Diet Dissolution Assessed
(Takehiko Tekehaehi; 14111110111 ML! ms, 9 Jun 82)...”

Tenalce Fection's Relationship at}: Koneito Exmined
(Takehiko Tekeheshi; WICHI BAIL! NEWS, 2 Jun 82) ....

MILITARY

Launching of Military Satellite Proposed by LIP
(“mm mIzAI m, SJ“ 82) COOIOCOOOOOOOIOOOCOIOII

30030410

Farmers Seek 11.3? Percent Boost in Rice Prices
(WICHI MLY NEWS, It, 7 Jun 82) eoeeeeeeoeoeeeoeooeoe

Increase anallest in History
Rice Price Calculation Viewed, Editorial

Japan Capital Abroad Beaches Record in F181
(mNIcHI mm m, 6 Jun 82) 0.0.0.000000000000'00...

awn Industrial mtput Declined 0.9 Percent prom ilerch
(MMCHI Mu “m, 27 m 82)..IIOOOOIOOOII.OIOOOU.0.

SCIENCE AND W!

Search for Revival in Various Industries Di scussed
(man “IN N, various datea) IDOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Efforts To Develop New mergy Sources Described '
(Gene Gregory; SIIUXAII mmm, 27 “Cr, 3 Apr 82)eoeoee

-e- [III-ASIA-ll]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recent Activities in Biotechnology Reported
(Various sources, various dates) ......................

Toyobo Research Foundation

Kitsubishi Glendon, Mitsubishi Corporation
Institute

Minamoto Haas Production of L-cysteine

Hochida mameosutical Interferon ‘h'ials

Green Cross m Investment

Hakunaga Glendon Strengthened Research Structure

3101: Brand Milk Products Laboratory, by Tokunaga

Briefs
L81 for Voice Recognition
M'T's IBI-Haldng 0mm

ub-

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POSSIBILITY 0? DIET DISSOLUTION ASSESSED

Tokyo MUNICH! DAILY ms in English 9 Jun 82 p 2

[Pr-on 'angetncho Doings" column by Inkehiko 'l'sknhashi:

Diet Dissolution"!

[Text]

About two years alter a
general election. - it is
customary tor voices to he
heard asking when the next
generaleiection‘vilitakepiaoe.
i-‘ollowingthemmallylengthy
extension oi the Diet anion
this time. a possible dwstion
oi theiiouseolitepresentatives
lsbeingtalltedabots. '

The Komeito is strongly-

carry out this revision. I
'anger" is mm»: and it
reiused to accede to Prime
Minister unltoSuzuki' s request
for a meeting with Chairman
\‘oshikatsu Takeirl prior to the
prime minister's attendance at
thesummltmeetlng

Chairman ‘i'aleiri has
declared that “a revisions! the
liouse ot Coonctiims’ national
constituency election system
should he reterred to the
W'IMW-"

“To reter to the people's
judgment" means. in the
political world. to hold a
general election in order to
obtain the people's verdict on
anissue.

lnthecaseettheltomeito. it
is being said that aiairman
Takeiri‘s statement does not
imply a desire tor a dissolution
ot the Home el RM
tatives.

This is beaten the lesson ot
the preview general election is
hetnshspt h mind When a non-
contidence motion was
presented by the Japan
Socialist Party last time. many
Li)? Diet members were ab-
sent trom tlieplenary session

The JSP had never expected
the nonoontidehcemotion
pass. But became oi the
unexpected developmem. the
noncontidence motion was
approved aid the Home of
Representatives was dissolved.
As the residt, althoodi there
had been a neereqnulihrium be-

No Repetition

"l‘heitorneito does not want a
repetition at such a situation.
Ryosalru Sasaki. chairman oi
the Democratic Socialist Party
has made a statement that is
one step ahead oi the Kometto.

.l-‘OROII'ICIALUSEONLY

"Candi. stone for
that tire‘iudgrnent 'wili be
handeddovntnhiarcborAprii.

prosecution'a argument.
demanding pmiahment. can he
expected tobeveryaevere.

.. “AtaboutihattlmethelDP’s
m taking piaoeMPuhilc opin'lolt:
is iiioeiy to be quite critical oi
the movements oi the Tanalra
iacton. lioreover. ii a vetdictoi
‘guilty’ is handed down in
March or April. this will be a
bi; blow to both‘i‘anaka and the
Tanaita iactlon

“‘i'lremltediocaieiectionand
the House oi Councillors
election will lotion. ii dual

electiniaareheidiortbeHome

oi Representatives and the
House oi Councillors at the
same time. these will be eiee.
tionsundertheworet conditions
ior the Tanalta iaction.

"‘i'heretore. aiter the revision
oi the House oi Councillors“
national oonatituency election
system is' passed iorcibly
durlngthecurrent Diet session.
when the opposition by labor
unions to the administrative
reiorm becomes brisk. the
House oi Representatives will
be dissolved. with ‘reierring to
the people's iudgment' given as
thereason.

"ii then the eiiorts oi the

Torah iaction are continued. it
will be possible tor the Tanalta
iaction. through strength at
numbers. to overcome the
conditions that may become
disadvantageotniorit."

Diet Dissolution

in addition. voices placing
anticipation in a disolution oi-
the House oi Representatives
and the holding oi a general
election are being heard irom
amongthosecomecied with the
Second Ad Hoc Council on
Administrativelteiorm.

The reason ior this is the
belie! that "it will not be
possible ior Prime Minister
Suzuki with his strength to
carryouttherecornmeruiauons
oi the Second Ad Hoc Cotmcil.
liladesirabieioranewprime
minister to handle the

When voices for a
“dissolution oi the House oi
Representatives" and "the
holding oi a general election"
start to be heard. these voices
generally mount rapidly.
Politicians become iidgety. it
cannot be denied that the
ataiement by 08? Chairman
Sasaltl will play the role oi
abettlngthismovement.

(The wriier Is an adviser to
the Malnlchl Newspapers and

_ Iormerdrleleditorlal n'rlier).
TANAKA PACTION'S RELATIONSHIP WITH MIN mm

Tokyo MAINICRI DAILY ms in English 2 Jun 82 p 2

[Article by Tacoma Tokahashi]

[Text ]

The Komeito is tirmly op-
posedtoachaogeoitheeiectlon
System tor the House oi
Councillors‘ national con-
stituency. its attitude at present
isoneoithorouai resistance.

The Komeito did not attend
the opposition parties' Diet
policy committee meeting held
onhiay aNordldhacoeptthe
Liberal~Democratlc Party's
proposal made alterward tor a
Dietpolicycommitteemeeting

Not only that buttheKomeito
executlm all went out to
participate in street lechtres
expressing tion to a
revision oi e House oi
Councillors eiection system. its
oppositiontseacaiating
, ChairmanYoshiltatsu‘i‘akeiri
and other executives oi the
Konieito are said to have a
special relationmp with ior-
mer Prime llinhter Kahuei
Tanaka. Even when such a
report appears inanewspaper.
the Korneito does not tile a
protest. Accordingly. the
existence oi a close relationship
between tormeri’rimehiinister
Tanaha and the Itomeito is
accep'zu as a iact in the
political world.

Tanaka is said to have been
the driving iorce behind the
very lenﬂhy 91mm oi [he
Diet session this time. Such a
lengthy extension was not being

district iiwate Preiechnei m
alreadyscheduled.

it the lengthy extension oi the
Diet session was carried out
under the leadershi oi iormer
Prime Minister analta. an
atmosphere is brewing that the
Korneito will find it necessary
to sever the relationship
maintained with Tam up to
now.

A‘mong the Koinalio
executives were those who ictt
that this reiatiomhip would
have to be severedsooner or
later. They hesitated about
saying so puitireiy, however.
because doing so would have
placed Chairman ‘t'aheiri in a

paltriul position.

Dissatisiaction

in the terminal organizations
oi the Solta Gahkai. the parent
organization oi the iiomeitn.
there is considerable
dissatisfaction about havhg it
said that theliomeitoiscloseto
the Tanaka iaction. The
Komeito executives are aware
at this. They have ielt that some
kind oi conntermove is
necessary.

Up to now it was believed that

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an opportunity for the liometto
to sever relations with the
Tanalta iactlon world come it
Tanaha is adjudged guilty Li the
Lockheed trial. The Komeito
executives ielt that in such a
case. Chairman Taheiri would
itnditnewssarytoiiqnidatethe
:eiationshipwith‘l‘anaka.

That has arisen.
however. in an M
quarter. namely. the re
lengthy exienﬂon oi the Diet
session.TheKomeitowonldllks
to tilt the revision oi the Km
oi Councillors national con-
stituency election system by all
means. it has acted along such
a course. The Japan Socialist
Partyisiniavoroiaproporo
tional representation system.
Although belonging to the
middleoistheoroad inﬂuence
also. the Democratic Socia’ist

reia .theKomeitonevei
tho t iormer Prime
hilnister‘l'anakawouldadopta
ollcy ot pressuring the
omelto to such I extent as
this. This has now
been: overturned. There I:

tn .
tltude that
toward thls. the

dlaatsslonswillylndtoanalt.
The Kanelto is
making on: meld tn omen-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500070062-1

FOR OFFYCIAL USE ONLY

tlng a 'revlslon a a. Home of
Counctllora natlonnl con-
stituency election oyotetn.

Now. wltn the strong
or antzatton called _Soka
Ga behintheKotneltots
llhely to 9% m wartm
wttlttheLDPJtuatdattme
ttteKotnettoaevet-sttuelatlons
with the Tanata tactho. the
ettecttttatttttswtllnaveontlte
polltlcal world hont now on to
bundtobegmt.

m» miter/“n adviser»
(be Nah/ob! New and
tomato/«Wm/

COPYRIGHT: Weld. Daily than 1982

080: #120,286

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-R0982-00850R000500070062—1
IAUNCHING OF MILITARY SATELLu'B ROMEO BY LDP
Tokyo Nlmﬂ KBImI SHINBUN in Japanese 5 Jun 1982 p 2

[Text] LDP's Space Development Special Comittee (Chairman Taro Nahyama)
drew up a proposal which seeks to revise the Basic Space Development Policy,
and submitted their proposal yesterday to the Chief Cabinet Secretary
Hiyazawa. The LDP proposal states that "the use of military satellites
would reduce defense costs" and requests that satellites be used not only
for non-military purposes but also for defense purposes.

The Basic Space Development Policy was formed in 1978 by the Space Develop-
ment Comittee (Chairman, Director General of the Science and Technology
Agency) with the objective to launch a SSOkg-comunications satellite with

the 8-1 rocket in 1992. however, the uses of satellites have mltiplied
since then and the United States has already launched comunications satel-
lites in the 1,000kg-cless. Compared to these developments, the technological
lag suffered by Japan is getting more conspicuous. Thus, the special cal-nit-
tee has asked for a review of the Basic Policy and for a net: effort to dm
up a full-fledged space development plan.

The L1)? proposal states that:
l. The Science and Technology Council should hammer out a clear space policy,

keep in close contact with the Space Development Connittee, and establish a
horizontal cooperation system among government ministries and agencies;

2. The space development budget should be tripled (currently 100 billion yen
for FY-SZ) to boost domestic technology;

3. Legislation for space development should be quickly established;

lo. Japan should participate in joint research with the United States on the
manned space station and space shuttle projects.

The focal point of the proposal is the objective to launch a military satel-
lite.

The proposal states that the use of satellites in defense comnications,
narine surveillance and reconnaissance 'Mill reduce defense costs because

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Japan's geographical location.‘ However, the uaee of satellites are defined
as "united to peaceful purposes only" by the plenary session of the Diet in
May 1969 and the National Space Development Agency Act. Therefore, objection
to the proposal is expected fro- opposltton parties.

COPYRIGET: Nikon Keizai Shinboneha 1982

080: 4105/130-P

”WWW?
FARMERS SEEK 10.37 PERCENT BOOST IN RICE PRICES
Increase Smllest in History

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 6 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

The Central Union ot-

Agricultural Cooperatives. Dy
let the largest «genitalia at
Japanese (am. Thursday
limited its demand tori-lee
prices this year to a W
growthotulpemnt

ﬁnenleotlnueasewhldtthe
Japanesewillhovetopmlﬂe
rtce [tom tombs lath
smallest In history since the
rental union hem mung
demands to the gavel-mat In
l950.

A union spoken» aid that
lndecldlogthemdunaotthe
organization bod changed the
old method 01 with; new
”°° “mi: 94”.“...
was
mad have mended}- an
WWI” ricewhlch

atpnsent ls [1.07 yen pew

”Wm. hem

COPY RI GHT :

In the m computottno.
m In up
M new
town in tail h
m anaue's't' 15mm

reﬂects nouutln‘l
criticlsm at the

E
a

'ood
rmmmw
we:

Halnichi Daily News 1982
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rice Price Calculation Viewed
Tokyo MAINICIII DAILY NEWS in English 7 Jun 82 p 2
[Bditoriah "Rice Price Calculation")

[Text]

The National Central Council oi Agricultural'
Cooperatives has decided on a rice price demand
based on a new calculation method. Aces jingle the
existing calculation system. the price wouidhave to
be raised by about 30 percent. but the council said the.
raise this time would be 4.37 percent under Mew
calculation. ‘- -‘ * ’2' '

The Ministry of Agriculture. Forestry -_and
Fishery highly evaluated the attltudeoi the council.
saying that tiie new rice price calculatton'hietllod-is a
step forward toward a better imdersiandﬁgf‘of the
environment surrounding agriculture-'len'iuat he
remembered. however. that the government is lacing
a severe iiscal condition and that the-coatumers’rrlce
price is likely to be raised again nextyeariinder the
prevailing liscal situation. in this regard: we must
say that understanding oi the prevailiﬁsith’atlda is
still superilclal. The time is now M19? themoat
realistic calculation system to be workedpot. .~ _ r - .

'l'he coimcil's new calculation method should be
called a ltind oi index system. taking into aoeotlit the
rise of materials to be used lor rice planting am! labor
cost. This is certainly a step iorward cti’npared with
the demand oi the All Japan Farmersllnlancgllin
[or a 16.7 percent raise. . _ - -

The rice price having so much to do with people’s
living must be something easy for '13 all 'to im-
derstand. But. the calculation involved in the rice
price has been very complicated tip to now.
Moreover, it contained political twat“.
Hence. we demand that the rice iirloe- cam
' should be simple and rational. -

it is also necessary to take into account the
change in agriculture in working out a new
calculation method. Rice used to be the major pillar
oi agricultural production and subsldlslng'th'e'l'arm-
er's income by rice price has had a lustiiidble
ground. But. things have changed quite a lot in the
meantime. The recent rise in livestock production has
lowered the position of rice. Rice production by part-
time farmers has been on the increase.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It Is quite anachronistic to accord thofable
treatment to the rice price alone. The government
should work out a balanced price policy iii-connection
with rice. while the rice price should r'etlcct- the
supply and demand situation 0! rice itacit. m rlcc
price calculation method must be cha aﬁed Wically
so that the nation’s agricultural i natty can be
reconstructed.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News 1982

C80: 6120/289

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN CAPITAL ABROAD RECESS RECORD IN F781

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEHS in English 6 Jun 82 p 3

[Text]

Japan'sdrectneneuh- m.umma
vestmentsinmcalm.w regions mm Jewel's
ended March 31. en a mu “William
Ilia/olﬁmmmﬂlmJltﬁ; “WWW!“
«.mmmsonmmwnm, Investments Q‘M
the Finance Imam-y el- mam-nuam
muneedPrIdey. jump- [no he! no. .130

mmbuyaldtheuon m dented

a m at as investment” e no:
Winn-mm W‘ Meet

The sharp have”, the «"10er

stepped-up Investments tot 3N” 1W“

(250: [0120/2815

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070062-1
APRIL INDUSTRIAL GYPPUT DECLINE!) 0.9 PERCENT PRO! HARCR

'fnlzyo MAINICHI DAILY mews in English 27 May 82 p 5

mam“ E mm” mm
mmmwmmmﬁwm mm” mm
mm? “mm wwwwumwmm warm
ummmm mmwmmm w mum mum “mmm h
mmmﬂ a wmw? memmmmww mtmmmmemmm
mmmm .mmmmm m mum mwmmumm
ML“ WSWmemmmmmmmmmmmmmm

[Text]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TBCHIOLOGY

SEARCH FOR REVIVAL IN VARIOUS INDUSTRIES DISCUSSED

Tokyo union [BIZAI sensor in Japanese 1-3, 6-8 Apr 82

[1 Apr 82 p 7]

[Text] Automobile Industry

To Eat or To Be Eaten; Survival Depends on Donestic Sales

"A period of readjustment has arrived in the automobile industry, in which
automakers are obliged to consider long-range strategies with a premise of

reduced production" (Kiyoshi Kawashima, president of Bonds Technological
Research Industry).

"Japan's automobile industry has not experienced competition in the true
sense. Strict capital theory is expected to play a more inportent role in
the survival of the industry in the future" (Tekashi Ishihara, president
of Nissan Ibtor Co). '

The autonobile industry is harassed by trouble from within and Iron without.
Prom outside. Japan's automobile industry is labeled the "culprit" of the

trade friction, and under the name of self-regulation, automobile exports
are being placed under the control of the other party. From within, Japan's

automobile industry is suffering from slow demand as a result of the uture
consuner nsrket and the sluggish growth in net industrial income. A high
growth rate cannot be expected in either experts or domestic demd. so a
drastic strategy for survival is about to be unfolded under reduced growth
rate.

Exports Are About To Crash

The 1981 automobile exports (partial prospect) fell short of the results of
the previous year for the first time in 3 years, since 1978, with a reduction
of 6.3 percent to 3,809,700. This was laregely due to the self-regulated
export policy with regard to the United States inlemented since April 1981,
with a reduction of 6.7 percent in that of the previous year, to 1,680,000.
Exports to Europe are not bright either. The yen remained high with respect
to the European currencies, and the export coqetitive edge was dulled
sharply. The sales were so slow that the frame of the European import

12
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
restrictions could not be broken. Exports to the developing nations. which
used to make up for the reduction in exports to European nations, have also

lost momentum since last fall. The actual sales results in 1981 (January to
December) showed growth only in two regions: Africa (06.6 percent increase

over those of the previous year) and Oceania (23.0 percent increase over
those of the previous year).

The loss in export momentum became more marked this year. The passenger car

exports in January and February suffered a loss of 16.6 percent from those
in the same period of the previous year, to 618,600. Nothing exciting can

be reported up to April either. This is so partly because the 1982 exports
to the United States have been restricted to 1,600,000, the same nuaber as

the previous year. Although automakers are accepting orders in the hope that
the regulation frame may be readjusted during the latter half of the year,

when the 0.5. market nay pick up activity, it is not likely that this will
be realized. As long as the world market remains stagnant, the import regu-

lation of the United States and the European nations will not be relaxed,
while exports to the developing nations cannot be expected to grow rapidly

either.

According to an unofficial forecast made by the Japanese automobile indus-
try, its 1982 exports are expected to remain on the same level as the previous

year. However, this figure is based on the premise that the u.s. economy
will improve, so there is still danger of there being a drop in the previous
year's ratio 2 years in a row.

However. export profits are in good shape. As a result of an increase in the
exchange differential profit due to the relatively cheap yen and a shift to

exporting cars with larger added values, the amount of money taken in
increased even though the number of cars exported decreased. The high profits

of the automakers are in practice supported by the cheap yen.
"Domestic Market" Not Optimistic Either

0n the other hand, bitter battles are being fought on the domestic sales
front. The forecast made by the Automotive Industry Association for
domestic demand in passenger cars is an increase of 3.1 percent over that of
the previous year, to 2,962,000. However, the total sum for all automakers

came to more than 9.6 percent. Beginning with a lO-percent increase intro-
duced by the Toyota Motor Co and its sales department. all other automakers

are equally aggressive in their plans. The idea is to make up for export
losses by domestic sales, but the situation is severe.

The growth in disposable income since January 1981 is either on the decline

or holding at the same level, and personal consumtion is still in a long
dark tunnel. "Personal consumption will improve by the fall, and 3.1 per-

cent growth in passenger cars can be assured" (Toshio Nakamura, executive
director of the Automotive Industry Association). Although there are a

number of optimistic observations, postponement of the purchase of automobile
in the latter half period as the official automobile inspection period is

extended may become widespread, so the situation cannot be too optimistic.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Capital Power Still Counts

Automakers are putting all their energies into domestic sales in this
unfavorable environment. "Cars with larger added values for exports and
less expensive cars for domestic sales will be the 1982 sales strategy"
(Kaichi Kaneo, vice president of Nissan Motor Go).

"To be sure, there will be a price war, but we are prepared" (Rideo Tojo,
president of Mitsubishi Automotive Industry). They are all showing a
fight not only to secure their own share but also to cut into the shares
of the other parties.

Beginning with its Sunday opening policy. Toyota is strengthening its tacti-
cal measures, including visiting the dealerships by the company staff and
cultivating new sales channels. Uhder the circumstances in which the pie
will not become larger. the only way to increase the number of cars sold is
to capture the rivals' markets. Capital power is the thing that can back up
this effort. If by taking advantage of its superior capital power Toyota
launches itself into the domestic market, then confusion will be unavoidable.
The automobile industry is about to enter into an era in which superiority
will settle the matter.

 

1. Changes in domestic demand and export of passenger cars (based on an

investigation made by the Automotive Industry Association)
2. Domestic

3. Export

a. Million cars

5. Year: 1976, 1977. 1978. 1979. 1980, 1981, 1982

6. (Note) 1981 figures are based on a partial estimate. The 1982 fore-

cast refers to the domestic market only. Exports are not given.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[2 Apr 82 p 6]
[Text] Food Industry

Heavy Pressure Bxerted by Reduction in Income; Betting on Timely Products

"The outstanding hit merchandise in recent years includes only the high-
quality instant noodles" (Tadao Suzuki, vice president of Ajinomoto Co).
The food industry, which was expected to escape the recession, deepened its
worried look when no move-eat in demd was perceived after the new year.

Ham sausage is a typical example. Sales of ham sausage, which kept up a
double-digit growth rate riding on the tide of Westernized dining habit, has

lost demand. The 1981 total production was 611,000 tons, with only the
slight increase of 2 percent over the previous year's ratio. The 1980

growth rate was also only about 1 percent, so an almost no-growth situation
has continued for 2 years already. "The goods does not sell even when it is

put on sale in the supermrket at reduced prices" (Joji Nevada, executive
director of Yukijirushi Food Co). Every maker is at a loss.

Reduction in Quality and Bad Cycle

Reduction in demnd for popular pressed ham is particularly significant. Its

sales showed a significant drop last year, with a l7-percent reduction from
the previous year. As a result, the price also plunged. The price was

successfully raised to an average of 7 percent last May with great diffi-
culty, but today it has plunged to the level before the price rise.

In order to maintain profits, some are even making the painful choice of
lowering the quality lately. As a result, inferior has is put on the
market, which further spurs customers to stay away from hem products, and
the price of ham is forced to drop again. A vicious cycle has been set
into motion. "The pass rate of JAS (Japanese Agricultural and Forestry
Regulation) inspection, which used to be nearly 100 percent, is now down to
90 percent." The worsening quality is a matter of concern.

The reason for slow demand is due mainly to sluggish growth in net personal
income. According to an investigation carried out by a private organiza-
tion, meat consumption, more than any other food item, is most sensitive to

personal income. Since there is no prospect for a significant increase in
net personal income, the pessimistic viewpoint that "we will not be able to

get out of this tunnel for some time to come" is permeating the industry.

worse, the hoof and mouth disease among Denmark's hogs is creating an even
worse environment in which to operate. Imports of pork from Denmark have

been banned since 1 March. Danish pork occupies approximately 30 percent of
all pork imported by Japan. This imported pork constitutes the raw material
for bacon and roast ham. The hoof and mouth disease has spread widely, and
the industry estimates that "the import ban may not be lifted for the next

5 years." If so, the price of pork is bound to rise. Taking into consid-
eration the cheap yen of late, the cost is expected to rise approximately

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10 percent. "Previously. it rained softly; since April, it has poured"
(Toyoharu Machi. president of Prins Ban Co). The outlook is getting even

cloudier.
Glanges in Consuwtion Structure, Too

The inset of dull demand on the neat industry is felt even by the indus-
tries related to aninal husbandry. for crawls, the mined feed industry
registered negative growth for 2 years, 1980 and 1981. and there is no sign
of recovery this year. The inset is further felt by the oil industry, which
supplies soybean residues to the feed industry and their profits are worsen-
ing rapidly. "A structural depression nay be setting in" (hitsuo Pukswa,
Nissei Oil Co).

The sense of depression is felt not only by the industry related to animal
husbandry. Instant noodles, which peaked in 1979 with 3.8 billion servings
(the nutter inspected by JAS). experienced negative growth in 1980 and 1981,
2 years in a row. Bread is also experiencing a low growth rate of 1-2 per-
cent since 1978. In the case of the instant noodle industry, January pro-
duction suffered a reduction, due to a were winter, of 18.5 percent fron tha1

of January the previous year. 'lhe industry is enveloped in an eerie atnos-
phere: "Sons significant changes my be taking place in our consunption

structure" (Nobuo Ida. vice president of Senyo Food Co). In the field of
instant noodles, the sales of high-quality instant noodles with a coupli-

cated procedure are going well, and health drinks, yogurt, and soybean milk
are also selling well. The sales of these products are expected to show a

strong increase of 20-30 percent over that of the previous year. In the
field of neat products. which are in bad shape in general, high-grade roast
hen sales are showing a healthy growth of 10 percent over those of the
previous year, and the prospect is said to be bright for this year also.

Shor t-Lived liit Products

It would be fine if consuqtion of food as a whole could be stimulated by
these popular itens of merchandise. but the reality is quite bitter. To the
extent that the hit products are gaining in popularity, soae other existing

products are losing popularity and ground. The population has reached 110
nillion and is not growing appreciably any nore. lhe per capits caloric
intake has also peaked at 2.100 kilocalories a day. So if the net personal
incone does not increase, than it is no watery that denand for foodstuffs
cannot increase any care.

what is more troublesome is the fact that consuners have been capricious
lately, so the life cycle of a product is getting shorter and shorter. A

hit product this year does not necessarily sell well the following year. .
"He have entered an era in which the food producer is in need of a tech-

nology with which to sonehow predict the likes and dislikes of the consuner
and produce tinsly new products. and nanagenent and production forces that
will carry out this feat" (III: Suzuki).

16
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In any case, the "food industry has entered into a zero sun society; froe now
on, it is either set, or be eaten" (Tsksyuki Naganochi, president of
Shinriken Vita-in). Recently, a chorus dennding ”income tax reduction" has
been heard fron the industry. They have cone to a point where, even with

this neasure, they may have difficulty in getting out of the trouble.

 

emancsm
01) man

 

1. Heat consueption levels off
2. (Note) Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery data
3. 10,000 tone

4. Han sausage production
5. Year: 1977. 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981

[3 Apr 82 p 6]
[Text] Paper and Pulp Industry
Complaint of Foreign Offensive; Iuplenentation of Structural Renovation

Demands Level Off

On the 1st of this month, KITI revealed to the paper and pulp industry its
1982 prospect for donestic demand (guideline) for three kinds of paper,
including court paper, which have nede up a depression cartel so far.
According to this forecast, the growth rate over the previous year is

2 percent for the top grade paper, 6 percent for court paper. and minus 6
percent for craft paper. Of these. the top grade paper and court paper,
among numerous paper and pulp products, are considered to have surplus power

for growth. If these two kinds of paper can expect only so such increase in
denand, then either "the industry as a whole can expect at best an increase

of 2-3 percent. or the industry should resign itself to zero growth" (Paper
Industry Division of HITI). .

The painful struggle the paper and pulp industry is experiencing today is due
in part to the expansion cospotition it carried on even after the first oil
shock. As a result, it is said to be 5 years behind, corpsred with other
industries. in switching over to a reduced production systen today. Bach
conpany is aggressively solidifying its own systea ,"to build an enterprise
which can go into the black with 60 percent Operation” (Oji Paper Co); "to
be in the black with 75 percent operation" (Senyo lokusaku Pulp Co); "to pay
hack 200 billion yen in loans in 2 years" (Daishowa Paper). But the fact is

that the past bills are not so easy to pay back.

17
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, as a result of drastic aessures isplemented last year, including
formation of a depression cartel and easing up on construction of new facil-
ities, the prospect is bright now that they may be able one way or another
to ride out this adversity, which has been termed "the worst since the war."
"The industry will coordinate more closely on matters related to production
and sales. No one will act recklessly any more as they did in the past"
(Pumio Tanaka. president of 031 Paper Co). It is the common understanding
of the industry that the business performance has hit the bottom and, though
very slowly. it is beginning to make an upturn.

However, just as the constitutional transformation toward low growth began
gradually to take shape, a new problen cropped up suddenly. Large quantities
of imports poured in from the United States, Canada, Korea and Taiwan. In
spite of the cheap yen, imported goods continue to flood the market this
year.

For exanple, custom statistics of February specifically tell the frightful
story: newspaper stock, 26,900 tons (34.9 times that of the same month last
year); craft paper, 1,700 tons (1.6 times); jute liner for corrugated card-
board, 4,600 tons (1.8 times); and craft liner, 15,500 tons (1.7 times). The
import volume of newspaper stock and craft liner reached 13-16 percent of the
domestic production in February.

The United States Demands Open Market

In addition, the 0.8. Government demands that the domestic protection
measures, such as administrative directive and depression cartel, be discon-
tinued and paper and pulp products be included in the 14 open market items.

HITI would like to avoid responding to the 0.8. demand, using the fact that
imports are increasing steadily as an excuse, but it is not yet clear how

this problem will eventually be settled.

Moreover, recently, 0.8. and Canadian enterprises, which are in a decisively
superior position on matters related to energy and the cost of the raw mate-
rial chips, are more actively making inroads into the Japanese market. The
largest exporter of chips to Japan, Reyerhaeuser Coepany of the United
States, revealed that it is going to establish sales headquarters of corru-
gated cardboard (craft liner) in Tokyo and Osaka in July. The corrugated
cardboard industry speculates that "many fir-s will probably jump at the

imported goods if the price is 10 percent cheaper than the domestic
product."

The largest Canadian paper and pulp producer, McMillan Brodel Co, also made
public its intention to export its main product. newspaper stock, to Japan.

“Supply bases will be set up in various major cities, so that the newspaper
companies will not be bothered by a port strike."

After two oil shocks and the subsequent inflation of the imported chip price,

the paper and pulp industry expected and worried about a sudden increase in
imported goods. Their worries materialized at a faster pace than they

anticipated.

18
FORINHﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY
Repeating the Sane Mistakes rude by the Aluminum Industry

Iuports fron Korea and Taiwan are nintained in part by Japan's stable market
condition. The present import pace will be maintained unless the mrket
conditions experience s significant decline. The export offensive taken by
the 0.3. and Canadian industries are due in part to the pressure building up
in each country as a result of the trenendous rash of facility expansions
that are taking place in each comtry. No doubt, this export offensive is
expected to last a long time.

The structural reform measure (surplus facility disposition measure) prepared
by the paper and pulp industry as its trusp card for the survival of the
industry is to be automticelly carried over one sore year, because MITI's
specific depressed industries teqorery treatment neasure, in which the
paper and pulp industry is included. is to be extended one more year. This
was probably a stroke of good luck for the industry.

The structural renovation neasure the industry has been studying internally
since last year has a strong coloration of being a measure which ettenpts to
balance the demand and supply of the domestic nrket only. Now that a steady
flow of iQorted goods has bacone a fact, this fact must also be taken into
consideration. In the aaeantine, "strengthening the international competitive

edge" vill probably be the biggest the-e, and the question of reorganizing
the industry my also be raised.

Unless it is handled very carefully, this industry may repeat the same nie-
takes made by the aluninun industry and the petrochemical industry whose
livelihood was all but shut off by the foreign offensive. As such, this

structural renovation measure has profound significance for Japan's paper
and pulp industry.

 

Key:
1. Changes in paper and cardboard production
2. Paper, 10,000 tone
3. Paper

4. Cardboard
5. Cardboard, 10,000 tons

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[6 Apr 82 p 8]

[Text] Fiber Industry

Synthetic Fiber Export Prospects Dark; Novelty Wins Fabric Market
Big Offensive Pron Korea and Taiwan

The synthetic fiber industry, which is having a hard time due to slow domes-

tic demand, has encountered another source of headache. "At any rate, it is
like having a “aruto whirlpool in your backyard" (08am Uno, president of
Japanese Chemical Fiber Association and president of Toyo Textile). "while
Japan is holding back on investment in facilities, Korea and Taiwan are
expanding rapidly. Nothing is the setter, but it is like scooping water with
a bamboo basket" (Taugihide Pujiyoshi, president of Tbray). The leaders of
the big synthetic fiber comanies are disgusted with the Korean and Taiwan
facility expansion offensive. The inortstion of cotton yarn from Korea and

Pakistan has increased so significantly that trade friction just opposite to
that of automobile exports is already taking place. The industry is appre-

hensive that what happened to cotton yarn "could also happen to synthetic
fibers. . ." (President Uno).

hbreover, with this happening at a time when Japanese exports have hit a
slump, the countenance of the indmtry can only darken further. The year
before last and also last year, Japan's fiber eaports (chemical fibers

occupying approximately 70 percent) were very strong, breaking the previous
record. The synthetic fiber industry, which was shrinking and balancing due

to the residual sympton of a long depression brought about by the oil shock,
somehow managed to lake up for the inactive domestic densnd by active exports.
Since September last year. however, the export situation has worsened rapidly
and the monthly amount of signed sales contracts suffered a 10-15 percent
decrease over that of the previous year for the ease month. This state of
affairs continued until the first quarter of this year, when China, Japan's

major export target, discontinued its contract. The declining trend thus
became even more acute.

"If the opportunity arises, a recovery may be ads that is as rapid as the
fall was hard; this is the hope held by the synthetic fiber industry, but it
is also feared that such an opportunity may never come" (Setsuo Taura,
director of fiber headquarters. executive director of Suaitomo Shoji). Even
if a recovery can be made during the latter half period, the sales are not

expected to exceed the level of the year before last, that is, approximately
$6.3 billion.

Middle and Far Eastern Countries Withhold Purchases

The worsening export situation is due nainly to the worsening depression in
the advanced nations and consequent reduction in demand. Moreover, Middle
and Far Eastern nations are withholding purchases because oil money has
become scarce due to a reduction in oil sales, while Grins, where the import
rights have been delegated to the local governnent, is in the process of

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sorting out the past excess of imported goods. It is feared that the

prospects for synthetic fiber exports during the second quarter period on
the basis of the monetary amount will be 20 percent less tlmn the previous

year—the worst situation so far.

As a result, the matter of reduced production has surfaced in the ﬂskuriku
area. where polyester long fiber fabrics are manufactured. Since April. the
Fukui plant has been operating at a 20 percent reduced rats. After" the
textile plant introduced the waterjet loom, which is termed a revolutionary
weaving machine, its cloth production capacity increased significantly. And
now exports are declining, so it has ended up with a considerable amomt of

excess capacity.

Unlike the synthetic fiber industry which is suffering from inactive exports.
the cotton textile industry is just about at the breaking point. thanks to a
sudden increase in imported goods. The cotton yarn inert during the mnths
of January and February this year was 60,000 bales each, setting the highest
record in history. Even after Septeﬂaer last year when the depression cartel
was called off, the industry was voluntarily reducing production by approxi-
mtely 15 percent and, in order to regulate imports. requesting HIT! to
initiate MFA (agreeIent on an international trade in fiber products). How-
ever, MITI's attitude was that "it is difficult to implement an exceptional
protective trade policy for the fiber industry only." Therefore, industrial
circles feel powerless: "The cotton yarn industry cannot help but sink in a

quagmire . "

If you look at clothing mterisls, you can note a shortage of bright Inte-
rials. An increase in the sum received from sales may be expected due to a
higher unit price, but there is no sign of an increase in demand itself,
because the consumers have chests full of stockpiled materials. Therefore,
a mvement to introduce a novelty such as a foreign brand is becoming
active, but only a small fraction will succeed and many attempts will nke a
poor showing'.

The total February sales of fabrics. which occupy 40 percent of the total '
sales. in department stores nationwide registered only a mild increase of 3.7
percent over those of the previous year. However, even this figure is con-
sidered exaggerated. A certain mainstay apparel ulcer is said to have dis-
patched its staff to the store front and scrutinized the sales situation of
the fabrics. They found out that the results were not that good in reality.
"Although we cannot say this for all department stores. it appears that

there are sales unrelated to the true demand. This is like 'an Inerial
Headquarters announcement,” said a person connected with the apparel nker

with a forced smile.

The sales of fabrics recently may be characterised as "clearly limping"
(Hiromichi Inegawa, president of Renown Incorporated). While those items of

merchandise in high demand are showing a high growth rate of a 20-30 percent
increase over the previous year, those items for which demand is low are

showing extremely poor results. Roughly speaking, lightweight fabrics
(pants, blouses. sweaters, and jogging-suits) are doing well, while heavy
fabrics (suits, coats) are not.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sales of apparel fluctuate widely not only according to the item of
merchandise, but also according to the maker and retail store. This
phenomenon depends on whether the dealer was able to anticipate the line of
gpods in high demand. and whether the maker took the risk by betting on the
line of goods in high demand. ’The fact that the big makers are doing
satisfactorily while the nediun and snall makers are fighting a desperate
battle for survival is attributable to the difference in the ability to
gather information and also to the robust constitution of the big makers,

which can take risks.

5(xes-ennnr

 

Key :
1. Fiber exports a. Previous year growth rate
2. Export results 5. (Ministry of Finance, Customs statistics)
3 . $10 million

[7 Apr 82 p 7]
[Text] 011 Industry
Painful Cheap Yen, Reduced Demand; Cannot Await Improved Constitution

After a month-long hesitation, the oil industry raised the price of oil
products by 3,000 yen per kiloliter. The price rise this time does not have
a "just cause" such as a crude oil price rise caused by OPEC. The only rea-

son for the rise is the rise in crude oil cost due to the cheap yen. Hhile
the prospect for recovery from a large amount of red ink incurred in early

1981 is not yet certain, the industry has encountered another difficulty
brought about by the cheap yen. within the industry is a sense of urgency:
"We must brace ourselves for what is to come."

At the Limit of Heakened Constitution

Since the first shock that occurred in late 1973, the oil industry has been
continuously troubled by two "external factors": the crude oil price rise

effected by OPEC and the unusually high yen exchange rate. The difficulty
encountered this time is slightly different in nature fros those of the

past. "bile the crude oil price based on the 0.8. dollar is falling as a
result of the oil glut. the crude oil cost based on the yen is rising as a

result of changes in the yen exchange rate.

22
INDR‘OIHWCJAI.IJSIZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The industry has to ride out a painful situation consisting of "a price rise

as a result of the oil glut." "hat is worse is the fact that the strength
of the industry has been weakened almost to the limit. During the period

from April to September, the industry accumulated huge losses amounting to
a total of approximately 500 billion yen in operating costs due to poor
sales activities. which is compounded by the exchange losses.

The oil industry has had the experience of being in the red 2 years in a row.
In 1974, inediately after the oil shock, 28 oil companies lost a total of
approximately 79 billion yen, and another 84 billion yen in 1975. At that
time, they were able to balance the books by selling some of their properties.
Today, they are in such a state that "the red ink can no longer be mds up
because they are running out of properties to sell" (Zentaro Rskayama, presi-
dent of Daikyo 011).

Industrial Demand Plunges

There are further reasons for anxiety. One is the fact that the drop in
demand for oil products which became apparent in 1980 is still going on.
What is pulling the entire mrket down is the reduction in industrial demand
for naphtha and type C heavy oil. The demand for type c heavy oil was most
significantly affected by the conversion to burning coal by the celent
industry and the halt to burning oil in the blast furnaces by the iron and
steel industry. The sales of type c heavy oil in 1981 (January-Decenber)
was only 65 million kiloliters, a drop of 25 percent from the peak estab-
lished in 1979. Sales of naphtha were also significantly affected by the
cheaper imports, and the 1981 sales experienced a drop of 31.3 percent from
the peak established in 1978.

The 1981 gasoline sales experienced a small increase, 1.9 percent, over that
of the previous year, but showed no appreciable fluctuations in the past 2

years. According to a tentative forecast unde by the Resource and Energy ‘
Office of HITI, the demand for fuel oil in the first half period (April-
September) of 1982 is expected to drop 2.9 percent over that of the same
period of the previous year. The reduction in demand for naphtha (3.9 per-

cent) and type C heavy oil (5.5 percent), in particular, is expected to
continue.

Prospect 18 Dark for Reduction in Facilities

Surrounded by difficulties including the cheap yen and reduced demand, the

industry is resigned to the fact that "we cannot do anything but to imple-
ment measures within our own power to improve our own constitution" (Kasuo

Okita, president of Shell Oil). The first problem the industry Inst tackle
is the disposition of the surplus facilities. The Resource and Energy Office

of HlTI is planning to ask each oil company to present its own disposition
plan by the end of June based on an oil supply plan (for 1982-86) which is
to be published in May.

The total capacity of norml pressure distillation (crude oil treatment)
facilities owned by the industry is 5.910 million barrels a day

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1 barrel - 159 liters), and the average operation rate in 1981 was only
60. 9 percent. According to the tentative supply plan of the Resource and
Energy Office, the average operation rate during the period April to
Septeﬂaer this year will drop further to 53. 7 percent. This office fore-
casts, therefore, a long-range daily need of no sore than about 1 nillion
barrels, so that spproximtely 15 percent of the facilities will become
unnecessary.

Against this background, unbera of the industry, in groups centered around
the big wholesale conpanies, have taken up discussion of the optimum opera-
tion rate of each refinery. however, this is the first tine the oil industry
has been forced to trin the excess fat by its own hand, and there are my
uncertainties including the eqloynent problen and the local reaction asso-
ciated with the disposition of the facilities. There is no knowing how far

and how deliberatively each cowany will carry out the countermeasures in
order to rebuild a new production systen.

Another problem concerns the structural renovation of the circulation depart-
nent. Anong the wholesale coupanies is a growing realization that the
presence of "more than 60,000 gasoline stations nationwide constitutes a hot-
bed for ilproper cometition." however, the special firns that handle the
distribution are almost all independent operators, so the idea of the whole-

salers nay not readily per-sate to the terminals, and thus rationalization
of circulation and inprovenent of efficiency is expected to take a long tine.

The oil industry was pressed by increasing denand during a period of rapid
growth, so its attention was caught by the rash of price rises after the
first oil shock. And now, all the hidden problem that have accumulated have
erupted all at once. The industry is treading s thorny path with the aware-
ness that "zero growth in oil demand will continue for a long tine to cone"
(Tokio Nagayam, president of the Oil League).

 

Key:
1. Gasoline and type c heavy oil sales novenent over four half periods
2. 10 million kiloliters

3. Gasoline
4. Type C heavy oil
5. Estimate

6. lbnths (quarters)
7. Years: 1980, 1981, 1982

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[8 Apr 82 p 7]
[Text] Petrochemical Industry
Troubled by Demand for Lower Price; Reorganization of Industry Unawoidable

"Polystyrene, which used to be an honor student even during the depression,
also failed. Since then, all petrochemical products have become delinquents"

(Takeshi Dokata, president of Sumitomo Chemical Industry).

Polystyrene is one of the five major synthetic resins, together with high
pressure polyethylene, medium and low pressure polyethylene, polypropylene,
and vinyl chloride. It achieved brilliant growth as a material used in
electrical and other industries. packaging, and general merchandise. when
the depression set in during the sunner of the year before last, when the
other four resins failed one another another, the demand for polystyrene
and its market activity still retained strong. Now, the situation has
become uncertain even for this "good boy."

Directly Hit by Depression in Audio Industry

First of all, it was hit directly by the depression in audio products. In
the past several years, the increase in polystyrene production was elmst
all absorbed by the electric industry. However, the market deteriorated

rapidly and "we have considered we had to make production adjustments
without warning at the molding fabrication stage since last fall" (Hitsui

Toa tau Chemical) .

As early as last spring, abnornml conditions in the materials used in audio
products such as stereos, radios, cassettes, and tape recorders were

noticed, but the situation has worsened since last fall. Recently, even
material for the V'l'R is not in big dennd, and the impact of dull export
activity in household electric products is keenly felt.

Another main use of polystyrene, packaging material, is also suffering from
poor market conditions. The white trays used for packaging vegetables and

meat in the supermarket are made almost exclusively of polystyrene.
"December is usually the month in which the deaand peaks. We don't know
why, but the demand dropped last Decesber, and we have been forced to adjust
production accordingly since January" (Asahi Dow).

The impact of a movement to "light, thin, short. and small" is also pain-
fully felt. Today, almost all TV cases are made of a plastic material such
as polystyrene. However. miniaturization of TV continues, and the total
number of units smaller than 16 inches in size exceeds 60 percent of all
products. As a result, the amount of plastics used is reduced significantly.

Asahi Dow, which is leading the polystyrene industry, had a huge lucky shot

recently. A plastic toydmodel kit "mobile warrior Gandam [phonetic]" mde of
its polystyrene became a big hit, and 6,000 tons of resins were sold last

year on this single item alone. The material for cassettes used in the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

popular headphone stereo is also selling well. However. these sales are not
big enough to make up for losses due to stagnant demand.

Even Polystyrene

"The slow market is due not only to stagnant demand. It_is painful to
realize that it is due to excessive competition among the producers, whose
expanded facilities are now in operation" (a person in charge of sales of a
certain polystyrene maker).

In order to absorb the higher raw material cost. since last fall the petro-
chemical coapanies have been making plans to raise the price of almost all
products. however. the price rise has had a difficult time getting through.
A reduction in price on certain products has been demanded by consumers,
with a slump in demand as an excuse. Polystyrene makers are receiving a

demand to lower the prices by such big consumers as light electric appliance
makers and supermarkets. The makers are tense with suspense: "A month or so

is the crucial period in which either the demand for lower prices will be
rejected or the makers will buckle under to the demand."

In spite of the dull market activity, a number of powerful polystyrene makers,
including Shukko Petrochemical, Dainippon Ink Chemical Industry, and Hitsui-
Toatsu. have started operation of new facilities one after another since last
summer. Although they are aiming at the development of a brand new applica-
tion field, the opening of these new facilities no doubt contributed to the
sag in the supply and demand balance and added fuel to the mood for lower
prices. The wave of excessive competition has caught up with polystyrene, the
honor student of the petrochemical industry.

The offensive launched by cheap imported goods is also contributing to the
pressure to lower prices. Polystyrene imports last year amounted to 36
million tons. The same amount was imported in January of this year alone,
and the imports increased in February. Approximately one-third of the total
imports consist of relatively high-quality U.S. products. The petrochemical
industry laments: "In order to ease the trade friction and also to prepare
for exports to the United States. the household electric appliance makers
have begun to use materials made in the United States aggressively.”

"As to structural reform of the petrochemical industry, everybody agrees that

'the nuuber of enterprises must be reduced,’ but everybody disagrees when it
comes to specifics: 'don't shut down mdne'; however, there are ways to

reconcile these two, including mutual production consignment" (Yasunobe
Kishimoto. president of Shows Electric Industry).

In addition to excessive competition within the industry, the industry is
also troubled by the high raw material cost. stagnant denand. and invasion
by cheap imports. The degree of polystyrene slump is relatively light. but
numerous petrochemical products have trodden the path of vinyl chloride resin
since last summer toward a structural depression even with intensified active
ities carried out by the collective sales companies.

26
FINI(MHHCIA1.US£4DNLY
Good Material in Imported Raw Material

Nevertheless, a number of hopeful materials appeared when the voice of spring
was heard.

The unsettled problem related to the reforn of the naphtha (crude oil) import
system, which is the raw material for the petrochemical industry, has a
prospect of being settled for the present. Early implementation of public
works which can stimulate the demand for petrochemical products has been

decided on. These measures will no doubt benefit the industry on the cost
side and demand side, but will not be a quick remedy for the depression.

Intensive industrial reorganization as a drastic measure to escape from
depression is being considered; it is believed to be the inevitable route
that must be followed by everybody. Since last fall, mutual production
consignment between two companies has become quite popular in the fields of
vinyl chloride resins and other synthetic resins, raw material for ferti-
lizer. and other chemical products. This is an attempt by all parties con-
cerned to increase their benefit by concentrating production on those plants
having a stronger cost competitive edge. There are too many enterprises in
the petrochemical industry. For example, there are 12 companies manufactur-
ing mainly the basic raw material, ethylene. Those companies which are slow
in establishing a cooperative strategy will be forced into a more and more
disadvantageous situation. Competition for leadership in the reorganization
of the industry, on which the survival of the industry hinges, is getting
hotter and hotter.

 

Key:
1. Movement of ethylene production, the basic raw material of the
petrochemdcal industry

2. 10,000 tons

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9113
CSO: b106/97

27
FOR OFF1C1A1.USEGDNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND 1mm

EFFORTS TO DEVELOP NEH ENERGY SOURCES DESCRIBE

Tokyo SW DAIAHONDO in Japanese 27 hr. 3 Apr 82

[Article by Gene Gregory: "Japan To Extricate Itself Fran Oil Dependence"!
[27 Mar 82 pp 91-93]

[Excerpts] Highly Practical Japanese Nuclear Fusion

Influential Japanese scientists subnitted unusually denanding advice to the
Japan Atonic Energy Conission in Phrch 1981, requesting that Japan act
ill-ediately and concentrate its effort on construction and operation of a

600-800 mgawatt experinental nuclear fusion reactor coating in 10 figures

in dollars by 1993 and on construction of a large-scale "engineering experi-
nental reactor" by 1986. If this tinetable is observed-mend the possibility
is extrenely high-~Japenese industries will lead in the practical application

of this new technology in the field of thermonuclear fusion control.

In Japan. the Nuclear fusion Comil chaired by lbrishige believes that so:
of the steps which were previously considered necessary for the development

of nuclear fusion can be onitted. According to the advanced present tine-
table. nuclear fusion generation is predicted to be co-aercialized by the
year 2010. However, some Japanese scientists think it possible to expedite
the developnent further if only nore hunsn resources are invested in this

project.

For all, it is clear that nuclear fusion cannot solve the current energy
problena of Japan. Indeed, there is no single answer to these problem.

What are being elphatically pursued now are various conservation practices
and substitute energy projects.

Champion of Energy-Saving

Japanese industries have consolidated their status as chsnpions in the tech-

nology of producing more with less energy due to the concerted conservation
efforts in 1980. Before the oil crisis of 1979, Japanese industries

increased energy consuaption by an average of 0.6 percent for each 1 percent
gain of GNP. However, in 1980, the total energy consunption on the contrary
decreased by 0.49 percent for each 1 percent gain of NIP. In ”-80, the

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Japanese economy showed a 3.8-percent growth while energy consumption was
reduced by 3.8 percentuby 10 percent in the case of oil consumption.

It is clear that this is not an_ isolated phenomenon but a long-term trend
which resulted from continuous conservation efforts. In the 6 years from
1973-1979, GNP rose 24.5 percent while the increase in the total energy

consumption was held as low as 8.25 percent and the increase in oil con-
sunption was only 1 percent.

This fantastic danpsning of energy consumption growth can be attributed
primarily to the following three factors:

—Power demand by the raw material related energy guzzling industries was
curtailed combined with the effects of a low economic growth rate.

—Electricity conservation technology for home electric appliances has Iade
a giant step forward.

"Consumer energy use was reduced by the 50 percent utility rate peak which
took effect in April 1980.

These factors definitely reflect not merely a temporary phenomenon but a
basic structural change in power consumption.

'lhe Industrial Structure Council of Japan admitted that the most important
task of the industrial structural reform was to change the general rela-

tionship between energy and the industrial system. Inversely. they accepted
the fact that the most effective approach to achieve large-scale energy

conservation and to introduce substitute energy sources was a basic reform
of the industrial structure.

'lhe council made the following explicit statement in its latest report:
"For this purpose, we must intensify efforts from the supply-side. for
instance efforts for securing a stable supply of oil and developing substi-
tute energy. Simultaneously. the demand-side must promote various projects
for the development of an industrial structure which is such higher in
energy efficiency and much lower in dependence on oil-base energy than the
present industrial structure through energy conservation technology and
introduction of nonoil energy."

Import Oil Dependence Reduced to 50 Percent

In May 1980, :1 "Substitute Energy Source Law" was enacted in order to pursue
the objectives. and a public corporation called the "New Energy Development

Organization" was established in October of the same year for coordination of
the substitute energy projects. The simply expressed purpose of the organi-

zation means that the import oil dependence will be reduced to 50 percent by
1990 from the current 75 percent, which. in other words, means a three-fold

increase in nonoil energy supplies in the 1980's.

29
FOR OI-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What claims the largest percentage among the substitute energy sources based
upon this supply target is coal. Coal iworts are expected to be raised to

163.5 million tons per year by 1990 from 92.5 million tons in 1980. At the
same time. we (liquefied natural gas) inorts will be raised to 105 million
tons fron 17 million tons.

However, in Japan, it is nuclear energy that is considered the most promising
intermediate substitute energy source in parallel with coal. Since nuclear

energy is a model of a system industry which is known for the concentrated
use of advanced technologies. its davelopnent is awaited with great expecta-

tions even for the future modernization of the general Japanese infrastruc-
ture.

The high temperature and energy density of atomic energy will open an avenue

for a revolutionary new energy system which cannot be developed with regular
energy sources.

Among the types of energy used in an industrial society, electric power
claims only 30-40 percent. The rest is consumed as fuels or thermal energy
in the industrial process. The very high tenerature reactor (VH’l'R) cur-
rently being developed “.111, on the other hand, reduce gas and synthetic gas
used as fuels and raw materials for the chemical and iron and steel indus-

tries. and in effect will curtail the dependence on coal and oil energy
sources.

The Japan Atomic Margy Research Institute is projecting the operation of a

50 megawatt comercial vm by 1987. Meanwhile. nuclear power generation by
regular reactors will increase over three times by 1990 to 51-53 megawatts
from 15.5 megawatts in 1980.

Ate-police

'lhe biggest target is the realisation of independent nuclear energy by the
end of the 1980 a both in reactors and fuel production. Ever since the
initial oil crisis, the Japan Develop-ant Bank has granted low interest
loan to nine power cospanies for the purchase of Japanese-made nuclear
engineering plants. and has stimleted both R G D and production of nuclear
engineering plant ukersuﬁitachi. Toshiba and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
in particular.

In order to assure independence in nuclear fuel supply by 1990, the Power
Reactor and Nuclear Iuel Development Corporation jointly operated by the

private and public sectors has intensified its efforts in studies on fuel
reprocessing at the ‘Iolui Research Establishment of the Japan Atomic Energy
Research Institute. Also, an agreement was concluded in regard to funding
for the establishment of commercial reprocessing facilities by private

corporations. Simultaneously, the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute
is promoting the development of a fast breeder. The fast breeder does not

require enriched fuels and can economically produce energy supplies on a
large scale until such time as power from nuclear fusion becomes usable.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
    
     

On 9 (3)
Varzu-s-an I) (8)

o a~n-9:(¢wt)(5 “'9’”
O ‘9‘- (5)
(ma-usual
w“ sunsets "(3)7
‘3 magi.) mm
'a
T .. ( _ .
(1) g...” (“M " '" marsrafgiz)
E 112??" ’ )n- u") Janos-r
5 ( t “It“ ) (v Inhwuu) (16)
3"" Err-mt 1.132%.” (19)
Q - (so-w: 9mm (20)
= twmnmvr—anm (22)

”(u-'0 ownzwwu (23)

$25)® ..,:s'zz:r::r‘t2.)

@m- «mum» (26)

U 0' 0’
w "(2) «Juan '(27ﬁa:nnn

Present State of Nuclear Fusion Research and Development by Method in Various
Countries

Key:
1. Density x confinement time

2. Ion temperature
3. TOKAMK

Io. Stellarator (heliotron)

5. High beta toroidal system (pinch)

6. Mirror

7. (Note) gray part indicates actual values while black part indicates
estimate (target values)

8. Nuclear fusion reactor conditions

9. Threshold plasma conditions

10. Japan

11. America

12. Soviet Union

13. Alcator

14. Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute

15. American Princeton Plasma Physics Research Institute
16. Soviet Kurchatov Research Institute

17. Heliotron 3 (Kyoto University)

18. 'Blectrotechnical Laboratory

19. Gama 10 (Tsukuba University)

20. American Lawrence Livermore Laboratory

21. (Nagoya University)

22. West German Utofas Research Institute

23. Wendelstein VII A (Heat German Garching Research Institute)
26. Bambi toroidal system (Nagoya University)

25. Gauss 6 (Tsukuba University)
26. Electrotechnical Laboratory

27. Source: Science and Technology Agency

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Changes in Nuclear Development Budgets in rhjor Countries

Key:
1. (Note) unitary use nuclear 6. Japan
developnsnt budget of each 7. France
country is excluded 8. West Germany
2. 100 million yen 9. England
3. 100 million yen 10. Source: The Japan Atomic
A. Anerica Energy Co-iasion
5e "-78

In order to overcome the opposition of local cousunities to the construction
of nuclear power plants, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry

has launched a highly insginative project which codines the construction of
nuclear power plants with the promotion of the developnent of industries and

commities. This project is one of the highlights of the “-82 budget and
will be in operation as of April 1982. MIT! will first research and investi-

gate these new ”atomlice" site candidates. Meanwhile, the government
subsidies will be increased to 67 billion yen from the current fiscal year's

7 billion yen within the 3 year research and investigation period. in order
to asplify the direct incentive for the nuclear energy projects.

In anticipation of the increase in the role of nuclear energy as described
above, a historical ground-breaking ceremony was held in Niomschi, to the
southwest of Takanatsu. conencing the construction of the world's first
facility for recovery of uranium fron salt water. This $2.5-billion facility
extracts uraniua from salt water which is sucked up by pipelines imbedded in
the bottom of the sea and filtered for removal of foreign matter and sand.
Afterward, the salt water is passed over a stationary bed of hydrous titanium
oxide which absorbs the ionized uraniue; 0.003 ppn uraniun particles thus
obtained are subsequently concentrated to 2.800 ppm.

With such lultiple projects for substitute energy development as a driving
force, the power industry in Japan will dramatically increase its investment
in the next 15 years. The total investnent, which was only $81.8 billion
in all in the 1970's, is expected to be nearly quintupled to $380 billion
in the 1980's.

According to a recent report by Yamauchi Securities, the nine power companies
will increase investnent by 2.7 times for coal-fired thermal power plants to

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

$45.5 billion and will quadruple investment for nuclear power generation to
$47.3 billion during 1980 to 1989. It is forecast that nuclear power will

claim 22 percent of the total power generation, and the coal contribution
will be 12.1 percent.

[3 Apr 82 pp 130-1321
[Text] Coal-Oil Mixed Fuel

It is forecast that liquefaction and gasification of coal will contribute
to the energy supply of Japan in the latter half of the 1980's.

The two processes that produce high-calory gas from coal-~coal-residual oil
process and hydro gasification process-are presentl, being intensively
developed as a part of MITI's Sunshine Project for the development of new
energy. The Electric Power Development Company intends to complete a proto-

type coal gasification plant with an operational capacity of 50,000 cubic
meters/day by FY-85 using the coal-residual oil process, and to introduce

practical commercial coal gasification in the 1990's.

An effort such as this for the development of a high-calory gasification
process is reinforced by the efforts of Hitachi, Babcock-ﬂitachi (pressurized

fluidized bed system), Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (conversion of coal to
slurry using dissolved salt) and Shin Heiwa Industries (recirculation-heating
system).

Five different methods for liquefaction of coal are also presently being
developed, in which 20 or more public and private enterprises play an active

role. Referring to government-backed projects which were advanced from the
initial schedule, practical technology for coal liquefaction is to be

developed in order to make it possible to start supplying over 15 million
kiloliters in terms of oil in the 1990's.

According to the estimation of the Japan Development Bank, it will take 7-8
years for coal to be able to compete fully with oil, although coal liquefac-
tion among oil substitute energies has the potential to supply a large part
of the Japanese energy needs.

However, once this target is achieved, it is highly possible that coal
refining may well replace the oil refining which currently supplies naphtha

for production of chemical goods. The iron and steel total-process makers
are expected to participate in the coal liquefaction and gasification busi-

ness in cooperation with oil refiners and to supply a compound gas of
hydrogen and carbon monoxide to neighboring chemical plants and power
plants.

A technology to produce petrochemical products from carbon sources other
than oil--01 cheunstry--is presently being developed by a cooperative

research institution organized by 14 major chemical companies through the
good offices of bﬂTI. In the 9 years from 1980-1989, a total of 15 billion

yen is to be invested for research and development of Cl chemistry.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liquefaction and gasification of coal are still in the developnental stage,
but the practical use of coal-oil nix (con) fuel is more iminent. COM fuel
will soon be used econonically for iron manufacture and cenent production,
and in general industrial boilers and thermal power plants.

At present, in the area of research for practical use, good 00M technology
that uses surface active agents is showing rapid progress. The Electric
Power Development Comany is hoping to generate 6 gigawatts using 00M by
1985 at a cost 5 to 10 percent lower than using heavy oil-fired power gen-
eration.

Plant construction contractors which are attenting at present to complete
00M technology include Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Mitsubishi Shipbuilding

& Engineering, Ishikawsjima-llariln Eeavy Industries, Kawasaki Heavy Indus-
tries, ﬂitachi Shipbuilding 5. Engineering and Hitachi Ltd. Among the surfacn

active agent makers which are participating in the work for developnent of
00M technology, the nest outstanding firms are Kao Soap, The Lion, Nippon

Oils and Pets, Dai-ichi Kogyo Seiyaku, Sanyo Chemical Industries and Echo
Chemical Industry.

10 More Years Before Practical Application of Optical Power Generation

Optical power generation, another developmental project, was initiated in
1980. It has been already put into practical use, although on a snail
scale, using silicon seniconductors to convert solar energy to electricity.

However, at present solar cells that use noncrystalline seniconductors are
being developed. with this type of solar cell, an increase in production

and a cut in cost can be simultaneously realized.

Six cowanies--Sanyo Electric. Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Fuji
Electric, Teijin Limited, Kyoto Cersnics and Komatsu Ltd--are proceeding
with the development of noncrystalline silicon solar cells with a light-
electricity conversion efficiency of 10 percent. At this conversion effi-

ciency level, the power generation cost of solar cells will be reduced to
100 yen/watt, which makes it economically feasible to use the cells.

The construction of a pilot plant for the production of noncrystalline
silicon cells and systens using these cells began in ”-81. It will be
FY 1992-1993 before the first lO—nsgawatt generation capacity comercial
plant is constructed.

In parallel with this. the Electric Power Development Company has built an
experimental solar heat power plant on a salt farm near a pilot plant for

extraction of uranium fron salt water, in Rio, Kagawa Prefecture. One unit
of this two-unit pair solar power generation system is based upon a "tower

light collection system" and is built by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and
Asahi Class Ooupany. The other unit is based upon a mirror systen with

plane and convex surfaces and is built by Hitachi Ltd and Nippon Sheet
Glass.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These two units have a 1,000 RE power generation capacity and will be

operated experimentally for 2 years in preparation for the construction of
a 10,000 kw (10 megawatt) generation capacity commercial plant to be com—

pleted at the beginning of the 1990's.

Assuming that the present developmental test is successful, solar energy
will become popular and will be widely used in the 1990's, with the

increase of the efficiency of the cells and the system and the reduction of
the construction costs. The further development of solar cells will make

it possible to produce hydrogen inexpensively in conjunction with coal
gasification. Also, it will thus make it possible to adopt fuel cells that

use hydrogen in the power generation system.
Various Biomass Phels

Biomass among the recyclable energies is given high priority as the one to
be developed for commercial use in the 1980's. On 15 Hay 1980, an oil sub-
stitute energy research association was organized for the development of a
biomass fuel supply system, and president Teruo Noguchi of Koa Oil Company
became the president of the association. As a catalyst for this 7-year
project, the government will supply 25 percent of the research and develop-
ment expenses and private industries will take care of the remaining 75
percent.

Initially. the association set up four separate project groups with the
company most advanced in each basic biomass technology as the leader of the
group. The following are the responsibilities of these four groups.

--Production of liquid grape-sugar from chaff, straw and waste wood (Kyowa

Hakko group including Kyowa Hakko Kogyo, Sumitomo Electric Industries,
Toyo Seisakusho, Daikyo Oil Company and Kurita Hater Industries).

-—Production of liquid grape-sugar from strained lees of sugar cane

(Hitachi group including Hitachi Ltd, Godo Shusei, Sumitomo Heavy Industries
Environtech, Toyo Seisaku—sho, Chisso Corporation. Chiyoda Chemical Engineer-

ing & Construction, Ajinomoto and Idemitsu Kosan).

-—Production of alcohol fuel for automobiles from liquid grape-sugar (the
second Kyowa Hakko group including Kyowa Hakko Kogyo and Nippon Oil Com-

pany) .

--Production of alcohol fuel for automobiles from liquid grape-sugar (Nikki
group including Nikki Chemical, Kansai Paint, Ajinomoto. Sanraku-Ocean and
Maruzen Oil Company).

If the best results are obtained, 76.6 million tons of waste wood, straw and
chaff may at some time turn into 9.2 million kiloliters of automobile fuel

exclusively from the first project. This figure is equivalent to 27 percent

of the 3.4 million kiloliters of gasoline which is currently consumed in
Japan. Even if only half the waste materials were used in order to
economize on expenditures for collection, the alcohol production operation

35
IINRCNHWCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from recyclable resources would have sufficient value, in the view of
industry and government.

However, a method which depends on the collection of wastes relies funda—
mentally on an unstable supply. A substitute supply source that guarantees
a stable supply is starting to be requested as well as a quantitative

increase in the materials. In response to this, HIT! added the following
three projects to the biomass development project in ”-81.

«Extraction of autombile' fuel from eucalyptus oil. Eucalyptus oil will
be supplied first from a pilot farm in Okinawa.

-Production of methanol from fermentation of seaweed.

--A coqrehensive wood tutorial utilization project for the extraction of
alcohol and combustible gas from trees which can be harvested many times a

year.

These projects are all based upon the cultivation of recyclable crops that
can be systematically grown and harvested using a growth acceleration method.

However, the economical efficiency of these projects is not totally dependent

on fuel production. Just as coal and oil became important raw material
sources for the production of chemical goods. so the technology that pro-

duces fuel alcohol from biomss will also deliver an extensive variety of
intermediate assets for the chemical, medical and pharmaceutical and food
industries.

This technology has merit in that intermediate assets with high added values
are produced from very inexpensive and easily available mterials. It is
therefore predicted that it will replace any of the regular chemical
exchange processes in the 1980's and 1990's. For this reason, chemical

companies play a large role in Mouse research.
Resistance to Supply Problem

What is considered more familiar and less problematic is the development of
geothermal energy throughout the 1980's. Geothermal power plants in Japan

currently produce lbs-megawatts of power, which makes Japan the world's
fourth geothermal power generation nation. At present, there are three types

of geothermal power plants in use, and a fourth type is now in the stage of
investigation for comrcisl use.

It is projected that in the next 2 years turbines built by Toshiba, Hitsubishi
Heavy Industries, Fuji Heavy Industries and Kawasaki Heavy Industries will be
installed in geotherml power plants which will supply 760-860 megawatts of
power to the Japanese power network. Thereafter, geothermal power plants
will be further increased, and will reach the goal set by the “HI of supply-

ing 1 gigawatt of new geothermal power by 1985 and 3.5 gigawatts by FY-90.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The effects of these gigantic multiple efforts by the government and the
private sector indicate that an enormous energy industry will prosper in
Japan. his energy industry will not only produce energy which is by far
much more fuel-efficient from various new and old supply sources, but it
will also strengthen the competitive power both in production and installae
tion of a complex energy system, power generation equipment and energy-
saving equipment.

Japanese industries once more seem to have chosen a source where misfortune
is turned into a blessing. As a result of the successive oil crises in the'
1970's, the energy industry in Japan is about to emerge as an industry which
supplies the world's most energy-efficient and most advanced energy tech-
nology, leaving its former precarious energy system which was in the world's
most vulnerable and the most technically dependent conditions.

If the currently available best forecast on nuclear fusion power generation
technology turns out to be something close to fact, by the end of this
century the Japanese energy industry will assume a technical leadership
similar to what the iron and steel industry presently enjoys.

’lhe significance of these developmental activities to the Japanese economy

is imeasurable. Of course, the Japanese economy will be substantially forti-
fied to an unprecedented level in modern history, and powerful resistance to
external supply pressure will be engendered. However, at the same time, the
astronomical investment in new energy generation facilities and the produc-
tion of new energy generation equipment will also have a strong impact on

the economy of Japan.

um I. nan (1)

 

Example of Coal Gasification Power Generation System

Key:
1. Pulverized coal 6. Tar remover
2. Pressure gasification furnace 7. Desulfurizer
3. Crude gas 8. Dust remover
1.. Ashes 9. Air
5. Dust remover 10. Steam

[Key continued on following page]

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11. Clean gas

12 . Low N0: incinerator
13. Gas turbine

16. Air calpreaaor

15. Air

16. Electric power

17. Generator
18. Waste heat recovery boiler

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Dale-nude 1982

8950
080: 6106/100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RECENT ACTIVITIES IR BIOTECHNOIDG! REPORTED

'Toyobo Research Foundation
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SBIMBUI in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p 1
[Text] Toyobo Plans To Establish a "Research Foundation"

Toyo Boseki (0. Duo, president) decided to establish a Leading Technology
Research Foundation (tentative name) for the purpose of assisting researchers

in the biotechnology field as a focus of events taking place in May this year
commemorating the 100th anniversary of its founding. In this field, which is

said to be the last technological innovation of this century, over 100 firms
are strengthening their research structure in Japan, seeking creative leading
technology. 0n the other hand, due to a serious shortage of technologists
because of the unfamiliar field, the plan is to help in upgrading the tech-
nical level in Japan as a whole by establishing a foundation. It is the
first research foundation to be established in this field.

Currently, details are being worked out by Vice President K. Hatsuaoto and
others. Although they have not revealed the specific substance of the
foundation, the initial funding will be 300 to 500 million yen, and funds

will be built up by adding from future profits. If possible, the goal is to
establish it in May and begin funding prospective research projects at vari-

ous universities, etc.

Biotechnology consists of four technological fields, including, besides
genetic reconbination, cell fusion, tissue culture. and bioreactors that

recreate biological reactions by engineering. Some say that it will have a
usrket scale of 6 trillion yen in 10 years in the areas of pharmaceuticals,

chemicals, food, agriculture, energy, etc. Research is being advanced in
American, Japanese, and European universities and business firms in concert.

In Japan, where natural resources are scarce, it is considered a very

promising field for the future since the country has a base of enzyme tech-
nology to begin with.

However, as a field which is said to require the strategy of throwing waves
of outstanding technologists into action, the Japanese firms have a serious
shortage of research funds. while a brain drain overseas is also becoming

evident. Establishing the foundation in an attempt to aid such researchers

indirectly is a significant effort.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Toyobo was initially founded as Osaka Boseki, with the first modern spinning
factory in Japan, on 3 May 1882 by B. Shibusawa, who was then the president
of Daiichi Bank. Subsequently, the present structure came into being after
repeated corporate mergers. The history of the company may well be the
history of the modern textile industry in Japan. having its 100th anniver-
sary this year, the comany itself is about to make a new first step into the

next 100 years on the basis of new technologies such as applications in bio-
technology, polymer chemistry, medn‘ane technology, etc. Reflecting such a

corporate posture and searching for a cone-native work that can contribute
to society as well, it has decided to establish a biotechnology research
foundation.

In couemoreting the 100th anniversary, the company is, in addition, aiming
for a transfornation of its past corporate image of "textile fire with tradi-

tion" to "a modern firm with vitality," with the entire corporate force
engaged in CI (corporate identity) activities. 0n the other hand, it will

delineate the "vision 1990" that air. for vitalization of the textile busi-
ness and expansion of new business and reevaluate the TQC (total quality

control) that aims for vitalisation of the corporate structure. however, it
will forgo showy events such as anniversary parties and will instead carry
out the social comemorative work of establishing a foundation.

COPYRIGB'I': Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Mitsubishi Chenical, Mitsubishi Corporation Institute
Tokyo “IRON K0620 SBIMBUN in Japanese 24 Feb 82 p 1
[Text] A New Coqany for Seed Development

0n the 23d, Mitsubishi Chedcal Industries (2. Suzuki, president) and
Mitsubishi Corporation (K. Maura, president) revealed their plan to estab-
lish a seed development firm "Plant Engineering Research Institute" as of
27 March by joint funding from the two firm.

The capital for the new firm is 100 million yen (the investment ratios are
Mitsubishi Chemical, 51 percent, and Mitsubishi Corporation, 49 percent),
and it will conduct research and development on plant breeding technology

using biotechnology and related consignment work. It is the first case in

Japan of private firms establishing a company with a research and developmnt
objective for plant breeding technoloy.

Biotechnology centered around the gene splicing technique has been mking
rapid progress lately, and its applications are being studied in broad areas

such as pharmaceuticals, food, agriculture, energy resources, etc., centered
in Europe and America. Japan, too, is hastening to consolidate a research

and development structure in both the government and private sectors. With
the belief that practical application will materialize earliest in pharma-

ceuticals and plant breeding technology in biotechnology, expectations are
great. -

so
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In such circumstances, Mitsubishi Chemical has been advancing basic and
applied research in biotechnology at the Mitsubishi Chemical Life Science
Research Institute and the General Research Institute. 0n the other hand,

Mitsubishi Corporation has been collecting information related to the lead-
ing technology through a worldwide network, and through a subsidiary, Kyowm

Seedlings (43 percent investment), it has been showing strong interest in
breeding as well.

The two firms agreed to establish jointly a "venture business" for research

and development of plant "seeds" which will contribute to increased food
production and provide a new energy source, based on their judgment that

technical development in the breeding area can be advanced more profitably
through a functional combination of the accumulated techniques of Mitsubishi

Chemical Industries and the extensive business activities and information
gathering power of Mitsubishi Corporation both at home and abroad.

The new company will start with a research staff of about 10 (from Mitsubishi
Chemical) for the time being and carry out research using the facilities at
Mitsubishi Chemical's General Research Institute on (1) improvement of seed-
lings to increase plant productivity and (2) application of the leading tech-
nologies, from tissue culture, cell fusion, gene splicing, etc., to plant

breeding. The president will come from the Mitsubishi Chemical group, and
the company will accept firms that desire to join in the future. It also

intends to supply the developed technology widely without limiting it to
related firms.

with regard to breeding, a fused species ”pommto" has already been produced
by cell fusion of a tomato and potato at an experimental level in West
Germany. A salt-resistant rice plant has also been produced by fusing the

cells of a plant resistant to salinity and a rice plant. With the inaugura-
tion of the new firm, research in this area is expected to make further

progress.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tbkyo Honsha 1982
Ajinomoto Mass Production of L-Cysteine

Tokyo NIﬂON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 26 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] First Mass Production of L-Cysteine

Ajinomoto (K. Utada, president) revealed on the 25th that it has established,
for the first time in the world, a technique to mass-produce an essential

amino acid, "chysteine," which is used for pharmaceuticals and cosmetics,
and it will embark on full-scale production in March at the company's Kyushu

plant. The production scale will be 100 tons annually; emphasis will be
placed on exports for the time being, with urket development centered in
European regions such as England and Italy.

In the past, "L-cysteine" was obtained mainly by an extraction process from
a natural raw material, hair, and due to a shortage of material,'production

bl
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

could not meet densnd either at hone or abroad. “us. the conpany will have

an advantage by being able to supply quality products at a low price by
taking advantage of use production.

"Ir-cysteine" is a sulfur-containing essential anino acid and is in the sen

category as nethionine, which is used for livestock feed. It is used for
pharmaceuticals such as nedicines, antidotes, expectorants, and for nsterial
for cold pernnent cosnetics.

In Japan, Nihon Rikagaku, Sun Orient Chenical, and Nippon Protein supply
approximately 200 tons annually. Bowever, in all cases, it is extracted fron
natural raw materials such as hair, feathers, bristles, etc., and there has
been a constant state of shortage of raw asterial, resulting in a shortage

of supply and an unstable price.

Due to such circu-tances, the fire advanced research and development of the
process for mas production of "I.-cysteine” by costining synthetic and

fermentation processes using methyl acrylate and one of the thiazoline
derivatives, amino-thiazoline carboxylic acid. as the main ingredients and
found a prospect in the technique.

The technique has been to synthesise "b—cysteine,” a natural substance,

and "D-cysteine," other than natural substance, and extract the useful
"L-cysteine" in the next process by nesotony. In the new process developed
by Ajinonoto, the characteristic feature is that after the raw material is
synthesized, only "h-cysteine" is sass-produced by Ming Pseudo-ones
bacteria.

'lhe world demand for this product is said to be on the scale of approxi-

mately 700 tons annually. Since a shortage of supply is nrked in various
European countries, the fins plans to market the product at a price below

the current market price of 15,000 yen per kilogram, for a high purity
product.

COPYRIGHT: Rihon Kogyo Shiﬂunsha Tokyo Bonsha 1982

lbchida Pharmaceutical Interferon Trials

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 2 Ihr 82 p 8

[Text] Clinical Trials for Interferon-Alpha, -Beta

Mochida Pharmaceutical (N. Nochida, president) will soon organize a research

teas and begin clinical trials of interferon-alpha and -beta as anticancer
drugs. The plan is to pursue respective development with Professor 8. Hattori

of Kanazawa University as the leader for the beta type, which will start
first, and with Professor ll. Tsuzure of Tokushina thiversity as the leader in
collaboration with Otsuka Seiyalw for the alpha type. Regarding the anti-
cancer effect of interferon, clinical reports have been nude in the Ihited
States, etc., and with the exception of sose cancers such as skin cancer,
results have not been consistently favorable as initially reported. however,

(02
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

now that the supply structure is ready for various types of interferon pro-
duced by genetic engineering, tissue culture, hamster method, etc., full-

scale clinical trials have begun in various parts of the world. Thus,
' interferon, which gathered worldwide attention as a "new dream drug," will
be evaluated within a year or two as to whether or not it can be realized
as an anticancer drug.

Three kinds of interferon-alpha, beta, and gamma--are known to exist so far.

various production processes, such as tissue culture and gene splicing tech-
niques, have been used in application. Of these, Hochida Pharmaceutical has

undertaken two types, alpha and beta.

For interferon-beta, an imported technique from Searle a Go of the United
States called the tissue culture technique is used in which human fibroblast

cells are mass-produced to produce interferon. A production facility has
already been built at the company's Shizuoke plant, and a supply structure

for 5 billion units/month of interferon with 10 percent purity is in order.
Since approval from the Ministry of Health and welfare was also obtained at

the end of last year, the company decided to organize a research team and
begin clinical trials this month with cancer patients as subjects.

For the alpha type, it has a technical collaborative agreement with Ringen
Biochemical Research Laboratory and it will be receiving a supply of inter-
feron produced by the hamster method developed by this laboratory. Due to

the technique used in the hamster method, which differs from the conventional
tissue culture technique, some have voiced apprehension with respect to

safety. however, now that the prospect exists for obtaining approval for
starting clinical trials from the Ministry of Health and welfare, clinical
trials are expected to start as early as March.

In administering interferon to cancer patients, it is said that approxi-
mately 100 million units are necessary per month per patient. Therefore,

with the beta type, the supply is only sufficient for 50 patients or so for
the time being. For this reason, Hochida Pharmaceutical is studying the

production feasibility of using more cost-effective gene splicing when
expected efficacy is obtained clinically, and it is now advancing basic

research independently. 0n the other hand, for the alpha type, Ringen has
a production scale of 300 billion units a year and there is no concern about

the quantity of supply.

Regarding the anticancer effect of interferon, the number of clinical reports
worldwide are few, due partly to an insufficient quantity of interferon supply

in the past. However, a large quantity supply has becoae possible for the
alpha type using the gene splicing technique of Roche, and full-scale clini-
cal trials have begun. Therefore, it is believed that the pros and cons for

its development as an anticancer drug will become clear in the next year
Or two.

COPYRIGHT: Nihkan Kogyo Shiabunsha 1982

#3
FOR‘0FHKJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Green Cross has Investment
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO 8mm in Japanese lo liar 82 p 12
[Text] 3 Billion Yen for Biotechnology

Green Cross invested approxintely 3 billion yen in research and developnent
for biotechnology during the 1981 business year (January-Decedaer 1981).

This is three-quarters of the company's annual research and development fund
of lo billion yen, and denonstrates the adiition of the firm in biotechnology.

' According to Green Cross, the fund of approximately 3 billion yen was used
nainly for manufacturing, research and development of interferon (virus
replication inhibitory factor) and hepatitis B vaccine by gene splicing
using E. coli. It also includes paynent for technical fees to CR1 in the
United States and Swiss Biogen, from which the techniques vere isported.

COPYRIGHT: llihon Keizai Shiﬂnnsha 1982

Waltunags Chemical Strengthened Research Structure

Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SEMI!!! in Japanese 5 hr 82 p 18

[Text] Strengthening Research Structure for Gene Splicing-Janet on 1m-
Alpha '

Having obtained a prospect for couercialisation of secretin, which was suc—
cessfully synthesized by gene splicing for the first time in Japan, Haltmags
Chemical (president: 6. Hakunaga; head office: 3-1-39, Pukushim,

Fukushims-ku, Osaka; capital: 250 million yen; tsl: 06498-8901), which

is attracting attention by its research and development in genetic engineer-
ing, has revealed its plan to advance research and developnent in genetic
recombination focusing on interferon (Inn-alpha. To that end, it plans to
further strengthen the genetic engineering research structure by doubling
the research staff in the noleculsr biology and i-mology groups in April,
while expanding some experimental facilities in the central research labora-

tory .

The company has leaped into the limelight since it synthesized the gastric
juice secretion inhibiting her-one, secretin, by gene splicing last June.

Subsequently, it has been advancing the development of bacterial strains that
carry out the expression of the characters are efficiently. As a result,

it has recently succeeded in producing 300,000 molecules of secretin fron
one E. coli cell and has applied for a patent. mus, it new has the prospect
of couercislization of secretin.

Consequently, it decided to put its entire effort in the future into the
development of Im-alpha, for which research has been advanced in parallel

with secretin. At present, the alpha type also seems to have various sub-

types, and the company is thought to be nearing the final stage of research
and developnent by gene splicing using E. coli.

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In its plan, first, in the research personnel aspect, the immunology and
molecular biology staff will be doubled as early as April. Specifically, in
the immunology group, Dr ‘1‘. Bozuni, who is known worldwide and is now
advancing research at the City of hope Medical Center in the United States,
will return and is scheduled to begin full-scale research with ll staff
members. The nolecular biology group is also being strengthened fron the
present lO-plus members to about 20 to extend its deployment.

0n the other hand, in the research facility aspect, it will enlarge the

central research laboratory in the lot at the hiroshima plant. Currently,
the first floor of the laboratory is being used for library and sons office

work; it plans to move these facilities. and the space will be allocated
for an experimental facility for gene splicing research, which is expected

to be completed soon.

Through such consolidation and strengthening in personnel and research
facility aspects, the company believes that the research and develop-eat of

gene splicing will move ahead rapidly. Regarding Il-‘N-alpha, it wants to
obtain prospects for development as early as possible this year.

(DPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shisbunsha Tokyo lionaha 1982
Snow Brand Hill: Products Laboratory

Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 hr 82 p 1

[Article by reporter Tokunaga]

[Text] 10 Billion Yen for Biotechnology--Anticancer Drug Production Within
5 Years

Snow Brand Milk Products has recently begun construction of a biological
science research laboratory in which to study biotechnology in a broad area
including fermentation techniques. It is to be comleted in March next year.

Funds for construction, including second-stage work, are expected to come to
approximately 10 billion yen, with a research staff of over 100. It will be

the biggest biotechnology research laboratory in the food industry. By doing
this, Snow Brand will gather all outstanding technologists at the laboratory
from each group and will begin heading full-scale toward "Snow Brand pharm-

ceuticals." The food industry is currently engaged in biotechnology in the
aspects of both multilateral and health food develop-ant. The bold assure

taken by Snow Brand is likely to stinulate the related industrial circle
greatly in the future.

According to the plan, the biological science research laboratory will be
placed at the former Tochigi plant site of the conpany in Ishibashi-nachi,
Shinotogagun, in Tochigi Prefecture. In the first stage of construction. a
six-story research building, a safety test building, and other facilities
will be constructed. “the total building area will be 9,500 square asters,
and the building fund excluding the cost of the land is approximately 5
billion yen. Scheduled completion is in March 1983.

(95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The conpany will then enter second-stage construction, and the plan is to
cowlete a research facility of approximately the sane scale as in the
first-stage construction by about 1985. he fund required for the construc-
tion of the research laboratory is expected to reach a final figure of
approximately 10 billion yen. Coinciding with completion, it plans to
increase the nusbar of staff aeders drastically, fron the current 50

(including wonen) to- about 100. In the food industry, this type of research
laboratory was constructed by Suntory in 1979, a bionedical research lab-

oratory which coat 1.6 billion yen. The research institute of Snow Brand
far exceeds the scale of Suntory's.

Snow Brand established s biological science research departnent in January
1981 at its Kawakoshi technical research laboratory and began research in
the biotechnology field centered on pharnaceuticals. In the future, Snow
Brand will undertake the leading technology on a full scale in its skill
areas of nutrition, netabolian, enzyaes, nicroorganissn, and fermentation,
using the newly built biological science research laboratory as the base.
At the sane tine, it plans to advance collaborative research with universi-

ties and public research organizations and produce pharmaceutical products
within 1-2 years.

Prospects for developnent have already been obtained for an enteric nutrient

which is directly injected into the patient's intestine for absorption and
an anticancer drug. Through further research, the target for finished

products is set within 2 years for the enteric drug and 5 years for the
anticancer drug.

In the pharmaceutical areas, Snow Brand Products is running behind the
manufacturers who had a head start and a long history such as Meiji Seika,
Ajinonoto, Sanraku-Ocean, etc. Envever, by opening a special research
laboratory, it is ready to catch up all at once.

In the food industry, various fires led by Ajinonoto and Suntory are showing
a venture posture in the biotechnology field all together, and have begun

establishing new promotional organs and increasing research laboratories.
Anong then, however, the equipment investnent of Snow Brand is conspicuous,

and it is expected to heighten further the biotechnology fever in the
industry. In the background is the severe circunstances of the food indus-

try, which is forced to strive for a multilateral operation and aim for
survival by emhasizing this kind of leading industrial field where growth

is anticipated.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shidunsha 1982

7722
680: 6106/86

66
.I-‘OB OPHCIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

LSI FOR VOICE RBCOGNITION-—Hatsushita Electric Industrial Co. and Matsushita
Electronics Corp. said Friday that they had succeeded in commercialisation of
speech recognition large scale integrations (LSI) incorporating all speech
recognition circuits into one chip. Called ”MRI 263," the 1.51 has 17,000
transistors, each 6 m square, and can recognize a maximum of 64 words. As
a result, the use of a speech recognition board, the print substrate for speech
recognition systems, has been minimized to less than half the conventional
requirement and costs have been reduced, a spokesman said. He said that the
companies would market the LSI at 10,000 yen ($41.7) per chip and 80,000 yen
($333) per board. [Text] [OHZIol319 Tokyo HAIRICHI DAILY NEWS in English

22 May 82 p 5] [COPYRIGHTz Hainichi Daily News 1982]

NTT'S LSI-HAKIRG COMPANY—Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corp. (NTT)

will form an 1.81 (large scale integrated circuit) manufacturing company next
month jointly with major bans and other interests, an NTT official said Satur-
day. The official said the new company would chiefly design and namfacture
LSI's for delivery to m. The joint company will be capitalized at 100 million
yen ($417,000) of which 50 percent will be put up by NTT, and the balance by
nine major banks, including Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, NTT-related firns and other
companies, he said. An inaugural general nesting of the new company will be
held on June 14 and the firm will start operations June 22. It will be based

in Musashino, one of Tokyo's suburban cities. [Text] [0H24l3l9 Tokyo HAINICIII
DAILY NEWS in English 2 May 82 p 5] [COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Daily News 1982]

680 l0120 END

(07
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY