FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10511

12 May 1982

USSR Report

EARTH SCIENCES

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain inforaation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itens are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND RE63LATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
EARTH Sctsucss

(2000 2/82)

Cou‘rewrs

OCEANCXERAPHY

Estimating Level of Kicroscale Turbulence Using hpirical
correlation um mom”. Mr .0...OOOOOOOOCOQOOOOOOOOCO

New Data on Structure of Ampere Seammt ......................

Effect of Sensor Size on Estimation of Rate of Dissipation
Of mbulent may in mom I...0......00.000000000000000...

Physical Aspects of Remote Sensing of Ocean-Atmosphere

Mm a...ecoo.eoeo.00.0.0.0CoeoleooeooeOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO

Effective Range of Hydroacoustic Apparatus ....................
Geology of World Ocean Floor According to Deep-Hater milling"
Study of Caribbean-Gulf of Mexico Resin .......................
New Monograph on Oceanic Turbulence ...........................

Propagation of Internal Waves in Stratified Medium nth
no" velocity 3‘.” 0.00.0...OOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Effect of Thermal Structure of Upper Ocean Layer on
mbulence Melomt eeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoaeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Spectral Dependences of Light Scattering by Sea Hater .........
Radar Waeﬂationﬂ of ma "ans at 303 eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Determination of Spectrum of Sea Haves by Spectral Analysis
of Aerial motocawa O...‘00.CO...0.0IOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

- e - [III - USSR - 21K SET

MWWONLY
FOR OFFIOAL I58 ONLY

Investigation of Surface Hind Current on Sea ..................

Adiabatic Interaction of Surface and Internal Haves ...........

Organization of Conputer-Inetrment Interaction in Systems
for Automation of Scientific Research with Variable

smcm nose-ooooooouooooc0no.no.ooooo-ooooooeosonooooooooo

Interaction of Computing Processes in Automated Research

Vessels aoooooococooooooooooo-oaoooooeoooooooooooooeoooooaooo

Black Sea Hydrophysical, Mechanical mum Results .....
Marine Geophysical Exploration I00oeoeoeooooooonoooooooooe-ooee
Annotation, Abstracts of Articles in Collection

'Physioal Aspects of Remote Sounding of Ocean-

Ammere sysm' .O..0...‘............‘.........I..........

TERRBSTRIAI. 6303118108

One-Dimensional Couputations of Displacements During Blast
in Problems with Weak Two-Dimensionality ....................

mommonu
WWW

UDC 551.1965. 15

ESTIMATING LEVEL OF HICROSCALE TURBULENCB USING EMPIRICAL CORRELAIION WITH
RICHARDSON NUMBER

Moscow OKEANOLOGIYA in Russian Vol 22, No 1, Jan-Feb 82 (nanuscript received
15 0c: 80. after revision 11 Feb 81) up 30-34

[Article by V. D. Pozdynin, Institute ot Oceanology ineni P. P. Shirshov, USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of the results of
synchronous measurements of nicroscale
velocity fluctuations of a current, its
vertical gradients and the vertical gradi-
ents of water density a study was made of

the enpirical “PM“ of the nean square
turbulence level H" the Richardson
number in the to u - aRi‘n. It was
found that with u <25} CI‘ sec'l the
correlatio ween u and R1 is lack-
ing. For u )0.3 ca-sec‘1 n - 0.11, a -
0.33 cm-sec'l. An algorithm posed for
cowuting the distributions u on the ba-
sis of the known Ri dis tion. An example
of computation of the u distribution is
given in a system of equatorial currents in
the central part of the Pacific Ocean.

The authors of [1, 9] gives enpi i formulas expressing the dependence of the
lcvcl of microscule turbulence u on the Richardson number:

. a _ 1 ﬂan
R' P (ll/dd)” ' (1)

where P and d p/dz is water density and its vertical gradient, dU/dz is the ver-
tical gradient of current velocity, 3 is the acceleration of gravity.

The empirical dependence of J u'2 on R1 was sought in [1, 9] in the form

Vﬁ- “RF“. (2)

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where the d n evaluations must be found using the results of in situ measure-
ments of u and R1.

With the present-day status of study of turbulence in the ocean an attractive side
of the use of R1 in empirical correlations is the ease in obtaining its quantita-
tive estimates with the use of existing standard oceanological instruments and as
indicated by (1), its direct correlation with some of the principal characteris-
tics of hydrological conditions.

Specialists at the Marine Turbulence Laboratory f the institute of Oceanology,
USSR Academy of Sciences, made measurements of u and R1 on several voyages
beginning in 1971. A suuary of evaluations of the parameters a and n in (2), ob-
tained using materials from these measurements, is given in Table l. The data in
this table show that the values of the a parameter differ appreciably from one
another. If they are interpreted, in accordance with (2), as the mean square tur-
bulence levels existing in the ocean when Ri - 1, they all seem exaggerated, ex-
cept for the last an evaluation. The tabulated n values indicate essentially dif-
ferent evaluations of the influence of R1 on the turbulence level. however, the
value n - 0.25 nevertheless is closer to the n evaluations obtained in equatorial
polygons in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, and the very fact of a virtual co-
incidence of the latter need not necessarily be mere chance. In this connection it
makes sense to discuss in greater detail the results of measurements made in 1980
in the Pacific Ocean.

During February-March 1980, in an equatorial polygon in the central part of the
Pacific Ocean (Zloth voyage of the scientific research ship "Dmitriy Hendeleyev"),
it was possible to collect empirical material specially intended for refining the
a and n parameters in (2). The initial data for R1 were determined on the basis of
the results of bathometric series and special gradient measurements of current vel-
ocity carried out using strings of BPV current meters which were lowered from
aboard a drifting ship. The depth distance between current meters was 10 a, but

in a number of cases the distance was increased to 15 and 20 m. The exposures of
the current meters at the horizons were 1 hour, in individual cases - a half-hour.

Computation of the vertical gradients of current velocity for R1 evaluations was
carried out using the method described in [7]. SynchronOusly with current measure-

measurements in these same water layers measurements were made of turbulence char-
acteristics using a freely falling sonde. The sonde was developed at the Atlantic
Division of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences, under the direc-
tion of V. ’1'. Paka and registers turbulence in the range of vertical scales from 2
to 25 cm.

The resulting J u'! and R1 estimates were plotted on a graph with the coordinate
axes in} u'2 and In Ri. It was found that with] u'!<0.3 ctnosec‘1 there are no

directed changes in J u'2 with a decrease or increase in R1. For u >0.3 cm-
sec'1 values such a dependence is missing (Fig. l). The data in Fig. 1 correspond
to evaluations a - 0.33 cm'sec‘l and n - 0.11. The n value virtually coincided with
its evaluation in the equatorial polygon in the Atlantic (n - 0.15). However, the

absence of a correlation between 111 andiu'§< 0.3 cn-sec'l can be attributed to the
following factors.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The mean hourly R1 values, relating to water layers with a thickness of 10 meters
or more. are too approximate for detecting a dependence between R1 and low turbul-

ence levels; it is possible that for finding such a dependence it is necessary to
use data on the fine structure of the ver ical R1 profile, but it is probable that

the sought-for dependence on R1 with u ‘<O.3 cm-sec“1 does not exist at all be-
cause the current becomes virtually laminar.

The measurements of internal waves in the equatorial polygon in the Pacific Ocean
indicated their weak development: the probability of the collapse of the crests

of such wave: is small and the contribution of this mechanism for the generation
of turbulence was absent at its observed level. In this case the value a - 0.33 cm-
sec'l can be regarded as an evaluation of the mean square turbulence level attrib-

utable primarily to the shear instability of current velocity and existing with R1
- 1. Thus, the formula

1/ «imam-u . (3)

somewhat modified and refined in comparison with 9 makes it ssible to obtain an
evaluation of the mean square turbulence level u ;I0.3-sec' . In this case, to
be sure, there should be a certain assurance that the shear instability of a cur-
rent is the predominant mechanism of generation of turbulence under given hydrolog-

ical conditions.

Obtaining ./u'! evaluations on the basis of formulas of type (2) is dependent at
the present time on the availability of data on R1 relating to different hydrolog-
ical conditions in the ocean. During recent years considerable interest has been
shown in determination of R1 values in the ocean. This is done both in an invest-
igation of internal waves and in the study of the fine vertical structure of hydro-
physicul fields. There are studies in which sets of R1 evaluations have already
been represented by empirical and theoretical distributions [2, 3].

0n the 26th voyage of the scientific research ship "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" R1 evalua-
tions were obtained on five meridional sections in the equatorial polygon. They
were given in the form of five meridional sections of the 81 field and in the form
-f a distribution for the three investigated layers of the ocean: upper quasihomo-
seneous layer, pycnocline layer and the layer situated directly beneath it with the
lower limit of the measurements at a depth of 300 m [4]. These empirical Ri dis-

‘ributions agree with the exponential and hyperexponential (with two terms) dis-
:ributions [S]. For the upper quasihomogeneous layer and the layer with its lower
boundary at a depth of 300 m the R1 distribution has the form

’|(Ri) ‘2.4 exp l—2u‘ R”! (a)

fur the pycnocline layer
MRi) -0.5[2.4 exp (—2.4 R!) +0.3 exp (—0.3 R1) ]. (S)

if the initial information on R1 is similar. for example, to (4) or (5), the re-
nults or the ‘J u:2 computations can be represented in the form of the distribution

5(J u'i). The law of distribution of this particular function is found from the
known law of distribution of its argument by transformation of the distribution of

POI OFT-1C1)“. USE ONLY
FOR<0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

the latter [10]; in our case with the use of (3). (6) and (5) we have

z(V7')—IJ¢(V7)]I¢' (Val. t- 1.2. (a)

where 2" (J u'i) is a function, the inverse of (3); w'(./u'2) I is the absolute val-
ue of its derivative. The concept "function, the inverse of (3)" re uires an ex—
planation. Formula (3) was derived as a regression equation for I ui2 relative to
R1. it is logical to assume that the "function, the inverse of (3)" in this case
should be a regression equation for R1 relative to u , derived on the basis of
the same empirical data as (3). This empirical dependence has the form 81 - 0.05
(J1715'2-4. It was used in computations made on the basis of formula (6).

Figure 2 shows the probability density function curves for! u'! computed on the ba-
sis of formula (6) with the use of (b) and (5). As indicated by the shape of the
curves in Fig. 2, the most probable mean square turbulence levels fall in the range
0.3-0.4 cm'sec‘l. The distributions in Pig. 2 cannot be identified with the dis-

tributions describing the actual state of the turbulence level under given hydro-
logical conditions and in a definite range of vertical scales of inhomogeneities.

457?c~-¢" cnosec‘l
85

   

-I
[0 ml -
h u , rat-c4

Fig. 1. Empirical dependence between [(1 Fig. 2. Probability density curvesJ u'5

d “3138 (4)-(6). 1) upper quasi-
und / u'! according to measurement data compute
fur equatorial polygon in central part of homogeneous layer and layer with lower

,. _ limit at a depth of 300 n; 2) pycno-
lacific Ocean in February March 1980. cline layer. The segments of the curves

represented by solid lines show the

J u'2 range in which the empirical de-
endence (3) was obtained making use of
u and R1 measurements in the equator-
ial polygon.

The distributions in Fig. 2 do not contain information on turbulence levels less

than 0.3 cm-sec‘1 because (3) is valid only for Jm)0.3 cm-sec'l. The dashed
segments of the curves in Fi . 2 must be regarded as preferable because (3) was
derived for the range 0.3:; u ‘<0.5 cm-sec‘l, as indicated in Fig. 1. In this
case the formal extrapolation of (3) in the direction Ri<£0.l$ seems premature.
The Ri< 0.15 Values may be critical for ocean conditions and it is not precluded

that in the initial stages of loss of stability by the current the relationships

F0!‘0l11C£kl.USE¢DNlN
butvcen R1 and «fl-IT! have a great scatter, which with Ri< 0.15 makes (3) unsuit-
able for practical use. For Ri<0.l$ the empirical formula (3) requires experimen-
tal checking. At the present time distributions similar to those cited in Fig. 2
are more correctly interpreted as distributions of the mean square levels of tur-
bulent disturbances which my exist with the observed distributions of Richardson
numbers simultaneously with weaker turbulence or even in its absence in individual
water layers.

Evaluations of a and n Parameters According to Measurements of Ju" and'Ri

Region Tine Hethod Scales of meas— Evaluation Source
ured inhomogan- of paraneters
eities 3: or n
sec'l
Equatorial, in cen- Feb 1971 Horizontal 2-150 1.3 0.15 [8. 9]
tral Atlantic towing
Equatorial, in cen- Feb 1971. Vertical 2-150 2.2 0.50 [1]
tral Indian Ocean sounding
Region of Kuroshio Aug 1977 Approximation - 2-150 4.7 0.25 [6]
Current by theoretical
dependence
Equatorial. in cen- Her 1980 Vertical 2-25 0.33 0-11 This
tral part of sounding P8P"

Pacific Ocean

In order to use (3) for obtaining lu'! evaluations under the influence of one or
several mechanism for the generation of turbulence in the ocean it is necessary
to take into account the scatter of a evaluations in the form of the 7(a) distrib-
ution with Ri - 1 corresponding to a definite range in the scales of turbulent
disturbances. There are no fundamental difficulties in obtaining this distribution.
Then the determination of m on the basis of individual data on Ri and on its

distribution law, for example, in the form (6) and (5), must be acconplished using
formulas (3) and (6), substituting into them the model or mean value a, in accord-

ance with the distributio ‘P(a) with 31 - 1. There is also a nore general ap-
proach to obtaining the] u'2 distribution as the quotient by dividing two inde-
pendent random values, each of which conforms to definite distribution laws [11].
In our case the most probable types of these distributions can be a normal distrib-
ut ion for the a evaluations [10] and an exponential distribution for R1, as follows
from [3] and data from the 24th voyage of the scientific research ship "Dnitriy
Mcndeleyev." The practical implementation of such computations will evidently be-
come possible after clarifying the real form of the ¢f(a) distribution and an eval-

uation of its parameters.

Judging from the ever-increasing interest in the real values of the Richardson num-
bers in the ocean associated primarily with an analysis of the stability of move-

ments, and bearing in mind the tendency in modern oceanological instrument making
to produce multipurpose and multichannel instruments, it seems timely to raise the

question of creation of a special "Ri-neter." By the use of such an instrument

FOR omcflu. USE ONLY
FCIICHNHCJAI.USHE(NVLY

the procedure of determining Ri would become in the practice of oceanological in-
vestigations as ordinary, for example, as the measurement of temperature or current
velocity. The mass of R1 data for the ocean will find immediate multipurpose ap-

plication.

In this paper we used empirical data obtained on the 2hth voyage of the scientific
research vessel "Dmitriy Hendeleyev." The turbulence measurements were made by a
detachment headed by V. N. Nabatov under the inundiate direction of the head of
this voyage, V. T. Paka. The primary processing of these data on a shipboard elec-
tronic computer was carried out by A. L. Sukhov. Gradient measurements of the cur-
rent were made by a detachment headed by V. D. Yegorikhin. Computations of the 31
evaluations were made by A. N. Gezentsvey.

The author expresses appreciation to V. s. Belyayev and A. Yu. Benilov, whose crit-
ical cosments assisted in introducing refinements into the text of the paper and
simplifying the proposed computation procedure.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Belyayev, V. 3., Lozovatskiy, I. D. and Ozmidov, R. V., "Correlation Between
the Parameters of Microscale Turbulence and local Conditions of Ocean Strat-
ification," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AIMOSFERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy
of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 11, No 7, pp 718-725,
1975.

2. delyayev, V. S. and Gezentsvey, A. N., "Shear Instability of Internal Waves in
the Ocean," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSPBRY I OKEANA, V01 14, No 6, pp 668-655,
1978.

3. Variatyy, Ye. P.. Ozmidov, R. V. and Pyzhevich, H. L., "Values of the Local
Richardson Numbers in the Ocean," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 21, No 2,
pp 211-216, 1981.

a. Gezentsvey, A. N. and Pozdynin, V. D., "Evaluation of the Richardson Number
From Measurements in the Equatorial Currents of the Central Part of the Pacific

Ocean," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 21, No 4, pp 587-591, 1981.

5. Kofman, A. and Ktyuon, R., NASSOVOYB OBSLUZHIVANIYE, TEORIYA I PRIHENBNIYB
(Mass Servicing, Theory and Application), Moscow, Mir, 1965.

6. Lozovatskiy, I. D. and Ozmidov, R. V., "Correlation Between the Characteristics
of Hicroscale Turbulence and Water Stratification Parameters in the Ocean."
OKEANOLOGIYA, Vol 19, No 6, pp 982-991, 1979.

7. Pozdynin, V. D., "Determination of Vertical Current Velocity Gradients in the
Ocean According to Data From BPV-Z Current Meters," ISSLEDOVANIYB OKEANICHBSKOY

TURBULENTNOSTI (Investigations of Ocean Turbulence), Moscow, Nauka, pp 79-86,
1973.

8. Pozdynin, V. D., "Statistical Evaluations of Parameters of Hicroscale Oceanic
Turbulence," ISSLEDOVANIYB IZHENCHIVOSTI GIDROPIZICHESKIKH POLBY V OKEANE (In-
vestigation of Variability of hydrophysical Fields in the Ocean), Moscow,
Nauka, pp 50-61, 1974.

6
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MNLY
9. Pozdynin, V. 0., "5er Statistical Pattern: of Hicroscnle Turbulence." 0W-
OLOCIYA, Vol 16, No 5, pp 791-797, 1976.

10. Khal'd, A., MATEHATICHBSKAYA s'rms'rm S TEKIINICIESKIHI PRIm-‘IYAH (Kathe
math-n1 Statistics with Technical Applications), Moscow. lad-v0 Inostr. Lit...

1956.

ll. Khan, 6. and Shapiro. S.. STATISTICHBSKIYB HODBLI V mmm ZAMCHAKH
(Statistical [306213 in Engineering Problems), Moscow, Mir, 1969.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Okennologiya", 1982

5303
C30: 1865/106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.662.66

NEH DATA ON STRBCTURE 0P AHPBRE SBAHDUNT

Moscow OKBANOLOGIYA in Russian Vol 22, No 1, Jan-Feb 82 (manuscript received
29 Sep 80, after revision 25 Mar 81) pp 87-90

[Article by V. H. Litvin, V. V. Hatveyenkov, B. L. Onishchenko, H. V. Rudenko and
A. M. Sagalevich, Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov, USSR Academy of
Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] Abstract: The Ampere sesmount was studied us-
ing the "Paysis" manned vehicle and the "2vuk-
6m" complex. The seamount is made up of volcan-
ic rocks, including trachytes. The latter are
exposed in the form of narrow, linear ridges.
Conglomerates dissected by scour and cavernous
limestonas were discovered at the seamount peak.

The Ampere seanount, situated to the west of the Strait of Gibraltar, has long been
known [8]. At different times Soviet and foreign expeditions have carried out sur-
veys of bottom relief and the magnetic field, as well as underwater photography

and the collection of samples of bottom sediments and rocks [1, 4, 6, 7]. Accord-
ingly, the general features of its structure have been studied and the seanount

is shown on all maps. During recent years new research methods and apparatus have
appeared, including towed and manned underwater vehicles which make it possible to
obtain qualitatively new information on the structure of the ocean floor. Such

work is being intensively developed at the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy

of Sciences.

0n the 30th voyage of the scientific research ship “Akademik Kurchatov" in Decem-
ber 1979 and March 1980 specialists carried out an echo sounding survey over the
Ampere seamount, together with photographing of the floor with a camera attached
to a cable. trawling with a biological trawl, and at the same time, and what is
most important, work with the "Paysis" underwater manned vehicle and the "2vuk-4nW
towed underwater vehicle (Pig. 1). During the submergence of the "Paysis" vehicle,
which makes it possible to carry out a broad complex of investigations [5], a crew
consisting of A. H. Sagalevich and V. S. Kurin carried out visual observations,
television videorecording with a duration of 30 minutes, photographing of the bot-
tom. measurement of hydrophysical parameters and sampling of bedrocks by means of
a manipulator. The vehicle moved a distance of about 200 m over the bottom and in-
vestigated an area up to 1000 m2. The "Zvuk-bm" apparatus, developed in the Deep-
Hater Research Technology Section of the Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(HVLY
FINI<MHQCJAI.USEZONLY

Sciences under the direction of V. S. Yaatrevov and constituting a system towed on
a Supporting-electrical cable, was used in photography, television scanning

and side-looking sonar survey of the seanount peak. Photographs were taken at a
distance of 1—3 m from the bottom in an automatic regime each 15 seconds. A total
of about #00 photographs were taken with a rate of towing of the vehicle up to l
knot. A survey with the side-looking sonar was made over a period of 30 minutes.
The width of the surveyed zone was 370 m (185 m to the right and left of the
vehicle). Inspection of the videorecord obtained by the "Paysis," petrographic
study of bedrock samples and analysis of the record from the side-looking sonar
and photographs of the bottom made it possible to obtain new data on structure of
Ampere seamount.

The sesmount rises above the surrounding bottom more than 400 m and enters into the
southern branch of the horsehoe-shaped Hosshu "7" rise. The sesmount peak extends
in u latitudinal direction and measures 1 x 3.5 miles; at the base it measures 35

x 45 miles. The sesmount slopes are steep and almost undissected. Individual small
side peaks are encountered only locally. The steepness of the slopes to a depth of
about 1500 m attains 40-50°; lower it gradually decreases to 20-15“. The eastern
putt of the seamount peak is somewhat uplifted. The depths here are 60-90 m; the
relief is uneven with depth fluctuations of 5-10 m. A slightly sloping, more level-
ed surface with depths from 100 to 180 m, on which hills with a height up to 20 m
with steep lateral slopes rise, extends westward.

 

Fin. 1. Schematic map of Ampere seamount and its location (at left). 1) track of
lowed "Zvuk-am" vehicle; 2) region of "Paysis" submergence; 3) trawling; 4) echo
sounding profile; 5) side-looking sonar survey.

observations from the ”Paysis" underwater vehicle were made over a small sector of
lhc bottom, near the peak, at a depth of 80-90 m (Fig. 1). At the upper part of
thv uuntlc slope there were low ridges, constituting outcrops of strata of dense

rncks gently sloping to the horizon (10-15') with a thickness from 0.5-1 (Pig. 2)
to 10-15 m. These are characterized by a rectangular fracturing. creating the im-

pression of laid bricks. The outcrops of the described rocks were photographed in
the region of submergence of the "Paysis" using the "2vuk-bm" apparatus (Fig. 2).
In the southern part of the seamount peak a trawl raised platy blocks measuring

FOR!0FF1C£11.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10 x 20 cm and with a thickness of 4-5 cm, consisting of reddish-ochreous trachyte
with n clearly expressed fluidal texture from a depth of 130-170 m. The upper part
of the blocks was covered with a crust of lithothamnium, whereas the lower part
was free of overgrowth. This same trawl contained numerous fragments of dead and
living madrepore corals and a great quantity of calcareous ooze with fragments of
shells. The trawl also contained pieces of very bubbly alkaline basalt with large
phenocrysts of titanaugite and olivine. The surface of the block was rough and un-
even. This sort of surface can be observed on underwater photographs of bedrock.

 

Fig. 2. Ridge consisting of trachytes and surrounded by light-colored calcareous
sediments.

Downslope observations from the "Paysis" made it possible to detect highly dissect-
ed relief. In this section of the bottom the bedrock is represented by strata of
conglomerates dissected by troughs with a depth of 1.5-2 n and with a width of sev-
eral tens of meters (Fig. 3). Using its manipulator, the "Paysis" sampled from the
exposure of conglomerates two well-rounded pebbles (measuring 10 x 8, 10 x 6 cm),
covered with a rather thick (1-5 mm) rosy-violet crust of lithothsmnium. Persist-
ing on the Surface of the pebbles were remnants of cement, represented by calcar-
eous detritus. Both pebbles consisted of alkaline basalts differing in their pet-
rographic composition. One sample was represented by magnophyric dense basalt with
impregnations of augite and plegioclase. The second sample consisted of aphyric ba-
salt with small bubbles.

The record of the side-looking sonar (Pig. 4) shows that at the sesmount peak it is
easy to trace two systems of ridges oriented almost perpendicularly to one another;
the submeridional ridge seemingly overlaps the sublatitudinal ridge. The first sys-
tem is evidently represented by outcrops of conglomerates. Here the ridges have in-
distinct boundaries and different widths. The second system is characterized by
rather distinct outlines and probably consists of layers of dense rock of the

t rachy te type .

10
FOR OFFICIAI.lEﬂE(NVLV
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060024-4

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Outcrops of conglomerates. A scour with a width of
at the center of the frame.

 

F13. 1., Record of side-looking sonar

11
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060024~4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The width of the ridges was 10 m or less and the distances between them were about
10-15 m, as is confirmed by visual observations from the "Paysis."

Summing the data cited above, the following conclusions can be drawn concerning the
structure and development of the Ampere seamount. The seamount itself is unquesticn-
ably a volcanic formation consisting of alkaline basalts and their derivatives, like
the overwhelming majority of the seamounts in the Atlantic Ocean [3]. The seamount
peak has the form of a small, scarcely sloping bowl and probably constitutes a par-
tially filled-in crater. Along its edges a stratified layer consisting of volcan-
ites of different hardness is laid bare. Denser rocks of the trachyta type rise
above the bottom surface, creating a system of ridges parallel to the edge of the
volcano. During glacial times, when the ocean level was lower than at present [2],
the seamount peak protruded above the water, constituting a volcanic island. The
action of storm waves led to a partial destruction of the rocks and the formation
of volcanic-pebbly beaches around the seamount peak. with subsequent rising of the
ocean level the seamount peak sank and the accumulation of calcareous sediments
began here. The cementing of the pebbles by fine detritus and lithothamnium algae
led to the formation of conglomerates. As a result of repeated depressions of the
ocean level during the Pleistocene the highest parts of the seamount reached the
sea surface and even rose above it, being exposed to the action of the waves and
surface waters. This led to the partial erosion of poorly cemented conglomerates
and the creation of scours and small canyons in their strata, for the most part
directed downslope. 0n the deeper western part of the seamount peak, during the
Pleistocene at virtually all times being under water, on the contrary, there was

an accumulation of calcareous detritus and a sand shoal was formed here. The post—
glacial uplifting of the ocean level led to the modern underwater position of the
peak of the Ampere seamount. Judging from observations from the ”Paysis," in the
eastern part of the seamount there is a weak effect of storm waves and swell at
depths as great as 80-90 m, stirring up the fine sedimentary material which is

transported onto its slopes. Accordingly, here there is exposure of volcanic bed-
rocks; conglomerates and sedimentary material are found only in relief depres-
sinus.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Corodnitskiy, A. M., Litvinov, E. H. and Valyasko, G. M., "The Anomalous
Magnetic Field Over the Ampere and Horridge Seamounts," GBOFIZICHESKIYE HETODY
RAZVEDKI V ARKTIKE (Geophysical Reconnaissance Methods in the Arctic), No 10,
pp 154-156, 1975.

2. Leont'yev, 0. K., "Changes in World Ocean Level During the Mesozoic—Cenozoic,"
OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 10, No 2, pp 276-286, 1970.

J. Litvln, V. M., Rudenko, H. V. and Kharin, G. 8., "Role of Volcanism in the For-
mation of Bottom Relief of the Atl utic Ocean," GBOHORFOLOGIYA (Geomorphology),
No 4, pp 92-98, 1976.

4. Rudenko, H. V., "Atlantic Ocean Seamounts," IZV. VSBSOYUZN. GEOGRAF. O-VA (News
of the All-Union Geographical Society), Vol 107, No 4, pp 295~301, 1975.

12
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NNLY
5. Sugulcvlch, A. M. and Podrazhanekiy, A. H., "'Paysie' Underwater Manned Sci-
entific Research Complex," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 19. No 5, pp 911-919,
1977. ,

6. ﬂeezen, 3. C:;“Tharp, H. and Ewing, H., THE FLOOR 0? THE OCEANS. I. THE NORTH
ATLANTIC. GEOL. SOC. AMER. SPEC. PAPER, Vol 65, 1959.

7. Laughton, A. 3.. Roberta, D. G. and Graves. R., "Bothy-etry of the Northeast
Atlantic: HideAtlantic Ridge to Southwest Europe," DEEP-SBA RBS., Vol 22, No

12, pp 91-810, 1975.

8. .Tolatoy, 1., "Submarine Topogrephy 1n the North Atlantic," BULL. GEDL. soc.
AHER., Vol 62, No 5, pp 441-650, 1951.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hunks", "0keanologiya", 1982

5303
C50: 1865/106

INIICIﬂﬂCigl,USE(HVLY
Ffﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(MﬂLY

UDC 551.46:68l.1/b

EFFECT OF SENSOR 8128 ON ESTIHAIION OF RATE OF DISSIPATION 0F TURBULENT ENERGY
IN OCEAR

Moscow OKEANOLOGIYA in Russian Vol 22, No 1, Jan-Feb 82 (manuscript received
4 Mar 81) PP 153-157

[Article by V. H. Zhurbas and V. N. Nabstov, Institute of Oceanology imsni P. P.
Shirshov, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] Abstract: the influence of the size of
the sensing element of a conduction-type
magnetohydrodynamic ans-ometer (am) on
estimates of the rate of dissipation of
turbulent energy 5 in the ocean is anal-
yzed on the basis of data from field meas-
urements. It was found that for the (MA
variants used in oceanological research
the understatement of 8 estimates asso-
ciated with finiteness of sensor size at-
tains a factor of 2-3. An empirical esti-
mate of the CHA spectral characteristic,
obtained on the basis of in situ measure-
ment data, is presented.

An important characteristic of oceanic turbulence is the rate of dissipation of
turbulent energy 8 . Estimates of this parameter on the basis of measurements of
velocity fluctuations can be obtained by several methods [1]. With the assumption
of a local isotropicity of small-scale velocity fluctuations the expression for
6 can be written in the form

a — 15v (du'ldxf‘. (1)

where x is the coordinate along the motion of the sensor; u' is the longitudinal
component of velocity fluctuations; V is the kinemtic viscosity of water. The for-
male (1) in a spectral representation is equivalent to the expression

0

where E(k) is the spectral density of the longitudinal component of velocity u'; k
is the wave number. The use of expressions (1) and (1') for 3 estimates assumes a
sufficiently reliable measurement of velocity fluctuations with wave numbers of

F0! OFFICE-kl. USE ONLY
the order of k - 0.1/n (n- (VS/e )1“ is the Kolmogorov internal scale), where
the dissipation spectrum k23(k) has a anxious [5]. Typical estinates of the scale
'1 for the ocean fall in the range 0.1-0.2 en [lo] and the maximum of the dissipa-
tion spectrum is attained with extremely high values of the wave nunber k - 0.5-1
rad-cn‘l, where there can be an understatement of the enpirical estimates of the
spectrum level as a result of averaging of velocity fluctuations in the working
volume of the sensor sensing element. The latter circumstance is particularly im-
portant when measuring velocity fluctuations by a conduction-type nagnetohydrody-
namic anemometer (GM) [2), used during recent years in Soviet oceanological in-
Vestigations. The CMA, together with indisputable advantages (insensitivity to
transverse velocity fluctuations and changes in medium temperature) has greater
geometrical dimensions than sensors of the thermoanemometric type. The spectral

characteristic of the CHA H200 ' 3(k)/Etmg(k), where Mk) and Etm(k) are the
spectral densities of the signal at the on output and longitudinal fluctuations

of velocity of the medim,was estimated in laboratory conditions [7] by a compar-
ison of the spectra of the output signal with the spectrum obtained with the ther-
moanenometer. It was noted that the influence of the averaging volume of the CHA
an a function of the type of spectrum of velocity fluctuations began with scales
l: 2n/k - 2-6 cm, where the lscaie was determined at the 0.5-level of the sen-
sor spectral characteristic: h2(23l/1) - 0.5. We will analyze the errors in esti—
mates of 8 in the ocean as a result of averaging of velocity fluctuations in the
working volume of the CHA on the basis of data from in situ measurements on the
24th voyage of the scientific research ship "Dmitriy Mendeleyev."

67:?)
’0‘ o I

III
III

[0

           

m" m 10' m' In In" m"
Fig. l. Dimensionless spectral densities of longitudinal velocity fluctuations in
upper qmsihomogeneous layer of ocean according to on measurements. The numbers

in the figure correspond to the numbers of the sectors in the table.

The measurements were made in an equatorial polygon in the central part of the
I'm-if in Ocean using the turbulence meter-sonde of the Atlantic Division of the
Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences [6]. The diameter of the GM

1
MOFFICIzLUQONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sensing element head was 60 mm; the distance between electrodes was 10 ml. The
noise level in the measurements did not exceed 0.7 Imrsec'1 with a mean square
amplitude in the freiuency range of the sensor 6-64 B: with a rate of sonde sub-
IIergence Va; 1 mosec' . The analysis was made using 10 sectors of vertical profiles
of velocity fluctuations with an increased signal dispersion level in the upper
quasihonogeneous layer of the ocean (the numbers of the stations, somdings and
depth ranges are indicated in Table 1). Figure 1 shows the spectral densities of
the longitudinal conponent of velocity fluctuations in these sectors in the
dimensional form

3“) =0“). .(2)

where E - 8/ (iv 5)1”, i - kn. In normalizing the spectra use was made of 5
estimates using formula (1). The solid curve in Fig. 1 gives the empirical uni-
versal dependence NI) for the inertial-viscous turbulence interval [5]. Figure 1
shows that dimensionless spectra with a relatively small scatter fell on one anoth-
er and in general agree fairly well with the universal dependence. However, in a
more detailed examination it is easy to find that with |t<10‘1 the estimates of the
spectra systematically lie above the universal curve; with an increase in k the
spectra drop off more steeply than the universal dependence, and in the neighbor-
hood k - 0.3 the experimental points are already situated below it. This peculiar-
ity of the spectra is still more conspicuous in Fig.2 ,a, which shows the result of
averaging of these same 10 spectra (denoted by the digit 1). It is natural to re-
late the exaggeration of the levels of the dimensionless spectra with k<0. 1 to

the use in the normalization of 6 estimates made using formula (1), which may be
too low as a result of the averaging of velocity fluctuations in the working vol-
ume of the sensor. In this situation the 8 estimates for the level of the sector
of the “-5/ 3" spectrum are more reliable.

Table 1

Stations and Ranges of Sounding Depths Used in Estimating Energy Dissipation Rate

     

Sector Stations Soundin Measure- Bvaluation6 an-sec'3

     
 
 
  

         

 
 
  

1 a 1.3. .
2 2 :‘g'ir- z (10--
3 big s ' 0 '
i 3 {is—as 8.940" 2.9-:0-0
5 2 11—22 2,0404 mac--
0 a 11—21 ”-10-. 3.1.104
7 a M 1.3.10” 3.5.40"
8 4 52.41 13.40- 43.10--
9 s 103.4“ 1,3-10-0 33.10--
10 ms 2 two-0 ”40-0
a 140-. 4.9.10ﬂ

Mean 8; value

16
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pill?!) 0'
a: (\\
, ." Annotations are ex-
f \ plained in text

    

10'

 

10 ’0

Fig. 2. Averaged dimensionless spectral density of longitudinal velocity fluctua-
tions (a) and dissipation spectrum (b) in upper quasihomogeneeus layer of ocean
according to CMA measurement data.

 

Pig. 3. Empirical estimate of spectral characteristic of 04A according to data from
in situ measurements.

The table gives 5 estimates made using both formﬂa (l) and using the "-5/3" spec-
trum sector level. In order to obtain the latter by the least squares method we
carried out an approximation of the lair-frequency part of each spectrum (ﬁ<lO'1)

by the dependence E - C5 2/3k‘5/3, where the c constant was selected equal to 0.68
[S]. The table indicates that 6 estimates for the level of the "-5/3" spectrum
level averaged 2.8 times greater than the estimates using formula (1). In estimates
of 8 at the "-5/3" level the dimensionless averaged spectrum was displaced downward
and to the left (denoted by the digit 2 in Pi . 2,a ; its low-frequency part coin-
cided with the universal curve, whereas with >lO' (that is, in the viscous inter-
val) the ggperinental points fell lower. The corresponding averaged dissipation
spectrum k (€00) is shown in Fig. 2,b. The dashed curve in Fig. 2.1: represents

the result of averaging of the eqirical dissipation spectra of this type according
to data in the literature which were cited in [5]. The averaged dissipation spectrum,
according to on measurement data, passes considerably below the dashed curve and

l?
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the area under it is 0.031, which is less than half the theoretical value l/lS
[5}. This circumstance also explains the difierence in the E estimates made using

formula (1) and the level of the "-5/3" spectrum sector.

An estimate of the spectral characteristic and characteristic scale of averaging

of the CMA sensing element can be made much as was done in [8] by a comparison of
the averaged dimensionless spectrum‘<B(k)> obtained using data from in situ meas-
urements with the universal curve for the inertial-viscous interval. The result of
such a determination of the CHA spectral characteristic as a function of the cyclic
frequency f - Uk/231 is shown in Pig. 3. The solid curve in Pig. 3 shows the re-
sults of theoretical computations [3] of the H2(f) function for a spherical sen-
sor in the field of locally isotropic velocity fluctuations with a spectrum dropp—
ing off in conformity to the "-5/3" law (the velocity fluctuations were averaged
for the volume of a sphere with the diameter a - 1.4 en). The choice of the spec-
tral characteristic for a spherical sensor for estimating the characteristic aver-
aging scale for the CHA is related to the fact that it virtually coincides with

the spectral characteristic of a two-dimensional longitudinal orientation sensor
[3] and accordingly can serve as a satisfactory approximation of the spectral char-
acteristic of real sensors with a different configuration of the averaging volume.

Thus, according to data from in situ measurements, the CHA spectral characteristic
is satisfactorily approximated by the characteristic of a spherical sensor with a
diameter of the averaging volume a - 1.6 cm. As follows from_Fig. 3, the "steep
drop" of the spectra, determined for the 0.5-level of the H2(f) characteristic, be-

gins at frequencies 25-30 Hz, which corresponds to values of velocity fluctuations
1- U/ f - 3-10 cm, close to the diameter of the can sensing element head. This esti-

mate of the CHA resolution scale is in good agreement with data from laboratory
tests [7]. It is impossible to determine the precise form of the H2(f) function and
carry out a correction of the observational data as a result of the dependence of
the H2(f) function on the spectral makeup of the measured velocity fluctuations
[3]. However, it must be remembered that when using existing CHA variants for esti-
mating the rate of dissipation of turbulent energy in the ocean the results may
prove to be too low by a factor of 2-3 as a result of spatial averaging of the vel-
ocity fluctuations by the sensor in the dissipative part of the spectrum.

In order to reduce the errors in 8 estimates associated with the finite size of the
sensor it is evidently necessary to design sensors with a lesser averaging volume.
Accordingly, the question arises as to what extent it is necessary to reduce the
geometrical dimensions of the CHA so that when measuring velocity fluctuations in
the ocean the relative understatement of 3 estimates will not exceed the stipulated
value 6 - strue/ e . The answering of this question requires stipulation of the
maximum crux value which, according to modern concepts, can be observed in the
ocean and corresponding computations must be made using the empirical universal
dependence for the spectrum of velocity fluctuations (2) and estimates of the spec-
tral characteristic of the sensor, taken, for example, from Fig. 3. If it is assum-
ed that euﬂx - 0.1 cmzosec‘3 [4], such computations show that for the CHA employed
in the measurements on the 24th voyage of the "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" scientific re-
search ship (a - 1.4 cm), 35$ 3.2, with a - 0.7 cm (decrease in the geometrical
dimensions of the CMA by half)6;$ln9, whereas with a - 0.47 cm (decrease in the
size of the CHA by a factor of 3) the estimates in the ocean will be understated

by not more.than a factor of 1.5.

18
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(M§LY
2.

3.

8.

COPY

5303
ISO:

Belyaycv, V. 8., Lyubintsev, M. H. and Ornidov, R. V., "Rate of Dissipation of
Turbulent Energy and Rate of Evening-Out of Tenperature Inhomgeneities in the
Ocean," IZV. ‘AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSPERY I GHANA (News of the USSR Academy of

Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 9, No 11, pp 1179-1185,
1973.

Golubev, Yu. Ye., Vasilevskiy, V. V. and ‘i‘urenko, V. V., "Velocity Sensor for
the Flow of Conducting Hater," USSR AUTHOR'S CRTIPICATB No 685981., published
in BYULLE‘I'EN' 1203ka (Inventions Duuetin). No 36, p 195, 1979.

Dotsenko. S. V., TBORETICHESKIYE OSNOVY IZHERENIYA GIDROFIZICEESKIICH FOLEY
OKEANA (Theoretical Principles for Measuring liydrophysica1 Fields in the Ocean),
Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1974.

Honin, A. S. and Ouidov, R. V., "Ocean Turbulence," ORANOLOGIYA. FIZIKA OKBANA
(Oceanology. Ocean Physics), Vol 1. Moscow, Nauka, pp 148-207, 1978.

Honin, A. S. and Yaglon, A. H., STATISTICHBSKAYA GIDRGEKHANIKA (Statistical
Hydromechanics), Part 2, Moscow, Nauka, 1967.

Paka, V. T., Bubnov, V. A. and Pozdynin. V. D., "Twenty-Fourth Voyage of the
Scientific Research Ship 'Dnitriy Hendeleyev'," OKEANOLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol
20, No 5. pp 956-955, 1980.

Povkh, I. I... Dunayevskiy, I. 6., Korneyev, V. D. and Cheplyukov, V. 0., "Met-
rological Characteristics of Conduction-Me Heaaursnent Converters." BKSPBRI-
HENTAL'NYYE METODY I APPARATURA DLYA ISSLEDOVANIYA TURBULENTNOSTI (Experiment-
al Methods and Apparatus for Investigating Turbulence), TBZISY DOKIADOV II VSE—
SOYUZNOGO SOVBSHCHANIYA (Smaries of Reports at the Second All-Union Confer-
ence), Novosibirsk, pp 102-105, 1976.

Crawford. w. B., "‘mrbulent Energy Dissipation in the Atlantic Equatoria1 Under—
current," Thesis. The University of British Columbia, Canada, 1976.
RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Okeanologiya", 1982

1865/ 106

1
POI OFFICIA9L USE ONLY
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLV

UN 502.3:629. 78

0

PHYSICAL ASPECTS 0? RM! susmc 0P OCEAN'AMSPBEKE svsrm

Moscow FIZICHBSKIYE ASPBKTY DISTANTSIONMGO ZONDIROVANIYA SISTER OKEAN-A‘DDSFERA
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 23 Apr 81) pp 2, 212

[Annotation and table of contents from collection of articles "Physical Aspects of
Remote Sensing of Ocean-Atmosphere System", H. S. bulkevich. doctor of physical and
mathematical sciences, responsible editor, ledstel'stvo "Raulra", 850 copies, 216

pages}

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles is devoted to space, aircraft, ship-
board and surface investigations of the sea surface and atmosphere for the purpose
of remote sensing of the ocean and the atmosphere over the ocean. nuch attention

is devoted to the transformation of visible and infrared radiation in the atmosphere
and analysis of the "ocean-atmosphere" system. The collection is intended for spec-
ialists in the field of oceanology, atmospheric physics, meteorology and other spec-
ialists using the results of space investigations of the earth.

Contents
Foreword 3
Part 1. Investigation of Thermal Regime of Ocean and Overlying Atmosphere

Halkevich. H. S. "Status of the Problem of Thermal Sounding of the 'Ocean-
Atmosphere' Systen Pron Space" 6

Gorodetskiy, A. K., Orlov. A. P. and Petrenko, B. 2. "Determination of Ocean
Temperature From Radiation in the Atmspheric Transparency Window 8-12pn" 29

Gorodetakiy, A. K. and Orlov. A. P. "Radiation Regime and Bmissivity of the
Water Surface in the 1R Spectral Range" 36

Badayev, V. V.. Gorodetskiy, A. K., Istomina. L. 6., Koslov. Ye. 14., Malkevich,

H. S. and Orlov, A. P. "Vertical Structure of Atmospheric Transformation of
IR Radiation of Ocean" 66

Halkevich. M. 5.. Shukurova, L. H. and Chavro. A. I. "Anomalous Properties of
Atmospheric Transliasion in Ozone Band 9.6,Am" 57

20
MWUSIONLV
- \

Part 2. Aerosol Attenuation of Radiation

Shukurov, A. Kh. and Chavro. A. l. "Attenuation of Amspheric Radiation in
Windows of the-spectral Range 8-21 pm According to Data Pro- 8ea and Contin-
ental Measurements" 72

Badayev, v. v.. Gorodetskiy. A. x. and Orlov, A. P. "Detenination of the Con-
tribution of Hater Vapor and Aerosol to Continuun According to Shipboard and
Aircraft Measure-cuts of Radiation" 76

Badayev, V. V., Gorodetakiy, A. L, Rozlov, Ye. M. and Petrenko. 3. z. "Deter-
mination of the Characteristics of 'l‘ransforntion of Brightness in Visible
and Near-IR Spectral Range“ 86

Halkcvich, H. S. and Istonina, L. G. "Spectral Brightness of 'Ocean-Atnosphere'
System" 99

Kozlov, Ye. M. and Badayev. V. V. "Determination of Optical Characteristics of
'Surface-Atmosphere' System in Visible Spectral Range" 137

Part 3. Sensing of Cloud Systess

Mslkevich. H. 8., Halkova. V. S. and Syschinov, V. I. "Optical Characteristics

of Clouds" 149
Corodetskiy, A. K., Orlov, A. P.. Syschinov, V. I. and Hatveyev, D. 1'. "Con-

plex Method for Determining Phase State of Hater in Clouds" 172
Gorodetskiy. A. K. and Orlov. A. P. "Radiation Characteristics of Clouds" 178

Gorodetskiy, A. K.. Gol'din. Yu. A. and Halkova. V. S. "Information Yield of Back-
scattered Signals in Laser Sounding of Quasihonogeneous Clouds" 191

Anikin, P. P., Chavro, A. I. and Shukurov. A. Rh. "Complex Optical Apparatus

for Investigations of Atmospheric Spectral Transnission on Slant and Horizon-

tal Paths in the Ultraviolet, Visible and IR Spectral Ranges (0.3-25pn)" 200
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Noun". 1981

5303
C50: 1865/11?

21
“WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.883.04
EFFECTIVE RANGE OF HYDROACOUSTIC APPARATUS

Leningrad DAL'NOST' DEYSTVIYA GIDROAKUSTICHBSKIKB SRBDSTV in Russian 1981
(signed to press 30 Sep 81) pp 2-6, 205

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from monograph "Effective Range of
Bydroacoustic Apparatus“. second edition. revised and supplemented. by Viktor
Nikolayevich Hatviyenko and Yuriy Fedotovich Tarasyuk, Isdatel'stvo "Sodo-
stroyeniye", 3500 copies, 206 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The characteristics of the principal parameters of the medi-
um causing a change in the effective range of hydroacoustic apparatus in the
seas and oceans are examined. Practical recommendations are given for evaluating
their anticipated effective range. taking into account the real characteristics
of water masses, the sea surface and floor. In comparison with the first edi-
tion (1976), this new edition is supplemented by data on instruments for com-
puting the anticipated range of detection of underwater features.-The book is
intended for hydroacoustic engineers and oceanologista and will also be use-

ful to shipbuilders and specialists in radio navigation.

Foreword. Hydroacoustic apparatus is the sole means for observation. communica-
tion and control in the underwater medium for teas and thousands of kilometers.
It is called the ’hlectronic key” to the mastery of knowledge concerning the
processes transpiring in the ocean depths. The effectiveness of use of hydro-
acoustic apparatus (BAA) for observation, communication and control in the
ocean is directly dependent on its effective range.

By the term "effective range of hydroacoustic apparatus" is meant that distance
at which the probability of correct detection of a feature (signal) is equal to
a set value. The probability of correct detection of a feature (signal) is a
function of the signal-to-noise ratio. The signal level necessary for obtaining
a stipulated probability of correct detection is determined by its characteris-
tic parameters. the spectral—energy characteristics of the noise, the volume
and quality of the problems to be solved by the station, its technical capabile
ities, the degree of professional training of the operator and many other fac-
tors.

Each of these factors is the object of study by specialists in different fields,
as a result of whose joint efforts it is possible to determine the value of the
signal-to-noise ratio corresponding to the required station operating regime.

22
FOR‘OFFKJA1.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without diminishing the importance of each individual factor exerting an influ—
ence on the effective range of the BAA, it is desirable to emphasise" the spec-
ial significance of the change in signal strength as a function of distance dur-
ing its propagation in the oceanic medium. It is precisely the peculiarities of
this change which are responsible for the level of the hydroscoustic signal

(and also many types of noise) at each point in the world ocean at any moment in
time.

There are at least three objective circumstances naking it possible to consider
sound propagation in the ocean to be the met important factor determining the
effective range of EM.

1. The beat technically prepared operator of the mat modern liAA cannot solve
the formulated problem if the sound propagation conditions are such that the
signal does not arrive at the station antenna. In such cases -- and they are
frequently encountered -- reasonings concerning the importance of other factors
simply lose sense. However. it is also possible to detect a signal which ar-
rives at the necessary reception point without complex electronic apparatus.

2. The station operator can control the absolute majority of the processes oc-
curring in the electronic units of the “AA, including assurance of reliability.
However, for the time being it is not possible to control the state of the en-
vironment. In principle the adaptation of BAA to ambient conditions is pos-
sible. but this requires attention first and foremost to the systematic deter-
mination of the peculiarities of sound propagation in the neighborhood of sta-
tion operation. Without a precise knowledge of the laws of spatial-temporal
variability of the acoustic field the use of different technical innovations
in the HM channels sometimes does not introduce any effect.

3. The technical improvement of the electronic components of the BAA has at-
tained a level at which an additional signal gain in decibel units can be ob-
tained only by employing complex devices. ibwever, this gain is less than the
variability in the conditions for the reception of a direct signal during its
propagation in the ocean.

In this connection it is important that shipboard specialists and designers of
HM first of all master practical procedures for determining the hydroacoustic
characteristics of the ocean medium and take them into account when using
analog-digital computers for constructing the trajectories of acoustic rays and
estimating the anticipated effective range of hydroacoustic apparatus.

In the second edition of the book, written by practical workers for practical
workers. there has been a continued systemstization of data on the hydroscous-
tic characteristics of the surface, water masses and ocean floor. The peculiar—
itics of sound propagation are examined and new information on measurement ap-
paratus is presented.

The use of the program for conputing the acoustic field on widely employed
types of digital computers cited in the Appendix will help in finding an an-
swer to many practical questions when precise information is available concern-

ing the vertical distribution of the speed of sound and other ambient para-
meters.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL use ONLY

when working on the manuscript the authors attempted to make full allowance
for the comments and wishes of readers expressed at conferences, in publish-

ed reviews and personal discussions during review of the first edition of
book.

the

The authors express appreciation to A. S. Potapov. E. P. Aleksandrova, A. H.

Vinogradova, V. A. Gavrilov, L. B. Demchenko, L. H. Korneyeva and N. Ye.
Cheshun for assistance which they have given in the process of work on and
finalization of the manuscript.

Critical comments and desired improvements should be sent to the address:
191065, Leningrad, Ulitsa Gogolya, 8, Isdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye."

Contents

Forewt‘d-u.u........o...oo...:......o...o.....o..........o.a..........-.

Introduction...uo........-.u..............o..................o.o.....u..

Chapter I. Hydroacoustic Characteristics of Ocean........................
#1. Characteristics of ueter masses.....................................
'2. speed of qu'OOIOOOIOOOCOOOCCOOIIO...0..I.O’COCOCQOVQCOCOOOOIOQOOO
'3. Spatial attenuation.................................................
'4. volme ugtcertns‘O0.0VIC...IO...CC.I0....CCOIOOOIOOOGOOOOOOCOOOQOIO

Chapter II. Rydroscoustic Characteristics of Ocean Surface and Floor.....
#5. Description of boundaries of medium.................................
I6. Surface characteristics.............................................
(7. Speed of sound in bottom material...................................
18. Hydroacoustic characteristics of bottom.............................

Chapter III. Hydroacoustic Hodels........................................
'9. Have and ray models.................................................
010. Focusing factor.....................................................
Ill. Propagation anomaly................................................
012. Reverberation anomaly..............................................

Chapter IV. Peculiarities of Sound Propagation in Ocean.................
013. Hydroacoustic phenomena in ocean...................................
#16. Acoustic climate and ueather.......................................
'15. Determination of sound propagation conditions......................

Chapter V. Estimation of Expected Effective Range of Hydroacoustic
System.....................................................

#16. Measurement of speed of sound in water and bottom material.........

#17. Detection zone plotters............................................

'18. Computations of effective range of hydroacoustic system using
digital computer.................................................

21:
roe omcm. use ONLY

5

7
7
18
36
66

54
54
66

73
81

9d
9‘
99
110
122

130
130
161
154

163
163
176

179
FOR»OFFKJAI.USEIJNLX

Sunnary................................................................. 18S
Appendices.............................................................. 187
Bibliography............................................................ 201
COPYRIGRT: Izdatel'atvo "Sudostroyeniye", 1981

5303
C80: 1865/112

25
won omcuu. us: ONLY
FORIOFINCJAI.1NHE(HVLY

UDC 55(260)
GEOLOGY 0P HORLD OCEAN FLOOR ACCORDING TO DEEP-HATER DRILLING
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII “AU! SSSR in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 35-40

[Article by A. V. Peyve. academician]

[Text] The deep-water drilling project has an international scope. In addition to
the United States. the principal holder of "shares" and the owner of the drilling
ship "Glomar Challenger," Rest Germany, France, Great Britain, Japan and the USSR
are participating in the project and are making financial contributions. The

"Closer Challenger" is small, having a displacenent of 11 000 tons. Its deck carries
more than 7 000 running meters of drilling pipe and it is possible to carry out
drilling to approximately this depth. including, to be sure. the water layer.

The "Glomer Challenger" has nany unique technical apparatuses for drilling in the
ocean. In addition to the fact that for the first time this vessel made use of ex-
trenely modern means of navigation, it was outfitted with a systen making it pos-
sible to hold it in position at a single point during the course of drilling. For
this purpose an ultrasonic buoy is lowered to the ocean floor and the hydrophones
situated under the ship are directed at this buoy. The data on the vessel's dis-
placement are fed to a conputer which then issues a connand to four position-con-
trol apparatuses situated at the vessel's prow and stern. The ship also has a
stabilizing apparatus which safeguards the drilling pipes against rupture during
rolling.

Fran the time of onset of drilling in August 1968 through October 1980, during 75
voyages. a total of 878 boreholes were drilled in 532 regions of the seas and
oceans. The maximum penetration into bottom rocks was 1741 n at a place where the
ocean depth was 3900 m. '

The technical knowledge obtained in the course of implementation of abyssal drill-
ing. the development of drilling techniques and the designing of a variety of in-
strunents in the course of the investigations attained great perfection. Not only
standard logging (acoustic. density, induction, neutron, game and other types of
logging) is carried out in the boreholes. but also different experiments. such as
for studying seismic phenomena. The employment of a hydraulic corer, asking it pos-
sible to extract a 901 largely undisturbed core, attracted the attention not only
of geologists. but other specialists as well. It was also found that repeated en-
try into the borehole shaft is possible and thus it is possible to obtain data over
a long period of observations.

26
IIIICHHHCIAI.U§E(HNLY
Ahvssui drliling of the floor of the world ocean and the marginal seas is an im-
portant landmark in the history of natural science. Now we can see before us the
structure. geological history, history of the life and paleogeography of the time
of formation of'the upper rock layer of the entire planet, not only its lesser
part, represented by the continents. It is understood, to be sure, that modern geo-
logical science is experiencing revolutionary changes not only as a result of abys-
sal drilling. During the post-war years the floor of the world ocean has also been
studied by other geophysical and geological methods, in particular, by mapping of
the floor by means of deep-water submergible and controllable vehicles, dredging.
photography, seismic and magnetic profiling, etc. These studies have been stimul-
ated not only by the interests of science in general, but also by the practical
need for studying mineral resources. And the deep drilling project from the very
beginning was also directed to a possible general evaluation of the prospects

first and foremost of finding petroleum and gas in the world ocean.

As mentioned above, work with abyssal drilling aboard the "Glomar Challenger" began
in August 1968. but by the beginning of the 1960's modern concepts relating to the
geology. geophysics and geochemistry of the ocean floor, especially the plate tec-
tonics hypothesis, had already begun to form. Accordingly, scientists directed
their efforts to finding new reliable facts which could be obtained only by means
of drilling.

The most important achievement of the modern earth sciences is the clarification
of the fundamental fact that the earth's crust of the oceans is essentially dif-
ferent from the continental crust. The oceanic crust is not only b-6 times thinner
than the continental crust; in its composition the main role is played by basalt-
oid mafic and ultramafic rocks, whereas the basement of the continental crust for

the most part consists of sialic granite gneiss strata which are completely absent
in the oceans.

The uppermost layer of the continents, consisting of sedimentary rocks, has been
penetrated to the basement by thousands of boreholes, especially in petroleum and
gas regions, and the Kola borehole, the deepest in the world, has entered the con-
tinental basement to a depth of 10 800 m. The continental granite gneiss crust, due
to the fact that its individual parts have been dislocated and have moved relative
to one another along faults, has been studied well in its entire depth, or as geol-
ogists say, its thickness. It has been established that individual blocks of the
continental crust have a very ancient age and were formed 3-4 billion years ago.

Prior to the beginning of abyssal drilling we knew essentially nothing or knew very
little concerning the geology of the sedimentary layer of the crust in the seas and
oceans. which is determined by use of geophysical data. The scientific results ob-
tained using abyssal drilling in all respects became a true discovery of our times.
As already mentioned, as of today a total of 878 boreholes have been drilled in the
entire world ocean; some of these have completely passed through the sedimentary
layer and have penetrated into the basalt basement to a depth of 600 m in basalts.

Simultaneously by means of dredging and using underwater submergible vehicles stud-
ies have been made of basement rocks of the oceanic crust -- ultramsfites and
mafites. for which the velocities of seismic waves typical for the mantle and the

FOIIOFFNJAE?USE(HVLV
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lower part of the oceanic crust are characteristic. The time and geological history
of formation of these rocks have still been poorly studied, but as is firmly es-
tablished, the above-lying basaltic and sedimentary layers of the oceanic crust in
all the oceans are not more ancient than 200-230 million years. which is evidence
of fundamental differences in the geological history of the crust of the oceans

and continents. of the much more ancient age of formation of the crust on the con-
tinents.

Now we will discuss briefly some of the fundamental patterns of structure and com-
position of the sedimentary and basalt layers of the oceans which have been reveal-
ed by abyssal drilling.

The sedimentary stratum of the world ocean proved to be extremely favorable for a
vertical breakdown of its cross section into layers exceedingly fragmented in time.
This became possible because the breakdown of the section was accomplished on the
basis of the remains of plankton organisms. such as forsminifers, rsdiolarians, '
diatoms. nanoplankton. etc., rapidly evolving and rapidly populating the world
ocean, present in the borehole cores. Taking into account the paleomagnetic scale
and radiometric determinations, for the first time, as a result of abyssal drill-
ing,it was possible to create a basis for a superdetailed and reliable correlation
of the time of appearance of geological phenomena and features over the entire
earth.

The study of the global time patterns of geological phenomena and processes in the
geological history of the earth, like in the history of life on our planet, is a
fundamental problem in natural science. Until now we could carry out only intra-
continental, or in the best case, intercontinental correlation of geological phen-
omens.

It has been demonstrated by drilling and seismic profiling that the sedimentary
stratum in the oceans, lying at the top in the vertical section, occurs virtually
everywhere. It is absent only locally in the central parts of large oceanic ridges
and on underwater volcanic rises. However, its thickness is variable, which is im-
portant to know when evaluating the prospects for finding petroleum and gas. Over
great areas the thickness of the sedimentary layer does not exceed 1-1.5 km, in-
creasing in the marginal seas on the continental margins to 10 km or more. Here
the sedimentary layer contains petroleum and gas. In the internal regions of the
oceans there are probably considerable sectors with a great thickness of sedi-
ments. to be sure. of a different composition.

According to drilling data. the sedimentary layer in the oceans. except for its nar-
row nargins, everywhere is underlain by basalts. This is the second layer of the
oceanic crust. Drilling has demonstrated that the youngest rocks are the basalts

of the axial zones of the mid-oceanic ridges, with increasing distance from which
the age'of the basalts gradually increases. Accordingly. the bottom of the sedimen-
tary layer also becomes more ancient in the direction from the axis of the ridge

in the direction of the ocean margins. Thus. the pattern of structure of the ridges
in the oceans is directly opposite their structure on the continents where the

axial zones of the ridges usually consist of the most ancient rocks.

28
INJI10lIﬂC1AI.|JSE2(HVLY
The sedimentary layer in the oceans with respect to composition of the rocks is
variable and diverse. Drilling has revealed many patterns of its structure. among
which we will note only one. the lost fundamental. The layers of sediments lying
above the basalts, it was found, in their character are always relatively more
shallow-water than those lying above, which is evidence of uplifting. expressed

in the relief at the time of formation of the basaltic crust of the oceans and its
subsequent subsidence.

In the Indian Ocean and along the margins of the Atlantic Ocean boreholes have pen-
etrated lagoonal and even terrestrial deposits now submerged to a great depth. It
was also found that the basalt layer in its structure is complex and diversified

in composition: in addition to the tholeiitic basalts characteristic for the ocean,
there is also extensive development of olivine basalts.

Drilling has revealed earlier unknown ore-formation phenomena in ocean ridges. It
was found that metal-bearing sediments of the Red Sea type. having increased con-
tents of manganese. iron and some other metals, occur widely in the regions of the
East Pacific Ocean Rise; they are also found in the other oceans. They lie locally
directly at the base of the sedimentary layer. Rich ores have not yet been encoun-
tered by boreholes. but the areas of development of metalliferoua sediments and
their masses not studied by drilling are enormous.

In 1978. in the East Pacific Ocean Ridge, at a latitude of 21°. American geologists
used underwater vehicles to observe the extremely interesting phenomenon of recent
sulfide polymetallic ore-formation in the basalt crust. Here at a depth of 2500 m
there was found to be a high-yield concentrated hydrothermal ore solution with a
temperature of 400°C. under a great pressure escaping from the basalts through fis-
sures. Near the outlets of these sources there is deposition of massive polymetallic
sulfide ores that include iron. zinc, lead. copper. silver. gold and platinum. The
content of elements is adequate for production if these ores were present on the
land.

Data on hydrothermal phenomena in the now-forming oceanic crust are of great im-
portance for learning about the processes of ore formation because in the structure
of the continental crust there have been found to be tectonic fragments of the
oceanic crust of the geological past. The sea water circulating in the oceanic crust
under a pressure of hundreds of atmospheres and being strongly heated is an extreme-
ly aggressive medium and leeches out the heavy metals, iron, manganese, nickel, cop-
per. etc.. and also lithophylic elements -- potassium, magnesium, and others. The
ore solutions forming in this case are a source of formation not only of sulfide
ores. but also widely occurring metalliferous sediments.

It is not impossible that the source of metals for complex ores deposited on the
floor of the oceans in the form of ferromanganese modules is hydrotherms of this
type. These ores are exceedingly rich. Their reserves are enormous. As is well
known. Japanese and Aserican firms have developed methods for their exploitation.
In the Pacific Ocean. in particular, these nodules extend over an area of many mil-
lions of square kilometers. In each kilometer there are approximately 8 000-10 000
tons of such nodules. In the richest sectors the manganese content in the nodules
attains 252; the content of nickel and cobalt is almost 1.5% and the copper content

INDRIOIFIC%EE.IEHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in thc same. This is enormous wealth which evidently in the near future will begin
to be extracted from the ocean floor. In the oceans and seas of the geological past
with a nelanocratic. basaltoid, ultramafitic crust. characteristic for the present-
day oceans, there were also ore processes at work sinilar to the processes which
transpire in the modern oceans and sees. Deposits of the nodule type are known in
the Urals and in other regions of the earth. For this reason their comparative
study is of great practical interest.

As already mentioned, by the beginning of abyssal drilling a new mobilistic global
tectonic concept had already developed. It is now usually called plate tectonics.
It is based on a recognition of drift of the continents with the simultaneous for-
mation of s new oceanic crust in the zone of spreading-apart of the lithospheric
plates. It has been calculated that the mean rate of crustal drift differs in time
and space, varying from 1 to 13 cm per year3and the mean rate of vertical movements
of the blocks is from S to 10 cm per thousand years. Drilling has yielded indisput-
able proof of drift and spreading-apart of the continents.

In the Atlantic Ocean. for example. it has been possible to reconstruct, with great
detail, the process of spreading-apart of the continental crust and its paleogeo-
graphy on the basis of synchronous sedimentary rocks which have been drilled through
at opposite Iargins of the continents and which were initially formed in a narrow
basin under lagoonal conditions during the initial period of splitting—apart and
spreading-apart of the continents.

Abyssal drilling equipment has been used in a detailed investigation of the geolog—
ical history of the sedimentary layer on the North Atlantic floor. It was found
that the onset of spreading-apart was different in different parts. The northern
and arctic parts of the ocean began to form later than its southern part.

Already by the beginning of abyssal drilling a partial study had been made of ocean-
ic paleomagnetism. It_vas established that a special feature of the magnetic field
in the oceans is the alternation of zones of normal and reversed polarity of the
geomagnetic field. On this basis specialists have developed a paleomagnetic strati-
graphic scale. The polarity zones are parallel to the rift zones of the oceanic
ridges or are simply parallel to the ridges, which consist of basalts. becoming
more ancient with increasing distance from the ridges.

At the time of abyssal drilling the paleomagnetic stratigraphic scale was checked
against a detailed biostratigraphic scale. In nany cases the boreholes passed
through the sedimentary layer and entered the basalt. Determinations of the age of
the bottom of the sediments on the basis of biostratigraphic data and the top of
the basalts as determined by the potassium-argon method agree very satisfactorily
with the age of the paleomagnetic isochronal lines. These data have become the
basis of a hypothesis of the spreading-apart and flowing-apart of the floor of the
oceans and can be considered a fundamental scientific achieve-eat of abyssal drill-
ing.

in the concept of plate tectonics there has been detailed development of the hypo-

thesis of the mechanism of drift of the continents and formation of the sedimentary
and basalt layers of the oceans. especially the problems of crustal subduction and

F0! magi USE ONLY
accretion. The mechanism of movement of masses in the earth's shells nevertheless
remains disputable because until now the role and interrelationship of different
intraterrestrial and cosmological factors participating in geodynamic processes
still have not been interpreted However. abyssal drilling has confirmed the con-
cept of mobilism. the basis for which is a recognition of the drift of large and
small continental and oceanic plates, and this concept must serve as the basis for
any geodynamic model.

It can be concluded from this far from complete review of the scientific and prac-
tical results of abyssal drilling that this project constitutes a unique attempt
at increasing our knowledge concerning the earth. the age, history and processes
of development of oceanic basins and seas. and also on the structure and composi-
tion of the oceanic crust. its metallogeny and presence of petroleum and gas.

The shortage of time does not make it possible to touch on other serious problems
which can be solved by abyssal drilling, such as the interaction of oceanic cur-
rents snd climate. as well as the evolution of fauna and flora of the geological
past.

A unique and invaluable achievement in the deep-water drilling project is the sci-
entific studies which contain the results of core processing. Each voyage of the
"Clomar Challenger" is described in one or two books, not to mention numerous other
publications in different countries of the world.

Soviet scientists have participated on most of the voyages of the "Glomar Challeng-
er" in all the oceans. first as guests. and after 1974. officially. when the USSR
Academy of Sciences began to make a monetary contribution to the drilling project.
Forty Soviet scientists. primarily from academic institutes. have participated

on the voyages and have processed core material in the laboratories at these in-
stitutes. They have honorably and at a high scientific level participated in the
common work on the international project and in scientific publications concerning
the voyages.

Due to participation in the project the scientists of our country have acquired in-
valuable experience and knowledge for work on investigation of the geology. geo-
physics and geochemistry of the world ocean.

Now it is already completely clear that the time has come to turn to the creation
of our own modern technical means for studying the geology and mineral resources
of the oceans. But prior to solutiwn of this complex problem it is necessary to
continue to participate in the international abyssal drilling project. '

it!

ACudcmlcian A. V. Sidorenko. vice president. USSR Academy of Sciences. spoke after
the scientific conference. He stated that the results of abyssal drilling examined
at the session of the Presidium. USSR Academy of Sciences. dealt with a problem of
the greatest significance. A very great amount of work has been done and highly
interesting material has been obtained which is not only of fundamental importance
for understanding the geological development of our planet. but also of enormous

31
FOR(HHW(1AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practical value. affording prospects for using the world ocean as a source of rain-
eral raw materials. Accordingly, A. V. Sidorenko noted the importance of further
participation of Soviet scientists in work under the international abyssal drilling
project and also the need for creating our own technical means for abyssal drilling
in the world ocean. work on study of the world ocean merits special attention, he
enphasized, and it is necessary to ensure organizational and material possibilities
for carrying out this work in a full volume.

Academician A. P. Aleksandrov, president. USSR Academy of Sciences, pointed out the
importance of the considerations expressed at the session concerning our own tech-
nical means for abyssal drilling in the world ocean and expressed appreciation to
the speaker for an interesting connunication.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akadenii nauk SSSR", 1982

5303
C80: 1865/122

32
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
STUDY OF CARIBBEAN-GULF OF MEXICO BASIN
Moscow VESTNIK AKADDiII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 98-102

[Article by V. A. Gorbanev]

[Text] The geographical position of the Central American Basin -- the Caribbean Sea,
Gulf of Mexico and adjacent regions of the Atlantic, its already exploited and con-
siderable potential mineral, energy and food resources. and key importance for solu-
tion of a number of fundamental problems in oceanology all account for the close at-
tention which scientists of different countries are devoting to this region at the
present time.

There are enormus reserves of petroleum and gas on the shelves of the United
States. Mexico. Venezuela. Colombia, Trinidad and Tobago. Suffice it to mention
that only too Maracaibo petroleum and gas basin. situated in the southern part of
the Caribbean Sea, among the sea basins occupies second place in the world with re-
spect to the volume of petroleum production: its output here exceeds 100 million
tons. In this region the basis of fishing is menhaden. which accounts for about 1002
of the total catch. In addition, fishermen here also take sardines, tuna, shrimp
and squid. The total annual production in the basin is about 2 million tons of liv-
ing resources, which is only 201 of the catch which could be allowed.

One of the tasks of USSR participation in the joint investigations of the basin is
study of its hydrodynamic and hydrometeorological regimes exerting an influence on
the weather and climate of our country. The computations made by Soviet specialists
on the basis of a numerical model of interaction between the atmosphere and ocean,
developed under the direction of Academician G. I. Herchuk, demonstrated that the
region of the western Atlantic is one of the mat important energy-active regions
of the world ocean. where processes of transfer of heat and moisture from one medi-
um to another occur most intensively. As a result of these processes macroscale
anomalies of temperature and atmospheric pressure arise in the ocean and atmosphere,
which in turn causes an anomalous transport of heat and moisture by air masses for
tens of thousands of kilometers to the east in the direction of Eurasia. Thus, the
hydrodynamic regime of the Caribbean-Mexican region in many respects determines

the weather over Western Europe and the European USSR and can serve as an indicator
for its long-range forecasting.

In the Caribbean-Hexican basin Soviet scientists are studying the geological struc-
ture of the ocean floor for the purpose of developing a global theory of tectonics
of the lithosphere and are investigating the biological structure and the living

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INHICINHCJAI.lEI!(HULY

resources in the ocean. It must be emphasized that the investigation of living re-
sources, the same as practical investigations in the field of the geology of the
shelves, is carried out primarily in the interests of the developing countries

of the region in rendering them selfless assistance in the mastery of modern meth-
ods of marine research, in the training of national cadres and in setting right
their own marine economy. .

Being guided by these humane goals, the USSR has actively supported the proposal of
the Netherlands concerning the formulation of an international program within the

framework of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (100) of UNESCO --
"Joint Investigations of the Caribbean Sea and Adjacent Regions."*

The resolution on creation of this program for "Joint Investigations of the Carib-
bean Sea and Adjacent Regions" was adopted by the IOC Assembly in 1967. At the
same time an international coordination group was established in order to coordin-
ate the efforts of the IOC meaber states participating in this program. The Insti-
tute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov, USSR Acadeny of Sciences over the course
of a number of years was the key institute in the country in implementing the pro-
gram. One of the first voyages of the scientific research flagship of this insti-
tute. the "Akademik Kurchatov," was an expedition to the Caribbean-Gulf of Mexico
region. This expedition, having a biological orientation, left a considerable
trace in the history of joint investigations of the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of

Mexico.

In addition to the biological studies, the Institute of Oceanology carried out
large-scale hydrological investigations and also investigations in the field of
the geology and dynamics of the sea shores of a nunber of countries, especially

the Republic of Cuba.

In addition to the USSR Academy of Sciences, major investigations in the Caribbean-
Gulf of Mexico region were carried out by the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences by the
personnel of the Marine Hydrophysical Institute and the Institute of Geological
Sciences. In the Caribbean Sea and in the Gulf of Mexico the Marine Hydrophysical
Institute carried out considerable hydrological surveys, refining the system of
currents in this basin and its influence on the formation of the Gulf Stream. The
Institute of Geological Sciences has carried out much work for studying the geol-
ogy of the floor of the Caribbean-Gulf of Mexico Basin and sedimentation processes.

Important fishery investigations in the region have been carried out by the special-
ists of the Atlantic Scientific Research Institute of Fishing and Oceanography of
the USSR Ministry of the Fish Industry. In particular, major studies were carried
out by these specialists in collaboration with Cuban scientists. Systematic hydro-
physical observations in the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico were carried out
by scientists and specialists on the ships of the USSR Hydrographic Service.

Our country has made a major contribution to study of the Caribbean-Gulf of Mexico
Basin during the lifetime of the program "Joint Investigations of the Caribbean
Sea and Adjacent Regions.” This was evidenced, in particular, by a review symposium

* In Russian: SIKAR -- Sovmestnyye Iasledovaniya Karibskogo Morya i Prilegayushch-
ikh Rayonov -- Joint Investigations of the Caribbean Sea and Adjacent Regions.

3!;
FOR‘OIIICIAI.UEII(I¥LY
held In Caracas in 1976 where the conferees summarized the results of work under
the program ”Joint Investigations of the Caribbean Sea and Adjacent Regions" during
the period 1967-1976. The reports of the Soviet scientists were characterized by
breadth in formulation of the problems. depth of their develop-ant and validation
by a considerable volume of data.

Considerable progress in study of the Caribbean-Gulf of Mexico Basin during the
lifetime of the program "Joint Investigations of the Caribbean Sea and Adjacent
Regions" was noted at the symposium. The collected data have created a good sci-
entific basis for further investigation of the region of joint efforts of the IOC
member countries.

At the last. VIIIth Session of the International Coordination Group on the Program
"Joint Investigations of the Caribbean Sea and Adjacent Regions" (1976) a resolution

was adopted on the creation, on an interim basis, of an IOC Association on the
Caribbean Basin and Adjacent Regions.‘ The task of the association included the de-

velopment and coordination of joint scientific programs, the collection, processing
and dissemination of the collected data, as well as assistance and furnishing of
experience to the developing countries of the region. A regional secretariat was
created within the framework of the association whose task was the carrying out

of routine activity during the period between sessions of the association.

Twenty-one countries are members of the association. Its president at the present
time is Manuel Murillo (Costa Rica) and its regional secretary is Robert Lankford
(United States). The Marine Hydrophysical Institute. Ukrainian Academy of Sciences,
became the key USSR organization under the association.

The Soviet Union is taking an active part in implementing the joint programs. During
the period 1978-1980 alone several expeditions were carried out in the Caribbean-
Culf of Mexico Basin. including aboard the ship "Mikhail Iomonosov." During this
voyage multisided oceanological investigations were carried out in the central and
eastern parts of the Caribbean Sea. New data were collected making it possible to
refine the conclusions drawn earlier concerning the thermohaline, dynamic, hydro-
chemical and hydrobiological structures of the water masses and also the hydroop-
tical characteristics of the water and to advance new scientific hypotheses. In par-
ticular. it was demonstrated that there are anticyclonic meanders over the Colombian
Basin on the basis of factual data for the autumn and spring periods. The direction
of movement of deep North Atlantic waters was determined. During the course of the
entire voyage depths were measured and as a result 30 points with new depths were
measured. The measurements of the strait between Pedro and Rosalind Banks were de-
termined with a higher accuracy; it is through this strait that the principal water
exchange occurs between the Yucatan and Colombian Basins. The results of measurement
of currents in the Grenada region indicated that the vertical dynamic structure here
is considerably more complex than was assumed.

Hydrobiological data are of special interest from the point of view of study of the
"nrmntinn of the productivity of waters. At the same time. these data to a consider-
ﬂhlgngegrce made it possible to refine the conclusions drawn concerning the

a
In Russian: HOKARIB -- IOC Association on the Caribbean Basin and Adjacent Re-
gions.

35
summon“
FOI‘OFIICJAI.USEGDNLY

structure and dynamics of water nasses. Data were obtained for the first time on
the internal waves in the region. They are based both on instrumental measure-
ments of temperature and current velocity fluctuations, but also on the results
of coaputations of hydrological parameters.

of all available data, a study was made of the spatial-temporal variability of

temperature. salinity, water density and oxygen content of water. In addition. a
study was made of the exchange of water nasses through the principal straits be-
tween the Greater and Lesser Antilles; a hydrodynamic model of the Caribbean-Gulf
of Mexico Basin was constructed. The enumerated results obtained on the hydrology
and dynamics of waters in the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico are set forth in a

Caribbean Basin, including investigations of the ecological basis of rational use
of bottom ichthyofauna of the Gulf of Mexico. Extensive fishery investigations

work of the association and in conformity to bilateral agreements between the
Soviet Union and Cuba, Jamaica. Nicaragua and Grenada. In particular, during 1979—
1980 alone there were two joint Soviet-Janaican expeditions in which scientists of
both countries participated. The collected data made it possible to obtain the

commercial catch. The total biomass of bottom species of fish on the Jamaican and
Pedro Bank shelves during July-August 1979 was 69 400 tons, whereas in December
l979—January 1980 it was 36 800 tons.

______.__________
* See GIDROLOGIYA KARIBSKOGO HORYA I HEKSIKANSKOCO ZALIVA (Hydrology of the Carib-
bean Sea and Gulf of Mexico), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1981.
_ wry-..” uuu y": nevus-an UL LUE yiwuuauuut apcuaco VI. LLB" wan coma.—

noted. The material collected during the expedition served as a basis for devel-

oping a nodel of the dynamics of populations of commercial fish and in predicting
their reserves.

During geomorphologicsl and geophysical work specialists collected and general-
ized an enormous amount of material relating to relief. magnetic and gravitation-
al fields in the Caribbean Sea. New information was obtained on the structure
and thickness of the sedimentary layer and the earth's crust. New highly precise
gravimetric charts and maps of the bottom relief of the Caribbean Sea floor were
compiled, as well as diagrams of tectonic structures. All these maps and diagrams

are of enormous practical importance and can be used as a scientific basis in the
search for petroleum and gas.

In addition to carrying out joint expeditions for clarifying the presence of re-
gions which are promising for fishing, the Soviet Union is systematically providing
places for foreign trainees on board its ships carrying out different investiga—
tions. For example, the "Mikhail Lomonosov." carrying out hydrophysical invest-
igations, carried six specialists from different countries in the region. During
work in the eastern part of the Caribbean Sea three specialists from Grenada un-
derwent training aboard this ship.

An important role in the professional training of specialists from the developing
countries was played by a scientific-academic seminar held aboard the "Akademik
Vernndskiy" during its call at the port of Nassau (Bahamas). The seminar was at-
tended hy scientists from different member countries of the association.

At the third session of the association held in December 1980 there was a detail-
ed analysis of the association's activity during the elapsed four years. Despite
the successes attained, in general the results of the joint investigations, in
the opinion of Soviet scientists, have not yet justified those hopes which it
was thought that the association would realize. The regional character of the as-
sociation led to a predominance of small narrowly specialised projects formulated
by the association and being of interest for only an insignificant part of the
develooing countries of the region. At the same time, the carrying out of wide-
scale fundamental or practical investigations not formally approved by the asso-
ciation, and this under conditions under which all the countries of the region
have declared ZOO-mile economic zones in which the carrying out of any scientific
investigations requires the permission of the corresponding coastal state with
the imposing of a whole series of preliminary conditions, involves considerable
organizational difficulties. As a result, there is a marked decrease in the flow
of data entering into the inlvrnational data exchange system.

Evidently these same factors in large part explain why the session adopted a res—
olution on transforming the association into the IOC Subcommission on the Carib-
henn Basin and Adjacent Regions. Nevertheless, the orientation on small local
projects persiSted. At the present time only two projects have really been devel-
oped: "Scientific Programs in Support of Fishing in the Lesser Antilles" and
"Program for Monitoring Sea Contamination." The remaining projects -- "Program
for Studying Lobsters in the Central American Basin," "Program for Studying Sea
Turtles in the Western Regions of the Central Atlantic," "Program on the Geology

37
FOI10FFICIAL.USB(MNLY
FUIIHHWCIAI.USE(NNLY

of the Gulf of Paria" and "Program on Oceanic Dynamics" are only in the stage
of formulation.

Soviet scientists also intend to pursue further the idea that it is necessary to
carry out large-scale global programs for investigating the Caribbean-Gulf of
Mexico region by the personnel of IOC member countries. Only on the basis of such

major fundamental investigations will it be possible to proceed to serious prac-
tical projects related to the possible presence of petroleum and gas in the ba-

sin and biological resources. As promising directions the Soviet Union proposes

several principal approaches for future fundamental and practical investigations
which in turn can serve as a basis for solving special local problems of inter-

est to one or more developing countries in the region.

An extremely timely problem is that of detecting the frequency of recurrence of
formation of large thermal anomalies in the basin and adjacent regions of the At-
lantic for evaluating their influence on the corresponding long-period variations
of weather in Europe and the creation of modern numerical methods for long-range
weather forecasting.

It is also necessary to carry out a further study of the structure and circulation
of water masses and mapping of vertical movement, the detenaining abiotic factor

exerting an influence on the formation and movement of regions with a high hiopro-
ductivity.

Investigations must be continued for studying the variability of hydrophysical and
hydrochemical fields for the purpose of ascertaining the laws of influence of
these factors on basin bioproductivity.

The problem of further improvement of the hydrodynamic model of the Caribbean Basin
is of extremely great importance for describing the variability of oceanological
fields at different spatial-temporal scales. A serious problem which still has not
been solved is that of creating a hydrobiological model of the Caribbean-Gulf of
Mexico Basin.

Such are the principal scientific tasks which await solution in the Central Amer-
icsn Basin. Soviet scientists and specialists hope that the existing difficulties
are of a temporary character and international cooperation in study of the nature
of the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and adjacent regions will rise to a qual-
itatively new stage and will become a more powerful lever by means of which it
will bc possible to carry out scientific research freely for the good of the pres-
ent and future.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR", 1982

5303
cso: 1865/122

FOI10FFRJA1.USE(INLY
NEH MONOGRAPH ON OCEANIC TURBULENCE

Leningrad OKEANSKAYA TURBULENTNOST' in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5 Feb 81)
pp 2. 320

[Annotation end table of contents fros monograph "Oceanic Turbulence". by Andrey
Sergeyevich Honin and Rostislav Vsevolodovich Osmidov, Gidrometeoiadat, 1630 copies,

320 pages]

[Text]. Annotation. This book gives a review of turbulence theory in stratified
flows, examines the nechanisus of generation of turbulence and summarizes data

on microscale turbulence. Information is given on the statistical parameters of
turbulent fluctuations and their dependence on background hydrological conditions.
The rates and dissipation of turbulent energy are analysed and the characteristics
of intermittence of turbulent fields in the ocean are presented. The theory of
macroscale. quasi-tvo-dimensionsl oceanic turbulence is set forth and the "nega-
tive viscosity" effects associated with it are analyzed. Information pertinent to
recently discovered synoptic eddies is given. The book is intended for oceanolo-
gists. geophysicists and students at the appropriate institutions of higher educa-

tion.

Contents
ForewrdosotOOOOsOOOOOOOOCIOIOIOO0.00.000.0IIOOOOOOOIOOOOOODIIOOOIOIOOIOOOOOOIOO. 3

chapter 1. Theory of Turbulence in Stratified Flows
1. Definition of turbulence.................................................... 8
2. Equations of dynamics of turbulent f10vs.................................... 26
3. Mechanisms of generation of oceanic turbulence..........3................... 39
6. Influence of stratification on turbulence................................... 56
5. Theory of turbulence spectrum............................................... 76
6. Microscale structure of turbulence.......................................... 97

Chapter 2. Microscale Turbulence
7. Apparatus for investigating nicroscale turbulence. Measurement method.....; 113
8. Statistical characteristics of turbulence.................................. 132
9. Velocity f1uctuations...3......... ...... ................................... 150
Mean square values....................................................... 150
Correlation and spectral functions....................................... 155
Dependence on local background conditions................................ 163
Spectra of intensity of fluctuations and energy dissipation.............. 170
Rate of dissipation of turbulent energy.................................. 172
Climatology of nicroscele turbulence..................................... 180

39
FOIlOIFRJA1.USE(NNLY
FtHICNHWCJAI.tEﬂE(MNLY

10. Temperature fluctuations.....................................¢.......... 185
Indirect method for evaluating temperature fluctuations............... 185
Local temperature gradients in ocean.................................. 186
Variability of fine-structured temperature profiles................... 190
Direct measurements of high-frequency temperature f1uctuations........ 200
Turbulent heat flomi'OOIOOOICODOOOO0.0IOCOOIOUOODOOOOIOIIOOOODOOOOOOI 201
Spectra of high-frequency temperature f1uctuations.................... 202
Spectral characteristics of variability of temperature field in ocean. 205
Rate of evening-out of temperature inhomogeneities.................... 209'

11. Conductivity and salinity fluctuations.................................. 213
General principles.................................................... 213
Local c and s sradienta............................................... 216
Spectral characteristics.............................................. 220
Dependence on local background conditions............................. 222
Intermittence of conductivity f1uctuations............................ 231
Data from deep measuraments........................................... 23S
Determination of salinity fluctuations................................ 236
Density fluctuations and turbulent flows of mass...................... 237
Climatology of turbulence in conductivity field....................... 260

Chapter 3. Hacroscale Horizontal Turbulence.................................. 266
12. Hacroturbulence and negative viscosity.................................. 246
13. Theory of two-dimensional turbulence.................................... 261
16. Spectrum of horizontal turbulence....................................... 284

Bibliography.................................................................. 299
COPYRIGHT: Gidrometeoizdat, 1981

5303
C50: 1865/116

ho
FOR omcm. use omv
UDC 551.596.13551.55

PROPAGATION OF INTERNAL WAVES IN STRATIPIED MEDIUM HIT“ FLOR VEEOCITY SHEAR.

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA AINDSPBRY I OIEAKA in Russian
Vol 18. No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received 3 Her 81) pp 165-152

[Article by V. Yu. Tseytlin, Institute of Atnospheric Physics. USSR Academy of
Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: It is shown that solution of the two-
dimensional problea of the propagation of in-
ternal waves in a nediua with arbitrary velo-
city and density profiles can be reduced to the
scattering problem for the Schrodinger equation.
Also exaained is the velocity profile in the
form of a hyperbolic tangent and it is shown
that there is a region of the values of the
parameters with which the corresponding poten-
tial has a nontrivial structure. One of the
results of this is the existence of e horizon-
tal waveguide for adequately long waves. The
limits of applicability of the geonetrical ap-
proach are deter-ined and the necessary boun-
dary value conditions are discussed.

1. In this article a study is made of the propagation of internal waves (I9)
in a nonviscous stratified fluid which woven with a velocity changing with
height. The ilportance of this problen is attributable to the fact that in-
ternal waves play an appreciable role in the energy balance of the upper lay-
ers of the atmosphere (for steeple. see [1] and the literature cited there).
but during propagation they usually pass through regions of s narked change
in wind velocity and density which may be either local. caused by surface ten-
perature inversions, or global, caused by more or less aacroscale synoptic
formations. The coefficients of reflection and propagation of I" thrOugh such
layers determine the corresponding energy fluxes and thus the contribution of
I“ to the energy balance.

The simplest aethod for exaaining the effects of reflection and refraction of
waves is geometrical, when the region of a sharp change in the parameters of
the medium is replaced by an interface at which the parameters and/or their
derivatives experience a discontinuity. By "splicing" the solutions on both

FIM!(HWNC1AI.USE(NVLY
Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(]kl.UGi§(ﬂULV

sides of the discontinuity by means of the appropriate boundary conditions,

II In wvswiblc tn obtain the corresponding Fresnel formulas. and thus solve
the problem in a particular approximation. An excellent review of such an ap-
proach for a density discontinuity and/or its derivative can be found in [2]*.
Without discussing the density discontinuities in detail and assuming that
density is a smooth function of the vertical coordinate, we will investigate
flow velocity shears. It is also possible to attempt to consider the latter
geometrically, assuming velocity to be constant above and below the discon-
tinuity and having a jump at this level, but this description is not self-
consistent because such a velocity profile is unstable. In actuality. the
flow stability criterion is the condition R>1J4, where R is the global Rich-
ardson number [3, a], which qualitatively denotes a quite smooth transition
from one asymptotic form of flow velocity to another. Thus, we arrive at the
need for a more rigorous examination of the problem. The latter. nevertheless,
does not mean that the geometrical approach must be discarded. A more precise
examination will make it possible to refine the boundary conditions at the
discontinuity and the framework of its applicability. '

2. The object of investigation is only I“ and therefore it is desirable from
the very beginning to exclude the effects of compressibility and the acoustic
waves caused by them. The continuity equation is used in the form

(aw-wish. v.u-o. (1)

where f’is density. U is fluid velocity, that is, density is invariable along
the trajectory of a fluid particle (quasicompressibility).

The equations of hydrodynamics in the investigated case have the form
p(0.+U- V)U+ Vp+pg-0. (2)

Then as a simplification we will examine a two-dimensional case, where x, y
are the horizontal and vertical coordinates. We will assume that the flow moves
only in the horizontal direction. Then in accordance with the problem formul-
uted above, the flow parameters in the zero approximation have the form:

po-Mv). PO'PJU). U.-(u.(u). 0). (3)

The zero subscript denotes background parameters on the basis of which wave
disturbances are propagated. that is

p-po+p. p-p.+p. U-U.+U. U-(v. 0.) (‘0

(below the parameters without a zero subscript correspond to a disturbance of
the principal state).

With an accuracy to the second order of magnitude we have the following system
of linear equations:

 

* The reflection of internal waves from solid obstacles has been described in
detail in [10, 11].

1:2
FOR omcm. use ONLY
Mid-+34 +M’vl-ot “D”... 0" +P‘ w‘

1 \ Dp+v.p.’-0. a.».+a,u,-o, D-d.+u.d.. (S)

where the derivatives of the background values are denoted by a prine.

The introduction of the stress function ¥(x,y):
”3-0", v'-—alv (6)

makes possible a substantial simplification of syste- (S). Differentiating
the first equation for x and the second for y and subtracting then one fro-
the other. we exclude p. Then applying the operator 1) to the derived equation
and adding it to the third equation, multiplied by g, we exclude [3 . Finally

we have:

 

mo .*+o.')¢+— —D-a,¢- (’1'), Dam—gﬁ’an-o. (7)

Since the background over which the disturbances propagate is uniforn relative
to x. it is natural to seek a solution of equation (7) by separating the var-

iables in the following way:
1PM!) 08D [ﬁns-nu) l- (3)

Introducing the x-cosponent of phase velocity c, - d/kx, we obtain an equa-
tion for y(y):

“‘u 9" i +5 u" -0. 9
(nu-c.) +‘Po (m—n)‘ p. (no-c.) ¢ ( )

 

 

 

a” +;-¢’- [k.'+'“

Equation (9) was discussed in the literature [3-5] in relation to the problea
of the stability of currents with a shear. but in this article it is interpret-
ed in a different context. Eliminating the term with the first derivative by
means of the standard replacement ‘

0-9? v. (10)
we arrive at the equation
i
9” { -*- '- [— W's." - 796%»! )‘+(U.-c.)"u.'+
(11)

+IPO"00'(lk-'€-)"+0O"Po’(uo-Cu) "MD 9-0.

which will serve as a basis for further examination. It is similar to the sta-
tionary Schr3dinger equation, where the role of energy is played by the value
"x 2. whereas the role of potential V(y) is the remaining expression in brack-
ets Even before the choice of a specific velocity profile it is possible to
draw some conclusions concerning the properties of solution of such an equation.
If V(y) has the constant asyuptotic forms V(-oo ) and V(+°° ) (an adequate con-
dition for this in the case of an exponential stratification. which will also

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be considered. is evidently the presence of constant aamtotic forns of the
velocity field (here Wires )< 0); the solution asynptotically has the forn of
a plane wave with the wave nunber

k.--(-k.'-v(:~))* ' ' (12)

A characteristic feature of potential V(y) is its dependence on ex, that is,
waves with different phase velocities on are scattered at different potentials. '
In the asynptotic forn this leads to a dependence of on and cx, that is,
as is easily confirned. using (12) this leads to a at ard ispersion rela-
tionship for IR [6]. taking flow velocity into account:

a 39k} (13)
“W”? T'
where it is assuned that o'O-kﬂo(*°°).
Po~oxp (—M. (14)

It is clear iron (13) that with a stipulated and t:x there will be a threshold
value It, - kthro corresponding to - O. 1" th Rx) kthr cannot propagate

in the medium. 0n the other hand. th stipulated Itx there is a threshold

value c - Cthr' such that with c) cu“. waves are inpossible.

Below we will examine those waves for which “0 - cx nowhere becones equal to
zero (the critical levels where “0 - cx correspond to the singular potential
in (11). which destroys waves arriving fron infinity). Then, continuing a gen-
eral examination of equation (11). we note that in accordance with the spec-
trun of the operator -d2/dy2 + V(y) in the problem there are scattering
states (continuous s ectrum) and related states (discrete spectrum). In the
first case. if Itx> It. (It!) It" ), there is no wave asynptotic for. with y -
+00 (y - -oO) and,t35cordingfyf there is a conplete reflection of the wave
arriving from the lower (upper) half-plane. If there are states of the dis-
crete spectrum. then these are normalized (localized with respect to y) solu-
tions which if they attenuate lore rapidly than exp (-Py/2) with y-eao (see
(10). (14)), correspond to a waveguide.

Now we will proceed to an investigation of equation (11) for a specific velo-
city profile.

3. As a swath approxination of velocity shear we select

nan-w: (II/b). (15)

where h is the characteristic transition region from uo(-°°) - -v to uo(+co)
- +v. The stratification is taken in the form (16). Converting in (11) to
dimensionless variables, with (16) and (15) taken into account we obtain

v"(ulh)+lE-V(x)lv(vlh)-0. (16)

m.
we omml. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

where
Eu-(k,‘+§'l£)h'. s-ih (p/h). (l7)
22(1-3') R LU-z')
V“""{‘ '(s-c' ) '+ (s—cr + (.-c) }
Here
. K, '.' R-“h'h'. C-CJU. LC”, (13)

R is the global Richardson number of the particular base flow. Benceforth we
will adopt the standard simplification in such cases [3, lo], seaming ﬂ<h‘1.
L .. 0, 8-. - kizhz, which corresponds to the real distributions (we note that
the term with l. in V(z) exerts no influence on the asymptotic form and its

contribution to scattering is easily restored). Despite the simplifications
made, the resulting potential

21(i—s') a
V“)"{ (3-0) + (x—cr'}

is quite complex and is dependent on two parameters. We will i-ediately cite
the limitations on the R and c parameters. The requirements of stability of
flow [3. lo] and the absence of critical levels give:

(17a)

R>'I.. |C|>i. (19)
The results of investigation of the potential V(s) are as follows:

1) asymptotic forms

R R

which. as was already noted. leads to a standard dispersion relationship for
m with y/h» 100;

 

 

2) evenness: V(z) is invariant relative to the replacement 37-» -y, C-e -C,
which makes it easy to obtain solutions for waves with opposite cx or v:

3) extrema: with R>c2 the potential does not have local extreme and smoothly
interpolates the asymptotic form; with 8‘ C2 there is a local minim and a

local maximum (Fig. 1). This peculiarity leads to a number of important ef-
fects (see below):

Io) dependence on parameters: dependence of asymptotic forms on the parameters
is obvious (see (20)). The difference

V(+°°)-V(-°°)-4RCI(C'—i)' (20.)

decreases mnotonically with an increase in C and increases with II. In the case
RSCZ (a) with fixed R Vmax with an increase in C first increases, attains a
maximum, and then drops off to zero. v.1“ increases monotonically, remaining

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negative and asymptotically approaching zero (we note that with 0‘00 Hz)»
0); b) with fixed c Vm with an increase in R decreases monotonically, pass-
ing through zero; Vain also decreases monotonically, renaining negative.

The relative change in the amplitude of the We) change in the transitional
region I( IVmax |- IV.1n|)/( |V6+co)|- |V(-¢0) I) increases with an increase
in c with a fixed R and decreases with an increase in R with fixed C. With
stipulated R the right asymptote (see (20)) increases with an increase in C
note rapidly than V.“ (both parameters are negative); therefore, for any 8‘
c2 we find such a celf that with cacc, v.1n<v(+°O)<V(-co). can 1;

 

Pig. 1. "Potential" in case a<c2, R - gﬁhzlv2 - 1,
oh

c--——3

there is a possibility of appearance of a discrete spectrum. In the remaining
cases the spectrum is evidently continuous.

Returning to the initial problem of the reflection and propagation of I"
through a region of sharp change in flow velocity, we see that it is reduced
to the problem of scattering for the potential investigated above. The stan-

dard formulation of the scattering problem is as follows (for example, see
[7]): with y/h-* -°0 there is an incident wave of a unit amplitude. which,

scattering on the potential. is broken down into transmitted and reflected
waves. and it is necessary to find such a solution of equation (16) which
has the asymptotic forms (we will consider waves arriving from the region
where their phase velocity ex is opposite the flow velocity):

v(-°) «in (this!) +0 a9 (-m'u).

v(+~) -5 up (defy).
The latter play the role. of boundary conditions for the corresponding boundary-
value problem. The a and b parameters are the amplitudes of the reflected and
transmitted waves. In this case r - aa* and t - (kyﬂkynb‘ are the coefficients
of reflection and transmission which are related to one another by the condi-
tiun

(21)

’+"" (22)

following from the nondependence of the Hronskian "(9. 5) on y.

Unfortunately, the analytical solution of equation (16) with the potential (17)
is inadmissible (in this connection see [3]). Accordingly, for solving the for-
mulated boundary-value problem. relying on a preliminary qualitative investiga-
tion. we apply the numerical integration method.

PO! 0mggl. USE ONLY
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. First we will examine the simpler situation when R>Cz. Assuming that the
potential rather rapidly arrives at an asymptotic form (the characteristic
width of the transient region is ~3), in this case it can be expected that
the precise solution differs little from that obtained as a result of a rec-
tangular approximation of potential (step):

(23)

where Nico) are given by formula (20). Applying the latter, however, it is
necessary to refine the boundary conditions at the discontinuity.

In quantum mechanics in such cases the requirement of continuity of the func-
tion and its first derivative is imposed. In hydrodynamics, however, as a rule
use is made of the condition of continuity of the velocity component normal to
the discontinuity and pressure variation [8]. Using for-miss (S). (6) and (8)
it is easy to confirm that with a continuous velocity profile these two pairs
of boundary conditions are identical". The formulas for r and t in the case
of the potential (23) have the form
P-lr ' ,
' (Pd-k) '“'
4?? k" ,

t (k*+lr)' I" bb.
where kt were determined in (12). A comparison of the Ibl‘ values given by
numerical integration and formula (2b) is given in Pig. 2. It can be seen
that the geometrical approach, involving a replacement of the potential in
accordance with formula (23) and use of the continuity conditions 9 and <9 '
at the discontinuity, is a good approximation. This approximation is the
better the steeper the step in (23), that is, the smller the C value and
the greater the R value (see (20a)). The dependence of the Ib I2 and t values
on C with fixed k! is shown in Pig. 3,s. The presence of a maximum on the
|b(c) I 2 graph is of interest. The transmission coefficient with a decrease
in C from the threshold value (Cthr - 6.07 in this case) rapidly attains
unity. This means that in this situation there is a sharp transition (in the
interval of change AC - 0.5) from the total reflection to total propagation
of I".

 

(2’0)

Now we will proceed to an enminstion of the mate interesting situation when
R< CZ. In this case due to the nontrivial structure of potential in the
transitional region (see Fig. 1) it is possible to expect a strong difference

from the solution stipulated by the rectangular approximation. In actuality,
here we meet with the pattern of scattering in a quasistationary or bound

(for adequately large c, see above) state well known in quantum mechanics
[7, 9]. Unfortunately, the region of change of B in equation (16) is limited

V(-) <B<0 . (25)

a

It is also easy to confirm that the use of a discontinuous velocity profile
-- a naive geometrical approach - leads to an incompatibility of the boun-
day conditions if P0 and )0 0' are continuous.

POI omahll. USE ONLY
l-‘OROFHCIALUSEONLY

and cannot be traced completely for the scattering states and fine effects of res-
onance scattering. However, even simple seniquantitative reasonings based on the
replacement of the potential (17) by the rectangular potential well and the barrier
following it indicate a considerable increase, at least for small c, in the trans-
mission coefficient in comparison with that obtained from (26). The results of
nunerical integration confirm this conclusion (Pig. 6).

I
but u ' I ‘4
(I
-.l' o
“E”: l EI-r
u
(-1 -: ‘ .~:..';.n'

Fig. 2. Dependence of square of amplitude Pig. 3. Dependence of square of ampli-
of transmitted wave lb I2 on a - 6n 2h2/ tude of transmitted wave and reflec-
sz with fixed C and R) c2 in comparison tion coefficient on C with fined B
with result of geometrical approach lboIZ; in the case 3202, R - 100, B - -2

n - 100, c - s. (a) and n<c2, a - 1, a - -o.2 (b).

 

Pig. 4. Dependence of square of
amplitude of transmitted wave
lbl2 on a with fixed c with a<
c2 in comparison with result of
geometrical approach lb I 2. It
can be seen that lb l2 as reduc-
ed bya factorof~ git-l, c-
1.5.

The dependence of lb '2 and t on C is shown in Fig. 3,]: and is similar to that
shown in Fig. 3,a. The change in t (and lblz) consists of two effects: with an
increase in C the asymptotic ferns of potential approach one another (see (20)),
which leads to an increase in t( I b l2), but on the other hand. c simltaneously
approaches the threshold value. which decreases t (and l bl2 ).

In contrast to the case R>c2, when there are solutions corresponding to l) scatter-
ing — in the 3 range stipulated by (25). 2) total reflection with V(+oo)< B< V
(-90), with R‘ 02 and sufficiently large c there are additional solutions for Vmin<
3< V(+°o). For snail R v.“ already becomes less than V(+00) with quite small c.

ha
son omcw. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l \ I

However. it is known [9] that in the case V(—-cs) #- V(+ao) for the appearance of

bound states in the potential well there lust be satisfaction of special condi-
tions related to 1“ depth.‘ Since in all the considered cases the well is sasll.

the bound state appears when V(--o)e¢ VON-9), that is. for R - 0.5 with c of the
order of several. tens. as indicated by nunsrical calculations. In this case the
corresponding 11* is close to zero and the waveguide is feasible only for very long
(in comparison with h) internal waves. '

S. In conclusion we will cite an example based on the real parameters of wind vel-
ocity shear and internal waves in the ataosphere. For this we use the character-
istics of the wind profile cited in [8, Chapter 1, l5] and the results of experi-
ments for detecting internal waves [12]. The mean data on the wind parameters in-
dicate that during the sunset there is a sharp shear of horizontal wind velocity
with altitude. At a latitude 30’ v=5 n/sec, hs3 In and H -ﬂ"1 - 6.5 km (nota-
tions as before). Then R2540, 1.10.66. The rameters of the observed internal
waves are as follows: cx - 20-100 m/sec, hf 2:12-60 Ira, #3:“ (0.08-0.14), c -
4-20. Thus, for the observed internal waves we have a situation similar to that
shown in Figures 1, 3, Ma: 1062, R is large and accordingly a geometrical ap-
proach gives a correct result. The E and C parameters for the experimentally ob-
served waves are far from the threshold values (for these wavelengths can; 60)
and therefore ti! 1. These conclusions are confimd by precise colputations whose
results with B - -0.1 are:

c s so is no
up 0.01 on on 0.90

For all C t - l with an accuracy to the fourth place. Accordingly, waves with the
observed parameters transmit the described wind shear virtually without reflec-
tion. A detailed investigation of the other observed wind distributions requires
separate examination.

In conclusion, I express deep appreciation to A. H. Obuhhov for forlulating the
problem and stimulating discussions. I thank Ye. P. Chunchusov and N. N. Romnov
for discussions and 0. A. Gel'fond for assistance in carrying out nuerical com-
putations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Chunchuzov, Ye. P., "Contribution of Traveling Gravitational Haves to the En-
ergy Balance of the Atmosphere at the Hesopause Level," IZV. AN 8888: FAO
(News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean),
Vol 15. No 10. PP 1087-1091, 1979.

2. Tolstoy. 1.. "The Theory of Haves in Stratified Fluids Including the Effects
of Gravity and Rotation." REV. HOD. PHYS., Vol 35. No 1. pp 207-230. 1963.

3. Drazin, P. 6., "The Stability of a Shear Layer in an Unbounded Heterogeneous
Inviscid Fluid," J. FLUID PIECE” Vol 10, No 2, pp 214-224. 1958.

It is well known that when V(-so) - Woo) in a one-dimensional case there is al-
ways at least one bound state when Vnin< Woo).

1:9
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’0. Miles, J. 17., "On the Stability of Heterogeneous Shear Flows, Part 11,"
J. FLUID 14363., Vol 16, No 2. pp 209-227, 1963.

5. Y1 Chua-ehun, "Wave Hovelente in Stratified Fluids," mm VOW
(Nonlinear Haves), Moscov, Hir, pp 271-296, 1977.

6. Uizen. Dzh.. LINEYNYYE I mum: VOL!“ (Linear and Nonlinear Haves), lbs-
cow. Hit, 1977, 622 pages.

7. Heeaia, A., KVANTOVAYA WANT.“ (Quantu- Hechanice), Part 1, Know. Nauka,
1979, 478 pages.

8. Goaaard, B. and Khuk, 0.. VOL)“ V Amosmn (At-oapheric Haves), becov, Mir,
1978, 532 pages.

9. Davydov, A. 8., KVANTOVAYA 113mm (Quanta! Mechanics), Moscow, Nauka, 1973,
703 pages.

10. Brekhovakikh. 1.. IL. "oncharov, V. V., Naugol‘nykh, K. A. and Rybak, s. A.,
"Oceanic Haves," 12V. VUZov. RADIOPIZIKA (News of Institutions of Higher Ed-
ucation. Radiophysica), Vol 19, No 5-6, pp 862-863, 1976.

11. Goliteyn, G. 8., "Reflection of Atmospheric Haves From Solid Obstacles,"
MOIST. ZR. (Acoustics Journal), Vol 11, No 3, pp 313-317, 1965.

12. Kazankov. A. M. and Portnyagin, Yu. 1., "Sole Results of Investigation of
Traveling Gravitational Haven According to Data From Radiometeor Observa-
tions," IZV. AN SSSR: FAD. Vol 17. No 1, pp 95-98. 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "Rania", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Pizika atmoafery i okeana”,
1982

5303
650: 1865/1110

50
me omcuu. use ONLY
UDC 551.565.61
EFFECT OF THERMAL STRUCTURE OF UPPER OCEAN LAYER 0N TURBULENCB DEVELOPMENT

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADDHI NAUK 888R: PIZIKA ATHOSPERY I own in Russian
Vol 18, No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received 17 Dec 80) pp 178-186

[Article by V. T. Paka and K. N. Pedorov, Institute of Oceanology, USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: A comparison of the results of
measurements of turbulent fluctuations
of velocity in the upper layer of the
equatorial part of the Pacific Ocean
with the diurnal variability of the
vertical temperature profiles in this
same layer indicated that with moder-
ate winds (up to 5-6 m/sec) a stable
thermal stratification arising as a re—
sult of daytime heating of the surface
layer effectively suppresses turbulence
in the upper quasihomogeneous layer of
the ocean (UQL). The intensity of turbu-
lence in this case thus experiences a
well-expressed diurnal variation. de-
spite the constantly available kinetic
energy of velocity shear. which in this
region of the ocean is especially great
in the lower part of the UQL.

It has already been noted in the literature [1. 2] that in the evolution of'
the upper quasihomogeneous layer of the ocean (UQL) there are periods when

the temporal attenuation of the wind (such as the Trades) or the daytime heat-
ing of the thin surface layer leads to the rapid and intensive destruction '
of the quasihomogeneous layer from below. Figure 1, taken from [1], shows two
vertical temperature profiles, obtained in the morning (at 0900 LT) and after
midday (at 1600 LT) at station 650, 7th voyage of the scientific research ves-
sel "Dmitriy Hendeleyev" on 13 February 1972 near the equator in the Indian
Ocean. Under the influence of the wind (3-5 m/sec) and nighttime convection
un UQI. of moderate thickness by 0900 hours acquired an ideal homogeneity with
a very clearly expressed temperature jump layer at the horizon 60 m. Daytime
heating led to the formation of a warm layer in the upper part of the 001.

FOROFFléhUSEONLY
Kl Veloc 1:

1d. III/sec
whose thickness by 1600 hours had attained 10 m. At this time the lower boun-
dury of the UQL hogan to be considerably blurred. Usually the process ceases
and the lower boundary of the quasihoaogeneoua layer is again accentuated im-
mediately after the next intensification of the wind or destruction of the
heated layer, even if the UQL has a greater thickness, as was the case, for
example. in the polygon in the tropical Atlantic [2].

Analogies with known laboratory experi-
ments [3] suggest that the reason for
the blurring of the lower sharp bound-
ary of the UQL in all probability is the
attenuation of turbulence in the UQL,
which can be associated with the ther-
mal stratification of the UQL from
above. Whereas turbulence in the upper
quasihomogeneoua layer has a predomin-
antly wind-save origin, the develop-
ment of a hydrostatically stable strat-
ification in its upper part can effec-
tively suppress turbulent velocity
fluctuations near the surface and thus
create a "blocking" effect ending the
energy influx from the wind to turbu-
lence remaining in the UQL. In this
case turbulence rapidly attenuates with-
out energy receipts.

The in situ checking of this hypothesis
has now become possible due to the suc-
cessful development of methods for di-
rect measurements of microturbulent
Fig. 2. Diagram of design of "Baklan" fluctuations in the ocean by means of
sonde. 1) sensor of velocity fluctua- freely falling sondes. Such checking
tions u'; 2) conductivity sensor; 3) was undertaken on the 26th voyage of

 

temperature sensor; a) cylindrical the scientific research ship "Dmitriy
sealed containers; 5) spherical seal- Hendeleyev" on runs along 163 and 167°"
ed container; 6) balls: 7) fabric through the equatorial part of the
fairing; 8) cable Pacific Ocean [6]. In the equatorial

zone, in addition to ordinary wind-Have
sources of turbulent energy in the UQL,it is also possible to expect addition-
al turbulence due to strong velocity shear at the upper boundary of the equa-
torinl subsurface countercurrent [5-7]. On the other hand. in this case there

is intensive solar heating creating a clearly expressed,thermal stratification
near the ocean surface during the daytime.

Measurement methods and instrumentation. The measurements were made with the
"Buklun" microstructursl sonde developed at the Atlantic Division. Institute
of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov, USSR Academy of Sciences. The "Baklan"
sonde has a cable connection with the ship. but due to the fact that the cable
in the process of submergence of the probe is cast overboard with a velocity
exceeding the rate of submergence the "Baklan" sonde can be classified as a

FOR‘OFIWCiE&.USE(NVLY
FOR 0901‘ TIAL USO-I ONLY

freely falling probe. Such a method was used successfully earlier by Gallagher
[8]. The presence of a solid cable simplifies the requirements on the submerg-
ible sonde and makes it possible to work in series, not in individual sound-
ings. This feature advantageously distinguishes the "Baklan" probe and the
Gallagher sonde from the completely autonomous (self-contained) Gregg [S] and

Crawford-Osborn [6] sondes.

O I I I - I: Q
um um am 1000qule m: to» 2m m: m:
I' . . 8‘

m G

 

100

200

 

100

Fig. 3. Vertical profiles of turbulent velocity fluctuations u' against back-
ground of distribution of zonal component of current velocity on section
across equator in Pacific Ocean along 163°15'H. The "-“ symbol denotes velo-
cities (in cm/sec) of a current directed to the west. The scale of turbulent
velocity fluctuations is indicated in the upper left corner of the section.
The asterisk "*" designates the numbers of the stations occupied during the

nighttime and morning hours.
The sensors of the "Baklan" sonde include:

I) the sensor of the longitudinal component is of the conduction and magneto-
bvdrodynamic type (the sensing element is a pair of point platinum electrodes
in the field of a strong permanent magnet), not sensitive to the influence of
medium stratification. linear in the range of amplitudes 0.07-20 cm-sec"1 and
frequencies of fluctuations b-6b Hz with an averaging scale 2 cm;

2) temperature sensor constructed by the Atlantic Division. Institute of
Oceanology, on the basis of a thermoresistor of the “MT-6 type, time constant
0.3 sec. measurement range 0-30’C, output slightly nonlinear. stability of
clmrncteristic in range 0.2'C;

3) depth sensor -- standard vibrofrequency instrument for measuring pressure,
type DDV. measurement range 0-50 kg-cm'z. error about 1.5 m, frequency output
slightly nonlinear.

FOR1OFFK523.USE(NULY
In addition. on the sonde there is a sensor for investigating the fine structure
and microstructure of conductivity, but its readings were net used in this study.

Hith respect to design the sonde consists of three principal components: a two-
section coupled container ("catamaran"). the frontal part of which carries the
sensors; a spherical container (ghaso me) with power source batteries and the fair-
ing of the spherical container, constituting a framework of convex thin rods over
which a dense fabric is stretched. The empty spherical container has a buoyancy

of about 50 kg. but it was inadequate for slowing the movement of the sonde. For
this reason polyethylene balls were placed under the fairing. Each of the 3 or 4
halls had a buoyancy of about 3 kg. By means of these balls the rate of free sink-
ing of the sonde was reduced to l m/seciloz. The limiting pressure which the balls
withstand corresponds to the 400~n horizon, which limits the depth of sounding.
The cable has a length of 500 u. but due to drift and a deep current the depth of
suboergence usually is within the range 250-300 m. The external configuration of
the sonde is shown in Fig. 2, where its principal dimensions are shown. The weight
of the sonde in the air is about 70 kg. The tensile strength of the cable is 300
kg (9 cable of the type KGZ-3-70 is used). The cable is usually attached at the
upper point, which was dictated by convenience in drawing the sonde to the sur-
face. However. under conditions of strong drift it is desirable to move the point
of attachment of the cable closer to the sensors for the purpose of maintaining

a zero angle of inclination of the sands during submergence. The rolling of the
ship does not cause disturbances in aovenent of the eonde and therefore it can be
regarded as an all-weather instrument. which broadens the possibility of its use.
The requirements on deck equipment for work with the "Baklan" sonde are simple: it
is entirely possible to use a rotating loading boom, but it is considerably more
convenient and productive to employ a cable winch.

Investigations of turbulence in the upper layer were accompanied by measurements

of currents at buoy and drift stations and also standard hydrology. Meteorological
observations were made regularly at intervals of one hour. Thus, the investiga-
tions had a multisided and systematic character, which considerably facilitated the
interpretation of observations for the purpose of clarifying the cause-and-effect
relationships between the intensity and distribution of turbulence and the thermal
stratification of the upper layer.

Measurement results. In accordance with the tasks of the 26th voyage of the sci-
entlfic research ship "Dnitriy Hendeleyev," most of the data were obtained in the
equatorial polygon. The measurements were made on two sections across the equator:
a section along 163°15'W -- run b times, and a section along 167'" - run once.

On each section the stations were situated at 11 points fron Z'N to 2'3. Five of
these were situated near automatic anchored buoy stations which were used as ref-
erence points for determining drift during current measurements from shipboard.

An attempt to represent nicroturbulencs measurements in the form of sections was

without results: no apparent pattern in the meridional distribution of turbulence
intensity was detected despite a priori ideas based on the conclusions of Craw-

ford and Osborn [6]. Figure 3 shows one of the sections of the zonal current velo-
city conponent constructed by V. A. Bubnov and V. D. Yegorikhin with profiles of
the intensity of turbulent velocity fluctuations obtained with the "Baklan" seeds.

55
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The section clearly shows the nucleus of the subsurface Cromwell countercurrent
with velocities attaining almost 2 knots. The nucleus is situated at the hori-
zon 150 m and is somewhat displaced northward relative to the equator. It can
also be seen that the intensity of turbulence as a whole in this region is rather
high. Other sections constructed on the basis of the measurements made in this
region have a similar form. At four stations on the cited section the thickness
of the constantly turbulent layer falls in the range from 30 to 60 m. In addition
to these "intensively turbulent" profiles and alternately with them there are pro-
files with shallow penetration of turbulence, and also with very weak turbulence
(stations 2002 and 2003), although at all stations the weather conditions were
virtually identical (see table).

The isotachs shown in the section (Fig. 3) clearly show the maximum shear region.
Its positioning. however, is difficult to relate to the features of distribution

of turbulence in the section. For example, at stations 2009 and 2003 the shear val-
ues are approximately identical but the vertical profiles of turbulence intensity
are completely different.

The patterns in this picture begin to appear if we compare the profiles of turbu-
lence intensity with the vertical temperature profiles (Pig. 6). taking into ac-
count the tine of day for each station (see table). It appears that the minimum
development of turbulence (stations 2002-2006. 2007, 2011) correspond to temper-
ature profiles with a clearly expressed heated surface layer with a thickness of
10-20 m. 0n the other hand. the maximum development of turbulence corresponds to
poorly stratified temperature profiles (2001, 2005, 2006, 2009, 2010). In turn,
profiles with a heated surface layer are usually observed during the daytime hours
when there is radiation heating. During the nighttime and early morning hours the
vertical temperature profiles in the upper layer are most homogeneous since by
this time nighttime convection can destroy traces of heating of the preceding

day. The day-long station 2012 was occupied in order to confirm this pattern in
the development of turbulence and its correlation with the diurnal thermal cycle.
In general it revealed the same correlation. however, the wind at this station at-
tained 8 m/sec. which stirred the forming surface heated layer.

 

Fig. 4. Vertical temperature profiles in upper layer of ocean at stations of sec-
tion represented in Fig. 3. The numbering of the profiles from 1 to 11 corresponds
to the numbers of stations 2001 through 2011. The temperature scales are given for
the first and last profiles. All the profiles have been successively displaced to

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the right relative to one another by 0.5‘C. The 27.5'C values are marked for each
profile by a thin vertical line.

The existence of a diurnal cycle in the variability of the vertical thermal struc-
ture of the upper layer in the ocean has been repeatedly noted in the literature
(for example. see [9]). It was again investigated in detail using the "Bumsrang"
thermobathysonde on the 27th voyage of the scientific research ship "Ahademik lur-
chatov" (the materials are being processed). and was also studied on thie same
voyage by Other means in connection with the so-called "calm weather thermal in-

homogeneities" [10].

Discussion of results. The development of turbulence in any layer of the ocean
should be related primarily to the energy sources which maintain it, but secondly
to the degree of hydrostatic stability of stratification in this layer. exerting
an extinguishing effect on turbulence. Two energy sources: 1) wind~wmve movement
and 2) a high vertical velocity gradient at the upper boundary of the Cromwell
Current are invariably present in the upper layer of the considered region of the
ocean, virtually not experiencing any diurnal variation. The kinetic energy intro-
duced by convection into the upper quasihomogeneous layer is proportional to the
potential energy set free as a result of cooling through the free surface in the
layer from 0 to the depth of thermal compensation [11. 12]. The quantity of this
energy usually begins to increase in the evening hours and attains a maximum prior
to sunrise, decreasing to a minimum close to zero in the afternoon hours. The en-
ergy of this convection becomes minimal when the sole factor counteracting tur—
bulence —- the Archimedes forces of thermal stratification - attains a maximum at
about 1600 hours local solar time. At that time, according to observations made

by the authors on the 27th voyage of the scientific research ship "Akademik Kur-
chatov" in the Sargasso Sea. the Brunt-Vdisili frequency in the upper temperature-
stratified meter layer of the ocean can attain (2-3)- 10'2sec-1. Thus, the night-
time and early morning hours are the most favorable for the development of tur-
bulence and the least favorable are the daytime and evening hours. The stations
occupied during the nighttime and early morning hours have been marked on the sec-
tion (fig. 3) by asterisks. Precisely they are characterised by the profiles with
the best developed turbulence.

Turbulence of wind-wave origin, when it is observed, during the nighttime intensifa
ies convective turbulence fed by the kinetic energy of velocity shear, penetrating,
as indicated by the profile for station 2006, by the early morning hours to depths
of 60-80 m. Thereafter the energy influx from above ceases as a result of attenua-
tion of surface turbulence in the developing daytime thermocline at depths of about
10—20 m. Turbulence in the thickness of the upper quasihomogeneous layer (UQL)

ulsu attenuates. although far more slowly. In the interval from 30 to 80 m thick
quasihomogeneous layers persist up to midday (stations 2002. 2007) in which, how—
ever. turbulence is virtually not sensed, at least by the "Baklan" sonde. However.
the vertical shear is evidently inadequate for maintaining active microturbulence
at the same level to which it is usually developed in the surface quasihomogeneoue.
layers when there is a wind of about 5 m/sec (stations 2001, 2004. 2007. 2011). It
is not impossible that the above-mentioned quasihomogeneous layers within the lim-
its 30-80 m in the daytime are in a dynamic state, being boundary layers between
turbulent and laminar movement and somehow similar to the unstable state of

57
roe omcur use ONLY
IN)! 0511(1Al.lﬁﬂi(NVLY

the supercooled fluid. With a thickness of about 30-50 m and a current velocity
of 20-40 cmlsec these layers should be characterized by Reynolds numbers in the
range 106-107. The introduction of a very small disturbance into these layers
(for example, with a local increase in shear or with penetration of convective
instability from above) should lead to them becoming turbulent rapidly. Evident-
ly this also explains the restoration of a sharp lower boundary of the UQL after
disappearance of the surface heated layer or during an intensification of the wind
noted in [1. 2]. Judging from the profiles for stations 2004-2006 (Fig. 3). which
are situated close to one another, only 5—6 hours are required in order for the
lower boundary of the turbulent layer to drop from 15 to 60-70 m. It is not in-
possible that this occurs even considerably more rapidly.

The detection of a diurnal variation of turbulence in the UQL in the equatorial
zone, that is. where its latitude dependence on the change in the characteristics
of velocity shear at the upper boundary of the Cromwell Current was expected, is
unquestionably a new result meriting attention. Scarcely anywhere else in the
world ocean is it possible to encounter such high values of vertical velocity shear
in the lower part of the UQL. It therefore follows that under conditions of a mod-
erate wind and in the absence of heavy precipitation the turbulence of the UQL
should experience a well-expressed diurnal variation virtually everywhere except
for the region of the high latitudes. The "blocking" role of thermal stratification
in the surface layer of the ocean in this case is fully revealed and it can be ex-
trapolated easily to any anomalous conditions when intensive heating is accumulat-
ed during a synoptic period (for example, in the case of freshening of the surface
layer by precipitation [13]) and in the surface layer creates a stable thermocline
which is not overcome by nighttime convection over the course of several days
(usually to the next storm).

0n the other hand, the direct "blocking" role of precipitation falling on the ocean
surface may be as equally important as the role of thermal stratification [13]. The
freshened layer, forming at the ocean surface after the falling of rain. according
to our observations has at its lower boundary a stable density jump characterised by
a Brunt-Viisali frequency N of the order of 2.10-2 sec'1 or more. Such a sharp
stratification should extinguish the turbulence in the thickness of the UQL when
there are moderate winds (up to 5-6 m/sec) as effectively as daytime heating. Pre-
cipitation. however, in contrast to lnsolation, does not have a clearly expressed
diurnal variation in most climatic zones.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Honin. A. s. and Pedorov, K. N.. "Pine Structure of the Upper Layer of the
Ocean," IZV. AN SSSR: TAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of
the Atmosphere and Ocean). Vol 9, No 6, pp AbZ-bbb. 1973.

2. Pedorov. K. N.. Plakhin, Ye. A., Prokhorow, V. I. and Sedov, V. 6., "Features
of Thermohaline Stratification in a Polygon Region in the Tropical Atlantic,"
ATLANTICHESKIY GIDROFIZICHESKIY POLIGON-70 (Atlantic Hydrophysical Polygon-
70), Moscow, Nauka. pp 236-282, 197‘.

3. Rouse, N. and Dodu. J., "Diffusion Turbulent a Travers Une Discontinuité de
Densite’," LA HOUILLB suncuz, No 4. pp 522-532, 1955.

58
mt omcm use ONLY
6.

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR<MﬂﬂCJAL|Eﬂ£ONLY

Paka. V. 1'., Bubnov. V. A. and Poedynin. V. 1)., "26th Voyage of the Scien-
tific Research Ship 'Dnitriy Hendeleyev'," OKEAMLOGIYA (Oceanology), Vol 20,
No 5. pp 954-957. 1980.

Gregg. H. c., "Temperature and Salinity Nicroatructure in the Pacific Equator-
ial Undercurrent," J. GBOPEYS. 388., Vol 81, No 6, pp 1180-1196, 1976.

Crawford. w. R. and Osborn. '1'. R., "Hicroatructure Keasurenents in the Atlan-
tic Equatorial Undercurrent During GATE," DEEP-SEA 1188., Suppl. 11 to Vol 26,
GATE. Vol 2. pp 309-3210, 1980.

Palm. V. T., Vaailcnko, V. IL. Oaadchiy. A. S. and Shkurenluo, V. 1.. ”Turbu-
lence. Internal Waves and Themhaline Hicroatructure in a Polygon in the
Equatorial Atlantic According to the Results of the Piret .Voyage of the Sci-
entific Research Ship 'Profeeaor Shtoknan'," IMNOST' TROPICRBSKOY AT-
LANTIKI V PERIOD PGEP (Variability of the Tropical Atlantic During the 1061’.
Period). 1981 (in press).

Gallagher. 3.. "Vertical Profiles of Temperature and Pine-Scale Velocity
Structure in the Thermcline." J. GEOPHYS. RBS., Vol 81, No 6. pp 1201-1206,
1976.

Pcdorov. K. N.. "0n the Su-er Daily Heating and Diurnal Beat Budget of the
Upper Ocean Layer," STUD! IN ONORE DI GIDSEPPINA ALIVERTI, Nepali, pp 27-40,
1972.

Fedorov. K. N.. Ginzburg. A. I. and Piterbarg. L. 1., "Physical Nature of
the 'Calm weather Inhonogeneity' in the Tenperature field of the Ocean,"

OKEANOLOGIYA. Vol 21. No 2. pp 203-210. 1981.

Solov'yev, A. V.. "Fine Thereal Structure of the Ocean Surface Layer in the
POLYHODE-77 Region." IZV. AN SSSR: FAD, Vol 15, No 7. pp 150-757. 1979.

Woods, J. D., "Diurnal and Seasonal Variation of Convection in the Hind-Mix-
ed Layer of the Ocean." Q. J. ROY. METEOR. 800., Vol 106, No 6109, pp 379-394.
1980.

Ginzburg. A. 1.. Zataepin. A. 6., Sklyarov. V. Ye. and Fedorov, K. It, "Ef-
fects of Precipitation in the Ocean Surface Layer," OKEANOLOGIYA. Vol 20, No
5. pp 828-836, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo "Natlka", "Inestiya AN SSSR. Pizika atnosfery i okeana",

5303
C50:

1982

l86S/114

59
won omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPMAL DEPmENCBS OF LIGHT SCATTERIM BY SBA mm

lbscow IZVBSTIYA MDT“ max 333R: 712m AMSPERY I 0m in Mam»
Vol 18, No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received 19 Feb 81) PP 185-190

[Article by V. I. Burenkov. B. P. Kel'balikhanov and L. A. Stefantsev, Institute
of Oceanology. USSR Academy of Sciences)

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
measurements and computations of the spectra
for the scattering coefficient at different
angles. The measured spectral dependences
can have a maximum for small scattering
angles. The elongation of the scattering
coefficient increases with an increase in
the wavelength. The computations indicate
that a model of two fractions of suspen-
sion makes possible a satisfactory descrip-
tion of the principal patterns of the measur-
ed scattering spectra.

In investigations of the scattering properties of sea water it is customary to
measure the angular dependence of the scattering coefficient in some direction
0'( Y) at a definite wavelength A. Par less attention is being devoted to mess-
uresents of the spectral dependences (1(7’. 1) and until now few actual data have
been obtained on the scattering spectra in sea water. The same applies to theor-
etical computations. Available light scattering tables. including tables of

light scattering by models of sea water [1], contain data only on the scattering
functions.

This article gives the results of measurements of the spectral dependences 60’.
A) for different scattering angles and also data on the corresponding theoret-
ical computations. The 017.1) spectra were measured using a submergible nephel-
ometer in which a diffraction grating was used as the dispersing element. Scann-
ing in wavelength was accomplished continuously, which made it possible to carry
out quite precise spectral measurements in the wavelength range 500-700 no. The
spectral resolution of the instrument is 2.5 nn. Measurements of O'( Y, A) were
made in the range of angles 3-165' with an angular resolution of l'.

l. The principal experimental data on the spectral dependences 0' (Y, A) were ob-

tained in the equatorial Atlantic; a umber of measurements were made in other
regions of the world ocean.

FOR omcﬂn. WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1 shows the most characteristic 6(Y, A) curves for different scattering
:mulcm measured in the surface waters of the central part of the Atlantic Ocean
(all the curves were matched at A - £20 nu). A col-on property of the reduced
curves. the ease as-all the other experimental dependences, is an increase in the
steepness of the dropoff of O’(Y. 1) with a transition fron slall to large scat-
tering angles. This is attributable to the fact that in sea water scattering at
large angles is determined to a considerable degree by small particles [2] scatter-
ing light more selectively than large particles and also by nolecular scattering.
For all neasureaants at large angles the scattering index 0'( Y, )) decreases
monotonically with an increase in 1 ; for a particular angle the scatter of spec-
tral curves is relatively small. Par greater variations are characteristic for the
spectral dependences for stall-angle scattering. Here there are two types of spec-
tral curves. Curves of the first type drop off monotonically with transition into
the red part of the spectrum (Fig. l,a); curves of the second type have a maxi-us
at wavelengths 660-480 on (Fig. 1.1)). The presence of a nonnonotonic behavior of
the spectral dependences of small-angle scattering is the Inost interesting and un-
expected result of the measurements Iade because it is usually assuned that for

polydisperse systems the peculiarities of the angular and spectral scattering dis-
tributions are smoothed.

UlriJlIaanM)
1

   

m m :00 Am a.

Fig. 1. Spectral dependences of index of scattering at different angles measured at

station 2832 (a). (0. 0°) and station 2838 (b). (0°. 23°30'H). Scientific research
ship "Akademik Kurchatov."

The collected experimental data can be used in an investigation of change in the
shape of the scattering function in the spectrum. In general, as follows from Fig.

l. the elongation of the scattering function increases with transition into the

red region. This is also illustrated by Fig. 2, which shows the spectral dependences
of the parameters characterizing elongation of the scattering function. As such par-
ametcrs we used the ratio 0’ (Yl)/a()’2), where the Y1 angle corresponds to saall
scattering angles and 7’2 corresponds to large scattering angles. The O’(Y1)/d()’2)
value with A - lo20 nn vas arbitrarily assigned the value unity. The figure shows
that the function elongation increases aost significantly in the blue-green part of
spectrum; after A: 600 on it changes insignificantly. It is usually asst-ed that

61
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the change in the shape of the scattering function is associated with an increase
in the contribution of molecular scattering with a decrease in wavelength [3]. These
measurements indicate that solely on the basis of this effect it is impossible to
explain the behavior of the spectral dependences O'(Y, 2). In actuality, it follows
from Fig. 1 that the shape of the scattering function can change considerably also
in the range of angles (7" 3045‘). where the contribution of molecular scattering
is known to be small. Below it will be demonstrated that the features of the 6(7,

A) experimental curves can be related to scattering on suspended particles.
1 - )‘N r "
\

 

m m .. us gn-
Fig. 2. Dependence of ratio 6(Y1)/O'(Y2) on ): Y2 I 165'. Y1 - 6' (l. 2). 16'
(3). 10° (6) for station 2838 (1, 3) and station 2832 (2. lo).

2. Computations of the spectral dependences of light scattering in sea water were
made on the basis of a model according to which the suspended matter consists of two
fractions: large measuring rzlptm and refractive index m~l.02 and fine measuring
rs 1;:- m and a refractive index m~l.15 [2]. The large particles determine scatter-
ing at small angles, whereas fine particles determine scattering at large angles.
The size distribution of both fractions is close to the Junge distribution f(r) -
Ar' V. This model has been used repeatedly for an analysis of data on the angular
dependences of the scattering index 00’), but it was not compared with date on

the 0'(r. A) spectra.

Computations of the spectral dependences O'(Y, A) were made using both the Hie
formulas and using the approximate formulae. Before proceeding to an analysis of
the results of the computations. we will examine the limiting dependences a'(Y, 1)
on wavelength within the framework of different approximations. For large spherical
particles scattering at small angles is described by the formula [6]:

[uuw- dif(l'raction)] [(1.r'g)_l,alx(ta)l'-'—:;J.‘(p1)-qu4'x(‘5)l'o (1) -

where
p-2nr__/ l. K (m) -'/.+e" I w-i- (a"— i) lyr': w-td; G-Zplm-i I'.

.1100 is a first-order Bessel function of the first kind. The factor Id“ in (1) de-
scribes diffraction in a circular aperture. It is simple to obtain limiting spectral

de endencea for it. With Pr<l J1(pr)xpr and IdifﬁA-Z. In the casepr)l J1(x)~
x‘ /2 cos x and Idif‘7‘ (the rapidly oscillating factor cos2(Pr) can be assumed equal

to 1/2). Scattering by large particles at great angles is described by the formulas
of geoeetrical optics and the dependence of the intensity of scattering on wavelength

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this came I»: absent (it is assumed that the dispersion of particulate matter is
saall). The factor 6|K(i¢$) I2 with 5 - 2/)ln - ll>1 is not dependent on A , but
with 3( l is proportional to A‘z.

For the fine fraction of suspended matter the Rayleigh-Gena approxination is correct
(SI:

1(1.r.l)--%-o‘r’(M-i)'ﬂ‘(1.p)(ii-ooh). (2)

where . 3 v
Rho-:7 (sins-seats); s-Zpsinz—u

um. P)’< 1 we have moan and 1( r. r.) )4". In the case pr» 32(u)~coszu/
u” and NY. r, )) is not dependent on A (coszz 1/2).

sm,l)l 00;. m)
' , ,o jaw-(5.0»

I
c.

u u'
m m an 4.. nn

"a
u \

. ..
. 4 Im

Fig. 3. Computed spectral dependences of Fig. la. Computed spectral dependences

scattering by large suspended particles for of scattering by fine suspended per-

one of variants of parameters. ticlea for angles 15-180‘ (the fig-
ures on the curves are the values of
the V paraleter).

The approximate limiting spectral dependences I( Y, r, A) are correct for a defin-
ite combination of particle sizes and scattering angles and are realized for the
considered model of sea suspended natter only in rare cases. In particular, they

do not make it possible to explain the presence of a naxismm on the spectral curves
at small scattering angles. For monodisperse suspended matter this peculiarity, can
be explained qualitatively on the basis of the or: of the functions entering into
(1). First we will examine only the function J1 (P7), having, as is well known,

an oscillating character. For particles with a radius of several microns and not
very small scattering angles (if the Y angle is so small that pr<1, there will be
a limiting dependence 10’. r, A)~) ’2) a change in wavelength here by a fac-

tor of 1.5-2 (which corresponds to a change in lin tne visible spectral range)
loads to a change in the arguentpyby several units. For exaaple, with r - Spa
7- 3'. A - 600-700 on x -P)’changes in the range 6-2.5. Since the period of the
function J12(x) with not very large it is equal to approximtely 5 (the term period
is used here arbitrarily because the amplitude of the oscillations of this function

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dm'n-uut-r: with an Int-reuse In x), with such a change in the argument J12(x) and
accordingly NY, A) can increase, decrease, have a minimum or maximal. Superpos-
ed on these changes is a spectral dependence of the factor b l x(15 ) l2, also hav-
ing an oscillating character. Thus. depending on the combination of particle sises
the refractive index and the scattering index there can be diverse spectral depend-
ences I(Y, r, A). It is more difficult to explain the behavior' of scattering spec-
tra for polydisperse systems: here it is necessary to‘ use numerical computations.
However. it can be postulated that if the particle sizes vary in s not very broad
range, the oscillations of the functions entering into (1) will be smoothed in-
completely and the behavior of the spectral curves can readable the spectral de-
pendences for monodisperse suspended matter. The experimentally observed fine
structure of the scattering function [6] is also possibly related to an incomplete
smoothing of the functions entering into (1), (2). We note that the appearance of
different peculiarities in the behavior of the I()’, r.}\) spectra is more probable
precisely at small scattering angles because at large angles the oscillations of '
the R2()I:.P) function entering into (2) are superposed on the monotonic depend-
ence A” .

Gunman, on)

    

m m m A, a. nm

Fig. 5. Computed spectral dependences of scattering by large and small suspended par-
ticles without (solid curve) and with allowance (dashed curve) for molecular scat-
tering by water. Explanations in text.

Numerical computations of the spectral dependences In”. A) were carried out separ-
utoly for the large and small fractions of suspended utter. For the large fraction
or suspended material we used the following values of the Junge distribution para-
meters: f(r) - Ar‘" . r1: r4 r2. r - l p. m. :2 - 5. 7, 101.; n, v - 2, 3, 4; the re-
fractive index In - 1.02. 1.03. 1.0%. The wavelength varied from 0.4 to 0.71-Ln. The
computations were made using the Hie formulas. Figure 3 shows the spectral depend-
ences of scattering at different angles for one of the variants of the used para-
meters (all the curves are matched at 3- 0.10,; m). A counon property of all the com-
puted dependences is a dropoff of I(Y,2) with an increase in A for the smallest
scattering angles 0.5 and 1°, which is attributable to the limiting dependence

6).;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the factor ld1f(Y, A)~)’2 in (l). The influence of the factor loIK(iJ )I 2
is that‘the computed curves, depending on the used parameters, drop off with an
increase in A either more strongly or more weakly than JK'Z. We note that we
made no measurements for such small angles. The shape of the spectral curves
for greater scattering angles (3-5’) is essentially dependent on the computed
parameters. For the determined variants there are spectral dependences close to
those obtained in the experiment. In particular, the computed curves (Pig. 3),
like the experimental curves (Pig. l,bx have a maximum (its wavelength position is
not constant and is dependent on the computed parameters). In other variants the
speCtral curves can drop off with an increase in wavelength (like the experimen-
tal curves in Pig. l,a) or have a more complex shape. It is characteristic that
the features of the computed spectral curves are situated in the same range of
angles (3-6’) as for the experimental curves. As indicated above, the most prob—
able reason for this is an incomplete smoorhing of oscillations of the functions
entering into (1) with values PY‘l. The considerable dependence of the shape of
the spectral curves on the initial parameters in the indicated range of angles
can be useful in solving the inverse problem -- determination of the spectrum of
sizes of suspended particles from their scattering properties.

With a further increase in the angle scattering by the large suspended particles
becomes increasingly less selective and for 7Q>h5° is virtually not dependent on
wavelength.

For the fine fraction of suspended matter we used a Junge distribution with the
following values of the parameters? r. - 0.01y m, r2 - ly.m, V - 4, 5, 6. m - 1.15.
The computations reveal that the spectral dependences of scattering by the fine
suspended matter always decrease monotonically with an increase in wavelength. The
steepness of the dropoff is appreciably greater than for the spectra for the scat-
tering by large suspended particles. This result agrees with data from measure-
ments of the spectra of scattering at large angles. Hith an increase in the Y
parameter the spectral dependences become more selective (Fig. A). The results of
the computations show that with fixed V the spectral curves for different angles
(ls-180°) do not differ from one another. The latter does not agree with the re-
sults of measurements since the experimental curves are characterized by an in-
crease in slope with transition to large angles (from 15 to 165’). The observed
effect can be attributed, on the one hand, to the influence of molecular scatter-
ing by water, and on the other hand, to the contribution of large particles to
scattering at large angles. The latter is attributable to the fact that the
elongation of the scattering function for large suspended particles is greater
than for small particles. Accordingly, with an increase in the angle the fraction
of nonselective scattering of large particles decreases and the spectral curves
become steeper. In our case such a situation is extremely probable because the re-
gion of measurements is situated far from the sources of terrigenous suspended
matter and the production of phytoplankton here is rather great.

we made computations of the spectral dependences for the complete functions. which
were computed as the sum of the functions of the large and small suspended par-
ticles and molecular scattering by water. In the computations we varied the re-
lationship between scattering by the above-mentioned components. Figure 5 shows
curves computed for a case when the large and small fractions of suspended matter

65
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scatter light at an angle 65‘ in the proportion 1:2 (in this case molecular scat-
tering is not taken into account). The dashed curve in Pig. 5 represents depend-
ences computed taking molecular scattering into account (it is assumed that it
constitutes 602 of the total scattering for 7’- 90'). The figure shows that the
selectivity of scattering increases with transition to large angles, which agrees
with the experimental data. In this case this effect to an equal degree is relat-
ed to both the above-mentioned factors. The influence of molecular scattering is
evidently most substantial in the most transparent waters where its contribution
can attain 30-502 for angles 7’390‘.

Thus, the computations made indicate that the model of two fractions of suspen-
sion makes possible a satisfactory description of the principal patterns of the
measured spectral dependences of light scattering in sea water. The greatest
peculiarities are characteristic of the scattering spectra in the range of angles
3-6', which agrees with the experimental data. The selectivity of scattering at
large angles is expressed more clearly than at small angles. Hith definite as-
sumptions the steepness of the spectral curves, as in the experiment, increases
with a transition to greater angles.

We note in conclusion that we made the measurements in relatively transparent ocean

waters. Further investigations will make it possible to clarify how general the
mentioned patterns of sea water scattering spectra may be.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Shiftin, K. S. and Salganik, I. N., RASSEYANIYE SVBTA HODBLYAHI HORSKOY VODY.

TABLITSY P0 SVETORASSEYANIYU (Light Scattering by Sea Hater Models. Light
Scattering Tables), Vol 5, Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1973, 218 pages.

2. Shifrin, K. S., Kopelevich, 0. V., Burenkov, V. I. and Hashtakov, Yu. L.,
"Light Scattering Functions and the Structure of Suspended Matter in Sea
Waters." IZV. AN SSSR: FAO (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics
of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 10, No l, p 25, 1974.

3. OKEANOLOGIYA. PIZIKA OKEANA (Oceanology. Oceanic Physics), T 1. GIDROPIZIKA
(HYDROPHYSICS) (Chapter: "Ocean Optics"), Moscow, "Nauka," 1968, 350 pages.

4. Burenkov, V. I., Kopelevich, 0. V. and Shifrin, K. 8., "Light Scattering by
Large Particles With a Refractive Index Close to Unity," IZV. AN 8888: FAQ
(News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Ocean and Atmosphere),
Vol 2, No 8, p 828, 1975.

S. Van de Hulst, H., RASSEYANIYB SVETA HALYHI CHASTITSAHI (Light Scattering by
Small Particles), Moscow, Izd. Inostr. Lit., 1957, 536 pages.

6. Han'kovskiy, V. I., "Fine Structure of the Light Scattering Function in Sea
and Ocean Haters," HORSKIYE GIDROFIZICBBSKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA (Marine Hydro-

physical Investigations), No 2(58), p 126, 1972.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Fizika atnosfery i okeana",
1982

5303
C80: 1865/116

66
FOR 0FFN]Al.USEGDNLY
RADAR OBSERVATIONS 017 WIND HAVBS AT SEA

Hoscow IZVESTIYA ARADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA AMSFERY I OKEANA in Russian
Vol 18. No 2. Feb 82 (mnuscript received 25 hr 80, after revision 13 Oct
80) pp 211-215 '

[Article by K. V. Konyayev and A. D. Rosenberg, Acoustics Institute]

[Text] The intensity of pulsed radar signals reflected from the wave-covered
sea surface at glancing angles of elevation for the most part is dependent
on the local angles of slope of surface sectors situated along the radar ray.
This makes it possible to employ a radar for noncontact measurement of the
parameters of wind waves [1]. However. the study is usually limited only to
a spatial or only a temporal analysis of the signals. whereas a nore complete
idea concerning waves can be obtained by a spatial-tenporal analysis. The de-
pendence of the intensity of the received signals on the surface slopes is
nonlinear and is superposed on a number of other dependences -- on the in-
tensity of ripples. which changes within the limits of a long wave, on the
presence of foam and spray. etc. Nonlinesrity leads to the appearance of dif-
ference frequencies in the signal corresponding to the envelope of wind

waves and also carrying information on waves. The article discusses the spa-
tial-temporal processing of radar signals obtained during moderate and strong
waves with a determination of the parameters of the principal waves on the
basis of the radar inage of these waves and their envelope.

The observations were made in the su-er of 1978 (methodological measurements
in 1977) in the Caspian Sea from a pile base with a local depth of 50 m. A
shipboard "Don" radar station was installed on a mast at a height of 35 m above
sea level. The length of the radio wave was 3 cm. the pulse power of the trans-
mitter was 75 Kh', the width of the antenna directional diagram in the azimthal
plane was 1". pulse duration was 0.1,». sec (range resolution 15 m), pulse repeti-
tion rate was 1.6 KHz. The signal from the output of the amplitude detector

is fed through a range gating stage. controlled by the generator of a scanning
strobe pulse. to a peak detector which discriminates the pulse envelope. After
the detector the signal is registered on a brightness indicator-automatic re-
corder (clectrothermal paper tape) with range scanning. controlled by-the

I70! omaéll. USE ONLY
FORiDFFﬂJALI£ﬂEONLY

strobe pulse generator. with a uniform movement of the tape in time or on a
magnetic recorder after measurement on a digital voltmeter. The strobe pulse
moves in range from 300 to 1300 m with a velocity of about 2 km/sec and with

a frequency of 1 cycle per second. The brightness indicator has a small dynam-
ic range; the signal level at its output is set by manual regulation of the
amplification factor with visual control of the brightness pattern. The volt-
meter makes 50 readings from three significant digits per second; there is
virtually no signal limitation.

The moving strobe shapes the signal as a function of the range corresponding
to the profile of waves along the radar ray. A series of range scans forms a
two-dimensional pattern of change in signal intensity in space (along the
radar ray) and in time. In the course of the experiment the radar ray is set
at different azimuthal angles to the direction of movement of the waves

(an angle of 0° corresponds to the direction of the ray along the movement
of the principal waves and 180' toward them). At the same time the waves are
measured by a wire wave recorder lowered from the base.

Figure 1 shows the radio image of a sector of the sea surface obtained in the
course of 18 minutes on 14 August 1977 [2]. The angle 9 between the direction
of irradiation and the main direction of wave movement is 225'. wave height is
class 4, wind velocity is 12 m/sec. wave height is l-l.S m. The intensity of
the scattered signal as a function of range and time has a characteristic band-
ed structure: in some sectors it is easy to discriminate lines corresponding
to the spatial-temporal trajectories of sectors of energybcarrying waves with
large local slopes. The distance between range lines determines the projection
of the wave vector onto the direction of irradiation k1 - 1: cos 9 . where k

is the modulus of the wave vector. the distance along the time axis is the
period of these waves; the slope of the lines to the range axis determines

the phase velocity of the principal waves along the ray v1 - v/cos 9, where

v is the phase velocity of the waves. In some places the lines form clear
spots elongated at an angle to the range axis. The spots correspond to groups
of waves: the dimensions of the spots determine the extent and duration of the
' groups. the slope of the spots to the range axis determines the group velocity
of the waves along the radar ray.

Figure 2 is a schematic representation of a sector of the surface (Fig. 1. dash-
ed line) [figure not reproduced here] with an extent of 275 m and a duration of
80 sec. The figure shows that the length and period of the waves are equal to

70 m and 6.5 sec respectively. the group consists of three waves in space and
six waves in time. The group velocity is equal to half the phase velocity and
accordingly the envelope of the observed waves is formed for the most part by
waves differing with respect to the modulus of space frequency, not with re-
spect to direction.

These parameters of waves are easily transmitted in a two-dimensional space-time
spectrum which has the form of a compact region of high values situated on the
dispersion curve. At low frequencies there is a small spectral peak correspond-
ing to the wave envelope [2].

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060024-4

IN)! 0030(1AI.USIZ(MVLY

ll 00 "3,0

  

  

relative
units

also cycles/l:-

Pig. 2. Schematic representation of sector of surface defined by dashed line
in Pig. 1.

Fig. 3. Spatial spectra of signal in cases of irradiation toward (a) and
across (b) wave movement. The 9 angle is equal to: l) 180. 2) 150, 3) 180,
a) 270. 5) 240. 6) 300°. The spectra 3, 4. 6 correspond to the two-dimension-
al spectra in Fig. 5.

Fig. 4. Change in wave spectrum and envelope of these waves with change in
angle: 1) 180. 2) 120. 3) 90, 4) 60, 5) 0’.

The observations of 1 July 1978 were aade under the conditions of a developing
storn with a wind constant in direction whose velocity varied froa 6 n/sec in
the morning up to 13.5 m/sec at nighttiae. At the height of the store waves
with collapsing crests attained 3 n in height. Judging from the available data
of the wave recorder. the spectral maxi-us was at a frequency of 0.25 Hz (wave-
length 30 n) at 1000 hours at a frequency of 0.14 a: (wavelength 80 a) at 2600
hours. A spectral analysis was carried out for the records of signals obtained
In the second half of the day (1700-2200 hours).

The spatial spectra of the signals were coaputed from 60 profiles each with a
length of 256 a, following each other each 1 sec. The constant coaponent was

separated from each profile and therefore the spectrum at the zero frequency

ls equal to zero and an artificial lowarequency peak arises at the adjacent

frequency. The adjacent spatial profiles were correlated. With a correlation

tine of about 10 sec the nuaber of degrees of freedom in evaluating the spec-
trum is close to 10.

FOB1OFFK§§3.USB(HVLY
FOR (WIM'IAI. USP. ONLY

umnxlmum probability maximum entropy _
’0'. m m
42-“:
Q! a:
I

cycles/kl

 

Pig. 5. Two-dimensional spectra of signals with 9 angles: 180, 270 and 300’
(top to bottom). At left -- eyelustions of maximum probability, at right -
evaluations of entropy. The solid curve is the dispersion curve. the dashed
curve is the same curve for the projection of the wave vector onto the di-

rection of the ray.

The principal feature of the spatial spectra is an overwhelming predominance
of the low-frequency components absent in the wave spectrum (Fig. 3). These
variations belong to the envelope of waves to one degree or another distorted
with a nonlinear conversion from the wave profile to the intensity of the re-
flected signals. The spectra are combined into two groups: the radar ray is
directed approximately toward the movement of the waves (9- 180. 180. 150')
and across the movement of waves (9- 260, 270. 300’). In the first case the
spectra drop off with great oscillations; in the second -- more smoothly. The
spectral peaks In the first group. at 8-11 cycles/km. corresponds to swell.
The wind waves. whose frequency is greater. do not give significant peaks in
the spatial spectra, which is possibly associated with the unstable position
of sectors with a large slope within the limits of wind waves with steep
crests. The equivalent width of the spectra is equal to approximately 10 cycles/
km. This value should reflect the width of a spatial spectrum of waves ap-
proximately equal to 100 a; the width of the angular spectrum (with a wave
length of 70 m) is equal to 0.7 red (60').

70
F03‘0FFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
Proceeding to a two-dimensional analysis, we will examine the change in the config-
uration of the projection of the total spectra of waves onto the plane k1, f,
where k1 is the wave vector component along the ray, with a change in the azimuthal
angle :9 in a case when the total spectra of waves has the form of a compact spot
on the dispersion surface (Fig. lo). Hith 6 - 180‘ (the ray is directed toward the
movement of the waves) virtually the entire projection of the spectra is concen-
trated in the dispersion curve segment. With a decrease in the €angle the space
frequencies of the fluctuations decrease and the time spectra remain unchanged. The
projection of the spot is gradually displaced toward the axis of time frequency and
is broadened with respect to space frequency. With 9 - 90' the projection reaches
the time frequency axis, having a relatively isotropic form. With a further de-
crease in the 9 angle the projection of the spot, moving into the lower half-plane
(the waves withdraw along the ray), moves in the direction of the lower branch of
the dispersion curve and reaches it at 6 - 0'. In the letter position the spot is
again concentrated in a segment of the dispersion curve. The envelope spectra in
the first approximation duplicates the projection of the wave spectrum, transferr-
ed to the zero frequency. In the initial position, with 6 - 180’, the envelope
spectrum is drawn out in a zone parallel to the discriminated part of the dis-
persion curve. with broadening of the spot the envelope spectra is drawn toward
the origin of coordinates. becoming relatively isotropic when observing waves
along their crests (9- 90'). with 9 - 0’ the envelope spectra again is drawn out
toward the pole, parallel to the lower branch of the dispersion curve.

The two-dimensional spectra of the radar signals are computed using 10 successive
records with an extent of 256 m and a duration of 6 sec (32 x 6 points) withOut
frequency averaging. with respect to time frequency the analysis is made using the
maximum probability algorithm and the maximum entropy algorithm, ensuring a higher
frequency resolution. With respect to space frequency, use is made of linear anal-
ysis algorithms. The maximum probability evaluation is ensured by approximately
two degrees of freedom: the maximum entropy evaluation is considerably more vari-
able.

On the average the two-dimensional spectra drop off with respect to time and space
frequencies (Pig. 5). Due to the centering of data along several profiles the spec-
trum at the origin of coordinates was considerably suppressed, which creates a fic-
titious peak at a low frequency at which the remnants of the wave envelope spectrum
are stituated. These tenants are displaced considerably from the origin of coordin-
ates along the time and space frequency axes with irradiation of the surface along
the direction of wave movement. Hith irradiation across the wave movement they fall
at the zero time frequency and are pressed to the limit toward the low space fre-
quencies. This agrees with the diagram of change in the spectrum envelope repre-
sented in Fig. 4. Using the f- and k1- coordinates of the envelope spectra tenants
it is possible to estimate the group velocity along the ray: with movement of the
waves along the ray the group velocity is equal to 3.5 III/sec. waves with a length of
32 m and a period of 6.5 sec have such a group velocity; this is somewhat less than
the parameters measured with a wave recorder. In the case of azimuthal angles of

180 and 300' in the two-dimensional spectra it is easy to discriminate a peak at
relatively low time and space frequencies. This peak falls fairly well on the dis-
persion curve and evidently corresponds to swell waves with a length of about 80 m
moving in the same direction as the wind waves. The wind waves themselves do not

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

('reato an appreciable peak in the spectrua (maxim probability evaluations) for
the reason indicated above. The maximum entropy evaluations emphasise the acute
peaks at the high frequencies. evidently belonging to the main wind waves. sene-
tines these peaks fall fairly well on the dispersion curve (in the case of irradi-
ation of the surface along the direction of wave movement), but in many cases sev-
eral wider scattered peaks appear due to the considerable variability of the eval-
uation.

The registry of radar signals reflected froa the wave-covered sea surface in the
case of moderate waves and wind lakes it possible to deternine the parameters of
the main waves -- length, period, phase and group velocity, number of waves in
the space and tine groups. width of the angular spectrum; in the case of intensive
waves and a strong wind using the wave envelope it is possible to deter-ins the
group velocity and indirectly the frequency of the main wind waves.

Despite the dependence of the properties of the radar as an apparatus for measuring
waves on any factors. which complicates the interpretation of data, evidently only
radar observations can give reliable uses data on the space-time structure of waves
on the see.

The authors express appreciation to I. A. Leykin for assistance in the measurements
and V. I. Hen' shilrov and G. I. Herinova for participation in data processing.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bass. F. 6., et al., "Radiophysical Investigations of Sea Roughness (Radio-
oceanography) at the Ukrainian Acadeuy of Sciences," TRANS. mm, ”-25, No
I. pp 63-52. 1977.

2. Lomeyko. A. I. and Rosenberg, A. 0., "Space-Time Structure of the Radar Image
of the Sea Surface," TR. XII KONFBRBRTSII P0 RASPROSTRANBNIYU RADIOVOLN (Trans-
actions of the Nelfth Conference on Radio Have Propagation), Tonsk, Part II,
pp 197-198. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Fizika atnosfery i okeana",
1982

5303
cso: 1865/114

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' unc 551.663:551.66.07/08

DETERMINATION or srscmun or SBA wwss BY SPECTRAL mmsrs or
AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS"

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADDiII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA AMSPBRY 1 0mm in Russian
Vol 18, No 2, Feb 82 (manuscript received 10 Mar 80, after revision 13 Oct 80)
pp 215-216

[Article by V. I. Titov, Institute of Applied Physics. USSR Acadeny of Sci-
ences]

[Text] As is well known [1.2], the nethod for determining the spectrun of waves
by spectral analysis of photographs of the sea surface has recently becone very
popular. This nethod is based on the assunption of the existence of a linear
dependence (under definite illunination conditions: clear sky. absence of solar
reflections) between the slopes and the brightness of the sea surface, which
leads to a linear correlation between the energy spectra: of the photograph
and the spectrum of waves.

In this article we propose a model of for-scion of the inage of a sea surface,
taking into account nonlinearity in the brightness distribution over the sky.
which trade it possible to evaluate the contribution of nonlinear effects to
the spectrum of the sea surface ilage.

Assuming the surface slopes to be snail. we will expand the surface brightness
I into series in powers of the surface gradient )1 and we will linit ourselves
to second-order terns

. .. i . .. .
I-I(n-0)+ WIN-0)" + —2-'|’6J('I-°)ﬂ.
where we used a matrix form of writing:

a ‘.
~-( )
1|:
is u nutrix column ('21 and “.2 are the '1 coordinates in a Cartesian coordinate
system at the mean sea surface).

( 132:2).

 

* Full article deposited at the All-Union Institute of Scientific and Tech-
nical Informtion. No (0324-81. Deposited 3 September 1981.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘I'he gradients and second derivatives of brightness I are determined from
the known angular dependences of sky brightness and the reflection formulas

of geometrical optics .

Then it can be shown that the statistical mean square modulus of the two-dimen-

sional Fourier spectrum Ch of the photograph (or the energy spectrum of the
photograph [3]) will be determined by the formula:

630% Gcik)(VJ|‘)'+ 2;] ca( 8’ + %) x

*“'(*'-%)[("'+5J-)x

«(P-inv-
where k is the space frequency. 2

In this expression the first term is proportional
”mu .3; to the product of the sought-for energy spectrum
of rises in the sea surface G; (k) (or the spec-
trum of waves) and the function (Vn Ik)2. It is
obvious that the contribution of the linear term
to the spectrum of the photograph will be maximum
when k "Vn I and the linear term is transformed
“-5 to zero when M. Vn I.
The second term, caused by the nonlinearity in
the angular distribution of sky brightness, is
the contraction of the spectra of rises and can
'2 N ’7 5" ” be regarded as noise or nonlinear distortions of

"'"u “3“” the spectrum obtained in this way at (k).

  

0,!

He will determine the coefficient of nonlinear distortions 00:) as the ratio
of the nonlinear tern to the linear term in the formula for Gk. In the case
of isotropic waves it is possible to obtain the following approximate for-
mula for an upward evaluation of the D(lt) values:

“0"(3I‘3J-3l3n’l)t'ln(kw'm)
um» '

where w is wind velocity. The figure shows the dependence D.” on the angular
solar altitude £93 for the case of a photosurvey at the nadir and Hlvn I. The
angular dependence of sky brightness was described by the Pbkrovskiy function
I! I. Evidently. D increases with an increase in frequency k and wind velocity
u (there is an increase in the kHz/g ratio). and also with an increase in the
angle between the direction k and the brightness gradient an- In this case
the minimum nonlinear distortions of the spectra will be observed with some
optimum solar altitude 93~30°. If 6..»0 or 03-.90' the distortions in-
crease due to the relative decrease in the brightness gradient since when
0890 the solar point of the sky corresponding to the brightness minimum ap-
proaches the zenith. whereas with 6.+90°, when the sun approaches the sen-
ith. the sky brightness increases and becomes an essentially nonlinear func-
tion.

[HMS I max] lung“...-

FOR OFHCIIA‘I. USE ONLY
The
once

1.

author expresses appreciation to L. S. 00111: and A. G. Luchinin for assist-
1n the work. a number of useful consents and adiice.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kaaevich, R. S.. "Dlrectional Have Spectra Pros Daylight Scattering."
J. GBOPHYS. RES.. Vol 80. No 33, pp 4535-4561. 1975.

Zugorodnikov, A. A. and Chelyahev, K. 8., "Use of Optical Processing in
Measurements of Haves by Remote Methods." MD! com (Transactions of the
State Oceanographic Institute), No 117. pp 25-36, 1973.

Konyayev. K. V., SPBKTRAL'NYY ANALIZ SLUCﬂAYNYRﬂ PROTSESSOV I POLBY (Spec-
tral Analysis of Random Processes and Fields). Moscow, leuka. 1973.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka", "Izveatiya AN SSSR, Pinks stnoafery 1

5303
C80:

okeana" . 1982

1865/1 110

F0! omczzl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.465. 553

INVESTIGATION OF SURFACE WIND CURRENT ON SEA

Pbscov IZVBSTIYA AKADDQII NA!!! 8681!: PIZIKA A1105?!“ I cum in Russian
Vol 18. No 2, Feb 82 (mnuacript received 23 Apr 79. after revision 19 Feb 80)

pp 217-220
[Article by 0. V. Perepelitsyn and V. V. Chernyavets]

[Text] During recent years increasing attention has been devoted to study of
the move-eat of the surface layer of water occurring under the influence of a
local wind. A knowledge of this is necessary both for investigation of the
structure of waves end for solution of any practical problems. including el-
lovsnce for the influence of novenent of the surface layer of water on the
spectrum of a signal reflected fron the sea surface in the case of a low height
of objects. In this article we have obtained an experinental dependence of the
velocity of the surface layer of water on the velocity and direction of the
local wind during tests of a Doppler instrument for measuring velocity. The
testing nethod is exasined and the results of tests and processing of the col-

lected data are given.

The orbital notion of reflecting particles of the water surface exerts the
main influence on the displaceoent of the frequency of a signal reflected

from the sea surface relative to the computed value [1]. As is well known, dur-
ing wave movement the water particles in a deep sea in the case of steady waves
move in orbits close to circles (Fig. 1). These circles lie in planes perpen-
dicular to the wave crests. The velocity of notion of a particle in orbit Vorb
vith a wave period 1",, and with a wave height Ii. is

Vorb ' “nu/Tu.

The orbital notion of particles leads to a frequency modulation of the reflect-
ed signal and a broadening of the spectrun if the reflection from different
putts of the wave is identical. However. experience shows that the reflection
is maximum from the parts of the wave situated in the neighborhood of its
crest. In the case of high waves the crests are broken and spray and foes are
formed, which can also lead to an increase in the level of the signal reflect-
ed fron the sectors near the crests. Since reflection from these sectors pre-
dominates, the frequency of the reflected signal is displaced by a value close
to the corresponding orbital velocity values, as occurs in the presence of a
current. This fictitious current is arbitrarily called an orbital current [2]

FOIOFI'IC&6LUSEONLY
and its velocity during wind waves is dependent on wind velocity, increasing
with its increase.

' Neapolitan '
z verb towns have . Direction of wave
V .

”V8.00!

 

    

Fig. 1. Profile of sea wave and trajectory of reflecting particles during wave
movement: 1) wave; 2) water particle; 3) orbit of move-ant of water particle.

This reasoning is correct during flights of an aircraft with Doppler apparatus
at great altitudes when the area irradiated by the antenna is considerably
greater than the length of the sea wave and the power of the reflected signal
is determined for the most part by the sectors situated in the region of the
crests of sea waves, that is, the frequency of the reflected signal is dis-
placed by a value corresponding to the orbital velocity at the wave crest. In
the case of a low flight altitude. when the area irradiated by the antenna

is considerably less than the length of the sea wave. the influence of nove-
aent of sea waves on the operation of the Doppler apparatus changes consider-
ably. The value of the displacement of the Doppler spectrum in this case will
be determined by the scan velocity of the surface current.

Kn. yin
1,3

I, 1

0, 9

0, 7

0,5
0.3

knots

Z 4 i l 10 )2
W, nlc m/sec

Fig. 2. Dependence of velocity of wind movement of surface current on wind vel-
ocity: w -- wind velocity, V“' -- velocity of surface current.

in order to obtain the dependence of the velocity of the surface layer of water
on velocity and direction of the local wind. in 1973-1977 specialists carried
out experimental investigations in the waters of the Baltic Sea. Special Dopp-
icr apparatus was installed on the ship (similar to airborne instruments for

measuring velocity), making it possible to carry out measurements with a high
accuracy at low heights of about 3-10 n. -

The velocity of movement of the surface water layer was determined from the
difference in the values of the longitudinal component of the ship's speed.
which was obtained using the Doppler apparatus. and the standard velocity
(with allowance for current intensity). determined on a radiotheodolite

ﬁORiOFFK;11.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measurement line using the following method. During the ship's movement on
the measurement line five determinations of the ship's positions were made at
the beginning and end of the measurement sector (run) at equal time intervals
by means of theodolites by colmand from the ship. The results of the measure-
ments were processed using an overlay with isolines of the bearings. An over-
lay at a scale of 1:5000 ensured determination of the rate of movement of the
ship on the run as the mean velocity values. determined from five segments of
the distances covered with an accuracy not less than 0.035 knot.

Synchronously with measurements of the standard velocity we measured the
ship's speed using a Doppler measurement instrument and a standard hydrody-
namic log. and the hydrometeorological factors were also registered (wind
velocity and direction. sea waves in units, etc.). Hind direction and velocity
were measured at a height of 3-8 m above the sea level. The error in the
Doppler system was no worse than 0.06 knot.

Table 1
Wind velocity V, m/sec 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 0.0 6.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0

Intensity of surface
wind current V“, knots 0.48 0.69 0.61 0.66 0.72 0.77 0.81 0.86 0.9 0.96 0.98

Hind velocity H. m/sec 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0

Intensity of 1.02 1.05 1.09 1.13 1.16 1.2 1.23 1.28 1.33 1.38

surface wind
current V". knOts

The statistical material obtained as a result of the investigations was pro-
cessed using the following formulas:

AVV,‘ - “In” - vustl - chrv vv - AV“ __l__ .

|C03(ku - kk)| '
where 23v“, is the velocity change due to the wind surface current along the
diametrai plane of the ship, V“ is the velocity of the wind movement of the

surface film, n
chr ' l Zlvxlos - VXStl
n
i

is current velocity. kv is wind direction. kk is the ship's course. n is the
number of measurements. Vx1°8 is velocity according to the standard hydrody-
namic log. szt is standard velocity, VxD is velocity according to the Doppler
measuring instrument.

As a result of the measurements it was possible to construct a graph of the
dependence of the velocity of wind movement of the surface current on wind
velocity (Fig. 2)

Vv - f(W).

8
FOR‘OFFN;A1.US£(NNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For an approximation of the functional dependence we selected an exponential
funrtlon In the form (taking into account that Vw - O with H - 0)

v" - Aw”,

where A and b are coefficients. Putting this into the logarithmic forn lg V"
- lg A + b lg H and introducing the notations lg V" - y, 1g A - a, 1g 9 - x,
we have y = a + bx.

For finding the coefficients a and h by a linear function it is possible to
use the least squares method [3], that is, the a and b values at the ninilum

must turn to the value
0. - 2 (ta-I-bxc)’.

I-I

For this it is necessary that

t-F-Di'. b - im-FN-w-f) / 2" (mm
“I

where

g I
1 i
!-—E ’(I'_—E"‘
' I

are the mathematical expectations of the random values.

Table 2

Wind ve10—"1_—'—4———

city u Hind K , de rees
m—m

 
 

ICC—II

    

 

 
 

NchOdoN-b

“QM-i9”-

1.3 1.! 0.6 0.6 1% 1,3 1,6

Making the computations, under the condition that V" is expressed in knots, H
In m/sec, we find I: = 0.558, a - -0.1983, A - 0.329, and we finally have th
MiG-56. A - 0.329, with V“ expressed in knots; A - 0.17 - with V" expressed
in m/soc.

79
‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Computations on the basis of experimental data show that in accordance with
the Student-t distribution the coefficients A and b of the approximating curve
with a confidence coefficient 0.9 fall in the interval A - 280-0.386, b - 0.56
10.08. The evaluation of the empirical standard deviation Vw fro- the result-
ing curve,under the condition that the dispersion is not dependent on wind in-
tensity, is equal to 3V - 0.06 knot.

The final result is given in Table l.

The statistical material was processed on a BESH-AH electronic computer. Table
2 was developed on the basis of the derived dependence. This shows the velocity
of the surface wind current on wind velocity and direction (simplified vari-
ant).

It was confirmed as a result of these investigations that the direction of the

surface wind current coincides with the wind direction. It was also found that
there is a dependence of the velocity of the surface current on wind velocity

and direction. An evaluation of this dependence was made and with the derived
dependence taken into account, a table was constructed showing the velocity of
the surface wind current as a function of wind direction and velocity.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Shuleykin, V. V.. KRATKIY KURS PIZIKI MORYA (Concise Course in Marine Phys-
ics), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1959, 478 pages.

2. Kolchinakiy, B. Ye., Handurovskiy, I. A. and Konstantinovskiy, H. 1..
DOPLEROVSKIYB USTROYSTVA I SISTEHY NAVIGATSII (Doppler Apparatus and Navi-
gation Systems). Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio, 1975, 632 pages.

3. Venttsel'. Ye. S., TEORIYA VEROYATNOSTEY (Theory of Probabilities). Hos-
cow, Nauka. 1964. 576 pages.

COPYRICRT: Izdatel'stvo “Nauka”. "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Fizika stnosfery i
okeana". 1982

5303
C80: 1865/114

80
FIH!(HHW(]AL.USB(N§LY
I!Il(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.lEﬂi(ﬂ¥LY

UDC 551.565.41
UDC 551.666.2z551.466.8l

ADIABATIC INTERACTION OF SURFACE AID INTERNAL HAVES

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSPBRY I OKBANA in Russian

Vol 18. No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received 20 May 80, after revision 25 Aug 80)
pp 220-223

[Article by A. Ya. Basovich, Institute of Applied Physics. USSR Academy of
Sciences]

[Text] The interaction of surface and internal waves has been examined in sany
studies in which the authors have determined changes both in the characteris-
tics of surface waves [1-4] and the parameters of-internal waves [5.6]. how-
ever. earlier such an interaction was investigated without taking into account
the reflection and capture of surface waves in the field of an internal wave

as a result of the blocking effect [2, 6]. As will be demonstrated. this ef-
fect can be important in the case of intensive internal waves.

we will assume that in a fluid with a two-layer stratification of the depth
bi + hz. where hl is the depth of the pycnocline*, an internal wave develops
at the time t - 0. We will ensue that with- t<0 there were surface waves with
a statistically and spatially homogeneous energy spectrum "0 I "0(k). As a
simplification we will assuae that the wave vectors of the surface waves are
parallel to one another and to the direction of internal wave propagation.
The equations of the problem can be written in the forl '

a”. ‘N. 0”.

— — —- 1
0i+‘03+‘0k 0. ()

OU ( 3 M—h 0) CU C. 0"] d

2 PC.

 

_ _ _I. —- -— was.
«n+0 as+o m” 40:! ‘ (2)

where Nk(x. k. t) . H(x. k. t)/¢/§i is the density of wave action, k is the
wave number of the surface waves, U is the velocity of the current created

at the surface of the internal wave. c1 [ghlhzsp//>(h1 + h2)] 1/2 is the velo-
city of internal waves of a low amplitude. and dp are the density of the
fluid and its change at the pycnocline, an d - €1h2/2f>h1(h1 + hz). Equation
(1) is correct if the influence of the wind and the nonlinearity of the sur-
face waves is small during the characteristic time of the considered process-
us [a]. The conditions of applicability of this approximation are defined be-
low. Equation (2) can be derived with the use of the results in [7] and dif-
rcrs from that cited in [7] by allowance for the characteristic nonlinearity

t
A two—Inyer stratification is examined to siaplify computations. Siailarly
n case of an arbitrary stratification can be considered.

81
FIHIIJFFICLAI.IISI:(MVLY
roe omcm. useoutv

of internal waves. The length of the internal wave is assumed to be much great-
er than the depth of the fluid.

The change in the parameters of the surface waves and the internal wave can be
found in an adiabatic approximation with satisfaction of the conditionftrLl(1.
Here i is the characteristic time of the change in the spectrum of surface
waves [a], 17 is the decrement (increment) of the internal wave during inter-
action with surface waves in a case when the changes in the spectrum of the
latter can be considered small. With satisfaction of this condition the inter-
action of the waves can be considered in two stages: first it is necessary to
find a change in the spectrum of waves in the stipulated field of the internal
wave and then its parameters* . The first part of the problem was examined in
detail in [41.Accordingly, in this study we analyze the direct behavior of
the internal wave.

2. The change in the parameters of the internal wave is described by equation
(2). There can be both a periodic and single internal waves (solitons) of a
negative GK 0) and a positive polarity (U >0). ‘i'he polarity of the soliton
is determined by the sign on the nonlinear term in (2), that is, by the rela-
tionship of hi and hz.

First we will examine a periodic internal wave. neglecting its characteristic
nonlinearity. In this case it is possible to neglect the weak dispersion and
equation (2) assumes the form:

7+C‘TJ--'—O:S “a“. (3)

He will seek its solution in the form 0 - Uo(t) cos q x. where U0 (t) is the
slowly changing amplitude of the wave, q is its wave number. x - ox - C1t. Hul-
tiplying equation (3) by U. integrating for x in the period of the internal
wave. and from the right in parts. we obtain the relationship:

00
—:; (—;-’Lwa)-a.§'!m—u—au (4)

Equation (4) can be simplified if we use one of the equations of motion of
wave packets of surface waves

DU 1 It

and the retention of Nk along the trajectories~ of their movement in space x.
k (41. Proceeding in (6) from integration for x, k to integration for no, to.
corresponding to the initial position of the wave packets with (t - 0). using
(5) and with retention of "kv we obtain the expression

a: _(.':_:.+—'—w I J‘m.au)-o. (5)

exprrssing the law of conservation of momentum in the internal wave - surface

For the first time such an approach was used in investigating the interac-
tion of a wave and particles in plasma [8]. Applicable to the interaction of
waves it was developed in [9].

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wave system. with relatively small changes in the wave numbers of surface
waves under the influence of an internal wave k - k - k‘. where k, . g/bC12
is the wave number of the surface waves with a group velocity equal to Ci,
equation (6) with an accuracy to the notations corresponds to the law of
conservation of momentum in the wave-particle system [10]. Accordingly. its

 

solution can be imediately written: (1.“) "0“)
d0
1(0- (7‘) /0.-1ww.
where ”‘H -
1- 29k“. 0”.
Maﬁa-9M) (0 _)b-a. 1“

Fig. 1. Temporal change in amplitude of
sinusoidal internal wave.

and the expression for P(t) [8] is not cited due to its unwieldineas. The be-
havior of U 0(t) with (ask/210k * < 0 is indicated qualitatively in the
figure. It 19epresents aperiodic l‘oschlations with the characteristic time

311:; as a result of the asynchronicity of movement of the wave packets along
the trajectories in the space “if, k the change in the spectrum of surface waves
occurs in such a way that their effect on the internal wave decreases with the
course of time and the oscillations of the amplitude "0 disappear. The ampli-
tude of the wave changes substantially differently than in the absence of cap-
ture of surface waves (exponential dropoff or increase) and with an increase
in time tends to the value 00(00 ). differing froa 00(0) by a value of the or-
der of ‘YLU0(O)1:.

Now we will examine the change in the solitones of internal waves under the
influence of surface waves. Assuming the change in the amplitude to be quite
slow. so that there is satisfaction of the condition of retention of the

form of the soliton [ll]. we will seek solution of equation (2) in the form

w h I"
v-v.mch-- (% ). mmvw- - WEE.

where '5 - x - Ct, c is the velocity of the soliton. Adhering to [9], we ob-

tain the law of conservation of momentum for a soliton and surface waves. sim-
ilar to (lo):

ﬁié‘mkiiwém

The behavior of the amplitude of the soliton is dependent. on its polarity.
With t 71:. where {0 is the characteristic time of movement of the wave pack-
ets in the field of the soliton. we have the following equation for 00(t):

d! Cd. 01‘:

 

‘0 “0’ 3h- a"
'0' (Ihll'h (_ a “I.“ (8)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From (8) we have the law of change in amplitude of the soliton

”a“, -00“), “"I‘O) -.I (9)

where

 

“-15% "'23.?” '”-‘°"]*( %)....}"'

The amplitude of the solitone of negative polarity decreases monotonically
with (a la k)k-k* < 0. With an opposite sign of the inequality the amplitude
of the so itons will increase. The change in amplitude (and accordingly A(t)
and C(t))is monotonic since a soliton with Uo<0 does-not capture surface
waves but only reflects them.

The capture of surface waves arises with Uo>0. (h1<h2). As a result of the
movement of wave packets of surface waves in closed trajectories the behavior
of amplitude is qualitatively close to that cited in the figure. The change
in amplitude during the time 111:0, corresponding to half .the "turns" of the
packets along the trajectory, can be estimated roughly using formula (9). as-
suming that t-nto. As in the case of periodic waves, the change in the ampli-
tude of the soliton with Uo>0 ceases with the course of time.

3. He will cite some estimates determining the limits of the region of applic-
ability of our examination. As the undisturbed wave spectrum we will select
the Rolle—Fisher spectrum [12] (in a one-dimensional modification):

“km - “-3 exp (—2g/kv2),

where A - 2.5-10‘2. v is wind velocity. The tip and “k values are related by

the expression “k - fighk/Jgk. Then the condition of applicability of the
adiabatic method has the following form (‘YL‘ 1):

where 1. - ﬁlm/2,30. T1 is the period of the internal wave, ’30 - Uo/C1.

Allowance for the nonlinearity of surface waves leads to the appearance of the
collision term stalk) in equation (1) corresponding to the transfer in the
spectrum of the energy obtained by waves from the wind. The neglecting of the
term stalk) is possible under the condition of the smallness of the character-
istic time of the considered processes (~t) in comparison with the time of
energy pumping in the spectrum [13]:

~[ 7:]...-

wIn-re Vk‘v/"glt-s is a matrix element of the interaction of surface waves [14]. By
comparing 1; and 17“ we obtain the inequality:

 

 

tn" "'

mﬁﬁ «wimp-13»
Ol'

81:
roe omcm. use ONLY
[ “Raﬁ-WON") ]' ‘90-

‘ﬂ'tcc' (11)

For an evaluation in accordance with the inequalities (10) and (11) we select
61 - 0.5—1 m/sec, 2n/q ~200 m. h1~20 a. He will assume that 1127111; in this
case the hz value does not change the order of Iagnitude of the evaluation
(10). We will assume that there are surface waves which are in symchronism
with the internal wave, for which with the selected model of the spectru-

it is necessary that 3v228C12. Por the cited parameters it is inequality
(11) which is decisive. from which it follows that: (3.2-10'1-2o10’2)exp
(-32C12/v2)<ﬁ0. This inequality shows that the model of adiabatic interac-
tion is applicable in the case of adequately intensive internal waves.

In the future it will be of interest to examine the influence of surface waves
in the train of internal waves within the framework of the model proposed above.

The author expresses appreciation to V. I. Talanov for constant interest in
the work and useful coments.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Gargett, A. E. and Hughes. B. A., "On the Interaction of Surface and In-
ternal Haves," J. FLUID HECH” Vol 52, No 1. pp 179-191. 1972.

2. Phillips, 0. PL. "Interaction of Internal and Surface Haves," 12V. AN 5388:
FAQ (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and
Ocean), Vol 9. No 9, pp 956-961, 1973.

3. Hughes. V. A.. "The Effect of Internal Haves on Surface Wind Haves," J.
GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 3. No c1. pp 455-465. 1978.

a. Basovich, A. Ya., "Transformation of the Spectrum of Surface Haves Under
the Influence of an Internal Have." IN. AN 8881!: FAO, Vol 15, No 6. pp

655-661, 1979. ‘

5. Pctrov. V. v.. "Interaction Between Internal Waves and Hicroscale Surface
Turbulence in the Ocean." IZV. All SSSR: FAD. Vol 14. No 3, pp 362-367.
I978.

6. Yermkov. S. A. and Pelinovskiy, Ye. IL, "Role of Nonlinear Interactions
in the Formation of Mean Fields," IZV. AN SSSR: 7A0, Vol 13, No 5. pp 537-
562. 1977.

7. Petrov. V. V., "Dynamics of Nonlinear Surface Haves in a Stratified Ocean,"
IZV. AN SSSR: FAD, Vol 15, No 7, pp 740-749, 1979.

8. O'Neil. T., "Collisionless Damping of Nonlinear Plasma Oscillations." PHYS.
FLUIDS. Vol 8. No 12. pp 2255-2262. 1965.

8
FOR OFHCIEL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basovich, A. Ya. and Gromv. Ye. N.. “Adiabatic Interaction of Ionoaonic
and Langmuir Haves." FIZIKA PLAZNY (Plasma Physics). Vol 5, No A, pp 833-
839. 1979.

Shapiro, V. D. and Shevchenko, V. I., "Have - Particle Interaction of Non-
equilibriun Mia," IZV. VUZov: RADIOPIZIKA (News of Institutes of Higher
Education: Radiophysics), Vol XIX, No 5-6, pp 767-791, 1976.

Karpnsn, V. N. and Haslov. Ye. 14., "Theory of Perturbations for Soli-
cons," th (Journal of Experinental and Theoretical Physics), Vol 73,
No 2(8). PP 537-559. 1977.

Lugovskiy, V. V., DINAHIKA FDRYA (Sea Dyna-ice). Leningrad, Sudostroyen-
iye. pp 162-178. 1976.

Caleyev, A. A. and Sagdeyev, R. 2., "Nonlinear Theory of Plasu," VOPROSY
TEORII PLAZHY (Problems in the Theory of Plans). Moscow, Atonizdat, No 7.
pp 7-165, 1973.

Phillips. 0. H., "Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Interac-
tions of Gravitational Haves." NELINBYNAYA TBORIYA RASPROSTRANIJIYA VOLN
(Nonlinear Theory of Wave Propagation). Moscow, Mir. pp 161-160. 1970.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'atvo "Nauka". "lsvestiya AN 888R, Pisika atmosfery i

5303
CSO:

okeana" . 1982

[865/114

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"DC 681 .325.5-l8l .4

ORGANIZATION OF COMPUTER- INSTIUHBNT IMWION IN SYSM POR AUTOMATION OF
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH H111! VARIABLE STRUCTURE

Riga AVTOHATLKA I VYCHISLITBL'NAYA nmnu in Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 81
(manuscript received 18 Jun 80) pp 81-91

[Article by S. N. Domarstskiy, 0. S. Zudin and 0. Vaynio]

[Text] A characteristic feature of recent years is the widespread introduction of
distributed computer networks into the practice of operation of industrial and
scientific organizations. Networks unite centers consisting of several computers
that interact with each other and exchange data with the network through a cmn
processor [1]. These centers may be in fixed locations or even on mobile platforms.
for example. on ships intended for oceanic research. Radio and space comaunications
may be used to include these centers in the network. Single-center computer net-
works located on scientific research ships ("18) of the 0881! AN [Academy of
Sciences - AS] unite laboratory systems for automation of scientific research
(SARI). automatic navigation facilities, meteosynoptic data acquisition systems

and data acquisition and processing centers. laboratory scientific research auto-
mation systems [LSRAS] contain computers; data input, output and display devices;
and a substantial number of scientific instruaents. A feature of the functioning
of the majority of LSRAS in ship systems is the variable composition of equipment
and the need for frequent and rapid reconfigurations of the system in the process
of operating with orientation to various experiments. This article is aimed at
generalizing the experience of organization of computer-instnnent interaction in
LSRAS with a variable structure gained in the process of a joint effort by Soviet
and Finnish specialists on developing the Integrated Scientific Research Automation
System for the USSR AS scientific research ship, "Aksdemik Hstislav Keldysh," at
the shipyard of the "loiollming" A0 [Joint-stock company) in Reina (Finland).

in the most general form, any experiment can be reduced to sending some set (in the
particular case, an empty set) of stimulating actions to the object of study and
determining (measuring) object responses to these actions.

By analogy to the concept of the computing process ([2]. p 25). one can introduce
the concept of the process of performing an automated experiment that covers send-
ing the stimulating actions, measuring object response to them. interaction with
the human operator. processing of the quantitative indicators of object response

according to specified algorithms and presentation of the data obtained in a con-
venient form, and exchange of information with other center systems.

FOR 0mg!“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From here on, the measuring process should be understood as the sending of actions
to an object and the measuring of its responses, and let us consider the experiment
program an isomorphic mapping of the algorithm for performing the experiment onto
the set of hardware.

The process of performing an automated experiment may be represented in the form
of s set of computing (VP) [6?] end measuring (11’) RIP] processes. Irrespective
of the experiment complexity and the quantity of apparatus taking pert in it. the
predominant role in the process of performing an automated experiment is played by
one of the CP. All HP and other CP are subordinate. As a rule, the processes
making up the automated experiment flow in standalone hardware nodules: computers
and various scientific instruments. Therefore, in developing scientific research
automation systems, much importance is attached to the proper choice of procedures
for interaction between the processes and apparatus which are implemented at the
functional-logic, electrotechnical and mechanical levels. The first level extends
to the formats of protocols and algorithms for exchange of data and coemmnds, the
second to the electrical characteristics of the physical data media and data trans-
mission lines, and the third ensures the mechanical compatibility of the inputs
and outputs for the various instruments.

Let us call an interface the set of hardware and software that permits affecting
the interaction of the component computing and measuring processes in an automated
experiment.

The same scientific research automation system may include both instruments capable
of only the simplest interaction and very complex instruments built on the basis of
microprocessors in which 0? flow along with HP. The interface system must enable
the organization of interaction at all levels of instruments of varying complexity
both between each other and with one or more computers, in which the main and sub-
ordinate C? of the automated experiment flow. A natural condition in doing so is
the orientation to existing standards.

Two standard interfaces for LSRAS that meet the requirements listed have now re-
ceived broad international recognition: the CAHAC system [3-5] and the Interface
for Programmable Instruments of the International Electrotechnical Commmission
[[EC] [6], known as the IEC Bus or the CPI! (General Purposes Interface Bus). Both
standards describe buses (set of communication lines) for data exchange and deter-
mine the interaction of apparatus. The main difference between them is in through-
put and the length of the communication lines. The CAHAC standards also impose
more severe restrictions on the mechanical level of interaction (including restric-
tions on apparatus sizes), and the 130 bus on protocols [7]. The areas for appli-
cation of these standards are discussed in [8].

Both of these standards have been used in the LSRAS for the single-center computer
network on the "Akademik Hatislav Keldysh" scientific researcl ship to automate
various types of research. Additional capabilities are realized with joint use of
the CAHAC system and IEC bus in the process of performing the same automated ex-
periment. For this purpose, modules that match up the buses are included in the
CAHAC crates and the appropriate software has been developed. Thus, the IEC bus is
used practically in all the LSRAS on the ship and is a major means for automating
experimental research.

88
F0!I0FFKJA1.USIiONlN
Let us go into more detail on the organisation of interaction of processes in sys-
tems based on the [EC bus. The 136 bus is a set of 26 communication lines: 8 are
informational when transferring data and multiline commands, 3 are used for estab-
lishing correspondence of the states of the processes of receiving and sending the
next portion (byte) of data, 5 are used to send comasnds for general management
of interection of the processes making up the experiment, and 8 are used to orga-
nize interaction attheelectrotechnical level. An exsapla of the interaction of

the instruaents joined by the 186 bus and the name and function of the bus lines

are shown in fig. 1. In any of the processes shown in the figure, three groups of
functions, conventionally depicted in fig. 2 by using sections 81, 82, 83 and 8a,

 

Fig. 2. Structure of processes
interacting by means of
136 bus
Key:
l. 130 bus
2. hardware nodule
3. 1? [interface functions]
4. PS? [data format matching
functions]
5. PF [instrument functions]
6. organs of interaction

 

7. object
Fig. l. 156 bus structure and capabilities
Key:
1. device A; process able to talk, 7. general interface management
listen and control 8. 010 [data input/output]
2. device 3; process able to listen DAV [data valid]
and talk NRFD [not ready for data]
3. device C; process able only to NDAC [not data accepted]
listen IFC [inetrface clear]
a. device D; process able only to ATN [attention]
talk SRQ [service request]
5. data bus REN [remote enable]
6. byte transfer control 301 [end or identity]

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORi0FF“JAl.US£¢MVLY

can be distinuished. The functions are described by algorithms or diagrams of
states and transfers effected by using external commands and actions. At any given
time, the meaning of a process function should be understood as its state and set
of commends and actions being sent in the process. Instrument functions realize
the basic purpose of an instrument, for example, sending some known action or
measuring a physical quantity. Instrument functions (PP) provide for interaction
with the object of the experiment and the researcher. Interface functions (IF)
effect interaction of a given process with other processes in the automated experi-
ment when commands and data are exchanged. The functions enclosed between sections
s and 53 (F5?) match formats of data received or generated by instrument functions
wlth the protocols adopted in the system in accordance with the restrictions of

the standard [7].

Table of Interface Functions Described by 130 Standard

Number of Subsets
Number of Possible Simultaneously

Symbol Designation Versions (Subsets) Realizsble
SH source handshake 1 l
Ml acceptor handshake l l
T(T8) talker or 8 h 1
(extended talker) °.°
L(LE) listener or A h 1
(extended listener) eac
C controller-instrument 28 5 (no more)
SR service request 1 1
RL remote local control 2 1
PP parallel poll 2 1
DC device clear 2 1
0T device trigger l 1

The ISO standard describes 10 interface functions, each of which has several possi-
ble versions of interpretation. The name and purpose of the functions are given in
the table above. The predominant computing process in systems organized on the
basis of the [EC bus flows in the system controller, and the subordinate GP for
control of the experiment (if any) flow in other controllers. A small or medium-
size computer is most often used as the controller. Processes flowing in control-
lets have the capability of issuing single- and multiline commands to subordinate
processes and of transferring control to each other. The system controller, and it
alone. has the capability of terminating interaction of all processes at any given
time and assuming system control itself. The only interface function mandatory

for all instruments is "acceptor handshake" (AH) which permits processes flowing

in the instrument to receive multiline commands and data. The other functions may
be contained in instruments in sny combination. when data is exchanged, each pro-
cess must be addressed in advance by the controller controlling the bus at the

time as the data acceptor or source. Only one addressed data source with several
addressed acceptors is possible on the bus at any given time. Addressing of the
processes ls two-byte: by the primary and secondary address. Under conditions of
interaction at the electrotechnicsl level, the number of instruments joined by the

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
bus must not exceed 15 with multiformity of primary addresses for acceptors (31)
and for sources (31). Several acceptors may have identical addresses. Each of the
primary processes may additionally activate by secondary addresses up to 31 pro-
cesses. Date exchange over the bus is possible with or without the participation
of the controller. Manual addressing of instruments is provided for operation in
the simplest scientific research automation systems without a controller. The rate
of data exchange over the bus is determined by the slowest of the interacting pro-
cesses. It is preferable to use the seven-bit ASCII code (ROI-7) in the system. ~

Over two hundred different instruments that are capable of interacting in systems
based on the 18C bus are now produced in the world. However, in developing
scientific research automation systems, instruments have to be used that were de-
veloped prior to propagation of the standard or are not compatible with the IBC
bus for some other reason. To ensure compatibility of the processes flowing in
these instruments with the experiment, they have to be equipped with PS? and IF
[format match and interface functions]. These functions with realization of com-
patibility of the processes can be interpreted by both the hardware (by using
electronic components) and the software (or microprogram) method. In doing so, the
task of ensuring compatibility at the slectrotechnical and mechanical levels is
solved in all cases uniformly. In instruments based on microprocessors, a large
share of the interface functions can be interpreted by the software method [9].
but this slows execution of the instrument functions and increases response time
to control actions of the bus. Some change to the instrument electrical circuits
is also required, which under laboratory conditions is not always convenient, and
for ship systems is often impermissible. Therefore, for these instruments and for
instruments that realize their basic functions on a base of analog and digital
electronic components, it is advisable to use separate standalone modules that
realize the functions of process matching.

Let us call the means that interpret the functions enclosed between sections 82
and Sa in fig. 2 an interface card.

As follows from [10-12], as a function of the number of interface functions and
complexity of generated protocols, hardware implementation of the interface card
(1K) requires 60-60, and for complex instruments up to 80 packages of microcircuite
and a number of other components. In reconfiguring the system, the matching func-
tions of the new processes most often do not coincide with the similar functions

of the preceding ones, which requires replacement of the interface card. Baworking
of interface cards in the case of their hardware implementation requires large in-
puts of labor and time and is unacceptable. The optimal solution lies in develop-
ing a universal interface card that provides for matching of processes flowing in
fundamentally different instruments. It is not possible to solve this problem by
hardware implementation of the functions because of the complexity of such a
device, in particular the circuits for implementation of the protocols. This prob-
lem has not been solved even with the emrgence of LSI circuits (81$) for hardware
interpretation of interface functions described in [13]. These LSI circuits,
though they do reduce to 10-15 packages the amount of apparatus that interprets

the functions enclosed between sections 83 and S“ in fig. 2, have almost no effect

on the amount of apparatus that interprets the functions between sections 82 and 83.
Despite the fact that attempts at developing universal interface cards for narrow

91
FfHICHHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FORiOFFﬂJAl.USE(MNLY

classes of instruments were quite successful [12, Id], they do not solve the prob-
lem posed as a whole. it can be solved only under the condition of application in
interface cards of the most modern developments of electronic components: micro—
processors and L81 microprogrammable logic. In the general case, the universal
interface card that implements matching of the overwhelming majority of instruments
applied within LSRAS must ensure execution of all the functional capabilities
offered by the 180 bus and compatibilityat theelectrotechnicalsndmechanical levels.
with respect to the instrument, it must provide the capability of input and/or out-
put of command words and data with a size of no less than 50 bits, manual address-
ing under the conditions of no addresses and easy changing of the instrument ad-
dress in the process of system operation. It must also provide the capability of
forming any protocols permitted by the standard and all conversions of data and
instrument commands with that, including calculation, as well as indication of
extreme operating conditions (no-address and malfunction situations). All neces-
sary functions of interface card inputs/outputs with respect to an instrument must
be performed in the process of interpreting P3P [format match functions], and com-
munications by direct electrical connections of the corresponding inputs/outputs

of the interface card and the instrument. It is also necessary to ensure the
maximum exchange rate.

From these requirements, it is clear that a universal interface card must contain
at least storage for programs that interpret functions, working storage for inter-
mediate values of auxiliary variables used in forming protocols, I/O hardware for
communication with an instrument, apparatus for matching with the lEC bus at the
electrotechnicai and mechanical levels, as well as a processorthst executes the
instructions of the interpreting program. However, in this case it will not be
possible to ensure the maximum possible speed; therefore, it is advisable to in-
corporate in the universal interface card a microcircuit for hardware interpreta-
tion of interface functions. Shown in fig. 3 is the structure of a universal
interface card built with nine microcircuits. instructions in the programs that
interpret protocol matching functions (and when necessary, the extended instrument
functions too) and are stored in a ROM (PZU) with a size of 2K bytes are executed
by the central processor [CPU] (TsP). Used for communciation with instrument func-
tions are two microcircuits (MC), each of which contains 256 bytes of working
storage and three programmable l/O ports: two with 8 bits each (A and B) and one
with a length of 6 bits (C). Each port can be programmed for input or output by
setting the appropriate bits in the internal status register (STAT) in the micro-
circuit. Six-hit ports, in addition to data 1/0, can perform the functions of
synchronizing registers for asynchronous exchange of data with an instrument. The
microcircuits also contain timers (TIM) and can generate requests for interruption
of the CPU when the eight-bit registers are full or empty or upon expiration of

a time computed by the timer. Used for interpretation of interface functions is a
separate microcircuit (HIP) that has logic circuits and also 18 control and status
registers accessible for CPU reads or writes. The registers are used for inter-
action between the CPU and the interface function interpretation circuits. The M1?
has the capability of interrupting CPU operation for a number of internal reasons
by sending an [NT signal to output. The CPU can store in the HI? the addresses of
acceptors and sources assigned to processes being matched by using the interface
card, data and status bytes for transmission to the 150 bus; and assign the code
for the line end symbol, the mode of operation for an exchange (acceptor or source),
masks for interruptions, commands and date to ensure the appropriate modes of

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Simplified structure of a universal interface card

Key:
1. V [gate] 9. H82 [nicrocircuit 2]
2. addresses 10. HIP [microcircuit for interpretation
3. commands of interface functions]
4. DK [decoder] 11. commend decoder
5. 020 [working storage] 12. II" [interface functions]
6. TIM [timer] 13. read registers, 0-7
7. STAT [status register] 1a. write registers, 0-7
8. HS] [microcircuit l] 15. PIP [transceivers]

operation. The CPU can read from the registers bytes of data obtained froo the 130
bus, interruption status bytes, addressings and statuses sent to the bus during
serial polling (8TB), as well as current values of addresses of the process being
matched, bytes of multiline caInands not understood by the cicruits interpreting
interface functions and bytes of secondary addresses that are recognized by the
software method. among the features of the structure of the suggested universal

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interface card is that the data transmission lines between the microcircuits are
coincident with the low-order lines of addresses. Used to separate addresses and
data is the “LE strobe sent by the CPU at the appropriate times. The microcircuits
have the necessary circuits to realize separation of addresses and data, and for
the ROM. an eight-bit microcircuit of strobed gates (V) is used. All commands
fetched from the ROM and data stored in working storage and HIP registers have
through addressing through the internal bus for the interface card. In the process,
the physical addresses are distributed in the array of addresses (from 0 to 64K)
generated by the CPU by the connection of the CHIP SELECT (CS) microcircuit

inputs through a decoder of type 1 of 8 (DK) to the noncoincident lines of
CPU addresses. Virtual addresses may be specified instead of physical addresses
when the appropriate cross-assembler is available in the process of compiling the
programs for interface function interpretation. The isomorphism between the virtual
and physical addresses with regard to the features of the apparatus is established
the following way:

name of variable EOU physical address
and for the ROM A - A ,
p c

for 0201 A” - A.c 4 D1 - Ah + 190°16’
for OZUZ AP - A:c + D2 - at + 200°16’

for HIP: AP - AcDB + D“ - ACIOO16 + 380016.

Here, Ap and at are the physical address of the first byte of the command or data

and this same address within the array of addresses of the corresponding microcir-
cult and D1 2 3 4 is the displacement of addresses due to organization of can-uni-
! I ,

cations in the interface card.

These addresses are accessible for processing by the usual CPU commands. The
microcircuit 1/0 ports are used only by 1/0 commands. OZU [working storage] is
shared through the IO/H inputs. The physical address of the port. status
register or timer may be determined by the formula Ab - Ac + nmc’ where but is the

displacement of the address for the given microcircuit, equal for HCl to 1816 and
for HCZ to 2016'

Matching with the 130 bus at the electrotechnical level is effected by using the
LSl circuits of the bus transceivers (PIP) that can operate in four different modes
as a function of what code is sent to the control inputs. For data lines, the
transceiver operates in mode 1, and for command lines, mode 0. The type of plug
and connecting cable stipulated in the standard is used for matching at the
mechanical level.

The operator has the capability of turning on the power, making the initial set-
ting and switching the LISTEN. ONLY and TALK ONLY modes. Input of the address is
effected by means of port 32 which is assigned as input during all interpretations.
in doing so, input via the two high-order bits are the statuses of the LISTEN ONLY
and TALK ONLY switches; the next two bits are allocated for the high-order decade

F0!‘0FFK£%&.USE(N¢LY
"L ."l

of the binary-decimal code of the address (maximum address does not exceed 31), and
the last four bits are for the low-order decade of the address. Information for
displays is output through the three high-order bits of port C2 which must be as-
signed as output with all interpretations. Remaining bits can be used to output‘
instrument control commands. Other than those described above, no other restric—
tions are imposed on the interpretation of functions.

The interface card built that way provides the capability of interpreting the func-
tions for coordination of the overwhelming majority of processes (from the simplest
to the very complex) that make up an automated experiment in LSRAS on USSR A8 ships.

Hith a high degree of confidence, one can state that what has been said is true too
for.the majority of LSRAS in general.

Let us consider the basic principles of development of programs for interpreting
functions for coordination of porcesses by using the interface card described in
the example of a laboratory pH-millivoltmeter. The instrument analyzes (measures)
the characteristics of samples of sea water by using various electrodes. In doing
so, the PF [instrument functions] generate a word of data that can be read on a
digital display or sent outside in one of three modes initiated by using the ap-
propriate controls. The instrument receives commands externally for start up,
waiting and keeping results at output. The commands and data, intersecting section
8 in both directions for the ph-millivoltmeter, are shown in fig. 6. In analyzing
tﬁe composition of signals, sent through section 8 , one can state that from the
viewpoint of interaction in the system, the instrument is simple. Sufficient for
such a system is the set of interface functions: Aﬂl, 8H1, T5, L2, 8R1, D02 and
DTl. in the process, it will receive the capability of receiving multiline com-
mands and addresses, sending data through the 120 bus, being started and put in the
wait mode, and sending the controller status-bytes during serial polling and re-
quests for service in event errors occur. In developing the interpreting program
in the interface card, all ports for caumuucation with the instrument except C2
should be designated as input. In the process, output through the high-order bits
of C2 are data to the displays, while the low-order bits must be designated for
output of the commands MEASURE, BAIT and NO DATA CHARGE. Decades of data are input
through ports Al (high-order decades) and 31. The high-order decade is sent first
to the bus. To simplify the interpretation program, the sign is input through the
low-order bit of port Cl. Information on the mode of operation and availability of
the instrument goes through port A2, and the values of the bite of the port are
selected in accordance with the recommendations [7] on generating status-bytes.

The three low-order bits are allocated for modes of measuring (polarization current,
ph and millivolts, respectively), bit 6 for the measuring readiness flag, and bit 8
for the overflow flag. In addressing, the instrument will send to the IEC bus a
message in the format FHHSDDDDE, where F is the overflow flag (an S or blank in the
absence of overflow), MN is the mode mnemonic (1?, pH or mV, respectively), S is
the data sign (+ or -). DDDDD is the data field taking the floating point into
account, and E is line end symbol (; or carriage return). The line and flag (END
on line £01) is sent to the bus simultaneously with the last symbol. All data
bytes are coded in ASCII (KOI-7) seven-bit code. Two types of errors are intro-
duced that require display and controller response: instrument errors (no mode set,
instrument not turned on or not working) and IEC bus errors (instrument is ad-
dressed as a data source, but there are no addressed receivers on the bus). Shown
in fig. 5 are the contents of the HIP registers suggested for the described

Ftﬂlfﬂﬂﬂcgzl.lkﬂi(ﬂﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. water samples
2 . elec trodes
3. PF [instrunent functions]

a. data

5 . sign

6 . contends
7 . ready

8. overflow

9. no date change

10. measure

11. wait
12. node

13. polarization current
ll». IV

 

Fig. 6. Interaction of laboratory pﬁ-nillivoltneter with system and external
environment

pH—nillivoltneters. Registers are grouped in pairs so that each pair corresponds
to one address Ac, and one register is used only for writing and the other only

for reading of data. The addresses Ac are indicated along with each pair. The
purpose of the registers and their individual bits used in interpretation of
F8? [data format matching] is as follows. The output register is used to send the
HI? data bytes in a series defined by the for-at shown above. The M1? then sends
these bytes to the 130 bus, matching the transmission of each byte with the re-
ceivers. The data input register is not used. The interrupt mask and status re-
gisters are used for output of CPU interruption signals under conditions (bits)
specified in the mask registers, when the bit in the status register is set. Bits
are set in status registers by HIF apparatus independently of hits in week regis-
ters. GET, DEC and ERR designate, respectively, nultiline bus commands for start-
ing the instrument, setting it in the initial state (waiting) and the occurrence

of bus errors. no is the next byte output to the bus. INT is the status of output
INTERRUPTION (INT) HIP. SPAS is the status "serial polling activated" of interface
function T. SPASC and ADSC are respectively the change in status of serial polling
and addressing of the instrument on the bus. The registers for the node and status
of serial polling are used to send to the IEC bus the statue-byte with the cape-
bility of its storage and reading in the HIP. In addition to the inetrunent lode
bits described above, bit 7 in the register for status of serial polling is used
for writing a request for service, which the SR interface function sends to line
SRQ of the 180 bus and sets in the process the SRQS flag in the status register}
bit 0 used for errory display and bit 5 for the wait node. Isgiaters for the node
and status of addressing are used to indicate the mode of addressing of the

FOR'OFFKgfi.USE‘0Nl¥
(1)
(2)
(3)

(lo)

(5)
(6)

(7) '

(8)

(9)

Eh»
*.
méhhéudz
mnmzﬁunm.
.mm“Mwmﬂw
ﬁﬁn
nnhBMEMMv
nmdﬁﬁmmm

 
 
 
 

 

    
 

   

unnnu
and

' .- (10)
connnuuunnun
oinumnméa:

mow d » I (12)
vonnnusuum

m... (13)
vmamzmana

o 0 Danna-mm

mu”
1

W - , (16)
vommmmmmmm

.. .. ;
v'anunnnnn

(17)

I

to:
.llﬂllﬂ
W , A (18)
‘ nun
mm m! (19)

Fig. 5. Contents of MIF [nicrocircuit for interpretation of interface functions]
registers during interpreation of functions for interface of

pH-nillivoltmeter

Key:
1. registers: reading 11 .
2. data input 12.
3. status of interruption l 13.
4. status of interruption 2 110.
5. status of serial polling 15.
6. status of addressing l6.
7. passage of con-ands 17.
8. address 0 18.
9. address 1 19.
10 . registers: writing

interface functions ‘1‘ and L. Ton is talk

data output

masks of interruption 1
masks of interruption 2
node of serial polling
nude of addressing
auxiliary nodes

address 0/1

auxiliary register A
auxiliary register 3

only (manual addressing), ADI-01 is

the address in the address registers, LA an TA mean that the inetrment is active
on the bus as either a data listener or talker. ”id 5“ HJHN indicates 1““ which

address is activate“.

Auxiliary comand register is used to store information in

auxiliary registers A and B (100 and 101 in field C", data in field 00) and for
The cos-land passage register is not used.
Through the address on register, the CPU can store the addresses of the acceptor
and (or) the source in HIP address registers and indicate which address pertains
to interface function i, and which to T. The line end symbol code 3 can be stored

issuing several auxiliary MIF coInands.

FOIOFFICKLUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. start

2. turn on power and initial setting

3. initialization subroutine

6. instrument node check subroutine “
S. instrument data reading subroutine
6. message generation subroutine

7. subroutine for output of data to bus
8. start

9. interrupt processing subroutine
10. return

 

Fig. 6. Consolidated structure of the progran for interpretation of functions
for interface of laboratory pN-nillivoltneter

in the £08 register. Site in the auxiliary registers A and B in the given inter-
pretation are set in such a way that the HI? puts out the END flag together with
the status-bytes and each byte that coincides with the contents of the ROS register.

Thus, the task of interpretation is reduced to forming the initial configuration
of the hardware for the interface card by storing the necessary data in the ap-
propriate registers, providing for transmission of bus con-ands to inputs MEASURE,
WAIT and NO DATA CliANGE, display of errors and generating lines MUDDDE of data
words shown in fig. 4. In forming the initial configuration, it is necessary to
enter data in the addressing node register and the address registers. The struc-
ture of the interpreting program oust be built in such a way that precludes the
effect of a possible operator error or other actions that would lead to an unautho-
rized change of the instrument address in the set of addresses in the process of
performing the experinint. The structure of the program for interpretation of the
FSF for the pﬂ4sillivoltneter is shown in fig. 6. The program cyclically polls
the instrument and ae measurements are available generates and outputs lines
FHHDDDDDE to the bus. All actions for issuing commands to the instrument and
sending to the bus of status-bytes are performed by the interrupt processing pro-
gran; control is transferred to its starting address (24 ) in each interrupt sit-
uation. If any error occurs, the interface card sends to the bus a request for
service and lights the error display, and program execution is terninated. The
initial sector of the program is loaded at address 0. Control is transferred to

FOI!OFFﬂi%E.USE(H§LY
this address right after the initial setting for the interface card apparatus when
power is turned on. Taking the port 32 read cs-ands to the initial sector makes
it possible to eliminate the undesirable effect of an unauthorized address change,
which can now be done only after pressing the initial setting button, which is
highly improbable. The actions performed by the subroutines shown in fig. 6 are
clear from their titles. The subroutines contain waiting peaks and internal cycles
and perform the required calculations to determine the place of the point in the
data field.

In conclusion, let us note that organization of instrument-computer interaction in
LSRAS must be performed on the basis of using standard interfaces; of these, the
IEC bus is preferred for the majority of ship scientific research automation sys-
tems. To match instruaents with this bus within the LSRAS, it is advisable to have
several universal interface cards on a base of microprocessors and 1.81 progra-nble
logic. The suggested structure of the interface cards allows matching with the 130
bus any instruments with parallel or serial input and (or) output of data used in
oceanologic research, and also allows expanding the instrment functions when
necessary. The suggested interface card is used in several laboratories on the
"Akademik Mstislev Keldysh" scientific research ship to interface various measuring
instruments and sounding devices to computers. The suggested structure of the pro-
gram that interprets the PSF [format matching functions] provides protection from
an unauthorized change to the instrument address without reducing the flexibility
of the system as a whole.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Yskubeytis, E. A., "Problems of Developing Computer Networks," AVT, No 1, 1980,
pp 3-10.

2. Tennenbaus, 5., "mogourovnevays organizstsiya EVH" [mltilevel Organization of
Computers], Moscow, Hir, 1979, 567 pages.

3. "A Modular Instrumentation System for Data Handling, CAMAC System, 126 Standard,
Publication 516," 1st ed., Geneva, 12C, 1975, 65 pages.

lo. "Phlltiple Controllers in a CAMC Crate," EUR 6500, rose-Esau“, Brussels-
Luxemburg, 1978, 32 pages.

5. "CAMAC. The Definition of m. A Language for Use in a CAMAC System Endorsed
by the ESONE Caunittee and the SAC NIH Omittee," ESONE/IHLIOI, ESONE Cot-nit-
tee, 82460 See], Belgium, October 1974, 36 pages.

6. "IEEE Standard Digital Interface for Progra-able Instrumentation," IBEB Std.
688-1978, 1555, NY, Nov. 30, 1978, 83 pages.

7. "Interface System for Programable Measuring Apparatus, Byte Serial Bit
Parallel, Code and Format Convention," (Draft), 1976, N 17, IBC, TCbé/HGJ.

8. Kolpakov, I. P., "Selection Criteria of Standard Interfaces,"1st Europ. Symp.
on Real-Time Data handling and Process Control, (Heat) Berlin, Oct. 1979,
5.1.a-lo.

9
FOR OFHCIA9L USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Benes, 8.; Harms, K. and Hunter, I... “A Microprocessor-Oriented Heasureuent
and Control System," in "Microcomputer Architectures," 3rd EUROHICRO Synp. on
Hicroprocessing and Hicroprogra-sing, October 3-6, 1977, Insterdan, North-
Holland Publishing Cc-pany, 1977, pp 143-150.

Gorelikov, N. 1.; Do-aratskiy, A. 11.; Douaratskiy, 8. IL; Ponenlto, N. V. and
Sitnikov, L. 8., "Requirements for System Functions of Measuring Instr-manta
according to the 130 Standard," PRIBORY I SISTER! UPRAVLENIYA, No 3, 1980,
pp 15-19.

Maratskiy, A. N.; Doaaratskiy, S. N.; Liskin, V. A.; Ponsnko, N. V. and
Sitnikov, 1.. 8., "lnterface Cards according to the IEC Standard for Parforator
and Photo Reader," PRIBORY 1 TEKHNIKA EKSPBRIMEN‘I‘A, No 4, 1979, p 109-118.

Domaratskiy, A. N.; Donartskiy, S. N.; Ponenko, N. V. and Sitnikov, L. 8..
"Interface Cards for Voltneters and Hultinetere for Instruent Bus according to
the NSC Standard," [’81ka I TSKHNIKA BKSPERDBNTA, No 5, 1980, pp 74-79.

Pieper, l. and Grossi. R. 1., "1.81 Streamlines Instrulent Interface with
Standard 1558-488 Bus," ELECTRONICS, April 26, 1979, pp 145-150.

"Five More DVH's Compatible with IRE-488," THE FLUKE REVIEW, June 1979,
Fluke (Holland) 8V, Filburg, The "ether-lands, 4 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinatne", "Avtonatika i vychislitel'naya tekhnika", 1981

8545

C50: 8144/0128

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 681.322551.56:S3.08

metros OF COMPUTING PROCESSES IN ANTED macs VESSBLS

Riga AVTWATIKA I VYCHISLITBL'NAYA 1mm in Russian No l, Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript received 30 her 81) pp 12-21

[Article by 0. s. Zudin, 8. N. Donaratskiy end LLindfors: "Organizing the
Interaction of Conputing Processes in Variable-Structure as“. for Auto-ting
Scientific Research"]

[Text] The most important indicators of the efficiency of mltipurpoae scientific
research vessels for studying the world ocean are the volt-e and quantity of data
collected end processed during a cruise and expenditures for reorganising the
progran of the cruise end essential downtine between cruises. Solving the prob-
lens of data collection and processing is inconceivable today without eutonetion
of research, without installing neaaurenant end cowuter hardware coabined into

a unified systea for automation of scientific research (SARI) on the ship. Auto-
nation of research on aultipurpose scientific research vessels is asde sore con-
plsx by the unique character of particular experinants. the necessity of collect-
lng date fron large areas over long periods of tile and in a broad range of
studies, the existence of a large nuaber of neasured parenters and measure-ant
techniques, the diversity of algorithns for recording and processing data using
deck, towed, and sounding equipaent, the necessity of rapidly restructuring the
automation systen to conforn to the requirenents of new expert-ants. heightened
requirenents for system reliability. and the like. This task is nade even nore
cosplex by the fact that the research contingent is not constant free one cruise
to another, while the data recorded both during the cruise and after its coqle-
tion nuat be accessible and understandable to a broad range of specialists in
different fields of science who did not participate in preparation for and actual
conduct of the particular experiment.

Meeting these soaetinea conflicting requirements lakes it necessary to design a
SAN! with flexible and quickly reorganisable structure, easy to naster, siwle
to use. with graphic representation of intermediate and final results.

Bork [1] reviewed the basic principles of constructing SARI 's' for multipurpose
research ships using the example of the integrated systen for autonetion of
scientific research of the research vessel Akedemik listislav Keldysh, which was
built for the USSR Academy of Sciences at the Hollning A0 shipyard in Finland.

This system consolidates asasurenant and coquter instrunentaand hardware, de.
vices for sounding the body of water, and devices to asaaure different paraneters

of the environnsnt, with subsystem for data recording and processing. into a

101
POI OFFICIAL [8! ONLY
”WISEONLY

single integrated couplex. The final product of recording is files in standard
forest with data in the form of values of the seasured and cosputed parameters.
The infatuation contained in these files say be subjected to further directed
processing in the ship's processing suhsysten end at on-ehore cowuter centers.
The values of the recorded paraseters are fed to the system Both directly free
various sensors, seasuring instrusents. end subject suhsystess end usually. using
a keyboard, by operators of laboratory coquters basedon the results of visual

observations of the state of the environ-ant or laboratory analyses of eagles
taken.

Let us dwell in greater detail on the methods and procedures which are the basis
for formlating the software of the SARI and sets it possible to restructure the
system for new experiments in a fairly flexible way with linin- expenditures.
The basis for this is including the appropriate resources in the recording subv-
systen: systen tables. seens of generating, sainteining. end updating them. end
certain procedures for organising interaction of comuting processes taking place
at different levels of the systes hierarchy. In this case. according to [l], we
will bear in sind that the state of the cosputing processes in the systea at any
nosent in tine is detersined by the progras. the current steps of this progres.
end the state of progran variables end input-output unite.

One of the nest isportent resources of the systes is the Table of Pereseter
Descriptions (TOP), which sakes it possible to break the full set of parameters
recorded in the SARI down into subsets assigned to definite laboratories or sub-
ject subsystem and to describe each elessnt of then. The T0! is generated or
updated during adjust-ant of the system for a certain group of experiments. The
recording subsystes insures recording of tho values of those, end only those.
pareseters whose descriptions are contained in the T0? at the current mnent.

The elenentary TOP entry, describing one pare-star. contains sandatory and op-
tional fields. The ssndetory field includes. as a mini-us, the name of the
paraneter and units of treasure of its values. the type of sensor or sessuring
instrunent, the forest end type of values obtained, and a description of its euh-
set affiliation and reference to use in other resources. The subset affiliation
is described by a cosposite code whose first two characters are e masonic abbre-
viation of the subset nose; the next four digits indicate the ordinal nunber of
the parsneters in the subset. if other ssthods of ordering elesents are not used.
The optional fields appear in TOP's when they are oriented to standard forests
for records of finite files with data. Table 1 below shows the forest of the
ole-eatery TOP entry and an erasple of recording one of the parameters recorded
by the autontic weather station of a synoptic weather laboratory cowiling a
finite file in a forest close to that of work [2].

As a rule the SAM is restructured for new experiments by connecting equip-ant to
it to measure new paraneters. which also requires a certain restructuring of pro-
grew at all levels of the hierarchy. ‘l'o nininise expenditures for reconfigura-

tion the software of the Integrated Systes of the research ship shade-ii. listislav
Keldysh is built on the modular principle. The functions of primary processing,

transmission. sorting, and storage of date are distributed sung the conputing

processes. which are defined by particular progran modules so that the required
changes touch the mini-us ouster of these nodules.

102
FOR OFFICIAL we ONLY
Figure 1. Structure of Interaction of
Conputing Processes During Generation
and Updating of TOP and Formation of
Files.

 

Key: (1) Keyboard: (5) Besssges;
(2) Cathode Ray Tuhe (Dinky); (6) Finite File;
(3) Counting Process of Lab- (7) TOP;
oratory Counter; .(8) Other Coquting Processes of
(lo) Parseeter Description; Recording Subsystem.

 

Figure 1 shows the structure of interaction of coquting processes during gen-
eration (updating) of the TOP, trensnitting infatuation on a perenster fro-

the recording subsystee to the laboratory coquter at the request of an oper-
star. and formulating new files. The coquting process defined by the Pm
program receives entries on use or changeable pare-eters iron the terninel in the
forest shown in Table 1 and structures the '10? in the coquter usury of the re-
cording suoeysten. The values of the TOP is defined by the progra- of the cruise
and does not exceed 300-500 entries in the system under description. The con-
puting process defined by the PM progran, when requested by the laboratory
cosputer, finds the necessary description by its conceite code and sends the
laboratory cosputer a eesssge which contains inforeation on the queried paran-
eter.

Table l.
Displacenent
Prinery Length, fro- Start,
No. Content of Field Field bytes bytes
1 Code of para-eter by classifier No 6 0
2 Name of parameter Yes 15 6
3 Code of unit of neasure No 3 19
’0 Name of unit of measure Yes 11 22
5 Scale 1 No 8 35
6 Scale 2 lo 8 £1
7 Attribute 1 Yes 7 69
8 Definition of attribute 1 Yes 11 $6
9 Attribute 2 no 7 67
[Table continued, next page]
103

POIOMCIALISIONLY
FOIOFHCIALIJSIONLY

1 continued]
Diepleceeent
Prim Length. tron 8tert.

Continent of Yield Held m m"
Definition of attribute 2 lo 11 74
Type of. seneor Yes 10 85
Code of neeeureuent technique by
cmeifier lo 2 95

1 97

Number of characters efter con No 1 97
Total length of value in characters Yes 2 90
Pornet identifier Yen 1 100
1'88 index Yen b 101
Conceite code of pore-etc: in SARI tee 6 105
Reserve lo 3 111
word description of neuurenent
technique In 29 114

Bugle of recording the pereneter of air moreture neeeured with
a precision down to tenthe or a degree ueing e eeneor of en auto.

eetic weather etetion inetened at e height of 20.5 netere iron the
deck on the eterhoerd eide:

000000
000001
000002
000003
000006
000005
000006
000007
000008
000009
000010
000011
000012
00001 3
000011:
000015
000016
000017
000018

GATE cont:
PAW NAME:
UNIT 0003:

URI“! M:

SCALE 1:

SCALE 2:
ammo-r: 1:
DWIIION 1:
“TRIBUTE 2:
0911117101! 2:
SENSOR:

21mm) 0003:
LENGTH or 030.:
row. LENGTH:
VALUE m3:
sun TABLE IND.
COMPOSITE cont:
RESERVED:
METHOD 03803.:

5000

AIR m S!
500

DEG C
1.000000
0.000000
20.5
mm, H

DIS-11
The programs which provide for transmission of data among subaystens of dif—
ferent levels are singled out in a separate group. The formats of the fields
of data of transmitted messages have been standardized so that the modules of
the communications programs can remain constant when the subsystem is adjusted
for different experiments. The protocols selected for the communications lines
between laboratory computers and the recording subsystems are subsets of well-
known standards 150-1745 and X.25. while the communications lines for subject
subsystems of the automatic weather station type use simplified procedures that
resesble the 38C [3].

Because the protocols do not affect the essential features of the messages them-
selves. we will describe here some principles of formulating them that make it
much simpler both as a problem of reconfiguration of software when the system
is adjusted for new experiments and a problem of retrieving recorded data.
whereas the water sounding experiment cited in [I] changed the set of sensors
and adjusted the work of the submarine and deck units, with traditional pro-
ccdures that depersonalize data and give the right to identify it to the com—
puting process defined by the recording program it is necessary to make changes
in practically all programs related to the experiment. To avoid this. the sys-
tem being described realizes the principle of data self-identification [4],
where all data being received are given tags that indicate their type, prop-
erties. time and place of recording. and so on.

Tagging data in the SANI's of multipurpose scientific research vessels should
be done beginning from the lowest levels of the hierarchy. At each level. as
the result of the operation of the corresponding computing process. the data
that are transmitted to the higher level are formulated. Tags are added to
these data. Their principal purpose is to organize the interaction of com-
puting processes taking place at the next hierarchical level of the system.

He will identify two levels of tags conforming to their purposes. First-level
tags (developer tags) are designated for controlling interaction of computing
processes defined by known program modules in the process of recording data.
Second-level tags (user tags) are designated to give greater informational
value to data during Subsequent processing and for control of the processes of
sorting and retrieving needed elements of a set of recorded data. The programs
of these processes are determined by the user and may be unknown in the stage

of system development.

The number and compOsition of developer tags transmitted with the data from cer-
tain computing processes to others at different levels of the hierarchy depends
on system structure. For instruments and sensors only the simplest developer
tags are needed. such as the tags for type and quality of data, for example the
code of the RR regime and the overflow sign P in the message PRBZDDDDDK for
laboratory pH-millivolt meters [5]. Other tags of this type include the code

of the quantity being measured or the number of the sensor in a set where there
is a large number of similar sensors. We consider information on physical over-
loading of an instrument and on a quantity going outside the boundaries of

the measurement range to be quality tags that describe the degree of suitability
of the data for processing; in the case of more complex microprocessing instru-
ments such tags may be data on errors that are recognized. when a new instrument
is connected to the laboratory level in a laboratory computer the computing
process that receives incoming data must be determined. This computing process

105
ton omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

may be expanded into a series of singlet processes, each of which corresponds

to one program module and performs one particular operation. For ample. for
the laboratory ph-millivolt meter data may be duaped in a dup file based on the
value of quality tag 8 by coQuting process No 1 that sakes a quality check,
while on the basis of the value of an my type tag the data are transferred to
cowuting process No 2, which receives the data measured in volts (or sillivolts).
"hen the processes are expanded by the values of user tags the new coquting
process may be defined so that it includes primarily prograa modules that already
exist, with a sull nusber of new (or modified) modules. This greatly reduces
the time required for reconfiguration of software at the level of the laboratory
coquter. We should note that at this level in the stage of prelininary data
processing user tags with values of recording time are added to then. In our
opinion, this is essential for the SANI'e of multipurpose scientific research
vessels.

In order to speed up the reconfiguration of software in the usages being trans-
sitted to the recording subsystem, there must be the following developer tags

at a minimum: the sender tag, which indicates precisely which one of the sini-
lar coqmting processes originated the message that has arrived; the type tag,
which describes the affiliation of the process to a certain group of cowuting
processes of the recording subsystems; and, the tag for the message function

in the subsystem. In addition, for data from prolonged measurenents there must
be a tag to indicate the name of the file for recording, while for data from
one-time measurements a key paraneter tag is needed to show the subset of
recorded parameters with which the particular message should be associated.
Figure 2 shows the structure of a field of data messages transmitted to the re-
cording subsystem of the Integrated System of the scientific research ship
Akademikﬂstislav Keldysh, while Table 2 indicates the values of the developer
tags for all types of system messages. The data in the messages are encoded
with characters of the standard seven-bit code ISO-646 (Soviet analog (OI-7 0081'
13502-74). when the coqosition of the available subsystems is changed this

set of developer tags makes it possible to limit changes in the recording sub-
system to simly editing the TOP. and when a new subsystem is connected to the
SANI the only thing necessary is to develop one more program for receiving
messages, without significant changes in existing software.

The nost frequently used user tags are parameters such as the date, time, and
place (latitude and longitude) of the experiment, the identifier of the researcher,
and parameters that describe the environment: direction and velocity of wind,

air temperature and humidity, sea state, direct and reflected solar radiation, and
the like. Second-level tagging requires inclusion of another resource in the

structure of the recording subsystem: internal memory, a supervisor Table of the

State of the Ship, system, and environment (1’83). This resource is structured and
modified concurrently with the TOP and contains the current values of parameters

that can potentially be used as user tags. Figure 3 below shows the structure of
the 155. The names of the parameters whose values form the 188 are defined in the

TOP by non-awry values of the TSS index (see Table 1 above). All elements of the
table are put in order according to the value of the index. Because the fomat

of parameter values is not known in advance and may change nsny times in the TOP
during the life of the system, a two-level structure is used for the 1‘55 that
sakes it possible to modify its format and dimensions on an operational basis.

106
IUN

VOUG‘UNHO

p

NH

Control lounge
Sequentiel reeding of veluee of 1'88
perenetere
lending velue of 188 perenter
Entering the velue of 1‘88 pereneter
Setting up date tilee

- Pile set-up neeeegee -
Poeition during experiment
Poeition et etert of experimt
Poeition et end of experinent
Environ-eat et start of experiment
hvironnent during experimt
Environnent at end of experinent
Requeet for description of perenetere
Pinel request for description of
perenntere
Date tron prolonged neeeureeente -
perenntere of e cycle
Dete tron prolonged neemrenente -
perenetere of entry
End of recording date tron prolonged
neeeurenente
Dete tron one-tine louvre-cute
End of recording of dete tron one-tine

neuurenente
treble 2 continued, next pege]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table 2 continued]

Character
Before
Data Value of Value 02
No. Field 11? Tag P1111 Tag mum
19 ST! 6 1 Starting process in recording subsyste-
2 Stopping process in recording subsyste-
20 ST: 7 - Transition of laboratory cowater to
regine of recording suheystes terminal
21 st: 8 0 Formation of finite files without entry
in St? [poeeihly locking filter hay]
22 1 Formation of finite files with entry in
861' [expansion unknown]
23 srx 3 l 52! entry for trans
24 2 52! entry for nucr
25 G 0 Starting DMC‘K process
26 l Stopping DBACK process
27 TY? F1111 Response message on receipt
28 S m m Response message on error

 

Figure 3. Structure of the 1‘83.

11 are parameters included in the 1'88.
1 ‘i (N <k€kis thenunherofparas—
eters in the ‘10?)

Key: (1) Identifier of 1‘88;
(2) Length [of 111. 112...];
(3) Indicator of [address of 111...];
(6) Value [of 111...].

 

 

The first part of the 133 contains an mrds where I! is the under of paraneters
of the table (for the cysts. being descrihed N - 200) and hegina at the heading
IDBPST, which occupies one word and makes it possible to localize its position

in neeory. The N words that follow contain fields with an indication of length

in nachine words and the addresses of the first word for the value of each 1'88
paraneter. The second part has variable length and contains as my words as

are occupied by all the values of the para-stern included in the ‘l‘aBle at the par-
ticular nonent of tiles taken together. The values of the paransters in the second
part of the rss are periodically updated. Host of then are ensured hy suhject
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

complexes during the entire cruise mdependently of other experiments, while the

rest are obtained as the result of laboratory cperinents and observations. Up-

dating times are assigned when the corresponding cmutmg processes are initial-
ized and may be chosen from the set of pereissihle values for the purpose of in-

creasing system flexibility.

Figure lo below shows the structure of interaction of computing processes during
generation and updating of the T88, and during recording of data from prolonged
measurements of parameters of the water using the hydrologic laboratory equipment
in the experiment given in work [1]. Any change in the set of sensors in the
underwater unit necessitates an updating of the TOP. For the sake of brevity in
describing the interaction of counting processes we will designate each process
with the name of its defining program. After each updating the T03 must be ana-
lyzed by the computing process defined by the m program, which constructs the
internal memory. the supervisory TSS in conformity with the structure shown in
Figure 3 above. Parameters are taken from the TOP according to the value of the
133 index. The values of the T88 parameters are updated using the RAVIG, “ESTA,
ECHOS processes which receive messages from the navigating system (updated at
periods of. 10 seconds), the automatic weather station (periodicity of 1-10
minutes), the echosounder subsystem of the geophysical laboratory (periodicity of
less than one second). and also from the computing processes activated by the
programs of the latoratory counters and mn—ucn and SM programs in the
recording subsystem, for example in the case of feeding visual observation data
from the keyboard of the synoptic meteorology laboratory computer. The computing
processes of the laboratory cosputers should prepare messages that contain the
composite codes of parameters and their values accospanied by the values of the
developer tags “Pd and FUN-3. When it is necessary to obtain the values of user
tags from the T88 by the processes of the laboratory computers. the latter are
sent to the nessage recording subsystem with developer tag values of “HP-l and
FUN-1, 2 (see Table 2 above). Program semaphore engineering is used to protect
the TSS against simultaneous access by different computing processes; in this
case the next conputing process receives access to the resource only after the
preceding one has coupleted its use and thrown the semiphore [6].

when recording data fron prolonged measurements a file must first be set up for '
these data in the recording subsystem. This is done by a statenent from the re-
cording subsysten terninal with the help of the mm process (see Figure 1 above).
Then the computing process of the laboratory cowuter is activated and. together
with the REMIX process, shapes the structure of the file and enters its titles.
sending a message with the values of the tags TIP 9 2. 3. The necessary user tags
nay also be put in the file as paranetars of the cycle and as recording param-
eters. This is determined by the content of the message on setting up the tile
(TY? - 2) which the mm: process uses to structure the file. The title in-
cludes infornation on the location of the ship and state of the environment.

Data for a heading are taken fron the T88 by the am process. The counting
processes defined by the Asmara: programs transmit messages on co-Iunicatione
lines following protocol ISO-1765. After the file is structured the counting
programs of the laboratory coqutera go into operation. In the case of sound-
ing the water with hydrologic laboratory equipment CELLAR) they request values of
the measured parameters from the deck sounding unit, perform preliminary process-
ing and computation of calculated parameters. form messages with data and the
values of the developer tags 17? - 6 and m - l. 2, and copy them using the

109
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

processes show in Figure 6 below, the HAND! recording subsystem. Them end
m processes first store the vslues of the psreseters in the Buffer file;

then shspe the finite files in the forest chosen. Dsts in the Buffer files is
stored in e fore close to thet in which it is recorded in the finite file. In
this case the necessery veiues of user teas ere sdded iron the 1'88. They ere re.

quested by the non end 81'3“ progress eccordng to the tee velues m - 1 end
FUN - 1, 2.

Figure 6. Structure of Interection
of Cosputing Processes During Gen-
eration of 1'88 end Recording the
nets of Prolonged Meesuresente of
Environments]. Cherecteristics.

Key: (1) Keyboerd;
(2) Cathode Rey Tube;
(3) Heter;
(6) Laboratory Cosputing
Processes;
(5) Subject Cospleses;
(6) Probe Suhserged in Heter
(Subserine and neck Units);
. (7) Other Leborstory Conputers;
(8) Conputing Processes of Record-
in; Subsystes;
(9) Buffer File;
(10) unite File;
(11) List of Capleted Files;
(12) needy Pile.

 

Date in the fore of seeseges my be received by the recording euheyetes sisul-
tsneously fros seversl cosputing processes of different lshoretoriee. Accord-
ingly, several finite files cen be constructed end opened for service by the
TRANS process sisultsneously. bets fro. all sources ere recorded first in the
proper file. As necesssry the lshorstory cosputing processes output messes ecc-
cording to which dsts on the locstion of the ship end state of the environ-eat
sre recorded in the eiddle end st the end of the experiment. Ihen recording of

date in e file (tesporery or tinei) stops, s sesssge cones fros the librery with
the teg veiues m - 6, m - 3, end uhen it is necesssry to cosplete recording

110
. .k', ,
and set up a finite file, the tag values are m - 8, m - 1. These nessagea
are transmitted to the TRANS process. which. shapes the finite file in the for-t
selected, putting in it entries fro- the buffer according to the tag Value 1'11),
which indicates belonging to a certain file. when a enall nunher of sources

are working at one time and _the density of data flows is not great, the software
can be generated in such a way that neeseges- fron the ram process can go to the
TRANS process. bypassing the stage of storage in the Buffer file. In this case.
the values of the 17m tags are used to record data in the required open finite
file.

when receiving a nsssage with the tags TIP 0 8, the TRANS closes the file ides-
tifiabla by an accepted value of the tag rm and inediately sets up and structures
a new file, free and ready to receive data, under the sane identifier. This per-
nits minimising the fairly protracted and lahorbintensive operations of setting

up and structuring files. The user perfores these operations just once for each
type of file structure.

The interaction of cosputing processes on different levels of the hierarchy is
carried on according to this description, as is interaction when recording data
tron one-tine neasurenents. But in this use user tags are used as key paran-
etere and play a nore important role in shaping the finite file. Requests in
the fore of coeposite codes of para-stern to add to the values of the user tags
selected free the 135 are, by the choice of the laboratory operator (user) in-
cluded in messages received by the processes 38011-7. The data together with
the values of these tags are first stored in a structure close to the data base
[7]. Then, based on requests structured according to different user criteria,
they say be selected by values of key parsneters and grouped in finite files
sinilar to files with data tron prolonged neasurenenu.

After conpletion of a finite file it say be stored on a nsgnetic disk for some
tine so that the computing processes of the processing subsystem can request

the data stored in it. When the need for this is over, the DBACK process is ac-
tivated and copies the finite file onto nagnetic tape, adding essential inforna-
tion on the cruise. organization. leader of the expedition and experiment, and
so on to the title. The ready file is stored on nsgnetic tape and any he med
in the processing systes at a later tine or transnitted to shore-Based cosputer
centers for processing. The LISTR process sakes it possible to output a finite

file to a display screen or print it for visual nonitoring and uintaining the
archives.

when forming the finite file the am process sakes an entry about it in the
third resource of the system, the list of cleeted files in tin forest shown in
Table 3 below. when it is necessary to get access to data recorded in different
finite or ready files, the user scans the contents of the entries in the list

of coepleted files on a screen or initiates a conputing process that selects the
necessary files according to the contents of the entries. After selecting the
necessary files their contents can he nenipulsted Both in the processing euh-
systen and at shore-hosed conputsr centers with. the help of counting processes

defined by applied progress, eating hroad use of the values of user tags re-.
corded in the files together with the date.

111
PO! OFFICIAL MONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Table 3.
Displace-
nent fro-
Length. Start,

No. Content of Field ﬁner bnee

1 lane of Station 6 0

2 [lane of Experimt 6 6

3 lane of M1!- 12 12

6 Rene and Version of File 12 24

5 line of Creation 13 36

6 fine of Conletion 12 68

7 Latitude 7 6O

8 Longitude 8 67

9 Me: of Paraneters 2 75
10 Coqoaite Code In 6 77

ll Conpoeite Code n2 6 83
12 O O 0
b9 Conceite Code nk 6 77+6(k-l)
llk is paraneter k recorded in the tile.
Conclusions

1. The structure of the SARI aoftuare of eultipurpose acientific research ships
oust be flexible, easily restructured, acceesihle (or quick eesinilation. eiqle
to use, and be able to repreaent reeulte in graphic fore.

2. The flexibility of aoftvere structure and possibility of quickly adjusting
the SARI to a new group of experiments can be accowliahed by introducing three
ayaten tables in the recording subeysten (the table of pereneter description,
the table of the state of the eyaten, ship, and environent. and the list of
.cowleted files). as well an eeens to generate. update. and uintain then.

3. It is advisable to tag date in the sun of Iultipurpoae research ehipa be-
ginning froe the loveat levels of the hierarchy. Two levels of tags can be
identified in auch eystens. rirstelevel tage are developer raga. designed to
control the interaction of data recording proceeeee; second-level taga are later
raga, designed to give the data greater iniomtional value in euhsequent
proceasing and to control the proceseee of sorting and retrieving elementa of
e set of recorded data.

6. The nuher of developer tage trsnenitted with the data fro- certain proceuee
to others at different levele of the hierarchy dependa on the structure of the
eyeten. With an eye to stepping up the reconfiguration of eoftvere it is eeeen-
tial to standardize the for-eta o! the data fielde of ell unsung”. Among the
developer rage trananitted to the recording euheyeten there should he tage for
the sender. type and function of the nessage. recording file, and hey paren-
etera. The current veluea of user tags should be kept in the state table.

112
m

l. 0. S. Zudin. S. DI. Donatatam. I. P. totik, c. It. Inklin, A. A. lovﬂwv,
L. S. Sitnikov. 0. Laakannen, and R. Aarinan. "Intnsratad syatenn of Auto-
natic Scientific Rascal-ch on Hultipurpoae lanai-ch Vessels." AVT. 1981,
No. 6, pp 72.80.

2. "The International Data Manage-ant Plan for the GAR? Atlantic Tropical Ex—
perinent. ~Part 1. General Description of the can Data Manage-ant Soho-n
and Its Specification." Geneva. 197‘, April, (GATE Iaport lo 13."

3. A. nutrinanko, and Deb. Sehton, "Protocols in Co-micationa networks for
Transnitting Digital Inforntion," “'1‘. 1978. No 6, pp 56-65.

6. G. I. Harchuk, and V. to. lotov, "Proﬁle-a of Counter Technology and Pure
Research," MIT, 1979, No 2. pp 3-“.

S. s. N. Donaratakiy, 0. s. Zudin, and 0. Vaynio. ”The Organization of Interv-
action of Inatrunenta and Cmntara in Variable-Structure syatua 'ro Auto-
nate Scientific Research," an, 1981, lo 3. pp 81-91.

6. B. H. Dijkatra, "Cooperating Sequential Proceaaea in Progra-ing Languages,"
"Acadanic Preaa". 1968 pp 63-112.

7. J. Martin. "Conputer Data-mad Organization." 2nd Ed. "Prantiaa—ﬂall Inc.”,
Englewood Preaa. N. 3., 1977. pp 451-487.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Zinatna", "Avtonatika i vychialitel'naya takhnilta".
1982

11,176
C80: 1863/120

113
PO! omcm USEONLY
Kiev KOHPLBKSNYYB WWICBBSKIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA CHEW MINA in Main 1980
(signed to press 26 Oct 80) pp 2, 237—233

[Annotation and table of contents from book "An Overall Description of Research
Conducted on Aspects of the Black. Sea”, by Sergey Grigor'yevicb Boguslavskiy,
Viktor Aleksandrovich Zhorov, mid Vasil'yevich Cherkesov, Vladimir Vasil'yevich
Yefinov, Geliy Grigor'yevich seem-in, llikolay Nikolayevich Kamauehenko, eennadiy
Stepanovich Dvoryaninov, Aleney Yevtikhiyevich Bukatov, Vladinir Ivanovich
Inpatnikov, Valeriy Nikolayevich Yoremeyev. Gennadiy Fedorovich Batramv. Arnol'd

Anatol‘yevich Berezovskiy. Svetlana vasil'yevna washenko, Tamara Rikolayevna
Abel‘s-ova. Vera Pavlovna We, Yuriy nikhaylovich Belyakov, beonid Anatol'yevich

xoveehnikov, Anatoliy mitriyevich zealyanoy, Lyudmila alekaeyevna Korneva and
Lyudvig mitriyevich pukhcyaz, Institute of Marine Hydrophysics. UkSSR Academy of

Sciences. Irdatel'stvo "Naukova dunka", 1000 copies, 2100 pages]

{Text} Problems associated with the hydrophysics and hydrochemietry of the Black
Sea are examined on the basis Of materials iron the latest expeditions, natural
experiments and mathematical simulation: small-scale dynamic and thermal interaction
betveen the sea and atmosphere, surface and internal waves. the vertical structure of

water. mixing, the light and electromagnetic fields, and aquatic geotheruy and hydro-

This book is intended for a broad range of specialists in ocean science and geo-
physicists.

Thirty one tables. 108 figures: bibliographies follow each chapter.

Porewrd........................o.o........3

chapter 1. Investigation of the Structure of the Boundary layers of

the Atmosphere and Sea

1010 Inuodmtim 0 O O o O O O b C O O O O O O O O O O O O o O o a o o S

1.2. Methods and Apparatus of Traverse Explorations . . . . . . . . . . 6

1.3. Spectral maracteristics of the Velocity Yield and o! Prouinenoes
inthe‘iindﬂaveiayer......................12

1.4. a Model of the Dynamics of the Turbulent Layer 0! Wind-Induced
1.6.

1.7.
Chapter 2.
2.l.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.

2.6.

”N
s
0‘!
s

2.9.
2.10.
2.11.

Chapter 3.
3.1.

3.2.
3.3.
3.4.
3.5.

3.6.

Chapter 4.
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.

Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.

Solution of the Problem for a Dynamic Field. Analysis of
”salts O C O O O O I O O 0 O O O O O O O O O C O O O O O . O 0 O o
A (lodel of a Surface Thermal Piln. Its Influence on Heat

Dif.f,aqion............................
TheHechanisnofTransferofBeatbywaves ...........

Windwaves

Ha’r inal Theoretical Distributions of Heights and Periods . . . .
Ca " ation and Analysis of Theoretical Distributions of
Frequencies, Lengths and Have Wrs, and heir Statistics . . .
Procedure for Calculating Statistical maraoteristics and

the Confidence Interval of aperinental Data . . . . . . . . . .
Development of a mthod of Preliminary Calculation of the
BlenentsofIrregularHaves ............ ......
Experimental Confidence and Conditional Distributions of

"1“ "G“: O O O 0 0 O O I O O 0 O 0 O O O O O 0 D O I O O O O 0
Calculation of an Experimental Curve for Distribution of
HaveSteepness .........................
Spectralhnalysisofﬂavegrans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Distribution of the Energy of Haves Visible on the Surface
HithRespecttoPrequencies...................
Laws and Variability of Experimtal Statistical Characteristics.
Laws and Variability of mectnl Characteristics . . . . . . . .
Calculation and lapping of Spectral Characteristics in
Relationtothewindrield ...................

Internal Waves

Typical Oscillation Periods and Generation Heohanisns of
InternalWaves .........................
Influence of Horizontal Density Diffusion on Internal Haves
Depending on Periodic Atuospheric Perturbations . . . . . . . . .

Influence of Vertical Charm in Horizontal Density Diffusion
on Internal Haves Caused by Periodic Perturbations . . . . . . .

Basic Equations Taking Account of the Vertical Structure of

the Velocity, Density and Turbulent Diffusion Pields . . . . . .
Theoretical Models of Continuous Distribution of Current
Velocities, Density and Horizontal Density Diffusion . . . . . .
Results of Analyzing Internal Waves in the Central Region
oftheBlackSea ........................

Hydrological Problems of the Black Sea

Vertical Structure of the Water . . . . . . . . .
Surface currents inthe Black Sea . . . . . . . .
Vertical Transfer Processes in the Black Sea . .
Heat Transfer by Currents in the Black Sea Basin

Hydrochenical Cycles of the Black Sea

Equilibriu Blenents of the Carbonate System . . . . . . . . .
Vertical and Horizontal Distribution of Hydrocbsnical
andHydrologicalParaneters...................

e e 0 e
e e e s
e e e o
e e e e
e s s 0
e e s e
e s 0 e
e e s e

115
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

29

44
49

59

63

71

74

77

83
87

89

92
95

103
110
115
120

122

125

136
147
150
155

163

174
Chapter 6.

.
NHm wNI-Iq UNn-I
.

e

O‘J‘G‘
..
.. .

E

o

e
o

'0
ﬂ
0
mﬁﬂ NIQQH

GDPYR‘IGIT:

11004

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spatial and Femoral Variability of the Black Sea'e Radioactive
Field
Bxperinentalﬁesults .....................

A Model of Formation of the Black See's Radioactivity Field . .
Objective Analysis of the Black Sea's Radioactivity Field . . .

Optical Characteristics of the Waters of the Black Sea
Vertical Distribution of Optical Properties . . . . . . . . . .

HorizontalStmctuzeofOpticalProperties .. . . .. ... .
Chazacteristice of the Light Fields. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Electromagnetic Field in the Black Sea
The Black Sea'e Blectrotelluric Field . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Electrongneticpulsations..................

Izdatel'stvo “Naukova M“, 1980

C80: 1865/ 100

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

189
191
193

199

206
208

216
226
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"DC 621. 370/550. 837
HARM GEOPRYSICAL EXPLORATION

Kiev DDRSKAYA GKJPIZICEBSKAYA m in Russian 1978 (81% to press 16 Dec 77)
pp 2, 162-163

[Annotation and table of contents from book ”thrine Geophysical hploration' by
Vladimir Ivanovich Gordiyenko, Institute of Physico-Hechanics, UkSSR Academy of
Sciences. Iadatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1000 copies. 164 pages]

[Text] This monograph examines problems associated with developing the theoretical
principles of designing systems intended for marine electromagnetic geophysical
exploration. A new theory of marine electromagnetic exploration based on a consider-

ation of slow motion of the marine enviroment is presented. and the limits of its
applicability are defined. 3 theoryof contactless electrwagnetio field emitters and
a theory of contactless measurement of a low (regency electric field are developed.
the possible geometries of systems for marine electromagnetic exploration are
analyzed, and the most eftective units are selected. The general properties of
electromagnetic fields are formulated, and the possibility of their reﬂection and
reproduction by real monitoring and measuring devices is analyzed.

The aonograph is intended for specialists dealing with the problems of exploratory
geophysics and geophysical instnnsnt making.

Thirty-five figures. 14 tables, 132 bibliographic references.

Chapter 1. Principles of the ‘l‘heory of Propagation of an Electromagnetic

PieldinSlovlyMovingmdia................... 9
l. The Basic Equations of an Electromagnetic Yield . . . . . . . . 9
2. Vector and Scalar Potentials of an Electromagnetic Field . . . l3
3. Propagation of Flat, cylindrical and Spherical Waves . . . . . 19
4.1.initsoi'the‘meory'shpplicability ....... 31

Chapter 2. Electromagnetic Field hitters (or urine Geophysical uploration 34
l. The Electromagnetic Field of an Blectric hitter . . . . . . . 34

2. The Electromagnetic Field of a toroidal Induction Coil . . . . 39
3. The Electromagnetic Field of a thgnetic bitter-a Magnetic

Dipole....o.........o....o...o...o51

117
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Effectiveness of Using Electromagnetic Emitters . . . . . . . .
5. Secondary Electromagnetic Field hitters . . . . . . . . . . .

chapter 3. Electromagnetic Field maeivers for Purine Geophysical

Exploration 0 O 0 O O 0 O O O O C O O O O O 0 O O O 0 O O O 0 O I
l. Inductive MagneticFieldmceivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Principle of Operation and Basic Dependencies of Inducti

ElectricFieldneceivers ...................
3. Deformation of an Investigated Field by the Eoueing

of an Inductive Electric Field Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Inductive ReceiversuithAxialcores . . . . . . . . . . . ...
5. An Inductive Electric Field Receiver with a Compound Gore . . .
6. Ways of Raising the Sensitivity of Inductive Electric

anduagneticFieldlbceivers .................
7. Iteasurenent of Electric and Magnetic Fields in Slowly Moving

maia..............o..o.....o.n...

Chapter 4. Properties of Electromagnetic Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1. Properties of Spherical and cylindrical Electrouegnetic Fields.

2. General Properties of Electra-agnetic Fields . . . . . . . . .

3. Determination of the Distance to an Blectronagnetic Field
mt“: O O O O O 0 d I O O O O O O D O O 0 0 0 C O l O O 0 O O

4. Reflection and Reproduction of the Properties of an Electro-
”gmuc Field 0 O C O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O O O O O 0 O O 0

Chapter 5. Analysis of the Geometry of Apparatus Used in Marine Geophysical

Electromagneticnxploration ...................

1. Analysis of the Geo-etry of Apparatus for Marine Electrov
magnetic Exploration Containing single and Differential
Primary Electronagnetic Field Receivers . . . . . . . . . . . .

2. Analysis of the Geometry of Apparatus for Marine Electro-
magnetic Exploration Containing a Single and Differential
Field Receiver in the Presence of Spherical Abnormal Bodies . .

Bibliography.................................

COPYRIGRT: Izdatel‘stvo ”Naukcva dulka", 1978

11004
C808

1855/98

118
F0! OHIOAL USE ONLY

55
58

71
11

73

76
79

81

101
101
111
114

117

12‘
124

136
155
ammo". answers or mucus In COLLECTION 'msxcu. ASPECTS or m
sownmc or "CW-AMSPHBRB svsm'

macaw FIZICHBSKIYE ASPBK'H DMIW ”Dim 818M MAME“
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 23 Apr Bl) pp 2, 213-216

[Annotation and abstracts of articles in collection "Physical Aspects of Renote
Sounding of Ocean-Atmosphere Systea", edited by Doctor of Physical and Hathmtical
Sciences M. S. Halkevich. Institute of Oceanology ineni P. P. Shirshov, USSR
Academy of Sciences, Isdatel'stvo "ﬂanks", 850 copies, 216 pages]

Annotation

{next} This collection is devoted to space, aircraft. ship and terrestrial explora-
tion of the sea surface and the atmosphere with the purpose of remote sounding of
the ocean and of the atmosphere above the ocean. Ieich attention is devoted to
transformation of visible and infrared radiation in the atnosphere and to analysis

of the dependencies between ocean paraneters end enission characteristics of the
”ocean-atmosphere“ system.

This collection is intended for specialists in oceanology. atmospheric physics and
meteorology, and other specialists using the results of studying earth tron outer
space.

THERMAL SOUNDING 0? THE 'OCBAN-A‘DDSPHBRB' SYS‘EH rm SPMS: STATE OF HIS 9mm

[Abstract of article by H. s. halkevichl

['nextl The problem of determining the temerature of the ocean surface and the
vertical tenperature profile of the atmosphere by remote methods is «ruined. The
possibility of attaining precision in such a determination necessary for solution
of fundamental and applied problem in research on the ocean and at-osphere is
discussed. Emphasis is laid upon the importance of the integral proble- ot aiml-
taneously determining. by satellite, both the thermal characteristics and the
parameters of the ocean atmosphere upon which measured radiation depends and con-
sideration of which is necessary for solution of this integral problu on the basis
of an analysis of the relationships of eaissions o! the "ocean-etnospherwe" system

and its other parameters. Hour figures, 33 bibliographic references.

119
N! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETERMINATION OF OCEAN TEMPERATURE on 131-: BASIS OF RADIATIW IN AN 8-12 moms
A'RDSPHERIC TWARENCY umnou

[Abstract of article by A. K. Gorodetskiy, A. P. Orlov and s. z. Petrenko)

l'lext) 'lhe problem of determining the temerature of the ocean surface by measuring
infrared radiation escaping the earth is exuined. The influence of the atmosphere
(aerosol attenuation and absorption by water vapor) on the error of establishing the
temperature of the ocean on the basis of radiation measurements is discussed. me
authors perform a nuserical experiment to evaluate the aerosol effect. They con-
clude from this experiment that synchronous intonation concerning different atmos-
pheric parameters influencing transformation of radiation in earth atmosphere must
be acquired. the tables. 10 bibliographic references.

RADIATION CYCLE AND EMISSIVI‘I'I O? m HATER SURFACE IN '1‘!!! WI) RANGE
[Abstract of article by A. K. Gorodetskiy and A. P. Orlovl

[Text] The relationship between the radiation and thermodynamic temperatures of
the surface water layer of the ocean is analyzed. Measurements of the intensity of
emission by the water surface and atmosphere, made from aboard a vessel with a
radiometer with 10-12 :1 spectral sensitivity, are the experimental basis for this
ccuparison.

By combining radiation and contact measurements of the temperature of surface water
the authors were able to reveal a strong dependence between angle of emission and
the emissivity of the water surface, and isolate radiation from the water surface

specifically and reflectedatmospheric back radiation from the total intensity of
radiation escaping the water-air interface. he mean effective hemispherical

emissivity of water, so' -o.96 was also determined. Variations in the reflected
flux total 1.2-3.2 percent. 'No figures, 16 bibliographic references.

VERTICAL STRUCTURE OF Annemarie TRANSFORMATION 01’ m ocean's IMO RADIATIW

[Abstract of article by V. V. Badayev, A. x. Gorodetskiy, 1.. G. Istomina,
Ye. M. Kozlov, M. s. Malkevich and A. P. Orlov]

[’l‘ext} This paper presents the results of integrated research on the vertical
structure of factors transforming infrared radiation in an 8-12 u transparency
window, obtained by both direct seasurement methods (by aircraft) and by indirect
methods (from aboard ship). and'the results of analyzing high-altitude transformation
of three-dimensional nonuniformities in the tewerature field of the ocean surface.
It is demonstrated that the principal substance responsible for transformation of

free radiation in the atmosphere is aerosol, the contribution of which to attenua-
tion of infrared radiation in the atmosphere say be evaluated indirectly from
shipboard measurements of the angular profiles of the air's emissivity and simul-
taneous determination of vertical thermal and moisture stratification of the
atmosphere, using the concentration of ”minimal values” of the effective coefficient

of absorption of water vapor for this purpose. Nine figures. 16 bibliographic
references.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABNORMAL PMPER’I‘IES OF AMPEBRIC TRANSMISSIGI IN m 9.6 MICKJN ozone BAND
[Abstract of article by H. s. Halkevich, 1.. M. Shukurova and A. I. Cluvro)

[Text] Research on abnormalities in the transmission function of the atmosphere

in the 9.6 u ozone band is presented, and the causes are examined. The hypothesis
that reactions of ozone with gaseous impurities and aerosol absorption bands in this
interval of the spectrum have an influence on the course of the transmission
function is discussed. The possibility of determining vertical concentration pro-

files and the total mass of ozone by neasuring emissions in the ozone band is
examined. M tables, 6 figures, 26 bibliographic references.

AMPHBRIC ATTENUA'I'ION OP RADIATIW IN masons IN 1'83 8-21 MIC“ mar 01" m
SPECTRUM ON THE BASIS OF MARIN! AND comm-m. mum's

[Abstract of article by A. 101. shukurov and A. I. Chavrol

[Text] Measurements of atnospheric transmission above the ocean in the equatorial
zone of the Atlantic are presented and comared with similar measurements made on
the ground. This permitted consideration of the aerial: range of variations in
humidity and temperature. Estimates of the aerosol and water vapor cosponents of
the optical thickness of the atmosphere are presented. the table, 2 figures,

9 bibliographic references.

DETERMINATION OF THE CONTRIBUTION BY WATER VAPOR AND ABMSOL ‘10 ms 001mm
[Abstract of article by V. V. Badayev, A. K. Gorodetskiy and A. P. Orlov]

[Text] The influence of aerosol and water vapor on continual light absorption in
the atnusphere is analyzed on the basis of data acquired from shipboard and aircraft
experiments (correspondingly involving large and snail water vapor partial pressures)
conducted with the purpose of studying variations in transmission of infrared

radiation. These data were obtained with a apectrooeter in the 9-15 u region of
the spectrum, and with a radiometer with lO—l2 u spectral sensitivity. Using the
principle of selecting the least optical thicknesses for the given mass of water
vapor, the authors evaluate the maximum possible values for the coefficients of
absorption by water vapor specifically. One table, 4 figures, 16 bibliographic
references.

DETERMINATION OF BRIGITNBSS TRANSPOMTIW GlARAC‘I'BRISTICS IN The VISIBLE AND
NEAR-IR REGIONS 0? 1‘8 SPECPRUH

[Abstract or article by V. V. Badayev. A. K. Gorodetskiy, Ye. H.1(ozlov and
3. z. Petrenkol

[Text] The results of aircraft synchronous vertical neasurements of sky brightness
and of the "water surface-atmosphere" system and the optical thicknesses of
attenuation and scattering in the 0.61, 0.74, 1.01 and approximately 2 u portions
of the spectrum are presented. It is demonstrated that spectral contrasts of the
water surface measured through the amosphere depend on the contrast properties

of the atmosphere and on residual absorption of radiation by the small particle
size fraction of aerosol. An approximate formla accounting for amospheric

121
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weakly reflecting surfaces is proposed for transparency windows in the visible
range of the spectrum. M tables, 6 figures. 26 bibliographic references.

SPECTRAL antennas OF THE ' -AmRB' SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by I. s. Halkevich and 1.. G. Istcnina)

[Text] The results of calculating the statistical characteristics of the spectral
structure of the brightness field of the ocean and the atmosphere above it are
presented. These calculations were node on the basis of aircraft measurements of
incident solar radiation and that reflected from the ocean Iade at two altitudes
in the atmosphere above the ocean (0.3 and 10 In). The statistical stability and
reliability of the obtained data on transformation of the density distribution of
the ocean's brightness in the atmosphere are examined, the mean spectral distributions
of ocean and atmospheric brightness are analyzed. and the ataosphere's transfer
function and transformation of albedo and spectral contrasts of the ocean in the
atmsphere are analyzed. The correlation between variations in brightness of the
ocean, the atmosphere and the I'ocean-atnosphere" system in individual spectral

intervals and the mutual correlations of the spectrums of incident and reflected
radiation are evaluated.

The reasons for the Opposite nature of the mutual correlation revealed at the two
altitudes are discussed. and recouendations are provided on accounting for atmos-
pheric effects when solving remote sounding problems. Five tables, 18 figures,

19 bibliographic references.

DETERMINATION OF OPTICAL WRIS‘IICS 0? m 'smna-nmmss' 81813! In in:
VISIBLE SPECTRUM

[Abstract of article by Ye. M. Kozlov and v. V. Badayev]

[mext] The results of measurements, made by aircraft above the sea, of the absolute
brightnesses of the path of the sun, the indicatrixes of the brightness of the

sky and the vertical profile of attenuation by an aerosol atmosphere in the 0.61,
0.744, 0.762 and 1.04 u portions of the spectrum in an altitude interval of 0.1-3 kn
are presented. The aircraft photometer is described. The obtained data are used to
analyze high-altitude transformation of the indicatrix of scattering and reflection
depending on the optical state of the atmosphere and the water surface. Six figures.
15 bibliographic references.

OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CLOUDS
[Abstract of article by M. s. Halkevich, V. S. Halkova and V. I. Syachinov)

next] Using optical measurements of a number of portions of the visible and near-IR
spectrums made by the satellite "Memos-320', the authors examine the possibility of
determining specific absorption by a cloud mass. Papers associated with the re-

search on absorption of solar radiation by clouds are reviewed. The nature of
substances in clouds responsible for absorption is discussed. 81: tables, 39 biblio-
graphic references.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTEGRATED W00 01“ DB'IBRHINING m PHASB STATE 0? WATER IN CIDUDS

[Abstract of article by A. x. Gorodetskiy, A. P. Orlova, v. I. Syachinov and
D. '1‘. Matveyev] . ,

[Text] The experimental rerults of synchronous measure-ents Iade by the satellite
”Rosales-384' in the infrared (10-12 v) and microwave (0.8 cm) ranges are analyzed,
as are simultaneous'neasureunts of cloud brightness in the near-IR range of the
spectrum (0.951 and 1.03 II) and cloud euissions in the 10.5-11.5 u transparency
window made by the satellite “Ensues-320.”

Basing themselves on an analysis of experimental data using television cloud cover
images obtained by ”Meteor“ and sssa satellites and synoptic naps, the authors pro-
pose a method of determining one of the basic para-etersuthe phase state of water
in clouds--on the basis of simultaneous measurements of cloud brightness in the
near-IR portion of the spectral, in the 10-12 u transparency window and in the
microwave range. One table, 3 figures, 13 bibliographic references.

RADIATION musncs'or cmuns
[Abstract of article by A. K. Gorodetsky and A. P. Orlov]

['nextl Measurements of free radiation in clouds in the descending and ascending
directions are presented. The measurements were made with a radiometer sensitive
to the 10.5-12 1: portion of the spectrun. The angular path of radiation through
dense clouds is close to isotropic, with the deviations being up to 2-3 percent.
The emissivity of dense clouds in the low and middle strata, which is 0.96:0.04,
is determined. 'No tables, 4 figures, 30 bibliographic references.

1: mmnou CONTENT or BACK SCA'l'l‘BRING SIGNALS Hanan UP 3! men soummlc or
guaszuuimm crows

[Abstract of article by h. K. Gorodetskiy, Yu. A. Gol'din and V. S. Halhova]

[Text] The relationship between the characteristics of a reflected back scattering
pulse and the parameters of the cloud layer is exanined. Back scattering by clouds
and mists is subjected to nulserical simulation and experinental analysis with this
purpose, using pulsed lasers mounted on an airplane and a ship. The calculations
resulted in a large quantity of data on the temporal dependence of a pulse of
reflected radiation in relation to different cases of single and double layer cloud
cover. Examples of aircraft sounding of stratified cloud cover above the sea are
also analyzed, and the possibilities of studying a nonuniform cloud layer and deter-
mining its structure are discussed. Six figures, 21 bibliographic references.

123
F0! OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMPIEX OPTICAL INSTWATIGI FOR ANALYZING nmsmsuc spsc‘nm. WEISS!”
MIMU INCLlNED AND Houses-rm. FLIGI'I’ PATHS IN 111: ULTRAVIOLET, V1813“ AND 1mm
RANGES 0? 11m 39m (0.3-25 HICKMS)

[Abstract of article by P. P. Anikin, A. I. Chavro and A. Ih. shukurov]

[Text] Comics Optical human» penitting synchronous msurenent of
spectral atmospheric transnission on inclined flight paths in a broad range of the
spectrum is described. me results of neasuring spectral transmission: by clouds

with a system of. five spectroaeters are presented. 'lhe error of. determining the
relationship between optical thicknesses of different types of clouds is evaluated.

Spectral attenuation of emissions by cqulus and cirrus clouds in the visible,”
infrared and ultraviolet ranges of the spectrun is oomaared. Bight figures.
10 bibliographic references.

COPYRIGHT: I:da’:el'stvo ‘Nauka", 1981

11004
60: 1865/99

1211
FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1mm GmPHYSIGS

UDC 532.51:519.63

ONE-DIMENSIONAL COMPUTATIONS 0F DISPLACDENTS DURING BLAST IN mamas WITH
WEAK WO-DDENSIONALITY

Moscow IZVBSTIYA AKADDIII NAUK 338R: nzm 2911.1 in Russian lb 1, Jan 82
(manuscript received 18 Jul 80) PP 63-71

[Article by A. V. Zabrodin, V. V. Kadet. L. A. Pliner, I. P. Podlivsyev and V. I.
Selyakov]

[Text] Abstract: A study was Inde of the possib-
ility of using one-dinensional methods in
investigating two-dimensional gas-dynamical
probless. In the example of the problem of
an unvented blast in a stratus it was pos-
sible to denonstrate the characteristic
difference in the results of tuo- and one-
dinensional couputstions. An upper estimate
of the nonclosure between two- and one-
dinensional conputations was obtained; this
was based solely on the information obtain-
ed when carrying out one-dimensional cosput-
ations. The class of problems for which the
estimate obtained in the study is correct
is indicated. The theoretical estimate is
compared vith the real computed nonclosure.
It is shown that the sectoral nethod lakes
it possible not only to clarify the prin-
cipal features of solution of tun-dimen-
sional problems, but also to evaluate sone
purely two-dimensional effects. such as the
phenonenon of pinching of strata during a
blast in a stratified nediu.

The use of unvented shots in the national economy has recently assuled increasing-
ly broader scales. In particular, the task of assuming the production of petrol-
eum and gas by the setting off of strong shots in collectors is becoming increas-
ingly timely.

The difference in the geophysical properties of the stratum and the surrounding
rock mass leads to a need for taking into account non-one-disensional effects
when carrying out blasting work underground. Due to the costliness and great

125
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aaount of work involved in preparing and applying two-dimensional computation
methods the question arises of the possibility of carrying out investigations
of these effects on the basis of one-dimensional computations. The existing
practice of computations. for example. in [1]. revealed the effectiveness of
application of one—dimensional methods in computations of problems involving
blasts in a medium with an inhomgeneity.

However. there has been no mathematical validation of such a method for solving a
definite class of problems. In this article we examine a class of problems re-
lated to the effect of a blast on a stratified medium. This class of problems is

of the greatest practical interest because real rocks usually have a stratified
structure .

The most significant manifestations of the two-dimensional effect can naturally
be expected in the near zone of the blast. where the displacements are maximum.
It is known that in this region the stresses exceed the strength constants of
the medium. and accordingly. in the near zone the problem can be examined in a
hydrodynamic approximation.

As an example we considered the problem of the initial stage in an unvented

blast in a stratum whose properties differ from the properties of the surround-
ing rock mass. The stratus (regions I and II), axisyI-etric relative to the 0:-
axis, is filled with matter with the density [91 and with the initial speed of
sound c1, whereas the medium surrounding it (region 111) is filled with matter
with the density J02 end the speed of sound c2 (Fig. l). The plane of mirror sym—
metry. perpendicular to the Om-axis, intersects it at the point x - 0. At the in-
itial moment in time in the cylindrical region I there is a release of energy

with the volume density 80. after which a shock wave is formed which propagates in
the stratum and in the medium surrounding it.

The non-one-dimensionality of the problem is related both to the stratified struc-
ture of the medium and also the cylindrical shape of this charge. As a result

of propagation of the shock wave in such a medium it is possible to observe the
following physical effect: if the shock wave in the stratum "escapes" more rapid-
iy than at the subsequent moments in time the pressure in the surrounding rock
nmss will exceed the pressure in the stratum and its pinching is possible. It is
known that such phenomena are observed, for example. during blasts in tunnels [2].

The pinching effect will be the greater the greater the velocity of the shock wave
in the stratum in comparison with the velocity of the shock wave in the surround-
ing medium and the greater the density of the rock matter in comparison with the
density of stratum matter. for real rocks the ratio of the densities and the
speeds of sound usually does not exceed 1.5 and 1.25 respectively. Moreover, it

is known that the speed of sound is greater in the more dense material; according-
ly. in order to obtain the maximum possible manifestation of the pinching effect
in the model computations an “exotic" relationship of the parameters of the stra-
tum and the surrounding rock mass is selected: Pll P2 - 0.66; c1/c2 - 1.25.

The problem of shock wave propagation is described by a system of differential
equations of conservation of mass, momentum and energy which can be represented

in the form [3]:

126
[’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-

an an au 21w w as a any tlgO
_ __.... ~——.--——- ——+ .—_—.'
0¢+u0r "8r r r00+r09 ”r

0.4 as 0P w w as

—- u—+v-—-—-——

0! 0r 0r r r 80 ' ' (1)

as: 0w v 8» we v 0?
7+“r+7ﬁ+7+77§""

OS 08 a OS
F337"??? "“9""

Here t is tine. r is radius, 91s the polsr angle, u and v are the radial and an-
gular velocity coeponents respectively, P is pressure, fie density, v - 1&0 is
specific values, 8 is specific entropy.

 

Fig. l. Stratus in surrounding rock less and discrinination of sectors for
one-dimensional conputations.

At pressures characteristic for the initial stage of a strong blast the equation
of state will be determined by the theml terns (6)

P

New '

where E1. is the internal energy of ther-l pressure per unit volme, Ex is the in-
ternal energy of "cold" pressure per unit volune. [— ( p) is the Grthei'sen para-
meter. vhich in the gas-dynanical stage in the process can be identified with the
parameter (Y- 1); Y is the adiabatic index. In practical computations an allov-
ance for the “cold" conponent is usually ends by uploying a two-tern equation of
state [5, 6]:

B-Bd'Bgﬂkr-

 

Few-co)
(1-09

 

i!-

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where P0 is the initial density of matter, co is the initial speed of sound. Sys-
ten (1) was solved numerically by the method set forth in [S]. The coaputation
method is based on a scheme of decay of an arbitrary fracture, and what is es-
pecially important. is adaptable to the conditions of the problem. that is, it is
possible to discriminate and investigate in detail the characteristic features of

the solution (shock wave fronts. contact boundaries, discontinuities, etc.).
' I I n

 

3
Fig. 2. Results of computation of position of wave front and boundaries of stra-
tum. The dashed curve represents computations by the sectoral method. The solid
curves represent two-dimensional computations.

One of the purposes of two-dinensional computations was a determination of the
degree of pinching -- warping of the boundary of the stratum and the medium.

In order to make an independent investigation of the phenomena caused by inhomogen-
eity of the medium and the effects associated with the cylindrical form of the
charge we examined two limiting cases: 1) P1/P2 - l; cllcz - l -- the medium is
isotropic and the non-one-dimensionality of the problem is related only to the
cylindrical shape of the charge; 2) the ratios P1/P2 - 0.66 and c1/c2 - 1.25
assume values extremely possible for natural conditions and the effects associ-
ated with inhomogeneity of the medium are maximal.

The results of computations of these variants for some moment in time are repre-
sented in Fig. 2. In the computations it was seemed that P1 - 1.1. g/tn3; c1 -
5 km/sec; Bo - 2.5-losJ/cn3; the half-width of the stratum is 0x0 - S n; the ra-
dius of energy release is to - S n.

A comparison of computations of these variants shows that both effects. both in-
homogeneity of the medium and the cylindrical shape of the charge. favor pinch-
ing of the stratum. but in general with the indicated relationship of parameters
of the medium there is no significant geometrical pinching of the stratun (the
pinching does not exceed 41). An analysis of the velocity field shows that by
the time for which the position of the boundary of the stratum is shown in Fig.
2 the movement of the segment of the boundary in the pinching region in a
transverse direction virtually ceases and the dimensions of the pinching zone
remain unchanged.

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The absence of an essentially two—dimensional geometrical effect indicates the
possibility of an approximate solution of this problem by means of the sectoral
method, which is a combination of computations for nonmutually interacting sec-
tors into which the region of interest to us is broken down. One of the possible
variants of organization of the sectoral computations is as follows. The rays
0A1_1 , 0A1+1/2 are drawn from the origin of coordinates, naturally coinciding
with {he discriminated point, of the blast epicenter type. These and similar rays
bound the regions called sectors (Fig. 1). within each sector we select still
another ray -- its "representative." For example, in Fig. l the "representative“
of the i—th sector (A1_1/20A1+1/2) is the ray 0C1. Such a ray can be, for example.
the bisector of an angle. Boundaries of the layers are stipulated along these
rays; these ensure an equality of masses and internal energies within the limits
of the corresponding sector for the two-dimensional problem and the one-dimension-
al sectoral probles. If at the initial time the medium moves, a distribution of
velocities maintaining the moments is stipulated. A spherically symmetric prob-
lem with initial data obtained for the representative ray is computed for each
sec COT .

In this study the computations were made for three sectors whose representative
rays were the 0x, 0r axes or the bisector of the angle x0r. The sectors defined-
near the 0x- and Or-axes have an angle aperture 30'; the aperture angle of the
mean sector is 60'. The results of computations by the sectoral method are repre-
sented in Pig. 2 by dashed curves. The position of the front of these waves coin-_
cides with the results obtained in two-dimensional computations with an accuracy
no worse than 12; accordingly, the position of the boundaries of energy release
at a particular moment in time differs by not more than 132. The masimum error

of the method in determining the geometrical parameters of the problem arises

in a sector whose representative ray is the axis of symmetry.

Evaluation of Error of Sectoral Method

An evaluation of the error in the sectoral method based solely on information ob-
tained when making sectoral computations is of practical interest. Such an evalu-
ation can be made for a class of problems whose solution is expanded into a quite
rapidly convergent series in spherical harmonics so that already the first two
terms of the expansion give the main part of the solution. A presentation of the
solutions of two-dimensional gas-dynamical problems in the form of series in
spherical functions and the derivation of a system of equations for the expansion
coefficients is given in [7]. Since in a sectoral approximation the angular velo-
cities are completely absent. for an evaluation of the main part of the error it
is sufficient to compare the sectoral computations with the roughest approxima-
tion. containing angular velocities. It should be noted that when obtaining an
evaluation the two-dimensional initial distribution can be replaced by the sum
of the first two harmonics, but not in the entire region of determination of the
problem. only in the region of sectors for which the evaluation of the nonclosure
is made. Therefore. an increase in the number of the sectors leads to a consider-
able broadening of the class of problems for which the evaluation obtained in

the study will be correct. In order to find the error in sectoral computations

it is necessary to evaluate the parameters with the subscript 6:

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m-ud-u. cos 0-11.;
”Pod-v. 008 8—0.;
P.-P.+P. m 8-H;
Sa-30+Sg m 6—3‘;
Ws-Wn Ii“ 6.

The subscripts 1 denote the corresponding values in the sector i; the subscripts
0 end 1 were used for denoting the coefficients of the zero end first hsrnonies
respectively; the ressining notations no as before.

Benceforth the evaluations of the errors are ude in e Lsgrsngisn coordinste sys-
ten in the i-th sector; the less coordinate a is introduced: dm—or’drlg...

Quitting unwieldy cosputetions. we vill give the torn of s systsn of squstions in
gas dynamics for'coefficients of the hnmnics:

-‘:)_tu.+r.‘¥"—:--EJ._. #mi%¥r.s(i;i; 2%“;

%-n‘%--§:—(u¢-m):—:¥_n{ ‘_E‘.%;
%-(m-m)%g§":_z wawm (2)
0%?+"9;;+m—"%'3— 4;;_

‘ .—— ———~—-

2.__ ‘0». 20'. r.‘ 804) .-
0»: r. v. 8m

 

with the initial conditions
’ mam-w»); x.(o,m)-§.(m);

where to and x1 are elasents of the nornslised specs of vector-solutions.

Here and in the text which follows NP. v) is the equstion of state. The system
for the errors hes the for.

POI OFFICRB USE ONLY
-cos e.-(-'-"—‘-’4'lu.+3n.) ; - (3)

0"?“ 0‘) ap (Pa. Pa)
.- __ .+ _ .;
S OF. P 30. v

with the initial condition

X.(0- 0') -L(m)-

It can be seen iron the second equation in systen (3) that the source of tho in-
honogeneity of the problsn for errors is the continuity equation; the nsxin- in-
honogeneity lust he expected at the poles: 9- 0. J1 .

The subsequent approach for coaputins evaluations of the errors is sinilsr to
that used in [8] and [9]. Re will introduce Riemann invariants for systens (2)
(the sectoral subscripts will he onittsd in subsequent computations):

 

GI'"|+‘:_P6 Hu-ﬁ-E'Pﬁ St; 1'» (‘)
"he” _ your. a) my. v) _
c " a» 09

is the speed of sound. He introduce the notations:
r’ Du . r‘ 0?

vP.' a: ' v r v on r.’ a:
r’ o ‘ ) ”

a. 0m v me—

?*—-2——-1..1.; .—-1.; (5)

:—.% .‘Tw-(a-Mé)
)

2

 

. 75%,"613 pI-Oﬁ
Ann-10+OI2 Acr-Ts+633 l1:s"1:+6s;
Alt-'60; A8I-1I-6l;

An-Ya‘éﬁ Aa-Ys-Osi Au"6c3

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY

r" as
Ail-$5,; 3 Ana-An;
C c u
Au-‘E; Act-“Au—y; Au'T.

The substitution of (5) into ayaten (2), with (5) taken into account, gives

06. r’c 06.

_ + —— + AuG|+A |J|+A|§|+AuwI-0;
a: 0 am
all Pc 0!!
’03—"T'aT.+4..G.+A..H.+A..S.+A..w.-0; -(6)
L; + A..G.+A..Il.-0:
0
«7% + A..G.+Achl+Auw|-o3

t a e a a
In roducing the vector-colun :1 . (61/ *, til/Bl , 8181 . ”1‘1 ), where . .
S * is the characteristic value ofcthc invariants, and the matrix 61 81

$1 , "1
A"; l1||n;.IG‘I.; AuSI’IGn'Z Aulh‘lcn‘
AﬂGr'IH 1". Au Ansl‘la 1‘: MM?!” 1‘
A — AaIGI‘ISl‘i Aaﬂx’lsl'; 0: 0
A..6.‘Iw.‘: Aunl'l‘l’l'; 03 A“

we write the ayaten (6) in natrix form with the right part Q introduced for uni-
vereality:

3'- 3'- - (7)
”57+D'EFH"Q'

where D is the aymetric natrix

r'clv 0 00
0 —r'clv 0 0
D' o o oo
0 0 00

Determining the scalar product and the vector norm

- I .
llal - I (ma...

after multiplying (7) by :1 and integrating for II we obtain

§;Iz.l'-(A.Dx.)Inc-(suDAH—u-t

132
FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
4.; (A, (D.-24)s.)dm+2i (x..Q)dn-

Here M is the maximum value of the ease I: used in the problu.

Now we will select the constants c2 and c3 in such a way that
l('|0 D") ll-O-(hs D'I) ll-ﬂ' <anig'.;

, j I (a. (D.-2A)z.)lam<c.ns.r.

we use the notation c1 - (c2 + c3)I2 and employing the Cauchy-Bunyakovskiy inequal-
ity. we obtain

8
Eananﬂ-HIQI.
fron which it follows that
Is.u<lz.n... cw; 8“""’IQ(1)lldr. (a)
I

The evaluation (8) of solution of system (2) has an auxiliary character and is
necessary only to the extent that the :1 vector enters into the right part of '
system (3), the evaluation of whose solution is the final objective.

Similarly we obtain an evaluation of system (3)
s“""-"-i}

c.-C.

n..|<.-.'{n:.n...+1.la.l... (9)

Here it is assuned that Q - 0 and the Yevalue is selected from the expression
liQ.l<1.ls.ll.

For short tines t<min{l/c3 , l/(cl - co] the evaluation is simplified
ha"<i‘e't-O+1s"lll-OL

The initial vectors 21(0, m) and s‘ (0, m) are obtained from the functions 81(m)
and i‘gm). As a parameter the constants Y; and Ila" t . 0 include cos 61. In
principle the choice of the initial formulation of the problem and the represent-

ative rays can be accosplished by minimising the parameters “‘6 "t .. 0 and
"31't _ 0 for all sectors.

It follows free (9) that the nonclosure increases exponentially with time. In ac-
tuality, as indicated by the computations, the nonclosure arises in the initial.
stage of the process during some characteristic tine and thereafter in essence
does not change. Therefore. for practical evaluations of the nonclosures it is
evidently necessary to substitute tzt into (9), where t is the characteristic
time of the problem.

133
5‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case for the evaluation it was assuned that ‘L- L/c, where l. is the thick-
ness of the stratum. The folloving values of the constants were obtained'in this

case:
mama-40,3: 1.30.8: I:.I...~0.1'I: ||!.I...~0.22.

Accordingly, the nonclosure value is 'r‘tl.t5 l. A colparison of the nunerical
computations gives for this sane assent in time the real error [[25 p llt .5 a
0.“. that is, the upper evaluation of the error in the neth in this problan
exceeds the real error by a factor of 2.5. An examination of the relative error
he. P “I Iap [shows that in this case it drops off because the norn of the solu-
tion vecttr 'z Iincreases more rapidly than the nonclosure vector “‘6 , P I]. By
the selected nonent in time “'e , |I increases by a factor of 2, whereas ll:P “
increases by a factor of 2.5; accorSingly

'(na. .iinsu) I.-.~o.1s. . (Ii..',l/u:.n).-.~o.1z

Despite the fact that sons two-dinensional effects are not deternined fornslly by
the sectoral method. they can be evaluated on the basis of sectoral conputations.
This sort of effects includes pinching of the stratun, determination of whose
value was one of the principal purposes of two-dimensional conputations. In order
to obtain the nsgnitude of the displacement for the discontinuity of the media

we will select two sectors between which the boundary to be investigated is sit-
uated. Using the results of sectoral conputations it is possible to deternine

the radial velocities at the boundary and deternine the pressure gradients J P09
:AP/Ae. Using the third equation of systen (l), neglecting the squares of snail
values and employing Lagrangian coordinates. we obtain an equation for the angular
velocity component:

a! '4... l0 Tut. A8. (10)

where. for example, by the tern u“, [2(t, n) is meant some mean value interpolated
between u1 and “1+1. Integrating this

 

bt 1
o a n w(¢m)--f”“"(“‘m) Madam) “ {_f“us(“.ﬂ) 6+,“ (11)
- ' .rm.(n.rn)' A6 " " "radon-T

Knowing the radial and angular velocity conponents, it is easy to ascertain the
boundary displacement. Conputations using ferrule (11) give a pinching value ~2-
JX, which satisfactorily agrees with the precise solution.

Thus. our computations indicated that the sectoral nethod not only makes it pos-
sible to detect the principal features of solution of two-dimensional problems,
but also to evaluate sone purely two-dinensional effects.

It has been established that for real rocks the effect of pinching of strata in
the dynamic stage is extrenely small and for investigation of such a class of
gas-dynamical problems (where Ap/p is of the order of several units) it is pos-
sible to apply the sectoral nethod. In this case the error of the sectoral method
can be evaluated analytically by the nethod described in the article.

nu
ma omcm. use onu
4.

Se

6.

7.

8.

9.

Terhune, 11.. H. and Shaw, J. 6., "Calculation of Rock Fracturing Fran Hultiple
Nuclear Explosive Sources," PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS, 1924.

Crowley, B. K.. Glenn, H. D. and Marks, R. P., "An Analysis of Marvel, 3 ﬂuc-
leer Shock-Tube Experiment." PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS, 1974.

Stenyukovich, K. P., NEUSTANVIVSHIYBSYA WIZHENIYA SPLOSHIDY SREDY (Unsteady
Movements of a Continuous Medium), Moscow. Nauka, 1971.

Zel'dovich, Ya. B. and Rayner, Yu. P., FIZIKA UDARNYKH VOLN I VYSOKOTDIPERA-
TURNYKH GIDRODINAHICEESKIKB YAVLENIY (Physics of Shock waves and nigh-Taper-
eture Hydrodynamic Phenomena), Moscow, Noah, 1966.

CHISLENNOYB RESHEIIIYB mam ZADACH GAZOVOY DINAHIKI (Nautical Solution
of Multidimensional Problems in Gas Dynamics), edited by s. K. Godunov, Hoa-
cou, Hanks, 1976.

TEORETICHBSKIYE OSNOVY I KONSTRUIROVANIYE CHISLENNYKH ALGORITIDV ZADACB HATE-
HATICHESKOY PIZIKI (Theoretical Principles and Formulation of Numerical Algo-
rithms in Problems of Hethemticel Physics), edited by K. I. Babenko, macaw,
Nnuka, 1979.

Podlivayev, I. F., PRIHBNBNIYE SFERICHBSKIKH FUNKTSIY V GAZODINANIC’HBSKIKli
ZADACHAKH (Use of Spherical Functions in Gee-Dynamical Problems), Moscow,
Preprint 11‘“ AN SSSR, No 91, 1975.

Kurant, R., URAVNBNIYA S CHASTNYMI PROIZVODNYHI (Equations With Partial Deriv-
atives), Moscow, Mir, 1966.

Godunov, S. K., URAVNENIYA mmncnrsxor FIZIKI (Equations of Mathematical
Physics), Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks". Izvestiye AN SSSR, Pizika Zenli, 1982

5303

C50:

1865/120

135
roe omcm. use ONLY