FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10086
2 November 198!

Japan Report

(FOUO 63/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms L/10086
2 November 1981

JAPAN REPORT
(2000 63/81)

Coursm's
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Foreign Finns Cooperate in Developing nuclear Reactor
(NIKON KOGYO samun, It An; 81; m KOGYO SHIMBUII, 7 Aug 81) ..

CAIN Reactor
West German Reactor

new Developents in Biotechnology Industry Noted
(Various sources; various dates) .................................

Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratory
Biotechnology Research Association
Kubotn Ltd

Takedn, Smitooo Che-ical

Toray, Kvova Flakko Kayo

llev Technologies Developed in Automobile Industry noted
(Sm ommm’ 2.111181) 0.0.0.0.0.00!OCOOOOOCOIOOIIOIOO'OI'OO

Machinery, Information Industries '81 Programs Outlined
(m1 8mm,'reb 81).I.OIIICOOOOIIOII..0.DODOOOOOOOOOOOIOCOOOOII 21

Industrial Technology, Canputers
References for Article

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 P000]

ma "Fl-1F“! It“ ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOREIGN FIRMS COOPERATE IN DEVELOPING NUCLEAR REACTOR
CANDU Reactor
Tokyo NIKON KDGYO SHIHEUN in Japanese 6 Aug 81 p 11

[Text] The Electric Power Development Co Ltd (president, Yoshihiko Horozumi)
announced on the 3d that it will enter into a comprehensive technological sur-
vey on the introduction of the CANDU reactcr starting the next fiscal year.
This comprehensive technological survey will be continued for 2 years, and

the company has requested a 1.5-billion-yen allotment from the nuclear power
development survey funds to cover next year's fiscal needs. by which means it
expects to conduct a safety demonstration of the fuel exchanger sent by the
AECL (Canadian Nuclear Power Company) as one of its projects. The move on the
part of this company to bypass the execution of the basic design necessary to
the safety inspection and conduct a "comprehensive technological survey extend-
ing over 2 years" is thought to represent a switch away from the early intro-
duction of this reactor to a long-term acquisition strategy. It appears that
the construction problems associated with the new converter reactor (ATR)

are causing some strange effects.

The Elect*ic Power Development Company started its efforts to introduce the
CANDU reactu‘ in February 1976 and has concluded that "there are no technologi-
cal problems." but the Atomic Energy Calmission in its decision of August 1979
said that "if there is an improvement in the economic situation and it becomes
necessary to reassess this country's nuclear power development program, another
look will be taken at this reactor at that stage," thereby putting a stop to
its introduction for the time being.

Since then. the Electric Power Development Company. reacting to the Three Mile
Island nuclear power plant incident in the United States (March 1979), has
apprehensively conducted (1) earthquake-resistant tests on imported samples of
pressure tubes and control devices at Hitachi Limited and (2) a safety analy-
sis of \ECL taking into account a coolant loss incident. There has been no
"change in the economic situation" that could trigger an overturn of the Atomic
Energy Comission's decision. and the company has decided for the time being to
discontinue execution of the basic design, which is the premise to introduction.

In this regard, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry stated: "A
comprehensive evaluation should be made on the safety of the CANDU reactor as

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a system in the event this reactor is introduced into Japan within the frame-
work of the technological surveys conducted to date" (Nuclear Power Development
Department, Resources and Energy Agency). As long as there is no "pressure for
introduction" on the part of Canada, the CANDU reactor introduction problem
will most likely fall into a "change in compartment" state.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Heat German Reactor
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHMUN in Japanese 7 Aug 81 p 1

{Text} Three Japanese nuclear power plant makers-~Hitachi Limited. Toshiba
Corporation, and Fuji Electric--and the West German nuclear reactor maker
Krautwerke Union (RHU, fully owned subsidiary of Siemens) have entered into

a technology agreement by which it was basically agreed that the Japanese
companies will engage in "domestic” development of the KHU type PHR (pressur-
ized light water reactor), and details are now being ironed out. Toshiba and
Hitachi are large-volume makers of the model IHR (boiling water reactor) which
follows the lines of the General Electric (GE) light water reactor, but because
of the worldwide favorable evaluation of the IUD type FUR, they decided to
introduce the PVR technology of RED and enter into the development of a safer
and more :oliaole Japanese type light water reactor. The Ministry of Inter-
national Trade and Industry and the electric power companies consider this

new move to be a forward looking one in line with this country's long-range
policy of handling multiple types of reactors. but-Japan's nuclear power
industry, which has been overwhelmingly tied in with the United States, con-
siders that ripples from thisunusual development, both domestic and inter—
national. cannot be avoided.

Disengagement From Completely American Associations

KHU not only is almost the sole supplier of nuclear reactors within West Ger-
many but is the largest West European nuclear reactor maker with an abundant
export record. In 1969, ABC Telefunken which was a BHR maker and Siemens
which was a PHR and heavy water reactor maker joined forces. and each con—
tributed half of the capital to form KHU, but in 1977 AEG withdrew from the
field completely, so this is now a loo-percent Siemens organization.

KHU handles both BUR and FUR, making it a very unique member of the nuclear
reactor industry, with the P operating in the line of the American Nesting-
house (NH) and the B in the line of GE.

Now the technological atmosphere inherent in West Germany has crept in, and
both P and B have strayed from dwirparents to the extent that this company

is now developing a strictly KHU type reactor which is highly evaluated through-
out the world, and KHU has been making great strides, especially as a PUB maker,
ever since the A26 withdrawal.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand, both Toshiba and Hitachi have been involved in the line of
GE, and they recently worked together with GB in joint development of an A-BHR
(advanced BUR) which outperforms the present BRR,andthis is indicative of
their very close relationship with GE.

At the outset of this international joint development of the A-BHR, GB, Hita-
chi. and Toshiba invited KHU to join them in this project. but they were not
successful. This was because both the B and P of [HO incorporated the tech-
nology of very high reliability intrinsic in the Germans, and RH" had become
a maker which none of the world's nuclear reactor makers could overlook.

In another direction. the Ministry of International Trade and Industry con-
sidered that maintaining this conpletely American connection might,_in the
long run, become a minus factor in assuring this country's international eco-
nomic safety. and set about gradually diversifying its associations. At the
same time, the power companies began to react to the line of thought they had
been following, and there was a shift in thinking to approach KHU. which re-
sulted in the recent agreement with KHU.

Fuji Electric was the maker of the gas reactor (GCR) which was this country's
first nuclear power reactor directed at power production built for Japan
Atomic Power at Tokai, but it was unable to come forth with an effective policy
during the BUR boom which followed, as a result of which it was downgraded in
its position in Japan's nuclear reactor industry. On the other hand, in this
present series of activities, Fujitsu was asked to participate in this joint

research on the strength of its deep ties with Siemens (capital cooperative
relationship).

There is another major current in the Japanese light water reactor picture.
This is the line of the PHR of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Mitsubishi
Electric, which have close ties with U5. The divergences concerning BUR
championed by GE. Toshiba. and Hitachi and this reactor have split this
country's nuclear power industry. There is even an attempt to follow along
the lines of the A-BHR development to come up with an A-PHR development, and
the 3 versus P conflict which beasts Japan's nuclear power industry is becom-
ing more and more fierce.

It is certain that raising the flag for this new PHR is going to create some
waves in the Japanese nuclear reactor market. At the same time, these move-
ments will probably have various effects on the export problems of the domes-
tically produced light water reactor which is expected to be developed.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

2267
cso: «105/237

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NEH DEVELOPMENTS IN BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY NOTED
Hayaahibara Biochemical Laboratory
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 Aug 81 p 6

[Text] Okayama-Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratory (Shiao Ishii, Okayama-chi;
president, Ken Hayashibara; telephone, 0862--24-43ll plans to double its production
of interferon (IF) from 300 billion units per year to 600 billion units with the use
of hamsters, and for this purpose it plans to invest about 1 billion yen in phase three
of its program to reinforce its Fujitak; Laboratory (Pujiraki, Okayama-shi), which
should be ready by the summer of next year at the latest. The accumulation of the
various types of analytical equipment is taking place in an orderly manner, and it

is expected to start on phase two construction within the year.

Last summer, the company initiated the construction of the Pujizaki Laboratory with
an overall expenditure of 700 million yen for research and production of IF, and it
started production on the scale of 300 billion units per year. The Phase two
construction will expand these production facilities. In addition to the production
of IF, the separation and purification of various physiologically active materials
(linihokain [phonetic]) are performed, and it is expected that this will be expanded
in its phase three research and production facility. The construction and internal
equipment for this is said to require 1 billion yen.

This company had previously entered into a cooperative agreement with the two
pharmaceutical companies, Hochida and Otsuka, by which means its development tempo
went into orbit, and it is conducting "preclinical tests" at the request of the
Ministry of Health and Welfare as part of the preliminary tests necessary to the
initiation of clincial tests. These tests will involve the use of animals in acute,
subacute, and chronic toxicity tests and will check all phases of safety, and it is
expected to that the results of these studies will be announced by the end of the
year.

The increased production of IF through the phase two construction will increase
production to 600 billion units per year, which will be the largest scale production
in the world, and this will be accomplished without having to increase the number of
hamsters by means of: l) expanding proliferating cells (kobu [possibly a lump,
swelling, knotl), 2) improving dissection technology, 3) raising induction efficiency
and a) eliminating purification losses. By these means a doubling of capacity should
be readily feasible, and these practices are expected within a few years to enable
production to reach a fivefold or higher level, according to this company's estimates.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Almost all of the IF presently produced will be used in the "preclinical tests,"

and they cannot all be carried out at the same time, but as the result of increased
production and of the clinical tests, by next year it may be possible to effect wider
distribution: "We have finally come to sea the possibility of meeting the wishes

of patietts, physicians, and researchers to whom this agent has thus far been denied.”
(Managing Director Yasu Hayashibara, head of the business office)

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1981
Biotechnology Research Association

Tokyo MAINICHI SHIMBUN in Japanese 12 Aug 81 p 3

[Text] Fourteen chemical and food industries, such as Mitsubishi Chemical Industry,
formed the "Biotechnology Development Technology Research Association" (director,
Eiji Suzuki, president of Mitsubishi Chemical Industry) on the 11th to promote
biotechnology, which has come to the forefront as a leading technology. Starting in
September, this association will take over joint research and development centered
on basic technology as well as participating in biotechnology research for the next-
generation industrial basic technology development system under the 10-year plan

industrial area. Microorganisms and enzymes are cultured in large volume in order

to decompose organic compounds such as petroleum and to develop new plants high in
protein. The areas of application are countless, and the subject of the present
research under way in Japan ranges from interferon type medical agents to agents in
the agricultural, energy, and chemical areas, with several hundred companies involved
in research and development programs.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry has incorporated biotechnology
research as one of the pillars in its next-generation industrial basic technology
development system and plans to fund 26 billion yen over the next 10 years in research
contracted to private industry.

The association applied for participation in this next-generation system program
on the above date to seek government aid in biotechnology research in three basic
areas—-"gene manipulation" to create new microorganisms to be used by the 14 member
chemical and food product companies, 'bioreactor” (microorganism reaction vessel)
development for energy conservation and highly efficient chemical processes, and
"large volume cell culture" to enable more efficient production of certain medical
products--and thereby to realize early practical application of biotechnology.

Biotechnology research in Japan is way behind the level of the western countries,
where research was started early in the 1970's, and of the 26 Japanese patents made
known thus far on gene manipulation, 19 have been the work of Western industries.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me induatries participating in this research association other than Mitsubishi
anemical Industry include Sumitomo Gnenical Industry, Hitsui Toatsu Chemicals,
Mitsubishi anemical and Life Science Laboratory. Kao Soap. Daicel Chancel Industry.
Electra Chemical Industrial. Mitsui Petrochemical Industries, Mitsubishi Gas and
anemicals, Asahi diaries]. Industry, Ajinomoto. Kyowa Hakko Kogyo. Takeda (helical
Industries, and Toyo .1020.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shilbunsha 1981

Kubota Ltd

[Text] Kubota Ltd (president. 'l'aro ﬂiroyasu) will initiate full-scale research on
biotechnology (life engineering) to look into utilization of new microorganisms and
new technology on natural and animal products use. This company proposes to branch
out from its original function as a maker of agricultural equipment and environmental
equipment to pursue the possibilities of gene maniupulation and cell fusion and is
soon expected to set up a "biotechnological research comictee", using its environ-
mental equipment research department as the parent unit. This is an indication that
the approach to biotechnology. which thus far has been the realm of chemical and

food product industries. has now spread to the machine makers, and the results obtained
by this group will be awaited with great interest.

Kubota Ltd is the top industry in the area of agricultural machinery which has deep
ties with biotechnology. It is a large maker of engines and environmental equipment.
and it is adequately equipped for the various conditions and needs of biotechnology.
Furthermore, its 90 years of history are replete with upansion and development of
industries tied in with “water."

The Environmental Equipment Laboratory (about 50 staff members) of its Environment
Plant Industry Department has more than 10 microbiological specialists who have
already been engaging in biotechnological research. The application of biotechnology
to environmental equipment involves, first of all, the creation of "new species"

of microorganisms—ones which can operate even with a small volume of air on a

large volume of sludge and speedin "chew up“ the sludge to develop a new activated
sludge treatment facility are a possibility which comes to mind. This company has
already formed a project team with these microbiological research staff members
which has started on specific research and development.

The next research objective will be the area of food. It may be said that this
company has accumulated technology which comes close to biotechnology in the matter
of developing new seeds, new fermentation technology, and cell fusion.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbuusha 1981

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Takeda, Sumitomo azemical
Tokyo TOKYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 24 Aug 81 p 2

[Text] Osaka—Takeda Chemical Industries will conduct clinical tests with interferon
(IF) produced by gene manipulation of colon bacilli at about 10 facilities throughout
the country, such as Osaka University, starting at the end of September. This is a
joint project with the world's largest pharmaceutical producer, Boffmann-La Roche
(Switzerland), and this will be the first time in Japan that a medical agent produced
by gene manipulation will be used in the husan body.

Sumitomo Chemical Industry is expected soon to enter into clinical studies on the
growth hormone for very 8M1]. children which was jointly developed by the Swedish
Kabi Drug and American industry, in addition to which it is promoting the marketing
of Yuei Drugs and Midori Juji products, and gene engineering will see its practical
use begin in the area of medical products.

what Tskeda will use in its clinical studies is the alpha type IF jointly developed
by Hoffmann-La Roche and the American gene industry firm Cenentech Company. Clinical
tests were begun in the middle of January in the United States. Clinical tests will
be initiated in Japan under the direction of the Special IF Research Section of

the Ministry of Health and welfare, in which Takeda and the National Institute of
Health will use the same IF on animals to establish its safety.

According to Takeda, specific clinical plans such as the dose and number of subjects
will be decided by the middle of Septuber, and 10 facilities throughout the country
centered on Osaka University will study the application of this agent on stomach cancer,
skin cancer, and malignant brain tumors.

Along with these clinical tests. Takeda is collecting facilities for a production
system and expects to initiate independent production about the beginning of next
year. Director Einosuke Omura (director of the central laboratory) said: "Once
production is initiatied, we will be able to supply 1.2 trillion units a year of
98 percent purity" (an ordinary dose requires some 3-10 million units).

In another direction, Sumitomo Chemical Industry is also planned clinical tests at
the Tokyo women's Medical College and Osaka University, and it will use the results
of the clinical studies being conducted in Sweden by the Kabi company to initiate
growth studies using hormone produced by colon bacilli as early as the and of October.

Gene manipulation is the technology which involves the artificial removal or
synthesis of a portion of the genes, which are the storehouses of information of
living cells, to be incorporated into the genes of easily cultured microorganism.
By this approach it is possible to produce hormones and IF, which heretofore had
to be extracted from humans or animals in their natural state in trace amounts at
high costs, through the use of microorganisms in large volume at low cost.

This is why the government has classed this study as a national project and is
supporting development through the Science and Technology Agency. Along with the
start of the application of this new medication to humans, the Ministry of Health
and Welfare is setting tp new manufacturing permit inspection standards which are
expected to promote the practical application of bioengineering.

COPYRIGHT: Chu-Nichi Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1981

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Toray, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] Toray (president, Hasatoshi Ito) and Kyows Hakka Kogyo (president, Shukuro
Kinoshita) announced on the 24th that they will engage in industrial production of
"interferon" and will produce "inteferon by the recombination of DNA (deoxy nucleic
acid)" by the method developed by the Cancer Research Institute's Cancer Laboratory
(director, Haruo Sugano), for which a license has been obtained. Interferon production
technology by recombinant DNA technology had previously been developed by the
Genentech Company of the United States and Biogene Company of Switzerland, and the
Swiss drug firm of Hoffmann-La Roche has been promoting its industrialization, as

a result of which they have a wide lead over Japan. This recent industrialization
announcement by these two Japanese companies is an effort to bite into one corner

of this lead, and this represents the first attempt in Japan to use domestically
produced technology to this end. Furthermore, the interferon which these companies
propose to industrialize is the so-called "B type" which is considered highly effec-
tive against chronic tumors produced by fibrocytes and is a product that is solely
Japanese. Its production by recombinant DNA technology is the first of its kind

in the world.

Interferon is sometimes called a virus suppression factor. It is a substance produced
by animal cells when they are infected with a virus. It is not only effective in
treating viral diseases but also serves to suppress propagation and has sometimes

been dubbed the 'ﬁream medicine." Research has proceeded to the stage that three
types of interferon have been discovered: tne A type. produced by mature leucocytes
and lumph cells; the Y type, produced by T lymph cells; and the B type, produced by
fibrocytes. Research and development on the industrial production of all three

types is under way.

The A type is being produced from mature leucocytes by Midori Juji, while production
from cancerous lymph cells is being developed by Sumitomo Chemical Industry and
Hidori Juji. In addition, Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratory is conducting research
on producing A type with the use of mice.

Toray is conducting research on the production of the A type from fibrocytes, and
the interferon produced by Midori Juji, Toray, and Sumitomo Chemical Industry is
already at the clinical testing stage. These method suffer from the need to propa-
gate cells and form cancerous materials which require considerable time, and

there are limitations to mass production. 50 the use of recombinant DNA technology
to overcome these difficulties has been under study. The technology to produce

the A type has already been well established in the Western countries.

The interferon which Toray and Kyowa Hakko Kogyo hope to handle in this new venture

is the "B type" which the Cancer Institute developed, and its technique is to extract
messenger RNA produced by interferon in fibrocytes, use this messenger RNA to
synthesize DNA, which is then incorporated into the plasmids (extra-nuclear genes)

of colon bacteria, and thereby produce produce interferon in large quantity exploiting
the high propagation rate of colon bacilli.

The industrialization of this technology has made Japan a participant in the world's
competitive efforts to develop methods of producing recombinant DNA for the ensuing
production of interferon, and the results of this venture are being eagerly awaited.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha

2267
C80: 4105/228 8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NEH TECHNOLOGIES DEVELOPED IN AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY NOTED
Tokyo sums 01w toss: in Japanese No H9, 2 Jul 81 pp 12-21
[Text] Car Electronics: New weapon in war1a Automobile "hr

The introduction of electronic technology into automobiles is progressing rapdily.
Car electronics is being emphasized as a selling point for new models.

At present electronic parts, including audio equipment, make up about 6 percent of
the manufacturing cost of passenger cars, but this will expand to 15 percent by the
latter half of the 1980's. There are studies which indicate that the automobile
industry is already investing some 30 million yen yearly in 10's (integrated circuits)
and LSl's (large-scale integrated circuits). This is twice the amount invested by
the watch or NC (numerically controlled machine tool) industries and is the greatest
expenditure of any industry except computers and other electronics.

Automobiles are a mamoth industry of nearly 6 billion yen per year. Although
electronic parts make up a small part of the cost, they are of great value, and
automobiles are considered a huge market for the electronics industry.

Dominant Factor in Small Car War

It is well known that since the first oil crisis in 1973, the Japanese automobile
industry, to the displeasure of groaning U.S. and European manufacturers, has steadily
increased its share of the world market. In 1980 the Japanese industry produced

11.04 million vehicles, compared with America's 8.01 million. Japan has actually
replaced the United States as automobile king, by a margin of some 3.03 million
vehicles.

It is not easy to say, however, how long this Japanese automobile superiority will
continue. Last year's takeover was almost a fluke-ca matter of striking the soft
spot of American auto makers, who had fallen behind in their small car strategy. As
the leaders of GM and the others keep saying, their true worth will be seen in the
clash between Japan and the United States brought on by small cars.

Onepointdetermining the outcome of the Japanese-0.8. small car war electronics.

At present America has the lead in car electronics. America's proportion of micro-
computer cars is far greater than Japan's, as seen in Gﬂ's intention to equip all
models. Hhile America furiously invested in electronic technology in order to improve
the fuel efficiency of large cars, Japan put its effort into small cars which were
already fuel-efficient and didn't worry about electronic technology. But now both
countries are in the small car arena, and the victory will go to car electronics.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Car electronics developed in the United States because of growing social and economic
demands for improved fuel efficiency, based on the new 0.5. energy bill and emission
control regulations represented in the Muskie Act. The search for safety and comfort
is another point which cannot be overlooked. The "roots" of American car electronics
for the purpose of improving fuel efficiency lie in the electronic fuel injection (EFI)
device using vacuum tubes developed by Bendix in 1959. The following year Chrysler
decided to make this Ei-‘I an option in its 1960 models.

The EFI developed by Bendix was just a start, and was followed by the diode alternator,
trsnsistorized ignition, the mixed IC regulator and other electronic devices for
the engine.

There is, incidentally, a trade-off between the emission control and the improved

fuel efficiency being asked of auto makers. Although theoretically there are a number
of ways to simultaneously solve these mutually contradictory tasks (such as adoption

of diesel engines), it was generally concluded that use of electronics was the proper
solution. That is, electronic controls could optimize engine iglition timing and

the air-fuel mixture (AF ratio), increasing fuel efficiency, and more complete
combustion would result in cleaner exhaust. This idea was given practical application
in an electronic fuel injection device using semiconductors (mixed IC) jointly developed
in 1967 by West Germany's Bosch and W.

Entering the Era of Microcomputers

The demand for cleaner exhaust applied equally to Japanese cars. Most manufacturers
cleared regulations by changing engine types and adopting catalytic converters, but
after 1970 more and more Japanese auto makers joined the United States by adopting
EFI.

Ei-‘I was first adopted by Isuzu's Isuzu 117 coupe in 1970. The following year it was
adopted by Nissan's Bluebird U and Toyota's Mark II. About 10 percent of Japanese
cars are said to use EPI at present.

The primary reason that EFI (which Nissan calls SCI-electronic gasoline injection)

is not used in most Japanese cars is the cost. The average cost of EPI is 60,000

or 70,000 yen, and it sometimes exceeds 100,000 yen. The truth is that the switchover
has not been made because of the desire to keep the unit cost of cars down.

The cost-performance problem is always present, but the issue of car electronics
itself has already entered the era of the personal computer.

Circuit integration is progressing--from IC to 1.51 to super-LSI—at an ever-increasing
rate. Prices are dropping rapidly and capabilities are increasing in geometric
progression. Super-LSI's are not used in automobiles at present, but the micro-
computer capacity is already too great to use just for engine controls, and efforts
are being made to systematize devices and parts which have previously worked
independent ly .

A single microcomputer can now control everything from EFI, an electronic carburetor,
and ignition control device and EGR (exhaust gas recycling device) that deal with
the engine, to safety and drive elements like an antiakid device, a malfuction diagnosis

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

device (0K monitor), an automatic speed control, and electronic locking seatbelts.

And even such comfort items as fully automatic air-conditioning and drive computers
can now be included.

Sensors Hold the Key

A complete computer car has not yet come into being. So-called "computer cars"

are being sold by Nissan, Mitsubishi Rotors, Toyota and Isuzu, but although they

have added secondary systems like drive computers, basically they have all just
concentrated engine controls. They do not have total system controls with sensors

on each cylinder, and are well behind in terms of electronification of the power chain.
The bottleneck is sensors. All the auto makers are now struggling to develop sensors
that can sense changes in the external environment and elicit flexible responses

from engine and other controls.

The equipment within the passenger compartment, on the other hand, is becoming more
and more electronic. Instrument panels have meters that spell out their readings.
These are developed around light emitting diodes (LED) and other electronic displays.

There are differences from manufacturer to manfacturer and from model to model, but

all have electronic speedometers, fuel gauges, water temperature gauges and tachometers.
Speedometers have digital displays with Arabic numerals, and many of the others have
zone displays (changes shown against colored zones) or sepent displays (which

light when a certain level is reached.

This equipment is limited to specialty care or luxury cars. but it is only the cost
that prevents their spread to popular models.

of cOurse. the "mission" of car electronics is to improve fuel consumption, safety,
comfort and convenience. Work will be done to introduce safety measures such as
radar to prevent collisions, optimum control of suspension and levelling, and traffic
information/route guidance. Development of these systems cannot be overlooked as
elements of investment in social capital from the perspective of development of
traffic systems, but the use of integrated circuits, which have progressed from 1.81
to super-L81, is indispensable, and tie-ups between auto makers and semiconductor
manufacturers can be expected to become closer.

New Materials: Meeting the Challenge To Reduce Height and Fuel Use

The worldwide war to develop cars which use less fuel-this will require emphasis

on development and use of new materials as well as on car electronics. Reduction

of fuel use will depend on development of both more efficient engines and lighter
chassis; it is hoped that new materials will be effective in the development of both.
But while electronics concentrates mostly on improving engine efficiency, the value
of new materials will be felt more in the area of weight reduction.

Increasing Importance of High-Tensible Steel

The flow of innovations in automobile materials has been from ordinary steel to
speci'ality steels to light metals to nonmetallic materials. But of course cost has
been a factor in this flow, and such difficult problems as how to bring down the
high prices of aluminum and organic materials and whether stable procurement is
possible are involved. The shift to new materials has been slow.

1.1
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Within this flow, the changeover from ordinary steel to high-tensible steel has

been most rapid. Steel makes up 50 to 60 percent of the weight of an automobile,

but most of that is the cold-rolled steel sheet of the body. If this is replaced

by high-tensile steel, the thickness of the sheet can be reduced 0.8 m to 0.7 m
with no loss of strength. Formerly, high—tensile steel was hard to work with in
such things as presses, but that drawback has been overcome by the large steel makers
lately. At present, high-tensile steel makes up about 20 percent of the total steel

in those models which use it most, but this proportion can be expected to increase
to 40 or 50 percent.

Moreover, technology has been developed for dual-phase steel, which is soft while
being formed, then hardened afterward; this will be introduced on a large scale in
the near future. This steel is also stronger than ordinary steel, and serves to
reduce weight.

What about making the body out of light metals like aluminum? Procurement of materials
is no problem, but auto makers are not interested because the cost of electricity in
Japan makes aluminum expensive. Instead, they dream of fiber-reinforced plastics

(PR?) and carbon fiber-reinforced plastics (CFRP). The so-called "plastic car" is

on the scene.

There are, however, many difficulties in making this practical. First of all, the
cost is high. CPR? is nearly 100 times the cost of steel. Moreover, it takes time
to form, and productivity must be slower than for steel formed in presses. Thus

for the near future, reduction of body weight will depend largely on improved steels.

1n the case of engines, on the other hand, there has been steady progress in reduction
of weight. Many engines today are cast iron, but moves to use aluminum alloys or
thinner castings are seen everywhere. For example, the method of reducing thickness
by inserting a liner (or sleeve) is being considered. The partial use of aluminum
alloys in the transmission is also going forward. In other words, it appears that
aluminum alloys, rather than plastics, will be used in drive machinery which requires
strength.

Trimming in Every Area

Thus weight reduction is an accumulation of weight saved on small parts. Interior

and exterior trim has all been made lighter. The bumpers are an example. The weight
was reduced about 20 percent by using urethane, but that has disadvantages in that

it weakens at high temperatures, and it absorbs water so a surface treatment is needed.
Judging from present technology, it is only a matter of time before the absorption

and heat-resistance problems are overcome.

The only way to make window glass lighter is to make it thinner; research to improve
it is being carried out. There is a trend toward headlights of a different shape
which are actually heavier; the possibility of replacing the glass with plastic is
being studied. In the case of tires, weight could be saved by getting along without
a spare, and plastic tires which do not go flat are wanted. Plastics are also being
used for meters, interior paneling and various tanks. Smaller bearings with the
strength to withstand weight are needed, and finding stronger bearing steel is
another task for materials manufacturers. There has also been progress toward
refinements like replacing camshaft chains with rubber belts and making plastic
cooling fans.

12

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY "
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Plastics for automobiles include vinyl chloride, polyurethane, ABS resins and
polypropylene, and also such "engineering plastics" as nylon and polyester. Japanese
manufactueres have fallen behind European and American chemical companies in the
development of the materials known as automotive polymers. It is estimated in some
quarters the development gap is nearly 5 years.

The chemical companies have, however, taken a very active stance in regard to
development. There would be great advantages in terms of total supply if automobile
and parts manufacturers would join in developing materials. In practice, there have
come to be makers who supply materials secretly, without seeking patents. In these
cases traditional ties like financial groupings are almost meaningless, and trans-
actions are strictly on the basis of product development.

That is, almost all new materials are developed through technology belonging to the
materials manufacturers; the technology is seldom that of the auto makers. In this
regard, the basic technology of Japanese auto makers lags far behind that of GM.

It was to overcome this lag that Toyota Motors decided this January to introduce
resin-forming technology from GE.

Structural Changes

Development of new materials is one way to make cars lighter, but design and structural
streamlining must also be mentioned.

This aspect is greatly influenced by design technology in respect to the strength of
steel sheet for the auto body. Computers have long been used in America in aircraft
design. In Japan, though, this idea got a late start, and has Just reached the top
levels. The result is structures which have strength in themselves rather than
relying on the strength of the framework. (The principle is that which makes an
eggshell hard to crush.) In these designs, strength is affected by the accuracy of
welds; this requires the development of accurate welding robots and steels with
strength which does not change after welding.

As a part of structural streamlining, the P? method (front engine, front wheel drive)
is well suited to the present demand for lighter cars. The F? method brings together
the engine and the transmission, of course, and also the differential and the drive-
shaft. And because the left and right rear axles are independent, it is possible to
put the gas tank and spare tire beneath the rear seat and trunk, making the car lighter
and giving more room inside. No propeller shaft is needed to drive the rear wheels;

in addition to eliminating the weight of the shaft, this will making the outside
dimensions more compact without reducing passenger comfort.

This FF method has not been accompanied by too much in the way of new materials
development. There have been technological improvements in the rubber parts of equal
speed ball joints, and improvements have been made in power steering in connection
with the front wheels bearing the load. And as the car becomes lighter, it will

be possible to replace the rear leaf springs with lighter coil springs. Weight
reduction will be all the greater if carbon fiber can be used in springs. The
technology has already been developed; the problem is bringing the cost down to make
it practical.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Carbon fibers may well be more useful for structural materials of this sort than in
body parts.

Full Use of Ceramics

New materials are making great strides in improvement of engine efficiency. There

has been a particularly sharp rise in the use of ceramics to improve the cooling
system.

The heat efficiency of the present reciprocating engines is low-30 percent-and if
losses from friction are included it is less than 20 percent. This is because water
is used to cool the cylinders. If new, high-temperature ceramics are used for the
cylinders, pistons, valves and pre-chamber, there is no need for coolant and heat
efficiency can be raised above 30 percent.

The new ceramics are compounds of silicon with nitrogen, carbon, aluminum oxide or
other materials. Their strength is competitive with that of the superalloys.

The new ceramics are almost ready for practical application, and they will be put to
use surprisingly quickly, once the remaining problems of volume production and
workability are solved.

In practice, the parts subjected to high temperatures of lOOO'C or above will be
replaced first, and in this process the radiator and other parts of the cooling system
will be reduced in size. Once the replacement with ceramics is complete the cooling
system will become unnecessary, and the dream of a "ceramic engine" will have become

a reality.

Because reduced friction is another characteristic of ceramics, there will be other
great advantages in that lubricating oil will become unnecessary.

of course the study of ceramic engines is not restricted to gasoline engines. The
possibility of using ceramics for the increasingly popular diesel engines is another
challenge to be met.

Diesels are superior in terms of fuel economy. The fuel efficiency of reciprocating
engines can be improved by increasing the compression, but this also increases the
harmful oxidation products of nitrogen (NO!) and tends to produce knocking, so of
course there are limits on increases of compression. But in a diesel engine the
compression ratio can be raised to three times that of a gasoline engine. This
improves fuel efficiency: fuel consumption is improved by nearly 30 percent.

The explosive power of diesels are excessive for passenger cars, though; the problems
of engine weight and vibration could not be elminated. The solution came in 1951 when
VW developed a small, 1500 cc engine. New technology such as valve-type fuel injection
pumps and forced coolant pistons was developed and mounted on a golf cart.

As in the case of the gasoline engine, there is the danger that oxidation and wear of
metal parts will he hastened in metallic diesel engines. As in the reciprocating engine,
cooling is necessary, and there are moves to use ceramics in diesel engines to
eliminate that necessity.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plan is to make the engine's combustion chamber of ceramics able to withstand
its high temperatures. And there is research on switching other high-temperature
parts, now made of high-grade alloys, to ceramics.

The gas turbine engine can be mentioned as the latest attempt to use ceramics in new
engines. Because combustion is continuous, this engine can develop 5 to 10 times the
power of a reciprocating engine of equal weight. Actual use will be delayed because

of poor fuel consumption at present, but fuel consumption can be improved by raising
the turbine's intake temperature. This will require making the turbine chamber of
ceramics rather than heat-resistant alloys.

Technology has been able to increase the turbine chamber intake temperature to 1,000°C,
so now the pressing task is the development of materials which can withstand such
temperatures for long periods. Research is going forward under the guidance of the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry and the Agency for Industrial Science

and Technology, and this research focuses on the development of new ceramics. It
appears that this research will bear fruit in the 1990's.

Car Technology: Study of the Companies Involved
Toshiba Corp

Toshiba entered the car electronics field in 1971 in cooperation with America's Ford.
Its first product, the EEC I (Electronic engine control), was used on Ford's 1978
models. The latest version, the BBC TV, is used on 1981 models. The semiconductors
used in these EEC modules are 12-bit NMOS LSI's.

In Japan, EEC modules are used by Toyota Motors for its car computer, and they are
supplied directly or indirectly to all auto makers. Car computer sales through March
1981 came to 25 billion yen. Sales to Ford were down, but annual growth was still

20 percent. In addition to computer chips, Toshiba holds a full 50 percent of the
world market for electronic rectifier elements. In 1979 a separate automotive semi-
conductor technology department was established within the semiconductor department
to make full-scale development possible.

Toshiba's "car electronics“ strategy is limited to the BBC series of engine control
computer chips. Unlike Hitachi, it does not deal with automotive equipment or sensors.

Hitachi, Ltd

Hitachi, which is tops in the electric appliance field, is deeply involved with
Nissan Motors and is thus a major producer of electrical equipment for automobiles.
Sales of automotive equipment reached 160 billion yen in 1980. Growth has continued
at an annual rate of 15 to 16 percent for the last few years.

The first "car electronics" device sold by Hitachi was a 1963 electronic ignition
which introduced Ic's. Although electronic equipment makes up only a small part of
total sales of electrical automotive equipment, Hitachi has a positive policy of
making it strong and long lasting. It takes a broad approach to car electronics,
encompassing such things as LED instrumentation and sensors that neasure temperature,
fuel mixture, pressure, etc. Like Toshiba, it has naturally put the greatest effort
into the engine control sector, with the goal of building a total system around that.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Production facilities are being built up steadily. An electronics plant to produce
10's and LSI's was completed at the Saws automotive equipment plant in 1980. At

the same time, the software firm Hitachi Automotive Engineering separated and became
independent. Hitachi is now ready to go forward on both the hardware and software
fronts.

Nippon Denso Co

As a general automotive parts manufacturer for the Toyota group. Nippon Denao is a
leader in car electronics strategy. As a start, it set up the world's first IC
laboratory in 1968. It also brought out EPI and such things as 0K monitors, autodrive,
the cruise computer and TCCS (Toyota computer control system). The company has not
revealed the details, but sales of car electronics are over 5 percent the largest in
Japan.

Last December it set up an "electronics headquarters" of some 1,200 persons. This
is an integrated organization which goes from development through production. It
is unique in the automobile industry in that it produces its own IC's and LSI's
(computer chips). Almost all its products are used within the Toyota group, but
there will be future sales to overseas auto makers and to non-Toyota companies like
Nissan Motors. Competition with existing semiconductor manufacturers will he a
problem, but Nippon Denso's strength is its "thorough knowledge of automobiles."
Its accumulation of knowhow and data cannot be matched by mere semiconductor manu-
facturuers. Nippon Denso's name for car electronics is 'hntoronics"; the fact that
it has this different name is an indication of its self-confidence.

Diesel Kiki Co

Diesel Riki has investment and technical ties with a worldwide automotive parts
maker, Robert Bosch of Heat Germany, and can he said to hold the key to electronifi-
cation of diesel cars. It is the major producer of injection pumps, which are the
heart of diesel cars, and its stockholders include Isuzu (22 percent) and Nissan
(9.7 percent), as well as Bosch (12 percent).

Under the fuel economy trend of recent years, diesel engines have come to be used in
passenger cars as well as trucks, and sales of Diesel Kiki's small VB injection pump
(for passenger cars) have expanded markedly. The company has strengthened ties with
Bosch--including the exchange of executives-~for the purpose of acquiring electronic
technology. Promoting electronic control of fuel injection devices should further
enhance the fuel economy of diesel engines.

Last year the electronic development department of the research and development
headquarters was divided into two specialised departments: fuel injection devices
(Department 1) and car air—conditioning (Department 2). This was done in order to
respond to the demand of auto makers for electronic diesel engines, and to create
an independent realm like that of domestic semiconductor manufacturers.

Mitsubishi Electric Corp

Mitshubishi Electric is capitalised by sources such as Mitsubishi Motors and deals
in such parts as electrical equipment for engines, pollution control devices and
chassis control devices (for a steady ride). In addition to Mitsubishi, customers
include auto makers like Toyo Kogyo Co.

16
FOR‘0FFK]AL.USE13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The core of Mitsubishi Electric's car electronics strategy is the engine control
module. At present its microprocessors are made by Nippon Denso, but it inaugurated
its Automobile Electronics Development Group in July 1978, and has now begun to
develop its own microcomputers. In response to Mitsubishi Motors' avid desire for
an "electronic car," Mitsubishi Electric began volume production of such things as
trip computers and electronic fuel injection devices in April 1980.

Stanley Electric Co

This company is the largest manufacturer of lamps for automobiles, but recently

it has pursued the theme of "fusion of light and semiconductors." It has put its

effort into bright light emitting diodes and colored liquid crystal diodes as electronic
parts suited for microcomputer cars.

Particular attention should be paid to the two~way colored liquid crystal displays,
for which the company has developed its own technology. They share the LED charac-
teristics of l) near-permanence,not humming out like light bulbs; 2) not producing
heat; 3) glowing with rapid pulses; and 4) saving energy by drawing little current.
But their greatest characteristic is the sharp clean image and wide angle of visibility
in comparison with the standard color liquid crystal displays. They are most highly
rated for brightness. They can be expected to be used in a broad range of applica-
tions, including automation equipment, measuring devices, audio equipment and
automotive instrumentation. Red, green, yellow and orange are already commercially
available. The company is now working to develop blue, and plans to have a lineup
of seven colors.

Stanley Electric has built up LED sales of 500 million yen per month; semiconductors
and related quipnent make up 20 percent of its total sales now.

Kanto Seiki Co

Advances in automotive electronics are being made in the engine compartment, but even
more so on the instrument panel. It is in this field that Kanto Seiki is a key
supplier to Nissan Motors.

For example, the TCU (time control unit) adopted for Nissan's Cedric and Gloria models
use Hitachi microprocessors, but assembly is by Kanto Seiki. The TCU provides pulses
regulated by a quartz oscillator to control the drive computer, intermittent wind-
shield wipers, turn signals and so on. Of course, it can be used to control audio
equipment, the speedometer and odometer, and Kanto Ssiki will put further effort

into this field. The company has already succeeded in creating an automoative

central warning device, and its next big task is a commercially viable liquid crystal
display panel for automobiles.

Nissan Motors considers the company a valuable member of its group, saying: "Kanto
Seiki will be ranked as a strategic company in the Nissan group, along with companies

like Nippon Denshi Kiki (fuel injection pumps), Nippon Automatic Transmissions, and
Ikeda Bussan (seats)."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other Suppliers

Jidosha Denki Co of the Nissan group supplies speed controllers. The Toyota group's
Aisan Industries has developed an electronic carburetor which is less expensive than
EFI. Yushin Seiki, which wants to unify mechanical and electrical components, is
eagerly working on an electronically controlled automatic transmission.

It can thus be seen that there is a crowded field of participants in the car
electronics revolution.

Table 1
Total Car Electronics

Driving Environment:

Sunroof

Automatic sir-conditioning (temperature, humidity,
air cleaner, acidity control)

Automatic control of seat position (front/back, up/down.
memory , cushion)

Exhaust Gas Recyclying-EGR (catalyst temperatures warning,
ignition timing, 02 sensor)

Displays:

Trip computer (fuel consumptionvolumnrate, arrival time
and remaining time and distance, cruising range. tempera-
ture, air pressure, central processing and display of
acceleration)

Digital instrumentation

Engine:

Total engine control system (drivability, optimization controls)

Automatic idle and choke controls

Ignition timing (knock prevention)

Air-to—fuel ratio control (electronic carburetor)

Electronic ignition (all IC--no contact points)

Semiconductor rectifier and voltage regulator

Safety:

Scatbelts (alarm, controls)

Light controls (automatic headlights, high/low beam control,
open circuit monitor)

Intermittent windshield wipers

Defroster (timer, automatic)

Mirror control (field of vision, antifogging)

Automatic door locks (when in motion)

Power windows

Road condition warming (ice sensor, external temperature)

Collision (radar controlled brakes)

Antilocking (antislip when braking)

Tire pressure warning and automatic control (sensors)

Monitors and warning (lights, etc)

Speed warning and control

18
FOR 0FFK1AI.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Driving:
Suspension and levelling (vehicle attitude control)
Lock-up type automatic transmission (fuel control)
Transmission shift (optimum gear ratio control)
Cruise (set speed) control fuel and brakes)

Power train (total system of engine and drive mechanism)
Other:

Electronic horn

Theft alarm and prevention (doors, ignition switch, steering)

Rain guidance and traffic guidance (a step toward automatic
driving)

Table 2

Electronics Suppliers to Major Manufactuers

Toyota Motors: microprocessor engine control system, electronic fuel injection,
solid state ignition, IC regulator, emission controls, cruise computer,
autodrive device, antiskid control, electronic automatic transmission,
power windows, automatic door locks, central warning device-Nippon
Denso; tachometer--Nippon Denso and Yazaki Corp; intermittent wipers--
Nippon Denso and Fujitsu Ten; liquid crystal car clocks-Jeco Co;
car audio-~Fujitsu Ten, Matsushita Electric and others.

Nissan Motors: engine central control system, electronic fuel injection-Nippon Denshi
Kiki; electronic carburetor—-Nippon Denshi Kiki and Hitachi; ignition
device without points, alternator with IC regulator, emission controls--
Hitachi and Mitsubishi Electric; drive computer, tachometer, central
warning device-Kanto Seiki; auto speed control, power windows, auto.
matic door locks--Jidosha Denki; antiskid control, electronic
transmission-Hitachi; intermittent wipers-éﬂitsuba Electric, Jidosha
Denki and Niles Parts Co; car air-conditioning-Nippon Radiators,

Diesel Kiki and Hitachi; liquid crystal car clocks--Kanto Seiki and
Niles parts; car audio-clarion, Matsushita Electric and others.

Mitsubishi Motors: Electronic fuel injection, ignition device without points, alternator
with IC regulator, emission controls, drive computer, warning system--
Mitsubishi Electric; tachometer--Yazaki Corp and Nippon Denso;
Intermittent wipers-~Niles Parts and Nippon Denso; car air-conditioning--
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries; liquid crystal car clocks--Jeco Co,
Yazaki Corp, Nippon Denao, Mitsubishi Electric and Niles Parts; car
audio-~Mitsubishi Electric, Clarion, Matsushita and others.

Toyo Kogyo: electronic fuel infection-Nippon Denso; ignition device without points,
alternator with Ic regulator, emission controls--Mitaubishi Electric;
tachometer, central warning device--Yushin Seiki; intermittent wipers—-
Asumo; car air-conditioning--Nippon Denso, Diesel Kiki and Hitachi;
liquid crystal car clock--Jeco and Copal Co; car audio-Clarion,
Matsushita, Pioneer, Veltik, Fujitsu Ten and others.

Honda Motors: electronic fuel injection for motorcycles, ignition without points,
car air-conditioning--Nippon Denao; tachometer--Nippon Seiki;
intermittent wipers--Mitsuba Electric; liquid crystal car clocks-
Jeco; central warning device-~Stan1ey; car audio--Matsushita, Fujitsu
Ten, Pioneer. Albion and others.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electronic fuel injection-Nippon Denshi Riki; emission controls--
Nippon Denso; tachometer-Yazski; intermittent vipers--Hitsuba
Electric and Jidoshs Denki; car sir-conditioning-Diesel Riki; liquid
crystal car clock--Yazski, Jeco; car audio-Clarion, Fujitsu Ten and

 

Isuzu Motors:

 

 

._——..‘

 

others.
Table 3
Height in American Pour-Passenger Cars (in pounds)

1977 1980's 1990's
Steel 1,000 to 1,170 925 to 1,100 875 to 1,075
High-tensile steel 60 to 180 50 to 200 75 to 250
Cast iron 190 to 210 70 to 200 70 to 175
Cast aluminum 55 to 85 80 to 125 75 to 115
Other aluminul 0 to 30 25 to 65 15 to 25
Copper and brass 10 to 25 15 to 25 20 to 30
Lead 15 to 20 15 to 20 15 to 20
Zinc 5 to 10 1 to 5 0 to 5 1
Rubber 40 to 80 35 to 45 35 to 65
Polymers 90 to 125 100 to 125 125 to 250
Pasteboerd 15 to 25 15 to 25 15 to 25
Glass 55 to 65 25 to 50 15 to 45
Tires 69 50 55
Other 100 to 150 65 to 260 30 to 120
Total 1,700 to 2.150 1,800 to 1.950 1,500 to 1,900

(Arthur D. Little, Inc estimates.

Table 6

Underline shows peak use.

Earnings of Automotive Electronics Suppliers (million yen) and yen

'Current Net Earnings
9222221 Date Sales Profit Profit per share Dividend
Toshiba Mar 81 1,567,611 82.816 66.238 19.9 7
Mar 82 1,760,000 90,000 66,000 19.6 7
Hitachi Mar 81 1,967,029 117,738 61,866 23.2 7
Mar 82 2,200,000 135,000 72,000 26.9 7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MACHINERY, INFORMATION INDUSTRIES '81 PROGRAMS OUTLINED
Industrial Technology, Computers
Tokyo KIKAI SHINKO in Japanese No 2, Feb 81 pp 15-31

[Article by the General Affairs Division of the Machinery and Information In-
dustries Bureau of the International Trade and Industry Ministry: "Measures

To Be Taken on Priority Basis by Machinery and Information Industries Bureau
in Fiscal 1981"]

[Text] Foreword

The machinery and information industries are given a position as typical knowl-
edge-intensive industries, whose products have great added value, and whose
technology spreads rapidly to other industries. Also, they are energy-saving
industries with high energy-consumption efficiency. We must establish an ad-
vanced industrial structure, if we want to build an affluent economic society,
in spite of the restrictions imposed on us by limited resources and energy sup-
ply. For the establishment of such an industrial structure, very big expecta-
tions are placed on the machinery and information industries.

With such a vision, the Machinery and Information Industries Bureau is endeavor-
ing to accelerate the positive development of technology and secure technologi-
cal independence for the machinery and information industries, so that these
industries can truly lead the development of technology in industrial circles.
Also, it has been taking various measures to give these industries a solid
foundation in accordance with the social requirements.

From such a basic point of view, this Bureau will vigorously push the following
measures in fiscal 1981. as heretofore.

I. Fostering of Up-to-Date Industrial Technology
1. Promotion of electronic computer industry.

(A) Acceleration of the development of basic technology for next-generation
electronic computers.

The electronic computer industry is destined to play an important role in the
processes of informationnlization hereafter, to meet the increasingly diversi—
fied and advanced needs among the people under the growing restrictions, such

21
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as the shortage of resources and energy supply. Moreover, it occupies a posi-
tion as a strategic industry to play a key role in the establishment of an
advanced industrial structure in Japan.

HITI, therefore, holds that it is one of the important problems for its poli-
cies to build an independent, stabilized electronic computer industry, and has
been taking various measures in this direction. As a result of the efforts
made by MIT! and by the manufacturers at home as well, Japan's electronic
computer industry is now gaining independence as an industry. For instance,
the liberalization of hard~ware imports was carried out in December, 1975, and
that of soft-ware imports in April, 1976. Nevertheless, the share of indigen-
ous products on_the home market remains at a level slightly higher than 50
percent, owing to the success in such efforts as the development of those
kinds of machinery which can rival foreign products.

However, IﬁH, which holds a share of about 60 percent in the world's electronic
computer markets. announced its completion of a big electronic computer of a
new type (3081), whose cost performance far excels those of the conventional
computers, in November last year. As a result, the development of electronic
computers, entered upon a new era (6th period). It is expected that this
period will see the introduction of new, epochqmaking technology concerning
hard- and soft-ware, to be accompanied by a drastic improvement in cost per-
formance, a beginning of new functions and a sudden increase in the range of
the use of computers. In such a situation, the urgent necessity of developing
a new'system of electronic computers for the next generation is growing steadily
in Japan, as well as in other countries.

A very large-scale integrated circuit, which is more advanced and speedier than
the present large-scale integrated circuit (LSI), is to play a leading tech-
nological role in the development of the hard-ware for the next-generation
electronic computer. This kind of LS! must be developed earlier than soft-ware
technology. with a subsidiary from the Government, its development was stepped
up smoothly from fiscal 1976 under a 6-year plan. The plan was carried out, as
scheduled, by the end of fiscal 1979.

For the development of a new system of electronic computers for the next
generation, however, new and extremely epoch-making functions are demanded of
not only hard-ware but also soft-ware and peripheral and terminal apparatuses.
It has been said that the gap in soft-ware technology between Japan and other
nations is even wider than that in the case of hard-ware technology. So, it

is indispensable for Japan to develop advanced technology in such fields as con-
trol programs and super-high-level language processors. In regard to peripheral
and terminal apparatuses, it is strongly hoped that the technology for process-
ing in Japanese will be developed in place of the present processing technology
centered on English, so that the processing facilities will become easier for
the Japanese to handle. Therefore, it is necessary to accelerate, by all

means, the development of such advanced technological devices as the Japanese—
language input-output device, a super-big storage capacity and external storage.

In view of this necessity, MITI decided to develop technology for the basic
soft-ware, or Operating System (05), which constitutes the core of soft-ware
technology, and the new peripheral and terminal apparatuses the technological
renewal of which is remarkable. under a unified study system covering all

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manufacturers (a union for the study of basic electronic computer technology),
and with funds totaling U67 billion, according to a 5-year plan for the period
from fiscal 1979 through fiscal 1983. It will grant a subsidy equal to 50
percent of the total expenses for development. In fiscal 1981, which is the
third year of this 5-year plan, it will push efforts for development even
more vigorously than before.

(1) Items for study and development.

(1) Basic soft-ware (OS).

(a) Basic technology (such as control of large-scale memory, RASIS, etc.).

(b) Network control technology (such as diversification of functions and that
of load).

(c) Data base control technology (technology for high-efficiency control of
data base. such as control of data base machine and mass storing and checking
of information).

(d) Virtual machine technology (technology for strengthening the diversity
of systems).

(e) Super-high-level language processor technology (program language tech-
nology which is extremely convenient and usable in character).

(f) Japanese-language data-processor technology.

(ii) New peripheral and terminal apparatus technology.
(a) Kane and kanji conversion input apparatus technology.
(b) Japanese pronunciation input apparatus technology.
(c) Japanese-language OCR technology.

(d) Japanese-language printer technology.

(e) Big-capacity magnetic disk apparatus technology.
(f) Big-capacity magnetic bubble apparatus technology.
(2) Expenses for study and development.
Subsidy--¥23.SOO million.

Subsidies from the General Account:

Subsidy for the promotion of the development of basic technology for electronic
computers—-¥6,200 million (35,785 million).

Subsidy for the promotion of the development of basic soft-ware technology--
YSJSO million ("0,910 million).

23
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subsidy for the promotion of the development of new peripheral and terminal
apparatus technology-41.050 million (I875 million).

(8) Research and study concerning the development of basic technology for
electronic computers (research and study for the development of Sth-genera—
tion computers).

It is expected that the environment around computers will undergo an even
greater change than before in 10 years to come, with the progress of informa-
tionalization. Also, it can be thought that the range of the use of computers
will expand drastically, to lead to development in such a field as office
automation, which is a combination between communications and data processing,
the progress of informationalization of education, and the emergence of a dis-
tribution system and data bank enterprises.

The computers, which presently are in use, are computers of the so-called
Nemann type. It cannot necessarily be said that they represent the best kind
of computers. It is said that a new kind of computer based on a new theory
and technology, or what is called the Sth-generstion computer, will make its
debut at the beginning of the 1990's. In foreign countries, efforts have
already been started for study and development of a computer of a new type.
As a nation to live by technology, Japan must give top importance to computer-
related technology, and develop new technology ahead of other nations.

Additional remark

The following can be cited as instances of the conceivable functions of the
Sth-generation computers:

(i) Functions as a computer with such advantages as everyday-language input
and output, conversation-type processing. and direct processing of figures,
images and sentences.

(ii) Functions to be discharged in place of man, including the making of
decisions.

(iii) Function of combining together the computers, which are used for differ-
ent purposes, into a unified system.

(iv) Programing as a function of the computer itself.
(v) Further development of high-speed computers.

(vi) Sel f-repairing function to minimize the effects to be produced by an
accident to the computer.

The following can be cited as instances of the technological problems for the
Sch-generation computers:

(1) Device technology: the technology for designing, manufacturing and test-
ing new elements, which technology is best fit for the theories of the 5th-
generation computer. and especially, the design automation technology, which
can automatically design the circuit for elements.

2;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(ii) Hard-ware and architectural technology: the technology concerning the
architecture of the non-Neumann type, which architecture can make the fullest
use of the functions of hard-ware by parallel calculation, as compared with
the present formula of successive processing, the function-diversifying sys-
tem architecture. which can build a system for the diversification of "e
fittest functions of a plural number of processors, the architecture for
advanced mandmachine communications, the associative memory and reasoning
and learning apparatuses, * which will make it possible to make advanced use

of computers as artificial brains, and automatic detection and repair of a
part out of order.

(iii) Soft-ware technology: the technology of making programs automatically
to answer the inquiries made in everyday language (natural language) or com-
piler language, the multi-function data base technology which can handle
figures, images and photos as well, and the data base control technology.

* Association--The function to take out the related information already
memorized, on the basis of one piece of information.

Reasoning--The function to produce a conclusion on a given piece of informa-
tion by inferring an unknown problem from information already memorized.

Learning--The function to memorize the contents of the measures to meet a new
problem in a highly usable form.

In View of such a situation, fundamental research will be conducted on the
problems concerning the development of technology for the Sth-generation com-
puters, and the schedule and systems for study and development of these com-
puters.

Subsidy to be granted from the General Account to help the study and research
concerning the development of basic technology for electronic computers (study
and research for the development of 5th-generation computers)—-¥15,0bb,000
(U0).

(C) Strengthening of the sales structure.

Electronic computers have entered a new generation (4th generation), with IBM's
announcement of its completion of a new kind of computer. It is expected that
the hard-ware price will fall drastically in this generation. It is unavoid-
able, therefore, that sales competition will become fiercer than ever.

In the recent multilateral trade negotiations (Tokyo Round), an agreement was
reached on a drastic reduction in the tariff rate for electronic computers.
So, it is expected that the market environment will become even severer than
before for the Japanese manufacturers, whose sales structure is vulnerable.

To secure a foundation for the lasting development of Japan's electronic compu-
ter industry under such a situation, the advancement of Development Bank loans
bearing the most favorable interest rate to Japan Electronic Computer Company
(JECC), which is a joint leasing enterprise, will be continued. At the same

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONU
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time, the specified period for the maintenance of the syntax of reserve funds
to cover the losses incurred by the repurchase of electronic computers, which
system was established against the losses due to the returning of rented elec-
tronic computers. will be extended. The advancement of Development Bank
loans to the manufacturers of electronic computers, too, will be continued,
for the improvement of the industrial structure.

Government investments: investments in the enterprises for the promotion of
home production of electronic computers (including JECC and enterprises for
structural improvement)--¥46 billion (“8 billion).

Tax system: extension by 2 years, of the period for the maintenance of the
system of reserve funds to cover the losses incurred by the repurchase of
electronic computers.

(Note)--JECC's leasing system.

JECC leases a system of computers, which the user has decided to hire, as its
own asset, at the request and on behalf of the manufacturer of this system.
The following is a emery of the leasing procedures:

(1) The user selects, jointly with the manufacturer, the kind of computer to
hire, determines the composition of the systen, and exchanges with JECC written
contracts concerning necessary matters, such as rent, the scheduled date for

the completion of the delivery and the site for installation.

(ii) On the basis of these written contracts, JECC concludes a leasing con-
tract with the user in accordance with the stipulations concerned.

(iii) The manufacturer delivers the system to the user on the basis of the
written contracts, and JECC purchases it from the manufacturer.

(iv) The manufacturer delivers the system to the user, after necessary adjust-
ments for its use by the user. The ownership of the system is transferred
from the manufacturer to JECC on the day of delivery.

(v) The user pays rent to JECC by the specified day of every month.

(vi) JECC will maintain the system in a way to keep it in normal operation,
and provide fundamental systems engineering (SB) and educational and program
services. All such efforts will be made by the manufacturer at the request
of JECC.

(vii) "hen the user wants to return the system to JECC, he shall notify JBCC
of his intention by taking procedures in accordance with the stipulations con-
cerned. The ownership of the system will be transferred back to the manufac-
turer from JECC on the day after the cancellation of the leasing contract, and
the manufacturer thereupon will remove the system.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(D) Promotion of the development of and transactions in general-purpose
soft-ware.

The period for the maintenance of the system of program reserve funds, which
system aims at stepping up the efforts of the Japanese information industries
for the development of general-purpose aoft~ware, putting this kind of soft-
ware on a paying basis and establishing a practical standard for softeware
trade, will be extended.

Tax system: The period for the maintenance of the system of program reserve
funds will be extended by 2 years (The rate of accumulation, presently fixed
at 50 percent, will be reduced to 40 percent).

(Note)--0utline of the system of program reserve funds: It has become certain
that computers will enter a Ath-generation period. One of the important char-
acteristics of the new period is expected to be a sudden increase in the weight
of soft-ware, which increase will follow the decline of the cost of hard-ware
due to renewal of technology. Furthermore. hard-ware (especially the main
body and the peripheral equipment and terminal unit) and soft-ware will be
separated from and become interchangeable with each other. Consequently, it
will become indispensable for the manufacturers of computers and the data-
processing enterprises to make soft-ware marketable as a commodity. It is no
exaggeration to say that the destiny of the computer enterprises in the 4th-
generation period depends on the success or failure in making softdware with

a high ratio of efficiency to the cost on a paying basis and marketing it as

a commodity.

Those enterprises, which have superior soft—ware technology and are in a super-
ior position in the market, can meet the requirements of the new era by the
complete transformation of soft-ware into a commodi: . For the Japanese com-
puter manufacturers and data-processing enterprises. however, it is difficult
to make soft-ware on a paying basis and market it as a commodity, because they
are technologically backward and because they have maintained a sales policy
treating soft-ware as an "addition."

To improve such a situation and make it possible for the Japanese information
industries to make softdwsre on a paying basis and market it as a commodity,
softdware of good quality. especially general-purpose soft-ware of high pro-
ductivity, must be developed as early as possible.

In view of this necessity, a system of reserve funds for the development of
general—purpose softdware was established as a part of tax reform in fiscal
1979. This system, whereby the limit on the accumulation of funds is calcu-
lated in connection with the income accruing from the transactions in soft-
ware, aims at offering an effective incentive to the efforts for two purposes,
that is, strengthening of the ability of Japanese information industries to
develop general-purpose soft-ware and establishment of practical standards

for making and marketing soft-ware as a commodity. The outline of this system
is as follows:

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR OFINCJAL.USE10NIJ'

a. Objects of the system: individuals and corporations engaged in soft-ware
business (including those doing it as a side business).

b. Programs covered by the system: programs developed at home and registered
with IPA as general-purpose programs, the dissemination of which is considered
desirable.

c. Limit on accumulation: #0 percent of the income accruing from the trans-
actions in programs and accompanying technological services.

d. Method of using accumulated funds: annual use of an equal amount for 4
years, after 4 years of deferment.

2. Promotion of aircraft and aircraft engine industries.

The aircraft industry and the aircraft engine industry are typical knowledge-
intensive industries, whose products have great added value. and whose technol-
ogy is most advanced and has extremely big effects on that of other industries.
It is expected, therefore. that they will play an important role in the efforts
to be made by Japan, as a nation to live by technology, for the establishment
of a knowledge-intensive industrial structure in a creative way. In reality,
however, Japan's aircraft industry is far behind those of the United States and
Europe. Moreover, it is extremely dependent on defense demand. So, it is ur-
gently necessary to endeavor to promote study and development in the field of
civilian aircraft production, above all. To this end, the following measures
will be taken:

(1) Promotion of the development of the next mainstay civilian transport (YX):

For the development of the aircraft industry, efforts will be made to promote
smoothly the development of the next mainstay civilian transport (YX). which is
expected to be in big demand in the civilian aircraft market hereafter.

The YX project aims at developing a ZOO-seat wide-body passenger plane, the 767
(twin-engined), as a joint enterprise of Japan, the United States and Italy, in
accordance with the expected trends of the market in the 1980's. This project
has been progressing smoothly, since the trial production of the plane was
started in October, 1978. To Japan is assigned the task of developing about

15 percent of the plane as a whole, and this share of work is centered on the
fuselage. Besides. Japan is taking part in the work in the general technologi-
cal field.

In fiscal 1981. the Government will continue to subsidize such efforts for de-
velopment as trial production of the YX and the manufacturing of a strength-
testing plane, as in the preceding fiscal year.

The parts developed in Japan will be sent to Boeing of the United States, which
is scheduled to start trial flights in September, 1981. It is expected that a
certificate concerning the type of the new plane will be obtained in the summer
of 1982.

28
FOR OFTWCIAL.USE(3NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The subsidy will be paid back to the National Treasury, if a profit accrues
from this project.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account for the development of civilian
transport (Yx)--¥2.043,040,000 ($6,943,060.000).

(ii) Conducting of research concerning the development of post-YX civilian
transport (YXX).

For further development of Japan's aircraft industry, it is necessary to push
development of the post YX civilian transport (YXX) in a positive way. From
such a point of view, the Policy Subcommdttee of the Aircraft Industry Depart-
ment of the Aircraft and Machinery Industry Deliberation Council proposed, in
its second interim report presented in August, 1980, positive efforts to
develop, jointly with other nations, a civilian transport of the 130-seat
class or a little larger by the middle of the 1980's, in accordance with the
future trends of the market.

Since last year, European and 0.8. aircraft manufacturers, too, have proposed

to Japan joint development of this kind of civilian transport, or joint research
in the form of exchange of information on a noncommittal basis, as a step pre-
ceding joint development.

The Government has decided to start such efforts as preliminary designing and
testing of designs in fiscal 1981, and grant a part of the necessary expenses
for these undertakings, in view of the necessity of establishing Japan's own
view on the aircraft to be developed, prior to the starting of joint develop-
ment with other nations.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account for research on the develop—
ment of civilian transport (YXX)--¥352,973,000 (‘0).

(iii) Promotion of the development of jet engines for civilian transports
(XJB).

In view of the trends of the market, it can be expected that strong demand will
arise, in the middle of the 1980's, for new-type engines with a thrust of the
9-ton c1a9g, which engines will be used for civilian planes of the l30-seat
class or a little larger (including the replacement of the engines of the
existing planes). So, efforts will be made to push the joint project of

Japan and Britain for the development of jet engines for civilian aircraft

(XJB Development Project), on the basis of the results produced by the study
and development of jet engines for aircraft under the big industrial technol-
ogy research and development system. The XJB Project is to develop, according
to an 8-year plan from fiscal 1980 through fiscal 1987, a high bypass jet
engine, which is characterized by less noise, less fuel expense and less pollu-
tion than other jet engines and which is expected to be in great demand here-
after. It is an international project to be carried out jointly with Rolls
Royce of Britain. on the basis of equal shares.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The contract concerning the execution of this joint project was concluded in
December, 1979. and went into force in late January, 1980. In fiscal 1980,

basic designing and tests were carried out. and the designing of particulars
and the manufacturing of the tools for the engine, which will be made on an

experimental basis, were started.

In fiscal 1981, designing of the particulars of the engines for trial pro-
duction, tests of various kinds and the manufacturing of the tools for the
engine for trial production will be continued. At the same time. the trial
production of the engine will be started.

This project is the first project started by Japan for the development of a
civilian aircraft jet engine for practical use. It is to be carried out by
Japan and Britain jointly, on the basis of equal shares. Moreover. the devel-
opment of engines requires extremely advanced technology, huge funds and a
long period of time, and involves big risks. because the funds used for such

a project must be recovered over a long time. The Government, therefore,

will grant a subsidy to help the Japanese side pay the expenses for this
project.

The subsidy will be paid back to the National Treasury, if a profit accrues
from this project in the future.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account for the development of jet
engines for civilian aircraft--¥4,722.157.000 (11.787.157.000).

Limit on the obligation to be borne by the National Treasury (in fiscal 1982)--
U3,819,660,000.

3. Promotion of data-processing industry.

(i) Strengthening of the enterprises of the Data-Processing Promotion
Enterprises Association.

The demand for the promotion of informationalization has become stronger than
ever, at this time when the nation must switch to a knowledge-intensive indus-
trial structure. Also, the development of the data-processing industry, which
nus: shoulder the burden of pushing informationalization. has become an impor-
tant policy problem for the Government, because the technological gap between
Japan and the United States in this industrial field remains to be eliminated.

In view of such a situation, the Government will endeavor to expand and
strengthen the activities of the Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Asso-
ciation, which was founded in 1970 for the purpose of pushing informationali-
zation and fostering the data-processing industry in Japan, with major
emphasis on the enterprises to be mentioned below.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account to meet the operational

expenses of the enterprises of the Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Asso-
ciation (including the expenses for special commissioning of the development

30
FOI.0F1ﬂC1AL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of soft—ware production technology and of soft-ware maintenance technology,
and the expenses for the promotion of the development of advanced data-
processing technolosy)--¥2.658,000.000 ($2,781,000.000).

(Note)--The Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Association: This Associa-
tion is the only national organization for the promotion of soft-ware. It

was founded in 1970 on the basis of the "Law Concerning the Data-Processing
Promotion Enterprises Association, Etc" (Law No 90, 1970). as an organization
to promote the development and utilization of programs and foster data-process-
ing service enterprises. It is dependent on investments by the Government and
private circles, donations from private circles and Government subsidies, for
the operation of its enterprises.

(ii) Promotion of the plan for the development of soft-ware production
technology.

The modernization or rationalization of the soft—ware production method, which
at present is labor-intensive in character, is an extremely important problem
which must be tackled in improving the productivity and reliability of indi-
genous soft-ware drastically. Especially, it has come to be demanded strongly,
with the growth of such trends as an increase in the soft-ware cost in recent
years.

Hith consideration for such a situation, this project aims at improving the
technology-developing ability and production structure of Japan's soft—ware
industry drastically to reach the American level, by switchover from the
traditional hand-operated soft-ware production formula to a formula of auto-
matic production with the use of electronic computers. It is expected to
produce various effects, including (a) the improvement of productivity and
(h) an increase in the reliability of the program.

This project is a long-term project which was started in fiscal 1976. It
will be brought to a successful conclusion in fiscal 1981, which is its

scheduled last year.

The sum to be earmarked for special commissioning of the development of soft-
ware production technology, out of the subsidy to be released from the General
Account to meet the operational expenses of the enterprises of the Data-
Processing Promotion Enterprises Assocation--I9IU,000,000 (¥1,672,000,000).

(iii) Promotion of the plan for the development of soft-ware maintenance
technology.

Soft-ware, in its nature, requires maintenance work, to meet the changes in
the environment for processing, such as the operating system, and the demands
of the users. The maintenance cost accounts for about 70 percent of the total
cost of soft-ware. 0n the other hand, the maintenance work is almost totally
hand-operated, and accordingly, is not veryproductive or reliable. It is a
principal factor for the rise in the soft-ware cost.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A 5-year plan will be started in fiscal 1981 for the development of a compre-
hensive system, which will overcome such a situation and increase the produc-
tivity and reliability of maintenance work by rationalization and automatiza-
tion (at a total cost of about ‘5 billion).

The sum to be earmarked for special commissioning of the development of soft-
ware maintenance technology, out of the subsidy to be released from the General
Account to meet the operational expenses of the enterprises of the Data-
Processing Promotion Enterprises Association—-¥140,000,000 (30).

(iv) Promotion of the development of advanced data-processing technology.

To secure the progress of informationalization in Japan hereafter, it is neces-
sary and indispensable to develop an advanced, complex data-processing technol—
ogy by the fusion of soft-ware technology with other kinds of technology, in
accordance with the progress of data processing. It has become difficult,
however. for the existing development organizations to carry out such a devel-
opment project. So, it is indispensable for the State to promote the develop-
ment of technology.

For the development of such an advanced, complex data-processing technology,
it is necessary to make a comprehensive survey of the elemental technology of
diversified kinds. The technicians. who are well versed in elemental technol-
ogy in their respective fields, belong to different organs or organizations.
For the development of these kinds of technology, therefore, excellent techni-
cians will be secured from various organs and organizations, such as data-
processing enterprises, computer-manufacturing enterprises, computer-using
enterprises and research institutes, to organize them into an ad hoc project
team for the development of technology. Because the technicians, who are to
take part in this project team, have their respective social foundations, it
becomes necessary for a public organ to coordinate and guide the operations

of the team. To meet this necessity, a soft—ware technology center (tentative
title), which is to serve as a theater of activity, will be established within
the Data—Processing Promotion Enterprises Association, which is the only public
organization for the promotion of data processing.

The sum to be earmarked for the promotion of the development of advanced data—
processing technology, out of the subsidy to be released from the General
Account to meet the operational expenses of the enterprises of the Data-
Processing Promotion Enterprises Association-~ﬁ395,53b.000 (131,912,000).

(v) Development of specific programs on a greater scale.

For the advanced use of computers and the promotion of the distribution of pro-
grams, the Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Association has entrusted the
deVelopment of those advanced, general-purpose programs, which it is difficult
for this Association to develop by its own efforts, to other organizations
concerned, and has been endeavoring for the dissemination of the programs
developed by these organizations. In fiscal 1981, it will step up its efforts
to have package programs developed by other- organizations on commission, with
a view to promoting the distribution of soft-ware.

32
FOIIOF11C1AL USEZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sum to be earmarked for the development and purchase of programs, out of
the subsidy to be released from the General Account to meet the operational
expenses of the enterprises of the Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Asso-
ciation-41.350.838.000 ($1,200,838.000), of which $300,000,000 G150,000,000)
is reserved for package programs.

(vi) Strengthening of the financial foundation of the data-processing industry.

The data—processing industry is given a position as a strategic industry which
is to play an important role in the improvement of the people's livelihood and
the establishment of a knowledge-intensive industrial structure. In reality,
however, its technological power and production capacity are still small. The
scale of enterprises in this industrial field, too, is smaller than those in
the United States and Europe. So, it is considered necessary for the Govern-
ment to take effective measures to bolster this industry. Especially, it is
difficult for the data-processing industry to secure smoothly the mount of
funds it needs under favorable terms from private banking institutions, because
it is only a short time since this industry came into existence, and because
this industry cannot provide enough security on which to borrow loans.

In viewof such a situation, the Government began to guarantee the debts owed by
the Data-Processing Promotion Enterprises Association in 1970. It has also
taken "financial measures for the promotion of data processing," in the form
of advancement of loans from three long-term credit banks on the basis of
acceptance of bank debentures by the Trust Fund Bureau. These measures have
been playing an important role in the development of data processing in Japan.

In fiscal 1981, too, the Trust Fund Bureau will accept bank debentures, to make
it possible to supply the necessary funds for the enforcement of these measures,
which have proved effective.

The Goverment will also make facilities investments necessary for the devel-
opment of soft-ware and education and training of data-processing technicians
by computer manufacturers and soft-ware enterprises and those necessary for
the on—line data-processing system to be established by the data-processing
service enterprises and others by the advancement of Development Bank loans.
Furthermore, the data-processing service is an industry of ublic nature, be-
cause it handles data concerning local public entities and theta. In View of
such a character, the Government will continue efforts to guarantee the safety
of the electronic computer system of the data-processing service industry, for
the prevention of such accidents as stoppage of the operation of this system
and the damaging or leakage of data. It will also record and clarify to the
public the state of implementation of the safety measures in this industrial

field .

01’

Subsidy to be released from the General Account for the promotion of safety
measures for the data-processing service industry-42,438,000 ($2,538,000).

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Government investments for the enforcement of financial measures for the promo-
tion of data processing (acceptance of bank debentures)--¥S billion (US billion).

Government investments in facilities for the development of softdware (Develop—
ment Bank loans)--to be disbursed within the framework of $66 billion (U68 bil-
lion) for the development of electronic computers.

Government investments for the promotion of the establishment of data-processing
systems (Development Bank loans)—-to be disbursed within the framework of
$06 billion (#68 billion) for the development of electronic computers.

a. Promotion of atomic energy apparatus industry.
(1) Acceleration of the introduction of atomic energy apparatuses.

The atomic energy apparatus industry is to play an important role in the estab-
lishment of an advanced, knowledge-intensive industrial structure in Japan, and
in the development of atomic power generation, which is expected to become the
principal source of energy supply to take the place of oil in the future. The
Government wants to increase the technological power of this industry by help-
ing the manufacturers of these apparatuses accumulate constructive experiences.
To this end, it will increase the amount of funds for advancement to this
industry.

Government investments in atomic power generation apparatuses (Development Bank
loans)--to be disbursed within the framework of $145 billion (I115 billion) for
the atomic energy industry.

(ii) Improvement of the safety and reliability of atomic power generation
apparatuses.

To remove the uneasy feeling harbored by the people about the safety of atomic
reactors and push the construction of atomic power plants smoothly, greater
efforts must be made to improve the safety and reliability of atomic power
generation apparatuses. Also, it is necessary to endeavor to secure the under-
standing of the people about the safety and reliability of these apparatuses.

For this purpose, the formula for the analysis of safety will be improved,

and demonstrative tests will be conducted on the sseismatic structure of re-
actors, the nature of fuel and the efficiency of valves, steam generators

and pumps. The results of these tests will be conducted also for the develop-
ment of a light-water reactor of the Japanese type, on the basis of the results
produced by the first and second rounds of improvement and standardization.

Furthermore, it must be made easier to control the operations and facilities
at the atomic power plants, so that the people's trust in atomic power genera-
tion will become complete. Efforts in this direction will be made in such
ways as follows: (a) to discover, as early as possible, any abnormality
which may lead to trouble; (b) to make it easier for the operator to recog-
nize the existence of such an abnormality and take proper measures to cope

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with it; and (c) to ease the burdens of the operator and inspectors in their
everyday control of operations and facilities and regular inspections. and
help private enterprises develop a support system conducive to the reduction
of even those minor defects, which are still discovered at present, by grant-
ing s subsidy amounting to two-thirds of the expenses necessary for these
purposes.

Subsidy to be released from the Electric Power Resources Development Special
Account for commissioning of the demonstrative tests on the reliability of
the atomic power generation facilities--¥7,780 million (97,176 million), of
which $1,241 million (¥521 million) will be earmarked for tests on the relia-
bility of pumps, and U730 million ($662 million) for tests on the reliability
of valves.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account for study and research concern-
ing the standard system for atomic power generation apparatuses--¥420,000
(¥420,000).

Subsidy to be released from the Electric Power Resources Diversification Sec—
tion of the Electric Power Resources Development Promotion Measures Special
Account for the development of an atomic power generation support system--
11,104,078,000 (U850,580,000).

(Note)--Contents of the development of an atomic power generation support
system.

The atomic power generation support system aims at easing the burdens of the
operators, examiners and inspectors and decreasing the damage to be caused by
accidents or trouble. For this purpose, the development of the (a) instruction
system. and that of the (b) automatic inspection system inside the container,
will be undertaken.

(a) Instruction system: This is a system to grasp comprehensively, with the
aid of an electronic computer, the information concerning the state of the
apparatuses, which constitute an atomic power plant, and their operations,
acquaint those in charge of the operations of these apparatuses with the nor-
mality of the apparatuses and their operations correctly, and give them proper
instructions concerning operations.

(b) Automatic inspection system inside container: This is a system to inspect
the state of the various apparatuses inside the container by moving a detector
on a rail or on the floor, under intense radiation.

5. Promotion of space industry.

The growing shortage of resources and energy supply has become an extremely
big problem for Japan,which is a small country, as far as indigenous resources
are concerned.

0n the other hand. foundations have already been consolidated for the utiliza-
tion of space, and it has become necessary to make active use of space for

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimental. observational and otherpurposes. Uith consideration for such a
situation, we must endeavor to implement Japan's resources and energy policy
in a positive way, and at the same time, study and develop the technology

for exploring for oil and other resources with the aid of resources satellites.
with a view to improving the technology connected with space development.

For this purpose, the system and technology for processing the data to be
obtained from such apparatuses as the synthetic aperture radar, which will

be carried by a resources satellite, will be studied and developed. Also,

the most suitable total systen will be studied.

Subsidy to be released from the General Account budget of the Resources and
Energy Agency for the development of technology for exploration with the use
of resources satellites-~US3.305.000 (I0).

(Note)--In fiscal 1980, a budget of 355,809,000 was given the Agency of Indus-
trial Science and Technology for the study of artificial satellites to be used
for the exploration of resources.

Subsidy to be released from the Coal. Oil and Substitute-Energy Measures Spe-
cial Account for the development of technology for remote detection of oil
resources--¥l,016,931,000 (U0).

Additional remark: Significance of fostering space industry.
(1) Foundation for space utilization.

(a) The utilization of space already has close bearing on the people’s live-
lihood, as can be seen from transmission via satellite in TV broadcasts, the
use of meteorological satellites for meteorological observation and that of
LANDSAT satellites for earth observation.

(b) It is expected that the role of space utilization will become extremely
big in economic life hereafter, with the expansion of these fields for space
utilization and the opening of such new fields as construction of space plants.

(c) The space industry is an industry to provide necessary means for the
utilization of space in these ways. It therefore is to constitute the basis
for space utilization.

(d) For the development of the utilization of space in the future, it is
necessary to improve, both qualitatively and quantitatively, the level of the
space industry. which holds a key to the materialization of this purpose.

(2) Effects of spread of technology.

(a) The technology for the utilization of space is a large-scale system tech-
nology, which requires the fruit borne by diversified technological efforts.
Especially for the apparatuses to be used in such a special environment as
space, it is necessary to meet such requirements as follows: (i) adaptation
to environment; (ii) reduction of the scale and weight; and (iii) high re-
liability. This means that high quality is demanded of these apparatuses.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently, it becomes necessary to improve the quality and extreme charac-
ter of these apparatuses, and an extremely high technological level will be
needed for their production.

(b) The space industry is an up-to-date industry which makes free use of such
advanced technology. This industry, therefore, is expected to play the role
of motive power for the improvement of the technological level of Japanese
industries.

(3) Industry of the next generation.

(a) The space industry is typical of the creative, knowledge-intensive indus-
tries which represent the concentration of advanced technologies, as is pointed
out in the Vision for the Trade and Industrial Policiesin the 1980's.

(b) It can be expected that the demand for the activities of this industry
will increase throughout the world hereafter, with the development of the use
of space. Also, it is expected that the space industry will serve as a nu-
cleus for the development of Japan as a nation dependent on technology.

6. Promotion of engineering industry.

The engineering industry is an industry which takes charge of all the pro-
cesses from the planning and construction to the delivery and operation of
plants. Characteristically, this industry has an "integrating function."

a soft function whereby many industries necessary for the construction of
plants are organized systematically, as its sales point. In character, there-
fore, the engineering industry is largely an industry to provide services of
advanced nature. It is a typical knowledge-intensive industry which requires
comprehensive technology covering all kinds of science, including civil engi-
neering, chemistry, mechanical engineering, metal engineering and environmental
engineering.

Also. the engineering industry has been developing since the 1960's, with the
construction of petro-chemical, oil-refining and other plants in accordance
with the policy of expanding heavy and chemical industries. It has been mak-
ing a contribution to the development of Japan's basic material industries.
At present, it is making positive efforts for overseas development by means
of plant exports. It is helping Japanese enterprises start activity abroad,
and at the same time, is making a contribution to the industrial development
of the developing nations.

As can be seen from this. the engineering industry is an important industry,
which holds a key to the development and utilization of the social systems
necessary for the establishment of an advanced welfare society through the
integration and concentration of human wisdom in diversified fields, and the
harmonious development of external economic relations through economic and
technological cooperation on the private level. Japan's engineering industry,
'however, has only a short history, and there is a big gap with those of Europe
and the United States in regard to the technology-developing capacity and the
foundations of enterprises. Therefore, efforts will be continued, as in fis-
cal 1980, for the establishment of the measures necessary for the development

37
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the engineering industry, such as the collection and compilation of infor-
mation concerning this industry, establishment of coma standards for engi-
neering, including those for the conclusion of contracts and the calculation
of prices, and the formulation of the measures for the training of project
managers.

Sum to be earmarked for research on the engineering industry, out of the
General Account budget for research on the trends for the development of
technology of the machinery industry-43,095,000 (33,439,000).

7. Promotion of robot industry

The robot industry is an industry requiring up-to-date technology, which com-
bines in itself machinery. electronics and information. All nations are mak-
ing positive efforts for the technological development of this industry as an
important strategic industry in the future.

Industrial robots will make it possible to automatize the production of diver-
sified kinds of goods in small quantities, and make a contribution to the dras-
tic iaprovement of productivity. Besides, they will produce big economic and
social effects, such as prevention of vocational disease, mechanization of
hazardous work and other kinds of work to be done under unfavorable conditions,
and the establishment of measures to meat the increasing ratio of old people
to the total population and the rise in the educational level of the people.

Because of the importance of the robot industry, concerted efforts of the
Government and people have been made, in a positive way, in Japan as well, to
develop and strengthen this industry. As a result, Japan's robot industry

has reached one of the highest standards in the world. It has become an urgent
problem to promote the spread of industrial robots hereafter, and establish an
advanced system for the supply of these robots. Because of such circumstances.
the following measures will be taken to promote the spread of robots in a
positive way:

Framework for Government investments (Development Bank loans) for the expan-
sion of the leasing business of the companies engaged in the leasing of robots
for private use-430,500 million (“3,000 million).

Robotization of hazardous work and work under unfavorable environment will be
pushed, with the use of the system for the advancaent of special loans for
the protection of industrial workers and the improvement of sanitary facilities.

Framework for the advancement of loans by the Medium and Small Enterprises
Finance Corporation for the protection of workers and the prevention of environ-
mental pollution--¥88,000 million ($84,400 million).

Framework for the advancement of loans by the People's Finance Corporation for
the protection of workers and the prevention of environmental pollution-

¥lb,000 million ($12,500 million).

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Promotion of technological development.

(1) Promotion of the study and development of large—scale industrial tech-
nology, etc.

Efforts for the development of "jet engines for aircraft," a "compound produc-
tion system using laser of ultra—high efficiency" and a "meter control system
using light" will be continued under the system for the study and development
of large—scale industrial technology. Also. efforts will be started for the
development of a "high-speed calculating system for scientific and technologi-
cal use." Besides, the development of "magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power genera-
tion" and "high-efficiency gas turbines" will be continued under the system
for the study and development of energy-saving technology (Moonlight Project).

Out of the General Account budget for the Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology, appropriations will be made for the following projects:

Development of a high-speed calculating system for scientific and technological
use (big project)--¥30 million (80).

Development of jet engines for aircraft (big project)--¥l,901,156.000
02.062.795.000): The operation of an engine, made on an experimental basis,
will be studied, with major emphasis on the long endurance test. high-altitude
landing tests conducted in Britain and tests for comprehensive valuation.

Development of a complex production system using laser of ultra—high efficiency
(big project)--Il2.7los.154.000 (32.825.047.000): An earnest study will be made
of technology for such elements as materials and optical machine parts. as in
the previous fiscal year. Also, the designing and construction of experimental
plants will be studied.

Meter control system using light (big project)--¥2.1018,6lo8,000 ($926,873,000):
A full-scale study will be made of light element technology, and of the total
system and subsystems of different functions.

Hagnetohydrodynamic (HHD) power generation (Moonlight Project)--¥623.8lolo,000
(0,321,871,000): mm power generation, which is characterized by a high
generating efficiency and the direct burning of coal, will be studied and
developed.

HHD power generation is a method of generating electric power by passing combus-
tion gas of high temperature (2.700 C.), which can be obtained by burning such
kinds of fuel as heavy oil, natural gas and coal. through an intense magnetic
field at high speed. The gas will be used to drive thermal power generation
turbines. for the generation of electric power. In this way. electric power
can be generated by the combination of Hill) and steam power. This method makes
thermal efficiency higher than that in the case of conventional thermal power
generation. If thermal efficiency is raised from 40 percent to 50 percent.

fuel can be saved by 20 percent. and exhaust gas can be decreased by 33 per-
Cent.

39
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of high-efficiency gas turbines (Moonlight Project)--¥S,919,8l8,000,
including $4,949,460,000 from the Electric Power Resources Development Promo-
tion Measures Special Account (ib,280.829,000, including $3,503,875.000 from
the Electric Power Resources Development Promotion Measures Special Account):
To increase the thermal efficiency of the power-generating gas turbine, a com-
plex power-generating system will be built, with the combination of a high-
temperature, high-pressure steam turbine using the high-temperature exhaust
gas of the gas turbine, with a high-efficiency, reheated gas turbine with a
high entrance temperature. This system will increase thermal efficiency from
60 percent to 50 percent, and, if combined with central heating and cooling
apparatuses, will make community power generation possible. If thermal effi-
ciency is increased from 40 percent to 55 percent, fuel consumption can be

cut about 27 percent.

Outline of the study and development of the high-speed calculating system for
scientific and technological use.

In the field of science and technology, ultra-high-speed calculation is strongly
desired for such purposes as high-speed processing of the images sent from
space satellites, simulation of nuclear fusion reactors and meteorological
analysis. To do this kind of calculation which is beyond the capacity of the
conventional electronic computers. it is necessary to have a computer with the
efficiency of more than 10 BFLOPS (Billion Floating Operation Per Second).

Such a computer will make it possible to widen the horizon of the various
branches of science.

In‘reality, however, there are bounds established by elements and architecture,
and it is impossible to meet the aforementioned requirements with conventional
technology. To break this deadlock, the following are necessary: (1) such
elements as Josephson junction (JJ), “EMT and GaAaFBT: and (ii) an architec-
ture like the formula of parallel processing, with the use of many basic pro-
cessors. In carrying out this project, these items will be studied and
developed, for the naterialization of a high-speed calculating system for
scientific and technological use.

(2) Promotion of the development of heavy machinery and trial production of
new kinds of machinery on commercial basis.

For the promotion of the establishment of an advanced industrial structure in
Japan, it is necessary to improve the technological level of industries, with
major emphasis on heavy industries, especially heavy machinery production.
So. efforts will be made for the effective operation of the system for promo—
tion of the development of heavy machinery (created in 1964). whereby loans
are advanced to provide equipment funds for those enterprises which purchase
new kinds of heavy machines turned out in Japan, for the first time, with the
use of new technology and design developed at home, and the system for trial
production of new kinds of machinery on a commercial basis (created in 1968),
whereby loans are advanced to provide the funds (equipment funds, etc) needed
by the enterprises which undertake trial production of mechanical equipment
to be turned out in Japan on a commercial basis, for the first time, with the
use of new technology and design developed at home.

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Framework for Government investments (Development Bank loans) for trial pro-
duction of new kinds of machinery on a commercial basis and development of
indigenous technology--¥bb billion (¥b7 billion).

Outline of the system.
(a) Development of heavy machinery.

This is a system for the advancement of loans to provide equipment funds
needed by those enterprises, which purchase heavy machinery turned out in
Japan for the first time, with the use of new technology developed at home.

while the machinery industry developed rapidly after the Har's end, the pro-
duction of new kinds of machines, which have been developed by new technology,
on a commercial basis has not yet made satisfactory progress, in spite of the
strong desire for the development and spread of such machines, for the follow-
ing reasons: (1) Trial production cannot be repeated easily, because the cost
of production per machine is too high; (ii) a large amount of funds must be
tied up for a long period, for trial production of a heavy machine which has
not been known at all; and (iii) users, too, feel uneasy and become reluctant
to issue an order for such an unknown machine.

In view of such a situation, MIT! in fiscal 196‘ established a system for the
advancement of long-term, lowbinterest-bearing loans to provide for users

the necessary funds for the purchase of heavy machines turned out for the first
time in Japan with the use of new technology developed at home, for the promo-
tion of the development and spread of heavy machinery.

(b) Trial production of new kinds of machinery on commercial basis.

To put the production of those multi-purpose machines. which are to be sold on
the market, on a commercial basis, it is necessary to make a considerable num-
ber of machines on an experimental basis in advance, and examine and improve

them from the standpoint of technology and design. In practice, this requires
huge funds. So, the manufacturers cannot afford to undertake production on an

experimental basis sufficiently.

HITI, therefore, established in fiscal 1968 a system for the advancement of
long-term, low~interest-bearing loans to help those enterprises, which under-
take trial production of those new machines to be turned out in Japan for the
first time, with the use of new technology developed at home, meet the expenses
necessary for the procurement of machines turned out on an experimental basis,
and other items which are to become their own equipment, for the promotion of
the development and spread of such machines.

(3) Promotion of the development of basic technology for the establishment of
next-generation industries.

For the development of technology as the foundation for Japan's survival as a
nation, it is necessary to improve the level of basic industrial technology,

kl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which level in Japan is lower than those of the United States and Europe.

The spread of basic industrial technology produces extremely big effects, and
is to serve as a pillar for the renewal of technology for a long time to come.
0n the other hand, it is expected that various risks will have to be met in
putting the basic industrial technology of revolutionary character to prac-
tical use. So, it is necessary to push its study and development by the com-
bined strength of industrial and academic circles and the Government. In
view of this necessity, a system for the study and development of basic tech-
nology for next-generation industries will be created, as a step to strengthen
drastically the basic technology indispensable for the establishment of the
next-generation industries, which are expected to come into bloom in the 1990's.
Under this system, study and development will be pushed vigorously by combin-
ing together the following: (i) the vitality and potential of private circles;
(11) large funds; and (iii) an effective formula for development on a planned
basis. As themes to be studied, problems concerning the development of basic
technology in such fields as new materials and new functional elements will

be selected, and private enterprises will be asked to develop this kind of
technology.

Sum to be earmarked for the study and development of basic technology for next-
generation industries, out of the General Account budget for the Agency of
Industrial Science and Technology--¥2,7lb,437,000 (U0); of this sum,
$1,356,642,000 (‘0) will be used for the development of new materials, and
¥673,250,000 (V0) for the development of new functional elements.

II. Development of Social System, Etc.
(1) Development of health care network system.

In Japan, many problems have arisen in the field of medical service, such as

the imperfect system of medical treatment, a regional gap in medical services,
the incomplete system of first-aid treanment and the increasing medical expenses
of the people as a whole. The development of a medical information system,
which makes use of computer technology and medical instrument technology, will
provide an effective solution for these problems.

Efforts have been made, therefore, since 1978, under a 6-year plan, for the
development of a "health cart network system," whereby the medical institu-
tions, such as hospitals, clinics and health-screening and medical inspection
centers. will be connected together, for joint use of advanced medical informa-
tion and advanced medical materials and unified use of health control data, and
for the establishment of advanced, rational regional medical systems. In
fiscal 1981, the development of a basic network and an application program will
be continued, as in fiscal 1980.

Sum to be earmarked for the development of a health care network system, out
of the General Account budget--¥221.869,000 ($221,849,000).

In Japan, there are various problems in the field of medical service. such as
the regional gap in medical services, an incomplete system for first-aid
treatment, and the necessity for patients to wait for 3 hours to receive a

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3-minute medical examination or treatment. For the solution of these medical
problems and curbing of the rise in medical expenses. it is indispensable to
develop and introduce a medical information system consisting of computers and
new medical instruments. In Europe and the United States, a large amount of
funds has been poured into the enterprises for this purpose. From this point
of view, efforts have been made to develop a health care network system by
combining together such medical institutions as hospitals and health-screening
and medical inspection centers, with a view to making possible the joint use
of advanced medical information and materials and the unified use of health
control data, and making a contribution to the establishment of advanced,
rational medical systems in the respection regions.

Functions of the health care network system: (a) use of health control data;
(b) joint use of advanced medical instruments and materials; (c) improvement

of the data-processing precision of hospitals and clinics: and (6) use of
advanced medical information.

(2) Research and study of a community energy system using substitute energy.

Energy-saving efforts must be pushed in the cities as well. For this, the
city as a whole must be treated as an integrated system covering the whole
process from production to consumption in the field of energy, for reduction
of the total energy consumption.

From this point of view, the feasibility of the "energy-saving urban mechani-
cal system," which will be constituted by three subsystems--regional energy
center (CBC). urban-system integrated circuit (IUC) and terminal for domestic
use, was studied in fiscal 1978 and fiscal 1979. in connection with the pres-
ent project. In fiscal 1980, a "community energy system using substitute
energy," which system will use coal as the primary energy source, was studied
on the basis of the results of the study in the preceding years, for switch-
over to the use of substitute energy. Also, the selection of model communi-
ties and basic research were carried out. In fiscal 1981, precise studies
and basic plans will be made to put this system on a paying basis.

Sum to be earmarked for the study of the plan for the development of a commun-
ity energy system using substitute energy. out of the Coal, Oil and Substitute
Energy Measures Special Account--Ub5,292,000 (362,167,000).

(Note)--ln fiscal 1978 and in fiscal 1979, however. "research and study for
the development of an energy-saving mechanical system" were made with an
appropriation from the General Account budget.

The community energy system, which uses substitute energy, can increase energy
efficiency drastically without the use of oil. Furthermore. it makes it pos-
sible to cut the cost of construction and the expenses for control and manage-
ment drastically, by the effective and comprehensive use and reuse of water
and various kinds of energy on a community scale, and by the establishment of
a unified, concentrated channel for the delivery of information concerning
water and energy.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(3) Promotion of the implementation of s new automobile running system.

The progress of motorization has been accompanied by the growth of such prob-
lems as frequent occurrence of accidents due to traffic congestion, environ-
mental pollution and a decline in the running efficiency of automobiles. As
an effective means of solving these problems, it has become urgently necessary
to implement a new automobile running system, which will give a simultaneous
solution to these problems, by the use of technology for comprehensive auto-
mobile control, which technology has been developed by a big project system.

For the smooth implementation of such a system, it is indispensable to study
not only measures for the dissemination of the comprehensive automobile con-
trol system, but also how to coordinate this system with other systems (such
as the existing road traffic information system and signal control system) and
secure the proper functions of the apparatuses to be carried by automobiles
for coordination. in order to establish a comprehensive vision. Question-
naires will be sent to experts on automobiles and electronic information tech-
nology. to seek theirOpinions on a new automobile running system. At the same
time. a committee will be formed with persons of learning and experience,
officials of ministries and agencies concerned and representatives of organi-
zations concerned as members, to study such a system.

Sum to be earmarked for the promotion of the implementation of a new automo-
bile running system, out of the General Account budget for the study and pro-
motion of pollution-free automobiles--!2,8l9,000 (12,819,000).

III. Positive Measures To Meet Social Requirements.
1. Promotion of energy- and resources—saving measures.

(a) Creation of new tax system for the promotion of investments in energy
measures.

A tax system for the promotion of investments in energy measures will be
created, to establish the energy foundations of industries by the accelera—
tion of investments in the energy-saving projects and enterprises for the
introduction of substitute energy, and overcome the rigid restrictions imposed
on Japan by the energy problem.

Outline of the new tax system.

(i) The taxpayer will be asked to choose between the deduction of 7 percent
of the cost of acquisition from taxation and the refunding of 30 percent of
this cost as an extraordinary step in the first year.

(ii) One-year carry-over will be permitted in regard to tax deduction and
extraordinary refunding.

(iii) The period for the application of these measures is 3 years.

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”ICHWNC]AL.USE13NLY

(b) Promotion of energy-saving and substitute-energy-developing measures
for such industries as casting and forging.

The casting and forging industries are unique in character, because they

must use a large quantity of energy to melt metal into a sand mold or heat

and plasticize metal for processing. To meet in a positive way the social
requirement of saving energy and developing substitute energy hereafter, it

is necessary to promote the introduction of energy-saving equipment, such

as industrial reactors of the energy-saving type, automatic burning control
apparatuses, cupolss of the divided blast formula, heat exchangers and mold-
ing equipment of the energy-saving type, and that of substitute-energy-using
equipment, such as industrial reactors using substitute energy. To meet this
necessity, financial and tax measures will be taken.

The Government will make investments in the form of the following loans:

Development Bank loans within the framework of 131 billion (#23 billion) for
resources- and energy-saving measures.

Medium and Small Enterprises Finance Corporation loans within the framework
of 393.7 billion (U75 billion) for other purposes.

People's Finance Corporation loans within the framework of $166.5 billion
(Vl37.5 billion) for other purposes.

The period for the application of the exceptional measures concerning the
standard for the levying of the fixed assets tax on the energy-saving equip-
ment, such as industrial reactors of the energy-saving type and cold box
molding machines, will be extended.

(c) Promotion of the resources-saving measures for domestic electric
appliances.

The reproduction of domestic electric appliances has important significance
for the effective use of resources and the smooth disposal of large-scale
refuse. Necessary research, therefore, will be continued in fiscal 1981, for
the reproduction of domestic electric appliances.

Also, the reality of after-service for broken domestic electric appliances
and the state of repaired domestic electric appliances in use will be surveyed.

Sum to be earmarked for the reproduction of domestic electric appliances out
of the General Account budget--¥3,566,000 (I3,54b,000).

(d) Promotion of the energy-saving measures for electronic and electric
appliances.

To make energy-saving electronic and electric appliances. efforts have been
made for the acceleration of the improvement of the efficiency of energy con-
sumption, in accordance with what is called the "Energy-Saving Law." For
further reduction of energy consumption. technology of decreasing refrigera-
tors' energy consumption will be studied and developed under the system for
the study and development of energy-saving technology (Moonlight Project).

1.5
son omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To save automobiles‘ energy consumption, such measures as the establishment of
guidelines for fuel expenses have been taken on the basis of the "Law Concern-
ing the Rationalization ofEnergy Consumption." The automobile manufacturers
are to step up their efforts for the reduction of fuel expenses in accordance
with these measures. The medium- and long-term energy supply situation, how-
ever, is becoming more and more stringent, as can be seen from the establish-
ment of a maximum limit- for oil imports at the Tokyo Summit. In View of such
a situation, it is requested of the automobile industry to start long-range
efforts for the development of epoch-making automobiles of energy-saving or
post—oil character beyond the framework of conventional technology. In fiscal
1981, therefore. the value of such new-type engines as pure alcohol engines,
hydrogen engines and Sterling engines and that of technology concerning auto-
mobile materials and for the prevention of wear and tear will be assessed from
an overall point of view covering such technological problems as reliability,
safety, freedom from pollution and fitness for driving and such economic
problems as the possibility of supply of substitute fuel, with consideration
for the trends of study at home and abroad, for the establishment of guidelines
for the development of energy-saving automobiles and decreasing of the depen-
dence on oil.

Sun to be earmarked for entrusting the study of energy-saving automobiles to
private organizations, out of the appropriation made by the General Account
budget for the study and development of pollution-free automobiles, etc.--
$3,602,000 ($3,602,000).

(f) Promotion of measures for the disposal of scrapped cars.

As of the end of fiscal 1979, there were 36,390,000 automobiles in use in the
country. The number had increased by 3.3 times in ten years. It is expected
to continue increasing hereafter.

Parallel with such an increase in the number of automobiles in use, the number
of scrapped cars, too, has been increasing, year by year (In fiscal 1979.
3,137,000 cars were scrapped). As a result, it has become necessary to esta-
blish rational systems for such purposes as follows: (i) disposal of the
scrapped cars abandoned on roads or vacant land; and (ii) proper collection

of scrapped cars for the prevention of pollution accompanying the growth of
the scrapped car disposal industry. So, the study of measures necessary for
the establishment of a comprehensive plan for the disposal of scrapped cars
will he continued.

Also. the advancement of Development Bank loans to the scrapped car disposal
enterprises will be continued, as in the previous fiscal year.

L6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sum to be earmarked for the promotion of scrapped car disposal measures, out
of the appropriation made by the General Account budget for the measures to

be taken to guarantee the safety of automobiles and prevent pollution-
l2,396,000 ($2,396,000).

Government investments (Development Bank loans) in scrapped car disposal fa-
cilities will be made within the framework of $31 billion (‘19 billion) to
be used for resources- and energy-saving measures.

2. Promotion of safety measures.
(a) Promotion of the safety of vending machines, etc.

Automatic vending machines have spread rapidly in recent years, and have be-
come indispensable for smooth consumer activities. Host of these machines,
however, are controlled by petty retail enterprises. As a result, the knowl-
edge necessary for the maintenance of the safety of the machines has not per-
meated among the public, and such accidents as tipping over have occurred.
Such a situation has made it a big problem to take necessary measures for the
safety of automatic vending machines.

So, the month of October every year will be designated "month for the promo-
tion of the safety of vending machines," with a view to spreading knowledge
concerning the safety of these machines.

Sum to be earmarked for the promotion of the safety of vending machines, out
of the General Account budget--UZ,989,000 ($2,989,000).

(b) Study of the measures for the development and spread of machinery for
the protection of the safety of industrial labor.

Efforts will be made to prevent casualties and pollution from occurring in
industrial fields due to the structure of machinery, in such ways as to sur-
vey the reality of the machinery for the protection of the safety of indus-
trial lsbor and establish the goals to be attained by the efforts for safety.

Also, a survey will be conducted over the cases of accidents caused by machin-
ery, criteria for safety and safety apparatuses, to establish common principles
for the protection of safety in all fields of machinery production. 0n the
basis of the results of such a survey, efforts will be made to extract the
danger in the respective fields, study measures for the prevention of danger
and confirm the safety by tests, for the establishment of JIS safety rules in
the respective fields.

Sun to be earmarked out of the General Account budget for the development and
spread of machinery for the protection of industrial labor--¥l,909,000
($1,909,000).

Sum to be earmarked for the research and study necessary for the standardiza-
tion of agricultural machinery, out of the General Account budget for the
Agency of Industrial Science and Technology--¥20,6LS,000 ($20,060,000).

1.7
roe OFFICIAL USE omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(c) Promotion of safety measures for casting and forging industries.

About 6,000 cases of labor casualties occur every year in the field of produc-
tion of pressed metal goods. So, it is necessary to promote the spread of the
pressing machines having safety apparatuses tor the protection of the safety
of labor in this field. Measures have been taken for the advancement of loans
for this purpose through the Medium and Small Enterprises Finance Corporation
and the People's Finance Corporation (in Okinawa Prefecture. the Okinawa
Development Finance Corporation).

0f the pig-iron casting processes, the finishing process consists almost solely
of handwork, and therefore, involves the danger of workers contracting
Raynaud's disease. So, efforts will be continued, as in fiscal 1980, to
develop an automatic finishing process for the casting industry.

Furthermore, the spread of automatic forging apparatuses, which have been de-
veloped by the use of computers for the automatiaation of the work of heating
materials and that of exchanging models, must be accelerated, for the preven-
tion of casualties accompanying work under high temperature, handling of mater-
ials and the work of exchanging models in the manufacturing of hot forged pro-
ducts. So. tax measures will be taken, as in fiscal 1980, to keep these

apparatuses as objects of the special refunding system for important complex
machines.

Sum to be earmarked for the study and development of the system for the auto-
matization of the finishing casting process, out of the General Account budget
for the Medium and Small Enterprises Agency (Medium and Small Enterprises Pro-

motion COrporation’s expenses for special study and development)—-¥72,657,000
(358,936,000).

Government investments for the acquisition and installation of the pressing
machines containing safety apparatuses:

loans will be advanced by the Hedium and Small Enterprises Finance Corporation
within the framework of ¥88 billion ($84.6 billion) earmarked for the advance-
ment of loans for the protection of safety and the prevention of pollution.

Loans will be advanced by the People's Finance Corporation within the frame-
work of $16 billion ($12.5 billion) earmarked for the advancement of loans
for the protection of safety and the prevention of pollution.

(d) Promotion of measures for the consumers of domestic electric appliances.

With the rapid spread of domestic electric appliances, the importance of the
measures to be taken for consumers is increasing steadily. So, various mea-
sures have been taken for consumers, including guidance about the period for
the maintenance of parts. For further promotion of these measures, the num-
ber of the items to be covered by the system of reserve funds for guarantee-
ing the quality of products will be increased.

h8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FEMICHHHCJAL USE‘ONLN

Tax reform: VTR and the electronic cooking range will be added to the list
of the items to be covered by the system of reserve funds for guaranteeing
the quality of products.

3. Promotion of environmental protection measures.
(a) Promotion of the spread of electric automobiles.

With the rapid spread of automobiles, automobile pollution has become a big
social problem. From the energy-saving point of view, too, it has come to
be requested that the way of automobile traffic should be reexamined.

To provide a fundamental solution for these problems,the study and develop-
ment of electric automobiles have been pushed under a big project system.

As a result, a technological foundation has been virtually established for

the improvement of the efficiency of electric automobiles. However, the tech—
nological problems, which must be solved for the practical use of the results
of the studies made until now. still remain unsolved. The conditions neces-
sary for the spread of electric automobiles, too, have not yet been estab-
lished. Research will be continued, therefore, for the promotionof the spread
of electric automobiles, and the measures for this purpose, too, will be
extended.

Sum to be earmarked for entrusting research on the promotion of the use of
pollution-free automobiles and that on the conditions for the spread of elec-
tric automobiles to private organizations, out of the appropriation made by
the General Account budget for research on the promotion of the elimination
of automobile pollution, etc.--U16,0b0,000 (l16,040,000).

(Note)--Under the system for the development of technology for big industries,
a sum of about $5.7 billion was spent on research and development in the 6-
year period from fiscal 1971 through fiscal 1976, mainly for the development
of electric automobiles to be used in the cities by concerted efforts of pri-
vate organizations, academic circles and the Government.

(b) Promotion of environmental protection measures in the field of casting
and forging industries.

The casting and forging industries are bound by their special character as
industries to turn out goods on order. They must meet the problems arising
from this character, and supply materials of high quality on a stabilized
basis, under a production structure free from pollution. So, a "comprehen-
sive committee on the problem of materials“ will be set up as a theater for
the study of such problems as environmental pollution, demand and supply and
labor force, and the measures to meet these problems. Furthermore, financial
and tax measures will be taken to encourage the establishment of facilities
and equipment for the prevention of pollution.

Sun to be earmarked from the General Account budget for guiding the efforts
to be made by casting and forging industries for the prevention of environ-
mental pollution, etc.-¥5,300,000 ($5,300,000).

1:9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Government investments in the facilities and equipment for the prevention of

environmental pollution in the field of casting and forging industries (such

as molding machines, foundation for the prevention of vibration and equipment
for the disposal of waste foundry sand).

Development Bank loans will be released within the framework of ‘82 billion
($82 billion), which will be used by HITI and other ministries as well for
the prevention of environmental pollution.

Medium and Small Enterprises Finance Corporation loans will be released within
the framework of $88 billion (¥84.4 billion) earmarked for the protection of
workers and the prevention of pollution.

People's Finance Corporation Loans will be released within the framework of
#16 billion ($12.5 billion) earmarked for the protection of workers and the
prevention of pollution.

Tax system.

Equipment for the disposal of waste foundry sand will be added to the list of
items covered by the special refunding system for the facilities and equip—
ment for the prevention of environmental pollution. Also, the period of
application of this system will be extended in regard to such items as the
hanging foundation.

(c) Promotion of measures for the elimination of PCB from electric machines.

The PCB Elimination Measures Committee will study measures for the removal and
elimination of PCB contained in such electric machines as transformers and
condensers. HITI has been supervising and guiding, through the Regional
International Trade and Industry Bureaus, the private enterprises handling
electric machines containing PCB, so that these machines will be used and
maintained properly. It will continue to strengthen such efforts.

Sun to be earmarked from the General Account budget for the study of measures
for the elimination of PCB from electric machines-¥ll,876,000 (111,876,000).

(d) Promotion of environmental measurement administration.

Examinations will be given by the State to the applicants for the status of
licensed environmental measurer. For the establishment of a proper system
for environmental measurement, such efforts as the establishment of standards
for the inspection of low-density air pollution meters, study and development
of standard gas of low density and the study of the measures for the ration-
alization of the system for the examination of clinical thermometers, all of
which efforts are to be made by private organizations on commission. and on-
the-spot inspection of the plants making environmental meters, will be con-
tinued, as in the previous fiscal year.

Furthermore, training materials (standard gas and chemical reagent), which
are used by the measurers' training institute in giving lessons on environ-
mental measurement, and electro-chemical meters, will be improved.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for state examinations
on the applicants for the status of licensed measurer--¥21,099,000
(n21,099,000).

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for environmental mea-
surement administration and measures to guarantee the safety of measurement--
U28,137,000 ($20,065,000); of this amount, $3,321,000 ($3,460,000) will be

used for entrusting the establishment of standards for environmental inspec-
tion, such as environmental pollution meters, to private enterprises, ¥8,b38,000
(¥8,h38,000) for entrusting the development of standard gas of low density to
private enterprises, and $6,171,000 ($6,172,000) for entrusting the study of

the measures for the rationalization of the system for the examination of
meters.

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for the measurers' train-
ing institute--¥28,370,000 ($27,902,000); of this amount, l21,264,000
(I20,976,000) will be used for instruction on environmental measurement, etc.

4. Promotion of regional development measures.
(a) Development of a mechanical system for settled habitation zones.

It has come to be desired that regional communities, which have serenity and
vitality. will be formed in accordance with the idea of settled habitation
zones. There has been a serious delay, however, in the extension of the
sewer system for the improvement of living environment and in the creation of
opportunities to secure attractive positions in the provinces. How to over-
come this delay has become an important problem.

In view of such a situation, a "small, mechanical system for wuste water dis-
posal," which can be built at a cost of about twanthirds of that of the exist-
ing sewerage, and which can also be operated and maintained at smaller
expense, will be developed, to improve living environment in the provinces
(under a 5-year plan covering the period from fiscal 1980 through fiscal

1984, with funds totaling $1.8 billion).

Furthermore, a "system for production and processing of food" will be developed
as a new, mechanical system necessary for the combination of agriculture,
forestry and livestock production. which are the major local industries, with
the food-processing industry, with a view to creating opportunities for local
residents to secure attractive positions in their districts.

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for the development of
a mechanical system for settled habitation zonea--U30.023,000 ($20,517,000).

(b) Promotion of the spread of welfare-related equipment.

The Government will endeavor to improve the system for the advancement of loans
to the enterprises engaged in the leasing of welfare-related equipment, with a
view to encouraging the use of the equipment necessary for medical treatment,
nursing and social comeback of the physically- or mentally-handicapped persons
and victims of serious diseases, and at the same time, improving the regional
systems for medical treatment.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equip-ant for the welfare of handicapped persons consists of extremely multi-
farious items, and their functions, too, are diversified. Furthermore, its
manufacturers consist mainly of medium and small enterprises which can give
publicity to their products only within a certain quantitative limit and in
limited areas. Under the present situation, therefore, it cannot be said
that equipment of excellent efficiency and quality is in circulation to meet
the elaborate needs of the users. To meet such a situation, and with con-
sideration for the designation of the year 1981 as the International Year for
Handicapped Persons, the Goverment will conend the excellent itans to be
used for the welfare of the handicapped persons, so that these items will be
known and used widely among these persons. It will also endeavor to help the
manufacturers' efforts for the development of technology and the improvement
of the quality and efficiency of their products.

Sun to be earmarked from the General Account budget for the couendation of
excellent equipment for the welfare of physically-Medicapped persons--
v2.oos,ooo (v0).

Framework for Goverment investments (Development Bank loans) in the enter-
prises leasing welfare-related equipment, etc.-'I30.S billion (“3 billion).

IV. Promotion of Strengthening of Foundations.
(a) Improvement and strengthening of materials industry.

Measures will be taken to secure the stabilized, lasting supply of materials,
make the quality of materials reliable, step up energy-saving efforts and
secure manpower. At the same time, such problems as demand and supply, sav-
ing of energy and labor will be taken up for discussion at the "comittee on
the problem of materials in general," with a view to establishing imediste
and medium-range measures to meet business fluctuations and external factors,
for the improvement and strengthening of the materials industry.

The Goverment will also continue to strengthen its guidance for the preven-
tion of pollution and the maintenance of security.

An appropriation will be made from the General Account budget for the pre-
vention of environmental pollution in the field of casting and forging in-
dustries.

(b) Promotion of measurement administration.

The system for measurement, like the coinage system, is one of the most fun-
damental systems in social life. The establishment of a uniform, reasonable
system for measurement is indispensable for the development of social economy.

The Measurement Law aims at establishing standards for measurement and carry-
ing out proper measurement. It contains provisions calling for such steps as
unification of the measuring units, securing of the supply of proper measur-

ing apparatuses, maintenance of proper standards for the weight of co-Iodities

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the promotion of controls over measurement. 0n the basis of this Law,
the Government will give tests to the candidates for licensed measurer and
make efforts for such purposes as dissemination of the idea of correct
measurement.

With the development of advanced industrial technology, there are increasing
cases which require standards to be relied upon for high-precision measure-
ment. So, a system for designation of the organs to provide measuring stan-
dards will be established in fiscal 1981, to improve the system for tracing
the standards within enterprises to national standards. Under the new system,
hardness and other quantitative elements of materials will be added to the
list of objects of measurenent. At the same time, the organs to provide
intermediate measuring standards will be examined.

Furthermore. such events as an exhibition on the history of measurement will
be held hmconnemoration of the 30th anniversary ofthe promulgation of the
Measurement Law, which anniversary falls on 7 June 1981.

Sun to be earmarked from the General Account budget for measurement adminis-
tration in genera1--¥26,333,000 ($26,333,000).

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for environmental measure-
ment administration and the measures for securing the safety of measurement--
328,137,000 (120,065,000); of this sum, $2,752,000 (I2,280,000) will be used
for the improvement of the system of industrial measurement standards, and
$5,289,000 ($0) will be used for the events to be held by private organiza-
tions, at the request of the Government, in commemoration of the 30th anni-
versary of the promulgation of the Measurement Law.

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget for the measurers' train-
ing institutes--¥28,370,000 (U27,902,000).

(c) Expansion of Machinery Credit Insurance Special Account.

To secure the smooth operation of the machinery credit insurance system which
is to play an important role in the modernization of the equipment of medium
and small enterprises, the funds, which are necessary for keeping the special
account for this insurance system on a sound basis, will be increased. Also.
the maximum limit for insurance contracts (provided for in the general rules
concerning budgets) will be raised, to meet the increase in the amount of
insurance.

Machinery Credit Insurance Special Account

Revenues and expenses--¥9,604.583,000 (M7,308,117,000)

Amount of insurance money paid-—¥2.S99.061,000 ($1,860,659.000)
Limit for insurance contracts--¥570 billion ($430 billion)
Limit for temporary borrowing--¥l billion ($1 billion)

Amount of capital-—¥2,170 million ($1,670 million)

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. Positive Measures To Meet Internationalization.
(a) Promotion of heavy machinery technology consulting business.

With the increase in the weight of Japanin world trade, it has become neces-
sary to build an advanced export structure on the basis of international co—
operation. Plant eXports, which are system exports representing the concen-
tration of technology and knowledge in a wide range of fields, can meet this
necessity. They can also serve as a kind of economic cooperation with the
developing nations. So, it is necessary to continue efforts for the sound
development of plant exports.

At present, however, Japan's plant exports are in a state of stagnation,
partly because of the violent fluctuations on the foreign exchange market.
As a result, plant exports now need even more multilateral assistance than
before. Especially, the strengthening of activity in the field of consult-
ing business, where Japan is left far behind Europe and the United States in
spite of the importance of this business as a forerunner of plant exports,
is strongly requested.

In view of such a situation, the Government will continue heavy machinery
technology consulting business, such as to provide consulting service for the
developing nations and invite foreign leaders concerned to Japan, through the
Japan Plant Association, as in the preceding fiscal year.

Sun to be earmarked from the General Account budget as a subsidy to heavy
machinery technology consulting business-~U36,402,000 (136,402,000).

(b) Promotion of measures for the adjustment of machinery exports.

Machinery today accounts for more than 60 percent of Japan's total exports.
So, the adjustment of machinery exports, or more concretely, the sound de-
velopment of plant exports and the prevention of trade friction over the
respective export items, has become an important problem for trade and indus-
trial policies.

The environment for plant exports has changed greatly, as can be seen from

the problems related to the international competitive power of Japanese indus-
tries, which problems have been caused by the drastic fluctuations on the
foreign exchangeunrket, the problem of accumulation of debts in the develop-
ing countries, which problem has now come to the fore, stagnation of the de-
mand for plants due to political unrest and the measures taken to meet the
request for cooperation among the advanced nations.

To secure the sound development of plant exports under these circumstances,

the Government will survey and grasp correctly the reality of the problems
confronting Japan's plant exports, and at the same time, set up a committee

of experts representing various circles, to study these problems from an over-
all, multilateral point of view and establish a guidepost to be relied upon in
guiding industrial circles. Besides, it will establish a structure for guiding
industrial circles on national and local levels combined, in order to expand
plant exports of medium and small enterprises.

Sh
FORl0FFK]Al.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore, the export of such simple items as domestic electric appliances
and automobiles has led to the occurrence of what is called trade friction,
as in the case of sudden expansion of exports to the advanced countries. To
prevent the occurrence of this kind of trouble, efforts will be made to
grasp the trends of exports correctly, and necessary measures will be taken
to promote orderly marketing.

Sum to be earmarked from the General Account budget--¥5,503,000 (V6,114,000).
(c) Promotion of the internationalisation of measurement administration.

In May, 1980, an "agreement on the technical obstacles to trade" (Standards
Code) went into effect. As a result, it became obligatory on Japan to "accept
foreign inspection data," as is provided for in this Code.

For the acceptance of foreign inspection data, a conittee will be established
to conduct research on the measurement systems, inspection systems and the
capabilities of inspection organs in foreign countries, with a view to
stepping up the internationalization of measurement administration.

Sum to be earmarked for the promotion of internationalization of measurement
administration, out of the appropriation made by the General Account budget
for environmental measurement administration and measures to guarantee the
safety of measurement-¥3,309,000 (U0).

COPYRIGHT: (Zai) Kikai Shinko Kyakai 1981

C80: h129/1818-F
References for Article

Tokyo KIKAI SHINKO in Japanese No 2. Feb 81 pp 32-56

[Text] (Reference ll)

Computers are the "central nervous system of the economic world" which play a
key role in an advanced and diversified society.

Some examples of the wide range of computer use:

Functions: Fields in which employed:

Business: *Production control, inventory control, sales management,
personnel management, salary tabulation, accounting pro-
cessing.

*On-line system of banks, reservation system for trains
and airplanes.

*Drivers' license and election monitoring.

*Horse racing and boat racing.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Scientific and
Technological
Calculations:

Management Science:

Information Service:

Information Search:

General Information
System:

Control:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

*Designing of machinery and atomic reactors, airplanes.
buildings and roads. City planning, ocean development,
designing and launching of satellites.

Management analysis, management planning, demand fore-
cast, economic forecast, operations.rcscarch.

*Information on stock market. buildings and land, labor
and occupation, used cars, opinion polls.

*Searches information on patent, court cases and
publications.

*Syatem for traffic control, weather forecast, pollution
information, medical information. home screen image
information system.

*Automation of nanufacturing nachinery (number control),
manufacturing process coutrol, automated operation.

56
FOR omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference #2)

Liberalization of hardware in December, 1975 and of soft-ware in April. 1976
completed liberalization of electronics calculator field.

(.421— 15314129101111;

3 I I: 3 $ (t
a)” 1&15

ammo-11.393335” 5051121119

comma: gunman.
.17 : B .

ems-123 1 8

200mm (”ea-m (”gymnastics mama

 

4951211 1 a R
“3900 14951211258

ﬁAﬂZﬂ.Wﬂ$ﬂ.lﬂlIlﬁ$

Key:
History of LiberalizatiOI:
A. Item 3. Liberalization of capital
C. Import liberalization D. Liberalization of technology imports
1. Computer 6. Parts
2. Main frame 7. Soft-ware
3. Peripheral equipment 8. Integrated circuit
4. Memory and terminal equipment 9. Number of elements-- 1-99
5. Others* 10. --100-199
11. --over 200
a. 6 August 1974 (includes IC for computers)
b. 1 December 1975 (includes IC for computers)
c. 24 December 1975
26 December 1975
1 February 1972
2d December 1975
d- 1 July 1974
c. 1 December 1976
f. 1 April 1976
g. 1 July 1976
h. d August 1971 (Excludes IC for computers)
1. 1 December 1976 (Excludes IC for computers)
1. 1 September 1970
19 April 1973
25 December 1975
k. 1 June 1978

t

Input. output and transmission control devices

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '3)

Computers. in response to technological advancement of elements used, go
through a wide range of model changes every 5 to 6 years. This time span

of S to 6 years is called a "generation." Generation changes have been led by
IBM. And for the domestic manufacturers. the central tactical issue has been
to develop a new system in step with generations changes.

The next generation system will see the super LSI in the center of hardware,
equipped with epoch-making basic softduare (08: operating system) aiming at a
drastic improvement in cost performance as well as the dramatic increase in
number of functions.

History of the revolution in semi-conductor technolggz:

Basic hardware: Vacuum tube Transistor IC LSI Super Human
(computer lat 2nd 3rd 3.5th LSI brains
generation) 6th
Time period: 1906— 1960- 1965- 1970- 1980-
Complexity
(Number of l 1 30-50 1.000- several
elements) 10.000 million
Capacity: several 10
(In terms of under 1 under l 10 bits 4.000 million billion
memory) bit bit bits bits bits
Impact: radio transis- satellite micro- PS

tor radio com— computer

puter

How many can fit
into 10cm3 cube: 4-5 - 150 S 100 several several
(No of parts) million million 10 billion billion
IBM model: 701 7,090 360 370 PS (Future

303 X System)

58
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FINICNHWCJA1.USE(MVLY

(Reference IA)
Development of a very large-scale integrated circuit (Super LSI), which is to

be the core of the hardware technology of next-generation computers, was car-

ried out for 4 years between 1976 and 1979 with a government subsidy of about
29 billion yen.

System for Super LSI Development

1 a¥nmeasxm

3 811.51 mummmsl. a)

lililliiiiiil
‘50 12Dec 1975

U
3
:3
a
‘I
E
Q
81

 

‘<

General Institute for Electronics Technology: a) Guidance

Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation: b) Cooperation
Super LSI technology research group

Joint research institute

Group lab (Fujitsu-Hitachi-Hitsubishi)

Group lab (Nippon Electric-Toshiba)

OUbUNI—‘ﬁ

nee...

What is Super LSI? Electronics computers are made of 10 thousand to 100
million transistors and resistors. If those many parts were used separately
and in their original form for construction, the finished product would be
so large it would be impossible to put to use.

It has been possible to make small computers owing to integrated circuits
(IC: 10-30 transistors integrated) and large-scale integrated circuits (L81:
1 to several thousand integrated). At present, computers can be built using
10 to 20 thousand LSIs.

Furthermore, a super LSI for future system (PS) use has tens of thousands
to several hundred thousand transistors (tens to hundreds times more than
L81) making the density 100 times more than at present. It will take only
several hundred SL815 to build a present day computer, thus minimizing the
size and accelerating the speed even more.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Capacity:

Memory:

logic circuit:
Speed:

Size and Weight:

Price:

Reliability:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Present situation:
6,000 hits

100 circuits

8/10 million second

size of a locker

l yen/bit

Super L51:

several million hits

several 10 thousand
circuits

2/10 million second

size of a desk-top
calculator

0.05 yen/bit

malfunction rate 1/1000

(Reference '5)

Generation:

1st

2nd

3rd

3.5th

4th

Through access

Local, batch
processing

Hulti-programming
processing

On-line processing

Multiple distrib-

uted processing
for end users

Processing Hethod:

Soft-ware (Operating System):

Loader (read commands in computer language and
operate).

Assembler prograllung system (symbolize computer
commands and translate a language).

FORTRAN programming system (translation of scien-
tific language and execution management).

Continuous processing of jobs.
ALGOL compiler (translation of scientific language).
COBOL compiler (translation of business computer

language).
IOCs (input-output control).

Multiple processing of jobs (parallel processing
of jobs).

Time-sharing processing (time-sharing language
processing).

PL/l compiler (translation of general-purpose
language).

On-line management (control of various terminals).
Virtual memory control (technology which makes execu-
tion of programs larger than actual memory possible).

Virtual Iachine function (virtula computer function).
Network control (transaction of large data among

many systems).

Data base control (centralized control of large data).
Processing of characters, patterns, image and
Japanese language (from "data" processing to
"information" processing).

Super-high-level language processing technology
(anyone can use high-level computers).

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

(Reference 96)

New Computer Development Abroad: Present stage of virtual processors. data
base machines and parallel processing machines abroad.

Developer: §zg££gz Type of machine:

Bell Research Institute XDMS Data-base machine
University of Toronto RAP Data-base machine
University of Florida CASS! Data-base machine

Univac DBP Data-base machine

IBM DBC Data-base machine

Goodyear STARAN Association processor

CMU C.nnP, 03* Parallel processing machine
Bell Research Institute PEPE Parallel processing machine
Seimens SHS Parallel processing machine
Purdue University PH“ Parallel processing machine

Data-flow processors abroad:

Developer: Stage of development:
Toulouse University (France) experimental stage

TI (U.S.A.) experimental stage
University of Manchester (U.K.) planning stage

HIT (U.S.A.) (Dennis) preliminary discussion stage
University of New Castle (U.K.) preliminary discussion stage
University of California (U.S.A.) preliminary discussion stage
HIT (U.S.A.) (Abington) preliminary discussion stage

University of Utah

(U.S.A.) (Davis) experimental stage
University

University of Utah (U.S.A.) (Keller) preliminary discussion stage

. 61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.couuouau coauauOuaounuHoo 30:3 95!? 3359.00 .w
65:39:— unwed—05—
uOu 3w you-388 vowel—.93 3080.596 .n «can»: none—Bu consensus 33753: .c
6023 32.. we won»... 3°C.; .5!» 332—900 .0 Juana—sou 9538;5389 .3333 .n
.wﬁ'auuoun $2. :0» ads: 3.39.525 unsu ennui—Boo .~

«0 coupon—.33» 05 3259 now-«o 3359—8 .n .558 can once .8». :33 away—Elev .H "508

     

             

ml1.u\.nhemw.!llm.u C 4$KA§~§HK O
T aux. unis“: 5.5!: e «Luann—58:339.. e 3:.
I n a "sauna-3:
« .uAnnglv‘ «118585 6 «I hanméCEﬂ G
«Inbx nhESw‘Kéimkoh e «Inhxnwﬂg: .3 .36 1.562500
4$KAIQI2IR
03
3.3.93». « 80.5»
to.
no: _..N
m K . £75305.—

225.303

«5. 25032.

30:93.—
havh—go .893 «N E

in & mm ‘ 039’

”0060086

 

3.33230 5n 0..» mo 332—500
Flam; negamﬁ Anyoucououo5::.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

(Reference '8)
Tariff rate: Japan has continuously lowered tariff.

Tariff record for computer related equip-eat: (percent)

~WEEIII-
(all)

    
 

   
      
  

    
 

1 _-_-_—- Is

2 mum-Iz-

3 —m:::-«—--:--:-

4' _wmg-—-—__

s _rmmm m. m m—

6 mum-namin-
mil-E-

   
   

   
 

8
9
10
Key:
A. Item a. working rate
3. Date 1). conventional tariff

C. Computer main frane
D. Peripheral equipment

E. 1c

1. Conventional tariff 6. Revision of custons tariff law

2. U.S.-Japan negotiated rate 7. Step-by-step reduction of tariff

3. Across the board reduction in (at the rate of 1/8th each year
tariff 8. Results of above reductions

lo. Signing of "Geneva Agreenent" 9. Results of above reductions in 11.8.
5. Raising of conventional tariff 10. Results of above reductions in 3.0.

*front loading

(Reference) 1. At the titre of Tokyo round talks on tariff reduction, par-
ticipating countries decided to gradually reduce starting in 1980. from the
can" rates. 0n 1 January 1987 the new reduced rate will be effective.

2. Aside from the above decision. Japan has also decided to reduce volun-
tarily its working tariff rate.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
61:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '10)

Share of Different Computer Manufactures by Countries:

  

(based on cost)

rs
Installed &
outside of 3
U.S.A. I
:r n
(45.4%)
installed

inside U.S.A.

Total cost: 82,189 million -- late
as of the end of December. 197-.

(Reference 011)

 

 

Comparison of 0.8. and Japanese Plans (unit: 10 million yen)
Japanese maker (reference)
Item 1m (1979) (A) A. E’ujitau (B)/(A) In! Japan
1979 B rcent 1979
capital 8.722 370 6.2 750
sales 50,177 5,010 10.0 3,262
profit before tax 12,187 336 2.7 730
profit rate 24.32 6.71 -- 22.52
debt/equity ratio 61.02 25.61 --- 62.61
escarch & development 2.985 “75 15.9 --

:_____________________________——-—————-———

The above figures include all sections of the companies. When limited to
computer department, differences become greater.

Debt/equity ratio - capital/total assets x 100

219.47 yen to a dollar was used as an exchange rate which was the 1979 average.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference #12)
JECC's performance on rentals:

The JECC system runs on the following two wheels; 1) government financial
funds drawn in through the Development Bank and 2) unified rental contracts
based on a registered price decided by a basic agreement with stockholder
nanufacturers. This is a very unique system in the computer rental field.

As the rental system diversified, as mentioned earlier, each manufacturer
set up a similar subsidiary for rental purposes. Rovever, JBCC is the only
company with the above-operational characteristics, which played a major role
in the development of indigenous models. The figure shows the rental perfor-
mance of JECC.

Purchases and Rental Income of JECC: hundred “1:131? en mu

Key:

A. Purchases

3. Rental income

C. Period of the lowest prime rate
D. Period of the highest prine rate
3. TerminatiOn of small model

 

involvement g
n
a
O
5
(ca)
78

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e #13)

ent of YX--breakdoun:

   

 

xy-‘J‘xuwu aux, -. r 12

. Developed by Japan
. Developed by Bee in:
Developed by Italy

e 6. vertical tail
nt body 7. vertical rudder
s rib 8. elevator
dle body 9. horizontal tail
k body 10. tail

6?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11.
12.
13.
1a.
15.

  

flap

front
engine
wing f
radar
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference I110)

Schedule of Development:

       

I
I max; ‘1'" Vans-am-
l . . .
5". 55/: 55/1
‘ CInI-IIIII
(5m) (2.)

   

55/ B-August 1979

“e" 55/7-Ju1y 1980, etc
1. Year 53-1978 A. Design
2. Year 54-1979 3. Equipment
3. Year 55-1980 C. Test planes, plane for vigorous
4. Year 56-1981 testing
5. Year 57-1982 D. Test flight
6 Year 58-1983 E. Put to service
a. Go ahead f. Assembly
b. Couuencement of domestic g. Transfer of parts
designing of specifica:ions h. R011 out
c. Start manufacturing parts 1. Initial test flight
d. Equipment assembly 1. Hode1 proof
e. Parts manufacturing k. Start delivery on manufactured p1anes

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference #15)

Yxx Project: Estimated Schedule

1980 1981 After 1982

Research on future Research on future demand Negotiation for joint
demand according to ____ from each airline compa- _.development (partner
models and areas. nies and their design selection)
(computation) requirements.

(field research)

(tentative agreement)
Decide specifics of joint
development-marketing.

Analysis and report on
design requirements.

on so

u see

(final agreement)
Start development
(go ahead)

Preliminary design.

as .- so a. no a. me .- u as so so so on .0

Preliminary design approval :
test using a wind tunnel.

Exchange of information with foreign airlines concerning future demands.

(Reference 0 16)

The Second Interim Report: By Policy Subcommittee of the Aircraft Industry
Division of the Council on Aircraft and Machinery Industry.

Aircraft Industry's Future--Its Capabilities and Problems

Japan's aircraft industry is gradually becoming stronger as seen in its devel-
opment and sale of the YS-ll and the development of the YX. Nevertheless, it
still lags behind 0.5. and Western European nations in sales, marketing and
technology. To overcome this gap, although a hard task, and to become fairly
competitive with those nations by raising capabilities is the immediate task
of the Japanese industry. What should be done to accomplish this?

The first thing that should be done is to carry out a developmental project
on civilian aircraft and to create capabilities that will lead to profitable

business. For this purpose, active development, manufacturing and sales of
serviceable civilian aircraft is essential.

The second thing that has to be done is to raise capabilities for technologi-
cal development. This requires sctive basic and applied research and coordina-

tion between the two.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) Developmental project on civilian aircraft: The following is the fore-
cast on projects before year 2000, as judged from the civilian aircraft mar-
ket of the future.

1. It is generally understood that only very limited mnber of models will
be involved in the new developmental projects on existing aircraft unless,
although unlikely, the engine power becomes dramatically larger. It is
likely that after mid-1980's, a new model with about 100 to 150 seats will

be developed since the demand for that size aircraft is estimated to increase
around that time.

2. There will be developmental projects on all size crafts, except for types
with 100 seats or less, in order to create modified models based on the exist-
ing ones.

3. There also will be projects, from the end of this century to the begin-
ning of the let century, aimed at developing future type aircraft, such as
the STOL Aircraft (short airstrip for take off and landing), high-speed
turboprop craft, hydrogen airplane and new type of supersonic airplanes.

Based on the above forecast, it seems appropriate to develop. among existing
models, one with around 130 seats. Incidentally, Japanese aircraft manufac-
turers have received a proposal for Joint development of civilian aircraft

with 130 seats or a little larger from the following manufacturers: Fokker

of Holland; Airbus Industry, a joint organization of France, West Germany,
Britain and Spain; Dassault-Bureqee [phonetic] of Trance- and MacDonald-Douglas.
Of these companies, Fokker, Airbus Industry and Boeing of the United States
have proposed conducting joint research aimed at information exchange on a
noncommittal basis in order to investigate the possibilities of joint develop-
ment.

Therefore, it will prove beneficial for Japan and for the development of the
Yxx, a civilian aircraft to follow the YX, to aggressively pursue joint devel-
opment, on an international basis, of a craft with l30-seat-capacity or a
little larger with the mid—1980's as the target period.

Also, Japan should not neglect to work to develop a new model craft, modified
craft based on the existing models and future crafts as the future demand
rises.

(Reference 017)

Characteristics of Jet Engine Development:

1. Jet engine development is a high-risk project. It takes 8 years to develop
an engine and 4-5 years for an aircraft. Research and development requires a
large sum of money which is several hundred times larger than the selling price.

2. Recently, there have been many cases of joint development on an international
basis. The 0.5. and many Nest Buropeaa governments directly and indirectly
extend their all-out support to the industry.

3. The Industrial Technology Institute has engaged itself since 1971 in a huge
project which includes research and development of a fan jet engine with a 4.5-
5.5 ton thrust impellent force and the establishment of basic technology needed.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ence 918)

1e of Development

 

N33”.
55.. m 5... mi 5... mu:
1m - '
2

 
  

”.13.”: '1 w’vﬂllﬂt

I 3
I I
5 mummi— -

wlﬂxvo’vﬂQ-Iﬂ \ I
ea] I

 

 

 

asic design

pecification design of ground testing engine
evised maintenance design

anufacturing of ground testing engine

est drive of engine for ground testing

evelopnent of engines for test flight and model approval
esign and manufacturing of engine for test flights
est flight

esign and manufacture of engine for model approval
eat drive of engine for model approval

lements testing

egin development

egin development on test flight engine

vet engine model approval

:nd of development

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference 019)

(1) Status Quo of Data Processing Industry in Japan

Number of offices and employees, annual sales.
More than 1,000 companies engage in data processing

5' , . ‘ Anna-1:9 use
H‘W-a‘mu- m .7 - 1:3 -mm

495%"- |l.322 591'A|2.(53.P!I {4A

I
505E .l.276'57 2.751 45

am: ,mvsgso .3-070 n
52:: ”540.72 4.126 44
san: -1.572'11 '4.602 '46

53 ’49:).
ilﬁlﬁlU-Ii'.

 

Source: HITI "Report on Statistical Survey on Specific Service Industry."

a. number of offices
b. Number of employees (thousand)
c. Annual sales (100 million yen)
d. Per office

1. number of employees

2. annual sales
e. Per capita annual sales

*Average growth rate

(2) Breakdown of Offices According to the Size of Sales

More than half of the offices have less than 100 million yen sale annually.

Less than 100 100 million to More than
Year million zen 1 billion zen 1 billion xen Total
(percent) (percent) (percent) (Percent)
1974 62.6 34.2 3.1 100
1975 57.8 37.7 4.5 100
1976 53.7 41.4 4.9 100
1977 51.3 43.9 4.8 100
1978 49.9 44.8 5.3 100

Source: MITI "Report on Statistical Survey on Specific Service Industry."

72
FOR 0FFHJAI.USE(DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference #19) [continued]
(3) Percentage of Different Types of Services.

Soft-ware development, program writing and sending out of computer personnel
have increased.

 

w L
19710
1975
40 1976

1977
1978

 
   
 
 

 

' . ._.;.;.;.;.;.;.;.;.:.:.;.;..-_.,.:.:
v \\ _ \ .
.2‘ “E 5.15;“ l‘..‘"‘.-‘;- "

 

§§.
2.1- -: V 1| x
\frl ~>\: ~~ § ‘§. 4 §-.
_ I SQ -_. x .\ \‘
x \Q :' ' \ ,
: '~ «i :f \ -‘ § ‘“
e . § § \ -
_ \\; {J \\ .r \ n_ \ .
o : §: .1 § \ '\ \ R: -
E3 lﬂ %
‘f a F N GD
19
1,; at m «a
a
Z

   

A. Computing

8. Soft—ware development/Program writing
C. Cardpunch

D. Machine time sale

E. Sending out of computer personnel

F. Information provision service

G. Others

Source: MITI "Report on Statistical Survey on Specific Service Industry."

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '19) [continued]

(4) Overall Comparison of 0.8. and Japanese Data-Processing Industries. (1978)

There is a wide difference between the size of 0.8. and Japanese data-processing
industries.

 

Item U.S.A.§A) Ja an Ratio SB/A)
Number of companies 3,391 1,336 0.39
Total sales

(100 million yen) 15,382 6,602 0.30
Sales per company

(100 million yen) 4.54 3.46 0.76

Source: INPUT Company, Report on Survey on Specific Service Industry.

(5) Comparison of Major 0.8. and Japanese Soft-ware Industries. (1978)

Major Japanese soft-ware industry is about one-tenth the size of that in the
United States.

 

0.8. Japan
Item A Sﬂote I) D SNote 2)
Sales (100 million yen) £23 55
Operating income (100 million yen) 68 2
Employees 6,169 A74

Note 1: Average of 5 major 0.8. companies. (Computer Science Corporation,
Planning Research Corporation, Automatic Data Processing Inc, Informatics,
System Development Corporation.

Note 2: Figures for Japan are the average of 17 major soft-ware companies
that contribute to the Joint System Development, Inc.

7:.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference 020)

Promotion of Projects To Develop Soft-Hare Production Technology:

Program production is presently carried out manually. These projects are
aimed at developing a new system capable of automated production byorgan-

izing and assemblying the program modules mechanically. This new system
will be the basis for the establishment of soft-ware industry as an inde-
pendent industry with a modern production mechanism.

Development Relations:

  
 
 

  
  
 

  
    

1.“.
M 9
I x
I 1'
= A
II
1 I u e
U u a
I 0 a
2 .2 .
m a
3
I
V I
6 'E ’1' A “"903; ‘
(ev.-~wxme>
Key:
1. Government 6.
2. Subsidy
3. Data Processing Promotion 7.
Association (IPA) 8.
4. Guidance and supervision of 9.
development 10.
5. Joint System Development Company
(an)

75

<¢I2I

O
”x

¢Btl

.-
O
law—mm-

¢Bél

0000..

was. nun
9mm :3)

Leasing of modules (Module
Research Group)

Subcontracting

Core industry

17 major corporations in the field
Group industry

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference I 21)

 

 

mo

 

5 Ratio of soft-ware to total data processin cost.

    

anglazrxanév7ral7awl

 
 
  
 
  
  

  

  

M
’\- F957
60 - hard-ware
w
v7roira?
n

soft-ware maintenance

 
 

I95 19m 1!“

(Reference 9 22)

Overall 5 stem of soft-ware maintenance 1.
technologz development project:

2.

ﬁvuav7+alr 1 1

I a.

A " c 5-

i ‘* a

I Q __ "7f 6

lg. H Ti!" 1d ‘

f ’ 'i-aﬁ—z y
B "

' -/-7.707"L. f'! A
’ l mmu ; '
g Int-31>} .f
_ 3 A B.
T
L

c.

 

—s

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soft-ware to be maintained.
Program analysis group.
Document production group.
Revision and exchange group.

Verification and examination
group.

Soft-ware after maintenance
process.

Unified control system.

Maintenance information,
date-base.

Sourcs program. analyzed
information, document, etc.

Maintenance information
management system.
FOR OFFMJAL.USEGDNL¥

(Reference '23)

Development of Advanced Data Processing Technology at the "Soft-Hare Technology
Center" (a tentative name) of the Information Processing Promotion Association:

A.
B.

C.

I 7o;.7rﬂ1rs«,g
A G R I U

   
   
 
 

"Ionic commune-I
3«.... \ » erov.7ril

['IRWI!
Bg-ulxaa/anaoMUL
L'Inm479-7.-ana ﬁsgzggo)

IQVO'JIﬂ-va-Vw
(109.7 til.)

--0

7 avr.-7

8%...

Ad-hoc research group for different projects

Division of labor among researchers

Extraction of know—how through discussions

Interfacing linkage along different technologies

Space and project management offered by a public organization

Project: researchers (technicians)
Users

(Operational knowledge in applied fields)

Computer manufacturers (08 related technology)

Data processing industry (soft-ware production technology)

Project manager of the Association (project management and control
Computers

Source material

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference 0 26)

Breakdown of Operating Budget at Information Processing Promotion Association
(IPA-4981)

( ) - 1980 figure. Investment and contributions are from 1970. 71 and 72.

 

Private Sector Government
____.___ _.,__

. . '.'eoooeeeooooooeeoemo
Investment and Investment Subsidy: Funds .using
contributions. 1.05 billion 2.658 billion yen. department.

1.03 billion yen. yen. (2.781 billion yen.) (A bank deben-

. : : ture acceptance.)

2 : : 5 billion yen.

' : : (5 billion yen.)

IPA own income 715 million yen. Long term trust
( 595 million yen.) bank. (3 banks)
Trust fund Development promotion enterprise. :

3.373 billion yen. (3.376 billion yen.)

 

o

Loan gu,'rantees.l. Specific program development. 1.351 billion Loans for program

development .

Maximum 20.8 yen. (1.201 billion yen) 5 billion yen.
billion yen. : (5 billion yen.)
(based on 2. Development of soft-ware production tech- ,
remaining nology. 970 million yen. (1.672 billion yen)
amount) :

. 3. Development of soft-Hare maintenance tech-

nology. 140 million yen. (0)

10. Promotion of the development of advanced
data processing. 395 million yen. (0)

5. Others. (Program dissemination, research.)
517 million yen. (503 million yen.)

seem-aeeouoeee
noun-cessaaessoa-osuoo

Data processing Soft-ware industry. Industries in
service industry. general.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference !25)

Instruction System:
Basic Concept

   

***** Target for deve

Key:

1. Plant 1. Plant

2. Measuring 2. Measuring

3. Computer to supervise plant 3. Computer to supervise plant
capabilities capabilities

4. Control panel/display operating 6. Control panel
machine 5. Data display

5. Data display 6. Instruction system

6 Operator 7. Operational data

7. Operation 8. Operator

9. Operation

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '27)

Utilization of Satellite Data:

lﬁa'ﬁ‘5t‘l‘f zﬁﬁmc‘y-y

5‘55””; seamenu

7MHIB'EEBhbﬂl-ﬂﬂ

8ﬂlIﬁﬁﬂ0ﬂtl

Key:

1. Visible nearninfrs-red sensor 6. Ground surface—topography data

2. Synthetic aperture radar 7. Geological formation-dock iden-

3. Spector data tificstion and classification

6. Three dimensional image 8. Prediction of areas of undiscovered
5. Rock classification resources

Utilization of Space in Universe and Its Effects:
Area used in: Comunication—Conmunication among fixed ground stations.

Method: First, orbit geostationary communication satellite equipped with a
repeater. Y'nrough the satellite, effective conunication and broadcasting
using microwave and quasi millivave among ground stations throughout a wide
area is possible.

Effect: It is more effective. in terms of long distance communication and net-
work couunication. than building undersea comunication cable or ground micro
link system.

Area used in: Comuniutiow-Conunication among mobile stations.
Method: Conduct effective comunication among ship, plane and autosobile

using milliuave and quasi milliwave through geostationary communication
satellite equipped with many repeaters.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference #27) [continued]

Effect: It can investigate the state of land use in urban and other wide
areas. It will also make effective crop survey of agricultural products.
The system can supervise the state of environmental protection of land,
areas of water inland and the sea around Japan.

Area used in: Earth observation-«Observation of the ocean surface.

Method: Observation satellite, at a low to mid altitude with various radars
and VNIR capable of observing ocean surface movements such as waves and cur-
rent, will observe the area and send back information through an image data.

Effect: Information on ocean current and the ocean wind will enable ships to
choose the most effective route in terms of time and fuel. Data will be also
available on the movement of the schools of fish which will prove beneficial
to marine product affairs.

Area used in: Earth observation--Land observation.

Method: Land observation satellite will be observed simultaneously from vari-
ous points on the ground using waves and laser. This enables the precise
measuring of the distance change between two points and the topographical
change in certain areas.

Effect: It will increase the scientific knowledge of earth and contribute to
the forecast of earthquakes.

Area used in: ientific observation.

Method: By using satellites with observation equipment such as optic and
wave telescope and others, astronomical observation can be conducted. Also
probe ship will investigate planets far from the earth.

Effect: It will increase scientific knowledge of space.

Area used in: Space plant.

Method: Satellite with equipment such as solar reactor and culture equipment
manufacture special material in high altitude vacuum and no gravity.

Effect: Through this system, manufacturing and processing of material, utili-
zation of resources hard to get on earth becomes possible.

Area used in: Space power generation.

Method: Solar power generation using power generation satellite. The satel-
lite has a large frame filled with solar batteries.

Effect: Extremely large amount of regenerative energy can become available.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDRiOFF1C1AL USEZCNQLY

(Reference '27) [continued]

Effect: It is possible to comaunicate with any mobile stations on the ground
surface at any time. Also it enlarges the transmission capacity of the line,
upgrading the quality of comunication.

Area used in: Communication--Mavigation method if airplanes and ship.

Method: Marine and air satellite with a repeater or a transmitter can offer,
to ships and planes, information needed to insure safe operation and compute
the most appropriate route.

Effect: Airplanes and ships can have access to navigational information at
any time, ensuring safe journey and energy conservation.

Area used in: Broadcasting.

Method: Make available to people spread in a wide area. high quality broad-
casting through geostationary broadcasting satellite equipped with a high-
power repeater .

Effect: Higher quality reception is available regardless of location or
topography of the area.

Area used in: Heather forecast.

Method: Heather satellite. equipped with a spector sensor which captures ground
phenomena. observes the weather of a designated area and sends information to
the ground as image data. In addition, it repeats weather data collected by
ground equipment or transmits a weather map to users.

Effect: Quality of daily forecast will become higher. At the same time, it
will contribute to disaster prevention and minimization of damage by predict-
ing typhoona, heavy rain and others.

Area used in: Earth observation--Resource probe.

Method: Resource probing satellite equipped with SAR. VNIR and others capable
of investigating geological characteristics is orbited to low and mid altitude.
It will observe the area and will send back information by image data.

Effect: It promotes effective resource probe by sorting out the areas of
possible mineral deposits.

Area used in: Earth observation--Ground surface observation.

Method: Observation satellite, located at low to mid altitude equipped with
optical sensor capable of detecting plants on the ground surface. will observe
the area and send back information through an image data.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '27) [continued]
Area used in: Space medicine.

Method: A patient is transferred from earth to space under low gravity and
is treated in no gravity atmosphere.

Effect: This is convenient for the treatment of the circulatory or skeletal
system ailments.

Area used in: Utilization of are resources in space.
Method: Send to the noon surface the resource excavating equipment in order
to find useful elements and minerals. Bring small planets with the reserve

'in useful resources close to the earth for excavation.

Effect: Resources needed for space development can be obtained in space. It
can also provide the earth with resources needed.

Area used in: Space tourism.
Method: Transport tourists to space.

Effect: Demand for transportation to and uéilization of the space in uni-
verse can be accomplished.

Area used in: Processing of waste material using space.

Method: Pollution causing waste material difficult to process on earth is
discarded into space.

Effect: Better environmental protection is attained on earth.

8%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\\\‘

w&&\\

 

\\\\\\?x;. . 3?:
\\\\\\\Vv\\ \: .\

 

General-purpose type.

Hitachi C.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ulsting System for Scientific sad Technological Use:
' its concept. ("hen Josephson junction element is u

datum
A \" 3 ﬁvwnesnmmnum

 

low temperature control system.
computer using Josephson junction element.
stem.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USEZONLY

(Reference '30)

The Status of Technological Development in Japan and the Trend in the United
States and Europe.

1. Today's industry and technology.

Efforts in technological development in Japan, compared with Europe and the
United States. have so far produced less in quantity and in quality as well

since Japan has concentrated its efforts on improving on existing technology
rather than developing epochmaking ones.

Unless this trend is corrected, Japan will always have to submit itself to
following the paths of those countries.

Innovativeness of research and development in United Kingdom, United States
and Japan:

'TIIﬁ'
Epochmaking ~------ (3) (nutter)

   
 
   

-- U.K. (total 1.5)

---- Japan (total 26)

' (mum mm» (m --- U.S.A. (total 23!.)

mom - Substantial change

Based on the report by Gelman polling firm. (Couldssioneu by the NSF in 1976.)

Note: 500 develop-eats of new technology which resulted in manufactured
products between 1953 and 1973 were sorted according to the coun-
tries and the degree of innovativeness.

87
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE10NLY
(Reference '30) [continued]

The percentage of money used for basic research in Japanese industries is de-
creasing every year.

10

     

(a) ,.

«6 “41480951853

(Reference 0 31)

Comparison of Amounts Spent on Research and Development Among Countries:

For total RSD, Japan spends a little less than one-third the mourn the United
States spends. Japan's ratio of money spent on R51) against GR? is lower than
West Germany and France.

 

12

105
a
R 6 D cost (Ll‘lllioﬂ) s
X
ll 6
R
4
I

Is)
..__L_

B T E 7
I F 9
u 4 “I
t n *1 2
Ratio of R a 0 cost "“"f'" 1.7 2.4 2.0 L8
nonrn
against GNP (as) (1cm (me) (1913) (1911)
Total research cost mxnu 35100 99.555 31.556 18.308
(31'!)
Japan U .s .A . Heat France
Germany
88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1“. USE ONLY

(Reference #31) [continued]

of the total Rab cost. the percentage of government subsidy is dramatically
lover in Japan than other developed nations.

56 '- - ___——.. ......
100

'3'!

Total
research cost 0
in industries :50

     

if
R
I
a
I? Government
g subsidy
10 u
4 E
4' w
'1 4
z 7
@s @8
Tot B I ”'0 0 an” 2m RF!
research cost 3“”
in industries. Japan U.S.A. U.K. West
Germany (trillion yen)

From: Kagaku Gijutsu Yoran (Scientific technology handbook.)

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2338.. no»? 8.2.8. ‘5 23m

nuance!

   

   

«In; glue!
shoauo: \ozu.

 

unauouazan unwouuuwum

 

 

0

 

$5-. I
0 MUG
MUUCUU Hﬁu G

5:033.“ .3253 can ”559—3 530:

an g 00:30qu

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference '33)

Illustration of Community Energy System Using Substitute Energy:

.L*1919L

. 33:39sz

.T ﬁﬂvzia
.ﬂzﬁnyz9A
.Iﬂa 'RIVXiL
. 2st V191.
.7-’-'71fL
.dilaiﬂ71ia

0'.

d
s
t
l
h
i.
j.

........ 3

3ﬂlx$~¥-o«v,-

Total control by computers

Data on gas, electricity and water
supplies

Local energy center

Hater supply system a.
Multipurpose water system b.
Sever processing system

Gas provision system c.
Power provision and generation d.
system e.
Local heating and cooling system f.
Solar systan g.

Garbage transport and process- h.
ing system

Flow system 1.
Data control system

91

    

. 1: ma
. INK WHO MOE-f

lo. Household terminals
5. Urban system integrated circuit
6. Group of terminal equipment

Water supply terminal equipment
Multipurpose water terminal
emnpmuu

Gas equipment

Lighting and household equipment
Sewer system

Air conditioning equipment

Power provision

Everyday life image data terminal
equipment

Energy control terminal equipIunt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference I 3!.)

Exhaust Gas Conparison:

Passenger Cars that neet (1'0 node)

cars: 1975 regulations 1976 regulations 1979 regulations

C0 2.13/KIII Sale Sans

nc 1.253/Km Sane Sane

N0: 1.23/Kn 0.6 0.25
0.85

Comparison of noise on acceleration:

Unit: dB(A)

Present Plans for
regulation M

Truck :Over 3.5 tons

:Over 200 horsepower 86 83

Bus 30ver 3.5 tons

s as u u so

:Under 200 horsegver

:Under 3. 5 tons

so

Passenger car : 81 78
*Proposal made by Central Col-ission on Pollution in May. 1976.

Electric car and energy conservation:

      

Key
A '2 Z’I‘Hl‘777> A.
2 ll 1 1 B.
5 Women»
All 9" ‘
'3 s‘ ; slam a g
m 7 '
- a! I suns-9 b
I a.
5" 5] 8.
l0 4* c.
‘5 3* it?” c d.
2_ e.
l-
o , _ .
ssannmrmmz (manna mu )
92

Total oil consumption (kl/10 years)
Comparison of total oil resource

consmption (10 years)

Small passenger car
Small truck

Car msnufsc turing period

Material manufacturing period

Operation period
Internal coabustion engine
Electric car

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric

OOO

Unit: (130]
Electric

 

70-75

60-65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Reference ’35)

Specification and Performance of Cara Developed on an Experimental Basia in
a Large-Scale Project:

Canaan iabnaa 'unam
lrsva sly-cam":

&(-).3155 3.410 3.140 4.590 9.300
m 4-) 1.420 I 1.500 1.355 1.695 2.400
2 It.) 1.430 1.400 11.605 H.050 3.060
lineman L427 '1.461 inssa 3.595 .14.045

15an (a) ' ‘ 2
ﬂkn‘ﬂ (ll) 300 1.000

as nan-m —: 7 0 9 0
00(4sz

Uta] E 7) (an)
(0-m/h) '

I i I ”(la/h)
(7 $0108)

NOMéUNO—U

0

 

Key: A. Model
B . Speci f icationa
c. Subconpact electric truck

a. Subcompact electric car d. Compact truck

b. Compact electric car e. Haas-transit electric bus

1. Length (ma) 6. Maxim- speed (km/h)

2. Width (m) 7. Mileage (km) on one charge

3. Height (ml) (at 60 lea/h)

I4. Height (ks) 8. Acceleration capability (sec)

5. Maximum number of passengers (0-00 km/h)
(persons) 9. Capability to go uphill (km/h)
Maximum capacity 053) (7 percent slope)

10. Over (00 kin/h

*A revised node]. from the first developmental project. Acceleration capabil-
ity is based on 0-30 km/h and the capability to go uphill was measured on a
6° alope.

COPYRIGHT: (Zai) Kikai Shinko Kyokai 1981

9782
C50: 8129/1818 END

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY