FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10496

8 May' 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 28/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATIOL
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 28/82)

CONTENTS

ECONCHIC

BELGIUM

Journal Accuses USSR of haudulent Pipe Sales
(Steve Polus; POURQUOI ”8?, 28 Jan 82) ..............

FRANCE

Economist, Mauroy on Reduced Workweek, Unemployment
(VALEURS ACTUBLLES, 22-28 Feb 82, LE 5013, 5 Mar 82)..

Sauvy Analyzes 39-Hour Week, by Jean-Francois Gautier
Mauroy Writes to Belgian Paper

Farmers' Union Leader Interviewed on Agricultural Policy
(Florence Portes Interview; PARIS HATCH, 19 Feb 82)...

POLITICAL

mam. REPUBLIC or 6mm ‘

North mine-Westphalia's Rau on SPD, Greens, Coalition
(Johannes Ra“ Interview; STEIN, 25 “at 82) eeeeeueelee

Kohl's Choice for a CD0, CSU Cabinet Given
(Martin Bemstorf; CAPITAL, Apr 82) eooeeeoeee-oouoeee

SPRIN

Spaniards' Allegiance to Democracy Allegedly Increasing
(cho 16, 29 Mar 82) OOOOOOOOOOIOOIOCOIICDICOIIOCOIU

-s- [III-WE-l

$0? OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

FRANCE

SNIAS, Thomson-CS? Collaborate on Antimissile Project
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET 003105, 27 Mar 82) ............

uremissile Group Completes Studies on Antitank Hissiles
(Pierre were“; AIR ET 003103, 27 Mar 82) oooeoeooeeoe

Briefs
Air-to-Air Missile Test
Antitank Missile Night Launches

GENERAL

FRANCE

Japan, South Korea Show Interest in Super Puma, Satellites
(mmm, 27m82) .0000....‘OIOOOOOOOOIOIQOOO...

Briefs
Second Ariane Launch Complex

ITALY

Revised National Space Program for 1982-86 Approved
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET COSMOS, 3 Apr 82) .............

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC BELGIUM

JOURNAL ACCUSES USSR 01" FRAUDULENT PIPE SALES
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 28 Jan 82 pp 12-13
[Article by Steve Polus: "Hhen Brezhnev Screws the Belgians"]

[Text] At the risk of being very vulgar, one should recall that one can do
anything with pipes, including screw one's neighbor. This is what certain
well-informed participants at the reception celebrating--all at the same time-
Brezhnev's son, Belgian-Soviet friendship, the excellent Tubemeuse contracts,
and hundreds of jobs created at P1enuaale-sur-Cools must have been telling
themselves the other day. This had nothing to do with the people demonstra-
ting for Poland; no, they were quickly silenced. It was a much more pleasant
matter.

The fact is that while the USSR is buying Tubemeuae pipes from Belgium, it is
flooding Belgium--through an intermediary German company-with pipes sold at
dumping prices. Better yet, Belgium has modified its laws in order to allow
these illegal imports to conpete better with its own producera—-in this case,
Tubel, a subsidiary of Tubemeuse... .

The Russians Are Bringing Down Prices

or course you don't have to tap your forehead with your finger and open your
eyes wide, but it helps. Hhen one sees this senseless movement of pipes
between Flanders, Wallony, and the Gulag, there is in fact good reason to ask
oneself whether the Belgians have become completely demented.

You don't know Tubel? You can be forgiven for this: the company was created
only last June (retroactive to 1 January 1981) by the amalgamation of four
factories which represent practically the whole light weight pipe sector of
Belgium.

These four factories-~two in Hallony, two in Flanders—used to belong to
'l'ubcneuse and to the French company Valery. when the government put Tubemeuse
back on its feet by purchasing 72 percent of its stock (as against 28 percent
of the German Benteler group's stock), it took advantage of this 2 years
later, to put the welded pipe sector back in order. Thus, Tubel came into
being, with, as its shareholders, Tubemeuse (31 percent), the Halloon region
(31 percent). He should mention in passing that we have here, as in the case
of Oockerill-Ysrds, one of the rare examples in which the Walloon region holds

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shares in factories in Flanders. The Flemish did not believe it necessary to
reciprocate, because it was the Halloon factories that were losing more....
But now things are going much better.

But things would be even better if it were not for the Russians and their pipes
of doubtful quality which are bringing the prices down.

“he Profits From the Crime?

As usual, it took a chance event for the secret affair to be discovered.
Actually, business had been complaining for a long time about a surplus of
welded gas pipes in our market. Naturally, the Germans, who are the best
commercial partners of the Soviets, were suspected of lending themselves to
a classic scheme: once in the FGR, the goods were "nationalized" ECG and,
thanks to the free circulation of goods, the trick was played. Naturally,
EEC regulations forbid this practice of direct imports, but just try to
distinguish between goods put into free circulation in Germany and then
reexported and goods in transit.

In Belgium, in any case, the Russian pipes were illegal, because a decree
fixed the import quota at zero. It is thus with the satisfaction of duty
accomplished that, last May, the customs officials of Lichtenbusch stopped
entire lines of trucks filled with pipes. The documents, which were fake,
indicated that FOR as the country of origin. But everything was so much
under control that the shippers had not even taken the trouble to remove the
labels in Cyrillic script which were on the bundles of pipes. who were the
shippers? The Sairex company of the Dusseldorf region, which itself is part
of an extremely discreet Swiss company.

The Swiss company is so discreet that critics wonder whether it may not have
among its shareholders the Benteler group, which is itself a shareholder of

Tubemeuse and, indirectly, of Tubel. But people will imagine anything when

foundry owners and great capital are involved.... Besides which, the Board

of Directors of Tubemeuse has vigorously protested.

The Embassy Reacted

Not imaginary were the "significant tonnages" discovered by the airborne
Belgian customs at Huizingen, the seat of Tubimex, subsidiary of Sairex in
Belgium. There were at the very least hundreds of tons, all illegally imported.
Even less imaginary were the howls of the Soviet representatives in Belgium,
who rang every possible doorbell. Thev did this so effectively that as early
as last 3 June, a ministerial decree abolished all quotas for pipes, thus
authorizing their entry. Thus, it was not necessary to investigate any
further an embarassing record or to remove seals-~which had never been put on,
anyway. The record was in fact apparently in the process of being lost when
the insistent protests of the General Inspector of Economic Affairs, of
Fabrimetal, of the Brussels Chamber of Commerce, and of pipe wholesalers help-
ed cause it to reemerge....

Officially, the reason for this extraordinary complacency on the part of
Belgium toward those who are trying to screw it is that Belgian legislation
was in violation of the regulations of the BBC. Thus. Tubimex won a case.
And 'yet today, our permanent representative reacted only mildly before the
External Relations Division of the EEC, asking for "some degree of inspection"
into the matter-whereas what could have been asked for was ”some degree of
protection" against trade dealings that have already made our industries lose

significant tonnage and that threaten employ-ant.

As Brezhnev's son was saying the other day at Flannel: "We look very favorably
on our relations with Belgium. They will be very conducive to friendship
between the peoples." This refrain is an unbreakable pipe.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 POURQUOI PAS?

9886
(ISO: 3100/ 325

FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOQI C FRANCE

ECOWIST, NAUROY 0N REDUCED HOMER, mm
Sauvy Analyzes 39-Hour Heel:

Paris mums AC'I'UELLES in French 22-28 Feb 82, pp 18-20

[Article by Jean-Francois Gautier: "The Sauvy Laws")

[Text] "Create jobs"--a necessity for Hauroyua "tragic
naivety," according to Alfred Sauvy. Employment cannot
be decreed, it must be won.

"‘lhe liberal tyrant was followed by an attempt to have a charity bureau....
laxity is increasing, but not a single administration agrees to recognize
its existence. Francois Hitterrand, a general advocate 'of change,‘ has not
even deemed it useful to demunce it, which would have been easy by attribu-
ting responsibility for it to the former administration, Faithfulnsss, con-
tinuity, cowardice."

Hore than 80 years old, Alfred Sauvy still says no to early retirement. lhis
week he is published an essay entitled "Worlds in Motion" (Canaan-levy), in
which he severely analyzes the social policy of the new administration.
Between his office at the National Institute for Demographic Studies and his
lecture podiuns, he finds the time to create books and articles. For him,
the 39-hour week is not the major worry.

"Reducing the workweek while maintaining salaries," he stated, "will create
very few jobs. he reduction will certainly cause some firms to hire, but
the increase in their production costs will have its effect, for example on
consumers through an increase in prices. You have to look at the entire
picture, and at the elimination of possibilities for jobs elsewhere."

Hr. Ssuvy concluded, "The expression 'create jobs' is tragically naive."

As for the "39 hours with no change in salary," Yvon Gattsa stated last Mon-
day hefore the executive committee of the CUFF [National Council of French
Employers], "We consider these decisions to be unacceptable and dangerous.
They will cost firms several tens of billions of frame, at a time when one
out of every two is m longer agle to invest. The government decisiom are

)4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"the easy ways out and will increase business expenses and eliminate
Jobs."

Last Tuesday, Pierre Hauroy and Jean Auroux, minister of labor, decided to
raise the minimum wage lo to 5 points above inflation in 1982. This measure
provoked a heated reaction in small and medium-size firms because of the
effect the minimum wage has on the calculation of other salaries. "Income
cannot be cut up like a cake," Andre Bergeron stated to the FD [workera'
Force].

At the National Federation of Public works (FNTP), the additional cost of
Auroux's laws (39-hour week and a fifth week of vacation) is estimated to
be 8 percent of the average salary total. This will be the case in other
labor-intensive industries, where "39 hours" will first of all mean the
necessity of paying doubletime for a new supplementary hour.

"Such a surcharge will be intolerable," says the FNTP. "Host contracts are
signed with fixed prices, or cancelled within three months."

Economists present two opposing theses when analyzing employment problems.

The first is that adopted by the Mauroy govermnent, in which national employ-
ment is a fixed quantity whim the state must divide equally among all French-
men. The second is that upheld by Sauvy, who believes that only coapetitive
work creates jobs, because it creates wealth to reinvest.

Sauvy denounces the first opinion as being based on a dangerous dogma. "In
today's state of degradation," he writes, "employment must be provided by
'the lord.‘ It is a goal in itself, and efficiency is no longer a criterion.
The Prime Minister, Pierre Hauroy, who has decreed a crusade for employment,
has made no mention of this efficiency."

The former colleague of Leon Blum, Paul Reynaud, and Pierre Mendes-Prance

is also irritated by the false logic of the "sharing of labor" when it
leads, in "solidarity contracts," for example, to exchanging a preretirement
for a first job.

"We cannor say that the ideas on employment are vague," noted Sauvy. "They
are opposed to reason, to the extent that they have come to consider the in-
active man as a useful being, almost a benefactor, and the active men, the
producer of wealth, as a bothersome if not danger0us man. After this, any
action, especially the worst, is allowed. The productive sector is loaded
and overloaded until it folds and sends the creators of wealth to the cate-
gory of inactive benefactors."

The system dismantled by Sauvy has been tested. Last week Gattaz recalled,
"In 1981, business finances underwent an historic slump, profits fell 40
percent, one firm out of two can no longer invest, and 20,000 of them have
folded." A fifth week of vacation, which, according to the CNPF, will cost
French businesses 32.5 billion francs, is going to be grafted onto this
fragile structure. who will pay?

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI‘I ONLY

Several times in his book, Sauvy berates a "general spoiled-child attitude,"
a "laxity," and political "cowardice." He writes: "Struggle itself is bene-
ficial. Unemployment, inflation crisis, deficits, drugs, child neglect,
crime, and terrorism all have the same clear, general cause: weakness....
'me spoiled child is, in sun, looking for a coupletely agreeable, pleasant,
and easy time, in which he is free and helped.

Sauvy concludes on "pleasure and consummation" by citing Paul Valery: "The
mind opens the veins in a dream."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Actuelles".

Mauroy Writes to Belgian Paper

Brussels LE 8011?. in French 5 Mar 82, pp 1, 8

[Text] Invited by the Catholic Conference, where he will
speak this Thursday at 1800 hours at the Beaux-Arts Palace
on the great challenges faced by our societies, Pierre
Hauroy will meet with the King and the head of state,
Wilfried Martens, during his private stay in Brussels.
Friday morning, the Frence Prime Minister will pay an of-
ficial visit to the European Communities. Upon the oc-
casion of his first trip to Belgium since heading the
French Government, Mauroy, herald of the fight against un-
employment in France, has written an article on this sub-
ject for LE SOIR.

For almost a decade, the world has been ping through a new economic crisis
caused originally by the tremendous increase in the cost of energy and raw
materials. Paced with this crisis, most Western democracies have looked for
responses and solutions in deflationary policies—that is, in a massive re-
duction of public expenditures for economic stimulation or social aid, and in
the establishment of interest rates at ridiculous levels.

Today everyone can evaluate the results.

In Great Britain production is declining, there are over 3 million unem-
ployed, and price increases are still above 12 percent. In the United States
production is again declining, over 8 percent of the workforce is unenployed,
and the rate of price increases in 1981 was higher than that of 1980, despite
a 2-percent decrease in the cost of imported raw mterials.

I myself think that Milton Friedman and his theories are largely responsible
for the crisis which we are undergoing.

I do not in fact believe that the behavior of a modern country's economy can

be reduced to controlling the money supply or sanctifying the unemloynnt
rate.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL RSI-l ONLY

Of course, I am aware that in the past the left often had real difficulty in
controlling the monetary and financial balance. But we have the problem of
drawing lessons from history, and today we are fully aware of the fact that
without stable money, controlled inflation, abundant savings, and financial
systems that are in good shape, we will not reach our scalp-particularly
our employment goals.

Since 10 May, France has embarked on another path. The victory of the left
is not, as some have dared to say, the sign that the French have relaxed
their efforts. 0n the contrary, it is a sign of the will of the majority
of the country no longer to live passively through the crisis, but to attack
the causes and not just limit ourselves to undergoing the effects. I will
add that the political change is also a generational change.

lhis sign of vitality is one of our deepest reasons for hope. The French
have not turned their backs on effort. They only want, and this is no
small hope, this effort to be distributed differently—for it no longer

The French have therefore said no to a certain way of managing their country.
They have said no to the language of mnnbers, which has swept away any hint
of huaanity, and no to the invitation "to aanage the unforeseen." No to this
drought, to this call to {accept} fate, to these calls to resign ourselves to
an unemploymnt problem which threatens to shatter the vital force of the
country, which plunges too many youngsters into despair, and which, if it were
to continue and grow, would sooner or later lead the workers to revolt.

He are not looking for the road to recovery in an unresponsible France, drown—
ing in subsidies, a France in which corporationisn and bureaucracy would im-
pose their laws on the state, a France which would renounce its international
commitments and cut itself off from the world.

We are looking for it in the path of growth, on the one hand, and in a new
division of labor on the other hand.

He want to have the maximum growth possible, which we have set at 3 percent
this year. But this growth itself will not allow us to absorb more than half
of the annual increase of the active population, about 250,000 individuals.
And this does not include women who justifiably hope to establish their in-
dependence thrOugh ewloyment.

A new sharing of labor is necessary. The fight for eqaloyment is based on a
gradual reduction and restructuring of the workweek. We have set 35 hours per
week as the goal to be reached in 1985.

But for such a policy to have maximum effect, it must definitely be imple-
mented on a European level. That is why the President of the Republic and the
French government have advocated a European "social space." At a time when
the construction of Europe is making no headway, it is looking for a larger
plan, we propose to bring social policies into line. The intertwining of our

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economies demands this. 1111: current adaptation of our cans of production
will pernit it. Only the political will is lacking.

ibis is what I have come to propose in Brussels, in this European capital.

9720
650: 3100/413

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

FARMERS' UNION LEADER INTERVIEHED 0“ AGRICULTURAL POLICY
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 19 Feb 82 pp 89-91, 108

[Interview by Florence Portes with Francois Guillaume, president of the
National Federation of Farmers Unions, by Florence Fortes; date and place
not given]

[Excerpts] French farmers, discontent with their lot,
have found in Francois Guillaume, president of the
powerful National Federation of Farmers Unions (FNSEA),
the leader they have been seeking for years. The man
looks good in a three-piece suit in Paris and speaks
well and in a direct way about a little-known profession,
while at the same time he manages a IlS-hectare farm in
Lorraine. He has taken the lead in a revolt that is

now European in its dimensions. As a matter of fact,

an upcoming event could rekindle the agricultural crisis:
At the end of March, European prices are to be fixed in
Brussels. Guillaume has said that he will be inflexible.
The FNSEA head is demanding a 16-percent increase, while
negotiations are going to revolve around 9 percent.

The relationship between the Socialist government and
the FNSEA has gotten off to a bad start. "They have
tried to destabilize us," accuses Guillaume, who also
thinks that "Madame the Minister of Agriculture" cannot
hold here own vis-a-vis the British and German negotiators.

[Question] Francois Hitterrand has agreed to meet with you. Does that in
your view represent a "victory" over your “enemy." Edith Cresson?

[Answer] Let's say that it represents a certain retaliation, in light of the
constant. repeated attacks leveled at us for the past 10 months and of the
systematic attempts to destabilize the FNSBA—-1n vain, I must say.

[Question] Destabiiize the FNSEA? How?

[Answer] By saying that the FNSEA's policies and farmers are rightwing, so
their arguments are not professional but political. Our biggest crime in
their opinion is that we are nor members of the Socialist Party. But that is
not really true, because in the FNSEA we have people with all different lean-
ings (850,000 farmers out of 1 million pay dues to us) who drew a clear line
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between their personal political views and their responsibilities as farmers.
We have socialists and communists. They may criticize the government as
farmers, while for other reasons they continue to vote for the left. The
opposite was true before.

[Question] In your opinion, why did the President decide to give you this
interview?

[Answer] I am not interested in politics, but the President, who is a sharp
politician, could not have failed to learn from the results of the parliamen-
tary elections right before the cantonal elections. Moreover, the size and
extent of the demonstrations show that it is not just a few leaders, as they
have implied up to now, who are not happy with the current policy. Maybe

the President also wants to reconcile with the farmers before the Brussels
negotiations, which have gotten off to a bad start and are heading toward a
stalemate.

[Question] After this gesture of reconciliation, the demonstrations should
quiet down.

[Answer] Certainly not. Farmers know from experience that it would be to
their disadvantage to let up the pressure on Brussels and Paris. Although
they view the meeting granted as positive, they are waiting for significant
actions—-decisions regarding their income and a new attitude toward their
labor union.

[Question] Could Mme Cresson be your partner in this new policy?

[Answer] She is our minister, and that will not change. It is true that in
all our contacts with her up to now, she has been the one mainly responsible
for the failure to reach any agreement, by behaving more like a missionary
of the Socialist Party than an official of a ministerial department. She
has just changed the staff of her office. This is perhaps a psychological
way of giving credence to a shift toward a policy more favorable to us.

[Question] Some farmers criticize her for being incompetent, others because
she is a woman. Which of these "faults" is most important?

[Answer] Incompetence. Other ministers before her were incompentent when
they arrived in the ministry, but they tried to correct it quickly because
they were responsible. We do not think that the fact that she is a woman is
the least bit negative. Why? Women farmers have for a long time found their
place in managing farms. A better question might be why is it the women who
are most aggressive with her.

[Question] When?

[Answer] At Poitiers, for instance. Women led the demonstration there.
They realize perhaps more than men that Edith Cresson is not one of them,
that she neither can nor knows how to take account of their social origin,

of their motivations and mentality. In a word, she does not understand them.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USL ONLY

[Question] Would you advise her to stop trying to rally the women?
[Answer] That is her decision, but she doesn't seem to have understood yet....

[Quescion] Do you think she is capable of defending the French position in
Brussels?

[Answer] She does have a certain tenacity. But just knowing how to say no is
not enough. She has to find the arguments and not let herself get trapped
in a deadlock situation.

[Question] There is a crisis situation, an inextricable one. The French
Government cannot cut the Gordian knot all by itself.

[Answer] It has known for months what the problem was. Negotiations are
prepared for well in advance and not "at the last minute," as Edith Cresson
and the Prime Minister say, as they brush aside our suggestions and proposals
with a sweep of the hand, adding that it is none of our business. To negoti-
ate is to gradually bring the adversary over to your side. That is what the
English did.

[Question] Have you at least succeeded in working out a satisfactory strategy
for the Brussels negotiations with your German counterpart, Baron von Hermann?

[Answer] The lack of coordination between the government and us has meant
that we have had to try to make our European Colleagues aware of our position
without knowing the French Government’s intentions! Can you imagine what a
handicap that is? It will be even greater when we meet with our British
colleagues.

[Question] Will there be a clash in Brussels?

[Answer] In view of the statements made by French politicians before they
came to power, it is possible that the French Government will refuse to agree
to continue the famous monetary compensation. What didn't we hear about these
compensatory amounts under Giscard! Since then, we have been told that they
must be abolished! But they have to get the Germans to agree before they

can eliminate them! As for prices, we have an alternative. Either we give
in to the British or we do not. If we don't, it is very likely that there
will be a stalemate.

[Question] And then?

[Answer] Then we are in a deadlock, and in cases such as this, the one who
can hold out the longest wins.

[Question] And what do you think of that?

[Answer] He could do that, but only on condition that it is not the French
farmers who hear the brunt of the consequences. I told the President that
if he opted for that tactic, then he must work out some arrangement so that
the price of milk and meat can increase normally on 1 April.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCinL USE ONLY

[Question] You want a French solution outside the rules of the Common Market.

[Answer] That is not my business. You must understand that since we were

not asked to join in the negotiations, and since they rejected our proposals
for a French strategy and sent us back to our desks, the only position we

can take is to stand by our demand, namely that prices increase by more than
16 percent on 1 April. without involving ourselves in how that will be done.
He do not want to be held responsible for a poor strategy. I will play my own
game. I am circulating information among German and British farmers. I an
organizing demonstrations, but I do not want to get involved in the debate.

[Question] Do you regard the Common Market as a necessary evil?

[Answer] I would say instead that the Common Market is positive but that it
is currently letting itself be dominated by the British, with the Germans
as accomplices. The others do not count for very much.

[Question] why are the Germans in collusion?

[Answer] Because the socialists are in power in Germany, and socialists have
never been interested in farming. That is quite clear in all socialist count—
ries, the extreme example being the Eastern [European] countries, where
socialism has completely missed its objectives. It is also true in France,
where only Mitterrand is somewhat interested in farming, while all the members
of his government are interested only in control by the workers. The German
Government is not very concerned with farming, either. If it weren't for
Ertl, the liberal agriculture minister, a man who has been in the business for
15 years and who knows all the ins and outs of the trade, [German] farmers
would be very poorly served. Let's not even talk about England during the
Labor administration.

[Question] Is there any hope forFrenchfarming under a socialist government?

[Answer] There are many different types of socialism. I would be very upset
if it took on a communistic form. If it took a turn as it has in Germany,
that would not be a catastrophe. But in other areas this government has
already gone a great deal farther than the socialist program.

[Question] You are thinking of the property agencies and the commodity
agencies. These projects seem to have reached a standstill, haven't they?

[Answer] Studies on the property agency are progressing, since a bill will
be submitted to the spring session, but it will be only a very general
proposal. The initial project hasin fact been considerably watered down.

A number of provisions were eliminated, including the commodity agencies.

[Question] Why?

[Answer] They were in complete violation of the provisions of the Rome
Treaty. Moreover. the [government] was forced to see that they were not
tenable because of the Kafkaesque nature of the system which would have to
be set up for controls. Finally, with the farmers dissatisfied, perhaps

12
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the government decided that this is not the time. General ideas developed
in vitro and implementation of a project once decided on are two entirely
different things. But I am under the impression that Hue Cresson still
intends toput them into practice, because she has made up her mind to do so.

[Question] So your only hope is Hitterrand?

[Answer] Yes. Besides being the chief of state. he is the only one in the
government who is sensitive to rural issues. He has the good sense of someone
from the countryside. and he has the innate knowledge that nothing should be

done precipitously. I asked clear questions. It is up to him to make the
decisions. He will judge the actions.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 by Cogedipresse S. A.

9805
cso: 31oo/azs

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL MUSLIC 0? CW

NORTH MINE-WESTPHALIA'S MI] 02! SPD. GREENS, COALITION

Hamburg STERN in Germ 25 Mar 82, pp 212-213

[Interview with Johannes Reu, minister-president of the North Rhine Hest-
phalia. by STERN editors Neiner Brenner, Ulrich Roeenbauo and Felix Schmidt:
"'Should We Decide in Favor of Needs...‘!'"; date and place not specified]

[Text] STERN: Herr Rau, when was the last time you talked to the chancel-
lor?

Ran: 0n 5 March during a discussion between minister-presidents and the
chancellor, and at an earlier date when the situation in North Raine-Hest-
phalia case up for discussion.

STERN: I so sure he took you aside and told you that you should prepare soon
for succeeding hie.

Rau: He did not say a word about that. There is no reason why Belnut
Schmidt should think about a successor, and I do not intend to becom any-
body's successor.

STERN: But do yOu not want to succeed yourself—if there are Landtag elec-
tions in North Rhine-Westphalia in 1985?

Rsu: I think I an capable of that.

STERN: But if the countrywide trend continues in the PRC, one will have to
be prepared for a four-party system—which means including the "Greens."
Could you imagine yourself as minister-president in a coalition with the
"Greens"?

Rau: In ny opinion it seems more likely that by 1985 the ”green" mvement
will have come to a standstill.

STERN: If an SPD nayor would ask your advice today, whether he should coop-
erate with the "Greens" to preserve the majority—would you advise hill to do
so?

Ran: No. At the present time I could not give him this advice, because in
ny opinion the "Greens" are unable to negotiate and operate—because of‘their

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHC 1M. USE ONLY

system of councillors and the basis of their independent democratic setup and
because of their intention to rotate the leaders of the mandate.

STERN: Apparently not every leading SPD personality sees it the same way.
Hans-Jochen Vogel in Berlin, for instance, is betting that the "Greens" or
the Alternatives will adapt themselves to the parliamentary rules and thus
they will become more predictable and will perhaps be able to work in a
coalition.

Rau: As a Social Democrat I am betting on the SPD and I am not speculating
on what the "Greens" will be like when-they will be "green" in a different
manner from what they are today.

STERN: But how "green" should the SPD be permitted to be? In particular, we
like to call attention to the dispute that arose when Prof Inewenthsl brought
up the question, whether the SPD should provide an opening for the "Greens"

or whether it would be preferable for the SP0 to rely on industrial workers.
its old base.

Rau: Loewenthel is certainly right when he states that the working class is
the f0undation of the SPD. But today these workers are also concerned about
problems such as environmental pollution, ecology and economics. The prob-
lem is not that one person wants clean air and the other one wants a job.

Even the person who is working in the Ruhr area wants quality of life and
clean air. And the issue is not only to preserve beautiful, green residential
areas but to introduce green things to those places that are currently gray.

STERN: After all, the SPD and its postwar building policy contributed to
the fact that the cities are so gray....

Ken: ...and now, when the choice is between weeds and concrete, should we
choose weeds? Certainly not.

STERN: But these gray concrete cities are the areas where you are losing
your regular voters. What are you doing to reverse the trend?

Rau: As a matter of fact, the SPD will have to start in the cities to make
up for its loss in compentence. I feel, for instance, that we must create
new initiatives to establish new ways of neighborly coexistence. And anyway:
the SPD should not be a debating club engaged in literary criticism, but it
must deal with the realities of life.

STEIN: Speaking about enjoying debates, you will have a tough time during
the upcoming federal SPD rally, particularly when the question of counter-

arming comes up for discussion. w111 the chancellor be backed by the party
after all?

Rau: Yes, it will be quite evident.

STERN: How much of a majority-Sl to 49 percent?

15
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rau: No, there will be a large majority. Because it will not be a matter of
conducting a special «miner on counterarming moratorium—although there

are always many who think so—but of articulating a political will. It means:
promoting the negotiations in Geneva and making very clear that our goal is
not rearmament but fewer missiles in Europe.

STERN: Erhard Eppler, however, is totally opposed to counteraraing....
Rau: Erhard Eppler is an iaportant voice within the SPD....
STERN: ...impor.:ant enough to be reelected to the presidium?

Rau: During the federal party rally in Munich we will first elect an execu-
tive committee for the party, which will subsequently decide on the compo-
sition of the presidium.

STERN: Will you personally support Eppler?

Rau: As far as I ma concerned, Eppler is part of the spectrum of the party,
and his activities as chairman of the SPD Fundamental Values Comission are
already enough of a reason to reelect him—at least I intend to do that.

STERN: Not only the left wing is putting pressure on the chancellor but also
the wing representing the working class. Horkers feel that the government is
not doing enough when it comes to its employment policy. “at will happen to
the coalition if clear demands are going to be adopted in Mich—for in-
stance, for a labor market or a supplemental levy?

Rau: As far as I am concerned, it would not endanger the coalition. If that
were the case, every EDP rally woald be endangering the coalition.

STERN: Is it not a fact, however, that for some time now the Bonn coalition
has been maintained not so much because of agreements on certain matters but
rather because the Union and Halaut Kohl have not been able to come up with
an alternative for the FOP?

Rau: In my opinion, the SPD and the EDP agree no less on matters regarding
foreign policy and detente, domestic and judicial policies as well as educa-
tional policies than they did at the beginning of the coalition. Sometimes

conflicts in the econopoliticsl realm are clouding this fact.

STERN: The question remains whether the FPD will still be of the same opin-
ion if in the fall the (:00 should come to power in Hesse, and Bonn will sub-
sequently be threatened by a policy of blockade pursued by the Union in the
Bundesrat. If this should happen, would it not- be better if the SPD demanded
new elections?

Rau: I see no reason for new elections before 1981:. I think, Helmut Schmidt
knows that the majority is behind him. But the style that is being used in

Bonn. how they talk and act. must be shaped in such a manner that the majority
of the voters can identify with it.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG & Co.

8991

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

KOHL'S CHOICE FOR A CD”, CSU CABINET GIVEN
Hamburg CAPITAL in German Apr 82 pp 12-13
ﬂieport by Martin Bernstorf: "Alternative List27

/‘l‘ex_t_7 If the government should fall overnight, a new chancellor
--in the present situation Helmt Kohl-mat inedistely present a
new cabinet. 'lhe list is fairly solid.

Should the Schmidt-Genscher Government fall tomorrow, 16 federal ministers and

20 parliamentary state secretaries or state ministers will become eligible for a
pension, in addition to the present chancellor. Another 24 civil service state se-
cretaries are likely to retire to a government subsidized private life. Also to be
added in accordance with long-standing custom are a few dozen ministerial directors
who, as "political officials." may not choose to survive a change in government.

All of them mat be replaced. It is therefore not surprising that, the more frequent-
ly the inninent demise of the government is predicted, the more vehemently an entire
horde of prmumptive successors pushes at the starting gates. After all, many are
ready but few are chosen.

If we assume that the fraction raises him up on the shield and the Bundestag elects
him, Chancellor Kohl will try for a broad government majority. In other words he
will invite the FD? to coalition negotiations, even though the liberals--rent by
internal dissensions--seem to be capable of no more than toleration for a minority
Union cabinet.

Should the POP join in after all, the Union will have to leave it its current proper-
ty, that is the foreign interior, economics and agriculture ministries. Maintained
in their offices will be the current office holders Hans-Dietrich Genscher (foreign
affairs) and Gerhart Rudolf Baum (interior). Agriculture Minister Josef Ertl, on

the other hand, is likely to take the opportunity to retire to private life, as he
has often indicated the wish to do so. Otto Graf Lasbsdorff would also have the un-
expected chance of leaving the political arena without this appearing to be in
direct connection with the allegations raised against him in the party donation
scandal by the public prosecutor's office.

Many Free Democrats are ready to assume Lasbsdorff's mantle (CAPITAL 2/1982), but
party chief Genscher has so far refrained from naming his candidate for the job.

1?
CIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SF. ONLY

"Brother Josef" Ertl's job might be inherited by Rhineland-Palatinate deputy Dr Holf-
gang Ruspf who is a forester and adequately experienced in farming matters too.
Moreover he has gained quite a reputation in the fraction and elsewhere.

The other government personnel would come from the CDU and 080. CSU chairman and
unsuccessful chancellor candidate of 1980, Franz Josef Strauss, still claims the most
important department: He aspires once more to become federal finance minister, a
post he held in the grand coalition of 1966-1969. Should, against all expectations,
Strauss prefer to remain miniter president of Bavaria, the alternative generally
mentioned has been Schleswig-Holstein Minister President Gerhard Stoltenberg. In
fact the tall and cool man from the north has steadily pursued federal politics from
his stronghold in Kiel. Following the CDU's electoral success in the municipal elec-
tions, Soltenberg now aims for a matching victory in next year's Landtag election.
That is one of the reasons why his name is more and more frequently mentioned as a
future CDU federal chancellor.

After all, something is quite certain: No later than the fall of next year (as-
suming the Union is then still in opposition), the party will have to settle on a
top candidate for the 1984 Bundestag election. In that event Stoltenberg must de-
finitely be given a chance against Helmut Kohl, although it would hardly be possible
to pass over the latter in case of a sudden change in government between elections
seeing that he is indeed the current head of the party and fraction.

There is some doubt at the moment whether, in case of a government upheaval,
Stoltenberg would be willing to serve under Kohl in Bonn. The third choice for the
ministry for finance would then be Svabian Dr Hansjoerg Haefele.

The defense ministry has long been disputed between two aspirants: Svabian Dr Man-

fred Hoerner, a dashing offier of the reserve and jet pilot, and Strauss' steward

in Bonn, CSU Land grOup chief Dr Friedrich (Fritz) Zimmermann. The latter is over-

due for a government job but cannot be considered for the ministry of justice (which
he would like to have), because there are some unexplained questions about his past.
He has been suspected of perjury. Kohl is said to be ready, as a favor to Strauss,

to give preference to Zimmermann and rebuff long-standing defense expert Hoerner.

Two more CSU seniors would move into the cabinet alongside Friedrich Ziamermann:
Huremberg's Dr Oscar Schneider, for many years chairman of the Bundestag committee
on regional planning, construction and urban construction, to be minister for con-
struction, and Bavarian education minister Prof Hans Maier to be minister for educa-
tion and science. In Munich Maier fearlessly deals with all-powerful Franz Josef
Strauss; he may well consider advancement in Bonn as a general promotion.

One problem remaining is the ministry of justice. Kohl would like to recruit former
judge Halter Hallmann. However, Hallmann has become well-nigh indispensable as
chief mayor of Frankfurt. Moreover, should the CDO once again fail to gain power in
this fall's Hesse election, Hallmann is supposed to replace CDU Land chairman Alfred
Dregger. Consequently Dr Carl-Otto Lens, son of deceased Adenauer state secretary
Otto Lens and long-standing chairman of the Bundestag judiciary committee, has hopes
of obtaining the appointment.

Dr Rainer Barzel, 1972 chancellor candidate, is also to be given cabinet rank again.
As a young man Barrel was Adenauer's minister for all-German affairs but not long

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enough to lay claim to a ministerial pension. He would once again be given the de-
partment for inner-German relations.

Some other appointments are virtually certain from the aspect of technical expertise:
Dr Norbert Bluem, currently Berlin federal senator and chairman of the CDU social
connittee, is set to be appointed minister for labor and social affairs. media expert
Christian Schwarz-Schilling minister for posts and telecomnications, traffic eapert
Dr Dieter Schulte minister for transport. Dr Helga Hex, chairwoman of the CD1!
women's federation, is to take the helm at the ministry for youth, family and health
"the only concession to women.

Kohl will take his confidant and parliamentary manager Dr Philipp Jenninger along to
be state minister at the chancellery. The question remains whom Helnut Kohl is goitg
to appoint government spokesman and champion of his policies vis-a-vis the public.
We may assume that he will not choose a journalist but prefer to appoint a colleague
from the fraction, who has antitions in this field.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 Co

11698
080: 3103/1008

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

SPANIARDS' ALLEGIANCE To DEMOCRACY ALLEGEDLY INCREASING
Madrid, CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 29 Mar 82 pp 26, 27

[Article by J. M. A.: "What You Would Do in Case of a Coup-0verwhelaing
Majority of Spaniards in Favor of Democracy"]

[Text] More than half of the Spaniards would now even be prepared to defend
democracy in case of a coup d'etat. Only 3 percent would support the coupists.
Exactly a year ago, another survey institute put that same question through this
magazine.

The comparison of both opinion studies, today's study and the one 12 months ago,
offers a very clear result which reveals the maturity and responsibility of the
Spaniards. The citizen increasingly feels inclined to defend denocracy. 0n the
other hand, the population's pro-coupist sector has remained ' unchanged at only
3 percent.

A few days after the failed coup d’etat of 23 February, 47 percent of those
questioned replied that they would do nothing in case of a new attempt. Today,
this passive sector has shrunk to 29 percent. Democracy consequently has more
active support. Looking at the sex breakdown. men proved to be more omitted
to legality. Women on the other hand deny their support to coupism in higher
percentages than men; on the other hand, their passivity increases with 33 per-
cent who "would do nothing."

The enormous rejection of coupism by a portion of the civilian population seems
to spring from the conviction that it is expressed in the answer to another
question: Except for 5 percent, nobody believes that a hypothetical triumph of
the scditioniats would help settle the problems of the Spaniards. Besides,

63 percent replied that the country w0u1d be worse off and 9 percent thought
that the situation would be the same.

No Social Base

The survey by the Emopublica Institute, one of the biggest and therefore one with
the highest index of reliability conducted so far, was carried out several days
before the start of the trial hearing. One of the questions was as follows:

"The prosecutor has asked for 30 years imprisonment for generals Hilans del

Bosch and Armada and Lieutenant Colonel Tejero for their participation in the

23 February coup d'etat. Does this sound very harsh to yOu, fair, or, on the
contrary, light?"

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One out of every four men questioned thought that the punishment was light and one
out of every six thought that it was very harsh; 39 percent thought that the
request was fair. Women proved to be more benevolent but there were also more of
them who thought that the prosecutor's request was light, rather than very harsh.
For 40 percent of the women, it was fair to ask for 30 years of imprisonment.

In the table analyzing the attitudes of the various job categories toward the
coup d‘etat, we must stress some facts which however are simple to list: (1) If
we apply a social evaluation to the various job categories, there are no dif-
ferences by social classes and democracy and liberty are defended equally while
sedition is condemned with the same unanimity; (2) among industrial workers, the
skilled worker feels much more disposed to defend democracy than the poor peasant;
(3) entrepreneurs and manufacturers are mostly with the Constitution. Although
their percentages are the highest. only 10 percent think that they would be better
off in case of a coupist success; (4) executives, self-employed persons, and
medium-level managerial personnel most clearly line up in defense of democracy,
giving us the highest percentages regarding their behavior against the coup and
their belief that a victorious coup would mean that the Spaniards would be worse
off; (5) farmers are most inhibited with 37 percent saying that they "would do
nothing."

While. judging by the variations among job categories it seems evident that there
is not slightest social base that would support a coup d'etat, the same is true
concerning the population groups, according to the number of inhabitants of the
cities. Here there are likewise no major differences between rural and urban
Spain. Coupist support does not exceed 3 percent. In small towns, what increases
is the percentage of "don't know, no response" compared to the big cities.

Cities with more than half a million inhabitants exceed the percentage average
in answering the key questions: they will defend democracy,the prosecutor's re-
quest for punishment for the coup leaders is light, and if a coup were to be
victorious, the Spanish people would be worse off.

From a comparison of data among job categories and population size categories,
one might deduce--apart from the previously mentioned findings as to the absence
of a civilian base for coupism--that the higher the citizen's cultural level, the
greater his ability to get information and the lesser his isolation in the area
in which he lives. the more does he reject involutionism and the end of demo-

cracy.

Another important sector of the population, likewise represented in the survey,
expresses behavior and attitudes very similar to the preceding ones. Here we have
those people who do not participate actively. They include the retirees, house-

wives. students, and unemployed.

Housewives and retirees come up with very similar responses, with a high index of
pnssivityto a coup and one-fourth came up with ”no response" or "don't know" on
other questions. Unemployed answered in a manner similar to the national average,
stressing their belief that the penalty asked by the prosecutor is "light."
Students proved to be more determined in replying—~to the tune of 73 percent--
that they think that everything would get "worse" in case of a coupist success
and 65 percent are ready to defend democracy as against 5 percent who would sup-

port the coup.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Technical Survey Data

Universe: Individuals of 18 years or older. Area: Persons living on peninsula
and islands. Sample size: 10.362 personal interviews in bones. Sampling error:
+1 percent in the most unfavorable case of 50 percent [replies] and with n
degree of confidence of 95.5 percent. timber of sanpling points: Approximately
700. Date of field work: January-February 1982. Conducted by: Institute
Enopublice y Saltes, s. A. Consultorea.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. .osllu «Shallow uoauozllon uuﬁmlunn «nouuwmllun
.usuwnllam uuwuhlnon £85: ESP-law “cocoa—mu.— o: .305— u.uonlnw~ “wad—Bo: 0... 3503': 3:00 05
«Mona—amnioN «Avenues»... “Eamon—Inna “can.“ 3:03 «3 £50230? on .5 one: 230;. .300 o uHIIQN «unosvou
m.u0u=uon0ka co cowaaollnu Educ; 9:00 we coco 5 neabusomlluu uw0>uaouno=IIH~ “mucovsumIION “noouuu
maxim “uoaoaﬂaploa “8332.3 3335...: 686% :9: 882:2 “353.225 8o.” 92:
30.7.3 3:0...» 833.30.7qu "Hag—own: Haauowwcaa ao>o7§3voznlnu "usoaocgqénnma "homage
vohoaauluaomléa Kwanzaa—32:13 “headmlla uuaocuumuuucutlm "can: gown—Ila rogue: voanuxncnnlw
“auction bwvcooomnnm “non—no: oozuxmlue 28.8on1...” “aoﬁuowouwu nonIN :33 Hagaumzuua ">8—

         

                    

 

   

    

 

 

 
 

 

: on 2 n. 2 3 2 1. 9. . . . . 9a.; 3 35( W
Z 2. o r 1. 3 n. on no _ . . ....... gazgau M
m 3 o m 2 a. 2 ma 3 .............. 82.3.: m
.~ 3 : 0 ~ﬂ 3 h— GM mm _ ....... . ........ vOQnuCL ”H
I... 32542. 3.. 5
a. 2. a Q 3 an 3. a on no .. . . ....... 2869. at :2 @H
a 3 o _ m a z = 2 a. a ..... o8.§ . 898 x.
on 3 ¢ n mu 5 on 3 p" 3 ........ 08.3 n 98.2 00
5 am 2 n 5 2 on 2 .n S ......... 08¢. a 35.... v0
3 on 2 o 3 n. on a. an o, 6:552 §.~ «a 353. ma
320553.. 95 3
t 2. a q 2 on o... o. 2 an a 3 .. . . . .. ..... $62: 3525 n."
2. _ 3 a F 2 a on 2 z a a 3. .......... .. 35893 «H
S . 2. o m 2 z 3. z : 8 a 3 3.5:... a .33.. 5.32.. 2”
2 3 o _ 2 J. 2 2 a 3 z. n 1 ............ . 5.2.2.. 3
3 1 z a «n e. 1. a o. 2 _ w a. ............. 8.3.53 o
8 u 2 o. : a 3 on a n a . . . ........ 9:635. w
.u o w on an on 2 2 nu n nv. 09:3 .9: 0.82:2.
.n 3 w in an m on 2 nu an n 5. .. . . 3.4.23.5 a: 9350 M
n» _ a m an on . 2.. mu 5 on n .n . . 5.2:! 352.33
:— u q 2 3. 2 v. an n on _ 032.215... 0.950
n. _ ._ h 2 3. n— w. r» v mu. _ . .. _.. Eauucv>
_ thOﬁEOdm m<4 H
_ a a z 2. 3 : on _ :. 7.23.3.7. 41c;
mus... «n mm mm .2 .2. an _ on _
.0... I!»
«I It; .1... 13’ If. 3-. _. :‘s
1.. 3.. .
.z .i _
13.1.! <m 7 7.. ::

    

.74 . I _ .2] 2.: _2.L-r.. .

gum... $60 0...» 3 unseen—mom nun—macaw

9. :1. I — .l— .I 2'. .1 Ian—.4: .8 a . .827 (Sui-L:

 

 

 

23
son OFFICIAI use ONLY

    

élE PARECE WA PENA MUY MA.

POREl_C_ONTR l0
11““:1“ . ‘3“ 3“

Mn”.

MbUN

 

I I \I mu In

ked for 30 years imprisonment for(
cutenant Colonel Tejero. Does thi:
malty? Key: 1--In percentages; 2‘
ow. no response; 6--Men; 7—Homen.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

aoué haria usted en caso de golpe do
Estado?

    

60cm Dou. mono I!

     

Enema 5W mat: ; l.\'!\Nl;|(S

what would you do in case of a coup d'etat? Key: 1-Year; 2-Defend democracy;

3--Support the coup; 4--wou1d do nothing; S-Don't know, no response; 6-Survey
date, March 1981; 7--Emopub11ca survey, February 1982.

25
son omcm. use ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

SNIAS, THOMSON-CS? COLLABORATB 0N ANTIHISSILE PROJECT
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 27 Mar pp 62. 48

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "SNIAS and Thomson-CS? Cooperation on SAN Naval
Surface-to-Air Antimissile Hissile"l

[Text] Aerospatiale (SNIAS) is collaborating with Thomson-CS? on the AHSArSAN
(Surface-to-Air Antimissile-Naval Surface-to-Air Missile) project. SAN is a
vertical-launched missile designed for the point defense of surface ships.

It is being developed under the French-British AHSA program, the successor to
the "68" program which has now been abandoned.

Feasibility studies of the 6S--an antiaircraft and antimissile point defense
system for surface ships of the French, German, and British navies--had been
initiated in 1975 within the NATO framework. For budgetary reasons, however,
Germany withdrew from what had all the prospects of becoming a truly European
cooperative program. Instead the FRG chose to join with the 0.3.A. in
developing a less ambitious naval surface-to-air missile, the General Dynamics
RAH system which is to be installed on German Navy patrol ships. Germany's
withdrawal from the 68 program led the other partners to terminate the program,
at least in its initial form.

Approximately a year ago, the French and British navies initiated a similar
project designated AHSA. This project still calls for a ahipborne antiaircrsft
defense system but with the addition of an enhanced antimissile capability
designed to cope with antiship missiles of the coming decade.

In mid-1981. British and French manufacturers initiated joint studies which by
year's end led to the submission of various proposals to interested agencies
of both governments. proposals complete with development plans and cost
estimates.

Pour proposals were submitted by different industrial consortiuma whose
members include Thomson-CSP, Hatra, Aerospatiale, and British Aerospace.
The proposal selected would in all cases call for equitable sharing of all
work by industries of both countries.

One of these proposals is the AMSA-SAN project submitted by Thomson-CS? and
Aerospstiale. It calls for use of a new missile whereas the other proposals
remain based on a more conventional missile.

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0Nl.\'

French and British authorities are expected to decide this year on whether
to continue the AHBA program. and if so. announce their choice of one of the
four proposals along with terms and conditions of the new French-British
cooperation agreement on development and production of the future missile
system.

Both navies. especially the French Navy. are highly interested in this new
AHSA system which would be scheduled to become operational by 1992.

In the AHSA-SAN project. Thomson-CS? is responsible for the "system" part and
particularly the major electronic components--surveillance and target
acquisition radars. fire control system and command data link--which are an
important element of the missile system. Aerospatiale's Tactical Missiles
Division handles the missile proper and the launch equipment.

The AHSA-SAN weapon system is designed to intercept aircraft and especially
antiship missiles of the 1990's. The threat at that time will markedly
consist of very high-speed (clearly supersonic), highly maneuverable, and
hardened missiles capable of operating in an electronic countermeasures
environment.

According to Aerospatiale officials. the SAN missile is of "revolutionary"
design and. therefore, has new capabilities in comparison with standard
present-day missiles:

a. Very short reaction time:
b. High maneuverability (more than 50 gs);

c. Very high peak speed (supersonic). Thus for a given target detection
range. the intercept range is greater than the one attained by a standard
missile, or inversely. for a given intercept range, the SAN can accept a
lower detection range, a capability which is a definite tactical advantage.

Simulations have shown that these two characteristics are those having the
main impact on the flyby distance from rapid-flying and maneuvering targets.
Consequently under the most difficult defense conditions. the SAN, with its
shorter flyby distance capability, has greater effectiveness than other
missiles. In particular. it has a very high probability of "structurally"
destroying the target. in other words. of literally stopping the attacking
missile, and no longer of merely damaging one of its components. damage
that would not be enough to prevent it from staying on course and hitting
its target in spite of everything.

This essential characteristic of the SAN missile, namely that of having a
very short flyby-distance. is obtained by equipping the missile with a
sustainer rocket motor whose thrust can be directed around its own center of
gravity at the proper time. It is thus possible to maintain trajectory
speed and accomplish an extremely rapid "power steering maneuver" (by thrust
deflection) which combines with the action of conventional aerodynamic
flight controls--control surfaces driven by pneumatic actuators--and
considerably enhances their performance.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1his composite flight control system, called PIP-PA? by Aerospatiale, is the
new missile's main innovation. It enables the missile to maneuver under high
load factors without thereby requiring added disadvantageous missile weight,
and while still having a very rapid reaction time. This thrust deflection
applied to the missile at the moment of intercept thus ensures a very short
flyby distance in the terminal phase of flight. The missile can. therefore,
intercept the target by scoring a direct hit or approach close enough to destroy
it. The SAN missile is designed, in fact. to have a high single shot kill
probability against a high-performance antiship missile. Although the SAN's
range is classified, it may be assumed that it will be a short-range missile.
the detection capability of radars mounted on antiship missiles being limited

in such case because of the small equivalent radar area and low-level
flight (clutter).

This same thrust deflection capability also serves to pitch the missile over onto
its sustainer flight path after its vertical launch by a jettisonable booster
which accelerates the missile to fliynt speed. In addition. during the
missile's low-speed phase of flight. thrust deflection is used to slew the
missile rapidly onto its target intercept course.

The SAN missile thus derives full advantage from its vertical launch capability
which gives it the IMO-degree free-fire zone needed to counter the threat of
future supersonic antiship missiles of the 1990's in a saturation attack
situation.

The SAN will. therefore, be a small supersonic missile with a thrust-deflection
sustainer motor designed by Thomson-Irandt and derived from a motor which that
company had proposed for its Brandon very short-range surface-to-air missile.

The SAN missile will be equipped with an active radar homing guidance system
developed from preliminary design studies conducted for other programs.

In France. Thomson-CS? has designed a solid-state homing guidance system and ES!)
[Serge Dassault Electronics] has designed an active antiaircraft homing guidance
system (4A) whose development is supported by government tectmical services.

The comand-data link's receiver and its associated antennas will be housed in
the wings. The missile will be armed with a warhead whose explosive charge
sprays highly focalized fragments and is detonated by an electromagnetic
proximity fuse. The navigation system will use a strapwdown inertial platform.
The SAN will be delivered as a complete missile round. the missile with its
folded wing and stabilizer being housed in a cylindrical storage and launch
canister.

Land-Based Version

Aerospstiale is also planning to apply the same missile concept (PIP-PAP flight
control system) to other air defense versions, including a future land-based
surfsce-to-air missile capable of intercepting aircraft and tactical missiles.

29
FOR omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1111: lissile, which might also be developed jointly with Mon-CSP, would
succeed the TRISAH surface-todir ﬁssile project, a collaborative European--

France. Germany. and Great Britain—project which had been under study for
several years but let a fate similar to that of the 68 project.

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982

8051
(ISO: 3100/528

1)
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

EURWISSEE GROUP COMPLETES STUDIES (N ANTITANK HISSILBS
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in Punch 27 Her 82 p 63

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "an Completes Feasibility Studies on Third-
Generation Antitank Missiles")

[Text] Feasibility studies on future third-generation medium-and long-range
antitank missiles have been completed. In mid-1981, the Buromissile

Dynamics Group (mo) formed by Aerospstiale (France). Messerschmitt-Boelkow-
Blohm (Germany). and British Aerospace Dynamics Group (Great Britain), submitted
the results of their 2 years of studies to official agencies in their three
respective countries.

In late 1981. these agencies approved the development of two new third-generation
antitank missile system. (he is a medium-range missile designed to replace

the Milan system. the other a long-range missile to replace the 801‘ and
Swingfire systems. EDHG is now awaiting finalization of a new memorandum

of understanding between its three partners before beginning the development
program's definition phase. lhese new antitank missile systems are expected

to become operational in the early 1990's.

'These missiles will be developed according to specifications jointly
formulated by military staffs of the three countries. The new systems will
have ranges comparable to those of the French—German Milan-4.000 meters—and
HOT-4,000 meters--systems which they will replace about the middle of the
next decade. These ranges are based on the dimensions of European terrain
compartmentation which will not have greatly varied by that time.

On the other hand, the third-generation missiles will have to take into account
the threat of the 1990's which, unlike the terrain. will have changed with the
appearance of new and better protected tankso-low profiles. composite armor.
etc.--as will be the case with the Soviet T-80 tank's successor.

The rate of fire will likewise have to be considerably increased over that of
current missiles which must keep their launch and fire control units occupied
during the missile's entire time of flight: 13 seconds for the Milan, 18 seconds
for the HOT. Consequently the new missiles will have a fire-and—forget
capability and/or increased speed (supersonic).

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To achieve this goal, DIDG proposes two different design concepts for the two
systems: a fire-snd-forget long-range missile and a supersonic medium-range
missile. This approach will also avoid pernicious standardization of
European weapons.

Two guidance system have also been chosen for each of the two missiles: a
10-12 micron infrared homing seeker or an active radar homing seeker especially
for the fire-and-forget missile. A choice will eventually have to be made
between these two guidance systems on the basis of effectiveness and
self-containment criteria.

Studies of these different guidance systems are being conducted concurrently in
the three comtries. In France, Thomson-CS? and SAT [Telecommicatione
Corporation) are studying the infrared guidance system while BSD and Thomson-CS?
are working on the radar guidance system. In Germany, AEG-‘l'elefunken is
studying the radar system and 361‘ [Bodenseewerk Geraetetechnik] the infrared
system. In Great Britain, British Aerospace is handling the infrared system
and harconi (and Pleasey) the radar system.

Development and production of the approved system or systems will then be
apportioned among industries in the three countries.

Similarly. development and production tasks for the two missile systems will
be distributed among industrial firms in the three countries. with a small
central project management organization. on“: at this juncture, being
responsible for major decisions and courses of action. Under this plan.
Aerospatiale will handle the medium~rsnge missile and missile system while
British Aerospace and Messerachmitt-Boelkow-Bloh (1433) will be responsible
for the long-range system, with British Aerospace being responsible
specifically for the surface~to-surface version and the missile. and EBB for
the helicopter-borne version.

The cost of the new third-generation antitank missiles should not exceed the
cost of the present Milan and HOT missiles.

(”WRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

8061
C50: 3100/ 528

32
DFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

AIR-TO-AIR MISSILE TBST--The official review UAW revealed this week
that Matra's new air—to-air missile Magic 2 had successfully completed its
first in-flight test firing at the Lsndes Test Center (GEL) on 18 November
1981. The missile was launched from a Mirage 3 aircraft assigned to the
Cazeaux Flight Test Center. The test was conducted as part of the Magic 2
development program begun in 1978. The new missile is designed to arm the
Mirage 2000, Dassault Breguet's new combat aircraft. [Text] [Paris AIR ET
COSMOS in French 27 Mar 82 p lol] [OOPYRIGBT: A. 8 c. 1982] 80101

ANTITANK MISSILE NIGHT LAURCHES—Euromiasile announced that to date it had
conducted 25 night f iringa of R01 antitank missiles from a light Dauphin
combat helicopter, and that 22 of the 25 missiles fired had scored target
hits. Euromissile officials said these results demonstrated a mastery of
thermal imaging and stabilized platform technologies. The missiles were
launched from a Dauphin helicopter equipped with a thermal imaging unit
(infrared 10-12 microns) maunted on a Venus stabilized platform. The first
firings-qt ranges of from 1.700 to 3.000 meters-were conducted at the
Bourges firing range and in connection with the Satory [French Army weapons]
show. Another series of firings were conducted in 1982. but this time at
the Cazeaux Test Center in the Landes region. Eight MOT missiles were fired
on dark nights under conditions of high humidity and as part of the
qualification program for pre-production missiles. Seven target hits were
made. The helicopter flew at altitudes of from 10 to 100 meters either in
hover flight, or in forward flight at 70 to 150 kilometers per hour, or
while performing an evasive maneuver. The missiles were fired at ranges of
2,500 to 3,700 meters. The two firings at the latter range were target hits.
The French-German HOT is an antitank missile with a daytime range of 4,000
meters. It is produced jointly by Aerospatiale and Messerschmitt-Boelkow—
Blohm. [Text] [Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 3 Apr 82 p 57] [COPYRlGliTz

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FT1C1AI.USE¢DNL¥

GENERAL FRANCE

JAPAN, SOUTH KOREA SRO" INTEREST IN SUPER PUMA, SATELLITES
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 27 Mar 82 pp 9, 68

(Article: "Japan Interested In the Transall and the Super Puma"]

[Text] Our Tokyo correspondent informs us that as a result of a visit to
Japan by Jacques Mitterrand. president of Aerospatiale and the GIPAS
[Association of French Aeronautical and Space Industries]. the Transall
[military transport] is in favorable position in its open competition with the
[Lockheed] Hercules for selection as Japan's maritime reconnaissance aircraft.
The 1983 budget could include the initial funds for three such aircraft.

The Super Puma [military transport helicopter] is under consideration for two
programs. One is a Maritime Self-Defense Force program calling for deliveries
of helicopters over a 10-year period. Super Puma's rival in this program is
the Bell 215 [super transport helicopter]. The second is an Air Self-Defense
Force long—range search and rescue helicopter program. In addition to the
usual American competitors, the Super Puma also faces competition in this
second program from the Boeing Vertol-Kawasaki 107-! whose conversion would
be very expensive. Also noteworthy is the fact that the first Bcureuil

365N [helicopter] ordered by the Tokyo fire department is now in the process
of assembly and certification.

In contrast, the Airbus was mentioned only by the French side. This couercial
transport is used by the Japanese regional airline TBA which has purchased

nine and already received six. Yet TDA has still not obtained the corresponding
traffic rights from Japanese authorities. This accounts for the low
utilization-—6 hours per day--of these aircraft. Nevertheless, TDA is highly
satisfied with its Airbus transports. All Nippon appears to be interested

in the A 320. Japan Air Lines is simultaneously studying the Boeing 767, the

A 310. with perhaps a possibility of acquiring A 300's.

During his 3 days in Tokyo, Jacques Mitterrand met with five cabinet ministers.
the three major Japanese aircraft manufacturers, and top executives of the
three major airlines. This visit was preliminary to the one made by Michel
Jbbert, the foreign trade minister. and which itself preceded the visit by

President of the Republic Francois Mitterrsnd.

In South Korea, Jacques Mitterrand received a welcome comparable to the one
given him in Japan. Talks on arms purchases were conducted in great secrecy.

3h
FOR OFFKJAI.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We do note that South Korea recently received Harpoon missiles and that P's
fighters are going to be assembled in Korea. Northrop has awarded contracts
for production of PS conponents to four local manufacturers. In the civil
aviation field, nothing is expected from Korean Air Linea which already has a
surplus capacity, particularly in Boeing 767's. South Korea did show interest
in co-unications satellites.

COPYRIGBT: A. 8 C. 1982

8061
cso: 3100/527

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
BRIEFS

SECOND ARIANE lAUNCH COMPLEX-The National Center for Space Studies has
designated Comsip Enterprise as prime contractor for equipment and installation
work on the ELA 2 (Launch Complex 2) for the European Ariane launcher, at
Kourou. French Guiana. Comsip will be assisted in this contract by Air
Liquide. Simca. and Siged. This group will install facilities and equipment
for handling toxic, conventional, and cryogenic fluids, plus equipment for

the administrative and operations buildings. It will also install control
equipment for ground systems and the Ariane launch vehicle checkout stand.
Comsip's share of the contract is valued at 60 million francs. Comsip officials
stated that the ELA 2 complex is scheduled to become operational in 1984.

They also pointed cut that their firm currently has 180 specialists

operating tracking equipment and fueling launch vehicles at the Guiana Space
Center. [Text] [Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 3 Apr 82 p 59] [COPYRIGHT:

A. a C. 1982] 8041

C50: 3100/527

36
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL ITALY

REVISED NATIONAL SPACE PROGRAM FOR 1982-86 APPROVED

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 3 Apr 82 pp 53-57

[Article by special correspondent in Rome, Pierre Langereux: "First Revision

of the Italian Space Program for 1982-1986"; passages enclosed in slantlines
printed in boldface]

[Text] Over a period of 6 years, Italy will devote 1,100
billion lire to space, half of which for the national program.

/The first revision of the Italian space program,/ approved on 23 March 1982
by the Interministerial Committee for Econunic Planning (CIPE), was presented
the next day by Prof [Luciano Guerriero,/ director of the program, to the
National Council for Research (CNR), at the opening session of the 22nd Inter-

national Scientific Convention on Space which took place in Rome (Italy), on
25-26 March.

The national Italian program has therefore been revised as planned, although
with a slight delay (March 1982 instead of December 1981). It is nevertheless
an important step for the Italian space industry which had been waiting im-
patiently for the CIPE decision, since this decision [ensures the continuity
of the space program] as far as the development of the new Italian space pro-
grams is concerned. The National Space Program covers in fact only /national/
programs, i.e. those carried out by Italy alone or, in some cases, in bilateral
cooperation. The Italian participation to the European space programs is
decided elsewhere within the European Space Agency, of which Italy is one of
the main members.

This first revision of the National Space Program led to the presentation of a
/second space program covering the period 1982-86/ and continuing the first 970'
gram (1979-83) which had been approved by CIPB only in October 1979 and conse-
quently started late (in 1980 only). The National Space Program is managed by
the CNR and was supposed to be revised every other year, according to a

"sliding program" formula which made it possible to adjust the objectives and
the means as a function of economic conditions.

The revision of the initial program, which started at the end of 1981, has thus
led to a new five-year program (1982-86) replacing and completing the previous
program (1979-83). In particular, the first two years (1982-83) of the new
program are also the last two years of the initial program. The second program

is to be revised again at the end of this two-year period, i.e. at the end 0!
1983.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1,100 Billion Lire

The first space program1 provided that, over a S-year period (1979-83), approx-
imately [500 billion lire/ (1979 prices) would be devoted to all of the Ital-
ian space activities: approximately 200 billion lire to the national program
and nearly 300 billion lire to Italy's participation in the European BSA pro-

gram. The national program was thus to receive 98 billion lire during the
first 3 years (1979-81) and 102 billion lire during the last 2 years (1982-83).

/The new revised Italian space program has been considerably increased./

/During the next 6 years, Italy intends to devote over 1,100 billion lire to
space; approximately 500 billion lire (end-of—1981 prices) will go to its
participation in European programs./ The present objective is to devote lap-
proximately 200 billion lire per year to space,/ half for the Italian program,
the other half for the ESA program.

The National Space Program benefits from this increase to a large extent since
it is expected to receive [660 billion lire until 1987 included]; this includes
39 billion lire which have already been allocated for 1979-81, 513 billion for
the 1982—86 period of the second program, and 108 billion lire thereafter (see
Table). These amounts are for payment credits, which total 552 billion lire
for the period 1979-86 (including 513 billion lire in 1982-86) and are to be
covered by funds allocated for that purpose (including 98 billion lire in
available funds, and 456 billiOn lire of new credits for 1982-86). The commit-
mert credits will amount to 592 billion lire for the second program and 656
billion lire for the period 1979-86.2 By then, the Italian space industry

should employ some /1,800 to 2,000 people,/ according to the program estimates.

of these 552 billion lire allocated to national space activities over the first
and second programs (1979-86), 200 billion lire had already been approved by
CIPE as part of the initial program. Since only part of these credits, viz.

60 billion lire, has been used to-date, there remains an available balance of
140 billion lire for the second program which, therefore, includes 352 billion
lire as the result of “new measures" approved recently by CIPE until 1986.

Under the second national program, therefore. /513 billion lire/ will be made
available /for the 5-year period 1982-86 only,/ i.e. slightly over 100 billion
lire per year. Even if Italian inflation is taken into account, this repre-
sents an appreciable increase in actual value ayer the amounts allocated in

1979.

These 513 billion lire of the national plan break down as follows: 76 billion
lire in 1982 and 82 billion lire in 1983. the balance over the remainder

I. See AIR ET COSMOS No 830.

2. These amounts are given in current lire (December 1981) and should of
course be adjusted during the coming fiscal years to take inflation into
account.
of the fiscal year. However, only the credits for 1982-83 will receive the
final approval of CIPE who will revise the program again in two years from now.
The credits for 1982-83 are therefore taken for granted. However, they must
still be confirmed when the annual Italian budgets are approved.

Priority to Italsat

As before, the new 1982-86 space program covers the industrial and scientific
activities related to developments in the fields of propulsion and satellites,
as well as scientific and technical experiments related to the study of future
projects. Similarly, the primary objective of the national program remains

the development of the Italian space industry, especially in the field of tele-
communications, in particular with the national Italsat satellite program
which is the main piece.

The lltalsat/ satellite program alone will absorb three-fifths of the 1982-86
program credits. i.e. I316 billion lire/ to bring the program to completion.
This includes 3 and 18 million lire respectively for the study and definition
stages of the program and 295 billion lire for its development, viz. 210 bil-
lion lire for the satellite and 39 billion lire to launch it, plus 35 billion
lire for the construction of the 20-30 CH2 telecommunications stations, 4 bil-
lion lire for one year of operation (the remainder being financed by the FIT
[Postal and Telecommunications Administration]) and 7 billion lire for the

40-50 6H2 propagation measurement campaign.

The Italsat satellite is_now being studied by Telespazio, with an important
participation from cus [rational Space Council? and Selenia, and the cooperation

of other Italian companies, among which STS [Consortium for Satellite Tele-
communications Systems], CSELT [Telecommunications Research and Study Center],
CTSE [expansion unknown] and FIAR [expansion unknown].

Italsat is to be a pre-operational telecommunications satellite equipped with
a 20-30 GHz telecommunications payload for digital telephone and "special
services" (fac-simile, teleconferencing, data transmission, etc.) and with
instruments to study propagation conditions at higher frequencies (60-50 GHz).
The satellite will be stabilized along its three axes and provided with a large
1,370 W solar generator (13 m span). It will make it possible to qualify new
technologies (multi-beam antennas, multiple access in SS [expansion unknown]-
TDHA [Time-Division Multiple Access], on-board communication, etc.) for future
Italian telecommunications satellites. The satellite will have a mass of ei-
ther 1,170 kg or 1.270 kg (including a ZOO-kg payload), depending on whether
it is launched by Ariane or by the space shuttle; this apparently has not yet
been decided. Nor has yet a platform been selected; it could be either Ital-
ian (credits have been earmarked), or American (Hughes Aircraft), or French
(Telecom l). Negotiations on this have just started with HATRA (Mechanics,
Aviation and Traction Company]. The Italian industry attaches considerable
importance to this selection since the Italsat platform could lead to the
construction of la dozen flight models/ for future national Italian programs
for operational telecommunications satellites, direct television satellites
and "national services" satellites (SICRAL [expansion unknown] military satel-

lite project).

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Italsat satellite is now in the definition stage; its development is sche-
duled to start during the second quarter of 1983 and to be completed during the
third quarter of 1987. Under the new program, [the launching of the satellite
is scheduled for the last quarter of 1987 or the first quarter of l988./ The
satellite will have an expected life of five years (until the beginning of
1993) during which it will be used by the Italian PTT to prepare the installa-
tion of a national operational space telecommunications network.

The definition of the ground network associated to the Italsat satellite is
also in progress; the development of stations is scheduled to start during the
second quarter of 1983 and be completed toward mid-1985. The stations planned
are as follows: one satellite monitoring station, several experimental stations
for 40-50 GHz propagation measurements, and four 20-30 GHz telecommunications
stations to be installed at Fucino, Rome, Milan and at another site yet to be
selected. These telecommunications stations will be equipped with a low-noise
amplifier (PET [field-effect transistor!) and with amplifiers of 50-200 H for
telephony (120 MBits/second) and 100 U for specialized services (25 MBits/
second).

30 Percent of L-SAT

The Italian industry is also taking a large part in the ESA [EurOpean Space
Agency] L-SAT program for a European experimental direct TV and telecommunica-
tions satellite; the Italian contribution to this program amounts to about

I30 percent/ of the program cost which is estimated at about 460 million of
accounting units, i.c. close to 2,800 million French francs. At present, this
is the most expensive_ESA satellite program. The construction of the L-SAT
has been entrusted to the British Aerospace Company with ISelenia/ as prin-
cipal cooperator-~Selenia is responsible for the integration of the four
satellite payloads and for the supply of two of them, for 20-30 CH2 telecom-
munications and for direct TV broadcasting. In fact, L-SAT will provide

/two channels for experimental direct TV broadcasting over Italy./

Italian official are, in fact, placing great hopes in the national Sirio 1
satellite (launched in 1977) and in the new L-SAT and Italsat satellites to
/acquire capabilities unique in Europe in the use of high frequencies/ (20 to
50 682) which will be the key to the telecommmnications satellites of the
1990's.

In addition, one year ago, the CIPE has approved the [HONOHIC/ [expansion un-
known] program, to which 5 billion lire are allocated in the new national

space program. This is a pilot project for the manufacture of gallium arsenide
(GaAs) monolithic integrated circuits operating at 12 GHz, which will be inte-
grated intoa Ihome direct-TV broadcastitg set./ This development, to be completed
early in 1983, is now being carried out by Itsltel, Selenia and CISE (expansion
unknown], in cooperation with RAI [Italian Radio Broadcasting and Television
Company] and several Italian universities.

b0
IRIS For Ariane?

At present, Italy is carrying out two national programs in cooperation with
NASA. These are IRIS (Italian Research Interim Stage), a powder-propellant
upper stage, and T88 (Tethered Satellite System).

The IIRIS/ propulsion unit was originally designed as an upper stage for the
American Shuttle,to place 600 or even 900-kg satellites into geostationary or-
bits.as a complement to the American upper stages (SSUS/PAH A and SSUS/PAH D)
which NASA had already decided to use. But, in view of the potential difficul-
ties in having this stage accepted for the shuttle, /Italy is now offering IRIS
as the fourth stage of the future Ariane 3 and 4 launchers] for the launching
of European scientific satellites on planetary orbits, or as an [apogee motor/
for the placing of European telecommunications satellites into geostationary
orbits by Ariane 3 and 4. However, this use has not yet been approved by the
direction of the Ariana program. Italy is now looking for a market for IRIS
for which /only three use: are contemplated at present/: the launching of the
future Italian x-ray astronomy satellite, that of a Lageos 2 geodetic satel-
lite, and that of a satellite of NASA's AHPTE program.

The program is new being carried out in cooperation by Italian companies; the
prime contractor is Difesa e Spazio (27 percent participation), Aeritalia (34
percent) being in charge of heat monitoring and structures, CNS (15 percent)
in charge of the nutation damper, Laban (14 percent) of the telemetry encoder-
decoder, Selenia (8 percert) of the antennas and the transmitter, and PIAR

(2 percent) of the batteries.

The development of the IRIS stage should start in October 1982; as of now, the
first launching is scheduled for IHay l986./

The cost of the program, financed under the second space program, is estimated
at 74 billion lire--60 billion lire for the development of the stage, and 14
billion lire for the cost of the first launching.

Tethered Satellite

This month, the ITSS/ satellite project will enter its definition stage; it

will be the responsibility of Aeritalia which has received a 3.7 billion lire
contract extending over 18 months. This program also has been delayed since
launching is now scheduled for [1987/ according to the Italian space program.

This program is covered by a memorandum of agreement with NASA, according to
which itnly would be responsible for the system, for the construction of the
satellite and for the integration of the experiments; an American company would
realize the deployment system of the satellite as well as the experiments.

Let us recall that this is a program for the realization of a Itethered satel-
lite/. deployed from the hold of the space shuttle to which it would remain
connected by a cable (unwound by a winch), which would /explore the regions
located 10-100 km below or above the shuttle orbit, the latter gravitating at
an altitude of approximately 200 km.

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WM

"SN—I

«IoI—I

"NH

m_aa~w~>u mugs»
no” «m

oumnouo “coaumﬂeou

oumuouu ucoaaam I Havana A¢HOH

nouauwucoaxu ucaa¢mwnwz
I mumamuuu guccoauum

ucuaumwcca vac soccowuwm
n «excuxv camp uncomuwuoao <¢o I

onus mcmcuuauu
:ooﬁnan uncomuuuoao «caucus I
aauwonuu vc-nm< I
m~ :uuauaou omaum I

unusao~o>ou new :uuwoaoz
a

auuvaum I nugUmqu auaupm
uucansn omuaano

Ax<mv «cmwaouqu dune I

w 3.352. 259.3 9.5.3.3 uoﬁd I

n A.0um .x<wv «yucca» so: I
mammuuu uuoeuz

o=0muuuwunnc
uumaaouua msocouuwu aqux I

oquuouwa 302
wuw~nouom mmh vauuzuwh I
«sauna mHzH I
osounaa wouau>v<
uuwuuuuow onHm I
awoﬁocgoou cuxozoz I
ouwuuouuo h<ma<hu I
ocowuaOmcseaouuna
oncomona “umuuaavcm wanna

VN

QNN
According to Italian officials. such a satellite could be used for the Ide-
tection/ of earth resources, as well as for various [scientific] experiments:
direct observation of ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling phenomena (around alti-
tudes of 125-150 km), in-situ study of plasma waves and currents (with an
electron gun on board), production of very low frequency electromagnetic waves
to study ionospheric propagation, direct simulation of electromagnetic pheno-
mena (using a very high voltage-30 kV--conductor cable through magnetic
fields). etc.

X-Ray Astronomy Satellite

The program provides that 50 million lire will be allocated for the [realiza-
tion, undrr a bilateral cooperation agreement, of a new Italian scientific sa-
tellite] devoted to lx-ray astronomy], which is scheduled to be launched in
ll986./

The feasibility study for this future satellite has been entrusted by CNR to
Aeritalia. Two options are now being contemplated:

- either a SAX [X-Ray Astronomy Satellite] satellite devoted to the study of
/hard X-rays,/ with an energy ranging from 2 to 200 keV, provided with scintil-
lation counters. Such a satellite would weight 600-700 kg and would be placed
intc a circular orbit with an inclination of less than 12'. This version
would involve coOperation with the /Netherlands;/

- or an OOXA [expansion unknown] satellite for the study of /soft X-raysl,
between 0.1 and 2 keV, using a powerful incidence telescope. Such a satellite
would weigh 1.5 ton and would have to be placed by the shuttle into a circular
orbit having a 28° inclination. For this version, cooperation with /Great-
Britain/ is contemplated.

However, a new possibility has appeared recently; it would involve [coopera-
tion with France./ France has offered Italy to participate in the French
gamma-astronomy satellite project, ISigmal, which has in fact a very interest-
ing mission, and which the CNES [National Center for Space Studies] cannot
realize on its own.

Therefore, Italy will have to decide whether it prefers its x-ray astronomy
satellite project or a participation in the French gamma-astronomy satellite
project.

Lageos 2 Geodetic Satellite

ISpace geodesy is one of the most important innovations of the second space
program/ which is allocating 20 billion lire to it: 9 billion lire for satel-
lite laser range-finding, 5 billion lire for large-base radio-interferometry
(VLBI), another 5 billion lire for the Lageos 2 satellite project, and l bil-
lion lire for geodetic data processing.

. 143
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The space program provides for the creation of a /national observation net-
work/ to monitor tectonic activity in the Mediterranean basin, and especially
to Iforecast the earthquakes] which periodically devastate the peninsula.
This network would include a [fixed laser station/ supplied by the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory (8A0) and a Imobile laser station] manufactured in
Italy in cooperation with NASA and the Delft (Netherlands) Physics Institute.
The network would use the American Lageos 1 satellite, launched in 1976 into
an orbit located at an altitude of 5,900 km and inclined at 110°. This pas-
sive satellite is a sphere 60 cm in diameter and weighing 610 kg, which is
covered with 426 laser reflector-prisms which reflect the radiations emitted
by earth stations.

The space prcgram also provides for the realization, by Italy. of a second
passive geodetic satellite, Lageos 2, which might be launched for free by
the NASA shuttle in 1987.

Italy also intends to /participate in the international large-base radio-
interferometry (VLBI) campaign/ to be organized in 1985-86 at the initiative
of the United States. For this campaign. a 251m fixed radio-interferometry
antenna would be installed in Bologna. and a mobile station would be built
in cooperation with NASA (type ORION or GPS); these two projects, under
guidance from the CNR, should be completed by 1983-84.

SAR Radar for Spacelab

The space program also stresses /remote sensing/ to which 30 billion lire
will be allocated over 5 years, viz. 15 billion lire for the development of
sensors, 10 billion lire for pilot projects. and 5 billion lire for data
processing.

A program for the deVelopment of new sensors has been launched. Telespezio
and CISE have been entrusted with the development of [optical sensors/

(visible and infrared radiations). and a pool of Italian companies including
CISE, Contraves, Selenia and SHA [expansion unknown] has been entrusted with
the feasibility study of a lsynthetic aperture radar (SAR)/. This SAR ins-
trument is intended for ISpacelab/ and will be developed in cooperation with
IGerrany/ which has recently given its agreement to the project. It is estim-
ated in Italy that the development of the C-band SAR will cost 15 billion lire.

Two pilot projects are also in preparation in cooperation with the Italian
universities of Rome, Bari and Firenze; they involve the application of
remote-sensing techniques to /agriculture/ and /hydrogeology./

In addition, Telespazio and CSATA [expansion unknown] have studied the simul-
ation of images from foreign observation satellites (Landsat D, Spot). with a
view to receiving these data at the Fucino station to supply Italian and
European needs.

Remote-Sensing Station in Kenya
Since the project for an Italian San Marco/Scout launcher (based on the Ameri-

can Scout and with Italian powder-propellant boosters)-which had been suggest-
ed by Prof Luigi Broglio of Rome University CRA [expansion unknown]- has been
abandoned, the use of the Kenya sea-base to launch Italian rockets is-no longer
contemplated. This decision was made a year ago by CIPE and has not been
changed. lAt present, there is no longer any project for the launching of
rockets from the San Marco platform in Kenya./ The next Italian scientific
satellite, the San Marco D realized by the CRA, will be launched in the United
States by NASA. The credits initially allocated to the San Marco/Scout rocket
project (17 billion lire) have been reallocated by CIPE to complete the

San Marco D satellite, the second satellite of the initial series being
abandoned.1

However, the Halindi (Kenya) station is expected to remain active, especially
for the tracking of the equatorial satellites launched by NASA and BSA. But

the space program also provides for the installation of a /station to receive
images from foreign remote-sensing satellites] at the request of Kenyan author-
ities. Credits amounting to 5 billion lire have theoretically been allocated
to study the installation of such a station.

The stratospheric balloon launching station at Trapani-Hilo (Sicily) will re—
main in operation; it will even be improved in prevision for the coming trans-
Meditcrranean balloon flight campaigns. These campaigns have been organized
every year since 1975 as part of the French-Italiaanpanish cooperation; al-
ready 22 large-volume (up to 850,000 cubic meters) stratospheric balloons

have been launched. 0f the 9 billion lire provided under the program, b'bil-
lion are earmarked for improvements to the station during 1982-83; the remain-
der is intended to cover operating costs (1 billion lire per year).

Scientific Experiments

In addition, the program allocates 30 billion lire for scientific experiments
and 15 billion lire for technological research and development programs.

In the scientific field, Italy is developing [payloads for Spacelabl: micro-
gravity experiments using a lfluid-state physics module] developed by the
Naples University for the first Spacelab flight scheduled for September 1983.
Italy also has a participation in the new European scientific satellites,
Exosat, Giotto, ISPM and Hipparcos, as well as in the operation of the Space
Telescope-as a part of the European cooperation with the American Space
Telescope Institute. The Italian industry also supplies stellar sensors

for the French-Soviet Gamma project. For the time being, however, Italy is
getting ready to operate the European /Sirio 2/ satellite, built from an
Italian platform. Italian sciertists are especially interested by the LASSO
experiment for the laser synchronization of atomic clocks.

The research and development program is very traditional and coordinated with
that of BSA; it is essentially centered on the development of new technologies
in connection with structures, propulsion, heat monitoring, attitude monitoring
and telecommunications systems for future satellites.

1. See AIR ET COSMOS No 87b.

1:5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. the space program allocates 8 billion lire to the study of /future
projects/ such as orbital stations, large geostationary platforms, telecom-
munications satellite swarms and, more recently, telecommunications satel-
lites to provide assistance to the victims of natural disasters.

An Italian Space Agency After 1983?

The project for the creation of an Italian space agency, which has been men-
tioned in Italy for over 15 years, has again been taken up by the Italian
Minister in charge of Scientific and Technological Research Coordination,
er Giancarlo Tesini./ at the opening ceremony of the 22nd International
Scientific Convention on Space held in Rome on 25-26 March 1982.

Minister Tesini announced that a lbill would be submitted/ to the Italian
parliament before the end of the year (next fall in principle); this bill
would provide for the creation of a national space agency. This is the first
Lime that a bill is filed in connection with this question. The minister
also stated that, if everything goes well, [the Italian space agency could
start operating after 1983,] i.e. in approximately two years from now. How-
ever, industrial circles in Italy are very sceptical as to this possibility
in view of the legal and administrative difficulties which would be raised

by such a project (without a precedent in Italian affairs).

A project for an /Italian Space Organization (OSI)/ had already been prepared
two years ago with the help of the industry. It provided for the creation of
a loosely structured national space organization, like the one wished by
Minister Tesini. The 081 would have included four departments (administration
and finances, technical, planning and logistic support), each headed by a
general director appointed by the Minister for Scientific Research (at the
time). Among other things, this organization would have been entrusted with
the managemert of current programs, the study of future projeccs, and the
coordination of the activities of the CNR and the CRA, the two organizations
which are now involved in space activities. The CNR manages national activi-
ties while the CRA is in charge of certain scientific programs.

COPYRIGHT: A. & C. 1982

9296
C50: 3100/532 END

2 ONLY