FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOGl7
28 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
acurces are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govement.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CONSUMER Goons AND DOMESTIC TRADE

ARTICLES 0N HUNGARIAN Ec0N0N1c MODEL
(F000 2/82)

CONTENTS

WSMTION mm AND POLICIES

Hungarian Farming Practices Discussed
(Sergey Golyalwv: NEW mes, Apr 82)...................

Hungarian Boonoazic Ibdel Diamond in séviet Pnaa
(minim-mun GAZB’IA. 3U Sap 81, 17 Mar &.
Pam, 22 Rb 82)0......OOIOO'OQOOOOOOIOOOOOO000......

Agricultural Bxparinanta. by Kapieolina
Koahavnikova

ﬁnancial, Baking Ineantivea, by V. Geranium

[grove-ants in bail Trade, by L. Valikanova

Economic Planning of (EMA Countries in Agroinduacrial

Operations
(Ivan Nikolayevich Buzdalov. Mikhail Yeti-avian.

VOPMY “moan, mt &)oooaaooooaoaooaoaoooooooaaooa

- a - [III - USSR -

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
HUNGARIAN FARMING PRACTICES DISCUSSED

Hoscow NEW TIMES in English No 16, Apr 82 pp 20-23

[Article by Sergey Golyakov:

[Text]

Thmm.p«lnp. no
connoisseurs at toad

§§§e:e§

z :
gs:
3
Egg;
ésiﬁ

3E

2%
E:
5%? g

E

3

E

f s

2;:
Egg?

*3
SE
g:
3:
5E?

:m-mmmwymm
mammmwm.
“Holmeumdmwﬂm
«om-1mm 1!: 11mm
urtcultnnmd have!“ 1150
dun-u and ”mow-I'm
madman. Wanama-
uoudtnecuo (ran agricultural
“Montana.

ﬂowwthhmtmlc
WWI“, I

1

”Creative £nergy"]

mdmunuupmﬂvtnmm
mm humm-
mm wmm develop-
m‘undthompplyoltoodiom
mmrmxumm
umuchhprodocdwhodnud
Whammaomm.
Lame-producuu‘y human".
mammal, {001:de
www.mmtyameo-
wumudamdlywby

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070063-0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m. 3%. gmmwmmgdﬁnmm mama” . a?“

u m . u M mum“ m? M .. a w m m m”
Wmzmmumwqummmmmmwmrrmmmummm mm memmmmm
m .ummm. WM ,m ”MW.MM w a mum“ ”MMWMWMW.W” “Mm “mm“
WWW mmwmﬂmmwmmwwmm mmmmmm W WE
mm MM, mm 4%? ”mm .3 w my rm
WW, mwmm mm mmmmmw. WWW mm wwmwm memwmmmw Mmmmmmwwwmw m WWWWW

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070063-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA~RDP82~00850R000500070063-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

o! preparation In macaw modern

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600070063-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070063-0

COPYRIGHT :

_' CSO:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M”
MMmmWMM
meotmw-W".
1am mm with“
mMIOW ”OW
mnbontormdcnmwkm

mmuu M "new
mama-any”: tor-mud

tmhonnbramn).

mun-mammalian
mmmmmuum
W at I cow".
Mmymﬂommu
M m Ol’ who.
{nut-«WWW
mac. -

mtmﬁmoWVO
Murmur”.me
wwmtauuuunmmm’
hue-oak 1mm Now-I.
mummamwm
“Manama-rum
mmmtmmcw
mummuwmdh
manual-twan-
mummmw
WbMWWMh
thou-cam at “In.”
(“.mmumm
”Wtotwhuhuohm
manna-dad. MW
«mm-Mm”
mwmwwﬂb

mmmm. NW“ ‘0‘
boo—work. which-unmet“:

’0! much um: and mu! “Wu

awn» unmet mm:
mum «ﬂu-ma 0M
.bovc anon minim-Io
awaamwnm'm
”wy‘mmuw “mm
~,wmutuewmua
dowtk mum»! m and
m.wmmm'
Mun-«mama...

mmmmaewm.

1812/82

boudlndoda u

Mmm “um munddmm
. M d ”I. W m d v
papa. (OWN
a WM M W- 0"” truly and Item:
Not available
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROO0600070063-0
:CNSARIAN ECONOMIC MODEL DISCUSSED IN SOVIET PRESS
Agricultural Experiments
Mu:cow LITERATURNAYA GAZBIA in Russian No 40, 30 Sep 81 p 13

' "ticle by Kapitolina Korhevnikova, Special Correspondent of LITERATURNAXA GAZBTA:
-~w Are Things in Hungary?"]

i-uxt] I first visited Hungary 2 years ago. I described my impressions of this

azzp in the essay "Believing in the Earth" (LITHRATURNAYA GAZBTA. No 8, 1980). The
rapid growth of Hungarian agriculture and the search for various ways to improve it
have caused a lively interest among our people. The editors received many comments
about this article. The readers were pleased with the successes of our friends and
thvy inquired and wondered what of the Hungarian experience could suit us. When on
trips and meeting with acquaintances and colleagues, I always heard the question:

"How Are Things in Hungary?"

This universal and, I would say, even avid interest in the present Hungarian country-
side caused me to go back to it.

In fact,'how are things in Hungary?

There was my first impression possibly tainted by excessive emotion. There was the
strong effect of the delights of this beautiful land. Had these not to acne degree
concealed the harsh essence of things? Certainly it was a question of purely preach
matters, earthly in the full sense of the word.

7‘25, again Hungary in the summer of 1981.
Something About Peasant Stinginess

Enis stingineas is widely known. "Peasant greed won_out...," "th do you grudge
every penny like an old village woman?...“ Is it not true that we often hear these
or similar expressions? Us no longer give them too much thought, we accept them as
they are offending the completely blameless village people. Yes. of course, there
u.:tainly existed a peasant small-owner psychology and an affection for one's piece
J. land. How else could it be if the grain grower got everything by sweat and toil,
jLut recall the recent history of both Russia and Hungary.

5

FOR,OFIWC1A1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A person constantly faced with the fear of hunger and pestilence learned to save
every piece of land, each piece of bread and every penny. He did not squander his
money as he had no capital. Once it was gene that was the end of it....

I would rather speak not of peasant stinginess, but rather thriftiness. Han through
the ages has lived off the lend, its fruits and everything that it produced and gave
him. He always looked at the skies wondering what to expect: an evil desiccating
heat or gloomy bad weather?

For the peasants life together, on a kolkhoz, has been both easier, more advan-
tageous and more productive. But it has also evoked a new concern: how to instill
in the country man the concept of "your and everyone's together." He drives modern
machines which have arrived in the fields and on the farms; he lives in a good home.
He even has his own motor vehicle (not every one, but some do). He earns a good
deal of money, he travels and visits resorts. But on the field you can see an
abandoned combine. The untransported potato can rot in the clamps.

How can a feeling of thriftiness, even a little stinginess, be returned to all farm-
ers without exception so that they did not waste a kilogram or a hundred kilograms
of tomatoes or apples?

No matter how one cuts it there is one way out: it is essential to find in our
viable socialist system not only the moral but also the precise material incentives
which would force a person to work so that it would be impossible for him to throw
out even a hundred grams of produced product.

For a certain time the ﬂungarians, not fearing the accusation of miserliness, have
begun to follow the principle that the best thing is money in the bank. Before a
cooperative or state farm undertakes something it first carefully analyzes whether
this will bring a profit or loss.

I know there are persons who would immediately raise counterargumenta: Such an at-
mosphere fosters a person with a petty owner psychology, that we do not live by
bread alone and so forth. But the main thing, in my Opinion. is something else....
Very poignant for me are the words of L. I. Brezhnev said by him at the 26th Part,
Congress: "The economy should be economic."

This is the issue. It is the main thing.

...He drove south from Budapest into the county of Baranya, virtually across the
entire country, past lush fields and vineyards, past old cities. He drove almost
to the very Yugoslav border. It was the settlement of Baksa.

Andras Pinter is the deputy chairman of the cooperative here. To become acquainted
with the cooperative, I might mention the figures of the harvest brought in last
year: 58 quintals of corn per hectare, 58 quintals of wheat, 67.7 quintals of
spring barley, and 25 quintels for sunflower.... These are solid figures. That
year, Pinter said, was a regular one and in some ways unfavorable. Incidentally,
in 1980 the entire nation obtained from each hectare 67.6 quintals of wheat. 37.7
quintals of barley, 53.3 quintals of corn, 371.3 quintals of sugar beets, 167 quin-
tals of potatoes and 52.3 quintals of grapes.... The Hungarians fatten beef, pigs

6
FOR<MﬁﬂCJAL.USE(MVLY
and chickens not only for themselves but have also made meat a most profitable itea
in their exports.

Tl? ability to count every forint, to proceed primarily from economic advantage and
fn feel the real soil under your feet-I was convinced of this again and again dur-
inw my trip-just how important this is to make agriculture highly profitable!

in Baksa they took a look. said Andras Pinter, and reached the conclusion that
-n a cooperative which had excellent machinery and good personnel available would
1 to produce sufficient products from the fields and farms if they could not find
t magic wand which is tedioualy called material self-interest.

"Just look," said Pinter enthusiastically, "how is a brigade's work usually organ-

:zcd? The leader gives the instructions and the people carry them out. There is

v-rhing to think about and nothing to wonder about. But the peasant certainly is

-. ~ creator on the land! Give him some independence. He loves to wonder what

thuuld be done and how. An indifferent worker is useless to the cooperative and

u -1ess to the state. Two years ago, with the aid of scientists from the economics

'. titute, the idea arose of creating small groups of workers for the sectors and
ndoning the large brigades where everything was lost and diffuse where eternally
nething or someone was lacking.

u. started with poultry raising. He assigned 15 persons who would be both the
poultry tenders, the mechanic, the driver and the night guard. Here you have all
the necessary means of production and here you have 600,000 forints which corres-
pnnds to the total wages paid during the year to the collective. By the end of the
year, see to it that you produce a profit of 3 million forints. How you do this,
by what ways and means-that is your job. Take over! .

There were arguments and debates about whether or not this would destroy the al-
ready existing organism. "as every person who dreamed about independence capable of
using it?

"well what happened,” said I with interest, "at the end of the year did they produce
the planned 3 million rubles of profit?"

"More, much more!"
"And how was this money divided?"

"Like this. Of the total received above the plan, 30 percent went to the coopera-
' 'c. This was for the amortization of the equipment, credit and so forth. The 30
, .cent was divided between the brigade members. They the-selves determined who got
how much. Well, things got underway. All poultry raising converted to the group
--rm and them the other sectors as well. The innovation was beneficial for us. Do
: u know I do not recall such a procedure for the equipment or such industry in my
cnoperstive although I have already been working here 18 years. Take the same
poultry raising. Certain farms have motor vehicles. They are eternally in short
"uply and new ones are requested. Now two vehicles satisfy all needs. They some-
';ucs are even turned over to other groups, but for a fee. Everything has been re—
poired and everything brought into order. Not even a single board is loose. The
F"‘d is consumed thriftily."

7
FOR(NHHCIAL.USE<ONEY
FOM.0ﬁ1ﬂ(]Al.USE(NNLY

The group or brigade is given extensive rights. when necessary they themselves can
hire urban residents or anyone else as they receive the entire wage fund for the
year and spend it at their discretion.

At the end of last year, the cooperative paid its seven groups 920,000 forinta above
their wages. Everyone received different amounts: some 2,000 forints and some
12,000.

"Obviously, there must be some ceiling in wages?"

"Yes, of course. This is determined by the Ministry of Pinances. If it is exceeded,
a person will pay a progressive tax...."

Is this a variety of our non-schedule system? Actually it is a Hungarian version of
it. It is a viable and interesting version which encompasses and solves a broad
range of problems including: independence, self-interest and economy. Here a per-
son keeps control of things and becomes their true master.

And as the master he keeps account of the money and everything else. he finds the
way out of a difficult situation and knows where to spend and where to save.

If it is awakened and directed into the required channel. this peasant thriftiness
is capable of a great deal. And ultimately it will end up with a well-stocked shelf
and table as has happened in Hungary.

"A Living Organism and Not a Honument...."

In my previous visit I had twice met with the then Hungarian deputy minister of
agriculture and food industry, Jeno Vancsa. At present, Comrade Vancsa is the min-
ister. we both wanted very much to continue our interesting talks. But life did
not provide such an opportunity. My meeting was set with the deputy minister Janos
Jeleki. ‘

The deputy minister was a short thin man in a sports jacket. The ice of unfamiliar-
ity was quickly broken.

It is worthy of note that Jeno Vancss for many years was the director of a sovkhoz
and for 18 years after completing an institute Janos Jeleki worked in his home vil-
lage somewhere beyond the Tisza River, initially as the chief agrononist and later
as the deputy chairman and then chairman of the cooperative.

"This is my second job," said Jeleki smiling, "and generally speaking, you can take
me merely as an ordinary rural agronomdat. Particularly as I have worked less than
a year here in the ministry...."

"The path of our agriculture is not at all simple," began Jeleki in reflecting, "the
tauntryside has lived through many difficulties. At one stage there was an efflux
of manpower into the cities, the planned quotas for the harvest were not met and
much produced product simply rotted. For a time we purchased frozen meet in Argen-
tina.... But the land and all that could be produced on it was the main wealth of
our nation. Nature did not grant us anything else. Amd the acute need forced us to

8
FOR¢0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
thlnk and seek. In what areas were the searches? How could labor in the country-
slde be made advantageous for everyone so that people would not wait for the orders
to begin planting, to sow such and such, so that they would learn to act independ-
ently. But this independence should not develop into anarchy but should bear fruit
onJ strengthen both the cooperative and our entire national economy. How does a
pilot learn to fly? At one moment he is sitting next to the instructor and then all
a: a sudden he is alone in the skies. It is terrifying. But he flies. The in-
aI-uctor below follows the flight. Is it easy for him at this moment?.... But let
us not look at the skies but rather return to the earth which must be cultivated,
ruunted and harvested.

 

'.w are relationships no" organized with the cooperatives? A state plan is drawn
up both for the 5 years and for the year. The far-s outline their own plans.
Usually they are higher than the state ones. why? Because in food production we
plan not only for the domestic but also the foreign market. Incidentally, almost
"nu-half of our income comes from the exports of agricultural products, such as
meat, vegetables, fruit and wines.... But the world market at present is extremely
carricious. For this reason we call our general state plans open. That is, there
L3“ be various changes and supplements. But then the annual plan is more stable.

'ahe present system of state prices for products, crediting and capital investments—-
all of this creates an economic sphere in which the interests of the cooperative and
the entire national economy are as close as possible."

“Our readers are very interested in how the situation is in Hungary with the process-
ing and storing of food products."

"In Hungary agriculture and the processing industry operate in one system. Even the
ministry is one.... In the present Sixth Five-Year Plan, the state is providing
great material aid to the farms for building all sorts of storage capacity.”

"Two years ago, I visited the settlement of Hernad where there is a cooperative
which is the head enterprise of the Bunnie-Hybrid system which raises chickens. The

cooperative along with its partners has built a packing plant."

"We have many like that. Large construction is hard for a single farm to carry out
by itself. It takes several others as partners. An interfarm cooperative results
and this is advantageous for everyone. But if nearby there is a large capacity
state enterprise which can fully handle the processing of the products, there is
simply no reason for the cooperative itself to build something similar. In hungary
both state industry, the cooperatives and trade are all linked by the common goal of
|rowlng more, processing and selling rapidly. Let us assume that there is a demand
.0: a certain product. But a cooperative cannot produce more of it. Then the state
enterprise and trade invest a portion of their funds in the cooperative so that it
:un produce as much of this product as is needed."

“But then the two forms of ownership, state and cooperative, are mixed together."
Juleki responded strongly to my perplexity as if anticipating it:
"Hull, what of it? Yes, they are mixed, but ultimately the property of all the

people is increased. This happens often in Rungary. Let us take tomatoes. There
a contract between the cooperative, the state plant and a trade organization. We

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

know the area to be planted and the proposed crop. But it is impossible to reckon
with the weather. If we harvest fewer tomatoes than we assumed, the plant will not
operate at full capacity. If more are grown than was planned, we are overloaded
with tomatoes. In order that there not be any conflicts, the cooperative and the
plant form vertical integration. The aim is the sale, that is, to rationally use
both the land and the plant capacity and to produce more products and income. To-
gether' they decide how to proceed. The cooperative changes the tomato variety so
that the crop does not nature all at once, but rather over a certain time. If the
plant is short of workers the village provides them for a time. And it can now oper-
ate around-the-clock. But then trade begins pushing: there is demand, give us
more products. Alas, the shops have to be enlarged for this. All three sectors in-
vest money. In Hungary, there are many different systems and associations."

"Just yesterday I returned from Szekszard. There is a system which brings together
the corn-growing farms. Almost half the nation is on their geographic map."

"Yes, this is a large production system. Some 15 years ago, five farms in Hungary
decided to fully mechanize the entire corn-growing process. And corn is a most im-
portant feed crop, the basis of our livestock raising. In various nation's we pur-
chased a set of the most modern machines. The entire aggregate of problems--both
biological, technical and economic--brought to life large associations which would
include many partners and organizations. But we also have simpler cooperatives, and

here is an example for you. We at one time lost much mineral fertilizers and chem-
icals in storage. It made no sense for each farm to build storage facilities as

this was not advantageous and uneconomic. But if 10 or 12 of them were brought to-
gether, it would be easier for them in comon to put up a true agrochemical center
with first-rate equipment. He are no longer enlarging our cooperatives. 0n the
contrary, some of them must now be. split up. Life has shown that giant farms are
less economical than medium-sized ones which are mobile, strongly united and well
managed. If you wish it is easier for them to maneuver within the systems and asso-
ciations. But our agriculture could not get by without these systems. Does this
not encroach on the independence of the cooperatives? In no way. On the contrary.
Only the independent unit is capable of determinin8 its place in the system and in
the one where it is more advantageous.

"Hence, complete voluntariness?"

"0h, of course! Each is free to enter whatever system he wishes and to withdraw from
it if this is found to be necessary. And they can join several associations at once.
For example, one for producing grain, a second for meat and a third for fruit. The
miniatry closely follows to make certain the systems are profitable. Initially they
are even given a trial period. It does happen that some fail. A living organism
and not cast once and for all like a monument. And anything can happen with a liv-
ing organism... The main thing is no coercion of these organizations and no inter-
ference. Otherwise it is disadvantageous simply for all of us!"

Like the Conductor of an Orchestra
The village is called Tengeri. There are 30 households in it. How many hamlets or
farms I have seen like this somewhere in the Ukraine! The same orchards with ripen-

ing apples and pears, the same red cocky roosters with flaming combs. And the roses,
the roses, a true rose kingdom.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Of course, I thought that it would be old folks living here who dug in their garden.
in some ways this was the case, but not completely. One's own farm. In Hungary
this concept has a somewhat different meaning.

"The Western economists criticize us for increasing the farmstead form of farming,"
I was told in Budapest by my Hungarian-journalist colleagues. "Just what sort of
>.cialist state is this which receives one-third of its food products from small-
5 ale production? We consider this criticism unprofessional and superficial. Who
nxoduces the feed? The cooperative and the state farm. They produce it in abund-
ance. Everywhere there are stores where feed can be purchased. The owner of the
farmstead plot receives young animals from the cooperative. The agronomist and
cateranarian are also sent out from here to him. If all of this were excluded or
taken back, the small farms would wither sway immediately. Here for you is inte-
gration of large socialized farming and small subsidiary farming. Why not develop
such a form of rural labor?"

Actually, why? It is developing quite successfully.
the quiet village of Tengeri is a particular shop of a cooperative, a houshold one.

ce opened one of the wickets and entered a spacious yard. we were met by the owner
"jos. He was about 70. Tall, stoutish, he removed his cap and wiped his balding
hrad and pink face. His bright blue eyes radiated good-natured slyness.

"For many years I worked as the chairman of the village council," said Grandfather
Lajos. "At one time the cooperative here was organized and the countryside was con~
verted to a socialist footing. I retired. But should I just sit with my hands
folded? I remembered the old and decided to work with my own hands for the good of
society. Then I still had my old senile plan. If you want to live a long time you
must work and get busy. So I went to work with my steers...."

He receives six-seven head of calves from the cooperative. It also provides feed,
grain and a plot planted with alfalfa.

We inspected the farm. The steers were in good condition and this was the second
lot of the present season.

"I have already sent the first off," said Grandfather Lajos, "and it went for export
to the USSR.... I have been fattening steers now for 10 years. Over this time, I
recently figured, I produced around 100 tons of meat or, in other words, 10 car
lots. . . ."

Tnere was pride in the voice of the farmer. He could imagine this train pulling out
from the courtyard of the humble pensioner. His was a legitimate pride. His wife
and daughter-in-law helped him. His son worked on the state farm. When the steers
‘ad been "brought up" to the necessary weight, a truck arrived from the cooperative.
There were no problems with sales. The money was received immediately. of course,
the cooperative subtracts the cost of the feed and everything else.

ﬁrnndfnther Lajos escorts us beyond the wicket, politely doffing his cap.

11

FOR 0FF1C1AL USEHOFHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The middle-aged woman Josefna Hatrai has a large family and a large house. There is
the housewife herself, a married daughter who is a teacher with her husband, the
chief livestock raiser of the cooperative, an old mother and a mother-in-law. The
Hatrai faaily has preferred vegetables and not merely vegetables but rather those
which are raised in a simle hothouse under a polyethylene film. At present the
sweet pepper or famous Hungarian paprika is ripening here. In the winter the women
raise seedlings, and early in the spring, lettuce. Later it is harvested and pepper
is planted which produces three crops a season. In addition there are cucumbers,

tomatoes and various greens. Incidentally, in many villages potatoes are grown under
film and city dwellers can purchase the young potatoes in March-April.

"Vegetables spoil quickly and so they must be sold quickly?" I asked the housewife.

"we conclude a contract with the cooperative. At reduced prices it supplies us with
the film, seed and fertilizer. And we are obliged to sell a certain amount of the
crop to it. They send a vehicle at our request and haul off the vegetables. This
is convenient and there is no spoilage."

It turns out that Josefna Hatrai continues to earn her length of employment for a
pension for the work on the farmstead plot under the contract with the cooperative.
This is quite correct! Certainly her activities are essentially a home form of
socially useful labor.

The farmstead economy has been raised into a special sector which is planned ahead
of time, it is directed and constantly concerned with. I became acquainted with
Viktor Horvai. his position is called the head of the sector for the farmstead

economy. His-charges live and work in six villages like Tengeri. They raise steers,
piglets, chickens, rabbits,‘doves"f6r meat, vegetables and fruits and berries.

"Each family sets its own plan for what it will produce and in what amount," Viktor
Horvai explained to me. "we total up these plans and are able to draw up an annual
program for our entire sector. I, as its leader, enter into professional relations
with the poultry industry and its enterprises as a portion of the raised chicks
goes to the cooperative and a portion is sold to the poultry industry. For example,
the inhabitants of the village of Kovagoszoles specialize in rabbits. Virtually all
of them are exported to Italy. The inhabitants conclude a contract with the cooper-
ative which sets out their relations. In our cooperative there is also a combined
feed plant. There is enough feed for ourselves, for the farmstead growers and some
is sold to other farms. In addition to myself, the sector for the farmstead economy
employs a veteranary technician; a veteramarian and specialists for rabbits and even
doves. All of them have a higher education. Without the cooperative, its aid and
leadership the farmstead sector could not develop.

Even during my first trip through the country I was convinced mainly of this: the
uniqueness of the private subsidiary farms of the inhabitants of the Hungarian
countryside consists in the close interaction of the large and small economy. These
farms are not abandoned to drift. Here is your plot but then just make certain
grass does not grow in the field. Small production cooperates closely with basic.
It has become an inseparable part of it. Precisely the cooperative and the state

farm have become the organizers of the home subsidiary production. The large
socialist farm operates here like the conductor of an orchestra.

12 .

FIIICNWHCJA1.USE(NVLY
"When the peasants joined the cooperatives, each person was allowed to keep the
out-buildings," said the deputy minister of agriculture and the food industry,

Janos Jeleki. "what should we do, let them fall into disrepair and collapse? No,
that would not be efficient. Certainly the concept of a 'small producer' in our
country includes not only the owners of a farmstead plot but in essence almost one-
half of the entire Hungarian population: workers, the intelligentsia and inhabi-
tants of not only the villages but also the cities. Let me explain. More than 15
percent of the small producers are persons who.work actively on their farmstead
plots, more than 10 percent are rural pensioners and a few less urban pensioners
while around 30 percent are all sorts of urban residents. He call them not active-
ly working. These are the owners of small orchard plots and those residents of
towns who have an opportunity, in observing health rules, to raise pigs and rabbits.
The feed is sold freely and you can grow what you like and sell it to the slaughter-
house. Our people are industrious. Why not utilize the industry of those who want
and can work in their free time? For many this is also an unique holiday, a commun-
ing with nature and change in activity. In agriculture tlere are also crops which
'yield‘ only to a small producer including greens, raspberries, currents and early
vegetables under film. He harvests them quickly and sells them quickly. Moreover,
these plants require a great deal of manual labor. They are best grown by an entire
family. Incidentally, each socialist nation has its particular features and the
forms of small production also need not be the same...."

Of course, this is quite correct. I might be asked: with such a universal involve-
ment in home production of meat, vegetables and other products, obviously in the
society there will be rapid enrichment. But precisely this does not occur. As I
have already said, there is a system of progressive taxation and this is an economic
lever. re are also moral levers as here they clearly do not encourage those who
endeavor to gain more.

"hat strikes the eye of the newly-arrived visitor? Both in the city and in the
countryside the Hungarians voluntarily live humbly, without excess and without avid
acquisitiveness. As in any family there are obviously black sheep. But there is
also a definite common mood.

0n the weekend I was kindly invited to an orchard plot by Doctor of Economic Sciences
Bela Tompa who jokingly said that he, an agrarian scientist, was also among the urban
dwellers "not actively working on the land." The "inactivity" of my friend Bela and
his wife consisted merely in the fact that they did not sell the surplus fruit from
their plot to the local buyers. There simply was no surplus. 0n the small Tampa
farm, everything was orderly. 0n the 600 m he grew a little grape, some strawber-
ries, an apricot tree, a walnut, several apples and a pear. For aesthetics and for
beauty, space was also allocated for emerald-green lawn. Roses blossomed over this
lawn and blue delphiniums grew.

There was a wooden, sharp-peaked "alpine" house with a mansard above. There was a
fireplace and a wine cellar. Opposite was the Danube with its steamers and smart
yachts. Nearby were similar saall houses or of a somewhat different style. But

everywhere were well-tended GOO-m plots which one could look at infinitely. They
were so attractive, these little pieces of land into which enormous human labor had

been invested. The term "little active" is certainly not applicable here.

13

FINlCNﬂﬂCJAl.US£10NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I net with the director of the Economics Institute, Janos Merton.

"Possibly the most significant thing occurring now in the Hungarian countryside,"
he cemented, “is the turning of it into an agroindustrial sector. At present, a
large number of various enterprises has already been concentrated in our villages,
basically those processing agricultural raw materials, including slaughterhouse,
fruit canneries and combined feed plants. The woodworking industry, machine tool
building and electronics are also-more and more invading the countryside. This is
a good thing! The youth stay put. The culture of rural society grows. In one
family you can even meet a livestock raiser, a worker, a physician. an engineer and
a teacher. While previously the city drew off the village people, now finally they
have ceased rushing there, seeing their fate only there. human life among nature
provides health and a sense of well-being. Labor under these conditions is the most
hmanized.

In Budapest I went to the Agriculture Museum. They say that this is the only one in
Europe. At the unseen was an exhibit of children's drawings on the subject of rural
labor. This interested me. Today's children, living in the tumultuous age of the

scientific and technical revolution basically draw not combines and tractors, as one
night expect, but rather horses and oxen. Horsemen are racing. An old man drives a
haytruck. A boy is feeding rabbits.

Is this not the intuitive desire of a child for that type of labor which Janos Marten
calls humanized? Is this not the eternal longing of man for nature, the very basis
of our life on earth? .

Financial, Banking Incentives
Moscow PRAVDA in Russian 22 Feb 82 p 4
[Article by PRAVDA correspondent V. Gerasimov from Budapest: "The Porint at Hork"]

[Text] A bank is a bank. There are armored Iinibuses at the entrance. The en:
ployees are emphatically polite and smartly dressed. Bending a pile of Ioney in
their fingers and taking in a score of bank notes in a trained glance, with amazing
speed and accuracy they count the forints.

The forint works well. It is sent where it is quickly repaid and brings income.

The forint is the control, the estimates, the taxes, the deposits, interest and
credits. It has become the tool by which the state endeavors to achieve balance and

effectiveness in all the economic subdivisions, for disclosing resources and inten-
sifying production and exports.

Without going into all the comlexities of the financial nechanism, let us take up
one of the roles of the forint, crediting. Our conversation at the Hungarian
National Bank started with this question.

"During the past five-year plan," said Matias Tiler, Chairman of the HNB [Hungarian
National Bank] and nenber of the Central Conittee of the HSZHP [Hungarian Socialist
Workers Party], "the enterprises and cooperatives used more than 300 billion forints
of their own savings for their development, construction and reequipping. Approxi-
mately 85 billion forints were given to them from the state budget as direct and

16 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
indirect state aid. A special credit fund was also created with 120 billion forints,
It is divided into two parts. One with 55 billion was the 'credit construction'
which served to strengthen the equilibrium of the foreign trade balance, to strength-
en exports and to produce competitive products. This total was called the 'competi-
tive part'.

"when at the start of the five-year plan, this was first announced almost 150 enter-
prises immediately applied to obtain credits. But the bank, in examining the most
enticing proposals, declared a competition for the best. The conditions for grant-
ing the 'competitive billions' were very strict. In the first place a study was
made to see how many forints the enterprise itself could invest. Secondly what
would be the profitability? For example, from the machine builders it was demanded
that it be at least 15 percent. Thirdly, the invested funds should be paid back
with foreign exchange earnings. -

"By the end of the five-year plan, the bank has concluded more than 1,700 contracts
for granting such credits," continued Matias Timer.

He also gave the figure of 100 billion forints. This was the amount of capital in-
vestments made to expand exports over the 5 years using the "competitive billions"
and the enterprises' own funds. During this period they brought in direct and in-
direct exchange-eerning exports totaling 3.2 billion dollars. Over the 5 years,
another 10 billion forints were made available to improve the trade balance and ex-
pand exports. The loan repayment times became stricter as of this year. While pre-
viously the enterprises were to pay back the obtained credit in 3 years from the
moment the new project went into operation employing the net receipts from the ex-
change earnings, now the capital investments should be repaid from the receipts from
foreign exchange earnings in 6 years from the start of the project's construction.
This encourages the enterprise to channel the credits into rapidly repaid capital
investments, that is, into new projects which can be put into operation as quickly
as possible.

"Our credit policy also helps to strengthen multilateral ties between Hungary and
the fraternal nations and primarily the USSR and to carry out the Comprehensive Pro-
gram of Socialist Economic Integration," commented the bank chairman in the talk.

During the years of this five-year plan, the credits from the second part of the
fund (for expanding and strengthening fraternal economic ties, specialization and
cooperation) have been channeled primarily into capital investments which would help
to save energy and utilize production wastes and secondary raw materials. Many
credits go for capital investments which help to replace and reduce imports from the
capitalist nations and to further strengthen cooperation within CEHA.

At present, the role of the credit mechanism is diverse. The forint helps to im-
prove the production structure and increase production efficiency. For this a spe-
cial system of conditions for obtaining credits has been organized. It operates in
the interests of strengthening contractual discipline between the enterprises and
helps to reduce the amount of inventories and the time of their replenishing. The
credits help to introduce innovations and inventions more rapidly.

"Since 1980," continued Hatias Timer, "the “NB has begun to grant loans for 8 years
for introducing Hungarian inventions, innovations and rationalization proposals also

15 \
FORJOFFICJAI.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to those enterprises which do not have technical development funds, for example. the
agricultural cooperatives or foreign trade associations, small plants and factories.
here the credit estimate can include the output of the prototype, the zero series
and marketing research for the new commodity. If the profit from the innovation
when put into production is higher than was expected, then the bank reduces the
total interest payments thereby encouraging the enterprise to be bold and fast."

Moreover, credits for inventions have begun to be granted by the Central Exchange-
Credit Bank, an affiliate of the END operating as a stock company. Here the capital
for innovation was created from money of the State Committee for Technical Develop-
ment and the Hungarian Ministry of Industry.

"Over the 2 years the fund has been in operation around 300 applications have been
received from enterprises, institutes and private individuals," said Brzebet Birman,
director of the Exchange-Credit Bank, in giving figures. "we rejected around 100,
we deferred a few more than this and began to be actively involved with the remaind-
er. He conclude an authorizing contract with the inventor and a contract for entre-
preneurship with the introducing enterprise which we involve with a credit. An es-
timate is drawn up which considers the development stages. In the event of high
sales, the bank for 3-5 years participates in the income. But in the event of a
'failure' we assume the expenditures. Now inventions are being selected which could
provide a savings in raw materials and energy and quickly return a profit."

The turnover of the forint and the initiative of the finance workers have been felt
by the public and they have not forgotten to make deposits knowing that this is ad-
vantageous. The State Savings Bank has become an active organizer of economic life.
Its general director, Jeno Szirman, started his talk by this:

"Our depositors are convinced of the party and government economic policy. The
forms of deposits and crediting for the public are constantly being broadened. For
example, the youth deposits. These can be made by young people up the age of 35.
They conclude a "thriftiness contract" with the savings bank under which for 5 years
they promise to deposit from 100 to 800 forints monthly. (This is 5-50 rubles.)
Each year. 5 percent interest is paid and at the end of the period another percent
as a bonus. Such a deposit helps to obtain, for example, preferential credit for
buying a cooperative apartment or furniture for the young family.

"During this five-year plan, we expect deposits to grow by 50-60 billion forints.
At the same time we will grant 75-85 billion forints to the public. For achieving
such 'arithmetic' it is essential that the public's interest grow more rapidly and
hence, deposits," said Jeno Szirman, "in order that the forint can turn over more

rapidly."

Nine-tenths of the credits go for housing construction. For example, up to 50 per-
cent of the cost of a house can be provided for building it for a family. But the

maximum is 200,000 forints. Apartments can also be bought on credit. Incidentally,
the savings bank itself builds apartments using its own funds. During this five-
year plan it will put up almost 60,000 of them. Some 50 percent of the apartments
are sold, as a rule, to the workers through the local councils on easy credit terms
(1 percent per annum). Along with the Komsomol, actions are carried out to sell
reduced-cost apartments to young families.

15 .

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
The savings bank actively strengthens the balance between solvent demand and supply.
Recently the Ministry of Domestic Trade, having coordinated its prOposals with the
use and the savings bank, broadened the range of goods which could be purchased on
time payments. Young persons having savings accounts and newlyweds will be given
advantages. They will not have to make any down payment at all. Usually it is es-
sential to pay 10-30 percent of the cost of the product. The savings banks by vari-
ous benefits provide an incentive to buy consumer durables on time payments.

A special system of credits has also been worked out for those who have farmstead

or subsidiary farms for the purchase of "small" equipment, for building hothousss or
quarters for animals.

"Are individual credits provided?"

"A rayon savings bank can grant a credit to a private individual for any purpose for
1 year up to 10,000 forints at 8-10 percent per annu," replied Jeno Szirman. "Of
course, we first study the financial possibilities of the client. And the annual
interest will depend upon the purpose of the credit. We pay the bills ourselves."

Initiative, entrepreneurship and the search of the financial workers help the forint
to circulate more rapidly and to better serve the state, the people and socialism.

Inprovements in Retail Trade

Moscow LITERATURNAYA GAZETA in Russian No ll, 17 Her 82 p 13

[Article by special LIIBRATURRAYA GAZBTA correspondent L. Velikanova: "The Full
Stores of Budapest"]

[Text] Sociological research has shown that shopping takes up very little time for
Hungarian women, just 9 percent of the time which they spend on housework as a whole.
And incidentally why just for women? An important role in saving tine for both
women and nan for nore useful undertakings than standing in line and traveling from
store to store in ﬂungary is played by trade itself or, more accurately, the princi-
ples and methods of its organization.

What do these consist of?
1. What the Director Can Do?

Not far from the hotel where I stayed during my week-long trip to Hungary was a small
ABC store. I remember this probably more than any of the others. Like all the ABC,
this was a store selling daily necessities such as food and essential household arti-
cles. In essence it was a self-service department store but in contrast to those
which are built in the USSR, a majority of the ABC take up comparatively little area
and the goods in th- are displayed sromd a circle. Initially, by the entrance, is
what one might need every day such as soap, shampoo, toothbrushes, razors and razor
blades, rubber pants for babies, sponges, dishwashing powder and some utensils, then
spices, refrigerated beverages and further on frozen food and confectionery articles,
dairy and other products.

17-

ms omcuu. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICJAL USE ONLY

I must admit that this small store where I went every day, whether I needed to or
not, provided me with some aesthetic joy. Everything in it was displayed efficient-
ly, with intelligence, everything was in its place and not in a heap but also with-
out excess fussiness so that you could easily take what you needed. And day after
day there were clearly more and more essential goods.

Who was supplying the store with such a broad and diverse assortment? How was it
possible to replenish the stocks every day? Hes "ny" week particularly good or was
that always the case?

As it turned out, it was a completely ordinary week and the amount of goods always
increases day by day. On Monday, as a rule, there are few purchasers in the store
and sales are less; on Tuesday there are more goods, while on Rednesday, Thursday
and Friday there are many so that everyone so desiring can complete their basic pur-
chases and not spend the weekend in stores (incidentally, they close early on Satur-
day and are always closed on Sunday).

For example, the store receives fresh frozen prepared dishes from three partners,
the director explained to me, one of which was located in Budapest and the other in
small rayon centers. The products are always of good quality and there are virtual-
ly no hitches in delivery and for now the store prefers these suppliers. Why Vfor
now"? Because, better ones can appear. The leaders are given free independence in
selecting their partners. They determine what is to be purchased, how much, where
and at what price.

In Hungary there are thousands of ABC, and externally they are all very much alike,
but at the same time you will not find two that are the same in the entire nation.

One store, in addition to the ordinary range of goods, is famous for its selection

of dairy products (in Hungary, there are 210 varieties), while in another you will

always find household novelties and in a third particularly good fresh frozen pre-

pared food. Everything depends upon where the store is located, who are its custo—
mers and what trade points have been opened nearby. Hence, the trade policy which

is determined by the store's director, his deputies and the department leaders.

Independence is one of the bases on which the operation of the trade organizations

is based in Hungary. "Our aim," Dr Berner Brms, the deputy head of one of the main
administrations of the Hungarian Ministry of Domestic Trade, explained to me, "is

for the leaders of the individual trade units to have the broadest rights and to be
materially interested in the results of their work."

At present no one sets the plan "from above" for either the trade associations or
the stores but rather it is worked out "from below," considering actual possibili-
ties. Here, all material incentives are aimed at constantly increasing trade turn-
over. The basic suppliers of goods as before rennin the wholesale organizations but
no trade unit is “locked into" its "own" supplier. Everyone can purchase goods from
whomever he wishes: from the wholesale base or directly from the industrial enter-

prises.
The range of duties and tasks of the trade organizations is also not set particular-
ly rigidly. For example, a wholesale base can open up its own store while a store

can organize small production or assign a portion of its floorspace as a storage
area for a certain type of commodity, thus becoming a competitor of wholesale trade.

18-

FIMI¢)FF1CJAI.[EHE(NQLY
The stores have the right to conclude a contract also with the owner of a farmstead
plot, for example, the owner of a cherry orchard. Incidentally, there also may not
be a contract. If the owner of the orchard, having obtained a large crop, himself
brings the cherries to the store, the director, seeing that they are good, has the
right to purchase them in order to sell them at a profit for the store (and for all
its workers).

Here the purchaser also benefits. he acquires fresh cherries right off the tree
and, moreover, inexpensively and possibly even cheaper than if the fruit had come
from a warehouse since in this instance the store does not have to pay the wholesale
surcharge.

These are the rights, and now the duties which they impose. If the director of the
same ABC has not found a reliable supplier, he will not be able to put the blame for
poor supply or overstocking on the superior "boss" who shorted him or did not give
him something. In the former understanding there are no superior ”bosses" at all.

On the other hand, in a new sense there is of course a superior organization. In
the sense that it is on a rather high level in order to see, understand, predict and
recomand. Yes, the Hungarian ministry of domestic trade does not dictate how much
should be sold to whom but rather informs the enterprises on the planned targets,
trends, expected changes in prices, denand and narket conditions. 0n the basis of
the overall national economic plan, the Ministry of Domestic Trade works out a gen-
eral concept of the sector or, if you wish, its policy. And also there is a system
of economic control and an organizational structure.

2.' The "Centrun," "Skala" and Others

...I arrived in Budapest not long before New Year's when the feverish pre-holidsy
buying was in full swing and everyone was buying everything.

The well-dressed Saturday crowd moved through the streets, flowing from store to
store and becoming evermore festive from the abundance of bright orange-black and
mottled blue-red polyethylene bags in which purchases are usually packaged here.

If you buy two pairs of pantyhose they are put in a small bag. A Inn's shirt goes
in a larger bag. A dress in a large generous bag so that it does not become wrinkled
on the way. The bags are carried all mixed up, two or three in each hand: orange-
black. blue—red and again orange-black. Although the color of the bag is not acci-
dental, and determines where they came from, to a certain degree it reflects another
feature and one of the principles in organizing Hungarian trade, namely its multi—
sector nature. You can buy a skirt in a state store, a blouse at a cooperative and
a belt and buttons in order to be "a little different," in a small private shop.
Around two-thirds (62.8 percent) of the connodity turnover in Hungary comes from the
state stores (they are represented, in particular, by the orange-black packages of
the "Centrum" Trade Association), a little more than one-third (36.4 percent) is
from cooperatives (the elegant bright firm bags of 'Skalakoop") and a little less
than 1 percent fron the snall private stores (the bright little packages without in—
scriptions). In complementing each other and in endeavoring not to fall behind, the
two major trade sectors (state and cooperative) and one tiny sector (private) have
formed a diverse network of stores which, upon entering, you do not want to leave.

19.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Supply and demand, particularly for daily articles, are balanced. And for all other
items, the scarcity here, if _it does occur, is not long and aggravating but rather
temporary. You might not be able to illlediately purchase a particularly fashionable
thing or find one's size in the first store. But in principle any purchase, from a
package of milk to furniture, did not present a problem.

Here an important role was played by the consuer cooperatives which were able to
successfully apply the new management methods and the independence granted thu.
Cooperative trade began to develop at such a rapid pace that it began to outgrow
the rural locality and it literally invaded the cities, applying a good deal of
pressure on state trade in them. Even in Budapest one out of every purchase is now
made in a cooperative store, while in the town of Make, for example, it is even
greater than one out of two (67 percent of the purchases).

In addition, when I first read in our press a rave article about the Budapest Shale
Department Store, I was simply amazed that it belonged to the consuer cooperative
or, as we would know it, the Tsentroaoyur [Central Union of Consumer Cooperatives]
(in hangary, this is Sevos or the Hungarian Council of Consumer Cooperatives). "How
could it be?!" I said in amazement. "This magnificent multistory trade center which
so struck me 2 years ago during a tourist trip through Bungary, really does this
super department store, the best in Budapest, belong to just a consumer cooperative?"
I recalled our few city "Smartime" stores and I wondered how our Tsentrosoyur
could show such, so to speak, ”criminal" inefficiency? Why didn't Tsentrosoyuz

build its own department stores in Moscow capable of competing with GUM [State De-
partment Store] as did Shale and Kovrinu competed with the other major state stores

in Budapest?

It was explained to me that there was nothing criminal in such inefficiency of
Tsentrosoyuz. 0n the contrary, it would be criminal for them to invade the city
where it is of course much easier and better to trade instead of developing trade in

the countryside, the reason they were created.

For this reason the first question which I asked almost before I crossed the thresh-
old of Sevos was precisely about this: was it right for the consmer cooperatives
to carry on urban trade so widely and did not this harm the supply of goods for the
rural inhabitants!

It turned out that the question of where the cooperative departments stores should
be-in the countryside or in the city—had been discussed rather long here. On the
one hand, it was inconvenient to take the bus into the city to shop, but on the
other, it was very unprofitable to sell outer clothing, consumer durables and high-
fashion goods in each village. Naturally no one wanted to wear all the same coats,
dresses and suits, but it was impossible to diversify the goods in stores serving,
for example, 500 persons, the inhabitants of a small village. Moreover, over the
last 10 years, approximately one-half of the cooperative members had begun to travel
to work in the towns or moved into them completely, and this trend involved millions.
And the number of towns themselves doubled as the rural population points gained the
status of a town. Does this mean that the cooperative stores should be shut down

in them?

Thus the decision was taken which was to the liking of all: to sell what was needed
every day for the family as close as possible to the residents while the remainder

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
would be in large department stores and specialized form stores which had a large
range of goods. Some 50 of the 80 such department stores operate in large rural
population points and 30 are in towns and cities. The consumer cooperatives also
allocate capital investments following this same principle: two-thirds as before go
to develop rural trade and one-third for the cities.

Over the last several year the Skalakoop Association has become the largest unit of
Hungarian cooperative trade and it includes 56 department stores scattered across
the entire country. The largest of then, of course, is located in Budapest. This
is the famous Skala, the four floors of which sell 120,000 different types of goods.
Each day the department store is visited by 100,000 persons, 35,000 of whom leave
with purchases and this fully conforms to the European level.

Now that some experience has been acquired, they have begun to talk more confidently.
If the consumer cooperatives had not created large trade centers in the towns and
cities, they could not carry out rural trade as successfully as they do now. In the
first place, a portion of the "urban" profits goes for its development and for this
reason there are more rural stores. Secondly, the assortment has been enlarged and
even the list of necessities sold in the countryside is now different than the city
one. For example, a rural ABC is in no way worse than what I saw in Budapest but in
addition it would sell tools needed to work in the garden.

It must be said that the example of cooperative trade in the best manner has been
reflected in the work of the state trade organizations. A strong competitor has
appeared and now there is a fight for the customer. For example, it was essential
to expand the food sections of all 36 department stores in the Centrum Association,
to improve their assortment, to more frequently change the suppliers of goods and
more freely establish direct ties with the enterprises.

3. The Search for Incentives

why did the consumer coOperatives adapt more quickly to the appearance of independ-
ence than did state trade? There are several explanations for this, including the
vertical principle of organizing the consumer cooperatives, when the entire process
of creating the good is often in their hands.

The Horozmako Consumer Cooperative which I happened to visit serves 50,000 residents,
including 20,000 rural ones. Some 15 years ago the commodity turnover of this coop-
erative was 65 million forints and now it is 865 million, that is, it increased by
12-fold. How did this happen?

The Moroznako Cooperative not only buys and sells pork (15,000 head) but also raises
piglets on its subsidiary farm and in addition itself processes one-half of the neat
and sells it in the form of sausages (including its famous "salsmi") and other meat
products. In addition, Horozmako purchases and processes vegetables and poultry, it
has a vegetable cannery and a small area for raising mink. At present, the coopera-
tive is building several projects to produce plastics, wood and metal articles. All
of this is in high demand, however it is essential to hurry as the other cooperatives
are also not sitting idle.

For example, take spare parts which were always in scarce supply as it is not advan-
tageous, as is known, for the large enterprises to produce them. The cooperatives

21

FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

have eliminated this scarcity in 5 years, having organized small-scale production
which manufactures spare parts in small numbers. Or. for example, wood products.
Quite recently, for example, such a minor detail as hangtrs were imported from
abroad. Now Hungary even exports hangers. Shovels have ceased being a problem.
Belgium purchases wooden dishes in llungary which have long disappeared from the
Belgian stores.

All of this has become possible due to the flexible price system, that is, due to
the fact that the prices for goods which are not primary from the standpoint of the
standard of living and in addition are subject to changes in fashion are calculated
and set by the producers the-selves. in considering all expenditures. Labor-
intensive articles which no one wanted to manufacture have become "advantageOus"

_ and have reappeared on the shelves.

..."‘l‘esek," "tesek," "teach." I do not know Hungarian but I could guess that this
probably meant "please," or "what would you like?" or "how can I be of service?"
On Saturday. soon a holiday, there are as many people as in our Saturday Tami [Cen-
tral Deparunent Store], but as soon as you go up to the counter with your purchases
(it is self-service in Skala). you imediately hear the polite but insistent:
"Tesek!" They want to serve you.

Why are they so enterprising? Because the entire material incentive system is aimed
at this.

The wages of a saleswonan consists of a fixed rate which depends upon length of em-
ployment, skill, position held and a so-called mobile, that is, bonus part. This
mobile part is figured as a fixed percentage of the increase in conodity turnover.
The upper limit of a bonus is very high and at the end of the month it is possible
to receive a double wage. Only it is very difficult to achieve this as there is
virtually no scarcity and the purchaser is selective. hence, the increased atten-
tion to the customer and the desire to smile at him and the insistent although com-
pletely polite "tesek."

Ultimately, each month everyone receives approximately 40 percent of a surpayment.

In addition, the section head has a bonus fund for persons who have particularly dis-
tinguished themselves. Such individual bonuses make up from 30 to 60 percent of the
wage rate. There is also a quarterly bonus from 15 to 40 percent of the surpawaent
received by those for whom the indicators in the socialist competition were the high-
est. Of course, the growth of comodity turnover depends not only upon the ability
to sell but also what one is selling. Since this is the concern of the heads of de-
partments and leaders of the department store, their wages are organized according

to the same principle: a guaranteed salary (approximately one-half of the total re-
muneration) and a mobile part which also is calculated as a certain percentage of

the increase in comodity turnover and is paid according to the results of economic
activities. It is difficult for the leaders to-reach the bonus limit. Hence their
desire to constantly increase the selection, to broaden the assortment and to supply
their shelves and counters with those goods which will be purchased even with a
saturated market.

22

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4. The Risk Fund and Rules of Conduct

The price reduction system which has been carefully worked out in trade is also
aimed at this "get them buying“ (the goods should be moved!).

First of all there are the seasonal price reductions: spring (February) and autumn
(August). In all the trade organizations during this time for two weeks goods are
sold at prices cut by 20-40 percent. After this, for some goods the prices are re-
turned to their former levels and others are not. For example, in December it is
possible to buy unsold leather coats (without a lining) at the so-cslled advertised
price which had been lowered in August.

Moreover, each department store can select a group of goods and for a certain time
reduce their price. For this the leaders of the departments have a so-called risk
fund. The rates for forming it depend upon the type of good (they are higher for
clothing since dresses and suits more quickly go out of fashion while they are lower
for advanced technical articles). Using the risk fund it is possible to cover the
expenditures related to reducing the prices and selling slow-moving goods.

To put it briefly, in entering any store you almost always see goods which today are
being sold more cheaply. During one week this can be shampoos, laundry powder, or
pantyhose, and next week, articles made from artificial fur or suede, and later on
certain types of footwear and headgear. The department leaders and the administra-
tion of the store determine what good is to be marked down and by how such. Also
upon their initiative production can be organized and output started for a certain
type of commodity.

For example, let us take the women's dress department. Let us assume that its lead-
er is not satisfied with what is being received from the wholesale enterprise. To
him these styles seem out of date and he feels that they will sell poorly. He has
his own idea and he "spotted it" in the last fashion magazine. Now it is up to him.
He has the full right to find a shop which will develop the style for the season.

No one approves either the style or the agreement with the shop. The department
leader makes the order at his own risk and peril as the firm (in the given instance,
Skalakoop) will pay for the expenses as it has confidence in the taste of its em-
ployee. Well, if he has made a mistake and the new dresses are not to the taste of
the buyers, then he is the first to suffer and he has let down his sales personnel.
If he makes another mistake, they will cease to have confidence in him and will ap-
point as leader the one who best forecasts demand. "So, he must 'take a risk' and
not sit in a comfortable chair," summed up Comrade Bogner, deputy general director
of the Budapest sksla Department Store.

In saying farewell, I became acquainted with the "Salesperson Rules of Conduct"
worked out and approved for all the department stores in the Skalakoop system. They
were very strict. During the workday, a salesperson can, in addition to the lunch
break, be absent from the department only to drink a cup of coffee once or twice

or another one or two tines, without fail informing the department head of this and

obtaining his permission. It is categorically prohibited to leave the building or
to move from department to department. Even in one's own ABC, which is located in

all the Skala department stores on the first floor, purchases can be made only after
work (the ABC is open one hour longer).

23

,FOR 0F!1CL\LI£SE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today the shoppers of Hungary are served by 66,000 stores. Conadity turnover per
salesperson is an average of approximately 1.5 million forints a year, that is",
125,000 a month. Yet in the Skala Department Store which I visited in the town of
Make. the output of a salesperson is 185,000 forints a month, although this depart-
ment store, in the words of its director, is far from in let place and is only in
20th place. "It is not easy to work here," said the director then, "as in contrast
to the high earnings of‘ our best salesperson some prefer a calm life in an ordin-
ary store." As they say, each to his own. But as a whole, the economic management

methods lead to a situation where the hopes of a calm life gradually abandon every-
one who wants to remain a trade worker.

In concluding the talk, I asked myself: Is it possible to simple adopt the experi-
ence of our Hungarian friends and transfer this to_ourselves? Certainly this is not
the case. Our nation has different scales, traditions and finally its own specific
tasks. But still much in the system of organizing trade in Hungary is worthy, in
my view, of close attention and serious study. In particular, of great interest are
the direct ties with suppliers, broad independence in choosing partners, flexible
material incentives, the practice of trade markdowns and the experience of the con-
sumer cooperatives. These forms clearly merit our using them whenever possible, in
further developing and adapting them to our own conditions. This is how they also

proceed in Hungary when they borrow the experience of friends, including our own
Soviet experience.

10272
CSO: 1827/72

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC PLANNING OF CEHA COUNTRIES IN AGROINDUSTRIAL OPERAIIONS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 96-104

[Article by Ivan Rikolayevich Buzdalov, doctor of economic Sciences, Renior
scientific associate of IEHSS, USSR Academy of Sciences; and Hikhail Yatimovich
Bukh, candidate of economic Sciences, department head, NII [Scientific-Research
Institute] of TsSU SSSR [USSR Central Statistics Administration]: "The

Economic Mechanism of the Agroindustrial Sphere"]

[Text] In the agrarian policy of the Communist and.workers parties of the social-
ist countries, ever-increasing attention is being devoted to increasing the effec-
tiveness of the economic mechanism of agriculture and the entire agroindustrial
complex.

There operates in the single system of the national economy of a particular
socialist country a single economic mechanism, and application is made of single
forms and methods of the planned social organization of production and

exchange of labor activity, which encompass all levels and links in that system.
At the same time, to the degree that it is rightful to isolate agrarian relations
from the overall system of socialist production relations, it is completely
natural to carry out a special consideration of the economic mechanism of the
development of agriculture, and, under conditions of the deepening of its
integrational links with the related branches and spheres in the national
economy, the economic mechanism of the agroindustrial complex. When analyzing
the specifics of the economic mechanism in the agroindustrial sphere and especialy
in its basic link, agriculture, a factor of fundamental importance is the

taking into account of the vast variety of concrete conditions of production,
which substantially influences the nature of the formation, making, and
implementing of the planned economic decisions, the providing of economic
incentives to production through a system of prices, the distribution of income,
etc. In turn, these specifics exert an influence upon the fundamental aspects

of the operation of the entire economic mechanism in the national economy.

A very important link in the economic mechanism is planning, and the forms and
methods of carrying it out. Studies by economists in the socialist countries and
the positive experience derived from the changes in the economic mechanism-of

the agroindustrial sphere indicate that their initial point is the use of those
methods of planned administration, forms of making and implementing planned

25

FOR OFFICIAI, USE ONLY
liﬂlC”ﬂﬂC1Al.lEﬂi(NWLY

decisions, and evaluations of the results of labor which, in all links of
economic-planning activity, are based on incentives and interests. The essence
of this orientation consists in the more consistent observance of the principle
of democratic centralism, in the elimination of excessive administrative regula-
tion of the work performed by the primary production links, which are supported
through a system of economic contracts and through the mutual material responsi-
bility of all the partners participating in the reproduction process of the

APK [agroindustrial complex] system. The necessity for improving the economic
mechanism specifically in this direction was indicated, in particular, at the
November 1981 Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee. In his speech at the Plenum,
L. I. Brezhnev remarked, "An important place when developing the food supplies
program should also be given to such large-scale problems as the improvement

of the economic mechanism and the system of administration -- the administration
of agriculture and the agroindustrial complex as a whole. And, of course,
administration at the local level."

Recently in the socialist countries steps have been carried out, or are being
planned, for the improvement of planning, and for involving the collectives of
enterprises and APO [agroindustrial associations ] in economic-planning activities.
When forming and implementing planning decisions and concrete assignments,

more and more active use is being made of economic levers, interests, and incen-
tives, and there has been an increase in the economic independence of the produc-
tion collectives, as a result of which there is a more consistent carrying out

of the principle of democratic centralism. An important form is the economic
contract, which acts as a direct economic lever for the well-substantiated
formation of the assignment, as an instrument of planning.

when evaluating a particular approach to the use of the economic mechanism, and
primarily its chief link -- methods of planning - from scientific positions,

it is necessary to take into consideration the results of the application in

the practical situation of the corresponding methodological concepts. In this
regard, something that deserves attention is the study and dissemination of the
experience in organising the economic-planning interrelations in the agro-
industrial sphere in VNR [Hungarian People's Republic). It is specifically that
experience that contributed to the skillful coordination of the work performed
by the Hungarian agricultural cooperatives and enterprises, as was noted in the
Report of the Central Committee to the 26th CPSU Congress.

During the past 15 years the increase in the harvest yield of grain crops in
Hungary came to approximately 20 quintals per hectare (with that increase being
achieved from a level that was comparatively high at the beginning of the eco-
nomic reform: in 1966-1970 it constituted an average of 25.4 quintals per hectare).
In other European CEHA countries, the harvest yield of grain crops increased

with the limits of 7-10 quintals per hectare. 0n the new economic-organizational
basis that was linked with the orientation of the economic mechanism on the final
results, high overall growth rates for agricultural production were assured.
During the past two five-year plans they came to an average of 4 percent per

year. During the 1960's Hungary was a country that was a net-importer of grain,
but in recent years, with a production of more than 1.2 tons of grain per person,
Hungary became a net-exporter of that basic product. The level of meat production
per capita of population was more than 140 kilograms in 1978-1980 (increase of
more than 50 kilograms as compared with 1965).

26
FOIHOUIICIAI.IEHB(IULY
The fact that the results of the rapid and -- as has been shown by the dynamics
of the production costs of output and profitability -- more effective development
of agriculture and the entire agroindustrial complex were achieved thanks to

the comprehensive improvement of the economic mechanism, is attested to by

the data concerning the amounts of attracted resources. During the period indi-
cated above, for example, capital investments in the agriculture of Hungary
dropped from l8 to 15 percent of the overall volume of investments in the national
economy. All this attests to the indisputable_ effectiveness of the economic
approach to the making and implementation of planning decisions, when provision
is made for the active manifestation of such a motivating force in the economic
mechanism as interests, personal self-interestedness, the special importance of
which in the course of communist construction was pointed out by V. I. Lenin*.
The broader the horizon for the manifestation of interests -- primarily the
material ones -- is created by the planning methods that are being employed,

the more dynamic the development and interaction of the entire system of
socialist production relations and the more effective the functioning of the
productive forces and the method of production as a whole.

The basic peculiarity of the economic mechanism of the agroindustrial complex in
Hungary consists in the fact that the state carries out the planning of the
national economy noc by means of the direct informing of the specific executors
of what their planning indicators are, but, rather, by means of using such
economic levers and incentives as the economic contract, the controlling of
state deductions from enterprise income, the regulation of the part of the
income remaining with them, various fixed payments and taxes (payment for fixed
and working assets, income tax, etc.), price policy, credit system, etc.

Enterprises and organizations in the agriculture and food industry of Hungary in-
dependently develop their own annual and five-year plans. Those plans are

not approved by superior organizations, which carry out monitoring functions with
regard to their execution. The procurement organisations and the trusts in the
food industry, on the basis of the plans received from superior agencies,
conclude contracts that are based on equality between the contracting parties,
with the SKhPK [agricultural producers cooperatives] and state farms for the sale
of specific types of output. The cost-accounting form of implementation of the
planned assignments guarantees the observance of the material interests of the
cooperatives and state farms and contributes to the formation of such an
agricultural division of the statewide plan in which the needs are more completely
¢)ordinated with the real capabilities of production and with its concrete
conditions.

An important area in improving planning is the inclusion in this process of the
purchase and supply-and-sales organizations on a cost-accounting basis. As has
been shown by the experience in Hungary, under conditions of the broad, active

use of economic methods, the cost-accounting principles of plan formation and
implementation, direct contacts, and economic-contract forms of exchange of
activity, the need for purchasing organisations and other intermediaries completely

 

*This does not contradict the determining role of social interests. In this
instance we have in mind the assumption that, the more completely personal self-
interestedness manifests itself in the system of interests, the more successfully
the collective and social interests are implemented and the highest goal of
production under socialism is achieved.

27
FOIIOFIICIAI.lEIi(MULY
FORIOFFRJAI.USE(NNLV

disappears. But in the event that they are retained, only complete cost'accounting
(and cost accounting is a method for the planned running of the economy) can
convert the procurement and supply organizations into active participants in

the system of planned administration, which have a direct self-interest in

the improvement of the economic-planning work, the efficient placement of the
plans, the improvement of the structure of production and technology, etc.

The course of the Communist and workers parties in the socialist countries, aimed
at improving planning, has led in recent years to noticeable qualitative shifts
in the direction of bringing the CEHA countries closer together with regard to
the economic mechanisms of the development of the agroindustrial sphere. This is
of great importance not only for increasing the effectiveness of these mechanism
within each country, but also for forming an effective economic mechanism for
international cooperation in the agroindustrial sphere within the framework

of the socialist economic integration. Obviously, at such time it is necessary

to orient oneself not at some medium alternative, but upon the more effective

decisions that have been developed and that are being employed comprehensively
in the individual countries.

Substantial changes after the March 1979 Plenum of the Central Committee of the

Bulgarian Communist Party occurred in the mechanism of the planned administration . .
of the agroindustrial complex of Bulgaria. PVGVIOUOIY th‘ system of planning In the

NAPK [national—economic agroindustrial couples] of Bulgaria'was characterised by

the fact that the central agencies developed the detailed indicators in the
plans for the districts, and the districts developed them for the agro-
industrial complex. For purposes of developing the economic initiative of the
collectives in the new economic mechanism there is an intensification of the
role played by cost-accounting levers and incentives. The APK and the other
enterprises in the agroindustrial sphere are informed of only four consolidated
indicators, including the mandatory sale of a number of basic types of output
(no more than eight types of products, depending upon the farm specialization).
All the remaining sections and indicators in the plan, including such ones as
the sowing structure, harvest yield, quantity and productivity of livestock.
production costs, profit, capital investments, and the number of employees,

are developed by the agroindustrisl complexes themselves. The new economic
mecnanism stipulates a sharp increase in the role played by prices and other
economic levers in planned administration. The mentioned limited number of
assignments for the APKareimplemented on an economic-contract basis of inter-
relations vith the appropriate purchasing and other organizations. As was noted
in the Report of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Cmmmunist Party to the
12th Party Congress, within the near future it will be necessary "to make
complete application of the basic principle and requirement of the new economic
mechanism -- the changeover of all types of economic and social activity to
cost accounting, the very core of which is the paying for oneself"*.

The measures for improving the planned administration are also being carried out
in Czechoslovakia, 003 [German Democratic Republic —- East Germany]. Romania,

 

*T. Zhivkov, Otchet Twentrul'nogo Rbmitsta Bolgarskoy kuwmunistioheskoy partii
XII s"yesdu i predatoyashchiye zadaehi partii [Report of the Central Comittee of
the Bulgarian Communist Party to the 12th Congress and the Tasks Confronting the
Party]. Sofiya Press, 1981, pp 34-35.

28
FOI<0IIICIAI.lEﬂ!(HVLY
and other CEHA countries. and this attests to the undoubted progress in bringing
closer together the economic mechanisms of the agroindustrial complex in those
countries. However, a large amount of work remains to be done, primarily

work involving the comprehensive use of the economic mechanism, and the

intensifying in that mechanism of the role played by cost-accounting levers
and incentives.

In conformity with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers that was adopted in November 1980, entitled "Improving the Planning
and the Providing of Economic Incentives for the Production and Procurements

of Agricultural Products," steps are being carried Out to eliminate the excessive
guardianship over the farms. There has been a reduction in the number of indi-
caters that are communicated to the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in a centralized
procedure. For kolkhozes, for example, they are limited to the volume of
purchases of agricultural products and the quantity of basic material-technical
means to be delivered. For sovkhozes, in addition, plans are specified for

the wage fund, profit,and financial limits of capital construction. Instead

of a large number of plans, a single plan is established for purchases of output

at all levels of planning of production, and norms lists for material-technical
support and capital construction are employed.

Since 1981 there has been a new procedure, according to which the collectives

in the subdivisions are granted the right to determine for themselves the size
of the bonuses and the overall earnings, with a consideration of the actual
contribution that was made to the final result by the activity of the collective,
and a consideration of the level and effectiveness of production. There has
been an intensification of the sanctions applied as a result of poor work.

The farm managers and specialists will receive bonuses not for overfulfillment
of plan, but for an increase in the volumes of sale of output and profit
received. In the implementation of these principles, a factor that is of
decisive importance is, of course, the change in the forms of executing the

planned assignments on the basis of increasing the role of the economic contracts
in the process of planning.

An important area for the further improvement of the economic mechanism in the
ngroindustrial sphere of the CEHA countries is the guaranteeing of the more
effective combination of the centralized plan with the development of the

uconomic initiative of the collectives at the enterprises in forming and fulfilling
it. Among the concrete measures being successfully carried-out in Hungary, one
that is of determining importance is the limitation of the directive assignments

to enterprises and associations in physical indicators, the communicating of

those assignments to the appropriate departments and regional agencies of admin-
lstration, and the use in implementing them of cost-accounting methods that

grant equal economic conditions of management for the planning-and-procurement

and supply-and-salcs agencies, and the enterprises of the APO [agroindustrial
associations}.

A special role in the comprehensive improvement of the economic mechanism in the
neroindustrial sphere is plaved bv the intensification of the functions of the
economic levers. which were constructed primarilv on the principle of the
cauivalencv of exchange. Therein lies one of the decisive conditions for the

29
HORIOFFICIA1.U8£IOBHJI
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

consistent application of cost-accounting methods in planned administration, and
the directed use of the motivating basic of the.entire mechanism -- interests.

At the present time, basically as a result of the lack of perfection with
regard to prices, there has been a break in the direct link between material
incentive and profitability, as a concrete expression of the repayment principle
and a generalizing indicator of the effectiveness of production. One should
note that the improvement of pricing is not a local question of reinforcing the
cost-accounting relations in the APK system, but, rather, one of the key
national-economic problems of socioeconomic development and the application of
' effective cost accounting in the entire national economy. what is required
here is the consistent carrying out of a series of economic-planning, statewide,
centrally carried out measures involving the application of a price system
that corresponds to the objective natural laws underlying the formation of
prices. These measures touch upon such an important problem of improving the
economic mechanism as the systematising of retail prices of foodstuffs and
articles made from agricultural raw materials.

For the European CEHA countries during the past 20-year period a typical feature
was the considerable increase in purchase prices. That contributed to the
reinforcement of the economic foundations of cost accounting-in agriculture.

At the present time a task that is becoming a very important one is the creation
of a more flexible system of purchase prices, which is based on the expenditures
of live and embodied labor, and also which takes into consideration the capital
requirements of output, including in the assets the land in its monetary
evaluation. The complexities in improving the purchase prices lie in the

fact that in a number of OSHA countries the production costs are not computed

by all farms. The normative production costs are determined for random groups
of enterprises. Their more precise computation requires an increase in the
number of farms that establish the production costs of the output being produced,
and the work on the basis of cost accounting includes the necessity of computing
the production costs of the output on each farm.

The role of prices as an incentive presupposes definite deviations from the
basic price, particularly through establishment of bonus markups to be applied
to it. The principles of paying such bonuses are different in various countries.
In Hungary, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia they are computed for the planned
increase in production as compared with the previous period. For production
of output in excess of the planned volume, no increased prices or markups are
established there. In Bulgaria and Romania, and prior to 1981 in the USSR,

in addition to the basic prices for a number of agricultural products, bonus
markups were applied for the production of output in excess of plan. The
encouragement of the planned increase in production by means of prices appears
to be more effective, inasmuch as the markups for sale of output in excess of
plan do not encourage the farms to accept intensive plans and are, in essence,
a return to a double price system.

The changeover of agriculture to an industrial base is closely linked with the
intensification of the integrationsl processes in the branch and with the forma-
tion of interfarm enterprises and agroindustrial associations. In this connec-
tion, during recent years there have arisen in the capitalist countries new

30
FOI!0FFKJA1.USEGIVLY
aspects of improving the pricing of agricultural output, which aspects are
influenced by the fact that, through prices, it is necessary to guarantee

the equal interest that the partners have in cooperative actions, primarily
income that is proportional to the contribution made by each participant per
unit of expenditures invested in the obtaining of the final results of the
economic activity. A factor that takes on great importance is the establishment
of contractual settlement prices. The degree of correctness with which the
settlement prices are established decisively determines the material self-
interestedness of the partners in the cooperative venture.

An important question when establishing the settlement contract prices is

their interrelationship with state purchase prices. Apparently, the countruction
of the settlement prices exclusively on individual costs without a considerationtaf
the existing purchase prices can'lead to a break between the economy of the
associations and the real reproduction process within the framework of the
national economy, and this, in the final analysis, will lead to undesirable con-
sequences. Therefore, when establishing the settlement prices, it is desirable to
orient oneself on the overall price policy, on the economically substantiated
level of state purchase prices. With the price relationships that have developed,
it is possible to include in the settlement price the purchase price. plus or

minus a markdown or rebate, proceeding from the individual costs and the nature
of the specialization of the partners in the association.

The chief area for improving pricing is the application of a well-substantiated

system of purchase and other sale prices, including the correct establishment of
prices of producer goods that are delivered to agriculture, and for the services
rendered to it. Unfortunately, the correlation between industrial and agricul-

tural prices for the output produced by the APK [agroindustrial complex] in the

CEHA countries, as a rule, is formed to the advantage of the industrial branches
and that lessens the incentive principles of the economic mechanism.

In the establishment of prices it is especially important to take into considera-
tion of the chief specific features of agricultural production -- the limited
nature of the land, with its dissimilar natural fertility,.that is, social con-
ditions which objectively lead to the formation of differential rent. Therefore
planned pricing cannot orient itself on the cost of production of output on
average land (in any instance, for the USSR). With this kind of orientation an
ilcvitable result is the preservation of subsidies and other channels, outside
the cost-accounting system, for redistributing the net income, and that weaken
the economic role of price as an incentive for intensifying production, for
specializing it, for encouraging an increase in effectiveness, etc. At the same
time this gives rise to the differentiation of the economic and social develop-
umnt of the farms that have at their disposal land of worse or better quality.

The orientation, in pricing, on the products of agriculture which are produced

on the worse land presupposes the transfer of rent to the social funds by means
of its direct extraction, by means of the differentiation of the rates for rental
payments depending upon the evaluation of the land. The income derived by the
farms and by the state will remain approximately the same, but the very mechanism
of regulating the rental relations with the use of a single price will have a
more active effect upon the increase in effectiveness.

31
FORMOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An important role in the providing of economic incentives for agroindustrial
production in the CEHA countries is played by the credit system, which is be-
coming a more and more effective regulator of production. There has been

a fundamental change in the structure of credit: there has been a sharp increase
in the percentage of long-term investment credits and a reduction in the share

of short-term ones. The interest rates for credit are becoming more substantiated,
inasmuch as the reduced rates, which are divorced from the overall normative
coefficients of effectiveness, nullify the encouraging role of credit.

An essential role in the economic mechanism of the agroindustrial complex of
the CEHA countries is assigned to taxes. in the form of which deductions to be
paid into the state budget are made. Experience shows us that the incentive
importance of the system of taxation is greater in proportion to the extent to
which the size of the taxes is closely linked with the profitability and with

the level of profitability. This principle is being carried out most consistently
in Hungary.

In Bulgaria in the mid-1970's a single task for the APR was established depending
upon the profitability of production. In East Germany the base for computing

the tax since 1981 has been the farms' profit, rather than the gross income,
as had been the case previously.

Another typical feature in the development of the system of taxation is the
increase in the importance of the land tax. In Hungary and East Germany, for

a long time, a part of the farms' net income has been extracted and paid into
centralized state funds on the basis of the land tax. In 1980 in Czechoslovakia
the land tax collected from enterprises running farm on fertile soils was
increased by 25-30 percent, including 70-90 percent for those on fertile
chernozems. Factually speaking, this is a concrete form of rental payments.

A factor of particular importance in increasing the effectiveness of the
economic mechanism is the intensification of the mutual self-interestedness and
responsibility borne by all linksiin the economic and administrative structure
of the APK in the final results. In directives dealing with the Sixth Five-Year
Plan for Hungary it was emphasized that, when carrying out the control functions,
the agencies of planning administration must bear the direct responsibility

"for their own economic resolutions and the effectiveness of their economic ac-

tivity.“ Contract relations are the legal and economic form of carrying out
this principle.

Scientific generalizations and the practical experience in the CEHA countries
indicate that the observance of the functional principles that are inherent

in contract relations. with which the partners in the agroindustrial sphere

act as completely equal economic links operating on a self-repaying basis,
creates real prerequisites for the efficient combination of centralized planning
with the development of economic initiative, for achieving a closer tie between
the incentives and effectiveness.

During recent years. in the decisions of the Communist and workers parties in
the socialist countries, there has been an emphasising of the need to intensify
the role played by contract relations, to reinforce contract discipline, and to
achieve a direct relationship between the providing of material incentives and

32
FOIICIﬂﬂCJAI.USElMNLY
the fulfillment of the pledges with regard to economic contracts. The economic
contract is becoming an increasingly active economic instrument for forming,
making, and implementing planning decisions.

The role of direct economic-contract ties in the prevention of losses is great.
Under the conditions of the relations that have developed between the farms

and the procurement and supply-and-sales system, the producers orient themselves
only on that amount of output which can realistically be accepted and stored

in that system in storage facilities. at warehouses, etc. with the traditional
system of procurements, as a result of the lag with regard to the infrastructure
of the agroindustrial complex, there is a loss, for example, of as much as 40
percent or more of potatoes, and as much as 25 percent of vegetables and fruit.
In the All-Hungarian Vegetable and Fruit Association that was created and is
operating on a contract basis, and that uses modern equipment, almost complete
elimination of losses has been achieved.

Practical life attests to the fact that it is precisely with a developed system
of economic contracts that one achieves the best balancing of production,
overcomes departmental barriers, and provides for the application of a truly
comprehensive system of planned administration of production both on the
macroeconomic and on the microeconomic level. The experience of Hungary shows
that the resolution of these problems to a substantial degree appears possible
on the basis of converting the economic contract into the chief form of economic
interrelations between enterpri es and the organizations of the NAPK, thanks to
which, factually speaking, the directed formation and successful implementation
of the state plan are carried out.

At the present time in the European CEMA countries 80-100 percent of the canner-
cial agricultural output produced in the social sector, in the course of its
subsequent processing and sale, is recorded in economic contracts. However,

in and of itself, the share of output that is involved in the economic contracts
does not yet determine the degree of effectiveness of the use of this system.
Against the background of overall progress in the development of economic-
contract relations, the degree of use of the functions and principles that are
organically inherent in that economic category is substantially different for the
individual countries. The contracts can fulfill the economic functions of
direct influence upon increasing the final results of the development of the
NAPK, when they act as a relatively independent lever for implementing the
cconomic‘planning decisions, rather than formally duplicating the planned
assignment. Correspondingly, the entire system of incentives and sanctions
should be constructed depending upon the fulfillment of the economic contracts.

The effectiveness of the economic mechanism depends to a substantial degree upon
the forms and methods of material incentive provided to the workers in the
production subdivisions, upon the clearly coordinated economic relations

within the enterprises of the agroindustrial associations, complexes, combines,
etc. The question that is fundamental here is the question about how the
system of incentives is consistently directed at effectiveness and quality,

and what predetermines the strictly established evaluation criteria and indi-
cators of economic activity. "hen improving the economic mechanism of the agro-
industrial complex, it appears to be important to achieve a direct functional

33
INNIIIHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FORtOFiWCJAl.US£10NLN

relationship between the enterprises' income and the level of payment of the
labor performed by the workers, on the one hand, and the generalizing indicator
of their effectiveness - profitability -- on the other.

with the aid of a price policy, deductions from profit, and other forms of
financial-economic regulation, one guarantees the combination of the interests of
society as a whole and the individual collectives. simultaneously one creates
the prerequisites for intensifying the material self-interestedness of individual
workers within the economic subdivisions. However, in order to implement these
prerequisites, it is necessary to inform every worker collective, every concrete
producer, of what the incentives are. This is possible by the development,
practical introduction, and constant improvement of a system of incentives that
is based on the socialist principle of remuneration for labor on the basis of

its quantity and quality.

Payment for labor is the chief form of realizing the personal economic interests
of the producers in the system of production relations under socialism. During
the past decade the role of the basic wages as a form of material incentive in
the agriculture of the CEHA countries has grown. This is linked with the change-
over to monetary payment, with the introduction of a guaranteed minimum wage,
and with the gradual reduction in the share of the vitally needed means which
are needed for the reproduction of the manpower and which are coming from the
personal subsidiary farm. But simply through wages one does not always assure

a direct relationship between the results of labor and the effectiveness of
production, on the one hand, and the income of the immediate producers, on the
other.

As a result of the development of comprehensive mechanism; the results of labor
are increasingly determined not by individual workers, but by a collective - a
brigade, section, etc. Under these conditions in all the countries that are
being considered, there has been an increase in the role of the system of
payment by the job plus bonus. This system, when determining the contribution
made by each individual to the overall result takes the most complete considera-
tion of the individual material interests of the producers and assures their

combination with the overall, collective interests*.

At the present time there has been an increase in the role of bonuses paid to
workers on the basis of the final results of their labor. For example, in
Czechoslovakia, in the overall volume of bonuses there has been an increase
in that share of them for which the payment is linked with the qualitative

 

*In the European CEHA countries, the job-plus-bonus system is used with the
giving of time advances. Sixty to 80 percent of the total earnings is paid
during the course of the year, and 20-40 percent on the basis of the year's
results. Experience indicates that the excessive increasing in the share of
payment based on the year's results is undesirable, since the even payment of
the labor during the year increases the sense of confidence in the workers.
Twenty to #0 percent of the total earnings to be paid out at the end of the
year seems to be a sufficient amount for guaranteeing the material self-
interestedness in the final results of the labor.

3b
FOI‘OIIlClAl.lEﬂi(H§LV
results of production and labor. Hhereas previously that share constituted
approximately 7 percent, at the present time it occupies 25-30 percent of
the total wage fund.

Despite the unification of the forms and methods of providing incentives to

the workers, including the farm managers and specialists, on the whole the pay“
ment of labor is not always directly linked with the results of production, with
its qualitative indicators. The forms of additional material incentive are
extremely varied, and frequently duplicate one another, but, most important,
they are insufficiently interrelated with the criterion and indicator of
effectiveness. That is why it would appear to be important to intensify the
work of guaranteeing the direct dependence of any additional incentive payment
upon the achieved indicators of effectiveness, upon the amount of profit
obtained, and the level of profitability. According to many participants in
the international conference that was held in 1981 and that was devoted to

the problem being discussed, herein lies one of the basic areas for improving
the economic mechanism in the agroindustrial sphere of the CEHA countries.

The rate of results in the comprehensive improvement of the economic mechanism,
the effective useof all the previously analyzed elements of that mechanism, and
the concrete economic instruments and levers, are largely determined by the
organizational structure in the NAPK, by the orientation on the final results of
the agroindustrial production not only of the economic levers and incentives,
but also the organizational-administrative system.

Practical life has shown us that without a change in the organizational-
administrative structure of the agroindustrial complex, it is impossible to
overcome the departmental dissociation or to eliminate the disproportions

within the complex. A step forward in the elimination of these shortcomings

was the creation in Hungary, East Germany, Romania, and Czechoslovakia of single
ministries of agriculture and the processing industry. That made it possible,
in particular, to maneuver the resources more effectively on the scale of the
entire complex, and to be more time-responsive in taking into consideration

the changing economic situation. However, the experience of the activity of the
new ministries attests to the fact that it has not yet been possible to overcome
completely the interdepartmental discrepancies in the relations among the
branches and spheres of the NAPK. The question of including the branches in
sphere I in the administrative system of the agroindustrial complex has not been
resolved (or has not received a definite scientific substantiation).

At the present time in the CEHA countries there predominates the opinion con-
cerning the need to create a coordination center for NAPK on the Council of
Ministers level, which center would be granted broad powers for resolving the
basic questions of developing the complex, as well as the administrations and
departments of the agroindustrial complex in the planning agencies. That kind
of center, with the existence of the corresponding economic functions, could,
by using contract relations and cost-accounting levers and incentives,
guarantee the comprehensive development of the NAPK and carry out effective
interdepartmental monitoring of its development.

In a number of OSHA countries there have already been created organizations that
are fulfilling functions that are analogous to the tasks of this

35
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordination center. For example, a governmental commission for administering the
supply of the basic types of foodstuffs is functioning in Czechoslovakia. The
commission is headed by the deputy chairman of the Federal Government. Its
makeup includes representatives of the ministries of agriculture and the

food industry, Gosplan, the Federal Price Administration, and other departments.
In East Germany for a number of years all the questions linked with the develop‘
ment of the NAPK, within the framework of the State Planning Commission, have

been under the jurisdiction of one of the deputy chairmen. That makes it

possible in a more time-responsive manner to maneuver the resources, and especial-
ly to change the structure of capital investments. At the present time there

has been an intensification of the comprehensive nature of planning and‘adminis-
tration of the NAPK in the USSR. In 1981 an Administration of Planning of the
Agroindustrial Complex was formed in USSR Gosplan. It has four sections:

a combined section and three branch sections (agriculture, food industry,
microbiological and combined~fodder industry).

Efficient organizational-administrative forms of the agroindustrial complex are
also developing on the microeconomic level. In Hungary a form that has become
widespread is the use of industrial production systems (IFS) for growing
animal-husbandry crops and for the production of animal-husbandry output. Their
-members are the overwhelming majority of the state farms and agricultural
production cooperatives in the country. The central link in the organizational-
administrative structure of the IPS is the so-called head farm, which might be
an advanced state farm or cooperative. The head farm is characterized by the
availability of a large amount of experience in the production of a definite
kind of output, by a high level of comprehensive mechanization, and by the
availability of highly skilled personnel. The association functions as a
completely independent economic organization. Every member of the industrial
production system concludes a contract that regulates its relationship with

the head farm and with the other partners. The general assembly, where the
delegates of all the participating enterprises are represented, and the board of
governors, which is elected by the general assembly, are the collective adminis-
trative agencies of the IPS.

In East Germany organizations that have proven their value as an efficient form
of agroindustrial integration are the associations which have been given the
name of cooperative unions. The cooperative unions include specialized agri-
cultural enterprises and organizations, as well as enterprises in the processing
industry and trade. The enterprises and organizations that are included in

a cooperative union retain their legal and economic independence. The highest
agency of the cooperative union is the assembly of authorized agents, the
makeup of which includes an identical number of representatives from all the
enterprisesandinstitutionsthatareincluded intheassocistions.The assembly of
authorized agents elects the council chairman and a time-responsive administra-
tive agency -~ the council of the cooperative union. Various working groups

and commissions are the consultative agency for administering the association.
Their tasks include the preparation of decisions in a particular area of develop-
ment of the association.

In the Soviet Union the regional agroindustrial associations (RAPO) are a
promising organizational-administrative form of agroindustrisl integration. These

36
FOI‘OFFRJAI.USE(NVLY
associations include within themselves, within the confines of the rayon,

all the kolkhozes, sovkhozes, interfarn associations, and processing enterprises
and sections of Goskomssl'khoztekhnika. The administrative agency of the
association is the council, which carries cut the administration of the partners
on principles of cost accounting. .The RAPO are subordinate to the rayon executive
comittee and to the functional republic-level or union-level agencj. 'lhe

RAPO have become most widespread in Estonian SSE. 'Starting in 1982, all the
rayons in the republic are changing over this kind of organizational structure
for administering the agriculture and the branches that are connected with it.
There has been an increase in the nuaber of rayon agroindustrial associations

in Lithuania, Latvia, and Georgia. The formation of regional organizational-
adninistrative structures on the nicrolevel completes the transition to

. production-economic integration within the nationalreconomic agroindustrial
complex.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Pravda", ”Voprosy ekonouiki", 1982.

5075
cso: 1824/242. sun

37
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY