FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10474

21 April 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm

W publications contain infatuation pri-rily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itee originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CvseaNETlcs, CcaPUTERs AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(reno- 6/82)

CONTENTS

HAW
New Collection of Articles on Microprocessors ............. ....

Use of Series K580 Microprocessor To Control Wristor Pulsed
Current Regulator of Electric Train ‘h‘action Engines ........

High-Frequency Frequency mltiplier for Problems of Precise
He‘ma‘eﬂt 0f LUIS 81W]- eoeoeeeeoeeoeeeeoeeooooeeeeeooeeoe

Cross Compilation of Programs on IeS Computers for
Microcomputers Based on K580 Micropocessor Series ..........

Package of Programs for Modeling Microprocessor Set of
x589 1081.8de mw‘m Circuits IOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOO

“SP-35 Adaptive Analog-Digital Converter ................._....
son'mns

Practical Course in PrograT—ing for M5000 Series Computers"...

Manual for Rams Data Base Managmuent Systan .................

Equivalent translations of Data Stream Schemes ................

Motionary-mrectory Subsystem for Automated System for
”000881118 of Test R0801“ 000.000.00.000.00000000000000.0000

N" PRIZ Aumud mama: aye“. eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeee
Manual on Switching to More Powerful Ies Operating System u...

- l - [III - USSR - 21C 85':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“I OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPTICAL PROCESSING

Application of Optical Information Processing Methods and
Hologram 0.0.0....0000'000000O0.0.0.000....00....O......

Spatial-Frequency Spectra of Images of Disturbed Hater

Surface seeeeooeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeeeee

Optical Method of Measuring Dimensions of Moving Objects
on 38313 or Scattered Haves aaeaseeeeeeeeeeeeoseeeoeeeoes

Output Units for Optical Information Processing Systus
Based on charge-Coupled “vices 00......OOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOO

Measuring Geometric Distortion in Television by Optical
Feedback “ethod .0.00...COC0.000000000000000000000000'00'.

Optical Processing of Information Prom Antenna Systems u...

Analysis of Conditions of Generation and Optical Processing
of Information at Radar Installations With Synthetic

Amrturp- .eoeoooseeooeooeeaeeeoeeeeeIceeeeeeeaeeeoeeeeesee

(Ia-Line Optical Processing of Intonation in Radio-
Holographic Systems aeeeeeeoeeoee-eoeoesoeeueoeeeeoseeeeee

Optical Calculation of Signal Ambiguity Function ...........

Optical Calculation of Signal Ambiguity Function Uith
vmable male on m8 0: RIM 0.0.0.000000000030000O...

High-Requency Acousto-Optic Orthogonal Filters ..,,........

Improving Signal-to-Noise Ratio in Acouato—Optical
”BOW halyaers 0.0.0.000...00.0.0000...ODIOOOOOIIOOOO.

Determining Time Position of Complex Signals With long
Dilution by MoustO-Opticsl Convolvers e s s a e a e e e e o v e o o e e e s

Bandwidth Evaluation in Optical Information Processing

systm 0.0000000000000000...0000.00.00sonoOllOOOOOOOOOOO

Optical Processing of Signals With Enhanced Resolution
in Noncoherent Light. Optical Systems Hlth Fixed
References Using Noncoherent Light for Real-Time
signal ”messing 0.0.0.0...OOO...ODOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Optical Methods of Processing Signals From Seismic Sources..

Principles of Design of Optical Digital Complex for
Scimic Infomtion meaning oeeeeeeeeeeeeeasaeseeeeeeoe

-b-
MWLWONLY
calm
Third International Conference 'Magnoaia and Failure-Free

Systm' ooooooooooooooooooooooo000000000ooooooooooo-ooooooo

”MUSIMY
FOIOFF'ICIALUSEONLY

3m

NEW COLLECTION 0! ARTICLES ON HICROPROCESSORS

R130 TSIFROVYYB USTROYSTVA I ”IMPROTSESSOH in Russian No 6, 1980 (signed to
press 27 Oct 80) pp 3. 173-180

[Foreword and abstracts of articles from book "Digital Units and Micro-
processors", edited by A. K. Barns. N. Ye. Zamva and A. A. Chips. Latvian 8811
Academy of Sciences. Isdatel'stvo "Zinatne", 500 copies, 180 pages]

[Text] Tron the Editorial Board

This collection of articles includes works on the use and design of sicro-
processor systems and their individual units. The uterial published is divided
into three sections:

1. microprocessor systems;
2. the digital mite of microprocessors and automation systems;
3. programing and modeling aicroprocessor systems.

The first section reviews the questions of construction of microprocessor sys~
tell and various ways of interlinking then with real objects, especially in
subsystena to control electric trains and notor vehicles.

The second section includes articles which treat the questions of construction
of the particular sssenbliea of nicroprocessor units and other discrete automa-
tion systems. Special attention is devoted to questions of organizing links
among the individual assedlies.

The first section is devoted to questions of development of software for micro-
processor systems using cross progran equipnsnt. in particular cross cowila-
tion of program and modeling work. A special algorithmic language for
developing programs to test digital microcircuits is proposed.

The material in this collection can he used in the development of digital units
for various purposes. we ask that all requests and remarks be sent to the fol-
loving address: 226006, Riga, Ulitsa Aksdeniyas. 16, Institute of Electronics
and CoQuter Technology of the Latvian 88R Acadeq of Sciences.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abstracts

000 681 . 325 .5-181 . 6 :62-83

A. K. Baues. V. T. Yermolov, A. A. Chips. et al., "Use of a Series K580
Microprocessor To Control the Thyristor Pulsed Current Regulator of the Trac-
tion Engines of an Electric Train."

This article considers the use of a microcowuter as a unit to control the trac-
tion drive of an electric train, eqloying a thyristor pulsed regulator. The
authors present the structure of a controller developed on the basis of a
K58OIK80 eicroprocessor. a flowchart of the control algorith, end time diagrams
of control pulses during codined testing of the power equipment and micro-
coqmter. The article hes seven illustrations and two bibliographic entries.

1100 681. 32-181.48:629.113

Yu. N. Andriyevichev. V. D. Romerov, N. V. Kochetov, et a1., ”Microprocessor
Systee for Controlling the Homent of Ignition."

This article describes a systen to control the moment of ignition of the fuel
mixture for internal coebustion engines. The systen was built using a micro-
conputer based on a [5801180 microprocessor. The authors show how the ignition
advance angle depends on input pareneters. present a structural diagran of the
system and a flowchart of the prograe for finding the ignition advance angle,
and describe the system interface. The use of this system in a motor vehicle
makes it possible to reduce fuel expenditure up to 15 percent and lower the
toxicity of exhaust gases. The article has three illustrations and one biblio-
graphic entry.

UDC 681.32-l8l.68:629.113

Yu. N. Andriyevichev, V. D. Konarov. and N. V. Kochetov, "The Effect of the
Paransters of an Anti-Interlock Braking System Control Block Based on a Hicrocoe-
puter on the Controllability. Stability of Trajectory, and Braking Efficiency

of a Hotor Vehicle."

This article presents an analvsia of the influence of the psrameters of a block
to control an anti-interlock system built using a microcomuter based on the
K5801K80 nicroprocessor on the controllability. stability of trajectory. and
braking efficiency of a motor vehicle. The authors review the fundamental laws
of control on which the functioning of contemporary anti-interlock systees is
based and possible ways to apply them in notor vehicles. They give a flowchart
of a eicrocowuter and its software. The analysis demonstrates the possibility
of realizing a block to control an anti-interlock systen on a eicrocomputer
and to insure high precision of execution of the law of control of an anti-
interlock system for a motor vehicle.

MWWONLY
UDC (681(3To181)66:629:ll3

Yu. N. Andriyevichev. Yu. N. Ivanov, V. D. Komarov, et al., "Resident System
for Designing and Debugging a Microcomputer That Realises the Laws of Control
for Engine Assemblies and an Antictnterlock Braking system."

This article describes a resident system for debugging motor vehicle micro-
processor automatic control systems realized on the basis of the l580lK80
microprocessor. The hardware and software of the system are considered. The
authors give a structural diagram of a resident design system. All the software
was developed on the modular principle. which makes it possible to build up and
refine the system further. The system described makes it possible to design and
debug all presently known motor vehicle automatic control systems. The article
has one illustration and two bibliographic entries.

UDC 681.327-l8l.6

Ye. a. Kalin'sh. "The Development of Interface LSIC's of Microprocessor Systems."

This article reviews the question of development of interface LSIC's [large-scale
integrated circuits] of microcomputers. The authors present a variation of the
application of universal interface LSIC's (third generation) and s comparison

of the use of first and second generation of LSIC's with the example of parsllel
data copying. The article has five illustrations and eight bibliographic entries.

UDC 681.327.2
G. V. Tabuns. "hardware Simulator of Control Memory."

This article reviews the questions of building optimal hardwsre for adjusting
digital units that contain microprogram memory. The author gives an analysis
of the basic parameters and requirements for the function of hardware simu-
lators. The analysis may hemmed as a recommendation for building such units.
The article has one illustration and eight bibliographic entries.

UDC 681.325.53:621.39l.23.037.372
D. K. Zibin'. "Duplex Interlinka Among Assemblies of a Digital Computer."

This article reviews structural diagrams of the interlinking lines of trans-
mitting and receiving units that use multivslued signals. The author proposes
duplex interlink lines. that is, two independent channels that work in opposite
directions on one interlink line. Changing to four-valued signals cuts the num-
ber of interlinked lines in half compared to two-valued signals. while combining
two channels into one produces an additional benefit. The article has two
illustrations and four bibliographic entries.

IOI‘OIIIJAI.UBIGMNLY
liltiﬂﬁﬂClAl.USiiONL¥

UDC 681.3.0‘
D. K. Zibin', "Physical Coding of Hultivalued Signals."

The articles considers one-, two-, and three-dimensional coding of variables of
multivalued algebraic logic by physical signals that "carry" the values of the

variables and gives appropriate geometric interpretations. The author reviews

the drawbacks of one-dimensional coding and ways to eliminate them. Different

coding variations use positive, negative. shifted, symmetrical. parsphasal,

and other logics, for which appropriate definitions are given. The article has
four illustrations and five bibliographic entries.

UDC 681.325

V. Ya. Zogurshiy, "Systess for Analog-Digital Conversion of Signals with Periodic
Discretization."

This article reviews the primary types of discretisation operations during
analog-digital conversion of signals. 0n the basis of a generalized descrip-
tion of analog-digital conversion the author proposes an algorithm for high-
speed analog-digital conversion by combining the operations of discretization
and quantization. The algorithm accomplishes periodic discretizatiou of the
input signal. The article gives the structures of system variations of analog-
digital convertors with different types of quantization. by asplitude and

time. There are five illustrations and five bibliographic entries.

006 621.375.2(088.8)
V. Ya. Zogurskiy and H. A. Arnit, "Device for Precise Systemisstion of Signals."

This article reviews the principal variations of synchronization units with pos-
sible precision of alignment to synchronizing signals to a level of 0.5-1 nano-
seconds. The authors analyze different ferns of constituent parts in the units
and possibilities of stabilizing the parameters of synchronizing signals. They
show the possibilities of using the devices. The article has three illustra-
tions and four bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.373

V. A. Bespal'ko. "High-Frequency Frequency Multiplier for Problems of Precise
Measurement of an LOIS Signal."

This article reviews a variation of realizing a high-frequency frequency multi-
plier with an output frequency of 400 megahertz. oriented for use in the
analog-dig;tal convertor of a discrete laser doppler velocity measurement [LOIS]
system. The high reliability and small dimensions of the multiplier are
achieved by constructing the principal assemblies on the basis of logical inte-
grated circuits. This article has two illustrations and six bibliographic
entries.

lNJIMOlIlCJAl.lEﬂ!(H‘LY
UDC 681.3.06

P. A. Ties, "The Process of Cross Compilation of Programs on Yes Computers for
Microcomputers Based on the K580 Microprocessor series."

This article reviews the process of cross compilation from macroassembler language
and a high-level language by systems of programs on a Yes computer for micro-
computers based on the [580 microprocessor series. The author presents the
principle of using a library of initial modules and formulating the initial text

of the program. The article has three illustrations and four bibliographic entries.

UDC 68l.326:681.3.06

Ye. Ye. Ekmanis. "Construction of a Model of a Program for Modeling Its Parallel
Execution."

This article considers the theoretical premises of construction of a model of a
program to model its parallel execution in a computing system consisting of a cen-
tral processor. a central memory unit. and a changing number of working processors.
The article does not consider construction of a model of system hardware. The
article has one illustration and four bibliographic entries.

UDC 681.32-181.68.001.57

N. Ye. Zaznova. "Package of Programs for Hodaling a Microprocessor Set of K589
Large-Scale Integrated Circuits."

This article describes a package of programs designed for modeling microprocessor
systems constructed on the basis of a set of series K589 LSIC's. The package is
written in FORTRAN IV and contains subroutines for modeling specific microcircuits
of the set. microassembler subroutines. and subroutines for computing logical oper-
ations using whole number arithsetic. The article has one illustration and two
bibliographic entries.

UDC 621.3.049.77.001.57:681.3

S. B. bondar', "Nine-Character Modeling of Logical Circuits."

The reliability of results of studying logical circuits by the simulation modeling
method depends significantly on the way that the process of distribution of in-
formation in the circuit is replesented. The purpose of this article is to
describe a nine-character modeling alphabet that correctly represents the infor-
mation characteristic of real signals in a logical circuit. The author reviews
combination and sequential circuits that realize elementary logical conversions in
the given set of characters. The article has five tables, one illustration, and
two bibliographic entries.

5
ms omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 683. 32 . 06-181 .48

V. H. Koaik. V. V. Krasltoy. A. V. Olekhnovich, and A. I. Yataunov. "The TALL-l
Problen—Oriented Algorithmic Language for Programing the Testing of Digital

Hicrocircuita. "

This article describes the TALL-l programming language. which ia designed for
use an the input language of generalopurpoae iniornationdnoaaurenent couput-
ing onto-a that make it possible to teat any type of LSIC. The article has
one illustration and five bibliographic entries.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Zinatne", 1980

a

11,176
C50: 1863/“

I‘OIOI'I'ICIALIBIONLY
1NDI¢OIIHCJA1.USIi(ﬂ¥lY

UDC 681.325.5-181.b:62-83

USE 0? SERIES K580 HICﬂOPROCESSOR T0 CORTRDL THYRISTOR PULSBD CURRENT
REGULATOR OP ELECTRIC TRAIN TRACTION ENGINES

Rigs TSIPBOVYYB USTRDYSTVA I HIKIOPROTSBSSOI! in Russian No 6, 1980 (signed to
press 27 Oct 80) PP 6-16

[Article by A. K. sauna, V. T. Yersolov, A. A. Chips. G. B. Vaaarin'ah, R. M.
herein and L. Yu. Veytsnen]

[Excerpts] One of the areas in which microprocessors are beginning to be used
successfully is electric transportation.

This article considers the use of series [-580 nicroproceasor to control the
thyristor pulsed srnsture current regulator of the traction engines of an electric
trsin.

Flowchart of the Control Systen of the Traction Drive of an Electric Train

Figure 5 below shows a flowchart of a control ayaten for the traction drive of
an electric train using a sicrocolputer. In it the nicrocoeputer plsys the role
of controlling sutonston. The input signals are: a signal free the generator
(400 hertz) that assigns the frequency of regulation; signals iron the analog-
digital converter which represent in number for- the current value of the area-
ture current of the traction engine; signals fro. the engineer's console. which
give the sagnitude of the set current; signals fron the position counter of the
rheostst force controller, representing the four-bit code of the position of_the
controller; and, signals from the tachoneter characterizing the current speed of
the train.

In confornity with the working program, the sicroconputer stored in a read-only
(permanent) nesory issues of the following control signals: pulses of a certain
length to block and unblozk the T13 (thyrister pulsed regulator); the logical
level for the transfer circuit of the power controller; a pulse to launch the
annhnrduntal converter and a strobe to select the channel of the convertor;
logical levels for the program nechanisn to indicate the settings being given.

The nicrocosputer A nodal of s single-board nicrocontroller based on the
K-SBOIK8O sicroproceaaor was used as the control nachine to perforn the

momtssonur
Key: (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5. Flowchart of the Traction Drive Control System of

the Ell-200 Electric Train.

Thyrister Pulse Regulator; (S) Analog-Digital Converter;

Power Controller; (6) Program Mechanism;
Voltage Sensor; (7) Tachooster.
Hicrocoaputer;

 

above-described task. The microcontroller has a cowaratively siqle structure
and consists of the following basic corponents:

generator of two sequential timing pulses with shapers.
assedaled on a series 155 integrated circuit. transis-
tors, and discrete elements;

the large-scale integrated circuits of the K5801K80 micro-
processor;

static-type internal neaory with a capacity of 256 bytes
(eight KSOSRUlo chips);

reprogram-able read-only sue-cry with ultraviolet data
erasure and a capacity of 1,000 bytes (four KSOSRRI chips);

a system controller assembled on a K589IR12 chip, a 1689.016
chip, and a series 155 integrated circuit;

POIOFHCIALIISEONLY
Key

(1)
(2)
(3)
(6)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Block Diagram of a Controller Based on the KSBOIKBO

Microprocessor
Timer; (5) Data Line;
Clear; (6) Control Line;
System Controller; (7) Address Line;

Confirmation of Readineea; (8) Internel Line for Memory Output.

- an address line uplifier (15891312 chipe);

- decoder for selection of page: in memory (internal and re-
programble read-only) and peripherala (155 IN integated
circuits);

- KSBOIKSS parallel interface.

F’OIOFFIGALISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Input signals are fed to the microcontroller and control signals are out-
putteo to the KSBOIKSS parallel interspace. The output signals have TTL levels.

Table 1 [not reproduced] shows the distribution of input/output signals by ports
A, B. and C of the interface.

The analog-digital convertor. A standard ATsPN-l convertor iron the Blektronika-
1001 set was used to convert the current value of the code of the traction engine
to a digital parallel code in the system described.

Conversion tine for the ATsPN-l is 20 microseconds and the word length is 10
bits (without a sign bit). Bight high-order digits of the ATsPﬂ-l were used.
The analog quantity being converted, in the form of a voltage read fron the
voltage sensor proportional to the current of the traction engine, was fed to
one of the 16 channels of the ATsPN-l. The procedures for switching the channel
selected and starting the ATsPN-l were carried out on instructions iron the
nicrocontroller.

Regulation frequency generator. The frequency of regulation of the current of
the traction engine is assigned by a generator (f - 400 hertz) which is aa-
senbled on a series 155 integrated circuit and discrete components. The output
signal of the generator has a TTD level and s "meander" form. The length of

the period T is 2.5 milliseconds.

The traction engine control system using a Iicrocouputer was tested on a labora-
tory stand in a rheostat brake regime. An IDT-OOA engine with an output of

210 kilowatts was used as the traction sachine, and the thyrister pulse regu-
lator of an EL-ZOO electric train was used as the regulator (box BXaA.030).

The results of the testing demonstrated the advantages of using microprocessors
in assemblies to control the power equipasnt of an electric train. These ad-
vantages found expression in improved qualitative characteristics of control,
greater flexibility and compactness of the control system. and an improvement
in the reliability indicators of the electric drive.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Zinatne", 1980

11,176
cso: 1863/44

10
FOItOIIICIAl.UBEIﬂNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373

awn-17mm mm HD'LTIPLIB NR PROBLM 0? FRBCISB MSW OP
LDIS SIGNAL

Rigs 151mm USTIDYSTVA I WPROTSBSSORY in Russian No 6, 1980 (signed to
press 27 Oct 80) PP 106-115

[Article by V. A. Bespal'ko]

[Text] As we knov [l]. neasuring the signal of the 1.018 (laser doppler neasure
of velocity) of gas flows amounts to measuring the frequency a of a radio pulse

with the gaussian envelope .
«(O-lupﬁﬁﬂwgé m

whose appearance at the output of the photo receiver is caused by a particle
aoving vith the flow intersecting the interference bands formed by the laser
beam. Measuring the frequency of the doppler signal is a fairly coqlex tech-
nical problem involving the tendon character of the noment of appearance of
the radio pulse, its brief duration (tenths of a sicrosecond). and the presence
of noise. The prohlen is solved using sets of measurement , computing, and
auxiliary equipment - LDIs maasurassnt systems.

In the case of the single-particle LDIS regime the discrete nethod of measuring
the frequency!» by the number of tines the signal intersects the zero level is
best [1]. In this case the frequency is defined as

0.3% ' - (2)

where T is the relation of the radio pulse, and N is the nuﬂ>er of tines the
signal intersects the zero level.

The basic unit that determines the precision of the measurement cmonmts of

a discrete LDIS syste- is the analog-digital converter of tine interval T [2].
The cosprehensive approach to solving the problem of precise analog-digital
conversion of brief tine intervals necessitates not only high-speed conversion
equipnent (selector counters and the like). but also appropriate sources cf a
standard frequency. Thus, to assure the quantity T with a precision of approx-

isstely 0.1 percent (the precision of the LDIS nathod itself , defined by noise)
by the direct calculation aethod. it is necessary to have a frequency in the
range 0.1-1.0 gigahertz for the standard quantising generator. The fact that

11
mmusrouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this generator lust be an integrated part of a single measurement system de-
termines the principal requirements for it: small dimensions; uniformity of
basic eleaents used in the generator and measurement system; coordination of the
parameters of the output signal (frequency, levels, and loading capacity) with °
other elements of the analog-digital convertor, and so on. In many respects

the well-known high-frequency frequency standards do not meet these requirements.

In what follows we will consider a variation for realizing a high-frequency mul-
tiplier ezth an output frequency of 600 megahertz, oriented for use in the
analog-digital converter of a discrete LDIs system.

In addition to traditional methods of singling out and alplifying the harmonica
of the signal being multiplied, the problems of multiplying a frequency are
often solved today by using pulsed systems of phased automatic frequency tuning
(IPAPCh) with division of the frequency in a feedback systea. These systems
permit large aultiplication factors. Because rigorous requirements are not
imposed for the form of the standard signal in measuring units for time inter-
vals, practically all the assemblies of an IFAPCh system can be constructed

on the basis of logical integrated circuits, thus achieving high reliability.
small diaensions, and siaplicity of layout. The maximum speed of contemporary
BCL (emitter coupled logic) integrated circuits is about 200 megahertz (series
100 and 500), and in the multiplier under consideration the input signal

(5 megahertz) is first multiplied to 200 megahertz using an IFAPCh system, and
then to 400 megahertz by singling out and amplifying the second harmonic (see
Figure 1 below).

 

Figure 1. Block Diagram of Frequency Multiplier.

Key: (1) Frequency Divider;
(2) Key;
(3) Pulsed Frequency Detectors;
(é) Generator Being Adjusted;
(S) Multiplier 200/600 Hegahertz.

 

The most significant factor that effects the quality of a frequency multiplier
with an IFAPCh system is modulation of the output signal by the frequency of

12
IIIICINHCIAI.UEE1ONIN'
the multiplied signal. "Complex" pulsed phased detectors of the "access-
atorage" type are usually used to eliminate this problem [3]. It is preferable
in this case to switch to an IFAPCh system supplemented by integrating the out-
put of the pulsed phase detectors. One such variation is the astatic IPAPCh
(see Figure 1 above) with an integrator on keys and a broad-pulse phase detector
with a unit to determine the sign of a phase mismatch [4]. Signals from the
outputs of the pulsed phase detectors that carry information about either the
sign or the magnitude of the deviation of the phase shift of the input signals
from a certain constant value are converted by key elements into equipalar
pulses of current and integrated in space C. The voltage from space C influ-
ences the frequency of the generator being adjusted (trimmed).

In a set regime the working algorithm of the pulsed frequency detectors may be
described approximately by the difference equation

41») -/;-.7[n/. (3)

where 6&0is the time mismatch identified by the detector; 13 is the period of

the signal being multiplied;Tbﬂ is the period of the signal at the output of
the divider in regulation cycle n. If we introduce the system amplification

factor ,3 :
[C It,“ 1 (‘)

where‘M is the coefficient of division of the divider;«.'iﬁ is the coefficient
of conversion of the integrator; and,KM is the steepness of control of the
generator being adjusted, from expression [3]. the behavior of the system can be
described by a first-order linear difference equation with constant coefficients:

7/n.'/.p-p)‘r/.j_-,,;. (5)

From equation [5] it is possible to determine the condition of system stability

67‘40 4 7 (e)

Ifojoz; -d‘[n'///-p)”, m

where 660 is the initial time mismatch for inputs of the pulsed phase detectors.
It follows from expression [7] that. where condition [6] is met, the time mis-
match for the inputs of the pulsed phase detectors in a steady regime is equal
to zero regardless of the initial conditions:

J' '(un (wry/)4, (a)

”I 0--

and the nature of change

in other words, this system is astatic with respect to the adjusting (setting)
action. Because the detector is in a state where there are not signals for both
outputs. the voltage in space C changes only when there is a mismatch for the
inputs of the pulsed phase detectors and thus the effect of reducing modulation
is analogous to the use of an"access-storage" amplitude detector with simpler
hardware realization and high working precision.

13
FOI‘OUFKIAL.UBI(NULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1! should be noted that expression [5] correctly describes the system only in
a steady regime when the phase and time mismatches for the inputs of the

pulsed phase detectors can be equated. To consider transfer processes in the
system requires a precise description of it in higher-order equations, but the
length and nature of the transfer process is not significant in the multiplier.
Analysis of the factors that affect the level of phase fluctuations of the out-
put signal shows that to reduce them it is necessary to increase the cowarison

frequency and saplification factor in the systqs as much as possible and also
reduce time fluctuations in elements of the circuit.

The principal asseablies of the multiplier (see Figure 2 below) are: the phase

detector, integrator, high-frequency adjustable generator. frequency divider
on emitter coupled logic triggers, and 200/400 megahertz multiplier.

___..._... '3'“ f‘Wzﬁ§--”—1 f“""‘""

I .
I I I
II Iii I I
' I

n:

' I ”an ”5 WI

, IH : g I I
.II -, 'Ii = i
I , = I
L.'_' 51> __ _ " . 'l _ " _ " . ' _ ' _ J LIJLIWW’WJ

 

Figure 2. Diagram of the Principal Assemblies of the Multiplier:
Ill-ll: - K130 131:114— KlLﬂJOlzlS- K100 L801.

Key: (1) Pulsed Phase Detector; (10) Frequency Divider;
(2) Integrator; (5) 200/600 Hegahertz Multiplier;
(3) Generator Being Adjusted; (6) Output, 600 megahertz.

 

The phase detector is assembled on elementsln-JM. As already pointed out, the
working algorithm of the detector was such that in addition to determining the

absolute magnitude of the phase (or time) mismatch 6th“). it should separate out-
puts by sign 6th], that is, realise the function

l'9”’/”/- (9)

1h
summon!
To perforn these functions the detector should contain a sign determination
unit that switches the two circuits for identifying the absolute value of

the mismatch [e]. As we know, the "I" circuit is the most precise circuit for
identifying the phase shift of pulsed signals, and an "1-K" trigger (33) can
be used to determine the sign. The output signal of this detector will be
zero when the input triggers (man) are working in opposite phases. when
the pulsed phase detectors are built with high-speed series 130 or $30 TTL
integrated circuits a time solution on the order of several nanoseconds is in-
outed.

The integrator consists of two controlled keys (V1, V2), storage space C. and
an isolating series on transistor V3. The currents of the charge and discharge
keys of the stage space are selected according to expression [6] based on the
condition of system stability [6}. the steepness of control of the generator
being adjusted, and the division factor of the divider.

The principal requirements made of the generator being adjusted in the frequency
multiplier are: insuring a generation frequency of 200 megahertz 110 percent
and low, brief instability. The simplest way to solve this problem is to use

a relaxation generator on an inverting emitter coupled logic logical element
and a delay line in the feedback circuit [5]. A cable of a definite length
(about five centimeters) is used as a delay line, and frequency control is ac-
complished by changing the actual delay of the sicrocircuit when regulating the
voltage on the loading resistor. The period of repetition of pulses of the
Output of the generator may vary in the range 180-220 megahertz with a change
in the control voltage of about two volts. The control characteristic in

this frequency range is close to linear. It should be noted that when de-
stabilizing factors related to the autonomy of the cycle are operative, the
relaxation generator has the ability to accumulate the dispersion of the
period between adjustment cycles, in other words. the phases of output signals
that are adequately dispersed in time of qussirandom. This makes it possible
to insure the independence of tests when the multiplier is used as a

standard generator in digital measures of time intervals with static averaging

[6].

The frequency divider is built on series lOOD—triggers. while the 200/400
megahertz multiplier uses a conventional circuit with resonance contours.

The basic technical specifications of the multiplier are: input frequency ~—
five megahertz; multiplication factor - 80; levels of output signal - at
least five volts. The shape of the output signal is close to sinusoidal,
and its instability is not more than 540'6 milliseconds.

It is recommended that a synchronizable 41-b0 quartz generator be used as the
source of the signal being multiplied.

FOOTNOTES

1. G. I. Grozdovskiy, "Analysis of the Precision of LDIS Measurements,"
TR. TSAGI. 1976. VYP 1750. pp 5-31.

15
summon“
3.

5.

FORiOFFKJALlEEZONlN

Yu. N. Artyukh. "Converter for Frequency-Tine Measure-onto in LDIS Systems."
in "Zkaperinsntsl'nyye Hetody i Apparatura dlya Issledovaniya Turbolentnosti.
Tr. II Vsesoyuz. Sovsshch." [Experimental Methods and Equip-eat for the
Study of Truhulence. Proceedings of the 2nd All-Union Conference],
Novosibirsk, 1977. pp 159-160.

S. K. Romanov. "Analysis of PAPCh System with Memory and Delay," VOPROSY
RADIOELKKTRDNIKI. SBR. TBKHNIKA RADIOSVYAZI, 1971, Vyp 7. pp 89-98.

Yu. N. Artyukh, and V. A. Bespal'ko, "Phase and Frequency-Phase Detectors
for Astatic IPAPCh Systems," in "Tsiforvyye Ustroystva i Mikroprotsessory"

[Digital Devices and Microprocessors). Vyp 2. Riga, "Zinatne", 1977.
pp 164-171.

s. c. Baailadze, "Integrated Circuits with Emitter Coupling and Their

Application in Nanosecond Nuclear Electronics," PRIDORY I IEKHMIKA
EKSPBRIHENTA, 1976, No 6, pp 7-19.

Yu. N. Artyukh. and V. A. Despal'ko, "Pulse Generator," USSR Author's
Certificate No 571882. OTKRXTIYA. IZOBRBTBNIYA. PRO“. OBRAZTSY. TOVARNYYE
ZNAKI, 1977, No 33.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Zinntne", 1980

11,176

C80:

1863/44

16
IIIICHHHCIAI.IENE(HVLV
UDC 681.3.06

CROSS COMPILATIW OF PROGRAMS 0?! Yes COMPUTERS POR HICKOCOHPUTERS
BASED ON K580 MICROPROCESSOR SERIES

Rigs 151mm USTROYSTVA I MIRROPROTSESSORY in Russian No lo, 1980 (signed to
press 27 Oct 80) pp 116-123

[Article by P. A. Ties]

[Text] In connection with the possibility of broad use of nicroprocessors and
microprocessor systems in various fields of engineering and in everyday life,
my different progress nust be fornuleted. As the volume and coqlexity of the
prograns increase, it because harder and harder to write then in machine codes.
Autonation of progra-ing on large coQuters and ninicoquters. i.e. programing
languages, 1-8 N108 used to “Bed-3d)- Coepiler programs which occupy a signifi—
- cant senory volume are used to convert the text of progress-written in the initial
language into the nechine codes of the particular conputer.

In nost cases the application of nicroprocessors is highly specialized and the
working program are copied into read-only (or rsprogransble) neeory, while the
internal nanory has a small volune that does not permit it to be used for con-
piling program. Assenbler-type programing languages and hiya-level languages
have been developed to use and accelerate the process of writing programs for
nicroprocessors, and the conpilers work on large counters and niniconputers and
produce object programs in the system of instructions of the microprocessor.
These coepilers have received the nsne "cross coepilers."

The present article describes the processes of conilstion by systens of progress
that include an ASSA-Yes cross colpiler fron necroassenbly language and a TL/H-Yes
cross coqiler free the high-level PL/ll language [1]. The result of this process
is an object progran that corresponds to the systen of «made of the K580
nicroprocessor series [2, 3]. The processes of comilation are generally sinilsr
in the Yes [Unified Systen] conventional operating syste- and disk operating
systen. Therefore, the Mal features of the process in the Yes disk operating
systa. are described separately.

The Cross Coqilation Process in the Yes Operating Systee-

Figure l belov shows a structural diagrss of the conilation process using the
ASSA-Yes cross conpiler. After loading control progras 6 begins feeding punched
cards 1 of control state-ants that define the vork regine fro- the systes input.
If the conpilation regine is selected free the punched card, progran 2 is exe-

cuted and the initial test of the progran is copied free punched card 1 to disk 7.

l7
summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the work regime using the library of initial nodules is selected, program 5
is loaded for execution. It feeds the names of the modules that must be in-
cluded in the initial program from punched cards 1, read them from the library
of initial modules 3. and formulates the sequential set of data on disk 7.
During the work of programs 4 and S diagnostic nessages are outputted to
printer 6. ””" ' ‘-

  

Pigure l. The Process of Cross Compilation from Macro-
aasenbler Language.

 

The initial text of the program may be supplemented from punched cards and formed
on magnetic tape 8, not on the disk. The next stage is loading and running the
cross compiler 9, which is a double-pass unit and after the first pass pre-
pares unit 7 or 8 for beginning to set up the data. Printer 6 outputs the
initial text of the program, the object code, the table of symbols, and error
messages. The sequential set of data containing the object program is formed on

disk 10 or magnetic tape ll. The set of data consists of entries in a definite
format.

When selecting the regime for output to punched tape, program 12 is loaded and
run and unit 13 outputs punched tape in the above-described format. The process
of cross conpilation is accomplished by requesting a procedure which is run in
one step and contains all the necessary control statements of the Yes operating
system [4].

Figure 2 below gives the structural diagram of the compilation process using the
PL/M—Yes cross compiler. In this case the procedure consists of two steps.

Performance of the first step of the procedure begins with loading and executing
control program 5. System punched card input 1 feeds statements to control
the compilation regime. If the regime that uses the library of initial modules 2

18
IIII(IHNC1AI.USE¢M‘LY
INIICHﬂﬂClAl.USE¢NNLY

— . . —
. .

5((0

am
0 am

6((0
c9

nir- rm- rm- a

Figure 2. Process of Cross Compilation from High Level Language.

 

is selected. program 3 is run. Those initial modules whose names are fed from
unit 1 are selected from the library. The sequential set of data consisting of
the initial modules whose order was indicated when their names were fed is
formed on disk 6. After this the program of the first pass of cross compiler 8
is executed; it feeds and processes the initial test of the program from unit 6.
In addition, part of the initial program can be represented in unit 1 and on mag-
netic tape 7. System printer k outputs the complete text of the initial program
and diagnostic messages. Sequential sets of data that contain the intermediate
language and tables of symbols are formed on disks 9 and 10. If a regime is
assigned that does not use the library of initial modules. program 3 is not ex-
ecuted.

The second step of the procedure begins with execution of control program 12,
which immediately loads for execution the program of the second pass of cross
compiler ll. Control statements are fed from unit 1, while the intermediate
language and table of symbols are fed from units 9 and 10. The tables selected

by the control statement, the text of the object program. and diagnostic messages
are outputted on unit 4. If desired, the object program may be outputted to

units 13 and 15 or to punched card unit lb. The format when outputting the object
program is identical to the format outputted by the ASSA-Yes cross compiler.

If the punched tape output regime is selected. program 16 is run and outputs the
object program to unit 17.

19
IIIICIHHCIAI.UBIIONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special Features of Using the Library of Initial Modules in the Yes Disk Operat-
ing System

The process of compilation in the Yes disk operating system differs funda-
mentally if a library of initial modules is used. we will now consider in de-
tail the process of formulating the initial program for the ASSA-Yes and TL/H-
Yes cross compilers (see Figure 3 below).

sum: Onepouwuos swam-o
1 JIOC' £1? ‘

    

2
§
3

SUSHW

«bore-Itcwvncpnsanoév

SUSLST

Figure 3. Process of Formulating the Initial Text of a Program
from the Library in the Yes Disk Operating System.

Key: (1) Yes Disk Operating System;
(2) Cross Compilers.

 

The DISYS program feeds the name of the cross compiler and the names of the
modules from the library which must be included in the initial program. The
statements and directions of the Yes disk operating system and the input infor-
mation for the SSBRV program are outputted to logical unit SYS GG 9. Before
completion of the work of the DISYS program the name SYSIN is given to logical
unit SYS CG 9 for feeding system statements and data. The Yes dish operating
system requests service program SSBRV which serves the library of initial modules.
The modules vhose names were fed during the running of the DISYS program are se-
lected from the library. The SSERV program outputs the modules to the logical
unit of the system punch SYSPPR. which is called SYS CO 7 for the DISYS 1 pro-
gram. The DISYS 1 program feeds the initial text from logical unit SYS 00 7,
processes it, and outputs it to logical unit SYS 00 3 as a sequential set of
data. The cross compilers use logical unit SYS 0’ 2 to feed the initial text of
the program.

20
FOR1OFFNJA1.U§E(MULY
FOOTNOTES

1. D. Mchcken, "A Guide to PL/M Programing for merocouputer Applications,"
Reading, Massachusetts. Addison-Henley, 1978. 356 pages.

2. A. A. Vuenkov. "Microproceuoro," ELEKTRONNAYA PROHYSHLENNOST'. 1978, No 5,
pp 7-9.

3. Yu. V. Ivanov. L. I. Kolosovakiy, N. Ye. Chebykin and I. V. Shturte, "Cross

Equip-eat for Development and Debugging of Microcoqmter Prograna."
BLEKTRONNAYA PWSHLENNOST', 1978. No 5. pp 37-38.

6. Z. S. Erich. D. V. Kapilevtch, 8. Yu. Kotﬂx, and V. I. Tugel'skiy.
"Fortran Yes EVH" ["Porcren for Yes Conputers"), Rocco". Statistﬂm, 1978,

264 pages.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”linens". 1980

11.176
cso: 1863/44

21 _
mommuseonv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[106 681. 32-181.48.001.S7

PACKAGE OF PROGRAMS POR mDELING HICKOPROCBSSOR SET OF K589 LARGE-SCALE
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Riga TSIFROVYYB USTBDYSTVA I MIKBOPROTSBSSORY in Russian No 10, 1980 (signed to
press 27 Oct 80) PP 134-142

[Article by N. Ye. Zasnovs]

[Excerpts] Modeling on general-purpose computers is an important part of the
process of developing microprocessor units. It permits checking the correctness
of the fundamental structural concepts and the algorithms for performance of par-
ticular operations and program to be copied into the read-only (permanent)
memory of the microprocessor system. This article considers a package of pro-
grams designed for modeling computer units built on the basis of a set of series
K589 microprocessor LSIC'a [large-scale integrated circuits].

Series K589 is a microprocessor set consisting of processor, storage, and inter-
face integrated circuits built with the technology of transistor-transistor logic
with Schottky diodes [1]. Its architecture is based on the "3-H"

(microprogram ability, modularity. and mainline [pipeline]) principle. The two
basic components of the set are the 16891381 microcircuits of the microprogram
control block and the K589IK02 central processor element. In cowination with
standard read—only, programble, and internal memory they can form highly pro-
ductive processor and monitor circuits. The supplenentary nicrocircuits of the
set - the K589IK03 accelerated transfer circuit, the K589IR12 multiregiee buffer
register. the K589Il<llo polarity interrupt block, and the K589APl6 and 1689026
line shapers - increase the productivity and capabilities of the primary com-
ponents of the set.

The package of programs for modeling includes subroutines that model the width
of particular microcircuits of the sets as well as a number of auxiliary sub-
routines. They are written in roam IV language and were tested in use with
the c-translator included in the Yes [Unified System] operating system.

Block “(58901 has 16 internal triggers, 15 of which are conventional synchron-
ized triggers which receive information only when the synchronization signal is
zero and output it to the output of the block when the synchronization signal is

one. One trigger, the trigger of the sign 0, is a D—type trigger which receives
information when the systemized signal is one and does not change its state when
the value of the signal is zero.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOOTNOTES

1. A. I. hereunto, L. N. Korysdin, A. I. Nour'ysn, and B. V. Orlov, "Series
K589 Microprocessor Set of 111. Large-Scale Integrated Circuits with
Schottky Diodes," ELEKTBONNAYA PROM-81'. 1978, No 5, pp 20-21.

2. N. Ys. Zunovs. "Hodcling Microprocessor Systems Using FORTRAN IV," in
"Tsifrovyys Ustroystvs i Hikroprotssssory" [Digital Units and Micropro-
cessors], Vyp 3, Rigs, 1979, pp 59-69.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstsl'stvo "Zinstnc", 1980

11,176
CSO:' 1863/“

23
POI OFFIGAL IS! ONLY
RESP-35 ADAPTIVE MAIN-DIGITAL comm
KiOV ”WNW ”33mm in main: No 1, Jan-Feb 81 p 104

[Article by Doctor of Technical Sciences Andrey Ivanovich Rondalev. depart-ant
head, Institute of Qbemtics, Ukrainian ssa Aoadmay of Sciences, Iiev, jun-
ior scientific worker Petr stepanovich mochan. Institute of wmtiu.
Ukrainian SSR Acadany of Sciences, and senior engineer Vasiliy Nikolayevich
Lavrent'yev, Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian ssn academy of sciences]

[Text] The Imp-35 adaptive converter developed at the Institute of Wher-
netics, Ukrainian SSR Maduy of Sciences, is designed for multichannel con-
version of positive and negative polarity Dc voltages to binary digital code
and for entry of it to a digital caputer using standard integrators of type
BANG-2K, Yes-M [Unified Canter ﬁsts-l and so on. It is used in autos-
tion of scientific experinents and measuring-test work, in industrial monitor-
ing systems. hybrid oosputerasystus and information-mute: complexes.

The device is designed on the nodular principle and consists of the baseline
version and additional units. An external view of the Al‘sP-3S is presented
on the second page of the cover. Operation of the converter is organized by
the digit coding method with tvo-way equalization of the signal to be con-
verted. The presence of additional units in the converter permits autcnatic
matching of the outputs of analog smsors to the input of the converter in
the voltage range of 0-100 V, makes it possible to reduce the aperture tins
of the converter to 1 us. to provide a general and normal noise suppression
coefficient of not less than 120 dB and it also permits one to aonitor. tune
and calibrate the converter paraneters during operation. The property of
adaptation includes the capability of changing the nuber of digits fro- lo
to 16 and accordingly the conversion tine frcn 5 to 10 1a, which permits op-
tinun utilization of the parameters of conversion accuracy and speed in dif-
ferent systems. A block diagram of the nap-as is presented on the third
page of the cover. Here 1 is a multichannel comatator. 2 is a reference
voltage source, 3 is a digital-analog converter. 4 is a conparator, 5 is a
display unit, 6 is a nunber register, 7 is a control and nonitoring unit and
8 is the interface.

The A'rsP-35 converter differs fron sinilar devices by structural Manganeity,
accuracy, economy and high speed due to the use of original engineering solu-
tious. The umber of control aaubers and regulations is reduced to a mini-u

21;
ton 0":an as: om:
by introducing e nonitoring device and automatic correction circuit. The

presence of digital dieplay pernite the A‘l‘ePb35 mute: to be ueed in the
volueter node.

Main Specifications

Operating principle Digit encoding
tan-her of connected analog channele 16

Input voltage range, v

Iain 0-110

auxiliary 0-10.11 0-11: 0-3100
Runber of digite oi output code 10-16
Resolution, w . 150
Convereion error (oorreeponding to output code),

percent 0.1-0.005
Lineerity error, percent - 0.0015
Moral and nornel noiee euppreeeion coetﬂ’icient, dB 120
Convenion tine, in 5-10
Aperture omvereion tine. we 1
Code output (requency, kn: 75-150
Oonauned power with voltage of 220 v, frequency of

50 as, H 150

The ﬁner-35 cmverter in etandard ASV‘r-H houeing neneuring 480 x 485 x 160 ie
beeed on eorially-produced integrated circuite.

neveightottheconverterdoeenotenceedmkg.‘

COPYRIGII'P: Irdatel'etvo 'naukova duake", Blektronnoye nodelirovaniye, 1981

6521
C80 : 1863/96

roaomazzluszonu
I-UK Uri-luau. var. UNLI

SOF'NARE

PRACTICAL COURSE IN PWMIN FOR H5000 SERIES commas

Moscow PWIKUH P0 PRMWIBOVMIYU DLYA EV“ $3811 “5000 in Russian 1981
(signed to press 27 Apr 81) pp 2-5

[Table of contents, annotation and introduction from book, "Practical Course in
Programing for the HSOOO Series Computers", by Ol'ga Hilthaylovna Hitsuk and
Yevgeniy lvanovich Nikol‘skiy, lzdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika", 12,200 copies,
176 pages]

[Text] Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Assembler Program Emples 5
Chapter 2. COBOL Program Exmsples 59
Chapter 3. RPG Program Examples 120
Annotation

This practical course in progranning contains examples of programs compiled in the
Assembler. 00301. and RPG languages.

Attention is paid to the rules for using 008 components and to operating with
general-purpose subroutines. The program examples can be used as fragments of
larger programs.

The practical course can be used in a system for training personnel for computer
centers, as well as by computer center employees, students. engineers and econo-
mists specializing in the field of processing economic information by applying
H5000 series computer complexes.

lntroduc tion

The development of information processing hardware in our country and abroad in
rates of development is outstripping the development of software for it. After the
first modification to the H5000 perforated computer complex (PVK), series production
of which began in 19710, domestic industry set up production of its successors: the
M5010 VK and the substantially improved “5100 W.

H5000 series computer complexes are small third-generation computers with modern

architecture, magnetic disks and tapes used as external etorage and standard peri-
phsrals and are made with a modern element base.

as
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The M5000 series VK are controlled by the disk operating system (DOS), designed to
extend its hardware capabilities and which is a characteristic feature of all
modern computers. The operating syst- is a set of software facilities that allow
automation of the process of compiling application programs and execution of them
on the computer; the facilities also control equipment during job execution.

The H5000 series computer complexes are upwards compatible computers, i.e. the
software developed for the smaller computers can be used for the subsequent modifi-
cations. ‘i‘his circa-stance large balances the priority in development of the hard-

ware itself comspred to the software for each new modification of the )15000 series
VK.

Both systems and applications software is being built up from model to mcdel; and
DOS itself continues to be improved. In addition to the Assembler system, the use
of new facilities for automating rpograslling, the algorithmic languages, was begun.
Translators have now been impluented for 00801.. RPG and DUI (first version).

Methods of progr-Iing with algoritl'ssic language facilities are given in the

"Practical Course in Programing for 115000 Series Computers." 'lhe orientation of
the H5000 series computer complexes to the processing of economic information has
determined the set of programing languages for the inclusion of them wi t'nin DOS.

Each algoritlsoic language. besides general-purpose, is oriented to a certain class
of problems, and it is for this class of problems that th~ highest efficiency of
use of all its capabilities is achieved.

ibis practical course has a number of examples using general-purpose subroutines
that are in DOS and delivered to users with the equipment. Using general-purpose
subroutines considerably facilitates the process of compiling programs by freeing
the programser from many routine operations. A progransr can call them when
writing programs in Assembler, 00301. or RPG. These general-purpose subroutines
include a complex of subroutines intended for recoding of information prepared in
accordance with various 6031‘ [state standards] into theHSOUO internal code and
vice versa.

The l6000 series VK internal code is a code for representing information in
accordance with 0081‘ 13052-76 and meeting the requirements for computer processing
of information.

Other standards are used for external media of information: infonsation on punched
cards can be prepared in accordance with 6081' 10859-64, «no [expansion unknown]
code 019.001 or 6081‘ 19769-76; information on punched tape is coded in accordance
with 6081' 15029-69, 6081' 10859-610 and HTK-ZH code.

‘lhe H5000 series Wt 008 contains. besides that of the 0081' named above. subroutines
for recoding information into the code used in the Unified System of Computers. the
MO! [decimal code for information interchange] (0081' 19768-76).

Isaong the general-purpose subroutines is a whole spectrum of routines designed to
sort and merge files. Part of these subroutines can be used to generate working
sort and merge programs, and part for arranging records in alphabetic order, etc.

- 2
P0! omcul USE ONLY
run urn-aunts. was. amen

To supplement the practical course [5], this work contains examples in the machine-
oriented language Assembler, which illustrate operation with magnetic tapes and
with information represented in accordance with the different 0081's and other
peculiarities in the use of this language.

'lhe capabilities of dividing a program into parts, sectioning it, are pointed out.
'lhe process of sectioning is convenient and sometimes even necessary when large
and complex programs have to be written. Examples are used to also illustrate the
the capability of making use of a canon area, or cocoon program section, for com-
munication between separate modules of a program.

This practical course also contains problems executed in the procedure-oriented
general-purpose language of COBOL (or Canon Business Oriented Language). 00301. is
intended for problems that entail organization and processing of large data files,
as well as for cyclic repetitive operations of data processing that are typical

of business and economic problems.

Using COBOL presupposes a description of processing by a certain scheme:
identification, or title, of the process;

instructions on the computer equipment that maut be used in processing;
instructions on the data structure and nature of the data to be processed; and
descriptions of the operations on the data.

In accordance with this processing schema adopted in COBOL, a working program
includes: the identification division, the envirotuent division, the data
division and the procedure division.

The COBOL translator is based on application of the standard version of the
language. 1n. COBOL input language may use both Russian and English mellonics.
As an aid for studying the COBOL system. we recommend Us].

The probleI-oriﬁ'tted RPG (Report Program Generator) language is a programing sys-
tem designed to create data processing programs to format output files and reports.
It was developed by breaking the process of data file processing into a number of
typical operations that are executed formally and uniquely irrespective of the
data content.

Such operations are:

searching records in a file for specified values of fields;
selection of individual records for their rpocessing;
execution of operations on fields in records;

adding new records to files; and

formatting output reports using specific forms.

‘Ihe algoritlws for data processing in an RPG program is not directly described; it
is generated by the compiler according to a standard scheme that is executed under
the control of the operating system. In this practical course, there is a chapter
containing examples for using RPG in its specific inplamentation for the HSOOO
series VK.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“more ere two vereione of IPG treneletote in the #15000 eoftvere. me vereion ie
deacribed in deteil in [3], end the other, developed by the 8K3 VI [Speciel Deeign
Office for Gwputere], ie deecribed in [1]. The letter vereion of the treneletor
hoe been illuetreted by emplee in thie couree.

Explenetione for certein functione implanted in the emplee ere given in the
couree ee eupplenentery infometion.

It goee without eeyin; thet before eettins ebout eolvins the problem in thie course.
one met etudy the technicel documentetion on the eottvere for the 115000 eeriee

coeputer caplexee [1] end other litereture (eee the Met of recoeleended
literetuxe et the end of the book)

COPYRIGII‘I: Izdetel'etvo "Fineney i etetietike”, 1981

8505
C80: 1863/111

POI LUSEONLY
tun vs e es—enu my... a. use

UDC 519.685
“MIMI. FOR KOHPAS DATA BASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

Hoscov RUKOVODS‘NO P0 8031) WAS in Russien 1981 (signed to press 9 Her 81)
pp 2-6, “-46

[Annotetiom teble of contents, introduction end references fro. book, "Henuel for
the KOMPAS Dete Bees Henegenent Systen". by Viktor Ivenovich Filippov, edited by

V. H. Kurochkin, cendidete of physicel end mathematical sciences, chhislitel'nyy
tsentr Akedenii neuk SSSR, 400 copies, 67 pages]

[Text] This nenuel covers the besic cepebilities of the XMAS dete bese nenegelsent
system [DBHS] developed in the USSR Acedeny of Sciences Cmputer Center end hosed on
the suggestions by the CODASYL [Conference on Dete Systems Lensueses]. The system
supports creetion. neintenence end use of dots beses through the programing
lengueges in the DUBNA monitor system or directly through the interective nodule
for teminel eccees. The syste- version described is version 1.1 (Jenuery 1981).
The aenuel is intended for XMAS DBMS edninistretors end users.

Contents Pege

Introduction 3
Chepter l. Besic Concepts 5
Chepier 2. System Architecture 9
Chepter 3. Dete Description Lsnguege (YeOD) 12
3.1. YeOD Syntex 12
3.2. Explenetion of Syntex end Senentics of YeOD Sentences 13
3.2.1. SCHEME Sentence 13
3.2.2. RECORD Sentence 14
3.2.3. SET Sentence 1’»
Chapter 4. asbscheae Description unguege (YeOPS) 16
Chepter 5. Dete Bendling bnsuege (YeHD) 18
5.1. Syntex of Besic Hendling Steteleents 18
5.2. Syntex of Service Stetenents 18
5.3. Functimas of Besic Hendlins Stetuents 19
5.3.1. PUT Stet-lent 19
5.3.2. 021' Stetenent 19
5.3.3. REPLACE Stetenent 20
5.3.6. 390V: Ststenent 20
5.3.5. INCLUDE Stetenent 20
5.3.6. EXCLUDE Stetenent 20
5.3.7. FIND Stetenent 20

30
MWWEONLY
5.6. Service Statemente 21

5.6.1. SUBSCHEHE Statement 21
5.6.2. compass Statement 22
5.6.3. CALL Statement 22
5.6.6. maul Statement 22
5.6.5. “(DID Statement 22
5.6.6. DATA Statement 23
5.6.7. PASSHORD Statement 23
5.6.8. women Statement 23
5.6.9. PROCEDURE Statement 23

5.6.1 . UPDATE Statement 23
5.6.11. DUPLICATE Statement 23
5.6.12. OUTPUT Statement 26

5.5. Data Baee Exceptional Conditione 26
Chapter 6. Organization of Application Program 27
6.1. Deecriptione 27
6.2. Statements 28
6.3. PASCAL Program Example 30
Chapter 7. Terminal Acceee Module 31
7.1. Obtaining the Terminal Acceee Module 31
7.2. Language for the Terminal Acceee Module 31
Chapter 8. Supplied Vereion-Bxample of Syetem 35
8.1. Compoeition of Vereion-Example 35
8.2. Operation with Version-Example 37
8.2.1. Start of Iraneletore and Programe - 37
8.2.2. Building Up Ueer Data Baee 38

8.3. Sequence of Pamiliarity with Vereion-Bxample 39
Appendix 1. Graphic Deecription of Scheme of Example 61
Appendix 2. Fragment of Text of Scheme of Example 62
Appendix 3. Structure of Tabular Subecheme 63
Bibliography ' 66

Introduction

The KOHPAS DBMS ie intended for definition and management of etructured data filee
(date beeee) on the BBSH-6 computer under DISPAR 08. The eyetem can be ueed to
deeign banke of data of any etructure and eizee for information-reference and
accounting-calculation eyeteme, planning eyeteme, computer-aided deeign eyeteme
(industrial and regional), application program packagee. etc. In View of the
availability of terminal ecceee fecilitiee. the eyetem can perform the functione of
an independent "adjuetable" information-reference eyetua.

The KOHPAS DBMS ie baeed on CODASYL euggeetione [1, 2, 3] (i.e. it can operate vith
any network etructuree of data), but does not implement theee euggeetione to the
full extent, though in certain propertiee it goee beyond them. In eubeequent ver-
eione, the eyetem will be developed, on the one hand. in the direction of approach-
ing the CODASYL euggeetione, and on the other, on the level and amount of eervicee
offered the ueere.

FOI(Mﬂﬁcah.lEH£0Nl¥
FUR UfHLIAL US: ONLY

In data structure and certain functional capabilities, the KOHPAS system is close
to its predecessor, the MM“ system [6, 5], but differs considerably from it in
methods of implementation, general architecture and capabilities, interaction with
inclusive programing languages and format of language facilities.

Contained in this menusl are the descriptions of the system language end progrua
facilities, reconaendations for their use and instructions on the composition of
the system version being sent and on placing it into operation. ‘lhe size of this
manual does not allow giving a sufficiently complete example of use; therefore,
the texts of the data base exmple delivered with the system are being made avail-
able directly by the developer as separate Appendices. The developer is also
msking available current ATsPU [alphamneric printed-instructions for the KMAS
system end the A‘rsPU—instructions for the universal DUBNA-interfsce with the
MARS-6 system and for the MARS-6 system.

ﬁle language and progrsm facilities in the KOHPAS system are rather standard, so
that this manusl can serve as a brief "Introduction" to the OODASYL suggestions on
management of data bases. 0n the other hand, for a fuller understanding of the
historical grounds and methods of using the suggested facilities, KOHPAS system
data base administrators should refer to the basic texts for the CODASYL sugges-
tions and works dealing with data base design.

To supplement the capabilities described here, development is now underway on
facilities for logging, restructuring, automatic generation of load progruss and
a relational interface with the KOHPAS system.

B 131. 106mm:

1. Stolysrov, G. K., "Review of Proposals by the CODASYL working Group on Data
Bases," in "Algoritmy i organizatsiys resheniya ekonomicheskikh radach"
[Algorithms end Organization of Solutions to Economic Problems]. No lo, Moscow,
"Stetistika", 1971..

2. "Report of the CODASYL Data Description language Committee," INFORM. SYSTEMS,
Vol 3, No a, l978.

3. Olle, 'r. H., "The CODASYL Approach to Data Base Management," 6. 8., J. Wiley
5 Sons, 1978 (Russian translation by "Statistika", 1981, in the press).

Io. Velichko, I. V. and Filippov, V. I., "The AL'HAol Network DBMS," in "Heterialy
Vsesoyuznogo seminars 'Progrsnrmoye obespecheniye bankov dannykh'" [Materials
of the All-Union Seminar, "Data Bank Softwara"], Moscow, VNIIPOU, 1979.

5. Velichko, I. V., "Sistema upravleniya bezami dennykh AL'M" [AL'HA DBMS],
lbscow, USSR Academy of Sciences Computer Center, 1980.

6. Martin, 1., "Organization of Data Bases and Computer Systems," Moscow, "Mir",
1980.

7. Pirin, S. 1., "Yazyk PASKAL'-monitor i ego ispol'zovaniye" [PASCAL Monitor
Language and Its Use], Hoscow, USSR Academy of Sciences Computer Center, 1978.

2
FOR OPEC?“- USE ONLY
8. Bryan-tn, V. H. et 31., "Sutm 901' 1-78 (tutovodotvo k pol'zovantyu)"
[PUL'T-78 Synta- (Uurs Hanan], Moscow, USSR Academy of Sciences Gouputer
Center, 1978.

9. Plltppov, V. 1., "Proceduro for Implantation of a Network DBMS Bued on the
MARS-6 P11. Syotu," 081“, lb 1. 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Vychiolitel'nyy tuntr Mada“ hank SSSR, 1981

85105
680: 1863/ 93

m 0911331. USE ONLY
I'D“ UFHLIAI. UM UNLV

UDC 681.3.06:51

EQUIVALENT TRANSLATIONS OF DATA STREAM SCREHES

Kiev EKVIVALENTNYYE PRBODRAZOVANIYA 3K3!“ POTOKA DANNYKH in Russisn 1981
(signed to press 21 Apr 81) pp 2, 65-66

[Annotation, conclusion end references iron Preprint 81-26. "Equivalent Transla-
tione of Date Stream Schemes", by Viktor lvanovich Borisenko, Institut kibernetiki
Aksdemii neuk Ukreinskoy $88, 300 copies, 48 pages]

[Excerpts] Annotation

One of the models of perallel progremming is considered: data
stream schemes suggested by Dennis et al. A system of translations
is constructed that maintain the property of strong similsrity

end permit varying the asynchronous nature of the scheme and
representing it in some standard form.

This work is of interest to specialists in the theory of
programming and developers of operating systems for
multiprocessor computers.

11. Conclusion

The system of trenaletions suggested in this work permits considerable reerrsnge-
ment of the informetionel portion of the scheme, varing the asynchronous properties
of the scheme or reducing it to some standard form. For e certain class of schemes,
this stenderd form is the netursl form that permits obteining the encessary condi-
tion of strong similarity of the schemes and, consequently, the necessary condition
of their functionel equivalence.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Dennis, J. 3.; fossin. J. 3.; and Linderman, J. P., "Date Stresm Schemes," in
"Theory of Progremming," Novosibirsk, Computer Center, Siberian Branch, USSR
Academy of Sciences, Vol 2, pp 7-b3, 1972.

2. Borisenko, V. 1., "Transletion of Progrem Schemes into here Stream Schemes,"

(Preprint 79-52). Kiev, Institute of Cybernetics, UkSSR Academy of Sciences,
Al pages, 1979.

F03<Hﬂﬂcaﬂ.USE(NVLY
3. Gluohkov, V. K. and talcum, A. V., "Church-loner Translators,"
KIBERNETIKA, No 5, pp 1-8, 1979.

lo. Bortocnko, V. 1., "Algorltln for Conatructton of Data Stream Schm,"
KIBEWIKA, No 6, pp 46-52, 1978.

5. Gluohkov, V. 11., "Stntu tuifrovykh avtoutov" [Synthuu of Distal Intonuta],
Honcov. Ftaotglz, 1076 p.300, 1962.

COPYRIGHT: Inotttut klbornettkl, 1931

8565
C80: 1863 I94

35
FOR OFFICIAL us: on“
UDC 681.03.06

DICTIONARY-DIRECTORY SUBSYSTBH FOR AUTOMATED SYSTEM FOR PROCESSRB 0? TEST 328"]..1'8

Kiev PODSISM "SI.0VAR'-SPRAVOCHNIK" AVTOHATIZIROVANMY 315m 03m}:
REZUIJTATOV ISPYTANIY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 19 Feb 81) pp 2-6

[Annotation and excerpt from Preprint 81-2, "Dictionary-Directory Subsystem for
Automated System for Processing of Test Results", by Vladimir Il'ich Skurikhin,
Valentin Grigor'yevich Kvachev and Yuriy Rananovich Val'kman, Institut kibernstiki
Akademii nauk Ukrainskoy SSR, 300 copies, 37 pages]

[Excerpt] Annotation

A problem-oriented dictionary-directory is considered for an
automated system for processing of test results. Pive functional
subsystems are included in the dictionary-directory system
described: informational support, mass input of information,
report generation, interactive mode and interface facilities.
‘lhe system described is implemented on the base of the SEDAN
data base management system.

Using the dictionary-directory in designing large data processing
systems provides the necessary service for administration of the
systems under development. This work is oriented to a broad
group of developers and designers of automated information

processing systens.

The complexity of data structures, the diversity of forms for representing and
methods of obtaining data, multipurpose utilisation. the varying functional orien-
tation of data processing programs, the variety of tasks being solved and the
rather large data processing systems lead to the necessity of automating the work
of administering such systems. This is a main reason for using dictionaries-
directories in automated data processing systems. In [1], the data dictionary has
been called the cornerstone of good data management.

A dictionary-directory system, on the one hand, is a "directory" in the sense that
it enables answering the question: “hat is in a given system? his question
breaks down into a set of questions:

what kind of data is kept in the system

what is their structure

in what formats are they stored

which programs use the given information

which programs are part of a given subsystem, etc., etc.

F0! OF'I'IC‘3A6L USE ONLY
0n the other hand. a dictionary-directory system is a "dictionary," since it permits
answering the question: "here is a given item of information stored?

The need for dictionaries-directories arose back in the early stages of development
of alrge data processing systems. Thus, to support flexible operation with a Yes
03 data set, a table of contents was created on direct access volumes. Then for
data base management systems (SUBD), tables emerged in the role of dictionaries-
directories; these tables were crested by using a data description language and
formed a nucleus for programs that support language interfaces. These were ell
prerequisites for the emergence of e dictionary-directory system. However, these

developments could not be considered dictionary-directory systems for the
following reasons.

First, the main users of such cetelogs, tables of contents end tables were programs
oriented to execution of specific functions. Therefore, on the one hand, end this
is the main thing. stored in such systems was only the data needed for programs,
and on the other, it was stored in the corresponding formats.

The information stored in these dictionaries was clearly inadequate for system
administrators in decision making.

Second, ell the dictionary systems developed were oriented to solving a specific
problem and were different.

The need for combining them into a single system, inherently, also led to the de-
velopment of the dictionary-directory system. A survey of a number of these
foreign systems was given in [1].

In contrast to systems of general-purpose dictionaries [l], in this work we consider
a dictionary-directory oriented to application in automated systems for processing
of test results (ASORI).

The data dictionary-directory is e metedate bank. It stores information concerning
declarations of the data base, references of programs to objects of the data base,
statistics on usage pertaining to access to the data, declarations of secrecy, etc.

COPYRIGHT: Institut kibernetlki, 1981.

8545
680: 1863/9b

FOR‘OFTWCJRI.1EHE<HVLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NW PRIZ ANIMATED Emma SYSTEH

Moscow INSTRUMAL'NAYA SISTM PWANIYA Yes m (PRIZ) in Russian
1981 (signed to press 21 Aug 81) pp 3-9. 157-158

[Introduction, chapter 1, bibliography and table of contents of book "The P312
Instrument Systen of Programing Yes Counters". by nil'vi Iokhannegovna Kakhro.
Akhto Peeterovich Kal'ya and Enn Kharal'dovieh Tyugu. Izdatel'stvo Pinsnsy i
statistika. 15,000 copies, 160 pages]

[Excerpts] Introduction

It is difficult to give an exact definition of the concept of a ”programing
systen." At the present tine the role of the programing systes as the aggre-
gate of neans for developnent of computer programs is steadily growing. As

the speed of coqmters is increased it because increasingly possible to automate
programing. high-level progra-ing systole in which the couputer is an intellec-
tual partner of the program have hecone widespread today. Anng these systess
is the P812 Yes, which differs iron noet other high-level programing systens

in that it is an industrial. not an experinsntal. systen. This systen has two
prototypes, the 8H? and Phil-32 systess which were tested on a Minsk cowuter.
The PRIZ systen has been used for a fairly long tins and is now being dis-
tributed by the Algorits Science-Production Association as a conponent of the
software of the Yes m [Unified Systen of Computers].

This book describes the capabilities and conceptions of the PRIZ systen, its
input language, and programing technology in this systen. The book is intended
primrily for progrsners who are developing specialized programing languages
and translators, progran packages, and large progran comlexes. The first
chapter, which reviews the basic concept, purpose. and capabilities of the sys-
tem. and the last chapter. which presents an exalple of a progras package, will
also be interesting to specialists in the applied areas who have an interest in
the construction of progran packages.

The book also contains naterial on the realisation of new concepts. Because
this systen mloys autosatic progran synthesis on a broad scale for the first
tine, the description of certain principles of realization nay be interesting
for systen prograI-ers and specialists in translators.

The authors have attespted to present the saterial in the book in such a way
that the reader will not need specialized knowledge in systen progra-ing.

MMWMY
Chapter 1 was written by E. 'i‘yugu. while Chapter 3 was written by M. Kakhro,
and Chapter 5 by A. Kal'ya. The bulk of the nterial in the book is the joint

work of all three authors.
Chapter 1. Purpose of the System. Basic Concepts.
The Place of the PRIZ Systen in the Software System of the Yes m

The software systen of the Unified systen of Counters (Yes m) is an extremely
large conplex of progress designed for conpntar operation and the development of
new prograna. The basic principle in progran development is the modular prin-
ciple. which nakes it possible to coqile and process pieces of a progran of the
necessary dinensione (”an”) independently of one another.

It can be said that the Yes M software supports the technology of modular pro-
gra-ing. Bork on structuring a program is essentially work on its nodules.

Each of then goes through certain stages of processing. input, text generation,
text editing, translation, linkage editing. loading. and starting. During this
the forn of the nodules changes fron the initial module recorded in a certain in-
put language to the object nodal (result of translation). and finally to the
loading nodal. ready for execution.

Yes colputers pernit storing a practically unlinited outer of nodules in li-
braries on napetic disks. But it is beconing increasingly difficult to keep
track of the large nunber of modules, select the needed ones fron than, and as-
sign the information necessary to join than into a single progran. Moreover,
when constructing a new progran from ready nodules it is almst always necessary
to devise a certain number of new, and alnost always very ensll. pieces of pro-
grans, in other words mdules to interlink the already existing ones. These
linkage nodules nay be required to transfer data. convert iornat. convert units
of neasure, and for other purposes. The Hill programing systen contains seam
to auto-ta the selection of nodules and autonatically construct nodules for

in terlinking other nodules .

An ieportant feature of this systen is its coqlete cowatibility with the
processing prograns of the Yes operating systen. with translators from FORTRAN
and COBOL, and with the nacroassenhler. We should note that comatibility here
means that the PRIZ systen does not inpose any additional linitstions on the
nodules. It can be considered an expansion of the Yes operating systen which
provides new naana for processing nodules.

Figure 1 below shows the relationship of the PRIZ systen to cosponents of the Yes
operating system and ways of using it. Progre-ing in FORTRAN or in the Asseda-
ler language (lines 7 and 6 in Figure 1) requires the use of the linkage editor
to obtain a loading nodule and operating systen for starting the progress.
Programing using the PRIZ systen always requires. in addition. use of the
Assembler language to obtain object nodules. There are different possible vari-
ations of conbined use of the programing systen:

a. programing in roman using expansions of the language
in the forn of job statenents (8);

39
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 1. Relationship of the PIIZ Systen with Yes W Software

Key: a. Package Input Language 1; g. Linkage Editor;
h. Package Input Language 2 ; h. Translator tron mm;
c. Package Input Language 3; 1. mm;
d. Package Input Language 6: j. Assedler;
e. UTOPISI‘: k. Assedler Language.
f. run

I). programing entirely in the input language of the P812
systen l; ‘

c. solving problem written in the package input languages of
the applied prograns, which are constructed by neans of the
P312 systen (2-6);

d. progra-ing in Assenbler language using expansions of the
language in the forn of job statenents (5).

Another pernissible application of the systen is where sons of the nodules are
written in FORTRAN. acne in assumes. and sons in COBOL.

Conpatibility with PL/l language- is not specially provided in the P812 systen be-
cause the translator iron this language outputs object nodules that are diffi-
cult to codine with nodules obtained tron other languages. But it is possible,
using procedures described in instmtions for programs in PL/l. to use nodules
obtained tron this language.

ho
momwsolmr
In the progra-ing system of the Yes operating system it is necessary to
explicitly indicate the modules in the request for a subrOutine or macrooperator
in order to combine modules into a single program; but the PRIZ system in many
cases eliminates the need for explicit indication of the modules which must be
joined in the final working program. Therefore. the system user is largely freed
from program-dug, but has the duty of describing the job conditions and on their
basis the program is automatically synthesised. Obviously. the correctness of
the program is then determined entirely by the correctness of the assignment
conditions, because the automatic program synthesizer does not make errors.

This greatly increases the productivity and quality of programmer labor, in
other words it raises the technological level of program development for Yes
computers.

The P812 as a System for Construction of Translators

In 1968 D.knuthproposed representing the semantics of programming languages by
attributes ascribed to language symbols and relationship assigned among attri-
butes [1]. This technique, called the attribute technique, is now the most com-
mon method of automating construction of the semantic part of translators. In
practice. however. it does not provide fully automatic construction of the trans-
lator with respect to description of semantics. In the first place. know-how

in defining appropriate attributes and relationships for all the constructions
of programming language is still not widely enough distributed. In the second
place, the attribute technique itself has certain problems in organizing compu-
tation of the values of the attributes [2].

The P812 programming system also permits defining the semantics of concepts (that
is, nonterminal symbols) of new languages by describing the corresponding attri-
butes, called their components, and the relationships among components, which per-
aits organizing computation of the latter.

In this sense, there is a full analogy between the attribute technique proposed
by D.Knuth and the semantic models technique used in the P812. The main dif-
ference is that the PRIZ system is applicable to write new problem-oriented
languages as expansions of the one base language, UTOPIST. Unlike most of the
systems for construction of translators. it uses the macrogeneration technique
for syntactical text processing instead of syntactically controlled analysis.
The principal advantages of the system are powerful and convenient means of
semantic processing and simple-to-use syntactical means. This allows extremely

quick construction of translators for many simple languages.
The PRIZ as a System for Construction of Program Packages

Development of a package of programs differs so greatly from development of an
individual program that expertise accumulated by programmers solving applied
problems is plainly inadequate to construct a package that functions well.

lbth specialists in the subject area and system programmers must participate in

construction of a package. Specialists in the subject area of the package are
responsible for correct selection of the concepts of the input language of the
package and for choosing computing techniques which are adopted as the basis for
programming modules of the package. The work of specialists in the subject area

In
ron omcuL use on“
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during construction of the package is ordinarily called modular analysis. This
is the. first stage of program construction. Hodular analysis may result in
a design for a program package.

System programmers are responsible for good-quality realization of the package
design. Ultimately they must put the package under development in the form of
a finished program product which meets very high quality specifications.

It often happens that applied specialists undertake the development of a pack-
age of programs without the participation of system programmers. The thing to
be feared in this case is that the progree package will take the form of a
partially operating model of the conceived system. Development of the finished
program package is postponed for an indefinite time because of unforeseen dif-
ficulties that arise in the concluding stage of work. The same difficulties
are observed when a program package is developed by system programmers without
participation by adequately qualified specialists in the applied subject area.
In this case there may be a danger that the class of jobs to be done as selected

by the designers of the package will not satisfy package users and the problem-
solving techniques will be ineffective or limited in applicability.

A quality package can only be developed by clearcut work procedures supported
by appropriate software. The PRIZ system is a system for constructing program
packages that insures all the basic stages of package development:

a. modular analysis;

b. programming, debugging. and testing the program modules in-
cluded in the package;

c. designing and realizing the input language;

d. development of the control part, that is, the part that or-
ganizes the programs of the package;

e. providing the services necessary for work with the package
(conunication with the data base, input-output. and dialogue).

For modular analysis the PRIZ system has means to formalise the description of
system models and processes from the most diverse areas. It provides the cape-
bility of automatic processing and storage of formalised descriptions.

For the second stage. programming modules, COBOL, PORTRAN, and HACROAS-
SEHBLER are applicable and there are expanded capabilities for including auto-
matically synthesised parts of the programs.

Nonetheless, these two stages are least subject to automation because they re-
quire knowledge of a specific subject area. and the main difficulty is not
machine realization but making correct content-oriented decisions.

The remaining stages beginning with realisation of the input language are very

highly automated in the PRIZ system. Chapter 6 presents the work procedures for
construction of packages.

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(NVLY
In the second half of the 1970's a trend was clearly observed to use artificial
intellect netth in practical applications.

In translators and progre-ing system application of these nethods is pron-
ising for raising the level of the language in which dialogue with the con--

puter is conducted. This refers to both progra-ing languages and specialised
lengtnges for job descriptions.

The P312 systen uses the following procedures fro- the field of artificial in-
tellect.

l. the sensntics of the input language are described in senantic nodels that
contain objects and relationships. Processing of the initial text involves
translating it into senntic notation and working with mentic nodels.

2. A very convenient possibility is created of expanding the input language
by describing new concepts through existing ones in the sane way as is done

in other artificial intellect systole. Sol-antic neaory and resources for work-
ing with it are used for this purpose.

In fact. work is organised with concept francs. that is, senentic nodels in
which significant changes are nade automatically to adjust to a concrete situ-

ation (use of objects of the “OPP type) and nehe it possible to periors the
necessary procedures autonstically (without an explicit call).

3. It realises auto-stic progren synthesis and creates possibilities of solving
problens based on their assigned conditions.

0n the other hand, experience has shown that the PRIZ systen is very applicable
to progran jobs for an artificial intellect. Specifically, using it one can
quickly set up nachine experinsnts to iorn concepts. teach, use unclear con-
cepts, and the like which formerly took Inch note tine.

Technological Services of the Systen

In addition to the prissry functions perforned by the PRIZ systee. the user can
receive the following services fro. it.

1. Virtual neeory progress which can be used in nodules written in FORTRAN
or ASSEMBLER language pernit work with a large-values natheneticel neeory. auto-
natically replacing pages tron disk nanory.

2. The dialogue regime of progrsn translation and generation pernite direct
contact between the user and the system.

3. Work directives with semantic eenory are sore ccnvenient for work with a
library of nodels than neans for work with library files.

lo. The HELP iniornetion progran is designed to receive operational intonation
on expansions of the UTOPIS‘!‘ language.

113
MWMMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. High-level debugging resources permit automation of comprehensive debugging
of synthesized programs taking into account possible errors in modules and
descriptions of job conditions.

6. The system has a set of catalogue procedures which permit work in various
regimes: batch processing and dialogue; the regime of expansion and modifica-
tion of the model of the subject area; the macrogeneration regime; the regime
for solving problems written in the input languages of the packages; the regisee

for Solving problems which are described in FORTRAN or ASSMLER language and
so on.

7. There are special utilities that insure convenient sanegement of the li-
braries of semantic models and the macroproceesor of the Pan system.

8. The package of applied program for data base control system is compatible
uith other packages designed in the PRIZ system, which enables users of the

system to construct individual data bases.

9. The generator of dialogue programs permits generation of dialogue modules
that are included in the program packages.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Knuth, D. 3.. "Semantics of Context-Pres Languages." MATH. SEPT. rumour.
1968. No 2, Vol 2, pp 127-164.

2. Meriste, Fl. 3., "Methods of Realizing Attribute Schemes in System for
Constructing Translators," PROGRM‘RDVANIYB. 1980. No 5.

3. "Osnovy Bazrabotki Translyatorov" [Fundamentals of Development of Trans-
lators]. Rostov-na-Donu. 860, 1974.

4. Crigorenko. V. P.. Saan, Yu. P.. and Sotnikova. N. 8.. "Experience with
Use of the Pall-32 System in Constructing Packages of Applied Programs
for an Automated Design System," PROGRAMMVANIYB. 1979, No l.

5. Levin, D. Ye., "The sm System. No l. Programing in the sen. System,"
Preprint We 80 AN SSSR, 1978, No 138.

6. Codd, E. F.. "A Relational nodel Data for Large Shared Data banks,"
emulsion-toss or nu: A04. 1970. so 6. Vol 13, pp 377-387.

Table of Contents
Introduction................................ 3
Chapter 1. Purpose of the System. Basic Concepts. . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

ChapterZ.TheUTOPISTLanguege...................... 17
2.1. Deecriptionofobjects..................... 20

2.2. Description of Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

FOIOFHCIALWBONLY
Syste-
Syste-

sees

eeee

2.3. Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20‘. Directtm t C O O 0 O O O O O O O O C O O 0 O C 0
Chapter 3. Sone Information on Realization of Yes PBIZ

3.1. General Structure and Fork Procedure of the

3.2. Translator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3. Prograscenerator . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6. Planner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5. Processing Descriptions of Types . . . . .

Chapter 5.

5
5

S
S

Appendices

. Progran Packages
. State end Generation of the System

s
eeeeeeeeee
s

e
e
e

seee

1

2. Progressing Modules . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Hacrosysten.............
.6. Input-Output
5

6

Progressing Technology in the Yes PBIZ Systsn
. Progras-ing in the Yes P312 syste-

e
e
e
e
o
e

eeseeee

Packages of Applied Progress To Manage Data Bases

.1. Languages of Data Bases . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.2. General Structure of the System . . . . . . . . .

.3. work with Data Bases

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT:

11.176
080:

1863/106

eeeeseesesesoe

.6. State and Generation of Data Base Manage-ant Systess

e
e
e
s

eeeeee

eeeeeee

seeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseesnees

eseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseesoees

1.5
mmmouw

Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy i statistika", 1981

oeeeee

eoeeese asses.

eesseeo eeeese

eesee

eeeee.

ssessee

35

63
69
69
SS
66
67

71
71
93
97
103
107
116

121
122
135
137
162

166

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MANUAL ON SWITCHING T0 mm mm us OPERATING SYSTDi

l‘bscw PM!) 01' NS Yes X 08 Yes (SPRAVOCHNYE POSOBIYB) in Russian 1980
(signed to press 11 Aug 80) pp 2-6. 226-231

[Annotatiom foreword, bibliography. and table of contents of book

“The Transition Pron the Yes Disk Operating System to the Yes Operating
System (Reference Manual)". by 0. S. Ivaniko, N. M. Ivanvutina, M. P. lotov,
T. P. Potapenko. L. M. Ronsnovskaya and A. ‘l‘. Fedorov, Isdatel'stvo "Statistika".

29,000 copies, 232 pages]
[Excerpts] Ant cation

This book reviews the basic differences between the Yes DOS [Unified Systen Disk
Operating System] and the 08 Yes [Unified Systsa Operating Systen]. Race-ends-
tions are given on converting nos Yes progress and files for use in the 08 Yes.

The sanual is intended for users of the DOS Yes who are planning to switch from
operations using the U08 Yes to operations using the 08 Yes.

Foreword

The software of Yes [Unified Systen] computers includes two operating system, the
005 Yes (008) and the OS Yes (08). These systens acconplish the seas purposes:
raising the efficiency of use of Yes cosputer hardware and increasing the labor
productivity of progre-ers and service personnel. In any respects the scene

by which these objectives are acconplished are the sane: processing, multi-
progra-ing. progra-ing languages and corresponding translators. data control
scans, end the like.

The concrete realisation of these neana in different operating systess is deter-
nined by the orientation of the systen to configurations of coquting nschines
that differ by power . Thus. the nos is oriented neinly to mll Yes nodels and
takes account of the linited capabilities of the hardware of these nodels (sasll
internal nenory voluse. low processor speed, end the stall set and linited types
of peripheral units usually connected to these nodels). The 08 operating systen
offers users a significantly sore poverful hardware configuration.

Theoretically the OS and the DOS can function on any of the Yes nodels with the
exceptions of the Yes-1010 and the Yes-1021. The appropriate operatins ”its. is

MWWONLY
MOWUSEONLY

chosen applicable to the specific purpose of the us sachine at the cowuting
center. As things we historically, however, the 008 operating system was
nost widely applied in the first phase of develop-ant of Yes cmuters. This
was Because its develop-ant and delivery preceded that of the 08 by 2-3 years
and owing to the linited configuration of the first nodels of Yes conputers.
Broader use of the DOS was pronoted by its sinlicity, which insured conpara-
tively rapid incorporation of the system

In recent tines users have reoriented thenselvea to the 08 as a result of the
following factors:

- the new nodels appearing in the Unified Systen of coquters
are significantly aore powerful than the first nodels;

- the configurations of already-installed coquters are being
expanded by connecting in additional equip-cut;

- lost of the packages of applied program are oriented to
the OS;

— users are developing a need for the additional capabilities
offered by the 03.

Analysis of these factors per-its us to conclude that noat users of the nos to-
day will in the near future face the question of switching to use of the OS.
The incoqatibility of the DOS and 08 operating systeas lakes this transition a
fairly difficult job. Anong the basic factors that nake the transition froa
the DOS to the OS difficult are the following:

a. It is not possible to exchange program between the oper-
ating system in formats that are the result of tranalso
tion (object nodules) and editing (absolute nodules for
the Dos and loading nodules for the 05). This exchange is
iqossible priaerily because the interface between problen
progress and the control progra- is realised differently
in the systen. and so the processing of SVC statanents by
which my of the systen fmctiona are requested is con-
pletely different;

b. Without preliainary analysis and, in a large majority of
cases. without additional processing it is inpossible to
exchange prograns in source languages. The labor-inten-
siveness of such processing depends on the progra-ing
languages and the program in these languages. For
Asselbler language it is very significant. while for

high-level languages it is less significant. This dif-
ference in labor-intensity occurs because users of the
DOS and OS are given substantially different sets of
syste- nacroinstructions without which no program in As-
sedly language can get by;

h?
mmmouu
POI oman. USE ONLY

c. It is in' asible to exchange prepared assignnente between
operating system hecaune of differences in essignnent
control languages;

d. Data files prepared on napet nedia in the DOS cannot al-
ways be used directly by prograns in the 08. In sons
cases prelininary conversion of the files is required to
use then in this way.

M prinary stages can be identified in the transition fron the nos to the OS:
evaluating the wisdon of naking the transition for the particular counting
center, and organizing work to carry out the transition.

In the first stage it is necessary to evaluate: the capabilities offered by the
as and the need for then to solve user problems; the availability and prospects
for receiving the hardware necessary for efficient operation of the 08; and, ex-
ternal factors that stinulate use of the os. These factors are then towered
with the labor-intensiveness of switching to the as. The naterial presented in
the book will enable the reader to comre the capabilities of the DOS and OS
and to get sone idea of the labor-intensiveness of the transition iron the DOS
to the 08.

After asking the decision that the transition to the as is necessary. study of
this operating system should he organized. This book can provide introductory
naterial for studying the OS. The book reveals the functions of the as by con-
paring then with the functions of the nos. which nahes it easier for a reader
faniliar with the DOS to understand the basic principles of the 08.

The nain purpose of this hook is to give concrete reco-endations on converting
progress. assignnents, and data files accunulated in the process of wing the
nos for subsequent use in work with the OS.

The book does not consider questions related to renote processing. The naterial
presented in the book corresponds to publications 2.2 DOS Yes and 4.1 08 Yes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Lesyuk, V. 6., Markov, A. 8., Peledov, 6. V.. and Baykov, L. D. (under the
general editorship of A. ll. Larionov). "Slate-a Hatsnaticheshogo
Obespecheniya Yes EVE" [Software Systen of the Yes Conputers], Hoscow,
"Statistika". 1976.

2. Peledov. G. V.. and Baykov. I... D., "Vvedeniye v 08 Yes W [Introduction
to the Yes Counter Operating Systen], Roscow, "Statistiha". 1977.

3. Nsunov, V. V. Peledov, 0. V. Tinofeyev. In. A., and Chehlov, A. 6.,

"Supervisor 08 Yes mm" [The Supervisor of the Yes Coquter Operating Systen],
Moscow. "Statistika". 1975.

l-‘OIOIIICIALIBEONLY
5e

6.

7.

Hitrofanov. V. V., and Odintsov, n. V.. ”Prograuly Obeluehivaniya 08 Yes
EVH" [Service Program of the Yes Computer Operating Systen], Hoscov.
"Statistika". 1977.

Lebedev, V. N.. and Sokolov, A. P., "Vvadeniye v Sistemu Progrslnirovaniya
05 Yes" [Introduction to the Prograsning Systes of the Yes Operating System].
noscov, "Statistika". 1978.

Shuts-Burs, h. 11.. Kovslevich. B. V.. Hargolin, H. 8., et al.. "Operatsionnaya
Sistema DOS Yes. Obshchiye Polosheniya" [The Yes Disk Operating System. Gen-
eral Principles], Moscow, "Statistika", 1975.

Bitel'. Yu. Yu.. Voyuah, V. 1., Gorbunova, R. V.. et a1., "Operatsionnays
Sistens DOS Yes. Spravochnik" [The Yes Disk Operating Systen. Manual],
Moscow. "Statistika", 1977.

Vseyuchkova. ‘1‘. D.. Zagusova, 1.. K.. Itkins, O. I... et al., "Yaski
Progra-irovsniys DOS .Yes an. Kratkiy Sprawchnik" [Progre-ing Languages
of the Yes Coquter Dial: Operating System. Concise ﬂannel], Moscow,
"Statistika", 1975.

Table of Contents

Foreword................................... 3

Chapter 1. Basic Differences Between the DOS and OS Operating Systems . . . . 5
1.10 T.mn°1°”0.0.0QO‘OOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOO S
1.2. Coaposition of the Operating System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.3. Operating Regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

1.3.1. Batch Processing. The Assign-cut . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.3.2.Hultiprogrll-lns.oo.o...........'..... 7
1.3.3. Hultiple Problem Regine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.3.6. Putting Assign-ants in Order (Queuing) . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.3.5. Selection of Assignments free the Queue . . . ... . . . . 10
1.3.6. Dispatcher Priorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.3.7. Quantization of Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.3.8. Control of Internal Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.3.9. Outputting Data to System Output Unite . . . . . . . . . . 17
1.4. The Libraries of the 08 Yes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
1.5.1.1.1hrsrstt8MIBI...................19
1.4.2. Program Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.6.3. Systes and Personal Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.6.6. Library of Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.5. Control of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.5.1. Cannon Peaturee and Differences in the Data Control
Systems of the DOS and OS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.5.2. Use of Subroutines of the Logical Systen of Input-

outputs.osseesaeeeeesssseaesoeee23

IKMICHHHCIA1.USEINNLY
1.6.

Chapter 2.

e e
e

NNNNN
.

“8‘th
e

e

e

2.6.

2.7.

Chapter 3.

e .

9"qu
50.829.—
. e

e e

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UIUIUIUIUOUIU'UUUIMMUIU‘

Independence from Me of Unit . . . . . . .
Logical Input-Output Unite . . . . . . . . .
Distribution of Input-Output Units . . . . .
Types of Requests for Input-Output Units . .

a

e
e e
”NGM5U
e 0

Temporary and Permanent Data Eiles . . . .
Attributes of Volumes . . . . . . . . . .
Autonomous and Operational State of Units
Setting Up and Removing Volumes . . . . .
Algorithm for Satisfying Special Requests .
Algorithm for Satisfying Non-Special Requests
Optimization of the Arrangement of Data Files

e e e
e
e

a
‘
e
o
e
a
e
e
e

Hv—HHHv—HHHHHHHH

Ou§U~H°°
m

e

.Naning Data Files and Catalogue Structure . .
eationofaSyaten..... .........
General Intonation . . . . . . . . . . .
Stages of Generation . . . . . . . . . . .
Results of Generation . . . . . . . . . .

Mandatory Data Files for Systen Resident Volume

(nu-bunk”! wo—u—n—u—u—u—o

Hv-‘Hr-‘I-IH
.
o~o~o~o~o~ao

e
e

e

Mandatory Data Files for System . . . . .
Non-Handstory Data Files . . . . . . . . .

e
e
e

ProgramStructure..................

Generallnformstion ..............
Loadingﬂodules ................
The Program and Loading Hodules . . . . . . . .
Means of Calling for and Transferring Control .
Recommendations on Conversion of Loading Hacroina
TransferofControl . . . . . . . . .
2.5.1. Programs with Simple Structure . . .
2.5.2. Programs with Overlapping Structure
2.5.3. Programs with Dynamic Structure .
Agreements on Linkages . .
2.6.1. Use of Registers .
2.6.2. Storage Area . .
2. 6. 3. Linkage Area . .
Editor of Linkages . . . . .
2.7.1. Special Features of Editing in the OS
2.7.2. Control Statements of the Linkage Editor.
2.7.3. Example of Constructing Assignments for the
Linkage Editor in the DOS and OS . . . . . . .

e
e
e
e
e

eeee
seen

0 e e e e
e e e e e
e e e e
e e e e

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
1
s
e
e
e
e
e

e e
e e
e e
. C
e e
e e
s e
e s
e e

s

eveeeeoeeeeﬂeeee

e-eeeeeeeee

ControlofAssignments................

Generallnformation .................
StructureoftheAssignment .............

Statements of the 08 Language for Assignment Control .
TheAssignmentStstenent (JOB) . . . . . . . . . . . .

So
roaomcuiusrolm

eeeeeemmme

e
e
e
a
e
e

eeee

eeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeseesee

Distribution of Memory in Units uith Random Access
.CataloguingDataFiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

eeeeeoe

E

O'Cototeeeengeees

eeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee;

eeee

eeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

eeee eoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

eeeeeeeeeee

23
26
26
25
25
26
27
28
28
30
30
31
32
32
33
33
33

36
35
35

37

37
37
39
41

106
64
Mo
46
48
I48
49
50
51
51
52

53
55

55
55
S6
57
3.8.
3.9.

3.10.

Chapter 6.

é &
e

.1.
2

5&5
e e
M?”

6.6.

Chapter 5.
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.

5.6.

e
0

MM“
0

NOW
0

Assignment Point Statement (EXEC) . .
Data File Description Statement (DD)

Procedures
3.7.1.
3.7.2.
3.7.3.
3.7.6.
3.7.5.

ass

General Information . . . . .
Symbolic Paraseters . . . . .
Modification of Parameters of EXEC Statement
Modification of Parameters of DD Statement

Standard Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement Instructions

essence...

0 O O O 0

sense

0090.

s
a
Q
a

a
Q
a
0

asses

ease.

0 O O O O

esessse

seasoseseeeeseeee

Comparison of Statements and Directives (Instructions of

Assignment Control in DOS end 08) . . . . . . . . . . . .

Examples of Converting DOS Assignments to OS Assignments

Transfer of DOS Piles to OS . . . . . . .

mn.r‘1 Infomtion s e e e e s e a
Transfer of Volumes from DOS to 08
Identification of Volumes
Heading of a Volume .

‘02010
6.2.2.
Identification of
Punchcard Piles .

Magnetic Tape Piles . . . . .

General Inforsation . .
Files Without Labels .
Files with Standard Labels
User Files with Standard Labels
Files with Non-Standard Labels

in Memory Units with Random Access
User Labels in Mesory Units with Randon Access

6.5.1.

0
UN
es

0
VI“
.

e ﬁe
OOOOE‘UIU'U'UI

Sequentia

e
e
e

§““5~&‘5&§
e
e

§UNH

ea

Macroinstructiona for Communication with Supervisor

General Information . . . . . . . .

Multiple Branchin
5.2.1. The Macro
5.2.2. The Macro
Resource Security
5.3.1. The Macro
5.3.2. The Macro

Communication Between Jobs

5.6.1.
5.6.2.
Loading Phases

seesso

Data Piles .

ssessee

e

e

e
a e
o e
s e
s a
e e
a e
s

l Piles

instruction ATTACH .
instruction DETACH .
instruction ENQ . .
instruction DBQ . .

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
s
e
a
e
0

losses

e
e
e
s
o
a
a
s
s
e
e
s
e

The Macroinstructions HAIT and HAITM
The Macroinstruction POST . . . . . .

ease-es

ooeeeaeeeesoe

esoseeseeeeeese

Cancelling Temporary Designations . . . . . .
Work with the Timer . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.7.1.
5.7.2.

51
mmmmv

The Macroinstruction GBTIMB . . . . .
The Macroinstruction SETIMB, TECB, EAT

eoeeeeeeesee

e
e
e
s
s
e
e
e
s
e
a
s
s
a

esesoeeeeeeso

.aeeesesseseese

sssseeeeeeeeo

sseeeeseee

seeeeeeeeeeeeee

eoeooooeeeeee

e

sesame-00000000

eeesesseessae

eeeseasseeeosse

Direct-Access Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Index-Sequential Piles

sees-eeoeaoeee.

eeeseoessseoeesee

eeeseeeaseeeses

eooaoe

seeeseesseeeeeees

eeeeeeseeoeeeee

eoseoeeaeeeseeese

eeesaeeaeeeae

ooeeeesseeeeeeseo

eeseeseseeeee

59

65
65
66
67
68
71
71

73
77

88
88
88
89
90
90
91
91
91
91
92
92
93
93
93
93
96

101

101
101
102
105
105
106
107
107
108
108
109
111
111
111
112
5.8.

5.9.

5.10.
5.11.
5.12.

Chapter 6.

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.6.

6.17.

[’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Processing Interrupts of the Proﬁle. Program
5.8.1. Interrupts by the Tiner . . . . . .
5.8.2. Interrupts for Progren Errors . . .
5.8.3. Interrupts for Abnorael Conletion .
5.8.6. Interrupts bounded by Operators . .
Cowletionof theProgran . . . . . . . . .
5.9.1. The Hacroinstruction 30.1 . . . . .

5.9.2. The Hscroinstructions CANCEL and DIMP
Unloading Internal lie-cry . . . . . . . . .
Establishing a Checkpoint . . . . . . . . .
The Hacroinstructions CALL. SAVE, and RETURN
5.12.1. The Hacroinstruction CALL . . . . .
5.12.2. The Nacroinstruction SAVE . . . . .
5.12.3. The Hacroinstruction RETURN . . . .

oeeoso

Input-Output Hacroinstructions . . . . . . . .

General Information .
Access Methods . . .
Description of Data .
Control of Buffers . .
6.6.1. Definition of Buffer .
6.6.2. Construction of Buffers in the

e e

a o s s
e e o s o
o e s o e

s o a o
a s e o o
s s s s e

o.....
V)

6.6.3. Methods of Controlling Buffers in the 0
Independence fro- Units . . . . . . . . . . .
Forms of Macroinstruction . . . . . . . . . .
Processing Input-Output Errors . . . . . . . .
OpeningaDstsPile ..........
ClosingaDatsPile .............
PunchcardPiles ...............
Printedl'iles ................
Magnetic‘l‘apel’ilea . . . . . . . . . . . .
Typevriterl’iles...............
Unit-Independent Files in the nos . . . .

Sequential Files in Menory Units with Rando- Access

eeeeaeessesseo

S

sessseeoosssss

e
s
o
s
e
s
o
s
s
s
e
s
o
s
s
e
s

oooeeesosssose

oooaooaoaoosoeoss

DirectAccessPiles . .
6.16.1 Indication of Location of Entry . . . . . .
6.16.2. HethodsofAccess to Entries . . . . . . . . .

6.16.3. Definition and Creation of Direct-Access Files

6.16.6. Methods of Creating Direct-Access Piles
6.16.5. Error Indication . . . . . . . . . . .
6.16.6. Direct-Access Hacroinstructiona . . .
Index-Sequential Piles . . . . . . . . . . .
6.17.1. Index-Sequentisl Organization . . . .
6.17.2. Definition of Index-Sequential Piles .
6173. BrrorIndication. . . . . . . . . . .
6.

17.6. Hecroinstructions for Processing Index-Sequential

e
o
e
s
o

o

eeoooaeeossoss

e
e
s
o
e
o
e
e
e
o
s
e
o
e
e
e
o
e
s
s

soeeooeaosesso

e
o
s
s
e
s
e
a
o
s
s
s
o
e
a
e
o
e
s
s
e
s
e
e
a
o
s
e

seesesssoseoeo

eosssease-oeeeasseesoseeoeeos

File“oaosaeoaeeeeeaeeeaeeee

52
F0! OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

oooseeeososese

eaoosssseoseaeoeooeeooossaaao

eeososeeososos

esooassoooo-soaooesseooosesso
6.18.

7.3.

7.6.

Chapter 8.

8.1.
8.2.

8.3.

Chapter 9.

9.1.
9.2.

Input-Output Progra-ing on the Physical Level . . . . . . . .
6.18.1. General Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.18.2. Correspondence Between Elenents of Input-Output Pro-
greening on the Physical Level in the DOS and OS

measees-see\eeeeeeeeeseeegse

General Infornation . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2.1. Definition of Selection Fields. .

7.2.2. Definition of the Pield on the Conputations

assesses

Differences in the EPG Language for the DOS and OS . . . .

sees see

Blank

7.2.3. Use of Register 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Organization of Input-Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3.1. Synbolic lane of the Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . .

e
s
e
e
s

Tape Pile

sesssesss

sseeee

7.3.2. Processing Non-Standard Label of Magnetic
7.3.3. Piles Without Labels . . . . . .

7.3.6. Setting the Tape . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3.5. Addressing Tracks on a Dish . . . . . . .
7.3.6. Opening Data Piles . . . . . . . . . . .
Preparation of Assignments . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.6.1. Use of Catalogued Procedures . . . . . .
7.6.2. Translation Regimes . . . . . . . . .

7.6.3. Definitions of Data Piles Used During Execution

mmsessseeseesseseseessseee

General Information . . . . . . . . . . .
Organization of Input-Output . . . . . . .
8.2.1. Access to Piles . . . . . . . . .

8.2.2. Dieensions of Entries in Sequential Piles

0
sense
sees.

a

8.2.3. Poreatting a Segnent for e Direct-Access Pile

Preparation of Assignnent . . . . . . . .
8.3.1. Use of Catalogued Procedures . .
8.3.2. Translation Regimes . . . . . . .
8.3.3. Programs with Overlay Structure .

mwlesseesseeeesaessess

General Inforeation . . . . . . . . .
Differenences in the Language . . . .
9.2.1. Special Register . . . . . .

seeess

sessee

s e e e
e
e
s e s e
e e s s

cos-eases

eeeesse

seesseoee

eeeeseees eesesss

sssesosss

9.2.2. The Paragraph SPECIALmﬂAHES .
9.2.3. The "Integer" Variation in the Phrase ASSIGN .
9.2.6. The Systen “see in the Phrases ASSIGN and PERUN .
9.2.5. m Phrue Am m I I O O 0 O Q 0 O O O O I 0
902e6s ThGPhrmm-Am..............
9.2.7. The Phrase MULTIPLE PILB TAPES . . . . . . . . .
9.2.8. Th. Phru. ML! 0 O 0 O O O O O O O O O O O O O 0
9.2.9. Declarative Procedures for Processing Input-Output
Error. 0 0 O O O O 0 O 0 O C e e e O s O O I O 0 0
9.2.10. The Statenents ACCEPT and DISPLAY . . . . . . . . .
902011. sortm O O O O O O 0 O I O O O O O 0 I C O 0 O O 0
9.2.12. Reserved Horde . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S3
roe omcm. use ONLY

eessseseesesese.

eeeseeees

eseeesses

sees

172
172

176
181

181
181
181
181
182
182
182
182
183
183
183
186
186
186
185
185

186

186
186
186
187
187
188
188
189
189

190

190
191
191
192
192
193
196
196
195

195

196
197
197
198
9.3.

O
H

muss
o

NHE
a

a
e
a

a
e

e a
““9393
e a

o

0
09‘5"”
a

9.4. r

i

..§i

OOOOQPOO‘O \OO

O
bUNH
o

Chapter 10. PL/l .
10.1.
10.2.
10.2.1.
10.2.2.
10.2.3.
10.2.4.
10.2.5.
10.2.6.
10.2.7.
10.2.8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

zation of File Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Fictitious Entries in Files with Direct Organization.

Fictitious Entries in Files with linden-Sequential

Organization ...................
The Statement EEIRITE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Processing Sequential Hultivolums Fi1es . .
Pmcuﬂm Rom-Stink“! “b.1' s a a e a e

Feeding Punchcard Files in the Input Stream
ration of Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Use of Catalogued Procedures . . . . . . .
Translation Engines . . . . . . . . . . . .

Definition of Data Files Used During Execution

e

e
e
e
s
0

Editing a Segmented Program . . . . . . . . . .

aaeseoeeseeeaeooeeeseoss

General Infornation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Differences in PL/l Language for the DOS and 08

Operations with Data . . . . . . .
Built-In Function . . . . . . . .
The Attribute DEFINED . . . . . .
The Statement DO . . . . . . . .
The Exceptional Situation SIZE .
The Onsyslog . . . . . . . . . . . .
Differences in Quantitative Constraints

Debugging Statements . . . . . . . . .

s a e e
a o e e a
e e e e e e

10 O 3 O Input-output O O O O O C O C O 0 C C I O O O 0

10.3.1.
10.3.2.
10. 303.
10.3.4.
10.3.5.
10.3.6.
10.3.7.
10.3.8.
10.3.9.

10.3.10. Format Elements in Stream-Oriented Input-Output

File Declarations . . . . . . . . . . .

The Statement "RITE Using the EEYFIOH Regime

TheStatementEMITE.........
The Statement LOCATE . . . . . . . . .
The Index-Sequential File . . . . . . .
Fictitious Entries for the REGIONAL File
Hexinue Size of All REGIONAL Files . .

a
a
s
e
e
e
e
o
o
e

eeoeesesee

e
a
e
e
e

see-eases.

cos.

a
e
e
s
o
e
a
s
e
e
o
e
a
e
e

e
e
o
a
e
e
e

s
e
a
e
a
s
a
a
a
Q
s
e
e
s
e
s
e
e
a

s
s
a
s
e
o
e
s
e

eeaeaeeoeseeseeaeo

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
s
a
e

oe-osesaeoeoeoeeeee

The Exceptional Situation KEY for REGIONAL (3) Files.
Files with Variable-Length Entries . . . . . .

lO.3.11.Input-Output in a Stream Controlled by a List .

10.3.12.Access to Data Files Used in a Program as Input

10.4. Preparation of Assignnents

10.4.1.
10.4.2.
10.4.3.
10.4.4.

Chapter 11. Utilities (Service Programs)

11.1.
11.2.

and Output Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Use of Catalogued Procedures . . . . . . . . .
Translation Regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Definition of Data Fi1es Used During Execution

writing Programs with Overlay Structure . . . .

eoeoeveoesees

General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Classification of 08 Utilities . . . . . . . .

5h
roe 0mm use on“

e

e

asses.

198
198

199
199
200
200
201
201
201
201
203
204

205
205
206
206
207
208
208
208
209
209
210
210
210
211
211
211
212
212
213
213
213
213
214

214
215
215
215
216
217

219

219
220
11.3. Selection of 08 Utilitiee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11.6. Examples of the Bee of Utilities in the OS . . . . . .

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COPYRIGHT: ladetel'etVO "Statistika", 1980

11,176
C80: 1863/101

55
roe omcm. use on“
Ova. assays-o... —--. ~.--a

OPI'ICAI. PROCESSING

APPLICATION OF OPTICAL INFORMATION PROCESSIIB “213008 AND “(WWW

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE WV OPTICHESKOY OBWI INFOMSII I GOINMPII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 1-2, 43641.1

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Application of Optical Intonation
Processing Methods and Holography“, a collection of the papers read at the Third
All-Union School on Optical Information Processing Hethods held in Riga in May
1980, edited by Professor 5. B. Gurevich and V. K. Sokolov. candidate of physico-
mathematical science, USSR Academy of Sciences, Order of Lenin Physico‘l'echnical
Institute imeni A. F. Lotte. LIYaP [Leningrad Institute of Nuclear Physics imeni
B. P. Konstantinov], 500 copies, “2 pages]

[Text] Annotation

‘lhis is a collection of the papers read at the Third All-Union School on Optical
Information Processing Methods held in Riga in May 1980.

The collection is divided by subject into three parts: optical methods of image
processing (including problems of practical use), spatial-tine light eodulators and
recording media and optical methods of signal processing. Both survey papaers and
results of original research are presented on these problems.

To a certain extent. this collection reflects the state-of-the-art in optical pro-
cessing of information and its element base at present. It will be of use to a
broad group of specialists working in the field of optical processing of images
and signals and its applications in various fields of science and technology.

Table of Contents Page
Part 1. Optical Hethods of Image Processing
E. I. Krupitskiy. Principles of the General Theory of Analog Coherent-Optical

Processors (Part 2. Nonlinear Systems) 3
R. I. El'man. Digital Hethods of Processing Aerospace Information and Their

Cpmpsrison with Optical Hethods 22
N. P. Berezin. Image Processing and the Quality Criterion Problem 32
G. A. Gevrilov and A. P. Halyy. hybrid Opticoelectronic Information

Processing Systems 38
A. Akayev. Prospects for Application of Holographic Hmories in the

Canputer Storage Hierarchy 51
0. I. Potaturkin. Diftraction Correlators ot Intensity 62

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L. O. Kraanova, A. I. Larkin and Yu. A. Mironov.

Study of the Characteristice of the Lotuann Correlator 70
Ye. s. Mezhevanko, O. I. Potaturkin and V. I. Khotehin. Recognition of

Inagae in Diffraction Oorrelatora of Inteneity 7’0
R. M. Bychkov, Ye.S. Mezhevenko and 0. I. Potaturkin. Application of

Optical Methoda for Inage Recognition in Inatruaentation 80
A. N. lorolvv. Syntheaia of Frequency Reeponee in Noncoherent Optical

Information Proceaaing Syatene 85

A. M. Karolvv and S. L. Morozova. Physically I-pluentable Pupilary Functione

in Taeka of Syntheaia of Frequency Reeponee of a Moncoherent Optical Syaten 89
A. M. Blagorodov, R. A. Vaneteian. D. V. Danilov, Yu. V. Sharov,

M. V. Shaklnatov and V. V. Shtykhno. Equivalent Spatial Filtration in

Noncoherent Optical Syatena 92
A. L. Aualender, c. N. Viahnyekov and G. G. Levin. Solution to Certtin

Inverae Problene of Mathaeatical Phyaice in Opticoelectronic Proceeeore 97
A. Akayev and A. Sytaykov. Solving Problena of Mathenatical theice by the

Optical Spatial Filtration Method 105
V. M. Karnaukhov, A. N. Korolev and Yu. V. Stolyarov. Digital and Coherent

Optical Proceeaing of Photo Inagea Ueing Caaputer Syntheeized Filtere 109
S. V. Rudakov and F. M. Subbotin. Optical Subtraction of Inagea 113
G. R. Lokehin, S. M. Karel and V. Ye. Delonuchkin. linear Filtration and

Quadratic Detection in Coherent Optical Information Proceaainge Syatela 118
I. V. Shchukin. Image Structure Malyaie by Coherent Optical Methode 121
A. S. Kuniekiy. Image Analyeie in lblecular Biological Reeearch 126
A. I. Dalabanov, 8. S. Bogdanov, V. A. Skorik and A. A. Feoktiatov.

Spatial-Frequency Spectra of Inagee of Diaturbed Hater Surface 137
S. V. Mikhlyayev and Yu. V. Chuguy. Spectral Method of Tolerance Greeting

of Object Dimeneione 141

V. V. Arietov, G. A. Baehkina, A. I. Yerko and L. V. Dorozhkina. Application
of Optical Filtration for Proceeeing of X-Ray Diffraction Inagee of

Cryetala 146
V. V. Vertoprekhov and Yu. V. Chuguy. Optical Method of Meaauring
Dineneione of Moving majecte on Beale of Scattered Havea 150

Yu. A. Dykovakiy, A. I. Larhin, A. A. Markilov and S. N. Starikov.
Development of llologran Filtere for Pattern Recognition by Uaing

Stochaetic Approxination 155
N. M. Verenikina and 0. V. Rozhkov. Operative Calplex Fourier Filter 159
G. R. hokahin. Optical Spatial Filter with a Given Proceeeing Algoritln 165

V. A. Arutyunov, M. A. Yeeepkina. B. A. Kotov, Yu. A. Kotov, A. P. Levrov and

I. I. Sayenko. Output Unitu for Optical Information Proceaeing Syatena

Based on Charge-Coupled Devlcea 169
Ye. I. Shubnikov. Study of Coherent Optical Proceaeor Noiae 175
V. A. Yelkhov, A. I. Zolotarev, S. F. Kalaehnikov, V. M. Morozov, Yu. M. Popov

and G. I. Selenov. Effect of Coherency of hieaion of Injector Leeera on

Quality of Correlation Proceeeing of Optical Signals 180
Va. V. Ivakin and A. I. Kitaak. Filtering Propertiee of Hologram of

In-Focue Integea Recorded in Light with Partial Spatial Coherence 186
Yu. X. Gruzevich and L. F. Lararev. theiconathaaatical deel of Syatan for

Generation of Infrared Inage in Real Tina 190
Ye. 1'. Akaenov. M. A. Yeeepkina, A. A. Lipovakiy, A. V. Pavlenko and 0. Yu.

Sotnikova. Study of Aberrationa of Integral Geodeaic Lenaee 196

D. I. Spektor. Reflective ﬁle-ante in Optical Information Proceeaing Syateaa 201

F0! OFFIélll. USE ONLY
neon. vee.~.s-- .—-. ~.~-a

A. V. Gnatovskiy, N. V. Nedved' and N. '1‘. Shpak. Using Dinary Phase Flasks
to Correct Spatial-Angular Characteristics of Coherent Deans

V. F. Relin and V. II. Sokolov. Transmission Characteristic of X-Ray
Projection Microscope and Its Dependence on Nature of Distribution of
Intensity of hission at Focus of X-Ray Source

6. A. Gavrilov and A. F. Nslyy. Measuring Geouetric Distortion in
Television by Optical Feedback lethod

Part 2. Spatial-Tine Light Modulators and Recording Media

N. P. Petrov. Information Processing Dy Using Light Modulators Based on
Electrooptic Crystals

A. V. IOIonenko, V. I. Harakhonov and N. G. Shlyagin. Fourier Inalysis of
Images Using PRIZ Modulator

A. V. Rhonenko, H. G. Shlyagin and V. I. Herakhonov. Using Dynasic Effects
in PRIZ Modulator for Image Processing

I. N. Koupsnets, A. V. Parfenov and Yu. N. Popov. Spatial-Tile Hodulstors
with Photoelectric Feedback

H. A. Gofnan end Ye. S. Nezhevenko. Controllable Transparencies under
Conditions of Nonlinear Conversion of Images

6. B. Kolpakov, 0. P. Spiridonov, V. P. ‘l‘rukhin, A. L. Human, V. A. Tsvetkov
and G. D. Yakovlev. PROH Transparency for Digital Information Processing
Systems

A. V. Knyaz'kov, N. H. Butusov, A. V. Ivanov. A. E. Rrunin' and A. R.
Shternberg. Application of Incident Electrooptic Effect in Ts‘I‘SLoCerunics
for Developoent of Controllable ksnsparencies

K. K. Shvarts. Photo Refraction and the Problem of Developing Controllable
Spatial Light Modulators

Yu. A. Cherkasov and V. S. Obraztsov. Molecular Recording
Photo Thermoplastic Hedia

A. 0. Ozols. Physics of Holographic Lattices

A. R. Shternberg and A. E. Kruntin'. Iransparent Perroelectric Ceramics and
Prospects for Their Application in Optical Information Processing Devices

P. A. Augustov. Photo Physical Processes of Optical Recording in Niobate
and Lithium Tantalate

Yu. A. Ekaanis and Ya. A. Teteris. Kinetics of Optical Recording in
Chalcogenide Glasses

V. H. Kozlov. Structure and Optical Properties of Morphous Arsenic
Chalcogenide Films

V. S. Hskerevich, A. I. Luk'yanove. V. N. Rubinov, Rh. A. Sultanov, V. R.
Felitsiant and V. G. Tsukerman. Recording of Information and Generation of
Elements of Integral Optics on Vitreous As-S System Files by Scanning

_ Electron Been

A. R. Lusls, A. A. Drishka, '1‘. V. Zenordik, Ya. Ya. Kleperis, Ya. R. Klyavin',
Ya. Ya. Pinis, 0. A. Rods and A. V. Khoftaarka. Electrochrone Devices for
Recording and Display of Video Information

0. A. Rode, N. A. Brishka, A. R. Lusis. Ya. K. Klyavin', V. A. Nikolaytis,
A. V. Khofoarka and 1‘. V. Zanozdik. Photo Electrochroue Devices for
Optical Conversion of Information

A. V. Knyaz'kov. A. 8. saykin, E. N. Ryzhikov, L. F. Bazarova and V. N.
Fedulov. Study of Depolarization of Coherent Light in Electrooptic
TsTSL [lead zirconata-titanate, modified by lanthanunl-Cerauics

58
was man. use ONLY

209

213
218
223
223
238
263
2&8
252

257

261
265

2 75
289

303
308
312
316

320

324

328

332
Part 3. Optical Methods of Signal Processing

N. A. Dukharin, I. A. Vodovatov, H. G. Vyeotskiy, N. A. Yesepkina. V. Yu.
Petrun'kin and S. A. logov. Optical Processing of Information fro-
Antenna Syetuse

Yu. S. Zinov'yev and A. Ya. Pasaurov. Inalysie of Conditions of Generation
and Optical Processing of Intonation at Radar Installations with
Synthetic Aperture

S. V. Horozov. (in-Line Optical Processing of Information in Radio-
Holographic Systems

Ye. K. Shnarev. Optical Calculation of Signal Inbiguity Function

8. V. Levy and Ye. K. Sharev. Optical Calculation of Signal Inbiguity
Function with Variable Scale on Axis of Delays

v.
T.

A.

K.

A.

Ushakov. high-Frequency Acouetooptic Orthong filters
Sergeyenko and V. I. Yakovlev. Inproving the Signal-to-lloise Ratio in

Acoustooptic Spec troanelyaers

v.

Yuichkin. Deter-ining Time Position of Couple: Signals with Long

Nation by Acoustooptic Convolvers

Ye. Myanteev and V. S. Fireov. Estimating Bandwidth of Optical
Intonation Processing Systens

V. Gushthin, B. H. Zuykovaand S. N. Rubtsov. Optical Processing of Signals
with Enhanced Resolution in Noncoherent Light. Optical System with Pixad
References, Using Noncoherent Light, for Processing of Signals in Real Tine
V. Gushchin,.nd A. .I. Khil’ko. Optical Methods‘Tor Processing Signale

from Seisnic Sources

P.

Ivanchenko and P. V. Hineyev. Principles of Design of Opticodigital

Complex for Processing of Seismic Intonation
N. Calanov. V. P. Ivenchenko and G. I. Poekonnyy. Development and Research

of
in
B.
A.
by
So

Device for Dynamic Input of Seis-ic Information into Optical Couputer
an Optical Digital Computer Conplex (OTeK)

Nentinov. Optical Holographic Converting Structures

Gil'man and C. G. Levin. Issage Restoration in an Optical Processor
the Van Cittert-Janeson Method

Glushkov, V. B. Konetantinov and D. P. Chernykh.

Liquid Pill: Spatial Light Modulators
Table of Contents

COPYRIGHT: um, 1980

8565
C30:

Blah/0217

59
ron omcun. use ONLY

337

361

3106
351

358
361

366
371
375

380
387
390

395
1.01
(016

623
636
I“ UI‘IILIAL var. UNLI

UDC 515.5:535.39

SPATIAL-FREQUENCY SPECTRA OP IMAGES OF DISTURBED HATER SURFACE

Leningrad PRDIENENIYB PETODOV OPTICKESKOY OBWI INPOMSII I WWWII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 137-160

[Article by A. I. Belabanov, S. S. Bogdanov, V. A. Shorik and A. A. Peoktistov]
[Text] Annotation

Experimental research performed permits picking out spectral features of presence

of syste-s of waves distinguished by their parameters (general directions, length

of waves and others) and gives an idea of the statistical stability of the charac-
teristics of waves obtained in coherent optical processing of aerial photographic

and radar inages.

Coherent optical processing of photographic images of a disturbed water surface is
one of the more promising methods of statistical analysis of wave characteristics

[1].

To process photographic iaages of a disturbed water surface, ve used an optical
electronic system for generating spatial-frequency spectra (PChS) (fig. 1).

 

Fig. 1.

The device includes the Be-Ne laser (1). the beam broadening system (2), the
Fourier transforming lens (4) and the photo detector (7). The laser beam. passing
through the beam broadening system, illuminates the image 31(xry1), placed in the

front focal plane (3) of the Fourier transforming lens, the light amplitude.

82(u, v) in the rear focal plane at an arbitrary point with coordinates :2, y2 is
related to the light amplitude E1(x1, yl) in the front focal plane by the
equation of the two-dimensional Fourier transform:

60
FIHI¢HWHC1A1.USE(MNLY
-£(aagosg~)
53m.” "/f£,m,y¢/c slyly,“- . u)

The values of the components of the spetiel frequency u, v ere determined from the

reletions: .
. _ It .
“"ﬁl"?" ". A If?!

where )\is the leser emission wevelength end P is the focel distence of the lens.

The spetiel-frequency spectre is recorded by leesuring the energy of the emission
thet hes pessed through the spectrel window formed in the spetiel-frequency plene
(5) of the spectroenelyzer by using the slit end wedge-sheped eperture (5' eperture
engle) in the opeque screen. "hen the slit is shifted, the window is shifted in e
redial direction elong the wedge-sheped eperture. The emission thet hes pessed
through the spectrel window is projected by the collecting lens (6) to the photo-
cethode of the PRU [photomultiplier]. Photo trensperencies with freg-ents
to be snelyzed ere pleced in e roteting ring with the center of rotetion on the -
opticel exis. The energy thet hes peseed through the emission window is neesured by
using the FEU end e recording eillienpere meter. Results of neesurenents ere re-
corded on tepe, end recording tepe novenent is synchronized with the rotetion of
the photo trensperency.

Both verticel eeriel photogrephic ineges end reder ineges of e disturbed weter sur-
fece, obteined by using side-looking reder [SLAR], were processed. Is is known [1]
thet the spetiel-frequency spectre of verticel eeriel photo ineges

EOPt(u, v? end of reder ineges 158““, v? ere releted (in the corresponding
scele) with the equere of the eodulus of the trensfornetion of the Fourier-function
of the relief of the disturbed weter surfece by the following reletionehips:

11) 7/5"'ﬂw1‘~m“r9!51(“nl'. ' ' - (a)
(2‘) .If‘fﬁumﬁu‘lﬁmm', . ‘ — '. ‘9’
Key:l. _E°Pt 2' as"?

The eppeerence of the squeres of the conponents of the spetiel frequencies in the
right portion of the expressions (3) end (A) is due to the fect thet the enplitude
trensnission of the eeriel photo end reder ineges is proportional not to the velue
of the weter surfece relief itself, but to the steepness, i.e. to the derivetive of
the weve relief eccording to the coordinetes. And in the cese of reder ineges,
there is en isoleted direction corresponding to the direction of illuminetion. In
view of the nerrow bend of the spectrum of the disturbed weter eurfece relief func-

tion ls‘(u, v)| 2, the spectral cherecteristics of the individuel weve systems cen

be defi;;d by neesurenents of the cherecteristics of the epeteil-frequency spectre
see 1 .

61
FtIICNNHCJAl.USEGDNlN
[U0 \ll'l'lslna. was. Ul'hl

Eleven aerial photo ineges of Lake baykal obtained during one flight were subjected
to coherent optical processing. The quality of the. was not too high, because the
waves were poorly developed and the presence of haze caused a sharp decline in re.
solution. Also, the degree of clesrness of the image of the wave system varied
sharply in going from one aerial photo to another and in going from one frsgnent to
another within one aerial photo. Despite this. the position of the nexianass in the
image of the spatial-frequency spectra defines the general directions of propaga-
tion of the two wave systems and the wave lengths corresponding to then, A1 . 6 a
and A 2 s 10 In.

 

m. 2.

Fig. 2 shows the plots describing the radial distribution of the spatislofrequency
spectra for the high-frequency wave system (VSV) and the low-frequency wave system
(NSV) along the general directions of propagation. Plotted on the X axis are the
distances from the center of the spatisl-frequency plans to the center of eech of
14 positions of the quantizing window. Plotted on the Y axis are radial sections
of the spatial-frequency spectra, averaged according to individual realizations,
and nomalized at points corresponding to the wave maximn III.

Precision of lessureoents for the high and low frequency wave systems varies from
87. and 10-127. (in the areas of Isainn-s of radial distributions) to 22 end 281. in

the remaining portion of the spatial-frequency spectra.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 3.

Given in fig. 3 is a general view of the angular relationship of the integral angu-
lar spectral. B and II denote the values pertaining to the high [3] and low [ﬂ]
frequency wave systems. In a change in general direction of one of the wave sys-
tems relative to the other, the value of the angle between the high and low fre-
quency maximus Y“ changes. This provides the capability, after constructing a

system of photo detectors for a certain spatial-frequency spectrua, of subsequently
automatically recording the relative variation of the general directions of the
wave systems and their other characteristics. In the process, obvious limitations
on the precision of the method are imposed by the widths of the anxious and the
signal-to-noise ratio. In our case, the average, by realizations, widths of the
high and low frequency maximums (at a 1/2 level) are 21' and 31', respectively, and
the standard deviations are 87. and 287.. By realizations, the average signal-to-
noise ratio, fell“, for the high and low frequency maximau was 2.0 and 1.7.

In processing radar images, this technique permits picking out similar features
describing the state of a distrubed sea surface.

BIBLINRAPRY

l. A. A. Zagorodnikov, "Radiolokatsionnaya s"emks morskogo volneniya s
letatel'nykh apparatov" [Radar Surveying of Sea Haves from Flying Vehicles],
Leningrad, Gidrometeoirdat. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1980

8565
C80: 8144/02]. 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vs's'auana. Una. one.)

UDC 535.517.2:53l.715.27

OPTICAL FCTHOD 0F HEASURIM DIMENSIONS OF HOVIK; OBJECTS 0N BASIS OF SCATTBRED
HAVES

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE HETODOV OPTICHESKOY OBMI INFORMATSII I GOLOGWII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 150-154

[Article by v. v. Vertoprskhov and Yu. v. Chuguy]
[Text] Annotation

A projection method is described for measuring the dimensions of moving objects
based on scattering by objects of interference bends generated by two sloping beams
of light. Object dimension is measured by calculation of number of interference

bands within its shadow image. Results are given for research of an experimental
system.

Actions of the majority of measuring systems are based on the principle of an
optical measuring "rule," the role of which can be performed. for exnple, by a
rule of photo diodes [1] and the band system in the Michelson interferometer [2].
Experience in developing such systems has shown that requirements imposed on them
are internally contradictory.

in this work. we discuss a projection method for measuring object dimensions. In
this method, high precision of measurement is achieved by applying an interference
"rule" in the form of interference bands, and high productivity by using the light
scattering effect of moving objects [3]. Measuring object dimension comes down to
calculating the number of bands within its shadow image.

This organization of the measuring process provides systu invariance to the rate
of object movement, which to a certain extent permits overcoming the contradiction
between accuracy and speed of the system. The value of the "rule" divisions is de-
fined by the period of the interference bands, which can be brought down to

several microns. System speed depends on the band counting rate, which can be

tens and even hundreds of megaherz.

Let us discuss the dimension measuring method by the diagram shown in fig. 1. For
the slopi.g coherent beams of light A and B, in the region of their intersection,
there is formed an interference field, the band spacing period in which is

A‘A/IW“. where A is the light wavelength and e(. is the half angle between
beams A and 8.

6h
roe omcm. use ONLY
Fig. 1.

During movement of object I in this field, information on its dimension D and
velocity V are recorded in two channels: the object (elements 205) and the
measuring (elements 2, 6+8). Formed in the first channel by lenses 2 and 3 in
plane P is the shadow image of object I, which is analyzed by photo detector a
with a point diaphragm. The signal output from the photo detector is converted by
the amplifier-shaper 5 into an electrical strobe pulse, the duration T of which is
determined by the object dimension and its velocity: T . DIV. As a result of the
scattering of the interference bands by the moving object, a light flux is formed

in the measuring channel that is time modulated. By using the beam splitter 6, this
flux is followed by the photo detector 7 in the rear focal plane P of lens 2. The
modulation period‘t of the measuring signal obtained equals the time of intersection
by the boundary of the object of one interference bendrt udllV. The measuring
pulses generated in unit 8 and the strobe pulse feed into the coincidence circuit 9
which forms an output burst, the number of pulses in which is N - T/t'. By calcu-
lating the number N and multiplying it by the weight factorl\ , the dimension
sought D - N11 is found in the computation unit 10.

It is evident that the error in measuring the dimensions depends both on the pre-
cision in shaping the strobe pulse in the object channel and on the period of the
modulated light flux in the measuring channel.

Let us analyze the measuring signal under the assumption that beams A and B have a
Gaussian distribution of the field with amplitude in the center of the beam.
Then with modulation of the interference bends by the moving object I, the dis-
tribution of the field in plane Pb along the x axis has the form:

- Jawl‘ - '''''
fm net: as (mx/ [1- cad/£515]: . (I)
where ur,IUt-'M¢/a . J

is the halfwidth of the Gaussian beam in plane Po along the x axis and rect(') is a
rectangular function. .

65
ms omcm. use ONLY
tux urrILIAs. var. UIVLI

when the photo detector 7 with the point diaphragm is placed in the center of the
Ircquency plane P1, provided Albl‘d . the measuring signal is proportional

- . f l
I, It; ~5- 6,71 ‘1.» “rm/MI [1 .. comm m]: m “3(2)

(The case of scattering of light on small particles D~£ A is considered in detail
in [3]). One can see that this signal, along with the low frequency component de-
fined by the structure of the incident beams, contains a high frequency periodic
component too. lend its pariod’t is uniquely related to the period of the inter-

ference bends: g a flat. v .11 IV .

It follows from e ression (2) that in the general case, the level of the signal

(t) varies asA . Under certain relationships between the permeters D andA.
t is signal can become zero. These effects are significantly attenuated in the
case of monitoring of. bulky objects because fo the presence of waves reflected from
their surface. Thus, for a cylinder, interference of the rays of the wave reflected
from it leads to the occurrence of a travelling wave, the intensity of which does
not depend on the relationship between the cylinder diameter and band period, but
is proportional

-‘ t a
Illlwllom/zugyt.ffx‘bméue (v l0.(3)

Since the measuring signal level depends in the general case on the interference
band period, this produces a limitation on increasing the system sensitivity by
reducing the bend period. A promising way of increasing sensitivity is generation
of a new measuring signal, the frequency of which is «1-fold higher than the photo
detector signal frequency, for example, by using an interpolator with phase .
automatic frequency control.

Experimental studies of a system, built on the basis of this method, consisted in
evaluating the accuracy and productivity of a measuring system with the exasple of
monitoring objects with known parameters, as well as in studying the criticality
of its characteristics to variation of the basic parameters.

Used to calibrate the system was a reference cylinder with diameter 00- 10-0012 In,
certified with an error of no more than 0.2 micrometer. _ Based on the derived value
of A - 211600.03 micrometer, the diameters of eight cylindrical rollers were
measured (D - Telb In), certified in advance with an error of 1 micrometer. The
maximum error of the measurements did not exceed 20 micrometers.

The experiments showed that when the velocity varied within the range of 0.5 e 1.5
m/s, i.e. by 1507. from the rated V0 - 1 m/s, the value of the error in measuring

remained unchanged. It should be noted that the permitted range of velocities V in
the system was determined by the bandwidth of amplifiers 8 and 9 and could be
extended when necessary.

Thus, the system developed permits determining dimensions of objects in the range
1 + 16 em with an accuracy of 20 micrometers when their velocity of movement is
1 + 0.5 m/s.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

COPY

8545
050:

B IBLIOGRAPBY

Reich, F. R. and Coleman, N. 1., "man-Speed Proms Measurement with Electro-
Optics," OPTICAL ENGINEERING, Vol 15, No l, 1976.

Bychkov, R. #1.; Korankevtch, V. P.; Solov'yev, P. 6.; an Yu. V. Chuguy,
"Measuring the Parameters of Threaded Products by Spatial Spectra," 1n

"111 Vsssoyuznaya konfsrentslya po holografu. Tezisy dokladov" [3rd All-Union
Conference on Holography. Theses of Papers], Leningrad, 1978.

"Lazarnyye dopplerovskiye inherits“ skorostt" [Laser Doppler Meters of
Velocity], Novosibirsk, "Nauka", 1975.

RIGHT: LIYal", 1980

8144 [021 7

67
FOR OFFICIAL use onu
l’". ‘W'.‘ 94“ I ﬁst \DI‘O.‘

UDC 621.382.8.069.776

OUTPUT UNITS FOR OPTICAL INFORMATIOR PROCESSING SYSTEMS BASED ON CEAEGE-COUPLED
DEVICES

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE HETODOV OPTICHESKOY OBRABOTKI INEOEHAISII I GOLDGRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 169-176

[Article by V. A. Arutyunov, N. A. Yesepkina, B. A. Kotov, Yu. A. Kotov, A. P.
Lavrov and I. I. Sayenko]

[Text] Annotation

Hultielemsnt photo detectors based on charge-coupled devices (P25) [COD] are con-
sidered. The design and features of operation of these photo detectors which have
a varied organization and number of elements are described. It is shown that these
photo detectors can be used as output devices for optical information processing
systems, in particular, acoustooptic spectrum analyzers.

Optical information processing systems permit high rates in processing large arrays
of data in real time. The processed date is contained in a spatial distribution of
intensity at the output focal plane of an optical system. Various photo detectors
are used to convert this data into an electrical signal. The choice of the photo
detector governs the accuracy and speed of the system as a whole. The most pro-
mising photo detectors now are solid-state converters based on COD [1, 2]. In the
general case, a multielement CCD photo detector contains an array of photo sensitive
elements (section for accumulation of charges) and shift registers (section for
charge transfer). Photo diodes or capacitors may be used as the photo sensitive
elements. They effect the conversion of a light intensity into a proportional
quantity of an electric charge. The shift registers play the role of buffer
storage and provide for serial travel of the obtained charge distribution to an
output assembly. Thus, the shift registers permit easy joining of GOP to various
devices, including computers [3]. The photo sensitive elements and shift registers
are made in one structure on a base of a silicon chip.

we studied two types of linear photo detectors: with coincident and separate
sections for charge accumulation and transfer.

Information charges in CCD with coincident sections for storage and transfer are
stored by the same electrodes used for transfer. This combination of sections has
become possible because of the application of transparent polysilicon electrodes
that form the transfer channel. In these CCD photo detectors, constant levels of
voltage are supplied to the various electrodes for the charge storage time to

68
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NWLY
maintain the required potential profile under these electrodes. To read out infor-
mation, the stored charge clusters are shifted to the output assembly. The shift

is effected by feeding the appropriate pulse voltages to the phase electrodes. At
output, we have a series of pulses that is a video signal. He studied two modifica-
tions of CCD with combined sections containing 50 and 500 light-sensitive cells.

The 600 photo detector with 50 cells is a linear four-phase shift register with a
32-micrometer cell errangment step (image digitization step) [4]. The width of the
light-sensitive area of the register is 1.5 mm, which permits integrating the light
flux at one of the coordinates. At both ends of the register are charge detectors
(charge-voltage converters) and output amplifiers. Output of information to any
output device is possible as a function of the phase relationships of the control
voltages. KHOP [CHDSJ series integrated nicrocircuits are used in the register
operation control unit. The control unit and CCD photo d tector are made in the
form ot a unified module with dimensions of 8.5 x 10.0 c , which is connected to

a source of constant voltage of 6 o 18 V. Input at 10 V of supply voltage is 30 m".

 

Fig. 1. Structural diagram of SOD-cell CCD with coincident sections for storage
and transfer

Key:
1. charge tr-r control 6. common charge detector
2. charge level 7. charge detector
3. F1, F2, F3. to 8. analog register
4. output (1, 2, 3) 9. charge sink
5. output amplifier (1, 2, 3) 10. substrate

Shown in fig. 1 is a structural diagram of a SOO-cell CCD photo detector with com-
bined sections for storage and transfer. This device has two f0ur-phase analog
registers with common phase electrodes. The cell digitization step in each regis-
ter is 26 micrometers. The width of their light sensitivity range is 200 micro-
meters. Space between registers is 13 micrometers. Electrodes in the upper regis-
ter are shifted relative to the electrodes in the lower register by 1.5 micro-
meters. On one side of the device, each register has independent charge detectors
with output amplifiers. 0n the other side, there is a charge detector with its
own output amplifier that is common to both registers. This design of this output

6
FtHICHﬂﬂCJEL USEZCMNLY
rm: Urns the. was. Ul‘l.‘

assembly provides the capability of effecting a temporary "deposit" of signal infor-
mation from both registers. Hith static distributions of light intensity and by
using an appropriate algorithm for storage and multiple readout of intonation,

this permits reducing the digitization step for the image being projected on the
light sensitive surface of the CCD to 1.5 micrometers. In the process, the number
of readout points can be increased from 500 to 8,000.

1he signals output from these CCD's, corresponding to the maximmn charge clusters,
are not less than 3 V. CCD internal noise does not exceed 120 microvolts. Spectral
range is 0.45 + 1.0 micrometer. Time for filling potential wells (storage cells)
with dark currents is 10 + 50 s at room temperature.

The CCD photo detector with separate storage and transfer sections has 800 light
sensitive cells and three sections differing in functional purpose: 1) separation
of carriers, 2) storage and 3) analog register. Separation of carriers generated
by light is performed by photo diodes 3 (fig. 2). the surface potential Y of
which is determined by the surface potential under barrier electrode 3. s

    

. 0 mm
(9%: I

Fig. 2. Cross-section and voltage waveforms for CCD with 800 cells.

Key:
1. semiconductor substrate 6. analog register electrode
2. photo diode 7. oxide
3. barrier electrode 8. stopper diffusion
1.. storage electrode 9. surface potential
5. separating electrode

Photo generated charges are stored under electrode lo. Upon completion of the
storage cycle, the charges are transferred to analog (read) register 7 by using the
separating electrode (gate) 5. In the register, there is one complete cell for
each photo diode. Right after the gate is closed, a new storage cycle begins, and
the charges transferred to the register are read out serially. In this device,
video signals can be output almost continuously. except for the brief interval for
transfer of charges from under electrode lo to register 6. and the photo diodes can
store a charge during the entire cycle. It should be noted that this device has
two analog registers: charges from even photo diodes are transferred to one regis-
ter, and from odd ones to the other. The registers have independent charge detec-
tors and output amplifiers. The registers have a four-phase system of control;
therefore, temporary "deposit" of signals from the registers poses no problem [1].

0
FOR OFFICIZL USE ONLY
The size of an elementary storage cell is 12 x 500 micrometersz. Spectral range is
0.3 + 1.1 micrometers.

The range of recordable illuminations for these 600'. is determined by the storege
time and liee within the range from -

104‘ to 100 lk [lux]. OCD dyn-aic range is no less then 80 db. In the devices,
there is the capability of electrical input into the registers of signal charge

clusters. This permits performing swing of electrical end optical information
in the (300's th-aeelves.

The capability of implementing certain functions for processing analog informetion
in the CCD output unit permits, also without using digital processors, obtaining
differential characteristics of the light distribution and thereby raises the
accuracy of determining intensity maximum.

The rule CCD'e discussed above with 50 end 500 cells and combined storage and trans-
fer sections were used by us as output units in an acouatooptic spectra enalyzer.
a diagram of which is shown in fig. 3. [4014 - acoustooptic modulator]

 

1.
CR control
-un
loll .
A014 51-76

Fig. 3. Diagram of ecoustooptic analyzer of the spectrum of radio signals

The spectra analyzer with a SO-cell gage 001) was made on the basis of an accusto-
optic modulator with an acoustic line of fused quartz with e central frequency
F0 - 130 m: and hed a frequency resolution A r: 100 Hi: [lo].

The gage CCD with 500 cells was used in a spectm analyzer, made on the baeie of
an acouetooptic modulator with an acoustic line of lithium niobate and had a fre-
quency resolution APR: 1 MHz and about 250 frequency channels.

Using CCD photo detectors expands considerably the capabilities of opticel proces-
sing systems; it also facilitates alignment and adjuenent of optical systems since
the need for using complex scanning systems is eliminated.

These gage CCD photo detectors and their control systems era very compact and simple.
They can be used not only in optical processing systems, but also in various other
systems that require recording of light intensity diatribution, for example, in
astronomy at output of optic spectrographs, in geodesy in laser levels. etc.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
toll UI’I‘ILIIII- 00¢. 01“.:

BIBLINRAPHY
1. (Seken, K. And Temp-ct, $1.), "Davie" with Chas. Transfer," 1978.

2. Bet-02m, V. Yu. and Kotov, B. A., WIKA KING I TELEVIDBNIYA. No 6, p 32,
1977.

3. Yeupklna, N. A. and others, INDY LPI, No 366, pp 31-36, 1979.
to. Arutyunov. V. A. and others, PIS'HA V Zh‘l'l'. No S, tun. 20. p 1280, 1979.
WPYRIGRT: LIYIP, 1980

8565
080: 8144 I021 7

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 535.818
MEASURING GEOHETRIC DISTORTION IN TELEVISION BY OPTICAL FEEDBACK METHOD

Leningrad PRIHENBNIYE HETODOV OPTICBESKOY OBRABOTKI INVORHAISII I GOLOGIAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 218-222

[Article by G. A. Gavrilov and A. F. Halyy]
[Text] Annotation

Optical feedback permits visualizing and measuring raster distortions in a tele-
vision system. The method is used in optico-televiaion processors, but may be
applied even more extensively in television.

Visual display and accurate measurement of the amount of raster distortion in tele-
vision systems is a rather complex technical problem. Various methods have now
been developed that basically meet the requirements of practice: test patterns and
special signal generators, the method of moire patterns and a number of others [1].
The choice of a particular method for evaluating and measuring raster distortion
depends on the specific nature of the problem to be solved and the technical level
of the system used.

This paper pertains directly to measuring raster distortion in optical processors
with television feedback [2, 3].

However, the feedback principle could be applied in other cases too, but to do this
a sufficiently convincing substantiation of the expediency of using precisely
this method is required.

The diagram of a processor with feedback is shown in fig. 1. The system output
image. reproduced on a video monitor (VKU) screen, is the input image for the
television transmitting camera (TX). The camera signal in negative polarity is com-
bined with the input signal. and thus a negative feedback circuit is formed. The
feedback makes the system stable and also very sensitive to raster distortions of
the camera and video monitor.

The simplest input signal that provides clarity of the display of raster distortion
of the device being measured and is convenient for measuring its value is the
network field (SP) type signal.

Shown in fig. 2 are the waveforms of line signals in the system which illustrate
the principle of measuring raster distortions. Assume that coming into system

F0liﬂﬂﬂcaa.USE(MVLY
Mm mrlLlAs. var. UNI.)

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of processor with feedback

Key:
1. input 3. video monitor
2. output b. television transmitting camera

are pulses forming the image of a vertical
grid (fig. 2a) on the video monitor screen.
Hhen there is no raster distortion in the
system, the feedback signal (fig. 2b) . a)
coincides in time with the input signal.

and an attenuated image of the grid (fig.

2c) is observed on the video monitor

screen. "hen there is distortion in the

device under study. the feedback signal c
appears shifted relative to the input

signal (fig. 2d). Reproduced on the video

monitor screen is the grid signal and the d
shifted image of the grid of opposite

polarity (fig. 2e). It is evident that

each successive passage of the signal

through the feedback circuit results in e
neu images of grids of alternating

polarities (fig. 2f).

Mathematically, the output signal for a
line of the vertical grid in a system
with feedback can be written in the form
of

N . .
any-(gating (-0’gsm"wt(x—nu, (I) Fig. 2

f

 

where uo(x) is the input signal of the GSP [expansion unknown]. K is the gain fac-

tor in the feed-forward circuit,J3 is the gain factor in the feedback loop, n is
the number of passages of the signal in the OS [feedback] loop. and £3.is the value

of raster distortions al the line ' "
on: Indra-n4) = {““wdl‘?

0. everywhere?”

FIMII)FFICi7 [EHEIHVLY
It can be seen from expression (2) that the width of the vertical line of the grid
(d) shapes the minimum value of raster distortions , which can be measured by the
given method. In the extreme case, this quantity equals the system resolution
element.

The gsinJB K is selected less than 1 so that the signals of the repeating grids are
attentuated and become practically indistinguishable by the time the signal of the
next vertical line of the input signal appears (fig. 2f).

Shown in fig. 3 is a sketch of the vertical lines on
the video monitor screen and the type of geometric
distortions, corresponding to it, in the system

.6 anner e

The feedback method permits easy calculation of the
quantity of raster distortions by the signal for
the network field. It is convenient to take the a)
raster center for the start of the readout of the
value fo the raster distortions, for which it is
necessary to achieve precise coincidence of the
input image grid lines and the feedback signal at
the center. In doing so, the shift in the feedback
signal by the value of [S in each of the squares of
the network field will describe the absolute value of
the raster distortion. The test signal of the net-
work field contains p-cells for the raster height H,
and the cell size I - hip. The nonlinearity factor,
by which it is customary to evaluate nonlinear dis-
tortions. is defined as [l]

K“ 8 £11 when ‘4” .

b6)‘
In the case in question, this value is written in

the form of
Ku’fra‘ke

where n is the number of periods of repetition of the
grids of the feedback signal in each square of the
network field. The relative value of raster distor-
tions of the raster leg} - llnp. It is evident that
determining the value of raster distortions does not
require complex calculations.

 

Fig. 3

Ln conclusion, it is necessary to say several words on the possibility of practical
use of the feedback emthod for evaluating and measuring raster distortions. The
method should not be considered universal. Use of it is expedient, for example,
for tuning and on-line monitoring of the parameters of optical-television proces-
sors themselves with feedback. Shown in fig. 3b are sketches of the crosshairs on
the video monitor screen when the camera is rotated relative to the video monitor
by the angleiekand when their axes are shifted and the scale disturbed.

FOR Oi1ﬁczélyUS£i0NlN
I'Uﬂ V'Il‘uIl‘l— was. VIVhI

It is evident that the feedback method does not permit separating raster distor-
tions of the camera and video monitor. this can be done if one of these devices
introduces negligible distortions of its own. Thus, to elioinate the effect of
camera distortions, it is advisable to make use of solid-state P28 [CCD] type
photo converters. These devices in accuracy of raster reproduction exceed by two
orders of msgnitude analog scanning devices. Hith such implementation, the method
could be applied, for emple, in measuring raster distortions and tuning video
monitors with large screens.

3 131. IWRAPBY

l. Krivosheyev, H. 1.. "Osnovy televisionnykh inereniy" [Principles of Television
Measurements], "Svyaz'", Moscow, 1976.

2. lllusler, G. and bohmarn, A., "Hybrid Image Processing with Feedback,"
0PT. comum, Vol 21, No 3, p 365, 1977.

3. Csvrilov. G. A. and Hslyy, A. P., "Hybrid Opticoelectronic Intonation
Processing Systems," in this collection, p 38 [Application of Optical
Information Processing Methods and Holography, Leningrad, LIYaF, 1980].

WPYRIGWI‘: LIYaF, 1980

8565
C80: SIM/021 7

FOR OFFICE]. USE ONLY
UDC 621.396.67:535.261.13.53lo
OPTICAL PROCESSIKS 0!" INFORMATION FROM mm 8Y8?!”

Leningrad PRDIENBNIYE HB‘IODOV OPTICIIESKOY OBIABOTKI INPOIHA‘I‘SII I cowcwn in
Russian 1980 (signed to prese 16 Dec 80) pp 337-3b0

[Article by N. A. Bukharin. I. A. Vodovatov. H. G. Vysotskiy, N. A. Yeeepkina,
V. Yu Petrun'kin and S. A. Rogov]

[Text] Innotation

Application of acoustooptic circuitry for processing signals from various antenna
devices is discussed. Probleme involving processing of signale from linear and
two-dimeneional antenna arrays and application of the principle of time
multichanneling in the processing circuits are discussed. Data is given on a
study of circuits for optical processing of information from ring antenna arrays.

A major application of coherent optics involves optical processing of signals from
antenna systems. Used in the majority of cases are ecoustooptical devices, i.e.
devicee in which acoustooptical modulators (A0") are used for information input.
Acouetooptical syetems intended for processing signals from linear and planar
antenna arrays were suggested by Iambert and his associates [1]. In processing the
signals of a linear antenna array, the signale from elements of the array of the AR
[antenna array] (fig. 1). after amplification and heterodyning, feed into the
pseudo-converters of the ADM. The acoustic vibrations excited in the modulator
channels form a dynamic diffraction grating, in which coherent light diffracts
from the laser. Information on the spectrum of radiation and angular coordinate of
the aignal source is contained in the focal plane of the integrating lens L1, in
the first orders of diffraction.

In the caee of a two-dimensional antenna array. circuits with time multichanneling
can be applied. In these circuits, signals from the line of antenna elements feed
into each of the ADM channels. They receive time delays in advance since the
acoustic vibrations corresponding to the signals from the various line elemente

are spatially separated. In the focal plane in the first diffraction order, we
obtain the spot. the position of which characterizes two angular coordinatee of the
signal source.

The principle of time multichanneling can also be used in processing complex sig-
nals. Used in this case are different versions of circuits. including circuits
with spatial filtration.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3w. H.

apvnu a
ASE I

Fax 6

x3 As A. \8 AW b@
Abv huv on va Aav new
Optical methods are very promising in processing signals from ring antenna arrays
[2]. The circuits used in these cases differ from those used in processing signals
from linear and planar arrays: Filtration matching is used to match the phases of
the signals coming from elements in s ring array. Set in the plane of the spatial
frequencies is s holographic filter that is a recording of the spatial-frequency
spectrum of the transmissivity of the reference transparency.

Generated in the system output plane is the distribution of light that is propor-
tional to the cross-correlation function of the transmissivity of the reference
transparency and the ADM transmissivity when signals from the antenna array are fed
to it. The distribution thus obtained corresponds to the radiation pattern of the
ring antenna and permits determining the azimuth of the signal source.

As research [3] has shown, the capabilities of this system can be substantially ex-
panded by using certain measurements of the optical circuit. Thus, application of
an astigmatic circuit (fig. 2) permits in addition to determining the signal source
azimuth studying the spectral composition of the signal. In this circuit, a pair
of lenses, consisting of a spherical lens L.f and a cylindrical lens Lts’ effect a

Fourier transformation along the horizontal coordinate and generate an image along
the vertical coordinate. After filtration by using the holographic filter GF, the
spherical lens Lv performs an inverse Fourier transformation. As a result of this,
at system output vin the plane of the recording unit RU, a light distribution is
generated that along the horizontal characterizes the signal source azimuth, and
along the vertical, the signal spectrum.

Asong other applications of coherent optical methods in antenna technology, we
should mention the study of characteristics and processing of signals of antenna
arrays with random arrangement of radiating elements. Antennas of this type [a]
are used to develop systems with narrow radiation patterns with a reduction in the
total number of radiators. Determining the characteristics of such antennas, in
particular, of two-dimensional radiation patterns is a rather complex problem
requiring large inputs of computer time. The method of optical simulation of the
radiation patterns simplifies considerably solving it.

Acoustoopticel circuits similar to those applied in the case of entirely filled
arrays can be used to process signals from antenna arrays with random arrangement
of the elements.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Lambert, L.; Arm, H. and Aymet, A., ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 8, p 3,
1968.

2. Levin, 9., ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 11, p 26, 1971.

3. Yesepkina, N. A. et al., "Tezisy dokledov III Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po
golografii" [Theses of Papers of 3rd All-Union Conference on Holography],
Leningrad, p 381, 1978.

a. Bazelyan, L. L.; Inyutin, o. A.; and Sodin, L. 6., ss. "anrrnnv", No 15, p 17,
1972.

COPYRIGHT: LleF, 1980

8545
C50: 8166/0217

79
FOR 0F!TC1A[.USEZ(N‘LY
O U“ \I. 0 I‘ll.“ 9.!“ V0 ‘8.

UDC 621.396.967:629.375.33

ANALYSIS OF CONDITIONS OF GENERATION AND OPTICAL PROCESSING OF INFORMATION AT
RADAR INSTALLATIONS NITN SYNTHETIC APBRTURE

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE HETODOV OPTICBESKOY OBRABOTKI INFORHAISII I GOLOGRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 341-3h5

[Article by Yu. S. Zinov'yev and A. Ya. Pasmurov]
[Text] Annotation

Discussed in this work is a new approach to describing radar
systems with synthetic aperture based on the principle of holography.

It is known [1, 2] that at RLS [radar installations] with synthetic aperture (RSA),
resolution by one coordinate (azimuth) is achieved by holographic processing of a
recorded signal. Till now, application of the holographic approach to analyze the
process of obtaining images at RSA has been limited to consideration of the optical
processor. In practice, there has been no mathematical substantiation of the point
of view that is the RSA as a whole as a holographic system. In this work, we have
analyzed the conditions for generating and optically processing RSA signals from
the unified positions of holography.

Let us consider an RSA moving at velocity v along the x' axis. The installation
records serially in time a picture of the diffraction of the probing signal on ob-
jects of observation. The received and reference signals ("artificial" reference
wave) interfere in a coherent detector. As a result, a hologram of the multiplying
type [3] is generated which is recorded by modulation of the intensity of the
luminescence of an BLT [cathode-ray tube - CRT] on photographic film, which is
moving relative to the CRT screen at velocity v . Assume all objects are located
at the same range R0 from the x' axis (in the process, the radiated signal can be
considered continuous). If the scattering properties of a linearly distributed
object are described by the function F(xo), and its dimensions by ’0 <3: R0.

we will obtain an approximation of the fresnel [6] for the a“
diffraction field along the x' axis (with regard to propagation of the signal to
the object and back):

(Kate " “ “h.“7‘
Vac? £37 I far.» e 1‘ alas . (I)
I 0"'

whore K'I‘Z/As

is the wave number and C is some constant.

80
FINI(HHH(]AI.USE(MVLY
I " ' ’
Reference wave amplitude equals u‘u'Ar‘. . Conventionally Y’ HOMO: ( o
is the angle of "incidence" of planar wave on the hologram). which provide. for

introduction of the carrier frequency at, numb.
‘Ihe equation of the hologram obtained ie

km .22; {Wail}. m) or Aw dun/Juan”), (2)

with regard to (1), it is clear that in the general case at the ISA, unidimensional
Fresnel holograma are generated. The following situations are also poeeible.

In the case when R.»Kn"'~

instead of (1). we obtain the approximation of Fraunhofer:

 

ml. . .2- u. 2""
3 I:
law-C lei-k? 6"“-jfraic 4.2;, (a)

as a result of which a Praunhofer hologram is generated.

a
In the case when R0»‘IL3 /’ (L. - VT is the length of the synthetic aperture
and T is the time of recording of the hologram), the term 9472;“sz

can be omitted in (3). In doing so, a Fourier hologram in formed, the condition
for obtaining of which let us notate in the form of

L, tent/r1 " m

If the object is a point (/(N‘VJM‘e‘), then the conditions of the Praunhofer

diffraction are met. By using the filtering property of the; -function, let us
derive from (3) the following hologram equation (without regard to the constant
phase term):

5‘ I
km '44. mmaa’wﬁ: *M . (6)

where A0 is the amplitude of the wave scattered by the object at the point of

reception.

Also. if (4) is met. then it follows from (5) that
law/{4A, m(m&’*e&%l. ' (e)

mus. for a point object, a Praunhofer or Fourier hologram ie generated at the RSA.
[n the first case, the hologram takes the form of a one-dimenrional zonal Freanel
array. in accordance with (5). and in the second, a sinusoidal array in accordance
with (6). In the procees of photographic recording. ecaling of the holograms ia
effected with replacement of the coordinate x' by x, where x - x'lnx, and "x. v/vn.

8i
F0! OFFICIA USE ONLY
I'Uﬂ Uf'lLMl— U5; Vl‘l—I

In the process, added to (5) and (6) is the constant term h0 ("shift"), needed for
photographic recording of the bipolar function h(x').

At the stage of regeneration of the image, exposing the photo transparency by a
planar wave with wave number K2, let us derive a diffraction field, the distribu--
tion of which at distanceJD from the hologram is described by the Huygens-Fresnel

integral2 way-170} "m L 36: I '
e 2d

VI?) =W: ‘fmhmc a: (7)

Substituting (5) in (7), let us derive the following functions that describe
images of a point object

W27 ‘ 16171.13 : Widﬁz :(uan, . Haﬁaﬁﬂ;
5 e

= 5 d3. (0)
W in

Let us find the longitudinal position of the images from the condition of equality
to zero of the index of the first exponent in (8); hence it follows that

yum/ems. ' <9)

integrating (8) under condition (9), let us derive that the images are described by
a function of the type sin ”/9, where

, .
9'[%n&*£§?’(,ﬁ‘7/I%I - (10)

The position of the image along the x axis is determined, evidently, by the
relationship

2 “Jo/ﬂu, wok. m. a, . (m

The first term in (11) corresponds to the coordinate of the object, and the second
is shaped by the carrier frequency. Images of two points having a cannon coordi-
nate x0, but different values of range R1 and R2, are characterized by different

coordinates '3 1 and Z 2, i.e. use of the carrier frequency leads to geometric dis-
tortions of the image of the band of view.

By Rayleigh's criterion, two points will be separated if the main maximum of one of
the functions of the type sin 9/0 coincides with the first zero of the other.
Hence follows the evaluation 0 the resolution:

\
4.2’-.:.‘-.c.’-1R./K:b..

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In RSA theory, the case of using the Freunhofer hologram has received the name of
"focused aperture." By focusing should be understood coupensetion for quadratic
advance of phese in (5), effected in the processing stege by using conversion (7).
The case of "unfocused aperture" corresponds to the equation for the Fourier holo-
gram (6). Accordingly, in the processing stage, the Fourier transform of the holo-
grem.function is used; hence it follows the; the inegesof points ere elso
described by functions of the type sin .0/9 , vhere

9-[ﬁ‘2wuanu “fused-€1-

The velue of.” is the focal length of the Fourier lens. The position of the image

is determined by the equation
'7-tﬁluﬁﬂa'66‘ﬂuh .

The image of the entire bend of view will else be distorted as a consequence of the
dependence of‘z on the range R9. The maximum etteineble resolution in en RSA with
unfocused aperture is by Reyle gh's criterion with regard to (a) the value of

”HIM.” 60.” MK.

Let us note that holograms are recorded on photogrephic film continuously in the
process of the flight of the RSA carrier. Therefore, the focused or unfocused mode
is specified at the stage of obtaining the image by selecting the dimensions of the
diaphragm, which determines the value of L.lnx, end by the appropriate design for
the optical processing circuit.

Thus, the hologrephic epproech per-its conceiving of en RSA end optical processor
as a unit. In doing so. the essence of the physical processes occurring in
recording end opticel processing uf RSA signals is disclosed most fully.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. leith,TIIER, Vol 59, No 9, pp 25-44. 1971.
2. Leith, s. end Ingells, 11.. APPL. opncs. Vol 7, No 3, pp 539-541., 1968.

3. Popov, S. A.; Rozenov. B. A.; Zinov'yev, Yu. 5.; end Pesmurov, A. Ye., in
"Meteriely VIII Vsesoyuznoy shho'y po hologrefii" [Heteriels of the 8th All-
Union School on holography]. Leningrad, pp 275-286, 1976.

a. Pepulis. A.. "Theory of Systems and Conversions in Optics," Moscow, "Mir",
pp 315-362, 1971. _
l
common: LIYeF, 1980

8545 s
cso: alas/0217 ,
E
'a
O
83 ‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum Urnblha. use. UI‘LI

UDC 621.391.1h

ON-LINE OPTICAL PROCESSING OF INFORHAIION IN RADIO-BOLOGRAPHIC SYSTEHS

Leningrad PRIHBNENIYE HETODOV OPTICHISIOY OBRABOTKI INFORNAISII I GOLOGRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 346-350

[Article by S. V. Horozov]

[Text] Annotation

Discussed is an optico-electronic tourist-processor with on-line
output of processed information in sections by the method of
heterodyne scanning, intended for realization of the operation

of a two-dimensional Fourier transform in radio-holographic systems.

Results are given for an experimental test of device operating
capability.

In solving s number of practical problems, information on objects under investiga-
tion is obtained by holographing them in the radio range. The need for obtaining
information by a similar method occurs in systems for microwave imaging and inves-
tigation of the scattering properties of bodies. In this case, when processing the
derived information. it is necessary to find the initial distribution of the radio

field according to a specified amplitude-phase distribution which is recorded by
the holographic method.

Lnformation processing in the systems in question with the validity of the Fresnel
approximation can be reduced to execution of s Fourier transform from some two-
dimensional complex function. This operation can be performed by both digital and

analog methods.

Existing digital devices for information processing in a number of cases do not
have acceptable speed.

Analog optical devices for information processing can perform the Fourier transform
within a very short time interval. They are also considerably simpler, cheaper

and more compact than digital computers.

The potential speed of analog optical devices for information processing, Fourier
processors, can be realized with application of on-line devices for information
input (this is achieved by application of controllable transparencies) and with

provision for on-line output of information.

an
roe omcm. us: ONLY
Pig. 1.

Key:
8. generator of linear-frequency-aodulated signal
10. anplitude-phase-neter

12. band-pass filter

13. outputs

Very promising from the viewpoint of the capability of on-line output of infom-
tion is the method of heterodyne scanning [1].

Based on this method. a device was developed (fig. 1) [2] that affects an on-line
Fourier transform of the two-dimensional anplitude-phasa distribution and output of
the results obtained in the form of a set of sections of the amplitude and phase
spectra of the Fourier of the distribution being studied.

The optical-electronic Fourier-processor operates as follows.

A collimated light beam illminatss transparency lo with recording of the distribu-
tion under investigation. Diffraction grating 5, with the sinusoidal distribution
recorded on it, provides for spatial modulation of the light distribution, corres-
ponding to the function being studied, and thereby shifts the Fourier spectrum,
generated in the focal plane of the integrating lens, into the region of the first
diffraction order of li ht, diffracted by an ul’ asonic wave in an ultrasonic light
modulator (UZHS)-6. 1k UZHS is set in the ex plane as the transparency on
which the distribution being studied is recorded.

when a signal with linear’-frequency modulation (m) is fed to the electrical
input of the 0288-6, scanning diffraction beans -arga on its shadow side. One of
these beans. namely the first diffraction order, strikes the photo sensitive euro
face of a photo detector. Thus, two light beau interfere on the surface of the

U
I'OI OFFICIiI. USE ONLY
photo detector: the Fourier spectrum of the distribution under investigation and
the scanning diffraction order from the UZHS.

The signal at the output of the photo detector, carrying information on the ampli-
tude and phase of the distribution under investigation, is isolated by band-pass
filter 12; the frequency shift of the light in one of the interfering beams, re-

quired during heterodyning, is achieved through diffraction of the light by a
travelling ultrasonic wave.

The slit diaphragm 11, set in front of the photo detector, is designed to destroy
extraneous illuminations and generate the specified section of the Fourier spectrum
of the distribution under investigation. The output signal is generated at a radio
frequency and is isolated by band-pass filter 12. One section of the Fourier spec-
trun is recorded in the device in question. Any other section can be obtained
when the transparency is rotated about its axis.

To perform experumental research of optico-electronic Fourier-processors, an in-
stallation was assembled on the base of the OSK-Z optical system. An OKs-lB-JS was
used as the source of therent light. The size of the transparency and diffraction
grating was 10 x 10 mm . The UZHS had a central frequency of 30 MHz with a band-
width at the level of 0.7-6 mﬂz. The acoustic line material was distilled water.

The experiments performed confirmed the correctness of the basic theoretical
propositions. A section of the two-dimensional Fourier spectrum of the distribu-
tion under investigation was generated at the output of the device within 1/50 sec.

The time of output of information could be varied by varying the parameters of the
LChH signal.

Dynamic range of output signals was 30 db. The value of the dynamic range obtained
in the experiment is lower than its maximum value, which is due to noise during
output of information (shot noise of the photo detector - FED [photoelectric ampli-
fier]), as a consequence of inefficient use of the energy from the light source.
The maximum value of the dynamic range of the output signals is restricted due to
noise from the optical system, noise from the light source and noise from the
information input device.

The dynamic range of the output signals is narrowed further as a consequence of
spatial side lobes of the diffraction spectrum of the zero order striking the
region of location of the signal.

Thus, for a quadratic cophasal aperture with a dimension of 2ax23, the dynamic
range, shaped by just the side lobes of the zero order, is

D' ——|__ﬁ—7‘=‘=‘Z'g.._T——,
(2,.“ '2'“! nu 2,. hfwrtﬂm. a

where t¢.n 2? is the diffraction efficiency of the transparency for the zero and
first order of diffraction;
[no is the diffraction efficiency of the UZHS for the zero order of
diffraction; and
is the spatial frequency of the diffraction grating.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 2. Fig. 3.

Shown ebove ere the results of en experilsentel test of the device opereting
cepebility. Fig. 2 shows the section of the aptitude Fourier spectra. of the
distribution under investigstionuround cophssel sperture. Fig. 3 shows the sec.
tion of the uplitude-phsse Fourier spectra of the distribution under investigs-
mono-square cophsssl eperture.

B IBLIGSRAPIIY

1. (Collier. R.; Berkhsrt, C. end Lynn. 1...), "Opticsl llologrephy," 686 pages,
Moscow. "Mir", 1973.

2. Vinogrsdov, s. 8.; Krupnitskiy. B. 1.; Kuznetsov-Nshchinskiy, L. A.;
Horozov, S. V.; Sergeyenko, ‘1'. N. end Yekolev, V. 1.. "Device for Opticsl
Modeling of DR [expension unknown] of en Intenne," A.s. [Petent] 599612 (USSR).
COPYRIGHT: LIYeF, 1980

8545
680: 81610 [021 7

FOR omcul. USE ONLY
PU“ UI'I'ILllaa. van UIVLI

UDC 621.391.2:535
OPTICAL CALCULATION OF SIGNAL AHBIGUITY FUNCTION

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE HETODOV OPTICIIBSKOY OBRABOTKI INFORMATSII I GOWWII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 351-357

[Article by Ye. K. Stuarev]
[Text] Annotation

A survey and classification are made of optical methods and
systems for computing a signal ambiguity function.

The ambiguity function (I’ll) plays a fundamental role in radar and sonar. In a
narrow-band approximation of consideration of the Doppler effect for the signal
s(t) - u(t) exp (1 Zfrwot). it is defined as [l]

ZmW'Iulfiw?}:wlqo(-jilw. (ll

where u(t) is the complex modulating function of the signal, at is the signal
carrier frequency, '8 is the relative delay and v is the Dopplgr shift of the fre-
quency. In the wide-band case, the ambiguity function can be notated in the form
of [2]

11:); - fpdn'fpdowdl, (2)

where .P'c‘o-rr is the Doppler parameter, v is the range rate of
target movanent and c is the velocity of propagation of waves in the medium.

Computation and display of the body of the usbiguity function has two major
aspects for detection and ranging systems. On the one hand, it permits judging
the information properties of the signal being emitted, and on the other, it is

a unique two-dimensional indicator of the detection and ranging situation in the
"range—speed" coordinates which operates under the conditions of optimal reception.

All the optical systems that exist up to now for computing the ambiguity function
can be conventionally divided into three classes. The first is based on the
spectral representation of the narrow-band ubiguity function as tourier-images
from the product of the functions u(t) and u*(t-‘t ). This approach is the simplest
to implement. but its applicability is limited to the narrow-band approximation.

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The second class uses the correlation method for computing the ambiguity function.

Hith that, in the narrow-band approximation. the ambiguity function (1) is repre-
sented as

zmw-[maqrystwé/Jdudl) (a)

and in the wide-band case as

Mull-ulna”), (4)

where the * defines the correlation operation. Systems in the third class use
nonlinear algorithms to compute functionals that have properties close to those of

the classical ambiguity function. In such systems, the optical Mellin transform
can be used in particular.

Let us discuss the most typical systems for optical computation of the ambiguity
function.

Spectral Method. An optical system for performing a unidimensional Fourier trans-
form is built traditionally by using cylindrical and spherical lenses. The basic
problem in computing the ambiguity function comes down to representing the signal
to be studied u(t) at the output of the optical system in the form of a distribu-
tion of a field of complex amplitude u*(x-y). Thus. in [3]. the signal is trans-
formed into the needed form by creating discrete time delays in the elctronic path
with successive ordering of the delayed signals on the y coordinate with recording
on a transparency. It is more convenient to make use of a turn of the transparen-
cies with recording of the signal in the input plane of the optical scheme. This
principle was the basis for the scheme implemented by Said and Cooper [4]. fig. 1.
The transmission of the transparency with
recording of the signal u(x), turned at
angle 9 to the axes of the coordinates,
can be notated as u(x cos9+ y sinO).
The respective transmission of two trans-
parencies, turned at angles of 65' and

.453 will b. . .. .
“($1304 “(3131].

The field of complex amplitude at the Fig. 1.
output of the optical system is described

by the function Vmw.fd(%g)u(ﬁﬂeylt/lealb' (b)

 

or after substitution of the variable a'llaryI/E

vi], ur/ - ﬂ‘x (ﬂy, (Eur; «799 11.71, (s)

which corresponds to the ambuiguity function with a precision to the phase multi-
plier. Used in the input plane in the scheme shown in fig. 1 was an acoustic—
optical modulator in water; the signal was input into it from two mutually perpen-
dicular directions. An intermediate frequency plane P2 was used for filtration

8
FOR OFF1C1A§.lEHE(HNLY
eves uaaayu... -9- vase...

of the spectral components corresponding to the the modulating function. Similar
scheme solutions were studied in [5, 6]. In [7], this scheme was implemented by
using a PVMS [spatial-time light modulator] of the "phototitus" type. In [3], the
possibility of computing the mabiguity function from complex functions was consi-
dered by using coding of the complex signal in the electronic path. In [6]. an
optical scheme was discussed with one input transparency, through which the light
passes twice, and at output the mabiguity function is reflected in a form similar
to expression (6). An astigmatic system was suggested in [8] that permits optical
transformation of an image into an oblique-angled system of coordinates and there-
by provides for representation of the signal u(x) in the form u(x-y). The system
reflects the ambiguity function without distorting phase multipliers and permits
varying the scale on the correlation axis.

Correlation hthod. This method of computing the ambiguity function is more gene-
ral, since it can be generalized for the case of the wide-band ambiguity function.
Various modifications of correlators can be used for the optical implementation:

1) Van der Lyugt, 2) with generalized hologram, 3) with movable transparency. Used
in [9] for computation of the narrow-band ambiguity function was the scheme of the
multichannel Van der Lyugt correlator with filters recordable on a matrix of photo
plastic. Discrete values of the phase factor exp(-j21fw t) in expression (3) were
specified by means of a turn of the plane-parallel platenthrough which a light bean
was passed in the stage of recording the next filter, matched with the specific
Doppler frequency w“.

For a similar purpose, it was proposed in a patent [10] to make use of a special
mutlichannel cylindrical lens, the focus and position of the center of which vary
along the y coordinate in a scheme of a holographic correlator. Another version
of a correlation scheme with the use of a combination of two-dimensional and one-

dimensional Fourier stages in a scheme with a generalized hologram was described
in [9].

When the signal to be analyzed takes the form of a series of pulses (from a pulse-
Doppler radar, for instance), a holographic scheme suggested in patent [11] can be
used (see fig. 2).

in it, correlation on the time axis x is g _ V. y,
effected by using filtration by a one- a 3 3:,
dimensional holographic filter placed in 0 £0. -

plane P1. Lens L3 forms the correlation

function on axis x2 and the "fine" p0 1:. L3 P. L3 ’1

spectral distribution on axis yz. Forma-

tion of the "fine" structure of the 1’18- 2.
spectrum on the axis y2 is effected in

accordance with the method of spectral analysis according to Thomas [12].
An interesting approach based on representation of the ambiguity function as a bi-
linear transformation is given in [13]; also given there is an original non-

holographic correlation scheme for obtaining sections of the narrow-band ambiguity
function.

FOR OFT-1321. USE ONLY
Results of experimental research on systems for calculating the ambiguity function
were published in [16].

Hellinovskaya Ambiguity Function. The authors of [15, 16] suggested using the
Hellinovskeye correlation invariant to the time scale for Doppler processing of
signals. To realize this processing, a logarithmic sweep (x - In t) is used at the
input of the optical correlator in recording the signal. In effecting the correla-
tion between the signal s(t) and s(l§t), the field of complex amplitude at system
output is described by the function

um! ism. wage aora- 6g». ' (7)

Shifting the correlation peak permits determining the value of the Doppler para-
mete51? , however, the algorithm for processing loses invariance to the time delay.
Therefore, the second spatial coordinate of the correlator must be used to

realize the exhaustive search by delays.

Experiments performed by digital simulation of the calculation of the Hellinovskaya
ambiguity function have shown that e numder of substantial shortcomings are inherent
to it. Thus, for example, broadening of the correlation peak occurs compared to

the classical linear ambiguity function (for the 13-element Darker code, the
correlation peak is broadened threefold), which leads to deterioration of system
resolution and noise immunity is also reduced. According to the authors of [15],
these shortcomings can be eliminated if two coordinate transformations are used,

one for the signal being emitted and a second one for that detected.

1he functional scheme for computing the Hellinovskaya ambiguity function with dual
transformation (MFNDP) is illustrated in fig. 3.
The idea of this method is based on the

fact that the optimal representation for

the radiated coded signal will be that

which will yield the initial linear code

after transformation of the signal upon
reception. Since after reception, the

signal is subjected to exponential trans-
formation of the coordinates (logarithmic
sweep), it must be transformed in the
logarithmic scale (exponential sweep)

before radiation.

 

The system can be built by using optical Key:

schemes for transformation of coordinates 1. correlator

(since transformation must be effected in

parallel in real time) [17. 18] and a correlator that contains a holographic filter
and a movable input transparency with recording of the transformed received signal.

Theoretical analysis has shown that the HFNDP permits separating signals by the

axis of range and Doppler; however, reading the Doppler shift is determined by the
correlation axis, and reading the range by the axis of the frequencies. also,

these readings are not independent. It should be noted that a system with the

HFNDP permits within certain limits varying by parameters of the resolution for the
range and Doppler, which is not possible in systems with a linear ambiguity function.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0V0 VI‘I‘OLDRI. Ue’l‘. UI‘L‘

Given in [18] are the results of digital simulation of the algorithm for computing
the HFNDP for the most typical radar signals. The authors promised to publish the
results of optical simulation of this algorithm in the near future.

Conclusion. It can be seen from this survey that considerable interest in optical
methods of correlation-Doppler processing of signals has emerged in recent years.

he spectral method of computing the ambiguity function is the simplest; it should
be used for radar systems to which narrow-band representation of signals is applic-

able. Correlation systems are prolnising for processing wide-band signals,
for example, in sonar.

Further research on the method of nonlinear optical processing, in particular, the
MFNDP, will permit defining the class of problans for which application of the
corresponding complex systems will be warranted.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Cook, C. and Bernfeld, H., "Radar Signals," Ibscow, Nov. radio", 1971.

2. Bavbel', Ye. I.; Gilevskiy, S. V.; and Yurovskiy, A. A., ZARUBEHNAYA
RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 6, p 26, 1977.

3. Casssent, D. and Kumar, V., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 18, No 10, p 1673, 1979.
it. Said, R. and Cooper, D., PROC. IEE, Vol 120, No 10, p 423, 1973.

5. Marks, R.; Walkup, J.; and Klile, T., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 65, No 10, p 11028,
1977.

6. Marks, R. and Hall, H., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 18, No 15, p 2539, 1979.
7. Casasent, D. and Luu, T., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 18, No 19, p 3307, 1979.

8. bevyy, S. V. and Shmarev, Ye. K., "Third All-Union School on Optical Information
Processing. Theses of Papers," Riga, p 123, 1980.

9. levyy, S. V. and Stunarev, Ye. K., "Second All-Union School on Optical
Information Processing. Theses of Papers," Gor'kiy, p 73, 1978.

10. U. S. Patent No 41231102, NKI 350/162.
11. U. 5. Patent No 4071907, NKI 360/822.

12. Thomas, c., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 5, p 1782, 1966.
13. Salch, 3., APPLIED OPTICS, v61 17, p 3408, 1978.

14. Lee, T.; Rebholz, J.; Tamura, P; and Lindquist, J., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 19,
No 6, p 895, 1980.

IS. Casasent, D. and Psaltis, D., OPT. LETT., Vol lo, No 1, p 18, 1979.

16. Marks, R.; Halkup, J.; Hagler, u.; and Krile, 1., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 16,
No 3, p 739, 1977.

17. Casasent, D. and Szcrutcovski, c., OPT. MUN” Vol 19, No 8, p 217, 1976.
18. Psnltis, D. and Casasent, D., APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 18, No 11, p 1869, 1979.
COPYRIGHT: LIYaF,1980

85105
CSO: 8166/021 7

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.391 .2 :535

OPTICAL CALCULATION OF SIGNAL AHBIGUITY FUNCTION um! VARIABLE SCALE 0" AXIS 0F
DELAYS

Leningrad PRIHBNBNIYE HETODOV OPTICHBSKOY OBRABO‘I'KI INFORHATSII I QOLIXBRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 358-360

[Article by S. V. Levyy and Ye. K. Slnarev]
[Text] Annotation

An optical system is suggested for calculating a signal
ambiguity function. The capability of controlling the scale
on the axis of delays is shown. Experimental results are
given for calculation of the ambiguity function for sampled

signals.

An optical system for calculating the FN [ambiguity function] of signals in a

narrow-band approximation was described in [1]. In this system, a signal was set
in two spatial modulators along the orthogonal spatial axes. Zlhe shortcomings in

this system include the rigid requirements on the quadratic geometry of the input
modulator which precludes the possibility of implementation of a multichannel sys-
tem. and the presence in the output field of complex amplitude of distortion phase
factor fo the type exp j 277' vy. These shortcomings can be eliminated if one of
the input signals u(t) is represented in the spatial modulator in the form u(x+y),
where x, y are the spatial coordinates in the input plane. Converting the function
u(x) into u(x+y) can be considered a shift to an oblique-angled system of coordi-
nates and can be represented in the form of

«my; - F“; It; [away/Mug” u)

where Fx and 5:1 are, respectively, the operators of a direct and inverse Fourier
X
transform.

Thus, according to [1]. the necessary signal transformation can be made optically
based On two one-dimensional Fourier stages and a phase transparency that is a
wedge in the plane Ix, yc, which increases linearly along one spatial coordinate at

an angle. Let us consider the possibility of implementing this transparency based
on the two cylindrical lenses in fig. 1. The transmission of the cylindrical lens
turned at angle ‘P to the x axis can be notated in the form of [2]

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

ﬁla'l*eqoyérx"-qo-lﬂ‘;(amV-IMYI,‘ (2)
where K.“/ t f“ is the focal distance of the lens.

Accord ingly. the transmission of the two V
cylindrical lenses turned at angles? 1 . x'
and ? 2 will be
a. 5.. “7° 11% We"? :r‘wr‘w 'tw‘w‘a W‘w- wk
faimﬁmﬁ-txymﬁmnl. (3) a.-
Fig. 1.

Considering f, I-f. n}; and Y, I ~11 a? , then

Wayl- Wy‘jfx/MH (4)

Thus. the transmission function of this lens system corresponds to the required
transmission function for the phase transparency.

.b‘wa Z'Q Wt

Ftss 2'
Fig. 2 illustrates a complete optical scheme for computing the ambiguity function.
In planes 1 and 5, the input signal appears along the x coordinate. Wtical systea

2-3-4 effects transformation of the image from plans 1 into an oblique-angled sys-
tem of coordinates in plane 5 in accordance with the a1goritlla.(1). The field of

complex amplitude in plane 5 behind the phase transparency can be notsted as

a, WM“? 736‘ WW"? '1! wit/ivy f I: Jets)

After effecting the inverse Fourier transfer: by f and reflection by y, the field
in plane 5 will be

a,a...”Wowwen-mama:

where 0 denotes the convolution operator, 3 is the delta function of Dirac. and
f0 is the focal distance of the astigamtic pairs 2 and 10 on the x axis. The last

expression corresponds to the representation of the image of u(x, y) in the oblique-
angled system of coordinates with the angle between the axes J'¢’0.¢no '

9‘ ' .ansr '(7)

9h
roe omcm. use ONLY
If transparencies with transmission u(x) are placed in planes 1 and S, then the
field of complex anplitude of the light in plane 8 can be represented in the form:

[war/:Iwﬂa/a.ifIMIV/uyjstuaxda (3)

(here the scale factors that depend on the paranotere of the astigmatic pair 6 and
7 are omitted).

Thus, generated at syeteu output is a two-dimensional anbiguity function of the
signal being analyzed with distorti phase factors and at a scale on the axis of
delays, determined by the pereneterr$ .

Fig. 3a illustrates an example of treneforaation of coordinates in an image with
three values of the para-eter 'f , and fig. 3b [figuree not reproduced] shows the
result of computation of the mutual ambiguity function of eampled aignals for four
values of the ecsle on the axis of delays.

B 181. ICXERAPHY

I. Said. R. and Cooper, 0., "Crosapath Real-Tine Optical Oorrelator and Inbiguity
Function Proceaaor," PROC. 125, Vol 120, No lo, p 423, 1973.

2. Shmrev, Ye. K. and Levyy, S. V., "Aatigmatic System for Optical Transforraation
of Coordinates," PIS'HA V Zh‘ri‘, No 20, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: LiYaF , 1980

8565
(ISO: Bible/C717

MOMUSEONLY
'\II UI'I'ILIAL was. UI‘LI

WC 536(0.75.8):621 .391

HIGH-FREQUENCY ACOUSTO-OPTIC ORTHMONAL FILTERS

Leningrad PRIHBNENIYE HETODOV OPTICHBSKOY OBRABOTKI INFURMATSII I GOLOGWII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 361-365

[Article by V. N. Ushskov]
[Text] Annotation

Proposed in this work is the Implementation of high-frequency
orthogonal filters based on an scousto-optic corre.ator, which
is in essence a line electricel filter, the pulse response of
which is defined by the structure of the reference transparency.

The fectors that restrict the capability of synthesis of such
filters by methods of acousto-optics are pointed out.

It is Ivnown that high-frequency (VCh) orthogonal filters can be efficiently used in
solving a number of radio engineering problems. In particular, they are promising
in the synthesis of high-frequency band-pass filters or in correlation analysis of
high-frequency random processes [1]. However, if traditional radio engineering
methods are used as the basis for circuit solutions for high-frequency orthogonal
filters, then implementation of the required frequency responses of electronic
filters with a given accuracy is a complex engineering problem, and in s number of
cases it is fundamentally impossible.

The broad functional capabilities of optical information processing systems now
permit development of devices for various purposes based on them. For example, de-
scribed in [2] is an orthogonal coherent optical filter, implemented on the basis
of a thermoplastic record, which determines the relative complexity of its practical
execution. Also, the device functions only in quasi-reel time.

Suggested in this work is implementation of high-frequency orthogonal filters on a
base of a known ecousto-opticsl (A0) correletor [3], which is essentially a line
electrical filter, the pulse response of which is defined by the structure of the
reference trensperoncy. aach a filter has certain advantages compared to radio
engineering implementations. In particular, synthesis of a filter with a given
pulse response comes down to manufacturing a reference transparency with a suitable
principle for varying its transmittance, and in a number of ceses, that which can
not be made by radio engineering methods is implemented in the AD correlator. In
the process, the relative simplicity and universality of the device that is attained

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
when variation in the nature of the pulse response entails just replacement of the
reference transparency makes the M) a very attractive elternativa.

Let us coneider an A0 implementation of a quasi-orthogonal high-frequency basis of
‘h" ‘m Mommmwwuu}. where (Y: ml

is a known system of low-frequency orthogonal functions (t - 1, 2, 3, ...) end '0
is the angular frequency of the high-frequency process subject to orthogonal de-
composition. A structural diagru of the simplest A0 correletor is shown in fig. 1.

 

Fig. 1.

It is composed of en ultrasonic light modulator (M), which includes acoustic line
2 with piezo transducer 8, reference transparency 3, cylindrical transforming lens
a, diephragme l and 5, which restricts the input collimstsd beam 9 and cuts out one
of the first orders of the diffrsction pattern at focal distance F, respectively.
Radio signal 8(t) is .fed to the UHS input end current, the complex envelope of
which is designated Iw(t), is removed from the device, photo detector 6/band-pass
amplifer 7.

Since in the expression‘f’ 1(02: wot, the function ‘9‘ (t) in the general case is

slterneting, then let ue write the relationship for the pulse response of the i-th
orthogonal high-frequency filter from the system

Wt(t)::: wot} in such a way that the amplitude multiplier describes the AH prin-
ciple. and let us sttribute the change of its sign to the phase function

9“} . Ls.

' ' lull vmm 5",. («M '95:).
a ‘ 0 u «no
°'°. 6J0. {r if ﬁle/<0. -

Thus, the pulse responee h1(t) of the i-th orthogonal high-frequency filter is a
radio signal with carrier wol2 IT, modulated in amplitude by the law I W1(t)| and

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'l'll IAI. U3: UNLI

which has phase manipulation in accordance with elk). Implementation of pulse

responses of this type in an A0 correlator (fig. 1) entails no fundamental diffi-
culties since preparing 2N reference transparencies of different structure is
enough for this (N is the number of terms in the orthogonal series implementable in
the device). However, the high-frequency range, the solution to this problem en-
counters considerable technological difficulties that can be completely overcome by
using the two-dimensional reference transparency described in [5, 5]. This trans-
parency consists of a set of coding and carrying transparencies superimposed on
each other. ‘lhe first is described by the binary two-dimensional function of
transmittance and defines by its structure the law of FM and All of the recorded
signal. ‘lhe second is a homogeneous diffraction grating rotated relative to the
optical axis 3 of the device (fig. 1) by a small angle. The spatial period of the
grating along the x axis defines the carrier of the recorded signal.

Fig. 2.

Shown for example in fig. 2 are the structures of the two-dimensional reference
transparencies corresponding to the first three orthogonal Legendre polynomials of
the first kind Po(x) - 1, P10!) - x, P2(x) - 0.5(3x - 1 ). 'lhe shaded areas are

the regions of transmittance of the coding masks.

Thus, in e system of an A0 correlator with two-dimensional reference transparency,
implementation of orthogonal high-frequency filters is very promising. Indeed,

in the first place, the necessary multichanneling is easily implemented; second,
the appropriate pulse response is easily synthesized in a single channel on the
base of the two-dimensional reference transparency; and third, the A0 devices offer
great possibilities in terms of increasing speed.

In conclusion, let us note that there are two factors that limit the possibilities
of synthesizing orthogonal filters by the methods of acousto-optics. ‘Ihey include
the limited duration of recordable reference signals and the significant level of
internal noises. lbwever, the advantages, mentioned above, of AD orthogonal fil-
tere as wall as the progress achieved in overcoming the noted shortcomings [6] per-
mit the expectation that A0 filters will find efficient application in solving
problems entailing othogonal filtration.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BIBLIWRAPHY

l. Antonov, 0. Ya. and Ivanyuk, I. P., RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELBKI'RONIKA, No 9,
pp 1907-1915, 1977.

2. Oatrovakty, A. 8.; Rallev, I. N.; and Pochernyayav. I. 11., in "Golograftya 1
obrabotka tnfor-atall" [Holography and Information Proceaatns], Leningrad,
"Nauka", p 1101, 1976.

3. (Carlton, 8.; Halonay, V. and Melts, 8.), TIIER, Vol 57, No S, p 32, 1969.

lo. Yegorov, Yu. V. and Ushakov, V. IL, Paton: No 605185, OTKRYTIYA, IZOBRETENI‘IA,
PROHYSHLBNNYYE OBRAZTSY, mm 2W1, No 16, p 166, 1978.

5. Yegorov, Yu. V. and Uahakov, V. N., RADIOTEIOINIKA I ELEKTRONIM, 80 5,
pp 1092-1091;, 1979.

6. "Physical Acoustics, Principles and Hathoda," ad. by H. Haaon and R.
Thurston , Vol 7, Moscow, "Mir", 1971..

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1980

8545
C80: SIM/0217

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm UH'ICIAI. UM ONLY

UDC 621.391.16
IMPROVING SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIO IN ACOUSTObOPTICAL SPECTIDH ANALYZBRS

Leningrad PRDBNENIYE HETODOV OPTICi‘IESKOY 03mm}: WWII I GOWWII In
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 366-370

[Article by T. N. Sergeyenko and V. I. Yakovlev]
[Text] Annotation

A possible alternative for improving the dynamic range of
acouato-optical spectrum analyzers is considered. The

method entails narrowing the band for passage of the receiving
path which is achieved by incorporating additional deflection
of one of the light beams participating in the optical
heterodyning.

In recent years. acousto-optical spectrum analyzers have begun to be used in vari-
ous fields of radio engineering. However, more extensive application of them is
hindered by the limited dynamic ranges of both the acousto-optical modulators used
as the input device and the matrices of the photo detectors that convert the light
distributions into electrical signals.

There are a number of engineering solutions [1, 2] aimed at extending the dynamic
range of the photo detectors in the analyzers that generate the energy spectra of
the signals being received.

In this paper, we discuss a possible alternative for improving the dynamic range of
acousto-optical spectrum analyzers in which the output signal is generated as a re-
eult of the interference of two light beams on the photo sensitive surface of the
photo detector [3, 4]. Photo multiplier tubes are mainly used as the photo deteco
tors since in the spectrum analyzers in question, broad-band photo detectors with
considerable dimensions of the light sensitive surface have to be applied. Ihe
signal-to-noise ratio [SNR] at their output has to be improved to improve the
dynamic range of the spectrum analyzer.

It is knovn [5] that the SNR in optical heterodyning is defined by the relationship:

£- -‘%~f.’ 35-1“ "I
where 9 is the quantum efficiency of the photo cathode, 5' is Planck's con-

stant, 9 is the light frequency, Pc is the power of the signal light beam and
a};.- is the band of the photo detector path. This formula is valid for the small

100
F08‘0FFEJA1.USE‘0NLY
power of the signal light beam compared to the power of the reference beam. lt fol-
lows from it that the SNR of the photo detecting path can be improved by increasing
the power of the signal and consequently the reference beams. or by narrowing the
path bandwidth. The first method entails increasing the power of the laser and is
undesirable. Therefore. the second method is more expedient.

Fig. 1 shows a diagram of an accusto-
optical spectrum analyzer in which
the band of the photo detecting

path Aid; is not tied to the bend
of the radio signals to be analyzed
and can be made considerably
narrower than the latter. Its
minimum value is determined mainly

by the transient processes in the
electrical circuits.

 

The main unite in the spectrum
analyzer are two acouato-
optical modulators made of
identical material. The first modulator, the signal, is used to input the signal
to be analyzed. The second, the reference, is used to input a signal with a fre-
quency varying in time according to the linear law. This signal creates a refer-
ence light beam scanning in the plane of recording within the bend of spatial fre-
quenciee to be analyzed. A condition for obtaining a signal at the output of the
analyzer isthecollinearity of the reference and signal beams. However, as shown
in the diagram, the central frequencies of the modulators differ from each other by
the value of (f'- fr). Therefore, when the velocities of propagation of the ultra-
sonic wavee in the modulators, V, areequal, collinearity is achieved by the
modulators being illuminated by different light beams being propagated at an angle
A9 to each other. To ensure collinearity, this condition has to be met:

.fo = 35" +A6
v v

As a result of heterodyning, at the output of the photo detector a signal will be
generated with the central frequency

Fig. 1. Diagram of acousto-opticel spectrum
analyzer

 

’ph. det. band - ’aig - {ref' (2)
Making use of relationship (1), we can derive
V
fph. det. bend-X A9' (3)

Hence it follows that the central frequency of the photo detecting path and its
band are not a function of the central frequency and band of the signals to be

analyzed. This permits narrowing the band of the photo detecting path and
unproving the SNR.

This result is explained by the fact that when the input signal frequency is
changed by the value of Af, the frequency in the reference signal must be shifted
by the same value to obtain the condition of collineerity.

101
F0!.0FFICLAL.US£10NLN
I'D“ UPPILIAI. 050. URL!

The scheme described above was studied experimentally. To generate two light beans
at the input of the modulators, we used a diffraction grating with subsequent fil-
tration of the unusable diffraction orders. The central frequencies selected for
the modulators were 27 MHz and 31 Hﬂz. Two harmonic oscillations with frequencies
of 24 MHz and 30 MHz were input to the signal modulator. An 15-75 laser was used
as the light source and the FEU-27 served as the photo detector. Connected to its

output were band-pass filters with various band widths having a central frequency
of 5 MHz.

Shown in fig. 2a [not reproduced] are the output signals from a spectrum analyzer
with a filter band of 6 ills. It can be seen that they are practically indistin-
guishable in the noise background. This is due to the low level of power of the
beams being heterodynsd. Improvement in the SNR was observed when the filter band-
width was narrowed (in the process, the frequencies oi the input signals and power
of the beams being heterodyned were not changed).

Fig. 2b [not reproduced] shows a filter band of 1 MHz, and fig. 2c [not reproduced]
a band of 100 kHz. The results obtained indicate the effectiveness of the
described method.
In conclusion, let us note that this method permits making use of a photo
detecting path with a band in a unit of megahertz in analyzing signals in the
SVCh [microwave] range.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Patent No 3942109, USA, 1976.
2. Patent No 393b153, USA, 1976.

3. Kulakov, s. V.; Razzhivin, B. P.; Sokolov, S. 1.; and Tigin, D. V.,
Patent No 337730, 1072 g., cl. 601, ch. 23/16.

a. "Physical Acoustics," ed. by W. Mason , pp 311—426, Moscow, "Mir", 1974.

5. King, D. 6., "pulse Compression by Optical Correlation Techniques," MARCONI
REVIEW, Vol 31, no 171, pp 209-239, 1968.

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1980

8565
C80: 8154/0217

102
FOI1OFFK3A1.USE(NVLY
UDC 621.396:535.8

DETERMINING TIME POSITION OF COMPLEX SIGNALS WITH LONG DURATION BY ACOUSTO-OPTICAL
CONVOLVERS

Leningrad PRIHEQENIYE HETODOV OPTICHESKOY OBRABOTKI INVOIHATSII I GOLOGIAFII in
Russien 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 371-374

[Article by A. V. Kuzichkin]
[Text] Annotetion

The problem of sesrching for complex signele of long duretion
by using e system of en ecousto-opticsl convolver end e
recirculeting deley line is considered. Bveluetions ere mede
of stetisticel cherecteristics of procedure for determining
the time position of complex signele received in e background
of Geussien noise.

Seerching for end receiving complex redio signele under the conditions of uncer-
tainty of their time position is one of the most interesting fields of spplicstion
of scousto-opticel convolvers (ADK) [1]. In ceses when the duretion Tc of signele
being received (PS) does not exceed the signel deley time 15 in the region of the
ecoustooptic interection of the ecoustooptic convolver. the ecoustoopticel proces-
sor is elmost en esynchronous processing systems end permits determining the time
position of complex signele ($8) with one-two cycles of their reception. Very
often, however, the duretion of complex signels is considerebly greeter then the
delsy time T , end then to eliminste energy losses thet occur in ecoustoopticsl
processing 0? complex signele with long duretion, coherent storege of convolver re-
sponses ere utilized by using recirculetion deley lines (RLZ) [2] or photo-P2"
[expension unknown] [3]. As eresult of this, the ecoustooptic processor loses in-
variance to the time position of the P3 [signele being received] end requires use
of speciel procedures for synchronizetion.

Evelusted in this work ere the cepebilities of repid sesrching for complex signele
by the combined processing systems of the ecoustoopticel convolvers end recircule-
tion delsy lines. The structurel diegrem of the system in question is shown in
fig. 1, where 605 is the reference signel generator, 8 is the summer, L2 is the
delsy line, U is the emplifier. end V is the gets controlling the duretion of the
period of the storage of the signele Output from the ecoustoopticel convolver to
the recirculetion deley line. The preference given to the use of recirculetion
deley lines es eccumuletors is due to the circumstsnce thet in the mejority of reel
ceses. the spplicetion of recirculetion deley lines permits obteining the required

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

Key:
1. input . 1 , Ilia]
2. AOK [acoustooptical ( ) w. . H mm .
convolver: mm
3. RLZ [recirculation u
delay line] : “‘52) “A"...
Is. output ' —-°—+‘QJ
5. S [sumer] ' J M iota-s
6. L2 [delay 1m] (7)
7. 605 [reference signal W” M?”
generator]
8. V [gate] '

9. storage control
10. u [Emplifer]
ll. PS signals being
received] F18' l
12. 08 [reference signals]
13. acoustoopticsl convolver output
16. recirculation delay line output

duration of the storage interval (to several milliseconds), and implementation of
an acoustooptical processor with recirculation storage is considerably simpler
than using photo-PIS [charge coupled devices].

In the most general case, the procedure for searching for complex signals by using
the acoustooptical convolver and recirculation delay line consists in serial step
correlation analysis of the signals being received with various values of reference
signal delay. The decision on detection of complex signals is made according to
the maximum of the signal output from the recirculation delay line after analysis
of the entire range of time ambiguity of the signals being received. An estimate
of the speed of successive searching for complex signals by the acosutooptical con-
volver and recirculation delay line system was made before the next mode of system
operation. The size of the range of acoustooptical interaction of the acousto-
optical convolver was chosen in such a way that for processing complex signals with
duration Te. an integer of recirculation loops is required: R . TelT3. The signal

being detected is formed by repetition of the complex signal formed according to
the law of the same pseudorandom sequence. The reference signal is formed by
splitting the initial complex signal into R segments, with duration T each. and
by time inversion of the segments obtained. The start of the recirculation period
coincides with the start of the first reference signal sage-tent. The reference
signal is detected in a background of white Gaussian noise with zero mean and
correlation function I/NV,I(l‘-hl.

in operation of the processing system under such conditions, the value of the
correlation peak (KP) of the signal output from the recirculation delay line and
the time of its emergence are a function of the time mismatch AT between the start
of the signal being detected and the reference signal:

10h
roe omcw. use ONLY
koﬁcu- IA? I 1213) torA'rr [-21 , 213],
‘KP 0 for remaining values ofAT,AtkP-Tc-AT/2,

where 8c is the energy of the signal being detected in duration ‘l‘c, Inc is the con-
stant factor of proportionality andA 1'B[-Tc12, TcIZ].

bet us evaluate the search system speed by th mean quantity of periods of the com-
plex signal, the detection of which is necessary to determine the time position of
the signal being detected: _

Q I RI]. PM,

where 1 .ATstepleelay’ ATstep

reference signal in serial investigation of the zone of the possible time position
of the signal being detected) and Ppr is the probability of the proper determina-

is the search step (value of time shift of

tion of the time position of the signal being detected after one-tine analysis of
the entire range of its ambiguity:

.. ﬁr '1 1!? H): ‘ - ,.
I: v u «9o (-0: "Id”: 1]. (A, ulIJ-w(u‘/zlldu;. '
A: .2tn/l"; f. ”Ea 0‘“ ”/II); [5"gé/Miﬂ‘ '3'”,

lo(') is a modified Bessel function of the first sort of zero order, M - B - lo for
l- 1, M - B - 2 for l - 2 and B - base of the complex signal.

The results of calculation of the dependence of 6 on the nunber of recirculation
loops R and the

energy excess of the signal being detected h: are shown in the table. Table data

are derived for a signal with the base 16386. The speed of the serial procedure
for determining the time position of the complex signal was investigated for two

search steps Argtep' Tdelayu - 1) and ATstep' 2 Tdelayu . 2). Also, evaluation

of the value of Q was made for the case of the most unfavorable search conditions
(value of Q is givgn in the denominator) and for the case of the best search con-
ditions (value of Q is given in the numerator). The difference of these cases
consists in the different values of the current time mismatchAT. Thus, when

AT . 0. the decision on detection of the complex signal is made by the correlation

peak of the highest value (h: - hg), and under unfavorable conditions, the decision
is made according to the correlation peak of the significantly lesser value
(hz - (0.5 .+ 0.7) h: ).

p min

From the results obtained, it can be seen that with relatively small values of h:
(less than or equal to 10), the highest speed of searching for a complex signal is

reached with the search step equal to Tdelay' But in the case of detection of sig-

nals under the conditions of a large energy excess of a complex signal (h: greater

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
than

a v“ vs a as—sII- we... usua-s

 

or equal to 20), for rapid determination of the time position of the signal

being detected, it is advisable to use a search with a step of ZTdelay' The mean

dura

tion of the procedure for detecting complex signals in this case is close to

RTc/Z, which is faster by the factor of DIR than when complex signals are searched

for by using conventional correlation detectors [4].

1.

4.

COPY

8545
C80:

BXSLIOGRAPHY
Kulskov, S. V., "Akustoopticheskiye ustroystva spektral'nogo i korrelyetsion-
nogo analize aignalov" [Acoustooptical Devices for Spectral and Correlation
Analysis of Signals], leningrad, "Nauka", 1978.

Morgan, D. P. and Hannah, J. H., [Surface Have Recirculation Loops for Signal
Processing], IEEE TRANS. SONICS AND ULTRASONICS, Vol 25, No 1, p 30, 1978.

Spregue, R. A. and Koliopoulos, C. L., [Time Integrating Acoustooptic Correla-
tor], APPLIED OPTICS, Vol 15, p 89, 1976.

Tuzov, G. 1., “Statistichaskaya teoriya priyena slozhnykh signalov"
[Statistical Theory of Complex Signal Detection], Moscow, "Sov. radio", 1977.

RIGHT: LIYaF, 1980

8144/0217

106
FOI‘OFTNC1A1.USE€DNLY
UDC 68l.7.069.32
BANDNIDTH EVALUATION IN OPTICAL INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS

Leningrad PRIHENENIYB HETODOV OPTICNESKOY OBRABOTKI INFORHAISII I COLOGRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 375-379

[Article by K. Ye. Rusyantsev and V. S. Firsov]
[Text] Annotation

The value is determined for the optimal bandwidth of the
detecting channel in a light pulse detector, the value of
which differs substantially from that recommended in the
radio range.

Constructing photo detectors of the F30 [photo multiplier] type with a bandwidth of
more than 50 MN: for optical information proceaaing systems is a rather complex
problem. In connection with this, it has become necessary to examine the possibili-
ty of applying photo detectors with a limited bandwidth in systems for detecting
nanosecond pulses tu.

In [1, 2], an expression was dervied to describe the shape of single-electron
pulses of a photo multiplier under the condition of exponential distribution of time
of transit by electrons of the interdynode spacing, zero initial velocity and no
space charge. For a photo detector with N identical multiplying stages and a con-
stant exponential distribution 7', the pulse characteristics of the photo multiplier
are defined by the expression:

A, .
1
£th 777777 {f/«yl'f’l, . (I)
where I?!” is a gamma function.

Knowledge of the analytic expression (1) for describing the frequency response per-
mits defining the effective photo detector bandwidth:

. r/mgﬂ U
‘f'rv’ 5?? I‘M/ell ' m

The shape of the electrical pulse at the output of the photo multiplier upon recep-
tion of a light signal with a rectangular envelope can be described by the formula:

10?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I VI\ U. O 0%.“... Vela. \Os‘u.

(Iv/.211 .
where (ﬁx, is an incomplete gssma function, and
II!) is a step function.

here the pulse amplitudes are normalized relative to the signal at the output of
the photo multiplier in the prescribed mode with the effect on input of a drop in
light intensity.

Upon detection of a pulse light signal, the spectral density of the noise current
at the output of the photo multiplier is limited to the frequency response of the
latter. end the fluctuating process is nonstetionary, varies in time and is depen-
dent on the value of the photo current. The mean square of the random process at
the output of the photo detector B(t,t) with pulse response (1) can be found by the
formula:

3 u _ MAM 2t/rl_ a 2M;
.39.! ' (I!) W I’l'tu/WJ”

where d"£‘}“”"/"‘fW/tu is the dispersion of the fluctuating current of
the photo detector, e is the electron charge,p is the factor of multiplication of
the secondary photo multiplier, (1+‘ ) is the coefficient that corrects for the
noise of the secondary-emission multiplication of the photo multiplier, and TI is
the mean nunber of photons detected within a light pulse duration.

Knowledge of the noise and frequency responses of photo detectors permits switching
to the problems of optimization of the bandwidth of the detecting channel in the
mode of detection of light signals. The detector picks out the maximal value of
the fluctuating process at the output of the photo detector within the observation
interval end compares it to the threshold level. The instantaneous values of cur-
rent fluctuations at the output of the detector are considered distributed accord-
ing to the normal law with mean dispersions:

In, 09:13,”. ,‘ 4,‘-!s/4¢//'//M;4fw, (6)
m, m. 114411,; 4,5471%“
respectively, on the assumption of fulfilling the hypothesis on the absence or

presence of a signal in the analyzed time interval. Here, F, and Tic is the mean

number of photons of the background and signal radiations detected within the
light pulse duration, and ’.E, 1/7,, is the signal and background radiation power
ratio.

The coefficients Km and K6 represent the maximum values, corresponding to

expressions (3) and (lo).

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The decision on the presence of a signal in the enelyzed time interval is made
when the process exceeds the threshold level C, the value of which is found

according to the given probability of a false alarm [PAT]:

C W. id. ‘73-?! ’ [2,), <6) '

-1
where 6PM] is the function, inverse to

CPI.” ngqu- t/tzlcﬂ.

Considering relations (2), (5) end (6), let us find the equation for the

detector performance: .
£ﬂ,¢(2r§l'cp./I‘Erl )
I'Kn‘ ,

The relationships shown in the figure
indicate the existence of an optimal
value of the bandwidth of the detector
channel A f0” which minimizes the

probability of missing a signal. However,
the value of the letter differs sub-
stantially from thet recalls-ended in the
radio range.

 

Fig. Relationship between detector be
width and detector performance
with fixed values of false elars

probability, q and :.

Key:
1. detector performance
2. false alarm probability

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t0“ UI'I'ILIAL use. ONLY

Table. Signal Miss Probability

 

Selecting the band of lltu would lead not only to significant complication of the

entire amplifier channel, including the photo detector, but would also yield an
excessive value for the signal miss probability, Pb (see table). Thus, for

example. when 3 a 5.2 and q - 20, the difference in the value of the P; would be
more then 14 orders.

Let us note the weak variation in the value of the detection probability in the
neighborhood of the optimal bandwidth which permits an additional reduction in the
band without substantially impairing the probability characteristics. This
permits designing amplifier channels including photo detectors with high amplifi-
cation.

A feature of optical systems is that the optimal bandwidth value is a function of
the value of the signal and background radiation power ratio. Thus, while when
q - 2, the optimal bandwidth value is 0.33 tn, when q - 10, it is 0.25 tu and

when q . 40, it is only 0.18 tn.
Thus, we have shown a substantial difference between the optimal bandwidth for the
detecting channel in a light signal detection system and that recommended in the

radio range and the dependence of the letter on the signal and background
radiation power ratio.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vetokhin, S. S. et al.. "Odnoelektronnyye fotopriyemniki" [Single-Electron
Photo Detectors], Moscow, "Atomizdat", 1979.

2. Vereshkin, A. Ye., "Determining the Correlation Function of Nonstetionary
Noise of Dissector and Superorthicon Chambers," RADIOTEKRNIKA I
ELBKTRONIKA, p 38, No 12, 1968.

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1980
8505
C80: 8106/0217

110
FOI'OFFKJAL.USE(NULY
UDC 621.391.268z535

OPTICAL PROCESSING OF SIGNALS HITB ENHANCED RESOLUTION IN NONCONERZNT LIGNT.
OPTICAL SYSTEMS WITH FIXED REFERENCES USING NONCONERENT LIGHT FOR REAL-TIME SIGNAL
PROCESSING

Leningrad PRINENENIYB HETODOV OPTICNESKOY OBRABOTKI INFORMATSII I GOLOGRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 380-386

[Article by V. V. Gushchin, E. H. Zuykova and S. N. Rubtsov]
[Text] Annotation

The possibility of increasing the resolution of devices for
processing information in noncoherent light through two-
dimensional representation of the signal at input to the
processing system is discussed.

In s number of problems in radio physics, it is necessary to perform spectral
analysis with a resolution that is considerably beyond the capabilities of existing
spectrometers. This is primarily true for problems involving measurement of the
width of a spectral line, studying wideband signals and isolating harmonic signals
in a background of noise.

The resolution of conventional spectral analyzers is lbsitsd to the width of the
input aperture according to time or a coordinate, i.e. the duration of the realiza-
tion subjected to spectral analysis and the number of frequency channels. This
shortcoming may be overcome if, for example, s two-dimensional optical spectral
analysis and raster recording of the signal at input are made use of [1]. The
recording can be obtained, for instance, by photographing the raster from a CRT
screen generated by a line-by-line breakdown of the signal which modulates the CRT
beam in intensity. A two-dimensional spectral analysis of the recording obtained
can be performed in both coherent and noncoherent light [1, 2]. do a result of
spectral analysis in the direction of the K: axis, the resolution 2""IDx is

obtained, where Dx is the raster line length; in the direction of Ky, we have a set
of comb filters with the resolution of l/NDx, where N is the number of lines in the

raster. If at the input we have the sinusoidal signal of the spatial frequency K,
then at the output of the analyzer, K can be represented in the form of
K - n2 U70" +AK, where A K lies within the interval [-F/D‘, *meo The first

term in the expression yields the rough value of the frequency, and the second, the
precise. A similar two-dimensional spectral analysis can be obtained without

111
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US€INVLY
I'UK UPI'IIJAL U3!”- URL!

advance recording on photographic f ills in optical processing schaes With time
integration. hem now on we shall be discussing only this type of system [3].

Shown in fig. 1 is s diagram of a two-
dimensional fourier transform with fixed
references in noncoherent light [4].

Used as input 1 is a CRT "without
storage" that is placed at the input of
the optical spectral analyzer, assembled
according to the scheme of the Meyer-
Eppler two-dimensional correlator with
fixed transparencies, zonal Fresnel plates
of the type

 

cosck (x2 + yz). One zonal plate is
placed on the CRT screen, the other at
some distance d in plane 2. The light
beams emitted by all input elements are
uniformly distributed relative to the normal to the source in the effective range
of the angles and modulated by the first and second transparencies. Corresponding
to the various beam directions are the various delays of the first plane relative
to the second. By the end of the recording of the raster on multichannel inte-
grator 4, placed in the focal plane of lens 3, the function of correlation of the
images of planes 1 and 2 is generated.

Fig. 1.

The informative part of the correlation function is a two-dimensional Fourier
transform of the type:

qb~ ‘
. ﬂfmmammgyowdaoy, . m
where f(x,y) is the raster recording of the signal at input, “I "i p

S" ‘c o 2"#/ and F is the focal distance of lens 3. Compared to spectral
analysis of the raster recording on photographic film, in this method storage from
input is transferred to output. The system operates in real time with no delay
since the result of the analysis is obtained by the and of the recording of the
realization. The frequency range of analysis is determined by the scanning speed.
However, the maximum number of elements of resolution for the Kx and Ky axes is

limited to the diffraction effects and may be~ 503603 2000, if we consider the
minimum resolvable element equal to gm- . Hith that, the dynamic range is

Another method of two-dimensional spectral
analysis with time integration can be im-

plemented according to the scheme of a l I
two-dimensional correlator (fig. 2) with

movable transparencies, two zonal Fresnel ,% lg
plates 3 and 6. The product of the trans-

parencies contains the couponsnt

. .cﬁmc'ma saw 013') h
gamlnf-U, ye]?! . "I , V Cr. Fig. 2.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Displacement along the x axis is reciprocating according to the sawtooth law, while
along the y axis it is uniform:

«(l/eaten»! v4 my! '14). (2)

where "x - d vxx is the rough. and my - o\ v’y is the precise value of the fre-

quency. The plane of such a transparency is the raster of time frequencies. In
the scheme shown in fig. 2. the signal, varying in time, modulates in brightness
input 1, which by lens 2 uniformly illuminates the plane of reference 3 and lo.

Then the reference plane is projected by lens 5 to the multichannel time integrator
6. where the signal spectrum is represented at coordinates w‘, w’. The shortcoming

with this type of analysis is the limitation on the frequency range at the top

because of the use of mechanical displacement and the complexity of making the
reference standard.

Another method of analysis is possible with a simpler reference standard of the
best quality but requiring a greater nunber of elements. This is the use of multi-
channel optical analyzers of the spectrum with the reference standard of

cos at, which can be implemented in the form of a rotating disk or crossed
optical gratings. A widebend signal is divided into a series of signals with a
narrower band by using electric filters. The signals go from the electric filters

to the light modulators and spectral analysis is performed simultaneously from all
modulators.

Another method is the use of two series connected multichannel optical spectral
analyzers. with that, one can make use of schemes with time integration both with
movable and fixed reference standards. M schemes of analysis are possible with
the series connection.

In the first case, initially subjected to analysis is the result of the time
quantization of the signal at a frequency that does not satisfy the sampling
theorem [5]. Hith that, the signal spectra is not uniquely defined. Ambiguity
is eliminated by secondary spectral analysis of the phase structures in the series
of spectral realizations of the quantized signal. The scheme of such analysis is
shown in fig. 3 [5]. In this scheme, the
signal being analyzed f(t) modulates the
light of input device 1 in intensity.
The variable component of the plane of
the reference mask lo is~ cosd (x)t.
Lenses 3, S and 9 effect the projection
of planes 1 to 7 along the y axis and 7
to 11 along the x and y axes. A set of
realizations of the spectrum is obtained
at the output of the multichannel time
integrator 11. Fig. 3b illustrates the
spectrum at the coordinates w and channel
number n of a sampled Doppler signal re-
flected by scatterers distributed in some
volume. If a continuous signal f(t) is
fed to input device 1 and it is scanned

 

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVS Ul‘l‘dklﬂu Uéa. VI‘LI

along the y axis for time T, then analysis of an individual resolvable element on
the y axis is equivalent to analysis of the input signal quantized with the scan
frequency. Fig. 3c illustrates the result of the primary spectral analysis of the
harmonic signal. Plotted on the horizontal axis is the frequency corresponding to
the value of the frequency of the signal ambiguously within the range 1/21.
Derived on the vertical N axis is the distribution of the phases of the spectral
realizations. A secondary spectral analysis along the N axis is performed by the
system similar to that discussed below and consisting of elements 2, 4. 6, 8, 10
and 12. Fig. 3d illustrates the result of analysis of the harmonic signal at out-
put 12 at the coordinates of the rough frequency value nIT and the precise fre-
quency value within the range of 1/ZT.

The frequency response of such a system can be represented in the form of:

gem,“ M/Va"; ‘s‘J-U' 27%,“)72m/l

”(“4 ’Jl(ﬂ";::-)72“/2

mM(%‘£;§: ”4W“ 37%}sz '

M(7;; -¢.Iy/~£,-.’5,¢)ru7./z

(3)
where 0"“; " IVE." . 72" is the auxiliary scan in the first stage of analysis
and E? - is the scan during the reading in the second stage of
analysis.

The second method of analysis with series connection of two multichannel analyzers

is as follows: obtaining in the first stage the current spectrum (rough analysis),
and then refinement of the frequency in the second stage by spectral analysis along
the coordinate of the current spectrum.

With two-stage analysis, the number of independent frequency channels is‘v 104 and
the dynamic range is Iv 30 db. It should be noted that the two-stage analysis can
be replaced by one stage if the product of reference standards of the type cos k y
and cos th is used. y

A special case of analysis with enhanced resolution is analysis on the intermediate
frequency (fig. b). in the scheme shown a _ __w
in fig. 4, the signal fed to modulator 1, ﬁg; “ii-L"
CRT with scan along the y axis. is in ad- 3.. u
dition turned around the x axis synchro- Ihu‘I
nously with the intermediate frequency. “I: as“.
Synchronism results in the brightness " "“
marks of the signal being shifted on the
CRT screen along the auxiliary scan from
frame to frame. The rate of their shift-
ing and the direction depend on the value

and sign of the signal frequency relative
to the intermediate.

   

11h
roe omau use any
Reference standard 2 has the form: cos (°L(x)t - Kox, where Kb is the spatial

frequency along the x axis, proportional to the intermediate spatial frequency K .
As the reference standard, we can make use of, for example, a rotating disk "P
with multitrack recording of the various spatial frequencies on the disk circle.

In doing so, the track numbers are placed on the x axis and the number of periods
in each track on the x axis equals the number of periods of the intermediate fre-
quency in the auxiliary scan. To determine the sign of the difference between the
signal and intermediate frequencies, each frequency track is recorded twice so that
the phase of the reference standard signal decreases as the disk rotates in one
track, but increases in the other. Behind disk 2 at some distance from it on the z
axis, the correlation function is obtained along the x axis in the converging light
between the recording on the CRT and the reference standard signal on each track of
the reference disk. Then the astigmatic system 4 projects on the y axis the CRT
screen. and on the x axis, the plane of correlation to the multichannel integrator
5. in the multichannel integrator, independently for each point of the y axis, the
maximum output is obtained from that reference standard track for which the sign

and time frequency of the reference standard coincide with the sign and frequency
of the signal.

The frequency response from output 5 can be represented in the form of:

‘ Ill r
" ' 12' 9’ - : I-ﬁ‘l/z
(a?! ,0 faint A3! 2 .iuaﬁ4ad' £6: . (‘)

(x, mm; mzmaw- gr”; 7,

where T is the duration of the scan for the y axis, D is the dimension of the win-
dow of integration for the x axis and HT/Z is the integration time. Fig. 6 on the
right illustrates the result of analysis of two signals with frequencies differing
by :20 Hz on the intermediate frequency of 62,500 Hz and of the constants on the y
axis on the input CRT l. with analysis on the intermediate frequency, the problem
of separating the response to the signal from the response to the constant compon-
ent is made easier because the filling of the response to the signal corresponds to
the number of periods of the intermediate frequency in the auxiliary scan, and this
filling does not exist in the response to a constant component. Therefore, the

dynamic range of analysis on the intermediate frequency tan-30 db and is mainly

determined by the nonlinearity of the characteristic of the input CRT in luminance.

in conclusion, let us note that in the methods we have discussed anove for analysis
of signals with enhanced resolution, the requirement on the precision of making

the reference standard is not l/H, where M is the maximum number of points in the
spectrum, but ltvﬁf' With that, the precision of l/H is imposed on synchronization

of scans or separation of the realization into parts which are then analyzed with
the precision of NJ".

in such systems for spectral analysis with enhanced resolution, one can also effect
matched filtration of signals with linear frequency modulation, processing of sig-

nals from antenna arrays and others if the reference standard is changed in the
appropriate way.

115

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NHLY
I'Ult UI'I'ILIAI. U3! uh! I

BIBLIOGRAPEY
l. Yuu, E. 'l‘. 8., "Introduction to “meaty of Diffraction, Intonation Processing
and Holography," translated from English, ed. V. K. Sokolov, lbscov
"Sov. radio", 1979.
Z. Orlov, Ye. F. et al., Patent No 499520, bulletin No 2, published 15 Jan 1976.

3. szrev, V. A. and Orlov, Ye. P., "Opticheskiye analizatory" [Optical
Analyzers], Moscow, izdatel'stvo "Sov. radio", 1971.

a. Zverev, V. A. et al., Patent No 4&3328, bulletin No 36, published 15 Sep 197“.
S. Zverev, V. A. et al., Patent No #10327, bulletin No 1, published 5 Jan 197k.
COPYRIGHT: LIYOF, 1980

8545
C80: 8164/0217

116

FOI.0I11CLALI£HE(NVLY
OPTICAL METHODS OF PROCESSING SIGNALS FROM SEISMIC SOURCES

Leningrad PRIHENENIYE HETODOV OPTICHBSKOY OBRABOTKI INPOIHAISII I COLOGRAFII In
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 387-389

[Article by V. V. Gushchin and A. I. Khil'ko]
[Text] Annotation

Optical devices are described that permit measuring the fine
structure and phases of spectral components of a signal from
seismic sources.

Application of optical analyzers in processing seismic data usually involves
spectral-correlation analysis of seismic courses. And the main advantage of optical
methods is in the capability of simultaneous processing of a large number of chan4
nels. This advantage of optical systems can be used to determine the fine structure
of the spectrum of signals from seismic sources. For this, the source unidimen-
sional signal is represented in two-dimensional form by the densities of the "line
by line" recording. which permits processing a realization'of long duration [1].
Fig. 1 shows a diagram of a high-resolution
coherent spectrum analyzer. A two-dimen-
sional transparency with a recording of

the signal is illuminated by a converging
spherical wave, and with that. the two-
dimensional signal spectrum is generated

in the spectral plane. The spectrum with

a resolution of 2 Hz is derived (the so-
called rough frequency) on one axis, and

a resolution of 10'3Hz (precise frequency)
on the other coordinate.

 

117
INDliolﬂﬂC1A1.USl2(ﬂVLY
Fig. 2 illustrates the results of
measuring the fine structure of the
spectrum of the quasi-harmonic signal of
the SV 10/100 seismic generator. Signal
spectrum width is at its minimum when

T . T - 105 s. This indicates non-
opt.

stationary phase flucuationa of the sig-
nal. Minimum spectrum width for the

SV 10/100 generator, as follows from an
experiment, is 0.0011 “1. The capability
of two-dimensional processing in optics
can be used for measuring phase spectra
of signals. which can be used in seiso
mology for measuring dispersion
characteristics of the environment.

Fig. 3 is a diagram of a coherent
analyzer of the phase spectrum. The sig-
nal to be analyzed is entered in density
form in each channel simultaneously. In
each channel, a special form filter cuts
out an individual frequency, an image of
which is built in the output plane [2].
By reading the spatial phase of each of
the harmonics in the output plane rela-
tive to the selected system of coordi-
nates, one can measure the phase
spectrum of the signal.
8m I‘m X

IIII IIIIIII IIIIIIIIII
III III III IIIIIIIII

I|I|IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII
IIIIIIIIII IIIIIIIIIIII

 
  

=-
"=

Fig. lo.

Fig. A illustrates the results of measurements of the phase invariant of a trihar-
Ionic wave propagated in e disperse medium [3]. Used as the trihamonic wave in
this experiment use a sinusoidal wave with pheee modulation. Shown for clarity is
the moire structure derived when the signal with phase modulation is superimposed
on itself. Shown in fig. lo is the output plans of the analyzer for two values of
the phase invariant, ¢ - 0 and Q . q;

BIBLINRAPHY

1. Gushchin, V. V. nad Khil'ko, A. 1., "Determining Optimal Time for Accumulation
of Signals from Harmonic Sources," in "Prostranstvenno-vremennaya obrabotka
signalov" [Spatial- Time Processing of Signals], p 65, Voronazh, izd-vo V60, 1978.

2. Gushchin, V. V.; Mnrav' yev, N. I. and Khil'ko, A. 1., "Ansliz smplitudnogo i
fazobogo spektrov signalov v kogerentno-optichsskoy sisteme" [Analysis of

Amplitude and Phase Spectra of Signals in Coherent-Optical Systems], p 36.1% ls,
AVTOHETRIYA, 1979.

3. Zverev, V. A.. "Oh odnom novom metode issledovaniys dispersii ul'trazvuka"
[A New Method of Research of Dispersion of Ultrasonics], Coll. Emory of A. A.
Andronov, Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR,1955.

COPYRIGHT: LIYeF. 1980

8545
C30: SIM/021 7

119
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1100 55033458131
PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN OF OPTICAL DIGITAL comm FOR SEISMIC INFORMATION PROCESSIIC

Leningrad PRIHBNENIYE HBTODOV OPTICHBSKOY OBWI INFORHAISII. I GOLCXSRAFII in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 16 Dec 80) pp 390-394

[Article by V. P. Ivanchenkov and P. V. Hineyev]

[Text] Annotation

Principles of design and structure are discussed for a hybrid
optical digital complex (Mel!) on a base of optical computing
devices and the "Elektroniks Nita-031‘" microcomputer with
extended main storage.

A feature of seismic intonation is the large amount of data to be processed and
stored. Computers and various specialized electronic devices are now used to
process seismic data. Hybrid optical electronic systems are a new direction in

the evolution of information computing resources for processing geophysical data;
tehy permit raising system throughput and efficiency. Introduction of such systems
into practice is subntsntially expanding the capabilities of performing on-line
processing of seismograma under field conditions; it is intensifying the reverse

effect of results of processing on the techniques and technology of performing
geophysical operations.

0f considerable interest in this regard is the development, based on optical com-
puter devices and microprocessors, of high-speed small computer systems that can

be used for on-line analysis and preprocessing of data right with the seismic
prospecting crew.

Fig. 1 illustrates a structural diagram of an optical-digital complex for process-
ing seismic information obtained in the search for oil and gas. This system is
based on the "Elektronika "Ts-031‘“ microcomputer and an analog optical computer
(AOV) with a spatial-noncoherent source of radiation.

Intonation is input into the system from a digital seismic prospecting station
(SSTs) through an external unified bus‘(VUM) into the microcomputer or through a
normalizing amplifier (NU) by using a spatial-time light modulator (PVHS) into the
optical computer. Used as the light modulator is a light valve tube with s thermo-
plastic medium [11 on which data can be recorded for 20+30 physical observations

(signal sample volmne is” 105). Placed in the frequency plane of the optical

120
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Fig. 1. Optical Digital Complex for Processing Seismic Information

Key:
1. L1 [lens 1] 9. US [interface units]
2. L2 [lens 2] 10. TsAP [digital-to-analog converter]
3. PVHS [spatial-time light 11. ATsP [analog-to-digital converter]

modulator] 12. Elektronika 020 [main storage]-6lsK-01
lo. 30? [unit of operation filters] 13. V11" [external unified bus]
5. F392 [photo electronic converter] 16. Blektroniks "Ts-031'
6. 881's [digital seismic prospect- 15. 11 [monitor]
ing station] 16. PR [seismic section plotter]
7. NU [mormalizing amplifier] 17. PL-lSO
8. [’91 [photo electronic converter]

computer is the unit of operation filters, recorded on a photo medium or made in
the form of special mechanical screens in performing filtration by frequency and
apparent velocity. Optical processing results can be read out both in the frequency
plane of the optical computer and in the plane of the image. To convert optical
signal: into electrical, it is proposed to make use of combined photo-electronic
converters (PEP), in which the image is read out for one coordinate by oscillatory
scanning of the mirror element, and for the second, by using a line of P28 [charge
coupled devices]. Considering the large intonation capacity of an image frame at
the output of the optical computer and the limited size of computer main storage,
realization of two methods for data read out is provided for: frame-by-frame and
offline frame-by-frame. Introduction of the second mthod for read out may also be
determined by the selected mode of write-erase of information for the spatial-time
light modulator [1]. In the frame-by-frame read-out method, information is coded
according to elements of a matrix of 1003:1000 positions. Each position is repre-
sented by 6+8 binary bits. From the photo-electronic converter outputs, the infor-
mation is sent through an interface unit (US) and Ms? [analog-to-digital converter]
to the computer for further analysis, processing and display of intermediate and

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EU“ UI‘I'ILIAL use. URL!

Fig. 2. Distribution of Operations between Analog Optical and Micro Computers

Key:
1‘

2.
3.

ll.

optical processing prec
enhancement tasks

ision 13.
14.

adjustment of photo-electronic 15.

converter characteristi

cs 16.

adjustment of spatial-time light 17.

modulator characteristi
adjustment of optical
aberrations

control tasks

analog optical computer
control

analog optical computer
control

cs 18.
19.

20.

21.

input 22.

output 23.

microcomputer input control 2“.
microcomputer output control 25.
asission source control 26.
information processing tasks
spectral analysis

122

frequency filtration

spatial filtration

correlation analysis

diffraction conversions

data compression algorithms
diverse summation

determination of seismic velocities
data sorting and editing
amplitude control

input and adjustment of static and
kinematic corrections

optical filtration parameter
selection

synthesis of spatial filters
analog optical computer
microcomputer

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
final results on the CRT monitor (H) screen or on the seismic section plotter (PR).
To provide processing flexibility, the structure of the optical-digital complex
provides for the capability of transferring information from the computer to the
optical computer through a TsAP [digitsl-to-analog converter] and a NU [normalizing
amplifier]. For data exchange between the optical analog and micro computers, the
size of computer main storage must match the size of data to be read out, taking
the signal coding word length into consideration. This is porvided for by connect-
ing the "Elektronika OZU-b4K-01" main storage unit to the computer.

The efficiency of application fo the optical-digital complex is largely determined
by the rational distribution of functions between the optics and electronics and by
the organisation of data exchaneg between the digital and optical parts of the sys-
tem in implementing a particular algorithm for sci-sic data processing. Based on
an analysis of the basic procedures and graphs for processing of the seismic infor-
mation [2] with regard to the specifics of implementation of hybrid computations in
optical-digital systems, the class of problems solvable by the optical-digital com-
plex and the distribution of functions between the analog optical and micro compu-
ters were defined. The distribution of operations between the analog optical and
micro computers that is shown in fig. 2 permits implementation of a large number

of processing algorithms. in the execution of which considerable difficulties

occur in digital computers.

To evaluate the capabilities of the optical-digital complex in question, compari-
sons were made of the time expended to implement a typical graph for data process-
ing by the method of the overall deep point [2] on the optical-digital complex and
a medium-size computer. 0f the various filtration procedures used in processing,
only frequency filtration and filtration by velocity were considered in the evalu-
ation. Hhen all graph procedures are performed simultaneously, processing time on
the optical-digital complex is one-sixth that on the medium-size computer. Hith
complication of the graph and repetition of computational procedures, which as a
rule is implemented in processing seismic data because of the inadequacy of

a priori information on the properties of signals and noise, application of the
optical-digital complex permits obtaining a more substantial reduction in time.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Galanov, A. N.; Ivanchenkov, V. P.; and Poskonnyy, G. 1., "Development and
Research of Device for Dynamic Input of Seismic Information into Optical Compu-
ter in an Optical-Digital Complex," this collection, p 395.

2. Gurvich, I. I. and Boganik, G. N., "Seysmicheskaya razvedka" [Seismic
Prospecting], 552 pages, Moscow, "Nedra", 1980.

COPYRIGHT: LIYaF, 1980

8545
C80: 8144/0217

123
F!HICNHNCJAI.USE(MVLY
IV“ UI'I‘ILML Uu‘. Ul‘la.

COHERENCE

THIRD muons CONFERENCE 'DIAGKDSIS AND Hum-n33 SYSM‘IS'
Kiov WY! “31W in Rnslian llo 1, Jon-Pot: 81 p 105
[Articlo by v. A. Gnlyayovl

[Tut] 'l'ho Third International contotonos ”Diagnosis and Pailuro-Proo Sys-
tems“ was hold on 2-4 Sopt-bs: 1980 in mkotok Villsgo noaz Katowico (Polish
Pooploo manic).

Thus soctions votkod at tho conform-toot gonoration and W dosign
with rogard to tho roquirusnts of diagnosis, diagnosis of ooaputo: control
oystua and thoi: sottuuo and diagnosis 0! aioroco-putors and antonatio tost
oquipnont. Sciontists from tho CSSR. Polish Pooplos Ropublio. Rnngaa'y. Yugo-
slavia, Ptanco, tho 08811 and oths: comattiss potticipatod in tho work of tho
confoa'onoo.

Roports of h. ulswiozki and D. Bodury (Polish Pooplos Rapuhlic) "Dost Gonota-
tion with Rogazd to Map for Asynchronous Dismto Systons,’ of I. Piochi
(Polish Pooplos Ropublic) 'ﬂodolling at tho Punctional mol of Digital Units”
and also tho :oport of P. P. Pnrkhononko (USSR) dovotod to m1.- 0! finding
malfunctions in oonplox systsns mo road at tho contoronco. nothods of anal-
yzing tho roliability of auto-atod control systou vats oonsidszod in tho to-
port of V. I. Maksiaov (USSR) and V. A. Gulyayov. A. D. Glukhov and A. K.
Lisitchonko (USSR) and othozs :oportod on "Antusatod Dosign of Diagnostic Sys-
toas Baud on an Appliod Program Pack to: Solving stphio Prohlons.‘

‘l'ho apart of D. G. Iblik (0853) was dovotod to nathonatioal aodols to: osti-
mating tho ottioioncy of oooplox systoao.

Data on tho autonatod tost synthosis syston ems: mo prosontod in tho
roport of I. Klinovio: and I. Suniovshi (Polish Psoplos Ropublio) “Clanc-
toristics o! Gonoration and Voritioation Syston for Posts o2 om Logic
Networks.“ Doduotivo nodolling was usod in tho cyst. and tho Roth algorithm
was :oalixod. All tho pzogtons voro nittsn in mm and Pia-l languagos.

Proms-s of osti-ating tho ”liability of opuating syst-s mo oonsidorod in
tho ropott of D. nban Polish Pooplos Ramblio) "m Analysis of Opszating
Systns.” G. Krona): (Polish Pooplos Ronnie) dvolt on pxobl-s of micro-
oolputs: tasting in tho roport 'spocitios o! uiozocuputs: Posting.“

12).;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Probl-e o! eeleoting the recovery etretegy for eultiproceeeor eyetne were
coneidered in the report of A. hid-en (United States) "Recovery Stretegy
for mltiproceeeor Syn-e."

The report of L. Bedkoveki end It. Neigebuer (Polieh Peoplee RepuMic) ”the
Method at structurel Optieieetion of e Syet. by the mintenence Criterion
Doing Bell-en'e Principle“ wee devoted to etruoturel optinieetion of eyetne
by eervioe oriterie ueing the dynenic more-in neﬂuod.

Approxinetely 60 reporte end coll-micetione devoted to verioue eepecte of
enelyeie end provieion of the reliebility of ounpler digitel eyetue end de-
vicee. including problue o: eonitoring oonputer eyetue. orgenizetioo o:

eicrocoeputer checks, teeter deeign principlee end eo on wee heerd et the
eeeeicne.

The reeulte of reeeeroh in the field of technioel diegnoeie end the reliebil-
ity of digitel eyetue were owned at the conference end aye We noted
for further developing reeeerch on thie problem the conference contributed

to en exchange of opinione end etrengtbening ot treternel reletionebipe be-
tween epecieliete of different oountriee.

OOPYRIGM'; Indetel'etvo 'Neukove duke”. Blektroonoye eodeliroveniye, 1981

6521
C80: 1863/86 ND

125
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY