FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10489

3 May 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 20/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 20/82)

CONTENTS
ASIA
AUSTRALIA

Figures Show 1980 Cannabis Confiscation on 26 Plantations
(THE AGE, 6 Mar 82) ..................... .............

Drug Laws Reassessed; Harihuana Legaliaation Opposed
(Various sources, various dates) .....................

Report Reconuendations
officials' Opposition. by Brian Hill

Briefs
Heroin charges

HONC KONG

Harihuana Use Increasing Among 'Trendy' Middle Class
(Stephen Clark; SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 26 Mar 82) .

Briefs
Heroin Traffickers Jailed
Thai Courier Sentenced

INDIA

widespread Drug Addiction in Punjab Surveyed
(INDIA‘DODAY, 15 Apr 82) .....

PAKISTAN

Briefs
Danish Charas Smugglers Arrested

- a - [III - WW - 11

FOR omnu "SF. ON! V
THAILAND

Khun Sa Seeks Negotiations With RTC
(Thongprai Phansaeng; HATICHON, 16 Mar 82) ..........

Columnist: Heroin Refining Continues Despite Ban Hin Tack
(Tamolo; BAN HUANG, 23 Mar 82) ......................

LATIN AMERICA

ARGENTINA

Drug Trafficking Increase Reported
(LA NACION, 19 Mar 82) ..............................

BAHAMAS

Briefs
Harimuana Boat Seizure

BRAZIL

Pure Cocaine, Weapons Seized in Rio de Janeiro
(JORNAL DO BRASIL, 19 Mar 82) .............. .........

Sao Paulo Police Officer Charged With Involvement with
Traffickers
(O GLOBO, 16 Mar 82) ................................

Briefs
Cocaine, Arms Seized
Marihuana Seized in Mato Grosso

COLOMBIA

Details on Record Cocaine Shipment to 0.5.
(Fabio Castillo; EL ESPECTADOR, 22 Mar 82) ......... .

Cocaine Laboratory, Shipment Seized
(EL TIEMPO, 13 Mar 82) ...................... ........

Briefs
Cocaine Plantations, Laboratories Uncovered

MEXICO

Colombia-U.S. Cocaine Shipment
(Enrique Rivas Ornelas; EXCELSIOR, 27 Mar 82) .......

Six Major Drug Traffickera Arrested in Nichoacan
(Rafael Medina; EXCELSIOR, 21 Jan 82) .. ..... .......u

- b -
NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
IRAN
Briefs
Drug Seizure in Tehran
Hashieh, Opium Seizure
Bandar 'Abbae Drug Find
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA

Infiltration of Drugs Into Townships Becoming Uncontrolleble
(Editorial; SOHETAN. 12 Net 82) .........................4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIGURES SHOW 1980 CANNABIS CONFISCATION ON 26 PLANTATIONS

Melbourne THE AGE in English 6 Mar 82 p 4

[Text]

Australian police dug upmore' cantiy lower than that in tour
than 24 tonnea of cannabis 00*! tater. South Australia.

found growing on 26 plant-I South Wuatm'm‘ ”'4 ﬂew
ations in 1980. according to "tr-I‘M. m". '

the latest available police “mum“ 935m“. WM
statistics. . [or use. the cannabis is many

A confidential Federal". 'uc. tlmaavl'ﬂmf and much m
r rt shows that State and Ode- valuable on a weight basts.‘

ra poiica around Australia's-m .
oovarad nearly lo hectam'de- Police sonrcas “M yesterday

mg“. to tha crop u, "so. 1 . that the conservative estimate 0!

Polk bel the market price for domestically
of “mam, alga; iguM' grown cannabis in mo was 3|

am I .Uam wholesale to a ioated
5.1:: m.35’m”ﬁ2.."f.‘“ _they daaiars and $1.50 to a gram

. . {or m retail.
increases in the number'and
sin oi operations detected last "mt ‘ considerable "9‘
year compared with thou found ,W‘n“ D.“ {or hmrtedconoew
in l980 indicated cannabis iarrn- ‘WM 10m 0' “MOW. Police
in; is nourishing. ﬁgures [or taco show that import~_
The 1980 figures show. how- ed cannabis oil latched a street

aver. that the scale of operations price of $30 to $50 {or hall a
detected in Vicloria is signiﬁ- gram.

CANNABIS. FABMINB IN AUSTRALIA

       
       
           
       
  
       
   

POLICE SEIZURIOJN 1m .
—_——_w
. .213 m atuanu

arm mam- srea-ana ﬁ'm.m~ llama
'—'——-W——

 

new a .300 12.100 a1a.1 11
71: a .242 3.400 11.1 s
___________.___
m. 4 gnu 21.4» was a
an 1 c.a1c usao no.5 so
”
WA 1 030 :00 2.0 2

——m=‘——_.
m s .001 . 0.110 111.4 s
———RW='—_’.
mu as asco 1oass1 ms «

 

min-”Wham.”
an «(on to at poop lo laoo up to I; called for lazulwon - :1me lo tho
new; double mud: comm; tho Rehabilitation of 0“me Act In nnwn
moo! mmhuanauowoaed to ”com and, - to I? introduced. mum all criminal
dunno; records or panel-ton and me.
uuaou mtolmmumm ltrmnw-dwwwn bere-
tha mobility at Mt Iowa to cop. nu: ﬁlm an}? ”62mm?“ “0:13;:
1 criminal syndicate. you“ PM "def mm:
mm“: and dm‘gI would be mated as :0me u dunk-
' o N M
was madlmndwﬂmp‘mutumm.mmz On Moot»! abuse. me upon mg to.
cannabis and boom mm by the Au- should “ "“9" Into “a: M 9°
mum mum on Aioobolluu am Dru; ”ah I: mm!“ W AWMM"
Dcpendanee. in. the Down: ondo me
m m was distributed 1m Monday 33%" “'9. 9:?me m “WW ‘4'
Jo: reloasc um Monday. but the embargo A'l‘m‘rfﬁnw “rm“ _
was broken ycsmday by tho Sydnay m- “a“ .‘mnmmwm
{“ng ”m. °{‘ m “‘0'" “mm” alumna banal! from in. can to: Ian:-
. on own no on.
The buhknown and nut. Innuenual my.“ 1‘,“ a“ W up °‘ ‘
members of the committee Included me The mm'mnm o, m,“
"R“°"" “mm“‘bﬂ “mm.“ “hm“ huand use veto unknown, but I: believed
11cc Kirby woman Liberal So we a." Ml!!!“ 1m ' than u,
smrle)’ Walton. [he Austramn Institute at coho! Ind tobacco on tho of t
Crlm mutant dmclor u: Dam mm“ m
Dues. and A 10mm: “’0"de Poll“ '
Commissioner. Mr y trod. sumo, wﬂhn. 'ho h "I“
The MP "mend“ W WNW." standing maimed on soda! vanguar-
should be allowed to now madman: (or mm. sold tho did not w m a“ Mean-
UIQ" 0'“ “IO. I ”I“ l“ 0“”? Mn ' “an.” m mmm‘
prohibited. t called on mo Monument
to comm manufactura and msmbuuon to In Brigham. the Autumn ﬁddled M-
tmun asundard dud unllorm quality. motion Queensland meant. Pronto:
Pmea would be so: low enough to dh- Tea Broom. and the would not mm a
coma" mm mfmmmm. but not to W to “all-o mlenI-
Iowauoboousnuon ems-mo. “We have enough problem associated
The amp suggested that the Com- mu: the abuse or alcohol and mun;
man-roam: Scientiﬁc and mammal Ra- mllloul compounding the problems mou-
Imch Ornnkwon mid b! In mm- Med mm mumm- and m potenllu (or
prim body to am out I {may may harm." she ma. 1 mm: on; leuulumn
on a "remnant mononol)‘. can u a mbnudod more.
The rem also mad the nova-amen! 'Madhuam mum. medically n to
to docummaﬂu Immediately tho paus- havo the manual to: brain Writ):
“on and nae or maximum and umovo put us conunuod use.“
The Mother: Animt Dru president.
Mn Merle-Ann 0mm". 35d her group
would lobby taint: any plus to loathe

the drug.

“me lenllution o! merihum would
30" do muons bout the problems neocl-
etedvlth mmcmmuma
question the ebtlity ot thou who my.

called {or mutton.

“We hove enough heals with mob:
and eieohol without inﬂicting e thud my.

lem on society.”

Officials ' Opposition

Canberra THE WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN in English 6-7 Mar 82 p 2'

[Article by Brian llilll

[Excerpt]

M ARIJUANA will remain
illegal - at least in the lore-
seeablc lulure.

Two ledenl Ministers. the
Attomey-Oeneral. Senetor
Durack. and the Minister lor
Health. Mr MoeKclIer. yester-
dey rejected o report recom-
mending lenilsetlon ol the
drug by e couunlttee ol the
Australia) Foundation on Al-
coholism and Drug Depend-
once.

Senator Dunek sold his own
view and that o! the Govern-
ment ,wu “completely oppos-
ed" to any move to,leullse
mﬂjum

Mr waeliu said he would
need "a lot 0! eonvlnctns".be~
lore agreeing that the noose;-
sion end prilmc cultivation of
nulrljueno. should be decri-
nunalised.

Thclr views were echoed by
other government MP: end
the Victorian Premier. Mr
Thompson. who sold his Gov-

ernment would vieorou
oppose my relaution ot '
druclu's.

But the leader at the At
relian Democmts. Sena
Chino. said he intended to
troduce o private memb-
btll to ouwort the main u
menu ot the oomnlttee'e
port.

Mr Devld lilies. e commit
member end en eulstent
rector ot the Austral-Ia In
tute o! Crimino .Cenbe:
sold testers!” h when
on the committee belle
thet possession. use end he
eultlvotlon ol mullu:
should be lent "Just the u
as beer" but that-ell other:
ductlon. open from that
the camp. should be benn

.Under the continues I
dellnee. which ere not. on o
dal view at the APADD.
vermin; would be reetrtc
end heelth werninu end I
limits would be ”named.
BRIEFS

HEROIN 6113163th nan allegedly found in possession of heroin with a street
value of $700,000 appeared in Melbourne Magistrates Court yesterday. Brian
Carl Hansen, 34, unemployed, of London Street, Bentleigh, appeared on one
charge of trafficking heroin, one charge of possessing heroin and one charge
of conspiracy to sell heroin. [Helbourne THE AGE in English 6 Mar 82 p 3)

C80: 5300/7543
MARIHUANA USE INCREASING ANONG 'TRENDY' MIDDLE CLASS

lionq Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 26 liar 82 p 18

[Article by Stephen Clark]

[Text]

Marijuana is becoming
the “in-thing" in Hong—
kong. but mostl among
the “trendy" m‘ le-elass.
according to a senior po-
lice narcotics officer.

Years afler the boom in

smoking in America and

ritain. Hongkong is
catching-on — or rather
turning-on — to the infamous
weed.

And some Reople are aitn-
ing at self-su sciency. grow-
ing their own marijuana
plants in their gardens in
rural areas or on versndahs of
their urban flats.

Marijuana. cannabis. pot.
hash. weed — call it what you
will — has been evident in
l-longltong for' years.

But police and customs
authorities believe that. as the

'soa'ety here becomes more

afﬂuent. more and more see
pie. both European and bi-
nese. are trytn out the drug
because it as become
'trendz;

Alt gh the policedonot
see marijuana as a serious
threat in lion ltong. com-
pared with t e problems
caused by heroin. they and
the courts still take a serious
view of oﬂences involving the

dmﬁi
ariiuana is still classi-
ﬁed as a dangerous dru .
along with heroin. and peop
found guilt of using. grow-
ing. or In! icking in the drug
are liable to heavy sentences.
Only last weeit. two people
were each sentenced to two
years in prison for the
sion of marijuana “or the

purpose of unlawful trafﬁck-
tng. '

Earlier this month. eas-
torns ofﬁcials made their big-
gest haul of marijuana since

975 when they discovered
l6kg of the drug — worth
around Sl.6 rnilion on the
streets — in undattned an
cargo at Kai Tait airport.

Officials believed the drug
was for local consumption
and would have been distrib-
uted mainly to Filipinos and
Europeans. but also to some
Chinese who had been intro-
dead to pot smoking when
livin orstndyingabroad.

onghon customs offi-
cials and ice have enjoyed
remarks success recentl)
in their fight against heroir
traffickers. with several large

seize the
”em-t “M

But have the recent sei-

zures resulted in people turn
ing to softer drugs?

Superintendent K eit I
Tidey. of the Narcotics Bu
reau. thinks not. ,

"In my esperience. loca
Chinese people on heroin d:
not go on to marijuana. The:
are more likely to pay tie
extra or go on to methadon-
(a heroin substitute used ti
wean addicts off herein) to
maintenance.

“By tradition. dre sbus
amen, the Chinese s in
giant or opium dens
atives. ey are not tradition
all marijuana smolera. The

is I Western inﬂuence.“
It is more of a tradition i
:5 >333: 2. 9:32..
33:33:...

>22 :3 Eu Sauce-3
ES :5 32:? So 322:.
033. 8....” i=5 8: 525 m.
35:: «2 :53 3:6: Q3.
In “R :8 2 18 33.3. .

a... .8 :58... 5: :8
523:: 3:an nave—28..
~83 36 3.8 3.3 can. 8
u 22:... 62:2... «2 3o
9....

we! .33 :8 5. 3n
3...... a 32A 132.8:
BRIEFS

HEROIN TRAFFICKERS JAILEDnM men were yesterday sentenced to jail in the
High Court for dangerous drugs offences. Sentencing Hui Wing-cheong (32) , a
clerk, to 18 years and Sze Pui-chau (30), a businessman. to 15 years. Mr Com-
missioner Davies said the case was one of the most serious yet to come before
the courts. The quantity of drugs seized--21.53 kg of heroin base-was said
by senior Crown counsel Colin White to be enough to supply Hongkong's addicts
for 3-1/2 days. The drugs were worth $9.5 million. Sze and Hui were found
guilty by a jury of possessing the drugs for unlawful trafficking. Hui was
also convicted of permitting a warehouse in Tsat Tse Hui Road, North Point,
of which he was the tenant. to be used for storage of the drugs. The court
had been told that police kept surveillance on the warehouse on the night of
August 24. The next morning Sze arrived in a car and removed two paper boxes
from the warehouse. He then drove to She Kuk Street where he was intercepted
by the police who found in the boxes 48 packets of heroin base, each weighing
slightly under one pound. Sze told the police that he had been asked by Hui
to pick up the boxes at his warehouse. The car used for transporting the
drugs had been reported stolen and it bore a false registration plate. On
Amust 29, Hui surrendered himself to the police. [Excerpt] [Hong Kong SOUTH
cumn mnnmc POST in English 26 Mar 82 p 24]

THAI COURIER SENTENCE-d Thai woman who tried to smuggle $600,000 worth of
dangerous drugs into Hong):ong by concealing them in a tropical fruit, was yes-
terday sentenced to six years' imprisonment. Sae Lim Siamhiang (35) pleaded
guilty before Mr Justice Barnes in the High Court to possessing 1.344 kilos
of heroin mixture for unlawful trafficking. Crown counsel 6.15. Andree-Wiltens
said Siamiang arrived from Bangkok on September 8 and appeared to be nervous
and ill at ease when she took her luggage, which included a plastic carrier
containing some rambutans, to customs for inspection. Customs officers exam—
ined the fruit and found some of them had been hollowed out, small packets of
dangerous drugs inserted into them and then stitched back together with fine
red cotton thread. Siamhiang admitted that she knew the fruit contained dan-
gerous drugs and that she had been paid $3,000 for carrying them. [Excerpt]
[Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 31 Mar 82 p 18]

C80: 5320/9125
WIDESPREAD DRUG ADDICTION IN PUNJAB SURVEYED

New Delhi INDIA TODAY in English 15 hp: 82 pp 80-83

[Text-.1

HE emerald green wnctt ﬁelds st-

retched for miles. Justifytng the

words on a hoarding at the bor-

der—"Punjab. granary of lndu".
Tucked any deep in the interior. uncharted
eteept perhaps on a detailed map of district
Bhuttnda. lay Village Khtllan. population.
LZw But despite the surface tranquillity.
Khtllan «as: thlaxetn turmoil. The reason:
Khtllan has been blitzed by the menace ot‘
drug addiction In the last at months ﬂ'hl
then hase died due to drugs.

On March I). when ism/t toou “sued
the \tllage. the men of Khtllan “re mourn-
ing the death of yet another vtctttn. Under
the inﬂuence ol‘a tablet hulls ltnoun as mu
numbrt tnumher will the than had fallen Into
a sewer and. being too datum! to lift hts
head out of the water. had drowned.

Villagers call the drug tau numbrt to
cause that weight- l00 milligrams-is statn-
ped on the tablet. The actual drug may
he etthet sovenal or seconal. both bar-
biturates Many other types of intoxicating
synthetic drugs are also sold-some of them
morphine-based. others are amphetamines
or the methaqualone-based Mandrax. now
illegally manufactured and stamped "8x" or
"St ‘ These drugs are comparattselr recent
additions to the traditionally um. plant-
dertsed drugs such as poppy-husk. opium.
hashtsh. mlI’IJIIIM and .lluturu.

Teehuically Accidental: The Village
chowltidar reported the death in the tehstl
headquarters at Marisa and it was entered
in the register at "death by accident" The
entry was technically eorrtu and the au-
thunttes were -:ontent to Eease II at that. The
eighth “cum.“ho died in the last week of
January had already eaused enough compli-
cations. Then tt had been unasotdably nee-e.
nary to enter the cause of death as drug
oserdose which called (or police actton. The

local supplier. Mahtndet Singh. the priest ol
the village gutudwara tSilth Tempter was
arrested and tablets there rerouted l'totn

thetr hiding place—allegedly. according to
the villagers. under the cloth covet-tn: the
holy boolt tn thegumdwara. But two months
after the incident Mahtnder Singh was back
tr. Khillan “here he also functions as a rm'tl

IIIIS'lI

"ADVAI‘

*t‘uuuut;.V.

 

(traditional docton. the nearest health cen-
tre is three km away.) When tsota mun
met htttt in his room adjacent to the guru-
dwan. medicine bottles still cluttered the
shelves. He hesttated to answer any dtmt
question. “I am here to help others.“ he said

In another Village. Bengt. 25 km from
Bhatinda. drug-related deaths hase reached
epidemic proportions—28 tn the last ;-eat
alone. Said .1 restdent. Sajjan Singh. an ex-
lndian National Army havtldat. "It's sad to
see young then die because of these damn
gout." In yet another Village near the
but. thank God. I haven't seen herotn ad-
dicts )ﬂ " '

HE problem is increasing." conﬁrms
I Bhatmda Senior Superintendent of
Police 0.5. Bhullar. The number of
cases he has been able to register are indica-
ll\¢ of the amount of drug-running in the
area. Last year L!“ drug earners were
arrested and for I982 his tally has already
reached 255 This he admits is only a fraction
of what rs going on. “With only 20 police-
men for esery unit of about 50 Villages how
clo.~e a aatclt can the) keep?" he asks.
According to Bhullar. drugs come into Pun-
iah from three sides: Nepal. Pakistan and
Rajasthan. Although heroin has been inter-
cepted coming from Pakistan it is not meant
for the local market—at least not so far.
As Bhuuar sees it. the crux of the
problem ts the mushroomtn; number of
registered medical practitioners tum. Ex-
plained Dr Raj Kumar Singla. past pre-
sident of the Punjab Medial Assocnauon
aho practice in Bhatinda: "These nut-s
hate usually worked with real doctors for a
few months lemme how to give tniocuons
and acquiring .t rudimentary knowledge or
drugs. They get themselt-es certiﬁed as amps
and then 30 open their own 'dispensanes' tn
the “llages. The} are quarks and selling
these drugs ts their mapr source of prorit."
To malte an even bigger prdlit all the
trade the drug peddlars adulterate thetr
wares. Said LR. Gupta. a small-toun che-

mist. "The suppliers have started to adul-
terate and duplicate tll forms of drugs and
«en opium." Booms-:ta's dark-brown col-
our malrea tt the :dcal addtttse to stretch
opium and an imitation opium ts made by
mixing stnehntne ta deadly :-.~-.<-~-- Ind
barbtturates tnto a base of burnt mgr...
"what we sold to lttll rats us not» being used
to kill people." he said

The fake opium presents another
problem —as the police commented. "How
can the fellow selling poisoned jaggery be
arrested under the Opium Act“ The sa-
mples tsout room collected [tom the area
for laboratory analysis proted the suspicion
of adulteratton: the opium was only 50 per
cent pure. the two types of tablets knoan
as "Bx" and "whtte escort" contained mor-
phtne and the tablet marked "seem!" was
)0“ chalk But the stuff was cheap: 10 grams
of opium cost Rs 20 and IS tablets mere
purchased for Rs 5. also indicattnp the east
IVIihblllly ol‘ drup.

Patten 0f L'se: Villagers described the

presalent patterns of use. A typical opium
addict makes losmall pills Irom 10 grams of
Iii. ‘.11n.1.1 llll?1‘l

> 53 ~03. :95."

a Extent». 3.. F35 \..2 ex

s5§...$§ $31.5. .2...» «5!:
5:55....1 2.13.: 9:31.— ..a 2.2.1.. 5..
=5. 3...: 3333: 3.2: is: .35.
3.: :52. ~K..:.&§w ..a 53.. Q 32‘
FESS‘E:5.....Ehx.§-§§§

”um .12 writ. at. an»... S. 2
«Es? 0:89. 9:36.... - F35. 0..
68: «2.3 2v 8 28.. .45....«53
was: .3 _ Ena— Sr5u £35.... 9:
:8: 2:5... 2.55:3 u...— IR 23
25:9. 5332519138 303 3.8:.
23 8 _ 9:55. 8 :8 822.... :w noun
.v 53.. 2.52. 8 cent—:38 S20: 3
as? In 3 53:... 3 n3: :3 53.8:
.13... Erin =8 1:! 2:258 so 83
.59.. =8 3.8. 0.. an.“ 7a «0803.
.5 ii in! unqci: as CO gala.
2-323. enuyaoana .92..»- 25 on.
Ram :23 :5 :2 :2... a. p 812..
.33.: 8 at 93692.5 59-: :32.
2... :5. 2:53. (:2: warm-.5. 9.?
3.2. o« 9:90.319 2.9589 :6...
:3 Sugar I «4.53:. 8 Ex. .8 tan
8 ant 89.533. 58 at: 8-8... «9.
:8 632. mu £893 823. 3. 5a
3528.. 2:15.53 0.. 90 965055:
.8261: 2. =9 (rota-r: 92. uni—o3
ca Bars—.82“. .3.» 35:5 15:0.
326.. w got—v an... 9.1.9.3 .9 =8
3&2. 33.86. .8... 3 Ba. 92. E05
828..

= w 7805.... 3:9: :3. 832:
an.“ 39:6. 32:9 5: :23 3 ca

BIDS-K 3-..mlBI 3‘35:— .35.!!!»
BRIEFS

DANISH CHARAS SMUGGLERS ARRESTEDnLAHORE, April 4-Some 13 kilograms of char-
as worth Rs. 15 lakh has been recovered from two Danish citizens at the Lahore
Airport. Both the culprits were arrested. The arrested persons were Mr. Prior,
Passport No. P. 3956993 and Mr. Kimbir kjar, passport number P 4281779 they
had arrived from Peshawar on Friday night. They wanted to go to India by air.
When the Lahore Airport Customs checked their luggage they found two attache
cases extra-heavy. On thorough checking in the false bottom they found 13
kilograms of the contraband, both the persons were taken into custody. A
couple of days earlier, three Danish citizens, also planning to go to Delhi,
were checked and 15 kilograms charas was recovered from their attache cases.
They were also under arrest. The Assistant Collector, Lahore Airport, said
that he suspected that there was a gang behind them and investigations were

in progress. [Text] [Karachi DAWN in English 5 Apr 82 p 10]
KHUN SA SEEKS NEGOTIATIONS “It“ RIG
Bangkok HATICHON in Thai 16 Mar 82 p 5

[Article by Thongprai Phansseng: Negotiating with [bun Se, heed the
lesson of the Guomindang")

[Text] News from various reliable sources confirms that at present "Khun Se"
is trying his best to negotiate with the Thai Government, stipulating that
he will place his troops under the Thai army. In addition, he has offered

to help enforce all of the government's suppression policies.

In this attempt Khun Sa has not only contacted officials from all the
various sectors of the government; he also has asked the director of the
Department of Public Relations to inform the king.

Khun Sa's past record-not to be overlooked

Khun Sa's S.U.A. movement was first established with the intention of being

an organ of national liberation. However, following the raid on Banhintaek,
Khun Sa's stronghold within Thai territory, our officials found a great
number of weapons and accessories for producing heroin. Our ofricials never
found, and Khun Sa himself has not produced, an official announcement of
his ideals for national liberation.

The over 10 tons of weapons, war materiel, and rations which the inspecting

Thai officials found could not have been for national liberation. Rather,

a more important factor in their being there is protection for the transport
of opium and the production of heroin.

Khun Sa's image all over the world is not of a revolutionary, but of a
"heroin king."

Not only that. Khun Se and his troops have also violated many This laws.
An obvious example is during the battle at Banhintaek Khun Sa's troops

killed or wounded 50 Thai officials. Besides that they used their troops

and weapons to attack police stations, causing damage and killing a number
of Thai officials and citizens.

l3
Although "Khun 8a" is trying to show himself to be a politician or a
revolutionary, the fact that cannot be denied is that he is a criminal
whose hands are wet with the blood of the Thai people and a ringleader in
the distribution of heroin, which destroys Thai peeple and people of the
uorld in the nest coldblooded and merciless way.

The Thai Cavernment should not forget the lesson of the "Modsng"

Guomindang troops or Division 93 retreated from china and Burma after the
victory of the Commist Party over the Guomindaog was complete in October,
19“. The Guomindang's claim was the same as Khun Se's, that in national
liberation—to liberate China from the Communists. This principle caused
the 0.3., through the c.l.A., to extend its hand and become involved in
the strategy for containing china, which was the policy of the 0.5. in the
period following world Her ll.

The executor of the 0.8. policy in Thailand at first was the police
department under Police General Phau Siyanon. The unit of the 0.1.5..
that he was associated with was the American Sea Supply Company, Ltd.

In any case, the main activity of the Guomindang was not the struggle for
the liberation of China, but the sale and cultivation of opium. The police
department and a group of Thai generals at the time joined the Guominc'ang
in the opium trade and gradually enriched themselves.

In the period following this, even though military headquartesr 0b was
set up by a resolution of the cabinet in 1970 to handle matters concerning
the Guomindang and the reliance on the Guomindang to suppress Conunists
in the north, the Guomindang retained intact the freedom to cultivate and
sell opium, and also developed into heroin producers‘

Even today there is no evidence that the Guomindeng is going to stop
producing narcotics, based in Thai territory and with the status of
Thai citizens.

He must disarm them and rescind all privileges

In the case of the Guanindang, with hopes of using those forces to suppress
Thai Communists (which should, rather, be a matter concerning Thailand
itself), the Thai government allowed the Guomindang to retain its troops
and helped to arm them. On the one hand, the Guomindang became involved in
suppressing comnism, but, on the other, it used those privileges to its
own advantage in producing and selling narcotics.

There was criticism for a long time that the Gmmindang was able to retain
those privileges because certain important generals joined with them and
supported them behind the scenes, and through contacts and pressure got
them Thai citizenship. Then that group set up its own "indep.ndent state"
and has given Thailand a bad reputation because of the intense amount of
narcotics coming through Thailand.

ll.
He should be well aware of the loopholes, and that the stipulation that
the government use this small national force as a “buffer" and a tool in
suppressing Thai Communists allows some military officers to use this type
of political loophole to their own advantage. The news that some
political parties at present receive financial support from sellers of
narcotics who cause suffering all over the world is not a blown-up,
baseless rumor at all, but has no little truth to it.

In the case of "Khun Sa," there are two points to consider carefully.

The first point is: what are we going to do with these troops, among which
very little trace remains of national liberation? If they are only troops
who guard opium and narcotics in the fields, with such a political founda-
tion, the nost they can be is "hired fighters." If this bunch were to be
used to kill Communists what guarantee would we have that these "hired
soldiers" wouldn't stir up new incidents, causing trouble among the Thai
people?

The second point is Khun Sa maintains presistently that even if he were
killed, narcotics would not disappear from the world. This strongly
indicates that the sale of narcotics is his economic lifeline and that of
this region of the world. If we accept Khun Se, what guarantee would the
Thai people have that his people will not continue to sell narcotics?

And this time the selling would not be done in the capacity of foreign
troops. but in the capacity of "independent" troops living under the Thai
flag. Won't it turn out that the Thai government is supporting a "narcotics
king" and allowing him to use Thai land as a base for sending out narcotics
which will cause troubles all over the world?

An old Thai saying quite rightly says: "Associating with hoodluns leads
to crime; associating with wisemen leads to benefit."

Dealings with evil people who sell narcotics, no matter whether it is Khun
Sa or others from the past, does not improve the national reputation. High~
ranking generals who have in the past been close to such narcotics sellers,
even those in high political positions, will be unable to avoid criticism,
and eventually their intestines will be pulled out and stretched longer

and longer.

Likewise. in the case of Khun Sa the government should not be so soft as to
hope that these people will serve as "buffers" with Burma or hope to use
them to suppress Thai Communists. These are short short-term results. But
the long-term results of drug addiction are much more severe.

The correct solution is to push them out of the country or. it they still
try to enter, to disarm them. And anyone who commits a crime should be
punished in accordance with the law, or if they disobey international law,
they should be extradited to the country involved in the incident.

15
Even if the cobra is weak and tired, we shouldn't feed it. because one
day it will turn around and bite the master who raised it, with no
thought of gratitude for the food and water it wee given.

The fable of "the Farmer and the Cobra" is not just to fool children.
There is truth to it, particularly in the one of "Khun Sal"

9937
C80: 5300/5698

16
COLUMNIST: HEkOIN REFINING CONTINUES DESPITE BAN BIN TAB!
Bangkok m HUANG in 111.1 23 Has 82 p 5

[Article by "Tamolo": "The Mountain Wind Blows the Dream Away"]
[Text] First please let me give you a brief news item to read.

On 11 March of this year P.P.s. [Narcotics Suppression?l and Customs
officials of Chiangdao, Chiangmai province, inspected two cars and found
172 liters of chemicals used in processing heroin number 6‘ valued at
900,000 baht.

Three suspects were captured, two of whom were Master Sergeant and Sergeant
in the Inspection and Production Force of the Defense Energy Department.
The other was a civilian. When interrogated the three men confessed that
they were taking the chemicals to a heroin factory at Doilang, which is

the former base of Division 93 of the Guomindang.

Reader, if the chemicals to convert opium into heroin cost 900,000 baht,
how many millions worth at heroin will they make?

In any case, it shows that Khun Sa, the big producer and seller that the

government has made an all-out effort to capture, is only part of the
peration which produces and sells heroin in the Golden Triangle region.

The raid on Khun Sa was only "effective" to a point, for a large portion of
the production and sale is still going on, having become an industry or

an enterprise, and production may be apeeded up in order to compensate for

Khun Sa's portion.

I would like you, reader, to observe that it was the "former Division 93
of the Guonindang" that was named by the suspects as the owner of the
900,000 baht worth of chemicals to be made into heroin.

The former Division 93 is a large-scale producer and seller just like Khun
Sa.

But there are others covering up by giving interviews to the news media saying
that the former Division 93 has not been involved in opium or heroin
production and sales.

17
It is impossible for anyone living in the vicinity of the Golden Triangle
not to be involved in the production and sale of opium or heroin.

The role for Division 93 of the Guomindang is a thing of the past, and
today they are just a minority group who live peacefully in Thailand,

but the structure still remains, having become a system of unofficial

self-government which spends millions.

Planting tea and selling it to merchants at Pratunam in Bangkok brings in
little money. and they'd probably have to sell it at a depressed price.

When Division 93 is mentioned sole of you may picture old war veterans
with old tales of adventure.

In Division 93 today it is true that there are old war veteran generals
and soldiers, but there are also their descendants, who are young and

strong and becoming a new Division 93, which is more powerful and younger
than the Division 93 of approximately 30 years ago.

At present Division 93 still has armed troops. and armed troops may not
legally live on the Thai border. Therefore the Thai government does not
have to take responsibility. But, in fact, who sits and watches and
prevents armed troops from crossing the Thai border?

They come in; the propagate; they pass on the bloodline of Division 93.

There are now Chinese-language schools for the children of Division 93 in
the area where Division 93 has settled.

Our Thai children in the good schools of Bangkok cannot compare with these
healthy red-checked children.

The Chinese children in Bangkok, too, have to go to these schools in order
to be able to study in Taiwan later (and Taiwan offers scholarships).

I have read a Thai writer on the Thais in Los Angeles, which he calls
Thailand's 73rd province.

Then they must say the same thing in Taiwan, that Division 93 in Chiangrai
is a province of Taiwan.

We are very concerned about Vietnamese refugees who escape from camps
and come and live in Bangkok as Thais.

But who is concerned about Division 93 coming in and becoming owners of
new commercial establishments in Bangkok and Chiangmai?

What is worth thinking about is that 30 years ago Division 93 contained
10,000 people. Today it has become 30,000 (because they don't practice
birth control).

In another 30 years they will be 90,000 people.

18
I don't have the exact figures for the number of people in Division 93 who
have settled along the Thai-Burmese border, but in another 30 years there
will be problems of the "minority group" of Division 93.

If they nixed and became Thai like the children of the Chinese in Bangkok,
there would be no problem.

But in that environment there in no way for them to become Thai (even if
they wanted to be).

The danger is that they will be a minority group that is intelligent,
well-educated, and armed.

Which all derives from opium.
What the government must do is to get Division 93 to became Thai.

And Division 93 will be able to become Thai when the governlent succeeds
in wiping out opium from the Golden Triangle region.

9937
650: 5300/5698

19
DRUG TRAFFICKING INCREASE REPORTED
Buenos Aires LA NACION in Spanish 19 Mar 82 p 12

[Excerpt] Taking advantage of the opportunity a few days ago in the city
of Mar del Plata to gather information about the arrest of several persons
who were implicated in drug trafficking--especially of Moroccan hashish
and marihuana--and of the fact that these drugs were to be shipped to
Spain for sale during the forthcoming world soccer championship. it became
known that this action was part of a wide investigation which personnel

of units of the Federal Police were undertaking in said vacation spot,
Cordoba and the Federal Capital. It has now been reported that in that
interior province, two international traffickers have been arrested, who
were seized not only with hashiah and marihuana but cocaine. heroin and
LSD, the latter two being of very restricted circulation and use because
of their very high cost.

In the case of the arrests in Cordoba, mention has again been made of the
joint investigations referred to above, and apparently. since there is
no official concrete report, it would have to do with the drug which was
to be carried to Spain for the soccer genes.

These two facts demonstrate a great increase in international trafficking

in our country since the first report given by the Federal Police of Mar

del Plata said that the drug came from Morocco, passed through Brazil,

Mar del Plata, Buenos Aires. to leave for Bolivia, and then to Europe.

Now with the second case, it concerns drugs brought from Spain and distributed
from our country to different places.

To this panorama, we must add the events in Salts, which resulted in one
death. 10 arrestn and an important seizure of drugs.

In Cordoba
Personnel from Federal Police arrested an international drug trafficker,
as part of a joint action, in the cities of Mar del Plate and Buenoa

Aires. where a total of 10 people were arrested.

According to reports, the man arrested in the capital is Antonio Herd
Ruiz, a 26-year-old Spanish citizen, singled out as the ringleader of an

20
important international group of drug traffickers. Posing as a businessman
in textiles. it is knOwn, for example, that he made several trips at the
beginning of this year to Spain, returning to this country with a quantity
of drugs which he would have distributed to certain places, in our country
and abroad. On being arrested, he was found to be in possession of 300
grams of pure hashish.

Also arrested was Patricia Elizabeth Lanfuerin Garcia, a 21—yearbold
Argentine, a native of Mar del Plata, who lived with the trafficker Herd
Ruiz since the end of 1981.

It so happened that up to now. in the actions undertaken in Cordoba,
Buenos Aires and Mar del Plata, large quantities of hashish, marihuana,
cocaine, LSD and heroin were seized.

Herd Ruiz and Lanfuerin de Garcia were brought from Cordoba to this capital

and remained at the disposition of the Judge of the Court, Dr Silvia
Hardoy de Garcia.

A Death in Salta

Members of the Salta Aguarry Group of the National Gendarmery seized
contraband drugs and in an armed confrontation shot down one of those
involved, in addition to arresting various people responsible for the
crime.

The events began Tuesday at dawn when the authorities stopped a vehicle
driven by Luis Hector Ruiz on national highway 35 about 30 kilometers

south of Salvador Hazza, Salts, in an area on the Argentine-Bolivian border.
As a result of discrepancies in the account of Hector Ruiz, the owner of
the vehicle, Miguel Paniagua, a Bolivian, was later arrested in Tarragal
and it was confirmed that both, with others involved, had brought bales

of coca leaVes into Argentina.

At the same time the other personnel of the same group became suspicious
when they saw a moving automobile carrying three men who were ordered to
stop.

Their driver stepped on the gas and tried to run down the security personnel
and an exchange of fire ensued in which one of the passengers was shot.

967s
cso: 5300/2243

21
BRIEFS

MARIJUANA BOAT SEIZURE-411:” Cuban Americans, a drug boat and a salvaged
boat were brought to Nassau by the Bahamas Defence Force Tuesday. The 34-
foot Criscraft "Miss Johanna" was picked up a mile east of Riding Rock. On
board were 70 bales of marijuana, varying in weight from 50 to 75 lbs. On
board "Miss Johanna" were Wilfredo Onoze, 48, of Hialeah, Pla, Luis Hernanel,
39. also of Hialeah, and Aracerio Moreton, 43, of Miami. During the opera-
tion, the Defence Force was informed by the US Coast Guard that a boat, "Ram-
anito" (92125 H F1). was missing. The Defence Force aircraft spotted a sunk-
en boat and passed on the inforniation to HMBS Exuma. The Ema, assisted by
HMBS P31, salavaged the sunked vessel, which turned out to be "Rananito."
The men, boats, and drugs were taken to the Defence Force's Coral Harbour
base. [Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 19 Mar 82 p 1]

C50: 5300/7542

22
PURE COCAINE, WEAPONS SEIZED IN RIO DE JANEIRO
Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 19 Mar 82 p 18

[Excerpts] Yesterday the police seized 2.65 kg of pure cocaine. "Enhanced"
(mixed with bicarbonate or talcum), the cocaine would have come to 15 kg. Since
a gram of this narcotic costs 8,000 cruzeiros on the retail market in Rio de
Janeiro, the traffickers, who were also arrested, would have received about 120
million cruzeiros, according to the police.

The arrested traffickers are Joao Candida da Ailva, attorney and former agent
of the defunct Vigilance Police, who was expelled from that agency on charges
of homicide, Jose Quintino Pereira, aged 57, and his sons Aldo Quintino Barreto,
aged 22, and Francisco Jose Pereira, aged 34. The arrested were charged under
Articles 12 and 16 of Law No 6,368, for drug trafficking and forming a traf-
ficking ring.

Single Confession

Despite having been sentenced to over 3 years for drug trafficking, Jose
Quintino Pereira denied any part in the sale of the seized cocaine, as did his
son Francisco Jose and attorney Jose Candido da Silva, who said he had just
been working to appeal the sentence against Jose Quintino, but had not been
able to locate the trial record, "because it had disappeared," he explained.

Only Aldo Quintino Berreto admitted to having brought the drug from Campo
Grande, Hato Grosso do Sul. He had been ordered by "John Doe" to deliver it
to Ipanema, Rio de Janeiro, to a person known to him only as "Pedro."

At the attorney's home, the police found three rifles, a .38 caliber revolver
and ammunition for these weapons.

23
24
SAO PAULO POLICE OFFICER CHARCED WITH INVOLVEMENT WITH TRAFFICKERS
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portugese 16 Mar 82 p 16

[Text] Sao Paulo (0 GLOBO)--Carapicuiba police officer Jurandir Comes Martins,
photographed at a party in the company of known dth traffickers, was dismissed
yesterday and will testify today at an inquiry presided over by Chief Enos
Boeche Junior, magistrate of DEGRAN [Greater Sao Paulo Police Department].

Marcos Antonio da Sousa, recently arrested by the DOPS [Department of Political
and Social Order], also made accusations against Jurandir, connecting the po-
lice officer with trafficker Niroito de Horses Joanides. Hiroito had been a
fugitive since last 3 February, when he escaped from the Taboao de Serra prison,
but he was captured on Friday in Pinheiros by a Mobile Tactical Unit of the
Military Police.

According to the SOI [Intelligence Operations Sector] of the Narcotics Division
of the DEIC [State Department of Criminal Investigation], Heroito was second

in command of a ring led by Pedro Botelho Franganeilo, owner of Pop's Hotel on
Rua Avanhandava, who has been at large for 8 years. The ring also includes
economist Pascoale Nigro, owner of the Casa de Poule bar and cafe on Rua Cesario
Mots Junior in Vila Buarque; Eduardo Kahl Issa, "Turquinho," who murdered a
woman in the Avenida Nove de Julho tunnel in 1979; and Sergio Costa Araujo,
"Sergio Pescoso," who was arrested with marihuana in his possession on 25
February by the DEIC's Robbery Divisionand handed over to the Narcotics Division,
where Chief Carlos Alberto Costa booked him for possession.

Inquiry

The directorate of the DEIC was surprised at the revelations by the SOI regarding
the ring, whose members have been trafficking in narcotics for over 18 years.
According to a Narcotics Division officer, "they were talking about old names

in a new ring."

In police circles it is commented that the "discovery" of the ring may be an
attempt to divert the attention of the authorities, since the information came
at a time when an inquiry is underway in the magistracy of the DBIC, directed
by Chief Dante Hautoni. The inquiry was prompted by revelations by Pascoal
Nigro implicating the staff of Chief Ademar Magalhaes Lopes. The economist
charged with forming a ring said he had been illegally constrainedandtortured

25
in the SOI. Chief Mautoni has already heard the testimony of five of the
complainants against the police.

Another inquiry is being conducted in the magistracy of the Civil Police, since
there are also accusations against police working in other departments. There
are also accusations in the 9th and 14th criminal jurisdictions of Sao Paulo.
Yesterday, a clerk of the SOI worked with the Civil Police Data Bank gathering
information requested by various magistracies regarding the accused ring mem-
bers. Former police officer Dirnei da Costa, arrested with Hiroito, should
testify regarding his connections with the trafficker.

According to the SOI, Herioto enjoyed special privileges in the Taboao da
Serra prison and frequently left to sell cocaine in a bar called "Pilequinho,"
near the police building. Chief Jurandir Comes Martins was in charge of the
prison at that time.

Hosnany

Chief Carlos Alberto Costa, responsible for the arrest of plastic surgeon
Hosmany Ramos last December, said he was surprised at the reports linking this
trafficker with the ring identified by the 501. According to Costa, despite
various investigations of the physician, he never turned up any names of in-
dividuals connected with Hosmany in drug trafficking, at least in Sao Paulo.

 

At a party at the house of "Sergio Pescoco,” police officer Jurandir Martins
(in dark jacket), talks with Eduardo 1553 and Hiroito Joanides (seated)

6362
CSU: 5300/2260

26
BRIEFS

COCAINE, ARMS SBIZED--The Military Police yesterday arrested Pedro Ribeiro
("Pedro Velho") and his nephew Luis Carlos Ribeiro Seizes on Horro de Santa
Maria with about 1/2 kg of pure cocaine valued at 1.6 million cruzeiros, l/2
kg of marihuana, weapons, ammunition, ether atomizers, tape recorders and other
electronic equipment. Later, accompanied by a team from the Narcotics Division,
the Military Police arrested Eneres Lino. who looked after the location where
the traffickers stored the merchandise. Eneres is a parolee["preso albergado")
and has already served 5 years of a 9—year prison term. In the Narcotics
Division, police commented that the ring was responsible for supplying most of
the ether spray cans for carnival as well as for the distribution of drugs in
several districts in the Southern Zone. The police now expect to arrest Eneres
Lino's son, known as Carlinhos, who they say is also a drug trafficker in Morro
de Santa Marta. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese

2 Mar 82 p 14] 6362

HARIHUANA SEIZED IN NATO GROSSO—-Cuiaba (0 GLOBO)--Harco Antonio, superintendent
of the Federal Police in Hato Grosso, announced yesterday that marihuana

fields had been discovered on two farms near tne city of Pedra Preta (250 in
from the capital) and that most of the 1,500 kg of seized marihuana had been in-
incinerated. He added that another crop could be discovered within hours, since
a team of agents is still searching the jungle in the region, investigating an
area where the ground is considered favorable for growing marihuana. The seized
marihuana was valued at 30 million cruzeiros. The superintendent noted that he
was prohibited by law from releasing the names of the individuals arrested.

He also noted that 1,800 kg of marihuana was seized last year in the region,
which is under constant surveillance because of the many clandestine marihuana
farms. [Text] [Rio De Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 16 Mar 82 p 6] 6362

C80: 5300/2240

27
DETAILS ON RECORD CMINE SHIPMENT T0 0.5.

Bogota EL ESPECIADOR in Spanish 22 hr 82 p 9-A

[Article by Fabio Castillo, special envoy]

[Text] Medellin, ll Mar-The Tampa airplane from which the largest cargo of
narcotics ever discovered to date was seized completed its Lima-lbdellin-Miami
itinerary in a single day, but the authorities doubt the possibility that the

1,700 kilograms of the alkaloid could have been placed aboard in the Peruvian
capital.

The Tampa airplane Rib-2401 arrived at Medellin at 8:30 a.m. from Lima with a
cargo of dried fish and left for Miami at 12:35 on a non-stop flight.

0n the one hand the customs administration at Medellin expressed surprise at
the way in which the authorities in charge of drug traffic control have tried
to blame that organization, while on the other hand the army and the judici-
ary police of the public prosecutor's office maintained a discreet silence

about the situation created by the seizure in Miami of cocaine officially
valued at some 1 billion dollars.

In Medellin, precisely at the time that the army was carrying out a security
operation, the plane was loaded with 180 flower boses left behind by flight
2600, also Tampa's. mo boses containing various leather item, 425 boxes
with products made by the company Cid Industries and Investments of Medellin,
apparently where the cocaine was found, and other boxes that contained house-
hold articles.

All told there were 63). boxes, several of which had been assessed or had had
their contents inspected more than 5 days earlier.

According to different versions circulating yesterday in this capital, Tampa's
airplane might be freed today by the American agents in charge of the investi-
gation. The crew, under the comand of Cpt Juan Maldonado Gonzalez, arrived
at Medellin on Wednesday afternoon, but returned to Miami yesterday.

At Tampa, it was said that no new itinerary had been assigned to Cpt Gonzalez

for a week and for this reason it was presumed that he would remain in Miami
for at least eight days.

28
Everywhere in Fudellin, the Subject of conversation was the million-dollar
cocaine cargo discovered by a surprised North American customs guard who ex-
amined the bones when he noticed that they had different markings.

In every small gathering there were all sorts of speculations about the own-
ership of the cocaine, implicating some alleged mafia members whose names
were cannon knowledge.

The truth is that the authorities questioned by this newspaper said it was im-
probable that such a quantity of the alkaloid could be gathered in a few

days, even though it is known that Lima is one of the principal sources of
cocaine in South America. Notwithstanding the above, other sources from the

same security agency commented that in four days one could easily gather that
much cocaine in Medellin.

The findings published by this newspaper made it clear that the same day that
the drug was shipped, an army operation under the comand of a lieutenant whose
name could not be established took place from 7:00 am to 5:30 pm at Olaya
Herrera Airport.

A source at the customs office, who asked that his name be kept secret, said
that the airplane HK-ZloOl was being guarded by the army when it unloaded the

fish coming from Lima and that several boxes randomly selected were actually
inspected.

The same thing happened when the Tampa Boeing 707 was being loaded.

Tampa asked the interior customs house in Medellin for the services of an as-
sessor for the following day between 7:00 am and 9:00 am. The customs ad-
ministrator, Hernando Buritica Rojas, chose Luis Fernando Hatiz to carry out
the inspection of the 425 boxes delivered by Cid Industries and Investments.
The other bOxes had been in the Tampa warehouse for several days, but they
had already been assessed by customs.

It was possible to establish that Cid Industries and Investments made use of
an export operation under the so-called Vallejo Plan that in this case con-

sisted of importing already cut cloth from Miami, which was then exported
after being made into garments.

Contract 3-626 of the Vallejo Plan served to protect the export of merchandise
identified in export registry 0780 as "jackets for men, plain weave, 100 per-
cent polyester" and "women's dresses consisting of skirt and jacket, plain
weave, 100 percent polyester." burlen Pizza M., resident of .‘bdellin, ap-
pears as the exporter. but it was not possible to lomte her.yesterday.

In one of the shipping manifests, 3,839 women's jackets and 1,906 women's
dresses packed in 150 cardboard boxes were declared.

The price quited in the bill was $31,224.02. The other manifest mentions

5,734 jackets for men and 5,266 men's jackets packed in 275 cardboard boxes.
The declared value was $69,710.

29
The first shipment was bound for Diversified Apparel Corp. located in Hialeah,
Florida. The second one was to be delivered to Oxford Industries, Inc, in
Atlanta, Georgia.

The household goods transported by Tampa were the property of Edwin John
Sausser, Victor Hugo mrtinez, Geo. T. Edwards, Richard "I. Geer, Peter
Berwic and James Campbell. There was also a box containing technical books,
the property of Edgar Galindo.

According to the versions known in Colombia by the international agencies,
the 1,700 kilogram of cocaine were in 20 cardboard boxes that presumably
contained ready-to-wear clothing.

Hedellin's customs authorities stated that it is really very difficult for
them to control the flow of merchandise because they lack warehouses. For
this reason all the cargo shipped by Tampa was stored in this company's ware-
house and although customs should protect the merchandise it is apparent
that they do not since there is no personnel to be assigned to this job.

In the warehouses merchandise is admitted and is certified but only in
reference to the number of items. Later the owner of the merchandise or his

customs broker, in this case Panalpina, asks for the appraisal of the mer-
chandise.

The customs administrator chooses the assessor according to the warehouses,
and following customs regulations the assessor should inspect 10 percent of
the merchandise. The assessment is made at random but that officer has no
control over the merchandise, and for this reason the chief of export should
accept his findings in good faith.

At the airport customs office there are always six assessors, who are rotated
weekly with 12 assessors in the internal customs house.

In this case, the assessor for both shipments from the company Cid was lauis
Fernando Hatiz.

After the assessing is done, the merchandise remains in the custody of the
customs house but in reality it remains under the care of the transport
company, because the official institution lacks the mechanism or resources
that guarantee that the merchandise inspected is the same as that shipped.

Neither does customs have the means of locking up the merchandise separately.
In spite of the above, regarding the |alane's cargo, it was reported that the
merchandise was assessed between 7:00 am and 9:00 am. Pliyzt 2401 left
Medellin at 12:35 pm.

Certification of the number of boxes, which is what Tampa really limits it-
self to, was done by Luz Sofia Jimenez, the representative for that company
at Olaya Herrera Airport.

30
The chief of exports from Nedelin's custom house issued the shipping orders
0614, 06B and 0612, but as remarked earlier, this was based on the inspection
of the merchandise done by the assessor on duty.

Tampa's lawyer, Gustavo Adolfo Londono, said that the release of the Boeing
707, HK'2401 is expected today after the necessary inquiries are completed,
because in his estimation the responsibility of the airline company in this
case would be the sane as that foisted on a taxi driver who transport a man
who is carrying an attache case containing drugs.

As soon as the airplane is returned to us we will consider Tampa exonerated
from any responsibility, although there has never been any doubt about the
company's freedom of guilt.

Yesterday Olsya Herrera Airport was a real den of detectives. The nation's
Office of the Attorney General, the general management of customs, and the
DEA assigned investigators who immediately started to ascertain tie facts
with the intent of determining liability.

9907
C80: 53 00/ 22106

31
(”GAINS LABORATORY, SHIPMENT SEIZED
Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 13 l-lar 82 p l6-A

[Text] One of the mat modern and sophisticated laboratories for the mufacture
of cocaine with a production capacity of more than 20 kilograms of the alkaloid

per night, was discovered and dismantled by officials of the P-Z in a luxurious
residence in the extreme northern part of Bogota.

Six Colombians were arrested in the operation, one of whom resides in the
United States and the others in various parts of Colombia.

When detectives closed in on the luxurious residence where the laboratory was
in operation, they found 15 kilos of high quality cocaine ready to be sent to
the black market in the United States.

Along with the cocaine plant. a krcedes Benz 280 GB camper with license
plates 1-‘c-9969 was seized, which according to those knowledgeable about auto-
mobiles, is the only one in the country and is valued at about 2 and a half
million pesos.

The cocaine plant had been in operation for about 2 nonths in a residence on
Carrera 14 at 151-76 in the Cedro Golf neighborhood, and neighbors called it

"'me Fortess" because of the extensive security and protective neasures pro-
vided by the owners.

The building is divided into three stories which were utilized to techniml
advantage by the cocaine manufacturers in the most functional manner imaginable.

0n the first level, in one of the kitchen... a type of collar or sooreroom was
being used. where basins, large cans, filters, chemical ingredients and packaging
materials were stored. 0n the first patio of this same level, an underground
cellar had been built to store the processed drug. The entrance was guarded

by a concrete cover which gave the impression of being a septic tank.

The second level was designed to store the most important and most dangerous
chemicals, and in order to prevent an explosion or accident, a system of venti-
lation and air exchange had been devised which prevented the accumulation of
explosive gases.

32
The area for the ovens and the final drying of the product was located on the
third floor where there were powerful electric lamps with thermostatic tenets-
ture controls to guarantee a high level of purity for the drug. Also on this
third level, were the bedroom for the group of man, furnished with all types of
conveniences.

On another patio, detectives discovered a type of "silo", also desimed for
the storage of already processed cocaine.

The men arrested in the operation were identified as Carlos Orlando Leal
Pardo, born in Garagoa (Boyaca); 'Jose Alvaro Alonso Vargas, who was the
"chemist" or "cook" of the organization; Jose Octavio Phjia Duque, a native of

Msnizales, who appeared to be the owner of the residence; Carlos Alberto Alzate
Arcila, of Medellin; Alonso Alfonso Vargas, a native of Granada (Boyaca) and
Hernan Higuera Santsmaria. from Bogota.

The first of those listed above, Leal Pardo, lived in the United States and
served as a contact there for the distribution and sale of the drug to the
North American mfia.

The confiscated drugs and the vehicle are worth more than 20 million pesos.

33

BRI BPS

mCAINE PLANTATIWS, LABORATORIES WCOVERED—-In operations carried out in the
eastern plains region, the police today discovered two large cocaine planta-
tions and two cocaine processing laboratories. The cocaine plantations and
laboratories were found near San Jose Del Guaviare. There were no arrests.
[PA170111 Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 2330 GMT 15 Apr 82]

(30: 5300/22 70

35
COLOPBIA-U.S. COCAINE SHIPMENT
Mexico City EXCELSIOR 27 Mar 82 p 33-A
[Article by Enrique Rivas Ornelas]

[Text] Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas, 26 Perch—me Judicial Police confiscated
100 million pesos worth of cocaine when it detained a gang of drug traffickers

who were bringing the drug from Bogota, Colonials for shipment to the United
States.

Carlos Aguilar Garza, coordinator of the Federal Public Ministry's agencies,
reported that 10 drug traffickers were arrested last mnday in lbnterrey,
after capturing Orlando Granados Barrera and Hugo Luis Hoyos Fernandez, the
Colombians who were carrying 60 packages of cocaine.

The drug was brought into the country in small rubber pouches that were
swallowed by several people contracted for the purpose. 'mese small packets
were expelled by the "human carriers" in the Nuevo Lean capital.

Jackeline Jacklnan Canabati, an American, and Maritza Perez Huerta, a Spaniard,

who bought part of the cocaine brought into the country from Grenades Barrera,
were also arrested.

Also detained in the muntainous capital at midweek was Alfredo Jackaman
Botarzzi of the United States, who was in the city to help the Colombians get
into Laredo, Texas.

Ramon Gullermo Calzado Bejar, the Public Ministry agent in Monterrey, reported
that he asked the agents of the judiciary policy in that city to pursue their
investigation, and they succeeded in arresting Diego Alfonso Diaz Dinazco and
Carlos Rivera Be tancourt, the Colombian leaders of the gang.

Aguilar Garza said that Alma Gloria Roldan Robles, Carlos Emilia Jackaman and
Hernando Echevarri Pblina were arrested later. One of the meiaers of the gang.

Carlos Rivera Betancourt, is apparently being sought by the Miami police for
two .surders, he added.

9805
080: 5 300/2262

36
SIX MAJOR DRUG TRAFFICKBRS ARRESTED IN MICHOACAN
Mexico City EXCBLSIOR in Spanish 21 Jan 82 p 3S-A

[Article by Rafael Medina]

[Text] After exchanging shots on two occasions with drug traffickers in the
state of Michoacan. agents from the Federal Judicial Police captured six of the
principal distributors of marihuana in the state. The capture of Jesus Sanchez
Silva and Haximiliano Munguia Mendoza, in a police post of the Federal Judicial
Police. enabled agents to break up this gang which even has ranches to hide the
drugs. Upon being interrogated. Sanchez Silva and Munguia Mendoza revealed
that in a pass near Uruapan called Espiritu Santo, a sample of marihuana would
be delivered to potential buyers. so the agents turned up at that place with
negative results: however, they then said that the meeting would take place at
the "El Salitrillo" ranch in Arteaga. “hen the federal agents arrived there,
they were greeted by shots fired by the drug traffickers and after the confron-
tation the gang fled toward the mountains. The Office of the Attorney General
of the Republic announced that there, they were able to capture Tomas Barragan
Espino and Samuel Garcia Mendoza. who were hiding 20 bags of marihuana in some
shocks and a sheep truck to transport the drugs. Upon continuing with the in-
vestigations, the federal agents found out that at the "Las Casas" ranch. near
Apatzingan. there were more drugs, so they moved to that place. Upon arriving,
they were greeted by shots fired by the criminal gang who, for the second time,
managed to flee. At "Las Casas" they managed to arrest Abraham Ortiz Alcala
and Jose Maria Suarez. The Federal Judicial Police, after initiating the pur-
suit of the fugitive drug traffickers. requested the collaboration of the army
before the number of mafiosos and the arms they were using. The six arrested
men were placed at the disposal of the agency of the Federal Public Ministry of

the area.

8956
CSO: 5300/2147

37
BRIEFS

THO DRUG LABORATORIES UNCOVERED--Monterrey. N.L., 19 Jan--Agents from the VII
military zone and from the Federal Judicial Police and the state seized drugs
worth 15 million pesos in two clandestine laboratories and detained six drug
dealers. The two clandestine laboratories where amphetamines were being made
were located thanks to an anonymous call in the suburb of Unidad Modelo and
the subdivision Cerro de la Sills. according to Jesus Torres Espejo, the direc-
tor of the state judicial. Those arrested were: Brand and Ira Brochardo,
Charles Brown. Jorge Luis Beltran, Luis Ruben Orozco Casanova and Genovevo
Rivera Camargo. The first three are sought by the FBI and Interpol. Torres
Espejo indicated that at the moment when they burst into one of the laborator-
ies. the drug dealers offered resistance but they were subdued. In addition
to the amphetamines. they confiscated arms and modern equipment to process
drugs which were then sold in Miami. Florida. [Text] [Mexico City EXCBLSIOR
in Spanish 20 Jan 82 p 32-A] 8956

MUCH SOUGHT DEALER ARRESTED--After a prolonged investigation by the Federal
Judicial Police. one of the most sought-after drug dealers was arrested yester—
day without the federal agents firing a shot. He was surprised while selling
psychotropic drugs to addicts of Culiacan, Sinaloa. Andrea Gilberto Reyes Car-
denas who was famous through the northeast of the country. where he distributed
toxic tablets to students and peasants of all ages. The agents of the PJF
[Federal Judicial Police] had been following his trail for several months but

it was not possible to arrest him without his being in possession of drugs,
since they would be lacking a motive, the proof that he was a drug dealer. Yes-
terday, he was surprised by 680 flasks. When he was arrested. Reyes Cardenas
had in his possession 29,280 tablets of Pludex Forte, narcotics of foreign ori-
gin. although with national packaging, and 250.000 tablets of national manufac-
ture. The arrested man said that he was selling them at $1.50 per tablet.
especially on the U.S. border and in Guadalajara. Culiaean and Mazatlan. Like-
wise. in other actions. the Federal Judicial Police arrested drug dealers
Antonio Galindo Angulo. Ana Elsa Acosta Acosta. Monica Acosta Ruelas and Onofre
Aguilar Lopez. who had formed a gang to distribute heroin in the city of Ti-
juana. Baja California Norte. After an investigation which took several months.
the agents arrested them while they had in their possession two packages with
1.2 kg of heroin of very good quality, of the kind which gives several “cuts,"
as Gen Raul Hendiolea Zerecero. the head of the federal corporation informed us.
[Text] [Mexico City EL SOL DB MEXICO in Spanish 20 Jan p lO-A] 8956

38
SINALOA POPPY FIELDS BURNED--Hazatlan, Sinaloa, 24 Har-0ne-hundred and sixty
poppy plants were destroyed during the past 5 days by federal agents in the
mountainous region of the southern part of the state. The drug was valued at
approximately 50 million pesos. The commanding officer. Dionisio Sanchez
Lopez, reported that the plants were ready to be harvested, and he indicated
that there were several arrests. but he refused to divulge the names so as
not to hamper the investigation. He was certain that those arrested have
contacts with important groups of drug dealers in the southeastern part of

the United States. [Text] [Mexico City EXCELSIOR in Spanish 25 Mar 82 p 8-D]

9787

DRUG SEIZURES, ARRESTS--The office of the attorney general of the republic
reports today that 160 kg of marihuana, 2 kg of opium and various amounts of
cocaine and heroin have been seized, and that 35 persons involved in the
traffic of drugs have been arrested. These actions were possible as a result
of stepped up vigilance by the Federal Judicial Police, which conducted them
both in the federal district and in the interior of the country. Even though
the total amount of the drugs seized was not indicated, the office of the
attorney general also announced that weapons of various calibers had been
taken from those arrested. Investigations are continuing to proceed with the
corresponding criminal action against the drug traffickers. [Text] [FL161532
Mexico City NOTIHEX in Spanish 0251 GMT 16 Apr 82]
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZURE IN 'rEﬂRAN—Tehran and Shahr-e Kord antidrug squad uIembers have
seized 26.119 kg of hashish, 10.753 kg of opium and 3.866 kg of opium juice
from 69 drug smugglers. They also seized 1.524 kg of opium from Ruhollah
Khorsandi, who was mailing the opium to his son in the United States.
[GFZSIZZG Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 11 Apr 82 p 4]

HASIIISII, OPIUH SEIZURE-Tehran antidrug squad members have seized 4.250 kg

of hashish and 16.871 R3 of opium from a number of persons. [GP251226
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 12 Apr 82 p 2]

BANDAR 'ABBAS DRUC FINE-According to Bandar 'Abbas Central News Unit. in
the past week the brother Revolution Guards have seized 150 rolls of opiun,
1 kg of opium juice. one colt, together with two full magazines and a number

of bullets from a group of traffickers. [Text] [Cl-‘251605 Bandar 'Abbss
Domestic Service in Persian 1330 GMT 25 Apr 82]

csu: 5300/5392

(00
INFILTRA‘I‘ION 0F DRUGS INTO TOWGSHIPS BECOMING UNCON'I'ROLMBLE

Johannesburg SOWETAN in English 12 Mar 82 p 6

[Editorial:

[Tcxtl

CSO :

"This Crime Must. Be Smashed"]

AS IS 't'lll-Z CASE with most major --

crime. the slow infiltration of
drugs into the townships will very

soon become an uncontrollable
problem. . .
The police have recently made.

arrests with massive bouts of Man-'

drax pills recovered. Indications
are that with the kind of haul in-
volved this is about to become big-
time crime with all its attendant
social evils.

When drugs are abused they
tend to become a social problem
with wide ramifications. One
would have thought we blocks have
enough problems without this ex-
traordinarily difficult one added.

In the past few years there has
been a trickle of arrests. and a few
big ones. and we are only hoping
the police do not relax their vig-
ilance. 'l’his crime must be
smashed.

We do not claim to know much
about Mnnclrax. What we know is
that the tlrug brings in massive
sums of money for those involved
in its traffic. The point is. innoc-

uous :is this drug may be. there is.

danger that those vilio indulge in it
may be lured to trying the more
potent ones. For addiction to one
drug usually means the demand for
a bigger “kick“ or u more potent
effect on the user.

()ur evperieoce of drug trafllck-

5 300/5 709

END

log is that -it telescopes into an
amoebic monster with a whole
brace of social evils.

Those who get addicted soon he-_
come desperate and are forced to
commit the most heinous and vi-
cious crimes to satisfy their crave.
Many of them get desperately ill.
some lose their minds. Many tlie.

Drugs soon become available to
young who are then used by nns-
crupulous criminal bosses.

Kids. and very often ndults. be-
come vulnerable and easily manl-
pulated by bosses to commit grave
crimes or do the most terrible per-
versions. Eventually the scene he-
comes organised.

in places like America big outfits
like the Mafia which thrive " on
drugs traffic control the lives. of
millions. They control the police.
they control magistrates and
judges. they control mayors. doc-
tors and lawyers. they control the
media. We are painting a grim pic-
ture for we wish to show the evil of
drug trafficking and what it can do
to our people.

With the kind of money soon in-
volved life becomes cheap.
Mobsters rub each other out. Some
are hired as “hit-men'j. Gangs be-‘_
gin to light for control and soon the
whole community is hcltl in terror
by greed and lust for money and
more drugs.