FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10066
22 October 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 60/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION ssavuce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
no: OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1006
22 October

JAPAN REPORT
(F000 60/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL
National Constituency System for House of Councillors Considered
Unlikely
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN, 15 Sep, 31 Kay 81)..

Media's Pessimistic View
LDP Presents Bill To Revise Election Law

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLmY

Fore ‘-.gners Seen Dominating Gene Engineering Patents
(NIKKAN KmYo SHINBU", 31 Aug 81) CIOOOOIOOIOOIQOOOOO0.00...

Japan, France Joint Interferon Testing
(JAPAN ECONm-Ic JOURNAL, 29 Sep 81) I....I........O.C......'

Plant Gene Hunting Expedition Envisaged for Yunnan Province
(JAPAN EWMC JwRﬂAL, 22 Sep 81) OOOOOOIICOOOIOIOOOOOCQOO

Government Efforts in Biotechnology Discussed
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIBUM, 7 Aug 81, TOKYO SHDIBUN, 25 Aug 81) ..

Development of New Agricultural Products
Massive Cell Cultivation Restrictions

Firms Chosen To Take Part in lO-Year Government R & D Plan
(JAPAN EcoﬂmIc JOURNAL, 22 &p 81) OOIOIOOOIDOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

Ratio of R & D to Sales Almost at U.S. Level
(JAPAN ECONMC JWRNAL, 22 Sep 81) COOUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOI...

NT’I‘, IBM To Swap Computer Patents
(JAPAN ECONMIC JOURNAL, 29 Sep 81)..

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 PC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fujitsu Fanuc Develops Assembly Robot
(JAPAN Ecmmc JomAL, zzmal) OIOOOOOQOOOOOIIOOCOOOO

Nippon Electric Due to 'Freeze' 6111! Ram Output
(JAPAN ECONQIIC JOURNAL, 22 Sep 81) ......................

Rivalry in Building Plants for Helium Intensifylng
(JAPAN EcmMc JWRNAL, 22 sep 81) OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOI.

NSC Expects Use of Oil-Based Fuel will Decrease
(JAPAN ECONMC JW, 29 39p 91) ooooooooooooooocooooco

Britain's 600 Group Hopes for Robot-Hakim Technology
(JAPAN ECONMC JOWAL, 29 &p 81 OOOOOIQOOOOOIIOOIOIIOI

HITI Hopes To Increase 011 Well Yield
(JAPAN ECONWIC JOURNAL, 29 sep 81) oocooccooooooooocooao.

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SNIOLOGICAL

NATIONAL CONSTITUENCY SYSTBi FOR HOUSE OF COUNCILLORS CONSIDERED UNLIKﬂaY
Media's Pessimistic View
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 Sep 81 p 1

[Text] "Is the Liberal Democratic Party really gOing to push through a national
constituency system for the Upper House at the Special Session of the Diet?"

"Our task is nerely to compile a responsive proportionate representation plan
and the rest is up to the Upper House Liberal-Democrats."

This was the exchange between Komeito Party's Election Policy Cousittee Chairman
Ohno. trying to worn out the Liberal-Democratic stand. and the latter party's
Election Systeo Investigative Conittee executive member.

The Kooeito Party is absolutely opposed to the Liberal-Denocrats' reforl plan and
thus the latter's possible moves at the Special Diet Session worries Komeito.
Consequently. they were relieved when "the informal feedback fron two or three high
level Liberal-Demcrats indicated that there appears to be no strong mve to

drive through the reforn." (Ohno)

Liberal-Democrat '9 Negotiable Item

At present, the Opposition is unexpectedly call with respect to the Liberal-
Deuocratic Party's move to present the redistricting proposal at the Special
Session. The Komeito and Democratic Socialist parties which had opposed the
Liberal Democrats' proposal at the previous regular session of the Diet have
reversed themselves. "We have no inediate plans for launching a cauntermve."
(Ohm) "We do not even have plans for an intro-party meeting before the Special
Session." (Democratic Socialist Party Election Countermeasures Co—ittee Chairman
Fujii) The Socialist Party had compiled its own Responsive Proportionate
Representation Plan prior to the Liberal Democrats. and thus, the party's
predominant opinion at the regular session-dad by the party's Special Committee
on Election Systen Countermeasures-was for "adoption of the Liberal-Dmcratic
plan." But now. such voice has abated and they appear to be resigned. "Passage
of reform at the Special Session of the Diet is highly unlikely." (Special
Committee on Election System Countermeasures Director Saito)

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

th has there been this uniform shift of opinion among the Opposition? Socialist
Fatty Central Executive Committee Chairman Tobita states that, "we have our hands
full with administrative reform questions and there is no room for considering

the national constituency system for the Upper House. Since the Special Diet
Session has become a single issue (administrative reform) session. the interest
toward the national constituency system for Upper House election has waned. More-
over. there is an interpretation that "the Liberal-Democrats must have the
cooperation of Komeito and Democratic Socialists in passing the administrative
reform measures. Perhaps it is their opinion that no good will come of antagonizing
Komeito and Democratic Socialists by pressing the national constituency for the
Upper House issue, especially when they have just obtained Komeito and Democratic

Socialist support on the administrative reform question." (Romeito leadership's
view).

The Opposition's view is that, "the Liberal-Democrats' motive in submitting the
national constituency plan at the Special Session is merely to use it as a
negotiable item vis a via the administrative reform proposals. And no one is
expecting that there is any likelihood of the passage of the nationwide redistrict-
ing proposal at the Special Session.

Prime-Minister's Face Must Be Saved

The only problem here is how will the Liberal-Democratic proposal (on redistricting)
be handled at the Special Diet Session. That is, it is a question of how it
will be settled. Among the Opposition, some hold the hard line: "Reject the
proposal absolutely!" The majority, however, anticipate "a continued
deliberation." The consideration here is, "how to resolve it without damaging
Prime Minister Suzuki's face, since it was his foremost public promise at the
time of his taking office. There can be no self-contradiction. [There must be
consistency.]" (Socialist Councillor Sango Satao) Next comes the plan for a
creation of the deliberative body that would examine the national constituency
system for the house of Councillors with the party in power and the Opposition
sitting at the same table.

'bnce deliberative committee is created for examining all the reform plans
including the Liberal Democratic proposal, then it would make it easier for the
Liberal-Democratic Party to retract its plan without embarrassment." (Fujii)

And there are those who say that, "since Prime Minister Suzuki wants the reform
measure to be a bi-partisan decision, a bi-partisan discussion with a view to

the 1986 Election would be satisfactory." (Socialist Party leadership) Still
others (Democratic Socialist leaders) look upOn this deliberative committee as

a final resting place for the Liberal-Democratic proposal. Once in the committee,
it can he allowed to fade out and eventually, it can be dropped.

Back to the Beginning

But even if the Opposition's strategy succeeds and the Liberal-Democratic proposal
is shelved, the problems associated with the current national election district
system will remain and the differences among the parties will still smoulder.

That is. under the currently effective system, only union officials who are

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

allowed both money and time can run for office. Scholars and cultured people that
the parties ought to have as members are barred from becoming Diet members."
(Socialist Party Secretariat Director Sato)

For this reason, a substantial number of Socialists believe that, "there is no
other solution save for the responsive proportionate representation system."
(Diet Policy Committee Chairman Yamaguchi). Komeito and the Democratic Socialist
Party, in the meantime, are still adhering to the "block plan"-their alternative
to the Liberal-Democratic proposal. In all likelihood, the debate concerning the
national constituency system for the House of Councillors will go back to the
beginning, and the question will probably be deferred until the next regular
session of the Diet.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

LDP Presents Bill To Revise Election Law

Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 May 81 p 2

[Text] The Liberal Demoeratic Party (LDP) has presented the Diet with a bill to
revise the Public Election Law to introduce a proportional representation or
system [Kosoku Heibo-Shiki Hirei Dsihyo sei] instead of the national constituency
system, and the ruling party has every intention of passing the bill at the
extraordinary session in the fall. The LDP is undertaking quite a task because
this is the first attempt to revise the Upper House election system that includes
the national constituency system. which forces candidates to spend tremendous
amounts of money and to campaign hard to win seats in the Upper House. unless

a candidate happens to be a "talents" (celebrity), a well-known bureaucrat or a

labor union leader.

Revision of the Public Election Law to introduce a "proportional representation
system" has many times been studied and debated at the Diet since the Meiji era,
but the representation system was never adopted simply because candidates would
have a difficult time forecasting election results.

Ir. order to revise the Public Election Law in time for the next Upper House
electiOn in 1983. the LDP must get the Diet to approve the bill this year.
However. the LDP and the opposition parties must work it out to agree to pass
the bill first. The Japan Socialist Party (JSP) supported the LDP's ideas until
recently. but now it is sending out negative signs. Komeito, the Democratic
Socialist Party (DSP) and the Connmnist Party (JCP) are opposed to the bill.

The LDP's bill will do away with the "one vote" system based on votes cast for a
candidate in the local constituency. Under the proposed system, even if voters
do not want to vote for a candidate in the local constituency, they can still
write in the name of a candidate in the national constituency.

The one-vote system was criticized for running counter to the principles of the
constitution, while the two-vote system is easily understood.

Another characteristic of the bill is that it calls on political parties to list
not only its members but also to list the candidates it recommends. The purpose

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is to set "celebrities" in various sectors of society to win seats in the Upper
House. First the political parties will give priority to candidates who are their
own members, however, in the long run, they will build up candidates other than
their own members. Under the new system, persons can win the Upper House election
without doing much campaigning. This will probably encourage capable persons to
run in the Upper House election.

One fault of the LOP-proposed bill is that persons seeking to win a seat in the
Upper House as non-affiliated candidates are deprived of the opportunity to run
independently. The new bill stipulates that political parties and other organiza-
tions which are entitled to submit the lists of candidates are: 1) those who have
more than five (5) Diet members each; 2) those who have won more than four (6)
percent of votes cast in the latest Lower House election or Upper House election;
and 3) those who have more than 10 candidates.

Those candidates who are planning to win seats in the Upper House as non-affiliated
candidates are naturally opposed to this requirement. In the "double elections"
held in 1980, five (5) non-affiliated candidates managed to gather lore votes

than all JSP candidates combined. In the next election, the LDP is reported to
have a stake in four (a) non-affiliated candidates, thus estimated winning seats to
be 25 in all.

Unless the LDP takes a more flexible stance on the three conditions, the
possibility of passing the bill in the Diet this fall is remote.

COPYRIGHT: Nikon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

llﬁbO
USU: h105/269A-P

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOREIGNERS SEEN DOMINATING GENE ENGINEERING PATENTS
Tokyo NIKKAN KDGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 Aug 81 p 33

[Text] It is said that the Japanese industrial circle turned
pale at the news of confirmation of the United States patent re-
garding recombinant DNA (deoxyribo-nucleic acid) at Stanford
University. "If the same thing materializes in Japan. we are
finished during the effective term of the patent as far as the
gene splicing technique is concerned." Be it gene splicing or
technologies in other areas. achievements in most research and
development are introduced into the world armed with patents.

In order to win research and developsent competitions, one may
say that all that matters is how strong a patent right was ob-
tained. In an unexplored technology such as gene splicing.

the battle for encampment called patents will be fought all the
more severely. Therefore. the problen points of the offensive-
defensive battle of patents that began with the Japanese Patent
Agency as the arena have been sought mainly through the opinions
of the people involved.

As you can see from the table, applicants with Kstakana [used for transliteration]
names are listed one after another. Nearly 80 percent of the applications are
from foreign countries. He may assume that the competition for application began
with an overwhelming dominance of the foreign powers.

As for the contents of the applied inventions. according to the data published
outside by the Patent Agency. recombinant DNA itself and its manufacturing proc-
esses comprise 30.5 percent. DNA vectors themselves and their manufacturing
processes, 25.9 percent; manufacturing processes for substances. 19.5 percent;
and the rec0mbined organisms (microorganisms) themselves and their manufacturing
processes, 16.6 percent. in that order: and many of them are related to the basic

parts of the splicing operation.

Those which may he cited among them as representative applications for inventions
are from the 161 in England. University of California and Genentech in the United
States. and Max Planck Institute in West Germany, etc.

The inventions of the British 161 are "a genetic modification process for micro-

organisms" and "manufacturing process for single cell protein," and the one by
the Max Planck Institute is "a manufacturing process for linear hybrid phage."

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Those from the University of California are entitled “DNA transduction vector,"
"purification process for fragments of nucleotide sequence," etc. And, the appli-
cations from Genentech are "synthetic DNA and its regulation," and "methods for
erpression and improvement of microbiological polypeptides."

Other prominent applications include "mutant microorganisms and their manufactur-
ing processes and applications" by Research Incorporated and "microorganisms and

their regulation processes" related to Pseudomnnas bacteria by General Electric
(GE).

Among the Japanese applications, those related to restriction enzymes that are
used for cutting and splicing DNA are predominant. It is said that this is due
to the delayed establishment of Japanese experimental guidelines for recombinant
DNA, which promoted research in the area of restriction enzymes unrelated to the
guidelines.

As we look over the list, we notice unexpectedly the fact that the invention en-
titled "construction of biologically active DNA" by Professor Cohen, et al. at
Stanford University, which is said to be the basic patent among the basic patents,
has not been applied in Japan.

Regarding this fact, patent personnel in industrial circles surmise that they
probably gave up the Japanese application due to differences between Japanese and
American regulations.

In the States, a system of prior right of invention prevails, and even if the in-
ventor published his invention at an academic meeting or in journals, it can be
patented if application is made within a year. On the other hand, in Japan, the
fact that the invention has been made known by the inventor [prior to patent
annlicatinn] is a reason for rejection. The Stanford University patent is a

case that falls under this rule, and the prospect of its being patented in Japan
is considered very slim.

K. Ono, chief of the patent department of Kyowa Hakko states with confidence "I
don't think it was applied for in Japan. Besides, that invention was made pos-
sible with government support, and royalties must be turned over. In addition,
they cannot demand royalties in an outrageous amount, as a rule. Even if the
patent had been confirmed, research and experiments can be conducted freely
(Patent law, article 69), and to say that the industrial circles turned pale is
an exaggeration. The question of whether or not practicable technology will
cone out during the effective term of the patent right is more important."

K. Takeda, chief of the patent department of the Nippon Kayaku 60., Ltd., also
criticizes the over-reaction of the outsiders saying "it is questionable to make
a fuss without really understanding the patent system. It is conceivable that
it may have an ill effect on research and development. I suppose it is more
sensational to say that the industrial circles are struck down gaping."

when we speak of a patent war, it is not to say that Japan is defenseless. I may
add the fact that there are many firms contemplating the fact that the time has
come again to use patent control skills learned the hard‘ew during the heyday of
technical importation.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Stanford patent seems to have resulted in "mach ado about nothing." However,

the true feeling in the industrial circles is probably a sense of relief deep
inside .

Regarding this subject, the Patent Agency gave me a more specific explanation.

"The Stanford patent should have been disclosed by new even if they applied using
the priority right (an advantage provided for those residing abroad wi.h respect
to the application period), but we have not found such an invention among them.
However, in the United States, 'new matter“ may be added up to 3. And, the last
one should still make the deadline, and we cannot say definitely that their Japa-
nese application has not been made at all. However, compared with the basic in-
vention, the effect would not be as great."

More of a concern than such a latter for the industrial circles is the delay in
the Japanese guidelines for DNA experiments and problems with related patents.

In other words, in Europe, the guidelines have already been relaxed and experi-
mental research can be freely conducted. However, in Japan, there are some areas
where nathing can be done due to the strict restrictions. If applications arrive
from foreign countries for inventions in these areas, how would the Patent Agency
handle the case? It is said that several such applications have already appeared
as actual problems.

Concerning this matter, a scientific investigator of the Science and Technology
Agency, A. Hatsuda states "we have made a request to the Patent Agency to examine
tnese cases based on the experimental guidelines."

For the Patent Agency, how to Justify rejection is a headache. Basically,
as long as the patent requirements are fulfilled, they are in a position inevit-
ably to register the patents.

There are voices in the industrial circles that the stipulation in article 32 of
the Patent Law "inventions that may be harmful to public health" should be ap-
plied.

However, there are voices, too. that "the experimental guidelines are a domestic
problen in Japan. Thus, to think that there is no way to hold foreign inventions
is a disgrace for a country noted for technology. When there is the prospect
that safety can be assured in the future, they should be patented. The Patent

Agency should judge independently according to the Patent Law [acnying patents on].
These voices are rather more predominant.

The Patent Agency apparently plans to require an indication of detailed data con-
cerning the safety for those cases that do not meet the guidelines. To cope with
this, the applicants are likely to be required to receive individual examinations
by the Council for Science and Technology and the Science Council of the Ministry
of Education to prove safety.

Dr K. Sakaguchi at the Life Science Research Institute of Mitsubishi Chemical
Industries, an inventor of a preparation process for thermostable enzymes states
that from the standpoint of the researchers "Such misgivings are encountered

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because of the existing gap in guidelines. We, researchers always wish for a
chance to compete on a common ground. Researchers generally lose their research
ambitions when they are restricted this way and that way as to the experimental
methods and facilities."

There are some among them who state practical techniques in gene splicing tech-
nology are not likely to materialize so easily during the patent term of 15 years
or so. That considerable technical differences have been produced is an undeni-
aLle fact, and I don't believe that crying for urgent relaxation of experimental
guidelines is very meaningful."

In opposition, Dr Sakaguchi urges a relaxation of the Japanese guidelines saying
"0n the contrary, applied microbioengineering and enzymology in Japan are the
scientific fields at the top of the world. Because this technology can be ap-
plied, there is virtually no delay in the field of agricultural chemistry. Espe-
cially, speaking from our standpoint. I would like them to make the plant micro-
organisms usable as hosts or vectors."

From 1 July, the U.S. National Institute of Health drastically relaxed the 0.5.
guidelines once again. Irritation of the Japanese researchers is likely to con-

tinue for a while.

Separate from the guidelines, one of the problems is that the foreign applica-

tions are written with a very extensive scope of patent claim. Concerned voices
are increasing sensing their purpose to be containment against Japanese research
and development. 0n the other hand, the Patent Agency observes that "new techno-
logical fields tend to have extensive claims. Their purpose may also be in feel-
ing how we handle them at the Agency. Amendments may be forthcoming at the time
of the request for examination and the submission of argument against the notice

of rejection and reasons.

Actually, it is said that the Agency has sent Out notices of rejection and rea-
sons for 2-3 cases. The reasons are said to be too extensive claims.

when we consider the special additional period allowed for those residing abroad,
the amendment for or argument against the notices of rejection and reasons from
the applicants in Euro-American countries will be returned around October. Then,
the purposes of the Euro-American firms and research organizations will be re-
vealed for the first time. The genetic patent No l in Japan will appear only
after that. The patent war in the true sense will begin from that moment, and
the moment of truth will be there for the Japanese industrial circles also.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ostN\o

onxwxo
ohxcxo

onxmuxn

onxns\c
anx~xc

onxowxn
onxmuxn

anxoxuu

as\o\HH
o~\o\ﬂa
on\on\°H
ohxmaxoa
a~\w\o

onxnxo
nsxhuxn

a~\hH\n
hs\~\m
nh\m\o
h~\o~\c

nu\nN\c

oh\on\o
nsxoaxna

nnxm\o
nnxnxo

coduuoaummu

.vaH .EUSO d5.d£90»ﬂ=

Acuuaumv .uudH aneuadm
Acmnv .>a¢= vn¢>huw

ouoaoaun<

nuocuumV .uncu usuuuom
ouoaoaun<

Aauuu .sv weasouuom
:uuquHoaauouo«n nah
ouoaouun<

Ema ﬁaﬁoﬁu

A<m=v goouaoauo

A<m=v :uuuuoaou

53 is. 48 99.8 33.
£3 63. .«om 935% 3oz
A.u=mv Hus

a¢m=v .uaaao uo .>«==
A<mpv .uaano uo .>«:=

Aahoo .3v .uucu Joanna so:
.vcu .aoso «Anananuax
.uca .au:u asnwpaouﬁx
.AQA .ooa .Hom caucum ovoz

A<m=v .caaz uo .>«a=

A<m=v vouauonuouau souuooom
uuaﬂdh w .Ivocor .OShaz
A.uauv Hug

Acwav uuuuouuu Huuocuc

 
 

Autos an: .:a a umu o:u mums:

[D 5 iiiiii t lust-’“LL-o

ooahsao ounuuaoluoSu mo :owuauamouml
ooauoooun OIOAU cu uncuuo> Cunaouunnu
van .dzn vdquuvoa .ocuououn uo coauaudnouml
ocwououa vouuouoo no nouuauuaouml
nvﬂﬁuann madadouuou
oaouauwuoouuul mo coauuonoun ouuaunuua cu uuuuoun <|
:«ououa
wanna; a mo nouuuuqaoua :« on: and can «In coauavozl
couuoudoauou an oaunoousuun no nouuauaaouml

wuuouooa wanna; no coauauamouml
nﬂhuuowuoouoaa mo coaua>uuaaon
nodal «Au
van nokunonhaon aquamoao«aonuqa mo unannounxul
«and! as» no :oHquuuuvaa
vac amvuunoahdon «wouuoaounouuaﬂ mo :ouuuouqnml
coauuasuou uuu can ¢za ouuonuaamu
429 nan«aaouou zuaua mo aoauosuuQGOOI
<29 vauunaooou has»: uo cowuoauuoaoUI
cuououm Hana ouwnda nan ouuooua mnwuauoownaqxn
oouosaoa
ovuuoouuaa mo oucolaauu nan acouona coauuoauauaml
OH Du 00> COdqu-vﬂp—QHU CZDI
.oouvopuuaa can acowuucc .uo>«ua>«uov
Icuaanau .cunancu .mouwnonauaa «nanosucho
cu so: can uuagn aqua»: passed no cowuauaaoumu
monnoooun Honucoo vuﬂoaaml
nonmoooum nouucoo vuloaaml
noauuauuacou nausu u=u owmsaoauouown no mauauum 302:
muuoo Huuuouuun vuauouucwuu
aaauUwuonow maﬁa: causnca new nmvooun wsﬁuauumuscuxl
mcoauuuaunnm van mumwuooua
uauuauoauauua nuasu vac nawwawuuoouUﬂa ucwuazl
onnuhad 30: a no awoooua ”cannuUIusuIZI
nauucwuuoonoaa now uuuoonm cowuwoauuvoa aquoaoou
mumwauoum aouuaaawou nqucu van namucuwuoouudzl

 

coauco>cu uo oauua

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oo\<\n
oo\oH\~

oa\c\u
omxuxo
oo\~\o
ooxeuxn
oa\ua\n

owxonxc
o¢\h\q
onxu\e
ow\H~\m
ow\a~\n
oo\u~\n
oa\au\n
ooxnxn

ooxoﬂ\a
onxo~\~a
m~\c~\~H

OR\NN\HH
onxoaxua

onxndxua

o~\on\od
¢~\NH\oH
o~\a\oﬂ
o~\n\m
on\d~\m
oN\cH\a
o~\n~\n

Aluao .39 unauanom
Avuauuoav ua>aaua=

A<m=v noouaoaou

n<m=u oauaom .n .u

A<mav .uaano no .>«:=

Acmav .uHH-u mo .>ﬂa=

Anaaaaomv nauseous uuao
Aummau

casuauuﬁH Juuasd ﬂow—5 A:

Acmpv anonaa

A65: 338 .n .o

A<m=V unouna

A¢m=v anonna

m¢m=v agoﬁaa

A¢a=v ugoﬁaa

A<m=v agoﬁnp

Admav .>«:D vua>hl=
A<mav cauao
A.»:mu came“:

Aaacaumv .uacu haauaam
azauazaax an an cow»
Icauuoaa> 0v anacoauaz aucam<

Aaouwumv .uucu uaauwwm

paucao Macs-o

A<m=v :soﬁaa

A<mav .>Hc= uuoucuum
.uan .aogo «gaﬁnaauuz
A<mpv csoﬁaa

A<m=V .uwﬂuu no .>«:=
cuoaocwn<

uoacau|<osn ma«:«Uu=ou mvwaoaun uo :owuauanaua
maneuaa> vﬁaaaan can avaaouaa 3a: muaaooua a>ona an»
maﬁa: macawl<o=n waw=«6uuoo oWuaoaHa mo coauauond
.aowuquaaoun and .ccnm “Hoe .N auuauaan uaduasl<oAAI
alauudmnoouaas an coasvoun anamosoooaaaonouauoml
madam
awuaSuaao aauauuuan mo nouonauaxa naaauouoapouoHZI
anouuauuaana van nowuauaaaua uwanu .auouaa> vaaouaml
ououoa> nowuaavaaauu <zau
uahw> aunaaauamluOZI
can: uaagu van ovwaowaml

 

anacoauauna mo cowuauanaumu

unaaoun acauauunaun qua and moan via-anal

macaw unconﬁned oauanuchmn

unaaoun nowuauaaaun mud van mush vﬁauaamu

unaccun noduluaaaun cud and Noah van-QHMI

aaaaoun acquauamaua auu van Nozm adamant!

ooauoua nouuaunnaua Qua was Honk vulnnnal

onaooun douuauanaun now was 00:» cannon»:
oaoaaaoua couuusvoua caauoua can «aaaguahn

anauoua yam wquOU aaau vasaauuo aduawadwwuu<l

unusaadm mo oauqou u:ouaﬂ:: .aanaumn

acuunuamaua uuasu can aaaaoaaoa <29 namdanaoaaml
acaauonn
vaawaunxa no aowuauuxa was macaw uuuozhoxoun

no auuozuaxaa uo aouuuancw aanuca uazu mucuaa>l
sag»

mcucwaucoa mamucaquOuaﬁa can «vaunwun wanna: 3azl
coauouaaana unazu vsw "maaoaaw auosu ouca maauo
:oHuwunaauu aunaunoa has Ou unoamauuou uazu mucus

Inauu <2n asocamoxa wcauuancﬁ now auaauuao mucuaa>l
<zx|uawcaunaa couauuauad cans; cu auuuouuaaauaaoo

”cwuunwnxa macaw wcd>as aoanawuo uaaaaaaoaau 3azu

anwuaﬂomu anouaaw mo cowuauanaumn

ucuon mumazuaxa Hawuucu as» an :oHuuavoun :«auouml

muuamaaml

usuauOHQ uswqaa unusuaﬁoe gnu; mo :oHunuunauml

namwcawuoouuda an mcwauOHQ aauo>uaxaa mo aumacunhml

auauoun coauaucaahaw w an acaazalq mo couuwuonauml

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
parstion

cleic acid ligsse

d restriction endonuclesse
epsrstion

882
338
886
836

Inst. Phys. Ch

Inst. Phys. Ch

Inst. Phys. Ch
Inst. Phys. Ch
Bethesda Resea

Inst. Phys. Ch
Mitsubishi Che
Mitsubishi Che
Inst. Phys. Ch
Inst. Phys. Ch
Inst. Phys. Ch
Inst. Phys. Ch
(Cases open as

:Pstent Information Center; sesrch-clsssifi

xency o
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign Patent Applications in the Area of Genetic Manipulation Technology in Con-
parison with Other Areas

  

(382.- -52¥ mum
V

    
  
     

 
 
  
 

:2” ‘) n: .
Mia-9m (76.7%) ....... '

“Same-ssh sonar? (5
"'fIlIZZZZZiIZ 111

Field of microbiology (18.92)

A11 industries (18.71)

(Applications during 1971-77)

Field of genetics (76.7%) (cases opened during 1973-Jan '81)

. Patent Agency data

Key:

0

UbUNH
o

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1981

7722
(:50: 8129/1918

12
FOR 0511C1AL USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCI ENCE AND THIIINOWGY

JAPAN, FRANCE JOINT INTERFERON TESTING

Tokvo JAPAN EONOHIC JOURNAL 1n Bullish Vol 19 No 974 , 29 Sep 81 P 9

[Text] Japanese and hutch vin-
esperts will put Maren on
clinical trial. as produced by
Hsyashibara Biochemical
Laboratories. Inc. ot’ Okayama.

The six Japanese experts in-
clude executives et Kttanto lo-
slitute and the Nation! Inti-
mte oi Health The five French
participants include experts at
two national mutations:
I'lnstltut Pasteur and "must
National de la Sante et de la
Recherche (INSERw.

1he two ﬁend: organisa-
tions' tests will be deﬂated to
confirm the Hayuhlbara inter-
teron‘s etteetivanca um
hynophobia and leukemia.
Following studies in ﬁance.
Japaneae virus atahorlties hope
they can do similar iesta with
the appoval by the Ministry at
Health & Welfare.

Fifty billiat units 1! the in-
tertcron are to he supplied by
llayashibara. which claims to
be the world‘s largest producer
at the virus inhibitory tactor.
mat the French reaeanheea will
most start clinical tests on
kymophobla patient; The plain
tor cliniml trials "reformulat-
ed niter Prof. Tsumtaro Kishi-
da 0t Kyoto Prefecturai Univer-
sity of Medicine arranged the
interferon supply to iNSERM.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nikon Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

(:80: 4120/20

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060043-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHmLOGY

PLANT GENE HUNTING EXPEDITION BNVISAGED FOR YUNNAN PMVINCE

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 111 English Vol 19 No 973, 22 Sep 81

- [Text]

Alarge-oculehotatlcalm magnum-duo. undue-MM!
lunﬂngexpeditlmbmlobe mmdymllhwnhdn Walla!
dispatched In China‘s Yunnan 0.8.. Raul: and any «but diam-mm."
Ptovincebymehpnmelh- commie- u a W magmas
smumcum.m:yt “gene bub." Swim!!! Walla"
Fisheriesmetimneuyar. ”mum-mm». Inmate-“w

Aceordingtotheliniury. mum-med Wuhan
may muons. led by Annette: may at and m M by Japanese
mdlheSovHUumlme duetttthow: MOW
beneamubmyhreeau (mama-mu mum
years hurting tot various “mum. mun-atom
breadsolwﬂd pltnbnot ”01¢me!!! Methyl
Immunirmwﬂudc Sowetsuhnbnuldto papa lobed
(or artiﬁcial MW at beach “annular. dadded nut rehq
new species otfoodandleod RomantiI'uYuun. mun-known.
croszapnnhunbobaneno mmmu Walnut!
madeadI-ivo.bmno Gammmwym BOW hitch-I

' (-rmammmsm mun-gummy ”9mg
efloru invariably involve mug humour“. W or an
acne recombination. cell W than. 11.. up... with "
m.mmrmuw magnum ‘0 Wm “"3“
new. heme an out an hm M ' M

newsman» "Momma! “W"-
u'odncelhemuunl M'- whamm
viva! nnd “predation The M an b «-
capociuuofvildplnulolnil mud to «that many

human-cultivated (arm plats ”equally mm In”
totmmprothctivity withlm beamﬂnwheem
cute. Trial: to dcvdop m unmadum
maﬁceotothermp hyauaodonwmud

that need no [utilization In Vietnam m [dim
already in m In Amr- a the world' mm
icaannnocckmo. mm “noun We"

' oulecumasmm «Mohammtb

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Kzizai Shilbun, Inc.

C80: 4120/19

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000‘00060043-4
FOR<0FF1C1AL.USE‘ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

GOVERNMENT EFFORTS IN BIOTECHNOLOGY DISCUSSED

Development of New Agricultural Products
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 7 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] There is a growing movement in the government and LDP to develop new seeds
for agricultural products, using biotechnology, as a strategic Japanese industry.

It is said that this field of advanced technology will revolutionize world agricultural
production. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery has taken a big step
forward from previous basic research. Beginning in FY 1982, it will begin serious
research and development for practical application in such facilities as the Agri-
cultural Technology Research Laboratory (hukuba). The first research subject to be
undertaken is cell fusion. by which cospletely new seeds can be produced from the
cells of different kinds of seeds. The LDP has decided to organize a "Biotechnology
Research Association" (tenative name) by September and actively promote the develop-
ment of new seeds. Specific product development is up to private industry. There-
fore. ways of speeding up application are under consideration. These include making
research results from the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery and other
agencies available to private industry and ultimately setting up a technological
research association cosposed of a number of companies.

LDP To Organize Research Group in September

The government and L0? decided to accelerate the development of new seeds using
biotechnology because this technology, along with aerospace development and elec-
tronics, is an important technology which will help deter-ins the future prosperity
of the country. Japan lags far behind the United States in biotechnology and a very
strong research and development system will be necessary to catch up.

The United States is at the forefront in biotechnology and is expanding applied
research in the fields of agriculture and botany. One example is an experiment to
produce rice plants which will grow in the desert by combining the genes of legumes,
which can produce the nitrogen needed for plants to live, with rice plants. It is
said that the United States is beginning to collect new types of plants which have
possibilities for increased production of food from South America, China, and South-
east Asia for the purpose of keeping a stable food supply, and that it plans to create
a "plant gene bank" in the near future.

The grand U.S. strategy is to grab up the "raw materials" of the world's plant genes
ahead of other countries. Thus, when a food war begins. it will have the advantage.

15
roe omcw. vs: own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Japanese government is also forced to come up with some form of countermeasures.
Also, not only the American seed companies, but many major corporations, including
the major oil companies, have entered this field and are rapidly doing research.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery has been carrying out basic research
to develop new seeds with biotechnology at the Agricultural Technology Research La—
boratory in the Tsukuba academic city and the Plant Virus Research Laboratory.
Beginning in FY 1982, it plans to begin doing applied research in earnest. Cell

fusion research and development will begin in FY 1982. This is a technology for pro-
ducing new seeds by combining the cells of different types to utilize the character-
istics of both. For exasple, by combining tomato and potato plants, it is theore-
tically possible to produce a new plant which produces potatoes below ground and
tomatoes above ground. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery has requested
a budget for this as one of its most ilportant projects for next fiscal year.

Also, it is planning to make an effort in a very important area, searching for and
storing up seeds and seedlings (for example, rice which can grow in cold climates
and soy beans which have large amounts of protein). They are the basic ingredients
in research and development of new seeds.

Meanwhile, in the LDP, there is a rapidly growing feeling that the creation of new
seeds by means of biotechnology must be cultivated as a strategic industry. The
Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Research Committee (Hyosuke Riva, chairman) and
the Agriculture and Forestry Subcommittee (Tsutomu ﬂats, chairman) of the LDP, plan
to jointly organize a research association and promote it in terms of the budget.
The research association is scheduled to begin meeting in September.

The feeling is strong in the LDP that research and development should be speeded up
in this field in order to secure a stable supply of food. Also, it believes that
the government and industry should join together to carry out research and develop-
ment in order to make this a strategic industry which could export products in the
future, and therefore, it regards that it is essential that private research be
extended along with the basic research carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fishery.

0n the private level, food, fertilizer, chemical, and agricultural machinery companies
have joined with specialists recently to organize the New Seed Protection and
Development Research Association (Tatsuro Minakami, director). Movements to acceler-
ate development of new seeds with biotechnology are gaining momentum. The Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery and the LDP are paying attention to these move-
ments and in FY 1982 they plan to promote even more actively the mutual efforts of
government and industry in the realm of information exchange and exchange of research
and development results.

New technological developments in the field of biotechnology will require large amounts
of funding as well as the compilation of research and development results. In VLSI
development, another advance technology field, major private companies have created

a joint research organization (the VLSI Technology Research Association) and the
government provides it with technical and financial assistance. Many people think

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that because the developmnt of new seeds is a similarly iaportant technology, a
similar Joint research body should be organized and research and development should
be carried out with government involvement.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Shidmnsha 1981

Massive Cell Cultivation Restrictions

Tokyo mo SHIHBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] me Science and Technical Council (Prime Minister Suzuki, chairman) has
adopted a policy of organizing a subconittee of the council's Life Science Committee
in the near future to study mass cell cultivation technology. This subcommittee will
review the mass cell cultivation regulations. which have been s bottleneck for the
field of gene recowination, in preparation for the era of practical application

of gene recoubination technology. has subcomittee will examine the problems which
may result from mass cultivation of new microorganisms produced through gene recom-
bination. At present the capacity of the cultivation tank is limited to a mum
of 20 liters. If this restriction is relaxed, it would remove a great obstc-T-s

for manufacturers aiming at production of pharmaceuticals through gene recombination.

Gene recombination is a technology by which the genes of life form such as manuals
or primates are coabined with colon bacilli or yeast to study the structure and
function of genes and produce pharmaceuticals such as insulin. Since new micro-
organisms which do not exist in nature are produced, the government adopted guidelines
in 1979 for gene recowination experiments, based on U.S. guidelines, in order to
prevent the mass occurrence of harmful life form.

Ihese guidelines have been reviewed three times and gradually relaxed, for exaaple,

by allowing the proliferation of types of microorganisms with which the genes of other
life forms can be conbined (hosts). Howaver, even now, the Japanese experiment guide-
lines are said to be the strictest in the world, and academic societies, such as the
Japan Molecular Biology Association, are clamoring for relaxation of the rules.

The researchers say that the rules taking it mandatory to keep the microorganisms with
recoubined genes sealed up in the laboratory restrict free research and they want the
restrictions mitigated. however, the main obstacle for manufacturers who want to
industrialize gene recoubination is the rule against mass cultivation of the new
microorganism produced with this technology.

me 1979 experiment guidelines definitely limit research to the laboratory level,
restricting the capacity of cultivation facilities to 20 liters. In contrast, the
United States experiment guidelines allow a capacity of only 10 liters, but permission
for mass cultivation by industry can be obtained by applying to the National Institute
of Health (NIH) and having a check made. So in reality, mass production by industry
is unrestricted.

None of the Japanese pharmeceuticsl and chemical mufscturers have yet begun full-
scale production using gene reconbination, but repeated inquiries have been made to
the Science and Technology Agency by these manufacturers as to when the capacity
restrictions will be relaxed.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The opinion of the industry, as expressed by Yoshiaki Kausnori, executive managing
director of Kyowa Hakko Kogyo. Inc., is: "If the tank capacity is restricted to

20 liters, we can produce only enough interferon for a few people a mth. Permission
for mass cultivation is essential for industrialization." The Science and Technical
Council set up a new subcomittee as a response to the strong demands of the industry
for reduced restrictions as they prepare to comrcisliza gene recodination.

The Life Science Conittee is now reviewing the capacity regulation,“ the Reconbined
DNA Subcomittee of the Science Council of the Ministry of Education has recein
requests from academic circles for relaxation of the regulations. These conitteea
are examining the experiment regulations with the sin of relaxing then to the same
degree as the United States by this fall. Japan is behind the United States and

Europe in the field of genetic engineering and the efforts to relax regulations are
going ahead at a rapid pace.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Chu-Nichi Shiabunsha Tokyo Honsha

9651
C80: 4105/229

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHMJLOCY

The Ministry of International
Trade a ltnhislry tentatively
hm.- elitist-n67 companies as pos-
sible recipients at its lone-plan-
ed research and development
service assignments to create
numerous innovational tech
mlogy of national importance
moor a 10-year program cust-
ltc V lat billion.

minted from October I. is
known as the Next Generation
industrial l-‘omdation Tech-
nology Developrnent System.

According to sources cloee to
turn. its final scneninc oi the
companies to be attracted with
such important research and
development jobs and its
signings ol contracts concerned
are scheduled to he completed
by the end of this month.

MIT] is said to have ohtniried
the Government's mhead to
launch the new program on the
strength of the now widely and
muted and impending need for
the nation to he on its own in
the earliest pissihle luture in
developing its "Mistrial tech-
nology a! all sorts.

Japanese industries in the
areas of the world's most
promising scientiﬁc and tech-
nolosy advances including
electronic. optical fiber com-
munication. steel. macline tool

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

timepiece. automobile. indu-
trial rohotiution and tactical
engineertm. have recently
been drawing wide increa-
Iional attention for thelr rapid
technological Wanna. As
far as such areas are con-
ca-ned. Japan b believed to he
no longer interim to any ad»
vanced Western nation or even
leading the wholeworld.

A: dines stand. Ne“! w
vanced Western indnatrlal
enterprisee are getting increas-
ingly reluctant to tramtc their
tecletoloues to wild-he Japa-
nese licensees. That has liven
rise a logical ' um
time is approaching when the
Japanese Will have to bid fare-
well to their traditioml prae
tice of importlrc hale Western
technological ideas, lmprov
and relinitu them into lush”:
ett‘lcient practicable types.

MFI'l'e invitation ot' would!»
Japnneee recipients of its im.
portal! service assigp‘ mum
closed at late has
applications (ram 00 leading
Japanese industrial enter-

tries, all trellltmnior
high mm

and researches conce
Althotuh the number til 1
cents may have been It
leer. competition (or the
choice '1 bottom to Inve
extretmly stilt hecatee t
one at the anilcants mat
dent in its teclnoloucal le
shiplnitsmiothutrlalﬂ
ﬂeet of the applit
recently ltzvnedgot tooeth:
speciality meted
reeeanch association to
Nady and vie tor We
m. .. e... “m”
technological an’tievelop:
ther Malta“ w
N M 0! ll”
We! adlieven
since the proposed midis
invariably tumriatle
M for tomorrw's .

‘l'heprourammshtydi
intotla'eemaina them
Whip: u,

-A' series ot mm
Woo and t
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Potable Pump.“ II Ml‘l'l's
Name-enth- Tech-doc

Wl’ngnm

cm (0.) m m “0):
ram than can can It...”
Km Km crank. Atom Glut.
"no. Min m Koo that.
[mu m. man Joan. mm
(lurk am KM lawn
mm. m '00!qu mu
sun ”to. lwlmollN-ﬁuflm
«cow Imam». an. um: um

”autumn-mm“):
[may mu. hull MU I»
”In. AM can. Kara". M.
m “cm: UNI-u mm
m m cum m
VWR'MMWM
”'0‘“me

momma-amt"
um): “I! um um MM»-
ou: navy mum "Illa. um
um mm It“ sum. Dob.
"at. m m um
"you “it. moan Coma. Yum
Moon manual-u New
Imam-I. m Mr. W
m harm. mm: m
luv-um Inn": mu. mm
mm Clark. on Known wow 00
MM.

luau-um m um): mm.
(WI m M ml
"In-Iv- Mm It. 30!. IV”
m m mm w.
M“ WWI cm V“
cm: Imam“. on: up»
Km 1910”".me
Inca-h. w 1w mm
mm on annual. an Minu-
uw nut mum of UN um

mum cum (I my:
le snark. um Insane.
lama. W cm mt
mwlmklmw.mm
mom: um Van-n. Sum
(new. an mm

Leizai Shlmbun . Inc.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIDlCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RATIO OF R h D T0 SALES ALMOST AT U.S. LEVEL

Tokyo JAPAN EONOHIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 973, 22 Sep 81 pp 1, 3

[Text 1

Japanese cnterprises' re
search and development ex-
penditure in inscal int will
continue to register a two-digit
per cent growth. and the ratio
of such spending to sales looks
due to attain the level of that of
the US.

This is according to a survey
by the Nihon Keizai Shimbtm of
companies listed on the na-
tion‘s stock exchanges.

The RAID expettttltune of the
703 big companies in fiscal not
will climb by to per cent over
that of the precedng fiscal
year to '”.850 billion. and the
ratio oi MD spending to sales
will rise to Let per cent.

The ill-D spending ratio is
nearly the same as the average
1.98 per cent for American
enterprise in fiscal I”. the
survey found.

The RA!) spending is par.
ticulsrly connspicuom in the
electric machinery and auto in
dustria which are involved in a
bitter international race to de
velop advanced technologies.
Their MD expenditures conn-
hincd constitute half of the
total nu) outlay as to symbol-
ize the tact that they form the
pivot oi a nation that depend
on technology for its existence.

The survey revealed that the
Rm spending of the 7s: cm
panics grew by ".8 per cent in
fiscal mo to ”.0223 billion.
and is estimated to increase by
l5.9 per cent to ”.3451 billion
in fiscal tQI.

AsaresulLtheratiooiR‘D
expenditure to sales in fiscal
mt will reach L90 per cent.
compared to 1.77 per cent in
ﬁscal ms and I.79'per cent in
fiscal mo.

The Business Week mana-
zine said in a survey some
time ago tint the no es-
penditure at 7st American
enterprises in fiscal mo
reached 823.0“ million. in

at the end of tut year. tile
equals reliably ”.700 billion.
or over twice tint ot Japanae
enterprises. Howevq. the ratio
of MD spending to sales is only
its per cent. This means that
the ratio for Japaoese firms in
fiscal mt virtually matches it
With the mo oil crunch. one

national competition
was now tings on Its tech-
rologicalsupremacy.

ln otherwora. wint heat-
indispreaantswellimotw
outlays is. as Prcident Kata»-
shlse Nita oi Hitachi. Ltd
lusptait. that commute have
begun to feel that “it is better
tor them to save up for the
More rather than to think in
tertt‘tsolitnmediate min"

The Rib outlays are W
ticulariy large for the electric
machinery and atntonnohile
companies The amount of
these two tielth combined (in
(turns) in fiscal mt run- to
users billion to comprise a
per cent at the expendtuno for
all ot the firms involved in the
survey. lniiscal IUJhestnra
hadbeun seeps-cent. Evmln

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

the Best to ranking as to actual
MD outlay in liscal mo. nine
were either electric machinery
orautofirms.

Both of these fields have built
is) their international competi-
tiveness on the strength oi their
list: technologies. in the case
41 electric mach'nery. tech-
nical innovation has been mov-
im swiftly in such areas as
semi . computers.
robots and optical fiber conn-
tnmication. This has thus led
cotnpaliea to pour money a:-
oeesively into areas oi‘ Nah
technology.

For instance. Nissan Motor
Co Vice Pneinbnt Yoshihlss
Yokoyanna. in referring to me
glottal small car var. says,
"We are m to shift stress
from the plans and equipment
invostmennt to research and de-
th"

‘i'he u-vey showed that the
ratio of MD My to sets
for pharmacetalcah teached
6.8 per cent. iar hi‘ter than the
is per cent for electric Ina-
chlnery and M per cent for
autos This is because rivalry
among drug makers to develop
anticancer medicines and new
' ‘ yin, and
.thbeoaost at such development

soaring

M for textiles and chennicab
of the basic material sector.
their makers are actively on
used in research to discover
newnys or making matey.

Torsy indutries. Inc. the
top producer of synthetic fiber.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ulready derives two-think 0!
'ts profit irorn iieltk other than
synthetics. and its accumula-
tion oi various teem B
changing the composition ol Its
wrongs. All oi the table
mixers also are expanding
their R‘D outlays in non-tee Jo
areas.

As to chemicals. many com
ponies are putting weiait on
research in biotechnology
which. as Masaki Yoaldda.
president of Mitsubishi Petr»
chemical Co.. says "h. on ex-
trerneiy ia‘gh growth poten-
tial."

hieumime. the survey found
thistinicthot many enterprise
were increasing their lit-D
spending despite their sluggbh
businees trends at this moment

Sample case was Mitsubisﬂ

MD Expenses la I-‘Ylﬂ

(ﬁllb h '0'“ “I“

nsmuvmm
mow-n
I tans-Mao: .......... metal
I “illus- ................. "MG.”
3 Mummileevrielno. nuts.)
4 museum. . noun
5 Isa-es .. all“)
4 Willie; . . . . seem)
a mum . . not“)
I Wﬁlxlvk .. not“)
9 moons-Snot . 0.00.4)
Io Ions . .. ..... CUM”
it 1mm ..... isms)
:1 NW ..... mum
is tandem-nicotine ..... new)
to lunlmnkm ..... anon
I5 ‘mSW ........ ”3".”
Is Komotw . ...... mun
n roiI'neaeImn ........... mm»
It Ivldueslsno ........... mu»
1' mulmum 10.30.”
20 Shun .. .......... int”)

he Nihon Keizai Shimhun,

22

Chemical industries. Ltd.
winch in fiscal lust (team end-
in January. use) is spending
Vlsbiliion tor MD. 1perant
more than {or the
your. In ubaoitite terms. this is
the biggest may for u com-
pany in this field However.
in its hissineaa your ending
Jamal-y. its pretax recurring
proﬁts appears due to drop to
V5.1 billion or ins then one
thirdolthevlubiilionolthe
pneedingyosr.1‘hisshowsthat
the company cmsiders MD
ng an inwitable weapon
lot it towin out in competition.
Nany tin-reel thatcorporote
reseurch and development on-
penditnre is tanned to keep
swelling toslow butane
and dull global economic

wth.

egg
5
3
g

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2... «2.1.7 .353. 2.3.3:...
75...... :5... «21...... 5.2.?
5...: :. .=...:...q._.. 3.. 35.5.7.
..a........n5.n 339:: 9213.1.

3:... .2. .5: 9.... 3 .5:
.33.. $257. =2. .2... ant-.22..
... :2. 3.1.1.1.. ... 33.2.2. n
.qilnisvin 323.... $3....
23..., ..:A..........v 5.. 3...... 5
.r 3......

3..., 32.3 :5. :5 333....
.53 .a. «angina v9.2.8
5...... 3... can: .59... 5: 7a.
:2... 2...... 2.... .39. :3... =2...
FUJITSU FANUC DEVELOPS ASSNBLY ROBOT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 1n English Vol 19 No 973, 22 Sep 81 p 7

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

l-‘uﬁtsu l-‘anuc Ltd. has de-
veloped two models at what it
believe to be the world's first
machine aaaembiirc robot oi
industrially applicable type.

It already has made three
kinds oi factory production
material inndling robots.

17* 00W"! NM 998' M0
on its new products from belie!
thattbeywiilaoaverylon:
way in automation machine
prochcing factory aaaernbly
line job hitherto heavily do
pendent on manual labor.

According to the company.
its assembly robots of two
models in weighﬂitting capac
ity. 5 and ts kilograms at the
maximum. are each oi a high
speed. high-precision type with
a working speed twice as last
as the best oi’ the material-
handling robots it has solar de
veloped. and they have a ma-
chine port and component-plac-
ing precision to times as ac-
curate as the lotter‘s material
placing accuracy.

Each is a cylintbical. coordi-
nate type of robot oi simultane
ous. tom-axis control iunctions.
equipped in its control section
with a whit microcomputer. a
custom-made large-scale inte
gration type oi semiconductor.
a magnetic bubble memory

unit. and a cathode ray ttdie
Chinese character-min da-
playdevice.

partaaodcompoomtalixlnc

poaitioru nd ormir'mny
differed m lobe at the
aamettme.

Fujitsu Fanuc is
to use the robots for its no

productivity is expected miy
tobrinaatleaataaoperoen

reductial in the prothctlon
coat,itaaya.

1981. the Hilton Keizai shlmbun, Inc.
NIPPON ELECTRIC DUE TO 'PREEZB' 64K RAH OUTPUT

Tokyo JAPAN EONONIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 973. 22 Sep 81 p 8

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

(ISO :

Nippon Electric Co. tNEC).
the nation's iaraeat semicon-
ductor manufacturer. will
“freeze" production oi “kilo-
bit random access memory
tRAM) chips at a level 0‘
230000410300 chips a month
until the last hall at next year.

The decision has come from
its judgment that reckleaa
mass-production might invite
contusion in the 64K RAM
market as computer builders
and other major teens have not
yet completed evaltntion ot the
ﬁrstgeneration product of so-
called very largeocale inte-
grated circuits «Vlsn won
test uses.

NBC‘: cataious atep will have
a far reaching impact on other
saniconductor matter-a Mich
have dacloaed their “K mus-
prodnction plans. They inclllle
Hitachi. no. (which plans to
promoe 700.000 units monthly).
Fujitsu Limited memo chips)
and Texas lmtrumerla inc.

NBC apent V30 billion in
ﬁscal mo and earmarked $35
billion in ﬁscal tut for expan-
sion and streamlining of its
integrated circuits production
facilities. it has beat rcmwel-
linu production lines at
Sogamihara Works and at its
subsidiary Kyushu Nippon
Electric 00. to produce all
RAM chips.

4120/19

min-u topping to one-
tmth that of a year no tJEJ-
ISM).

NBC ia a looting semicon-
ductor supplier. oontrollllu is
per cut at the world's market
as tar as “K RAM chips. the

productprecadinum.an
conoarnod.

1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RIVALRY 1N BUILDING PLANTS FOR HELIUH MWSIFYING

Tokyo JAPAN acououtc JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 973. 22 Sep 81 p 9

[Text I Helium activities are being Koatsti Gas Kayo. which in-
atepped up. inclining new en- tende to Mlle into lielitln
tries and Mien capacity along with Intuit Ii Co. and
immu. became the demand Shown Dede Kl!" plan to
is unite up last lot such up buildeimilarlaclllttaetouba
plicatiom as gas chromatog- City at we million for u-
raphy. welding. heating sales to the meantime: in-
niediim in atomic may (lieu-y. 80K. a Tokyo Gas enh-
plants. semiconductor Follic- eidary and two hum
lion and "man-mule air."‘lhe an arm. m. have
activities partly teﬂect the agreed to on to a count-tun
highveuire gas imu'fl in- to impact “Wilda-n m
tention to pmmote the more Udon Cubicle (ht-p. Mill!
wotitable specialwline. equally due the impacts. tot-

Japan Oxygen (30.. a leading loving the uttlu I» d that
gas um. has tied t1) With m. Uni! the m
a wtredettoutupajointly- mmvulmﬂmly
owned helium filling center mat-much“. In.
near Mal village. nuclear helm J06. WW
mecca. By investing #300 mil. Co. and Teiaan INC. (la-meet:
lion. the company plans to mzmwltil‘.) in
com e e helium rill‘ lant “M m ind:
than will become "1:! new: penuble {or maintaining
secondmehplantalteruieot mm!” ”at:
the Japan iielitln Centet‘. a llneanmotorm ‘
commit-n we started with. mwb'mm':
among others. Aim Inc. ol-the mm
us. At row. .IOC will an '0‘ “a” m um
small container: with hellun m
imported from the U.S. com-
pany tor sales in and near '

Kanto region. Annml sales 0!
200.000 cubic meters are esti-
mated. with Japan Atomic
Enemy Research lnstittne and
march cutlets in ﬁuktba (a
"science city“) counted as like
ly me‘pt' clients.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

CSO: [0120/19

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NSC EXPEC'I‘S USE OF OIL-BASED FUEL WILL DECRHSB

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 976, 29 Sep 81 p 6

[Text]

Nippon Seal Corp. upsets remit. om of We!
its petroleum-based luel cow p... m u out. ova 3..
mpuon during the «mat mwm.
ﬁscal year undue next March Du-in‘ and 1”.de
to drop 47.! per cent (run mmw:.um
preceding ﬁscal year to crowd mum at mum-hood
021.000 kiloliten. Ma. down an pet can

he curl-an ﬁscal year's the m ﬁnal year.
communion volume l: 0001! «Ml hole Mn Into
onthhoflhuinnscallm. man 0! LPG

Jam's largest steelmaker c.000kllollmﬂkmmd
act-the: such ulmp m w oil. 07.0” We! mud
in luel oil commpuon to no oil for mu ad mono
steppedwcﬂomtobrw kilolimoltnelolltntm
down the dependcm on all. pram M.
such as oil-lea Nut (mace nscumwmmwu
operations and increased mot second also common
«Ike oven 80!. marlin (then! urn-ms)

Nﬂ'smlaﬂ a “s a bun tuned u.cunh‘ an aunt”

furnaca into all-MW W mm by 10 par
bytheendollutﬂaykn cgnt.

a
3

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizal Shinbun, Inc.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRITAIN'S 600 GROUP HOPES FOR ROBOT-MAKING TECHNOLOGY

:0 PY‘R IGHT :

ISO:

know-how in line with Britain's
recent call lor Japan to extend
technological cooperation.

Belore negotiating with the

company. however.
Fujitsu i-‘anuc will Ieelt wider-
standing 0! Siemens A0 of
Mmich. The Jopaoce enter-
prise holda a general agency
contract with the German elec-
trical machinery matter on
sales oi industrial robots in
Ewpe.

The 600 Group. Britain's
biggest machine tool builder.
"as been selling ’hjtis;
Panuc's robots there for three
years under a marketing
license granted by Siemens.

The British machine tool
mater. anxiou to manufacture
robots on its own, aelied
Watcher's aides to seek Japa-
nese robot production expertise
W covernmenttopovem-
ment bargaining.

British Industry Department
Dcputy Secretary AG. Mamie
and Education 6 Science State
Secretary Keith Joseph came
to Japan recently and conveyed
their with to the Ministry oi
international Trade & lndtstry
tn wort: on Fuiitsu Fanuc to
conclude a technological tie
with themGroup.

Joseph. tanner industry state
secretary. and other British
soverranerl officials. at a
meetim with their Japaneee

4120/20

1981. the Nihon Keizai Shinbun,

important to improve the
nation'a prodtntiviiy.
revitalizing domeatic Wm
trig.

Mi‘l‘l appear: ready to port-
tiveiy ”port the propued lint
oi Fulton Fanuc and the
tendon company in an eliort to
mitigate mounting British

outcryacaioetJa over-the
lopsided trade unﬂattering

an-

...,...n.

Japan's trade with Britain
scored a aurplta at new
million in not and a eta-pineal
81.200 million in the January-
Juiy period oi this year.

haded: indiutry.ea¢ertooor-
root the teeth imbalance with

Britain and expend inputs
from the country. mieJepa-
neec emerpria- to coop-ate

Inc.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

niththeirliritishootliterparta
in‘WtechnomWhaaeain-
dude; compute-related aott-
ware. bilineaa maclinea and
optioalﬂbraaawellaembota.
eiectioniea and ecumenica—

tiona emiptnot.

in order to help Japaneee
enteprteea‘ militate ranting

aidtotlieBritom.
I‘m to ready to amide.
related data anti information.
actaaanlua'mediaryintie-up
mom. and otter our
aidiea or government-

(naraoteedloana.

annual rate oi more that ”per
cent. reducing tome nooo
mite or me billion.

“magmiion hedrivui US.
pennierwieeetoio-
troduoeJapaneaerooot-mkina
tecluolozy. Hitachi. Ltd. has
hit tied up with General Elec-
tric Co. oi the 0.8. on robot

tonendmarhthig,
SCIENCE AND IECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

HITI MPES 1'0 INCREASE OIL HEI. YIELD

Tokvo JAPAN EwNOHIC JOURNAL 1n Eiglioh Vol 19 No 976. 29 Sep 81 p 16

[Text]

COPYR ICHT:

C50:

Japan's studies on reputedly
tapping apent oil wells to boost
crude oil yield will be launched
next year by the Ministry at
International ‘n'ade and Indu-
try.

Ml‘l‘l reported it has decided
to start a ﬁve-year Joint pov-
ernment-indtatry project in
ﬁscal 1m tlrom Apriil to de-
velop secondary and tertiary
oildrawing methods. M
hope to boost oil well yield trom
only around :5 per cent oi the
total estimated pool hitherto at-
tainable to twice or even three
times as much. Conventional
methods of drawn"; only an oil
wclt’s now leaves underground
the largcott portion ol the pool in
sticky or harder [oi-1n.

lx‘vclopment oi methods to
tap oil wells otter they have
ran-hen the limit ot ﬂow is said
to he already under intensive
study in the US. with an eﬂet-
tivc method reportedly being
applied on a commercial basin
Such methods are drawing
sharputtcntion at many oil-pro
itminu nations for their im-
portance in extending the pro
duct iwt y at oil resumes.

Ml'l‘l plant to have the gov
cmmcntal Japan National Oil
Corp. and domestic oil and
chemical companies undertake
the proposed neat-arch project.
They Will share the total esti-
mated coat 0! no HIM in the

6120/20

proportion of 15 percent (or the
corporation and 3 for indiu-
trial companies. Such com-
pani. will be asked to create a
joint researchdveloptnent aa-
aociatioo torthe prom

The basic theoretical atudleo
on which the project will be
based are enacted to be corn-
pleted by the corporation and
also the governmental Petro
leum Development Technology
Centerbynoxt March.

There have been many inter-
nationally lotown methods ot
such repeated tapping of a
sport oil well. such as "tpreo-
site) an injection." "water-
tlooihng." “tire-ﬂooding" and
"miscible drive." The last 00¢
13 to pour liquefied petroletln
got or something like it into a
uedoilwelltodiaoolvethere—
maining ham or atlcltler
crude oilandptsh it om.

mm is planning to develop
two methoda through the joint
monument-industry ettorta.
One is a thermal mahod to
pump preaaurioed alum into
the well for dissolution and out-
ﬂow ot the remaining crude.
and the other is a chemical
method to pmh looming our-
tactant taurtace active adult)
or Bully-polymerized chunlcal
into the well ia- aimilar effects.

MIT! envisions build“; a

pair ot teat demomtration

plants. oooaaetilaNil‘Iaend

1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

END

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Akita Pretectureo iJapan': two
oil-produeim Japan Sea coastal
region). between me and
me. it things so well. the final
test: beiore commercialization
are scheduled tlmat‘ter at
Middle East or South American
oil fields where Japanese have
obtained development concer-
slono.

Such aecondary or tertiary
oil well tapping is said to be
much more economical than
coal llquetaction or oil shale or
oil and oil extraction mam.
according to an estimate of
Bechtel Corp. of the us. At the
well-known mowing corpo-
ration hao flamed. the neces-
sary per-day. pehharrel invet-
ment in the repeated tapping
method will be only $28,000.
compared with 372.000 tor
limetaction of coal and t! 30.000
tor oll shale cracking. Bis-bili-
neae 0.5. oil companies this
have been developing their re-
spective repeated tapping
methods etnce me under pv-
ernmental wholdioa of $15 mil-
lion to 850 million a year.

Besides Nil" impired by
American precedents. MIT]
sees the poarihility of various
oitproducim nations demand-
inl nae-ted um capacity
as necaaary qualiﬁcations (or
foreign oil ex to he
wanted development cum
aim.