FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10505

10 May 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 21/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
.ms publications contain information primarily tron foreign
nevspapara. periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- Bnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, vith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and ntarial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or follouing the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sunnrized or extracted.

Unaniliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion ark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times vithin itans are as

given by source .

'nae contents of this publication in no vay represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS WING MRI? 0?
“\TBRIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF 1318 PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED ?OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIIE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(rouo 21/82)

Cou'reu‘rs

ASIA

AIBTRALIA

Covenant weighs Giving Police Access to Is: Files

(Ted met; m3 MW. 9“: &)OOOOOOQOOOOOOOOIOOIOOOOO. 1
Drugs Commission Hears Testimny on Passport Peloificetion
(A11een3.rry; mm, 11hr a)OCODIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOO' 3
Brieﬁs
Drug Lew Inform I.
Raid on Drug Lab 4.
INDONESIA
Malaysian Nations]. Arrested ﬁor Smsgling Morphine
(KOWB’ 17 hr &)OOOOOOOOIOOOOOQOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO s
Briefs
North Suntre Drug haggling 6
Ships Seized 6
PAKISTAN
Drug Sellers Benished Pros Lyeri
(Siddiq Beluch; M. 23 Apr 82)........................... 7
3110.58 _
'Bnpty' Suitcases Heroin Recovery 8
m Governor in Huhington 8
Heroin Recovered: Briton llsld 9
Che-ru Seined in Peshewer 9
Chores Seized (95 tiles) 9
- e - [III - WW - 138 2000]

MB Amﬂev eve-I- Anne:
FOR OFFICIAL [BB (NIX

‘ LATIN ”ERICA

BOLIVIA
Briefs
Intinerootice Operatione
Traffickers Arrested
Investigative Reporter warned
BRAZIL

Governmnt Prepares Rational Gawaiga Against Drug the
(0 mo, 28 mt ”)000000000000000.0.0000...00.000.00.000.

FUNAI, Police Seek To Prevent Trafficking on Indian
Reservation
(0 mo, 28 hr &)eeeooooaoeoesaeeseeeeesoseoeeeotoeooseoe

Band Trafficking in Cocaine. Haehieh, Harihmne Arreeted
(o almo’ 3 Apr 82).OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'CoOOOIQOOOOOOO

Briefs
Major Treffickere Listed

Herihuana Production: mun

Major Cocaine Trafficker Arrested

Rio Drug Addiction Figures

Plant for (bceine Production Seized
COIOBIA

Gaston Officials Dismissed Over Drug Shipent
(Gustavo Ramirez; 81. 113190, 19 hr 82).....................

WIND AND MAN

Brie fe
Cushe Forest mrihuena

SIB-SAHARA“ AFRICA
KENYA

Briton loses Drug Case Appeal
(MILY NATION. 6 ”I &)eseeoeseseooeseseoooneeseooeeeeeeeee

3mm IA

Briefs
Senegalese Diplonat Snugglea Baahieh

-b-

’03- OMCIAL [BB 0818

3355

16

l9
19
20
20
2 l

22

210

25

27
800111 AFRICA

Kwezulu'e Mtinillion Bend mggn Indmtry Explored
.ﬁﬂeg Rimey; mm, Dir-Apr 82)........................

UPPER VOL‘I‘A

'L'QSBRVA’EUR' View Police Actions ‘Do Control Drug Irede
(L'OBSERVARUR. “rum ans)...I..OOOCOOCOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO

Cannabis Trade lhcovered. by Frank s. Vierex

lbre Arrests Made. by Vienx P. Senou
Police Vigilance

WEST 30mm

REMARK

Police Crack lbwn on 'Olicsgo-Style' Copenhagen Drugs Gangs
(Bent Belt hdersen; BBRLINSKB HEN“. 15 Apr 82).........

Police Official Discusses Drug Smuggling, Arrest Patterns
(Bent Bak Andersen; BERLINSRE um. 11 opr 82).........

Briefs
Finn Sold unshish. Sentenced
Narcotics Police to Peru
FINLAND

Finnish Paper Reports on Drug-Smggling Into Nordic Area
(Stefan Lmdberg; RL'FVUISTAIEBLAIB‘I, 29 wt 82)............

Police Studying Rapid Increase of Drugs in North
(Hummmr, 19 m 82).oeoeotoooooecoeooeoooooooooe

RONA!

Police. clearing Up (buntry 'e Biggest Amheteline Cece
(Bel? mabwn; “GMT, 26 hr &)OOOIQIOOOOI0.00000

Investigation Reveals Hid-spread Drug Use on Oil Platfor-
(morleif Andreessen; Amman, 3 Apr 82)...............

Researcher Refutes Police Officisl'e Viewing of Drug World
- (Pal ‘I‘. Jorgensen; MGLMBT, 31 hr 82)...................

MWMONIN
SHEEN

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Police Narcotics Investigation Ethode Debeted
(hm 6.21108; 7mm, 3*! ”)000000000000000000000....

loopholes in Drug Lu Bring Release of Accueé'SIugglere
(Eve Ekaelim; DAMS menu. 27 hr 82)..................

Regulations 'for 'Delephone hyping by Police Described
(01338 10‘3““; 7 m, 3 hr ”)00000000000000000000no...

Article Traces Illegal Drugs Plow. Describes Trafficking
(Bu men”; “ms mun. E ”r &)OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOO

Crimea Involving Bard Drug; Increasing Prison Violence
(Eva menus: mm mm. 15 Apr m)eooeoooeooooooeoee

Briefe
Dutch Amphetamine Snuggler Sentenced

Gang Snuggled m Opiun

”WWW?
GOVBRWT "31088 GIVING POLICE ACCESS TO TAX FILES

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in English 9 Mar 82 p 1

[Article by Ted Kncz]

[Text]

THE Governmenlls to W? am the Federal Police am i
tothepersonaltaxrecordsoldmgdeMaodpeoplcmectedol!
almlnalacuvlllcs.

ThcmovclssuwxlymhmcMcMhQCaumwhmlulonvhicth
bcdlsamcdsoon umbtmmautmOmtlma
ducmumrmuncmmmwmcnyumhﬂomr
mmugmmermmmMuUMmmmcaulg-uac.
whohcccclledonthcdommwllltmmmm
pmlﬂon'sonbcuxhn.

wcocunnclallhcdhchaduncovmcvldwccollucvmm
undrlnudsonthcwalcmoounvom hmolmmlomolm

Thoma-cube Ithaca-dun by
owl-la nuun- muummwmmwm
AndlchPu-ty. Woolen! imam
3':me um wmmmmm

M
ummamgmcmtmmammwww
mumluhnlnlothcmmnoacnm

80!.th muwwmihmlbcum
walnut! acmm.mum:mmm
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060018-1

CSO:

m. .
muuMnmvauumm
mmmmmm objec-
mummmuom
A new 1mm mm
hum WWW?-
mm Mount/om
wanmummwm
malt.

The eme- md as: him rem

unhappy with the Ian at

wmmmm
anmcﬂutmlmu.

A decision or. Imam the Oovcm-.

5300/75“

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060018-1
DRUGS CWISSION MR3 TBSTIHW ON PASSPORT PALSIPIC‘ATION

Mm WNW” mm wwﬁu mm” mm “5mm” Mm ”mm
mm: mmwm WNW mm?» mummwm Mum: “WWW”. mm .9me
mm. mm WWW
.mmmmmmﬁ mmmm mmwmw Jmmwwmw MMMMM mu WWMWWW. .mm m.”
m g gmmmmmm ””me wmmmmm
WWWHMWme za mm mm. WWW" WWW mMWmem www.mm

WWW memmummmwmm mm mmme mmmm «www.mm ”mamww mu .. “1%..me
WWW WWW www.mmmm WWW“ «WWW mmmw mmmm “Mmmm

”Immmm mm“ mm Wmmmm ”mum Mam

Melbourne me A68 in English 11 Hit 82 p 5

1m. mm: wm Mmm
m mm: - m. mwmmmwm -n mm
m WWW ...me.m.nmw.wmmmm “WWW“? Wmmw u
n mmmmmmiﬁﬁ “mm mm mm“
M. w Mmmmwxm MW mmymmw..um Mummmm Mwbmu
“MW www.mmmm “.me mmmmm mmmmm m

5300/7544

cso:
BRIEFS

DRDG MU mam-nae 88“ Young Liberals yesterday supported a reco-endation
that nsrihuana be nde available freely. but their president, Mr Chris
Crawford, said the recomndation did not go far enough. The Young Liberals
supported the full legalisation of the manufacture, distribution and supply
of the drug, he said. He said he had written to all centers of Federal and
State Parlianent free 1183, urging the. to support moves to allow the posses.
sion and private cultivation of urihuana. The Auatalian Foundation for
Research and Treat-ant of Alcoholisn and Drug Dependence rectal-ended, in a
report released unofficially last week, that possessing narihuana or culti-
vating it for one's own use should not be a serious criminal offence. Hr
Crawford asked HPs to support that reco-endation as the first step in a
campaign to lift all restrictions on the use of the drug. The Pruner, Hr
Wren, had been hypocritical in rejecting the proposal out of hand, he said,
while the leader of his own party, Hr Dovd, had disappointed hin by not
supporting it. "There is no reliable evidence that nrihuana in itself
induces the use of harder drugs, but it is apparent that there are links
between pushers of urihuana and the pedlars of heroin. The latter are
being presented opportunities Idlich result solely fro. urihuna's illegality,"
14: Crawford “1d. [rm] [Sydney m mm mm new in rum):

9 Mar 82 p 3]

RAID on DRUG IABuPolice say they have found a drug laboratory at Rattle
Glen. Pour aen in their early 30s were taken for questioning after a raid
on a property in Silvan Road. The raid began about 6.30 last night. Police
said the men were connected with an international motorcycle club. One
firearm and part of a nachinegun were found in the raid. Police iron the
drug squad, the special operations gro and the bureau of crininal intelli-
gence were involved in the raid. [Text [Helhourne THE A63 in English

11 Mar 82 p 3]

CSO : 5300/ 75610
MAMYSIAN NATIONAL ABRBS'ED FOR SHUGGLING mmnu:
Jakarta ROMPAS in Indonesian 17 hr 82 p 12

[Text] 0n Honday, Region I custons officials tiwarted an atnelpt to snuggle

l6 packages strongly believed to contain mrphine dmt at hdan's Polonia Air-
fieId. ‘Ihe packages were in the hand luggage of 18c, 37. a passenger on a HAS
flight from Penang, Malaysia to Medan. According a: his passport, “Kc is a
Malaysian national who lives at liboag tubal no. 5 King Bong Garden W8, Penang.

Police Lieutenant (blonel Dzahry heed, head of the Police Region II. North
Sula tra Information Service said KC and the 16 packages had been turned over
to the police. RC is still in custody, and investigation continues.

Responding to a KOHPAS query, Daoed said he could provide no details about the
investigation. lie said only that there were some 880 gram of the substance
suspected to be wrphine dust.

A KOMPAS source at Polonia said the dmt included (unthylenedi exyamhetanine)
morphine.

NKC was carrying the packaps in his bag. The three custons officials who
searched the bag at first found only four garnnts. But a search of the lining
revealed the packages.

NKC said the morphine dust was owned by AT, and was turned over to bin at Penang
Airport. An unknown person was to receive the goods in mdan. Kc did not know
his contact, but if he cleared cmtons, he was to carry die bag under his right
arm as a signal.

“(C said A'l' had paid M. 32000 hlaysian. u had paid hin the mney and delivered
the goods to him on 13 March, at Penang Racetrack.

9197
C80: 5300/8322
BRIEFS

NORTH SUHATRA DRUG smem-Hedan, 22 Apr (AMARA).-Despite the decline
in the number of drug snuggling cases handled by the police, the North
Sunstra police headquarters believes that a narcotic syndicate tidely
organising drug traffic still operates in Indonesia. The North Sunatra
police headquarters stated here recently that 81 drug smuggling cases
were uncovered in 1980, involving 162 people and 660 kg of narcotic,

as against only 38 cases in 1981, involving 52 people and 238.3 kg of
narcotic. The sending of narcotic by the smugglers has so far been done
not only through air transport, but also sea and land transport.
[Jakarta mm in English 0806 GMT 22 Apr 82 BK]

SRIPS SEIZBD—A Region IV custom team has intercepted three vessels believed
to be used by the "Hhite Horse" syndicate for conducting narcotics transactions.
‘lhe three ships are the kn cc; GP and K-VI. The results of the seizure were
not revealed. According to infatuation, the "White Horse" syndicate is a
narcotics netwrk that moves fron ship to ship in ‘hnjung Prick, to deal
narcotics. ['Dext] [Jakarta HARIAN mm in Indonesian 16 hr 82 p 2] 9197

(250: 5300/8322
“mmmmﬁmmmxﬁmm%ﬁ§
a"; “WWW” mmmmmmmmmg mmg WWW
w€. :2 @wmﬁ Wwﬁwx

mm a
wﬁwwwﬁﬁmmim mmmkmm

Wﬁmx ﬁxﬁmwﬁﬁw mmm

My. m
m wwwmmwmm mm m E?

, a m”
mm mm ”MMMWWWE mam m mm 3mm”
BRIEFS

'EHPTY' SUITCASBS HBROIN RECOVERY-dumbed, April («—The Airport Customs offi-
cials remained unaware of the heroin worth about two and a half crore rupees,
lying under their custody for about two months. This interesting story was re-
vealed by the Customs people themselves while talking to the Press reporters,
who had gone to the Airport hearing that the customs had recovered heroin worth
crores of rupees. According to details, three persons Faiz Mohamed, Sadiq
Husain Mine and Shams Zaheer, were held at the Airport for allegedly trying to
smuggle out antiques. They were trying to carry 46 precious pieces of antiques
with them to London by PIA Flight No Pit-783 on Feb. 7 last. They were stopped
by the customs authorities at the Airport and the antiques were covered from
them. The Customs people took into custody, the two suitcases containing the
antiques in their custody. The suitcases, after being checked, were stored in
the godowns as empty. At about 2.00 in the afternoon, the Superintendent Cus-
toms, Mien Farooq, received a anonymous phone call. The caller offered him

Rs 100,000 to get back the two empty suitcases. lie got suspicious and informed
the matter to his high-ups, who ordered that the two suitcases should be re-
checked thoroughly. This resulted in the recovery of the heroin. A fresh

case has been registered against the three accused already under police custody
for allegedly trying to smuggle heroin. Further investigations were being
made. [Text] [Islamabad THE MUSLIM in English 5 Apr 82 p 3]

NWP GOVERNOR IN WASHINGTON-Washington, April l3—NWP Governor Lt General
Pazle qu, arrived last night for talks with US officials on matters of mutual
interest. The General has come here in response an invitation from the Narco-
tics Division of the State Department. He will stay in the United States from
two to three weeks. Besides meeting with officials dealing with the narcotics
question and economic aid, he will have a working luncheon with Under-Secretary
of State for Security Assistance, James L. Buckley. General Esq said that among
the subjects to be discussed would be the situation in Afghanistan, development
aspects of the Frontier Province and the narcotics issue. After his meetings
here through this week, the General will visit California, Chicago before
returning to Washington to meet some Senators and Congressman. He will also
visit New York before returning to Pakistan. The General denied American

press reports about an increase in drug traffic from Pakistan, saying the
situation was under control. Through the vigorous efforts of the govertnent,
he said the cultivation of poppy has been reduced to 18 of the peak production
in 1979-80. The Governor said there were economic reasons for poppy cultiva-
tions, but the government was providing incentives to cultivators for crop re-
placement. For this large funds were required and this was one question he
would raise with US officials. As regards reports about the growth of so-
called heroin manufacturing factories, he said the government was one the
look out for them and closing them whenever discovered. 0n the other hand,
custon officials have stepped up their vigilance and were impounding large
quantities of drugs destined for Hestern EurOpe and the United States.-APP
[Text] [Karachi BUSINESS RECORDER in English lb Apr 82 p 3]

KEROIN RECOVERED: BRITON HELD-Jrhe task force of the Pakistan Narcotics Con-
trol Board and Crime Branch officials yesterday apprehended a Zurich-bound
British national and recovered 2 kilo of heroin from his possession. In
Zurich, the heroin would fetched Rs one crore in the under-world market.

The heroin was recovered from a suitcase carried by the accused Walter Pimlott
at the Swiss airlines briefing counter. The group leader of the task force,
Ch. Paryad Hussein said that “alter, a 69-year-old British national was born
in Calcutta and has lived his entire life in this subcontinent. Only a couple
of months back he came into contact with one llasim, a resident of Janrode
tribal belt who offered him to pay Rs $0,000 if he works as a courier for a
narcotic gang. On his acceptance Easi- gave "alter a suitcase containing

2 kg of heroin and also Rs 18,000 for expenses and purchasing Ear-Zurich
Karachi air ticket. however on receipt of a secret information the task

force was reapatched to the airport which nabbed him at the Swiss air briefing
counter in the morning. Halter was also given a "book" as a code signal for
handing over the consignment to the recipient at Zurich and also receiving his
"fee." The task force has also sent an information to Interpol and investiga-
tion was progressing under the supervision of Sardar Abdul Aziz, AIG crime
and in charge of the force. The three-month old task force has so far seized
28,000 tablets of mandrex, 10 kg of heroin, 650 kg charas besides carrying out
investigation into 16 cases received police stations.—-APP [text]

[Karachi BUSINESS RECORDER in English 14 Apr 82p 3]

CHARAS 88123!) IN PBSHAHAR--Peshawar, 27 Apr—One thousand and two hundred
kilogram of charas worth RS three crore in the international black market,
was seized by the customs mobile squad in Harden from a truck, which they
anbushed near village Kaloo Khan in Sawabi Tehsil of Harden District on
Tuesday. The charss was being smuggled to Europe via Karachi. Truck driver
Akbar and his cowanion Aqalmust, were arrested on the spot. The trap wu
laid after receiving information from a source well in time to make the
truck's escape impossible. [Text] [6?!)1125 Karachi DARK in English

30 Apr 82 p 6]

cums SEIZED (9S KImS)--‘rhe Excise Police of District west seized 95
kilograms of charas valued at about Rs. 5.00.000 froa IIth in 'Bara Market'
which was being used as a storage place for distribution locally as well as
for export, says an official handout. Accused Eaji Gul shah and Anser Khan
escaped but excise men dug up the courtyard of the hutment and discovered a
hidden pitch and recovered the charas. [Text] [Karachi DA"! in English

19 Apr 32 p a)

CSO: 5300/5728
BRIEFS

ammco'ucs OPERATIONS-According to infornation released here today, three
dead persons was the alleged result of one of the lost inortant operations
carried out, with 0.8. Governnsnt support, against the elaboration of cocaine
in eastern Bolivia. According to the journalists who were invited to witness
this suppressive action, the operation was started in the departments of
Cochabalba and Santa Cruz, located at 600 and 1,000 ks west of La Pat
respectively. A ring of cocaine traffickers was discovered through this

operation. The asters of the ring had to flee and abandon a truck which
was transporting coca leaves, raw nteriel for the elaboration of cocaine

and approximately 2 nillion Bolivian pesos in cash ($450,000). It was also
stated that a great nulber of cocaine factories which operated in Yapecani,
120 kn northeast froa Santa Cruz, were discovered. were are a great nuaber
of persons arrested but no nanes were released. The peasants of the area
also informed the journalists that agents of the drug depart-ant and sons
dressed in military uniforss are huniliating the peasant faeiliea in order
to get then to reveal who transports coca leaves from the production zones
to the underground cocaine factories. They said that groups dressed in
military uniforns pass themlves off as agents, seize drugs, money and
goods and carry out all kinds of abuses. The suppressive operation is being

carried cut with the support of helicopters. [Text] [P1261510 hem Lires
ISLAM in Spanish 1765 GMT 26 Apr 82]

TRAFFICKBRS Ams‘mbubue to untimely (renarks sade) without any authorisa-
tion by representatives of the Interior Ministry, an investigation of one of
the most important cases of cocaine traffic involving operations fro. this
country with contacts in Colo-his, Penn and Mia-i has been thwarted. This
inforeation was provided by Col (Carlos Zapata), national director for the

control of dangerous substances, during a press conference held this norning
with other officials of this organisation in attendance. The director said

that despite the fact that the investigation was thwarted, officials of his
organization, during an investigation carried out sons tine ago. seized 123
kg of cocaine in addition to $170,900 in cash and checks for $750,000.
During the investigation 12 people were arrested but it had to be suspended
due to the declarations snde by officials of the Interior Ministry. declara-
tions which alerted the different contacts who left the country, contacts
which are co-only known as the big fish. his is the reason why the
investigation has been stopped. [Excerpt] [m‘ozzs La Pas Radio lllinani
Network in Spanish 1700 GM! 13 Apr 82]
IMSTIGATIVB “POKER WED-4.- Paz, 23 Apr (m)o-lavyer Carlos Ponce
Sanjines yesterday was the target of an attenpt on his life in the wake of
his repeated exposes of drug trafficking in the country. the Press-Radio
Organization reported. 'lhat umbrella organization for radio stations and
newspaper ovnsrs reported that its neaber, lawyer Carlos Ponce Sanjines,
was almost run over by a pickup truck as be excited his car after parking.
Ponce Sanjines, who is also director of the board of the newspaper JORNADA,
said that the attespt on his life is due to his continuous requests for
the investigation of drug-traffic-related crises and of snuggling opera-
tions. The leader of the Radio-Press Accord, Mariano Baptists mnucio and
Carlos Serrate Reich, have warned the public about the threats to freedon
of expression. [Text] [“260739 Paris APP in Spanish 2056 our 23 Apr 82]

CSO: 5300/2282

11
GOVERNMENT PREPARES NAIIONAL CAMPAIGN AGAINST DRUG USE
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 28 Her 82 p 10

[Text] Brasilia (0 GLODOX...The Press Secretary in the Office of the Presi-
dent of the Republic Carlos Atila believes it to be "extremely opportune" to
debate the drug problem at this time primarily in view of its connection with
pornography.

A study prepared by CDNPEN (Federal Narcotics Council) is being studied by

the Press Secretariat in the Office of the President. This study is intended,
during this first half of the year, to launch a national drive against the use
of drugs and stimulants.

This information was released by CONFEN chairman and secretary general in the
Ministry of Justice, Arthur Pereira Castilho. In his opinion. preparing a
drive of this kind is "a delicate job because you have to avoid sensationalism.
Some earlier attempts were counterproductive and only alerted people to the
existence of drugs. This is why the Press Secretariat is carefully preparing
the context of the message to he brought to millions of Brazilians via radio
and television."

According to the CONFEN chairman "we do not have a complete picture of the
tremendous damage caused by drugs throughout the nation. The data we do have
are statistics pertaining only to arrests made by the Drug Control Division
of the Federal Police Department. In the‘ light of the volume of informatics,
we have some idea of what the situation is but we have not catalogued the
infornation methodically. but we do know that drug use is one of the most
crucial problems of modern times. Because Brazil is a country with a vast
border. it is exposed to the evils of foreign smuggling. International in-
fluence is a fact of life for Brazil. but we do have bilateral agreements
with neighboring countries calling for the exchange of information on a basis
of reciprocity."

According to Castilho. the main battle lines in the fight against drugs have
already been drawn for this year. Decentralization of operations along with
the establishment of state councils patterned along the CONTIN; increase in
health supervision over products considered to be toxic (remedies) and first-
level and second-level education programs alerting the people to the dangers
of narcotics.

l2
In addition, Brazil is using publications put out by the United Nations and
technical reports providing guidance for the fight against narcotics use.
These are the aids which the Press Secretariat will use to organize the drive
and posters will be printed for this purpose.

The data available to OONIEN are a part of a demonstration report drafted by
the DP? and deal with the period of January to August of last year. The Ear-
cotics Control Division during those 8 months of last year confiscated 229.2
tons of narihuana as compared to 88.5 tons confiscated in 1980. As for
cocaine, which is still rather little used in Brazil when compared to the
developed countries because of its high cost. 92.8 kilograms were confiscated
in 1980 and 90.6 kilograms were confiscated during 8 aonths of last year.
Confiscations of opiua. morphine, heroin, and dicetylmorphine are not re-
corded.

5058
680: 5300/2260

13
FUNAI, POLICE SEEK 1'0 mm TRAFFICKIm 02! INDIAN RESERVAIIGIS
Rio de Janeiro 0 61.030 in Portuguese 28 Mar 82 p 10

[Text] Brasilia (0 cwno).—mm [National Indian foundation] and the Fed-
eral Police are conducting a joint effort to prevent drug traffic on native
reservations prinarily in Alums. haranheo, and norains where traffickers
have nade trasendous offers to the Indians to grow toxic plants.

According to FUNAI, the problem is difficult to get under control because most
of the native groups always use some type of drug during their religious
rituals and the traffickers believe that there is "an opportunity to grow
certain toxic plants here."

To outveigh the advantages offered by the traffickers, MAI is expanding
agricultural projects in the areas most sought after for this type of traffic
by giving these cos-unities nore noney for planting rice, corn, beans, soy-
beans, and cassava, anong other things, and by guaranteeing the purchase of
all produce.

Parallel to that, FUNAI is making the native leaders aware of the fact that
this kind of traffic is illegal and that, since they are responsible for the
tribe, they eust refuse any proposals nade to then by the traffickers, in-
nediately reporting then to the police station couander or directly to the
Federal Police.

Custos

The head of the PUNAI delegation in Hanaus. Kazuto Eavanoto, ‘aid that the
lnonaais of Roraina and Anaconas use five types of hallucinogtns but the

"Etena" plant is the lost important one folloving conversion into a povder to
be inhaled during rituals.

he reported that the linen and Tucson 1m!!!“ in the Anesonas region use the
plant called ”Bpadu" fron which cocaine is extracted. The traffickers are
very busy in these reservations.

“We cannot," he said, ”prevent the planting of these herbs because this is a
part of the culture of the 1941”“ But we are preventing the excessive

14
planting that could be characterized as engaging in trafficking. Through

bigger agricultural projects we want to make sure that the Indians can nake
an honest living."

According to Kazuto Kawanoto, the priests who work in the native areas are
also working to indoctrinate the natives, explaining to them the consequences
of illegal traffic and the evils connected with the excessive use of drugs.

he noted that the difficulty in this type of work resides in the fact that
the traffickar, in making his offer, lists the big advantages connected with
it and the practice of paying by the hour.

"Right now." he added. "most of the leaders are rejecting the proposals made
by the traffickers out of fear of reprisals. There have been reports to the
effect that the Indians on the Rio Negro are trafficking in narihnana but
nothing has been proven. We have been able to ascertain nornal planting
activities because they use this herb as a remedy. We had reports to the
effect that the indians in Alto Solimoes were tempted to plant but the fre-
quent presence of FUNAI and officers from the Federal Police prevented the
traffickers fron getting in there."

Haranhao

The head of the FUNAI delegation in Sao Luis, Alipio Nevea. said that this
year alone the police station chief in the reservation of the Guajajara in-
dians "arrested two traffickers and handed them over to the Federal Police."

"The Federal Police is working with anthropologists in the area of the Guaja-

jara so as to find ways of planting for con-unity consumption and preventing
the surplus froa being sold to the traffickers," he added. -

He noted that this effort began 3 years ago after it was found that the traf-
fickers were paying theIndians to plant toxic plants.

"It is difficult to keep tabs on the entry of the traffickers because there
is a vast dessert area around the reservation. The Federal Police however
are applying intimidation against the activities of the traffickers in the
region. As in other states. we are promoting new agricultural projects so
that the Guajajaras will earn profits similar to or greater than those .of-
fered by the traffickers," Alipio Nevea concluded.

5058
cso: 5300/2260
BAND TRAFFICKING IN OOCAINE, WISE, MARIEUAMA ARRESTED
Rio de Janeiro 0 61.030 in Portuguese 3 Apr 82 p 13

[Text] The police arrested the traffickers Paulo Cesar Medina Antunes, 28,
and Bdson Cones, 36, and through then got the pusher Nivaldo Dias nutra, 26,
in whose hone, at 560 Estrada Santa Eugenia, in Santa (hm. 21 kilogr-s of
sarihuana and small quantities of hashish and cocaine were seized.

Reported to be the owner of the drugs who had brought then fron Santos to

sell then in Rio, Rivaldo Dutra was also arrested but escaped in his hone,
using his wife, Marcia Maria de Oliveira Dutra, 29, to divert the police of-

f icers to a presuned confession on drug traffic. In addition to Marcia,
police officers arrested Maria Cristina Borges Martins, 20, hivsldo's nistress.

Maria Cristina, who is 2 nonths pregnant, said that she did not know that
Nivaldo was narried and Marcia Haria did not know of the existence of the
other wonan in her husband's life. They let in the lockup of the 60th DP
[Police Precinct] where they were taken after having been arrested by officers
fron the DPM (Metropolitan Police Depart-ant).

According to detectives, the boss of the gang—whose base of operations is in
Sao Paulo—is the trafficker known by the seas of Ansel-o who was arrested by
DEIC [Criminal Investigation Department] officers yesterday.

Nivaldo is still at large. lie escaped on foot into a thicket and was being
pursued with the help of the PM [Metropolitan Police]. He left behind the

Passat 83-9069 with Sao Paulo license plates, registered in the nsns of Luis
Carlos Pereura.

Report

The 0PM officers who yesterday afternoon presented the prisoners and the con-

fiscated naterial to the reportsrs said that everything began when they re-
ceived a report to the effect that Paulo Cesar Medina Antunes (nus [loses
Senhora da Salete 76, apartsent 201, Rocha Miranda) was selling nsrihuana re-

ceived free a gang in Sao Paulo.

Yesterday afternoon, Paulo was arrested in Rocha Miranda Square where he had
1.25 kilograms of narihuana on his. "hen questioned, he said he had received

16
the drug from Nivsldo through Edson Games. He also said that the two of them
were going to meet with him at 1930 in that same square.

Police set up a stakeout and were lying in wait. At the scheduled time,
Nivaldo Dias Dutra arrived in the Passst with Bdson Comes and Maria Cristina
Borges Martins. After having been arrested, they tried to deny their parti-
cipation in drug traffic but Nivaldo confessed that he had in fact met Bdson
to get the latter to persuade other persons to sell drugs. Bdson lured Paulo
Cesar to whom he gave 1.5 kilograms of marihuana to sell. During the meeting
which ended in their arrest, Paulo Cesar gavs Nivaldo the money from the sale,
'that is, 100,000 cruzeiros (he had however not yet sold all of the marihuana).
Edson made 7,000 cruzeiros and Paulo made 5,000 cruzeiros for every kilogram
sold.

Escape

Nivaldo Dutra, trying to gain time to escape, which in fact he did, indicated
that he was ready to take the police officers to his wife's home in Santa
Cruz although he told them that the woman was his sister (he wanted to keep
Maria Cristina from finding out that he is married and the father of a 2-year-
old son .

Nivaldo prolonged the conversation, fingering Anselmo as the gang leader in
Sao Paulo. He made a signal to the woman, not knowing that Maria Cristina

was his mistress, and she got the police to listen to a presumed confession
in the bathroom. In this way he diverted the attention of the officers to

her and used the opportunity to escape through the back door which leads to
a thicket.

weapons and Scales

In the house, police officers in addition to drugs--estimated to have a street
value of 800,000 cruzeiros-oseized a 7.65 caliber pistol with two clips in

a holster and two scales, one of them a portable precision scale used to
weigh cocaine.

They also found a tape recorder, a TV set, and two car license plates-HT-2298
and SY-1869, both from Rio-supposed1y unused or taken from stolen cars.

Edson and Paulo said they did not know that Rivaldo was also selling cocaine
and primarily hashish, a drug little used in Rio.

Bdson Comes said that he is a cab driver and also works with attorney Adenir
Afonso Guimaraes on Avenida dos Italianos. But he denied that the attorney
knew anything about his criminal activities, maintaining that he was working
in the law offices as real estate broker. Paulo Cesar said that he is a shoe-
maker and works at home. Police officers however said that he had always been
involved in traffic and that he was the "airplane" (junior pusher) of the
trafficker Jose Carlos dos Reis anina, alias Becadinha, who had been fingered
as one of the biggest drug sellers operating in Horro do Juramento, in
Hadureira; he is still at liberty.

l7
rgea Martins (19 Agua Branca Street, apartment 101. in Hag-
feasional training course in

xlhaea Bastoa) said that she is taking a pro
)ediatrics and is a receptionist at the National Hotel in Sao Conrado.
larcia Maria, Nivaldo's wife, rather irritated. said that "this is the end."
there is the hatred that springs
another Hanan and that she is even

_aria Cristina Bo

”In addition to the arrests, the disgrace,
Eron the fact that I know that Nivaldo has

expecting a child from him."
h0th DP in Rocha Miranda.

who had already arrested Anselmo
hers involved in these activi—

The four of then were charged in the

The D?! contacted that police in Sao Paulo
and is also looking for hiveldo as well as ot

ties in Santos and in the capital.

     

the

icker who escaped, and, on the left.
material seized.

Nivaldo Dutra (top photo) the trsff
other nenhers of the sang with the

5058
CSO: 5300/2260

18
BRIEFS

MAJOR TRAPPICKERS LISTED-—The Narcotics Squad has listed the following as
principal traffickers operating in Rio, with their respective areas: Paulo
Luneta, Tijnca; Paulinho da Hatriz, Botafogo; Flavinho, Berra da Tijuca;
Wilson Ferreira das Reyes, alias Chulipa, Andarsi; Hamilton da Silva, alias
Boi, Ilha do Governador and baixada Yluninense; Jose Omens. Jacarepasua;
Crela, Baixo Leblon; Antonio Jorge, Iraja; Vanir, Canpo Grande; Paasoce,

Bangu and Canpo Grande; Cueca, Morro da Providencia and Praca “sue; Congo,
Tijucs; Tiao Capenga. Posse, Baixada; Eduardo Carroula, Ladeira dos Tabajarae;
Beto, Laranjeiras; Helito, Banco de Areia, Belford Bozo; Valentin, partner

of Helito, Caia do Porto; Bdo and Toinha, the so-called Rainho Brothers,
Andarai; Carabina, who gets drugs fro. the Coragen Brothers, Cruz Vernelha;
Pings, Salgueiro; hineiro and Branco, section between Laps and Cruz Vernelha,
dealing only in cocaine; Baiano Doido, Horro da Providencia na Praca Hana;

Ci, Acari; Hashington Poderoso, Paulo Haluco and Escadinha, horro do Juranento
en Vicente de Carvalho; Valter Negao, Curral das Bguas. en Baalenso; Paulinho
Amigo, Sao Cristovao; Tocao, Lane; Roberto Halve, Grands Rio; Celso Queinado,
Grande Rio; Joao Porcado, nonsucesso, Ilha do Governador and Duque de Caxeie;
Petis and Denis, Rocinha; and Ceci. lnhauna. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro JOBNAL
DO BRASIL in Portuguese 27 Mar 82 p 9] 5058

MARIHUARA PRODUCTION Dowﬂv-Police officers from the “arcotics Squad stated

that this is not a good time for drug traffic because there has been a drop

in the cocaine trade due to the recent seizure of large quantities in the
United States and because this happens to be the tine between Iarihuana har-
vests. To nake up for the Iarihuana shortage, traffickers usually nix the

herb with alfalfa or animal nanure, thus fooling the addicts when the drug is
prepared in small doses. The cocaine is nixed with talc [talcum powder],

wheat flour, or bicarbonate. Cocaine sells at 3.2 million curzeiros per
kilogran and narihuane sells at 60,000 cruzeiros. These prices are not stan-
dard throughout the state because, in the southern part. considered the area
preferred by traffickers, a Iarihuana joint with a smaller quantity than
norlal is sold for 1,000 cruzeiros; in Beixada Pluninense, an amount suffi—
cient fer four joints can be obtained for 500 cruzeiroa. Harihuana--the main
drug consoled in Rio because of its lower price-usually reaches the city

after being brought in by "hicks"; these are Ien who are hired to carry the
stuff in suitcases and to hand it over to the traffickers who ordered the
stuff. In the traffic set up, the next step consists of the sellers who supply
themselves through the distributors; they are the ones vho are the lost exposed

19
which is why they are often the target of the police. They disguise them-
selves as vendors of popcorn, hot dogs, peanuts, and even beverages. [Text]
[Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 27 Mar 82 p 9] 5058

MAJOR COCAINE TRAFFICKER ARRESTED-The trafficker charged with being respon-
sible for more than 50 percent of the cocaine reaching Rio de Janeiro was
arrested yesterday by officers from the D613 (General Department of Special
Investigations); he is Geraldo Alves de Azevedo, alias Geraldo da Beatriz,
52, serving a 14-year prison sentence for engaging in drug traffic in the
Adauto Botelho Hospital in Cuiaba, Hato Grosso, but he frequently goes to
Rio de Janeiro. He denies trafficking in cocaine from Hato Grosao to Rio

de Janeiro but the officers have been able to discover that he purchased a
Passat in December of last year from another trafficker by the name of Jose
Carlos dos Reis Bncina, alias Bacadinha, whom he supplies with drugs. Geraldo
da Beatriz has little to say about his frequent departures from prison in
Cuiaba but police officers hinted that he will have to finger persons who
help him when he goes back to Marc Grosso. Geraldo was arrested while having
lunch with his wife, Maria Alina de Sousagand a son; they live on Bus Fig-
ueiredo Hagalhaes 263, apartment 706. Gersldo was quite calm and said that
he is paying with financing through the Economic Fund. At the moment of his
arrest, he was in the Real Restaurant, on Atlantica Avenue, and he displayed
no emotion. At the 0618 he said that he was arrested in Cuiabs in 1979 as

he was preparing to purchase 5 kilograms of cocaine. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro
JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 27 Mar 82 p 9] 5058

RIO DRUG ADDICTION FIGURES--A research project by the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation,
which has been under way for a year and which will cost 60 million cruzeiros,
estimates that Rio de Janeiro has 100,000 drug addicts with about 20,000
having psychiatric problems. The project is aimed at determining the factors
that lead to this addiction and the extent to which the family structure con-
tributes to it. According to researchers, the estimate is based on 0“ data
for Latin American countries, such as Argentina, Chile, and Mexico. The
research coordinator, psychiatrist Anasticio Horgado, an assistant professor
at the National Health School, figures that last year alone there must have
been 1,200 serious cases of "heavy" drugs taken care of in specialized psy-
chiatric institutions where the victims had to be admitted. Out of the 87
cases studied, two began to use drugs beEween the age of S and 9 "through
brothers, friends, or peer pressure." According to the UN study, 5 percent
of persons between 15 and 39 are drug addicts and they generally begin with
barbiturates and marihusns until they go on to the more dangerous drugs. The
research project by the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation does not say whether the
number of addicts is increasing. But, according to Horgado, a drug addict
never says that he is an addict, and the scientific studies do not enable us
to say whether a marihusns consumer will go on to use cocaine, heroin, and
LSD. The psychiatrist said that he “does not dare" talk about marihusns
"because our knowledge here is very uncertain." But he noted that there is
no effective treatment to cure drug addiction, except love. His research,
confined to Rio and assisted by the Rational health Fund plus financing fro-
the UN's Fund for Drug Abuse Control, has 40 items intended for patients and
20 for families. The as yet preliminary conclusions reveal that drug addicts

20
Have a serious lack of appetite, many have psychiatric prbblem, and
the majority do not reveal any problems relating to nental illness. [Text]

[Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAD PAULO in Portuguese 31 Mar 82 p 21] 5058

PLANT FOR oocanu: PRODUCTION SEIZBD—The police in Anasonas seized a large
quantity of "epadu"--fro|s which cocaine is extracted—in the township of

'refe, in Media Solinoes. where a group of international traffickers had a
5-hectare plantation. 0n reaching the place, police officers arrested the
Earner, Joao Rodrigues, alias Joao Ila-bu, and his son, Joao Rodrigues Junior,
who ran the plantation; 12 sacks with dry plant leaves were found there.

After interrogation, the police found another two traffickers—Francisco Bentes
Rodriguea and lierval Dias de Araujonand later on arrested a former official
of the Electric Power Plants of Amazon“, Sebastiao de Olivaira. who was
charged with being responsible for the planting of "epadu." Joao Rodriguea
said that he was persuaded by two strangers, possibly Colowians. to plant
"epadu" on a couercial scale because the plant is found in. its native state
throughout the region where the Moon and Tucson Indians grow it for sale to
Colombian traffickers. [Text] [Sao .Paulo 0 ESTADO DB SAD 91mm in Portuguese

6 Apr 82 p 21] 5058

C80: 5300/2260

21
GENES OFFICIALS DISMISSED OVER DRUG SHIP“
Bogota EL TIBMPO in Spanish 19 hr 82 pp l-A, 3-A

[Article by Gustavo Ramirez]

[Text] bdellin, 18 hr-dhe (hief of Cmtons in Antioquia, Capt Alvaro Joins
Ibgollon, and five other officials were suddenly discharged today by the Head

Office of Custom because of the seizure of a shipment of cocaine from bdellin
discovered in a Tampa Airlines cargo plane.

In addition to Captain Jail-es )bgollon, Lieutenants limberto Flores and
Hernando Vargas Vargas, Oorporal Antonio Yanez and the appraisers Jorss Olaya,
Luis Hernando mtiz sad Luis A. Oepeda were also discharged. ‘lhe fornar
officials were working in the branch of the Omtons Departlnnt at the Olaya
Herrera Airport in mdellin.

In an investigation mdertaken in the airport by the General Cmtom Adminis-
tration it was proved that the appraiser, Luis Fernando htiz, was the one who
reviewed 425 cases in which the North Anerican authorities .discovered 1,800
gram of cocaine in the transport plane of the ﬂaps comany.

The drug, valued at about 1,000,000,000 dollars (more than 60.000.000.000
Colonbian pesos) was stored in Tampa warehouses in hdellin, while unto-s

reviewed and authorised shipment of a cargo of jeans and flowers to the United
States.

The discharge of the chief of Customs in Antioquia, .Captain Jaines lbgollon,

and of the Lieutenants Flora: and Vargas, (brporal Yanez and the appraisers was
made by "the discretionary authority of the government to route ptblic officials
from their jobs without preview investigation," according to an informat of the
Customs Department in mdenm. '

After the incident, the national director of Customs, Rafael Poveda Alfonso,

had complained of the difficulties in discharging Onstoms officials who were in-
volved in disciplinary investigations.

me discharges occurred when personnel free the Head Office of Custom and from
the Antinarcotics Department of the lhited States undertook an investigation to
uncover the methods used in the shipment of drugs abroad.

22
It was announced that David Huber Restrepo will replace Jainea Hogollon.

me new official was head of ms [Administrative mparmnt of Security] in
Hanizsles.

me cargo of 1,800 kilogram of pure cocaine was shipped to Hiaei in 22 carmns
which was part of the normal load of a Boeing 707 of the ﬂaps company.

The cartons, which aroused the suspicions of Cuton personnel in North
Amrica appeared in the Custom declaration as "personal belongings."

Suspicious on the involvenent of Custom personnel in Dudellin are based on
the fact that the 625 boxes of mrchandiae which the airplane carried arrived
actually at the consignees in Miami.

me manager of the "El Cid" cowany. owner of the Ma airplane cargo,

Guilleran Valencia Jars-inc, said that it is possible that cocaine had been
shipped to Miami from Oolodia my time hidden anon; export nerchendiee.

9678
080: 5300/2261.

23
BRIEFS

CUSllE FOREST HARIHUANA—Port-of-Spain. 18 Apr (CARA)—Hore than three nillion
dollars (1 TT dollsr : 41 cents 0.8.) worth of fully grown marijuana plants
and compressed ganja were destroyed and four persons arrested by police in

a recent raid in the Cushe Forest. the local press reported. The police
party uprooted about 50,000 trees, THE GUARDIAN newspaper said. The raid
also turned up three fully furnished forest canpa. a quantity of Iarijuana
seedlings and about 150 pounds of the compressed drug. Police said other
suspects escaped. Those arrested have been charged with illegally cultivat-
ing marijuana. [Text] [P1192161 Bridgetown CANA in English 1630 GE

18 Apr 82 FL]

080: 5300/2279

26
be .

{law had admitted that on
Novem at 20 Ian an at
Lenptaalltilnbthe ‘ tube"
M m .

1'}; Chic! We noun
hadhccnu-Idthatpolkeoﬂim ‘ .
acting on Inﬂuence laid .an - .- -.- w
amhahnuhaa-ehlaapu. HARVEY...“UeuIaMm"

    

The officera entered the home and found Harvey and other people. l'hey
searched the house and found reeln oil worth 160.000/- in a bedroom

ﬂarvay lodged an appeal through lawyer nuayoka Mana. ll‘he lawyer said the
nine-month jail eentenee llpoeed on the aocuaed was unfair ae Harvey had ad-
nltted the offence.

Bur. ﬁr. labutete aald Hervey van a Brltleh dtlun and had been eenvlcted of
poaeeutng haahiah in another country.

Harvey also need felee paaaport and nae, he eald.

'ne hae been to Kenya any tine but hie paeeport ahova entrlee for aperturea
tron Kenya but no entriee for arrivale or daetlnatlona in other conntrlee,"
etated Hr. Mute“.

The State Cemeel acid the nount of raaln all found in Harvey'a poaeaealon
was large.

25
In his judgeent. Justice Bret noted that Remy her! other convictions in en-
othe: comm.

me judge am the Chief Magistrete would heve granted e stiffer eentence es
the offence called for e fine not exceeding 20.000/- 0: tepdeeneent not ex-
ceeding 10 yeere or both.

.metice Bru- eeid the nine-loath sentence eppeered lenient.

080: 5300/5725

26
30 March 1982. at the Cologne-Bonn airport. The drug aeeu to have been
imported froe India. As he could not be queetioned in Ger-any becanee of
his diplonatic statue, Anedon Seye. was declared ”persona non grate" by the
west Ger-an niniater of foreign nffaira who enjoined hi- to leave the me
within a "suitable" tine. Once he returned to his country, Seye, who no
longer enjoyed hie diplonntic i-nnity, wan queationed and placed under
comitel order by the law. The inventixation and hearing of the cue is
taking its course but an exemplary pnniel-ent mat be expected an no to
discourage any other attempt of this nature. An att-pt which doea not honor
its authors who are our repreeentativea abroad and which tarniahee the
distinguished image which Senegal has acquired on the internetional ecene.
[Text] [Dakar 1.! 801.311. in French 17-18 Apr 82 p 8]

cs0: 5300/5729

27
KHAZULU'S MWION RAND DAGGA INDUSTRY mom

Braaufoneein FRONTLINE in English line-Apr 82 pp 39-40

[Article by Rog Runny:

[Text]

T was dues that took me to mines.

scene of [action hitting that makes

Sicilian vendettas seem tame. Dana.
KwaZulu‘s multimillion and crop. its
only important industry.

And listening to Eliiah Mhlonoo. ea-
policeman and veteran ol‘ many data-
deetroyina raids. tell how prolifically it
grows in the surrounding hills I think
what a pity it is I have come to write
about it rather than to smoke it.

I am sitting in the shade on ldhlorno's
plot near the Tupela. fihtina off flies and
the smell emanating from what loolts to
me through sweat-misted prescrbtion
annalasaes like leather thongs hung up for
curing. I ask Mhlonao why the people in
the area stow due.

The reason. as he sees it. is simple. To
grow anything else you need space. fer-
tiliser and irriastion You also need to
ﬁnd a market. To grow daua you need
next to no space - no more than an old
cattle ltreal. and nothing else at all And
you don‘t need to [ind a market either -
it linds you. before you can even snap
your fingers Moreover the dw runners
wll come from the city to collect it from
you. You can make an easy R600or eoa
year. by doing little more than alttina in
the sun.

RISO for a mealie-saclt of “Number
one“: around moo a sack {or lower»
grade merchndiee - the some are tlny
compled to the final retail price. But
here it 8 Money with a capital “ht”.

llere. anion the mud huts with the
broken dreams of derelict cars rusting in
their ylds. the women walkitn with the
stately ash that thek wide. dish~shaped

28

"Dew-11“ Burn Machine the Copa Can't Stop"]

head-dresses ~‘demand. the inconaruous
vans emblazoned with and: mysterious
inmates as ”Beyond a Song". . . . here.
practically any money that you can fold
in::ad o! bite is Money with a capital

Mhlomo himself has an unusual plot.
No trace of due. but plenty of 'hririrn
vegetables and fruit. lnciudha a vine
from which he causally picks hunches of
sweet grapes. This in an area bedevilled
by drought for the last two summers.

Iihloiuo ‘- one of the few who has
minted his land. He works with Church
Mrieultural Projects (CAP) on the farm

lldukutahai where Neil Aleook and his
wl‘e Geina head a notable attempt to
develop aarieuhure in the ltsinea area.

The Alcoehs encourage food product-
ionin phce ofdualrowlnc'l‘heyane
well aware of the incentives runnin in
the oppoelte dkection.

An Ndwendwe cane grower. {or
example. Inhht echt to net R368 a
year. {ermine an area or. on average. 1.46
hectares Aduaauowerwouldearnthe
nine amount from a field ”300: the size.
A ton of cane would net R535. Anyone
whhatonol’duaa forsalecouldearn
between R8 000 and RIOOOOO. depend-
lna on how and where he sold it.

Moreover. the Alooeka point out. cane
needs fairly expensive back-up services
Dana needs none at all

Says a CAP newsletter: “It coats
R25000 to create a lob ininduetryin
South Africa. It cost Sukhurnani (Deva?
oprnent Company) R5 000 to aeate alob
lnntaarh 1979/80. Butthedgp
industryaﬁsfornot'acent-iteeeatea
its ownlobs
(:80:

"Dana proves that when the econom-
ic incentive is there the black farmer has
all the qualities for m”

Yet at the same time as he proclaims
that deua is Kwelulu's only cash crop.
Alcock reareu its existence: “Continual:-
ies have salted me to help stop individuals
mowinaduaahecauseoftheharmit
does to the whole community. The tra-
gedy is that the actual mowers never set
ceudrt.”

Those ceuaht and Imprisoned are fall
auynhemynwhohappentohelnor
around the deans plotatthetime.1’hey
willserve theirssnteneeswlthoutamnr
mur forfearoftheoonsequeneeslfthey
revesl the identity of the plot’s owner.

Dena smohlm begins in the area at an
early age, the Aicocks say. The deprodat-
ions of thieveswhostriphandfuisofleav-
es from the growls; plants cut into the
powus' profits. And often these thieves
are young boys.

Every summer police helicopters come
todestroy thedeaafleidsusslnchteiye
poison spray instead of uprootina the
plants and hurnis. them But they have

touched only a fraction of the crop

The growers have come to terms with
the raids. it seems. Some pluck leaves
from the plant as it stores so that no crop
will so completely to waste.

Also. the raids have tausht arowerse
simple economic lemon: scarcity equals
eshte.

One grower Aleoclt hasspoken to says
he hesthepollcetothsnkfortheprioes
hisdauacencommandeitwasleuiised
he would he a much poorer men.

Down there in the neon hills. the
plant itself looks homely. somehow. in its
natural surrounds. l was reminded of the
2qu name “Mthunziwenlthukhu” or
“Shade of the fowls”. Before dupe was
declared illeael in I928. dear would he
arm 00" the doorway of most Zulu
huts and the chickens would rest under
the p'lents lower leaves.

Thisisreferred to in the Zulu praise

maidens:

Bum machine of the mind

Bum shade of the [owls

You remind use of the other ride a]
the moonlit"

When: looms here assembled

5300/ 5719

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060018~1

Butltnsanothersoqfardlstsntin
timeendcultutethouthtofsswere-
crossed the bread-brown river which
“lei-thaw the‘l’uosia valieyand
on either dde of which the mountains
humptotheskhsaslateamlyhhaeasthe

glare In a madman's eye. “Picture your-
self on a host on the rivet. . ." the Beatles
ran; ’And after some of the local
inns“ ehomvu. its delta-Metre-hydra-
cannahhoi heat-forced to a made po-
tency, sliairlshseekaleidoscopeeyeem
yes. and witheaehdraws mlllionhrsh
cellseanhh.

It‘s easy to was lyrical over the 1‘th
Valley and nmlisr rural paredlsss. espe-
cielly from the venue! Wilt of the city.
The reality. howeeer. h somethiru else.
Take the river. for ﬁnance. it carries a
muddy film that elinae to the body, quite
aside from whatever esaeta are canally
deposited upstream. The local people live
with it. ulna it to dump rubbish. weds
both hveanddeedhod'nssnd provide
drinking water.

There'ssmocltorreallsationherefor
the city dicher-lilreiearnhrathatthe
attractive headdremes are human hair
puiiedarounda haeofmudandthetthe
loss needles the women carry are for
scratching the scab without disturbing
the ehhorate plapherealle. A realsation
nearly asmlhhasstheshhtofthe
hunuy people.hhssm hytheaew
hws with: down on mb'ant
lshour-apctfromdqaatheonly
consent source of money - as by the
droedstsof the last two summers.

Beyond a son. But nodouht.mou
of the city'spbedreamsarerootedina
romentiehed memory of an unpleant
reality. like Ital-as. .

29
'L'OBSBRVATEUR' VIM POLICE ACTIONS 1'0 CONTROL DRUG TRADE

Cannabis Trade Uncovered
Ouagadougou L'OBSBRVA‘I'EUR in French 18 Feb 82 pp 8-10
[Article by Frank S. Vierax]

[Text] "An ouncu of prevention 19th a pound of cure," they say.
Bobo-Dioulasso—-the second largest city in Upper Volta, with at least 100,000
inhabitants--has been invaded by harnful weeds since 1965-66. Banful weeds
in two senses: firstly, its youth, contaninated by adventurers who have
dipped into the euphoric world of drugs; secondly, all sorts of drugs—both
drugs produced in modern laboratories, like cocaine and tranquilizers. and
plants like Indian hemp, also known as camabis. They do our people no good.
If Adam and Eve were lazy, as recounted by the Bible and the‘Koran in the
story of the beginning of unkind, it was because they lived in the paradise
of the Garden of Eden, which provided then with everything they needed. All
they had to do was pick what they wanted. All that was long ago. and today
nan nust earn his bread by the sweat of his brow, since Satan took the for-
of a serpent and, as the first spy in man's world, visited Eve. The develop-
ing countries seen to have been sore severely punished for this. he are citi-
zens of developing countries, and we have a great deal left to do. We need
all our able-bodied manpower.

Alas! Invoking various pretexts, each less vaJ id than the last, young peo-
ple and even adults are indulging in a state of euphoric conte-plation by
subjecting themselves to the effects of narcotic drugs. Re have published
many articles about the drug trade. We return to the subject now with
Comiasioner Youl Medee's latest series of arrests. He rounded up 7.53 kilo-
grams of Indian heap when he was a police inspector in the Mobile Brigade of
the Bobo Police Department. This tine he netted 50 kilogr-as of Indian help
for the Bobo-Diolasso prosecutor's office. Here is how he did it.

On 15 Jamary 1982, Conissioner Youl Modes of the second police district,
which has just been opened near a cycle factory (Ivolcy) and the Bobo rail-
road station. not far free the unprotected railroad crossing on the Sikasso-
Cira--Sonssoribougou line (near the airport), was asking routine rounds with
all the vigilance of an alert police-an. In a public place (...) he found a
shady looking character who appeared to be a drug addict. To take sure, he
asked hin to identify hinaelf. Forty-eight hours later this person shitted

30
that he belonged to the world of an artificial paradise, but only as a con-
sumer. Questioned about his supply source, he named one Adana Sako, who
already had a police record and a prison record: a 6-1sonth sentence for
involvenent in the drug trade in 1980. Thus, the connecting thread was found.
On 22 January 1982, police inspector Zonbre Christophe followed up the inves-
tigation by questioning Adana Saks at his hone; the latter attelpted unsuccess-
fully to hide two bags of hemp when he saw the inspector arriving. This becane
evidence. But where did he get his supplies? That was Inspector-Zonbre's
problen. In his initial statement, Adana Salts med a young man from Dande

as his supplier. A few days later, he stated that he got his supplies from
two old men in the village of Kodara in the Darsalany (Bobo) section.

lie named Ouattara Balls as his first supplier. The investigation was pursued
in the latter's residence on 27 January 1982. Balls, who is known all over
the region as a big charlatan, was openly holding consultations. Disguised
as ”snifeurs," the investigators asked hin for 30,000 CPA francs worth of
Indian heap. After they had been served, they identified themselves and pro-
ceeded to search the premises. They found a cache of lo kilograns of Indian
help, packaged for consunption. The inspectors repeated the one scenario
with Ouattara Padouba, Adana Sako's second supplier. When offered 100,000
CFA francs, Ouattara Padouba went to his storehouse and got out a large jute
sack full of hemp and several other partly filled sacks. This raid netted a
total of 26 kgs of packaged Indian heap. The nest interesting side of this
story is that Balls and Padouba are both distributors of Indian help. selling
their product for Prs 1,000 per SO-gran hescafe box.

They got the seeds of this valuable plant fron an Ivorian schoolteacher named
Koffi E-anuel who was passing through Kodara; apparently the whole crop was
to be delivered to him! But our two producers still had their stocks and were
selling then retail. Bella grew 260 square actors of heap this year for this
purpose. In 1981 they sold a large part of their crop to a European professor
from Ouahigouya. Padouba grew 183 square asters of hemp in 1981-82.

Together, Balls and Padouba grew 623 square meters of heap and produced 30 lugs
of Indian henp worth Prs 600,000 on the market. One problen renained to be

that was very different frou the ones supplied by Balls and Padoma. Hhere
did he get it? To answer this question, the police had to interrogate Sake
again. He confessed that he got it fron Alidou Ssnou, in the region of

Dande. 60 kn fron Bobo along the hobo-Farm ads (in the opposite direction
f roa carnal-y). Inspector Zowre sent his nen to bands again. Approaching
Alidou with the drug addict's lingo, they asked him for Prs 1.000 francs worth
of Indian henpua full SO-gran Nescafe box, called a "cup" in the drug trade's
jargon. After they had been served. they searched the prenises. Alidou's cache
netted 20 kgs. he naned Barro Tiantinsroncalled Hormonal—in Koundougou as
his supplier. The latter grew 29 square aeters of help this year for the drug
trade. If it is true that Tiantinsro grew the heap, he got the seeds fro-
Sanou Te Karin of Nara-a, 26 Ions from Dande. Sanou Te Karin furnished the
seeds, Tiantinaro grew the plants. and Alidou narketed the product. Thus
Cousissioner Youl Anedee of the second district and his sen uncovered two or
three of Bobo's supply sources in this roundup, along the Isny sources exist-
ing on Upper Volta's territory. This reninds us of the saying: "An ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure." It is tile for the Departunta of health,

31
,.
u .3.

the Interior, Youth, Sports and the Arts to get together and ask for a budget
to finances special narcotics squad in Upper Volta‘s main urban centers. we
are headed toward a situation now afflicting deve10ped countries because they
did not discover it sooner. Our national budget would not know which saint to
turn to if it had to finance detoxication centers soon.

More Arrests made
Ouagadougou L'OBSBRVATBUR in French 27 Jan 82 pp 1, 12

[Article by Vierax F. Sanou]

[Text] "The more you go after it the deeper the evil seems to take root." '_In
this way the evil advanced, little by little, in the so-called industrialised
countries where the spoiled children of rich parents, especially those of the
bourgeoisie, are idle because they cue into a world where their parents
offered then everything on a silver platter and they didn't have to do any-
thing: everything had already been done. This is certainly not the case yet

acquire: “A world of euphoria... a temporary paradise. full of visions both
demonic and romantic." This is still fresh in our ninds, since it started in
1981. In our Rio 2119, we saw that the perspicacity of our country's police
force enabled it to confiscate 17.5 has of cannabis and 3,500 doses of tran-
quiliser tablets worth Pr 1.5 million. As we regarded in our No 2189 of
l981--to mention just two of many cases—the Mobile Brigade of the hobo police
confiscated 7.530 grams of Indian hem that year. The responsible persons
were punished. But this sens to have left the drug trade unscathed. Thus
the Bobo Gendarmerie's traffic prevention brigade has just arrested five Indian
help pushers while seizing 326 kgs of Indian help worth 35 nillion CPA francs.
The credit for this fine haul and the blow dealt to drug addiction belongs to
Gendarnerie comander Lt Jean—Pierre Palm and his men of the traffic preven-

tion division.

Five pushers were arrested. It all began with rumors about a disturbing
entry of drugs into Bobo-Diuolasso through a group of pushers led by the
Ghanaian Steven Addai Hesse, 37 years old, who had been procuring drugs in
Ghana for an international group of smugglers based in Cologne, in the no.
On 20 December 1981 these mmors were confirmed, and Deputy Gendarme San
60am Armtole of the traffic prevention division and his nan went into action
inediately. Their energy soon led the. to a suspect: Anoanou bushels,

27 years old, a citizen of Mali, a transporter by profession, who resided in
the Diarradougou section of Bobo-Dioulasso. he adnitted having been offered
125,000 CPA francs to transport a masher of packages containing drugs through
Hali. lie was sorely tempted, but the deal was red hot and the gendarnes
were already on the trail. Antanou heeded the voice of reason and refused

this tempting offer without revealing anything about it to the authorities.
The drug pushers. acting with the usual distrust and discretion of those who

asks their fortunes in this way, continued acting through niddlemen, thus
making things very difficult for 8a and his men. But their perseverance and
ability led them to Drissa Sanogo, 36 years old, an Upper Volten, an makilled
laborer and a member of the Echo Transporters Trade Union. He agreed to act
as a go-between in finding another transporter. He was arrested on 29 December
1981 at 8 pm at the nafra-Bar. Following the trail from there was child's
play. Steven Addai Mensa, who was the brains of the group, admitted the acts
imputed to him. This was clearly not his first crime. He had already brought
off another drug deal that earned him the "trifling sun" of 5 million CFA
francs. Illegal traffic, in particular drug traffic, is risky, but there are
enormous profits to be rude. A man like Steven knows this. That is why he
did not hesitate to invest 2 million CPA francs in Indian hemp in Ghana to
meet the demands of his clients Adu James and Adana Abitu, both residents of
the PRC. En route, the 326 kgs of hemp had to pass through Hobo on their way
to Mali, then Senegal. It is not always easy to make the necessary arrange-
ments. Many packages were involved, and enormous profits. One could not he
too greedy. That is why Steven-an old hand at the game--recruited King Koffi
Assante, 28 years old, a Ghanaian who sold beauty products in Bobo-Dioulasso's
Sikaaso-Cira section, as an assistant. It should be emphasized that Diane
Hamadi agreed to transport the merchandise for 150,000 CPA francs, and Drissa
Sanogo kept the packages at home for 10,000 CPA francs per night. The 35 mil—
lion CFA francs worth of Indian hemp are now in the Bobo-Diolasso prosecutor's
office, and since January 1982 the civilian prison has had some new guests from
the drug world.

Police Vigilance
Ouagadougou L'OBSBRVATBUR in French 4 Feb 82 pp 11-12

[Excerpt] Drug addiction, heretofore unknown in Upper Volta, has been gaining
ground here in recent years. Drug dealers saw in Upper Volta--a call enclave-
an ideal place for their business. Lying at an international crossroad of
major overland routes, Upper volts was destined to feel the affluence of drug
dealers from Senegal, Ghana, Togo and even Nigeria if the population was
receptive to drugs and if the narcotics squad at national police headquarters
could not meet the challenge.

In the capital alone, the narcotics squad at national police headquarters
arrested a number of people and consigned then to justice: about 50 people,
including about 30 men, were consigned to justice; 75 kgs of hemp, cannabis,
etc, were seized, as were 90,000 doses of psychotropic substances.

The drug dealers, thus thwarted, deserted the capital and the eastern part of
the country and moved west. They did not reckon with the determination of the
national police and the national gendarmeries, who seized 7.53 kgs, 326 kgs,
and a dozen people in Bobc-Dioulasso.

As we have said, the people are not receptive to drugs, so one does not find
pushers selling drugs in the streets, or hemp growers, among them. But our
policemen must not relax their vigilance on this account; they know the
nefarious side of this phenomenon better than anyone else. At any rate we
have confidence in then!

9855
080: 5300/5686
33
POLICE CRACK m 0” 'GICAGO-STYLB' W m m
Copenhagen mmsxz mm in Danish 11o Apr 82 p 2
[Article by Bent Bak Andersen]

[Text] During the last 2 years, the Copenhagen suburban police districts have
been intensifying their efforts to combat the growing traffic in narcotics.

"It had gradually become so in Albertslund that all young people knew that they
merely had to visit the youth center Horharhaven [the Mulberry Gardens] if they
wanted to purchase hashish. Our investigation started in the fall of 1981, and,
so far, 25 pushers, who have sold at least 50 kilos of hashish at the youth center.
have been charged. At present, five persons have been mested in the case," says
Tom Beck, detective superintendent, Glostrup.

The persons charged in the case are not members of any well-organized network of
pushers but simply young people who thmelves smoke hashish. To get money for
their next purchases, they sell from their supplies of hashish to other users.

"Us consider it a major preventive Job seeking to eradicate the hashish traffic in
our police district. Of course. there will always be new ones ready to tales over
the market, but the young people will now find out that we will not tolerate any
violations of the narcotics laws and the laws governing the use of enphorisnts,"
says Tom Beck.

"We, moreover. hope that we may help some young people avoid getting into the
narcotics environment. Here. I particularly have in mind the people who 'snoke
hashish in company.’ When they learn that their suppliers have been arrested. or
the area in which they live has been made dry. as far as drugs are concerned, we
hope that they will give up the doubtful enjoyment of moldng themselves into
maladjustment," the detective superintendent says.

In the course of the investigation. several of those charged have told the police
about the almost 'Chicago-style' conditions prevailing in Horbmrhaven.

80 far, two bandits from one of the local gangs have been imprisoned for robbing
several of the pushers charged with traffic in narcotics. 'lhe bandits offered
the pushers protection and convinced the pushers that they needed protection by
beating them up.
"The investigations and the clearing up of the environment within our police
district continue, and we hope that en increaing number of people will help
us by telling us about these hsshish ghettos, so that young people will not be
tenpted or lured into something which Is: eventually bring the young people
into something even worse. such as hard drugs, and thus also pave the us: for
crimes in order for then to procure money for their drugs."

In 1981, e total of 81 persons were charged in the Glostrup police district with
violations of the strict narcotics law of the criminal code. which is the third
largest number in the Danish police districts. In addition, there were 203

violations of the law governing the use of euphoriants. which is the fifth
largest number in Denmark.

7262
080: 5300/2274
POLICE OFFICIAL DISCUSSES DRUG smccum, ARREST PATTERNS
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDB in Danish ll Apr 82 p 6
[Article by Dent Dal! Andersen]

[Text] "I have a quiet dream that we would be given a chance to take cases
up again half a year after a severely sentenced narcotics criminal has been
released. For a person who has been involved in organised drug trafficking
once never gets away from it again," said police magistrate Michael Lyngbo.

The bitter experience of the police and the prosecuting authorities shows
that it is the same criminals one finds time after time behind the inter-
national traffic in the criminal worldo-and this is probably especially true
of narcotics crimes where the goods are so easy to sell.

"If we could take up the case of a released narcotics criminal half a year--
or perhaps even soonerusftet his release, we could in many instances crack
down much sooner on gangs. With the aid of a lot of desk work and talking
back and forth with Danish police divisions and foreign colleagues, we can
quickly determine whether a released criminal is in circulation again. One
example is the recently sentenced Greek, Georgie Kyramis. In 1970 he was
sentenced to a year in prison, in 1975 he was sentenced to 1 year and 7
months and the last time he was sentenced to 9 years in prisono-in all these
cases he was sentenced for dealing in narcotics. As soon as he was released
and expelled from Denmark in 1977 he went to Holland--Amsterdam--where he
settled in and used the sources he had met in Danish prisons along with his
old colleagues--and had an easy time selling heroin to the Danish market,"
said Michael Lyngbo.

For all of 1981 and up to 1 April of this year, jury cases were heard or
prepared against 35 people in Ostre High Courtnmost of them accused of
smuggling in large quantities of heroin or cocaine. Jury cases are those in
which the prosecuting authorities are asking for prison sentences of at least
6 years. Of the 35 people accusedo-and in some cases sentenced--only four
were Danish. The rest were foreigners-optimarily Turks and Greeks.

”It is typical of these two nationalities as well as of Pakistanis that they
work in national organizations. It is extremely seldom that they include
people of other nationalities in their organizations, while for example
Yugoslavs belong to groups consisting of meters from several lands. ' said
Michael Lyngbo.

But the entire international narcotics criminal world is extremely well-
organized and well-prepared.

"If we arrest a courier or make a number of arrests in which we get our hands
on a large part of the dealer network, new organizations are always ready to
step in. For example, if a narcotics buyer does not receive a shipment--
perhaps because the police arrested the couriero-a new delivery can be ob-
tained in a few hours-- just by calling up the contact in Amsterdam through
which most of the hard drugs for all of Europe pass, or in another European
city and ordering a new shipment which theoretically can arrive in Del-ark a
few hours after the police have arrested the first courier," said police
magistrate Michael Lyngbo. -

Last year, 1108 young Danes died as a result of drug abuse.

6578
680: 5300/2275

37
1 million larks in Christiania. The sentence. handed down earlier by the City
Court. was upheld on Friday by Oeter Lenderet (the Court of Appeal). Four years
in prison is a stiff sentence in Beam. where tens longer than 2 or 3 years
are avoided. However. Tau-Jo. Rieni had participated in bringing into the comtry
200 kilograms of hashieh. all of which was sold in Christianie a. few Ionths of?
10

5%!) Aiming [Fug [Helsinki mmmm in Swediah 27 Her 82 p

NARCOI'ICS POLICE T0 PERU—The Ministry of Justice will, within the next few due,
receive a request from the Commissioner of Police to the effect that a Denieh
narcotics criee expert be posted in South America. He will probably be given
permanent quarters in Line, the capital of Peru, where he in to try to expose
some of the many organization which export large quantities of cocaine to the

Norgic countries. [Text] [Copenhagen 33mm TIDBNIE in Ihnieh 7 Apr 82
p 2 7262

0302 5300/22?“

38
PENIS! PAPER mom's (I! hummus M'O “ORB!!! AREA
Helsinki “WWW in Swedish 29 liar 92 1) 1‘0

[Ki-nae by Stefan Lundberg: ”Drugs Streaa Across Unguarded Borders)?

ﬁexﬂ The year was 1975. Three young wonen. Finnish wonen. stood on the steps
leading down to a door in a. sides‘u-eet to the notarious Istedgade, the heroin
street. in Copenhagen. They were filthy with old dirt, as were the two children
who clung to the skirt of one of the women, The wonen were prostitutes. two of
then also drug addicts by injection. one obviously seriously alcoholic. Today
at least two of then are dead. according to the statistics.

These are a "conseqmntial phenonenon.‘ Just as their thomands of sisters who
have succeeded then in Copenhagen'e heroin quarter. A consequential phase-anon.
because they are the visible part of the gigantic international narcotics trade
which is happening to Denmrk.

A considerable portion of the drugs used both in the Nordic countries and on the
world market passes through Den-ark and Copenhagen.

The prostitution and misery openly displayed on the street behind the central
Station in Copenhagen is of course shocking. and the "Junk pusher." the heroin
seller. is the nest despised of the despised. but these are only the crmbs of

the heroin cake that have dropped on the way to the big nerkets from the tables
of the rich.

In the fashionable residential sections outside Copenhagen. where blue-black
lercedescarsglidearomd,nodrugsaretobeseen.buttheyarethm.behind
the facade.

Unguarded Border

The narcotics stream into the Nordic countries by land. by sea and by air. when
the police try to block one channel. the drug stress flows along new fun-on.

Centrols at the IaJor airports and in the anor ports have been tightened. so
the couriers seek new routes.

One way of bringing narcotics into Sweden froa behind: or Holland. for eggs.
is to use small pleasure craft. The pleasure craft traffic between the
t
1

T1»---

1

\o‘

K'JpenIJan

 

This is how the drugs travel in the Nordic ares. Host of whst cones to Finlurl
goes back out into the world. Finland is only a. transit country.

coastal cities of Jutland and the Swedish west coest or Norway is practically
impossible to control. The Swedish coast guard is well swam out the extent of
the snuggling by boat. since it has seized several large ship-outs en route to
Sweden. One group of Norwegians were caught ssiliu hsshish tron llorocco to

Bohuslsn.

60
Once the narcotics have reached Oslo. for exanple. it is simple to get then into
Sweden. Border crossings in Var-land and Bohuslan are often manned. The con-
rier cores to a sign which asks him to contact such and such an authority if he
has anything to declare ....

Hobile police patrols are trying to keep snuggling under control. but it is like
trying to find a pin in a haystack.

The police have often found large shipnents in cargo ships on their way up. for
example fro- Rotterdan in Holland.

The ship's officers have beccae tougher since the narcotics snuggling began. the
head of the narcotics division in Gothenbum. Lennart Lindnan. says.

”Last year. after crew nenbers on board ships owned by the Nordstdernan line were
caught for drug smuggling. it happened that officers notified police after find-
ing 300 kilograms of marijuana in the ship's hold outside Rotterdam.”

The Dutch Supply

In contrast to Stockholm. Gothenburg has no heroin problea. but all the lore
problem with anphetaaines. The Dutch and Italians take care of the supply.

ﬂeet of it arrives by air or car. Previomly. when a car ferry operated on the
Gothenbm-g-Aasterdan line. that channel was used. The route has not been oper
ated for sons tine. but service will begin again this spring.

"Then this wretched business will probably start again.” Lindlan says.

The ferry line between Fredrikshavn in Demark and Gothenburg is also a well-
frequented channel for the supply of narcotics. The ferries leave every hour.

Six nonths ago the Gothen‘ourg police caught an alphetanine gang of six Finns.
The capture took place in cooperation with the Finnish narcotics division. A1-
thoxgh the people caught were considered fairly big in the business. the Finns
are not believed to play a major role in Nordic drug trafficking. At least not
asbigasafewyears ago. when severali‘innishdrugkingswerecapttredandput
behind bars in Sweden.

'Heroin Tourists '

For sole inexplicable reason. heroin is not a problea in Gothenburg. but very
much so in both Stockholm and Hallo. '

The heroin deliveries reach Sweden from various directions. Sons of then come
from Holland. where heroin is kept stored and distributed to the world. Host of
it. in any case. comes from Turkey. Lebanon and Bangkok. The ancrity of the
shipments are brought to Europe by air. Both couriers and tourists are respons-
ible for the supply.

heat of the heroin enters Sweden via Denmark-concealed in cars.

61
At the narcotics division in Stockholm one is today worried about the increase
inthe nunberofi‘innishheroin usersaswell. ‘lhisalsoneansthattheheroin
contacts with Finland will get a stronger foothold.

Passes Through Finland

Alarge anomtcfdruge,handdrugsaswell, arereportedtoarriveinl‘inland.
although not much is said on the subject. This involves narcotics which have
never been intended for the Finnish market. Alone other things. couriers bring
thedrussacmsstheungmrdedbordersbetwunrinland-Ncrwey-ewedeninthe
north.

The narcotics are driven to Helsinki and are thereafter sent out to their final
destination. The reason for the answer is that the ship-ants then originate
fro: a new comtry-Jinland. And in the big world Finland is not regarded as a
drug supplier, but increasingly as a transit country for hard drugs.

Five Percent Are Caught

According to the sane source as referred to above. only an insignificant portion
are caught by custons or police. It is calculated that a Iaxinun of five per-
cent of the world's contraband narcotics and up in the hands of the authorities:
for Finland, the figure nay be even lower.

The well-known foner arm prosecutor in Finland. district attorney Jana Seise
(who handled. along other things. the lamest heroin case in our country). is of
the opinion that the drug problen is considerably worse in our country than what
the statistics on confiscation show.

Seise is critical of the police with respect to cooperation.
"There ought to be an integrated organisation. at least in the area of the capi-
tal city. Now. the Helsinki police work in their area. the Bsbo police in

theirs. and no one can cross the city linits and enter the other one‘s terri-
tory." Seise says.

119‘9
0802 5300/2233"

42
POLICE srummc mm mcmsa as muss m mom
Helsinki HWVUDSTADSBLADET in Swedish 19 Her 82 p 20
[Imam Drug Probleas Have Reached Lapland as wenj

[Text] Today there are acre than 100 narcotics criminals in Keai. No one knows
yet how many acre there are. But even this nunber shows that the narcotics
problea has definitely get a grip on Lapland. And to such an extent and with
such force that it surprised even the police. Narcotics investigations are now
in progress in Keni and Tornio. and sergeant Pauli Partanen. who heads the Keai
investigation. hopes that one will gradually obtain a clearer picture of Just
how serious the situation really is.

The investigations initiated by the police in Keai at the end of Nova-her were
started as a result of a tip ”froa a well-inforaed some," as Partanen puts
it. It was not a question of a direct accusation. only intonation that all
drug traffic in Keni is increasing and increasing rapidly.

The police went to work. and what has been discovered so far is quite frighten-
ing: marijuana. hashish and anphetanine is being snuggled from Sweden to the
market in Keni and in the rest of Lapland. Partanen does not want to elaborate
on the size of the snuggled quantities. but he states that a few large anounts
have been confiscated. There are indications that at least sons of the snug-
gling takes place under organised ferns and by professionals.

But the picture of the "average sauggler” looks a little different. lie-«for in
the majority of cases it is definitely a he--is a person of about about 20 years
of age. He works or has worked in Sweden and cans in contact with drugs there.
He cones home and offers his friends and acquaintances “a taste.” and this is
how the abuse spreads like ripples 0n water.

"It is mainly by this route that snuggling takes place and drug abuse begins.
But there are also indications of traffic in the other direction." smeant
Partanen says.

"It is lucky that we have the good cooperation between the Finnish and Swedish
police that we have. Infernation and experience are exchanged. and we fight the
drug criainals with Joint efforts regardless of what side of the border they
happen to be on."

63
If the snuggler is around 20 years old. the ease also applies to the addict. A
few years ago the police in Keai even cans in contact with 13-year old addicts.
but Partanen reports that there is no longer any addiction aaong children of
that age. 0n the other hand. drug abusers occur in all social layers. Addicts
are found among acadsnically educated as well as along the uneducated and unen-
ployed.

It is essential for those who have entered the vicious circle of drug addiction
to obtain money for drugs. For they are not cheap. A day's supply of hashish
costs about 150 narks. narijuana 200 narks and alphetanine about 300 harks.

“For those who are really slaves to the habit the costs lean. of course. that
the aoney can't be obtained in an honest nanner." Partanen stresses.

"The result is that drug crines lead to crises against property. But fortunate-
1y thereareveryfewpersonainKeaiwhoaresodependsntcnthedrngsthat
they would have to con-it a crime against property."

Onecfthereasonsforthatrayoflightintheshadcwyworldofdngsissm'ely
that no heroin sntgglsrs were found durim the investigations. But the Keri po-
lice nevertheless do know of a few heroin mere. as well as of a few tragic
cases of LSD use.

”linen you try an LSD trip. you never know what you get into. In Real we know
that there are people who still. years after trying it. without forewarning are
forced to take surprising trips. The LSD circulates. so to speak. in the body
and the trip cones when it cones.” Partanen explains.

Despite the opinion of sergeant Pauli Partanen that the situation in Kelli is
known and that the narcotics narket has called down considerably due to police
action. he warns against a false sense of security that the situation is under
control.

”Dmg crise nust still be actively fought. This is why we in the narcotics in-
vestigation are still continuing with our work. But we can't nanage without the
help and assistance of the public. I hope that everyone will realise that nar-
cotics crime is not only a problen for the police. It is a problen for all in-
habitants and for all of society." Partanen aphasises.

That society nay perhaps not feel its responsibility snow is evidenced by the
fact that subsequent care is conspioous by its absence. practically speaking.
After the addict and/or mum has been released by the police. he or she is
left totally alone. And for many it leans that the step back toward orine and
new visits to the police is very short.

"Society should create a network of contact persons who would be willing to sup-

port sonsone who has aessed up his life. mat would be profitable in any ways.
Both econonically and otherotise.” l’artanen save.

£339 5300/2251;
POLICE CLEARING UP CWTRY'S BIGGEST MPHETMINE CASE
Oslo OAGBLAOET in Norwegian 26 liar 82 p 9
[Article by Helge Amotsbakken: "Gigantic Narcotics Seizure On Norwegian"]

[Text] The Norwegian narcotics pollceare now in the process of uncovering the so
far greatest amphetamine case here in this country. The exposure takes place after
a 32-year-old Norwegian was seized with 1.5 kg amphetaalne in Goteborg before the
weekend. The stuff is worth at least ‘0 million kroner on the open market.

The Norwegian bought the stuff in Amsterdam. he was seized when he was about to go
on shore from the Danish boat and has admitted the facts of the situation. The
police suspect that he has carried out a larger nuaber of similar smuggling trips in
the last couple of years.

The 32-year-old man, who is from Nolde. travelled with a rented car to Amsterdam
last Tuesday. After two days stay in the Netherlands he arrived in the ferry harbor
in Goteborg on Friday morning.

The man was seized in a pure routine control by Swedish customs agents when he was
about to go on shore front the ship. The customs agents became suspicious when he
stepped out of the car, because the man had the stuff taped to his body, which the
customs agents observed by looking at him.

Two investigators from the narcotics deparuaent at Oslo police headquarters travelled
down to Goteborg iumediately when the report about the arrest came. The 32-year-old
man had been detained for questioning in Goteborg until he was brought to Oslo '
yesterday afternoon. lie was presented in the magistrate's court today. with

request that he be kept in custody for 8 weeks with no letters and visitors allowed.

According to what DAGBLAOET has found out. the 32-year-old nan has made a larger
nunber of trips abroad during the last two or three years. it probably involves
three to four trips annually. However. the policeare very reserved with information
in view of the intense investigation which now is being carried out.

Taken ilith 1.5 Kg of Ahphetamines on His Body
"Nhat i can say is that we suspect that he may have carried out a series of such

trips in the last couple of years. i cannot discuss in further detail whether
other people are involved, but it is probably natural to believe that in cases like

45
The ttuff ls taped to the back

5 In this way:

to snuggle narcotlc
laces on the body.

Odd Uentzol)
ldar Holgholn at

one man alone.” pollen inspector V

s DkGBLADET.

For comparison during
n this country. whlle ln
hat the 1.5 kg arc uorU
A gram of anphet
nd wlth

a nordlc scale.
seized here l

lt ls ostlmnted t
In Oslo..
ls usually pal

The selzura is suprlsln

all of last year 1.07 kg of
1980 the flguro.was scarcely 300'
at least b nllllon kronor on the

as elght doses. A dose

anlne can be diluted to as much
300-350 kroner.
"The seizure in Goteborg. is a new, good example of the effective nordic police and
customs collaboration which we now have. lie: have deliberately worked on making
the effort at special check points in Sweden and Dennark more effective. and this
gives results."

It is the chief of the narcotics police. police inspector Arne liuuse, who tells
MGBLADET this.

"we believe it is at least as important to stop the stuff at these points as it is
to stop it inside Norway's borders. In one way we are talking about some kind of
an external defense. It is very encouraging that the work with this now gives
such results." continued Huuse.

"llhere does the amphetamine cane from?"

"More than half of what is sold here In this country originates precisely from
Amsterdam. The import paths vary, but the ferry from Fredrikshavn to Goteborg is
probably most used for such things."

"llhere is the amphetamine used most in Norway new?"

"in the eastern part of the country and along the southern coast. The consumption

has spread violently in recent months and indicates a further hardening in the
narcotics environment here at home." says Arne iiuuse.

8958
C50: 5300

107
mvssncarlon REVEALS motsrmo onus use on on. rurroms
Oslo arrenrosreu in Norwegian 3 Apr 82 p 8

[Article b Thorleif Andreassen: " 'Open' Smuggling Channels For Narcotics In The
North Sea“‘ '

[Text] It is far too easy to snuggle narcotics to the oil platforms. 'l’he control
measures are too poor. They must be "proved- The most used snuggling channels
are personal and mail shipments with helicopters and goods transport with boat.

This is evident from a preliminary report on the control measures to and fra the
oil platforms in the North Sea. According to what AFTENPOSTEN has found out. l85
persons in Stavanger are suspected of using or selling narcotics on the platforms.
Now many are suspected of such relationships from other towns will now be clarified
by the police.

Last year when it was found out that there was narcotics abuse on Norwegian oil
platforms. Ninister of Justice Mona Nokke appointed a public investigations counlttee
under the leadership of chief of police in Stavanger. Carl Vendt. In the report

the comittee proposes a series of measures in order to eliminate the narcotics
traffic.

The goods transport to and from the continental shelf is carried out almost ex-
clusively with boats today. In the catering service and araong the operators a

control stage has been established when the goods are packed in containers. But

no control for narcotics is carried out. A corresponding control stage has not been
established for goods which the contractor and subcontractor companies send off shore.
The cmlttee points out that the channels are therefore completely open for snuggling.

The personnel transport to and from the installations takes place nostiy with hell-
copters. it is the helicopter bases at Bergen and Stavanger which are being used.
The- report therefore specifies that the personnel and baggage control at these
bases is therefore of great interest.

In contrast to the airports. public authorities have no responsibility for the
control of personnel at the two heliports. The operator companies are responsible
for the control and have hired a guard company to perforla this service. However.
the report establishes that this control is not sufficiently effective: lilth

the limitations which the guard. personnel are subject to in their service, there
are obviously relatively few possibilities for finding narcotics.

48
According to the comittee the guard company should be provided more suitable premises
and given more thorough training. "A better collaboration should. be started between
the guard canpany and poiice,‘ customs and the operators' security service. Custom

and police shouldl‘in the future participate in the security control. These

departments have files on narcotics abusers and can carry out a more thorough
control of personnel."

Fran the report it is clear that mail which is sent through the operators is subject
to very little control. A study is now being made to determine whether x-ray
equipment should be used to reveal if there are narcotics in the envelopes.

The report contains the following sensational infornation: Hall which the sender
delivers directly at the heliport is not subject to any form of controll

The preliminary report on narcotics traffic to and frm the North Sea gives a
clear picture: The snuggling channels are sensationaily open.

8958
C50: 5300

49
RESEARCHER REPUTBS POLICE OFFICIAL'S VIEWING 0F DRUG WORLD
Oslo DAGBLADET in Norwegian 31 Mar 82 p 9
[Article by Pal T. Jorgensen: "Hhat Is the Truth About Narco-Norway?"]

[Text] "Narcotics war" has broken out between Police Inspec-
tor Arne Huuse, head of the police narcotics section, and
Ragnar Hauge, research chief at the State Institute of Alcohol
Research.

Rorwegian mass media-dwith the good help of Arne Huuse-have
crested an extreme and exaggerated picture of the drug situa-

tion in Norway, according to Range.

"Range is trivializing the seriousness of the use of narcotics
and putting out veiled insinuations against the police," says
Arne ﬂuuse.

The "wsrwbetweenresearch chief ﬂange and Police Inspector ﬂuuse started with
an article by Hauge in the periodical STOFFHISBRUK [Drug Abuse]. In it the
research chief asserted that the ﬂorwegian people have been given a biased
picture of the drug situation here in Norway. A picture that is greatly exag-
gerated and that is based mostly on information from the police.

With the aid of research results Hauge describes a wholly different narcotics
situation from that which has been accepted as’the truth heretofore. Bauge

drew the following conclusions:

I The use of narcotics has stagnated since the middle of the 1970's.

I Smugglingofnarcotics is done by the users themselves. There is no evidence
that international rings are behind narcotic sales in Rorway.

I Host of those who get into drug use quit after a short time.

I Narcotics users are recruited among young people,who traditionally have great
social problems.

I The police narcotics section has unparalleled personnel strength. At the sane
time the narcotics police are allowed to use methods of investigation that would
be regarded as'illegitimate in other fields. That is dangerous.

Police Inspector Arne Huuse reacted very strongly to ﬂauge's article. "A very
unfortunate move. Hauge wants to trivialize the seriousness of the abuse of
narcotics. He is making veiled insinuations against the police," was Buuse's
response. TheP01iceinSPeCt°rpoints out that there are 100,000 narcotics users
in Norway, that the abuse is increasing, that professional smugglers are bring-
ing the narcotics to Norway, and that the users are not just society's losers,
but also come from so—called "good homes."

Research chief Hauge tells DAGBLADET that he is sticking to what he wrote in
his article in spite of Huuse's crass answer.

"Huuse cannot have read my article properly. Besides, I am surprised at the
police inspector's almost personal attack on me," says Eauge.

"My point of view is that we must get a true description of the narcotics situ-
ation in Norway. That is the prerequisite for the best narcotics policy. And

what I did was to point out that there is an alternative picture to the one that
is presented in the mass media. That the situation probably is not so simple as
it is often represented to be.

"What I did in my article was to call attention to the research findings that
are available on the narcotics situation. That material is relatively limited,
so that it is hard to say anything certain about what the true reality is.

But on the basis of the research results that do exist I will say that it is a
distorted picture that has been presented up to now."

"Huuse insists that you are trivializing the narcotics problem with research
material that you say yourself is too poor. Is that so?"

"Trivializing is Huuse's word; I do not think it is that myself. The problem,
however, is that we have two types of data: information based on observations
by the police, parents, and others who are in contact with drug users. It is
obviously a very selective picture that they give, not a correct picture of the
actual conditions.

”0n the other side we have research results that point in a somewhat different
direction. It must therefore be permissible to present an overall picture of

the information that is available without its being called trivializing," says
research chief Ragnar Hauge.

8815
050: 5300/2269

51
POLICE nmcorrcs mss'rmu'm list-Hons IBBATED
Stockholm 7 DAGAR in Swedish 3 Her 82 pp 1k?
[Krticle by Hats Gezelius: ”Suddenly rougher lethods were neededj

[Fears] "Isn't it time to stop for a moment and reﬂect? It can't very well go
on like this."

The debate about the new working methods of the police flared up after a report
that former drug criainals are used as police agents. after the discovery that
without any actual discussion we are in the process of getting a society in .
which the police may break into suspects' homes and plant hidden microphones.
at the prospect that the police authority. in order to hunt damLcoaoealed .
criminal activity, is allowed to'subjectlarge poups of people--in no way sus-

pected of criae--to inquisitive scrutiny and extensive investigation of finan-
ces and social relationships ....

The case of Fleeing Bro-an, in which the police are using a forner drug crisi-
nal to catch a major drug dealer. raised the question of how far the police
should be allowed to go in order to apprehend. by provocation and infiltration.
a few "drug kings." who very quickly will be replaced by new kings.

The Bronan case also focused a great deal of interest on the proposal for "sec—
ret eavesdropping etc.“ which was subaitted more than 3 months ago and which
so far has nostly been discussed by the nation's lawyers. The Couittee on
Coercive Heasures. which subaitted the proposal. is of the opinion that the

police arsenal should be increased by concealed microphones and television can-
em.

The Duty to Increase Protection

The Committee on Coercive Measures was appointed in 1W8 by the then minister
of justice. Sven Ronanus.

At that tine, no lore than it years ago. even the discussion on any expansion of
the investigative capability of the police was not of current interest. On the
contrary, the couittee's foreaost task was to increase the individual's pro-
tection against the use of excessive authority.

52
At the sane tine a study was underway at the National Police Board aiud at
finding ways for the police to get at what they call nodern. as opposed to tra-
ditional. crine.

Breakirg and entering. robbery. under and fraud ained at an individual person
or conpany are exaaples of traditional crine which the police use traditional
nethods to clear up-or even sore con-only. when the perpetrator is W'-
to shelveeeee

Spanark and Spanek

Along the nodern crises are narcotics crises. financial crises. environnental
crises and other fans of organised orine. Typical of these crimes is that they
often affect large groups. which either have no interest in reportim the cries.
such as the drug addicts on the street. or discover the crise when it is too
late and they have already experienced aftereffects of the discharge into the
air. or are too nuserom to be affected individually. such as the taxpayers.

A nunber of working groups were appointed under the leadership of Esbjorn
Bsbjornsson--section chief at the National Police Boarduand with Rational Orin-
inal Police conissioner Tony 1.1th as secretary. along then the Spsnek and

Spanark groups.

The Spanek report. which dealt with financial crises. was conpleted in 1979. A
central conclusion was that investigation nust begin at a considerably earlier
stage. before the banlu'uptcy. before the noney is in Switmland....

The Spanark group. which conpleted its work in June of the following year.
worked on narcotics investigation. In the report. the concept is further devel-
oped that the work or the police lust be aimed at preventing and tracing ca'ine
instead of sitting with crossed arls. waitim for a crine to be reported-“the
drug shipnent should be stepped before it arrives in Sergels Square.

This early investigation. called intelligence procedure in police language. is
conducted by a special unit of about 30 investigators at the National Crinnal
Police. Their task will be to keep an eye on "potential criainal constellations
and activities in society” and to follow up tips from the general public or from
its ”stable" of stool pigeon and infer-era.

Bro-m Case Foreseen

Systematic use of inforners with crininal contacts is one of the unconventional
lethods which Esbjornsson-Lindstron wanted to use in order to reach the hard-
core, hidden. crininal world. The Spanark report also contains discussion of
how the police. directly or through others. can infiltrate gangs and provoke
evidence. for example by purchasing a drug shipsent which the police know will
be in the possession of a smpect....

Thus. all of the elesents in the case of flesh; Bro-an. the forner drug dealer
who turned police agent. were foreseen in the report.

53
It is also in the Spanark report that the police for the first tine bring up
the need for having the capability of eavesdropping on conversations other
than telephone eonversaticm and to use hidden television eaneras to investigate

primarily drug crininals.

The Spanark: grcup subsitted its findings to the National Police Board. The
latter largely agreed with the group's conclusions and passed the report on to
ﬂakan Hinberg (Conservative). who was minister od’ Justice at the tine. at the
end of 1980.

At the beginning of 1981 Hakan Vinberg responded to the police connunication.
He stated that there are no legal obstacles for the police to provoke evidence
by purchasing drugs. which would otherwise have been sold to soneone else. Go
the other hand. he determined that the police nust not under any circmstances
perait themselves to sell drtgs in order to obtain evidence.

Coupleted in 9 honths

He left the questions of electronic eavesdropping and television surveillance
to the Committee on Coercive Heastn'es. which thus originated in order to study
the possibility of increasing the protection of the individual's integrity. He
believed that "this involves probleas sinilar to those already being deliberat-
ed” by the conlittee.

And the police, who saw the nation afloat in drugs and realised that the pres-
ent wiretapping methods were not sufficient. believed there was a need for
haste. They got the minister's support and great sympathy fron the conittee.
and not quite 9 nonths later the proposal. which will soon fen the basis for
the legislation. was ready.

If the committee gets its way. the police will be allowed to eavesdrop with the
aid of concealed microphones under the sane circunstances as telephone wire-
tapping is carried out today (see a separate article on drtg crises and tele-
phone tapping). The secret nicrophones say be used in order to bug a suspect.
provided that the crime is aggravated (carries at least a 2-year prison sen-
tence) and that the bugging could lead to acquisition by the police of inferna-
tion "of particular inportance to the investigation." which they would not be
able to obtain in any other way.

Eavesdropping Is a Double Crine

In the Instrusent of Govern-ent. the Swedish constitution. the freedoa of pri-
vacy is established. that is to say the right. along other things. to be pro-
tected from eavesdropping or concealed surveillance in the hose. Electronic
eavesdropping by means of a spy transnitter placed in the hone constitutes a
double crime against this basic principle-warty because of the basing itself.
and partly because the police nust secretly enter the hone in order to plant the
secret microphone.

"Should the police actually couit crine in order to fight crine." the critics
wonder.

56
"It is not a question of committing any crises. The idea of the new legisla-
tion is precisely to legalize this ilportant aid. so that it lay be used coa-
pletely lawfully and under control ." Bsbjorn Esbjornsson says.

Right now the bill of the Connittee on Coercive Heasures is at the Department of
Justice. Last Monday the period for subaitting Opinions expired. but several
weighty advisory bodies had not yet expressed their viewpoints, anong then the
National Police Board and the Bar Association.

Several weighty advisory bodies are critical of the proposal for secret eaves-
dropping and in any event want to limit this for use only in narcotics crises
and crises against national security. Another viewpoint repeated tlupwiout
the responses is that the legislation can be lads provisional or be put off con-
pletely until the Connission on Coercive Measures has finished its work.

BRA Critical

The police and the prosecutors. with certain exceptions. in general take a posi-
tive attitude on the possibility of the police to utilize concealed microphones
and euphasize that these must be allowed to be used during the preliminary in-
vestigation before anyone is yet "reasonably suspected” and according to the law
must be notified that he is a suspect. On the whole they are of the Opinion
that the use of electronic eavesdropping and television surveillance nust not
be surrounded by too any restrictions.

The Criue Prevention Council (BRA) is one of the voices of criticism. BRA
questions whether there is actually a need for such drastic and inlediate lea-
sures and indicates that the description by the police of the developlent Of
crine is aisleading and exaggera .

The Study on Freedom of Expression does not think it is urgent to change the
law. and the Swedish Union of Judges is of the Opinion that the proposal is an
inconplete provisional Ieasure.

th so Urgent?

"any advisory bodies and others who have consented on the proposal pose the
question of what has aade it so urgent all of a sudden to give the police their
new powers. They wonder what has happened in the last few years that caused
such drastic. a few years ago totally inconceivable. leasures to be rushed
throtgh the levels or study. sublission for Opinion and legislation.

As early as the beginning of the 1970's the police were given the opportunity or
expressim their opinion on the need for concealed electronic eavesdropping.
when the Instrunent of Govern-eat in 1975 for the first tine expressly prohib-
ited eavesdropping. the police had no objection.

"The situation was different in the beginning and niddle of the 1970's. we had
succeeded in dealing a blow to the amphetamine inport and the criainal world was
not organized in the ease way. He sinply didn't believe that we would have to
use buging.“ Esbjorn Esbjornsson says.

55
He describes the gangs of today. which are newly ilpossible for the police to
penetrate with treditionsl nethods. They often consist of foreign citisem.
often with entirely different cultural pstterns and strong family ties. These

groups are elnost inpoeeible to infiltrate. and it has turned out to be very
difficult to recruit infused-e within the group.

Those who are critical of the police strategy Isintsin thst the police are
tskingthewrongpeth. Thnttheyaretrying.whileependingmreeeonablere-
sources. tocntanedgeoffthedrugluketinsteedofettsckingitst theroot.
the any; addict‘ion the street. ”the only one who is irreplaceable in the entire
drug chain.“ to use the words of drug pmfeeeor lilo BeJerot.

ﬁn. ‘2
119w
cso. 5300/2236

56
worsens nu mac um same mass or accusssn. smccms
Stockholm News mam in Swedish 27 Her 82 p 5
[Article by Eva Ekselius]

[Tart] It was a revealing decision that will he of funduental importance.
Judges and prosecuting attorneys were in agreuaent on the decision to acquit

a Swede and a Netherlander who had been convicted of felony drug crines in both
district court and the court of appeals. The Suprene Court decision points to
shortcomings in the narcotics law as well as in the evidence itself.

In Novaber last year the district court sentenced each of the two accused non

to 3 years in prison. They were convicted of complicity in felony narcotics
crimes.

The two suspects were apprehended by police when one, the Swede, was delivering
2100.900 kronor to the other, the Netherlander. Both were known to be in
contact with persons in Holland who are believed to be involved in organised
narcotics trade. I'or this reason, it could be seamed that the money was
involved in the purchse or sale of narcotics, according to the district court.

The court of appeals was of the sane opinion and upheld the verdict of the
district court.

Now the Supraa Court has stated in its decision that it say indeed be con-
cluded that the two were involved in drug trade and that the noney was part of
this trade, but the role of the two nen in the transaction was unclear. It nay
not be ruled out that their part in the drug trade was not punishable by law.

There are nanely certain loopholes in the law. Purchasing or acquiring
narcotics is not against the law. It becones a punishable offense only when
it can be proven that the purchase led to the possession of narcotics. Also,
giving noney to soneone for narcotics that have already been delivered is not
punishable. It cannot even be called conplicity in a narcotics crime.

In this case, both nen have denied participation in any type of drug offense,

but in the opinion of the courts they were unable to give any reasonable
explamtion for the exchange of the noney.

57
Drug Money

The Supreme Court is convinced that the noney is connected to drug deals, but.
it could not rule out the possibility that the nen co-Iitted acts not covered
by the deficient narcotice legislation.

The Crime Prevention Council (BRA), in a recently published report. drew
attention to loopholes in the law and presented a proposal to alter the
legislation. The proposal is now being discussed.

It is probable that the Suprene Court chose this case to confine and illustrate
the loopholes in the law nentioned by the Crine Prevention Council.

"A person cannot be convicted simply because his-friends are unsuitable.”
This was the opinion of Goran Berner, one of the judges at the district court.
who disagreed with the najority decision and considered the evidence
insufficient.

Conviction

The prosecuting attorney could not indicate or prove what criminal act was
behind the nonetary transaction.

But the majority of the jurors were of a different opinion. They voted in
favor of conviction.

The deficiencies in narcotics laws have caused some uncertainty as to whet
acts are punishable and whet is required for a conviction. In my cases the
jurors have been sore inclined toward conviction then the president of the
court.

In this case the court of appeals upheld the najority decision in the district
court, but as in the Riganakos case the courts have now stressed the inportance
of a narrow interpretation.

Inger Nystroe, director of the Chief State Prosecutor's Office, represented
the state at the Supreme Court.

"An entruely revealing decision," she said. "A positive review of the
current legal situation."

Our present law fails to respond to the current level of cri-e, she said. The
law was written before we had organized narcotics gangs.

Insuffic ient

Our present surveillance nethoda are insufficient to produce evidence that
will hold up in court, she said, but she hopes for support free the proposal

of the Connittee on Legal Measures.

a new law plugging the loopholes would have been sufficient for a conviction in
this case, but present surveillance nethods are insufficient to break all the
links in the narcotics chain and convict all those involved.

9336 58
CSO: 5300/2252
REMIONS FOR mm TAPPDIG BY POLICE 128081330
Stockholn 7 DAGAR in Swedish 3 liar 82 p 7

[Article by Class Lofsrem 'Bnging-éurromded by Secrecyﬂ

Behind the increase in the lumber of wiretappings lies the develop-eat of nar-
cotics crine. Is secret telephone tapping a threat to the right of the individ-

ual to protect his integrity or is it a. necessary weapon in the fight against
organised cries?

surround the wiretapping issue with s wall of secrecy. In 1969 s tesporery law

were suspected. The law was lisited in tine and its validity was extended for
1 year at a tine by the Riksdag. In order for the politicians to be able to
ton an opinion on the extension. the Rational Police Board was required to
furnish a. report on the amber of wiretaps and their effectiveness.

Board have the right to see the report. It contains a detailed account of all
wiretapping activity, any indictsents and verdicts of guilt.

The constitution smutees the individual the right to private integrity and
in principle prohibits "the public side”—in this case the police-4:0- secretly
eavesdropping on the citisens. However, the law allows for exceptions "only in

order to benefit purposes acceptable in a. dssocrstic society.“ The exceptions
must be approved by the hi .

59
sect the need for telephone tapping in narcotics investigations. Another pro-
visional law of 1975 Sives the police the right to tap telephones when foreign
terrorist: is suspected or in the investigation of a foreigner who is hiding in
order to avoid deportation.

With the cessation of validity of the 1969 law. the obligation of the police to
report to the govement ceased as well. Nevertheless. in the last few days.
the National Police Board sent over a report on eavesdropping cases in narcot-
ics investuadons for the second half of 1982 as well. when the requiresent to
report had ceased. ”A cleanliness require.ent."'says Tansy Lindstros. head of
the National Crininal Police.

The ment of the Police Board for using secret wiretapping and potential new
means of coercion in the future is that narcotics crises have both increased
and become more organised. The increase fro- 1929 to 1%0 in reported drug
crises-42.500 to more than 60.000—is 163 percent. The figure is med as
proof that secret wiretapping is needed.

But of the 60.000 reported crises only 1.500 resulted in prison terns. Of
these. ':00 received prison sentences exceeding 1 years and 17 persons prison
sentences exceeding 6 years. The allegation that narcotics cries is on the in-
crease presu-es that the nusber of drug addicts is growing. Henrik Thar-a re-
searcher at the Criae Prevention Council-wave to that:

"During the latter half of the 1960's the nunber out drug addicts increased
dramatically. There is no indication that the nusber has increased since then.“

To the assertion that the criminal world has becole sore organised. Than says:

"There are certainly tendencies. But the drug gangs are loosely organised and
the persons at the t0p easily replaced. He scarcely have any nai‘i‘ia. in the
foreign sense. The problea for the police is perhaps above all that the heroin
trade has been taken over by foreigners. Then Swedish stool pigeons are use-
less.”

The number of telephone taps of persons suspected of narcotics crises:

1969 28 1976 64.
1970 39 1977 122
1971 M 1978 102
1972 31‘ 1979 19?
1973 1:6 1980 220
1971‘ M 1981 2??
1975 1+2

11999

cso: 5300/2236

60
ARTICLE TRACBS ILLEGAL DRUGS wow, DBSCRIBBS WINK:
Stockholm DAGBNS METER in Swedish [5 Apr 82 p 54

[Article by Eva uselius]

[Text] Swedish narcotics criminality is not organized in any clear hier-
archy or even in any clear pattern. It consists of many people more or less
loosely or temporarily associated with each other, sometimes organized in

temporary "gangs." But the ”gangs" overlap. Dealers, couriers and whole-
salers switch gangs or work for more than one. when one disappears, another
replaces it.

Narcotics crinss are considerably less organized than the prevailing con-
cept (as presented in the mass media and elsewhere) would suggest. But they
are still considerably more organized than traditional crimes, which are

hardly organized at all.

This is connected with the fact that it does not require much capital to get
into the narcotics market, explained Dag Victor of the Justice Hinistry who
looked into narcotics crimes at the request of the Crime Prevention Council.
The mark-up--the amount a seller adds to his own purchase priceuis so big
that it quickly provides money for new purchases.

The iwortant thing is not money but contacts. The leading people in the
market are those who have the important contactso-with processors, suppliers,
couriers, wholesalers. Many of the imrmt contacts are outside the coun-
try. A large part of. all narcotics is smggled into this country.

Many gangs are ethnic, they are made up of people of the sue nationality.
Today Greek, Turkish and Swedish gangs predominate while in the past there
were Armenian, Arab and Chinese gangs, among others.

Heroin was brought in by people who had contacts in the parts of the world
where heroin is produced, explained Dag Victor. The Chinese had contacts in
the Golden Triangle (in Southeast Asia), the Armenians had contacts with
growers in Iran and Afghanistan, the Greeks, Turks and Arabs had contacts
with growers around the Mediterranean.

61
"But that does not make them any more organized than other people who know
each other," explained criminologist Leif G. H. Persson. “The person who
wants to import narcotics asks around among the people he knows when he
wants to work with others. it is no more complicated than that."

"“V .'

Holland-oTransit Area

Often it is foreigners who have contacts with growers and suppliers. The
Swedes come in at a later stage in the chain. They often have contacts in
Holland, which acts as a large transit area in the narcotics trade.

The "big" Swedes are those who have contacts that can deliver large quan-
tities of narcotics. Under them are a lot of buyers, dealers, street
pushers who buy a batch when they can find one and then redistribute it.
They seldom work under anyone, but usually operate independently. Those who
are called "kings” do not have a staff of subordinates either; they quickly
sell their imported batches to buyers who are already in the market.

At the request of the municipality of Stockholm, Ingemar Boxed and Marie
Sesser tried to chart narcotics crimes in Stockholm» A report is given at
the end of the article concerning the results of their investigations.

Amount Too High

Criminologists Leif Lenke and Hans lnroth have studied the finances of nar-
cotics crimes. They looked into claims that the narcotics traffic involved
sales of several billion kronor and soon discovered that this amount is much
too high. A more realistic estimate of narcotics sales in Stockholm would
indicate sales in the range of 30-40 million kronor.

Leif G. H. Persson referred to the unrealistic figures quoted in connection
with the amount of drugs smuggled into the country.

There are between 10,000 and lb,000 hard drugs addicts in this country
according to the state study into the extent of narcotics abuse (0N0).
According to Nils Bejerot the figure is at least 20,000. It can be assumed
that several thousand of them are heroin addicts. Since a dose of heroin
weighs 0.1-0.2 grams, 1 hectogram of heroin (diluted to 50 percent strength,
the customary practice) would be enough for lO-lS,000 doses.

"There are simply not enough drug addicts in Sweden to use up the quantity
of drugs alleged to exist here," he said.

Leif Lenke has also found that the number of importers of drugs is such that
it can be quickly felt on the market when the police crack down on a sus-
pected "big" drugs criminal. Supplies dwindle, prices rise and the number
of burglaries and thefts decline. After a few months, the vacuum is filled
and a new importer takes the place of the old one. Burglaries increase once
more, supplies of narcotics are good and prices decline.

62
This is how a typical "narcotics gang"
scribed in the mass media (diagram on
right shows how these organizations re
Ingemar Rexed and Marie Sesaer in thei

Key:

1.
2.
3.

muo‘ub
I

Bodyguard ' 9.
Drug smugglers. 10.
Narcotics king, the "spider 11.
in the web," importer 12.
Front man 13.
Driver 14.

Wholesalers

Big dealers

Small pushera and drug addicts on
the street (Sergels Square, etc.)

63

 

(the so-called Plastic Gang) is de-
the left). But the diagram on the
ally look, according to investigators
r report to the Stockholm municipality.

Narcotics importers
Agent

Supplier, Amsterdam
Supplier, Heat Germany
Supplier, Thailand
in 1982 customs agents seized 255 kg of cannabis (hashish), 7.5 kg of uphe-
tamines and 2.7 kg of heroin. According to police and customs estimates,
this is a twentieth of the narcotics illegally brought into the country.

Customs Seized 255 Kg of Cannabis

But this figure is pure guesswork. A more "systematic" or "initiated" guess
would indicate half that amount, says Leif G. V. Persson.

The police estimate means that there is enough heroin for around half a mil-
lion doses a year. An "industrious" heroin addict can consuls up to about
100 doses in a single year.

"The estimates made indicate that there are only about half that number of
heroin addicts. Their annual consumption would be closer to 20 than to 50
kilograms," he said but stressed that all estimates are uncertain.

Mafia on the Continent--Not in Sweden Yet

Here are two different versions of how a narcotics gang looksuone true and
one false. In the middle sits a narcotics king like a spider in his web,
surrounded by front men, body guards, drivers and snuggiers. Under him are
wholesalers, big dealers and street pushers. But it is not that simple. A
real gang consists of a tangled network of relationships, organized in a
loose and temporary way.

That is what Ingemar Rexed and Marie Sesser found when they reviewed a
number of cases of people convicted of serious narcotics crimes at the re-
quest of Stockholm municipality. The description above shows the so-called
Plastic Gang in the version of certain mass media and in reality.

Their review of the most serious sentences over a 10-year period showed that
the idea of the pure "financiers" is a myth. There was not one case in
which someone had simply provided the capital and then left it to others to
take care of the deal. The person who could invest the money had to super-
vise several stages: he had to check the goods, check the weight and test
the product.

He had to collect the money himself (very seldom did he have a special col-
lector), especially for drugs sold on account (payment following delivory).

"Seldom do group members make a collective effort in their activities,” say
Ingemar Rexed and Marie Sesser.

Nor is there (yet?) any Mafia. But such groups can be found on the conti-
nent and they could emerge in Sweden.

6578
C80: 5300/2272

64
CRIHES INVOLVING HARD DRUGS INCREASING PRISON VIOLENCE
Stockholm DAGENS mm in Swedish 15 Apr 82 p 5
[Article by Eva ﬁtselius]

[Text] Violence in the prisons is on the rise.

The increase has an obvious connection with crimes
involving herd drugs. That is what Claes Amilon of
the National Prisons Board said in connection with
the DAGENS NYNETER articles on a big narcotics case.

Two of the men prosecuted chose to tell the court
what they knew. They new risk reprisals for what
they said. They will be testifying in appeals
court against the other accused nen.

"Snitching” is one of the most serious crimes one can commit in the so-
called underworld. To "snitch" is to tattle or squeal. A person who does
this is called a snitch and risks being taunted, harassed, threatened and
mistreated because he has violated the unwritten code that applies outside
the law.

Telling the police what one knows about others is snitching. So is testi-
fying in a court case. At times it takes only a few words to be branded as
a snitch or squealer. Just being in court can be enough. Sometimes
punisI'nent is exacted siaply because it is rumored that someone has
snitched.

"Those with money have no trouble buying a torpedo," pointed out lawyer
Bengt H. Nilsson who defended Ronny in the big narcotics case (see DAGINS

NYHRTER 3 and lo April and subsequently). The testimony given by Ronny and
Roland made it possible to sentence several of the others involved to long

prison sentences.

Lawyer Nilsson referred to the threats expressed during the trial and to the
risk that others could act to punish Ronny and Roland even if they are
placed in different prisons from those to which others sentenced in the same
case are sent.

65
Risk of Violence and Harassment

"My client runs a constant risk of being exposed to harassment, threats and
violence in prison.

"I hope the prison system can give him some degree of security," said Bengt
H. Nilsson.

Do serious threats and violence really exist within the prison system?

"They certainly do,” said Knut Hast, institutional director of the prison in
Norrtalje.

"Just a few days ago one of our inmates was kicked in the head by three
others and injured so seriously that he had to be stitched together."

The one who is mistreated almost always refuses to say who did it.

"Showdowns" are not uncommon in prisons. But the administration can only

speculate as to the real reasons. The only thing they know for sure is that
violence does occur. The injuries cannot be concealed.

”we see them battered and bloody. But they just say they fell down the
stairs or ran into a door."

At the prison in Ostereker they are less affected by violence than is the
case at other prisons. They have a special selection of inmates through the
various drug rehabilitation projects.

"It has been a long time since we have had any violence. The prisoners do
not seem to be afraid--not as long as they are here.

"But many are afraid of what will happen when they get out," said Kjell Aka
Lindstrom who manages the Osteraker institution.

"There is an increase of violence in the prisons," said Claes Amilon,

section chief of the National Prisons Board in Norrkoping. "We know that
from experience even if we cannot back it up with statistics.

"The violence is obviously connected with crimes involving hard drugs," he
said. "Unfinished business deals and economic transactions are settled.

But there are also reprisals when someone has said too much to the police or
the court."

Is this serious violence?

"There are no fatalities, this is a question of things as serious as broken
jaws and ribs getting kicked in," Claes Amilon replied.
1he prison system has limited opportunities to provide inmates with the pro-
tection to which they should be entitled.

In practice, the only possibility is to give an innate voluntary isolation
when he requests it.

There are roughly a hundred such cells in the prison system and they are
almost always occupied.

The National Prisons Board has also linked the need to protect certain
criminals from others with the need for ssi’er prisons for those involved in
crimes relsted to herd narcotics. So the violence of hardened criminals
against other prisoners could lead to an even stricter security system being
built up around these criminals.

6578
050: 5300/2272

67
BRI BPS

DUTCH mmmua SHJGGLBB SMBNCED-Jhe Dutch truck driver who snuggled

102 kg of amphetamine: into Sweden in February has been sentenced in Stock-
holm District Court to 9 years in jail for serious narcotics crines and
goods mggling. He admitted having mggled in 50 kg of amphetamines pre-
viously in addition to the (02 kg. After serving his sentence the man will
be permanently expelled from the country. The nan was arrested on 16 Feb-
ruary outside Perstorp in Shane. The national criminal police and the
hassleholn police had been tipped off that a large narcotics shipnent was on
the way from Holland to Sweden and they waited at the ferrﬁ to Trelleborg.
[mu] [Stockholm moms man in Swedish 15 Apr 82 p 1 6578

GANG SHIBGLED RM! OPIlH--After a 1-year investigation the narcotics £83100 in
Vaxjo uncovered a gang which traded with raw opiua. Last Thursday. grams
of raw opium. worth 100,000 crowns. were confiscated in a car that arrived at
the customs station in Helsingborg. The Vaxjo police had notified the oustoea
and police authorities in lalao and Helsingborg that the car was about to en-
ter. It cane from southern Yugoalavia. "The drugs were hidden in a hollow
part of one of the fenders. The hole had been sprayed over with undercoating
coepound." the narcotics police said in Vaxjo. Five neabers of the gang were
taken into custody. and applications for the detention of three have been filed.

The Vaxjo lice suspect that the gang has been operating 1’ several years.
59x37 ﬁend-1 SVBISKA vacuum in Swedish u har 82 p 119'»

cso: 5300/2236 m)

68