FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10507

11 May 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 29/82]

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NI OFHGAL US! ONLY
m

ms publications contain informtion prinrily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sunrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nenes Preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. “times within itsns are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Govern-eat.

OOPY'RICBI' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERRING MRI? OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED 1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HEST EUROPE REPORT

(rouo 29/82)

CONTENTS

Hm! mums

FRANCE

Study Views Community Role in ﬁery Policy, mtlook
(Bernard .Bonrgeois; mam mm: FORTI DI mu,

“0 15’ 1981) 00.000.00.000...O0....OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIII..O

POLITICAL

WRKBY

Lack of Inpartiality in Dealing With Turkey necried
('Isam 'Abd al-‘Aaiz; All-KATA“ AIr-‘ABABI, 19-25 Mar 82).

MILITARY

FRANCE

Light Amy Plane Adapts to New Antiaircraft weapons Abroad
(Jacques Lazaro; mus D'AUJOURD'HUI, Her 82) .........

Briefs
New Voice Control System
Armed Services Manpower

GENERAL

MOE

Photo of Ariane Solid Propellant Booster Released
(AIR ET m, 10 Aw 82) IO.I...IIOOICUOIOCOOOOOOOOOO.

-a- [III-WB-IS

m 0W" llSI-‘ﬂNlV
STUD! VIWS 60““le ROLE IN BERG! POLICY, cum
Milan ECGIOKIA BELLE mm DI ENERGIA in French “0 15 1981 pp 37-62

[\rticle by Bernard Bourgeois, of the Economic and Legal Institute of Energy,
National Scientific Research Center, University of Grenoble: "mergy Policy in
France: What are the Prospects for Regions and Local Comunities?j_'/

[Texy Since the mid 1970's French energy policy has aimed at reducing the part
of petroleum in primary energy supply through rapid development of nuclear en-
ergy, and secondarily through measures for energy economy and diversified use
of alternate sources.

This entire policy was decided on and implemented in a very centralized and
authoritarian manner under the direction of the Ministry of Industry, Electri-
cite de France, and the Comnissariat for Atomic Energy y.

In that context local communities (regions, departments, and municipalities)
did not have a large role to play. Host of them, moreover, did not claim it,
for at least two reasons.

In contrast to the situation in Italy or Germany, local communities in France
have remained very weak vis-a-vis the central authorities. The region, as a
recent creation, does not yet have real powers. The department is above all a
relay for central administrations.

Theoretically, the communes have real powers, but they seldom make use of all
those conferred on them by law, for lack of financial resources and technical
expertise, particularly in the case of the numerous and quite small rural com-
munities. Those institutional weaknesses do not, however, mean that local

leaders are without political power, as we shall see later.

The second reason is more directly linked to energy problems. As in most coun-.
tries of the world, municipalities played a role, at the end of the 19th and in
the early 20th century, in creating and developing gas and electricity distri-
bution systems. But that role was never as extensive as it was elsewhere, and
particularly in Germany. After the nationalization of 1946, municipalities
kept control of only 250 gas and electricity utilities affeoting.3,0CO communes
and approximately l+,OOC,OOO inhabitants _2/.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Why then is there discussion in France today concerning the role of local com-
munities in the definition and execution of energy policﬂ Independently of
institutional changes now underway 1/, two groups of factors contribute to it:

Firstly, social factors: the new aspirations expressed by the ecological move-
ment, the rebirth of associative life, and the development of regionalism have
compelled major traditional decision nukers to seek the approval, or at least
the neutrality, of local commities concerned by establishment of large ener-
gy installations. In consequence the latter have begun to express their inter-
est in energy problems, particularly by examining possible local alternatives
to certain national choices;

Secondly, technical and economic factors: even though energy saving has not up
till now been the priority objective of French energy policy, the central au-
thorities have understood the role which could be played by certain local ini—
tiatives. Primarily because local commmities are energy consumers which could
economize by appropriate measuics.

Secondly—and this is probably more importantubecause local communities, by
_ their impact on housing and transportation, and on industrial installations,
influence energy consumption by all users. It is thus important that they
should take into account the energy impact of their local policies.

Finally, local communities are better able than major energy companies, or the
state, to develop dispersed energy resources, particularly insofar as their
development requires better adaptation between resources and consumers. To
that end, it is indeed desirable to take account of existing complementary re-
lationships between energy resource-networks suited to collective development
and those suited to individual development. This necessary complementary re-
lationship appears, for example, in the heliogeothermal projects, or in the
potential effects of ground water cooling which would result from massive de-
velopment of heat pumps using ground water as a heat source. To spell out
these factors which militate in favor of active local community participation
in development and implementation of energy policy is not to suggest that the
modes of such participation are simple.

or the many problems to be solved, two will be discussed in the following por-
tion of this article:

The first concerns the sphere of local community action. Examination of this
problem is not complete, for that would imply in particular an evaluation of
energy resources under the direct or indirect control of local communities

which could be integrated into the French energy account by the year 2000 3/;

The second relates: to the mode of local community action, which must remain
compatible with national energy policy. If we wish to avoid duplication and
waste of investments, it is indispensable to define the logic which will gov-
ern arbitration between central and local actions.

I

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1. Evaluation of Regional Energy Supply and Demand Prospects in France by ZOCO

1.1 Introduction: Scope of the Study

Here will be presented a brief summary ﬁ/ of the study made by the IFJE_for
DATAR [Belegation in Charge of National Development and Regional Actiogh The -

and long term energy supply and demand. In order that they may be compared

with one another and situated in relation to national prospects, these regional
projections are expressed in the form of energy accounts whose construction as-
sumes the definition of a number of strong trends; some are nude explicit in

the scenario, as for mple regional differentiation, modes of economic growth,
assumptions concerning the evolution of the international environment and ener-
gy prices; while others have an implicit "rationality," as for maple the pol-
icies of local connuunities, and the behavior of consumers, and this rationality

is assumed to be coherent with the hypotheses of the scenarios.

Projection of these regional energy accounts is accomplished with the aid of
three contrasted economic and energy scenarios.

The time frame is set between the limits of 1975, the last base year common to
the energy_statistics of cm [expansion unknonﬂ and the economic statistics

of INSEE [National Institute for Economic Statistics and Studiey, and 2000,
the conventional reference horizon for studies of this kind.

The regional division represents a compromise between a level of detail suffi-
cient to be pertinent in an approach designed to be regional, and a minimum

level of consolidation, allowance being made for limitations on access to in-
formation and treatment of data.

In practice, the division could only be into a whole multiple of program regions.
The choice fell on a 9-region division.

Associated with those economic scenarios are energy scenarios having the follow-
ing characteristics:

Scenario I (least probable of the three): As is the case in the rest of the

economy, energy policy consists of allowing the international market to deter-
mine short term adaptations of the energy system;

orientations are planned and determined by the state, continued support is given
to the electro-nuclear program;

3
m orncm. 'an 01m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scenario III: Within the framework of an imperative energy plan, choices are
made with the aim of promoting a high level of energy saving and mobilization
of local resources.

1.2 Supply-Demand Equation and Forecasting Methodology
1.2.1 Supply-Demand Equation

By definition, construction of an energy account aims at providing a supply-
demnd balance for a given geographical area and time span. This balance can
generally be attained in various ways:

According to the level and structure of demand, whose determinants are set by
socio-economic conditions;

According to the supply_system in effect, which is characterized by a structure
of available resources, and by particular conditions of adjustment relating
each of those resources to the various demand categories.

In practice, the supply-demand balance is obtained either in its entirety or
for the few mjor demand sectors, without introduction of the concrete condi-
tions of adjustment between the characteristics of supplies and those of de-
nand. The method adopted here, on the contrary, permits those conditions of
adjustment to be specified and verified by starting from relatively disintegra-
ted geographical levels, and then progressing step by step to the regional and
national echelons.

Supply-demand adjustment is attained in accordance with three criteria: the
time frame, the spatial localization, and the thermodynamic level.

For the first criterion, the accounts constructed here follow the standards ap-
plied to conventional accounts: that is, an accounting system founded on an an-
nual base and detached from particular constraints linked to energy storage.
For the second criterion, the level of disintegration is minimally that of the
DAM [belegetion for National Development and Regional Actiog/ region. In
fact, finer adjustments are attained for supply-demnd pairs concerning types
of energy not easily transportable, such as those supplying urban heating sys-
tems; or, more simply, coherence tests are nude for dispersed forms of energy,
such as biomss, which would necessitate adjustments at an excessively detailed
level.

It is for the third criterion that the dispersal effort is carried farthest.
Indeed, one objective of the study is to determine the best possible contribu-
tion from local forms of energy. Since these are often ‘of lower thermodynamic
quality, and therefore less polyvalent, than conventional forms of energy, it
is necessary to estimte their potential penetration into usages requiring cor-
responding quality. The methodological steps in construction of accounts, first
at the regional and then at the national level, are expressly defined to permit
such adjustment. They consist initially of projecting demand by breakdown ac-
cording to forms of energy, economic sectors, and usages, and then-examining a
few categories of supply which correspond to it, in relation to preceding cri-
teria, and allowing for priority allocation of certain force of energy to cer-
tain “5889‘. ’4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.3.2 Categories of Demand

Demand is evaluated in terms-of five major sectors: residential-tertiary, indus-
trial (with a breakdown into intermediate goods, capital goods, consumer goods,
and agricultural-foodstuffs), transportation, agriculture, and construction.

In addition, three usage groups are distinguished, which themselves may possi~
bly be subdivided within sectors other than agriculture and construction: heat-

ing, mobile motive power, and specific uses of electricity.

Except for the last two sectors, for which energy demand not broken down by use
was evaluated directly in its final form, demand was evaluated beforehand in
terms of useful energy for each use category in the other sectors. This dis-
tinction between useful energy and final energy on the one hand permits better
determination of the place of non-commercial energies whose conditions of ad-
justment are more constraining, and whose contribution is more easily defined
in terms of useful energy, since the final energy equivalent in fact results
from conventions, and secondly makes it possible to highlight the importance
of performance in use in assessing energy consumption.

Those use performances themselves vary, for a given use, with forms of energy
utilized. To the extent that those forms of energy can be substituted for
certain uses, final energy demand is conditioned by the structure of the sup—
ply. Hence it was evaluated, after various prior iterations, on the basis of
the formulation proposed in the Medea simulation model.

Table 3 summarizes the major use categories mentioned, by sector and in rela-
tion to major physical categories of supply: fuels, hydrocarbons, electricity,
and new energy forms.

1.2.3 Categories of Supply

Physical categories of supply group energy forms according to their thermodyna-
mic characteristics and use limitations for different types of use. Those dis-
tinctions permit verification of conditions of thermodynamic adjustment between
supply and demand. Energy supply, moreover, is spread according to three geo-
graphic levels so as to bring out more explicitly the contribution of local
energy resources or, conversely, the extent of dependence on outside sources.
From that standpoint:

Local energy includes all forms whose primary origin is local, or whose local
application permits reduction of the proportion of imported energy;

National energy includes those forms whose transformation is not linked to
strict local limitations such as thermal electricity, conventional or nuclear;

Imported energy includes fuels of outside origin.

related to several levels:

Non-imported fuels are assigned entirely to the local-regional level, owing to
the preponderance of coal, which is ill-adapted to long-distance transportation;

5
ma orncm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among new energy sources, heat pumps are assigned to the local level, despite
the need to supply them with electricity or conventional fun1 a. They are in
fact accounted for under the heading of new energy only bees-us:1 of the portion
of heat they preempt from the natural environment (water, air, soil).

The means of electricity production are considered almost entirely in-nationsl
toms owing to their connected network. Nevertheless, hydraulics, combined
production, and cogeneration are placed with local energy sources, because of
the nature of the primary resource in the case of the former, and because of
the practical modalities of utilization in the case of the latter.

Other techniques of use or production of new energy forms could have been con-
sidered, but it appeared more realistic to consider only proven technologies,

or those which could become so fairly rapidly, and which present no major un-
certainties.

1.2.l+ Supply Projections and Settling of Accounts

The various distinctions considered, both on the supply and the demand side,
permit verification of the conditions of adjustment between those two components,
from the spatial viewpoint (thanks to the regional or subregionsl divisions) as
well as from the thermodynamic viewpoint (thanks to the spread introduced into
the uses and forms of energy).

Complete determination of supply, in both its volume and structure, does, how-
ever, assume definition of priorities between local, national, and imported
energy sources, the ulterior arbitration between energy forms within each ca-
tegory depending on technical and economic considerations. By design, and in
conformity with the overall logic of the three scenarios, we opt in the third
scenario for vigorous penetration of local energy forms, and we agree to assign
to the first two rates of penetration fixed respectively at 25 and 50 percent
of the rates obtained ex-post-facto for scenario III. Once the contribution of
those energy forms is determined, the supply-demand balance is met by national
and imported energy sources. That operation bears partly on fuels and hydro-
carbons, and partly on electricity. The account for new energy forms is set-
tled by definition, since demand is considered only to the extent that it can
be. met by available supplies.

Details of these calculations are explained in the document "Energy and Regions."
Therein will be found the overall hypotheses concerning the contribution by lo-
cal energy forms, as well as the rules adopted to balance the fuels and hydro-
carbons account and the electricity account.

Herein are mentioned only those hypotheses and arbitrations intended to evalu-
ate contriuutions potentially admissible by new energy "forms within the content
of scenario III. ~

Heliothermy. Solar energy is under development in the domestic, tertiary, and
industrial sectors. It covers over 50 percent of heating needs for new cons-
truction. ‘

6
m onrcm. use on?
Biomass. The potential of biomass is estinnted on the basis of agricultural
wastes, animal and vegetable, which are not re-usable for other economic pur-
poses or not needed for soil reconstitution. For lac! of timely access to the
results of the National Forest Inventory, we were unable to include in the bio-
mass potential that of firewood. The existing government objective is to at-

tain 5.5 Htep [million tons equivalent petroleuy by 1990 (3 “tap in 1980).

Urban wastes. Only those from urban centers of over 50,000 population are
considered.

Geothermy. Its use is reserved for cities of over 20,000 population which a:-
ceed a given threshhold of heat consumption. A 25 percent shortfall must be

undo up, of which half is to be provided by heat pumps and half by conventional
fuels 2/.

Industrial heat wastes. Allowance is made for limitations restricting use to
within 10 km from location of wastes, and for the need to adjust supply to sea-
sonal variations in depand 5‘].

Heat pumps. It is accepted that 30 percent of new housing tome built in 1975-
2000 are to be equipped with heat pumps, and their competitiveness is being en-
hanced in cold climate areas.

The estimate of penetration levels for those forms of energy takes account of
many factors such as the evaluation of regional potentials, the rapidity of
maturation of technologies applied, the influence of social and institutional
conditions, the evolution of production costs, etc. Uncertainties concerning
those factors lead to certain arbitrations adopted to the detriment of certain
forms of energy owing to lack of data on existing potential or on time require-
ments for technological maturation. To offset those exclusions, penetration
hypotheses for forms of energy considered are formulated from a clearly volun-
tarist perspective. Compatibility of penetration rates in regions where new
forms of energy represent a considerable proportion is tested indirectly by
insuring, for example, that the volume of new energy forms intended for new
housing does not exceed the possibilities opened in each region by new cons-
truction. ~

1.3 Regional Results of Energy Supply and Demand Projections to 1985 and 2000

For information purposes, final energy accounts for France to 2000, in the
three scenarios, are given in the Appendix.

In Chart 2 will be found the portion for each form of energy in final uses for
each region for Scenario III to the 200C hor' zen.

1.3.1 Analysis of Regional Results

In 2000, final consumption as derived from Scenario I is superior, for all re-
gions, to that resulting from Scenario II, with the exception of the East and
Southwest. For the former must be noted the determination to safeguard, within-
the "national rebirth" scenario, such strategic sectors as steelmaking, and for

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the latter the will to apply a more vigorous policy of industrial employment
creation. With Scenario 1, two regions make rapid progress: the Paris Basin
and the Rhone-Alpes, as a consequence of polarization of economic activities
in two regions already endowed in 1975 with good infrastructures. For Scenario
II, classification of regions according to the growth rate of final demand from
1975 to 206C is shown in Table 5.

It appears that regions with the most sustained growth rate are in general those
which retain a high level of industrial employment or which benefit from prior-
ity development.

with Scenario III the change is complete. For many regions, the 2000 level of-
ten eotceeds the 1985 levels by only a few points (Paris Basin, North, t,
Rhone-Alpes), and the Paris region even declines from 1985, owing essentially
to population stagnation. Only three regions (Heat, Southwest, and Hassif Cen-
tral) record an appreciable rise, and they are the very ones for which economic
development hypotheses are strongest. Reference to the chart will show that
those are the three regions in which the projection interval for 2000 is the
narrowest. The "new growth" in Scenario III here gives results approximate in
form to those for "pure liberalism" considered in Scenario I. Actually, that
- equivalence results from two evolutions which broadly offset each other: sup-
port for economic development and energy conservation in the one case, and in
the other stagnation of development and of energy conservation for lack of pub-
lic encouragement. For all other regions, and especially the Paris Region and
Paris Basin, the spread in projections between Scenarios I, II, and III is more
pronounced. There is no compensation of those two opposed orientations, but on
the contrary an amplification of the socio-economic hypotheses by the energy
hypotheses, an indication of the degree of that amplification being already ap-
parent in the distance separating I and II, which is small for the North and
East, greater for the Paris Basin, Rhone-Alpes, and Mediterranean, and consider-
able for the Paris Region.

The repercussions of the various national development policies are clear, but of
varied density. They are clear in the sense that economic development projects

lead to a rise in total energy consumption resulting from population increase
through an outside influx into the region or maintenance of the local popula-
tion level. That is a rather natural conclusion, and one which has been brought

out by many studies of relationships between energy, gross domestic product,
and employment.

But overall, for all regions, the "reinforced polarization" of Scenario I is ac-
companied by an ever greater levy by favored regions on national consumption.
The "loose polarization" of Scenario II attenuates the most marked effects of
that tendency. Only a policy of decentralization (Scenario 111) permits resto-
ration of a certain balance between eastern and western regions of the country

2/.

1.3.2 Contribution of New Forms of Margy to Regional Supplies

Construction of supply scenarios has taken account of the doubly favored char-
acter of local and regional energy sources arising from their contribution to

8
FOR onrcm. use om:
national energy independence and from their marked links to regional space. In
addition to thei' contribution to the supply of France as a whole, their part

in supplying the various regions should be appreciated.

The contribution of conventional fuels of regional origin will be very limited
in the 2000 horizon, and will be almost entirely attributable to two regions
alone, the East and Southwest. As for hydroelectricity, the major hydroelectric
regions (East, Rhone-Alpes, Mediterranean, and Southwest) will maintain their
predominance by concentrating in their territory nearly 90 percent of produc-
tion. The rise in regiOnal energy production will in fact relate mostly to new
forms of energy.

The contribution of new energy forms in 2000 for all regions steps from 4.0 Mtep
to 9.? Mtep to 18.9 Htep according to the three scenarios. Those different lev-
els correspond to 25 and 50 percent reductions of the contribution in 2000 (III)
of most of those energy forms, in accordance with the hypothesis adopted at the
outset of supply scenario censtruction. That reference to the third scenario
permits the conclusions set forth to be limited to that single case. In Table
6 will be found projections relating to the penetration of each new form of en-
ergy in each region.

The regional distribution of new energy forms proves rather homogeneous, and in-
validates the idea of favored regions. Host of them attain by 2000 a level of
10 percent of the potential set at the national level. Though the Paris Basin
exceeds tnat threshhold because it totals a quarter of the national contribu-
tion, and though the Massif Central, on the contrary, brings but a relatively
modest contribution, those distortions in relation to the average are due in
large part to conventions adopted at the outset of regional division.

Solar energy, urban wastes, and heat pumps are distributed regionally in a man-
ner very close to that of new energy forms as a whole. For solar energy, which
is in first place in S of 9 regions, we find that is a consequence of the fact
that this form of energy is valued almost homogeneously according to region for
heating uses, by reason of the compensation between length of heating season
and sunlight intensity. Volumes of urban wastes are themselves directly linked
to the size of urban populations in the regions. Finally, penetration of heat
pumps is linked to the rate of new construction, except in regions of mild cli-
mate such as the Mediterranean and southwest, where their competitiveness is
less assured. For that reason, this source of energy is not expected to attain
quite as homogeneous a distribution as the two preceding ones.

On the other hand, the three other energy sources of biomass, geothermy, and
industrial heat wastes have a very unbalanced distribution, and their develop-
ment possibilities at the present stage of technology are limited to a few fa-

vored regions.

Biomass is concentrated in a proportion of 72 percent in three regions: the
Paris Basin, West, and So thwest. That regional concentration is in fact rela-
ted to a double specialization: combustion of grain straw in the Rarie Basin
(#0 percent of the national contribution), and methanization of animal wastes

in the Heat, with the Southwest combining the"two equally. As for wood, its
contribution has not been possible to estimate, for lack of reliable regional
data at the time of the study. 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Geothermal energy plays a significant role only in the Paris Region, the Paris
Basin, and the East, owing to localization of sources and urban centers. Devel-
opment of mid-depth geothermal sources could, it is true, contribute in the fu-
ture to spreading this resource over a broader span of regions, by taking ad-
vantage of combined use with heat pumps to raise the temperature level of sour-
ces concerned. .

Industrial heat wastes recoverable in significant quantities are for the most
part localized in three regions: Paris Basin, East, and Mediterranean.

2. Logic of Local Commity Action in the Energy Field

Although the "families" of actions can in practice have elements of similarity,
the following discussion will present them in terms of two dominant logical
principles:

1. Logic (1), or "buffer-relay" logic;
2. Logic (2), or logic of local or regional initiative.

The content of these two logical principles is made explicit in what follows
by a comparison of their effects on:

1. Motives for action which the local community accepts or hopes to take in
charge;

2. Local modalities of action;

3. Modalities of linking actions in the energy field to other components of
comunal or departmental concern;

1+. Hcdalities of linking local actions to those at other levels.

Though the examples given in the balance of this section primarily concern
large urban comunities, the particulars given remain valid, subject to trans-
position and adaptation, for smaller urban or for rural communities.

2.1 Motives for Action which the Local Comunity Accepts or Hopes to Take in
Charge

It is assumes" here that throughout the whole range of possible urban community
action in the energy field, application of logical principles 1 or 2 woald
lead to a different selection of actions.

Under logical principle 1 the community is limitedneven confined—in its range
of action, either because it considers it need not intervene where specialised
private agencies are able to act, or because it relies on the competence of
energy producing organizations or of the National Agency for Energy Conserva—
tion. This desire or obligation to accept limitation does not mean that the
comunity refuses to accept a role in informing the "dispersed clientele," for
example, on energy conservation, or in fostering relationships between the dif-

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ferent occupational groups concerned in such investment; but that role is limi-
ted to relaying informtion produced by institutions having national impact,
such as those mentioned above.

Under logic 2, communities can progressively consent to take their own action
in certain cases, or--while retaining control--to delegate responsibility to
specialized agencies. In addition, they may be led to provide "autonomous" in-
formation on subjects traditionally recognized as within the competence of en-
ergy producers. This paeticularity may be linked to the fact that within the
context of this logic 2 cotmuunities seek to develop their potential energy re-
sources systematically 1_0/, and to advise users as to choices of one or several
energy forms, local or national. In that spirit the comunity can, with the
backing of consumers' associations, constitute a neutral reference point in re-
lation to technical or comercial pressures by energy producers. This can go
so far as acceptinguunofficiallyuto provide its good offices in the event of
sharp conflicts between groups of private persons and energy producers or pro-
cessors.

Under logic 1, where that sort of conflict can also occur, the comnity inter-
venes only under the compulsion of an urgent situation, without real negotiating
power vis-a-vis energy companies, and so with an implicit role of "buffer" be-
tween "partners."

Thus the differences here relate not only to the relative scopes for action,
but also to the content of information imparted to the public; which content
can range from simple reproduction of standards developed elsewhere to adapta-
tion, or even modification of those standards, according to the objectives
being sought.

In logic 2, local communities intervene either to counter or modify national
energy policy in relation to other overall choices. or to obtain consideration
of specific local factors (heterogeneity of space and facilities).

2.2 Modalities of Action

We have just seen that logic 2 would rather tend to provide the community with
partially autonomous _1_1/ means of technical expertise, whereas in logic 1 the
community seeks rather to deflect requests for action to local or national eac-
perts independent of its influence.

From the legal standpoint, the more interventionist tendency of logic 2 could
lead communities to commit themselves more directly to responsibility for man-
agement of local public services; thus modes of direct management by a public
corporation, or a mixed company under predominantly local control will be pre-
ferred to contractual or concession system, which are more in keeping with the
spirit of logic 1.

From the financial standpoint, coauunities may within the terms of logic 2, in
order to permit sufficient coverage of the financial risk entailed by develop-
ment of certain local resources, go so far as to set up agencies for compensa-
tion of those risks, which would play a self-insuring role with the backing of

11
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

other local communities facing the same problem. In like manner, subsidies in
addition to those of national agencies my be initiated to co-finance all oper-
ations considered as "demonstrations" in the community. But in this field bud-
gets will never be large insofar as financial repercussions (reduction of for-
eign exchange outgo) hardly favor the community budget.

Indeed, if logic 2 leads comunities to provide themselves with means of finan-
cing complementing those used in logic 1 (Deposit Fund, Sofergies, All: [Energy
Economy Agency subsidies), their motivation must be other than a "frantic will
to interventionism in energy matters" in all directions.

2.3 Modalities of Linking Actions in the Energy Field with Management Policies
for Other Urban Services

If logic 2 leads the commnity to promote a policy of intensive development of
public transportation facilities, this normally has positive effects on energy
consumption 3/. But the realities of community financial management compel
those economies, despite the considerable increases in energy costs, as negli-
gible in the light of the inevitable operating deficits nornmlly incurred by
development of public transportation capacity. If such deficits are accepted,
that is more fundamentally because they are the counterpart of social policy
objectives relating to mobility of persons of low income. In like manner, if
communities consent to intervene in operations to insulate public housing units,
the energy conservation aspect is but secondary compared to that of reduced
heating costs to tenants in those housing units.

Despite the possible existence of "pilot-alibi" experiments by coauunities,
logic 1 would likely lead them to confine their‘action to management to prevent
overcrowding of subsoil between development of energy systems centralized in
the community, and development of other properly municipal systems such as wa-
ter and sewers.

In logic 2, that obligation to harmonize development constraints affecting
energy distribution and municipal utilities system'would more likely find a
corresponding determination to integrate in the Poe (subsoil use'plan) an ener—
gy use plan indicating zone allocations for particular forms of energy, such
allocations being defined in conformity with development-projects for local
energy resources.

2.1; Modalities of Linkage to Regional and National Echelons

In logic 1, linkage should normally be limited to regionalination of national
objectives for energy diversification or conservation. Urban or rural comuni-
ties are indispensable partners, but they only accompany energy programs adop-
ted at anothef level and from a perspective foreign to the cousunity spirit;
which is not to say, however, that this strategy proves ineffective in terms
of results obtained.

By contrast, logic 2 would lead comunities progressively to define local ener-
by programs, whose broad lines would be negotiated at least in part at a region-
al echelon, if risks of incoherence with plans of centralized producers should

12
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
appear. In this donnin, ad hoc regional exchanges would have the role of set-
tling conflicts between development of networks in certain sensitive zones in
which development of local energy resources depended on protective measures.

Such a mechanical, moreover, is proposed in the law on energy conservation and '

heat networks, but in that law the authority to arbitrate as to classification
of networks is finally vested in the state.

3. Conclusions

It must be recalled here that utilization of these two logical principles of
action deliberately simplifies the range of actions open to local comuni’cies
in practice. It is quite possible that in actuality, concrete situations
could be intermediate between these two extremes, and present characteristics
related to both logical principles presented.

It is tempting to seek to cross these two logical principles with possible re-
lationships between the state and local communities.

The types of situations which would result can be sketched es in Table 7.

In the balance of this article we shall particularly consider the groups of hy-
potheses combining on the one hand situation 1 a-the logic of buffer-relays

and centralized relationships; and secondly situation 2 b--the logic of initia-
tive and decentralized relationships.

Finally, we shall cross those two groups of hypotheses with the two following
sets of conditions:

a. A high level of energy conservation and sobilination of local energy re—
sources in France in ZOCG;

b. A moderate to low level of energy conservation and mobilization of local
energy resources, in the same space-tine frane.

In addition to differentiating the economic hypotheses explained below, which
influence the probability of occurrence of those two sets of conditions, Table
8 indicates on the one hand the choice of hypotheses adopted to define, res-
pectively, Scenarios II and III of the study; and secondly the existence of
indeterminate factors affecting the Judgment which can be nude today on the
conditions of success of the strategy aiming at a high level of energy con-
servation and mobilization: of local energy resmrces.

That type of crossing is all the more problematical in that it combines:

Explicit technical-economic hypotheses tending to predict the chances of tech-
niques for use and production of energy at a local level, and;

Hypotheses of "isplicit regulation"-to adopt the torus used by Y. Stourdae. 13/
--which interact in the confrontation of three "actors" in a complex game: the

central administration and its local secular arm, the local leading citizen,
and the technician/industrialist.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"For over a century a curious contest has opposed the leading citizen to the
technician, a contest played out in several rounds with interminable prolonga-
ticns. Its recurrences are strange md a‘ts rules intangible, the idea being
roughly as follows: the technician can have no real hope of entering into the
local universe withOut showing the velvet glove, for any incursion into it is
subject to negotiation. At the border of the local world, technology, if it
wishes to penetrate inside, will have to accept control. ilhence a complex
game of interrelations at the local level between notables and technicians,

whenze the particular form assumed there by technology." Stourdze, op. cit.,
p. 1 2.

Thus if, as Stourdze further states, "it is through differentiation that the
local echelon pretends to assum its difference and its responsibilities," the
strategy for a high level of energy conservation and mobilization of local re-
sources under the inpulsion of a centralizing state, through the relaying ac-
tion of local communities, appears to constitute a situation of unstable or
temporary balance, insofar as acceptance by local authorities of that program
implies a transition from the logic of buffer-relay to that of initiative.

Consequently, recognition of "local specificity" is necessary at two levels in
the content of an intensive program of energy conservation and development of
local resources:

a. At the technico-economic level: the extreme differentiation of gegoraphic
and economic situations, of characteristics in the energy resource to be mobi-
lized, and of programs for therml rehabilitation of existing habitats, all
indicate thorough investigation of local realities;

b. At the level of relations between authorities: that thorough investigation
can be conducted in a uniform manner and without negotiation with local lead-
ers insofar as they are the persons ”the hold in their hands the power, tenu-
one but real, partially to disconnect the system." Stourdze, op. cit., p. 146.

Reciprocally, the risk of a strategy of energy conservation and development of
local energy resources, which would aim at decentralization by taking account

of local specificities through multiplying "technical specificitiee which seem
to be more like artificial tangles than authentic differences" is to lead ini-
tially to a costly proliferation or impossible situations, and later to a fi-

nancial deterioration of the entire program.

PM

1. when the dynamism of the Energy Conservation Agency began to thwart the
policy of promiting use of electricity for heating, particularly of hous-
ing, the agency was recalled to order and its chief was. changed.

2. Cf. ANROC Aational Assgciation of Public Service Corporations and Local

Commity Organizationg/ and may ﬁational Federation of Contracting Com-
munities and Public Corporationy.

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'+.

8.

10.
11.

12.

The decentralization bill now being debated in parliament is the first ma-
jor reform undertaken by the Left since its accession to power. @or rela-
ted article, see JPRS 80182 No 1911+ dated 25 Feb 82, pp 5-16 of this ser-

ies_./

As established by a study commissioned from the Economic and Legal Insti-
tute 03 Energy by mm @elegation for NationalDevelopment and Regional
Actiog/ and executed by B. Bourgeois, J. P. Bonaiti, and J. Cirod. Complete
results uere9gublished in "Energy and Regions: Production and Consumption

5

PZecspects, 1 -2000," MTAR Notes, La Documentation Prancaise, Paris 1980
2 pp.

This summary is derived from an article by J. P. Bonaiti, B. Bourgeois, and
J. Girod entitled: "Regional hiergy Supply and Demnd Prospects in France
to 200C." The article appeared in REVUE DB Dim-361E, No 33%, Hag 1981. I
thank the editors of that review for permission to reproduce various pas-
sages of that article.

P. Barret, F. Bas, J. F. Langumier, J. C. Huron, J. Fiona, and A. Valeyre.
"The Future: its Use or its Obsession," WTURIBIES, SCEIARIOS Pam L'AVHIR,
Paris, 1978.

'These hypotheses would normally lead to estimating geotherml heat potential

at several Htep. In point of fact this potential has been substantially re-
duced because of-an arbitration more favorable to combined production in

cities of over 50,000 population in regions of moderate climte: that is,
outside the Southwest and Mediterranean regions.

Evaluation of effluents and recoverable potential was done at by
Messrs Chauchat and Labbe. Regarding industrial cogeneraticn, it is sup-
posed that 50 percent of electricity consumption by the 5 branches: refin-
ing, woodpulp, textiles, chemistry, and agricultural-foodstuffs, is supplied
by mixed sources (gas turbines and diesel engines).

These conclusions can be extrapolated by considering the forms of energy
making up total consumption. we are thus led to assume a relatively close
link between national infrastructure development policies and levels of
electricity consumption. It indeed appears that an industrial redeployment
policy (Scenario II) particularly favors increase of such consumption, in
any case much more than that of fuels.

Whereas occasional development of those resources is admissible in logic 1.
Variable according to size of conunities and type of problem raised.
'Terverse" effects can mask these positive aspects: the considerable devel-
opment ofpublic transportation in the Paris region offers a good example

of this, insofar as it was accompanied by an equally large increase in
"mobility" of travelers.

15
ron orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. Y. Stourdze, "Variable-Geometry Authority: Deregulation," WALES DB NINE,
Feb 1981, pp 137-1166.

TAM

Table 1. Year 1980: Energy Consumption in France (Htep)
Rational total Local commit; pgrtion

 

 

Industry and agriculture 610.8 0.5
Transportation 36.1 0.5
Residential-tertiary 61 .6 15.1
Energy sector 26.1 --
Total 188.6 5.1

Source: Report by H. Ossadzov, ABE [Energy Economy Agenc17,'"Contribution by
Local Comunities and Residences to bury Conservation and Substitution of
Energies," in "Regional Conference on New mergies and Optimum Energy Use in
Local Ccmunities and Residences," 26-27 Feb 1981, Regional Council of Burgun-
dy and City of Talent.

Table 2. Major Economic Characteristics of Scenarios

 

Talia-2 “2 ‘32 $22 $42
DIM M T J:
55am ‘8 “-7:
mind"
Sch-do! Nome-n 00mm Monique +3” Nathan
. Ibex-line van-t. 1973-83 March

(5) <5) “Wuwhn (9)

ﬁne» n Relax: 1m sauna: +346 m
. m m (h I973” dance
mud“: M +35

1m
(10) (11) 3&1» (13) (11+)

 

 

 

Search!" Nanci: Au» +3” Tank.
ruin-u m d'epb. mam Illino-
bless
(15) (16) W17) (18) (19)
min
pﬂb
Key: 1. Name 6. Total opening 10. National upsurge
2. Outside exchanges 7. Electronics, glass. 11. Controlled European
3. Motivating branches building materials, integration
10. Growth rate no [57, automobile 12. Safeguard of basic
5. New liberalism 9. Reinforced polarization industries 8. capital
goods

[Rey continued on following W

m OFFICIAL 083 OIL!
Key, Table 2, continued:

1". Loose polarization 16. Self-centralization 19. Trend to haloge-
15. New growth 17. Capital goods; nintenence; neity
intermediate goods; public
services

Table 3. Principal Categories of Energy Use by Sector

74*“ ’ ( 1) (2) \ 2) ( lI»)
Comb-stiﬂe: Cabral: Bxﬂiriu‘ m

“3?: W “amt-lg.’ ”Em.
(Suﬁsm

 

 

 

(5) egg“ (6)
(7) Woven.
La queue w Uses: dlleut dnlcur ”5* dulm
man
Munich M
Tampons (8) Pete: (9) Pen:

 

 

 

Key: 1. Fuels 7. Electricity, specific uses

2. Hydrocarbons _ 8. Transportation
3. Electricity 9. Hotive power
‘0'. New energies 10. Indistinct uses
5. Residential-tertiary 11. Construction
6. Uses for heat: '

Heet‘

ms

Cooking

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Local National

 

Coal

natural gas
Hydrocarbons

 

' Hydraulic and wind Conventional
Combined urban pro- thernel and

duction nuclear
Industrial cogenera-
tion

 

Solar, biomass
Urban wastes
Geothermal
Industrial heat
wastes

Heat pulps

 

:1 Growth Rates

Region

Paris Region
Mediterranean

Massif Centre
Rhone-Alp”

Southwest
North

Paris Basin
Vest

East

18
IO! OHIOIAL USE ONLY
Table 6. Regional Contributions of New Pom of Energy in Htep, Scenario III,

 

 

 

year 2000
(1) (2). (3) (10- (5) (6)- ('7) (8)
, . a Pa: in me
.lup '3 i z (mined
i . g in ilk
a ‘ .8. h Mam
-——-——_—-—'—_——I.—-
mm or 02 o: o; 0.: o: 22 9.1
mm m u o: 0.: 05 03 so 152
M o: no 0.: — 02 oz 13 1.!
Eu _ 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 2.0 n
One: 0.1 1.2 oz — o: 0.4 2.7 m
Salons: 05 0.9 0.1 — on 02 1.9 m
New...” :3 :3 a; - r. 2.: 9-: '3‘:
main-s. 0.1 o: .02 2 oh on :31 33
“~—
Total Pm 3: 6.3 1.7 03 an 2.7 13.9 no.1
Key: 1. Solar 3. Urban mtoa 5. Industrial heat mt” 70 TOtal new
2. Biomass ‘6. Geothermal 6. Heat W ' energy

tom
8. New energy forms: percentage of final use total

Table 7. State-Local Commit: Relationships

Logic of local calamity action

in energy sector
m

a. Logic of buffer- b. Logic of

 

State-local community

 

 

' ’ iative
relationships relay nut
W
Possible Impossible

1 . Centralization

2. Decentraliaat" on Not very plausible Possible

' 19
iron orncm. use om:
Table 8 .

Scope of socio-political
hypotheses

Buffer-relay role of local

comunities, with centralization

Local comunity initiative, with

decentralization

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soda-political Hypotheses in Relation to Local Energy Programs

Local energy conservation and development

program
W

Broad

Temporary crossover
possible

Crossover possible
if program takeoff
problems solved
(Scenario III)

Narroa to moderate

Crossover possible
(Scenario II)

Crossover possible
but not very plausi-
ble

Final Energy Accounts of France, Year 2000, Scenarios I, II, and III

M d m
WHICH”

manna-nu-
Mud-warm
"team“

I”! M

”5.0 ‘9

”0““an

Gnu-alum

Mu”

m Whﬂlﬁb
lat.

Metal—n
moo-am

“on“.
I)!“ when“
1-: M

5.‘
I5

{382:3‘

7’
I”

s
b

 

athw'

 

lel
211.!

34'
In

467.3
36.7

55::

RID

 

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

M”
Mn W W‘
a0- 10, ”I! fl.
m
mall" ’91 M 2145
Wit-Tenth 3:; I) 13;:
Tm SIJ 15.4
1’0de- I‘ND 9.? SM
man-mam CI:
[Helium‘s-M I10. ”.0 361»
.———_—_—C——_‘—_
w
”maintain!“
Onion 6.!
(Bu-minim I:
this 1}
I” 31
“that. 01
w 0}
”up.” u
PAL I, 7°,
Mo“...
but“. I». u
can. in. MA
nun-mun w m M ”I
l-l M In»
new 0”
Sal-loll
Me! Win W
a.» In. M m
m \
mam 68.5 3.1 1.6.2
MT“! 11.1 ISJ I!”
W ‘ 3.! 2.0 21!
TM: ”.9 ' I65
1’de. m: I” 331)
muamaw 28.!
ntmlwu m M ’ as»
W .
whwmnm
0-.- 1A
“Mum I:
W. 55
In. 6.3
MM I5
m .5
WWW 2.0
PM. 2.7
Ina-woman- 70.1
mm.:». ”.1
0.1.“. 391
2) tumbdtcﬁd in I!» 06.0
I ‘2 cm m»
M an»
(--I mmaw-u-uaw
me ohmwumnauwm
:Mtw’ul.ﬂ.ml7m MHMMW

[Key unknowing 110537

N: OFFICIAL I183 OIL!
FOR OFFICIM USE ONLY

Key to tables, Scenarios I, II, and III:

1. Combustibles and motor fuel, Htep
2. New energy forms
3. Electricity, 'Nh‘

Left-hand column:

Consumption _:

Industry and BTP [expansion unknown?
Residential-tertiary

Agriculture

Transportation

Total final uses

Electricity transfer losses

1) Total final consumption

Availabilities: local and regional energx contribution

Coal

Natural gas and hydrocarbons

Solar

Biomass

Urban wastes

Geotheml

Industrial host wastes

Heat P‘mPB

Hydraulic and wind

Combined urban production

Industrial cogsneration

2) Total contribution, local and regional

1) and 2) Combustibles
Electricity

(1 - 2) Contribution of national or imported energies
‘Including self-production originating from combined urban and industrial
cogeneration (respectively I, II, and III: 1? Nb, 22 Tim, and 59 M).

22
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chart 2 - Forms of energy: proportion of total final energy use in each region

Cupbiqu 2 . Par! 4: (MN! lam: fungi: luv In un‘liuuan [index it rbaqu

 

"(ion
zxn.sunublu
W “I 6* x
(1) 6"
Fame
Nowell-
lam
WW (2)
ﬁnned (3)
Clrbwm (If)
unwumuu (5)
W iu'tu'vu'u'au'lu'n.a'lu'zu (5)
ni”““ﬂ)
Key:
1. Regions

2. New forms of energy

3. Electricity

#. Liquid fuels

5. Solid fuels

6. Total consumption per region in Htep

COPYRIGHT: 1982 by Fee Riviate

6145 '
cs0: 3100/39? 214

FOR OFYICIAL USE ONlY
FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLV

POLITICAL ' m

LACK OF IMPARTIALI'H m DEALING Hm! rum 0303131)
Paris AL-HATMI AIP'MI in Arﬁic No 266, 19-25 Her 82 pp 48-69
[Article by 'lsan 'Abd e1-'A112]

[Text] No and a half years after the arm coup in Turkey, the "achievenents"
of the any have becone one of the nost inortant questions under discmsion,
especially anong the various political parties in Hestern Europe. Opinions
are divided and varied. Sane say General Kman Bvren's seizure of power on

12 Septenber 1980 was a logical result of the anar:hy that reigned in the
country at that tine. Others say that all the army as achieved in Ankara

is repression and concentration on the link to Anni-lean nilitery plans to
realize a strong wish of the nen of the Pentagon in n'sshington.

In reality, the facts of the situation in Mkey today have becone a latter of
lively dispute of concern to various circles in the mm world. It is es.-
pressed in this specific question: Is it possible for an em to develop
into a safety valve capable of preventing a country fron rushing into a
whirlpool of anarchy and social and political struggles?

Supporters of the arm's experinent in turkey say that political tsrrorisn in
the country had led just before the coup to the killing of about 20 persons a
day and that the stmggles between the variOus parties nada it iQossible for
the government to remain in power. Disorders broke out at that tine in the
Kurdish areas in the southeastern part of the country and workers' strikes
spread everywhere so that industrial production fell 30 to 40 percent and
there was also total econonic disarray. Dbreover, the public debts of the
Turkish goverment were about 18 billion to cut off electricity throughout
the country for 6 hours a day in an effort to supply pressure to the oil bill
which snounted to almost a billion dollars a year. Heaxwhile. inflation was

at the rate of 96 percent a year and 16 percent of all those ﬁle to work
were menployed.

Supporters of the nilitary coup add that political terrorist operations have
decline; 98 percent, the average inflation rate is close to only 36 percent,
and the value of Turkish industrial exports in the first 9 nonths of 1981 rose
by 600 nillion dollars over what it was in the oonparshla 1980 period.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Defenders of General Kenan Bvren's experinent go on to say that it was diffi-
cult for the "National Security Council," i.e., the ruling nilitary council,
to achieve sore than that in the short period of tine that has elapsed since
the coup. Moreover, all the signs indicate that things are mving in the
right direction, especially since Turkey lived through s bloody period before
the coup.

But what do critics and opponents of the am experiunt say?

Opponents of the nilitary regine in Turkey are aiming their arrows at the
economic and political spheres in particular. As for the econonic sphere,
they say the governnnt froze wages at 36,000 Turkish liras a nonth without
taking into accent the effect on the situation of fadlies that earn the
lowest wages, especially since the standard of living of these mane: has
been falling by one-half on average annually since Evren cans to power and
adopted a policy of fornally covering up the inflation problee by taking away
part of the incone of the poor fanilies.

These opponents add that the military government deliberately ignores the
problel of rental housing and does not take into accoun. the effects of in-
flation, despite the fact that rent alone swallows up a third of the incone
of families with a limited income.

Critics of the any also point out that Turkish factories are still working
at half their capacity, despite the 66 percent annual increase in exports.
The trade deficit remains what it was before the coup (2.5 to 6.5 billion
dollars a year).

In the political sphere, opponents of the army regine say that never in all
its history has the comtry witnessed as repressive s regine as that which
followed the Septenber 1980 coup. They cite as evidence official figures
which indicate that the nunber of political prisoners in the country at the
end of last year was 26,000 awaiting trial, witn 7000 in prison and 2500 of
those "indicted" having received varying sentences.

Apart from these views, is there a neutral view on Bvren's experiment?

A correspondent of the London nuancm. mas wrote from Ankara last

18 Novenber that "peace in Turkey still rests on shifting sands. The silence
that has fallen over the country does not seen the people are satisfied.
while the aajority supports the regime, the divisions that brought Turkey to
the brink of disaster are still interacting under a thin layer of artificial
call. The political struggle is still raging as always and the older leaders
have not stopped working. Host of thee, including alpaslan Turkes who has
been detained for 16 nonths and is facing a death sentence, believe that when
the any returns to its barracks, the stage will be set to receive the. once
again.

However, European sources are not neutral.... At the present tine Europe
is unable to place its weight behind Evrend as it did in the fall of 1980.

momaatuseomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reason is that Hashington has intervened to spoil those relations between
the two parties.

Early in Decednr, the American Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinbergsr wound
up his visit to Ankara by agreeing to the fornation of a committee of Turkish
and American experts to supervise the "broadening and isprovenent of military
cooperation between the two countries." This leans Washington has definitely
decided to rely on Turkey to carry out two specific tasks:

(1) Extension of NATO activities beyond the European eons, specifically, in
the direction of the Persian Gulf region, through the creation of Aurican
nilitary bases (within the alliance fruework) in Turkey.

(2) Development of a network of medium-range nuclear missiles ained at the
Soviet Union from Turkish territory adjacent to the Soviet borders. That
angered Europe, for it means cox-sitting the continental mesbers of llA‘l‘O to
participate in American strategy in the Middle East. It also mans Bumpean
economic interests in the Middle East will be at the mercy of American policy,
aside iron the fact that this strategy" is a procation to the Soviets for
which Europe will eventually pay the price. Doesn't the old continent have
steadily increasing economic interests with the countries of the Soviet bloc?
Is it not this and this alone that will turn into a field of tactical nuclear
warfare, as Reagan said in an earlier statement last fall?

So, the dispute has begun to affect relations between Europe and Turkey, on
the one hand, and between the United States and Turkey, on the other. In

this context, General Bernard Rogers, co-Iander-in-chief of the NATO forces,
declared that nilitary aid to Turhy must be increased to between S and 6
nillion dollars to modernize the Turkish nilitary establishnnt. The Anerican
aid received by Ankara in 1980 was valued at 650 nillion dollars. It rose in
1981 to 547 nillion dollars and again in 1982 to 703 dllion dollars.

At the same time the Parlianent of Europe (21 western European countries)
postponed indefinitely its 1982 assistance to Bvren's government (600 million
dollars) while awaiting the return of denocracy to Ankara.

The fact is Europe is not criticizing the absence of denocracy in the Evren
regime, nor is the United States interested in Turkey's domestic situation
except insofar as this situation allows it to carry out its strategy in the
region.... As for the Soviets. the Alerican-Turkish military rapproachnent
was enough to impel the newspaper IZWST'IYA to accuse General Bvren's govern-
ment last January of being a "military clique interested only in suppressing
the Turkish people and increasing their poverty and deprivation."

So, there is no neutral source to deternine exactly the nature of what is go-
ing on in Turkey. All the parties involved have a direct interest, one way or

mother, in concealing aspects of what is happening there secretly and in pub-
lic.

COPYRIGHT: _ 1981 AL-HATAN AIP'ARABI.

52 16
C80 : 6606 I2 5

27
me OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
LIGHT ARMY PLANE ADAPTS TO NEW AHTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS ABROAD
Paris ARHBBS D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Mar 82 pp 30-31
[Article by Col Jacques Lazare*: "ALA? Abroad"]

[Excerpts] The increase in the number of modern antiaircraft weapons
(guns and ground-to-air missiles) henceforth forces our helicopters to
resort constantly to tactical flying, precludes the orbital firing of
weapons from the gunport, and necessitates the outfitting of aircraft
with devices aimed at masking the thermal radiation of their engines.
Furthermore, even if the presence of hostile aircraft continues to be
exceptional, the threat represented by armed helicopters makes it indis-
pensable to carry shipborne self-defense weapons today.

Implementation of the Means

There are three possibilities in this area. Two of them are conventional--
aircraft, rapid but with small carrying capabilities; and ships, which

can transport a sizable load but can move about slowly. A third alterna-
tive is more recent--the organized flight of helicopter formations.

Techniques of loading and unloading that are specific to ships and transport
planes are familiar by now to ALAT personnel and are used routinely. It
should be noted that these two methods of transportation, with the excep-
tion of aircraft carriers, make necessary preparatory exercises prior

to embarkation and realigned flight fcrmations following unloading, the

duration of which should be taken into account in planning prior to any
action.

The constraints connected with the use of aircraft and ships have prompted
ALAT to experiment with the autonomous use of its helicopters in flight.
It is now conceivable to envision the disposition of helicopter formations
in flight traveling distances of 900 km without a refueling stop and

*A graduate of Saint Cyr military academy (class of 1954), Col Jacques
Lazare has served alternatively in the ABC [Armored Corps and Cavalry]
and in ALAT [Ground Forces Tactical Air Support]. Holder of an Advanced
General Staff Certificate, Colonel Lazare commanded the 5th Combat Heli-
copter Regiment. He is now head of the 3d Bureau in the ALAT command.

28
F0|!0FFKJA1.USI(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 1,800 km a day using an intermediate stop. In the latter case the heli-
copters can be used for assignments immediately upon arrival, but the con-
tinuation of their operations for longer than a few days remains subordinated
to transportation by other means (aircraft or ships) of the personnel and
equipment necessary for support and environment.

Combat and Its Support

ALAT's combat and support abroad follow the same rules as those spelled
out for the European theater. However, experience has shown that very spe-
cial attention must be given to certain fields: The training of personnel.
the organization of the means, their use, and their technical support.

It is obvious that specific preparation of the personnel must precede the
overseas engagement of units of all types. This is even truer of the air
crews called to combat as isolated patrols while at the same time faced
with a particularly adverse environment in terms of the technical means
that they use. Additionally, the units of ALAT have been obliged to acquire
a collective know-how essential for action abroad: take-off from a naval
force at sea to secure a landing beach or airfield making it possible to
establish a beachhead. ALAT has an essential role to play in such an ini-
tial stage of operations, assuming responsibility for the establishment of
the support bases and their necessary coverage through reconnaissance and
protective fire. This presupposes training beforehand related to actions
launched from aircraft carriers, the technical training of the crews, and
the tactical training of the units.

The deployment of available strength often raises a difficult problem.

The limited number of aircraft prompts one to keep them assembled so as

to have a sizable mobile air reserve at hand, baL additionally the large
distances separating the ground units at the time of controlling a territory
may make it desirable to give each group some mobile air capability. Can—
tralizstion. decentralisation--there is no rule making it possible to decide
in absolute fashion which is better, and what will be involved first and
foremost will be constantly to adapt the deployment to the situation of the
moment by using maximally ALAT's capability to redeploy its forces rapidly.

The often limited number of aircraft engaged abroad should not allow one
to forget three basic rules of ALAT combat:

1. Any authorization for the utilisation of ALAT capabilities must rely
on an ALA! liaison officer enabling their optimal use in a difficult environ-
ment.

2. The minimal unit in the use of ALKT is the two-plane patrol, a level
below which they are not effective.

3. The aircraft of ALAT are speciaJised and the results of their engage-
aent will be a function of their use in missions for which they are planned:

29
son omcm. uss om:
Helicopters or light planes for intonation-gathering, armed helicopters
for support, intermediate-sired helicopters for tactical and logistical
transportation. If necessity dennds that the authorization for me not
respect this specialization function. one must. nevertheless. be aware of
the limits of the means involved. even of the risks undertaken.

The combat support of ALA? abroad raises first and foremost a problem of
maintenance in working condition of equipment in a very adverse environ-
ment. To meet this problem, experience has shoun that the personnel and
equipment of the second and third echelon should be consolidated in a
single workshop located close to an airfield necessary for the rapid trans-
portation of spareparte originating from the home base.

ALA‘I has learned a lot during engagements abroad in which it has participated
and still continues to participate. The data that it has collected fro-
them make it possible for ALA? today to be better prepared for this kind

of action. But it should be noted that beyond an indispensable effort to
adjust to such an environment, its effectiVeness in costat depends, even
more than elsewhere, on the motivation and determination of its personnel.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces srmees francaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

2662
080: 3100/697

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

couree. also add their contribution, notably by integrating the environ-entel
aspect of flight: ambient noise, helnet noise. pilot fatigue or stress,
accelerations end vibretione. etc. [Excerpt] [Paris AIR B‘r COSMOS in French
10 Apr 82 p 28] (COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1992] 8041

ARMED SERVICES MANPOWER-Jive tote]. 198‘. authorised personnel strength of the
armed forces end services breaks down as follows: strategic nucleer forces:
19,348; tactical nuclear forces: 9.632; conventionel forces: 387.882;
overseas forces: 17.313; reseerch end tests: 6,766; training organisetions
and agencies: 76,192; personnel support organizetions end agencies: 23,375;
equiplent support organizations end agencies: 19,169; general edlinistretion:
17,451; total strength: 577,128. [Text] [Paris AIR 31‘ 00908 in French

10 Apr 82 p 29] (common: A. a C. 1982) 8061

080: 3100/ 566
norm 0? ARIANB SOLID 930mm 300mm W
Paris All! 31' 00908 in French 10 Apr 82 p ‘3
[Article: "Ariane 3 Solid Propellant booster"]

[Text] Aerospatiale has just published the first photo of one of the solid
propellant boosters for the future European Ariane 3 launch vehicle scheduled
to hem operational in 1983. This booster was produced by the Italian

fire Aeritslia. lta erection container was built by A0!!! of France. This
container will be used to raise the boosters to an upright position for their
attachment to the launcher's first stage. Integration of these Ariane 3
boosters is accolplished in Aerospatiale's plant at Les threeux near Paris.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

son
cso: 3100/5“ m

32
“OFFICIALUSEONLY