‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10643
8 July 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 14/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names ren"ered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(F000 14/82)

CONTENTS
HERO!
British 81.331113 Gainer ﬂatbed mr Coal (initiation
(BRDOBL 8 Kmmms-Pmcmz. Mar 82) .................
TMSPORI‘ATIOI

Volbmen working To Develop Gas Turbine for Automobile:
(Peter Hunt, at 9.1; m WEBMISCEE ZEITUIG. May 82)..

-a- [In-we-151:
mommusaomv '
BRITISH SLACGING GASIFIBR ma) FOR COAL GASEICATION

mmtelden-Echtordingen noon. a mm-ms-Pmnocuwn in English May 82

pp 219-221

[Text]

Amawogtmmmnw
“mummwmduuob-
mum'mmmyuw
tomoouwomeou.mm¢ulo
Membouoodtomduummm
mauwwmmm-d-
moabvpowormbnmrwm.
Macho wadiuolgutormu
mmw.uwluw
outachanlcdnwmun.

‘uunwnumamunewwa-

m.wnmemmmtm
000091 Ind W W by W
“.mmwscmmc

mmmausmmnmw
moo wooxw'u'msxto'ma

ﬁg???

3%;
I

3 :3
5 ii
3 3:

53
*§
§%
é

gii
22};
is;
23;!
g 3
§ :35

1

mmwammm.
muuwwmmm
Marmalrumuhm.m
mbWbMthm
W M by m. m
m. '

WWMwmuMbun
cmmmmmmwpcomm
mmmmmmh
“Mumtmm.mtm
Wammnulw
mmwmmmmw
MNMMMIW
lmmmuummocoum
wwﬁwmwwmdw
ImMmolumhdﬁolhooodtop
m an W m in p
mummy-«Wang:
swameummmm
mmmuwwxw
m.nsmwmmw
wwwmmmmmnyuuo
mmmdmmvﬁm
Wmummmmmm
Wuwmluwocm
tmwmlommmw

“Mlmmmm.
Whoa-WWW”: lama

camarmammmumgw

WMMganlmmgw
Mamboncydodtoumm
the W. a m muted I1
mmmmmwsJ-rm
ummnmlmmm-
tmamwwmmmw~
Movafromholopotﬁnbocﬁhow
wammummmeoa-
mmtmmmlowtwdm
Modm.uno¢uoonatdonomby
MOWW.WWM‘
iumhmmguMbomcM
IywOpotooM.

n ma boon chime that m ﬁxed-bod
mammmmom

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT :

C80:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cousmnmwmmmcnu-
lontionlomomofmdom
manna-mum“ WWW
5mm.&bumlldmot

wmmmcwmu
museumsumuum

mwmmmmmm
NMJMWIMMWW
mm.

mmmﬁmﬁmmm
bmctodtobomory.

MW

mmmamlamm
mmmm.m.m
ram Wanna-m
decwormm
mmmmmn
ummwmmmw
mtonm mun-memo.
www.m.mmau
waoxmmmmmm
www.mmmuua»
mmmcydu.m

MmummMmm.

3102/ 331

2

www.mwmmm
dummy to: W 9000mm. hm.
www.mmmcy-
w.mu.mmmmwm
uonocguwmumwmw
www.cmmummmm.
ham cos-mention. at m 40 pt
m.mwmmmmm3$w
eomlormlmm-cydom
Mﬂnodmmc-nmar
woos.

WMMIIMOMWM
ummmmwm
DIM we“ mutton. Tho slow m
m um mogul“ cod-Who

mmummmnammy
toWCWsmtommma
variety M m. The M ha been
mtomsnaﬂyudlloodsuudbm

mmwaﬂ
(2.“m)hmumummm
corn-weld was. Bum Go. In
mmamwnwm

Ibo to. .
Wm “90an

Industriaverlaq van Hormuuaun KG, Lelnfolden-Bchterdingen 1982

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOLKSHAGER WORKING TO DEVELOP GAS TURBINE FOR AUTOMOBILES

Stuttgart MHZ MOTORTBCENISCHB ZBITUNG in German Mar. May 82
[Mar 82 pp 125-128]

[Article by Peter Halter, Joachim Neier-Grotrian. Rolf nuchheim: "Development Hort
on an Automobile Gas Turbine"]

[Excerpts] A loo-RH automotive gas turbine is being investigated at Volkswagenwsrk
AG. The paper describes the special features of the component elements of this
engine and presents the current status of engine development in regard to response
ties, fuel consumption. aultifuel capability and engine emissions. Test results of
an experimental gas-turbine-powered vehicle are submitted. Reference is made to
further improvements in fuel economy with the aid of ceramic components.

1. Development Objectives

As part of the research into alternative power units for the automobile, the gas
turbine is one of the units being tested at Volkswagen. Theoretical considerations
and simulation calculations show that the gas turbine enjoys advantages with respect
to its multifuel capability and absence of exhaust pollutants. Its throttle
response. fuel consumption at small part loads and manufacturing costs seem to be
problems, but not insoluble ones. This paper describes different steps in develop-
ment in the attempt to make the gas turbine an alternative power unit that is con-
petitive with the gasoline engine. This objective will have been reached when a

successful high-temperature engine is finally developed on the basis described
here [1].

2. Engine Construction

Figure 1 shows the construction of the engine. It is a twin-shaft gas turbine with
regenerative air preheating and integral reduction gearing. The gas generator and
the power turbine work in the longitudinal axis of the engine. The gas generator
drives th. compressor and. through a secondary takeoff, the various auxiliaries
needed to operate the engin . The power turbine drives the output shaft through
reduction gearing. The tubular combustion chamber sits on top of the engine. Two
regenerator discs are located on the sides as heat exchangers. The engine has
adjustable guide vanes ahead of the compressor and the power turbine. It is
equipped with an electronic-hydraulic control system.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a VA \u‘s syn“. was; UIQLI

  

m _ . .
sue a: "(la-turbine 01' 150 (hr WWW
no. INN-61'1” beau-e cos mMMQn

Figure l. V" Gas Turbine for Passenger Cars

Key:
1. Combustion chamber 6. Fuel pump
2. Fuel nozzle 7. Inlet guide vanes
3. GE turbine 8. Power turbine
4. Regeneretor 9. Power turbine guide vanes
5. Compressor 10. Output shaft

Table 1 contains additional important date on engine layout. The engine's rated
power is 100 k", working with a pressure ratio of 4.5:1 and a turbine intake temp-
erature of 1,283 K. the maximum speed of the gas generator is 63,700 rpm and that
of the power turbine is 52,200 rpm. The output shaft reaches a speed of 5,500 rpm,
which is normal for piston engines. Engine volume and weight are comparable to
those of a gasoline engine of equal power. Development of the prototype of this
engine was carried out between 1972 and 1975 in conjunction with the williams
Research Corporation. in Walled Lake in the United States. The rest of the paper
describes mostly the work carried out as part of the research project sponsored by
the BHPT [Hﬁwietry for Research and Technology] from 1977 to 1980 end the improve-
ments that were achieved.

2.1 Compressor with Backward Curved Rotor Blades and Adjustable Intake Ring

In order to obtain an overall high thermal efficiency with the engine, a compressor
is needed which has such a broad operating range that even at partial load the
vehicle can be driven with the engine operating at the highest possible temperatures,

h
we OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that is, working temperatures which can just be tolerated by the materials of the
turbines and heat exchangers. In addition, optimal efficiency should, first of all,
be in the low partial load range and, secondly, always be close to the operating
curve. Radial compressors with backward curved blades meet these requirements better
than those with radially curved tips. But in order to obtain the same pressure
ratio, higher circumferential speeds. that is, greater rigidity is required. In
this case, by choosing a high-strength aluminum alloy and as a result of careful
three—dimensional finite~element analysis, a compressor with backward curved blades
was successfully developed, which reaches the desired pressure ratio of 4.5:1 at a
circumferential speed of 513 ms/sec.

with an adjustable guide vane ring ahead of the compressor, the airflow in front of
the turbine can be directed in such a way that

-the engine's fuel consumption at idle is reduced, while gas generator speed is
unchanged,

--epecific fuel consumption at part load is reduced,

-during nonatationary operation, changes can be achieved in power output over a
particular range simply by rotating these vanes while maintaining constant gas
generator speed.

It can be seen free the compressor performance map that a broader operating range
was achieved(up to 12 percent at high rpm) and that good efficiency is still avail-
able down to low rpm. With a guide vane adjustment equal to 60° constant twist,
the same effect is obtained with respect to air and fuel flow in the lower rpm
range as with a gas generator speed reduced by 10 percent without any pretwist.

For the sake of comparison, the performance map of an earlier compressor with
radially curved blades is included.

Figure 5 shows the influence of the adjustable inlet guide vanes on compressor
efficiency and airflow. At part load, with 63~percent gas generator speed and a
turbine intake temperature (TIT) of 1,120 K, there is an improvement in efficiency
of more than 2 percent. At idle speed, with open turbine guide vanes (NGV) [acronym
not positively identified], the result is a 30-percent reduction in airflow as a
result of reduced pressure ratio, with a vane angle in the inlet guide mechanism
equal to 60' pretwist.

5
FTHICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(MVLY
. a... nee-um... we... v-em-e

 

Fig. 5 Effect of adjustable inlet guide vanes

.Key:
1. Airflow / 6. ____n - 572 inlet guide vanes open
-L" 'L,a-0 5. n1 - 63 Z turbine inlet teep-

2. Vane angle a. 1 Erik s _ 1.120 K

3. An Compressor
2.2 Iubines with Ceramic Shroud

During hot operation, the radial clearance has a great influence on the efficiency

of the turbine stages. In a cold engine the clearance between the outside disaster
of the rotor and the internal diameter of the shroud is very seall. However, after

starting, these two components heat up at different rates and to different degrees.
Since heat is conducted away through the bearings, the rotor expands less than the

turbine shroud. and a large redial clearance is created during engine operation.

when the engine is shut down. the housing with the shroud cools sore quickly, while
heat is retained longer in the rotor. To prevent any contact under all conditions,
it would be necessary to accept an operating clearance of 0.75 am in a purely metal
design, which, with 15 mm-long blades, is the equivalent of a relative clearance of
5 percent. Component efficiency of the turbines can deteriorate up to 10 percent,
compared with very much slaller clearances. Sincee measures such as cooling the
housing coeponents would entail removing large amounts of heat and such seasures
would be extremely expensive free a design standpoint, the operating clearance in
this engine is maintained at 0.3 nm by using a ceraeic turbine shroud with a low
thermal rate of expansion.

Figure 6 shows the parts of the ceraeic turbine shroud. Reaction sintered silicon
nitride (isostatically pressed) was used as the ceramic material. Figure 7 shows
how euch the efficiency of the gas generator and the power turbine could be increas-
ed by introducing these ceramic shrouds.

2.3 Heat Exchanger Matrix and Flow Distributor on the Heat Exchanger
At seall part loads and at idle, up to three-quarters of the energy needed to drive
the engine is taken free the heat exchanger. Because of the seall engine dimensions

needed, two rsgenerator discs nounted on the side were selected. By careful devel-
opment of the seals, leakage could be reduced to between 2 to 3 percent of the

6
FOR(MHHCIAI.USE(MVLY
(211 m

Fig. 6 Ceramic turbine shroud with retainer

   
   

0.,

tea .
1..

(I). u M u u 0.7(6 ll

 

Fig. 7 Turbine efficiency with ceramic shrouds

Key:
1. Isentropic efficiency 5. Metal shroud s/l - 0.05
2. Gas generator turbine 6. Ceramic shroud ell - 0.02
3. Power turbine 7. Metal shroud s/l - 0.05
4. Ceramic shroud s/l - 0.02 8. Pressure ratio

airflow at a given time, including the leakage carried in the matrix itself. The
matrix and the airflow to the matrix were carefully optimized to achieve the highest

possible degree of heat exchange.

7

IN)! OFINCLAL USIZ<MNLY
The regenerators were obtained from the Corning Glass Horha and are nade of lithium-
aluminum-silicate. Table 2 shows clearly the progress that was made by switching
from the triangular matrix '1' 20-38 to the triangular ‘1' 16-20 matrix, with respect

to the size of the exchanger surface per unit of constructionvoluae. The rectangu-
lar matrix listed in the table would be even better, but the manufacturing tech-
niques have not yet been mastered. '

 

Table 2. Data of Regenerator Matrices

mm: 1' 20-38 1 14-20 5.3

Porosity 0.6100 0.7105 0.786
Cells/cmz 11.0 219 62
van thickness an 0.120 0.070 0.102
Bydr. diameter III 0.569 0.5103 0.762
Spec. surface m2/e3 0.500 5,490 3.707
Engine test x x 1980

In the engine unequal flow through the regenerator discs reduces the exchange rate
and causes increased loss of pressure. Improving the flow distribution is, there-
fore, an effective measure to increase the efficiency factor of the heat exchanger.

Figure 9 shows the effects of these steps on the efficiency factor of the heat
exchanger in the ranges of particular interest here, idle and low part load. It can
be seen that it was possible to improve the efficiency of heat exchange by up to

lo points by improving flow distribution and by switching to the I 16-20 matrix.

2.4 Combustion System with bow Pollution Level and Hultifuel Capability

The 00-10 correlations shown in fig. 10 were aeaaured with diffusion-flame con-
bustion cheaters and premix combustion designs. ac eaissions are not shown, since
they normally do not exceed the limit, if 00 emissions are not in excess of the linit.
The acceptable operating ranges for 1.5 grams/mile N0 and 0.6 grams/mile N0 are
shown as dark bands. A gas turbine engine with a fuel consumption of less t an

15.7 liters/100 has can be operated withing the ranges shown.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 9. Improvement in Regenarstor Efficiency

Kay:
1. Regsnerator efficiency, 2 6. - - T 20-38 matrix, improved airflow
2. Gas generator speed. 2 distribution
3. - - - T 20-38 matrix S. T 16-20 matrix, improved airflow

d—istribution

   

ﬂ
.
{so
a.
3
. I
as .Mgm
. men's-
E .
g s
(D'

Figure 10. Ranges for Different Emissions Improvement Systems

Key:
1. Emissions index CO grams/kg 4. Diffusion-flame combustion chamber
2. Emissions index N0 grams/kg S._Totsl operating range for city cycle
3. Premix combustion chamber with consumption of 15 mpg

Different combustion systems were developed for the engine in accordance with
these emissions levels and used as the emissions limits required, see fig. 11.

9

IND! OIITCJAL USIZCNULY
(l) (2) (3)

Figure ll. Combustion Chambers for Passenger Car Gas Turbines

Key:
1. Direct injection 3. Dual-stage presixing
2. Single—stage premixing

~-0n the left is a conventional combustion chamber, optimized for minimum emissions,
with direct injection of the fuel into the reaction chatter. With this type of com-
bustion chamber, all the requirements now in force and planned in Europe can be com-
plied with. The 0.8. emissions regulations currently in force cannot be met with
this combustion chamber. This combustion chamber is extremely cost-effective to
manufacture and presents no operating problems in a gas-turbine passenger car.

-In the center is a combustion chamber in which all the fuel is premixed and pre—
vaporized before it goes to the reaction chamber. A continuously burning auxiliary
flame is required for operation. All the emissions regulations in effect in Europe
and the United States can be met with this combustion chader. It cannot meet the
extremely rigid limits planned in the United States of 0.6 grams/mile for “0,, 3.4
grams/mile for 00 and 0.61 grams/mile for RC (Muskie standards). This combustion
chamber can be made only at a considerably higher cost than the combustion chamber
shown on the left.

-0n the right is s coﬁustion chaﬁer with two-stage injection and premixing. The
first stage controls idle and the lightest loads, while the second stage comes in
only during acceleration and at higher loads. In both reaction zones the fuel-air
mixture is burning close to the lean flame limit. Only with this one of the three
combustion systems showa is it possible to meet the Muskie standards, but it requires
considerably higher construction costs and a very complex control system.

The combustion process in a gas turbine is, for a number of reasons, particularly
suitable for operation on different fuels. '

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l. The continuous combustion process, which takes place at almost constant press-
ure, makes it possible to use fuels with a broad range of octane numbers, vapor-
ization pressures, distillation processes, ignition qualities and heat values.

2. The large amount of excess air allows fuels with widely divergent stoichiometric
ratios to be used.

3. The reaction volume has free limits and adjusts automatically to the magnitude
required for the various fuels.

For these reasons, the combustion chambers developed so far could be operated with
a broad range of fuels. More details are given in [2].

2.5 Electronic Control System

The electronic control system of an automobile gas turbine must be able to function
satisfactorily under different operating conditions:

1. The load cycle of an automobile gas turbine is characterized by very frequent
load changes and frequent driving in the low part load range.

2. The engine must be able to respond to requirements following a load change.

3. Low consumption and low emissions can only be achieved if the various engine com-
ponents are optimally harmonized with each other.

4. Even an unskilled driver must find it possible to operate the engine safely.

Optimal fuel consumption, the lowest emissions and instant throttle response can be
achieved in a gas turbine, if the engine can be operated at the highest possible
temperature for the material. Operating in a range which is so close to the limits
of permissible material stress requires an extremely precise control system to guar-
antee maximum operating safety. If there is any danger of these limits being exceed-
ed, the controller must automatically initiate rapid countermeasures.

In cooperation with Lucas C.A.V., London, a control system was developed which meets
these different requirements. It consists of the electronic control unit, several

sensors for rpm and temperature and a hydromechanical system for the fuel supply and
the two mechanisms for adjusting the guide vanes.

Details of the switching circuit and overall function are given in [3]. The follow—
ing section describes some stationary and nonstationary operations.

In stationary operation, the main control circuit governs gas generator speed ac-
cording to accelerator pedal position; this is carried out with the help of the "Slave
Datum" control loop, patented by Lucas, which influences fuel flow.

The other value controlled in stationary operation is the temperature between the
turbine stages. This is achieved by the integral control unit adjusting for zero
deviation between the specified temperature which is measured on the one hand and
created as a function of corrected gas generator speed on the other; to do this,
the control unit adjusts the guide vanes accordingly.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. some so. can”... -a. a ~-.I~g

The compressor intake guide vanes are rotated each time to the positions in which
the lowest possible fuel consumption at idle on the one hand, and the lowest poss-
ible specific fuel consumption under load requirements on the other hand, can be
obtained.

The two-stage premix combustion chamber, which is needed for the lowest emissions,
is regulated by the control unit so that the first or second fuel nozzle is supplied
with fuel according no the fuel-air ratio.

During nonstationary operation, the inter-stage temperature control adjuster is
occassionally switched off to obtain optimal response from power turbine torque.
This is done by again working, a very short time after a load change requirement,
toward engine conditions which are close to the condition that is then to be set.

After initiation of full-load acceleration, gas generator speed is increased in
accordance with the "Slave Datum“ control circuit; in doing so, maximum permissible
acceleration, which is predetermined as a function of gas generator speed, remains
limited. This creates temperatures that would not be permissible for stationary
operation but which can be tolerated by the engine material for the short duration
of acceleration.

By controlling the power turbine guide vanes in nonstationary operation, a high rate
of acceleration of the gas generator is achieved on the one hand, and on the other,
a rapid increase in torque at the power turbine is obtained during this acceleration.

If the driver removes his foot completely from the accelerator pedal under any load
condition, the power turbine guide vanes are rotated rapidly to a braking position,
creating negative torque at the power turbine. The braking position is fixed at a
value at which the turbine intake temperature is at a safe, low level (the temper-
ature control circuit is open). Not until the power turbine speed has dropped to

a fixed value are the power turbine guide vanes returned to the open idle position.

If the driver only partially removes his foot from the accelerator pedal under any
load condition, the power turbine guide vanes are rotated to a fixed part-load posi-
tion, while the gas generator shaft is slowed down, either in accordance with the
"Slave Datum" control circuit or in accordance with the deceleration fuel volume,
which is to prevent combustion chamber flameout.

Depending on the position of the ignition key, either "Start" or "Off," a start or
shutoff sequence runs in the control unit to start or shut off the engine automatic-
ally.

The safety logic of the control unit has two tasks: to guarantee maximum protection
for the experimental engine and-in the event that some components fail-~to make
maximum controllability and potential performance possible under safe operating con-
ditions.

The result of these considerations is a "Fail—Safe-System," which allows the car to
be driven home under reduced power, if some components fail, and if certain other com-
ponents fail, the engine is shut down if safe engine operation cannot be guaranteed.

12
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
If the turbine shafts are run at excessive speed, and if the guide vane controls
(including the position sender) fail. the engine is switched off. If the speed

pickups. temperaturesensors and accelerator position sender fail. speed and fuel
flow are reduced to a low and safe level.

[May 82 pp 185-189]

[Excerpts]

3. Test Stand Results

Figure 13 shows the experimental VH—GT 150 gas turbine on the test stand. After all
the components had been developed on special test rigs, the interaction of all the

components in the engine was optimized on this engine test stand with a view to the
objectives mentioned at the beginning of the paper.

 

Figure 13. Experimental automobile gas turbine VH-GT 150

3.1 Throttle Response

One of the goals of the development was to be satisfactory engine throttle response.
The development work for this had to be the first in time carried out, to ensure
that the other steps that are planned to reduce consumption and emissions can build
on an engine and a control system that operate satisfactorily. The throttle re-
sponse of a two-shaft gas turbine is determined mainly by the time required by the
gas generator to accelerate from idle to full speed.‘ This time can be influenced

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a was we 0 eye...- 5.“. Use...

through the polar moment of inertia of the gas generator, the rpm difference of the
gas generator that has to be overcome or throagh the excess power at the gas gener-
ator shaft.

During the selection of the materials and the aerodynamic design of the gas genera-
tor efforts were made to achieve the lowest possible polar moment of inertia, to
ensure the best throttle response possible.

Since the lowest idle speed possible is needed, from the point of view of fuel con-
sumption, tests can still be carried out to shorten response time. primarily by
increasing surplus power. This surplus can be achieved as a temporary increase in
turbine intake temperature and through a temporary increase in the pressure gradient
at the gas generator turbine.

The change in gas temperature can be carried out in a few milliseconds by altering
the fuel delivery. Upper limits for the excess temperature are set by the pumping
limit of the compressor, by the broad flamesut limit of the combustion chamber and,
if the process lasts for any time, by the temperature resistance of the materials,
for example, of the heat exchanger.

An increase in the pressure gradient can be achieved in one-tenth of a second by
opening the power turbine guide vanes. The limits to be observed are that, with
increasing vane opening, the runup time of the gas generator becomes shorter, while,-
on the other hand, the torque that is developed at the power turbine during the

runup of the gas generator decreases. Finally, it is-true of both temperature
increase and pressure gradient increase that too large and too abrupt changes can
lead to instability in the running of the engine.

Hork on improving throttle response is accordingly concentrating on refining fuel
delivery and optimizing power turbine guide vane control. In fig. 14, at the top,
power turbine guide vane position and fuel flow are shown as functions of time.

For comparison, the temperature reached momentarily by a component behind the gas
generator and gas generator speed are shown. The graph in each case covers the
first 2.5 seconds after initiation of full—throttle acceleration from idle. As fig.
14 shows, up to 150 percent of the amount of full-load fuel is injected in about

1 second, and this amount of fuel for acceleration is being injected very early,
while airflow volume is still very low. Simultaneously, the guide vanes are moved
from their open idle position to s part-load position, in which a good compromise
is reached between pressur gradient at the gas generator turbine and development of
torque at the power turbine. Shortly before maximum gas generator speed is reached,
the vanes begin to rotate to their final position, corresponding to stationary con-
ditions. The gas temperature that is generated briefly is very high and can be
used for acceleration, but in spite of tbat--as the figure shows-«the momentary
component temperature does not exceed the permissible limits. Fuel delivery and
rotation of the vanes are started in the control system after receiving signals

for speed and temperature. Technically, the impulses for rpm can be registered
quickly enough, but on account of large time constants in the thermal elements,

the gradient of the signal has to be processed.

In fig. 14, at the bottom, the increase in torque is shown as a function of time
following the start of acceleration. It can be seen that the goal of 60 percent

of rated torque after 0.9 seconds, with satisfactory driving characteristics, was
almost reached.

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19

Figure 14. Torque response

Key:

1. Gas generator speed

2. Component temperature behind
the gas generator turbine

3. Guide vane angle. Idle - 0°

4. Fuel flow

5. Torque

6. 1201 torque after 0.9 secs

3.2 Specific Fuel Consunption

   

  

1.. 2.0

8 8 8 8 S 8'9

8..
“it
(lzyumwulunllubudulu-n

Status 1 January 1977

Status 30 June 1977

Power turbine speed N3 - 102
Vehicle auxiliary drives 1.5-2.6 kw
Torque at rated power - 174 Nm
Time in secs after initiation of
full-load acceleration

Figure 15 shows the specific fuel consumption for part-load driving on the road

as a function of the power required to drive the car. The control system ensures
that the guide vanes for the power turbines are rotated in such a way that the high-
est permissible gas temperature is maintained at the turbine intake under all part-
10ad conditions and that. in each instance, the guide vanes ahead of the compressor
create optimal airflow conditionss Figure 15 shows how the specific fuel consump-
tion improved during development by applying the modifications described above to
the components. For comparison, the corresponding consumption curve of a carefully

15

FtHICMﬂﬁCJAL USE2(MVLY
I'W UI‘I‘I‘JAL Do". UIVLI

optinized gasoline engine is shown. The graph shows that it has been possible
to equal or to best the specific consumption of this engine. down to about 30 per-
cent power output.

 

(3) 0 2° ‘0 N 00100
"M‘IU'MQURO. “xv (‘)

"anus" (5)

-..-vennaeane sssenuusvenlqu
mam; mmmcﬁ)

- MM W:
«as an; Reg. mm m C.
vuwwmm
MWU)

-— sanctum. Ilwuunounndllz 7
west-enzmmw
urnﬂdll-Insgusnn-Unsduu-
hunVlhklhnnluﬂevOulﬂnpﬂw

Figure 15. Fuel consumption of the VH—GT 150 vehicle gas turbine, over-the-
road, part-throttle operation.

Key

e
e

1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
6.

Fuel consunption at idle, 2.5 kg/hr 7. -..- Inproved flow distribution;

Gasoline engine I lb-ZO matrix; regulator seal
Specific consunption. grams/kw hour Type C. conpresaor with backward
Rated power kw curved blades; vzcv [variable inlet
- - - Ststus 1 September 1977 guide vanes]

-.- Improved flow distribution; 8. ___ Inproved flow distribution;

T 14-20 nstrix; regulator seal

Type C

T 14-20 Iatrix; regulator seel
[Type C]. compressor with backward
curved blades; VIGV; cerenic shroud
for the 63 end power turbines

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consumption at idle is very important for a passenger car in a city driving cycle.
In regard to low consumption, the idle speed chosen should be very low, in regard

to a short response time, it should be as high as possible. As already described,
the idle speed was set at 60 percent of maximum speed. An additional reduction in
consumption is then only possible by rotating the guide vanes ahead of the compres-
sor and the power turbine. Opening the guide vanes ahead of the power turbine '
causes all the available enthalpy difference to be used to drive the gas generator,
and rotating the guide vanes ahead of the compressor has the effect of lowering its
power requirement. By means of these two steps, a state of operation with respect
to pressure ratio and air and fuel flow was achieved at 60 percent of maximum speed.

which, without compressor guide vanes, would not be available until 52 percent of
maximum speed.

At the start of acceleration, the vanes can be rotated back to their power position
in less than one-tenth of a second. Figure 16 shows how great the influence of

compressor guide vane position is on consumption at idle, with power turbine guide
vanes (NTL) closed or open.

a I
0‘ . NIL ge'athlos'u

 

° . (T : 1120K)

. c (3)
s', 0..
g zoel

. NTL geoflnel

2 L0‘[ (4)
a r we
g ' a daemon-muo- “(5)
a main-«butane
E ' a Metre?”
3 0'5 - ' (6)
(I) ‘0 £5 50 55 50

Gowmgerdrehzohl [961(2)

Figure 16. Influence of compressor guide vane position and the opening of
power turbine guide vanes on fuel consumption at idle

Key:
1. Consumption at idle, “3/330 4. NIL open
2. Gas generator speed [X] 5. Blade angle of the compressor guide ring
3. NTL closed 6. Consumption at idle, status 1 September

1977

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e was an e on...“ s .... v-‘Le

3. 3 Emissions

The combustion chambers shown earlier in fig. 11 [2] were tested in the engine.
Figure 17 shows the recorded emissions indices for the best diffusion-flame com-
bustion chamber and for the premix combustion chamber. It also shows the limits
that must not be exceeded for a given fuel consumption, if particular emissions
limits in the 0.8. city and highway cycles are to be met. Based on these figures.
1.5 grams/mile N03 can be achieved with the diffusion-flame combustion chamber.
with the premix combustion chamber, 1 gram/mile so“ can be achieved, using the

single-stage type; to achieve 0.6 grams/mile, furt er development work is needed
in the direction of two-stage injection.

      

<2) .‘1°......:.°..:.°...:..?° W W

Figure 1?. Emissions for diffusion flame and premix combustion chambers

Key:
1. Emissions indices 4. Limit for 3.4 grams/mile CO with
2. Gas generator speed, 1 a consumption of 16 liters/100 kms
3. Limit for 0.4 grams/mile in the city cycle
N03 at a consumption of 5. Diffusion-flame combustion chamber
16 liters/100 kms in the 6. Premix combustion chamber

city cycle

The influence of different fuels on emissions was also tested experimentally. In
order to be able to compare the emissions of these different fuels with each other,
the energy-specific emissions index was used, which gives the emission of pollutants
per energy unit consumed. In fig. 18, the recorded emissions for the different
temperature increases in the combustion chamber A T are shown. The diffusion-

flame type with the same injector nozzle was alwayscused as the combustion chamber.

These are the results:

1. The NO“ readings show no appreciable differences, except for methanol, where
they amount to only 20 percent of the figures for the other fuels. The low
adiabatic flame temperature at a etoichiometric ratio and the different fuel-air
mixing rate could again be the reason for the difference.

18
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600080017-0

2. The CO readings are widely divergent. particularly at lav
chamber teaperatures]. Hethanol and diesel fuel produce
than the other fuels. In the case of methanol, the low t
erent fuel-air mixing rate could again be the reason, whi
fuel, the unsatisfactory fuel system is responsible for t

3. ac readings demonstrate similar behavior to the 00 readin
must be be the sane as for the CO readings.

    

o In no no we
(“)omrstworMhuno AT, [Kl

Figure 18. Emissions figures for different fuels

Key:
1. Emissions index Nox [ms/1U l 5. Gasoline
2. missions index 00 [ng/kJ] 6. Methanol
3. Emissions index HC [Is/U] 7. Diesel fuel

lo. Temperature increase A‘rc [K] 8. 0-6
9. Liquid gas

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080017-0
I'VI‘ Vl’l‘ltll‘h 05‘. UI‘LI

a. Test Vehicle

An Re 80 was chosen as the test vehicle. It was in production until 1977, manu-
factured by Audi-N80, and was normally equipped with a 115 hp Rankel engine. The
vehicle, which originally had front-wheel drive, was converted to rear-wheel drive
for the installation of the gas turbine and equipped with 3-speed automatic trans-
mission fron 2F (Zaharadfabrik Friedrichshafen), without the hydraulic converter.
The car has a brake booster and power-assisted steering. With the gas turbine and
all the necessary recording equipment on board, the vehicle test weight is 1,700
kg. Air intake is provided by two small lateral grilles, mounted aboveuthedfenders.
Two tunnels for exhaust gas run under the vehicle's floor to the rear. Heat will

be provided by a gas-air heat exchanger, which is supplied with gas taken from the
power turbine Outlet.

4.1 Behavior on the Road

To demonstrate the good throttle response of the turbine, the vehicle was driven
over the U.S city cycle, which is considered representative. Figure 20 shows the
traces from the first two phases of this cycle. The speed deviations show how
well the driver of the gas turbine test vehicle is able to follow the prescribed
speeds and speed changes. As can be seen from fig. 20, the vehicle can adhere to
the prescribed speed changes during the greater part of the cycle, with the excep-
tion of the quick acceleration at the beginning of the second phase. Future

improvements are needed here to achieve a rapid increase in torque. to bring about
completely satisfactory road behavior.

   

        
         
     

II “II!!! III

IIIIIiiIIIiIIIINI
IIII' -5IIIUIIIIILI

IHEIIIIIHUIIIIIIN
IIIIIIIIMIIIIIII“

— tamed-m Wyn-0mm (2)

‘0 —MeulsoW9I-W (3')‘]‘

MHGEEE=Mﬂmow~mﬂ'

 

Figure 20. Gas turbine vehicle operation in PDC urban

Key:
1. Prescribed speed 3. Permitted deviation in speed
2. Actual deviation in speed 6. Time

20
FIN!(NWH(JAI.[EHE(MVLY
To demonstrate the good power of the engine. which had been measured in test
stand experiments, in the vehicle. acceleration times from 0 - 100 km/hour were
taken and the distance covered in the first 10 seconds was recorded, accelerating
from idle in each case: The results were 13.5 sees and 147 as.

6.2 Fuel Consumption

The fuel consumption of the experimental gas turbine vehicle was measured in the
0.8. city and highway cycles. The results are given in Table 3.

Table 3. Fuel consumption with diesel fuel in 0.8. cycles

City highway Combined
VH-GT 150 in a
1.700 kg R0 80
test vehicel 15.3 literal 9.4 liters/ 12.6 liters/
100 kls 100 has 100 has

In fig. 21, the consumption from the combined cycle is compared with the con-
sumption that was published by the EPA as the 0.8. CAFE consumption in 1979. The
results show that, in its present state of development, the gas turbine vehicle
described here can achieve an overall consumption similar to that obtained by
vehicles powered by gasoline engines. Fuel consumption is relatively good at
higher speeds; consumption at idle, however, still represents a problem.

  

(l) 0 Inc 1a» ans
(3) 'shnsuuswlem . he

Figure 21. Fuel consumption of the VU~GT 150 and 0.8. CAFE in 1979

Key:
1. Combined cycle-consumption b. Diesel engine
in liters/100 km 5. Gasoline engine
2. mpg 6. VH-GT 150 gas turbine

3. Vehicle weight, kg

21
IKHICHﬂHCIAl.USE(MVLY
0'0“ 90 A‘OLII'IM we“. VIVQ.

5.3 Hultifuel Capability

Diesel fuel was used in the tests described above. In other tests the engine was
operated on gasoline, kerosene or methanol; engine performance remained unchanged.
The fuel injection system was adjusted for operation on methanol in accordance with
its low heat value.

4.4 Emissions

The optimized diffusion-flame combustion chamber and the single-stage premix com-
bustion chamber were also tested in the experimental vehicle. Table 4 shows the
results of emissions readings in the U.S. city cycle. The figure calculated pre-
viously from the engine tests were confirmed, namely that the current emissions
standards can be met. The two-stage premix combustion chamber, which is necessary
to meet the Muskie standards, could not be tested, as i. can only be operated with
a control system that is not suitable for installation in the vehicle.

Table 4. Emissions in the PDC urban

VHcGT 150 in a 1,700 kg C0 grams/mile ac grams/mile NO‘ grams/mile
Rs 80 test vehicle

With diffusion-flame
combustion chamber 3.4 0.3 1.8

With single-stage premix 3.4 0.3 1.0
combustion chamber

5. nigh-Temperature Gas Turbine

Besides the development of components with improved efficiency, increasing the
annular process temperature would contribute significantly to an improvement in
turbine performance. A temperature increase of 300 K, to 1,650 K, would improve
fuel consumption by about 20 percent compared with today's carburetted engines
and simultaneously reduce engine volume by about 20 percent. Since this temper-
ature increase would hardly affect reaction zone temperature, the effects on NO‘
emissions would also be only slight.

A substantial increase in temperature can only be realized if components made of
new high-temperature resistant materials, for example, ceramic, can be successfully
developed.

The stresses on materials in a high-temperature gas turbine and on material qual-
ities are outlined in [A].

Figure 23 shows several turbine components manufactured from ceramic material.

The materials are silicon nitride and silicon carbide; manufacturing techniques
include hot pressing, injection moulding and slip casting. Stationary components,
such as the flame pipe and guide vane ring, are the only ones to have been tested
so far, at gas temperatures and in temperature cycles like those in a metal gas
turbine. Prototype all-ceramic rotors, made from hot-pressed silicon nitride hubs,

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and reaction-aintared silicon blade rings have withstood circumferential speeds
of up to 450 ms/sec in cold-spin tests-—measured at the blade tips-and thermo-
shock strain up to 500 K/sec.

With rotors made from metal hubs and injection-moulded silicon nitride blades,
speeds up to 420 ms/sec have been reached in hot-spin tests. There is still a great
deal of scatter in all this development work and unsatisfactory reproducibility of
test results. It still appears, however, that, with further applied effort, the
development of these components can one day be successfully concluded.

 

Figure 23. Ceramic prototype components

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Wslzer, P.. Klsrhoefer, Ch., and Koehler, M., "Fuel Economy Study of Future
Metallic and Ceramic Automotive Gas Turbines," ASHE Paper, 76—GT-104.

2. Buchheim, R., "Influences on Exhaust Emissions from Automotive Gas Turbines,"
ASHE Paper , 78-GT-85.

3. Nalzer, P., Meier-Grotrisn, J., Hardell. J., "An Electronically Controlled
Automotive Gas Turbine," ASME Paper, 79-GT-76.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(.0

5.

6.

7.

Halzer, P., Poerator, 8., "Developnnt of Connie Compomnto for an Automotive
Gas Turbine," J8EE. Tokyo, 1977, Paper 67.

Walter, P., Buchheim. R., Meier-Gretna, J ., "Development work on an Auto-
motive Gas 'l'u'blhh," ls_t-.'Progress Report, Verlag TUeV, Bhineland Gmbn.

Buchhein, 3., Meier-Grotgian, J ., "Development Hot]: on an Automotive Gas
Turbine," 2nd Progress Report. Verlag TUcV, Rhineland, cum.

Meier-Grouch, J ., Walter, P., Rottenkolber, P., "Develop-ant Work on an
Autonotive Gas Turbine." 3rd Progress Roport, Verlng may, Rhineland, Cuba.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Franckh'sche Verlagohandlung, H. Keller 5- Co.. Stuttgart

9581

CSO:

3102/ 289 m

2h
[’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY