FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10316
10 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polia
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 8/82)

CONTENTS

EQNOHIC

I TALY

Pist's Romiti on Industry's Prospects for '82
(Cesare bmiti Interview; PANORAHA, 11 Jan 82).................. l

SPAIN

Economic Conditions Expected 1b Ilprove in 1982
(M10 16. 16 NOV 81)oooooon...ooooooooooooossovoooooooooooosao 7

Reduced Hydroelectric Power Causes Increases in Oil Imports
(MIC 16’ 21 he 81)....leleeeooeoeooooooooDoooouooocoiolcooeo 10

POLITICAL

1 TA LY

Partiea' Opinions on Possible Early Elections
(Roberto Ippolito, Paolo Passarini, II. MONDO, 8 Jan bl)........ 110

MILITARY

FRANCE

General Describes Mirage's Flexibility, Role in Air Defense
(Bernard Capillon; AIR E‘r cosms. 12 Dec 81)................. 19

- a - [III - WE - 150 P0001

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
New Military Radar Equipment 2’0

man

ITALY

Polenica within the Intelligence Services
(mmi “3.1;114 mm, 8 Jm 82)....0...content-0.00.00.00.00 ZS

PSI'a Ando Calls for Reform of Security Services
(Salvatore Ando Interview; PANORAMA. 11 Jan 82)................ 28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC ITALY

FIAT'S ROMITI 0N INDUSTRY'S PROSPECTS FOR '82
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 11 Jan 82 pp 80-82

[Interview with Cesare Romiti, managing director of FIAT, conducted by
Giuseppe Oldani, date and place not given]

[Text] The pic has shrunken. "We are in a recession," says
FIAT's menaging director. And Italian industry will
ask for more sacrifices to enable it to modernize:
from the unions, asking them to he more flexible in
upcoming contract negotiations, and from the govern-
ment, asking it to reduce interest rates.

Once upon a time there was a myth that held that the word "layoff"
would henceforth be stricken from the Italian language.

Once upon a time there was another myth, the one that said the state
should always be willing to bail out private industry when it got into
trouble, then go on losing its own money without too much pain.

And then there was the myth thnt said it was always a good idea to in-
cur debt rather than finance your investments yourself, since every-
body knows that inflation is must helpful to the man who flings him-
self into debt up to the neck, with the help of friendly banks.

Now, almost overnight, all these certainties that since 1969, since
those months of the hot autumn, all of us without exception -- poli-
ticians and union members, industrialists and bankers had held so
dear, have suddenly vanished in the face of a crisis that has somehow
become a structural given, rather than a passing twinge.

In short, the comb has hit the snarls. But has the comb got all of
them? Or are there still some nasty surprises in store for us?
PANORAMA asked that question of Cesare Romiti, managing director of
FIAT.

Question: The government's intervention in production through pri-

marily state-owned companies is going through a period of stagnation
and there are even those who talk of opening them up to private in-

vestment, either through joint ventures or through transfers. Why,

in your opinion, is this phenomenon growing in Italy now, while in

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS}: ONLY

France a socialist government has drawn up a plan of action which pro-
mises precisely the opposite? And what will be the impact of these
disparate philosophies on the economies of our two countries or, for
that matter, on the rest of Europe?

Answer: Even so, it needs pointing out that the beginning of this de-
cade, in all industrial systems, brings to light widespread and far-
reaching processes of readjustment to cape with changing conditions

in the area of competition. One need only consider the slowdown in
growth, the growing costs of energy and raw materials, the entry into
the world markets of new and extremely aggressive rivals (several
Asian countries, Japan at the head of the list, followed by the devel-
oping countries), the profound technological revolution, and the on-
going changes in the qualitative makeup of the labor supply.

The glib couplings (I am referring to some literary works that would
lump Italy and Great Britain together as "the sick men of Europe"),
like the contrasts ("the disparate philosophies" define for you the
aspects of the policies coming out of Rome and Paris), I think may
turn out to be misleading. Particularly if, as we duly duly mark down
the predominant political valences of the individual countries, we ne-
glect to make due allowance for the cultural and economic hinterlands
of these countries. Naturally, the countries which in the early half
of the Sixties had lower productivity rates must make up for lost
time and therefore are called upon to work more decisively and more
rapidly if they do not want to widen the gap that already separates
them from the more advanced countries. Italy is certainly among the
former but only just lately has there been broadening awareness of
this fundamental requirement. Even so, it seems to me we can arrive
at a least common denominator for Europe: behind the plant walls there
is a trend toward increasing and improving efficiency, introducing mo-
difications in job organization and in the productive processes, whose
aim is to cut unit costs of product.

Insofar as Italy is concerned, there has thus far been a shortage of
political initiative, a lack which I should call critical, not only
with respect to our country's backwardness, but also in view of what
has been happening of recent years in the countries that are our com-
petitors. Even so, there are some encouraging signs on the horizon.
One of them is certainly the declared determination to orient state-
participation industries toward efficiency and competitiveness, by
taking the requisite measures for streamlining, including whatever
cuts in the payroll may turn out to be needed.

Question: Another of the myths that seems to be wobbling is the one
about job security in big corporations. Starting with FIAT's decision
back in 1980 to deal with the labor productivity snarl by means of mass
layoffs, and right up to the recent plans of the state-participation
sector to reduce the number of jobs in sectors like chemicals, steel,
electronics, and automobile manufacturing, we have had a succession of
decisions that have long been put off and which tend either to restruc-
ture their employment base along leaner lines, and/or to boost the
productivity of what workers remain in the plants. Why are we only

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ()I-"FK'IAI. USE. UNI)

now beginning to deal with this problem? And what basic impact will
it have on the caintry's growth over the next few years?

Answer: Italian industry stands in urgent need of a competitive spurt.
We are in the midst of a recession: the "pie" is smaller and we can—
not afford to waste even a crumb , bearing constantly in mind the ag-
gressiveness of our new competitors, who have moved in among those we
might call the traditional ones.

When you are in an expanding market situation, the proper responSc is
to expand the volume of production. At the same time, you feel less
pressing need to monitor the level of efficiency. however, I believe
there is no dodging the fact that FIAT, even in the second half of the
Sixties when, for example, the automobile market was booming, did not
flinch from alerting management and labor to the dangers of neglecting
productivity problems.

But it is precisely during hard times, like the ones we are going
through now on a global scale, that it is “real" employment, by which
I mean productive employment, that counts, because only from that kind
of Jobs can we draw the resources necessary to implement a social po-
licy to help the unemployed, and, above all, to stimulate new produc-
tive activity and thus, down the road, create new jobs.

Question: Yet another profound alteration in the world economy seems
to affect relations between industrial power and financial power.
Whereas in the past the fortunes of the great entrepreneurial families
were built on plants, today the feeling noted by many observers is
that accumulation of wealth depende far more than it used to on fin—
ancial and real estate operations. Just how accurate is this inter—
pretation? And what effects will it have on power relationships in
Italy?

Answer: The current economic recession has two aspects: one transi-

tory, and the n‘her structural. In Italy it is hard to see just where
the boundary lies between these two aspects, because they get entang-

led and sometimes coincide. What attitude could the entrepreneur take
in the face of this situation?

There are some pessimists, who find the structural aspects -- the stub-
born, ingrained oncs -- most important. They perceive great historical
processes of change, and they feel inadequate to adapt to them. These
entrepreneurs understandably tend to disappear from the scene. It has
already happened many times in the past.

Then there are the wait-and-see types, the ones who see ‘Hc transitory
aspects most clearly. They are willing to tighten their belts, sure
that they can get back up to normal once conditions improve. Meanwhile.
they stop making investments, put a lid on innovation, and downgrade
the quality of their product.

There is, though, a third kind of entrepreneur: the truly tough ones,

the far—sighted ones, who take advantage of bad times to do some hard
3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thinking about their own corporate identity, and to get their own

house in order. They analyze their own areas of strength at the pro-
duct level and at the organizational level, and they restructure them;
if necessary, they scale down their operation so as to be able to ride
out whatever storms may come. This is the kind of entrepreneur we need
today. Especially in Italy. Unfortunately theirs has not been an abun-
dant Species of late years; they have been crowded out by others with
an eye to finance and real estate, the same ones who have often wound
up as industrial disaster areas.

Maybe it's too easy to be a financier; it's too hard to be an indus-
trialist. But once he fails to give priority to the production side,
even a financier is going to have to find some other line of work. I
can venture to say that, because I have achieved the production mind-
set, where I intend to keep on operating, with a good many years of
financial experience behind me.

When we go forth rejoicing to greet recovery, we shall find with us
only the real entrepreneurs: there is no longer any room for super-
ficiality or for last-minute improvisation.

Question: The ability of big corporations to handle their own financ-
ing seems to have vanished, and the problem of finding enough money

to pay for operations and expand investments has become crucial. What
kind of distorting forces can bring about such a situation?

Answer: In Italy, financing outside the corporation is far more common
than it is in other countries. In fact, on top of the traditionally
smaller capacity for in-house financing -- a condition, incidentally,
which Italy shares with Japan -- we have got in recent times the enor-
mous growth in public indebtedness. The Italian family's very strong
propensity to put every spare lira into savings is no longer adequate
to satisfy both the needs of the productive system and the insatiable
demands of the national debt. Caught in this bind, there is danger

of strangulation for the process of innovation and growth in the indus-
trial system, and not only because it is squeezed out of the market,
but also because of swollen interest rates, which presuppose returns

on investment incompatible with the real current potential of the Ital-
ian economy and its competitive strength.

Just recently, the people in charge of steering our country's economic
course have become aware of the gravity of this situation, and have
themselves voiced the need to reduce interest rates. That is a step

we must take as quickly as possible if we want to prevent the inability
of the weaker portion of our industry to meet its financial commitments
from adding still another element of tension to a state of affairs

that is already too difficult.

Question: To go on to matters moreintiuately connected with the cur-
rent situation, Italy still suffers from a very high rate of inflation
by comparison with its foreign competition. In your view, is an all-
out fight against inflation more important than determined action to
save jobs? And how does the exchange rate of the lira fit into this
whole picture? 4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: I see no contradiction between fighting inflation and expand-
ing production and hence providing more jobs. It is all too evident
that, at least in the industrialized countries where we have large
unused productive capacity, inflation and recession go hand in hand.
The peculiar point about Italy lies in its higher relative inflation
rate: this means that we have home-grown sources of inflation all

our own, which must be rooted out or at least brought back under con-
trol. The government has put its finger on the right spot to step in:
taper off on automatic cost-of-living wage hikes; put limits on pub-
lic spending; and stimulate productivity.

We can already glimpse some encouraging signs (a ceiling on inflation;
limits on the deficit; easing of the "fiscal drag"), but they still
look too weak and uncertain to amount to any significant change of
course. Even though inflation sometimes seems to be tapering off,

it is still running at double the European average. This great a dis-
parity is obviously not without its impact on the exchange rate.

Question: One last question: FIAT. What kind of year was 1981 for
the biggest privately owned Italian corporation, and what does 1982
look like from here?

Answer: On a year like 1981, which was unquestionably one of the
worst years for the economy since the end of World War II, FIAT will
close its books with an industry profit which will be significant and,
for the first time, will be consolidated and certified.

It must be noted that FIAT enjoyed the advantage of diversification of
its activities outside the automotive sector. All the other automo-
tive companies, though, are feeling the pinch of the current slump in
the industry.

But even in this sector, notwithstanding the loss of South America --
where the market literally took anosodive -- our overall picture
is better than that of the other companies, while our marketing fig-
ures are excellent: our market share in Europe rose significantly
from 12.8 in 1981 to 13.0 percent over the past twelvemonth. That
record put us in first place among all automakers with sales in Eur~
ope. And we did it in the teeth of the overall decline in demand.

While we are talking about the diversification that is PIAT's hall-
mark, I must add that every company in the group, with the exception
of those in steel, showed a profit last year. Some of them showed
very niCe profits indeed. For example, Iveco boosted its sales by

33 pchent across Africa and the Middle East, and our tractors shawed
comparable gains.

Our volume of business showed a growth of 22 percent for 1981: and
that means a marked increase in real terms, since the inflation rate
we have to work with is not Italy's but the average for the countries
we operate in. Our indebtedness, meanwhile, is unchanged.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to widely accepted predictions, 1982 will be very much like
1981 for the automotive industry. Some recovery is predicted for 1983.
FIAT, though, is not standing still and waiting for the markets to come
back to life; that would be a losing, give-up policy. FIAT has inves-
ted and plans to invest a total of 4.7 trillion lire from 1980 to 1984
in its automotive sector alone: and that figure does not include ex-

pendinires on research and planning (around 300 billion each vear ad—
ded to our costs).

This effort will enable us to keep on place among the top companies

in the world when it comes to technology, innD.vation, and quality. We
shall be able to win the game, though, only if we are competitive
across the boar», and that includes prices. And that leads us into the
matter of labor costs. I repeat once again that there is often far
too much precious time wasted on idle chatter.

We have repeatedly called for scrapping the 1975 pact on the single

point of the economic situation. There remains nothing left to do
but to deal with the issue when the contracts come up for renewal at

the end of 1981, partly to put labor's good faith to the practical
test.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Bditore S.p.A. Milano
6182

C50: 3104/81

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC SPAIN

ECONOHIC CONDITIONS EXPECTED TO IMPROVE IN 1982
hadrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 16 Nov 81 p 75

[Text] In 1982 there will be a clear shift in the direction we need to go if
we are to solve economic and social problems that have been affecting the
Spanish economy. Despite this. however, still we will be far from resolving
these problems definitely. These are the conclusions of a comprehensive re-
port on the Spanish economy in 1980 and its short-term prospects. recently
prepared by the Ministry of Economy and Trade.

"There are a number of positive factors in 1981 which if coupled with more
favorable international circumstances in 1982 and with the positive impact of
the National Agreement on Employment, permit us to see an upswing from the cri-
sis in 1982," as Anselmo Calleja, director general of economic policy and wel—
fare explained to CAMBIO 16.

A Healthier Economy

To Calleja, there are four positive factors in the 1981 balance sheet, which
can be confirmed by reliable data. The first one, a recovery of productive
investment (“investment in plant and equipment. above all in modernization and
energy savings"). Another positive factor is the behavior of the foreign sec-
tor. which is contributing to the economic expansion by means of increasing
exports and decreasing imports. in large amounts ("thanks to the foreign sector
we are going to have a l-percent growth this year"). The third favorable point
is the moderation of prices, which in the first 9 months of this year have risen
1 percent less than in the same period in l980 ("we are going to close the year
with an Inflation rate below 1A percent"). And lastly. the fact that less
energy is now required to maintain the-same revel of production.

"What is happening is that. for the first time since the crisis began. Spain is
living within its means. Consumption in the past was financed with higher
foreign indebtedness and now resources come from exports and from greater in—
vestments. This is the beginning of a healthier behavior of the economy and
this permits being more optimistic about the future," Anselmo Calleja explains
to this magazine.

But there are gloomy points also on the 1981 balance sheet. "The economy is at

a standstill. not only here but in all countries, employment drops and unemploy-

ment grows, although at significantly lower rates. This decline should continue,
but at a lower rate and i believe that a trend change can begin in 1982," Calleja

notes.
7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Facing 1982, the first favorable element comes from abroad: the industrialized
countries that makeup the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
think they may experience a 2-percent growth (compared to the 1 percent expected
for 1981) and it is estimated that there will be a substantial increase of de-
mands for Spanish exports (about u percent compared to slightly under 2 percent
in 1981). And if there are good prospects for our exports they are due. pri-
marily. to Spain's improved competitiveness abroad. "ages are reaching inter-
national levels and productivity per worker is rising sore than in the other
countries.

"But undoubtedly, the most positive factor facing us in 1982 is the National
Agreement on Employment (ANE)," Anselmo Calleja believes. According to the
director general of economic policy and welfare, this will influence the situa-
tion positively in three ways: psychologically by improving business expecta-
tions ("profit margins will improve and there will not be credit strains"):
secondly, by the beneficial effect on prices that will result from a wage in-
crease of 9 to 11 percent (in the face of an expected inflation rate of 13 per-
cent); and third, because the negative employment trend will be broken thanks
to greater economic growth, lower labor cost and a significant expansion of
public investment.

The Unknown, the U.S.A.

"The biggest unknown in 1982 is the United States. If we have another period
of monetary instability, with extremely high interest rates, as in the first
part of 1981, Spanish monetary policy would have to harden and that would make
recovery enormously difficult," adds Anselmo Calleja, who however is not eun-
cerned about energy for the coming year. "And God squeezes but does not choke:
I expect 1982 to be a good agricultural year, after a bad one in 1981 which
followed the big 1980 crop."

It remains to be seen if private investment is going to revive. "There already
is private investment and with the effort of the public sector, 1982 can be the
first year of decidedly positive investment. And I believe this panorama will
cause business expectations to imnrove and businessmen will fulfill their
responsibility," Callcja notes.

In his opinion, 1981 could be described as "the year hiwhich the economy has
adjusted to the crisis.“ in which Spain has begun to act according to its
means. "And this has been made possible by the attitude of the workers. In
no Western country, not even in France with a socialist government, have the
workers accepted wage increases below the inflation rate to help the economy
to come out of the crisis. And it is from this sense of responsibility exer-
cised by the social forces in 1981 that our hope for 1982 is born," concludes
Calleja. ANE holds the key.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030025-6

0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(:hart:
How the Econonz Is Going
Magnitudes 1981
Economic growth 1.2
(Gross Domestic Product)
- Inflation (percent) 13.5/14
Foreign deficit (current
account in millions of donors) 5.500
Unemployment 1.9 millio
Credit to the private sector
(percent of increase) 17/18
Wages growth (percent) 13/11:
- Cross Investment growth
(percent, public plus private) 1.5
COPYRIGHT: 1981. Informacion y Revistas. S.A.
9925
(:50: 3110/50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030025-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCONOMI C SPAIN

REDUCED HYDROBLBCTRIC POWER CAUSES INCREASES IN OIL IMPORTS

Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 21 Dec 81 pp 52-54

[Text] The long and dramatic drought has wrought havoc upon the
Spanish economy, to such an extent that, for the first time in re-

cent decades, the year is coming to an end with a total standstill
of production.

Along with the spectacular decline in harvests--in grains the
decrease is almost 50 percent--and the destruction of half of our
livestock, the widespread absence of rainfall has led to an exorbi-
tant consumption of our fuel oil, which we import and pay for at its
weight in gold. For this reason alone the additional consumption in
1981 exceeded 3.2 million tons.

While 2 years ago we could say that it was raining oil in Spain,
today the drought that is forcing us to use fuel oil in our hydro-
electric power plants has endangered our spectacular energy balance
which the economic depression and the effectiveness of our national
energy plan had made possible.

For 25 years Spain burned petroleum in growing amounts, ignoring the
energy crisis and the rise in prices. In the end, 1981 broke this
cycle. And in 1982 Spain will consume 5 million tons of petroleum
less than it did in 1981, which is practically 10 percent of its
total consumption.

Despite such favorable achievements, the P803 [Spanish Socialist
Workers Party] feels that our energy planning has been a disaster:
it lacks imagination concerning the measures to be taken, and the
few that have been taken have been uncoordinated.

Jose del Pozo, who is in charge of energy, doesn't believe it is

possible for Spain's economy, which has to continue growing, to
tolerate a decline in its absolute energy needs. “Therefore," he

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

said, “the 10 percent decline in our petroleum purchases has been
made possible only through the use of coal, whose 1982 consumption
will be twice that of 1977." In 1977, Spain produced 17.8 million
tons of coal, and in 1982 coal production is expected to be 35 mil-
lion tons. The substitution cf coal for fuel oil in our thermal
power plants to generate electricity and its use in the cement in-
dustry are the main causes of this new resurgence of coal.

"Those who said we were crazy for wanting to fill up the country
with ashes,” said Joaquin Almunia of the PSOE, "now, 2 years later,
have come around to our beliefs and have corrected their national
energy plan, which called for a predominance of nuclear power, a
major increase in fuel oil use, and little attention to be given

to coal and hydroelectric power."

The differences between the 90vernment and the opposition party on
energy are total, if we except one fact: energy is expensive; its
price is never going to decline, and we have to get used to con-
serving or paying a higher price for it.

According to Spain's energy director, the average Spanish citizen is
undisciplined, wants high levels of comfort, and is prepared to pay
for his comfort. A price policy, therefore, is the only answer.

But the P803 says that one of the myths that must be dispelled is

the myth of comfort as synonymous with energy waste. In support

of its contention, it cites as an example the fact that the average
U.s. citizen pays twice what the average Swedish citizen pays, and
has no greater level of well-being. Joaquin Almunia believes this

is a problem of collective social organization, and that this organi-
zation must necessarily originate with the government.

”There is no true awareness of the gravity of the problem," said
Del P020, "and the administration can not take police action to
force the people to save. Efforts are being made, but the people
only began to become aware of the problem when prices started to
rise. The energy chief is convinced that little can be done on a
private level. "Gasoline rationing for automobiles would create
such administrative problems and would encourage cheating on such
a massive scale that it is better not to try it. For heating,
measures have already been taken, and CAMPSA [Leasing Company of
the Petroleum MonOpoly, Inc] is maintaining centrol over consumption
in this area."

The Socialist Party believes that Spain's consumption, which is not
very high compared with other developed countries, can not be
reduced, but it does feel that increases in consumption can be

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

controled. “We have to tell the citizens,“ said Joaquin Almunia,
“that they are going to continue to pay more and more for energy,
and that this is an irreversible process, aside from the rising pri-
ces of a barrel of petroleum or the decline of the dollar." The
P808 has proposed periodic increases three points above the cost of
living index, but the public must be given an explanation of what is
being done with this money, and what results are coming from these

price increases in terms of research or the development of new al-
ternative energy sources.

According to the P508 spokesman, there are many ways to avoid waste,
and a price policy may be a good tool, as long as the consumer is
given some way out. I'Electricity meters with different rates, de-
pending on times, could be installed. These meters have already
been invented and are used in some other countries. The installa-
tion of solar energy systems, such as water heaters, should be en-
couraged. In some 0.8. states, this is obligatory in buildings
now under construction. We should try to avoid bottlenecks on
weekends by increasing local train service. hENPE's [Spanish
National Railroads] schedules on workdays should be improved, since
it now seems that these schedules are designed precisely so the
trains can not be used by commuters."

"RENFE has not been electrified,” continued Joaquin Almunia; an
enormous amount of money is being squandered on hauling freight

by road, while we have a practically unused train system. No serious
campaign to encourage saving has been conducted. There are prac-
tically no tax incentives for the installation of insulation sys-
tems on a private level, and our tax legislation only considers
reductions for the installation of double-pane windows."

The administration's defense against these charges is that the
effort must be a total one, not solely done by the government.

The important thing, obviously, is to bring about a reduction in
industrial consumption, which uses over 50 percent of our energy:
but other sectors, such as transportation, agriculture, and ser-
vices, which use approximately 20 percent, also have to make their
contribution to energy conservation, along with Spain's citizens,
who, all together, consume 8 percent of our total energy.

More Coal
“On an individual level, we have to realize,‘I said the energy
director, "that energy conservation means real savings in a family's

budget, and that this money can then be put to use for other pur-
poses."

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the subject of industrial energy use, Del Pozo said he was
generally satisfied with the achievements made in terms of con-
servation and with the use of coal. "Through the use of taxes or
incentives, businessmen have come to accept coal, which has some
very clear advantages, such as its cost, which is 50 percent less.”

The government's position on the expansion of nuclear energy is
strongly challenged by the P508. "We do not oppose the operation
of the existing plants and those now under construction, but we
disagree about the excessive number of nuclear power plants proposed
for Spain. Everyone knows the disadvantages of this type of facili-
ty. In addition, they did have some advantages that have now dis-
appeared. The kilowatt-hour is no less expensive, they employ few
people, and the technology, which is their one great advantage, is
becoming a handicap for Spain.”

In the middle of this debate, the Spanish energy picture is still
awaiting its definitive clarification. The present time, when we
are caught up in one of the harshest droughts ever known and an
economic depression with few precedents, may be right. And the
course of independence, security of supply, and the reduction of
costs is marked by this new resurgence of coal.

7679
C50: 3110/64

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJALIﬂﬂEONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

PARTIES' OPINIONS ON POSSIBLE EARLY ELECTIONS

Milan IL MONDO in Italian 8 Jan 82 pp 10-13

[Article by Roberto Iopolito and Paolo Passerini]

[Text] There's a whiff of ballot-boxes in the air. A lot
of the denizens of Montecitorio are sure of it:
sometime in 1982 there will have to be early elec-
tions. Will the 8th legislature really be left in-
complete? Here is what the thinking is all across
the party board.

Don't let the public statements of party spokesmen fool you: on
Montecitorio and among the political‘forces the all but unanimous
prediction (exceptions are rare indeed) is that somewhere along the
line in 1982 Italian voters will be summoned to the polling places
again. Besides, since 3 December 1981, this eighth legislature has
has passed the halfway point in its term. All of which means, for
one thing, that from that transition onward the chambers may be dis-
solved at any time without deputies or senators' losing the pension
and fringe rights that go with their term in office. Whichever way
it goes, as of 3 December this eighth legislature is fully valid.
People are beginning to wonder, as it has been traditional to do in
Italy for some time now, whether it has done everything we had a
right to expect of it, or whether it would serve some useful purpose
to keep it on a while.

Raising this question insistently and with determination is Bettina
Craxi's Socialist Party (PSI), followed and sometimes beaten to the
draw by its buddies in the Social Democratic Party (PSDI). "We'll
make our decision at the proper time," Craxi told TRIBUNA POLITICA,
without specifying whether his statement was meant as a warning or
as a real threat. What is certain is that the PSI has made up its
mind (and its leaders say so openly) that, once Giovanni Spadolini's
government falls, the Christian Democrats (DC) will be faced with an
either-or choice: either a socialist prime minister or early elec-
tions. Take your pick.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And the DC? Some argue that, secretly, the party leaders have already
promised Craxi a turn at the polls very soon, provided they don't lose
Palazzo‘thigi a second time. Questions asked on this score at Piazza
del Gesu, though, are answered only with denials. Denials that may
well be sincere, since, for the DC, giving Craxi a shot at the voters
right away, without leaving time for consolidation of the changing of
the guard already launched at the EUR assembly, could well prove a
risky business. Should the DC lose a few points and the PSI chalk up
gains, the next 5 years would be Craxi's and Plaminio Piccoli (or who-
ever is standing in for him) would have to fold his tents. An ill-
starred denouement for the DC, which could certainly not be wholly
offset by a possible further deterioration in the polls for the PCI,
already in deep trouble over Poland.

Besides: is that "take your pick" option -- either Craxi for prime
minister or early elections -- really that much of a sure thing? In

the DC they are beginning to talk about a compromise scenario which,
while giving the DC the prime minister's chair, would guarantee the PSI
a meatier role. There are those who talk of a DC-PSI coalition govern-
ment, or of dusting off Cossiga's formula 2: a three-party (DC-PSI-PRI)
coalition. The socialists swear they would never agree to that, and

say they are confident of victory in their next big push. Things,
though, will probably get quite a bit more complicated than that, partly
because it is certain that if President Sandro Pertini can count on a
majority within the parties in favor of allowing this legislature to
serve its full term, he will move heaven and earth to avoid dissolving
it. At this point, then, the only sure thing is that 1982 will be the
year of Craxi's all-out attack. How will it end? IL MONDO asked top
spokeSmen for all the constitutional parties for written replies to
this question: What will the second session of the eighth legislature
be like, and what do you want it to be like?" Here are the answers.

Oddo Biasini, Republican (PRI) Party secretariat

In the situation the country finds itself in, the pace of majority and
government activity cannot be hampered by chronological considerations
which might cause interruption in undertakings of some moment which
have already demonstrated their adequacy and which have therefore been
given the considered approval of the nation.

The Spadolini government was called into being to deal with the emer-
gency, on the basis of a crash program that won approval from a broad
majority. Its accomplishments from the outsethave commanded a scope
reaching far beyond the mere transitory situation. And while it is
true that 6 months are not enough to redress situations that will take
decades to set right, it is even truer that we are on the right road.
Therefore, anyone who interrupted an experiment in the majority and in
government which is already yielding fruit would be shouldering a very
grave responsibility indeed.

To conclude: I do not think that there is a problem as to the second
half of the eighth legislature other than the continuation of the ac-
tion begun, with salutary results, in the space of those 6 months.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ciriaco De Mita, DC Deputy Secretary

To imagine that we are living in normal times would be a dangerous
illusion. The overall crisis grows day by day. And the fae,ors -—
almost invariably uncontrollable, which deepen it seem to be prevail-
ing over every attempt, laudable though it may be, to come to grips
with it. One might say that every measure, no matter how lofty its
motivation, leads inevitably to irreparable damage. Hence the outlook
for a headstrong and unruly career for this legislature would seem to
be the most reliable.

And yet, if the political parties still have some chance to keep the
situation in hand, they can prove it only by demonstrating that they
can indeed govern under these conditions. I do not think one shows
ability and courage by indulging in flights to the future. The all-
too-frequent resort to early elections can only be veiled hypocriti-
cally as an appeal to a sovereign people. Put in more practical terms,
it is evidence of ineptitude.

Democracy is more than a pointless electoral rite: it is the capacity
for orientation and for proposals around which one gathers the con-
sensus of the people in conferring legitimacy upon one‘s governance.

What are we being asked to do when we turn out at the polls? Upon
what proposals, upon what political prospects different from those to
be found invariably in the parliament we have, are we to decide? If
there is somebody who thinks he can win the race by spinning solemn
scenarios around a few points variance in the percentages at the polls,
of course anything makes sense -- even calling early elections. But
nobody, I think, could possibly imagine that such behavior made any
major contribution toward getting us out of our difficulties and out
of the trying conditions under which we must cope with them.

Valdo Spini, PSI Deputy Secretary

This year 1982 looks like a crucial year for Italian politics. Last
year, 1981, was marked by a change of prime ministers. From the day
Ferruccio Parri fell in November 1945 to the formation of the Spado-
lini cabinet we have had an uninterrupted string of Christian Democrat
prime ministers, from Alcide de Gasperi to Arnaldo Forlani. The is-
sue we face in 1982 is whether or not the Spadolini government is a
mere parenthetical pause, perhaps to give the DC time to get its house
in order, to celebrate the new-start assembly and to hold its congress,
or it may well be the prelude to a real change of direction.-- a change
of course triggered by the discovery that no party today can hold sway
over all the others, and that the Socialist Party has become the deci-
sive factor in the politics of our country.

And so we hope that 1982 will prove to be a year of renewal. We are
the party that has moved most vigorously toward a replacement of the

ruling class: we want to bring that same spirit into Italian poli-
tics, so long accustomed to chugging along well-worn and familiar tracks.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We intend to do this on the political plane, but also on the issues.
The fact that the Spadolini government is forced to man its defense
lines along the Piave of a public-sector deficit of $0 trillion lire,
which is 10 percent of the GNP, a rate no country like ours can afford,
is prima facie evidence of the fact that a system of political and eco-
nomic relationships is already well on the road to the scrapheap. We
must therefor push ahead with a policy of broad scope and vision, one
that can create a political context of greater stability, hospitable
to the upgrading and restructuring of our nation‘s machinery. We have
already received major pledges of cooperation, first among them that
of organized labor. What we need now is the guts to match them at the
political level.

Giorgio Napolitano, PCI party whip in the Chamber

The first question is whether there will be a second sessio: cf this
legislature. We communists eagerly sieze this opportunity to under-
score the gravity of the consequences an early dissolution of the hou-
ses would entail, in the sense that it would interrupt the commitment
to solve a whole series of major problems already raised at the legis-
lative level.

There is a chance to complete and pass major legislation, already too
long stymied by various brands of resistance and roadblocks. Laws we
need to put the brakes on the growth of public spending, to upgrade

it and bind it to specific priorities: reform of the pension system,
reform of local government finances, and a charter for the civil ser-
vice. Laws we need to move ahead with a meaningful job of providing
ethical groundrules, to guarantee renewed operability of our democra-
tic institutions, to bring Italian justice out of crisis: drastic re-
form of the investigating commission for impeachment proceedings against
members of the government, reform of the prime minister's office and

of the ministries, and new authorization for reform of the criminal pro-
cedure code.

These examples would suffice (although many others could be adduced in
connection with numerous fields of activity) to make it clear that, if
it is not cut short by early elections, the second half of this legis-
lature can serve as a testing ground for the commitment to cleanup and
renewal of all the democratic parties and also, we hope, as a fruitful
matrix of sound solutions for issues that are long-since ripe and even
overripe.

Carlo Vizzini, PSDI Deputy Secretary

During the second half of the legislature, the P801 intends to work at
consolidating cooperation betwven the forces of socialist lay democracy
and those of Christian Democracy. We plan to work, too, toward a non-
traumatic end to a phase marked by an agreement and a government born
of the need to deal with several emergencies. Hence we are talking
about working toward a broader political agreement, still within the
$~party framework, that might typefy the second session of the legisla-
ture.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We are convinced that the nation's problems call for a period of po-
litical stability designed to do more than merely cope with emergen-
cies. We Social Democrats, therefore, are certainly not pushing for
dissolution of the legislature. It is clear that the attempt to

reach broader consensus will involve some rough patches, and the need
to face up to several issues that have to do with the way our institu-
tions work. To strive for parliamentary government in a Country whose
governments have an average life-expectancy of 6 to 10 months is not
an easy thing to do by any means. Even so, as things stand now, none
of the majority parties has indicated opposition to a broader entente.
Starting at the end of this month, we shall be checking to see whether
and to what degree absence of opposition turns into practical backing.

Valerio Zanone, PLI (Liberal Party) Secretary

The second term of the legislature begins with 1982. During its first
session we have had four governments, each one supported by a different
majority coalition than backed its predecessor. In the closing months
of this year the government's action, especially its attempts to con-
trol inflation, has shown us mounting evidence of the ertreme fragi-
lity of government coalitions.

The experience of these months show us clearly that to reclaim and im--
prove the state is going to take more than budget economies: it is
going to take an adequate program of legislative reform. However, the
various laws to be enacted have one thing in common: their salutary
effects will not be politically ascertainable until at least 2 years
have passed, and until several months of inevitable unpopularity have
run their course. To lay that onus on governments destined to last no
more than 8 to 10 months (a little longer than a butterfly's lifespan)
is impossible, because a government that would adopt as its program
the introduction of unpopular measures and then be toppled at the
height of their unpopularity would be politically anu electorally
suicidal.

Therefore institutional reform, long understood primarily as reclaim-
ing our institutions from thv rxcesses of state control and welfarism,
calls for a government with time to do the job and to get credit for
its first fruits, a government of the legislature for a legislative
program. The right coalition to draft it and enact it can only be a
five-party coalition. Everything, beginning with foreign relations,
points to the fact that in this legislature there is no alternative to
the S-party coalition. If it succeeds in establishing program continu-
ity, there will also be continuity in the legislature.

pOPYRIcuT: IL MONDO 1981

6182
cso: 3104/81

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0FFIC1A[.USE4DNLY

MILITARY FRANCE

GENERAL DESCRIBES MIRACE'S FLEXIBILITY. ROLE IN AIR DEFENSE

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 12 Dec 81 pp 23-25

[Article by Air Defense Connmnder Bernard Capillon: "The Role of the Mirage F-l in
Air Defense"; introduction by Jean de Galard]

[Excerpts] The Mirage F-l's Main Advantage: Its Flexibility
The Air Force's Two-Seater F-l Squadron Has Passed the SOO-Hour Mark

To date, 649 Mirage F-l's have been ordered from Dassault-Breguet by 11 countries,
including France for its Air Force. These orders are for the different versions--

single-seaters and two-seaters--of the Mirage F-l: for interception, ground at-
tack, reconnaissance, training.

At the end of this year, the builder will have delivered a total of 484 planes, 66
of then to France, including three prototypes and three preseries planes.

when in 1973 the 30th Fighter Hing--based at Reims and previously equipped with
Vautour two-seaters--received its first Mirage F-l's. some immediately expressed
the opinion that the new plane--compared with the most recent versions of the Mi-
rage 111,whieh was then in service and the oldest of which it was gradually replac-
ing--incorporated few technical novelties and offered few operational advantages.

Today, they have to recognize objectively that in 8 years the Mirage P-l has become
a highly flexible combat plane.

A simple single-seat interceptor, not refuelable in flight, in its first version,
designated F-IC, it is now offered in three other versions, intended for ground at—
tack (F-IA). training (F-IB two-seater) and reconnaissance (F-ICR single-seater).
In its F-lC first version, it has become capable of refueling in flight. And an
F—IH version has been derived from the F-lC.

The highly flexible character that the Mirage F-l has reached today testifiies to

its basic qualities as an aircraft and to its builder's ability to gradually draw

the greatest possible advantage from it, in response to the demands of the air
forces that use it.

France, for its part, has ordered 252 Mirage F-l's. including 20 F-lB two-seater
trainers and 62 F-lCR versions. The first F-lB’s were delivered to the "Contat

19

FOR OFTTCIALVUSEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Venaissin" squadron of the 5th Fighter Wing, based at Orange and this 3/5
squadron has just passed the SOO-flight-hours mark. AIR ET COSMOS wanted to go out
to the field to inform its readers about the conditions in which the training of
the Air Force's future F-lc and F-lCR pilots is done with this plane and about the
principal advantages brought by the arrival of this new version in the unit.

But we first wanted Air Force General Bernard Capillon, air-defense commander, to
set the place of the Mirage F-l within the framework of air defense. We take this
opportunity to thank him warmly for the interview that he kindly granted us and on
the basis of which the following article was written. - Jean de Galard

The Mirage F-l's Place in Air Defense

"Let us be very clear,” General Capillon stresses at the outset; "air defense is a
whole. It is not just airplanes, even though the air component (airplanes + the
weapons they carry) represents an essential part. The fact is that one has to de-
tect, identify, and as the case may be. intervene and possibly destroy, and lastly,
protect oneself, for not everything can be stopped."

The F-lC, a Powerfully Armed Interceptor

The place of the Mirage F-l in air defense? General Capillon does not hesitate to
call it essential, and he has plenty of arguments to justify that description.

The Mirage F-l, within the framework of the zone-coverage mission assigned to it,
means the possible interception of intruding airplanes flying at 70,000 feet and at
speeds corresponding to Mach 2.5.

It also means a sizable weaponry capacity in the air-to-air domain for which it was
designed (two cannons plus four missiles), but it has also been proven that the
Mirage F—l's air-to-ground capacity is also sizable, and it would have been a
shame, General Capillon notes, not to have taken advantage of it. At low altitude,
in fact. the Mirage F-l still performs very well, and furthermore. the reconnais-
sance version (F-lCR) of the F-1 will benefit greatly from the F-lC's achievements
in the low-altitude area.

The Air Force has always seen to it that its flight personnel have a certain flexi-
bility. Despite the reduction of the unit pilots' air activity to 15 hours per
month and the fact that their training is partly oriented toward the unit's main
mission, they always devote a little of their flying time to training for a second-
ary mission. Until now. for carrying out this secondary mission of the air-defense
units. which is ground attack, the F-lC pilots had only two 30-mm cannons mounted
on the plane. That was not much. Other armament will rogressively be delivered,
and General Capillon notes in this regard that the first firing programs for the
Mirage F-lC equipped with conventional boms (400, 250 and 125 kg) and 68-mm rockets
mounted on the LPR-l carriage should take place next year. This air-to-ground mis-

sion will, of course, continue to bu a secondary one.
The Mirage F-lC, General Capillon goes on, means a wide range of possibilities. As
regards interception, the pilot has available to him the Matra 530 air-to-air mis-

sile, which is well-proven today, or the Super 530 air-to-air missile for big dif-
ferences in altitude; if one or the other does not hit its target, the pilot still

20

IYDRloiiﬂCJAI.lﬂ5EZ(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has his two Magic air-to-air missiles for close combat, and as a last recourse. the
cannon. A light patrol--two Mirage F-l's--repreaents considerable firepower: four
cannons. eight missiles. In reality, observes the air-defense commander (and with
all the more objectivity in that he was previously second-in-command of the FATAC
[Tactical Air Forcesl), ”the F-l is as well-armed as certain attack planes.“

An Airplane of Great Flexibility of Use

The Mirage F-lC in its most recent configuration. whether intended for the French
Air Force or for the air forces of foreign countries, has been subjected to con-
stant improvements, on the level both of aerodynamics (combat flaps) and of firing
conditions (heads-up radar and sights), which has made it possible to achieve con-
siderable progress for combat or air-cover missions. Since 1977-1978, the air-
defense command has thus been able to fulfill an operation very important to it:
the deVelopment of its pilots' combat capabilities and of the "fighter" mentality.

In any case, General Capillon notes, the Mirage F-lC possessed, even in its initial
version, the qualities of facility related to its piloting (automatic pilot, VOR
[Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Radio Range], automatic ILS [Instrument Land-
ingSysteml)that made it the Air Force's first plane with which pilots were author-
ized to descend to minimum altitudes never before achieved: a ceiling of 200 feet
("and 60 m is really low," General Capillon comments) and horizontal visibility of
l km (which corresponds to less than half of the length of a conventional runway"-
2,AOO m).

One final area that testifies to the scope of the range of possibilities of the
Mirage F-lC is that of the deployment of the units. Because of the fact that the
plane can do with runways whose characteristics are inferior to those required by
the Mirage III, for example, the fact that its conditions of use are less restri:-
tive, the Air Defense Command can shift squadrons from one field to another to a
greater extent. and in very short times.

The Mirage F-l, General Capillon continues, also means maintenance that has ad-
vanced a long way and that makes it possible to achieve very satisfactory "cruis-
ing" availability rates, on the order of 80 percent. In specific short-duration
actions--the "Dates" exercise, for example--readinesa went up to 98 percent.

The term "maintenance“ should be taken here in its broadest sense--that is, to in-
clude the major-overhaul operations and the modification projects carried out by
Ateliers Industriels de l'Air (AlA) on the occasion of major surveys, involving es-
sentially the mounting of IVM [Climbing-Speed Indicator] versions of Thomson-CSF's
Cyrano radar, the mounting of a harmonization box to adapt the F-1 to the Super 530
air-to-air missile, and the modification associated with the sight.

As regards the airplanes already delivered, this involves a relatively long-tern
program. General Capillon specifies, "for it is obvious that on account of consid-
erations of costs and availability, not everything can be done at once."

The final advantage of the Mirage F-l, but not the least one, General Capillon com-
ments, is its ability to be refueled in flight. This is an essential capacity,

"especially when the number of combat planes available is not so high. In this re-
gard, in-flight refueling capacity is very advantageous in three respects: first of

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all. one can do long-distance intercepting or, as the case may require, stand by
for a long time (5 hours stand-by time, on patrol), which makes it possible to ex-
ploit whatever advance warning there may be); secondly, escort missions can be
flown if necessary; and finally, Mirage F-l units or patrols can be sent overseas,
under particular circumstances and in response to particular needs: it is no secret
that missions of this type to Djibouti have already been carried out. At a time
when there is a growing threat and just the interplay of alliances in the world at
large forces one to remain vigilant, the new capacity given the Mirage F-l by its
in-flight refueling capability is very important."

In short, General Capillon concludes, the Air Force has in the Mirage F-l today a
combat plane that holds an essential place in air defense. "The 155,000-hour mark
has just been passed by the four wings equipped with F-l's, without any major
trouble with either the airframe or the engine." (Editor's Note: The Mirage F-l's
engine is a SNECMA [National Aircraft Engine Design and Construction Company]

Atar 9K 50 that develops 5,000 kg of thrust dry and 7.200 hp with afterburning

[as publishedl.) “The first F-lc's delivered have flown more than 2,000 hours, and
the plane is aging well. The oldest engines total around 1,400 hours of opera-
tion." ‘

General Capillon uses two key terms to express better the Mirage F-l's place in air
defense:

-—flexibility of use: "It is now known how to go very quickly from one point to an-
other, and also how to go very quickly from one type of mission to another";

--coherence: "The F-l/Super 530 pairing presently available constitutes a perfectly
coherent system."

"This does not mean." the Air-Defense commander admits objectively, ”that no insuf-
ficiency is noted. Thus it is that the modification projects referred to earlier
are going to last another 3 years, which means that not all the F-l's delivvered
will be remodeled until 1984, which corresponds to nearly half the estimated life-
time of the F-l."

One can understand that the Air Defense commander would have liked to have all the
F-l's ready to the same standards sooner. One can also understand that he would
have liked the range of the radar to enable his pilots to see farther and lower.

In its present version, the Mirage F-l has a certain number of possibilities for
countering electronic warfare. One will understand why this subject is not devel-
Oped here.

Matra Super 530 and Magic

9‘
Two years ago, almost to the day (it was 19 December 1979), a big ceremony marked
the delivery to the 12th Fighter wing, at the Cambrai base, of the first Matra
Super 530 air-to-air missiles, whose characteristics and performance place them in
the forefront in the area of high-altitude and high-speed interception.

Since that time, the 12th Fighter Hing—-which today has one squadron more than in
l979-—has trined its pilots in the use of that missile, whose advantages over the
interception missiles of the preceding generation we recall here:

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢WTHJAI.USE(NQLY

--it makes it possible to do interception without recoil or with very little re-
coil, even against hostiles flying at twice the speed of sound at 70,000 feet;

-—it makes it possible to intercept the planes presently in service that have the
highest performance characteristics, even when they are flying at the peak of
their capacity.

"The process of equipping with Super 530 missiles is presently under way," General
Capillon states; “after the 12th Hing, it is the turn of the 5th Wing, and the re-
sults of the test firings done. notably by using the restitution facilities of the
Landes Testing Center, confirm its performance characteristics. It can be said
that it hits the target in actual firing."

The F-lC ; iots have far more experience with the Magic (Hatra 550) air-to-air mis—
sile, and it cauld be said that its use is part of the training-type mission. "Re-
cently," General Capillon reveals, "an F-l of the 5th Hing took off from Orange at

night; it went and fired a Magic at the Landes Testing Center, and came back to its
base after having landed at another base."

CJPYRIGHT‘ A. & C. 1980

[1267
C50: 3100/239

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY ‘ FRANCE

ND! MILITARY RADAR EQUIPMENT-40mm is now marketing new elements intended
to enlarge the family of ORB-32 airborne military radars./ ﬁn boldface]
Indeed, Omera offers a /gamut of subuassemblies/ [in boldface? permitting
the building of systems adapted to all maritime missions, whatever the car-
rier. This gamut includes a /choice of antennas, transceivers, and visual-
ization systems/ [in bold fac_e7 offering many operational modes, including
monitoring of a tactical situation and automatic tracking of objectives with
radio transmission of data to the launching vessel. we recall that this
grou of units has been tested as a whole in ﬁrms-horizon firing/ [in bold-
face; of long-range Exocet and Otomat missiles. The ORB-32 has already been
adopted by five countries. [Text aria AIR Er C(BHCS in French 2 Jan 82

p 127 [commmm A. s. c. 1981 61 5

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORCNTKJALIEKEONLY

(
GENERAL ITALY
O

POLBMICS WITHIN THE INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 8 Jan 82 pp 14-15
[Article by Gianni Rossi: Arabia Off-limits to the 007s]

1

[Text] There is a generation gap emerging inside Italy's intelli-
gence services (SISMI for counterespionage and SISDE for counter-ter-
rorism). It centers on the retirement and modernization program which
the new head of SISHI, Gen Linetto Lugarese, and his opposite number
at SISDE, Prefect Emanuele De Francesco (both appointed in the wake

of the P2 scandals which involved their predecessors) have introduced,
to the accompaniment of considerable vocal outrage and bitterness both
inside and outside the services.

According to the increasingly persistent rumors that seep out of the
closely guarded rooms of the Barrachini palace and from Via Giovanni
Lanza in Rome (where the two branches have their headquarters), a lot
of secret agents who have won international recognition for their pro -
fessional skills are beginning to lose their motivation. Some go fur-
ther, and actually say they don't know who they are any more.

This is the onset, in a word, of the so-called mass_defection among the
professionals, and it affects mainly the most delicate of the intelli-
gence agencies (by reason of its vital mission): SISMI. A sense of
frustration, of being pushed aside, hangs over the delicate work of
the 0073 who are still left, because the new bosses find them too
independent.

Among those who have paid the price (even though the machinery SISMI
uses is the bureaucratic device of retirement "having reached the man-
datory retirement age" is Carabiniere Col Stefano Giovannone, who led
SISMI's southeastern division and most importantly was the man who
maintained close ties with the top spokesmen for the incandescent Arab
world, including the Palestinian leadership.

Ciovannone's replacement is the litmus test of the Italian intelligence
services' new foreign strategy. Until now, in fact, most of counter-
espionage's attention was devoted to building and strengthening good
working relationships with the Arab nations around the Mediterranean.
There were two major rationales behind this good-neighbor policy: to

25
FOR(NﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

keep Italy out of the line of fire of the Palestinian guerrillas and
other Arab irredentist groups; and to keep up steady penetration of
the Middle East markets on behalf of the Italian weapons, installations,
and telecommunications industries. And this entire effort was put
forth in the overriding cause of energy, in order to get, in return,
adequate supplies of oil at affordable prices directly from the Arab
governments.

Using every means available to block the growing autonomy of the Ita1~’
ian intelligence Services in the Mediterraneas area at the outset were
two extremely powerful intelligence groups: France's $0305 and Israel's
Mossad. There were Mafia-style slayings and intimidation attempts in
Italy on prominent figures in the planning industries who had contracts
with Iraq (then looked upon as the Arab Bulgaria because of its subser-
vicnce to the Soviets, but now on the way to better relations with the
westerners), signed with the names of the more intransigeant Palestin-
ian organizations, but of dubious origin. There were leaks to the me-
dia, often sheer fabrications, concerning alleged payoffs to Italian
parties in connection with trade agreements (such as the sale of Lupo-
class frigates to Iraq and, quite probably, the BN1 contract with Pe-
tromin). Attempts at internal destabilization ensued, culminating in
the murders of several Arab spokesmen on Italian territory.

"These have all the earmarks," some SISMI officials told IL MONDO, "of
a single maneuver designed to keep Italy from maintaining relations or
entering into dialogue with the Arab nations."

And all this is going on just when "the CIA, acting for the American
government and the other intelligence services of the European countries
who are our allies are doing their level best to get control of rela-
tions with the Arabs," the same sources told IL MONDO.

Another blow to the freehand line in the foreign policy of Italian in-
telligence came with the recent influx of CIA personnel here, both be-
fore and after the arrival of the new U.S. ambassador to Rome, Maxwell
Raab (a member of the very powerful American Jewish lobby who has
business connections in Israel). While on the one hand, Italy's capa-
city for foreign penetration (and “foreign" for Italy in this delicate
context means primarily the Middle East) was declining, on the other
hand even policy toward the Arab states was changing, in line with the
anti-Libyan positions taken by some socialist leaders.

For the Italian 007s scattered through the Arab world, life has got a
whole lot harder since then and their very activities (split about
50-50 between diplomacy and business) were beset by serious difficul-
ties. No better opportunity for transfers could have arisen, then,
than the one tied in with the changes at the summits of the services
in the wake of the P2 hurricane. By that time, though, it was all too
evident that the structure of the intelligence services was coming
unglued. One attentive political observer close to Prime Minister
Giovanni Spadolini is beginning to wonder "if what we have here might
not be a reemergence of parallel structures for the intelligence ser-
vices, arising out of the growing heat in the political kitchen, to
pave the way for the government to follow Spadolini's.“

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This particular apprehension, too, coupled with mindfulness of the
excesses of the services in the past and recently, may have moved
Prime Minister Spadolini to let it be known that for the present he
contemplates “no decision as to whether or not to appoint an under-
secretary-delegate for the security and intelligence services." Just
such an appointment, though, was what the DC, through Antonio Gava,
who heads its political secretariat, called for only a few days ago.
Even so, not all Christian Democrat troops share Gava's opinion. Here
is the view of Erminio Pennacchini, chairman of the interparliamentary
commission on the security services: "I believe this was a personal
initiative rather than any practical requirement. My impression is
that the problem is not yet imminent."

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981
6182
cs0: 3104/81

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-FK'IAI. USE ONLY

GENERAL ITALY

PSI'S ANDO CALLS ma REFORM or sacuanv SERVICES
Milan pmonm' in Italian 11 Jan 82 p 40

[Interview with Salvatore Ando, head of the PSI‘s State Problems
section]

[Text] No sooner were the new chiefs of the armed forces and
secret services appointed than all the political par-
ties admitted that Giovanni Spadolini's government had
indeed based its choices on criteria of profession-
alism and competence, in total disregard of political
considerations. And yet, only 6 months later, we have
a resurgence of attacks, polemics, and criticism aimed
primarily at the way the secret services are doing
their jobs

The DC targets Spadolini and hopes to get political con-;
trol of the services for itself. DC Senator Claudio
Vitalone rails against the reform of the services and
calls for reuniting SISMI and SISDB in a single agency.
The Socialists, too, dismissing the tough stand the
Prime Minister has taken ("Hands off the reform act!"),
are pushing for radical change. In this interview

with PANORAMA, Salvatore Ando, head of the PSI's State
Problems section, explains why.

Question: Why do you think the present law governing the secret ser-
vices needs revision?

Answer: What is happening every day cries out for reunification of the
two secret services. SISMI and $1503 have broad areas of activity that
overlap. And because they are doing the same things, they are.perforce
competing with each other. And their spying on each other uncovers
irregularities first in the one and then in the other.

Question: Past experience has shown, though, how dangerous it is to
concentrate all espionage and counter-espionage activities in‘a single
agency, whether you call it SIFAR or SID.

Answer: Yes, there have been abuses. But now, when we have two agen-
cies, aren't we seeing the same pattern of carbon copy and "bug" wars?

28

I HOR(WTK]ALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: These are serious charges, but they are also pretty vague.
What do you mean, in practical terms, by "bug" warfare?

Answer: When the missions of the secret services are not clearly de-
fined it is inevitable that you will get a very dangerous internecine
war. The revelations we have been hearing over the past few weeks
from several of the majority parties' political secretaries about
wiretaps should make us do a lot of thinking.

Question: Prime Minister Spadolini, though, has officially denied
that the secret services are conducting eletronic espionage against
political leaders.

Answer: Yes, but the denial conflicts with what the leaders say. In
any case, Spadolini ought to promise to keep a closer eye on the job
of coordination between SISMI and SISDE.

Question: Spadolini has said clearly that he has no intention whatso-
ever of reforming the secret services.

Answer: And things will keep on going from bad to worse. You have
proof of that in the expanding terrorist activities. Israeli intelli—
gence warned western intelligence agencies, including the Italian
ones, several months ago that a massive terrorist offensive against
the top brass in NATO was in the offing. The German government got
wind of it, too. Well, who took steps to provide proper preventive
measures? We have reach a point where the other countries long ago
ceased putting much faith in our security apparatus, so much so that
with the Moro kidnaping and now with that of General Dozier we must
permit American and German intelligence people to work on their own
in Italy.

Question: You are saying that our agencies are not really concerned
with terrorism. But isn't counter-terrorism the mission of SISMl, the
agency that reports to Defense Minister Lelio Lagorio, a socialist
like you?

Answer: Since reform, we no longer have for the two secret agencies
any problem of direct control by the defense or interior minister.

What we have is mainly a coordination problem, a gap in overall policy,
a lack of clearly defined mission. We socialists get the impression
that this drive has been absent all too frequently. Our quarrel with
Interior Minister Virginie Rognoni, for example, is a matter of record.

Question: True. hut just exactly what is it you charge him with?

Answer: For a long time Rognoni has been minimizing the matter of the
Red Brigades' (8R) international ties, even after the police had found
clear evidence of them, even after President Sandro Pertini's reports.
It seemed to us than theinxerior minister had a kind of blind spot for
the whole matter, and that his unwillingness to see was primarily due

to domestic political considerations.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO-I ONLY

Question: For instanCe?

Answer: Not to put too fine a point on it, fear of treading on the
PCI's toes.

Question: But what do you socialists really know about foreign ties
or about international involvement in Italian terrorism?

Answer: We have pieced together a series of facts and coincidences.
First of all, there are statements by confessing [terrorists], which
reveal the substantial support terrorist organizations got from some
eastern governments. And the prosecution of Augusto Viel, a terrorist
linked to Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, had come out long before these con-
fessions. There is also additional evidence that involves Libya. I
am referring specifically to the investigation conducted by Rome Dis-
trict Attorney Ferdinando Imposimato into the traffic in rifles sold
to the Libyan government and subseouently discovered in a Prima Linea
hideout. Don't these constitute more than sufficient cause for the
security agencies to probe to the bottom of it all, and find out just
who finances, arms, and commands terrorism in Italy?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore S.p.A. Milano
0182

END
cs0: 3104/81

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY