FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10181
11 December 1981

Translation

HUMAN INTELLIGENCE AND COMPUTER PROGRAMS

Ed. by

0.K. Tikhomirov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. .Haterials from'foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

JPRS L/10181
11 December 198].

HUMAN INTELLIGENCE AND COMPUTER PROGRAMS

Moscow INTELLBK'I‘ CHBLOVEKA I PROGRAMMY M in Russian 1979 (signed to
press 23 Jul 79) pp 1-230

[Book edited by Doctor of Psychological Sciences 0.x. Tikhomirov,

USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology. Izdetel'stvo 'Neuke',
7. 100 copies]

CONTENTS
Annotation.................................. 1
Foreword................................... 1

Part I
Psychologicel Principles of
Dialogue Systems

Intellectual Activity in a “Dialogue“ with s Cosputer (0. K. T'ikhomirov,

I. G. ulavina) 0 O O U 0 O O C I O C O O O I O I O O O O O O O O O O O I O 8
Using a Computer to Control Goal Forming Processes

(O.K.Tikhomirov,¥u.0.8abeyevs) .................... 39
The Turing Criterion. Thinking and (bunniestion

(A.Ye.Voyskunskly)............................ ll'l
"Artificial Intelligence" and the Problems of Constitution

(A.Ye.Voyskunskiy)............................ 132
The Computer User's Responsibility for the Insults of Activity

(L.I.Notkln)............................... 137

Part II

Psychological Problems of
Automated Control System

aperience in Applying Psychological Knowledge to Automated Control

System Development (1.. H. Berger. 3. K. Koehkin) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
The Role of the Personality/'8 Activity in Raising the Effectiveness of

Automated Control (E. D. Telegine, L. A. mus-yen) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

Part III
The Prospects for Bringing “Artificial Intelligence"
closer to lit-Ten Intelligence
The Psychology of Thinking and the Problems of ﬂeeting "Artificial
lntclligence"(¥e.s.l(uzin)........................ 166

- a - [I - USSR - N F000]
FOR OFFICIALUSEONLY
m OIII'ICIAL USO. ONLY

“Artificial Intelligence" and the Strategy of Analyzing the Cognitive
Structures of Natural Intelligence (1.. H. Vekkex) . . . . . . . . .

me Possibilities for Oonputer Modeling of mecriptive and
Conceptual‘nlinking (Yu. V.Orf0ycv). e o e eeeeeee one to

Phonene Discrimination Operations in Oral and Mental Actions
(Ye.N.Vinu'skaya) ........................

'Artificial Intelligence" and Decision Making (V. P. habakhin) . . . .

(bnclueion..............................

Bibliography.............................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17].
175

184
188
193

196
NATION

'mis book examines psychological problems associated with summation and mental
labor. It describes the methods and results of experimental psychological investiga-
tions of the intellectual activity of an individual participating in a 'dialogue"
with a computer, and it discusses the prospects for bringing the potentials for ma-
made systems closer to those of human intelligence. The general psychological pre-
requisites for raising the effectiveness of automated systems are analysed.

his book is intended for psychologists, philosophers, and specialists in automation
of mental labor.

FOREWORD

Decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress have posed an important task--raising the
effectiveness with which computers are used and broadening the range of their appli-
cation. Naturally, various sciences can and must make their contributionto this
couples task. However, the effectiveness of integrated research depends on how-
clearly the specific tasks of each scientific discipline are outlined. his is an
especially important premise in relation to psychology. since the present practice is
often to substitute the psychological approach by the information-and-cybernetics
approach. As a consequence we must state the basic ways we are to use psychological
knowledge in automation of mental labor, and we must formulate those problems of
automation that are specific to psychology and which, when solved, would make appli-
cation of this knowledge possible and effective.

One important direction for the use of psychological knowledge in automation is
associated with one of the forms of computer application--the “dialogue" approach.

As v. M. Glushkov noted. "further development of dialogue methods poses many techni-
cal and scientific problems. 'l'ney pertain mainly to accounting for human psychology...“
((34, p 41). consideration of the ptvchological features of human activity associated
with writing (evaluating, iuproving) dialogue programs is a new area of applied psycho-
logical research. ihis is precisely why most of the attention of this collection is
devoted to it. In order that human activity mdiated by couputer dialogue programs
would be structured with sufficient effectiveness, these programs lust be evaluated

on the. basis of not only logical and mathematical parameters but also the parameters
of human creative activity. The possibility for posing new goals is one of the

met important attributes of creative human activity capable of change, and this is
precisely why we reconnend interpreting change in goal formation as one of the con-
crete parameters to be used in evaluating dialogue programs. The program rust be

1
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
r03 OI-I‘ILIAL USE ONLY

evaluated on the basis of whether or not it broadens the possibilities of goal
formation. The study of new forms of human activity, mediated by computer programs
and thus maximally ”unburdened" of technical, 'routine' operations, is one of the
directions of applying psychological knowledge in practical automation.

we practice of building automated systems generally requires the use of psychologi-
cal knowledge as well. until recently the operator was the focus of the attention
of psychologists concerned with the man-machine problem. 'Doday. research on the
activity of computer users (planners. scientists, managers, and so on) is acquiring
ever-greater significance. I have formulated several psychological principles of
the planning of man-computer systems oriented on such “users."

1. Satisfaction of cognitive needs. 'lhe range of changes occurring in cognitive
needs must be considered when we select the information to be furnished to the
individual by the computer. If it is difficult to determine the range of changes
(in the case of purely creative tasks). the optimum strategy would be one in which
the individual is given maximum freedom of selecting the information to be furnished
by the computer, and of selecting the modes of computer use.

2. Enlargement of the creative components of labor. Such enlargement may be

achieved by freeing the individual from routine operations. It is important in
this case that he be freed of not the maximum but the optimum number of operations.
"Overautomation' may disturb the system of human activity and reduce its effective-
ness, rather than producing the expected growth in the creative content of labor.
If we are to upgrade the quality and increase the speed of problem solving, we
would have to study the factors affecting this process. and we would have to make
sure that the data employed are complete and verified.

3. The possibility of voluntary regulation of information flows beateen man and
computer. When using a computer. it is important to regulate the flow of intonation
from the computer center, to personally monitor the work of the coquter and, when
necessary, to perform back-up calculations.

4. 'me unity of the principles of improving automated and unautomated control.

the evaluated a person gives to information furnished by a computer depends on the
content of this information. its correspondence or lack of correspondence with the
user's previous experience, and the user's relationship to the computer and his re-
lationship to other people (those transmitting the data for computer processing, and
those servicing the computer). Mistrust of a computer may be based on a mistrust
of other workers, and this is why automation must be tied in with improvements of
management as a whole.

mess principles, which I had formulated in the book “Man and amputer" in 1973
(105), were introduced into the practice of creating a concrete automated system
owing to the initiative of L. M. Berger. His article, written together with B. K.
Koshkin and contained in Part II of this collection, examines concrete problems
concerned with implementing the psychological approach in automation practice; it
is within the framework of this approach that the authors analyse “needs.“ ”goal
formation.” and so on. Approximately the same theme can be found in the article
by E. D. Telegina and L. A. Abramyan, who associate growth in the effectiveness of
automated control with “the activity of the personality." Thus research described
in the collection's second part is in a sense a continuation of the research described
in “Man dndcomputer" (105).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another direction for the use of psychological knowledge in the practice of auto-
mating mental labor is assOciated with determining the prospects of automation, the
possibilities and means of bringing ”artificial intelligence“ based on combs:
programs closer to human intelligence. Our country's leading scientists hold
different opinions on this question. In his report "in. Scientific Problems of
Developing Computer Technology“ given at a jubilee session of the 0551: Academy of
Sciences, v. H. Glushkov worded the end goal of this development as 'creation of
artificial intelligence that is not only not inferior to, but which also greatly
exceeds, in its capabilities, natural human intelligence. Although this goal is
still rather far away. we are working toward it at full steam' ((34), p 41). 'me
work he is referring to is aired at raising the “intelligence level" of computers
with the purpose of quickly raising the labor productiVity of persons engaged in
intellectual activities. In V. V. Olavchanidse's opinion 'were we to have oonputer
concepts at our disposal, we could cause an artificial conceptual intelligence to
deal in deductive processes, including those of scientific and artistic creativity“

((101), p 219). A. M. Prokhorov states another opinion: ”mere is a fundamental
difference between modern computers and the human brain. Its roots lie in the very

foundation of these systems... What is interesting is that atteapts have been made
to utilize some prinCiples of living matter to build computers. this direction came
to be called 'bionics. ' However it has not as yet produced tangible practical results.
Thus computer development is proceeding in its own unique direction, one which will
continue to dominate in the near future“ ((70. p 21).

The differences we find in the assessments of the prospects of automation stem, from
my point of view. from differences in interpretation of human intelligence, and from
whether the psychological characteristics of human intelligence are ignored or taken
into full account, and therefore precise psychological definition of human intelli-
gence is a priority prerequisite for scientifically grounded prediction of the trends
in development of couputer technology.

Materials pertaining to this range of questions are published in the oollection's
third part, which includes reports given at the All-union Seminar “Psychology and
Artificial intelligence“ in 1975. The points of view presented in these reports
differ, which attests to the complexity and ubiquity of these problems. I believe
that the main prerequisite for effectively developing all three directions is to
study the unique qualitative features of human thinking in comparison with computer
information processing. Such research is precisely the main psychological problem
with which efforts at automating mental labor are concerned. Therefore we met
dwell on it in greater detail.

Both "art: ficial intelligence" specialists and psychologists smtimes ignore the
unique qualitativa features of human thinking. "in relation to artificial intelli-

gence, the question as to what is doing the perceiving and what is doing the
thinking-man or machine--is uniuportant. his is an insignificant detail,‘ writes

N. D. Nil'son (62). At the same time the formula «meted to by positivistically
oriented psychologists, "intelligence is that which is seasured by intelligence
tests" ((130. p 588) , offers support to those who are prepared to interpret cases
of computer solution of some problems as evidence of the computer's "intelligence."

we often encounter the following assertions in the literature: "Creativity is in-
formation processing" (57) , "Drinking is a random process," “The essence of thinking

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lies in construction of a model of the outside world,“ and "Invention algorithm do
exist" (1). 'lhe infatuation theory of thinking, which is somtimes called the
"mdeling" theory, having in mind mainly semeiotic models, has taken shape. In my
opinion any comparison of an information theory of human intelligence with a psycho—
logical theory must include a comparison of the realities described by the term

“psychological reflection" and "intellectual activity" on one hand and the terms
"model" and "information processing" on the other, as well as the revelation of
qualitative differences between them.

A distinction is made in A. N. neont'yev‘s work between a sensory image and a model.
'lhe unique features of a sensory image are activity (interest) making deeper pene-
tration into reality mssible, objectivity, and participation of effector units

in the arisal and operation of the image (56).

In addition to reflecting the world in the form of sensory images, the human mind
can reflect at a thinking level, which is also typified by objectivity. What we
usually encounter is not individual objects but entire objective situations, which
include complex mutual relationships and interactions among objects. Activity,
interest. and selectivity are also inherent to mental reflection, but in this case
they assume a specific form of manifestation. A mental image also requires effector
units for its develOpment, which can be seen especially clearly in cases of active
visual thinking, though it may also be discovered at the level of verbal thinking
(objective manifestations of internal speech).

problem solving process. 'Nrning to this particular case, we must distinguish
between initial, final, and intermediate reflection of the problem by the subject
(that is, its conditions and requirements). It should be noted that activity is
inherent to initial reflection of the conditions of the problem. As experiments

by V. Ye. Klochko (53) showed, when smajecte first acquaint themselves with the condi-
tions of a new problem they prepare themselves in a certain way for formulation of

a particular goal, one which sometimes anticipates and even displaces the goal
formulated by the experimenter. "Initial orientation in an assignment" (this is

what we sometimes call this process of initial reflection) may be very heterogeneous
in terms of its psychological structure.

Human mental reflection includes within itself both conscious and unconscious ele-
mnts including generalization. It is typified by operational and personal meanings
of complex dynamics. As was demonstrated by I. A. Vesil'yev's research (25), opera-
tional meanings transform into personal ones during solution of a particular problem.
'mese unique features of real human thinking, in particular, are not accounted for
by the 'mdeling" theory, and thus development of artificial systems satisfying

the requirements of modeling theory would not mean re-creation of human thinking.

The qualitative differenc between human thinking and computer "information
processing" is expressed in the description of the former as the activity of a
subject. As with all other activity, human thinking is the product of human needs
and models. Developed forms of thinking are typified by the presence of special
cognitive needs and a specific "object“ with the help of which the range of needs
for knowledge is satisfied. These needs are not only a prerequisite of mental
activity, and they are not only transformed after the completion of mental activity:

4

FOR 01-1-10“. USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL (BB ONLY

they also arise and undergo modification in the course of solution of a concrete
problem. New goals arise on the basis of cognitive needs. ‘lhe goal forming process,
various form of which are examined in a special paper (76), is one of the most
important characteristics of real hunan thinking. During his activity, man makes
various evaluations expressing the relationship between the results attained (or
anticipated) and the motives of activity. 'lhese evaluations say be emotional, they
may be verbal-logical, and they perform a role in internal regulation of activity.
Research by Yu. Ye. Vinogradov (75.76), I. A. Vasil'yev (25), and V. Ye. Klochko (53)
showed that solution of subjectively complex problem would be impossible without
emtional regulation, though presence of such regulation does not guarantee attain-
rent of an objectively valid result. lbsearch has revealed the existence and the
great role played by emotional anticipation in the solution of comlex problems.

If we are to arrive at an objectively valid solution to a problem, we would have to
achieve coincision of sxbjective and objective value characteristics: if they do

not coincide, the problem will not be solved. At certain stages of the search for

invoruntary reactions of the body) and verbal evaluations (right, wrong) of certain
intellectual acts, in which case the emotional evaluations sometimes do in fact have
greater validity. If the latter are dominant in such cases, the activity leads to
an objectively valid result (75). It has been demonstrated that intellectual emo-
tions play a part in all stages and levels of goal formation, and that revelation
of the unverbalized operational meaning of elements within a situation is a pre-
requisite of the arisal of intellectual emotions (2S). functional anticipation may
also alter the structure of the problem solution process.

All activity includes technical procedures (operations) within itself. Efforts at
creating ”invention algorithm," 'techniques of invention," and so on are essentially
based on the failure to distinguish between activity and operations. The procedures
by which we transform objects are a part of creative activity, but they are not all
of it. 'Ihe expression “algorithm" often bears a metaphoric nature, and it may be
used in relation to a program of planned, directed actions ((8). p 101): it is some-
times even used synonymusly with the expression "stages of activity.” However, it
misleads engineers who have become accustomed to viewing the algorithm as a formal-
ized procedure guaranteeing a solution. We must clearly see that instructions such
as "study the principal technological sectors,” "study the subordinate technologin
sectors," "gather intonation on ways for solving technical problems, on physical
effects, and on new materials,” ”learn creative decision making,” and ”correctly
state the problem" reseable the instructions of an algorithm in outward Appearances
only.

we should make note of the conceptual relationship between psychological problems
associated with "artificial intelligence“ and those associated with "dialogue."
"Dialogue" interaction between man and computer may be described at two levels:

the information level and the psychological level. At the information level, inter-
action is typified by the form of the sysbols enployed, their sequence, and the
speed at which they proceed from uuchine to nan and from man to madiine. At the
psychological level. interaction is once again typified by the goals forthe attain-
ment of which the individual conmmicates with the couputer, and by transformation
of goals under the influence of the information obtained, the meaning it has to the
individual, and the evaluations (including emotional ones) made by the individual
of both the overall capabilities of the computer and of the solutions of concrete

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0L'IUAL USE ONLY

problems. The san- syubols, presented to the user in identical form and at
identical speed, my be evaluated, understood, and employed differently depending
on the concrete situation, on the overall state of the individual, and on the goals
and natives of his activities. Given constant information interaction between man
and computer, the psychological interaction will vary.

'lhis difference is not accounted for (it is ignored) in the information-and-qvher-
netics approach; however the studies published in this collection show that i:' we
do not account for it. we cannot evaluate and effectively build dialogue programs.
Psychological research on the activity of an individual engaged in a dialogue with
a computer must rely first of all on the general psychological theory of activity
and on psychological research on creative thinking based on this theory. Para-
doxicel though it may seem to specialists in computer technology, were we to define
engineering psychology an the study of the interaction between man and machine
through information. as is often done, we would not be able to achieve effective
development of dialogue programs on the basis of engineering psychology since we
must consider a broader range of factors than just intonation interaction alone.

If we are to reorient research from the "operator" to the "user" of automated
systems, we would also need to differentiate are clearly between the enginer-ring
psychology approach and the psychological approach itself; it would require con—
sideration of the symcific qualitative features of man for the creation of man-
computcr systems, and it would necessitate our not limiting ourselves to super-
ficial analogies between man and machine in our descriptions of infatuation tlows

Thus no matter which of the three named directions we take in our eflort to automate
mental labor (creation of "artificial intelligence" models. planning and evaluation
of the effectiveness of automated control systems, construction of effective util-
logue systems), we would have to account for the psychological features of human
thinking, and human activity as a whole. Naturally these must become the object

of further, deeper research.

Expansion of mn'smu llectual potentials is assocuted today by way psychologists
with assimilation of the logical apparatus (conceptr, the methods of logic) and
with increasingly fuller (more "rigid") control of tne process of assimilatiw: 2:315;
apparatus. Thinking formed in this way i: said to be sore snphistica-‘ed than
creative, independent, intuitive thinking.

The use of r‘omputt'rz; opens a fundamentally new way for broadening the intellcrtua!
potentials of the individualuthut of unburdening him of formalized, logical ;..-r- cc-
dures, and germittinq him to utilize such procedures without having to assimife-L':
them. let me clarify this idea with an example. We could get an individual tr.
assimilate a certain algorithm, and then assert that from here on in, no more v"l‘-‘:‘.':-
would bu made in solving problem of a certain class. and that the problem would
be solved faster and on a more general basis. The second way is to solve 'r..-- wu-
blnms utilizing an algorithm already contained within :4 computer program, w.t2.-mr.
having to assimilate it. The advantages of the second way lie in the fact that the
algorithm may be inplcmcnted significantly faster and that the complexity of tin
algorithm itself could exceed the practical capabilities the individual has. for
assimilating this algorithm.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by logical procedures outside of the subject, and thinking mediated by internal
logical prooedures--that is. by assimilated concepts and methods of logic. hinting
mediated by computer programs is the most coupler form of externally mediated
verbal-logical thinking. Analysis of this sort of thinking is a new task of

general psychology, posed to it by the practical problems of automating mental labor.

ﬁne collection offered here to the reader was prepared in conjunction with the
scientific research program "Psychological Problems of Creating and Using 'Artifioal
Intelligence” organized by the Scientific Council for the Problem ”Artificial
Intelligence" of the USSR Academy of Sciences Presidium Committee for Systemic
Analysis. Books published previously in thio series include “Artificial Intelli-
gence' and Psychology" (50) and "Psychological Mechanism of Goal Formation" (76).
Naturally, not all of the psychological problem of automation were illuminated in
this collection. Problems such as the use of. couputors in training and in psycho-

I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-“.0“. US! ONLY

Pm I
PSYOIOIDGICAL PleIPIJS 0P nmowr SYS‘I'BS

INTELLEC'NAL ACTIVITY IN A 'DIAIDGUB' am A comm
0. x. 'rikhonirov, I. G. Belavina

is an attexpt to approach study of the activity of the "5810f 'man-conputer“ "dialogue"
systems from the positions of general psychology. Work in this direction is already
going on (79). Its main purpose is to study and develop the methods of teaching

In foreign studies. this direction is also broadly represented in the planning of
teaching systems intended to train all persons who, by the nature of their activity,
use computers for, as an example, several hours a day. 'lhese include all sorts of
ticket agents. bank workers (clerks), secretaries and so on. In the opinion of many
prominent specialists in computer technology (59,72), however, it would be impossible
to teach all interested persons programing skills. They may include, for example.
directors of large companies. engineers. designers, planners, physicians, teachers
and so on. Besides people possessing programming skills, there has recently appeared
another category of persons who use ready-made program and comuter resources but

do not possess programing skills. It has been noted that this category is becoming
the largest and that it is constantly expanding as sore specialists fron different
areas of science and public services join it (36.7.1).

effectiveness of computer use in the 'man-coqmter" mtems existing today. created
for joint solution of problems. is not very high (59,72). Cases are known in which
the overall effectiveness ofe "Ilan-cotlputelr'I systeu has been reduced by hundreds and
even thousands of times because of inperfecticns in program or poor organization of
problem solving with the computer (34). 'This is an indication that either the indi-
vidual fails to utilize all of the advantages offered to his by the colputer. or he
refuses to use them at all. As a rule the important role of psychological principles
in development of “dialogue“ programs is understated.

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He turned to laboratory experimentation to study the unique features of the intel-
lectual activity of an individual solving problems with a computer in ”dialogue"
node. We did so because, first of all, "dialogue" systems are still just under-
going creation, and there are difficulties in conducting research with real systems
second, laboratory research opens up possibilities for lore-analytical study of

activity, and development of some general reocmendations for planning real 'dialogue"
systems.

We chose goal formation as one of the principal parameters describing intellectual
activity, since goal formation is a particular manifestation of the creative nature
of activity. By doing so, we were able to maintain a specifically psychological
approach (in distinction froe an information-and-cybernetic approach) to man's
interaction with a computer.

The research objective was to develop a procedure for studying 'dialogue" activity,
conduct the experimental studies themselves and discuss, on the basis of these
studies, the principles of writing ”dialogue" program and the activity of an indi-
vidual using these programs. This was essentially the first elaborate laboratory
experimental study of intellectual activity in “dialogue" node. Naturally, therefore,
it was exploratory in nature.

51. The Methods of the Experiment
Game Analysis

"Kalah," a zero-sum game for two persons (one player wins and the other loses), was
used to analyze goal formation by individuals in a “dialogue" with a conputer.

Each player possesses six playing fields, 36 counters (stones) and one 'kalah" field
in which the player must collect his counters.

1n the "kalah" fields, counters can only be accumalated; these fields and the 12 other
playing fields create the objective conditions of the game.

me counters are distributed evenly among the six fields (positions). which are
nunbcred as shown below.

The fields of the rivals are opposite one another; moreover each player has his own
special field, called the 'kalah,“ next to the first playing field.

When his turn comes up, the player remves all oomters from one of his fields and
rcdistributes them, placing one in each of the other fields in decreasing order of
field number, to include his "kalah." If there are any counters left over, they
are distributed in the opponent's Nations (in order of their decreasing nunber):
if more counters are still available, these are distributed once again in the

player's :ositions,‘oypassing the opponent's “kalah.'

Rule 1. If the last of the distributed counters falls into the player's "kalah,’
he gets one more move. In all other cases it becous the opponent's turn.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

M #5 H I! I: ll nu: I

"mm A MI M2 M3 M6 M5 M6
0 6 0 G G a 0

..-.——-—-._ ———-—-—-_

ﬂ 6 6 0 ﬂ 6 0
MGNSMA M3142”! Kuasll

 

Figure l. The Starting situation of “Kalah'x a) situation on the board:
b) mmerical description of the situation

Rule 2. If the last of the distributed counters falls in one of the player's enpty

DOS-'1 tions and the opponent's opposite position is not eupty, the contents of
these two fields are moved to the "kalah' belonging to the player making the love,
and it becomes the opponent's turn.

Rule 3. If there are no counters in the player's positions. then all counters in
the opponent's positions are moved to the opponent's ”kaleh,‘ and the game ends.

In all cases the individual who collects more than 36 counters in his "kalah' wine.
In the 'kalah" positions counters can only be accumlated: therefore a «in can be
determined from the ratio of counters in the "kalah' positions of the players without
playing out all of the counters.

'me end goal of the gene is to accumulate the maxi-um nusber of counters in one's
”kaleh.‘ The players move in turn: however, the rules of the game permit several
moves in a row by one of the players. if the counters in his six positions create
a particular situation. The arrangemnt of counters among the fields of the subject
and the fields of his opponent is what creates the concrete game situation. In the
initial situation the arrangement of the counters is always the same: The "kalah"
fields of the players are eupty. 'me game can be started by either of the players.

The counters are moved among the fields in the same direction (counterclockwise). Each

move produces a specific result—-a change in the game situation. Each move may per-
form either one or several functions depending on the concrete conditions of the

particular move. The principal functions are: protection, capture, entrapment and
simle accumulation of counters in a 'kalah.‘

10

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2 shows a game situation illustrating the functions listed above.

9
7
V
'v'
7
V

    

dﬂoddddd

15 IN I" ”J A? I! KM"

N

3

Figure 2. An Intermediate situation in 'xalah" Illustrating the Principal
Functions

Player A exercises a protective function when he loves from field five to fielo two.
If player A fails to remove his counters from field five, in his next move player 8

would be able to take these five counters from field five and place them in his

“kalah. " Then the ratio of counters in the ‘kalahs' of the player and the opponent
would be lS:22--that is, clearly not in favor of player A.

A capture function is exercised when player A moves from field one to his own field
six; in this case the number of counters in player A's ”kalah" increases by seven.

A trap forms when player A moves from field three and player 3 fails to move from
field four.

Simple accumulation of counters in player A's 'ltalah" is achieved by swing from
field two or field five.

The objective functions of a save may be interpreted as the strategic goals of the
player. he functions of protection and capture are analogous to those functions

in chess. Accumulation of counters in a 'kalah" lay occur quickly when the subject
fails to capitalize on the remaining fmctional possibilities offered by the concrete
situation, or when the conditions of the task themselves prevent the subject from

doing so. A move made with the purpose of entraping the Opponent is preparatory to
a certain change in the game situation leading subsequently to capture.

Change in the gene situation may be dependent and independent of the subject. An
independent change in the conditions of the task (the gene situation) would be a move
by the opponent (player 13) which might reduce the subject's possibilities for imple-
menting his planned actions--for exanple preparing for and exercising the capture
function. Each concrete move, which can lead to a particular result, is character-
ized by the strength parameter. In the gate of 'kalah" (as is the case. for era-pie.
in chess), we can distinguish parameters such as the strength and value of results.
A strong move, for exauple, would be one in which counters are taken from one of the
opponent's fields. The strength of a move is gauged in relation to the scale of

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-OR Oil-KIM. USE ONLY

value of the results to which it leads. Thus moves in which centers are taken
and quickly aecuulated and a nova creating a threat to the opponent are strong
mves.

me value of a game situation depends on both the nulber of the playing field and
the quantity of counters it contains. As an exasple the closer the playing field
is to the "kalah'--that is, the lower its nusber, the higher is its absolute value

from the standpoint of the possibilities for counter accumulation. however, this
absolute value is not always consistent with relatiw value. The relative value
of an elemnt depends on the concrete conditions, particularly on the ratio of
counters in the fields, while the strength (value) of a concrete practical love

depends on relative value, which is governed by the absolute value of the field and
the nunber of counters.

He can distinguish among game situation paramters defined by the concrete conditions
(unique features) of a position. A player's position may be strong, weak. good,
bad, or neutral.

When playing to win, the subject considers several things in dloosing his best move.
'lhe process of choosing such a move can be described as the setting of goals having
a hierarchical structure and corresponding: a) to attaining the end result--that is,
winning; b) choosing a particular type of strategy; c) finding those tactics which
would support the chosen strategy. Goals associated with directed transformation of
the game conditions can be called strategic. mree types of such goals can be dis-
tinguished in the game of ”kaleh.‘

1ype l--creating a trap for the opponent. By reaching a type 1 goal the subject is
able to gain a certain material advantage. The extent of this material advantage
depends on the nature of the game position. 'lhus when the game position is good,

a significant material advantage can be achieved. A material advantage close to a
type 2 goal can be achieved from a poor game position.

'bjpe 2--East accumlation of counters in the 'kalah' in accordance with rule 1.
Achievement of this goal permits the player to make several saves in succession
leading to a material advantage, though of course lower than in the case of type 1
goals, since the hunter of counters in the "kalah' is increased by one in each move.

Wpe 3--hindering the opponent from reaching type 1 and 2 goals. Attainment of such
goals requires development of certain tactics, which may in principle be associated
with tactical goals.

The choice of a concrete move depends on parameters of the game situation such as,
for example, the evaluation reached by smation of the relative evaluations of the
elements of the game situation.

(maracteristics of Conputer Messages

It is not hard to learn to play 'kalah." The rules of this game are simple, but at
the sane time it is not a trivial game. Moreover it is easier to describe it in

formal terms for programming purposes than it is to describe chess. 'ihe first program
for the game of ”kalah" was written by (Bessel) in 1964 (62). (Sleygl) and (Dikson)

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our research the game of 'kalah" is used for laboratory analysis of the activity
of subjects participating in a dialogue with a computer in a language close to a

natural language (missian), with the computer acting as an "adviser.“ Our goal was
to develop a procedure of experimental psycholOgical research which would allow us

corresponding methods of describing the game of “kalah' in formal terms permit
creation of strong program that can stand Up to hulan intelligence (62,86,151).

To select a mve (the best possible), the cowuter builds a decision (game) tree and
sorts through the possible variants on the basis of their heuristic evaluation. his
is done using a system of formalised evaluation criteria, the values of which can

be determined in the following fashion. me of the evaluation methods is the mini-
max procedure, used to calculate the best maxim evaluation of one player (in
artificial intelligence systems, this muld be the cosputer) and the best minim
evaluation of the other player (in artificial intelligence system, this would be
the person). 'Ihe decision tree reflects the possible plays of the partners, and

it is characterized by the nusber of successive moves of the player and opponent

(by the depth of the tree). As the depth to which the possible mves of both players
are considered is increased, the tree tends to branch out laterally. Therefore in
order that the cosputer could predict the moves of the player and the responses of
his opponent, heuristic programing methods last he used. A literature analysis
showed that in game programing, there are no unawiguous heuristic techniques
applicable to even one game (for example the game of 'kalah"). Program created

by different authors differ from one another in relation to the potentials of
computer prediction, the ability of a person to win a game in a certain amount of
time, and so on. In our study, the program for the gm of 'kalah" was written

in two phases. me first phase was based on decision tree building methods de-
scribed by (Dsh. Sleygl) (85) (”first in depth” and "first in breadth”).

Next we modified the first decision tree building variant on the basis of a special
analysis of the game, which revealed to us a certain group of heuristic arguments.
A certain set of strategic goals and tactics that would help the individual to win
was introduced into the program (16). This approach was significantly different
from approaches typical of modeling natural intelligence. Programs created in
support of this method gave the individual certain advantages: me computer played
not against the individual but in his behalf, serving as a partner and "adviser" in
joint decision making. By reorienting the program for joint decision making, we
were able to allow the subjects to make two forms of predictions relative to changes
in the game situation: those dependent on player A, and those independent of him
(actions of player 8).

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50R OFHCIAI. US}. ONLY

Three forms of computer messages are used in the organisation of the dialogue
between man and computer. The first form consists of basic messages. they contain
infatuation on the game situation, and their content reflects, to a. certain degree,
the qualitative features of goal formation depending on the conputer program variant
employed. The second and third form are used to organise the dialogue between man
and computer (first function), to record certain elenents of this interaction (second

function). and to automatically record some para-stars of joint decision making
(third function).

’lhe method penits use of two variants of progress for the basic messages. The
composition of the basic messages (the first fore of messages) was determined by
the research objectives. mree classes of messages were developed for the first
variant. 'Ihey are oriented upon the results of a move, its evaluation and the
possibilities of achieving strategic goals and iqle’lenting tactics promting
victory. These messages corresponded to certain classes of goals determined for
the game of "kalah."

The first class: messages having to do with the properties of a concrete gene
position (GP) and recommending the best move.

The second class: messages having to do with son general possibilities for achieving
strategic goals (56).

The third class: messages having to do with sons of the tactics of achieving certain
strategic goals (TA).

Messages of the first class are subdivided into five types.

1. Messages directly stating the nave of the principal player that would be most
preferable in the given situation. If several loves of equal value are possible,
they are all considered in the computer message. An example of a message of the
first type (for the game situation shown in Figure 2) mad be: "the best move is
from field 1" (an).

2. Messages containing an evaluation. expressed in numerical form, of a move that
has already been made by the principal player and which therefore cannot be re-
scinded (6P2). An example for Figure 2 would be: 'EValuation of the love you made
yourself: 0072" (Before the game began, the manner in which the cowuter calculates
the evaluation in arbitrary points and the fact that the range of evaluations varies
from 0 to 1000 were related to the subject in his instructions).

3. A message taking the form of a set of evaluations--nuserical values assigned to
each of the six fields for the given game situation (693). they are calculated by
the computer for the last depth level for the first program variant, 5. 'lhus at
depth 5 the computer tree contains 7,776 game situations reflecting the consequences
of loves from all six fields; following certain heuristic rules. the computer evalu-
ates groups of game situations representing the consequences of just a single initial
move. The heuristic arguments also include certain features of the game such as the
locations and numbers of counters in the fields and the ratio of counters in the
'kalah" fields belonging to player A and player 3. ﬁrst group having the highest

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LGE ONLY

value is said to be the best. In distinction from a 691 message, a 6P3 message

not only contains information on the best move (the maxim evaluation), but it

also provides a numerical description of all moves possible in the given situation.
An example for Figure 2 would be: “The evaluations of your positions are as follows:
784 413 396 380 472 99." this means that, for example, a move from field No l is
evaluated by the computer as 784 points while a save from field 6 is worth only

99 points.

4. A message containing an evaluation of a love made by the opponent in a given
concrete situation (6P4). An example for Figure 2 in a case where the opponent
moves from field 3 would be: I“Evaluation of the nave made by the opponent--036.'
This message is similar to a 6P2 message.

5. A message consisting of two parts: A an message and a message indicating
how frequently the computer encountered a maximum evaluation when it calculated
the evaluations of all possible variants of the game situation in one group or
another (GPS). 1!) calculate the evaluations given in a GP3 message, the computer
examines all 7,776 game situations. Dividing than into groups of 216, the computer
simultaneously calculates the umber of maximum evaluations encountered in each of
the six groups. ﬁne, for example, if evaluations of equal or close value are
encountered, the subject may base his choice of loves on additional information
indicating how frequently such evaluations are encountered. If the frequency of
a high evaluation is large, this mans that a move from the first field would be
strong. An example of a GPS mssage would be:

"Evaluations of your positions are: 784 413 396 380 472 99."
“Frequency of evaluation: 2 2 3 3 2 4.”

In this case the move with a maxi-um value of 784 and a frequency of 2 is the best.

Messages of the second class actually contain the generalised characteristics of
the game situation at hand, permitting or not permitting the player to set the
following four strategic goals that may be attained at depth SP-that is, with his
third move (56).

l. A message indicating player A's (the subject's) possibility for collecting his
opponent's counters in his own "kalah." Such an action is equivalent to an attack
on the opponent.

2. A message indicating whether or not the opponent could be prevented from
collecting the subject's counters in his “kalah.” or a message indicating the
opponent's possibility of moving into his 'kalah.“

3. A mssage indicating the subject's possibility, or its absence, of moving into
his "kalah." An example of an 56 message would be: ”In your situation you cannot
prevent the enemy from moving into his 'kalah'.“

Messages of the third class contain a description of tactical goals leading to
victory.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Selecting your move in such a way that the svaximum nusber of your counters would
fall within your fields. are of the results of reaching this goal is preventing the
appearance of additional counters in the eneq's fields, so as to permit collection
of all of your counters in your 'kalah" at the end of the match, or to keep the
opponent from creating a threat. .

2. Selecting the next move in such a way that the opponent would not have any empty
fields left. By reaching this goal, the subject is able to avoid the threat of an
opponent wishing to reach his goal of "collecting the counters of the main player

in his 'kalah'.’

3. Selecting the next move in such a way as to permit placennt of your last counter
in the field closest to your own 'kalah' field. By reaching this goal, the subject
is able to move into his “mah'--that is, achieve the goal of aceumlation.

4. Preventing accumlation of a large number of countersinone field. Attainment
of this goal permits the subject to avoid a threat from the opponent.

5. Selecting the next move in such a way as to accumulate l3 counters in some one
field. Attainment of this goal would allow the subject to subsequently reach the
goal of "collecting the opponent's counters in his 'kalah'.”

6. Selecting your move in such a way as to accumlate. in one of the fields, a nusber
of counters equal to the sum of 13 plus the field nusber. Attainment of this goal
would permit the subject to move into his 'kalah." 'ihese messages were all presented
together irrespective of the concrete situation. Certain messages in the list. for
example 4 and 5. contain conflicting information, such that the subject was able to
select the best strategic goal in the given game situation.

In the second variant of the "dialogue" program the basic messages were developed
on the basis of content analysis of the goal formation processes carried out by a
subject solving a problem in "dialogue" interaction with the cosputer, using the
formalised resources offered to him by the computer. The meals of describing com-
puter information and transferring it to man were reworked on the basis of the

laws characterizing the psychological features of joint problem solving, revelation
of which became possible only owing to the use of the first variant of the programs.
Ibreover the psychological features of solving the type of mental problems under
consideration here made it necessary to supplement the formal methods of building
the game tree in the conputer memory. Additional heuristics were introduced into
the program. making it possible to increase the depth of game tree construction from
5 to 8 in the same computer time. In this variant there are eight types of messages
providing concrete data on the material advantages of one player in relation to the
other and on the possibilities the player enjoys for reaching his generalised
strategic goals. The goals were general in nature in that the computer indicated
the nusber of threats and the nuﬂoer of moves into the "kalah” of the player or
opponent from some initially selected field x in the given game situation, rather
than a concrete message describing the possibility or inpossibility of making some
particular moves. Reorientation of the conputer messages not only toward the end
result but also toward the intermediate stages of problem solution made it possible
to organize sore-flexible interaction between man and computer.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The content of the basic nessages in the second variant was determined in accordance
with the depth of the subject's analysis of the game situation.

a IA (13) message contains information on how many counters may be accunllated
in the "kalah' belonging to player A (or player Bathe opponent) at a given depth
and from a selected field.

A In (113) message contains information on how many times player A (or player 3)

can create a threat to the opponent at a depth prescribed by the subject and from
an initially selected field.

a In). (1118) message contains data on the concrete ouster of moves into a "kalah"
possible at the given depth for player Anthe subject-war player Buthe opponent,
if the subject makes the first save from some particular field.

A IVA (ivs) message is brief. It is a "yes' or “no“ reply to the subject‘s question
as to whether or not it is possible to threaten the opponent or mve into the 'kalah"
in the given game situation and at a particular depth.

Let us go on to a description of other fem of messages representing substructures
of “dialogue” interaction. There are messages which participate in organisation of
the "dialogue” itself between man and computer, which determine its rhythmical
structure and which document individual moments of interaction. here are auxiliary
messages (the second form) which, in addition to performing the listed functions,
help the individual ask the right questions of the cosputer, since they contain
information indicating the presence or absence of mistakes in a previous question
the individual had submitted to the computer. Messages of the third form are a
special set of comuter sentences which encourage the subject to maintain a positive
attitude toward interaction with the cosputer and toward his participation in the
process of joint problem solving. Such messages have nothing to do with the problem
solving process directly; they have an indirect influence on the effectiveness of
interaction, and they sustain the activity of the individual using the computer in
his work. Their presence in the ”dialogue" structure makes the work of nonpro-
fessional computer users easier by reducing the monotony of the technical procedures.
1he computer prints out various sorts of phrases to reward particular actions by the
subject. 'no a certain degree. such mssages imitate dialogue between people.

The structure of the dialogue programs was developed in such a way that their form
could be varied: Transitions are possible from complete. step-by-step listing of
the computer's possibilities (in which case only one basic message is received in
response to each successive interrogation of the comuter) to a brief, abbreviated
form in which the subject may receive several messages simultaneously in response to
a single inquiry. This structure permits organisation of various ways by which the
subject can check out the content of the basic messages. The programs written in
support of our methods provided for such checking of couputer operations by the
subject. whenever he desired. the subject could verify the basic message either by
examining a special print-out of the computer's decision tree variants. or by re-
ceiving a supplementary message describing how the comuter arrived at the content
of the first basic message.

17

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FUR 05'“;th USE. ONLY-

In the cosplete form of “dialogue,“ a detailed list of all basic passages and in-
structions to the subject indicating how to compose an inquiry is automtically
printed out by a typewriter connected directly to the couputer. As an exasple, in
the first variant of the program the beginning of a 'dialogue" would appear as
follows:

Couputer: Proceed.

Han: lb.

Outputer: The oomuter will now help you in your game.
For this. you will need to micate your wishes to it.
For example you may wish to know the rules of the game,
to receive advice on the next save, or learn about sous
tactics of the gene which would help you to win. mat
do you wish to receive: advice, rules, tactics? Indi-
cate in your response: advice. rules, tactics.

Mam Advice.

Computer: Advice say be given:
1) In relation to a concrete position,
2) in relation to a gene situation,
3) in relation to certain tactics of the gene.
Indicate in your response: position, situation. tactics.

In the brief form. the subject's inquiries consisted of the codes of the basic
messages. the nusber of the field under analysis and a statement 0! the depth of
analysis of the game situation.
In the brief form of the ”dialogue" the typewriter printed out the problem in sylbols.
the content of the subject's inquiry related to a particular basic message, and the
oonputer responses. in examle of the brief. for:- of 'dialogue" for the second
variant of the programs and proqu l “0015 be:

Oosputer: Brief fora?

Man: Yes.

Computer: Advice?

Man: the opponent's threat.

Oonputer: Report the field you are analysing.

Man: 5.

Computer: 1b what depth do you wish to have advice?

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hanzz

Computer: In this situation your fields are not threatened
by the opponent.

Instructions, Problems and the Plan of the Experiments

Experiments were conducted to reach the main objectives of the research: A plan
for preparing subjects for work with this method was drawn up, and the requirements
and conditions of the experiments were formulated. 'me method was used in experi-

mental studies differing in the goals and the concrete problems to be solved by the
subjects, the instructions and the variants of the dialogue programs (Table 1).

Because the possibilities forusing different types of basic messages and forms of
control over the computer's actions were diverse, experimnts dealing with different
aspects of joint problem solution by man and cosputer could be performed. me exper-
Iental research was conducted in two stages.

In the first stage one of the participants (the principal participant) was able to
ask the computer for "advice" during the game, while the other subject. who served
as the principal player's opponent, did not have this possibility. ‘me activities
of the principal subject were analyzed in the study. 'lhe activities of the other
subject were not considered in this research.

the principal subject was given the following instructions.

"You will be playing with an opponent who is in another room.
The computer will help you during the game. After the opponent
makes each move, interrogate the comuter for a message.
However, you may make the final choice of love yourself.

me conputer does not obligate you to strictly follow the
recommndations it provides.

"Your opponent will play without comuter assistance. Take
your time, the cosputer will wait for your replies patiently
during the “dialogue."

in some cases. at the request of the subject, he was permitted to make one move
without interrogating the computer (a move into the 'kalah"). This move was unique
in that it permitted the subject to take one more move, though for this second move
the subject had to interrogate the computer. After this, it becam the opponent's
move. he was stated in the instructions, computer interrogation time was not regu-
latcd.

In the main (second) stage of the research the instructions, the problem and the
list of the couputer's possibilities were given on separate cards. the instructions
read as follows:

“Your goal is to find the best move. You may irterrogate the
computer for advice whenever you wish. You have been furnished
with a list of advisory statelents. Your fields are in the

top row. During the play. you may accept any item of advice

any number of times in relation to any of your fields, to depth X.“

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Distribution of Bxperimntal Series

Experimental 00n-

1ype 'Depth of ditions (Main

’rogram Activity Game situ- Hessagga Used) No. of
variants Prob1em ation's Couplete Limited No. of Prob1m
L g Gene So1ution Analxlis Set umber Subjects Solved
+ - + - S + - 16 -

- + - 5,6 1-5 + - 10 20

- __ - 1.3.5.6 - + - 8 9

- + - 1 1-5 — + 9 9

- + - 2,3,4,5 8 + 10 17
+ - - 1-6 5 - 16 53
+ - - 1-6 5 - + 4 3
+ - - 1-6 s - + 10 24
+ - - 1-6 5 - + 5 15
4. - - 1-6 . 5 - + 5 13
- + - 2,5 3-6 + + 9 16
- + - 1-6 5-1' + - 9 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These instructions were given for investigation of unrestricted interaction (series 1,
2.10.11). In the other series we used a modification of these instructions indicating
the specific messages which the subject could use (“fable 1). The experimental
mterial in the principal series consisted of six problems selected in such a

fashion that to the extent possible, different functional features of a gem could

be represented in the initial situation. The situation could be neutral, with the
player and opponent enjoying an equal advantage, or the player (the subject) could

be faced by a threat (a trap). In all problems, the best move was not made clearly
evident to the subject: on the contrary the opponent was more than likely to have

the advantage, since his situation contained the preconditions for setting up fast
accumulation of counters in his 'kalah."

Time was not limited in the preliminary series and in the subsequent, principal
seriese-that is, the subject could ponder over the problem (or the game match), over
his choice of the main message and so on for as long as he liked (within the limits

of the maximum duration of an interaction session). The maxim duration of a session
was 2 hours.

'1!) make the game more interesting the conditions (5 interaction were changed in
certain cases during the preliminary series. ‘lhe subject was not warned of such
changes. No types of interaction were foreseen:

the "correct" message,
"false" advice.

In the first type the objective content of the cosputer messages offered to the
subjects corresponded to the real properties of the game situation. In the second
type the objective content of the computer message was inconsistent with the game
situation. An example of a "false" message would be a rscomndation to make a move
from a field containing no counters.

me sibject and his opponent were prepared for the gem in special training sessions
consisting of tie or three game matches or two or three problem (in the principal
series). In these sessions the subjects acquainted themelves with the rules of the
game, they were shown various tactics. and the advantages of particular strategic
goals were explained with examples of real game situations.

suajects that were to use the computer in smsequent experiments were taught the
technique of interrogating the computer with a typewriter console, and to cospose
and feed inquiries into the computer. In supplementary sessions they acquainted
themselves with the set-up of the room in which the experiment was to be conducted.
The experimenter dewnstrated the possibilities of I'dialogue" program, and he showed
how a decision tree is built. how evaluations are calculated and how the conputer
determines the best move. In the preliminary series of experiments the subjects
worked with a real 'kalah" game board and a set of counters (l'igure l). 'lhe posi-
tions and moves of the subjects and the responses of the oppcnent were transmitted
back and forth by telephone. ‘me subject fed data on the game sftuations into the
computer in symbolic form:

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe Unnuat oat omu

'14 8,2.ll.l.5. 0--the first line of the computer message;
‘ 5,3,0,3,0,4, 16--the second line of the oomuter message for
the game situation shown in Figure 2.

'lhe time between preliminary training and experimentation varied fra several hours
to several days, but the research results stated that this time did not have a
significant influence on the play of the game.

After the subject was given his instructions and problems, the subject was allowed
to interrogate the computer only after analyzing the problem he was given. In

the principal series of experiments the experimenter set the moment when the subject
could interrogate the computer. for example only before the subject began solving
the problem or after he decided upon and couitted hisself to a particular move
(series 5.6: Table i). In this stage of the research the conditions of using the
messages were varied extensively from unrestricted (series 1,2,10,11) to restricted:
in the latter case the subject was allowed to use only one type of messages (or

one type of message pairs in the second variant of the program: series 3,5.6,7,8,9).
In certain series the number of times the subject could interrogate the computer for
a message was varied (series 9, Table 1). his method also permitted us to vary
the catplexity of the problems by increasing the depth to which the subject had to
determine the best move. 1hus the instructions required the subject to find a
solution one or two moves ahead, and so on.

Use of a modern computer facilitates automation of the experimental process: The
paraneters can be recorded, subjected to initial processing and displayed automatically.

By maintaining a psychological approach to writing the program. of man-coQuter
interaction, which was organized in the sethod as a rhythmical structure, we were
able to achieve registration of individual activity parameters with respect to time.
The principal temporal characteristics of problem solving jointly with daeoomputer
were recorded on special cosputer information carriers (a wide-carriage alphamsseric
printer was used). 'lhese characteristics were related to time (reckoned from the

moment the subject received a colputer message to the sis-lent he fed his inquiry into
the comuter). his permitted us to assess the time taken by the subject to think

out the main message and the conditions of the problem (the chosen field and depth).
and to analyze the message itself. ‘i‘ssporal characteristics are shown in Figure 3.
Information on the experiment and on the subject. the quantity and type of messages
used in the experimnt, the hunter of wrong actions and the total interaction time
were also printed out on the same information carriers. In certain cases when the
subject used certain form of information verification, a step-by-step print-out

of the game tree, or a fragment of the tree to the depth prescribed by the subject,
was immediately furnished. Because the entire “dialogue“ between man and couputer
was printed out with a typewriter which also served as the means of operational

commication with the computer, the entire interaction dynamics were recorded
automatically.

Automatic recording was combined with traditional methods of documenting activity:

"reasoning aloud"--verbalization of the cosponents of activity,-

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘ﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Figure 3. Diagram of Temporal Mlationships: 1-initial “dialogue"
conditions; 2--selection of a type of oolputer message;
3--selection of a field by the computer; («selection of
a field by the subject; 5--a message concerning the
opponent's move: 6—selection of a field by the opponent:
7--determination of the possible depths of analysis:
8--selection of a concrete depth of analysis: 9--receipt
of a computer message and request for further explanation;
10--explanation of computer message, receipt of additional
information; 11--continuation of the solution process,
or transition to the next problem 12--resunption of the
“dialogue” cycle

1. Computer 3. mac
2. Man

an interaction recording sheet--pernits isolation of the stages of investigative
activity, its dynamics depending on the types of messages involved, and the dynamics
of game situations depending on the current love:

the subject's retrospective report, given after the experiment and permitting the
experimenter to reveal the subject's attitude toward different messages, toward the
"dialogue," and toward his own activity;

replies to the experimnter's questions;

the solution results-~that is, agreement or disagreement between the nave selected
by the subject and the couputer solution, and use or mouse of colputar messages
in move selection.

52. Psychological Factors Governing Joint Problem Solution by Man and Oonputer

Analysis of theoretical works and of the results of experimental research, and the
experience of operating real nan-computer system permit suggestion of the hypothe-
sis that interaction between man and computer in solution of intellectual problems

is a part of the general structure of thinking activity, and it influences its

effectiveness. The effectiveness of interaction between man and computer during
problem solution depends on the psychological principles of this interaction,

inasmuch as the computer serves as a tool of the individual's thinking.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Structure of Joint Problem Solution by Man and Oosputer

'Ihe results of research using program variant I permit the conclusion that analysis
of the game situation, the search for the best move and the nature of requests for
the basic messages were the same for all subjects. the one difference lay in the
dynamics of interaction, which had an effect on arisal of several forms of inter-
action in the preliminary series and on the diversity of the ways these messages
were used in the thinking process itself.

me experiments showed that joint solution is typified by two forms of investigative

activity. 'me first is associated with problem solution, with analysis of the situ-
ation and with formulation of intermediate and end goals.

The second form concerns interaction between man and computer. this form of investi-
gative activity has the objectives of finding those types of lineages which would
correspond to the subject's goals to the greatest degree, of cowosing inquiries

and receiving responses to then from the computer, and of evaluating the adequacy of
a received message and the subjective assessment of the end goal formlated by the
subject. these two forms of investigative activity are combined together during

joint solution to form a structure similar to that seen in the joint activity of
people solving a problem.

'lhus subject Yu. M. analyzes the game situation from the standpoint of the possibility

or impossibility of causing the opponent to suffer a loss and evading a threat from
the opponent's side.

”Field 6 has nothing to offer.... Pield l--no chance for an
attack.... Now the threats. 'lhe opponent has 13 counters in
field 1: I have to come to the rescue of my field 6.... But
can I ask the computer for two different items of advice at the
same time?" (When told that he could request only one item of
advice, the subject continued with the following). “This means
that I will have to move from 2 to my 'kalah' and the move in
such a way as to 'kill' the opponent's possibilities.... 'Ihat
means I need to get an evaluation from the corputer. We have
clarified the tactics. and there is nothing obviously threaten-
ing about the situation" (the subject checks out advice in
classes I, II and III).

What the subject is actually doing is using the computer message as a means for
checking and comparing his own goals with those basic messages from the computer
which provide full intonation on how to proceed in the given game situation.

In certain cases subjects use computer evaluations to verify and cospare them with
their own evaluations of moves already made:

Subject A. M.: 'I don't want to use the advice on this move
because I can't make out exactly what is happening here: if
I've made a mistake, I see it from the evaluations.‘

In the experiments, subjects fomd special goals aimed at revealing the potentials
of the computer in terms of solving particular problem, rather than simply in term

of the uncertain situations typical of the training series, in which the experimenter
demonstrates the potentials of the programs:

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY

Subject Ye. P.: “It would be interesting to find out what

the comuter could do for me; therefore I will as): for all
messages in succession.“

Later on, if a subject had participated more than once in the experinent, the minor
of requests for messages of different classes decreased. Class I messages race-lend-
ing the best move are used most often.

mus, replying to a question iron the experiInnter concerning what advice was the
best. subject L. H. answered:

“Which items of advice were most valuable to as? Advice item

6P3 (class I): the rest were less so, and I could not \nderstand

how 695 was different free (:93. Advice on tactics (class III)

is advice on rules of the game, but they are clear enough as it

is. Advice on the situation (class I) didn't help as in any way...."

However, different subjects find the Isaningfulness of aessages to be different.

'Do subject A. Kh., class III messages on tactics were the Inst meaningful, and this

subject's entire search for the best love was based on the use of messages in this
class:

”Now let's look at tactics. I'm not ready for tactic 1 yet,

or tactic 2 because I don't have any counters.... Tactic 3....
It‘s a possibility. I want to eqaloy tactic 3, whidl would
mean I would still have another move. What would happen if I
moved from field 5.... net‘s say I start with 5.... (Be reads
the tactics).... Ahab... I want to see if I can collect

13 counters in field 2. ﬂow? If I begin with 4, I would be
able to place one (counter) there: if I begin with 6. doesn't
work. Three is better. that if I as): for an evaluation of

my position (for a class I useage)? Yes. I want 6P3 advice.
(he continues after the couputer's reply). No, the oosputer's
suggested mve won't get as to field 2.... Let me try it lyself....
I'll try to make several waves on my cm, and then I'll ask the
computer about the situation if I get in too deep. In general,
it's easier to work with the comuter. It‘s like a crib sheet.”

Use of "false“ advice in the experilents showed that sibjects exhibit varying

degrees of independence in their interaction with the computer. Not only external
factors but also the individual's a priori assessments of the comter'e possi-

bilities have a significant influence on their independence. External factors

may prevent joint solution, for examle in cases of technical or other systemic
failures. or when "false“ advice is given. It turned out that external factors play
a more-secondary role than do the a priori assessments nade by the subjects of the
computer's possibilities and of its role in joint problem solving.

1n the experiments, "false" advice was given to only three subjects (Ye. P. , O. M.
and A. Kh.), with the most being given to subject Ye. P. (for four moves in
succession), who assessed the comuter'a possibilities realistically prior to the

25

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

experimnt. Despite such frequent and continuous provision of false information by
the computer, this subject did not break off his interaction with the coquter.
moreover he even tried to receive information from the couputer about the possible
consequences of the opponent's actions, for which purpose he utilised the functional
features of the 6P3 message. Because such a message could provide predictions only

in relation to the principal player, he switched his positions with the opponent's
positions.

Subject 0. H. interacted in an entirely different way: she considerably exaggerated

the possibilities of the computer. She offered the following evaluation of her future
joint work in problem solving:

“It's amazing how much this computer can do; it probably has a

very conplex program. It's a good thing that it can be my
adviser!“

But following just one "false" item of advice the interaction ceased inediately.
and the subject refused to ask the computer again for a new message.

”Hell now. let me ask the computer, it's fun with the coqauter.
(She asks for a 6P3 message and receives false information).
Hell, I have to move somewhere.... But why did the cometer
suggest a bad trove? I can't really pass up a move, can I?"

Four types of manifestations of activity were observed in the research.

1. Cessation of interaction in response to external intereference (program failures.
mistakes made by subjects when composing the game situation, cases of "false" advice)

without attelpts at its subsequent resumtion. Subjects analysed and selected the
next move independentlylwithout the computer's help (subjects 0. H. and 1.. lb).

2. Interaction between the subject and the computer characterised by two forms of

investigative activity: to verify the game situation and the basic center
messages (subjects 1.. H., A. K., H. K., D. IL).

3. Transformation of the structure of interaction in such a way as to change the
structure of interrogation and sinultaneously receive two messages together or to
organize faster “dialogue." Before receiving the opponent's response. the subject
types in messages (auxiliary manages) containing no information having a direct
bearing on the problem at hand (subject A. Ian):

“while he's thinking and making his move, I'll find out what
GP3 is.‘ '

4. Transformation of computer messages by means other than those foreseen in the
instructions. 'mis happened when a subject tried to determine what the coquter

assessment of the opponent's future slaves were (subject Ye. P.--in a situation of
recurrent “false" advice: subject Yu. H.--in a situation of recurrent, lengthy in-

consistency between his evaluations of the moves he selected and the evaluations
received from the computer in a 6P3 message).

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me entire process of joint solution was accoqanied by statements--evaluations of
a special type reflecting the subject's attitude toward the selected message. toward
its result, toward interaction. toward the problem and toward his own participation
in joint solution. The results of the experiments showed that the evaluations of the
subjects had a significant influence on the solution process and on its effectiveness

from the standpoint of making maxim use of information contained in a basic message.
Four types of evaluations were revealed.

1. Evaluations of the content of computer nessages.

Subject I... M. evaluates the content of a 693 message: 'GP3
advice provides evaluations.... Makes it clear right away....
M goals possible: the best move is.... I can see which
positions (fields) have the highest evaluations, and I can
compare them with my own. GP3 messages are useful. they
provide a great deal of information right away."

2. Subjects' evaluations of their participation in joint problem solution. A
tendency for the subject to do the maximum amount of work, as manifested in analysis
and comparison of the results of the subject's own goals with information received
from the computer, was most typical of most of the subjects.

Subject Yu. H. evaluated his participation in joint solution as follows:

“I enjoyed working with the cosputer, but were I to follow
the computer's advice to the letter (he was referring to a
(:93 message stating a specific recommendation for a mve) .
there would be no food for thought left. Using a GP3
message, I could evaluate and compare my move with the
conputer's move and analyse any discrepancy."

Subject 1.. H.: “When I received a 6P3 message, I began to
feel that the computer was trying to help m.... I was very
happy to learn that my evaluation agreed with the computer's.“

3. Evaluations of the temporal characteristics of different substructures in the
dialogue programs. thus the subjects were not irritated by the amount of time spelt
by the computer to calculate the game tree.

Subject 1.. M.: mthe time the computer is taking is not out
of the ordinary: I'm still thinking about my move.”

Subject A. )(h.: "While the computer's computing, I'm
thinking about the situation."

Subject Yu. M.: ”Does the computer think as long as a man
would? Fifty seconds? Is that an?"

uowevcr, almost all subjects noted. as a negative factor of interaction, the long
time it took to receive responses to auxiliary messages serving to organize and

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI UDOWIAL 030. (ML!

rmume “dialogue," despite the fact that the real the spent on typing messages such

as “Play“ and “Tell me which item of advice you have selected” was much shorter than
the computer solution tine.

Subject A. 101.: "It types awful slowly." The subject keeps
repeating: “Let's get on with the game.“

4. Subjects' evaluations of the experimental situation. In general, the attitude
toward the experiment was one of interest. Recurrent participation by some subjects
is evidence of this interest. Five out of eight suajects participated in the ex-
perisents sore than once. 'mey expressed a wish to continue the experiment on.

In the course of interaction during the experiments, evaluations of the content of
main messages (type 1 evaluations) underwent change. Various forms of the use of
information contained in basic messages were observed, from their total rejection to

acceptance of the basic message and its inclusion into the solution structure without
changes. of 78 game situations, 15 were characterised by total violation of the
structure of joint solution, 15 were characterized by partial violation, subjects
made 20 moves under the influence of infatuation contained in the messages, and in

28 moves they used the computer's intonation as it stood, without changes. ‘nnus
we observed the following.

a) ‘Ibtal violation of the psychological structure of joint solution, the subject‘s
refusal to interrogate the cosputer for messages.

Subject A. K.: “First I will try it myself, and then I will
see what the couputer has to say.”

b) Partial violation of the joint solution process, manifested as ignoring a message's
information following interrogation of the cosputer.

Subject Yu. M.: "I could prepare for an attack, clear out
1 or 5; I should leave 6 alone for the moment.... I’ll ask
for GP: advice.... (After receiving the information:)
Interestingl The computer gives the highest evaluation

to 4. But what about S--a zero evaluation“. Is it really
a totally useless save? I don‘t know, I think I'll move

from S anyway."

c) Partial acceptance of a conputer message: The subject does not formally accept

the information (for example a recolnendation for the best move), but it does have
an influence, causing the subject to re-analyze the game situation and reformlate

his end goal. The subject selects a save from a field which he had not considered
in his initial analysis.

d) Acceptance of the computer message and its inclusion into the structure of the

solution without change. his form arose when the game situation would not allow
the subject to achieve the strategic goal he selected, or when the result hoped for

by the subject was consistent with the conputer data.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

smaject A. Kh. : ”Now why did the computer say that? Let me
think this out myself. What sort of tactic do we have available?
(He inspects the class In nssages). Oh, now I mderstandnl
need to fill up my opponent's enpty position."

Psychological Factors of Effective Interaction

Experiments conducted in the preliminary stage of the research provided a general
psychological description of the activity of subjects solving sental problems in a
“dialogue" with a conputer. the forms of investigative activity were revealed. and
their role and structure in the overall process of joint solution were determined.
It was demonstrated that the joint solution process is typified by manifestations
of certain types of activity. which played an inortant role in organization.
maintenance and sustainment of interaction between man and computer.

The subject's activity also manifested itself in his system of value judgments con-
cerning various aspects of joint problem solving. ‘l‘hese evaluations have a signifi-
cant influence on the effectiveness of communication with the oosputer and use of
the information it provides. Analysing the forms of use of comuter data. we can
conclude that in this stage, for practical purposes the subjects never did achieve
true (informal) joint problem solving.

'lhis fact may be explained by the following: first. by the novelty of the situation
and the almst couplets absence of information on psychological mechanisms influencing
”dialogue" interaction. and second. by the orientation of the first variant of the
program toward formal methods and tactics most typical of modern 'artificial
intelligence" systems. The results and these conclusions permitted us to formulate
the hypothesis that goal-forming processes are the met important prerequisites of
effective use of computer information. Expansion of the individual's possibilities
for posing qualitatively new goals, leading to opti-Im solutions and the best results,
can serve as the effectiveness criterion. ‘1!) confirm this hypothesis. in the main
stage of the research we studied goal formation during joint problem solution by

man and computer (series 1-4, lo, ll). In these series the subject' s use of the
computer as an assistant and an adviser led to qualitative transformation of his
thinking. Comparative studies were also performed on the use of the first and

second variants of the programs (series 5-9) . Series 1-9 were performed in coopera-
tion with T. v. Kornilova.

'lhe results of the preliminary series showed that differences in the ways coquter
messages were used depended mainly on the structure. cosposition and content of the
basic messages. Moreover the first variant would not permit acquisition of a
complete prediction of the possible consequences to the player and the opponent at
different depths of the player's analysis of the problem.

An analysis of evaluations made by subjects concerning the form of co-Iunication

with the computer showed that the "dialogue" form had to be more flexible. that it
had to he were adaptable to the dynamics of the thinking process itself. He found

that different ways for the subject to verify computer solutions had to be provided.

When computer messages are consistent with the content of the goal forming process
(as in the second variant of the program). the subject includes these messages into

29

POROFHCIALUSEONLY
I'OII OI'IIL'IAI. 08¢ ONLY

the problem solving process as is. At such times the subject exhibits sibjective
satisfaction in joint work with the computer (series 1, 10. 11). In cases where
computer messages were inconsistent with the content of goal formation, the attitude
expressed toward interaction varied (series 5-9). The subjects not only failed to
find what was objectively the best move, but they sometime even rejected the best
move recommended by the couputer. Computer advice was accepted in only 38 percent
of the cases, being rejected in all others. In series 2-4, sometiltu the subjects
did not analyse the mental problem independently: they mechanically utilised the
computer messages. However, despite the fact that there was almost no preliminary
analysis of the problem in these series, the results of the mental activity were
mch better than in series 5-9, and coaputer messages were accepted in all cases.

The best results were achieved in series 1, 10. ii. The objectively best move was
found in 18 out of 20 problems (series 1) and in 22 out of 25 problem (series 10,

ll). The moves found by the subjects were objectively the best according to the
computer's criteria. In the remaining cases. the disagreement between the subject‘s

nave and the objectively best mve (as determined by the comtcr's criteria) was
associated with the fact that during preliminary analysis, this given move had not
been verified with the computer's help.

In series 2-4 the best move was found in 73 percent of the cases. and the thinking
effectiveness was significantly higher than in series 5-9 (in which a correct solu-
tion was found in only 44 percent of the cases). ‘Ihe difference in thinking effect-
iveness between series 1. 10 and ll on one hand and 2-4 on the other is associated,
first of all, with the greater couplexity of the problem solved by subjects in
series 2-4 (to a depth of 5-7, as opposed to a depth of 5 in series 1); second of all
with the limitations imposed on the types of corputer aessages esployed and on choice
of the depth of couputer analysis: third. with the absence of additional resources
with which the subject could check and verify colputer messages he used in the course
of his thinking. These additional resources (step-by-step print-out of the computer's
actions on special information carriersualphanumeric printers. and the explanatory
information the suaject received in regard to his initial message) were added to the
method in series 10, ll. As a result thinking effectiveness was increased to 90 per-
cent (as opposed to 73 percent).

In series 3, in which subjects solved a problem using a restricted pair of messages,

different leans of coununication with the computer were observed: sorting through
all move variants (six out of ten subjects interrogated the coeputer for information

on all possible fields in the game situation) and selecting information regarding only
the Specific fields under examination (four subjects). However, despite the fact that
this was not the optimum solution. four out of the six subjects gave a positive eval-
nation to their joint work with the computer.

me qualitative change in goal formation processes which occurred in series 1. 10,
ll and in certain cases in other series using the second variant of the programs was
accompanied by gradual transition from analysis at a depth within the means of the
subject, without the computer's help. to analysis at a depth of 5-8 using informa-
tion from the computer. The content itself of the subject's goals changed under the
influence of the computer messages as well: Game situations began to be analyzed

in conformity with the content of the basic messages.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subject I. V.: “0.K., can I as): for a nasage indicat‘ng the
nusber of threats?. Seventy-nine out of 216 gam situations?
I won't be able to consider 216. and even 79 would be difficult."

As was noted in the research (in series 4), this transition to a greater depth of
analysis was not always accompanied by a qualitative positive diange in goal forma-
tion. In certain series the latter had its limits, or sons. mm in series 4 at
depth 8, cosputer nessages were not always included in the goal forming process.

Subject H. B. : ”At depth 5 the conputer was helpful, because

I was able to evaluate and weigh, and then coware. while at
depth 8 the computer does not provide any inforsation that I could
judge as being correct on the spot. "

A typical feature of all problems solved by the subject was a need for analysing
several solution variants (from one to six). The search for the best nave exhibited
its differences when preliminary analysis occurred before or after interrogation of
the cosputer. When the computer was not interrogated the different variants were
examined sore extensively, while problem solution jointly with the counter tended
to reduce the zone of analysis. In series 1 as an eagle. from one to five fields
were checked out with the assistance of the cosputer in 17 out of 20 cases. In this
case the sibject analyzed from 3 to 19 item of advice. utilising messages ranging

in nunber from one pair to the entire set. In two cases selectivity of analysis and
love choice had a negative effect on the results.

In the final analysis, a qualitative change in the goal forming process occurred in
this stage. allowing the subject to act sore productively. In cases where the second
variant of the program was employed. most subjects interpreted interaction with the
conputer as joint problem solving.

Subject 5. M.: "Today the conputer really worked liked an adviser,
because I was able to check my own saves with its help. (Experi-
renter: 'You mean as a verification mechanisn7'). No! Before

(in series 5) I selected the save and the oosputer told me yes or
no, while here it is different: Here it (the colputer) could tell
me everything about each field.... Before. I thought that it was
deceiving me, while here I could not but believe it. All of the
calculations were there to see.”

mus utilization of the conputer's potentials was fuller than in the first variant

of the programs. For variant 1, the frequency of referral for nessages during
analysis of one game situation averaged 2.38. while for variant II it averaged 6.6.

Differences were observed in the nature of requests for messages. Out of 10? re-
quests in the first stage of the study. 77.5 percent were associated with class 1
messages, 14 percent were associated with class 2, and only 8.4 were associated
with class 3. In series 1-4, 10 and 11 of the principal stage of the experiments,
the frequency of requests for nessages concerning accumlation of counters was

71.2 percent, while the frequency of requests for the rest of the mssage pairs was
29 percent in series 1-4 and 45.5 percent in series lo and ll.

31

MI! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
EUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As in the preliminary series, in the principal series joint problem solving was
accompanied by a special type of statement-~evaluations Mamﬁzing different
aspects of this process. Evaluations stated during 'dialogue" with the cosputer
were identical in nature for almost all smjects. Auxiliary messages, which had
the function of organizing the structure of interaction, never received negative
evaluations. All subject responded positively (with laughter, with excitement)
to special messages. ”How well mannered your comuter in“; ”I enjoy col-sting

with the computer, it's as if we are really talking“: ”well me, will the oomter
understand the word 'please'?".

has the following changes in goal forming processes were revealed in the principal
stage: 1) modification of goal formation, on the basis of cosputer messages, in
terms of both content and depth of analysis; 2) adjusmnt of the subject’s goals

to make them correspond to the wording of the cosputer messages: 3) violation of

goal forming processes under the influence of oosputer messages. The experiments
showed that if subjects are to make effective use of the content of cosputer messages,
they must observe certain conditions. ‘Ihere must be no restrictions in the possi-
bilities for using different types of computer assagss, for making arbitrary changes,
and for selecting the depth of computer analysis. ‘lhe rhythm of the "dialogue“ must
be such that the subject would be able to act jointly with the comuter, to analyse
the goal forming process and to check the corputer intonation out.

It was revealed in a conparative analysis of stages 1 and 2 of the research that
"dialogue” programs have an influence on the individual's activity in general in re-
lation to the entire set of different forms of messages (substructures). 'mus de-
pending on the degree to which the content of goal formation is accounted for in

a ”dialogue" program, we can observe two qualitatively different processes--truly
joint solution and formally joint solution. ‘lhus our experiments showed that inclu-

sion or noninclusion of computer data into the problem solving process is a parameter
significant to evaluation of the overall effectiveness of man-comuter systens.

53. Psychological Problems in Analysing the Effectiveness of han-Cowuter System

no leading specialists in corputer planning note that extensive application of com-

puters in human intellectual activity requires development of new programing Imthods
and ”dialogue" interaction nodes, the quality of which has a direct influence on the
effectiveness of man-computer systems (34,59,85,90). loday, the labor-intensiveness
of developing the software for such systems is from 400 to 5,000 man-years (49), de-
pending on the complexity of the problems solved together with the coqzuter, and it
has a tendency to grow geometrically in comparison with the outlays on the required
hardware. Developers often view computers as nothing sore than arithmetic units.

The recent literature, however, especially the foreign literature, notes: "the inter-
pretation of a corputer as an arithmetic machine comels us to distribute our accents

in such a way that special attention is devoted to the internal structure of the
machine, in detriment to and at the expense of mam-the user; in other words users

are forced to plan their work in a manner convenient to the machine" ((90), p 14).

Data transmission system specialists believe, on the basis of the experience of many
foreign countries, and mainly the USA, that whenever users themelves feed the in-
formation into the system or engage in a ”dialogue" with the conputer, the psychologi-
cal features of problem solving have the principal influence upon the system's

32
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

development. ”System users may vary. Son know programing techniques while others
do not. These differences lead to differences in the structure of the dialogue. In
the future, when communication resources of greater diversity will appear, this
difference will be asplified!‘ ((90), p 24 . The need for simlifying “dialogue"

program and adapting them to the needs of nonprofessional users is now being noted
in foreign software planning (59,36).

nations of the effectiveness of 'dialogue" systems. a an exaspls researchers
atteupting to use, as an effectiveness criterion, “the capability of a human operator
to solve a problem promptly. accurately. over a given amount of time and with minimum
outlays of effort. resources, energy and materials” ((48), p 35) digress from the

users differs from the activity of operators not only in the content of the problem
they solve and the tenporal characteristics of the solution process, but also in the
structure of the ”dialogue.“ the composition of which is more ooaplex.

solution quality, time and cost (103). Authors adhering to this approach believe
that these factors are directly associated with certain characteristics of inter-
action--mutual understanding and psychological preparedness. 'lhe concepts "inter-
action” and "dialogue" may be interpreted differently in application to “dialogue“

used with "dialogue" system, which in turn reflects upon the approaches taken to
analyzing the effectiveness with which these systems function.

mere are two interpretations of the term “interaction.“ In the cybernetic. infor~
national aspect "interaction“ is defined as "exchange of messages between man and
computer in support of the need for successive or parallel performance of actions

by man and computer in joint solution of some sort of problem" (110). In the psycho-
logical interpretation a user working on mental problem with the assistance of com-
puter messages must interact with the oosputer "when the user experiences the need
for referring to the conputer; in this case the nature of interaction last approach
the rhythm of a natural psychological process” ((105). p 38).

From a psychological point of view man's problem solving activity involving the use
or nonuse of messages received from a computer can be called interaction. 'lhis
activity depends on the individual's objective attitude toward the computer
messages, the goals formed by the subject and the choice of the mans for their
attainment. Activity may change under the influence of conputer messages. In
particular under favorable conditions the creative coaponents of activity go into
action. As our experiments showed, the conputer influences man not only at the
mosent of inquiry and receipt of a message from the computer. The individual's con-
ception of the computer's potentials and of the particulars of the program has a

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3'0“ UI'HLMI. USO. URL!

significant influence on his preparedness to use (or not to use) ooaputer messages,
and it influences the effectiveness of their interaction. Soae studies ilply that
the individual features of the nor have a significant influence on the productivity
of interaction (59,82).

some part of it. ‘Ihis is a very important parameter of activity, but as our experi-
ments showed, preparedness for interaction depends mainly on the individual‘s atti-

infomstion symbols but also analysis of the leaning of a mssage, as well as the
emotional reactions accomanying such analysis, ones absent from counter "under-
standing." If we stipulate that mutual understanding between man and computer must
be a decisive prerequisite of the effectiveness of “dialogue" system, it would
clearly be unattainable. And yet it is sometimes asserted that the principle of
mutual understanding is one of the basic factors of effective interaction. It is
believed that mutual understanding must 'reflect a knowledge of the system of
symbolic languages used for intonation exchange, and the presence of at least a
partially coinciding idea about the subject of Mcation“ ((37). p 9).

In this context establishment of sutual understanding ispliss only man's study of
the potentials a computer has for helping solve a certain problem. (brrect formula-
tion of a message to the comuter by the individual is said to be the principal
result in this case. ‘mis approach is an abstraction from the couple): structural

oonposition of the process of man's coqarehension of particular messages.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Accessibility of the coupute' to the individual may be interpreted in different ways.
In some cases it depends not only on the temporal characteristics of the comuter
and the possibilities of the software, but also on the user's attitude toward the
computer. mm a psychological point of view accessibility of the cosputer to man
may be associated with the factor of man's trust or mistrust of couputer data. we
principle of unlimited access in "dialogue'I mode must be interpreted not only from
the purely formal aspect but also from the psychological aspect, since when smjects

do not accept computer messages or when they solve problems without using the com-
puter, access is limited.

Computer reaction speed must be evaluated with regard to the differences in signifi-
cance of different form of couputer messages (basic, auxiliary. special) to the
subject, the complexity of the problems being solved and the user's a priori evalu-
ations of the expected computer response time. A prion: evaluations of cosputer
reaction speed do not always correspond to the actual amomt of time the coaputer
takes to solve the user's problem; therefore "dialogue” programs must foresee the
possibility for maintaining comnication between the individual and the computer in
cases of disagreement between subjective evaluations and the real time outlays. Data
exist indicating that uncertainty felt during anticipation of a response from the
computer may disorganize the user's activity.

Convenience of comunication should include, in addition to the universally accepted
conditions, consideration of the emtional state of the individual. who personifies
the computer in the course of interaction, relating to it as to a partner. If dia-
logue programs are to be universal, they must not only afford the possibility of
broad access to different users. but they must also account for the individual
features of the person and the activeness of his participation in the use of the
computer information.

A ”dialogue“ between man and cowuter and its structure may also be characterized
from both a technical standpoint and a psychological point of view. In the context
of cybernetics, “dialogue“ is defined as work of an individual with a conputer
typified by periodic repetition of a cycle including assignment of a task to the
colputer, acquisition of a reply and its analysis. the principal characteristics
of "dialogue” are said to be its form (a graphic or alphanumeric structure) and its
tenporal parameters. From the standpoint of information theory and cybernetics,
structure includes only the characteristics of the messages exchanged between man
and computer; from a psychological point of view the structure of a “dialogue“
implies the rhythmical atomization of joint problem solving. The size of a com-
puter message may also be interpreted either in purely formal terms (in relation

to the nuuber of systole it contains) or with a consideration for its meaningful-
ness to the individual, the ease and convenience of coqosing the message and the
possibilities fuchanginq its form during joint problem solving.

An analysis of our research showed that if “dialogue" is to be organized effectively.
in such a way that it accounts for the psychological characteristics of the user.

the corputer messages must be differentiated in terms of the fmctions they perform
in the activity. Some messages are involved with goal formation, modifying it,

others regulate the rhythm of communication, and still others support formation of
different forms of relationships with the conputer. We found that the accuracy with
which the time required by an individual to solve mental problems is predicted depends

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in many ways on how correctly and coupletely the psychological conditions governing
the rhythm of communication are accomted for.

As 6. Martin, one of the prominent data transmission system specialists, notes,
“dialogue is a more significant factor in the creation of an effective man-machine
interface than is the system's response time“ ((59), p 73). This assessment of
the significance of the structure of joint problem solving has been confirmed by
experiments. For example auxiliary eclputer messages, which perform a supporting
role by organizing the overall rhythm of interaction, represent that 'dialogue'
sibstructure which is most difficult to adapt to man. Being the lust constant and
frequently recurrent form of messages, they should ensure convenience and ease of
requesting basic computer messages.

As was shown earlier, two types of problems arise in interaction between man and
computer-mental and comicative. Consequently the overall result of interaction
depends both on the effectiveness with which mtal problem are solved and on
organization of an optimum rhythm of communication. 'lhis rhythm is precisely one
of the decisive elements of commicative problems (13,30).

in contrast to the two-cycle interaction typical of the cybernetic approach (103,
110) , our experiments revealed five cycles in the rhythm of communication. Joint
problem solving consists of a succession of cycles: 1) analysis of the problem
conditions; 2) selection of the particular way to include the colputer in the
search for the solution; 3) determination of the requirements on the organization of
“dialogue," selection of the forms in which to display the inputs and outputs. and
composition of the computer inquiry; 4) acquisition of a reply from the computer in
relation to a concrete phase of solution; 5) comarison of the cosputer reply with
the initial conditions of the problem, and analysis of the conuter reply. cycles

1 and 2 are central to joint problem solving, since during this period the subject
forms his goals, determines the zones within which the search for the best solution
is to proceed, and selects anauequate loans for acquiring data from the corputer.
Inasmuch as the time of “dialogue” messages influences the cost of the system,
optimum organization of the rhythm of commication is an iuportant problem, one
still awaiting its researchers. here is no unanimity of opinion in the literature
concerning how fast a computer response must be. Sore authors (59) say the faster
the better, while others make response speed dependent on the nature of the problems:
If they are computational problems, the response time must be within seconds, and if
they are not computational problems, the response time would be in the minutes.

From the cybernetic approach, "dialogue" would be met effective when the corputer's
average response time is sufficiently low (from several fractions of a second to
several seconds) (110) . According to our data the length of the cycles can vary
from tenths of a second to several minutes depending on the complexity of the problem
and the content of the computer message. In our experiments the maximum time from
the moment of acquisition of a message to the subject's response was 8 minutes

25 seconds (cycle 5), the maximum time until interrogation of the cosputer was

5 minutes 9 seconds (cycle 1), the maximum time for selection of the message type
reached 2 minutes 23 seconds (cycle 2), the maximum duration of cycle 3 was 2 minutes

24 seconds, and cycle 4 varied within 1 minute.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

The experimental data revealed a certain dependence between the times of different
cycles. An analysis of the temporal intervals recorded in the experiments would
indicate a direct dependence between the time of anticipation of a oomuter re-
sponse and the time of analysis of the initial problem (cycles 1, 4). Various
factors have an influence on the time of cycle 3: the volum and complexity of

the inputs and outputs. presence of different forms of displaying the computer
results and the structure of the ”dialogue." ‘ihus the time spent by the subject to

decide on the form of data presentation may be longer than the time spent directly
to organize “dialogue" (to print out auxiliary sausages).

Analyzing interaction in relation to time. couputer specialists distinguish

different nodes of temporal organization, namely i-ediate, off-line and batch.

The immediate mode presupposes ”diaIOgue" interaction between man and computer in
which communication between man and corputer is never interrupted during the activity.
As a rule ”dialogue" messages are short. and they are issued by the couputer quickly.
Off-line interaction takes longer. In this case coeplex, voluminous texts, graphs
and illustrations are used. In the opinion of certain computer specialists this

mode is used mainly for creative problems. In batch mode, interaction time from the
absent a problem is fed into the computer to the mment the individual receives
finished results may be very great. The enphasis in man-conputer system planning

is now being laid on imediate and batch interaction modes. The off-line mode.

which is most in keeping with joint problem solving, has not yet enjoyed adequate
attention in development of man-conputer systems. There are presently no reconnenda-
tions available on how to organize its rhythmical structure, the composition of
messages and the software.

Development of ”dialogue" systems is sometimes based on the two following methodo-
logical principles: development of the theory of problem solving by man in a
"dialogue" with a computer, and quantitative research on and formalization of the
factors of their effective interaction. In addition to quantitative research on
effective interaction, we also need to perform qualitative psychological analysis of
the general structure of joint problem solving, to include analysis of mental activi-
ty and man-computer interaction.

'lhe experiments showed that the effectiveness of interaction depends to a significant
extent on how well the qualitative characteristics of goal formation are distinguished

and accounted for in the oouputer programs. Computer messages are perceived by the
individual as advice if they reflect possible change in the conditions of the problem
at different problem solving depths. when the process by which the oonputer arrives
at solutions is made available for inspection and when additional means for double-
checking a selected message are present (a second explanatory message would suffice) ,
the individual can analyze the couputer solutions and persuade himself that the com—
puter is working mainly on those problems which had been given to it by the individual.
In this way, mistrust toward information received by the individual from the computer
is relieved. The structure of the programs must foresee a possibility for utilizing
Inessaqcs not only in the final stage but also right during joint problem solving.

The structure of the program lust also reflect the dynamics of the goal forming

proccSS.

Interaction which is not recognized by the individual to be joint problem solving
is less effective. In such cases the individual may refuse to accept oouputer

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

messages, he may develop a negative attitude toward them, and he may abandon joint
problem solving.

(he important factor promoting formation of a positive attitude toward the cowuter
is rhythmical organization of interaction, coupled with inclusion of special

messages in the program to simulate dialogue between people. The results showed
that introduction of such messages pmmtes stiniletion of the user’s activity in
the work. especially when external interference is present (errors in message compoc

sition. system failures and so on). lbreover the messages make the mnotonous
technical procedures of interaction more interesting.

let us summarize the results of our analysis of "dialogue' system effectiveness.

1. An analysis of published data would show that at present, the cybernetic approach
to the effectiveness problem, which rests on quantitative characteristics, dominates.
aphasis is laid on the inmediate interaction mode in development of "dialogue”
systems for Ian-computer interaction. The off-line lode (joint problem solving).
which is typically used with complex problems, has not yet enjoyed adequate attention
in the developnent of nan-cosputer systems.

2. The effectiveness of man-corputer interaction (acceptance or nonacceptance of
a computer message, the nature of its influence on the subject) depends on the content
of the computer mssages and the extent to which they participate in problem analysis.

3. The structure of "dialogue" programs must include three types of substructures.

having various influence on overall effectiveness and differing in functions and
meaning.

4. The overall structure of communication must include not only inediate inter-
action but also solution of mental problems.

5. The main factor governing the effectiveness of interaction is the content of the
basic computer mssages, conposed with a consideration for the goal fouling
mechanisms ewloyed by the subject during solution of a mental problem.

6. The effectiveness of the thinking of an individual using computer messages
depends not only on the external form of these messages but also on the subject's
internal attitude toward them and toward the entire interaction situation. It is
only when these effectiveness criteria are met that true joint problem solving exists.
On the other hand man-computer interaction that is ineffective from the psychological
point of view is typified by violations of the goal forming processes, mechanical
utilization of comuter messages and rejection of these messages. In this case we
are dealing with the ”appearance" of joint problem solving.

7. Commuter messages used to organise the ”dialogue" must be adapted to the indi-
vidual features of the user.

8. Psychological research on goal forming processes, performed in the laboratory
with the methods proposed here, can reveal new heuristics to be used in creation of

the decision tree. By accounting for them in problem solving programs, we can
significantly reduce couputer tine;

38

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

USING A CGIPUI'BR 10 CONTIDL con. 1'0)!!an PDGSSB
0. K. Tikhoairov, Yu. D. Mayeva

'me central objective of this study was to analyse the possibilities of using coo-
puters to control human intellectual activity on the basis of its psychological
structure. We were especially interested in using coquters to control those
intellectual processes which cannot be delegated to the computer at the present stage
of technological developnent. Goal formation, which is now being studied intensively
(76). was chosen as such a process. Preliminary analysis (12) showed that goal
forming processes cannot be fully described by the existing asthods of formal de-
scription. Consequently we encounter the ilportant problem of studying the ways

and nethods of controlling unfornalised processes. since formalised ones can be
delegated completely to the colputer.

A laboratory experiment was perforud to study the process by which a subject words
the possible goals of an object of analysis suggested by the erperinsnter. As we
know, there are different ferns of goal formation (91). We studied one of then in
our experiment--production of possible (conditional) goals. Sons authors believe
examination of the field of possible goals to be an imortant cosponent of creative
capabilities (146) . But at the sa- tine these processes have been left alsost
completely unstudied by the psychology of creativity (148).

the authors of “idea generation" methods such as 'brainstorning' (1M), "synectics'
(125), “morphological analysis" (156) and so on have cons closest to solving the
problem of controlling the production of possible goals. However, it is difficult
to adapt these methods. which contain numerous unforaslised amounts, to a coQuter
(70,100).

In order to describe some of these difficulties, let us analyze one of the tradi-
tional directions of computer use in creative activity. one which is perhaps en-
countered nost frequently today in studies of the possibility of controlling "idea
generation” by a computer. In this approach. the cosputer is used as an auxiliary
device in the production and analysis of a certain field of possibilities prescribed
by the given algorithm. '1'he cosputer synthesizes all possible variants of ideas

(or their specific rudiments) on the basis of the individual's overall plan and

a certain list of eleaents prescribed by hill. A certain set or these elements is

tea into the computer toe-cry in coded term. The conputer subsequently synthesizes
solution variants on the basis of a special coshinatory algorithm which, by processing

the prescribed elements according to certain rules. prescribes the field of possible
combinations.

39

FOR Oil-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OI-NL‘IAI. USE ONLY

Justifying the possibility for using a coaputer in this way in artistic and
scientific creativity, A. Hol' points out that in all problematic situations, the
field of possibilities is extremely vast as a rule. "A person selecting a certain
path in this field may pass by much more attractive variants without even suspecting
their existence. mly a computer that systematically applies all rules of coi>ina-
torial analysis to all prescribed elements is capable of examining and exhausting
the entire field of possibilities" ((61). pp 91-92). In general, this suggestion

is quite logical. However, researchers atteqting to inlement it have inediately
encountered a nutter of fundamental difficulties associated both with the process
itself of revealing the elements and the rules andvith creation of special ”filter
programs." Such program are needed for the following reasons. Selectivity, which
restricts the boundaries of the field of possibilities analysed by the subject. is
not only a "nuisance” factor (144) but also one necessary to human thinking. in this
case variants are far from always evaluated and selected on the basis of formalized
rules that may be embodied within a "filter program.’ If deprived of such evaluation
functions so specific to human thinking, a conuter may synthesise such a large
quantity of variants that the individual would have to exert an extremely large amount
of effort to choose the best. Moreover it is not always possible to reveal the

optimum set of rules to be included in colbinatorial algorithm, and therefore many
variants synthesized by the comuter may end up being generally meaningless. has

the need arises for specially organized “dialogue" interaction between man and com-
puter.

He considered the following to be among the general shortcomings inherent to the
presently available methods of using couputers to control "idea generation.”

1. For practical purposes most methods are not based on psychological information.
It should be considered that among their creators (engineers, inventors). there are
a few professional psychologists. Psychologists, meanwhile, far from always devote
sufficient attention to analyzing these methods, which in our point of view is a
significant hindrance to further development of this promising direction.

2. As a rule the notivational and emotional components of activity are not accounted
for in attempts at computer realizations of I'idea generation“ methods. Moreover the
opinion exists that many effective ways of influencing man's emotional and motiva-
tional sphere. presently being used successfully in a nutter of known methods, cannot
be used today in automated system inasmuch as they cannot be stated in algorithmic
term.

In our research, goal formation was controlled with a comuter using a specially
developed ”dialogue" mode. The dialogue rode was created on the basis of a prelimi-
nary psychological analysis of controlled intellectual activity, and it accounted for
the motivational and emotional couponents of activity. Although we do agree that

it is irpossible to formalize a large nunt'r of psychological factors. we do not
share the point of view that it is impossible to make real use of these factors in
automated systems.

me effectiveness of modern "dialogue“ systems may be raised significantly namely
by making broad use of the techniques and methods of controlling unformalized

processes .

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we can distinguish at 18L it three classes of goals produced by a abject participating
in a ”dialogue" with a cemeter.

l. he goals of analyzing an object provided by the experimenter (possible goals).
we will abbreviate them as P-goals. ‘lheir sue total characterizes the field of
possibilities which the abject is able to reveal in the experiment.

2. Goals associated with the subject's direct comicaticn with the experisenter,
abbreviated B-goals.

3. Goals arising in the course of conputer-udiated co-tnication with the experi-
senter or other swjects, which we will call C-goals.

‘me experimental research was conducted with the purpose of analyzing P-goals. 'me
other classes of goals were studied only in their relationship to P-goals.

‘lhe Grounds of the Experimental Method

Developing the experimental nethod, we relied on data from former research (11.12)
and on known uethods such as Guilford's method of studying ”sensitivity to problems”
(127), micky's ”morphological analysis” (156) and Bush's ”chain of ideas and asso-
ciations” (24). He made use of all these methods for the following reasons.

the extremely few psychological studies of production of possible goals are dominated
by experiments involving the me of tests to detenine ”sensitivity to problems.”
mlying on these concrete data. we can judge with better grounds the nature of
changes made by including a computer in the goal formation process.

In Guilford's opinion "sensitivity to problems” may manifest itself in the form of
recognition of the need for certain changes in the situation at hand, or of recogni-
tion of defects and shortcomings in things as they are. ‘lhis ”sensitivity” is an
important component of creative capabilities: it permits the individual to quickly
recognize things that are strange. unusual and contradictory in problematic situations.
Recognition of such inconsistencies is, in particular. the source of the goals of
actions aimed at resolving then. Guilford developed his ”sensitivity to problem"
tests on the basis of the assumption that in an “perinatal situation. a concrete
area of problem production may be assigned in the form of certain objects or situa-
tions. In this case the more comenplace the situation or object is. the nere
”creative potential" is required of the subject to reveal ”defects, needs and short-
comings" (127).

we made use of the methods suggested by wicky and Bush because they are among those
few methods of controlling "idea generation” which are best suited to coaputer use.
Both of these methods are based on the use of certain conbinatory algorithms. The
"rudiments" for P-goals are synthesized using either the rules of complete sorting of
all possible combinations of the initially selected significant factors typifying the
object under analysis (156) . or rules that lead to different cowmations of elements
in the ”chain” of synonyue for the object under analysis and elements of the ”chain
of associations” (24). his approach. in the opinion of the authors of these methods,
permits us to significantly expand the boundaries of the field of possible goals and
to reveal new. original directions in research on various technical objects.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic premises of our experimental nethod differ significantly from those de-
scribed above.

1. As in Guili‘ord's “instrumental Test“-~part or a battery of “sensitivity to pro-
blems" tests, the probleaatic situation prescribing the area of production or P-goals
was represented by well known household objects. In distinction from this test,
however. we did not iapose rigid limitations on the nulber of. goal variants re-
vealed; on the contrary we asked the smject to forsulate as many possible goals

of analyzing the given object. 'lhe specific instruction to seek 'detects and short-
comings" was excluded as well. From our point of view this ends it possible to

judge the features of the field of possibilities revealed by the swject with better
grounds.

2. The choice of elements to be fed into the comter semry and to be used in the
cosbinatorial algorithm was based on data from a special preliminary series of ex-
periments. The data showed that these elements may be only the properties or the object
of analysis (as is suggested in Vicky's and Bush's methods) but also concrete pro-
cedures permitting the subject to transﬁora property statements into statements of
possible goals. "Procedure" is an arbitrary label applied to a certain verbal
construct with an omitted phrase, such as 'imrove ... (property 013).” If we insert
a certain property of. the object into this gap, we may arrive at a statement for
one of the possible goals or the object's analysis. ‘lbe concrete procedures the
subjects used to produce their statements of 9-goals were revealed on the basis of
an analysis of data sheets from the preliminary series of experiments.

3. The computer algorithms we developed also differed significantly from those de-
scribed above. ln arriving at couputer synthesis of the "rudiments' tor P-goals,

we rejected the rules or complete sorting of all possible coshinations of revealed
elements. Instead, we applied special rules accounting ﬁor certain differences in
the probability that the revealed properties and procedures would appear in the real
activity of the subjects. For this purpose we loaded the counter mssory not only
with statements describing properties and procedures but also data indicating the
frequency with which they appear, obtained from an analysis of the results or the
preliminary series of experiments.

We developed the methods of this series on the basis of the hypothesis that certain
relationships exist between the processes by which statements of possible goals of

an object's analysis are produced and the revealed properties of the object. Selec-
tivity typical of human thinking and shrinkage of the field of possibilities -
analyzed by the subject may manifest themselves both as a certain amount of selec-
tivity in the choice of the procedures. properties and their cosbinations and as
selectivity in application or the procedures to certain properties and their cosbina-
tions. By obtaining statistically valid data on these features of the goal forming
process, we can not only generate nontraditional ”rudimuts" for P-goals but also
develop special subprogrm by which to obtain coquter statements and possible

goals typical of another degree of selectivity specitied by the experimenter. 'l'his
approach opens up interesting prospects for studying goal formation by an individual
participating in a "dialogue" with a partner whose selectivity in production of state~
rents of possible goals is structured on the basis of other principles.

42

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
Four "dialogue” modes were developed on this basis: 'original property." ”property."
'conbination of properties” and ”problem" lhese nodes are characterized by the
use of randomly generated properties of the object (having different probabilities
of appearance), random cosbinations of these properties and subprogra- producing
cosputer statements of P-goals. 11he subjects could not only freely choose aIng
these modes of interaction with the cosputer. but also change from one node to
another during their work.

4. Our assessnent of the effectiveness of these “dialogue" nodes was inseparably
tied in with cosparative analysis of the productivity of suajects working in tradi-
tional conditions (without a cosputer) and in 'dialgue' interaction with a counter.
We had to determine whether or not use of these modes causes significant expansion
of the boundaries of the field of possibilities analysed by the smject and reveals
sure-attractive variants of the possible goals. in this analysis. expert methods
were used to evaluate the quality of P-goal stateunts produced by the subjects.

Studying the possibilities of controlling human intellectual activity through special
influences upon man's emotions and motivations is, from our point of view. a new
direction in research on various form of use of conuters in this activity.

The productivity of hmn activity is known to be sigaificantly influenced by eno-
tional and motivational factors. However, because these factors do not yield to
formal description today. their use in “dialogue" interaction between man and cosputer
requires development of special methods. In this connection we suggested the follow-
ing basic hypotheses: a) that the emotions and activations of an individual parti-
cipating in a ”dialogue“ with a couputer may be influenced through various form of
group interaction mediated by a coqmter; b) that objective data on autonomic para-
meters can be used to control the intellectual activity of an individual participating
in a “dialogue" (the reference is to a special type of feedpach in the nan-couputer
system). In this case. inasmuch as the basic difficulty of making practical use of
autonomic data lies in the polyfmctional origin of these data, we hypothesized that
concrete motivational mechanisms influence the way the subject differentiates those
autonomic parameters which are significant from the standpoint of certain controlling
influences from those that are insignificant.

We developed the following new variants of the experisental methods on the basis of
these hypotheses: l) a special effort was made to create conditions favoring arisal
of the native of competition with the coqauter in subjects participating in a dialogue
with the computer. For practical purposes this was conpetition with other partici-
pants of the experimnt. mdiated by the oonlputer. This process was controlled by
varying the computer's evaluation responses; 2) sore-flexible form of influence

upon human emotions and motivations were studied in experiments in which the elements
computer responses were furnished to the subject were coordinated with a concrete
functional state of the subject, as he worked on the experimntal assignment.

Use of procedures of this type allows us, from our point of view. to exercise flexible
control over unformalized processes in human activity. the effectiveness of these
processes may be raised not only by capitalizing on certain potentials of modern
computers (such as their tremendous weary, their high speed and so on) . but also by
activating. as much as possible. the specific mental potentials of the subject parti-
cipating in a "dialogue” with the cosputer.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All of the computer prograns were written in Pia-l for a Yes-1020 mter. ‘Ihe
experimental named: and the data obtained are described sore concretely below.

InVestigation of the Production of Feasible Goals hiring an Individual‘s 'Dialogue'
Interaction with a Oouputer. Description of the hperiuntal Method.

named as the objects in the series of preliminary experinnts having the purpose of
studying production of possible goals. As was noted earlier. this procedure is often

used in studies of the psychology of creativity. 'me stbjects were given the follow-
ing four instructions successively.

Instruction 81: "the object is... (the new of the object is given). ﬂy to uses as
nany properties of this object as you can.“

Instruction 52: “The object is... (the nose of the object is given). Try to nane as
many unique properties of this object as you can.“

this object? Try to nane as many Probless as you can."

Instruction 92 differs from the previous instruction only by the statemt: "ﬂy to
name as many original problems as you can."

ﬁne subject worked in accordance with each of these instructions until he gave up

three tires. After the first time he gave m. he was given the additional instruction:
”think a little tare." and after the second time he was told: "You have con up with
few properties (problems). thin): sons sore.” If the subject did not give up. a time
limit was inposed (1 hour).

We recorded the following on data sheets for the esperiuntsx l) the concrete
products the subjects produced while fulfilling these instructions (these data per-
mitted several conclusions on the typical features of the field of possibilities re-
vealed by each of the subjects); 2) the tine spent on each instruction: 3) the nusber
of times the abject gave up. The line of reasoning of the subjects was recorded
right during the experimnt (with a tape recorder). and following the experiment

as an unprcapted report. Some additional parameters of analysis were introduced

in correspondence with the hypothesis, mentioned above. that a certain relationship
exists between production of the statements of P-goals of analysing a certain object
and revelation of the properties of this object: the properties and the colbinations
of properties used by swjects in their P-gosl statemts: the concrete procedures
used by the subject to transforn the property state-ants into P-goal state-ants.
Moreover we analysed the frequency with which certain properties. cominations of
properties and procedures appeared in the activity of the subjects.

sixty subjects participated in the preliminary series of experiments (students of a
vocational-technical school and V02 graduates). - me results were used not only to
develop the conputer programs but also for comparative analysis of the specific
ways P-goals are produced in traditional conditions (without a comauter) and in
"dialogue“ interaction with a.conputer.

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIOFHCIALIJSEONLY

In the main series of experiments the subjects were first given two of the instruc-
tions described above-4’1 and 92. Inediately after the stbjects cowleted these
instructions (after they gave up the third tine) they were asked to use the help of

the computer. In their reports, the suajects usually indicated that by the ties
their resources for revealing the field of possibilities had been fully exhausted
and that they could not think of any mre problem-wriginal ones all the are so.

Experiments with the conputer were conducted as follows. Sosa of the subjects
(the control grow) actually interacted with the War, while the rest worked
with an autonomous display system (ADS). In this system, the work of the counter
was simulated by the experimnter using coqauter data acquired earlier. the MS
system was developed by V. B. Ryabov and Yu. A. man of the USSR Academy of

Sciences Institute of Psychology. Its use saves computer time necessary for studying
the features of ”dialogue" interaction between man and comuter.

All subjects were given identical directions and instructions--both those actually
interacting with the computer and those working with the ass. 'mus all subjects

were given the following direction before the main experimt: “blow you will work
with the computer. You will receive all necessary instructions from it. ll‘he experi-
menter will be here only to see that the equipment operates properly: therefore you
are not to ask him any quescions during the experiment." )Ioreover the abject was
asked to explain his actions aloud as he worked. ‘l‘hese stateunts were tape-recorded.

then the following assignment was given to the subject via a counter-display linking
mic (in the autonomous display system) or a typewriter console (in real interaction
with the conputer).

Instruction Pal (statement of P-goals in a "dialogue“ with the conputer).

Let us continue. I will now be working together with you. We
will formulate the problems of analysis in relation to the some
objects. I can work in the following modes:

1) "Original property'--I provide you with a property which appears
original to me. and you formulate the problem you associate with

this property)
2) ”property'--the sans as mode 1, but the property is random

3) 'oonbination"--the sale as in the previous modes. except that
the single property is substituted by a cosbination of proper-
ties which must associated with one problem:

4) ”problem”--I formulate a certain problen of analysis myself ,
and you nust formulate another in response.

Tell me which mode you would like to work in, and than rank them
in order of preference. You can do this singly by typing their

nunbers.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the subjects rank the modes, the coaputer displays the following message by

scans of the appropriate linking unit: "Please type the new of the node in which
you wish to work now.“

After this instruction is fulfilled, the oowuter may answer the subject in the
following fashion.

If the ‘conbination' lode is chosen, it transmits the smssage: 'How my properties
must this codeination contain? Your answer should be a mﬂoerﬂ The subject types

1f the swject chooses the ”problem" node the counter guerries: ‘what sort of
problems do you wmt--'crasy' or 'intelligent'?" If the stbject selects "intelligent”
problems the oouputer randomly selects one of the problem contained in a special
problem library storing a num>er of cosputer statements, and problems suggested
earlier by other participants of the experiment. If the subject selects ”crazy”

in a certain selected mode. he receives the following message: ”let us continue.
Is the node to retain the ease? Answer yes or no.“ In the case of a positive re-
sponse the work goes on in the former mode, and in the case of a negative one an
additional question is asked: "In what mode would you like to work now?“

and therefore we terninated the experiment after a certain amount of tile (2 hours)
or after the subject gave up just once. the following items of information were
recorded on the experimental data sheet for each swjectz a) a couplets trans-
cription of the ”dialogue” between the subject and the oomter: b) refusals to
continue the work: c) the mural characteristics of the “dialogue" (intervals
between the typing of different messages. the typing time, the tinm used to rank
the nodes and so on); d) the sibject's reasoning aloud; e) the reports given by
the subjects after the experiment. lbreover the subjects were asked to ran): all
modes once again after the experiment.

Forty-five subjects participated in the main series of experiments--college students,
high school students in their senior years and professional cosputer users.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the main series there were two suppleuntsry series. In the first

we studied the conditions under which subjects felt a need to appeal to the oomter
for assistance. Considering the limited possibility of modern cosputers for analysing
messages written in natural language, in this variant of the method we used a simli-
fled model, substituting the naming of the possible goals of analysing a certain
object by one of the components of this process. sainly that of revealing the pro-
perties of the same object.

‘lhe subjects worked in accordance with three instructions given in succession. ‘me
first two were those described wove. $1 and 52, concerned with naming the proper-
ties of a certain everyday object (in this experiment only one object was chosen--
"chair"). After the subject gave up for the third tin. in his work on the last of
these instructions. he was told that all of the properties he named had been fed

into the computer. and that he was now to word: together with it (these experiments
also involved both real interaction with the cowuter and the autonosous display

system). Then the following lessage was transmitted fros the computer via the
linking unit.

Instruction SPlx ”He will now work together. I will provide hints to you. I will
name one property which you have not named yet. and than you will name other proper-
ties. If you need another hint. sisply type the word 'hint'."

the experimental time was limited-d hour if the subject did not give up. ﬁne ex-
periment was also terminated if the subject gave up at least once during this time.

As the preliminary experiments with this method showed, the word 'hint" was unpleasant
to most of the subjects. Consequently a certain conflict was created between an
arising need for assistance and the form in which it was offered.

Wenty-five sdajects took part in this series of experimentsucollege students, high
school students in their senior years and professional cosputer users.

me second supplementary series of experinnts had the purpose of studying possible
approaches to solving the inportant problem of evaluating the productivity of goal
forming processes.

In order to clarify whether or not use of the conputer causes a certain increase in
the productivity of the goal forming activity of the subject, we had to make a com-
parative analysis of the productivity of this activity in relation to smjects
working in traditional conditions (without a cowuter) and in "dialogue" interaction
with a computer. The main difficulty of this analysis lay in the absence of cot-only
recognised methods by which to evaluate the productivity of goal foreing processes.
'lhe total nusber of possible goals produced and the percentage of acceptable
variants are often used as possible quantitative criteria characterising ho: optilum

this process is. The nest acceptable variants. meanwhile. are revealed by expert
methods. since evaluation of goals is totally unfornalisable.

In the experimental method we developed, to evaluate the productivity of goal forming
processes we used both the characteristics of the process itself of producing possible
goals and certain characteristics of the end products of this process-«tetanus of

goals of analysis, with which the subject's activity ended. In this case the quality
of those statements was also evaluated by expert methods, which necessitated inclusion

47

POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of yet another supplenentary series of erperieents. As we know, the results of an
expert inquiry depend significantly on the concrete procedure of inquiry, ,

and therefore we varied the experisental instructions in order to arrive at the
best-substantiated evaluations.

First of all we were interested in whether or not any sort of qualitative differences
exist in the goals stated by the sane person in different conditionswindependently
or jointly with the cosputer. ‘mis in turn necessitated revelation of criteria

used by the stbjects to evaluate the quality of P-goal statenents.

The two following variants of the expert procedure were eqloyed: a) evaluation,
by a certain group of experts. of possible goals forunated by a certain subject
(the author); b) evaluation of these sane goals by the author hiuelf, now playing

the role of expert. This Isade it possible not only to obtain the subjects' evalu-
ations of the results of their own activity but also to coware the author's evalua-
tions with the opinions of other experts.

In each of these variants the subjects ranked three sets of state-ants of possible
goals. First they ranked the statements of goals produced by sons individual
independently, then they ranked the state-eats of goals they formlated during work
with the conputer. and then they ranked both types of goal statements together. A
week later this ranking procedure was repeated in order to reveal the stability of
the preferences of the experts. M types of instructions were used in the experi-
ments, differing in the eeans by which the ranting criteria were presented.

Instruction R1: Sibjects fulfilling thisinstructicn were silply asked to order each
of the indicated three sets of state-ants of possible goals into a single series by
preference. After the ranking was coupleted, the criteria by whidl the sdajects
ranked these statenents were determined by questioning the latter.

Instruction a: Before perforating the ranking procedure. each subject was asked
to nane all possible criteria by which to evaluate P-goal statements. Ebr this
purpose the subjects were told to consider two ieaginary situations in succession.

The “supervisor situation"~-the subject was asked to imagine himself in the role of
a disinterested supervisor, one of whose functions was to evaluate the goals pro-
duced by his subordinates. The subject was asked to name all possible evaluation
criteria which he w0uld use in this case. The second situation was referred to as
the "subordinate situation.“ 'lhe subject was to imagine himself in the role of a
Subordinate given the job of selecting the goal of his further work from a certain
set of alternative goals offered to him. In this situation the abject was also
asked to name all possible criteria of such a choice.

men the subject was given two criterie--‘problen ilportance” and “problem original-
ity"--and asked to rank the statements of possible goals in relation to each of
then. In one form or another. these criteria were usually already contained in the
lists of criteria given by the subject himelf.

Statistical treat-lent of the expert data included calculation of Spearean's rank
correlation coefficients, concordance coefficients and evaluations of their signi-
ficance (52). Moreover we used Wilcoaoon's two-samle shift test (5). In addition

48

l-‘OIOFFICMLUSEONLY
to these standard methods, an algorithm of “paired' nonmetric analysis developed
by V. s. Kamenskiy (51) was used for comuter treatment of the expert data.

Because we used these methods for statistical treatment of the expert data. we were
able to iapose more rigorous requirements on our approach to the following basic
objectives: 1) revealing the stable preferences of the experts in relation to a
certain set of objects of ranking suggested by them: 2) revealing the consistency of
the opinions of the experts (pairs of experts and the entire group as a whole):

3) revealing the possible preference for some group of objects in the set of all
objects of ranking.

All subjects of the min series took part in erperinnts performed in accordance
with this method-45 authors and 18 experts (vuz students). In this case 22 authors
and nine experts fulfilled instruction R]. and the rest fulfilled instruction R2.

The authors ranked only their own statements of the possible goals. Bach expert
completely repeated all of the ranking procedures described above, which were also
completed by the author of the problem. for this purpose he was given a set of
cards with one problem statement typed on each. his expert was not given any informa-
tion as to precisely who the author of these statements was. after he ranked the
problem of all authors, problems that were supposedly written by different people
were given to him, though this tine not on cards but on individual sheets. In
reality, these problem had been revealed by the same person but mder different
conditions (independently and with the help of a counter). ‘lhe expert was asked

to state his judgment concerning these people on the basis of the statements of
possible goals they produced. These "verbal portraits' were also considered in the
analysis of the obtained data.

Analysis and Discussion of Experimental Data. General Features of Production of
Possible Goals of Analysis

The results revealed two mutually associated means of formulating possible goals of
analysis. In the first case the subject, who possesses certain a priori knowledge
of the general goals of transforming objects of analysis. initially formulates these
goals and then in a sense seeks properties corresponding to the former. For exaaple
a subject might note: "First of all I need to determine what in the object should
be inproved," after which he produces a statement of the following sort: I'Improve
property x," "Determine if property x would improve if property ‘1 were changed,"
and so on.

'me second method of goal formation was directly opposite to the first: Contrary
to the first situation. the subject first revealed a particular property of the
object and then thought about ”what could be done with it'nthat is, he sought a
sore-general goal permitting him to transform his property statement into a problem
statemnt. In a nunber of cases the problems were generally formulated as "proper-
ties with a question mark." In this case the subjects noted that the expanded
statement of this property in the form of a problem is self-evident, for which
reason it need not be written out.

Subject Add. offered the following wording for a possible goal
in response to instruction Pl: "Presence of sap in the wood“

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(the object is ”chair"). msponding after the experiment to
a question tron the experimenter regarding this formulation of
the goal. the subject said: "lhe main thing is to reveal a

problematic property. since the subseqmnt expansion of the
probleu stateunt would be standard.“

In this case the subject believed that the expanded statement would apply to an
entire class of problems such as: "malyse the wood for the presence of sap,”
'lhveal how it influences the quality of the wood and of the article itself, espe-
cially its processing,“ “If it has a negative influence, then find out how this
shortcoeing could be corrected, "--that is, an entire class of P-goals.

It should be noted that in addition to the two means noted above for producing the
statements of possible goals, others existed as well. mus formlatim of problems

on analogy was a rather typical phenoesnon: The subject adapted certain problem
statements known to him earlier to a new object given in the experimt.

Study of P-goal production is inseparably associated with revealing the criteria
for optimization of this process. As w“ noted earlier, the total nuﬂasr of P-goals
formulated by a subject in an experiment could serve as one of the quantitative
indicators. This indicator is often basic to a nuioer of known, applied aethods
(24). “(never the experimental data we obtained showed that this characteristic
depends significantly on the concrete type of goal forming process. An examle in
which the subject named only a single probleuatic property rather than formlating
a P-goal was given above. In this case he had in mind an entire class of problems
which he did not name, believing that they were self-evident.

Moreover many subjects working on instruction Pl gave not just unrelated goals but
a certain hierarchy of goals ('rable l)-that is, first they distinguished certain
universal goals as the general directions of analysis, and then they broke them down
into swgoals. In this case the system of universal goals developed in application
to one of the objects given in the experiment was often carried over by the subjects
to other objects without significant modifications, though the subgoals could be
different in these cases. Some subjects working with second and third objects

even tried to generalize these system of universal goals.

Table 1
no. of Subjects
Group of No. of Producing a
Subjects Sub ects Hierarchy of Goals
1 (college students) 20 12
2 (professional computer 5 4
users) '
3 (high school students) 20 7

The following happened in regard to the total nulber of possible goals formulated.
Subjects who built hierarchies of goals often noted that the nulber of stbgoals in
their hierarchy could be very large, and that in principle they could continue
this work for a rather long tine. with additional stinulation by instructions,

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
however. following the first and second time that those subjects gave up. all of
then were hardly able to increase the number of miversal goals they had formlated
before. Growth in the total nunber of goals occurred nainly due to an increase in
the nunber of subgoals in the hierarchy (Table 2).

Thus from our point of view in such a situation it would be unsensible to use only
the total number of fomulated goals as a quantitative criterion for assessing

the goal forming activity of all subjects. A more elaborate analysis to reveal
the features of the process itself of forming possible goals must be conducted.

Table 2. Average Number of Universal Goals and Subgoals in Goal Hierarchies
Created by the Subjects

Gro of Stb ecte

1 (College 2 (Computer 3 (H19!)
Indicators Students) Users) _ School Students)

No. of universal goals 4.9 3.6 4.3
No. of subgoals 7.5 4.7 8.1
After first stimulatory
instruction:

Enlargement of the

nuuber of univer-

sal goals 0.3 0.2 0

Enlargement of the

hunter of subgoals 5.5 4.2 6.4
After the second stimu-
lating instruction:

Enlargemnt of the

nunber of univer-

sal goals 0.08 0 0

Enlargenent of the

number of subgoale 4.7 3.9 4.1

Table 3. Average Nunbers of Original miversal Goals and begoals

Grou of Sub ‘ects

1 (College 2 (Computer 3 (High
Indicators Students) Users) School Students)
Original universal goals 0.25 0.2 0.27
Original universal sub-
goals 3.42 2.7 2.4
51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In :egard to the nusber of original goals (the naming of a given goal by only one
sutject of the experimental group was diesen as the criterion of originality), we
also felt it suitable to analyse the originality of universal goals and suagoals
separately. limever, the following circuntance should be considered here.

Despite the certain similarities in the ways the stbjects built their goal hierb
archies, sore subjects exhibited certain differences connected aainly with the amunt
of detail in their goal systems. 'lhus different subjects could place the sane goal
at different levels in their hierarchies-«hat is, a goal which is universe]. to some
subjects may be treated as a subgoal by others. Cbnsidering this circustance we
said that universal goals were original only if the goals were not encountered among

other subjects as either universal goals or subgoals. We can use sore of our data
as an exanple (Table 3).

line data in Table 3 indicate that universal goals were relatively standard as basic
directions of analysis. But growth in the nutter of original subgoals often depended
significantly on whether or not the subject independently decided to develop the
basic directions of his hierarchy of goals in greater detail. -

me other isportant fact should be noted. he the experiments showed, sibjects who
built goal hierarchies basically med the form: of the two goal forming methods
(formulation of more-general goals followed by selection of concrete properties)

to build their miversal goal hierarchies. But subjects who did not make a special
effort to build goal hierarchies exhibited use of the second type of goal forming
process much sore frequently. It would be interesting to note that for most of the
subjects, it would be easy to organise their goals into such a hierarchy; mreover
when these SlbjOcts went on to other objects as required by the experiment, it was
mainly the "miversal" goals which they carried over to other objects. even though
they did not sake a special effort to distinguish these goals as universal. A third
group of subjects created goal hierarchies for other objects (one created a hier-
archy for the second object and two created hierarchies for the third). 'lherefore
in our analysis of the results of their activity we were able to coware their hier-
archies of goals. Such analysis made it possible to reveal the following features.

As was noted earlier. subjects who did not make a special effort to build a hier-

archy of goals usually employed the second type of goal forming process--that is,

they first analyzed the properties of the object and then sought the P-goal state-
ments corresponding to then. In this case there was no clear influence of a rigid

hierarchy of universal goals. and as they worked on the properties of the objects,
the subjects somtiues discovered original directions of analysis. But such cases
were few in nunber.

‘ihe obtained data al-zo showed that swjects could very rarely "divorce“ themselves
from a certain practical use (including a nontraditional use) of the object presented

in the experiment. and as a rule, on revealing a certain property. they did not limit
themelves to formulating "purely analytical" goals. Despite significant difficulties

they continued this process until such tine that they revealed the corresponding
practical significance of these goals. Thus the analytical goal was in a sense a
stage along the road to a certain practical goal contained within the former.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only a few subjects out of all of the experimental groups (12 out of 45) revealed
possible goals of analysis outside the traditional uses of the object or in general
not connected with any of its concrete uses. It would be interesting to note that
out of all of these subjects, only one built a hierarchy of goals.

The obtained data may be supplemented by results from the preliminary series of
experiments. In these experiments, prior to instruction P1, concerned with problem
statement. the sibjects were given instruction 81, by which they were required to
name the properties of the object. We hypothesized that those suajects who stray
beyond the framework of the traditional uses of the object in fulfilling the in-
struction of naming the object's properties, and who reveal nontraditional uses

as, for exasple, functional properties or who name certain 'internal" properties of
the object which cannot be observed directly, but about which conclusions could be
made on the basis of scientific knowledge, as well as properties associated with
this object's interaction with the environment (for greater detail about this classi-
fication see (11)) , would display the same sort of originality when fomlating pro-
blems. This hypothesis was based on the assunption, described above, that a close
correlation exists between production of possible goals of analysis of a certain
object and revelation of the properties of the same object, and the assumption that
the influence of the "psychological barrier of past experience" upon the same abject
fulfilling instructions Pi and 51 should be extrenly similar if not identical.

'lhe results of experiments conducted to test this hypothesis showed that subjects who
had formulated problems outside the framework of the object's traditional use did in
fact as a rule display the same originality when revealing its properties. However,
even among those subjects who displayed a certain degree of originality when ful-
filling instruction Sl, only a few (about 30 percent) went beyond the traditional
uses of the object in fulfillment of instruction Pl. 'Ihe influence of the following
factors is doubtlessly evident here: the type of goal forming process, the conti-
nuity of the goal producing processes and their critical evaluation, change in atti-
tudes upon transition to a new instruction, to include attitudes associated with
traditional ideas about the object. m system of universal goals stated by sub-
jects who built goal hierarchies was often so "rigid“ that it would not permit them
to subsequently go beyond the framework of the object's traditional uses. In other
cases universal goals were stated in a form which provided a convenient out (for
example a statement such as: "study the possible uses of the object.“ in which the
functional name of the object was formally left "open'). however. when wording their
subgoals the subjects often limited themelves to just the traditional uses of the
object.

the experimental data showed that in these cases different sets in the activity of
the subjects had different influence. mus under the influence of sets connected
with traditional uses of the objects the subject might unconsciously ”close" “open“
characteristics (78) when formulating universal goals. Somtimss, incidentally,
this process was partially recognized by the subject, as manifested in the uniqueness
of his critical evaluation of the formulated problem. As an exasple a subject might
deem, as iuportant and suitable, only those problems which are directly associated
with the traditional uses of the object, and discard those statements which are less
iuportant in his opinion. "Purely analytical“ problems were also frequently dis-
carded if the subject could not find the appropriate practical application for such
problems.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we should also note the influence exerted by differences in the definition of

words contained in the instructions (for exuple the word 'probles') and by reformu-
lation of activity goals in connection with transition to new instructions (transi-
tion from instruction $1 to instruction Pl) which was associated with development of

tail in (ll) I .

me inﬂuence of different sets and self-inosed linitations was also manifested in
the following. A colparison of the list of properties drum up in response to in-

struction 81. which specifically oriented the abject on this, and the list of pro-
parties used in formulation of problem showed that the overlap of. these lists could

be highly insignificant--that is, the subject might reveal new properties with

Did this mean that there are certain special “problematic" properties in the objects
of analysis? To answer this question we perforud the following experiment. The
experimenter read a list of properties of an object which the subject had revealed
earlier in fulfillment of instruction Sl, specifically oriented to this purpose,

but which the subject did not use to formulate the problems (instruction Pl). ‘lhen the
subject was asked to come up with problem statements in relation to each of these
properties. All subjects participating in the experiment easily completed the assign-
lent.

miss this limitation was not fundamental in nature, being instead the consequence
of certain self-imsed limitations arising in the course of goal formation itself.
Moreover there can be no domat that an influence is also exerted by a large nudier
of other psychological factors. ones which cause the subject to stop producing P-goals
despite the fact that his potential resources in this direction are far from ex-
hausted. A typical indication that these factors exist is the possibility subjects
hays for producing new property and problem state-ants after giving up their effort.

me oxperinental procedure was structured in the following way: First the subjects
revealed the properties of the object or formlated the possible goals of its analysis
(instructions 81 and P1). After they gave up three times. they were asked to name
only the original properties of the object or the problems associated with them (in-
structions $2 and 92). Host of the subjects (about 60 percent) refused to follow
these instructions. The refusals were aotivated by the fact that during fulfillment
of instructions P1 and 51 they had already "coupletely exlzaueted their resources“
and that they could not think up any more new problem or propertieeo-original ones
all the more so. The fact that many of these refusals were sincere may be judged
from the significant increase in temporal intervals between the properties (and
problems) the subjects hand as the experimental assignment approached its conclu-
sion. Still, some of the subjects never were able to fulfill instructions 52 and P2.
Many of them fulfilled these instructions with great difficulty and with minimal
productivity. Only one subject revealed an additional ten new properties and eight
possible goals, and the averages for the other subjects were significantly lower:

3.2 for properties and 1.6 for problem.

At the sane time these subjects noted in their reports that they could have named
many more properties and problems. Pbr them to do so, all they needed was "a slight
hint," "a push into a new direction of thinking." and so on.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 4. Comparative Data for the 1on1 m2 of Properties ﬂuid: were lhvealed

by Subjects in Experiments With Instruction 81, Specially Oriented
to mis Purpose. But Which Here Not Used to Formulate the Possible
Goals of Analysis of an iject (Percent)

No. of No. of rties
Sibjects Subjects mject l (biect 2 (biect 3
College students 20 70.6 62.5 58.3
Students of voca-
Lionel-technical
schools 20 57.4 43.4 66.7
W2 graduates 20 61.1 54.4 72

And so, as subjects produce P-goals, they work in the presence of various limitations.
such that many of their potentials for analysis of the field of possibilities they re-
veal remain unexplored. we noted the following asong these limitations.

1) Limitations associated with the types and features of goal forming processes--
for example limitations elicited by erection of a "rigid" system of universal goals.

2) me framework of
functions, its mes.
this point of View),
hindered the subject

I
traditional i“ about the given object of analysis (its
and properties and problems which would be significant frou
instilled into the abject by past experience. 'lhis often
from using his available knowledge on properties of the object

insignificant to its traditional uses, on new means of its application and sometimes
on the possible modifications the. can be made of the object without straying beyond
the framework of traditional use.

thus our experiments were conducted with the participation of a rather large nunber
of specialists in chemistry and physics; however, only a few of the. utilized their
professional knowledge to reveal properties of the object and to produce possible
goals. may explained this in their reports by saying that they could not see the
everyday objects shown to them in the experiment as professional objects of analysis.

We were greatly interested in making a couperative statistical analysis of properties
revealed by the subjects in fulfillnent of instruction $1 and properties used by them
directly to formulate P-goals. the concrete influenceof the frameworkoftraditional
ideas about the object of research may be determined graphically. As we had hypothe-
sized. those properties which were significant to traditional use of the given object
(zone I , Figure 4) uneared most frequently among the named properties. It should be
considered in this case that the sane property could be used by subjects in several
statements. he limitations inposed by traditional use of the objects of analysis
manifested themselves in particular as a certain degree of selectivity in choosing
the properties of the object used by the subject to formulate P-goals.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'll I

Ill 'o

‘ C
II 1.. ‘ .1; . ..L-';‘3___e°.:'_z._~ -.-m-'-em.
/ l

..- .‘ . ‘1'”! .17.. .... __ ..‘.':'-_-_L_£ L"

Pigure 4. Frequency Distribution for the 8am Properties of a Given (bject

heated by a' Group of smjects (Instruction 51, First mject): Aster-
isks denote the frequency of properties used by the same subjects

to formulate P-goals (instruction Pl). while hyphens represent
the frequency of properties named by swjects in fulfillment
of instruction 81.

Despite significant differences observed in the lists of properties revealed in ful-
fillment of instructions 81 and P1 by each subject, the fuguency distributions of
these properties for the group as a whole turned out to be extremely siniler. More-
over if a subject used not one but two or more properties in the stateunt of a
P-goal, analysis of the experisental data showed that in this case he was highly
selective in his choice of property combinations.

3) The subjective attitudesubjects displayed toward their activity. There is an un-
breakable relationship between the evaluation process and the goal production process.
we can also include within this category of limitations the low self-assessment given
by a nusber of subjects to their possibilities for independent goal production, and
the fear of going beyond one's cospetency.

The results show that if we are to study the influence of these factors on goal
formation, we would have to reveal the subjective criteria . used to evaluate the
goals. we made a special analysis or‘ this problem. as will be described below: for
the mount however we will cite a nutter of exawles confirming the important role
of such evaluation to goal foruation.

swject A.P.: '1 was perpetually worried about getting carried
away and talking nonsense. I was unable to concentrate all of
my attention on thinking up problem, because I could never get
my mind off of whether I was talking nonsense or not.“'

Subject L. 2h.: "Very many problems came to mind, I wanted to
dig deeper into them. the work was interesting to me, but the
problems I came up with did not seem very isportant. At work.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is difficult to do those tasks which are ilportant only

to yourself, since they have to be coqleted in an atmosphere
that tells you your work is not really necessary. I left out
many problems which in my opinion would not be interesting to
others. At work, things are simpler, because I deal with
objects that are well kncun to M--dllt is, I know perfectly
well what is inportant. I always keep it in my mind that I
nust maintain an awareness of this isportance. In some ways
this creates obstacles, but in others it reduces the amount
of problems I have to consider.“

”nus a subject may also reduce the field of possibilities he analyses by fully con-
scious selection of the P-goal variants he produces. 'Ihe criteria of such selection

are highly diverse. As an examle possible goals can be evaluated not only as
interesting or uninteresting to the abject himself but also from the standpoint
of their social usefulness.

4) Subjective interpretations of both the instruction as a whole and its individual
words. The boundaries of the field of possibilities analysed by the subject depended
on the specific interpretation the subject gave to his assignIIent: He may supplement
or reward the instruction. injecting new components not contained in the text of the
assignment. As an example many subjects felt it necessary to view the presented ob-

ject as a whole, without breaking it up into its parts (even though this was not
stipulated in the instruction).

All combinations of the factors listed above are possible as well. lbreover the
subject was not always generally able to explain precisely what obstacle hindered
his work, though the fact that such interference did exist was commieated in the
subject's report (thus limitations imosed on production of possible goals could also
be differentiated in terms of the degree to which they are recognised by the subject
himself). Here are some specific examples.

Subject '1‘. 6.: ”A lot more problem cans to mind than I wrote
down. They seened to fade away. I was unable to state then
not because I was scared what someone might think, but for
some other reason. Generally, it always seemed to me that I
was doing something wrong, that I was making a mess of things,
and it was because of this that I fomd it hard to work."

Subject 0. v.: "I know that I came up with very few problem
and that they were all really quite uninteresting. Something
was bothering me-—I don't know what. Maybe it was that I don't
use these objects very often (I). If I used then more often (I),
perhaps I would have come up with some sort of ideas. But the
way things stood, it was very difficult for me. I could not

see anything new that I could do. and most iuportantly I could
not come up with anything that would be useful." when the ex-
perisenter asked a question concerning the fact that the subject
doubtlessly makes frequent use of the everyday objects presented
in the experiment, she replied: ”What I meant was that these
obj: cts have never had anything to do with my professional work.
Yes, I do in fact use then often. but I have never thought about
them deliberately."

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we attenpted to reveal a certain "best” group among the subjects participating in
the experiIent, using the following characteristics: never giving up, a large
nuwer of produced goals, statement of goals which are beyond the traditional

uses of the object and which are not directly associated with any of the object's
concrete uses. Out of all of the participants of the experimntuthere were 130

if we include the preliminary experiments-only six subjects fell into the 'best"
group. we were interested if the limitations discussed wove were present or

absent in these subjects. andwhat their distinguishing features were. ‘lhe results
showed that such features could include: loose restrictions in tem‘ of the fram-
work of traditional ideas about the object of analysisnattemts at seeking something
new even in that which is traditional. at seeing any object with other eyes, at
applying one's professional knowledge to this object. Is also noted mique features
in the concrete types of goal forming processes teoyedna desire to formlate as
large a nunber of universal goals as possible (this desire appeared in recognized
form when special hierarchies of goals were created) and transformation of all
subgoals into sources of new goals. We also observed greater interest in fulfillment
of assignments characterized by the greatest complexity md ones independently form-
lated by the subject for himself.

Here are some exaqales.

Subject 0. Ye.x ”The most interesting thing was to find uni-
versal directions of analysis, because once they are found, it
is easy to come up with subproblems.”

Subject M. I“: “At first, it was easy to think up problem.
but that was not very interesting. But as soon as it becam
difficult to think them up, things got interesting, because
nothing more would come to mind but I knew that their had to
be some others, and I immediately felt that there was hope-
for new avenues of thought--after all, I had already emausted
all of the possibilities on the surface.’

However, we do need to define the concept "best" group more specifically. We had
reason for placing this word in quotation narks. ‘Ihe fact is that a subject'scapa-
bility for producing a large nusber of interesting, original and inportant goals

may not be directly dependent on the productivity of his real activity. thus one

of the subjects in the "best” group noted in an interview with the experiunter that
in his job, he is bothered a great deal by an overwhelming flow of ideasnformation
of a treuendous quantity of secondary goals during solution of some concrete problem.

As an example, here is an excerpt from his report.

Subject 0. Ye.: “When I perform experimnts (I work in
experimental physics) various 'incidental' effects con-
stantly nag at my attention. he a consequence it takes
enormous will to concentrate on the initial task, and my
attempts at doing so are far from always successful. As
a result I begin to expand the initial problem in an
attemt to include all of these secondary goals within it,

and I end up with such a mess of bits and pieces of different
goals that I can't make any sense of it all."

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhus the results confirmed the hypothesis that a certain relationship exists
between formulation of possible goals of analysing a certain object and the process
by which its properties are revealed. “the analysis revealed the following: exis-
tence of at least two types of processes with which to come up with such statements:
presence of a certain hierarchy of goals namd by the subject; confinement to only
quantitative criteria for determining whether or not the goal forming process is
optimum; a need for revealing the qualitative characteristics of both the process
and the products of goal formation. He also revealed sons factors influencing the

quantitative and qualitative characteristics of goal formation. 'lhese character-
istics were differentiated in term of their positive and negative influence.

Ouaracteristics of Production of Possible Goals in ”Malogue" lbde

He differentiated the following characteristics in our analysis: first, changes in
activity elicited by procedures developed for the purpose of providing additional
assistance to the subject and placed at the basis of the "dialogue“ nodes indicated
above: second, changes in activity depending on the concrete type of interaction
between nan and computer in ”dialogue" mode.

As was noted earlier. the computer program were based on data from the preliminary
series of experiments. All of the “dialogue” nodes were developed in such a way that
they would promote certain changes in the goal forming activity of the subject--

in particular. by breaking down a number of the limitations that prevented broader
production of P-goals.

The “dialogue" modes were oriented at the following changes in the activity of the
subjects, in couparison with the traditional conditions of their work (without a
computer).

1. When working independently (without a computer) the subjects exhibited at lent
two methods of producing their statements of possible goals. Use of the first
Iothod was often accowanied by construction of a "rigid" hierarchy of universal
goals which hindered broader production of P-goals. 'ihe overwhelming majority of
computer-assisted work nodes (three out of four) were oriented on the second type
of goal forming process (from analysis of properties to formulation of possible
goals). From our point of view this orientation could promote weakening of the
negative influence exerted by a “rigid“ hierarchy of universal goals on the goal
forming process.

2. Data from the preliminary experiments also showed that the choice of properties
used by the sdaject in formulating his P-goals and of the concrete procedures by
which to transform property statesonts into Pbgoal statesents is distinguished by
significant selectivity. Subjects often reveal certain classes of properties and
then formulate problems without going outside the particular class, for crawls the
class of properties characterizing the external features of the object-~color,

shape and so on. In these cases the wordings of the possible goals of analysing
the object can be highly similar. The subject used just a few "procedures” such as
"studying... (property )0," 'inproving... (property X)“ and so on. Choice of one
property often predctcmines the choice of the next: the same can be said for choice
of "procedures" as well. All of this had a negative influence on the productivity of
goal forming processes. We accounted for these characteristics of the activity of

59

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM UIIOILIAL US!— ONLY

the subjects when developing the "dialogue" modes. thus we employed a random
selection procedure in the “property." ”original property" and "codaination' nodes.
Properties belonging to the most diverse "classes'I and having different probabilities
of arising in the object were named to the subject in random order. Selectivity in
choosing ”procedures" and the properties corresponding to them in the algorithm at
the basis of the "problem" mode was also weakened by exploying random procedures
and a highly insignificant number of restrictive rules that “prohibit" certain
combinations of propertiesand"procedures.' 'lhe consequent need for switching
quickly from one class of properties to another and for analysing unusual cobina-
tions of properties and "prvocedures'I could promote revelation of new directions in
the field of possibilities analysed by the abject.

3. As the preliminary experiments showed. when an independently working subject
formulates possible goals he utilises properties which as a rule fall within an
extremely narrow domain, mainly within zone I (figure 4). For the mostpart these
are properties associated with traditional uses of the object of analysis presented
in the experiment. The number of times each abject strays beyond the bomds of this
domain is usually small. but the total number of original properties revealed by a
certain group of subjects could become significant (in this case an original property
is defined as one named by only one subject in the group). The comuter-assisted
work modes allow the subject to utilize the generalized experience of many people,
and therefore to work not only in zones 1' and II but also in sons III (see rigure 4)
of the property distribution. Moreover a subject working in the "intelligent pro-
blems” mode may participate in a computer-mediated 'dialogue" with other partici-
pants of the experiment, which also promotes expansion of the subject's ideas about
the field of possibilities he is analysing.

4. me preliminary experiments showed that swjects wanting independently (without

a computer) rarely use more than three properties in a single problem statement;
moreover the choice of properties used is distinguished by significant selectivity.
In the "combination" mode the subject was given the possibility of working with a
number of properties of his own choosing: moreover these properties are selected from
the computer memory by random as well.

Let us now analyze the concrete modifications that occurred in the limitations on
goal forming imposed by subjects working in a "dialogue" with the computer.

1. Changes Associated with the Parameter “Concrete Wpes and Features of
the Goal Forming Process”

In distinction from previous experiments, not a single suaject participating in the
experiments with the computer built a hierarchy of goals, doubtlessly because of
the characteristics of the nodes. While in experiments without the computer (in-
struction Pl) the subjects first formulated a certain system of universal goals and
then broke them down into subgoals. the process was reversed in work with the com-
puter. Moreover when formulating a goal at the lowest level of the hierarchy, the
subjects often referred to the possibility of existence of goals at a higher level:
"There is a problem of even greater importance here," "nus is a partial goal" and
so on, but in this case they were not always able to formulate these more-general
goals. the reason for this lay not only in the specific features of the methods
upon which the corresponding dialogue modes were based. but also, very importantly.

60

ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the concrete features of interaction between man and colputer. particularly
in the rhythm of coununication between man and comuter. As an sample many
subjects noted that although they often sensed the existence of more-iQortant pro-
bleu when working in a particular node. they did not, using the words of the sub-
jects themselves, try to ”drag them up to the surface of their consciousness,"
instead suggesting simpler variants. since the lore-cosplex problems required
special thinking but the computer "was already waiting for a response“ ("I did not
want to break away from the rhythm iaposed by the computer," ”I felt uncomfortable
making it wait“).

It should be noted that the subjects made the independent decision. often contrary

to the supplementary instructions from the experiunter, to transmit the messages to
the cotputer as quickly as possible. and they noted that delays in transmitting these
aessages often felt unpleasant to them. We can be explained in particular by the
fact that a nulber of features and stereotypes of the couunication rhythm encountered
in the evolved practice of communication with other people are carried over by the
susjects to the new conditions-~to those of a “dialogue“ with a cosputer. This pro-
blem is considered in greater detail in (13).

mus we need to differentiate a dual effect of the rhythm of comication with the
computer on the goal forming process. A subject experiencing a subjective lack of
time is unable to thoroughly work out the goals he formulates. at one hand this
relieves the obstacle produced by the subject's tendency to be critical of his deci-
sions, while on the other hand it promtes arisal of purely mechanical coabination
of characteristics; in a sense, the individual's activity becomes machine-like
(likened to an ”intelligent conveyer") . In this case the work of the subjects was
essentially quite similar to the problem statement acquisition algorithm we developed
(the ”problem“ mode).

2. Changes Associated With the Parameter “Framework of Traditional Ideas
About the Object of Analysis“

A significant weakening of limitations associated with this parameter was observed
when subjects worked in "dialogue“ with the comuter. this weakening was manifested
in particular as a significant increase in the nutter of goals not associated with
traditional uses of the object of analysis presented in the experth (Table 5).
Moreover we observed the appearance of analogous goals, ones only remotely associated
with objects presented in the experiment-what is, the subjects actually strayed
beyond the bounds of the instructions, which were adhered to strictly during inde-
pendent work (without the computer). It should be noted, howaver, that violation of
the traditional framework of ideas about the object of analysis was hardly a fre-
quent occurrence. Thus many subjects working in the ”original property" or "codaina-
tion" node often exerted significant effort in an atteapt to adapt the most unexpected
properties and the most senseless coabinations of properties of the object to pro-
blems associated with its traditional functional use.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. Comparative mta Characterising Expansion of the Subject's Ideas about
His Object of Analysis hiring Work in 'Dialogus' lbde

No. of Subjects Stating Possible
Goals Not Associated with

Traditional Uses of the Inject

Subject No. of In Indepen- In Hort Iith
Grog Sub ects dent Work the ter
1 20 7 16
.2 5 0 4
3 20 lo 15

3. azanges Associated with the Parameter ”Subjective Attitude inward the
Activity and the Self-Assesenent of the Subject's Possibilities for
Independent Goal l-‘orIation‘I

This group of factors deserves the mat persistent attention, because the changes they
experienced during "dialogue" with the cosputer quite distinctly reflected the in-
fluence of a nuﬂaer of psychological features associated with interaction between

man and computer. in particular. these changes were connected with personification
of the coeputer and with consequent arisal of special goals pursued by the suaject
during conununicative interaction with the computer.

As was noted earlier, the activity of the subjects in the experiment exhibited a
complex structure. Instructions given by the experimenter oriented the abject
toward revealing the possible goals of analysis of a certain object. Consequently
in this situation we are dealing with a case of consciously self-initiated goal

formation (91); this does not exclude, however, the possibility of involuntary arisal
of goals in the subject's activity. But goals voluntarily forlnilated by the subject
do have the following unique feature. They are not directly associated with the
mtives of the practical activity: the subject limits himself only to naming the
goals, and therefore we called these possible goals. or P-goals. in distinction from
ones that are actually pursued.

However. besides these possible goals the abject also produced actual goals in the
experiment. First. analyzing the instructions given by the experiments, a subject
would reveal concrete goals of his activity in the experiment, transforming his
assignment into "my own goal" (we will refer to these goals as III-goals). H-goals are
precisely what orient the subject toward revealing P-goals. Second, the experimental
situation includes elements of the stbject's direct comication with the experimenter
and computer-mediated comunication with both the experimenter and other subjects,

in the course of which special goals may also involuntarily arise (B-goels and C-goals).
The characteristics of the way these "actually pursued" goals are produced have a sig-
nificant influence on the productivity of P-goal formation.

bet us coepare as an example a nunber of reports given by subjects after fulfilling
instruction Pl (independent revelation of P-goals) and instruction pm (counter-

assisted revelation of P-goals).

62

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subject 0. H. (instruction Pl): "It was very difficult for me

to formulate the problem. I kept thinking that whatever I did,

1 would not be able to come up with anything interesting. and even
the elementary problems case to mind with difficulty."

(Instruction mu): '1 could have given two or three problem and
(lore for the same contination. I always had this urge to tell this
to the computer (C-goal). It always seemed to me that it was giving
me properties that were already known to fit the object. though
randomlyuthat is. it probably already knows the problem associated
with these properties, and it wants to receive as many of then as
possible. I even wanted to ask it to give me a harder task (C-goel) .
so that it would know that I could handle it. Generally. I found
the experiment very interesting this time. I would never have
thought up all of these properties myself. I even felt sorry that
the experiment had to end."

c-goals may perform different ftmctions in the activity of subjects working in
"dialogue" interaction. mm they may distract the subject from his nain goal or,
on the other hand, as was demonstrated above. they may pro-rate its attainment. here
is one more exanple.

Subject 6. 1'. (instruction Pl): “It is very difficult for me to
think of anything. I want to think of something original (D-goal).
but I can't come up with anything" (the D-goal is unattainable).

(Instruction Phi): '1 like working in the 'original property'

rode very much, because I wanted to learn as many of these Original
properties from the colputer as possible (C-goal). It seems to me
that this is the only way a person can come up with original problems.
After all, originality cannot begin in a vacuum: You wast have a
certain amount of knowledge. and this knowledge must be good, and

the couputer can be an aid in this" (in the smject's opinion attain-
ment of this C-goal would promote attainment of the D-goal).

Following are a few more interesting facts connected with the psychological character-
istics of the subject's subjective attitude toward the coeputer in his work with
it--namely with a problem important to man-computer systems, which may conditionally
be referred to as the problem of division of responsibility. 'Ihus many subjects in
the experiments with computers in a sense delegated responsibility for the quality
of the P-goals they produced to the couputer. u an example one subject said:

“the problem is generally not very interesting. but the cosputer is itself at fault
for that: You wouldn't be able to come up with anything better for the coatination
it qavo.” in some cases the I'qv.ia.).ity" of the statement of a possible goal produced
by a subject was dependent on his high trust in the knowledge stored in the com-
puter (we examined this "over-trust effect” in greater detail in (11)): ”the com-
puter knows everything well," “The cosputer knows what it wants, so there is nothing
to be worried about. If it names a certain property, it must be important." here
is a concrete exanple.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POROFHCIALIJSEONLY

Subject 6. 1.: 'It is such sore interesting and somehow easier
to work with the conputer, because there is some sort of
reference point here. ibst iQortantly, you stop wondering
whether or not your being ridiculous, since the cosputer kmws
what it wants. I'trust it or, should I say, what it knows."

Another exaqzle. Subject 1’. h.: "It is sore interesting and
easier to work with the comuter. lien I was working alone I
was always afraid that I would digress to nonsense. But the
reason why it is were interesting to work with the cosputer
has nothing to do with the fact that it is easier. Working
with it, I was able to concentrate all of ﬂy attention on
actually thinking up probless, rather than worrying about
whether or not I was coning up with nonsense, because the
material had already been evaluated by someone else. It is
easier to evaluate what sesame else cones up with than to
cone up with your am. what is called for here is an opinion.
If the conputer gives you smething. them it also bears the
entire responsibility for the eaterial, and at the sane tin
this gives no free rein--efter all, I can always add something
of my own to what the computer gives ne.‘

All of these phenomena also have both positive and negative aspects. a: one hand
the subject receives the possibility for working with less restraint, for concen-
trating more attention mainly on the process of producing the problem, rather than

on their critical evaluations. But on the other hand the possibility for passing
the “responsibility" to someone else prolotes production of highly superficial and

sonetines simly meaningless probless.

Thus the analysis showed that in ”dialogue" node, changes occur in goal for-sing
processes. mess changes are elicited both by the concrete types of interaction
involved between man and computer and by the methods embodied within the conuter
programs. He observed change in a nusber of linitations hindering develop-ant of
the goal forming process: significant weakening of the inﬂuence of a “rigid"

hierarchy of goals, expansion of subjective ideas about the object of analysis,
a less-critical attitude toward the produced goals. These changes occurred under

the influence of the following factors: a certain node of communication between
man and conputer, personification of the colputer, the possibility for utilizing
the generalized experience of nany subjects. arisal of special goals associated with
computer-mediated comnication with the program: and other subjects, and the
possibility for dividing "responsibility“ when in "dialogue" with the computer.

The Need for Referring to the Oouputer and for Oomnicative "Intercourse” With It

As was noted earlier, the "dialogue" nodes offered rather high possibilities for
obtaining the ”rudiments" for formulation of P-goals. mder these conditions the
productivity of a subject working with the computer depends to a significant extent

on arisal of a need within the subject to appeal to the comuter for assistance.
Otherwise these potentials nay not be realized. Subjects should hardly be forced

towork with a computer, especially when solving creative problems. merefore we
believe the stability with which the need for referring to the computer is expressed
to be one of the principal indicators of the effectiveness of "dialogue" nodes.

64
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the series of experiments we conducted using instruction pm (the 'dialm - ' mode) ,
not only did none of the Sibjects refuse to work with the computer at any time

during tne experimental assignnent, but also many of them even expressed the wish

to continue producing P-goals after the experiment ended. ‘me research showed that
two groups of factors elicit the need for referring to the colputer. These factors
are associated with the external and internal conditions of the individual's activity
in ”dialogue" mode. An exanple of an external factor is the experimnter's instruc-
tion, while internal factors include a cognitive interest toward the miner's
potentials and cognitive needs arising in the subject during his principal activity.
'lhe last factor is decisive to an evaluation of the effectiveness of the "dialogue"
node, and this is why we attempted to deliberately form a cognitive need in the
subjects. One of the possibilities for doing so involved creation of external
conditions which would stimulate internal factors.

The experimental procedure was organized in the following fashion: The sibject was
encouraged to continue his activity even though its furtherance would be difficult.
All subjects began working with the couputer only after they formilated some P-goals
independently--that is. after they had partially exhausted their resources in this
direction (after giving up for the third time). In this case, while working in one
node they named from one to seven problems, and then they once again referred to

the computer for assistance, working in the ease or in a new mode. In their reports,
many of them noted that they could have produced more problems after the computer
gave one property (or a corbination of properties or problem). but these problems
would have all been of the same type. It was namely for the purpose of changing

the direction of problem production that they referred to the comuter again.

The need expressed by the subjects for cowuter assistance was analyzed in greater
detail in a special supplenentary series of experiments based on the following
mﬂiod. ’me subjects worked in response to three instructions given in succession
(51, S2 and SP1) (see the description of the method). The first instructions were
51 and 52, which required the subject to name the properties of a certain given
everyday object. After the subject gave up for the third tine in his work on in-
struction 52, he was told that all of the properties he named had been fed into the
comuter. and he was now to work together with it (instruction $91). All subjects
worked with only one object, and they were given 10 hint-"properties of the given
object which had not been named by any subject in the group during work on instruc-
tions 51 and 82. On the average. subjects working with one hint hand seven to eight
properties (from 2 to 31).

Many subjects expressed a negative attitude toward the hints several times in their

discussions of their work on the assignment in the reports they gave at the end of
the experiment.

Subject A. A. noted in his report: "It was hard working in
this mode, I could not tear myself away from the hints in

any way, but on the other hand I very much wanted to do without
them. In general. I do not like being repetitive. I do not
want to accept a thought that someone else tossed out as my
own. All the time I wanted to think of something that was my
own.

:\
,1

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. despite these negative elotions the subject nevertheless did appeal for
assistance from the computer. This phenomenon cannot be explained just by cogni-
tive interest in what the conputer “knows,“ since to satisfy this interest it would
have been sufficient to name just one property, while most of the abjects namd
significantly lore properties after each hint.

In this connection we were especially interested in attelpts by subjects to conceal
their need for couputer assistance from the experimenter. Various tactics were
used in this case. Thus one of the widespread tactics was exaggerated and intention:

demonstration of true or false C-goals before the experimter. Here are some con-
crete examples.

Subject s. Ye. (while reading the instructions and while working
with the first two hints): "In general, I could work without the
hints as well, I'm sinply interested in what the coaputer knows
(C-goal). Notice that I'm responding mechanically, almost without
thinking.” This same subject noted the following while working
with his third hint: ”Hell, I need to show the oomter that I

can work without this help as well“ (C-goal) . After this he named
14 properties. of which 11 were associated with hints.

Subject A. A. (before interrogating the cosputer for the third
hint): "I could keep working with the previous hint, since I
can still name many properties having to do with this object.

I an asking for a hint only out of curiosity. I want to find
out what the cosputer knows (P-goal). After the cosputer gave
the next hint, he exclaimed: “mat's no help, I can't think of
anything else. I'm now in a worse position than I was before.
I can't think of a single property lore. so that I could ask
for another hint."

Sonatimes subjects tried to “debate” the originality of the properties stated by
the couputer.

mus subject 0. 1.. notes: 'All of the properties the computer
has hinted to me were ones which I myself wanted to name while

working on the previous instructions. but somehow I forgot about
then. For practical purposes the cosputer was not hinting, but
only reminding."

After the first hint, suaject G. V. turned to the experimenter:
"You did not word the previous instructions correctly. You should
have explained to me from the very start what sort of properties

I was supposed to name, or at least the direction I was to go.
Then there would have been no need for any sort of hints. Now

I an forced to once again ask for hints to find out how else you
confused me.“

Thus the subject in a sense blamed the experimenter, who worded the instructions
"incorrectly.” for having to interrogate the couputer.

66

FOR 0510“. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But why did the sibjects turn to the cosputer for help, and what was behind their
demonstration of false C-goals? As was mentioned earlier, the experimntal method
was designed in such a way that they began working with the cosputer only after they
had partially exhausted all of their possibilities for thinking up properties or
for producing problems (after giving up three tines). mder these conditions the
process itself of thinking upnew items was difficult for a nubsr of subjects,

and required a certain degree of mental exertion.

mus subject V. G. noted in his report: "First it was very
easy to name the properties, and I did not need any intonation
that would define the object more exactly. 'me properties were
in a sense on the surface, and I named them almst without
thinking. As fewer and fewer of these properties were left,

I began to think more andmore. Now it was difficult to come
up with new properties. a: one hand I felt that there were
still many properties. while on the other nothing else was
coming into my head. I began searching for a loophole of some
sort, I tried to divorce myself from everything that I had said
earlier, to broaden my understanding of this object-that is,
to find some sort of new direction."

The same was true for a nunber of other sibjects as well. How difficult it was

for the subjects to work after the first time they gave up, and especially after the
second time, could be judged not only from what they said during the experiment or
in the reports, but also from the significant increase in time intervals between
named properties. While initially these intervals did not generally exceed several
seconds, toward the end of the experimnt they increased to 5-6 minutes and sore.
'lhis led to the conclusion that the subjects did not give up insincerely.

And so, on one hand the subject encounters certain difficulties in fulfilling the
instruction given at the end of the experiment while on the other hand he is often
quite interested in proving hiaself well in the ex..eriment. The very fact that
they had to resort to hints was, to many smijects, a confirmation that they were
not working sufficiently well in the experiment. As a result the need arises for
seeking new resources, a new direction for their thinking. It is with this goal
in mind that the subjects turn to the computer for assistance.

mis could be concluded from the statements of the sibjects as well.

Subject 0. v.: "What a hint gives me is not just the name of

some one property, but a certain directim for my responses.
After all, I had not named these properties before because

I had not been thinking in this direction.”

Subject 6. V. : “A hint broadens the range of the concepts
with which we had worked before the hint was given. It pro-
vides an exit from the limitations which we ourselves imposed.
A hint prOVides new direction to my thoughts, one based on
someone elsc's knowledge and opinions."

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFIGAL [BE ONLY

The experimental data show that in cases where swjects were sufficiently cognizant
of the obstacles which were preventing then from successfully fulfilling the in-
structions, or where the possibilities for surmting these obstacles with the
help of the cosputer were analyzed thoroughly, “dialogue” interaction with the
conputer was most effective. This was expressed in inroveaent of a mater of
parameters characterizing the productivity of the subject's work in this node
(growth in the total nudaer of properties thought up, and of the mﬂer of original
properties and new directions). Moreover, in such a case the subjects expressed a
stable desire to work together with the coaputer. A large umber of negative eso-
tions connected with the negative attitude of any subjects toward hinting were
elininated.

The way many subjects evaluated the hints themelves was interesting free the

standpoint of the help they provided in this torn of activity. Here are son con-
crete examples.

Subject 0. v. : ”It generally seems to me that a hint has the
best impact when it bears the least inforaation. Such -a hint is
the least obtrusive. such that I could ignore it if I wanted to.”

Subject A. A.: "Alnlost all of the hints provided little help to a.
they were very concrete, they referred to a very narrow direction of
thought, and they could not be broken down into smaller eleaents."

Subject 1.. A.: ”For some reason I can never switch my attention
innediately if I am thinking in a certain direction. This is why I
need hints which would open up a very broad avenue of thought. After
all, it is easier for me to narrow this avenue down than to broaden it.”

Thus the suajects state very concrete require-ants toward coaputer advice.

And so, what we are saving is that the subjects develop specific cognitive needs
that are satisfied by interrogating the cosputer. 'mese needs are associated with
expanding knowledge of the ocject of analysis, surmunting limitations and seeking a
new direction of thought. Cognitive needs associated with the subject's own evalu-
ation of his activity, which in the conditions of conputer dialogue assured the

form of the need for a cowuter evaluation of the mtject's actions, are a special
case.

fans subjects noted: "I wish that the cosputer would talk with m a
little more, since I don't know whether it likes what I an doing or
not. If it would talk a little more, perhaps I could get sole idea
of what it thinks"; "I wish that the computer would either praise or
scold me. then I would work better“: "I wish the comuter would evalu-
ate uy responses. It would be nice, for example if it said: "lhat's
interesting,‘ "rhat's original,‘ "mere, you see, things are now be-
ginning to fall into place.‘ It's hard otherwise, because you don't
feel that real comication is going on and it's needed very, very
much here.“

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Man's need for commieation is an imartant psychological problem, and such re-
search is being conducted on it today. Now that dialogue systems are enjoying in-
tensive development, this problem is acquiring a new ring.

he experimental data showed that the need of the subjects for comication that
manifested itself in man-computer dialogue was closely associated with the oosputer's
personification. we revealed the following features associated with this phenomenon:
l) ascription of intellectual properties to the computer ('smart,” ”stupid," “reasons
well" and so on): 2) endowment of the counter with conscious goals ("It deliberate-
ly gave me a hard assigmuent,” I'It wants to prove to me that it is starter than me'
and so on); 3) ascription of human emotions to the cosputer ("It won't be insulted,‘
'So let it be unhappy," and so on); 4) arisal of a special class of c-goals in the
subject himself (”It would be interesting to know how the cosputer learns.“ 'I'll
prove it to it" and so on).

'me extent to which the personification phenomenon manifests itself dowtlessly
depends on the training level of workers using the oonputer. mus naive personifi-
cation--"anthropomorphization" of the computer-is typical mainly of untrained
computer users, though we may even occasionally encounter it among professionals
working in this area. It should be noted that what we are dealing with in a large
nutter of cases is not personification of a device but communication mediated by

this device, communication with a prograsmer, a group of programmers, an experimenter
and other subjects participating in this experiment. In this case when we hear the
phrase: “I want to find out what the colputsr knows," the ilplication is essentially
to find out what the unique features of the program are; however, even here it may

be said that there are certain elemnts of personification.

Personification of the conputer and the need for communication during work often led
to a situation in which the subject began to imagine oomnication going on where
there was none (especially people not prepared in this aspect). mus one abject
said the following in response to a oosbination of properties given by the computer:

-"1‘hat's mean, you've done it again, thinking that you've steeped me.
But watch, I'll figure it out, and then I'll put you yourself on the

spot. "

mis was manifested especially clearly by some subjects working in the "problem”
mdenthat is, in the most "intelligent" of all of the offered modes.

1b demonstrate these phenomena more graphically, here is the record of one of the
experiments as an exanple.

Experiment hoard (Excerpt)

Subject '1‘. R. begins working in "problem" mode after "original pro-
perty" mode (after three interrogations of the computer).

Subject (types): Problem.

Computer: What kind of problems do you want: ”crazy" or ‘intelligent"?

(.9

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subject (laughs): Now that's pretty fmny. Just in case I better
go for 'intelligent.‘ since this might be a trap. (Mes) :
Intelligent.

Oonputer: what should be the optimum dimensions of a pencil?

Stbject: Just don't think that you're going to lead me around by

the nose. (Wpes) : Develop a process for using a wood substitute.
(Speaks): ﬂow let's see how well you can think on your ovm. (1b the
experimter) : I want to find out if it will work out my own problem
or if it will also think up something on its own, as I did.

Computer (after the subject asks for the same mode): Analyse the
need for painting a pencil.

Subject (perplexed): But that's plagiary, and underhanded plagiary

at that. After all. a coat of paint is something that covers the
pencil lead. It answered in such a way that one could think that

its problem is not associated with mine because it's talking about
paint. But it's isnediately evident that this is obvious plagiary.
(‘1!) the experimenter): ‘nell me. does your cosputer get insulted very
easily? I want to type out that this is plagiary. (‘men she thinks up
a problem and types): Analyze whether or not a leadless pencil could
be created. ('Do the experimenter): I want to see whether or not its
problem would be associated with mine once again. (Ihen the comuter

asks for the work made, the subject replies with irritation: -"You
don't have to be tricky, we're obviously still in the sale Dds“).

Computer: Creation of a mechanical pencil writing in different
colors.

Subju-c (laughs): How now. my precious. so you can't think on your
own. Once again there's a connection with my problem-after all.
this is a counter-problem to mine. I was going for a leadless
pencil, and it wants more leads. O.K., this time I'll forgive it.
I like the fact that it was able to worm its way out so well. Your
computer does not lack a sense of humor. Good for it! (Types),
Creation of an improved pencil for the blind. (Speaks): That makes
me somehow feel a little ill at ease--this tile I've borrowed from
the computer a little. After all, a mechanical pencil and a pencil
tor the blind are quite similar, since they both have to be highly
mechanical. Hell, O.K., if it picks up on my ideas, I should be
able to pick up on its ideas, we really should share. (She asks
for the same mode, making the cornentz ”You yourself could have
guessed what mode I want by now”) . (1b the experimenter): I
wonder what sort of association it will come up with noun-supposing
it can't?

Computer: Change the shape for greater convenience.

70
FOR OFFICIAL US? ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subject (speaks): I don't like this problem. It's kind of fussy;
the computer's probably tired too. And anyway, that's not fair. the
rules I have to work with are stricter. Now I'm going to think up a
problem, and choose another node; let the coaputer rest.

no results showed that personification of the cosputer influences the subject's
activity in a certain fashion. Thus under the influence of personification, a
subject may display greater activity in goal production. high responsibility for the
quality of the goals and so on. However, under certain conditions personification
could also disorganire the subject's activity, isplying the need for a certain
alount of caution in using this phenomenon as a means for optimizing “dialogue"
interaction between man and coaputer.

We demonstrated that in the experiuontal situation under analysis, the need for
referring to the computer was elicited by no groups of factors--external and inter-
nal. The experimental data confirmed the hypothesis that appearance of cognitive
needs in the subject is the decisive factor in an evaluation of the effectiveness
of "dialogue" interaction. In this connection we showed it possible to form cogni-
tive needs that encourage the subject to refer to the counter by making certain
changes in the external influences. We found that when subjects were encouraged by
an outside source to continue activity which was made difficult at the given soment
by the limited possibilities of the stbjects theuelves, they developed a need for
assistance from the computer, even in the presence of a specially created conflict
situation in which this assistance is provided in an ”unpleasant" manner. In this
case subjects react to the conflict situation by attemting to conceal their need

for assistance: they express their real or false C-goals in an exaggerated and
deliberate manner.

We revealed a special case of cognitive needs associated with evaluating the activity
of the subject himself; in a computer "dialogue“ these needs manifest themelves
concretely as the need for acquiring evaluations of the subject's ‘actions from the
computer.

We also demonstrated that when an individual interacts with a coquter. he develops

a need for a certain form of this interaction (for "comicstion' with the coaputer),
which in turn is closely associated with the revealed phenomenon of ”personification

of the conputer." He described different types of personification, and we demon-
strated their relationship to the user's training level and their influence on the

activity of the subject engaged in ”dialogue" interaction.

Selectivity in Using the Possibilities Offered by the Computer, and Evaluation of
Concrete Forms of Their kaliration

The subject's selective attitude toward concrete fora: of realizing the possibilities
offered to him by the computer is closely associated with the arisal of the need

for oomunicating with the computer. We attitude is one of the manifestations of
this need.

The productivity of creative activity depends on many factors (146,148). It would
be difficult to imagine that someone could develop an optimum ”dialogue" mode which
would satisfy all subjects without exception. breover a certain aaount of mtony

7!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in conputer responses could also have a negative influence on the productivity of

a subject participating in a "dialogue“ with the cometer. Prom our point of view

a subject participating in creative activity together with a comuter should be pro-
vided a certain amount of freedom in choosing concrete nodes of "dialogue' interaction
with the conputer. Selectivity in utilising the possibilities offered by the com-

puter would be manifested in this case by the stbject's choice of specific “dialogue“
modes.

In the experimental method we developed the suajects could not only freely choose
concrete nodes of interaction with the couputer, but they could also switch fron one
mode to another during their work. The experiuntal results showed that choice of
lodes was governed by the following factors: a) cognitive interest in the given node:
b) subjective evaluation of the difficulty of work in the given node; c) subjective
evaluation of the successfulness of activity in the given node, using an independently

formulated ”success" criterion, which could be represented by a concrete goal of the
subject's actions in the given situation; d) stbjective evaluation of the possibili-

ties for acting in a way other than that suggested by a hintuthat is, the possibili-
ties for maintaining the dominant role in independent goal formation, even when con-
puter assistance is provided.

The factors listed above underwent modification during the experiment in accordance
with change in the goals of concrete actions and with the evaluation criteria asso-
ciated with these goals. He used these nodifications to evaluate the different
variants of the “dialogue“ nodes.

Thu in the stage of a priori analysis of the modes. the stbject is able to predict
the difficulty of work in a given node, the possibility of successful activity in it
and so on only on the basis of the description of the mode provided by the counter,
the subject's own experience and his knowledge of the possibilities offered by modern
computers. 'l'hese a prion: evaluations essentially predeternine the initial choice

of mode. A priori evaluations say be rather persistent: 'l'hus about 30 percent of all
of the subjects worked in all of the offered nodes, while the rest worked in only three.

two, or even just one.

In the stage of a priori analysis, many subjects evaluated the possibilities of the
coaputer in addition to evaluating the node: moreover we found that these processes
were close interrelated. Here is one of the most typical examples.

choosing a node. subject L. Ye. commented: "I would like to try
the "conbination'I mode but I'm afraid that it would be too hard.
after all. the properties may not have anything in col-on. or they
might be completely random. Yes. that's what the computer is most
likely to do. since it can't make choices like a person could.“

‘lhe "combination" node was one of the most popular. Almost all subjects usedthis mode
in this series of experiments. ranking this mode first or second in both a priori and
a posteriori ranking. He in turn were interested in the reasons behind such high
consistency in the opinions of the subjects. He can illustrate this with concrete

examples .

72

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIQAL [SE ONLY

Making her a priori evaluation of the mass, subject 0. H.
consented: "I'm choosing the 'codaination' node because it seems
to be the most difficult and interesting." one a priori evalu-
ation was found to be very persistent: the subject worked in this
mode throughout the entire experiment. In her report following the
experiment. she noted: "It appeared to me that I had chosen the
most interesting and diffith node from the very start. and there-
fore I didn‘t want to give it up.”

However. even when the field of choice was limited in this fashion. the conditions of
work in this mode underwent a certain modification-whence in the nutter of proper-
ties contained in a combination. Bach ties, the nuiser of properties was chosen by
the szbject himself. The reports of the subjects show that this freedom of choosing
the concrete conditions of work in the selected mde was very attractive to the
swject, since it in a certain sense permitted hill to 'finely tune" the conditions
of working with the computer to his own possibilities, including in relation to

the dominant criteria of sxbjective choice of the work nodes.

Thus subject K. N. consented: "I tried to find the most difficult

and the nest interesting mode, except that it had to be one within
my capabilities. Therefore I constantly increased the nunber of
properties in the coubination." ‘lhe abject successively selected
combinations of three properties (twice), four properties (four
times) and five properties (once). When the experimnt was halted
she noted that she had ”not yet reached her limit.“

let us analyse the choice of a particular quantity of properties by subjects working
in ”conbination' node in greater detail. A conparative analysis of the activity of
subjects producing goals independently and working with the cosputer led to the
following resul'.s. Forming P-goals during independent work (without the cosputer).
as a rule the subjects used one or two and. much more rarely. three properties of
the given object. In this case analysis of these coubinations of two or three pro-
perties showed that these were extra-sly ”biased“ choices (61).

in "combination" node the choice was random. and the hunter of properties was deter-
mined by the sxbject himself. Although the instructions did not state that the choice
was random. most subjects were able to deduce this. and starting their work in "con-
bination" mode. to begin with they chose a snail rim! of properties (two or three)--
that is, closest to the nurber of properties typical of independent work without the
computer. An interesting change occurred subsequently as a rule. Here is a con-
crete example.

Subject V. L. (in her first tin with "commotion” node) : "I would
like to try a combination with two properties, since it would be
very difficult to formulate a problem using three properties. After
all, the conputer will be giving me tendon continations." (Her
second atteupt): ”Now I'd like to try three properties. Only I'm
afraid that the problems would end up totally insane, but that would
make it intercsting.’ (Her third atteupt): "I‘ll try three one more
time. and then perhaps I’ll go on to four."

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFHCML Wt. UNLV

1he computer provides the following properties: “weight,“ “lengthy”
‘thickness.’ Subject: "Hell, this is no good. That's the way to
get bored quickly. All of these properties are so closely associated
that the problem simply begs itself. Of course, I'll name a few
problems to raise my score, but I don't particularly care for then.“

Thus a certain change occurred in her evaluation of the made, connected with change
in the systen of dominant criteria for making this evaluation. In the a priori
analysis stage the same subject rejected the "codaimtion' node mainly due to the
random nature of the choice of properties provided by the counter (“difficult and,
consequently. not very interesting“). Then while working in this node she ceased
liking "associated properties” because in this case the problens begged themelves
which is also not very interestinguexcept that in this case we now find that the
sinple tasks are the ones which are not very interesting.

In our opinion the reason for this lies in the fact that in addition to the dominant
criteria of mode assessment explicitly stated by the subject-u-ones such as difficulty
or interest, there are also hidden criteria which can be revealed only on the basis

of deep psychological analysis of the subjects in the experiment (in the overwhelsing
majority of cases, the possibility that such hidden criteria nay exist is not accounted
for by engineers developing autosated system, resulting in ineffective use of these
systems).

Thus one such hidden criterion was associated with a smject's subjective evaluation
of the productivity of his own activity (this criterion of node choice was not named
by any stbject. even in response to leading questions designed to reveal such criteria)
'me connection between this criterion and others (explicit) is as follows. Despite
the fact that activity in "combination" nodes becomes significantly sore colples when
a large nunber of properties are chosen, the stbject's self-evaluation of the products
of his activity may rise under these conditions. for the sake of obtaining a product
with a subjectively higher evaluation. the abject selects a more diffith sods,

even when it is assessed to be uninteresting on the basis of “explicitly' worded
criteria.

In some cases subjects offered a rather elaborate explanation of such action in the
form of concrete goals and verbal evaluations.

Thus subject 5. n1. began work in 'cosbinetion" mde with a choice

of three properties: "three is best because two is not enough and

four is too many, it would be difficult to think up a problem, and

it is not very interesting when it is very difficult." However. the
second time he asked for "cobination" lode he selected five proper-
ties, consenting: "I want to tax myself. I know that the properties
do not follow any sort of system and that they are difficult to coinine,
but still I want to try to cosbine all five. of course, this would be
very difficult. but then I night just end up with a really good problem,
and if things do not work out right away, I can always try again."

mus subjects consciously select conditions of working with the computer that are the
farthest from the conditions. of their independent work (biased choice of a small
nunber of the object's properties), since in this case the possibilities of the com-
puter in a sense broaden and raise their own possibilities for producing P-goals
(Table 6).

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6. Comarative Data on Ganges in the amber of Properties of the iject Used
by Slbjects in 1heir P-Goal Statenents During Inchpsndent Bork (Without
the Comuter) and During work With the (blputer in “Oonbination' Mode
(Second Group of SlbjOCtS)

No. of Goals in Which Following Mars of mules Here Used: t
Experinents Without

the Enter mutants with the ma:
sweet _1_2__31 i_2_3_4_s_6_7_8
l 100 0 o 0 0 0 14 56 30 0 0 0
2 80 20 O O 0 30 24 30 16 O o 0
3 100 0 o o 0 20 lo 40 20 lo 0 0
4 100 0 0 0 0 0 25 20 3O 10 10 5
S 90 lo 0 0 0 o 50 20 13 lo 7 o

The personal features of the subjects manifested themelves quite clearly in node
selection. Tues. using the same criterion, for crawls the difficulty of work in the
given node, and arriving at a similar conclusion as to which node is the most diffi-
cult fmn their point of view. depending on their personality features the sibjects
could either select or reject the given node on the basis of this conclusion.

We were especially interested in a criterion used in the choice of computer node
which we labeled “the possibility of acting without hints.“ 'me developers of 'arti-
ficial intelligence“ systems often note that the higher the 'comuter's intelligence”
is, the more optimum and natural is the interaction between it and the individual.
Our data said scathing slightly different. We found that in the stage of a priori
analysis. subjects often rejected the 'problen" sodsuthat is, the lost intellectual
mode of the entire set. ‘mus in the first experimental group 14 out of 20 subjects
ranked the ”problem" mode in last place during a priori analysis, noting in this
case that they had no intention of working in this mde. Oily 5 of the 14 subjects
changed their opinion during the experimentuthat is, they began working in this
mode. But in a posteriori analysis three of then ranked this node in second-to-last
place. Here are the most typical exasples:

smoject L. 1.: "'Problem’ node would be dictatorial, since I would
have to use what the couputer gives me."

smaject S. zh.: "'Prcblen' node is nothing but coaching, the nest
brazen coaching! That's very unpleasant. I'm the person. it's the
machine, and it's trying to coach me! Moreover it's coaching us not
in something inconsequential but in sonathing that I, as a person.
should do better than it. I find it insulting to know that the

computer can calculate better than me. though it is not performing any
calculations in this instance. Of course, I'm not trying to say that
it can do this better than a person, but nevertheless it all seems un-
pleasant somehow.”

He noted earlier that the goals of action may serve as criteria of rods choice. In
this connection we were considerably interested in analyzing conflicting criteria as

well as conflicting goals. which were quite clearly revealed for a nusber of suajects.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁne one goal-deeming as much as possible from the coeputerucould be contradictory
to the goal of working independently.

For exasple subject 0. V. counted in her report: "llad my task not
been to think up a problem on my own. I would very such have wanted to
try out the 'problem' mode, since I was interested in what a modern
computer can do in this direction. Had I chosen 'problem' mode. I
would still have wanted to avoid the inﬂuence of hinting, and this
might not have been easy: moreover, the smarter your cosputer is, the
more diffith this would be to do. Ilhen I have to work with sonone
else's original ideas, my mind goes blank."

In this case the goal of working independently was dominant, and so the stbject re-
jected the “problem“ mode . In a nuwer of cases however, the C-goal may turn out

to be the dominant one. here are concrete angles.

Subject 5. 211.: ”Now 1 would like to do something entirely different.
Rather than giving the computer something original, I want to learn

a little more from it, and so I'll state my own problems, but only
for this purpose.“

Domination of a C-gcal may be temporary in this case (we made a special examination
of a case of false demonstration of C-gaels earlier). Inanulber of cues this is

associated with a certain strategy selected by the subject himself.

Subject 6. T.: ”'Problem' mode would be the last resort. First I
need to learn as much as I can about the potentials of the computer,
I must know what weapons to use against it. After all. 'problem'
mode is essentially the most brazen coaching, and I want to work

on my own, independently, without copying what the cosputer has to
say; I would simply be unable to divorce myself from the comuter,
and that would be degrading.“

It would be interesting to note that only one abject made mention of the possi-
bility that “coaching" may occur in other modes as well: the rest of the smijects
“accused” only the ”problem“ mode of this. mus it may be asserted that as the
computer's “intelligence“ grows, difficulties associated with developing optimum
modes of interaction with the couputer may not decnur-on the contrary they may
even increase. 'Ihis would occur. in particular, because certain features and

characteristics inherent to human communication may be carried over (including in
altered form) to the situation of “dialogue" interaction with the cosputer.

An analysis of selection of computer operating modes would be incouplete without
studying the dynamics of this choice in the experiment, since we would thus be
able to make conclusions concerning the dynamics of the criteria, the goals and
the evaluations associated with them. It was noted above that only 30 percent of
all of the subjects stated in their reports that they wanted to try to work in all
nodes in succession. since otherwise they would not be able to choose that node
which was most suited to them. what, then, caused the other subjects to change
their work mode?

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY

One of the factors responsible for a switch to another node was satisfaction of
cognitive interest in the previous node and arisal of interest toward other nodes.
Modes may also be switched as a result of an inconsistency between the a priori
evaluation of a given node and its a posteriort evaluation. a subject may also
switch to a new node because in the previous node he fond the work easy (he was

successful) or, on the other hand, because work in the previous node was hard (he
was unsuccessful).

But the most interesting factors responsible for changes in made were those associ-
ated with the subject's evaluation of the productivity of his own activity in a
certain mode, based on independently formulated criteria: in this case an evaluation
of both the activity itself and its concrete products was iqlied. Moreover evalua-
tions pertaining to the product of activity and to the process of this product‘s
acquisition could be conflicting. Here are a few of the most typical exatples.

During a priori evaluation of the nodes subject 0. L. cemented:
“The most interesting node is 'original property,‘ and the least
interesting are 'coﬂaination' and 'problesl.‘ I don’t even know
which is worse. 'problen' node or 'cosbination' node. Both are
dictatorial, and entirely uninteresting." ‘lhen the subject began
working in the "original property” node, but after two attespts
with this mode. which she assessed as unsuccessful. she cos-entedx
"Yes, the properties are rather original, but what's the sense.

I can't think of anything interesting to go with them, and I
simply don't want to. I want to try another ands."

After this the subject began working in "cosbination" sods. which she had ranked
second to last during a priori evaluation of the nodes.

In a nuvber of cases the node choice was predetermined at the very start by the
subject's evaluation of his predicted productivity.

mus after working in “original property“ node subject 8. m.
consented: 'Yes. now I understand that despite the originality
of the property, the problem may end up being unoriginal, and
this is objectionable. in this sense "cosbination" mde would
be better. 1 did not understand this right away. '16 be lure
accurate, I made an incorrect choice. I thought that if a
property was original, then the problem would necessarily be
original, but this is not so."

And so. psychological analysis of an ilportant factor governing the effectiveness
of man's interaction with a cosputeruselectivity in utilising the possibilities
of the conputer and the subjective evaluationof the concrete for-s in which these
possibilities are realized--denonstrated that selection and change of sodas of
computer operation are processes with a complex structure. 'ihey involve a priori
and a posteriori analysis of the offered nodes, subjective evaluations of activity
and its products in a given node. made on the basis of independently for-ulsted
criteria. and evaluation of the possibilities of the cosputer itself.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFFICIALISEONLV

We revealed the following factors influencing selectivity toward the forms of
realization of the cosputer's possibilities: cognitive interest, subject evaluation
of the coaplexity and successfulnees of activity in the given node, stbjective eval-
uation of the possibilities for maintaining the leading role in goal found».

we demonstrated the conflicting nature of a tutor of evaluations. their interaction
and the dependence of change in the evaluations of the nodes themselves on different

oosbinations of these factors and the dynamics of their developmnt during the
subject's activity in the experi-ent.

Moreover we desonstrated that growth in "cosputer intelligence” is not always
directly associated with optimization of interaction between nan and counter.
Moreover difficulties in developing optimal forms of interaction may even increase
due to the carryover of certain features and characteristics of human comication
(including in modified form) to the “dialogue" situation. As a result the net
"intelligent" nodes may even be rejected by the user's.

Ooaparative Analysis of the Productivity of a Subject's Activity [airing Independent
work and mring (he of a Corputer

The experilental results permit the assertion that the traditional parameters for
evaluating the productivity of P-goal forsailationuthe total nuaber of P-goals pro-
duced (related to the time of their production) and the percentage of acceptable
variants—ears clearly inadequate. merefore we broadened the list of possible
parameters by including the characteristics of both the process itself of producing

P-goals (various temporal parent-tars for examle) and its end productswP-goal
statements.

ﬁne products of goal forming activity were evaluated on the basis of both qualitative
criteria (revelation of which was a special objective of the research) and quantita-
tive criteria--we calculated not only the total umber of P-goals revealed by the
subject but also the nusber of ”universal." directions of the object's analysis.

the nunber of subgoals formulated, and the nunber of times the subject went beyond
the bounds of the object's traditional uses.

By utilizing these paramters, we were able to evaluate the productivity of the
individual's activity during indepeth work and in 'dialogue" interaction with the
couputer with better grounds.

when the oonputer participated in the work, the hunter of P-goals revealed in ful-
fillment of instruction Pl increased by an average of 152 percent. the quantity of
"universal“ directions of analysis increased by 60 percent, and the hunter of P-goals
not associated with the object's traditional uses increased by 160 percent. All of
this indicates a certain degree of expansion of the limits of the field of possi-
bilities analyzed by the subject during production of P-goals.

As was noted earlier. expert methods were used in order to achieve fuller analysis
of the products of goal forming activity. Both a special group of subjects who had

not participated in the P-goal production experiment. and the subject who produced
the given P-goal--the author-"served as the experts. Inclusion of the author in

the group of experts made it possible to obtain interesting data concerning produc-
tion of possible goals.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many subjects noted in their reports that the better (in their point of view) the
P-goals they revealed in the experimnt were formulated, the mere interesting the
work became. Satisfaction in the work and in its results appeared. In turn,
arisal of interest in the current activity had a positive inﬂuence on its produc-
tivity. In this connection we were interested in revealing which P-goal statements

the authors felt to be the best, and in comparing the author's evaluation with the
opinion of other subjects (experts).

Statistical treatment of the expert data showed that the author's opinion often
differed significantly from the opinion of the experts. This inconsistency was

elicited in particular by the influence the concrete features of P-goal production had
on the subsequent evaluation applied to the goals.

'lhus a large nunber of subjects producing goals while working with the computer in
different modes were observed to exaggerate their evaluations of those goals which
were hardest to formulate and those goals which permitted the subject to "invest
himself" to a greater extent into their computer-assisted formulation. It would

be interesting to note that quite often this process went on in the presence of
conflicting evaluation criteria.

To some extent the significant increase in time required to produce goals and the
remarks made by the subjects during the experiment served as indicators of the diffi-
culty of goal formation. The desire of subjects to work as independently as possible
despite referral to the computer for assistance ('avoidingnints," “using hints but
contributing as much as possible to the problem on my own“ and so on) could be gauged
from the reports of the subjects as well as from the line of reasoning of the subjects
during the experiment.

If despite difficulties and the "obstrusiveness" of the hints the subject was never-
theless able (in his opinion) to fulfill his task, the resulting P-goal statement

was often "defended” by the subject against possible criticism (”This problem is

not formulated very well, but it is very important,“ "It may be true that the problem
may not look so good to an incidental observer, but it'sthe best I've done" and so on).
As a rule such a problem was given one of the highest evaluations when ranked after
the experiment; in a nunber of cases the decision of the subjects was accompanied

by a "speech in defense" of the problem.

But in our opinion the very desire to "defend” a problem :gainst possible criticism
indicated the ex-stence of certain conflicting evaluation criteria, the existence
of doubts in the subject as to the validity of the high evaluation he offered. In
this case, when the subjects described the process of such evaluation aloud, they
never suggested criteria such as "difficulty of goal production“ or “making my own
contribution." it would be interesting to note that if after the problems were
ranked the experimenter directly askedwhether or not such criteria existed, many
subjects gave a negative reply.

We add that in and of itself, time spent on producing goals did not correlate
significantly with high goal evaluation. Thus a subject might abandon his intention

of "'xtrlcating himself from a difficult situation with dignity“ and formulate a
problem which "would at least somehow associate the properties suggested by the

conputer." Such goals were given a low evaluation as a rule, though in some cases
they could be given a rather high evaluation.

q

:J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘JI‘UIIILJAI.CHBI.IMVLV

During the ranking, subject 0. '1'. consented: 'hlthough this is a
rather maningless problem at first glance, something more could
still be done with it.“

‘lhus he essentially said that it was possible to elaborate further on a process
which he had abandoned in the course of the experiment. In a nusber of cases a
"failure" associated with production of a given problem could also be exaggerated.

Thus a subject might note: 'Strmge, when I wrote this problem down

it seemed to me to be rather stupid, and now I see that there is
something to it.“

1he results permit the suggestion that there exists a certain dependence between the
subjective evaluation of the difficulty of the P-goal production conditions set by
the couputer, the difficulties and unique features of this process in these condi-

tions, and the subjective evaluation of the products themselves of goal forming
activity.

Statistical treatment of the data obtained during initial and repeat ranking of
P-goal statements revealed stable preferences on the part of the experts. Analysis
of these data showed that in addition to a certain system of stable criteria applied
to the products of goal forming activity, as a rule there exists a certain system of
criteria formed during ranking. ’lhese criteria may be situational in nature, and
they may be distinguished by significant variability in comarison with the stable
criteria. Moreover variability in the definition and interpretation of the objects

of ranking--that is, the P-goal stateuents~plays a large role in the evaluation
process. its subject in a sense "gleans new content' from the objects andcorres-

pondingly changes both the criteria of their evaluation and the characteristics of
value themselves.

Sowetimes these factors led to significant disagreement in the opinions of individual
experts (Figure 5). As a rule however, even in these cases there was evidence of
rather high consistency in the opinions of the group of experts as a whole (the
concordance coefficients were significant at the 5 percent level).

Out of 22 subjects performing the ranking procedure in response to instruction R1

during simultaneous ranking of goals produced independently and goals produced to-
gether with the conputer, 15 showed preference for goals produced together with the
computer--that is, the averaged sum of the ranks for these goals was lower than for

goals produced independently. A second series of experiments was performed with
instruction R2 in order to support a more-detailed analysis of the causes of such

a "preference.” In this series we first analyzed the criteria used to evaluate
goals produced by others (the "supervisor's situation") and the subjective criteria
applied to selection of a goal from a certain set of alternative goals (the "sub-
ordinate's situation"). We revealed the following two most frequently mentioned
criteria in this rescarch--problem inportance and problem originality. IMen we
performed the ranking procedure on the basis of these two criteria.

Quantitative treatment of the expert data produced the following results: For 60
percent of the subjects in this group, the evaluations for originality of goals pro-
duced jointly with the conputer were significantly higher than for the goals pro-
duced independently. For 35 percent the differences were insignificant, and the

80
FOR OFFICIAI USE Y
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ejl'.’

otfﬁ)

 

01(2)

r_._____ -_ .

H-.. .. __.

 

Figure 5. Banking, by 10 Experts, of the Wording: of P-Goals Revealed
by smject O. M. wring Independent Work (without the Winter):
Subject. 0. l. is in the expert group as nﬂer 3: X(£)--objects
of ranking: !(.7')--expert with nulber J (involved in initial
ranking): Y'(J) "expert with nulber J (involved in repeat
ranking)

evaluations were lower for only 5 percent. Evaluations for importance were scuwhat
different: For 45 percent they were higher in the case of independent goal produc-
tion. for 30 percent the differences were insignificant. and for 25 percent the
evaluations for importance were lower with independent goal production than with
production of goals together tit-h the outputer (Wilcoxon's two-seaple shift criterion
was used to evaluate the significance of the differences).

It may be noted on the basis of these data and the reports of the subjects that when
goals were formulated in ”dialogue" nods, nest subjects unaged to produce goals that

were more original but less significant.

It is interesting that many stbjects recognized this while producing goals in
"dialogue' node and attelpted to protect the P-goal statements they produced fro...

possible criticism.

81

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subject 5. IL: "Rte idea is basically there. Right now it doesn't
sound very thoughtful, and for the tenant it cannot be given a high
score for importance. since for the moment I can't prove this. But
there is sclething here to think about.‘'

Quantitative treatment of the expert data shared that the opinion of the experts and
sud-lore relative to a particular group of objects out of the total objects stbjected

to ranking agreed in my ways. Disagreements were mainly connected with the order
in which the objects within these groups were ranked. In this analysis we were

especially interested in a case where the subjective evaluation made on the basis of
the originality criterion was higher for goals revealed with the assistance of the
computer, and when it was higher in relation to the inortance parameter for goals
produced independently. Here is a specific exawle.

while producing P-goals independently, subject 0. 14. noted several
times that she was having a hard time fulfilling the assignment and
that "although I very much wanted to think up something original,
nothing came of it.“

she had to give up her attempt to fulfill instruction P2, specially oriented toward
originality. Ranking her P-goel statemnts revealed with the comuter's assistmce.
she assessed them as extremly original but not very important. neatmnt of the
expert data showed that this opinion was shared by all nine experts.

We were especially interested in the verbal portraits of the authors which the
experts had to give after the ranking procedure. for this purpose P-goal statemnts
supposedly written by different people were shown to the experts--not on cards this
time. but on separate sheets. Actually, these were goals revealed by the sale indi-
vidual but under different conditionsu-independently and with the assistance of the
computer. the experts were asked to state their opinion of these supposedly different
authors. me expert was not informed that the author was in fact the sat. person.

In the exauple we will consider here, the first sheet with the title 'Subject 1"
listed the goals foruulated by subject 0. H. [female] independently. The second
sheet titled “Subject 2" listed goals revealed by the same subject working with the

computer in dialogue node. Here are concrete examples of the experts‘ respomes.

Expert 0. v.: ”Subject 1 is young. and probably a girl. Very
organized. logical to the extreme. Sets a goal and proceeds
downward on the ladder of incrtance. Attached to what she knows,
and relies only on it. But if I needed a 'clear thinker' for a
certain job, I would not have chosen such a colleague: Perhaps he
may become a worker who responds to orders reasonably well, and in
any case a very conscientious worker. Subject 2 is an entirely

different person. I like hin very such. He stays loose, his thinking
doesn't have the rigidity that nine does, for example. Perhaps not
everything he wrote down is useful, and perhaps some of these thoughts
are totally 'wild' at first glance. bordering on absurdity, but such ideas
are needed. While subject l's ideas left me indifferent. hers I
immediately encountered a nutter of incidental problems. I an even

sorry that I can't say anything about then. You know, such a person
should not be subjected to any kind of training. so that he would not

get limited, so that he would not get stuck in a framework of

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

certainty. he only needs a little push, though not right away.
It is difficult to make any conclusions about his logical capa-
bilities, and we shouldn't even try, he should be saved for those

moments when he is needed. Such people are needed. I could hardly
work in this way, I am a little too critical for that.”

Expert L. H.: "Subject 1 is probably a good worker and administrator.
he is more practical than abject 2. (bviously it would be good to
get his advice on practical problems. beject 2--well, he's an
entirely different person. It would be interesting to talk with
him because he could open up comletely new aspects of things that
have been long known. he is mad! mre original than the first,
but he is totally unpractical, like a child. If one of his ideas
would require some exotic plant, it would never cross his mind that
it would have to be inported all the way from Africa. In general,
it would be good for these two people to work together, assuning of
course that the first would not be envious of the second.“

Expert S. 5.: "Subject 1 is more practical, he has work experience.
he knows his job, but he doesn't have any ideas. he's purely a
practical worker. he can be used only for practical work with

someone else's ideas. He couldn't invent gmpowder. Subject 2 on
the other hand .is little acquainted with practicality, he doesn't
suggest important ideas, and he offers no practical solutions, but
his ideas are rather unexpected. 'lhey are original, and sonehow
very attractive. Probably because they are so far afield of tradi-
tion. hey are not very applicable from a practical point of view,
but this person does have an original way of thinking. He should
not be set to work on other people's ideas. If he is able to learn
the job, he would find it easier to orient hiuelf in the sea of his
own ideas--people like this have many of then."

Expert P. T.: "I don't like subject 2. he does everything better
than I--such ideas would sinply never have entered my head. He is

higher in mental developmnt than subject 1. Subject 2 could transfer
his technical knowledge even to everyday things and make them inter-
esting. Subject 2 is probably a man. suajectl 18 in teaching or
writing. Precise, probably a woman. A good worker.“

[Expert A. L.: ”Subject 1 approaches problem more practically.
Subject 2 has less substance. Subject 1 takes a snre-coaplete
approach, while subject 2 is bent on originality, though his facility
with industrial production is not generally very good. He probably
thinks he‘s a genius. I feel that he has a passion for being ori-
ginal. But practicality and originality must be interrelated--other-
wise things would be absurd. I don't generally like such people.
What would happen if all of a sudden we find out that he‘s not

really a genius but simply likes to say off-the-wall things.

Subject 1 could be relied on, probably a woman or an elderly man."

83

FOR Ol-TlClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And so, the experimental data permit the hypothesis that subjects showed preference
for goals produced in ”dialogue" with the cosputer, because in this case they were in

a sen;e able to expand their possibilities and reveal more-original goals, which was
preferable to many of the subjects.

we did of course observe a certain decline in the evaluations of goals on the basis
of the inportance paramter concurrently with this. herefore we included a- umber
of supplementary instructions in the experimental nethod. ‘lhus we asked the subjects
to specially analyse, after the experiment, those P-goal statesmnts which had a low
evaluation on the basis of the 'isportance" parameter concurrently with a hi9: eval-
uation based on the "originality' paramter. In this case we provided the supple-
mentary instruction: "Try to modify these problems in such a way that they would be-
come more important without detriment to their originality.” m stbjects handled
this assignment relatively easy But it was significantly harder to modify the

same P~goal statements in such a way as to improve their evaluation based on the
"originality” parameter (some subjects would not even try to cleete this assignment).

Thus we developed and implemented a variant of the expert procedure which can be used
for qualitative evaluation of the products of human intellectual activity and for
comparison of these products. arrived at by an individual working in ”dialogue" mode
with the computer and without the counter, on the basis of qualitative indicators.

By using the expert methods we were able to deepen the analysis of human intellectual
activity in “dialogue“ with a computer. The results of this analysis revealed addi-
tional parameters characterizing goal formation. namely the P-goal "originality“ para-
meter and the P-goal “importance" parameter. In term of these parameters. activity
performed in dialogue with a computer is typified by higher evaluations for P-goal
originality and a certain decline in relation to the ilportance parameter. However,
under the influence of a supplementary instruction the subject could relatively .
easily modify P-goal statements to arrive at a higher evaluation in term of this
parameter. But at the same time it was hard to modify goals in such a way as to
raise the originality evaluation.

Consequently the ”dialogue“ mode we developed would best be used primarily to raise
the quality of goal forming processes in term of the “originality" parameter.

Investigation of the Possibilities of Controlling Goal Formation in "nialogue'I With
the Computer by Influencing Emotions and Motivations

me preliminary experiments. perforsed without a couputer, showed that a significant
nuber of the subjects were affected by the active of competition with other subjects,
ones whom they had predicted would participate in similar experiments. That this
motive arose may be deduced from their questions and from the statements they made
during the experiment. free the reports they gave following the experiment and from
the particular features of their activity. After the experiment many subjects asked
how others had performed in this experiment. The questions asked of the experimenter
in this case often helped to reveal goals associated with this motive and those the
subject formed while fulfilling the given instruction. 'lhus subjects usually asked
about the nusber of properties or P-goal statements named by other participants of
the experiment.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us now dwell on the experimental methods in which the effectiveness of intellec-
tual activity was raised by organizing special forms of "dialogue' with the computer
capable of influencing the subject's auctions and Iotivations. The experile
situation stimulated arisal, in the subject, of the "motive of competing with the
coputer" under the influence of the ooaputer's responses. Such indirect influence
on motives was were effective than instructions directly orienting the subject toward
mention. Considering the limited possibilities of mdern couputers for analysing
messages in natural language. we used a simlified mdel in which we substituted the
naming of possible goals of analysis of a certain object by revelation of the proper-

ties of this object. the obtained data were used to study the possibilities for
optimizing the goal forming process itself.

A nunbcr of tests were performed to reveal possible differences in the use of this
signified model. Subjects participating in these tests were given instructions
similar to those described below. me only difference was that they were asked to
produce P-goals rather than properties. The tests were performed only in the AIS
mode, in which the conputer's work was simlated by the experimenter. Wenty subjects
(college students) took part in the tests.

‘me following instruction (351) was transmitted to the subject via a colputer linking
unit (the display of an autonomous display system (MS) or the typewriter console of
the computer in cases of actual interaction with the computer): "'aaject'... (the name
of the object is given). Please name the properties of this object. Send a message
after each property. and wait for my reply. If you wish to stop work, simply type
the word 'end’ .'

The computer made one of the following responses to each property named by the
subject: 1) I know this property: 2) I know this property, it is named often; 3) I
don't know this property. Everyday objects were named in the instructiom: pencil.
match, chair. no order of their presentation was the ease for all subjects.

The corputer memory contained 120 properties for each of these objects, revealed from
the results of the preliminary series of experiments described above. 'mese were
properties which were stated in one, two or three words and which could be expressed
as a certain standard verbal construct with fill-in blanks: '"lhe object (name of
object)....can (one of the functional properties of the object)...." Properties
named by more than 50 percent of the subjects participating in the preliminary

series of experiments were placed in the "named often" category. ‘nms while working
with the conputer, each subject could compete with the participants of the preliminary
series of experiments (a situation of conpetition between experiment participants
mediated by a computer).

Analysis of the data obtained from all experiments in this series (series R5) was
performed in relation to the following parameters: 1) the number of properties re-
vealed; 2) the number of original properties: 3) instruction fulfillment time;

a) time intervals between the smaject's responses; 5) refusals to continue activity:
6) the sequence of computer responses.

me line of reasoning of the subjects was recorded during the experiment itself (on
tape) and following the experiment in the form of an unprompted report and as answers
to questions, which will be presented below. The following served as indicators that

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the motive of coupetition with the cosputer arose: a) statements made by the sub-
jects during the experiment and their emotional undertone: b) questions asked of
the experimenter: c) the stbject's reaction to coaputer responses and the dynamics
of their change during the experiment; d) the subject's attitude toward lengthy
series of identical responses from the cosputer: e) data in the subject's report.

Forty four subjects participated in the experiments on instruction RSl. mesa were
college students, high school students in their senior years and professional com-
puter users. Certain difficulties requiring some changes in the experimental method
were revealed in the very first experiments. This was particularly true of problems
associated with the subject's possibility and need for obtaining a correct response
from the computer.

when an autonomous display system is employed, the possibility of obtaining a correct
response is limited to a significant extent by the experimenter's aim capability for
simulating the work of the conputer. In real interaction, meanwhile, the corputer
was unable to analyze lengthy messages which were written in natural language and
which would not yield to standardisation. we doubtlessly could have taught the sub-
jects to word their properties in a way which would be cowatible with computer
analysis, but this did not seem to be a suitable approach. Besides creating the
danger of indirectly coaching the subject while training him, we would also have had
to exclude from the analysis those properties which could not be worded in standard
fashion, and the latter are precisely the ones which are of the greatest interest

to the analysis.

Another solution might have been to create 'coquter-experimenter-subject' inter
action, in which the potentials of the experimnterwould be mliﬂedby the couputer.
But although this approach does appear promising in terms of subsequently developing
a general method for automating the psychological experiment, it would have required
asignificant increase in the time intervals between the mssages of the sibject and
. the responses of the computer, which was undesirable in this experiment.

Some interesting procedures maintaining the illusion of human cos-unication with a
computer have been developed in known 'dialogue' programs (ELIZA, PERRY and others)
in order to “simulate" a degree of understanding which the cosputer naturally does
not possess (27, 117, 119, 155).

Following these traditions, we developed three variants of mode 5151 described above.
whenever the wording of a p'operty would not yield to conputer analysis, in the first
variant the couputer produced an additional response: ”Next property" (the correct
response nodeuSZ): in the second variant one of two responses was selected at

random: "1 know this property” and "I don't know this property“ (mode hs3--random
response); in the third variant the same responses were given in a more evasive form:
"I know this property but in a somewhat different wording“ or "I don't know this
property, though I do know some similar ones” (mode lab-evasive response). 'ihirty
subjects (VU: students) took part in experiments on these instructions.

We were especially interested in the case where a correct response could in principle
be obtained from the computer, but where this was undesirable, inasmuch as it could

ruin the motive of competition. the hundred twenty properties associated with each
object were fed into me computer memory. Msuming that the computer necessarily

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

provides correct responses, such a rival might be too strong for some subjects and
insufficiently strong for others. In such a situation, random responses--be they even
evasive responses-would be undesirable, as would their presentation in accordance
with a special program-~for exasple depending on the length of the series of previous
responses subjectively perceived by the subject as unpleasant or pleasant. As the
preliminary experiments showed, sharp inconsistencies in the subjective evaluations
made of the computer responses by the subjects are unavoidable with this approach,
which in turn results in frustration, the destruction or weakening of the motive of
coapetition, and sometimes violation of "dialogue" interaction itself.

We hypothesized that the nunber of such inconsistencies could be significantly re-
duced by using some additional objective data which. when fed into the couputer,
would allow us to at least partially predict the subject's subjective assessment of
certain products of his activity, and to mnitor the dynamics behind development of
the coupetition motive. As was noted earlier, the characteristics of autonomic
parameters, which reflect emotional evaluations to a certain degree, were chosen as

such data. ‘lb the extent we can judge from the literature. this is the first time
this principle is used in the organisation of a "dialogue‘ mde.

It stands to reason that this hypothesis could have a real basis only if we could
differentiate among the corresponding autonomic changes with sufficient precision
and establish their mutual relationship with son suajective evaluations of the
subjects.

'no test this out, we had to conduct a special series of experiments, for which purpose
we supplemented the experimental method.

The autonomic parameters we recorded from all subjects fulfilling the above-described
instructions 51. $2 and ml in ass mode were the SR ((Pere's) method) and pulse. 'lhe
method used to record these parameters is described in detail in (25). The following
tines were labeled on the tape on which these parameters were recorded: 1) the noment
the subject fed his message into the couputer; 2) the mount the subject began typing
a new message; 3) the moment message typing was terminated and, in mode 161, an extra
label; 4) the mount a response was obtained from the cosputer.

We analyzed the following indicators: a) appearance of significant phasal changes in
autonomic reactions in relation to background values (beginning with 3 kOhms for

the GSR and 15 beats per minute for pulse); b) the frequency of these changes: c) their
dynamics: d) changes in autonomic reactions occurring in different stages of the
subject's principal activity depending on its features. We also had to consider that
the autonomic reactions may differ in sign; therefore to be able to make conclusions
concerning the qualitative features of the subject's state, we used information from
the subject's verbal report and his recorded thoughts during the experiment. ’lhe
entire experth was tape-recorded. Hhen treating the experimental data. we corre-
lated the tape recording, transcribed to a data sheet, with the $8 and pulse recording
using the time labels on these recordings. ll‘he precision of this correlation-"1.5
seconds—was sufficient for the purposes of our research.

in order to find the correlation between autonomic changes and some subjective evalu-
aticns, following the experiment we asked the subjects to rank all of the properties

they named in order of preference (the experimenter did not offer a preference cri-
terion).

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One more modification of the R51 method was developed in order to pernit closer
analysis of the concrete ties existing between anticipated enotinnal evaluations

revealed on the basis of the objective indicators of emotional activation and their
corresponding verbal predictions.

Mode IBVZ: After a subject working on instruction :81 hand 12 properties (without
giving up) or after he gave up, he was given the following instruction:

"You have now acquainted yourself with the way the computer works.
You probably noticed that the computer gives one of the three
following responses to each property you name: 'I knew this
property,‘ '1 know this property, it is naned often,’ '1

don't kmwthis property.‘ In your further work, try to guess the
conputer's response. 1o do so, each tine you news a property you
must write down the following synbols: 2-1: you believe that
this property is known to the cosputer: N-if it is not known!
Glulf the property is one which is w often.“

in this case the autonomic parameters and the line of reasoning were recorded in the
same way as in the previous series.

He developed a special method permitting us to graphically demonstrate one of the
real possibilities for practical use of the objective indicators of emtional activa-
tion in “dialogue" programs.

rode RSVJ: As with the previous series of experimts. this series used the A116.

The computer responses were given in correspondence with data describing the subject's
functional state. Experimental data obtained in the previous series showed that for a
certain group of subjects (stating the response '1 don't know this property” to be
the nost preferable) . a significant emotional undertone was typical of properties
which they subjectively felt to be the most original and unknown to the comuter.

That this was true could be determined from their line of reasoning during the experi-
ment and from a special interview. me autononic parameter recording tapes for these
subjects revealed sharp drops in the 658 during the tine interval in direct proximity
to the beginning of the typing of a new message (subjectively evaluated as original)
and in a nuwer of cases just prior to feeding this nessage into the coqauter.

1n correspondence with this subjective emotional evaluation (a subjective prediction
revealed on the basis of the objective indicators of emtional activation). the ex-
perinenter sinulated the work of the convuter with the AIS, outputting comuter re-
sponses according to the following system.

1. Right ("I don't know this property“). when the subjective prediction agreed with
the real situationnthat is, when the property was not contained within the library
of properties.

2. wrong ("I don't know this property"), when the subjective prediction did not
agree with the real situation--that is, when the property was known to the computer,
and when a long series of responses undesirable to the subject (more than four) were
given to him prior to this point.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. Right (”I know this property“ or "I know this property, it is named often”).
when the smnective prediction agreed with the real situation as well as when it did

not agree with this situation but the outer of previous successive responses unde-
sirable to the subject was less than four.

Mnty-eight subjects took part in experimnts with instructions RSVZ and RSV3-
college students and professional. couputer users. After they had fulfilled the series
is instructions and written their unprospted reports, they were all asked the follow-
ing questions.

1. How did you react to the computer's responses (to each response)?

2. Did your attitude change in the course of the experimnt?

3. Why did you stop working (if the subject had given up during the experimnt)?

4. Precisely what properties did you want to name?

.>. Did this wish cnange during the experiment?

6. Here you always able to think them up?

7. If not. what did you do in such a ase, and why?

8. Has the number of properties you named important to vou? why?

9. Was the quality of the properties you naled inportant to you? why?

10. Did you try to second-guess the computer's responses? If yes, then why did
you do this?

11. Did you enjoy working with the computer? what exactly did you like, and what
did you dislike?

12. Did you have any sort of emtional experiences while working with the conputer?
If yes, what kind, and with what were they connected?

13. If the way your “dialogue“ with the computer were to be organized depended on
you, how would you like to see it organised?

Discussion and Analysis of Experimental Data. The Possibility of (bntrolling Goal
for-nation in a “Dialogue“ with the Computer by Influencing Motivations

We analyzed the arisal. specific features and degree of manifestation of the motive
of competition with the computer. We obtained the following data: Arisal of the
coupetition motive to one degree or another, coupled with formation of different
systems of goals (Table 7). was recorded for the overwhelming majority of subjects
in all oxperinental groups.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7. Nunber of Subjects for when Arisal of the native of Onpetition With the
Comuter was Recorded

No. of Subjects for Rhos Arisal

'notal No. of the native of Constition
Group of Subjects with the com: was Recorded, t
01 (college students) 20 80
oz (professional
coqauter users) . 4 100
DJ (high school
students) 20 70

M a rule this motive did not form right away. 'Ihe specific features of its arisal
and the ways and degree of its manifestation de,.nded on a large hater of intricately
interrelated factors. For examle the dynamics of its arisal depended significantly
on: 1) the particular features of the subject's activity during performance of his

experimental assignment; 2) the oolputer's responses and their consistency: 3) the
stability of the hierarchy of motives characterising the subject's personality:

4) the particular ways the subject analysed the possibilities of his rival, and his
attitude toward this rival.

The subjects were not told beforehand how the colputer would respond to that during
their work, not were any explanations offered as to the nature of these responses.
The very nature of this reaction depended significantly on the subject's evaluation
of the ”intellectual" possibilities of modern coqmters. Three basic groups of ex-
periment participants could be distinguished on the basis of this principle.

we placed subjects who overstated the possibilities of the computer (subjects having
absolute trust in the computer. viewing it as a super-rival) in the first group. Here
are some concrete examples. Subjects said: 'mrytbing that can be known about the
object is in the computer. Consequently if it responds: 'I know this property.‘

then I am doing the right thing, and if it responds: 'I don't know this property,‘

I must have made some sort of mistake: Either I worded my thoughts incorrectly or
the property does not fit."

Subject 0. I. (group 01): “If the couputer replied 'I know.‘ I felt
that I had given it what it wanted.“

Subject G. ‘1‘. (group 01): ”Men the cosputer said: 'I don‘t
know this property' I became elbarrassed, because I concluded I
had blurted out something stupid. I also thought that the com--
puter would not want to work with me any more. After all, it
knows everything and the work it gave me was rather easy, but I
made a mistake."

Subject A. F. (group 01): “when the comter responded: "lhis
property is named often.’ it meant that the conputer understood

that I had named the object's best-known characteristic. When the

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conputer responded: 'I don'tknow this property.’ I even became
angryweither the meter wasn't working right or something else.
After all, it knows everything about this object, or at least a
great lot more than I. And later on, although the property to
which the conputer replied in this way seemed right to me, I

was perpetually afraid that perhaps I was making a mistake and that
this property really didn't fit. his is why every time I typed in
a message I was very worried that it would once again reply that
the property didn‘t fit. I mean, the computer isn't the only

one that's involved. It may be smart, but it has no soul. Later
on, it lets other people read my work, naking In look ridiculous
for giving such totally stupid answers.”

Subject G. 2. (group D3): Following the couputer's first reply,

"I don't know this property,” the subject asked the experimenter:
"What do I do when the counter doesn't know? m I stop with the
first property that doesn't fit?“ Then the smject began persuading
both herself and the experimenter that the property which she had named
and which pronptcd this response free the oomter did not fit.‘

however, despite the tendency to overstate the possibilities of the counter. which
distinguished subjects in this group, the motive of coupetition arose in this case
as well. However, it's arisal and manifestation exhibit unique features. i‘he sub-
jects, who were essentially carpeting with other participants of the experiment.
viewed the computer moderating this cowetition as a judge and not a partner. Here
is a specific example.

Subject Ye. A. (group 01): "l‘he comuter knows everything, but it
has worked with many people and therefore it knows what properties are
named especially often. merefore I wanted my response to be a valid
one, but one that is not named very often. It'sbest when the comuter
replies 'I don't know this property,‘ since this means I came up with
a reply that is more interesting than usual.“

He placed subjeccs with a neutral reaction to the cosputer's responses in the second
group. here were only two subjects of this sort in all of the experimental series.

Subject A. A. : "I didn't pay any attention to the colputer's responses
because I couldn't understand why it was writing all of this. Maybe it
needed all of this so that it could do its analysis.‘

Subject H. K. : ”I didn't pay attention to the cospoter's responses
because the computer offered no explanations as to how I was to

react to these responses; therefore I didn't know what I was supposed
to do. and I stopped paying any attention to its responses.”

The motive of conpetition with the aouputer was not recorded for subjects in this
group.

91

F0! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
MOFFIGALIJSEONLY

we placed subjects who were more critical. than persons in the first group, of the
“intellectual" possibilities of the comuter in the third group. All professional
computer users and a significant proportion of the subjects in the other groups fell
within it. the following attitude toward the conuter's responses is typical of
subjects in this group: "what the cosputer knows about this object was fed into it
by programrs and subjects participating in the experiaant. If the couputer replies
'1 don't know,’ this means that I was able to find so- original property which no
one had thought of yet-~this is a gap in the cosputsr's knowledge.“ Sons smjects
of this group even felt that the for. of the cosputer's responses was generally in-

mtent .

Subject A. P. (group D3): ”The thing that asased as the Inst was
that the computer replied 'I know' and 'I don't know' as a person
would. It would have been such sore natural for the conputer to
reply ‘1 have information' or '1 don’t have any information.‘ After
all. the conputer can't think on its own.”

Also typical of subjects in this group was a dialstrically opposite attitude toward
computer responses in co-parison with the group of subjects examined above tending
to express excessive trust in the computer's knowledge.

Subject 5. R. (group 01) notes: “I felt a cosputer reply of '1 don't
know' to be very good, to be the lost pleasant. his neant that
this property had not yet been hand, and I was the first to do

so. But when the computer replied 'I know,‘ this was unpleasant,
while it was completely bad when the oosputer said 'Naud often'.‘

As a rule the reactions of this group to the computer responses also had a greater
emotional undertone than did the reactions of the other groups. are of the obvious
reasons for this was that to subjects of this group, the comter became a totally
real rival. and not an omniscient judge. Sons even experienced a desire to explain
certain things to the computer. to help it.

Thus subject Ye. B. (group 01) notes in her report: “I didn't like
it at all when the conputer replied 'I know.’ his was very un-
pleasant. and the more it knew, the sore unpleasant it was for me.
When the computer made its first 'I don't know' reply, I was very
happy. and it took a long time for me to settle down. Then I
immediately began thinking about how I could explain it to the
computer better (in C-goal) , so that it could understand and know
this property.”

Quite often, of course, such assistance was far from disinterested.

Thus. after the couputer's first 'I don‘t know this property“
response subject 0. L. asked the experimenter: “Tell me, can

I be certain that the couputer will sunrise this property and
say '1 know“ to others who will be participating in the experi-
ment after me?” Later on in the experiunt the subject naned

the same property once again. Following the computer‘s response,
'1 know,‘ the subject commented with regret: ”It's a pity that
it couldn't rcmeuber that it was I who taught it this property.”

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subjects in this group sometimes strmtured their activities specifically so as to clarify
the “intellectual” possibilities of their rival sore precisely, developing a special

”dialogue” strategy (elements of personification were observed in this case even
among professional users).

As an example, here is an excerpt from the report written by
subject V. I... (group 02) : "I always wanted to find out what
the computer really knows, and by my replies I tried to get

it to tell me. I also wanted to find out if the cosputer could
learn. For example I name different pencil meters. It replied
that it didn't know. I explained to it what the nulbers neant.
that they indicated the hardness of the pencil lead. and then I
named another number. The computer replied once again that it
didn't know. This meant that it is completely stupid. Later on
I wanted to find out if it could distinguish among different shades
of color if I named different colors. Does the cosputer savory
contain knowledge about a particular object, or is this some
abstract object? I was able to determine all of this by naming
different colors."

from perceiving the conputer as some rechanical device containing a certain amount of
knowledge to personification of this device and to "dialogue" with it based on

procedures typical of human dialogue (determination of what the commuter could "feel"
and "learn," whether it is “stupid“ or ”smart" and so on). In a number of cases the

acceptable in human dialogue than in dialogue with a technical device ("I became
angry with it," "It insulted he,“ "I will prove it to it," "I'll get back at it.”
"I wish it would stop laughing at me” and so on). It should be noted that such state-
ments were also typical of professional users engaged in "dialogue" with the conputer.

Thus we can deduce a certain transfer of the form and features of human comnica-
tion into new conditions--to man's interaction with the couputer. However. it would
be incorrect to assert that all of these phenomena are associated only with naive

personification (anthmpouorphization) of the computer or with a certain inertia in
the spoken word, in the habit of expressing a particular thought oran emotional state

in a certain verbal form. It should be considered that a "dialogue” with a com-
puter is computer-mediated comunication between a large group of people. and not
simply an individual's interaction with some mechanical device. New forms and
features are inherent to such computer-mediated communication.

Thus in the experiment the subjects often attempted to clarify the sort of informa-
tion the computer uses as a basis for producing certain responses, ”who really stands
behind the computer's back,‘ who the real rival (or rivals) is (are). This process
was often evident throughout the entire experiment. ﬂare is a specific exanple.

Subject V. C. (group 02) : "At first I was not familiar with the
set of concepts with which the conputer was able to reply. The
first time it replied 'I know' I thought that there nust also be

a 'I don't know' reply. which should more than likely be interpreted
in two ways: 1) 'me answer is not in the conputer many,- 2) the
computer was unable to understand. Therefore I tried to word my

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subsequent messages as precisely as possible, in order to be
certain that I was actually naming unusual properties, and not
those which the cowuter was aware of in principle but which it
could not understand. I perceived the reply "this property is
named often' as respectful information about the other subjects--
that is, the intelligence level of the average subject. But I
did not think of this right away. After I did, I became dis-
appointed. In my opinion I was just average all too often.

and I didn’t like this. But at the same time my interest was
raised because I wanted to try to name something that the computer
didn't know. I began to perceive the connotes response 'I know'
as 'Someone had said this before; tell le something that I don't

know, and if you can't, this means that you are stupider than the
computer. and it could be taught everything'.‘

Thus the experimental data confirmed the hypothesis that by capitalising on the ele-
ments of computer-sediated communication and on the tendency to personify the con-
puter, we can influence motivations in “dialogue” mode similarly as in the conditions
of collective "generation of ideas.” In particular we confirmed the suggestion that
conditions promoting arisal of the cospetition Iotive in subjects interacting with a
cosputer is possible. As an exasple. arisal of the cometition motive and the
subject's active inclusion in “dialogue" with the counter manifested themselves in
the following:

a) in anticipatory evaluation of counter responses: "Privately I tried to guess
whether or not the cosputer was aware of each property I named,“ ”It seemed to me that
the computer did not have this information. but nonetheless I wanted to see how it
would react“:

b) in atteupts to reveal the Weak point“ in the comuter's knowledge:

c) in personification of the computer (in arisal of special C-goals associated with
interaction with a rival):

d) in attempts to determine the "real rival': "I am certain that the programmer is
a man. He might have omitted or forgotten something. I tried to capitalize on this,
I attempted to stand in his shoes and think about what he might have omitted."

we noted earlier that all subjects participating in this series of experiments were

divided into three basic groups in relation to their attitude toward the conputer as
a "rival" and in relation to their reactions to the computer responses (Table 8).

However, this division is not inflexible. We observe not only certain differences in
the way the subjects of each of the distinguished groups interpreted the comter
responses, but also certain dynamics in the way this interpretation changed in the
mind of a single subject. Here are some concrete exasples.

Subject 1.. 5.: "At first when the cosputer replied 'I don't know

this property' I thought that I had done something wrong. 'ihen I
realized that this was not so, and I began to want to work in areas
the computer didn't know."

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Effect of the Subject's Evaluation of the Water's Possibilities on
Arisal of a native of Rivalry Iith the mantel: within His:

8% of Subjects, \
w

 

ith Overstated With "Critical“
Evaluation of With Neutral Attitude ibward
Experimental Oolputer's Attitude ‘noward Quiputer's

Grog Possibilities Com: menses Possibilities
01 (college students) 35 5 60
71.4. 6 91.6
DZ (professional 9 o 100
computer users) 0 5 W
D3 (high school 55 g 40
students) 63.6 0 86.5

'Numeratorv-subjects entering into competition, e.

In the following case the cospetition motive arises when the subject develops an

understanding of the "intellectual” possibilities of the comter, which transforms
from a "know-it-all" into a real "rixval.’I

Subject I. 2.: “I thought that the couputer knew everything. But
when I became certain that this was not so and that there were
things that the cowuter did not know either, at first I was very
amazed, and later on I began to like it this way very Ild’l. ‘Ihe
work imdiately becane interesting.“

However, even in this case of the ”debunked know-it-all," many sibjects continue to
maintain a certain tendency to exaggerate the computer's knowledge. mus subject

v. I... consented at the beginning of her report that “the oonputsr is rather stupid,
and it doesn't know very nuch.‘ She formed this conclusion on the basis of her inter-
action with the conputer. Later on the sen subject says:

”I could not arrive at a clear idea of what 'property' unit.

In each concrete case I had to find out frou the comuter.

As an exasple when I gave it some 'dmbtful' property and it
responsed '1 know,‘ I felt relieved, because I was now sure that
this was in fact a property, and not sosething else.“

And so, as a result of man's interaction with a cowuter, as a result of the subjective
reaction of a large nunber of smjects to the responses of the computer, the motive

of conpetition with the comuter arises. In this .case this active manifests itself
much more clearly in the group having a sore-critical attitude toward the "intellecr
tual" possibilities of the computer than in the group tending to exaggerate the con-
puter's knowledge. One of the possible explanations of this is that to su>jects with
a Dre-critical attitude, the counter becomes a real rival, while to others it is

an inaccessible rival and concurrently a strict judge.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
played by the conputer. In other words it beeches possible to select a rival who
would permit the subject to remain in the most favorable conditions for successful

For convenience of presentation we will use the following sylbols: z--comeponda to
the computer response 'I know this property": Cit—to the resptmee 'I know this pro-
perty, it is named often"; N-~"! don't know this property."

Subject 3. I. (Ch, Ch, Ch. z, 0:, 2, a1. Ch): ‘At first I named
typical properties of the object. The colputer knew a little too
many. Its great knowledge began to annoy an. and I was overcone
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 9. Growth in Number of Original Properties: Oomarative Indicators

Quantity of Original Properties (in mlation to the Total Wt,
Revealed Throug Fulfillment of Instruction £51). Mora” Per Subject, t

For Sub ects Enterin Into tition
With Critical With Overstated
Assess-ant of Assess-snt of For Subjects
Subject Computer's Ocmuter's Not Entering

Grog Possibilities Possibilities Into Mtition
01 30 12 10
oz 33.3 - -
D3 26.7 11.4 9

out: 'How cone you know so moh?’ Anyway I began to name things
which Iwas certain itwouldnotknow, Ibegennaningtbemost

absurd properties I could cone up with. If it's so snart. let it
figure things out.”

Subject '1'. I. (01, ch. 01, z. 2, 0|. z, (3:, Ch): "It was very easy
to work in the beginning, but then I got the urge to find a property
which the computer didn't know. I got this urge after a succession
of "lhis property is named often" responses. I began rejecting
those properties which could produce such a response fro- the
conputer. I got great satisfaction when the couputer did not

know the property I named. In soee vague way. this made use more
interested in working with the couputer. Why. even I don't know.

I generally became annoyed that the celputer was saying 'I know'
all too oftenuthat is, that it was reproaching me for being the
sale as everyone else."

'me aspiration to win ”at any price” caused some subjects to make deliberate mistakes
when typing the messages out, and to give confused responses, even forgetting in
this case that the experimenter could be watching. Moreover many of the subjects
developed an urge to "get back at the counter" (a c-goal).

Subject P. A. (group :3) notes: 'Generally speaking I didn't feel
any special satisfaction when the counter finally admitted that
there was something it didn't know. Nevertheless I did want to
get back at it, so that it would not become conceited. No matter
what. can knows more, and the cowuter should roaster this."

It is interesting to note that this urge appeared even among pro-
fessional users: Subject 0. Ch. (grow DZ): 'I was irritated by
the 'I know this property. it is named otten' replies. I knew
that this was stupid. but I wanted to get back at the comuter,

I couldn't control myself, I wanted to do everything I could to
set the computer on its ear.”

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As was noted earlier. the competition motive assuned clearly pronounced for: in

a umber of cases. In this regard, we should make notion of the great significance
the individual features of the smaject have in relation to both the fact itself that
the motive of cometing with the comter arises and the dynamics of this cospetition.

‘lhus a long series of identical comuter responses caused some subjects to give up
against too strong a rival. while an even larger mater of identical responses created

an urge in others to win at any price.

why did the coupetition motive arise. and with what sort of stable hierarchy of
motives typical of. the subject's personality was it associated? Some relevant infor-
nation could be obtained directly free the report of the abject.

Subject 3. 1.: 'I wanted to show my best side“: subject 2. 1.:

“I wanted to feel that I was smarter than the oowuter'x subject

P. 3.: “I like to be first in everything, and I had such a strong
opponent here“; subject 8. 5.: "I wanted to experience that feeling
of superiority you get when you name something the computer doem't
know, though I didn't particularly feel that this was something to
gloat over”: subject It. Zh. : "met I found most interesting was

to name something the counter didn't know.”

It would not be difficult to note that ntives such as the “desire
to be first” and the “desire to put oneself in a good light" assume
somewhat different forms when manifested specifically in a consti-
tion with the computer: Subject '1'. 11.: “Generally speaking I love
to win, and there's special honor in winning against the counter":
subject L. 3.: “Generally speaking I'm not oometitive, but it
would have been eubarrassing to lose against the emitter. 'mis
would have meant recognising the superiority of a soulless auto-
maton. “

What sort of functions did the competition motive perform in the activity of the
subject during the experiment? Some of then associated with general stimulation

of activity were discussed above (as was the possible negative inﬂuence of super-
motivation). However, these forms of the finctions played by a motive in hulan
activity do not exhaust all of the possibilities.

let us examine certain structural functions played by the cometition motive--
functions which manifest themselves as a significant increase in the couplexity of
the system of goals associated with this motive.

l. A general increase in the mute: of goals occurred in relation to both the entire
group and each subject taken individually (0-, a- and H-goals). In experiments in
which the competition motive did arise, though spontaneously (in experiments in

which the mute: did not provide judgmental responses) . one of the principal D-goals
that arose in most of the sxbjects was that of naming as many properties as possible.
In experiments in wnich the couputer provided judgmental responses, the goal forming
process devaloped lore broadly. he a rule subjects participating in these experiments

developed an entire system of goals associated with this motive.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HE“ of Goals

1. Naming the largest
nuber of properties

2. Naming the largest
numer of properties
“not named often"

3. Naming the largest
number 0: properties
unknown to the computer

4. Naming at least a few
properties unknown to
the computer

5. Naming properties as
quickly as possible

1. Beating the computer

2. Guessing the con-
puter's response
correctly

3. working in a direc-
tion “the colputer
mesn't know"

4. mduring the pace
imposed by the com-
puter

5. I'Getting back” at
the cosputer

6. Finding out the
”weak" point in
the program

7. Determining what the
computer knows

8. (btaining information
about the programmer
and about other
subjects
H)“ ODNL'ML UM ONLY

Subject I. B. (group Di) : “At first I didn't have any questions
about the instructions. Everything was understandable. Later on

I case to want to find out what the goal of my work was, I guess just
for -y own satisfaction. m alternatives arose: l) naming sore
properties in general and 2) mung more new properties (D-goal
variants). At first I wanted to siny none as many properties as
possible. Later on I wanted to not only hale properties which the
coeputer did not know (a D-goal) but also to anticipate its response
(a c-goal)."

It was not until the sixth property that the coquter replied 'I don't Imow this
property.“ he subject exclaimed: "hank God. finally!" oo-enting about this in
his report, the subject said: 'I was very happy that I was finally able to think up
a new property. After all, I did want to lake the best i-pression. After this. the
rivalry turned into a gale. After the fifth property I decided that it would not be
bad to go for quantity. but sibsequently this desire passed. I decided to begin
naming original properties only (substitution of n-goals)."

The following phenoeenon would also be interesting to note. We perforued a special
series of experiments to which the following roquirennt was added (in distinction
from instruction 161) : “Give as many properties of this object as possible.‘ Mnty
Nth-grade students participated in these experimts. ‘lhe results showed that sub-
jects for who- the competition native becase very sigificant often “forgot' this
requirement, since it becane less iQortant to then than the desire to one proper-
ties unkmwn to the coeputer.

2. In addition to a general increase in the systea of D-goals connected with the

comtition votive, we could also note arisal of son special goals at a lower level.
‘mese goals, which say be conditionally referred to as "substitute‘ goals, case to

the forefront only when the main goal began to seen subjectively mattainable. here
are some concrete examies.

Subject V. A. : “At first I wanted to uses original properties
only, but then I decided that quantity would not be bad either.
Later on I once again stumbled on an entire class of properties

unknown to the oonputer, and I becase indifferent to quantity.‘I

Subject 5. In: "Sons of the properties I named only for the sake
of quantity. so as to win tine. I hoped that during this tile
something original night once again surface."

Subject 1‘. K.: "I wanted to na- only those properties which

the computer did not know. men I was unable to do so, I also
named ordinary properties, just in case. I thought that if I
would not be able to win in originality, I could at least come out
on top in quantit .”

3. breover we were able to reveal the 'effect of first achievement of a significant

D-goal" in these experiments, directly associated with the arising motive. This
effect manifested itself especially clearly smug those subjects who, despite signi-
ficant sotivation, found their possibilities for achieving their D-goal inadequate.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me subjective evaluation given to these possibilities by the subjects themselves
also played a great role in this. Such stbjects often gave up inediately after the
first time they were able to achieve their D-goal--for exagle naning an original
property following a rather long series of Ionotonous "I know" responses. If they
did continue their work, however, as a rule they tried to sake the experimenter
aware of the changed conditions.

Subject 3. A.: "0.1:. now, I've won, this cospetition has now turned
into a gene for me. and I'd like to see what else it knows“: subject
I. 7.: “well, now I'm satisfied, it's responses are no longer as
unpleasant to me, since there are sone things that it doesn't know
either. I feel that I have won."

tions in ".‘ialogue" mode. In particular we confirmed the suggestion that conditions
favoring arisal of a motive of cometition with the computer may be created within

the subjects. we demonstrated that the dynamics of this aotive's formation depend
significantly on the way the subject hiuelf analyzes his rival and on the subjective
attitude he develops toward him. He also noted the role of the following factors:

the personal features of the subjects, the nature of their activity during experiments
and the way interaction with the conputer is organized (the nature and sequence of con-
puter responses).

We distinguished three groups of subjects differing in the type of evaluation given

to their rival and their attitude toward hit-"groups with an overstated, a neutral and
a critical evaluation. we demonstrated that subjects in the ”critical" group were
distinguished by greater activity in their analysis of the rival's possibilities and
by a more clearly expressed emotional reaction to the oomuter’s responses: their
motive of conpetition with the comuter mifeeted itself most clearly in then as well.
In this case, even though the evaluations they gave were critical, even this group
exhibited a tendency to personify the comuter: as a rule this had a positive influence
on the subject's activity in the experiment.

puter caused a significant increase in the nI-ber of variants in which the experi-
mental task was completed in relation to the ”originality“ paraseter. ‘Ihis was ex-
plained not only by the stimulatory function of the motive but also by the subject's
assunption of the tactic of deliberately, purposefully seeking the "weak points“ in
the computer's knowledge. The structuring influence of the notive, which revealed
itself in the simificant growth of the comlexity of the system of D-, C- and B~
goals--expressed as a general increase in the meter of goals, growth in the con-
plexity of their interrelationship and arisal of substitute goals-was a manifesta-
tion of this tactic's application. ‘lhe hierarchical relationships between C- and
D-goals changed as well.

If we are to utilise objective data describing the fmctional state of an individual
working in ”dialogue” node, we would have to clearly differentiate these data

101

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(inasmch as autonomic parameters are polyfmctional as a rule). In this connection
we stated the hypothesis that it would be possible to use the mechanism of mtiva-
tion to distinguish autaiomic parameters that are significant, from the standpoint of
exercising certain controlling influences, from those that are insignificant. to test
this hypothesis, we had to comparatively analyze experimental series offering differ-
ent conditions for arisal of the competition native.

Series 81

For most subjects fulfilling instruction Sl (naming the properties of the given ob-
ject without regard to originality). significant autonomic shifts corresponded to
mist ..es in typing the messages (though prior to the experiment they were told that
they’gaould ignore mistakes). Moreover significant autonomic chmiges also appeared
at the end of the experimnt even in the absence of mistakes in typing the messages.
It may be hypothesised that this is associated with difficulties in thinking up new
properties. 1his hypothesis was confirnd by an analysis of what the subjects said
during the experiment and in their reports. nus many subjects counted that they
wanted to conplete the experimental assignment as best as they could. under the
inﬂuence of an instruction given during the experiment, they formed a goal—that of
naming as many properties as possible. it was at the meant that thinking up new
properties became difficult-~that is, when the real possibilities came into a certain
conflict with the set goal--that we observed these autonomic changes.

In order to permit analysis of the relationship between vowel-logical evaluations
of the end product of activity and the purely emotional evaluations esde of the
process of acquiring these products, following the experimt we asked the stbjects
to ran): all of the properties they hand in order of preference. we should note
that the sectional evaluations were analysed mainly in the course of the stbject's
activity in fulfillsent of the instructions, while verbal-logical evaluations, which
had to do with the products of activity, were analysed after this instruction was
fulfilled--during ranking.

The experimental data showed that a comlex mutual relationship eﬁsts between the
motivational factors, the goal and the verbal-logical and notional evaluations.

As was noted earlier, the desire to "cosplete the assignment as best as possible'
caused a sizesble majority of the subjects working on instruction 81 to distinguish
the dominant characteristics of the goal--"naming as many properties as possible,”
in relation to which the requirement "describe this object as clearly as possible“
served as a limitation, since the properties were often directly associated only
with the traditional uses of. the objects, thus significantly constricting the area
within which the properties were sought.

This requirement was not written in the text of instruction 51. However, as the
experimental data showed, cost sibjects participating in this series did in fact

supplement their assignment in this way. During the ranking process, moreover, this
requirement, which was independently foreulated by the subjects, was often the key

to the order of preference they expressed. Autonomic changes, meanwhile, corresponded
in this case with the principal characteristic of the goal--that is, with the nusber
of named properties, and owing to this they were inconsistent with the ranking eval-
uations. The most clearly expressed autonomic shifts were observed either at the

end of the experiment, when naming new properties became difficult and the level of

102

Ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

motivation was still sufficiently high, or in the case where the subject was able
to reveal a property introducing him to an entire class of properties, to a new
direction.

Thus maxim autonomic change in subject I). A. corresponded to

the property “brittle" (the object was a pencil). He stated in
his report: "I became very happy on recalling this property.
since now a simificant reserve of properties issuediately appeared
before me.“

Such an esotional evaluation was often so significant that in a miner of cases the
subject gave a high rank mainly to such a property, even though this contradicted
the consciously formulated verbal criterion that 'those properties which describe
the given object most clearly are preferred."

1he special goal of naming original properties arose only amng a few subjects in
this series; moreover this goal was typified by instability, and as a rule the
subject found it easy to abandon it. here is a concrete exane.

Subject H. In: ”I wanted to think up some original property, but
I quickly abandoned this idea because the object was a little too
cannon, and I decided that there could be nothing original about it.“

Such periodically arising unstable goals influenced the structure of emotional eval-
uations; sharp phasal changes in reactions, in relation to the background. often
corresponded to these evaluations on the recordingsof the autonomic paraseters.

Thus autonomic shifts recorded in the sibjects during their fulfillment of instruction
51 are hard to differentiate. The difficulties are associated with the impossibility
of monitoring the changes in motivational factors, the dynamics of the goals and their
dynamic characteristics. Thus in this series, interaction of the cowonents of the
”motive-goal-emotional evaluation” system permitted simltaneous operation of several
evaluation .‘riteria of identical importance (realised and unrealized). The activity
of the subject is guided by a certain dynamically variable system of goals and sets
subordinated to emotional evaluations. ‘lhe hierarchical organisatia: of this system
is essentially what determines the hierarchy of the emotional evaluations: various
characteristics of the goals (recognized criteria) and sets unrecognised criteria)
could serve as the criteria in this case. When several goals and sets are present at
the same hierarchical level, the sectional evaluations associated with them are hard
to differentiate. Formation of this system depends on a large nulber of psychological
factors, motivational ones primarily.

Certain difficulties in controlling this process should be noted. 'l‘hus attths at
preventing, by means of special verbal instructions, arissl of goals, sets and emo-
tional evaluations that are undesirable fro. the standpoint of the objectives of the
experimental research often fail to produce the needed effects.

For example despite the experimnter's directions to pay no attention to mistakes

in typing the messages or to the work pace, autonomic changes corresponding to sis-
takes and to hunting for the needed letters on the keyboard of the display were often
clearly pronounced, and sometimes their amplitude significantly exceeded the autonomic
dmanges of interest to us--those corresponding to revelation of the object‘s properties.
All of this made differentiation of such shifts extremely difficult.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFILIAI. USE ONLY

Series 52

The pattern was somewhat different for instruction 52, which was specifically orienhed
at naaing original properties of the object. First of all we observed a certain
correlation between autonoeic shifts corresponding to those properties which were

Thus while the autonomic shift corresponding to named properties and typing mistakes
varied from 3 to 7 kOhns for instruction $1, with instruction $2 oranges occurred in
both the anplitudes of the recorded parameters and their relationships. In series
82, autonomic shifts corresponding in tine to printing aistakes usually did not
exceed 3-4 km. (that is, they were less than in series 81). At the sen tine
autonomic shifts corresponding to need properties (ones which were original fron
the stbject's point of view) increased to 10-12 ram.

me experimental data show that when the goal of activity changes (when the subject
goes on from instruction $1 to instruction 82), certain structural changes occur in
this activity, particularly in the structure of esotional evaluations preceding the
final verbal-logical evaluation of the products of activity. Both instructions in-

tional activation corresponded with the lost significant ”Dents from the standpoint
of the subject's successfulness in reaching his adopted goal. Thus maxi-1st autonomic
shifts were noted when the subject experienced the greatest difficulties in pursuit
of his goal (for exanple at the end of the eatperinent. when thinking up new. and all
the more so 011911)“ properties. became difficult) or when the activity' s successfulness
reached its peak (in series 1 when properties opening up a new direction or a class
of new properties were revealed to the subject. and in series 2 when the mst original
properties were revealed).

me results show that an instruction can regulate arisal of some form of emotional
evaluations. As was noted. however, goals. sets and emtionsl evaluations that nay
also be undesirable from the standpoint of the analysis objectives nay also arise
within the subject. which should be accounted for in the analysis. He were able to
prevent the appearance of undesirable factors to a certain extent in series 52. This

was the main difference between series 81 and 52. m. experimntal data permit the
assumption that the reason for this lay mainly in the qualitative differences in

the actives of activity in the two cases. and in the associated changes in the type
of "active-goal” relationships. In series 52, a goal of the highest order, one

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

serving as a native, acquired new characteristics, in turn transforming all other
structural levels of the subject's evolving system of goals.

mile in series 81 the subject wanted to complete the experimental assigns-ht as
best as possible and his system of goals reflected this (“giving as many properties
as possible,” "working carefully.” “quickly" and ”without mistakes'), in series 52
the subjects often associated the instruction they were given with attelpts at
testing their mental capacity, which stimlated maxim intensity in their activity
(76). As a result the goal of naming original properties, and its different variants
(offering "at least a few original properties," ”giving as many original properties
as possible,” and so on), occupied a more-stable, dominant position in the subject's
evolving system of goals. Correspondingly, the emotional evaluations underwent
structural reorganization as well. 'i'he autonomic shifts corresponding to the named
properties, the amplitude characteristics of which depended significantly on the
subjective evaluation given to the originality of these properties, were more clearly
expressed in couparison with shifts corresponding to ussage typing mistakes and to
hunting for letters on the keyboard. lbreovsr the data permit the assertion that
the degree to which autonomic shifts are expressed depends not only on qualitative
but also on quantitative characteristics of uotivaticnal factors. Thus in series S2,
in which the strongest notive arose, the amlitudes of the autonomic shifts were
greater than in series 51. From our point of view, now that we have revealed this

relationship between the strength of anotive and the esqaressivsness of the objective
parameters of enotional activation, we can approach the imortant problem of develop-

ing objective methods by which to evaluate the quantitative characteristics of noti-
vational factors.

And so, the experimental data confirmed the hypothesis that the concrete mechanism
of mtivationrs can be used to separate autonomic parameters that are significant from
the point of view of the goals of the analysis from those which are insignificant.
However, it is precisely with the close correlation existing between natives and

the structure of emotional evaluations that the main difficulty in implementing this
approach is associated. The results indicate that as soon as a motive weakened (as
soon as "saturation“ occurred), it became difficult to differentiate the autonomic
shifts.

Thus we find that we must not only create a sufficiently high level of motivation,
but we must also maintain it over a certain amount of time. It was isportant for our

purposes to establish the possibility of doing so in a situation of dialogue inter-
action between M and computer. Consequently we conducted a special series of

experiments in which we created conditions promting arisal of a motive of coupetition
with the conputer in the subjects.

Series Rs

As we demonstrated above, many subjects working with the conputer in this series
developed a motive of competition with the coaputer. In this case significant auto-
nomic shifts corresponded in time both to the naming of individual properties and to
concrete types of reactions of the subjects to the conputer's responses (this was

emotional activation corresponding to anticipation of a response from the conputer
and to its subjective evaluation).

105

FOR OFFICIAL USO: ONLY
NI OH'ICIAL USE ONLY

After acquainting themselves with the assortmt of computer responses in the
experiment, as a rule the subjects began showing a preference for one of the possi-
ble responses. striving to name precisely those properties which would ensure a
preferred response from the computer. ’lhis change in goals had a direct effect on
the content of aessages fed into the cosputer. The reports written by the stbjects
showed that when they were in a situation of colpetition with the coaputer, they
interpreted its responses subjectively as a "reward” (the most favorable response)

or a ”pinion-ant“ (the unfavorable response). Anticipation of the response was asso-
ciated with the subjective prediction ends by the subject as to possible success or
failure (anticipation of “reward" or 'pmishment'), while the reaction to the response
was associated with his subjective evaluation of the 'reward' or 'punishment.’ ‘lhese
features of anticipation and of the reactions the subjects exhibited to the corres-
ponding computer responses--features which were also reflected by certain changes in
objective autonomic parameters-«re mique indicators of the arisal itself of the
native of coapetition, and of its dynamics during the experiment.

marison of the GSR and pulse recordingsmade from subjects entering into oometition
with the oomuter and from subjects who did not do so permitted us to assert the
following differences. me GSR's of all subjects were typified by a drop in skin
resistance immediately after a message was fed into the coquter and when messages
were printed out by the computer (in the laments of anticipation of the response and
the reaction to it). however, while the drop in the 68!! curve of subjects counting
with the couputer typically increased in amplitude from 3 m to 7-20 ROhms at the
moment a new goal of activity directly associated with the cowetiticn motive was
adopted (the moment the subjects entered into computer-mediated coepetiticn with the
other participants of the experiment). this drop in skin resistance did not exceed

3 kmms throughout the experiment for subjects who did not develop the coapetiticn
motive. mus arisal of a strong native led to greater expressiveness (in terms of
asplitude) of certain autonomic shifts corresponding to esotional evaluations of
those stages of the activity which are met sigiificant in a oometitive setting.

The comuter responses come to stand for 'reward" and 'pmishmmt," and the autonomic
reactions associated with these responses become more evident within the structure

of emotional evaluations.

me subject's attitude toward a response most favorable to him changed especially
clearly during the experiment when this computer response was 'I don't know this
property“ (assuming that the subject did enter into cospetition with the comuter) .
lb the extent that we can judge from the reports written by the subjects and from
their oral statemnts made during the experiment, in this case the gradual growth

in the amplitude of autonomic shifts corresponding to anticipation of a 'reward" and
to the reaction to it could be associated with development of the oonpetiticn motive.
A decrease in the amplitude of the corresponding shifts. meanwhile. coincided in the
overwhelming majority of cases with gradual extinction of the subject's interest in
tolpetition of this sort (this was followed either by rejection of cogetition or by
a "saturation" situation).

An interesting change occurred in the attitude toward the most unfavorable response;
this change manifested itself especially clearly in relation to long series of

such responses. In these cases the curve describing change in the corresponding
autonomic shifts was observed to have two shapes: a) 'exponential"--continual growth

in autonomic shifts that could terminate with violent emotional outbursts. and

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

sometimes by the subject's refusal to work with the computer (smject SJ»: ”That's

all, I quit, the computer's making a special effort to make me look ridiculous”):
b) "bell-shaped"--gradual or sharp growth in autonomic shifts followed by their
extinction, often corresponding to a refusal to cospote.

The experimental results showed that the concrete shape of these curves depends on

the length of the corresponding series of responses unfavorable to the subject. on
the individual features of the subject. and on a number of other factors. A specific

example of changes occurring in autonomic shifts during "dialogue" with a couputer
is given in Table ll.

Table 11. mange in Autonomic Shifts Depending on Oonputer mspomes

 

State-ants
incordsd
Autonomic Shift, kOhms During
Cowuter Preceding Resanse After Emeriment
Response computer Skin Resmse (Yollowing
No. Resanse Resistance .Gﬂ ﬂ meme) hart Data
2 Z 34 5 10
3 z 34 8 8 What kind of I very mud: wanted
property does to give a property
it want? An which the computer
unusual one? cid not know
4 Ch 31 5 8 'i'nis is bad,
very bad
5 z 31 3 S Ye-es I decided that the
corputer knew a
little too much
6 N 28 about 3 12 All right!
It doesn't
know
7 N 27 5 14 Doesn't like
it!

It would also be interesting to note that in a hunter of cases autonosic parameters
served the same purpose as oral statemnts made during the experiment and son contra-
dictions in the reports written by the subjects-~they reflected attespts by the subject
to advertise false goals and false verbal evaluations. mus subject 8. I. noted in
his report that after the conputer's zirst "I don't know this property' response he
"lost interest in the work,“ because he was “already satisfied with his victory," and
that from then on, he worked ”insincerely, with no interest at all in the cosputer
responses." However, the autonomic shifts corresponding to "I don't know this

ro erty" computer responses continued to grow.
P P

mus the data showed that change in some motivational factors during nan-computer
”dialogue” (development of the conpetition motive, arisal of “saturation“ and

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"supermotivation" situations and so on) could be sonitored to a certain degree by the
Objective indicators we revealed. We were especially interested in studying the
possibilities for revealing those autonomic paraseters which would correspond to some
qualitative unformalizable characteristics of properties of the object revealed by
the subject, since this would permit us to tackle the 'cosputer swathy' problem.

Certain changes in autonomic shifts also accospany the naming of properties of objects
by a subject in competition with the computer. A correspondence between autonomic
shifts and certain subjective evaluations of nan-d properties was met clearly ex-
pressed in the group of subjects to whom the native of cometition with the celputer
was especially significant. The computer response preferred by all subjects of this
group was ”i don't know this property.” In this case emtional activation was ob-
viously associated with the subject's anticipatory evaluations of the cosputer re-
sponses, both emotional and verbal. mus maxim autonomic shifts corresponded to
those properties which, from the subject's standpoint, were unknown to the coqmter

and which were in this sense ”original.“ 'mis coincided on the time-correlated $3
readout with sharp phasal drops in skin resistance during the time interval i-ediately
before the subject began typing out these properties, and sometimes at the resent the
subject fed the message into the computer (when the subject reread what he had written).
Thus a real possibility arose for correcting cosputer responses depending on anticipa-
tory acquisition of data on changes in autonomic parameters (a possibility for achieving
high agreement betwuen the subject‘s own evaluation and a subsequent evaluation by a
“disinterested party").

Moreover autonomic shifts corresponding to properties which the subject subjectively
evaluated as "original" revealed themselves much more clearly in the structure of
emotional evaluations in this series than in series 81 and 52. men the cospetition
notive began to manifest itself in clearly expressed form in the subjects. message
typing mistakes and tines of hunting for needed letters on the typewriter keyboard
ceased to be acconpanied by significant autonomic changes in a large number of cases
(the decrease in skin resistance could remain below 1 kOhn, and be significantly
different from shifts corresponding to an emotional evaluation of properties). Here
they even to appear. in the overwhelming majority of cases significant autonomic
shifts corresponding to mistakes and to hunting for letters did so only in the time
interval associated with typing the most original (subjectively evaluated) properties,
and thus rather than hindering they facilitated revelation of these properties during

analysis of the experimental data. Concrete exasples illustrating this premise are
shown in Figure 6.

  

”.532 (3)" TLC". "I. a . i
funny I, I.

Figure 6. Subject Ch. I. Ibsent of Time Corresponding to ming a Property
Subjectively Evaluated as ”moriginal' (a) and “Original" (b)
Key:
1. mm 3. Message fed into computer
2. Message typing begins

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
adopted the special goal of 'guessing what the comuter response would be': this goal
was not a requirement of the instruction. We were interested in the influence this
goal had on the structure of emetional evaluations, especially in situations in which
this goal could possibly assure a dominant position. her this purpose we conducted
a series of experiments with instruction nsvz. After the abject named his first
twelve properties, he was given the special instruction of 'guessing what the com-
puter response would be.‘I these experiments made it possible to analyse in detail

1he experimental data showed that for 80 percent or the subjects, the goal of ”guessing
what the oomutor response would be” arose beforo they were instructed to do so (as
determined from the reports written by the sdajects and from an analysis of their

line of reasoning during the experiment). However. many of the subjects noted in this
case that this was ”not their main goal,“ since “the main thing was to name proper-
ties (give as many original properties as possible. and so on)."

An analysis of the autonomic parameter recordings showed that arisal of “incidental"

goals of this sort was not a significmt obstacle to differentiating autonomic shirts
in this experimntal situation, while in a number of cases it even facilitated such

Despite this, however, we do need to note certain difficulties in analyzing the
obtained experimental data connected with the significant cosplexity or the processes
we were studying. He can demonstrate this with concrete exasples. A certain proper.
tion of the inconsistencies we recorded between emotional evaluations and subsequent
verbal evaluations was associated with unique "strategies" adopted by the subjects,
revelation of which required special analysis. In a matter of cases for example.

a wrong guess, or the property would be known to the computer, meaning that the

loss would be overshadowed by the win chalked up to guessing. mis hypothesis was
confined not only by data in the reports written by the subjects (as a rule by
certain contradictions existing in them, and not at all by “honest confessions'
volunteered by the subjects themselves in regard to such 'strategiee'), but also by
a nunber of other indicators. Thus when a property was not known to the cosputer
the emotional reaction to the loss in guessing was not negative, as would be expected
in such a case. but positive: The subject smiled, he made statements such as 'good.‘
"finally' and so on.

For example after receiving the instruction 'Qiess what the cosputer

response would be," subject 1.. Ye. consents: “well, at last I have
a specific goal, new I know what I have to do.“ In his report, he

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

writes: ”The main thing for ms after the additional instruction was
to guess what the cosputer's response would be. It was silplest of
all to do this with original properties, since it is much harder

to guess 'I know' and 'nasod often' responses correctly.‘

Thus the subject attempted to logically justify his desire to nan only original
properties. failing to note that by doing so. he contradicted a desire he himself
stated in his report--"selecting the most difficult conditicms for the colputer game."
After the additional instruction was provided, this subject revealed an increase in
autonomic shifts correspondingto revelation of "original“ properties and in autonomic
shifts corresponding to anticipation of a “I don't know this property” response from
the computer and the reaction to it. however, it was hard to attribute such changes
simply to a 'win" in guessing the colputer's responses, since in these situations we
recorded subjects saying-things such as: “mt you that tin, you don't know much
yourself either," and so on. All of this permitted the hypothesis that in the new
"computer game" conditions the cometition motive and the former goal associated with
it, orienting the subject toward naming original properties, not only did not lose their
significance. but in a certain sense even "grew stronger" due to the arisal of
additional goals. Moreover in this case the subject gained the possibility of using
these additional goals to mask others significant to him, allowing him to reduce the
unpleasant influence of losses.

similar data obtained with other subjects permit the hypothesis that motivational
factors may be indirectly controlled in this manner by changing the Ddes cf inter-
action through changes in the appropriate instructions. However, control of motiva-
tional factors through more-flexible variation of comter responses in one inter-
action mode appears no less promising to us.

We recall that in experiments involving the naming of the properties of an object,
not to mention experiments involving problem formulation, in a large umber of cases
it was impossible for the conputer to respond correctly when asked whether or not it
knew a given property. This is explained by the fact that at the present level of
development of computer technology, cosputers are still unable to analyse nessages
written in natural language sufficiently well. ‘lhis is why the additional computer
message ”Next property" was introduced in series 852. This message was printed out
when a particular property would not yield to cosputer analysis. 'lhe experisontal
data showed that in comparison with Dre-concrete responses, this one did not have
sufficient motivational force for many suajects, since it did not provide the necessary
information on the "opponent" and on the evaluation given to the successfulness of
the subject's activity in the experiment, meaning that a motive to conpete with the
computer that had arisen previously could break down.

Experimental series RS3 and 834. in which the couputer printed out random unobjective
responses ("evasive" in series 184 and concrete in series 183) when it was ilpossible
to formally analyse properties produced by the subject. showed that the randomness
of printing out such evaluations could also result in an inconsistency in functions
between man and computer, and in breakdown of the coupetition motive that had arisen.
'mus subjects said in the experiment: ”The cosputer is responding randomly, and
that's not interesting”: “Somthing must be wrong, since it can't be that the com-
puter knows an original property but doesn't know the sinplest ones“ and so on.
Especially clear emotional outbursts accoupanied situations in which the self-
evaluations disagreed sharply with the comuter responses. Here are some concrete

examples.

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stbject N. A.: ”I refuse to word: like this. he colputer has probably
broken down. I just gave it a very original property. and it replied
'1 know'; then I deliberately gave it the siqlest possible property,
one which it had to know, anditreplied '1 don't know'.‘

Sibject V. V.: ”Your comuter's just fooling around. making a
mess of things while at the ease tine giving the appearance that
it's answering correctly. I don't like working this way.”

Thus the limited possibilities ﬁor coeputer analysis or messages written in natural
language and of the conputer's comicative functions caused breakdown or inter
action nudes that worked well for the subject.

In addition to cases in which the conputer was unable to provide an objectively
correct response, talents in which such a response was undesirable were no less
important. mus the experiments showed that long series or identical responses that
are especially unpleasant to subjects could also break down an existing native to

compete with the ccuputer; such breakdown could occur, for exanple, because the
”opponent" is found to be too strong.

And so we revealed two factors: a) the length of the series of identical calputer
responses; b) consistency between the self-evaluation and the colputer response. We
hypothesized that changes in these factors occurring in "dialogue“ lode could have
certain controlling influences on the motivations of subjects interacting with the
computer.

Data obtained from a number of experiments in this series allowed us to fornilate
specific requireunts on control of these two factors:

a) monitoring the influence of a long series of identical responses on the activity
of a concrete subject during an experinnnt. using for this purpose the changes in
autonomic parameters corresponding to "anticipation'. and “reaction to conputer re-
sponse" which. as the experiments showed, permit us to make certain conclusions
concerning the arisal and change of the motive to compete with the computer:

b) preventing arisal of such long series and possibly resulting sharp disagreements
between self-evaluations and computer responses, using a nutter of the revealed
characteristics of changes in autonomic paramters for this purpose:

c) monitoring change in autonomic shifts corresponding to "anticipation" and “re-
action to conputer response," in the situation where the cosputer response “reinforces“
the subjective evaluation. the nature of which was determined from an analysis of

the objective indicators of emotional activation. This would allow us to make

certain conclusions as to the possibility of exerting ”reverse influences” on the
motivation level through the use of son characteristics in the structure of emotional
evaluations.

He had already noted earlier that stbjects working in competition with the corputer
began second-guessing the computer's possible responses, as manifested not only in

their statements but also by certain changes in autcnonic parameters. He used these
results to support the subject's motive to conpete with the colputer by correcting

111

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the cosputer responses before they were printed out. In lode asvs, developed for
this purpose, the responses of the computer were printed out following analysis of

both verbal and nonverbal information (see the description of this series in our
discussion of the lethods).

l. Refusals to work with the co-puter. resulting in previous series due to sharp
disagreement between suajective evaluations and the coquter's subsequent responses,
disappeared.

2. Motivation maintained a positive impact for a longer period of time (the mtive
to compete with the computer arose more frequently and broke down more rarely).

3. The overall emotional attitude toward the activity was positive.

Thus by utilizing data describing the sxbject's emtional state, we were able to
carry our analysis of the functions of the motives in the structure of the subject's
intellectual activity further. We found that under the influence of an arising
oonpetition motive, there occurred a certain redistribution in the structure of
emotional evaluations, which now became sore expressive and, therefore, sore easily
distinguishable. and which began to show more frequent consistency with the objective-
ly meaningful factors of the experimental situation. These results provide the
grounds for the assertion that despite the psychological asbiguity of autonomic
parameters, they say be used to optimise the "dialogm' node. lbre specifically,
they say be used to create consistency between corputer evaluations and the concrete
subjective evaluations of the products of activity on the basis of the ”originality"
parameter, or to simlate such consistency when the possibilities of coqruter
analysis are limited: by doing the latter, we are able to prevent disorganization
of the activity of subjects participating in dialogue interaction.

It was denonstrated that in a nunber of cases autonomic paraleters are indicators
of certain changes in motivational factors, and that they may reveal attespts by
subjects to “demonstrate“ false goals and false verbal evaluations of the products
of activity. The real possibilities for exerting controlling influences on human
mtivations in a "dialogue“ with a conputer by utilizing changes in autonomic
parameters were demnstrated. This makes further analysis of goal forming processes
and sore-flexible control over goal fornatim possible.

We should also note that the results of the control series of experiments (in whida
the subjects produced P-goals) were basically consistent with the data of the principal
series, described above (in which formlation of P-goals was substituted by one of
the components of this process--revelation of the object's properties). The main
difference was that in the control series, sharp autonomic shifts that corresponded
to the mment the subject typed "key” words in a P-goal statement could often be
revealed on the autonomic parameter recordings.

These experiments revealed the real possibilities of using a cosputer to control the

unfornalizable process of goal formation. We developed special control procedures
based on utilizing different variants of supplementary assistance to subjects, on

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

encouragesent of oosputer-aediated colpetition between participants of the experi-
snnt, and on use of autonomic indicators of the emtional state of the abject to
control goal formation. Despite the extremely lisited nuber of formalizable
components of goal formation that could be delegated to the counter, these proce-
dures sake it possible not only to increase the total amber of possible goals that
could be produced. but also to significantly raise their originality in cosparison
with the products of independent activity (of subjects working without the computer).

Different variants of the use of a cooputer to control production of possible goals
were compared.

Production of possible goals by subjects working independently and in response to
couputcr control of goal forumtion were studied. certain factors keeping the subjects
from realizing their potentials in independent production of P-goals were revealed

(in particular. limitations associated with the concrete type of goal fornation,

with formation of a “rigid" hierarchy of universal goals and so on). Data were ob-
tained indicating that P-goal production is selective, and that subjects exhibit
selectivity in using the properties of an object and their combinations in the state-
ments of possible goals of analysing this object. It was for the purpose of weakening
the negative influence of these factors, ones which inhibit goal formation, that we
developed special “dialogue” Iodes. Procedures in the couputer programs providing
additional assistance to subjects are based on the use of randomly generated character-
istics of the object (ones having different probabilities of being realized) and their

coubinations. as well as of algorithm for transforming revealed characteristics
into P-goal statelents.

It was demonstrated that in cosputer "dialogue." a manner of features of interaction
between man and computer directly influence goal formation, to include ones such as:
a) the commieation node (the content of messages. the rhyths and the freedom of
choice of interaction modes); b) the possibility for dividing responsibility in
"dialogue" mode: c) “personification of the cosputer.‘

We classified the following as the most important factors.

1. mt- s'mcct's develovmntof the need itself for working together with the computer
and the associated need for certain forms of couounication with it. The possibility
of forming cognitive needs facilitating the subject's commication with the computer
by specially organizing his activity with and without the use of a computer was
demonstrated. A special case of cognitive needs which were associated with the
subject's own evaluation of his activity and which took a specific form in computer
”dialogue" as the need for “computer“ evaluations of the results of the subject's
activity was revealed.

2. ihe subject's selective attitude toward using the possibilities offered to him

in computer "dialogue," manifested in particular as the subject's selection of
particular modes of interaction with the cosputer (a ”free choice" of modes situation).
he experiuental data showed that selection and change of nodes in which to work with
the computer depend on a large number of factors such as cognitive interest. the
subjective evaluation of the difficulty and successfulness of work in the given mode
and so on. Concrete combinations of these factors and the particular features of
their change during the experiment go a long way to define the effectiveness of

goal forming activity.

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORWUSEONLY

he obtained experimental data confire our hypothesis that controlling influences
may be exerted upon the activations of an individual engaged in 'dialogus' inter-
action with the conputer.

‘mis work analysed the arisal, features and degree of manifestation of the motive

to comets with the cosputer depending on the following factors: the persmality
features of the subjects, their activity during the experimt and a certain type of
organization of interaction with the oomtsr (the nature and sequence of coeputer
responses).

Three groups of subjects differing in the way their "rival" is evaluated and in the
attitude expressed toward him are distinguished: 1) subjects with a "critical
evaluation"; 2) subjects with an ”overstated evaluation”; 3) subjects with a “neutral
evaluation.” Subjects in the “critical group" were distinguished by the greatest
effort to analyze the possibilities of their “rival," by a greater emotional reaction
to the computer responses and by the clearest expression of the native to mete
with the computer. Despite the fact that the evaluations of these subjects were
critical, as with the other two groups this group exhibited a certain tendency to
personify the comuter. which as a rule had a positive influence on the subject's
activity in the experiment. These data are of special interest for the following
considerations.

First, it should not be surmised that a person always corpetes more readily with a
computer with "intelligence" scored sufficiently high by him. 'mus the competition
motive manifested itself much sore clearly in the group with the "critical evaluation“
than in the group with the "overstated evaluation.”

Second, the ”personification phenomenon" is not a direct consequence of an uncritical
attitude of the subjects toward the possibilities of the conputer (that is, naive
"anthropomorphization" of an automaton due to insufficient knowledge of the princi-
ples of its operation), obviously being instead a such mre couplex entity associated
with “transfer" of certain features and form specific to lmman coununication to
"dialogue“ interaction with the computer (there are gromds for suggesting that
different levels of such transfer exist).

The experimental data showed that arisal of the motive to comete with the computer
led to a significant increase in the variants -of the solutions to the experimental
problem in regard to the "originality“ parameter. 'mis can be explained not only

by the stimulatory function of the motive but also by deliberate, purposeful explora-
tion of the computer's knowledge for "weak points" by the subject. Use of this
tactic had a structuring influence on the motive. 'lhis influence also manifested
itself in significant growth in the couplexity of the forming system of D-goals,
C-goals and B-goals, which was expressed in general enlargement of these goals.

in growth in the complexity of their mutual relationships and in arisal of "substi-
tute" goals. Hierarchical relationships between c-goals and D-goals changed as well.

One fact that is significant from our point of view is that by capitalizing on the
psychological factors of interaction between man and conputer. revealed in our

study, we can arrive at an effect much more simply than by the ways traditionally
employed by the developers of modern automated system. In their approach. a com-

puter can be made a human partner only by raising its 'intelligence.‘ We believe

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that to have controlling influences on motivations similar to those influences that

are specific to interaction between people, we do not necessarily have to make
“computer intelligence" similar to hman intelligence.

Our experimental data show in particular that by capitalizing on the psychological
elements of cosputer-mediated communication between people as well as on the tendency
to “personify the computer“ (observed even asong professional ooquter users). we

can create conditions promoting arisal of the ”motive to cospete with the computer"
in the individual. despite the fact that the possibilities for for-slicing the

real activity that was simlated in the experimental situation are highly limited
today.

the obtained experiuental data confirmed the hypothesis that autonomic perm-stars
objectively recorded from an individual interacting with the coeputer in ”dialogue“
node could be utilised. Inasmuch as the main difficulty of making practical use of
this information lies in the polyfunctional nature of these parameters, confirmation
of the possibility for using concrete mtivation mechanism to separate significant
autonomic shifts from insignificant ones is a significant result of the research.

mder the influence of the cospetition motive, a certain redistribution occurred in
the structure of emotional evaluations, which became more pronounced, and which

therefore became easier to distinguish and which began to coincide more frequently
with the objectively significant factors of the experimental situation. 'lhis per-
mitted us to use them as a means for optimising the “dialogue“ mode itself: to
create consistency between computer evaluations and concrete subjective evaluations
of the products of activity in regard to the “originality" parameter, or to simulate
such consistency.

In a number of cases autonomic parameters are indicators of certain changesinmotiva—
tional factors; they may also reveal attempts by subjects to demonstrate false goals
and false verbal evaluations of the products of their activity.

Using our data, we developed a nuber of premises which might be found useful to
"dialogue" system planners.

1. when a computer is to be used to control creative processes, it would be suitable
to develop nodes of working with the coIputer which would possess specific degrees

of freedom. This would allow the subject to independently regulate the conditions

of his activity during his interaction with the computer: in particular, it would
allow him to be more active in his search for an optimum comination of his own

. possibilities and the possibilities of the computer depending on the concrete features
of his needs and motivations. We have also provided certain recomendations on the
possibilities for capitalizing on the comication rhythm and on the 'oomuter
personification“ phenomenon to raise the effectiveness of “dialogue” interaction.

2. Our method may be used to create practical methods for colputer control of "idea
generation . "

3. Purposeful formation of a competition motive may be a means of active control of
productive processes occurring in a cosputer “dialogue.” The possibilities a com-

puter has for moderating coununication between people may be utilised to achieve

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more-flexible, individualized selection of a 'rival,‘ which in turn would allow the

subject to rennin for a longer period of time in a zone beet favoring development
of his activity.

4. ijective autonomic parameters nay be used to optimize coquter control of
productive processes, by the following leans for exalple: a) by broadening the
conputer'e evaluation functions in regard to not only verbal but also nonverbal

data; b) by coordinating conputer responses with concrete functional states of the
individual at given mutants of ”dialogue" interaction: c) by permitting Ute-flexible
change of nodes and forms of interaction between nan and coaputer.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFIGALUSEONLY

1142 TUMNG CRITERION, WIRING AID manna:
A. Ye. Voyskmskiy

httelpts at ccnparing man with machine, at explaining his “structure” and behavior
on analogy with the operating principles of technical system and mechanisms have a

distant history. It would be sufficient to recall that this idea very such med
the interest of prominent intellectuals such as leibnis, Le Hettrie and Descartes.

devices indistinguishable from man (this topic is even represented in urban folklore,
for example in the legends of Frankenstein and Galen). Philosophers shared the
opinion that simlating bodily fmctions would not be enough for this-mo. such a
device would necessarily have to be able to perform intellectual actions. Like it
or not, such thoughts remained distract, since none of the existing machines were at
all promising as "candidates" for the role of intellectual creations. vmenever such

were found, invariably they turned out to be hoaxes (such as Keepelin's "autonatic
chess mdtine").

Such machines finally did appear in the mid-20th century. The heated debates on
whether or not a machine could think, brought on by cybernetice. are memrable to all.
'lhe appearance of cybernetic systens did in fact mark a new stage in the evolution of
machines. using information madaines, they are invading all of those areas which

had traditionally been thought of as intellectual. At one tine it seemed that we
were on the brink of programing a machine that really thinks. But it became clear

in the 1970's that the ”cybernetics boon" had not and could not bring this about.
However, it was still permissible to doubt this in 1950. 'lhis is precisely when an

article written by the famous English mathematician A. luring was published (95).
This article was fated to achieve broad notoriety.

"ny objective is to examine the question: 'Can machines think?’." wrote Ming.

“But for this purpose we would first need to define the meaning of the term 'sachine'
and 'think" ((95). p 19). he was dissatisfied by the definitions available in the
philosophical literature. since it was inpoeeible to directly 'fit" then to a con-
puter. Almost 20 years later I. h. Poletayev, one of the first Soviet cyberneticists,
recalled that "the debate about 'a machine that thinks' bogged down at about the
level where the cyberneticists declared: 'Define what you mean by thinking, and we'll
program it in before you know it!‘ , to which the proponents of 'spirituality' replied:
“rhinking is the highest form of reflection of reality.’ he far as we know, no one
has been able to program this definition" ((69).?!) 10-11).

117

WWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Turing found the solution by devising an operational procedure making comparison of
human and machine thinking possible. He applied the "black box" principle. which

was especially fashionable at the dawn of cybernetics. unable to learn what is
“inside” man. scientists learned to deduce certain conclusions by cosparing the inputs
to the outputs. Such was, for example, Shannon's original guessing method. with
which he was able to establish the statistical laws of written text. As with

Shannon as well as many other pioneers of cybernetics, luring sought a way to

utilize man's knowledge and mility to think without taking a single step toward
understanding these processes.

For this purpose luring developed the "imitation game.“ It is played by three persons~
a man (A), a woman (B) and a person of either sex who asks the questions (C). 'ihe task
of the latter is to enter into communication: with A and s in order to determine which
is the man and which is the woman. C cannot see his partners, and he co-Iunicates

with them in writing, for exanple by telegraph. 1b A, the goal of the game is to

cause C to come to the wrong conclusion. while to B it is to help C.

Having described the rules of the "imitation game." mring continued: "Let us now
ask: ‘Hhat would happen if a machine were to participate in the game instead of A?‘
Would the person asking the questions make mistakes as often as in a game in which
only people participate? These questions will substitute for our initial question.
'Can machines think?” ((95), p 20).

Such was the procedure luring developed for determining the possibilities computers
have for thinking. But he was not at all suggesting that it could be applied in the
near future. 'Ihe reason for this. we believe, is the inadequate development of the
rules of the “imitation game” (this will be discussed below) and some random factors
introduced to the procedure by Turing himself. Determining the sex of a correspondent
on the basis of his written statement, for emle, is not one of the stronger points
of the "imitation game.” it is difficult to look at this as anything more than
arbitrary choice of a criterion. But at the same time the choice is a rather good
one. In fact, after all, neither algorithms nor even any sort of unique lathods _of
determining the sex of a partner on the basis of his written statements are likely

to exist. In view of this, we might expect any unpredictable questions from player C,
and the machine would have to be ready for this. ‘ihus the 'imitation game" completely
ensures unpredictability of the situations in which the machine may find itself, and
it demands a certain degree of universality from it.

Whatever the consequences, we will risk stating the conviction that the “imitation
game" was perceived by most readers of 'hiring's articles free of random conditions
arbitrarily introduced into the rules of the game. It appears to us that the essence
of mring's suggestion was interpreted as follows: If a person entering into communi-
cation fails to notice that his partner is a machine and not a man. then it can be
said that this is a thinking machine. It seem to us that in addition to the “imita—
tion game,“ this assertion, which transmits the essence of the procedure. may be
assumed to be mring's criterion (or test). 1111: interpretation is confirmed by
analysis of modern scientific publications.

'mis criterion was met with a certain amount of enthusiasm. There wouldbe nopurpose
to dwelling on individual manifestations of this enthusiasm. but it would be worth
recalling that Turing's criterion is still in scientific usage (only this.

118

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

incidentally, can explain publication of this article). the qualification should be
made here. Young researchers of “artificial intelligence“ rarely ponder over machine
thinking, hiring's criterion and other ”philosophies” of this sort. However, for
some specialists who are less pragmatically predisposed, Turing's criterion is a
parcel of their theoretical baggage.

ﬂewill try to validate this with exarples. "mine invested a great deal of work into
surmtnting the deeply rooted prejudices suggesting that technical systems occupy an
inferior position,,and he categorized these prejudices. now much paper we could have
saved today. had many distinguished authors writing on the topic 'hachines cannot
think' attentively read mring's work!“ enclaims K. Shteynbukh ((108), p 438).
Gelernter associated the prospects of meeting Turing's criterion with ebodying
the heuristic procedures discovered by (Poya) in a nchine: ”A machine which could
operate on the basis of the cosplete set of principles indicated by Poya would be a
superior device for solving mathematical problems. and it would mark a major step
forward on the road to satisfying 'ruring's conditions for a machine which can deal
successfully with the 'imitation game.‘ ibwever. creation of such a machine is a
matter of the indefinite future...” ((32). P 146).

Reytman describes 'hiring's procedure in detail. lie diseases the possibility for
meeting the criterion with a future system answering questions posed in natural
language. A question-answer system proposed by B. Raphael, in mytmen's opinion.
"clearly indicates the direction for development of new program which would be
capable of playing Turing's simple gun, as described in his article, and winning((78) ,
p 318). In contrast to him. Adler, the author of numerom books and director of the
Chicago Institute of Philosophical Studies, does not share such a prediction. But
this does not stop him from accepting ‘ruring's point of view (114). Adler deduces
from evolutionary and anthropological data that the most fundamental trait of
intelligent man, characterizing him primarily and separating him from all other beings,
is the capacity for articulate speech. It is in view of this that the ”imitation game“
iupresses Adler so much: After all, it requires a mastery of language. and thus is
directed at what is met important, it is "right on target“ (132).

Such an attitude toward Turing's test is also typical of the present status of work

on “artificial intelligence." Thus Aleksandrov not only cites Turing with the greatest
sympathy but also concludes: "This statement of the ‘imitation game' is unusually
fruitful, and in view of its constructiveness it reduces the occasionally arising
objections to naught“ ((6). p 41). In relation to the heuristic approach to the
"artificial intelligence" problem, Aleksandrov feels. 'ruring’s criterion 'is the
methodological foundation.“

Nor did Arbib ignore Turing‘s criterion: he believes that it is ”much harder for a
machine to pass ‘Nring's 'test' than to behave in an intelligent manner“ ((10). p 126).
And therefore Arbib notes, "his (Turing's--A.V.) goal was not to find the necessary
conditions of intelligence but to think up a test which, if passed by a cosputer,
would persuade even the staunchest skeptics that intelligent machines do exist. and
to reduce discussion of this test to discussion of the 'artificial intelligence'
problem“ ((10), p 127). A book written by the leading foreign critic of "artificial
intelligence," Dreyfus, describes Turing's criterion in the greatest detail, after
which it makes a cautious conclusion: "lb a philosopher, sisple similarity in be-
havior would probably be insufficient grounds for recognizing a machine to have
intelligence, but nothing could beat Turing's test as the goal of the work of those

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OW ("I‘ILIAL USE ONLY

who do in fact yearn to build a thinking machine, and as a criterion that could be
used by critics evaluating the results of this work" (124).

Perhaps the following remarks, “scattered in passing" through the works of recent
years, might be an even more persuasive proof of how ooutenporary 'mring's criterion
really is. Here are just a few exanples: Nil'son, the author of one of the best
contemrary books on ”artificial intelligence,‘ inforns his reader: "During (1950)
eliminated many of the standard argumnts against thinking machines. '1!) resolve the
issue as to whether or not machines can think, he proposed a test which is now
con-only called Turing's test” ((62), p ..9). A cycle of works written under the
guidance of a prominent specialist in human factors analysis, Chapanis, and devoted
to cowarative evaluation of different channels of comication between man and
cowuter, points out that “idealized cowuter system which will pass ming's test'
are being simulated in the laboratory (116). hation should also be made of the words
of one of the prominent modern ideologists of the 'artificial intelligence" direction,
Coles: "if we are nurturing hopes of solving iuportant problems in 'artificial
intelligence' such as the 'imitation gale' proposed by hiring back in 1950 and known
to this day as mring's test,“ we would have to have mastery of natural language
((121). p 215).

References to the "imitation game" naturally do not imly cenplete agreement with
Turing‘s idea. he procedure proposed by the latter may also be interpreted as a
”convenient heuristic procedure,“ using Brudnyy‘s words (21). Brudnyy uses this
"procedure" in a quite unique way: He builds an imaginary "dialogue” in which ques-
tions concerning the structure of the world, its objectivity and the nature of con-
sciousness are asked. Quotations from works written by representatives of (L. Vitgen-
shteyn's) and (R. Karnap's) school of logical semantics are used as the responses.

It is concluded as a result that the responses must have been generated by, of all
things. a machine. And although this conclusion is not really correct, this should

be the case from a theoretical standpoint. "In any case,“ notes ':xudnyy in regard

to the quotations used as responses, "the content of these upset-ably formulated
statements bears a certain 'nonhulnan' irprint. In fact, vitgenshteyn implied not man
as such but a 'netaphysical subject,‘ an abstract bearer of the capacity for thinking,
'a thinking entity.‘ And were we to imagine a capacity for thinking that exists
extrasocially and in total isolation from objective and practical reality, the leani-
festation of this capacity would be devoid of traits inherent to human thinking" ((21),
p 173).

"Heuristic” use of 'ruring's procedure (in slightly modified form) led Brudnyy to this
conclusion. Incidentally some authors are undertaking extremely active attemts to

"revise" mring's criterion. Abelson (113) has made the met progress. His effort
will be discussed below. Kmsov and his coauthor mention a ”modification“ of Turing's
suggestion in passing: ”We believe that an evaluation of the adequacy of plans, based
on a comparison between psychological and computer experiments, may be interpreted

as a modification of 'mring's criterion for evaluating the 'intelligence' of the be-
havior of machines (models)." Later on the authors note: "In our experiment the
behavior of the model was practically indistinguishable from that of the human sibject

((8): PP 208-209).

'lhiring's criterion was useless as a means for testing a recently developed conputer
model of personal. interaction (135). his interaction entailed generation of mutually
associated personality paramters. Nevertheless the author was able to utilise

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Turing's idea: M real dialogues between people were encoded according to the use
system at the basis of the computer mdel, and these record sheets were offered to
a group of judges together with records of- a 'dialogue" with the corputer. he
judges were able to identify human interaction: in only one case) they erred in the

second. 'lhis, the author believes, to a certain extent confirms the 'realism" of
the nodal he created ((135), p 267).

Such "mdifications" (which could hardly be treated as "heuristic' uses of mring's
procedure) are in company with reports of comter program that have successfully
passed 'luring's test. It would be sufficient to mention a letter written by

D. Bobrow (147) , an American conputer specialist. 'ihe fact that his listeners showed
a preference for melodies composed by a conputer (in accordance with a certain pro-
gram) rather than by hman composers meant that the program had passed faring's test
(97). The expression ”inverse Turing criterion” has also slipped into the literature
(106) : The idea was that in some psychological experiments concerned with an opera-
tor's interaction with the computer, it is found to be advantageous to simrlate the
work of the conputer in such a way that the abject believes the expedsenter's
responses to actually have been generated by the computer.

we believe that these exanples are enough to confirm the fact that luring's criterion
is not at all of just historical interest alone. Of course, however, the fact that
the "imitation game" is fully contemrary does not imply that the gene has not en-
countered criticism. Highly significant rsnarks have been stated in opposition to
‘l‘uring's proposal. Some of them rest on philosophical grounds (63,128,142) while
others are grounded on mathemtical logic. In order to refute the very possibility
of machine thinking, sore specialists brought up Godel's well known theorem on the
incompleteness of formal theories. ‘lhe limits of its application are not totally
clear, however, as other authors hastened to recall (67).

He will not dwell on the criticism, valid in many ways, of Turing's test, since the
progress that has been made in work on "artificial intelligence“ permits us to

carry its discussion to another plane, one which to our knowledge has not yet been
subjected to criticism. Recognition of the theoretical significance of efforts at
computer simulation of natural-language comication urges us to do so. We believe
that the time to recognize this has con. Our discussion will center primarily on
Heirenbaum's ELIZA program (27,150,155) (and its mdifications) and Colby's program
simulating paranoid verbal responses (117,118,119). We will first consider ELIZA,
since it comes first chronologically and its principles are clearer.

The creators of ELIZA gave it only one objectiveumaintaining comuniostion (in
written form, by teletype) by natural language not limited in any way. This meant
that ELIZA had to be ready to perceive any phrase whatsoever and generate an accept-
able response. 'Ihis task, which would appear to be beyond contesporary comuter
technology at first glance, was solved with surprising simlicity: ELIZA structures
its response by modifying the inputted statement. As an examle it may transform it
into a question by changing pronouns and verbs from first to second person and
adding a steriotypic introductory expression.

A specially conpiled list of key words helps it identify the most significant part
of the phrase. Other words and expressions situationally associated with the given
element on the list are indicated as well. If the inputted phrase does not contain

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

key words, ELIZA reSponds with one of several universal expressions foreseen for such
a case and not disturbing the course of the discussion, or it may return to one of the
previous phrases and build a response on its basis. mus ELIZA is successful in
maintaining a conversation entirely due to selection of a list of key words and es-
pressions of universal applicability adequate to the given goals. and the clearness
of the grermatical transformations built into it.

ELIZA allows change of “scenario'--ths entire natural-language part of the program.
Only the rules regulating interaction with an individual are rigidly programmed
within it: the concrete linguistic expressions themselves my be easily substituted.
This makes it possible to improve ELIZA as it acquires experience in co-Iunication.
Moreover the program allows the scenario to be written in any language. and ELIZA
instantly becomes capable of maintaining communication in the chosen language.
Scenarios may be written by a person totally unfamiliar with programing. Such
scenarios have already been written for several languages.

This basic information on the work of ELIZA is enough background for further dis-
cussion. We should now recall a very interesting experiment conducted with this
program 10 years ago at the Massachusetts Institute of Ilechnology as part of the
well known MAC project (140). This project is concerned with using high-capacity
computers on a time-sharing basis for operational interaction between man and com-

putcr. In the experiment, commieation went on in real tiles the authors note that
the latent period between the absent the subject stopped typing a statement and the
moment ELIZA began typing a response did not exceed 5 seconds.

me experiment was conducted in a psychological laboratory in which a terminal (a
conputer linking console) and a typewriter were installed. me terminal was linked
to a high-capacity computer by a telephone cable. ﬂoaty-four persons, including
programmers, took part in the experiment. Each experimental session lasted exactly
an hour. During this time individual subjects were able to feed 10 to 65 messages
(an average of 22 messages) into the cosputer, and to receive as many responses. me
subjects were informed that their partner was a comter; nevertheless, after finish-
ing. their .session 15 persons (62 percent) felt that they had been comicating with
a person. 5 (21 percent) were not sure and only 4 (17 percent) were convinced that
the responses were from a computer. The researchers established that meubership of
a subject to any one of these groups correlated neither with the individual's coupe-
tency in computer technology, nor with the intensity of interaction with the com-
puter during the session, nor with the percentage of unsatisfactory ELIZA responses
to messages fed in by these subjects.

This last finding is especially interesting and surprising. After the experimnt,
19 percent of ELIZA‘s responses were recognized to be msatisfactoryngramatically
wrong or out of context. The bulk of such responses (85 percent) did not change
the belief of the subjects that the "dialogue" was proceeding properly. silajects
made no association between an unsatisfactory response from the computer and their
subsequent statemnt. They were prone to explain syntactic anomalies by interference
in the conuuunication channel, and in met cases they were able to interpret such
sentences to their satisfaction. Subjects explained ELIZA responses that were out
of. context by suggesting that some other maning had been imparted by their partner
to the particular phrase. or they found justification for such statements in unusual
notives of their partner (for exasple a subject might conclude that the partner is

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHGAL 1.83 ONLY

joking). 'mus even clear program failures (which occurred with almst one out of
every five statements) did not shake the belief of not smjects that their inter-

locutor was a person. Nor were they concerned by the fact that fragments of
their own statements were repeated in each of the partner's responses.

Turing wrote in 1950: "I am certain that 50 years from now it will become possible
to program the work of computers with a capacity of l§ bits in such a way that they
could play the imitation game so well that the chance an average person would be able
to establish the presence of machines within 5 minutes of the moment he begins asking
questions would not exceed 70 percent“ ((95), p 32). But as we can see, just a decade
and a half was enough to drop the chances of an average person to firmly establish
presence of machines after a 16-minute “dialogue" to 17 percent. 'l'hus the ELIZA
program was apparently the first to satisfy Turing's criterion, in its simple inter-
pretation described above. Ihis happened not only in special experimental conditions
but also "improuptu‘ (147' .

Ihe first thing we should note is that ELIZA simlates not a single mental function

and not a single aspect of thinking. Even the concept of understanding, without

which it would seem that no question-answer system could do without, is reduced in

this program to searching for key words. 'lhus this program. which has met Turing's
criterion, can in no way be called a thinking program. But if the overwhelming
majority of smjects maintained a conversation with it for an entire hour with ob-
vious pleasure, does it not satisfy some sort of human need? no answer would have ,
to be positive. In fact, oomunication with ELIZA very and: recalls phatic commi-
cation. ‘me sole meaningful purpose of such mication is tobringa groupof interloc-
UZ‘DIS together. But this requires some explanation.

Malinowski, a well known English ethnographer, was the first to discuss phatic
communication (134). His field work was concerned with the life of indigenous tribes

whose representatives did not tend to distinguish speech from other form of human
behavior. Hhen resting after work or performing uncouplicated work. these people
cxchangedwords almost constantly. Malinowski discovered, however, that these words
often had no relationship to the situation. "A sisple expression of respect,“ he
wrote, “one which is no less in the vogue along wild tribes than in European parlors,
performs a function having almost nothing in coulon with the meaning of its words.
when we inquire as to a person's health, remark about the weather or make assertions
concerning a state of affairs that is obvious to the utmost as it is, we do so not

to inform and not (in this case) to establish comnication between acting people, and

naturally not to express some particular thought" ((134), p 313). he sole purpose
of exchanging such questions, remarks and assertions is to establish social inter-

action, and it is precisely such use of language which Malinowski called phatic
comunication. Any Emotion of speech which establishes and maintains social contact
is also naturally referred to as phatic.

Halinowski's observations and hypotheses quickly achieved the recognition of special-
ists. And in fact, all of the facts upon which he relied were indisputable and
obvious. As Halinowski himself noted, ”despite the fact that the exasplee were taken
from the life of aborigines, we could find, in our society, the met exact parallel
of each type of the uses of language examined to date" ((134), p 315). In this he

is absolutely correct, and it would seem that any emles would be superfluous.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it. Thus in phatic communication there is no information transmitted. which provides
the grounds for believing it to be a meaningless pastime. But goals need not exist
on just the intellectual level alone; the social meaning of phatic oelnmication is
deep and indisputable. Of course the expressions which people actually exchange in
phatic comlunication do not have great significance. They may even be totally out of
context: What is isportant, after all. is only that they be uttered at the usual
tespo and with ordinary intonation. M an exasple Lever (133) describes a little
experiment performed by the English writer Dorothy Parker during a boring evening
party. Whenever any of the casual acquaintenances tuned boner with meningless re-
marks the writer replied: ”I just axe-murdered my husband and everything's fine."
She said this in a sweet conversiva tone, such that none of the guests paid any
attention to the Ionstrous meaning behind the words spoken to them.

let us return to the ELIZA program. It appears now that we can make this conclusion:
It is intended for phatic comunication. After all, the only goal posed to ELIZA
is to maintain a conversation at any cost, without having it die out. his goal is

But this conclusion casts a troubling shadow over the validity of ‘l‘uring's teat.

suggested that “the question-and-answer method can be applied to any realm of human
activity that we might wish to scrutinize“ ((95). p 21). DialOgue can in fact be
applied to the lost diverse spheres of activity. and were we to expect ELIZA to

cone up with profound, intelligent responses to problems formulated for it, its anti-
intellectual nature would manifest itself very quickly.

It is no accident that Heizenbaum asserts that ELIZA achieves the best results when
it is taken to be a psychotherapist. Moreover, inhis words. ELIZA parodies lbgers'
system of psychotherapy, in which the patient's words are repeated and rewarded (155).
However. if Turing's test is to weed successfully (in the way hiring himself defined
the problem), intelligent conversation on a narrowly specialized topic would not at
all be required, and in our opinion attainmnt of the goal proposed by Turing--
identifying the sex of the partner-does not differ very dramatically from a dis-
cussion with a psychiatrist: In both situations the simulating program must be

Our ideas are based not on what 3:11an (21) refers to as a ”heuristic" interpretation
of Turing'e test, which does not of course raise any objections, but rather on the

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

’Nring's criterion mre couples. He will show below that at least some of these
attempts have not altered the basic essence of Turing's proposal. This effort would
be justified by the fact that attempts of this sort are still being rude. Academi-
cian V. M. Glushkov essentially suggests developing mring's test (son aspects of
his statements have elicited criticism ((55), p 94): "mring's criterion...remains
unchallenged, and it implies that serious people will seriously converse with a
machine, for a tenth or for a year and on any topic” (57). Dragging the "imitation
game" out for a year is definitely not something Turing would have intended. Ibse-
over, we could hardly expect such basically quantitative expansion of the test to
occur without serious qualitative changes.

It should be noted that researchers have not concerned themselves with whether the
results satisfy 'Nring's criterion or not (140). a: the contrary it has been
noted: "It is obvious that not a single discussion of a subject with a cosputer
would have passed Turing's test, and it is just as obvious that most of the sibjects
drawn into conversation with the computer maintained it in the same way as they would
a conversation with people“ ((137), p 231). It would be difficult to agree with the
first part of this conclusion. It would sure likely be one reached by a casual ob-
server evaluating the dialogue, and not at all by a participant of the dialogue,
which is the only person with when hiring is concerned. Thus the authors obviously
have the intention of waking mring's criterion more couples in one way or another.
This is surprising, since their experiments demnstrated the total hopelessness of
attempts to determine, on the basis of the subject‘sbehmior, who his interlocutor is,
computer or a person. "...if our results receive confirmation,“ they write, "than
in research on the use of computers for counmmication in natural language, it makes
no difference what sort of instructions are given to the subjects, since they would
always react in the sane manner as if they were speaking with people“ ((137). p 235).
These words have the ring of condemation of not only Turing's test but also the
idea itself behind it. no matter how saddening this may be to his supporters.

And so, Turing's criterion tests for the presence of the capacity for comication.
We feel that the experiment was purposefully designed in such a way that the com-
puter's responses would be typed out at "human" speed, and that mistakes would some-
times ”accidentally” slip into them (for example spaces between words may be left
out (138,140)). To explain ELIZA's success we would need to analyse the mutual
relationships between the partners of communication: we would need to determine

those aspects of comicative technique which met be present for a partner to deem
the conversation satisfactory, and those aspects which are less mandatory. But un-

fortunately not a single science studying human comication is presently able to
provide a conclusive answer to this question.

Only some approaches to solving this problem can be noted. may are associated with
an interest displayed by researchers in the pragmatic side of commieation. For
example some authors have analysed cases of abnormal cominication to arrive at
those conditions which, if absent, wOuld make commieation maningless (77). The
authors of this work proposed a nunber of postulates of normal communication. Pail-
ure to satisfy any one of these postulates in an act of comnication would make such
comunication abnormal. We analyzed this work and offered sane suggestions in
((105), chapter 5). Suggestion of comicatiw postulates was also attempted in a
direction of linguistics that has come to be called “generative semantics' (126).

The recent tendency among linguists to study real human mication must be recog-
nized as fruitful. Linguists today are exhibiting a sustained interest in pragmatics

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(for example in soeiolinguistics) and in research bordering between linguistics and
logic (the teaching on presuppositions). In our opinion promising methods for
analyzing the conditions of normal oomication, ones capable of suggesting

answers to some questions posed in the present article, may appear at the juncture
of these directions.

It is interesting that the researchers who had conducted the ELIZA experiment com-
pared speech interaction with a game and attespted to explain the success of their
experiment from the standpoint of the rules of a gas. 'ihey validly note that be-
sides traditionally recognized phonological, syntactic and semantic rules, there

are other rules of communication which govern interaction between partners in a
communicative act. As an example the roles of speaker and listener are switched

in accordance with certain rules. Connunicaticn is assessed to be satisfactory or
unsatisfactory in accordance with other rules. of course, the authors of (136,138,

139) did not make it their objective to arrive at a couplete smry of the rules
governing human commieation. Such an objective would be unrealistic at the
present time. Nevertheless these researchers were obviously right when they said
that these rules exist and, moreover, that relatively speaking they are pretty nuch
the same for all normal users of each natural language. 'l'his assusption permits
the following hypothesis (137,138): If the initial stage of an act of com-unice-
tion satisfies rules of interaction isplicitly known to the individual, the latter
becomes certain that his partner also recognises this system of rules in its en-
tirety, and obeys it. But if the partner's messages subsequently become hard to
interpret, this does not usually cause the individual to suppose that his partner
was obeying different rules of oral commication. An experiment showed that other

explanations of deviant oral behavior are usually sought (140).

The entire historical record suggests that only a human being is capable of using
natural language: It is beyond the means of all aninls and all artificial devices.
Thus it is no surprise that subjects perceived sun's responses as coming from a
person. And if it is a puson that is ensuring, he met adhere to the system of
rules of communication comn to all representatives of genus Hana. The attitude
displayed by subjects toward a program responding in English may be cospared with
the ecnoes of the mythological relationship to the world so cos-on to our ancestors.
Here is what V. V. Ivanov wrote: “Many characteristics of human behavior become
understandable if we accept the hypothesis that man processes every sequence of
signals received by his senses as if it were an intelligent message (that is, man's
starting point is that a mssage met be intelligent: this set would be typical of
cryptologist). his class of phenomena includes not only ordinary linguistic consumi-
cation (in which even knowingly unintelligent messages are perceived to be intelli-

. mt), but also attempts at interpreting natural phenomena as signs, which was es-
pecially typical of the earlier periods of hvman history" ((45), p 82). Considering
this, it would now be proper to suggest, as an explanation for sun's success, the
hypothesis that all people are inherently predisposed to treat both nonlinguistic
and (all the more sol) linguistic messages as intelligent. 'lhroughout the centuries,
this assulption has een unconditionally valid, but in the future it may lose its
status if program such as ELIZA enjoy greater application.

Starkweather (89) suggested the opinion that programs may be found to be useful to
teach medical students how to talk with patients (89). "he advantages would include

the constant availability of the computer and the possibility forenercising

126

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cosmunicative functions several tines in succession: moreover, time-sharing makes
it possible for dozens of students to undergo such training silultaneously. We
believe, however, that for instructional purposes, specialized program would be
nore suitable. For examle, the responses of Colby's program to questions from a
psychiatrist could not be distinguished by experts from the responses of a schizo-
phrenic (118-120). amza, meanwhile, is a general-purpose program to which some
shortcomings are inherent. All human experience-«mg which the habits of commi-
cation are not an exception-do limited, such that the author of a scenario would
unwittingly anticipate that commieative behavior with which he is familiar. m:
anticipated behavior is precisely what becomes the norm for the cosputer. But if
a person with somewhat different habits of consummation enters into oosuamication
with such a program, very probably the dialogue would fail. A similar opinion has
been stated in the literature (140). thus we cannot entrust teaching the art of

talking with a patient completely to a computer, since such learning would be one-
sided.

He can mention here as an analogy Greenblatt's reluctance to allow the chess program
he created, WK [not further identified], to participate in cosputer cospetitions.
MAKIGIAK is in all probability the most powerful chess program presently in existence:
It has already been playing with people in official correspondence coupetitions for
more than a year. According to some sources it is holding up against players with
ratings' of 1,500 or even higher. of course, this is far fro. the grand master's
class (a rating of not less than 2,500): however, many amateur chess players never
even reach this level, and thus W's strength is greater than theirs. We should
note that recently former world chamion R. Fisher, who challenged this program,

won all three gases played.

Greenblatt explains his refusal to pit W against other programs by'the
following: ”Here my program to participate in a oosputer championship (right now
it is just playing with people), I would wish it success. I would hope that its
success would produce an advantage out of all the features characterizing a game
between opponents. But in the final analysis this would lead to development of the
program in a direction which is irrelevant to my end goal--sucoessful play with
people" ((153), p 26). Greenblatt validly suggests that every chess program em-
bodies only the limited experience of its developers, and therefore neither a single
program nor all of then put together can play the role of a teacher. We do not see
any reason why this conclusion could not be carried over to question-answer commi-
cative systems.

Our assertion that mring's criterion tests conumnicative and not intellectual
capacities requires additional discussion. First of all we need to answer the ques-
tion as to whether or not it is valid to divorce intelligence from speech. lthere is
no need to cite the numerous statements by philosophers and psychologists concealing
the profound relationship existing between thinking and speech. ‘mus psycholinguis-
tics faces one of the met diffth tasks of science: studying the limits, the

'An index officially adopted by the World Chess Federation (mm). It reflects the
results achieved by chess players in competitive events. It is calculated by a

special formula and it is used, as an exaaple. to set the norms which must be met
before a player's competitive rank could be raised.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
...no one has yet managed to come up with the facts demonstrating that thinking

can proceed only through the resources of natural language." mainkin validly notes.
"This has been an assertion only. but experience tells us somthing else“ ((41).

p 37). Distinguishing two blocks-~intelligence and language, minkin divides the
former into three "subunits": the systea of concepts on reality; the influence of
eeotions and motives: intellectual operations. In the language block he distinguishes

work of both blocks during conluunication. Interaction of the two blocks is supported
by an intermediate structure which lies between then and ties then together-semantics.
"We would have to presume,” Zhinkin wrote cautiously, ”the existence of a special

zone tying in the intelligence and language blocks. ‘lhis zone is senantics“ ((40).

p 14). In that same year there appeared another work by the same author, in which

the cited assumtion was substantially confirmed (41). Clinical observation of a
woman patient suffering semantic aphasia permitted him to refer more boldly to a
“semantic filter" at the boundary between language and intelligence. This filter's

It is not within our objective to examine the structure of the semtic zone. It
would be sufficient to state that it evolves as the individual learns to correctly
use language to express mental constructs. minkin traces the entire Path Of comiﬂtiﬂ
interaction--fron the birth of a plan or a spoken idea to formation of the meaning of the
stated words in the recipient's (the addressee's) head (42). But we are not interested
in this at the meant. He wish to extract from this brief sumary the conclusion
that psychological theory, in its present state of develop-ant. fully allows us to
refer separately to language and to intelligence. though of course not forgetting

for a single minute that these entities are mutually associated. ‘l‘hus theoretical
psychology validates the conclusion that Turing's criterion may be concerned with
speech and not with intellectual capacities.

It was already mentioned above that the imperfections of ‘l‘uring‘s proposal were
obvious to a large nuwer of specialists from the very beginning. This encouraged
some of them to improve the procedure of the “imitation gene." Let us dwell on

the atteupt by Abelson (113). who went the farthest. Abelson turned his attention
to the fact that 'I‘uring had said nothing about the degree to which player C was
informed: Has he made aware of the possibility that a cosputer progrua might be
participating in the experiment? In the case of a positive answer to this question,
as Abelson validly notes, the subject (playing the role of player C or a judge)
would change the strategy of his actions-~that is, he would try to determine which
room the cosputer is located in. rather than clarifying which of the players is a
man and which is a woman. In an attespt to avoid this. while preserving Turing's
basic idea Abelson developed stricter rules of the game. According to then. the
game lasts for several sessions. me judge is told only that property which,
depending on its presence or absence. would identify his two addressees (they could
be distinguished not only by sex and age but also by intelligence). The percentage
of correct responses by the judge--the base percentage-~is determined from a series

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of sessions. At certain moments a cosputer enters the game as a substitute for
one of the addressees. but the judge is not aware of this, such that from his point
of view nothing has changed. In these sessions the percentage of correct responses
by the judge is calculated separately (the computer program in a sense ”inherits"
all of the properties of the player it replaces). 'mus the test percentage is
determined.

If introduction of the computer into the gain did not influence the judge's success-
fulness, this means that the computer program has successfully substituted for the
subject. This may be stated more precisely: Imitation is successful if both the
base and test percentages exceed 50 percent, with the test percentage not differing
significantly (in the statistical sense) from the base percentage. If the computer
successfully passes such an"expanded ‘mring test" in relation to a large nunber of
contrasting differences (including intellectual differences), this would loan that
it is hard to distinguish from a person.

However, even the expanded Turing test (as modified by Abelson) has already been
passed. This was done with Colby's program simulating paranoia (117-120). Pre-
cisely this psychological disease was selected, Colby notes, because specialists
are relatively agreed on what paranoia is. As far as other diseases are concerned,
pSychiatrists are less certain to reach a column opinion. The experiIant with
Colby's program was performed as follows. Eight psychotherapists interviewed three
paranoic patients by teletype. From time to time a comuter was substituted for the
-.-'.ients. The physicians were not aware that such a substitution was possible.

:y each conducted two interviews lasting 30-40 minutes, after which they were
informed that they might have been conversing with a cosputer program. Each
psychiatrist was asked to determine which of four situations was true in his case:
both interviews were conducted with people: both were conducted with a conputer:
first with the couputer and then with a person; first with a person and then with

a computer. 'lhe fact that only two out of eight specialists answered correctly
would have to be recognised as a product of random guessing.

'mis experimental design recalls ‘Nring's proposal. 'me test was expanded after
the first phase of the experiment: Records of interviews conducted with both the
computer and a patient were sent to 105 randomly selected psychiatrists with the
request to send back their conclusions. They were not told of the cosputer's parti-
cipation. In 43 percent of the cases the 33 specialists that did reply considered
the computer to have a sore-severe form of paranoia than the real patient. This
figure is close enough to 50 percent to suggest that once again the psychiatrists
were unable to distinguish a person from a computer program.

The experiuent continued. Another hundred psychiatrists were chosen at random.

Each was sent two transcripts of the interview with a request to determine which
interview was conducted with a person and which was conducted with the mutant.
This tine 41 specialists responded, and only 21 answered correctly (which is 51 per
cent). Once again the results did not exceed the level of random guessing.

Next the experimenters tested the hypothesis that persons well acquainted with the

possibilities of computers would be able to recognise the computer responses. For
this purpose transcripts of interactions with the coupqu and with a patient were

sent to 100 randomly selected sewers of the Association for Oosputing Machinery (A04).

129

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Out of 67 replies, 32 (48 percent) were correct. which would have to be recognised
as a random level of guessing. 'lhus specialists in computer technology were also
unable to determine which transcripts belonged to interaction with a computer and
which represented interaction with a real patient. This result agrees with data
obtained in the study examined above (136-141); however, its credibility is greater
because it is supported by a statistical analysis ((118), p 92). A similar conclu-
sion may be made relative to cosputer responses that are out of context. After

the tests described above were completed ("in the spirit of luring," Colby notes).
the program was deliberately "worsened'--sodified in such a way that it would
select a concrete response in random fashion from among responses it had generated
previously-~that is. independently of the question at hand. In in the previous
study (136-141), statelents out of context did not influence the evaluation given
to interaction between the modified program and the psychiatrist: Out of 69
specialists (this many persons sent in replies, though transcripts were sent to

200 randomly selected sewers of the American Psychiatric Association). 35 were

unable to distinguish an interview conducted with this program from an interview
with a paranoiac.

We will not dwell on the results of a survey of specialists conducted by Colby in
order to clarify the parameters in relation to which responses generated by the
computer program agree or disagree with responses by real patients. Data such as
these may be used to improve a concrete program, though this is not what we are
interested in at the soment. He will sinply note that among the most significant
disagreements (with a 2.11mi? icance level of 0.001). the author implicated a factor
connected with the linguistic cometcncy of the program. with its poorer understanding,
in comparison with real patients, of statements in natural language. It is no acci-
dent that isproving the linguistic aspect of the program is now the focal point of

the efforts of (blby and his colleagues (145).

Thus the expanded Turing test was now also met. It would be worthwhile to take

a peek at the program with which this was made possible. Oolby's program is akin
to Heisenbaum's program in that exceptional attention is devoted to the linguistic
support to interaction. Although Colby attemts to simlate the personality of a
paranoiac. his main attention is concentrated on building adequate responses to
questions from a psychiatrist. It may be said that (blby'e program simulates mainly
the oral reactions of a paranoiac, though it is based on some theoretical model of
paranoid processes. As Heizenbaum wrote about this program, "there are no grounds
for thinking that it might tell us ”nothing about the paranoiac just because it in
a certain sense reflects the behavior of a paranoiac. Although a simle typewriter
in a certain sense reflects the behavior of a shy child (it can type a question
which does not receive any sort of reply). this in no way helps us to understand
the nature of shyness. 'rhe validity of the nodal must be verify on the basis of
theory" ((26). p 52).

Hence the former conclusion begs itself: A program which had successfully passed
the expanded Turing test has remained entirely within the mainstream of comunicatlve
processes. without concerning itself in any way with intelligence. In this way it
does not differ fundamentally in any way from ELIZA, meaning that expansion of the
”imitation game'I has not changed the fundasental essence of the game. As was
asserted above, 'Nring's criterion tests only communicative capacities, and it tells
us nothing about the presence or absence of intelligence. We believe that all

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible expansions of this criterion (were they to materialize) would not change
its fundamental nature. Intellectual capacities would have to be tested in a
different way, and Turing's idea would not be any help in this: thus it is about
tire to decisively reject the notion that the "initation gun" (in its various
modifications) is a criterion of intellectual activity. As is ilplied in
Tikhomirov's article (94), rejection of 'ruring's criterion met be the first step
on the ”path of using psychological knowledge to raise the effectiveness of efforts
to automate mental labor.“ 'me time for taking this step became ripe long ago.

In conclusion we would like to state a few remarks concerning the influence of
research on “artificial intelligence" upon the theory of cosemnication. The fact
itself that practical efforts in "artificial intelligence“ have led to problem

which are within the competency of couwnication specialists mat be recognized

as surprising. It is especially curious that these problem have turned out to be

the least developed in the entire conglomerate of sciences involved with commieation.
After all, serious study of phatic comication has not even begun yet, and scientists
have only started talking about linguistic (and, equally so, nonlinguistic) conventions
or postulates to which all individuals entering into communication adhere without

noticing it.

Without a doubt these problems have always sealed very abstract. far away from practi-
cal things. But new practice itself has in a sense illuminated thee with a bright

searchlight and brought them to light from the deep shadows, attracting the attention
of specialists to them. it is in this that we believe efforts in “artificial intelli-

gence" have certain theoretical significance.

The entire area of "artificial intelligence" is now living through a difficult stage.
We often hear references to a crisis in research on I'artificial intelligence.“ Dis-
cussing this issue is not within our objective. However. we believe it possible to
note that this scientific direction has occupied a certain place in the research
front, and it is rather effectively proabting the synthesis of different sciences.
In addition to the cosmnly known synthesis of sciences in the bionic direction, we
can also say that efforts in ”artificial intelligence" are also having an influence

on research on human communication, this effect expressing itself as creation of
interest in scientific problems that had previously seemed far afield of any sort
of practical applications. Thus there is some mrit to research on "artificial in-
telligence”: It is attracting the attention of specialists to problems which have
been on the periphery of the interests of representatives in those sciences having

communication betwaen people as their abject .

131

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR omcw. USE ONLY

'ARI‘IPICIAL INTELLIGENCE M10 as PM OF common-Ion
A. Ye. Voyskunskiy

Oomunication with a computer in natural languages occupies one of the places of
honor on the list of problems facing specialists in “artificial intelligence.” All
of the problems addressed by research in "artificial intelligence," it is often
admitted, are related rather closely to psychological research. at the other hand
problems concerning commieation have not been as lucky-wthat their discussion
might require the support of psychological data is almost never considered. As a
consequence we encounter uncriticial repetition of fuzzy and excessively general
expressions and wordings behind which we soutisss fail to find concrete content.
And yet work on systems supporting man's oomication with a cosputer in a language
close to natural needs psychological facts and psychological research no less than
do other directions traditional to "artificial intelligence.‘

we will try to demonstrate this with a particular exasple. Indications of the
ambiguity of the words and expressions of natural language. encountered in some
linguistic works, are often interpreted by specialists in "artificial intelligence“
as specially selected examples intended to demonstrate the couplexity of natural
language. ‘me opinion has often been stated that asbiguous words are not used in
real discussions between specialists (and all the more so in comicetion with a
cosputer). that such discussions do not entail the use of'technical sublangusges.
However. it has been noted that to a speaking individual. the words he utters are
fully unawiguous (112). 1111: can be explained by the fact that the context (which
is obvious to the speaker) imparts just one leaning to a word, and the speaker is
siuply unconscious of any other possible meanings. ‘mus we would have to forego the
hope that people communicating with a cosputer would avoid ambiguous expressions.
There can be no doubt from a psychological standpoint that a person acting as a
speaker is incapable of recognizing the possibility of multiple interpretation of
his speech. both at the level of words and the level of sentences.

But on the other hand asbiguity (for exasple that associated with hononyms) seriously
encmbers speech perception by the listener. let us make the qualification that it
may become obvious to the speaker as well--then he corrects himself. placing his
idea into an unanbiguous context. But for this purpose the speaker lust perceive
his idea from the listener's position during the speech act, separating the uttered
text from the process of its generation. The successfulness of such Speech
analysis, coinciding in time with the process of speaking itself. depends on how
well the speaker‘s habits of communication are developed and on his capacity for
standing in both positions.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Although only the speaker is actively engaged in speech at any given solvent. he may
not be able to realize his comiicative interests to their full extent. since the

probability is great that his useage would not he

went through a commication channel is not at all the unset economical means of en-
suring error-free reception of a text at the other end of the channel. there are

dancy into a code. Nevertheless in

language, in relation to whom these interests are, naturally, within the realm of

development , and eve

in addition to many other factors these communicative

influence on the evolution of natural languages. But to bearers

system, between opposite comunicative interests. It
coupromise may be violated; and in fact, the interests of the listener are often

tot n1 1 y disregarded

times compared with
eliminated in telegr
addressee.

in the speech of aphasics. ‘nsxts

"telegraphic style“: As we know.
am, and of course,

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

textual redundancy is partially

such economy is not in the interests of the
FOIOFNCIMJJSEONLY

Very little is known today about precisely what the con-micative interests of the
speaker and the listener are. Nor have experimntal studies been performed to
clarify the extent to which the speaker accounts for the listener's interests as

he produces speech. ‘ihus works in the psychology of influence (21) do not go beyond
simly mentioning the fascination phenomenon, and no mention is made of the experi-
mntal approaches to its analysis. Fascinative signals are ones which "time" the
listener to reception of the information accomnying then. Pascinative signals
act upon filters possessed by the listener. ones discussed by N. Viner and through
which the sessage transmitted by the speaker must pass. ally that part of a message
which passes through these filters is perceived by the listener and is capable of
eliciting the effect the speaker was working toward. ‘l'hus the speaker is compelled
to include. in the text he generates, signals creating favorable conditions for the
listener's perception of this text. Thus fascination is one of the key phenonena
in the complex mutual relationships between speaker and listener; as we said, however.
research on it is only beginning (22.54.76). '

This compromise evolved in natural languages wholly on the basis that both positions--
both that of the speaker and that of the listener-have always been occupied by
people--that is, beings with a similar nervous system and similar psychologycal
potentials and limitations (allowing, of course, for individual differences). Must
we carry this compromise into the realm of conunication between man and msdiine?
That is the implication when we suggest f‘teaching" a coputer to understand natural
language. I do not feel that this is the best direction in whidn to seek means of
comunication with a conputer that would be optin- in relation to man. After all.
if a couputer not passessing psychological features and limitauom inherent to man
(an exasple might be the limitations of man's working mmry) were to play the role
of partner in conuunication, the individual would be able to fully realize his
interests--both as a speaker and as a listener. In our opinion this could lead to
developuent of communication resources specially intended for an individual in the
position of a speaker or in the position of a listener. and these resources may turn
out to be different.

(airing dialogue with a computer, the individual acts as both speaker and listener.

We should make the qualification that not only acoustic communication with the com-
puter but also mre~standard written coununicaticn is inplied, and the term “speaker“
and “listener" are, in this case, generalized name for the positions of. correspond-
ingly. the message transmitter and the message receiver. ‘lhus these terms will subse-
quently be used out of the context of oral comicaticn between people.

“me real contribution psychologists could make in one specific area of "artificial
intelligence"--developing systems for communicating with a computer in a language
close to natural--would be to study these resources of comunicating with the com-
puter which would be natural to man (a speaker or a listener).

Here we to make it our objective to immediately determine how natural a particular
language of coununication with a conputer is to sun, we would find it difficult to
interpret the results, since we would have to account for a very large numer of
parameters. Therefore it would be more convenient to begin the analysis with indi-
vidual fragments of language (syntactic constructs for exalple), which could be
brought together in the future into a single language of comunication with the
computer. How natural such fragments are to man must be determined both when the

individual occupies the speaker's position and when he occupies the listener's

134
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

position- me latter has not yet attracted the attention of specialists, for which
reason we will limit our discussion to the former.

Much attention is devoted in mathematical linguistics to one of the lechanisms of
natural languages--self-nesting of clauses. 'lhis mechanism entails splitting a
certain clause into two parts and 'enclosing' another clause between them. The re-
sulting phrase may in turn be split apart, and a new clause may be inserted into it.
From a gramtical standpoint the hunter of sud; self-nesting operations can be

unlimited. In reality, however, there is a certain limit, as follows from the
"depth" hypothesis suggested by the Amrican mathematician (V. Ingve) (47).

Beginning a phrase in natural language, we met melorise certain gran-atical infor-
mation about it and utilize it to finish or: this phrase. Otherwise the statement
would end up grmatically incorrect. In Ingve's words, our memory stores the 're-
sponsibility" of finishing a started clause correctly. According to Ingve's hypothe-
sis the nunber of such intermediate bits of information which the working mmry can
store during creation of a phrase cannot exceed 722. me quantity of such memorized

units. each of which reflects a particular step in the phrase's development, was
called the ”depth" of the phrase.

Sel f-nesting is one of the obvious means for increasing the "depth” of a phrase.

‘lhe limits of man's psychological possibilities must have their effect in all commi-
cation, including with the couputer. 'me suggestion that nesting constructs would be
complex and unnatural to an individual transmitting a message to a conputer (that

is, to an individual occupying the position of the speaker) was refuted by esperi-
mental testing. “we test was performed with materials contained in two types of
conditional expressions that have enjoyed widespread acceptance in a number of
programming languages. 'No microlanguages were developed: Language A contained the
nesting construct "if...then...otherwise...," while language B contained a construct
with a transition to a marker “if...transition... ." The problem were selected in
such a way that their solution would require successive inspection of a nunber of
conditions. In this case the programs for solving problems written in microlanguage A
had to contain nesting constructs while this was inpossible for program written in
microlanguage B. The experiment is described in detail in the book 'Artificial
Intelligence and Psychology“ (50).

the experiment showed that subjects preferred aicrolanguage B. In a similar experi-
uent, however, the results were directly opposite (154): 'me self-nesting construct
was deemed the easiest. me of the possible reasons for the discrepancy in the
experimental results is a difference between the problems offered to the suajects.

It is still early to wake any final conclusions. Nevertheless we cannot exclude the
probability that the constructs of natural language are not the most convenient re-
source of communication with the computer to an individual acting in the position of

the speaker. Confirmation of this assusption requires numerous and meticulous ex-
perimental studies to compare individual linguistic fragrants. 'lhe Inthods of such

research have been described in sufficient detail by Glushkov and Timfeyev (35).

Only after conducting such studies can we appraise the opinion we stated earlier
(50) that similarity of the language of man-colputer interaction to natural language
does not mean that this language of interactior. is natural to the user. However, it

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

should be noted that a similar point of View is being suggested and validated with
increasingly greater frequency in the scientific literature. 'mus Snul'son (87) makes
a distinction between the linguistic and psychological naturalness of the language
of man-computer interaction. Mayne (143) also asserts that similarity of the latter
tonatural language does not at all mean that it would be easy for the user to learn
or that it is natural to man (the exact opposite may even be true). Mayne used the
term "simple natural language" to mean language that best suits the interests of the
user (Halpern called this active language (129)). He sets such language off against
two tendencies: development of "pseudonatural languages” and development of languages
"of the natural type“ (differing in the principles of organization of linguistic
processors).

mus our point of view is directly confirmed by these authors. which permits us
to conclude that these problems are important and that they require extended study
from the standpoint of experimental psychology.

However, we are still far from any sort of final conclusions also because finding
resources of speech comumcation with a coaputer that are convenient to nan as a
speaker is only half of the battle. Research conducted on natural languages nay
also provide significant assistance to studying human conunicaticm in particular
it may shed light on the commicative interests of the speaker and the listener and
on the nature of the coupromise between them. Thus the circle of psydiological re-
search would in a sense be closed. Having been started with the purpose of intro-
ducing the 'husan factor” into co-unication between an and oosputer (the particular
features of comunication between people were accounted for in this case) , it will
return full cycle to problem having to do with human ooununicetion (data on man-
conputer comnication in natural languages would be utilised in this case). Here
we to actually implement such a research program, it would serve as a unique example
of how research in ”artificial intelligence" can promote solution of specifically
psychological (or psycholinguistic) problems.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE COMPUTER USER'S REPONSIBILI'H FOR m3 RESULTS Ol' ACTIVITY
L. I. Notkin

‘me responsibility of a computer user for decisions is one of the least-studied pro-
blens. Materials published on this problem tend rare to sisply stateit than to actu-
ally study it (115,123,131). Despite the fact that the psychological content of the

regulation. as change in the relationship between the inortance of the individual's
evaluation of himself and the importance of the evaluation given by other persons,
and as development of the mdlanism of self-exactingness and self-control. An
irresponsible, inadequate, ill-conceived attitude toward one's acts is, on the other
hand, one indication of the personality's imaturity. Such behavior is often
characterized in pathopsychology as an indifferent attitude toward one's mistakes,

as the inability to successfully cowlete an assignment without external control (44).

The first series of our experiunts was devoted to research on the relationship
between external control and self-control as the met important manifestation of
responsibility.‘ We used 8. Burdon's correcting test (73) as the basis for this
series. the one difference was that rather than processing traditional correction
tables. the subject was asked to give teletype replies to syﬂaols displayed by a
conputer according to the following rule: 'lype synbol I when sylbol 0 appears,
sywol J when 2' appears, U when M appears, X when S appears and L when H appears.
If any other sywol appeared. the abject had to type the asterisk synbcl. A program
of 400 synbols was written in two modifications for two series of experiments":
In one of then. when the abject typed a wrong answer, prior to printing out the
next sysbol the computer informed the abject of his sistake; the subject was not
inforned of his mistakes in the other program Print-out of a mistake signal was
interpreted as control of the subject.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A total of 14 persons participated in the experimts, 7 in each series. 'Ihe subjects

included secondary school students in their senior years and college students. Each
subject took part in only one experiment.

The instructions offered to both groups contained the rules of using the teletype
machine and the rules of responding to appearing sywols. llo indications were given
relative to the speed and accuracy of the work. No limitations were inposed on the
nusber of times the subjects could reread the instructions.

Seven subjects worked with the corputer with the program providing mistake signals
for 6 hours 39 minutes 28 seconds. All subjects made a total of 37 mistakes in this
series. 'lhere was nothing to indicate that the interval between mistakes increased
after a mistake signal was displayed. Bmching of wrong answers was the more typical
pattern for subjects in this series. thus for exaqale. stbject 1!, who typed l3 wrong
answers, made mistakes on the 6th. 13th, 15th, 23d, 26th, 185th, 191st, 205th, 207th,
213th and 216th syabols. Subject K made three mistakes with the 5th, 7th and 21st
synbols. Subjects 1 and 1.. who made a total of two mistakes each, did so with the
13th and 16th and the 78th and 85th sydaols respectively. About two-thirds of the
wrong answers in this series were typed with an average interval of three sylbols.

According to interviews conducted following the experiment three of the subjects

in this series, who had made 13, 5 and 4 mistakes respectively. felt the work to be
mnotonous and uninteresting. Subject 101., who made two mistakes in the first 100
synbols. felt the work to be monotonous only in the beginning. In their reports.
the subjects were generally correct in estimating the nuber of mistakes they made.
Subject 3 underestimated the number of mistakes he had made.

Seven subjects worked with the cosputer using the program not providing a mistake
signal (2,800 systole) for 4 hours 30 minutes 28 seconds. The subjects made 22 mis-
takes. Much greater scatter was typical of the mistakes in this series of experi-
mnts. All sibjects felt their work to be interesting and not monotonous. As in

the first series the reports by these sibjects generally indicated the true nusber

of mistakes they made. Subjects M and A reported more mistakes than they had actually
made.

Subjects in both series noted that they felt a sense of competition with the computer
during their work. expressed as a rule as the desire not to fall behind the couputer's
synbol typing rate.

One unique feature of these experiments, making them different from B. Burdon'a
correcting tests, is that they did not contain so-called omitted sylbols. The
swject had to respond to each appearing syiaol by typing an appropriate response.
This circumstance prevented us from using the formulas usually esployed to quantita-
tively determine the accursq and productivity indicators of the subject's work (73).
Therefore, following Binet's practice (15), we will limit oursele to siuply indi-
cating the number of mistakes made as well as the time the subject worked.

'ihe results show that mistake signals do not raise the subject's productivity.

Mistake signals are sooner an interference to the activity of the subjects. Absence
of mistake signals--that is, monopolization of activity control by the subject his:-

self , and in this sense an increase in the feeling of responsibility, significantly
raised productivity and the quality of the work.
138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the problem of achieving an optimm relationship between the user's self-control
and external control, which arises in the planning and organisation of nan-machine
interaction. cannot be resolved uniquely. Despite its external expediency and ob-
jectivity, an error message may be subjectively perceived by the user as a super-
fluous, annoying reminder or even as harrassment, and it may reduce the effectin
ness of his activity. These results are a confirmation of the “waning barrier”

effect, in which the subject remains in a sense ilpermeable to controlling influences
(20).

An analysis of these experiments. which were performed to study the relationship be-
tween external control and self-control as a manifestation of responsibility, reveals
that an examination of the responsibility of a oowuter nor for adopted decisions
cannot be limited to an examination of just the functional aspect of this problem
alone. Being a motive, responsibility is obviously associated primarily not with the

procedural but with the personal components of activity, with its meaning and purpose.
'merefore the next experimental series was conducted to study division of responsi-

bility for joint problem solving between man and computer in situations posing differ
ent goals to the subject.

A certain modification of the task proposed by the Bulgarian psychologist (L. Sekey)
(83) was presented in experiments simulating operational 'dialogus" with a computer.
The subject had to balance a scale in such a way that this balance would be disturbed
after a certain amunt of time without any outside interference. A numer of objects

were offered with which to balance the scale, to include a box of matches and a candle.
1b solve the problem, the subject had to balance a lit candle which, gradually burning
down, would disturb the balance of the scale. The difficulty of this solution lay in
the fact that the subject had to isolate a latent property in the candle--the decrease
in its weight as it burned down. "Dialogue' with the computer was similated by the
experimenter, who typed out the following 17 questions, in strict sequence, on a dis-
play linked to the subject‘s display':

1. Nunbernof paper clips, matches?"

2. Weight of each paper clip, paper clip box, match. matchbox?

3. Height of the pencil, candle, bolt, nail?

4. What is meant by the words "about a minute”?

5. What is meant by the words "with outside interference"?

6. What is want by the words "balancing the scale"?

7. What manipulations are possible with the objects?

8. Name the properties of the pencil.

9. Name the material of the box.

*‘l‘he method of simulating operational “dialogue" with a computer using paired displays
was developed by V. B. Ryabov.

"The nusber and weight of the objects were given at the time they were described in
the problem conditions.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

10. Name the properties of cardboard (paper, wood).'
11. Name the properties of matches.

12. Name the properties of candles.

13. Name the properties of objects that can be used to solve the problem.

14. Is the expression "balance the scale” equivalent to “place objects with
identical total weight on the pans of the scale“?

15. Can the balance, once it is established, be disturbed without outside inter-
ference? If yes, nase some of the causes.

16. Are you familiar with objects which change their weight in response to one
cause or another? If yes, name some of them.

17. has: the properties of objects listed in the problem as exesplified here:
Nail--l) metal, 2) changes weight in response to: change in magnetic field, oxida-

we used descriptions of the problem solving process published by Antsyferova (9) to
develop the method of the experiment. Questions asked of the subjects during simia-

ofthe probler-establishment of an accurate balance, disturbance of the balance and
noninterference. This was the first stage. has 8th. 9th, 10th, llth, 12th, and

13th questions correspond to the second stage of the problem solving process-
determining and analyzing the sure-complex cause-and-effect relationships that re-
quire consideration of different properties of the objects. The 14th, 15th, 16th,

and 17th questions correspond to the third stage, in which, following productive
rewarding or the basic requirement of the problem "change the balmce of the scale'I

to "change the weight of objects on the balance," the subject seeks the properties of
objects that could cause change in their weight. are first three questions were asked

mainly for training purposes.

Because "consummation“ with the cosputer could proceed in natural language,
scientists, college students and secondary students in their senior years who had
never had any experience with ooaputers or who did not know much about the possi-
bilities of mdern computers were included strong the subjects. A total of 26 subjects
took part in the experiments. mirteen participated in each series. Each subject
took part in an esperinent once.

140

POI OFFICIAL [8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instructions offered to the subjects included the text of the problem and the
rules of using the display necessary for 'cosamnication" with the computer. The
difference in the instructions given to the two groups of subjects was that in one
case the subject was required to present the problem to the oolputer for solution and
then to “simply assist“ it by answering questions that it may ask in the course of
solution, while in the other it was emphasized that the problem is enormously diffi-
cult for the computer and that it could not be solved without effective assistance
from the subject. In neither case was the subject directly required to solve the
problem himself. It was presumed in this case that the second variant of the in-
structions would raise the sibject‘s responsibility for problem soluticnnthat is,
that it would ilpart different meaning to the subject's goal.

After they acquainted themselves with the instructions the subjects of both groups
began typing the text of the problem on their display screen and feeding it into the
computer. Three minutes after the text of the problem was fed into the colputer.

the subject was presented the first question at a rate of lo synbols per second.

An interval of 30 seconds was established between a sibject's response and each new
question. Interaction with the couputer entailed the asking of questions by the
computer and the typing of answers by the user. After the abject answered the

17th question he was told that the time limit for the comter experiment had ex-
pired. Following the experiment the sibject was asked the following questions:

1. Did you know the answer to the problem before analyzing it? 2. Was it interest-
ing to you? 3. Recall the text of the problem. i. Did you feel a sense of compe-
tition with the computer during the experiment? 5. lb you feel that you had a part
in the problem's solution? If yes, then what did your participation consist of?

6. Do you know what the solution to the problem is now? If yes, explain it. 7. When
did you figure out the solution to the problem?

Spontaneous statements and the behavior of the subjects were recorded during the
experiment.

()1 processing the experimental data we revealed significant differences in both the
results and the nature of the activity of subjects in the first and second group.
Four subjects found the correct solution to the problem in the first series of ex-
perinents. In the second series 10 subjects solved the problem. He learned from
the interviews that five subjects were interested in the problem in the first group,
and eight persons were interested in it in the second. A sense of competition with
the conputer was stated by three and seven subjects respectively.

We were also highly interested in how the subjects described their role in the pro-
blem's solution.’ Pour subjects in the first group described their participation as
providing additional data; one of them (sibject V) stated the clarification that he
did not try to solve the problem. “to subjects felt that they did not participate
in the problem's solution. Subject I. viewed his participation as "responses to un-
clear questions.“ The last two subjects described their participation rather in-
distinctly--as a form of feasible assistance. In the second group. out of three
subjects who did not solve the problem two described their participation as

participation in a search for the solution, and one described it as assistance.
“me responses of only those subjects who were undale to solve the problem were

analyzed and compared.

14].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I‘ILML UM URL!

What the subjects in the two groups said in theirinterviews was confirmed directly

by data acquired during interaction with the cosputsr. A reluctance to deviate from
the text of the instructions and from the role of a sisple intemdiary between the
experimenter and the "computer" was typical of subjects in the first group. this

was expressed as recurrent requests for advice from the experisenter and as attempts
to find. in the text of the instructions, literal indications as to what the responses
should be to the questions from the "computer.“ Receiving no assistance from the
instructions or the experimenter, the subject often typed arbitrary. inadequate
responses.

mus, naming a property of paper. abject P typed: “Thin material for writing."

Among properties of a pencil, sxbject Rh. naned its graphite core. When asked to

name a property of watches, subject A replied: "Wooden. with green tips." Sibject B's
answer to question 16 was "ijects that change their wsi¢1t exist. but I don't know
any cxanples," and so on. (king to this the responses of the sibjects were often
irrelevant to each other.

mus, responding to the questions about the properties of the objects, subjects
v and Rh. at first consistently namd only those which had to do with their use as
weights, and they asserted in response to question l3 that they did not know any

properties that would be useful in the solution. the role of casual
observer was most typical of subjectsinthis grow is also confirmed by the fact

that following the experinents the subjects often displayed an interest not in the
solution itself but rather in how a certain solution was arrived at by the counter.
'No out of four subjects who solved the problem were not certain that they had
solved it correctly. It is interesting that many of the subjects in this group
named loss of weight when burning as one of the properties of a candle in their re-
sponses, but they did not use this property to solve the problem.

Independent thinking without referrals to the instructions or the experimenter was
more typical of subjects in the second group. ‘lyping their responses, the subjects
tried to make their wordings precise and unawiguous. 'mus, describing the manipula-
tions with the objects possible, subject P replies: "Rsarranging the indicated ob-
jects." and he adds regretfully: "lhat word's isprecise." He also feels his de-
scription of the pencil's length to be imrecise. Not knowing how to answer the
question about the properties of paper. stbject I replies: "I don't know any proper-
ties having a bearing on the problem at hand.“

“to out of the three subjects who had solved the problem, even after being asked

all of the 17 questions, failed to name the property of losing weight when burning.
They stubbornly named moistening and drying out of hydroscopic objects as the only
cause of possible changes in weight. Such nonacceptance of hints differs signifi-
cantly, in our opinion, from the inability to use hints to solve the problem, noted
among subjects in the first series. m difference here is that the subject does
make active attemts to solve the problem, though of course he is unable to progress
beyond certain stages of its solution.

in analysis of the transcripts of the ”dialogue” with the ”computer" for partici-
pants in the first and second series that had solved the problem permits the hypothe-
sis that in most cases the final wording of the solution was arrived at long before
the questions were asked. ﬁres of the subjects in the second series solved the
problem before starting their interaction with the "conputer" while one did so after.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁne the activity of subjects in the second group was associated to a much lower
degree with the 'coxputer's" questions.

What was most typical of participants in this series of experiments was interest in
the solution itself and not in the way the counter arrived at it. After the experi-
ment the subjects often asked the experimenter whether or not they had found the
right solution or what the solution was.

‘mus the analysis of the responses given in the interview following "dialogue" with
the “cowuter,” of the content of questions asked by the experimenter at the end of
the experiment, of the spontaneous statements made by subjects during "dialogue,”
and primarily of the responses to the "computer's" questions, can reveal significant
differences in the actions of subjects in the first and second groups. These differ-
ences, which stem from the different degrees of responsibility for problem solution
imosed by the instructions, manifested themselves basically as presence or absence
of the problem solving process.

Taking Antsyferova's lead, we may assert the fact that in the experimentally “pro-
voked“ absence of the problem solving process or its incorpleteness, the sibject's
effort to isolate the needed property did not lead to the use of this property to
solvu the problem. However, we also based our analysis of the experimental data on
Soviet psychology's premise that "every spoken statement is a doomsntation of the
results of thinking, one which cannot but have an influence on further thinking“
((80), p 95). We assumed in this case that the verbal statements of our subjects--
that is, their replies to the ”computer's" questions, were in one case a reflection
of the solution process and were aimed at the geek-solving the problem, while in the
other they were sinply responses linked together by a series of questions. Neverthe-
less in both cases the verbal statements were in fact an expression of the thinking
process (the sort of process is unimartant in this case)--that is, of analysis and
synthesis, of inclusion of objects in new relationships and discovery of new proper-
ties within them, as well as of detection of mutual dependencies and the mutual ex-
changeability of the two positions.

In both cases the thinking process produced the ”logical-objective prerequisites“
((80), p 71) of subsequent problem solving. In one case, however, they were used by
the subject himself to arrive at the solution, while in the other they were inter
preted by the subject as prerequisites for someone else's solution, the conputer's
in this case. Thus the method of our experiments permits us to distinctly reveal a
situation in which a series of stated premises containing within themselves the
means for successive transition from one premise to the next cannot be brought to-
gether into a single problem solving process, a situation in which presence of the
procedural components of thinking does not yet predetermine its content.

To resolve the problems arising within the context of the situation described above,
we considered 3. L. Rubinshteyn's statement that ”the course itself of problem solving
creates the internal conditions for further advancement of thought: in this case
these conditions include not only the logical-objective prerequisites but also the
uotives of thinking, its 'drivers'" ((00), p 71). Rubinshteyn's thesis that thinking
is "self-motivated" essentially shifts the accent in research on thinking from the
procedural to the personal aspect. Rubinshteyn's works contain no indications as

to the reason for arisal of new motives in thinking: As we know, he limited himself
to the suggestion that studying the personal aspect of thinking should be the next

143
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI'IILML UM UNI-I

task of research on thinking. Our experiments permit the hypothesis that generation
of new motives during thinking is associated with goal formation.

The following conclusions may be suggested on the basis of our experimental and
theoretical analysis of responsibility associated with operational interaction between
ran and computer. Responsibility for decisions is a real factor, one which signifi-
cantly determines the effectiveness of this interaction. The lost important nanifesta-
tion of responsibility is the subject's self-control during activity. Introduction of

computer control over the individual may reduce self-control and the activity's pro-
ductivity.

If the responsibility for the results of joint problen solving is relieved. the
user may become passive in his interaction with the comter. The extemal manifesta-
tions of activity, particularly the characteristics desribing the state of an indi-
vidual working with a oomuter (103) or the pace of con-mication, are still insuffi-
cient as indicators of the individual's participation in problen solving. Activity
at the level of goal formation is the most productive for: of activity. liaising re-
sponsibility for decisions is one of the means for controlling activity which leads
to more-productive interaction with a computer.

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pm 11
PSYGIOIDGICAL 91081-338 OP ammo m SYSTBS

EXPERIENCE IN APPLYIIIG PSYQIOIDGICAL W 1'0 mm
MIDI. SYSTEM mm

1.. u. Berger. B. K. Koshkin

The Ministry of Electrical Equipment Industry's 'xl'fa' Msociation, which is
developing manufacturing and engineering plans for 350's [automated control system),
is turning special attention to a nudaer of social and psychological problem that
arise with introduction of ASU's: arisal of the 'psychological barrier.” change in
the nature and content of the work of manage-ant emloyees in the new conditions.
some problem associated with AS!) training for personnel and with selection. re-
certification and retraining of personnel, the need expressed by "users” for con-
puter information and the possibilities of using it. and consideration of the ”ht-an
factor“ in planning.

Consideration of these problem was pro-pted, on one hand, by the mess dis-
played by the management of the A80 service in the iQortance of 1580's fro. a purely
practical point of view. 0n the other hand presence of the theoretical base
developed by colleagues of the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology's
Laboratory of Automation of Mental Labor (23,87,104,105) played an enormous role.

It was determined in 1972 that the “problem of psychological study of 'nan-cowuter'
systcss is not only interdisciplinary, but it also spreads into other fields of
science. It may be hypothesised that development of this probleu will lead to
formation of a new field of psychological science, one developing in close inter-
action with general and social psychology. the psychology of labor and art. engin-
eering and pedagogical psychology, the psychology of science and the science of
unagunent, and so on" ((104), p 19).

This premise was laid at the basis of the planning effort. An attemt was made to
examine social and psychological problems integrally.

An iqaortant role in foruation of the conception behind this effort was played by

the idea that "the effectiveness with which an EU functions as a 'nan-nachine
system' depends not only on the parameters of the corputer but also on how well

the functions of man and computer are distributed and 'uated' and on how well

145

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
PCIKUIDMJAL.USECMVLY

interaction between them is organized.... These problems can be solved only on
the basis of psychological analysis...” ((23), p 95). The ensuing conclusion led
to inclusion of a group of psychologists among the BSD developers. The N50 divi-
sion of “Bl'fa” now contains an ASU psychosocial support sector.

This sector is working in three basic directions: 1) participation in 380 planning.
2) development of recoursndaticns on introducing the plan and 3) activities asso-
ciated directly with ASU introduction. These directions are distinguished from

one another not so much due to their content as for organisational reasons.

The psychological requirements associated with the plan are based on the following
principles: a) satisfying the cognitive needs of users; b) raising the quality and
speed of decisions adopted and implemented by the individual) c) increasing the
creative content of labor: d) allowing for voluntary regulation of the information
flow; e) accounting for the individual features of the users; f) ensuring their job
satisfaction; 9) ensuring unity in the principles of imroving automated and un-
automated control ((105). pp 45-56).

Development of these problems would have been inossible without a theoretical base.
But such a base does exist. ‘mus our study of the cognitive needs of users was
based on research that has revealed the structure of the thinking of an individual
solving creative problems (92). Re defined the user's managerial activity as ful-
fillment of a production plan. and the evolved situation serves as the conditions for
this activity. Our analysis of the sort of intermediate goals a user poses is based
on experimental research (75).

The psychosocial support sector devotes special attention to the operational planning
subsystem, mainly because special research has been conducted in this ma (23,104).

The results of research on the psychological structure of planning activity have per-
mitted us to optimize the movement of informatics: flows, raise the quality and effi-

ciency of information and account for factors that raise the creative content of

the labor of users and their job satisfaction. ‘lhe sector is working on a method

by which to account for their individual features.

me research and planning activity of the $0 psychosocial support sector is pro.
ceeding under the ismediate scientific and methodological supervision of the USSR
Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology's Laboratory of Automation of hental

Labor. 'mis supervision has made it possible to significantly raise the quality of
the work done. Moreover the laboratory‘s participation in the sector's projects is
significantly facilitating introduction of the planned projects and promoting inter-
action between the sector and other subdivisions involved in ASU planning and intro-

duction.

Recomndations on asu introduction are being written basically according to the
same principles. that is most inportant here is to achieve unity in the principles
of improving automated and unautomated control. (he of the associated problems is
that of preparing the user for work in the new conditions. ihe theoretical grounds
of this effort are provided in the book “Man and Wter" (104). the computer
only creates a possibility for improving the structure of human activity. This
possibility is realized when certain technical. paychological and social conditions

are met.
146

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOROl-‘II'ICIALUSEONLY

‘rhe psychological conditions require that the individual be adapted "to the conditions
of working with a cosputer" ((104), p 261). Therefore the main roccsnendation must
be to ensure presence of the psychological conditions promting improvement of
activity. This goal is achieved by isplementing a broad program of measures in all
stages of the ASU's creation. 'lhis program esbraces a large nuwer of areas, to
include isproving the control system, preparing and training personnel, advertising
and publicizing the A50, and so on. ‘lhe sector is working on standard noosnendations
to be introduced into enterprises of the Ministry of Electrical Bguipmnt Industry.

‘lhe effectiveness of the individual measures is being verified through special
research at the 'Bl'fa" Association. The objects of this research include some
features of the thinking activity of users, the "psychological barrier“ to creation

of the A50 and the structure of interpersonal relationships in the enterprise
magentant.

1he immediate purpose of the ASU introduction sector is to implement the plans md
recounendations. The sector is encountering significant organisational difficulties
in this effort: abSence of a statute explaining the functions of the A80 psychosocial
service. and of guidelines general to the sector: absence of state or sector directives
stating the importance and necessity of psychosocial research; the unofficial nature
of scientific supervision given to the sector's work.

Although interest in social and psychological problems is constantly growing,
creation of the appropriate study groups at other enterprises is often hindered by
the organizational difficulties listed above. we can sense an acute need for creating
a single center to coordinate work on the psychosocial problems of 380's, and for
developing and publishing the appropriate guidelines.

Moreover the scientific research on these problems sust be brought together under a
single program. From our point of view such a program could be developed as part of
the research effort on the "artificial intelligence” problem. It is only by com-
bining the work of different scientific-theoretical and applied (planning) collec-
tives within the framework of such a program of integrated study of these problems

that we can ensure effective consideration of the psychosocial factors associated
with ASU creation.

Let us now dwell on two special problems of accounting for these factors.

Goal Formation and Creation of Information' Needs

me of the most important problem: of creating an automated enterprise control system
(A30?) is to determine the information needs of the eaployees. 'No basic mthods

are used in practice--building an economic mdel of ewloyee functions, and expert
interview. what the developer gets in both cases is not data on the real need for
information but a theoretical idea of this need. He must therefore reveal the real
information needs by studying the activity of A80? users directly.

"I‘he term "information" is used in this context in its traditional meaning, and not
in a special one.

1.47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case the object of study would have to be goal formation in enterprise
control activity, inasmch as "the need for infatuation depends on the content of
the corresponding problems...“ ((104) . p 167). He would be required to establish

the direct ties existing between the goal of an action and the intonation supporting
attainment of this goal. No less significant is the "information-weal of action“

relationship. since the process of goal formation regulates to a significant extent
the kind of information that is obtained. “We must organize information processes
in such a way that every euployee and the collective as a whole would know not only
what the task is and how it must be coapleted, but also why (that is, the signifi-
cance of the collective's task to the enterprise and to society in general)‘ ((104).
p 169).

me system of operational planning of the enterprise's work was chosen as the object
of analysis. The end goal of this system‘s colleagues is to fulfill their plan.

We know. however, that other secon(.ry goals exist on par with this goal--establish-
ing good mutual relationships with subordinates, earning the respect of a super-

visor and so on. All of these goals are closely associated with the overall task,
and therefore fulfillment of the plan also means attainment of other goals.

When we subdivide this plan into intermediate goals, we can distinguish a nusber of
basic functions requiring information support: 1) acquainting the employee with the
plan. 2) acquainting the employee with the real situation at the facility for which
the plan is being created. 3) searching for the possibilities of supporting plan
fulfillment. 4) monitoring its fulfillment. Each of these functions is in turn
associated with formation of intermediate goals. 'merefore it would seem best to
examine these functions as independent stages. In this case we may ignore the fact
that they may coincide or overlap in time.

1. As a person familiarizes himself with a plan, he becomes aware of the basic goals
of the planner's activity. which in turn generates new needs for information. This
process is regulated by the interests and predispositions of the planner. Thus for
example, "an enterprise executive interested in product marketing problems...say
desund, besides information necessary to the enterprise'a management, detailed in-
formation on the possibilities of selling the enterprise's products” ((23). p 74).
Our research revealed that some executives exhibited greater interest in the plans
of subdivisions at a higher level (the global approach) , in the procedures of the
plan's creation (the genetic approach) or in the plans of similar enterprises

(the comparative approach). he general line of the executive's goals changes in
accordance with the approach he takes. An executive taking the global approach
requires a clear understanding of the tasks facing the enterprise; he requires not
only verbatim fulfillment of the plan. but also fulfillmnt of the demands it ex-

presses between the lines. he procedural approach is in keeping with mare-formal
fulfillment of the plan, with an orientation toward “good" accountability at any
coetuit is precisely in this case that we often encounter the tendency to make
untrue, exaggerated reports, to raise certain indicators at the expense of others,
with an eye on what subjective evaluation higher supervisors might give. The com-
parative approach is associated with coupeting tendencies, with an orientation toward
performance ”no worse than others” in plan fulfillment.

Our research included experimnts with imposed changes in the structure of information
used in decision making. 'mese experiments showed that the influence of information

148

FOR OFFICIAL Obi ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on goal formation is extremly limited in this stage. Information outside the
limits of the user's needs is hardly perceived at all. Users believe such informa-
tion to be superfluous: “Who needs this”, "I don't have time for all of this
nonsensel", and so on. when the subject finds it impossible to avoid perceiving
subjectively superfluous information, the result is contradictory: a: one hand

he develops a negatiVe attitude toward the experiment, in general, losing all
interest in the imposed information. and as a consequence the information is per-
ceived but not assimilated: on the other hand his need for subjectively necessary
information grows. This result permits the assertion that when a person fasiliarires
himself with a plan, goal formation dominates over formation of infatuation needs,
and it predetermines the composition of subjectively necessary information.

2. When acquainting himself with the real situation at the facility for which the
plan is being drawn up. the planner uses both information directly acquired during
planning and information accumulated in the past (the so-called ”knowledge of the
facility"). merefore the information need varies significantly depending on the
extent to which this person is informed about the facility, and it takes the form
of the need to acquire information supplementary to that already available. Using
the "supplementary" principle we can subdivide all information on the state of a
facility into general and variable--that is, into information that condensates for
an inadequate knowledge of the facility and information which supplements this
knowledge with a knowledge of the imediate situation.

The need for general information is obviously determined uniquely by the accumu-
lated knowledge. At the same time accumulated knowledge is to a significant extent
unconscious knowledge, and it yields to analysis with great difficulty. ms is
why we concentrated our attention mainly on variable information.

One of the met interesting facts revealed in our analysis was the planners' gross
exaggeration of their information needs. his tendency manifested itself especially
clearly in interviews. At the shop chief level, for example, interviews revealed a
daily need which significantly exceeded the amount of information actually received
at the given absent; howeVer, the shop chief spends up to 30 percent of his work day
analyzing the received information (this includes time spent on its perception),

and he is not in a position to devote more time of any significance to this activity.
At the same time, production executives often demand that information about the
status of the facility be transmitted to them as frequently as possible, more fre-
quently than they are capable of using it in decision making. It has already been
noted in the literature that "if management units receive information in ties inter-
vals that are so short that they cannot assimilate it well enough to make effective
decisions, the only result is unjustified additional outlays of labor" ((104) , p 44).

At the same time the interviews revealed extremely few couplaints that the form
in which information is presented is inconvenient, and particularly that its appear-

ASU planning division before starting work on the plan. There can only be one
explanation for this phenomenon-«goal displacement, displacement of the plmer's
end goal by one of the intermediate goals. Inasmuch as gaining an acquaintance with
certain documents is an intermediate goal to clarifying the situation at a facility,
the process itself of familiarization becomes a need. An indirect confirmation of
this premise may be found in the unique jargon used by management personnel: Rather
than "Set the assignment for the shop," they say "Include the shop in the plan”;

149
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY

rather than "Oneck up on plan fulfillment." they say 'mview the daily report" and
so on. Here, operations with the cbcuments become the goal, and the real goal
fades into the background. Hence also the format of the document is perceived as
soaething absolute, determined forever and not subject to discussion.

Thus although the goal at hand predetermines the intonation need in this case,

the goal itself forms (or, more accurately. undergoes transformation) under the
influence of those form in which this need is satisfied. Here, goal formation
exists in a complex dialectical relationship with forutiom and satisfaction of

an information need. It may consequently be hypothesized that when the comesition
of incoming information changes. the goal of the planner changes as well.

he analysis also revealed another case of goal displacement. The planner of

an operating system tries to plan not so much the and goal itself as a smoothly
running production operation--that is. absence of manpower and equipuent idleness,
timely delivery of raw materials, semifinishad products and associated articles.
fulfillment of labor discipline. norms and so on. 'me information need changes
correspondingly as well: 'lhe planner is interested mainly in information on pro-
duction deviations, and he rejects information having to do with a normal course of
production. But the real goal of a manager is not to correct disturbances in a
normal production operation but to prevent such disturbances by prospt action.
1herefore predictions of deviations. ones allowir; the eanager to foretell possible
interruptions in production. are objectively necessary information.

N. . . slyun'kov, director of the Minsk Tray»: Plant, discerned this phenomenon with
surprising accuracy: ”The actual stoppage a conveyer had always been the

disaster signal. and it was at that ties t emergency measures were isolemented.

And as long as the conveyer was still running, it was thought. there was no reason

to raise a fuss. But an order making preventive maintenance mandatory imparted
rhythmiclty to the work of our conveyer. and on the other hand it changed the view-
points of the people. it was some time before the laborers and specialists became
accustomed to the simple idea that emergency measures should be implemented before

the fact, and that our objective is not to get the conveyer running once again through
heroic effort. It must never be allowed to star-this simple idea came into acceptance
with agonizing difficulty” (88).

In our experiment, predictions of possible failures did not produce a dramatic
change in the structure of intermediate goals (a change from correction of failures
to their prevention). It may be supposed, however, that the desired impact would be
achieved after the practice of providing such information has existed for a longer
puriod of tin.

3. Finding the possibilities for changing the situation at the target facility
with the purpose of supporting plan fulfillment is the lost complex stage. what we
are dealing with here is a function of operational planning that is the key to the
entire planning systolic-formation of the plan of action to achieve the planned goal.
This function may also be interpreted as the making of a planning decision, since
the search for the scans of making the decision is inseparable from the choice of
the best decision. 'lhe information used in this case is distinguished by both

great diversity and high uncertainty. Additional difficulties are associated with
the fact that the bulk of the necessary information is selected and perceived by the

150

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

planner nondeliberately, randomly to a certain extent. merefore neither the
experiment nor the interviews produch reliable results, and so the analysis rested
basically on observations of the activity.

The field of decision making resources is limited alsost entirely to two forse of
information: a) accuuulated experience, b) the theoretical recommendations of
colleagues (including subordinates, supervisors and even “plain old acquaintenances") .
1heoretical reconmendations have relatively little value to productim managers due
to their excessively general nature: "...they need concrete reference intonation
which may be utilized right away. The intonation interests of these users are
forced upon them by the circumstances“ ((92), p 12). If we add to this that most
managers received their special education a rather long time ago and that their
knowledge is to a significant extent obsolete, it becomes clear that the theoretical
knowledge possessed by production executives comes entirely from personal experience
acquired in the given job or at the given enterprise.

Personal experience is transformed into a certain system of relationships between
certain decisions and frequently encountered problem. The task of the planner
boils down here to reducing the existing situation to a past situation (seeking a
precedent). In this case, external advice changes almost nothing: The
personal experience of the subject of planning is sisply emetituted by the personal
experience of the "consultant.“ If a precedent is found, the decision is brought
into concrete form on the basis of information describing specific aspects of the
situation. At this noment the information need centers on specific aspects depend-

ing on the precedent chosen. For a certain while the precedent itself--the decision
selected in the past--assumes the role of the goal.

The definition given to the end goal by the subject of planning plays a tremendous
role. To many managers this goal is the desire to eliminate disturbances of the
production cycle at all costs. In this case the information need is limited to

the given disturbances--their depth, their duration, the external causes, the persons
at fault (more accurately, the persons responsible) and their significance from the
reporting standpoint. A decision eliminating the failure itself is adopted
correspondingly. me range of action of a decision is limited to the current situ-
ation. The possibility that a given failure may recur is not accounted for to a
sufficient degree, and in the best case, someone is sade personally responsible

for failures in an effort to prevent such failures in the future.

But the real goal of management, as it is defined by the met successful executives.
is not to correct a disturbance but to eliminate its causes. in this case the de-
cision must be deeper, more far-reaching, and predictive to some extent. Specifically
speaking, only such a decision can be called a planning decision. When planning is
performed in this way the information need rises significantly. The information

must support analysis of the activity of the target of planning over a significant
time interval, prediction of its activity in the future and determination of the
possibility for maintaining a long-term influence upon the facility.

Thus, here as well we encounter change in information need under the influence of
the way the end goal is defined. At the same time, for-ation of the intermediate
goal depends on how well this need is satisfied. The way extended provision of

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this certain infornation in this stage influences the possibilities for change
in the orientation of goals was not analysed.

4. The fourth stage of operational planning-~control over plan fulfillment-do
closely associated with familiarization with the real situation. he fact is that
plan fulfillment data for a current period simltaneously represent information
necessary for future planning. assuming that these data are promtly received.

The results of our analysis show that ignoring the specific needs for control in-
formation would not be detrimental to the overall picture. '

Smarizing the results, we can make the following conclusion: li‘he information
needs of a manager in an operatioaal planning system are formed under the influence
of the main goal of action, as subjectively defined. Intermediate goals, on the
other hand. are formed under the direct influence of the received information.

'lhus the relationship bemeen the end goal and intermediate goals is found to be
indirect, mediated by the information need and by its satisfaction. Provision of
subjectively superfluous but objectively necessary information does not have a
direct influence on the results of activity, but were such information to be pro-

vided over a long period of time, it could inﬂuence the definition of the end goal
and, consequently, the informatics: need. Formation of new information needs is
the external manifestation of this influence.

Consequently we cannot base a definition of the structure and volume of output in-
formation in an ASUP on the existing informatial needs. Automation of control opens
up new possibilities before users. ones which they cannot put into action without
special training. Consequently we need to determine what data are objectively
necessary, and then train the user to use them. In this case the way the informa-
tion is presented is itself one of the factors to be considered in manager training.

characteristics of Coal Formation in Managerial Activity

Operational planning is defined in the economic literature as a means for achieving
a single goal--fulfillment of a production plan. “By promoting smooth and coordi-

nated operation of all production units with the goal of achieving uniform fulfill-
ment of the production plan in term of specified volumes and assortment , opera-
tional planning thus promtes rhythmical work of the enterprise...” ((103). p 3).
However, the goal of the whole system may mt be consistent with the goals of
individual workers--the executors in this system.

Internal shop planning performed by foreman (section chiefs) and senior fore-ten
(shift chiefs) was adopted as the object of study. We used a method of active ob-
servation of the work of the foreman to reveal those factors which most actively
influence goal formation.

The study was based on division of all forum of planning information into three
categories: the target plan. the plan of action and the follow-up plan. The target
plan was defined as the complex of indicators that had to be achieved as a result
of the activity of the section (shift) workers, assuming that the means for
achieving these indicators are not specified by plan. The plan of action is de-
fined as the set of resources promoting attainment of the target plan: in other
words it is a concrete guide for action. he follow-up plan was defined as a

152

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
planning document not having mandatory force and used to monitor and record ful-
fillment of the target plan: an exasple of such a plan would be a section's
uonthly work plan, if deviations from this plan, occurring within the month (or a
10-day period) , are said to be permissible.

The target plan and the follow-up plan are submitted to the foreman in ready form
"from above"--from the plant's plan dispatch department (PDO) or the shop's plan
dispatch bureau (P08). The foreman creates (or should create) the plan of action
independently or with the help of subordinates. An analysis of the plan of action
would lead to a number of conclusions concerning the foreman's relationship to
different components of the target plan and concerning presence of other goals
posed by the foreran in the performance of his official responsibilities. lnasnuch
as the plan of action is usually not documented, and sometimes not even verbalised,
analysis of this plan was based on a study of the actions themselves. It was
assumed in this case, with a- certain amount of arbitrariness, that all actions of
the foreman are sited at fulfillment of a certain plat, conscious or unconscious.

no results of the analysis allow the assertion that fulfillment of the target

plan is, to the foreman, only a means for achieving goals at a subjectively higher
level. Such goals include positive evaluations of the foremsn's activity by different
evaluating groups. A foreman has three such groups: the shop management and, in
part, the management of the entire plant, the shop administration collective, and

the collective of workers directly subordinated to the master. Contradictions in

the opinions and evaluations of different groups elicit corresponding contradictions
in the goals of the foreman.

The management evaluates the foreman's activities on the basis of production indi-
cators: fulfillment of the target plan, coapliance with technical and procedural
standards, maintenance of labor discipline at the required level, ecoImization of
materials and the wage fund, equipment maintenance, production rhythmicityand so

on. In this case the manager is quite happy if the foreman is able to satisfy
certain norms established by custom. within the limits of these norms, the foremen's
actiVity is usually not questioned, assisting that the manager does not receive
additional ”external" signals . ‘mus frosl the manager's standpoint the best foreman
is one who is able to satisfy universally recognised norms of activity, one who
keeps ”everything in order," and whose actions never require the manager's inter-
ference. One other condition is included here rather often as well: he foreman
should turn to the manager for help in solving mlex problems as rarely as possible.

From the standpoint of his colleagues the foreman mist: first, ”not be better than
everyone else," not be too far ahead of the other sections (shifts), and not force
other forcmen to change their «DIR Style and nomads by personal example: second, he
must fulfill his responsibilities as independently as possible, without running to
his comrades for help and without distracting then from their mm responsibilities;
third, he must uniformly share general responsibilities with neighboring sections
(shifts) , he should not "profit at the expense of others.‘ '1!) satisfy these require-
ments, the foreman must often reduce his work effectiveness, fail some of his respon-
sibilities, and work at the lower limit of managerial expertise when a possibility
for working sore effectively does exist.

The requirements isposed on the foreman by his workers may be divided into two
groups. First of all there are thoee consistent with the management's requiremnts

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY

in relation to production indicators--the workers are basically interested in the
section‘s (shift's) effective work, and as a minimum in a high evaluation of this
effectiveness by the management. But the workers also have specific requirements
toward their foreman associated with a narrow approach to the section's activity.
with a tendency to solve their own problems at the expense of external resources.
The foreman must defend their interests, in the opinion of lost interviewed workers,
namely "at the expense of others," no matter what the probler-expenditure of the
wage fund, the quality of raw materials and semifinished products and their delivery
schedule. or the use of repairman. The interviews clearly revealed the need of the
workers for a foreman able to have the needs of his section and of his workers
satisfied first. This factor acquires special significance in regard to material
stimulation, to include distribution of "profitable" and "unprofitable' jobs,
determination of output noms, overtime pay and so on.

The contradictory nature of the interests of different groups making value judg-
ments of the foreman is an inherent trait of the coupler network of overlapping and
conflicting interests in national economic planning. “...the probability is not
excluded that the state plan's assignments, which reflect national needs and which
are brought to the awareness of the production collective, may not be consistent
with its interests; as an exauple the average profitability level or the product
sales volume of the enterprise may be decreased“ ((23), p 36). "The mtual rela-
tionships between the economic planning department (sac) and the production dis-
patch department (PDO) make up one of the lost confused and couples areas of
management. Their operating mechanism is itself characterised by a certain in-
consistency in individual parts of this mechanism... Under these conditions the
Poo's work. ..boils down to ‘tailoring' the production plan to economic indicators
calculated without regard to the actual status and tesporal dynamics of production,
and to controlling production on a real time scale, having to deal not with 'conpari-
3011' articles and not only norm-hours but also natural, 'physical' indicators ((104),
p 544).

Returning to the activity of the foreman, we ‘ind that it is aired at reaching
contradictory, incompatible goals. We know ”that in addition to an and goal, inter-
mediate goals formed independently by the abject depending on the evolved condi-
tions play a highly important role in the sibject's activity“ ((88), p 20). Forma-
tion of such intermediate goals, associated to one extent or another with the end
goals, promote the latter's attainment, and in our opinion they represent the goal
formation process in the foreman's activity and, by the way, in the activity of any
manager.

Our research revealed a certain set of typical, Inst frequently proposed goals.

An analysis of the causes and conditions of their formation would permit us to gain
a better understanding of the foreman's activity and of the laws governing goal
formation. One of the most complex functions of the foreman is to distribute

shift assignments between workplaces containing identical or functionally similar
equipment. (In this case we are dealing with various types of stamps.) Individual
series of parts differ in volume-darge series should be sent to the sore-productive
machine tools so as to reduce the number of times the tools must be readjusted (the
number of times the stamps must be changed). Because some norms that do not account
for the specific features of certain parts cannot be net, jobs may be more profitable
or less profitable (norms may be more or less intensive), which makes it necessary
to distribute the jobs uniformly in tem of the possible income. 'lhis uniformity

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is violated when the foreman tries to use profitable jobs as a means of material
stimulation, and by the fact that the wage interests of different workers are not
the same. Orders can also differ in terms of their mletion deadline, and there-
fore the foreman must account for both the reliability of the equipment and the
possibilities of the worker. The need for simultaneously accounting for all of
these factors considerably raises the load on the mental capabilities of an indi-

vidual faced by a rather large volume of jobs (when there are 50-100 persons in a
section).

Judging from the observation results the foreman structures his chain of interuediate
goals depending on the degree to which their attainment is controlled. Rush orders
are given priority--they are assigned to the met reliable and experienced workers
using the met reliable and productive machine tools. This pertains to orders ful-
filled in response to dispatch warning signals (controlled by the plant P130), to

the personal directives of the shop chief (personal control) and to orders upon
which satisfaction of nonthly norm depends (controlled by bonuses).

when this goal is met, the foreman sets a second goal--satisfaction of the lost
serious wage complaints of the workers. Because frequent machine tool readjustments

of loading the equipment in the most effective way. And it is only after this
second goal is attained that a new goal of action rises to the surfaceu-distribution
of jobs with maximum economic impact, with madman labor productivity.

This displacement of what would seem to be the main goal--raising labor productivity--
to last place requires special explanation. First, this goal is partially reached

Second, the workers themselves are interested in theircwn productivity even sore than
is the foreman (at least from the standpoint of material stimulation). third, labor
productivity as such is not controlled specially, the moral and material stimulation
it receives is relatively weak, and not one of the evaluating groups places priority
on it. Therefore whenever raising labor productivity is found to be in conflict
with other goals, it is in fact sacrificed.

Another example of the sane process can be seen in the interaction of different
target plans. Several plans are “lowered from on high" to the foreman: technical-
economic, the monthly plan broken down into days, dispatch warning signals, the
labor and wage plan and so on. The foreman does not have the possibility, and some-
times even the desire, to ensure fulfillmnt of all of these planned targets simul-
taneously. 1herefore he builds a unique hierarchy of intern-diets goals taking the
form of a hierarchy of the plans, based on their importance.

In practice, the hierarchy of planned targets is based on the degree to which their

attainment is controlled and stimulated. Thus the monthly plan is stimulated by
two indicators: If the monthly target is not met, the foreman forefeits the sec-

tion's "progressive" bonus, and there is another bonus that is paid for rhythmicity
of production-~for uniform fulfillment of the lonthly plan in relation to 10-day

periods. his is why meeting the planned target for the month is at the top of
the hierarchy and compliance with the 10-day plan is in second place. Fulfillment
of the daily (shift) target is controlled only in the event that failure of the

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

target would cause idleness of other shops. But the plant also uses a system of
dispatch warning signals that are sounded when shop shut-down is threatened. In the
hierarchy of plans, the dispatch warning signal stands even higher than the 10-day
target, and the shift target is hardly even considered in relation to the distri-
bution of jobs. Therefore the section's shift target is perceived not as the target

plan but as a follow-up plan, used to control fulfilleent of mnthly and 10-day
targets.

i’ailure of the labor and wage plan is controlled in practice only at the shop
level, while exceeding the wage fund is sometimes stimulated by the workers them-
selves, and it facilitates fulfillment of the production plan. 131s labor and wage
plan is accounted for only in "favorable" months, when the production plan can be
fulfilled without a threat of failure, or in response to a special directive from
the shop chief, when things are not going so well in other sections.

Summarizing the above, we can say that a planned assignmnt which is not subjected
to rigid control or to moral and material stimulation does not become a target plan

to the foreman. OonSequently such an assignment is not included in the structure

of the foreman's actions, and the associated plan loses its value. This cannot be
thought of as unique to the enterprise we analyzed, since the literature often con-
tains such examples. "The foreman places priority on parts for which production is
behind.... This 'deficit' often consists of several dozen types of parts, and it

may require a day‘s worth of the shop's capacity or even more. When this happens,

for practical purposes sections find themselves doing nothing more than catching

up on production of such parts. Thus the monthly plan loses its force as a distri-
bution planning tool, and the strap works on a 'deficit' basis every day” ((17), p 21)-

We can now attenpt to build a general scheue of the thinking activity of a foremn
drawing up a plan of action. ‘lhe foreman receives the target plans, considers the
opinion of evaluating groups and creates the intermediate goals. The intermediate
goals assume a hierarchical structure which is determined by the hierarchy of the
target plan, and at the highest level of the end goal by the evaluation given to
the foreman's activity by the evaluating groups. Then the intermediate goals are
met by the cospletion of tasks determined with regard to the particular status of
the section at the moment each intermediate goal is set.

Consequently in terns of the foreman, formation of a target plan requires consider-
ation of the unique features of goal formation in operational planning and control.
This acquires special importance in the planning of automated control systems (PSU‘s),
where the target plan is prepared by a computer, which makes it difficult to account
for human factors.

‘Ihus the ASU psychosocial support section created within the ASU division of "Bl'fa'
is studying the literature on psychological problems of automation, consulting with
the appropriate scientific institutions, conducting psychological research on a

specific enterprise and applying the obtained knowledge to creation of an automated

system (with the purpose of determining the structure and volume of output informa-
tion on the basis of the needs of the users, accounting for the particular features

of goal formation in the creation of an automated operational planning sdasystem and
so on).

156

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

THE ML! 0? m PEIGONI‘N'S ACHVITY IN RAISING m
EFFECTIVENESS 0? AM!!!) cannot.

a. D. Megina, L. A. Abramyan

msearch on the place. role and functions of the individual in control systems is
one of the directions of solving the complex problem of improving production control.
This problem is acquiring special urgency and controversy in connection with crea-
tion of ASU's. It is entirely obvious in this case that the place of the individual
in automated control systems met be different from that he had occupied in tradi-
tional systems. hhich elements of managerial activity should be retained, which
would have to be transformd with the goal of ilproving it, and in which direction
should this transformation proceed? These questions could only be answered on the
basis of a comprehensive. deep study of man's managerial activity and its analysis
in the met diverse as:ccts-~production.wdn. psychological. mly such a study
could provide kmwledge on its strong and weak sides.

It is already clear today that simple installation of more-cosplicated and more-
sophisticated computers in a control system would not be enough to fully realize
the idea of automated control or to ensure optima control in organisations. If
we are to eliminate the obstacles arising in the way of automation of managerial
activity and the information system upon which the latter is based, we would need
to first reorganize the control system itself. axe example of a way suggested for
isproving an organizational system is to consider the reguiresents on the effi-
ciency of the developed system and the rules and means of satisfying these require-
nents (66). In this case the organisational system is interpreted as a normative
system providing managerial personnel with a padtage of decisions which they apply
to the appropriate situations. In more general form, these ideas, worded as require-
mnts concerned with special research on the planning of the activrty of people in
an ASUP, are reflected in the theory of Man factors planning. If we intend to
plan and specially organise the activity of the individual in an 580, we would have
to utilize knowledge on the structure of managerial activity in different systems--

particularly knowledge on differences in the content and structure of this activity
in traditional and automated control systems.

The oomlexity of this problem stem to a significant extent from the unique features
of managerial activity viewed as one of the forms of mental activity. ‘lhis activity
includes adoption of various decisions, often nontrivial ones, which requires a

creative approach. But at the same time much of all managerial activity includes
steriotypic, monotonous and habitual operations--often in large volume at that.

mese may include arithmetic operations (in system in which accounting operations

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL [SE ONLY

are not mechanized and automated), operations associated with filling in or
checking documents in a strictly routine fashion, and various sorts of stereotypic
decisions not requiring special analysis of situations.

According to a hunter of authors such work makes up more than 80 percent of the

activity of even highly qualified managers (64). ‘lhese are precisely the sorts of
managerial jobs which make it so isportant to automate managesent with the purpose
of emancipating the managers, releasing them for creative labor, for which there is

exists and is subjectively confirmed (managers theuelves coqlain that they are
forced to work 'like automatons”) . But this is not the only reason toconsider automa-
tion. Other no less inportant reasons for automating managerial activity include

traditional control systems based on the sinplest calculation equipant, and the
iupossibility of accounting for all or at least most factors. which is crucial to

tremely mdest. Many authors have specially analysed the causes hindering automa-
tion. Thus Novikov distinguished two groups of such causes.‘ 'ihe first group is
associated with the imperfections of general mathematical economic models and
methods, which are often found to be inadequate to a concrete control system,
particularly in application to the specific conditions of supply and marketing.
The second group of causes stems from insufficient development of the methods of
mathematical economics in relation to the supply and marketing system (64).

In a situation where the traditional informatics: system is left intact, the struc-
ture and content of material-technical supply of the AS!) do not satisfy the re-
quirements of the sethods of mathematical economics. Because the information on
supply and marketing processes used in the comuter is incoaplete mistakes are
made, decisions are unsatisfactory and, to make matters worse, many managers
develop a psychological barrier conpelling them to return to manual information
processing and ignore computer data. In the final analysis, this means slow
introduction of the computer. higher outlays associated with these delays and

a certain discrediting of the idea itself of automating control.

studies conducted beforehand on information flows, document turnover and the
functions of managers. Our previous research (105) showed that such studies,
when performed without psychological analysis of the activity of managers, cannot
fully reveal their management practices. Special psychological methodsnpersonal
interviews of workers. direct observation of their managerial activities--reveal
the deeper structure of this activity and permit revelation of the methods of
action and the factors regulating these actions, ones which do not lie on the

3A3 in Novikov's research. the concrete object of analysis of managerial activity

in our research was the national economy's material-technical supply system, to
include organisations from enterprises and associations to the central organs

of the USSR Gosplan. the (58R Gossnab and the main supply administrations of
various ministries and departments.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

surface and which are often unrecognized even by the wagers then-elves, but which
nevertheless play a large role in the effectiveness of their work.

Our analysis of human managerial activity revealed one general factor influencing the
nature of this activitynthe amount of activity contributed by the individual himself.
when everything in the managed facility proceeds 'snothiy," the individual can make
do with a previously packaged set of routine decisions and mthods of action taking
the form of various norms. It is at this level that the individual has special need
for couputer assistance. However, control also presupposes the most diverse changes
in the managed facility. These changes are equipmbable, and they are not always
predictable. Any reorganization of the control system would only reduce their
human-it would not eliminate them. on possibility that they would arise will
always remain, and consequently the need for identifying them and the ability to
eliminate them would remain as well--that is, the need for control would remain.

An inconsistency between the general goals of control, as perceived by the individual,
and the real status of the facility he manages is what cospels the individual to act.

me actions the individual takes reflect his experience and his ability to make cre~
ative decisions. Through his active actions, the roots of which lie in the basis of

control, the individual finds it possible to surmount many obstacles (underproduction,
deviations from the norms, changes in plans and so on) on the way to achieving the
goals of control.

In real life, the individual far from always displays such activity, or lives up to
his possibilities and aspirations of creative management. The unique paradox that
couple): managenent problems are solved by simple lethods is often noted in descrip-
tions of the way an individual solves coupler management problems. this paradox

is the main reason for introducing automated control, but in it we should also seek
the factors that hinder automation and the answer to the enigma of the computer's
limited possibilities in a control system. 'lhe answer to this enigma is that a very
signifith factor is added to these siaple memods, namely man's experience,
knowledge and creativity (64,105). And although these processes occupy a minor
place in the activity of managers in traditional systems, they are found to be so
iuportant that they make man competitive with couples automated systems.

We must keep in mind, however, that the goal of automation is to free the individual
for creativity. But this does not always happen in practice: Although the indi~
vidual finds himself with more time for creative work, in an automated system (one
which ignores the laws of transformation of managerial activity in an ASU) its over-
all effectiveness dcclines. Rather than the anticipated flourishing of the creative
activity of an individual in an 350, we often witness one form of routine work being
sisply substituted by another connected with processing computer data. Such is the
unexpected result of change, or more accurately, insufficient change of the content
of the individual's activity in an 350.

But why then, despite the doubtless decrease in the voluae of stereotypic jobs, does
automation not automatically cause a rise in the creative potential of the individual's
managerial activity? The answer to this questim should be sought in an examination
of the psychological mechanism of creativity, in the native forces behind creative
activity, in the activity of the individual operating as one of the necessary condi-
tions of creativity.

159

FOR omcut USE ONLY
DUI WIILIAL 03!. ONLY

What sort of factors arouse man to creativity, to activity in control, and what sort
of changes do they undergo in an ASH? This question can be answered by an analysis
of the structure and content of managerial activity. As was no'ted earlier, comlex
management problem can be solved by simle methods. but they may also require the
individual to exert his mental capabilities to the maxinmn Possible changes in
plans which perpetually occur. the supply interruptions that are still encountered
and other factors that disturb organization require a transition from actions based
on a stereotypic pattern to actions structured on the basis of an active analysis
of initial situations. Finally, absence of couplets correspondence between instruc-
tions on one hand, representing the basic responsibility of managers, and their

real responsibilities on the other also reflects contradictions and possible un-
certainties in the content of managerial activity.

One consequence of such contradictions is that managerialactivity may proceed in

different ways, even when the general formal requirements imposed on the results of
managerial activity are satisfied as stated in the instructions. The extensive

possibilities for interpreting instructions depending on the particular features of
the subject of control--his qualifications, experience, knowledge, personal qualities,
activity and his desire to achieve the highest resultsuare precisely what cause the
highly significant differences in the quality of managerial activity.

'lhus practically all instructions regulating the responsibilities of managers contain
words such as "ensure,” "achieve” and so on: but as a rule the instructions do not
specify the sort of results that must be ensured. and at what level. The means and
level of achievement of results are determined by the worker himself. 'lhis is pre-
cisely where his managerial experience. activity and orientation toward a particular
result operate as the most important factors.

It is presumed that the requirements contained in instructions would be tailored to
the real conditions before specific actions are chosen. Every control system contains
inherent factors which stimulate managerial activity ”from within“ and which determine
its specific features.

As an example in the form of managerial labor we studiedudistribution of material
resources--a discrepancy between the indicators of the plan and the concrete re-
sources available or the requirements of the consumer was usually such a factor.
In this case the manager's task is to find a means for eliminating scarcities or
satisfying a consumer‘s new requirements (if they are deemed to be suitable). This

manager structures his activity on the basis of an entire system of active actions.
the choice, succession and suitability of which he determines himself. As an

example he may take the problem to the dispatch office, the shipping department.
the sales department, the management or even 'the very top" (using the words of
middle-level managers). He in a sense plays the role of middle-man between the
consumer and the supplier, striving to complete the plan and satisfy suitable re-
quirements.

The choice, formation and fulfillmnt of all actions required in concrete situations
would be possible only if the individual exhibits a certain level of activity, if
he understands the significance of the overall goal, and if it is his aspiration, if
it is within his personal interest to achieve the overall goals (to fulfill the
delivery plan). 'lhe individual's active position. his adequate self-evaluation of
his actions is one of the main regulators of managerial activity conducted at a

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORWLWEONLY

higher level. since the individual practically always has the possibility for
limiting himelf to performance at a lower level.

'lhe activity of an individual in a control system may ccapensate for various
shortconings in the operation of such a system: It my surnunt information and
material shortages. It is governed by a system of many factors and phenomena typical
of the organization of all forms of labor. It may be raised by creating special
stimuli accounting for the economic, production, social and psychological factors

of the organization of managerial labor. mation of such stimuli is a mans for
shaping the most effective motives. 'lhe general psychological teaching on active-
tions and on their influence on productivity (43.53.109) may be laid at the basis

of stimulation, and thus it would be one of the resources by which to scientifically

organize managerial labor and raise its effectiveness.

The system of motives regulating managerial activity reflects the individual's
attitude toward the results of his labor and his duties, and it expresses the degree
of responsibility shown toward these duties and the unbrstanding the individual
possesses of the social meaningfulness of his work.

In what way does the activity of the individual, shaped in connection with the
unique features of his personality and mtivations. manifest itself in managerial
decision making? Personality traits and differences in the individual's attitude
toward a situation. a task and the results of activity are factors upon which
managerial. decisions depend. However, these factors are not only never accounted
for in the planning and creation of asu's, but they also have never been a special
object of study.

If we are to raise the activity of the individual, we would first have to consider
the object itself and the structure of control. The tasks arising before a manager-
ial worker may be completed at the level of the “informational language of nulbers'
with a consideration for the principles of optimum distribution of resources. These
principles are realized in the work of the computer, which reﬂects a certain level
of possible distribution of material resources in the 380 that leads to a particular
result.

However. the individual hardly ever limits himself to solution of managerial pro-
blems at this level. He makes managerial decisions on the basis of information con-
cerning available resources (in comparisons with planning indicators and their
changes). utilising the principles of resource distribution. or he acts in spite

of them on the basis of his own smjective understanding of what a sensible distri-
bution would be.

Management decisions based on a subjective understanding of what a sensible distri-
bution would be might not be consistent with decisions produced by a coqauter in

similar situations. Sometimes-«when the individual makes a decision without regard
to its host iuportant consequences because he is unable to process a large quantity

of informationuhis decisions may be inferior to cosputer decisions in term of
what is optimum. This is a case demonstrating the advantage of counters in control

system. But cases of another sort arise as well-when mnagement decisions made
by the individual and based on a subjective. personal interpretation of the situation,

turn out to be the best. The conditions of such a situation are often such that the
formal principles of what is optimum Ilust be violated—something that a conputer
161

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI WI. USE ONLY

cannot do at present. Moreover, man can also easily change evolved stemotypes
and form new principles.

It is precisely in the creative element of managerial activity that the personality
comonentm-the subject's relationship to the situation, to the conditions and to

theresults of his activity--acquires special significance. ‘l'hese factors determine
whether or not the swject will continue to observe the formal principles of deci-
sion making in his activity, or follow new principles accounting for the specific
-features of the concrete situation. Analysis and evaluation of a situation and
its conditions presuppose the ability to see and find the dominant, I'key" factors
within them.

As an exanple in normal conditions. ewloyees of main administrations attenuating
to solve the problems of distributing material resources amng different enter-
prises consider the initially planned distribution indicators, current changes in
the plans, the transportation resources available, the evolved scarcities, presence

of surpluses among consumers and so on. A concrete management task. for examle
thatof determining the priorities to be placed on delivering resources to different

enterprises, may be completed with a consideration for all these factors by either
man or a couputer. however, only man would be able to include purely personal
factors in the structure of the decision.

Thus investigation of activity associated with material resource distribution pro-
blems in one of the main administrations of "Glavsnabugol" established that managers
often find it necessary, and suitable from the standpoint of production, to violate
the priorities of deliver' al to consumers. According to the established hier-
archy, coal is delivered priority to the principal consuIers: byproduct coke
industry, electric power plants, the Ministry of Railroads and others. lbwever,

the circumstances sometimes become such that a middle-level manager might make an
independent decision changing the priority of coal delivery in favor of ”secondary“
consumrs, on the basis that the principal consumers could wait a little without
detriment.

The iuportant role of personal relationships in managerial decision making is well
known in management practice, at both the supplier level and the consumer level.
men is even a special system of actions which shapes the personal relationship of
managers toward a particular situation. Thus for examle, a letter may be received
from an enterprise asking for help in organising an emergency shipsent of coal.

Or a complaint may be received that the supplier was falling short of the coal
delivery plan. In these cases the esployee of the main administration must display
an active effort to examine these issues and make the correct decision: provide
coal to the first consumer and analyze the causes of nondelivery to the second.

The inpact of decisions made by a main adsdnistration often depends on the activity
displayed by the consumer and on the steps he takes. Precisely what steps he takes
depends on the importance and urgency of the problem and on the personal relation-
ships which influence the decision making process. Thus we find that letters and
telephone conversations are often used to influence decisions: however, they are

not viewed as a very effective measure. An example of a significantly more effective
step would be when an enterprise director visits a supplier himself, personally.

In this case we find that there is inportance to precisely who it is that makes

the visit, inasmuch as the goal of such visits is often to persuade a supplier (re-
presented by a concrete person well known to the visitor) to make the needed decision,

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not so much on the basis of the formal principles of distribution, of which the
supplier is already well aware or which could have been transmitted to him by letter,
as on the basis of shaping his personal relationship toward the needs of the con-

sumr and causing this relationship to have an effect on the decision made by the
supplier.

However, the supplier must be able to implement an adopted decision, he must be

able to demonstrate its adequacy. It is namely here that a personal relationship
transforms into a direct native of activity, such that the manager begins seeking out
the resources and the possibilities of their redistribution--that is, it is here that
he takes a number of actions that seem the lost expedient in the evolved situation.
It is also precisely here that we reveal the advantage of man over couputer, and

his leading role in control systems, both traditional and automated.

the reason many ASU's have been inadequate is that individuals have had to use com-
puter information which did not reflect the needs and relationships of real people.
Owing to this the meaningfulness of the information they received was inadequate to
shape their active relationship to the object, and so their activity was limited to
fulfillment of actions at the level of formal principles of organization.

Thus the generally correct idea that a transition to automated control would require
reorganization of the control system itself, which would in turn require determina-
tion of what a sensibly developed system should be and the means by which this is

to be taken into account in the ”0's development. may go unrealized if only the
formal rules and methods of managerial decision making are utilized. If we wish

the ASU to allow man's creative possibilities to reveal themselves in their fullest,
when we introduce the computer into the control system we must make sure that the
conditions permitting operation of the principal psychological mechanism of creativity
remain.

To a significant extent the individual develops an active relationship to the object
of his activity under the influence of his interpretation of the meaningfulness of
the overall goal. and of its attainment in joint activity with other people. Hence
we find that ”infection by activity'--personal influences resulting from contact
with people and from consideration of their opinions and their evaluations-do
broadly employed in management practice as a means for raising activity.

Thus an individual's wo‘k with figures that reflect management processes and the
state of the object of management is also associated with people, who in the final

analysis form his attitude as a subject of control. It is precisely this attitude
which operates as the factor responsible for transition of managerial activity to a

higher level, a factor which raises its effectiveness and its creativity.

me only part of activity that is automated in ABU's isthat which man himself can
structure in formal terns, activity which reflects the regularity and the repeat-
ability of management actions. However, as was demonstrated above, the individual's
understanding of the meaningfulnees of events and his personal relationships to them
and to people assomated with them are the natives of this activity's host creative
part.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

Formation of subjective relationships is often not consideredin rodern ASU's; it is un-
foreseen in the organization of the new type of human managerial activity. People
using computer data in an 350 find themselves excluded from the system. they deal
with objectivized, inpersonalised intonation that does reflect real, concrete people.
This excludes an entire area of motives regulating development of the individual's
activity and creativity in management, which naturally cannot but have an influence

on the effectiveness of automted systeu and on the individual's evaluation of his
place within them.

If we are to capitalize upon the individual's activity with the purpose of raising
the effectiveness of management decisions, we would have to purposefully develop the
personality. The main thing we would need to do is to shape a special motivation--
the individual's understanding of the social meaningfulness of the events associated
with any decision he makes. We would also need to raise his sense of responsibility
and capitalize on the system of values and relationships of other people toward his
managerial activity.

An analysis of cases of low effectiveness of some 150’; would show that managers
become less active. they beoom indifferent, their decisions become uncreative, and
their sense of personal responsibility decreases whenever the counter information
with which they must deal does not reflect real people and their relationship toward
it. Such "dehumanized" information is unable to stimulate people to make management
decisions at a higher, creative level, to perform additional actions (ones not
specified in instructions) and to display creativity.

Typically, individuals who have had to work with such corputer information have tried
to surmount its negative influence on their own. Once again, their effort to sur-
mount this influence entailed inclusion of contacts with people into their activity.
Thus on receiving computer information about a control process, the individual tele-
phones the enterprise to receive it a second time, "first hand." This duplicates
the work of the computer, and naturally it should be interpreted as a harmful factor
in the work of the ASU. However, despite the fact that the individual must perform
some additional work, he feels it to be justified, since in addition to gaining ob-
jective information he also learns the subjective attitude felt toward it by other
people, which permits him to form his own system of attitudes. mese attitudes are

then included in his own managerial activity, into his management decisions.

Thus a conputer must be used in optimum fashion in an asu: It must operate as an
assistant to the individual, and it must not substitute completely for other people,
it must n0t displace contacts with them. Their attitudes, opinions and evaluations
must be evident behind all computer information, and they should be utilised in the
making of management decisions.

The theory of human relationships in organisation and in management, developed by
Soviet social psychology, describes numerous forms of interaction among people at
different rungs of the hierarchical ladder of control as factors promoting growth
in the productivity of managerial labor. These forms include creation of a positive
psychological climate within the collective, creation of positive mutual relation-
ships between supervisor and stbordinates, joint managerial decision making and
formulation of new management goals on the basis of comnication and interaction
between people (29.58.65).

164

FOR OFHCIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The individual's understanding of his place within the structure of the joint
activity of people in an automated control systea. consideration of their evaluations
of and relationships to the results of the individual's labor and consideration of
these evaluations and relationships in the individual's work are amng the neceuary
prerequisites of. organizing the individual's magerial activity in an A50, and of

ensuring his activity as a subject of control.

165

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
MWWWLY

pm III
THE PMSPRZTS FOR BRINGIDIG 'ARTIPIC’IAL IMIGENCE'
CIDSER '10 Hill”! 1mm

m PSYCHOIDGY 0P HIKING AND m PM 0? CKEATING
'ARTIPICIAL INTELLIBNCS'

Ye. S. Kusin

Most researchers concerned with creating 'arti ficial intelligence“ formulate different
definitions of it and then base the orientation of their further work on these defi-
nitions. The main reason why there is no agreeIont on now this term is understood
lies in the diffuseness of interpretations applied to the concept ”intelligence."
Clarifying the nature of intelligence and its role in the life and activity of a
biological system is the priority task of scholars in the natural sciences, and mainly
psychologists. I believe that a definition of intelligence must avoid the two ex-
tremes: “suedmanization"--that is, attemts at describing it with the help of para-
meters typically applied to machiner-on one hand. and its definition solely on the
basis of the features of huaan activity on the other.

merefore the goal of efforts to create “artificial intelligence“ is not to re-
create natural intelligence together with all of its unique features. but to develop
a certain automatic systes performing specific functions of intelligence. At the
same time. creation of such a system rust be based on couprehensive research on
thinking by psychology, physiology, linguistics. philosophy. and so on, or attempts
to simulate the typical traits of its organisation. However. when we pose the issue
in this way we iqaose higher requirements on this research. since only distinct
conclusions and definitions can serve as the foundation of further work. Work on
”arti ficial intelligence“ reanwhile. should itself continue in parallel with this
research. growing richer from the latter and posing new problems. In this case auto-
matic (arti ficial) systems should simlate primarily those aspects of natural intelli-
gence which appear most fundamental toda .

He based the research described in this article on two typical features of the
organization of thinking: its comrehensibility and possession of a certain system

of knowledge by the individual.
Operation with the content of concepts reflecting sleunts of the problematic en-

vironment and their interaction plays the fundamental role in thinking. "Intercus works
have been devoted to this aspect of thinking.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me fundamental importance of cosprehensibility, “which is inherent to memrisation,
to recall and to the organization itself of the search for a solution to a problem,"
is emphasized in Tikhomirov's last work (91).

As a result of creation of a mental model of the objective worldby the subject, each
concept (mental discharge) acquires is semantic content through association with
other concepts in the model. me appearance of a new waning is the result of some
sort of transformation in the model, and it is equivalent to arisal of new knowledge.
Revelation of the semantic content of a concept and the search for elements of the
required leaning on the basis of conceptual associations make up the basis of

the thinking process.

Rubinshteyn (81) points out that analysis of each eleunt of a problem depends on
the associations of which it is a factor and which are deters ined by the relationship
between this element and the requirements of the problem. The results of thinking
are included into the thinking process itself and, enriching it, they govern its
subsequent course.

'rikhomirov words the iuportance of analysing the semantic content of concepts during
thinking very clearly (92): "One of the most isportant characteristics of problem
solving is that the meanings of certain elements of the situation undergo develop-
nent. Meaning is the result of a certain group of retrieval operations; meaning
develops by the inclusion of the same element into different systems of interactions."
'rikhomimv interprets the entire course of problem solving as a search aimed at
analyzing the semantic relationships of elements in different situations and con-
ducted within the subject's system of knowledge. In this case presence of elements
with particular properties in the situation is anticipated, and the need for such
elements. referred to as the need of "retrieval," is created.

Thus one requirement an "artificial intelligence" system necessarily isposes on

an internal model of the objective world is its cosprehensible reflection of the
content of elements in the problematic environnntuboth the initial centant and
that formed by the system in the course of problem solving. The potential for ex-
anining each element in terms of any meaning that may be required by the problem
solving process--that is, the possibility for "exhausting'I (using Rubinshteyn's
term (81)) its semantic content--must be ensured. In each stage of problem solving,
each element within the problematic environment must have only a certain “opera-
tional meaning" different in the general case from its ”operational manings" in
other stages of solution. In this case the system mat ensure a nusber of degrees
of freedom that is maximum possible for the given hardware, and a broad possibility
for voluntary reduction of the degrees of freedom.

One fundamental feature of the way the subject perceives the objective world is its
representation in the form of a single system of knowledge, one appearing as an
integral set of knowledge. This means that the semantic content of any concept
within this set may be expressed only by way of all other concepts within this set
as a whole. No concept, no individual item of knowledge can be interpreted in iso-
lation; when abstracted from this system, it ceases to exist. Every concept has its
own personal weaning to the individual. a meaning that is a product of the entire
system of his knowledge.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me individual's system of knowletge is defined by his environmnt. by what he does
in this environment, and it bears an oriented nature in the broad sense of this

word. However. the orientation of its organization cannot be represented as a set
of general Indels of situations and variants of behavior corresponding to them. Such
organization is limited in nature, and it may be interpreted as only a particular
case. In fact. when we perceive knowledge to be organized in terms of different
situations. the situation appears as an integral eleaent having particular semantic
content. The elements of the situation. manwhils, play the role of characteristics
which permit us to distinguish one situation from another. he system's reactions
would be adequate in this case only in the event that the concrete situation can be

identified with one of the reflections of the situations already present in the
system's memry.

within a system of knowledge. the meaning of any situation is revealed as the result
of an analysis of the semantic content of its elemnts, and the system's behavior
in the given situation is the result of a synthesis performed on the basis of this
analysis. In this case adequate behavior say be organised even if a new situation
is encountered (a "new” situation is defined as one whose elemnts are already known
to the system but which are encountered for the first tins in the particular rela-
tionships) .

Reproduction, in an automatic system. of the integral structure of a system of
knowledge, together with the undisturbed organisation of semantic associations be-
tween its elements, is in our opinion the first step on the road to creating artifi-
cial intelligence systems.

One such attempt was developsent of the principles of representing this system of
knowledge in a couputer during creation of an automatic system capable of searching
for the paths of problem solution. 'lbe main parts of the system are the model of the
problematic environ-lent (HPBP-a progran containing the sin total of mutually
associated items of information about the environunt, and a set of reasoning
schemes (IB)--a program containing the sum total of schemes for organising "thinking”
during the system's solution of various problem. The mthod of organising the
solution process in this system was named the waning retrieval method (HRH).
Knowledge is represented basically in the HPE as a programed organisation taking
the format an integral structure consisting of different elements and the associa-
tions among then.

When these program are run in the conputer, each element appears as a set of com-
puter words. All the words (except auxiliary or working words) have identical
structure: Some of the bits of each word indicate the address of one of the ele-
ments with which the given element is associated, and the rest of the bits indicate
the nature of the associations between these elements. Each such association is
two—sided. Thus the potential is ensured for leaving on the basis of these associ-
ations from one element to another in any direction. and if a certain strategy for
such movement is developed, a possibility for organising directed retrieval within
the structure is ensured.

ﬁle system of knowledge is represented within this word structure in such a way
that each element would correspond to a certain concept of the system of knowledge:
in this case some of the concepts (relationships) may exist as both elements and
associations simultaneously.

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole, the described structure forms the memory, organized according to the
associative principle, as it is defined in coquter technology--that is, the search
for the needed elements is organized not on the basis of a priori assignmnt of
addresses but rather on the basis of assignment of their semantic content.

This structure affords a possibility for using a broad class of various problem-
oriented languages based on natural language. The model of the problematic environ-
uent may also include specialised couplemes of knowledge having different structural
organization and expressed in the corresponding formal languages. 'no maintain the
integrity of the system of knowledge and its auntie unity, these cosplexes must
include concepts definable within the main structure, since they must themelves

fit within this structure as individual concepts.

One indisputable merit of the “PE is its open-endednsss and the simplicity of inclu-
sion of new concepts. New concepts are introduced by definition, using the appro-

priate semantic associations with concepts already present in the system of
knowledge.

he reasoning schemes, also included in the system of knowledge, perform retrieval
and the necessary transformations in the HPE. Such transformations can include

formation and incorporation of new concepts in the m. addition of further detail
to the structure of existing concepts, representation of new relationships between
concepts in the HPE and so on.

Each of these reasoning schemes represents a certain a priori strategy controlling
retrieval in the MP5 and, consequently, its transfornation. The form of strategy,
and thus the type of reasoning scheme as well, depend on the particular task (for
example the tasks of planning, demonstration, determination of laws and so on), and
for practical purposes they do not depend on the problematic environment. In dis-
tinction from knowledge in the HPE, knowledge contained in the I6 is expressed only
in inperative form, as in conventional computer programs (that is, a set of uncondi-
tional and conditional commands).

An 16 is a sequence of steps of semantic search (search based on given semantic
associations), formed a priori. The result of each step in the search is retrieval
of a concept possessing a somatic content necessary for continuation of the solu-
tion process, or the conclusion that such a concept does not exist (at least in the
given search direction). After each step of the seard) (or after a determined
sequence of steps), the i6 contains a coluand for a conditional transition that
switches the reasoning process, depending on the results of the search at the given
stage, to some new retrieval step.

Following completion of the stages of the search, as governed by the as, the
reasoning scheme makes the appropriate transformations in the FPS, after which new
stages of the search begin, ending with new transformations, and so on.

Special emphasis should be laid on the fact that each specific untal step in the
structure of the MPL‘ depends on two factors: on one hand the order built into the

as and. on the other, the semantic relationships of the concepts--that is, their
semantic content. 1he principal native of retrieval is the “need to retrieve“--
the need to find an clemnt possessing the needed properties. The “need to retrieve‘I
itself arises as a result of an inconsistency between the representations of the

169
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

target and current situation: in the sodel of the problematic environment. 'me
desire to elininatc arising inconsistencies encourages a search, following a
strategy contained in the 8, for operators responsible for transformation of the
problematic environmnt, perception. calculation and so on.

Several variants of models for different problematic environnnts have been examined
thus far. development of a language for describing the problematic environment in
relation to one class of problems is now coming to an end. and one of the variants

of a planning algorithm designed for series Yes 8%! comters is now being run.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWUSEONLY

'AR'I‘IFICIM. INTELLIQNCE' MD as: 8mm! 0? ANALYZING 1'88
COGNITIVE STRUCTURES OF ”TURN. 1mm

L. H. Vexker

Research on the "arti ficial intelligence" problem is limited today to the possi-
bilities for technically reproducing various types and form of human cognitive
processes at the level of just general couputer codes. 'lhere is good reason for
this, since at this universal level the organisation of the information structures
of "artificial" and natural intelligence adheres to con-on principles. his is pre-
cisely why the present method enbodies within itself the theory and technique of
modeling intelligence at the level of elemntary information processes-~that is,
operations with syxnile. However, this universal level far from exhausts the entire
diversity of concrete information structures. Further movement forward in research
on "artificial intelligence” is being restrained by the status of the psychological
theory of natural intelligence.

In the psychological theory of cognitive processes, manwhile. two diametrically
opposite points 0. view are pitted against each other. (he of then are used for
interpretation of different forms of cognitive processes by various systems of
concepts and by the terms of various scientific languages (psychophysics. the theory
of perceptual gestalts. logical-linguistic conceptions of thinking). a: the other
pole we are encouraged to erase the boundaries between intelligence, thinking. per-
caption and the mind in general. and consequently to blend the initial and deriva-
tive forms of cognitive processes together. his significantly distorts the picture
of mental structures pertaining to both lower and higher forms of cognitive processes.
In regard to elementary forms of cognitive processes, such equalization of initial
and derivative levels expresses itself, for exasple, as the very widespread tendency
to deduce the features of the spatial-temporal structure, objectivity, constancy and
integrity of perceptual images from the degree of their comprehensibility, of their
realization, from the nature of word meanings and so on.

This tendency is significantly signified by the fact that form of organization of
information processes that are sore-particular than what can be expressed at the
general computer code level are typical of perceptual images. This is why revealing
the information laws governing this organisation is so such sore difficult. As a
consequence we arrive at a paradoxical enpirical-theoretical situation in which all
of the basic characteristics and laws of the spatial-teaporal organisation of cogni-
tive structures existing at different levels (from the level of sensations to that
of conceptual thinking) are artificially focused only on the perceptual sphere, which
represents only the middle layer of the hierarchy of the levels of intelligence.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M 00'er 05¢ ONLY

Both the lower-lying, specifically sensory level and the overlying general level of
thinking. and all the sure so the conceptual level. are thus “made lame” to the
general laws of spatial-tenoral organisation of cognitive information structures.

must exist. Contrary to elementary logic. problems associated with reflection of
object locations are treated in lost studies and even textbooks as pertaining to the -
sensory level, while representation of the space within which this object is located
is treated as being at the specifically perceptual level. 'lb move on, in regard to
the thinking level of intelligence this deformation expresses itself in that thinking
processes turn out to be generally iIIune to the less of spatial-teQOi-al organiza-
tion of cognitive structures. mese laws and characteristics of spatial-amoral
organization of thinking processes are said to be somewhere ”beneath thinking,“
divorced from the principles of its specific organisation.

We find in this case that while isolation of the sore-general structures of the
intellectual hierarchy from the elementary structures, to which specific genetic
steps correspond, is commonly said to impermissible. the such mre artificial opera-
tion of ”liberating‘ the overlying structures from fundamental generic structures

is said to be totally natural and permissible. All of these deformations in the
natural relationships existing along intellectual structures are the inevitable con-
sequence of the blending of their initial and derivative forms.

If we are to surmount this accepted but false premise. we would have to determine

the specific features of the initial and derivative levels of cognitive processes
within the framework of the general laws governing their organization. These general
laws are considered by the modern general cybernetic (om-Shannon) theory of human
information processing. On this basis, the specific features of different particular
structures of intelligence must be revealed within the framework of the general
principles of the organization of information processes.

Revelation of the specific features of the particular principles of organisation
existing within the general principles would require a special strategy resting on
the genetic approach and on the method of abstract I'extirpation" of overlying layers.
This method allows us to reveal the specific characteristics and laws of each of the
forms and levels of cognitive processes. and to reveal the means of their synthesis.
from "below" and from ”above." into the integral structure of natural intelligence.

his strategy permits us to represent, within the framework of common organisational
principles, different particular forms of the information structures of cognitive
processes. existing at different levels (elemtary sensations, perceptual and
secondary images. mental structures. and the highest four-conceptual thought). as
different levels of mental reflection. each having its own measure, form and range
of constancy of reproduction of the properties and relationships of reflected ob-

jects.

Thus according to the extensive eapirical material of hkishiga's scale (and our
data (28)), the spatial-temporal organization of sensory processes conforms to the
level of the partial metric invariant. perceptual images are the integral metric
invariant, and transitory forms of the sensory-perceptual domain and secondary

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

images are different levels of spatial—temral invariants (starting at topological,
proceeding through projective and affine to the level of invariants of similitude
transformations, and finally, metric invariance).

The large nuaber of facts provided by experimental and applied psychology provide

the grounds for concluding that the specific features of thinking processes are deter-
mined by interaction of symbolic operator structures of external or internal

speech with spatial-objective gestalts. me facts shw that these spatial scher
are not just the descriptive basis of thought but also an internally necessary
component of its organization.

Conteaporary general theory permits us to represent these spatial-objective cowonants
of thinking on one hand and the systolic comente of its spoken form on the other
as different languages in the general cybernetic meaning of this ccncept--that is.

as different particular forms of informational and code structures isomorphic to
their source objects.

On this basis the specific organization of hunan thinking may be represented as a
continuous process of reversible translation from a language of siniltaneous spatial-

objective representations (pertaining to different levels of generality) into the
sysbolic operator language of speech systole. 'men a thought, viewed as a separate
structural unit, would be the result and the invariant of this process of inter-

lingual translation.

Theoretical analysis supported by experimental verification allows the conclusion

that within the franework of this general principle of the informational structure

of thinking, a concept is unique in that this reversible translation from the language
of simultaneous spatial gestalts into the systolic language of speech signals occurs
at a minimum of two levels of generality (generic and specific). ‘lhen a concept,
viewed as a separate structural unit of thought at the highest level of intelligence,
would appear as an invariant 'of the transformation of the levels of generality into

a process of interlingual translation.

Experimental research (28) specially undertaken to verify these premises has shown
that there are specific relationships in each of the examined forms of cognitive
processes between informational (structural and statistical) characteristics, their
energy equivalents and their operational composition. In the first approximation,
the cupirically obtained relationships correspond to the theoretical expectations.

Inasmuch as this strategy allows us to reveal the universal spatial-teaporal cospo-
nents of these hierarchically different structuresnconponents which pass from the
bottom to the very top of the hierarchy, we are able to examine the mthods of

synthesis of these different cognitive levels, “from the bottom up.“ into the
integral hierarchical structure of natural intelligence. It is only after revealing

the specific nature of the structure, invariance and the operational couposition
of the concept--viewed as the highest layer of this hierarchy-«hat we are able to

clarify the regulatory and organizing influence this highest level has on elementary
cognitive processes, and thus uncover the mthods of synthesis, “from the top down."

of this set of levels into an integrally functioning system.

Thus natural intelligence viewed as an integrally functioning construct is a hier-
archical system consisting of many levels. Its function is based on continuous

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFﬂCIALUSEONLY

interaction of two languages: simultaneous spatial-objective stmctutesp and the
systolic operator language of speech signals. When one of these languages, which
are a part of the principle itself of integral organization of natural intelligence.
ceases to function. the intelligence stops working normally not only at levels per-
taining to the excluded language but also to the entire set of cognitive processes
contained within the integral bilingual structure of intelligence.

Clear evidence of this can be found, for exaaple, in the clinical pattern of
sen-antic aphasia, in which the speech and thinking functions of intelligence are
disturbed as a result of lesion of the parieto-occiptal lobes of the cortex, with
'which not the language of the speech signals themselves but the first of the two
languages of natural intelligence--the language of simultaneous spatial-objective
gestalts--is associated.

Were we to exclude the language of speech signals from an integrally functioning
bilingual system. we would obtain a purely perceptual level of cognitive processes.
But-and this is especially iaportantvif the language of sinsultaneom spatial-
objective gestalts is excluded from this system, we would arrive at the general
coded form of information processes, that which we see in modern technical infer-a-
tion systems. Being in keeping with the present potentials of "artificial intelli-
gence.‘I it unites natural and "artificial intelligence” on the basis of a single
general cybernetic principle of organisation.

mus further development of the theory and hardware of “artificial intelligence."
which will proceed along the lines of siaanlation of natural intelligence, should be
ensured by reproduction of the mechanisms having to do with both information

languages, the interaction of which predeternaines the specific features of the
integral operation of human intelligence. ﬁne greatest theoretical, experimental
and technical difficulties existing at this stage are elicited by simulation of
those cognitive information structures which are «bodied within the particular
forms of the codes. and which pertain to the first of the languages of natural
intelligencenthe language of simltaneous spatial-objective images.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WWW?

THE POSSIBILI‘I'IES 0? compares mm“: 0? $8le AND WON. ammo
Yu. v. Orfeyev

When researchers consider the philosophical aspects of modeling thinking, they

do not devote enough attention to how well descriptive thinking yields to comuter
modeling; this is despite the fact that the limited nature of the methods of informa-
tion modeling (which is discrete by its very nature) manifests itself more clearly
here than in information modeling of logical problem solving, in relation to which
visual images may not play a significant role in searching for the solution.

From the standpoint of genetic psychology. the structures of conceptual thinking.
which are by their nature interpsychic. arise in the ontogenesis of the child on

the basis of previously developed capabilities for operating with images of surromd-
ing objects. Even in early childhood the infant is capable of recognizing the faces
of people surrounding hin, food and toys. In abnormlly developed children, ones
suffering mild retardation for exaaple, the capability for operating with images
does not depend on the level of intellectual development. The same can also be

said for animals, which are capable of actively using images of the environment to
organize their behavior. but which are generally devoid of conceptual thinking.

Descriptive thinking is a special form of aanifestation of intelligent behavior. as

is conceptual thinking, which develops within the individual as he masters systolic
activity. It would be interesting to note that mdern writing and the ideographicwriting
that preceded it developed out of symbols--pictures. Some hieroglyphics still

possess clear descriptive similarity to the object they represent.

In human thinking activity. the descriptive and conceptual components are closely
associated. and they interact with each other actively. In his ties, Rubinshteyn
wrote in this regard that being different levels or stages of cognition, descriptive
and abstract-theoretical thinking are in a certain sense different aspects of the

same process and are equally adequate uthoch of cognition of different aspects of
objective reality (80).

Here we to examine human thinking only within the sphere of the exact sciences. in
which the level of abstract- theoretical thinking is naturally high. even here we
would find that images play the decisive role in the initial stage of the creative
process.‘ Einstein wrote the following in this regard in -MI' creative’autobiography:
'It will be interesting to cite Heshcheryakov in this connection: ”...real thinking
is never reduced to operation with synolsuof which gestures and words are repre-

sentatives in a certain sense; instead, it always presupposes operations with the
images of objects and actions" (60).

175
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFI'ICIALISIONLY

"lb me. there is no doubt that our thinking proceeds for the most part in disregard
of systole (words) and. mreovsr. unconsciously. Were it to be otherwise. why would
we sometimes be 'surprised,’ and quite spontaneously at that. by a certain experience
(Brlebnis)? we 'act of surprise' apparently occurs when perception enters into
conflict with our established world of concepts. In those cases where this conflict

is experienced acutely and intensively. it in turn has a strong influence on our
mntal world“ (109).

Both discursive and descriptive thinking have their spheres and linits of effective-
ness. One class of problems might be solved sore easily with reliance upon visual
mdels, while another class of problems might not be solved effectively with these
models. and in this case discursive thinking would have indisputable advantages.
Descriptive thinking nay lead to gross errors if the problen to be solved is outside
the directly perceived sequence of events. but in cases where the solution to a
problem can be deduced from the organisation itself of the 'visual field,” using the
terminology of Gestalt psychologists, visual-descriptive thinking would have domt-
less advantages over discursive thinking.

Beginning in the 1950's energetic efforts were undertaken in cybernetics to teach
computers to recognize visual images. An essentially integral direction can into
being in cyberneticsusmcalled image recognition.‘ however, the problens which

are actually solved by the methods of “image recognition" are not equivalent to the
problems associated with image perception. 'lhe Iain task of a co-puter recognising
images is to relate a certain object durecterised by a set of features to a certain
class--that is, its task is classification. while the psychological problem of per-
ceiving an object as a result of active objective actions with it cannot be solved
by the methods of cybernetic recognition of images.“ Iron a psychological point
of view object classification is preceded at least by the object's perception and
recognition (18). In fact. in order to recognize some nineral, we would first have
to perceive it as an object. Manipulating this object, we can establish for exasple
that it is granite. And it is only after recognising the object that we could
identify it. Of course. under certain conditions of ham activity perception may
be reduced to the process of identification. '“ In a large library. for crawls.

 

”the term "image recognition.‘ commonly used in Soviet cybernetic literature and
apparently synonymous with the English expression “pattern recognition," would
best be substituted by the term ”image classification," since the letter tern
better reflects the essence of the couputer task: moreover the English word
"pattern" may also be interpreted as meaning "nodal."

“"lfan individual is to form the image of a thing that reflects its objective
properties." Heshcheryakov writes. "he would have to perform some sort of practical
action in relation to it. Simle perception of a thing without practical influence
upon it does not provide a possibility for penetrating deeply into its essence“
(60).

"'A criminal may be arrested on the basis of both a verbal description and by
confrontation. In the first case we would need a list of the crininal's features.
while when he is recognized by a witness this list would not be needed. Identifi-
cation by means of a verbal description in sany ways recalls the principles of
recognition embodied within the existing computer programs. while identification
on the basis of confrontation is not yet within the mans of a couputer.

176

IOIOIIICIALUIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only the numerical code of a book would provide information as to its location,
and librarians may pay attention neither to the name of the book nor to its
appearance.‘

In the methods of image recognition known today, all sorts of clever procedures

are used to separate the characteristics of one image from another-for example

the conpactness hypothesis, and projection of characteristics onto a subspace.
However, all of these nethods presuppose, in one way or another, the possibility

for distinguishing a certain set of characteristics and relating thee to a previously
given, fixed list of characteristics or a standard. “

Ihe difference between human recognition and the behavior of a computer ”recognizing
images" is fundamental in nature. Sinple external properties of objects such as
straightness, cohesiveness and so on cannot be given to a oonputer directly; instead.
they must be reproduced by a complex system of equations which would allow the com-
puter to verify coordinates of appropriate points in order to determine whether or

not it is dealing with ‘ straight line or a curve. A computer cannot show preference
for one conbination of figures over another if it had not previously been given the

characteristics on which to base a preference. At the sale time, an individual making
a choice between one combination of figures and another usually follows unverbalizable

esthetic criteria. A computer can do the same only in the event that the methods of
classification are clearly written out.

Practical use of cybernetic nethods of identification is made complex by the fact
that, first of all, it is often difficult to say precisely what the significant
characteristics of an object are, and second, there are no grounds for the assumption

 

‘It would be interesting to note in this connection that three means of perception
were distinguished in ancient Indian philosophy (Nyaya philosophy). me first
means--(nirvakal'naka)--signified recognition of the simple existence of a thing
without a distinct itpression of it and of its characteristics. For examle a
person innersed in his own thoughts might take a bath without once thinking about
the water as water. Nevertheless it cannot be said that the water was not perceived
while bathing. In the second means of perception: an object is viewed as a thing of
a special sort; this means is called (savikal'paka). Thus for example, looking at
an orange, I say to myself the conclusion: "'lhis is an orange." In this case I
not only recognize its existence as such, but 1 also distinctly understand that it
exists, at least within my perception. The third meme-~(prat'yabkhidzhnya)--
signifies recognition of an object as something known to us. For examle: '"Ihis
must be that same person who shoved me yesterday' (102).

In European psychology this classification may correspond to concepts such as per-
ception, recognition and identification.

"Among cybernetics. Shannon mst clearly recognized the entire couplexity of
solving the problem of image recognition by mdern computers. He said: "...machines
that could effectively solve such problem as pattern recognition, translation from
one language to another and so on would require a type of conputer that we do not
have today. It seems to me that these would be computers capable of performing
natural operations with patterns, concepts and fuzzy analogies. and not successive
operations with decimal nunbers” (Shannon's presentation at the debate "What will
Computers Be Able n: no?" is published in the collection (122)). However, no one
knows yet how machines that could operate with “fuzzy analogies" should be organized.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWONLY

that characteristics making A similar to B and a similar to C would be the sale that
make A similar to C. were may be no noticeable similartity between A and c and,
moreover. they may still be similar to a. An object is placed in one class or
another not on the basis of its properties but rather on the basis of the classifi-
cation goals.

In order to delve more deeply into these problems, we would need to acquaint our-
selves with the existing psychological theories of perception. Perception psycho-
logy usually makes a distinction between successive and simultaneous recognition.
In order to demonstrate the fundamental difference in their mechanisms, we will
examine a few examies.‘

Any literate person is capable of remgnizing handwritten letters, but at the same
time he would be unable to identify the characteristics on the basis of which this
recognition proceeds. ‘mis is precisely why it is impossible to come up with a
necessary and sufficient list of characteristics for handwritten letters: modern
computers can dependably recognize only type which is structured to son extent,
and not handwriting. Much effort has been expended on making a machine capable of
perceiving any handwritten text, but no signifith progress has yet been made.

'me difficulty of this problem apparently lies not only in the fact that simultaneous
recognition cannot be substituted by conceptual recognition in the perception of
handwritten letters, but also in the fact that under normal conditions recognition
of the graphic elements of handwritten letters depends on context--that is, the
adjacent letters of a word contribute to recognition, and in a number of cases the
entire context of a statement is taken into account. As an exasple the word "kelp.”
when handwritten. may be read as both ”kelp” and "help'--it all depends on the
broader context which the individual unconsciously considers.

The same can also be said for recognition of handwritten graphic elements such as:
lOt. ‘mese graphic elements may be recognised as the nulber 10010, or as lOt, or
as three letters 0 separated by vertical lines and so on.

Thus for recognition of handwritten text, there is no minimum of graphic elements
(the building blocks of a text) upon which we could rely. Correct recognition de-
pends an interpretation of the "building blocks" at each level of linguistic des-
cription (letter, phoneme, sentence, statement).

On the other hand if a civilized individual met distinguish a 20-story building
from a Zl-story building of the same height, or distinguish a polygon with 20 sides
from a polygon with 19 sides, in this case the particular image would have to
possess distinct characteristics, and simltaneous perception would be ineffective
in such cases. A computer may surpass man in solution of such problem if the
nunber of characteristics necessary for identification is sufficiently large.

”Simultaneous recognition." writes M. S. Shekhter, "includes integration of

several characteristics (of the appropriate sensory information, to be more precise)
into one indivisible unit. as a result of which the object is evaluated in accordance
with a single perceptual characteristic and not on the basis of several corresponding

to different properties of objects" (107).

178

'0! OFFICIAL. 4'! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ciffercnce between simultaneous and successive recognition is fundamental in
nature. Nuuerous psychological studies of perception processes have shown that
Simultaneous perception is not a reduced, swiftly proceeding version of successive
perception, but a mental process of a special type, one based on considering the
"appearance" of a figure and the "shape" of the figure as a whole, perceiving the
context and background, and so on. In other words this is recognition based on
integral characteristics, owing to which perception of the whole anticipates per-

ception of the DJICS“CI’I¢'. is, the parts are determined only after perception of
the whole.

Perception psychology interprets simltaneous recognition as activity performed
without successive analysis of the perceived object. In the process of training
(learning), successive recognition transform into simultaneous recognition, but
for such a transition to occur, the individual's consciousness must contain an ideal
plan, which is a specifically human form of reflection of reality.‘

The simultaneous perception problem is closely associated with the presence, in man's
perc-.-ption, of unconscious reflection of objects in surrounding reality: experiments
with subsenscry perception may provide experimental confirmation of its presence.

We are well aware of experiments of the following sort, for example: The subject

is: successiVely shown sets of nonsense syllables. When some of them appear, the
SLij-‘Ct is; given an electric shock. me subject develops a reflex as the experiment
proceeds: Whenever a Certain syllable appears, he gets a presentiment of an eletr
tric shock. me subject cannot explain (verbalize) the characteristics of the
symuul which produces this presentment (146).

Another good example of unconscious reflection is the well knmm stereoscopic
effect that arises when one looks at two almist identical images through special
glasses. Such reflection is also reserved with auditory and tactile stimuli (33).

Thus unconscious reflection, manifested as simultaneous perception with a Gestalt
nature, plays a certain role in perception of objects and their relationship. As
we know. to recognize objects, a computer can operate only with a fomlized
knowledge of them. Presence of unconscious, unformalizable knowledge about
external objects is precisely the main obstacle to progress in image recognition
by computers.

In addition to dividing perception into simultaneous and successive (conceptual),
perception psychology sometimes draws a distinction between cognitive and opera-
tional images. Coqnit ivc image:. are a unique sort of storehouse in which all in-
formation about an object accessible to the subject is concentrated.

(auraticnal images are those which arise in the course of practical manipulations
of objects aimed syncifically at solving certain problems.

Although cyberneticists have enjoyed certain successes in creation of the methods
of recognizing cognitive images, the problem of forming operational images in

 

 

:I’syt:inoyiathology is well familiar with agnosia associated with disturbed simil-
taneous recognition; in this case object recognition may occur only with reliance
upon successive recognition.

17‘:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

modern comsuters is still not soluble within the limits of this methodology. The
data of phenomenological psychology indicating the mobility of the boundaries be-
tween the body of the subject and the ”external world“ surrounding him attests to
the great complexity of forming an operational image. ‘l'hus parts of the individual'e
own body may sometimes be perceived as part of the "internal world" and at other
times as part of the "external world" depending on the conditions of perception.

As an cxanple when an individual pares his nails, the hand performing this procedure
would belong to the "internal world" while the other would belong to the ”external
world.“ in other cases the reverse may be true: Part of that which we usually

treat as belonging to the "external world“ beeches included in the ”internal world."
As an example everyone who has ever ridden in a motor vehicle knows that during the
time in which he is operating the motor vehicle, the driver's “external world" begins
with the outer surface of the cab. ﬁle same effects are also observed in piloting

an aircraft. Consequently the boundary between subject and object may be mobile
in an operational image.

The nobility of the subject-object boundary is also at the basis of the objectivity
of our perception. In fact. from the standpoint of the cybernetic theory of image
recognition it would be difficult to explain the objectivity of images.

According to the cybernetic conception of visual perception, an object to be
recognized must at first be sonawhere within the subject, and later on, by means of
an act of reflection or by some other (mechanisms, it is carried outward and related
to reality. Such a receptor conception of perception is being experimentally

refuted by all developments in experimental psychology.

'mo mobility of subject-object boundaries allows us to give a deeper explanation of
the objectivity of Visual perception, something which has long been at the focus of
attention of Marxist philosophy: "...when light from a thing stimulates the visual
neer. this stimulus is perceived nor. as subjective stimulation of the visual nerve
itself but rather as the objective form of the thing that is outside the eye" ((1),
P 82) .

In order to understand this point we would need to turn to the way a cane (probe)
is used to feel out the way in darkness. At first, while saving in darkness with a
cane the individual would sense jarring in the palm and fingers whenever the cane
touches some object lying on the path. But as experience accumulates (as happens
with blind people) , these jars transform into the sensation of certain objects out-
side the individual. Moreover these subsidiary sensations, as Polanyi refers to
them, or. being integrated by our body, acquire a certain meaning to us as signals
of objects lying along our path (149).

something similar also happens in visual perception which, as we know, is based on
intr-riorized sensomotor schemes of locomotion and of manipulation of objects. In
vrsunl Inmception. the role of a probe (feeler) is played by beam of light, owing
to which our sensations shift in such a way as to create objectively perceived
images.

11.15 interpretation of the objectivity of visual images can be traced back to
Seclu-nov, who wrote the followmg in this; regard: “In this sense the act of looking

1!“:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

may be likened to the body's release of feelers which can lengthen and shorten

to enormous proportions in such a way that their free ends, on converging with one
another, would come in contact with the objects being examined at the given instant.
Without stretching the point at all, we could then perceive the visual axes to be
such contractile feelers" ((84), p 521).

In addition to these facts, which are usually not taken into account in cybernetic
modeling of perception, there are also facts indicating perceptien's close relation-
ship to emotions and to sensory anticipation of a perceived object.

The examples above show how far afield the principles used in automatic image
recognition are from the real processes of human perception. Nevertheless, cyber-
neticists have proposed a number of important technical procedures for image
recognition, and this fact cannot be forgotten. me existing practice of image
recognition has assuned the path of joint solution of these problems by man and
computer in "dialogue" mode. In these conditions man‘s unique capabilities are not
excluded from recognition, and on the other hand the hardware supplements and
amplifies these capabilities. Tangible practical results have been achieved along
this path.

'me problem of image recognition by cosputers is also posed in cybernetic litera-
ture as one of automatic formation of concepts, if the objects subject to classifica-
tion cannot be visually interpreted. A typical example of attelpts at using a
computer to forn concepts can be found in the works of Khant (99) and Benerdshi (18).
But even here, success in the initial phase of use of the methods is supplanted by
disenchantment as soon as the need arises for applying them to fornation of concepts
in more-complex situations.

i'hant interpreted concept formation in the following way:

1) Objects are these real elements which may be observed by the “subject" (a person
or an artificial concept forming system). The set of all. objects lakes up the
general set:

2) obJects may be distinguished in terms of the significance of their character-
istics. Thus each characteristic is a degree of freedom in the qualitative differ-
ences of objects:

3) the description of an object is an indication of its status, as determined by the
observed characteristics;

4) the set of quantitative characteristics which may be interpreted as being
equivalent is represented by a certain value:

5) the description space is the set of all possible descriptions of objects.

if we look at the concept forming methods used in "conputer thinking" from a philo-
sophical point of view, these uthods would in fact be traceable back to the purely

empirical understanding of abstraction which we can find in the works of Locke
and Mill. 1he theoretical aspect of concept formation was first addressed in
philosophy by Plato, who clearly recognized the entire complexity of this problem.

181

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

now do we identify objects, how do we relate them to a certain class when every
object differs from another? In his dialogue with the priest Euthyphro, Socrates
demands a clear and unambiguous definition of piety. Buthyphro tries to clarify
the definition of piety, but each of his proposals is criticized and refuted by
Socrates. since all of Euthyphro's definitions are only "accidences'--modes of the
idea of piety. while what Socrates requires of Euthyphro is the idea itself of
piety (68). The fight between nominalism and realism in Middle-Age philosophy is
also a reflection of the complex philosophical problems which require theoretical
analysis of man's concept formation for their solution.

has crisis which the cybernetic approach to formation of concepts by computers now
faces was in a certain sense anticipated by the criticism of the weak sides of
the empirical theory of abstraction in the works of Kant, richte, Hegel and
llusscrl. As we know, husserl meticulously criticised the empirical theory of
abstraction, according to which a generality arises in the subject's consciousness
on the basis of a comparison of similar characteristics.

liusseri felt that if that which is common is to be perceived in objects, a special
intentional act is needed, in which the consciousness must be directed not at con-
crete objects but rather at the idea by means of which the objects surrounding the
individual are generalised. husserl felt that when a person recognizes objects,

he introduces a universal meaning (the noeme) in his interpretation of his sensory
data (14) . In other words image recognition and concept formation would be impossible
without a certain ideal plan.

1.. Vitgenshteyn and other representatives of linguistic philosophy also criticized
a simplified understanding of the nature of abstraction and explained the danger
harbored by such an understanding. Vitgenshteyn suggested the conception of
"family similarities" as an alternative to the traditional theory of abstraction.
Vitgenshteyn asserts that the idea behind the characteristic facial traits of a
family newer could be transmitted by showing "family portraits“ (cited in (19)).
From vitqenshteyn's point of view man is able to recognise a family nether without
going through the list of characteristics on which he achieved such remgnition.

'mc concept formation problem is analyzed to its deepest extent in harxist philoso-
phy on the basis of the dialectics of the singular or special and the general.
ll'ycnkov clearly stated the problem of the universal: '"l‘he radical-materialistic
reinterpretation of the achievements of Hegelian logic (dialectical by Marx.

Engels and Lenin is associated with confirmation of the objective reality of the
universal. though not at all in the spirit of Plato and Hegel. It is associated
more likely with the natural relationship existing between material phenomena, with
the law of their linkage into a certain whole. into a self-developing totality, all
of the components of which are essentially 'kindred' not because they all have the
same, identical characteristic but rather in view of the unity of their genesis...“

((46) . p 256).

An analysis of the empirical theory of abstraction in which concepts were inter-
preted as a disjunctive-conjunctive ccubination of the characteristics of objects
was subjected to sharp criticism by Lenin in connection with the party's debate on
trade unions in the early 1920‘s. Lenin wrote: I"l‘he formal logic to which in-
struction is limited in the schools (and should be limited-with corrections--to

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the lowest grades) works with formal definitions. using as its guidelines that

which is uost usual or that which catches the eye most frequently, and it limits
itself to this. If in this case two or more different definitions are taken and
joined together quite by chance (a glass cylinder and a drinking inlemnt) , we

get an eclectic definition indicating nothing sore than different sides of the
object.

”Dialectical logic requires that we go farther. In order to in fact know the object,

we mst esbraco and study all of its sides, all of its associations and 'intimations'"

We can see iron all of this that in “cosputer thinking.“ the concept is interpreted
only as a combination of characteristics isolated from a set of objects under

examinationuthat is, that it is at the level of the espirical thaory of abstraction.
At the same time the problem of toning theoretical concepts cannot be solved in
"computer thinking.“ Hence we can understand that the concept forming procedures
used in ”conputer thinking“ have a limited sphere of practical application for the

nonent. and that further progress in this sphere nay be ensured only through "dia-
logue" interaction between man and oosputer.

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NONE“: DISCRIMINATION OPERATIOIS In ORAL AND MENTAL ACTIONS
Ye. N. Vinarskaya

We are well aware of Icnin's premise that "sensation, thougit and consciousness are
the highest products of material organised in a special way“ (2). Therefore if

achievement of the strategic goal-~approaching human intelligence more closely--
would be impossible if we ignore or limit our use of the data of psychological

science on human intelligence (50), achievement of this goal would also be impossible
if we fail to take accomt of the data of neurologyuthe science studying the struc-

tural and functional relationships of the brain and the neurophysiological equiva-
lents of the mind.

v. I. Lenin also pointed out that beyond the limits of gnoseological studies. ”oper-
ating with the opposition of utter andspirit, of the physical and the mental as
with an absolute opposite would be an enormus mistake" (3). Leont‘yev (55) dis-
cussed some types of relationships between the material a“ the ideal in application
to thinking. I. believe interaction between the neurophysiological and psychological
aspects of thinking to be significant. Various psychological operations are
supported by neurophysiological activity of not the brain in general but certain
of its structural units. Knowledge of the systemic structure of neurophysiological
Rechanisms could help us understand the structure of psychological processes.

1his cossuunication briefly presents sole ideas about the operational structure of
verbal thinking stemming from psycholinguistic observations of patients with selective
defects in systemic organization of their neurophysiologicel processes. The theo-
retical premises will be illustrated by excerpts from the observation notes for

one of our patients.

Here are the initial neurophysiological facts.

Patients of the group described here suffer focal lesions in the mediotemporal sub-
region of the cortex of the dominant hemisphere, coupled with breakdown of functional
integrations in which the nerve cells of this region of the cortex play the leading
role. The degree of the brain's focal dysfunction could change in the course of ob-
servation of the patient, but the affect of its presence remains constant. 111s
activity of the integral brain proceeds invariably in the presence of the same

systemic defect.

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

More or less pronounced disturbances in speech perception are observed among all
patients in connection with such focal brain lesions. 'l‘hese disturbances are ex-
pressed as substitutions, transpositions and omissions of the consonants and vowels
of phone-es (ul'i-—'uyli." tsokol'--"chokol'," karate-‘raketa,’ berlogau'bergruga.
bekroga. bekloga' and so on).

The disturbance of psycholinguistic operations supporting perception of the adequate
phonem structure of oral symbols leads to a situation in which the patient ceases
to understand the speech of surrounding individuals. the statements of the patients
themselves contain a sizeably larger number of homnyms, since oral syﬂaols with

different meanings are expressed as having the same meaning (in view of insufficient
differentiation of phonemes). As an exasple the phonemic form of the words 'grosovoy,
legka, Kronshtadtskiy" is not differentiated from the phonemic form of the words
"gruzovoy, legla, grazhdanskiy." Naturally, surrounding individuals cease to under-
stand thc speech of such patients.

Patients experience the greatest difficulties in perceiving verbal synbols having

phonemic composition similar to that of other verbal syubols, especially if both are
also characterized by similar morphological structure and are used in similar semantic

context.
"Hhat is a karavay [bunl‘r’
"It is something to sleep on (the word'krovat' [bed] is presumed)."

"Explain what this sentence means: 'cu poluchil noshevuyu
nozhnuyu ranu [He received a knife leg woundl'."

(The patient thinks.) “No, I don't understand it.”
"But what if I. said that he received a knife wound in the leg?“
“Hell, that I can understand."

hat was precisely what the first sentence meant.

However, there is an exclusion to the general rule stated above: words with a pro-
nounced objective relationship used in situationally dependent dialogue. Patients

can not only understand such words well, but they can also pronounce them correctly.
Monologue statements on abstract topics are beyond the capabilities of the patients.

Patients do not understand various inflections, prefixes, suffixes, prepositions and
linking verbs totally devoid of objective relationships when they are uttered in the
speech of surrounding individuals, and they ignore them in their own speech, which
makes it strikingly agramtical. Thus the following statement was typical of the
patient: “ma stala chitat' knigu. Vot ona. [She began reading the book . here

she is] (Points to a women in the office). his I can mdsrstand. Reading--that
1 can understand also. (Mimics the act of reading). a boob-here is a book (points

to a book). But why is the word began here? “at is began? I don't understand."

185

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
MOWUSEONLY

If they have visual-descriptive correlates, lexical and grasnatical syﬂaols are

used adequately by patients in their speech. ‘ihus an analysis of mistakes in linking
adjectivesto nouns in nominative case ('bol'shaya plamya, veselyy karusel', sladkaya
kieel', mya klyuch. chemyy ten”) showed that such granatical mistakes occur

only when the gender of the noun is a conditional granatical abstraction, one ex-
pressed moreover by a phonemic structure of low probability for a morphs-e of the
given gender.

wherever the granatical gender of a noun is consistent with the biological sex of
the object under discussion, no difficulties arise. (“Man is masculine, meaning that
you would say bol'shoy muzhchina: cow, of course, is feminine, meaning you would say
ryzhaya korova" and so on). Nor do mistakes arise when the phonemic expression of

a gender-related morphcme is highly probable for words of masculine, feminine and
neuter gender. ('Basket is feminine, so you say bol'shaya: lake and milk are, of
course, neuter and so lake is bol'shoye and milk is beloye; cabinet is masculine,

so you say seryy; chair is also masculine, so you say novyy.").

In psychology. vygotskiy (3i) brought attention to the sydoolic nature of thinking
done in words. 2vegintsev (43) explained the close relationship between verbal
thinking and speech by the operational use of the same syﬂaols, formed under the
influence of language, in both processes. Using special observations which will be
described below, I would like to not only confirm the sywolic similarity of speech
and verbal thinking but also demonstrate the identical nature of disturbances in
usage of symbols in both speech and thinking associated with verbal concepts.

The first thing that comes to mind is that patients always try to relate verbal con-
cepts to their sensory images. (”Why is a cat called a 'cat'? ﬂy is a table called
a 'table'? .fhy is a white flower called a 'rose'? ‘ihis is 'rose'.’ (Points to a
rose-colored pencil.)

Narrating the content of stories that they had heard and movies they had seen,
patients use verbal concepts to describe only the train of their own descriptive
impressions, and they do not make use of any abstract verbal concepts reflecting,

in synbolic form, the relationships of the characters, the reasons behind their

acts and the general meaning of the occurring events. (Here is the way a scene from
a notion picture was described by a patient who found this scene disturbing. In it,
drunken thugs murdered a young man who had come to the aid of a girl: “He approached
her. mey smiled at each other. Then another three fellows came up. may stag,-.ed
about.... 1hey began making threats, and then they murdered him.")

while being able to classify pictures of objects (furniture, china, animals) and
verbal concepts having visual-descriptive correlates, patients become confused when

they try to classify abstract verbal concepts.

Patients readily perform assignments involving selection of antonymic concepts of

a concrete sort (black-white, fast-slow, night-day), but they cannot do the exact
same thing when they are offered abstract concepts. In this case it is sometimes
evident that the difficulties lie in finding that same phoneme form of a verbal con-
ccpt. Thus when asked to provide a concept opposite to that expressed by the word
“proletariat,” our patient replied: “I know that it is some word beginning with
'c'.” "Capitalist?" "Yes, that's what I thought.’

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while they can easily solve arithmetic problems involving from one to three mani-
pulations. patients suddenly cease performing such assignments if words having similar
phonemic conpositions are introduced into the problem conditions. mus our patient
was able to solve the following problem in his mind as he listened to it: "A boy has
five apples; a girl gave him another ten. such that he now had three times fewer
apples than the girl. How many apples did the children have together?" no patient
was unable to solve the problem stated with different mowers and with the words 'boy
and girl“ substituted by the names 'Sanya Petrov and keys Petrova.‘

To sum up, only those concepts and conclusions which have clear visual-descriptive
correlates were retained in both the verbal thinking and the speech of the patients.
Verbal thinking in abstract concepts is impossible for such patients, as are m-
logs on abstract topics. Visual-descriptive thinking and verbal thinking proceeding
in parallel visual images were retained. as was situationally dependent dialogue
speech.

An individual's verbal thinking is disturbed. first of all, to the extent that it is
expressed in abstract verbal concepts or, more precisely. in abstract linguistic
(lexical and grannatical) concepts and, second, depending on the structure of phonemic
generalizations making up the symols of these linguistic concepts. Inasmch as one
of the axioms of linguistics declares that any linguistic eyebol is a two-sided mental
entity, the data of our research are easily explained.

The clinical pattern of the focal brain lesions tells us that each of the conponents
of the singular mental essence of linguistic sywols has its specific neurophysiologi-
cal correlate, and that each neurophysiological correlate of a particular psycho-
linguistic component may be disturbed selectively, leading to various systemic dis-
orders in the speech and intellectual behavior of the individual.

The bionic conclusions: Thinking in abstract verbal concepts and speech apparently
have not only a com dependence upon sylbols but also cox-on psycholinguistic
mechanisms. Sequences of phonemic generalizations making up the appropriate

symbols occupy a certain place within the system of psycholinguistic units, and they
exist in complex structural relationships with then.

11115 must be accounted for when developing "artificial intelligence“ system, so
that the intellectual possibilities of these systems would be more comensurate
with human possibilities. Failure to account for complex systemic relationships
on the psycholinguistic plane (the phonemic forms of linguistic symbols in this
case) would have an especially tangible iupact in regard to creation of man-machine
complexes requiring interaction between man and machine in natural human language.

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI Ot'HLIAL USE ONLY

'ARTIPICIAL IMELLIGENG' AND DECISION MAKING
V. F. hibekhin

”Artificial intelligence“ is one of the pressing and complex problem of the modern
science of cognition.

Usually when we create ”artificial intelligence' systems, we single out two different
terms of supporting softwareunethodological support, to include the use of heuristic.
logical-algebraic, linguistic. bionic and other methods, and modeling support, to

include informational and algorithmic programing support. We should obviously
add to this, and raise to paramount isportence. psychological support.

The USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology, the heads-y o: Pedagogical
Sciences Institute of General and Pedagogical Psychology, the lbsoov State {Diversity
and Leningrad State university psychological deperuents and other scientific insti-
tutions are presently studying the psychological aspects or the “artificial intelli-
gence" problem. This research is being performed basically in four directions:

study of the relationships between torualizdsle and unfomlizable coaponents of
natural intelligence:

investigation of the stmctures and mechanisms of decision making:
analysis of the ways and possibilities of formelising mental processes;

study of the possibilities of creating adaptive nan-machine or biotechnical systems.
including hybrid systems.

One of the most important stages and the key moment of existence of any cosplex
system is the decision making set. Even e robot lust make decisions concerned with.
for exanple, the choice of the route to travel to a goal or of the means for sur-
nounting an obstacle. In this case the met interesting structures are supplied with
subroutines in which the possible variants are played out beforehand. a plan of oper-
ations is drawn up and the expected result is predicted. In its ”behavior.” we
recognize many traits typical of human behavior and, concurrently. profound, funda—
mental differences in the processes of mental regulation, ones having no analogs in
"artificial intelligence" programs. natives, emotions, will, and moral-ethical norms
are absent from modern "artificial intelligence" devices.

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY

The differences between the organisation of human mental processes and the structure
of the behavioral programs of robots become distinctly evident when we cospare
functionally kindred processes. for example the processes of recognition.

ﬁne structure of recognition algorithms contained in “artificial intelligence”
systems is in a sense organized in a single plane: the particular way in which an
algorithm is run depends directly on the problem at hand or the goal posed. While
decision making on the basis of numerous criteria would require algorithm of greater

complexity, it would not alter the fundamental structure of the regulatory processes
the-selves.

Man's processes of perception and recognition, including procedures associated with
decision making at this level, are different in nature. me stages of informational

preparation for a decision and of decision making itself may be described in general
form as follows:

Information preparation to decision making boils down to procedures falling into two
groups: a) retrieval, isolation, classification and generalization of information on
the problematic situation: b) creation of "current” images or operational conceptual
rodels. The decision making procedure may be described by the following operations:
a) initial suggestion of a system of ”reference hypotheses": b) oouparison of
”current" images with a series of standards and evaluation of the similarity between
then; c) correction of the images (mdels), “adjustment" of the hypotheses in rela-
tion to the results; d) selection of the ”reference hypothesis" (or its derivation).

Now let us examine particular laws on the basis of different experimental approaches.

B. F. nomv and his colleagues undertook an experiment to study formation of a per-
ceptual image during perception of an assortment of figures--an arbitrary cotination
of straight lines and curves. me conditions of the experiment (exposure time. obser-
vetion range, figure illumination) were varied in such a way that the process of the
image's formation would be expanded to the maxim.

In all three variants of the experinmnts, certain general traits were observed in
the dynamics behind formation of the perceptual image. In the first phase the per-
ceptual image reflects the position of the figure within the field of vision relative
to the principal spatial coordinate, its overall dimensions and proportions and its
basic color. in the second phase the most striking turns in the outline of the
figure and its basic (largest) details are reflected; the color characteristics of
the figure are determined more specifically at this time. The figure's small details
are distinguished and traits revealed earlier are defined more specifically in the

third phase. Formation of an adequate image is oozpleted and the image is verified
in the fourth phase.

Thus intensive analytical-synthetic activity and discrimination of different charac-
teristics of the object in different phases are significant psychological character

istics of the development of a perceptual image and of the retrieval operations
supporting its development.

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MMLUSEONLY

He obtained similar infatuation in research on perception and recognition of complex
objects (images on a noise background).

Our experimental research on perception of such noisy images permitted us to suggest
the hypothesis that perception and recognition under these conditions has a coabined
“layered-stepped” nature. According to this hypothesis, solution of such a problem
would include the following processes:

a) “layer-by-layer" analysis--preparation of the structure of the images in a
succe-nsion from layers representing large elenents to layers representing snall
elements;

b) stepped-phasal processing of information: within one layer involving the running
of several cycles of analytic-synthetic procedures:

c) formation, “at the output” of the layers. of intermediate images that are subse-
quently integrated into the final image:

d) comparison of these images with a standard having different information content.
and determination of the standard isomorphic to the current image.

He conducted experimental research on perception and recognition of photographic
images of lone and grouped objects on a noise background in order to clarify the
specific laws governing solution of such problem. Our "test objects“ were small-
scale photographs of airplane silhouettes characterized by different degrees of
resolution. The alphabet consisted of 18 stimuli with 10 degrees of resolution
(from 7 to 40 lines/nan). “the procedure required recognition of the noisy images
one at a time, begiming with the lowest levels of resolution. presented in random
order.

'No levels of information processing were established experimentally: 'topological"
and ”categorical.“ The following sublevols can be distinguished in the first

(add up to 10 lines/m) : a) grouping of indistinct “spots” by their dimensions;

b) grouping of indistinct images by their "topology”; c) their differentiation within
a group. At the second level (over 10 lines/n), the subjects distinguish sub—
levels of the grouping anddifferentiation of the configurations of the objects as
semantic "constructs" in application to their classes (subclasses) and types-~that
is, the objects are determined lure concretely layer by layer.

Work with the groupedimages showed that when an image is significantly disturbed by
noise. the loss of its elements may be compensated by the use of external inter-
ference-resistant indicators as well as by activation of ideas (imagination) and
thinking. ‘lhis process now goes beyond the limits of the image's resolution, but
it can lead to the goal--recognition.

we found that the process of perceptual study of objects within the limits of the
revealed layers has the character of an expanded search. and that to one extent or
another it makes use of inforsation from previous experience.

The results of another series of experiments showed that the process of recognizing
the images of simple objects is entirely different. 1his process is abridged, it

190

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

does not have clearly distinguishable phases, and it relies on other methods of
examination and on other operational units of perception. moognition is typified
by a sharp reduction of the nunber of revealed traits and retention of a certain
set of introductory components. This minimization is expressed externally as
immediate concentration upon the axis of symmetry or the center of the figure. as
exclusion of a nurber of areas from the analysis, as more-ordered inspection of the
remaining areas, as use of a limited nutter of fixation points and as sharp reduc-
tion of returns to points already inspected. This process is directly connected
with a predictive procedure. Internally. minimisation boils down to using other
combinations of characteristics resulting from their isolation, enlargement and
subsequent semantic coding. Naturally these acts of recognition may proceed in
other time frames as well.

As we had noted earlier, decision making at the level of perception and recognition
includes the operations of deriving and selecting hypotheses and comparing them with
the formed image of the object.

'Do clarify the general dynamics of hypothesis derivation in complex conditions, we
conducted experiments of greater detail to study recognition of the photographic
images of geometric figures on a noise background. here were 12 degrees of resolu-
tion (from 5 to 35 lines/m) , and different exposure times were euployed (from 0.3 to
l. 5 sec).

The experiments showed that the hypothesis is derived and chosen under these condi-
tions in accordance with the principle of progressive classification. The subject
works through several hierarcnical steps of varying information content, corresponding
to the layers (information levels) of the “layered-stepped model.” In general form,
recognition proceeds from levels with very high entropy to levels with limited
information content.

As the resolution and structural integrity of the image rise. the nunber of hypothe-
ses (the alphabet of standards) at the given level undergoes a general decline.

It may be hypothesized that in multiple recognition, the object is compared each
time with different systems of "standards” (alphabets) depending on the phase of
image formation in which the couparison is made. An analysis of the experimental
data revealed the fact that subjects never make their choice in strict correspondence
with the code tree. They in a sense skip steps; 83 they proceed from certain cate-
gories to others, they limit themselves each time to comparison of the perceptual
image only with an insignificant number of “standards,“ changing the characteristics
upon which to make the comparison as the process goes on.

It may be presumed from the research of a nunber of authors that standards are asso-
ciated with different alphabets in the individual's memory. The same "standard”
may exist as an element of many alphabets. Standards are generalizing in nature.
04inq to this, the alphabets overlap, which makes reduction of the path taken in
search of “standards“ during recognition possible. The individual need not sort
through all elements of each alphabet.

’lhus decision making processes are characterized by the following features at the
level of perception and recognition, especially when decision making proceeds in
difficult conditions.

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Both in the phase of intonation retrieval and formation of the perceptual

image and in the phase of decision making itself, these processes have a productive
nature, expressed in: constant inclusion of the Object of recognition in new systems
of associations through analytical-synthetic activity (the alphabet of characteristics
undergoes change; it exhibits a “sliding" nature): change in the level of generality
of the characteristics of the objects under examination (transition from perceptual
characteristics to semantic ones, enlargement of the operational units of perception).
and so on.

2. me decision making procedure itself proceeds to a significant extent not on the
basis of actualisation and sorting but rather on the basis of hypothesis derivation.
11113 appears very significant to us, inasmuch as selection of and sorting through

hypotheses are typical of decision making in most of our research on decision making.

3. 'me content of the decision making phase is determined by the nature of the
formed perceptual image. In other words in actualization and selection of hypothe-
ses. the particular features of the image ensure selectivity in actualization of
specific hypotheses.

Returning to the problem of building “artificial intelligence” systems, we met

once again enphasize that the structure of human perceptual and recognition decision
making described very briefly here is far more coupler than that of recognition
processes built into cybernetic devices.

Hitn time, however, some of the phases and procedures of recognition revealed in
psychological experiments may be realized in oouputer form.

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

W101

In the opinion of a number of authoritative scholars, creation of I'artificial
intolligence“ is the most coupler scientific-technical problem of all that have
ever beenaddressedby mankind. The contemporary literature on "artificial intelli-
gence" problems is typified both by acutely critical statemnts directed at ”arti-
ticial intelligence“ and by no less acute criticism of this criticism. For example
3. v. Biryukov believes that Dreyfus' critical assessnnt of the prospects for
development of ”artificial intelligence' "has not passed the test of time. "'

In Biryukov's opinion we now know the answer to the question as to "how far we can
go on the road or computer simlation of the functions and structures of the living

and the intelligent.... There is a vast noman's land between modern heuristic auto-
matons and the specifically human sphere, inaccessible to oouputer reproduction."“
The criticism of the critics of "artificial intelligence” is sometimes qualified

as misconceptions associated with the progra-ing of "artificial intelligence.“

From the psychologist's point of view the modern literature contains misconceptions
not only relative to “artificial intelligence" but also relative to human intelli-

genes.

on. first misconception is associated with the assertion that conputer programs
enbody the same methods of arriving at decisions (corrected to be conpatible with
the high speed of conputers) which are used by man (heuristic programing). In
fact, however, informal search methods, which include emtional isolation of the
zones to be searched, and the motive governing this search are not reproduced in

heuristic programs.

me second misconception lies in the assertion that the behavior of self-teaching
and self-improving system of any conplexity whatsoever may be expressed as a list

of rules that may‘ be represented in the form of computer progrus. Self-development
of the personality, for exanple, cannot be reduced to clear rules, since it includes

generation and resolution of conflict situations having solutions for which there
are no fixed rules.

______.___

'Dreyfus. Kh.. ”Gaeqo ne mogut vychislitel'nyye msshiny" [that Counters Can't Do],
Moscow, PROGRESS. 1978, p 303.

"Ibid.. p 329.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oil-10M. USE ONLY

The third misconception is contained in the assertion that the process of posing

new problem follows clear rules that may be revealed and programd. Psychological
studies have shown that in addition to logical rules. processes associated with

detection of contradictions play a significant role in the posing of these new
problems.

The fourth misconception is the assumption that the rules of intelligent activity
function separately from human enotions and ”traits of charscter.‘ 'lhe principle

of the unity of affect and intelligence, according to which the real function of
human intelligence is subordinated to laws of the affective sphere as well, has
been around a long time in psychology.

The fifth misconception is that emotional evaluations are identical to verbal-
logical evaluations; in fact, these are qualitatively different phenomena. 'Ihis
misconception generates the illusion that there would be no difficulties in ebody-
ing man's emotional sphere within the work of computer program.

The sixth misconception boils down to the suggestim that manifestations of intelli-
gence (“phenomenology") are independent of its internal structure (”mental apparatus”).
However, this independence is relative, since different manifestations of intelli-
gence seen in the child and the adult and in the normal individual and the sick

person are usually the product of differences in intelligence structure (dominance
of visual-active thinking over verbal-logical thinking in the child, change in moti-
vational regulation of thinking in a sick person, and so on). Moreover the same
external manifestations of intelligence may differ in psychological content. Thus
even though the word “table“ may be recognized as referring to the sauna objects,

it may have different significance and different personal meanings to different
individuals.

we seventh misconception is the opinion that direct simulation of the brain is

the sole alternative to the phenomenological approach. Intelligence is in fact a
function of the brain, but we also know that the brain (the healthy brain) does
not uniquely determine the content and structure of the individual's activity, which
is formed under the influence of social and cultural factors, and at a certain stage
of development, under the influence of the conscious e‘forts of the thinking indi-
vidual.

In my opinion by surmounting these misconceptions concerning the nature of human
intelligence we will be able to discuss the possibilities and concrete ways of

creating "artificial intelligence" in greater detail and more substantially.

Developing clushkov's idea that "there is fundamentally nothing hindering us from
creating 'artificial intelligence‘ that is significantly superior to natural human
intelligence.“ Ivakhnenko and Kostenko assert that human psychology can really
develop only after we create a general theory of superintelligence. In other words
human intelligence could be understood more fully only after we study the laws of
suarintelligencenthe next step in the evolution of intelligence.“

'Gulshkov. V. M" "O/bernetics and Artificial Intelligence,” in 'Kibernetika i
dialektika“ (cybernetic: and Dialectics], Moscow, Nauka, 1978, p 181.

"Ivakhnenko, A. 6., and Kostenko, Yu. v., “The Possible and the Impossible in
Intelligence Simulation," AVTOHATIKA, No 6, 1978, pp 75-82.

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This premise, which casts the gauntlet before psychologists, gives birth to the
following fundamental question: In terms of what parameters should we expect
“artificial intelligence" to be "superior" (”better”) than human intelligence?
Human intelligence is distinguished into different foruuvisual-objective. visual-
descriptive and verbal-logical. mesa different for:- coeiuet in the adult, and it
cannot be said of any one of them that it is absolutely superior to the others
irrespective of the type of problem at hand. Re need to clarify the particular type

of problem in relation to which we hope to achieve ”superiority" in “artificial
intelligence . "

The function of human intelligence is always regulated by a system of mtivss, the
cost important ones of which are those associated with studying the essence of ob-

jects. Might we expect that 'superintslligence" would possess qualitatively new,
more-sophisticated activation? Without human auctions, there would be no distortion
of truth. ﬂight we expect that "superintelligence' would possess a more delicate,
sore sophisticated form of emotional regulation than hunan intelligence? One of the
met important functions of intelligence is to pose new goals. ﬂight we expect that
"superintelligence" would be capable of posing lore-sophisticated goals, 'supergoals"?
If the answer to these questions were yes. then we would have to show how possible
it would really be to endow “artificial intelligence" with these properties, at
least in elementary, primitive form, so that dreams about “superintelligence” would
transform into scientifically grounded experimental realities. But if the answer

to these questions were no, the imression would arise that human intelligence will
have to be "surpassed" not in relation to those indicators which characterize its
true essence, and therefore there would be no grounds for thinking that “artificial
superintelligence" would be able to understand the essence of human intelligence.
since the former would siuply be lacking the most significant characteristics of

the latter.

195

FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY
l.

3.

4.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIW

Marks, K., and angel's. it. “Soch." [Works], 26 Edition, Vol 23, p 82.
Lenin, v. 1.. ”Pain. sobr. soch.‘ [Couplete Collected works], vol 18, p 50.
Lenin, v. 1., “Poln. sobr. soch.. vol 18. p 259.

lenin, V. 1., "Pain. sobr. soch.," Vol 42, pp 289-290.

Ayvasyan, s. A., "lssledovaniye statisticheskikh zavisimstsy“ [Analysis of
Statistical Dependencies), Moscow, Metallurgiya. 1970.

Aleksandrov, Ye. A., 'Osnovy teorii evtisticheskikh resheniy: Podkhod k
izucheniyu estestvennogo i postmyeniyu iskusstvennogo intellekta' [Principles
of the Theory of Beuristic Solutions: An Approach to Studying Natural and
Creating Artificial Intelligence], Ibscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1975.

Al'tshuler, G. s., "Algoritm izobretsniya' [The Invention Algorithm], Hosoov.
Hoskovskiy rabochiy, 1973.

Amsov, N. H” Kssatkln. A. IL. Kasstkina, L. 11., and 'ralayev, s. A”
“Avtonaty i tar-mare povedeniye" [Autonatons and Intelligent Behavior]. Kiev,
Naukova dunks. 1973.

Antsyterova. 1.. 1., "The Ible of Analysis in mderstending Cause-and-Bftect
Relationships,‘ in Rubinshteyn, S. L. (Editor). “Proteus Hyshleniya i
zakonolnemosti analiza, sinteza i obobshcheniya' [Blinking and the Laws of
Analysis, Synthesis and Generalization). lbsoov. lad-v0 APN ISISR. 1960.

Arbib, 3L, "Hetaforicheskiy ng " [The Hetephorical Brain], mscow. Hit, 1976.

Babayeva. m. D., "Psychological Analysis of Task Pomulation,‘ in "Iskusstvennyy
intellekt i peikholoqiya" [Artificial Intelligence and Psychology]. Moscow,
Nauka, 1976.

Babayeva, ‘lu. 0., Adler, Yu. N” and Tikhonirov, O. K., ”Analysis of Attempts to
Formalise Decision Making, and the Goal Pox-nation Problem," in 'Psikhologidioskiye

Inekhanismy tseleobrazovaniya" [Psychological Mechanism of Goal Formation],
Moscow. Nauka. 1977.

196
non OFII'IOAL USE ONLY
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Babaycva, Yu. 0., tktldViua, 1. 0., and Voyskunskiy, A. Ye., "'lheoretical-Expeu-
mental Investigation of the Rhythm of Comication in Man-Oonputer Systems," in
"anloveko-Inashinnyye sistemy” [Han-Machine System], lbscow. HDNTP, 1977,
Reprint.

Bakradze, K. 5., 'Izbrannyye filosofskiye trudy" [Selected Philosophical works].
1611191, lad-v0 Tbilis. tin-ta, Vol 3, 1973.

Basakova, I. 1... “Some Possibilities for Processing Experimental Data on Atten-
tion Stability by the Correcting 'l‘est Method," VOPROSY PSIKHOIDGII. No 3, 1968,
pp 161-167.

Belavina, I. 6.. "Solution of Game Problems in Operational Interaction With a

Computer. 'lhs State Library of Algorithms and Programs,” ALGORIM I PmGRAm.
No 2(16), 1977, p 43.

Belousov. R. A., “Plan, interesy, aktiwiost' trudyashchikhsya" [The Plan.
Interests and Activity of Laborers). Moscow, Ekononika. 1974.

Benerdzhi, R. , "reciiya resheniya zadach" [Problem Solution meaty]: lbscow,
Mir, 1972.

Bogomolov, A. S., 'Angliyskaya burzhuaznaya filosotiya xx veka" [Wentieth Century
mglish Bourgeois Philosophy}. Moscow, Wsl'. l973.

Bozhovich, L. 1., “Son Problems and Methods of Studying the Psychology of a
Schoolchild's Personality,“ in Boshovich, 1.. 1., and Blagonadeshina, 1.. V.
(Editors), 'Voprosy psikhologii lichnosti shkol'nika" [Problem of the Psychology
of the Schoolchild's Personality], Moscow, Isa-v0 APR PSPSR, 1961.

Brudnyy. A. A., ”Semantika yazyka i peikhologiya cheloveka" ['ihe Semantics of
Language and Human Psychology], Prunu, 11in, 1972.

Brudnyy, A. A., and Shreyder, Yu. A., "(blamication and Intelligence,“ in
'Geneticheskiye i sotsial'nyye problemy intellektual'noy deyatel'nosti" [Genetic
and Social Problems of Intellectual Activity]. Alna-Ata, Kat. ped. in-t in. Abaya,
1975.

Bryzhatyy, A. 6., 'nerekhov, V. A., and 'rikhosirov, 0. K., "Han-Wter Inter-
action in Operational Planning," VOPPOSY PSIIHOIDGII, No 6, 1972, pp 94-102.

Bush, G. Ya., “Mtodologicheskiye osnovy nauchnogo upravleniya izobretatel'stvou”
[Methodological Principles of Scientific Hanageaent of Invention Affairs], Riga,
Liyesma, 1974.

Vasil'yev, I. A., ”theoretical and Experisental Investigation of Intellectual
Emotions," Candidate Dissertation Abstract, lbscow, 1976; on the title page:
USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology.

Veyzenbaum. Dzh., "The Influence of Computers on Society," in "Infornatsionnyye

sistcmy--mif i deystvitcl'nost" [Information Systeuuﬂyth and malityl. Moscow,
Znaniye, 1973.

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Veyzenbaum. Dzh. , "widersundinq a Wter's Textual Columnication,“ in
“Raspoznavaniye obrazov" [Image Recognition], macaw, Mir, 1970.

Veltker, L. H.. "Psikhicheskiye protsessy" [Mental Processes], Ianingrad, rad-v0
mu, V01 1'2, 1974.

Vil'khovchenko, a. D. . "Kritika sovrenennoy burzhuaznoy teorii chelovecheskikh
omooheniy v promyshlennosti' [A Criticism of the Hodern Bourgeois 'lheory of
Human Relationships in Industry]. Moscow, llauka, 1971.

Voyskunskiy, A. Ye., "Concerning the M horas o! mderstanding in Joint Proble-
Solution." in ”Psikhologiya tekhnicheekogo tvorchestva" [Psychology of 'nechnical
Creativity]. Moscow, 1973, uprint.

quotskiy, L. S., "Ihinking and Speech,' in 'Izbrannyye psikhologicheakiye
issledovaniya" (Selected Psychological Studies], Moscow, ltd-v0 m 35:51:, 1956.

Gclcrnter, G. . "Creation of a Computer Capable of Proving Geonetric Wrens,“
in "Vychislitel'nyye mashiny i uyshleniye" [Oomutera and thinking]. lbscom
Mir. 1967.

Gershuni, G. V., "Study of Subsenaory Reactions Accoupanying the Activity of
Sense Organs," PIZIOIDGICHBSKIY mum SSSR. W1 33. R) 4. 1947, pp 393-412.

Gluehkov, v. H., "Scientific Problems of the Develop-ant of Oomuter 'Dechnology.“
VES‘I'NIK AN $558, No 2, 1976. PP 28-44.

Glushkov, V. 11., and 'rimofeyev, B. 8., ”Psychological Analysis of the Languages
of Han-couputer Dialogue," in "Inzhenernaya psikholoqiya' [Engineering Psychology],
Hoscow, Nauka, 1977.

Deykstra, 8.. “Notes on Structural Programing," in Del, 0., Deykstra, 3., and
Khoor, x., 'Strukturnoye progralirovaniye" [Structural Programing]. Ibscow,
an. 1975. pp 7-97.

Dovqyallo, A. 14., and Stoqniy, A. A., "Dialog cheloveka i EVH" [Dialogue Between
Man and Computer], Moscow, znaniye, 1975.

Drazdauskene, FL. "me Contact-Establishing Function of Speech,” Candidate
Dissertation Abstract. Pascal, 1970; on the title page: K30.

Zhinkin, N. 1.. ”Coded Transitions in Internal Speech," VOPIUSY YAZYKOZNANIYA.
No 6, 1964. PP 26-38.

Zhinkin, N. 1., "me Plan of Speech,‘ in “Plany i mdeli budushchego v rechi"
[Plans and Models of the Future in Speech], 'Ibilisi, In-t paikhologii in.
Uznadzo. AN GSSR. 1970.

Zhinkin, N. 1., ”Graxmr and Meaning,“ in “Yazyk i chelovek" [Language and
Man], Moscow, Izd-vo H60, 1970.

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

51.

52.

S3.

54.

55.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zhinkin, N. 1., ”Intelligence, Language and Speech," in "Nannneniye rechi u
doshkol'nikov" (Speech Disorders in Preschool Guildren], Moscow, Prosveahcheniye,
1972.

ZVegintsev, v. A., Way): i lingvistichesraya taoriya" [Iangmge and Linguistic
meow]. Moscow, Izd-vo M60, 1973.

Zeygarnik, a. v., “(he Porn of Thinking Disorder,“ VOPIDSY PSImOIAOGII, No 6,
l956, pp l36-l43.

lvanov, V. V.. “The ble of Semiotics in Cybemetic Analysis of Man and the
Collective," in “logicheskaya struktura nauchnogo snaniya" the logical Struc-
ture of Scientific Knowledge], Moscow, llauka, 1965.

Il'yenkov, 3. v., "Dialekticheskaya logika" [Dialectical Iogic]. Moscow.
Politizdat, 1974.

lngvc, v.. "me Depth Hypothesis,“ in "Novoye v lingvistika' [Advances in
Linguistics], Moscow, Progress, 4th Edition, 1965.

Prokhorov, A. 1., and El'but, R. 8. (Editors), 'Inzhenerno-psikhologicheekoye
obsledovaniye i otsenka sistea 'dxelovekﬂuashina' na etape ekspluatatsii i
ispytaniy" [Checking and EValuating Han-Machine System at the Operational and
'nesting Stages From the Standpoint of Engineering PBYdIOJ-DOYI: Riga,
Mezhotraslevoy lPK spets-ov nar. Rhos-vs LatvSSR, 1974.

"Report on the Seminar 'Business Games and Sottvare',‘ UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYB

‘rikhonirov, 0. K. (Editor), "'Iskusstvennyy intelekt' i peikhologiya' ["Artificial
Intelligence" and Psychology], lbscov, Nauka, l9‘l6.

Kanenakiy, v. 5., "Methods and Models for Nomtric Multidimensional Scaling,“
AV'l'OMATIKA I TELEHEIGIANIKA, No 8, 1977, pp 118-156.

Kendal, M., 'Bangovyye korrelyatsii' [ﬂank Correlations], Moscow, Statistika,
1975.

Klochko, V. Ye. . "Goal Ebmlation and Pomtion of Evaluations During Statement
and Solution of. Mental Problems.“ Candidate Dissertation Abstract. Moscow,
1978: on the title page: MGU.

Knorozov, Yu. v., "Classification of Signals," in “Oenovnyye probleuy
atrikanistiki" [Basit Problem of African Studies], Moscow, Nauka, 1973.

leont'yev, A. A., "Language as a Social Phenomnon (Mart! a Definition of the
“ﬂeet of Linguistics)” IZVE‘I‘IYA AN SSSR. SBR. LIT. I 10.2., No 4, 1976.

Leont'yev, A. N.. 'Deyatel'nost', soznaniye, lichnost" [Activity, Consciousness,
Personality]: Ibsoov, Politizdat, 1975.

199
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
57.

Se.

59.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

7°.

DUI 0"“.th US!- URL!

Glushkov, V. 14., and ”>er, V., “Artificial Intelligence,‘ LIT. GAL, 1 January
1976, p 11.

Hagutov, I. s., and Unanskiy, L. 1., "Organizator i organizatorskaya

deyatel'nost" [The Organizer and Organizational Activity], Ianingrad, 13640
1.60, 1975.

Martin. nah” ”slate-my analir peredachi dannykh' [Systems Analysis of Data
Transmission], msoow, Mir, Vol 1, 1975.

Heshcheryakov, A. I. , 'Slepogluklwnewye deti (razvitiye peikhiki v protsesee
fornirovaniya povedeniya)" meat, all: and Blind Children (Mental Developlent
During Fixation of Behavior”, Meow, Pedagogika, 1974.

Hol', A., mks, v., and Kassler, IL, "Iskusetvo i M” [Art and the Corputerl,
Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Nil'son, N., 'Iskusstvennyy intellekt" [Artificial Intelligence], Pbscow,
Mir, 1973.

Novik, I. 3., 'Kibernetika: Pilosotskiye i sotsiologidwskiye probleny'
[operneticsz Philosophical and Social Problem], lbscov, Gospolitizdat, 1963.

Novikov, D. 15. ”Voprosy razrabotki i moroniya Asa naterial'no-teklmicheskiu
snabzheniyen narodnogo khozyaystva" [Problem in Developing and Introducing
Automated Systems for Controlling Haterial-‘l‘echnical Supply in the Rational
Boom-y). Moscow, um i GP, 1975.

"MR: Lichnost', deyatel'noet', kollektiv" [Scientists and technicians:
Personality, Activity, Collective], Kiev, Naukova dud“, 1975.

Oltyanu, 1., "Organizatsionnyye struktury sovrenennogo predpriyatiya"
[Organizational Structures of the Modern Enterprise], Mosom, Ekononika, 1971.

Orteyov, Yu. V., ”Philosophical Problem of Dbdeling Hum Mental Functions,"
VOPIDSY FILOSOFII, No 10, 1970, pp 172-177.

Platon, ”Buthyphro," in "Polnoye sobraniye tvoreniy Platona v 15-ti t." -
[Chaplete Collection of the Works of Plato in 15 Volumes]. Petrograd, Vol 1,
1923.

Pols‘tayev, I. A., "me 'Difticult Period' of cybernetic: and herican Workso"
in "Chelovecheskiye sposobnosti nashin" [me Human Capabilities of Machines],
Moscow. Sovetskoye radio, 1971.

Polovinkin, A. 1., “m Place of the Task of Automating Inventive Creativity
in the Problem of Creating Artificial Creative Intelligence," in 'Evristikl i

iskusstvennyy intellekt" [Heuristics and Artificial Intelligence], Kiev,
Izd-vo AN USSR, 1969. (Seminar proceedings: issue 1).

200

POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

81.

82.

83.

85.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pospelov, G. S. , “Artificial Intelligence and the Automated Control System,‘
in "Voprvosy kibernetiki" [Problems of Cybernetics], macaw, Izd-vo AN 5551!,
No 21, Part II, 1977.

Pospelov, G. 5., and Pospelov, D. 8., “Artificial Intelligence,“ VES‘I'NIK AN
$588, No 10. 1975, pp 26-36.

Leont'yev, A. N., and Gippenreyter, Yu. '3. (Editors), ”Praktikum po
psikhologii' [Laboratory Manual in Psychology]. lbscow, Isd-vo MGU, 1972.

Prokhorov, A. M., ”Solid State Physics and Its lble in Science and Practice,“
VESTNIK AN SSSR, No 2, 1976, pp 19-27.

'rikhomirov, O. K. (Editor). “Psikhologicheskiye issledovaniya tvorcheskoy
dcyatel'nosti" [Psychological Studies of Creetive Activity]. Moscow, Nauka,
1975.

'rikhomirov, 0. K. (Editor), ”Psikhologicheskiye mekhanizmy tseleobrazoveniya"
[Psychological Mechanisms of Coal Pbrmation], macaw, Nauka, 1977. .

Revzina, o. 6.. and Revzin, I. 1., "A Semeiotic Experiment on the Stage,“ in
"Uchenyye zapiski Tart. un-ta" [Scientific Notes of Tartu adversity]. No 284,
1971 ("Trudy po znakovym sistemam' [Works on Syﬂnl Systems], Vol 5, pp 232-254).

heytman. U., "Poznaniye i myshleniye" [Cognition and ﬂanking], Moscow, Mir,
1968.

'Resheniye zadach obrabotki dannykh e pomshch'yu E‘l‘aVM: (Inetruktsiya dlya
po1'zovateley sistemy non-75)" [Processing Data With the Help of a Digital

Oonputer: (Instructions to Users of the YaOD-‘IS System”, Xiev, Part 1, 1975.

Rubinshteyn, s. I... "o myshlenii i putyakh yego issledovaniya" [Thinking and
the Ways of Its Analysis], Moscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR. 1958.

Nubinshtcyn, s. I... "Printsipy i puti razvitiya psikhologii" [Principles and
Paths of the Development of Psychology]. lib-cow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1959.

Sakman, 6., ”Pcsheniye zadach v sisteme chelovek-EVH" [Problem Solving in a
Man-Computer System], Moscow, Mir, 1973.

Sekey, L., “Knowledge and Thinking," in Hatyuehkin, A. H. (Editor). “Psikhologiya
myshleniya" [The Psychology of winking]. Moscow, Progress, 1965.

Sechenov, I. M., "Izbrannyye proizvedeniya" [Selected Works]. lbscou, Izd—vo
AN SSSR, Vol 1, 1952.

Skurikhin, v. 1., and Horozov, A. 3., ”Integrated Automated mntml Systems:
Features of Their Structure and the Direction of Their Developmnt,‘
UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYE SISTEH‘! I HASHINY, No 2, 1976, pp 5-11.

201

POI] OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96‘

97.

98.

99.

100.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Slyyql. 0:11., "lskusstvmmyy intullokt" [Artificial intelligence]. lbecow,
Mir, 1973.

Snul'son, H. I... “The Linguistic and Peydwloqicel Neturnlneu of the Language
of Commication With a Conputer.‘ in 'Senenticheskiye voprosy iskusetvennogo
intellekte' [Semantic Problem of Artificial Intelligence]. Kiev. Zneniye, 1976.

“Sotsial'nyye problemy industriel'nogo crude: Moteriely konterenteii eotsiologov
Pribeltiki" [Social Problems of Industrial Labor: Proceeding: of e Conference
of Baltic Sociologists]. Vilnius, 1973. kprint.

Starkueter, Och. , "Comuter lbdelinq of e Psychiatrist-Patient Interview,” in
"Elektronno-vychislitel'neye tekl'mike v iseledoveniyekh nerueheniy peikhicheskoy
deyatel'nosti cheloveko" (mute: ‘lﬁechnoloqy in heeerch on amen nentel
Disorders], )becow. Heditsina, 1971.

1‘eyior, R., "The Relationship of Interactive Calculations to Computer Science,“
T1188, V01 63' 1975! PP 13-170

Tikhonirov, 0. K., “The Concepts 'Goel‘ and 'Goel romtion' in Peythology,‘
in "Psikhologicheskiye nekheniuly teelobrezoveniye' [hydrological Mechanism of
Coal Formation], lbscow. Neuke. 1977.

Tikhonirov, 0. K., "Struktura uyslitel'noy deyetel'noeti cheloveke' [me
Structure of Hum Thinking Activity), Hosoov, zed-v0 non, l969.

'rikhonirov, 0. K., ”Philosophical and Psychologicel Problem of 'Artificiel
Intelligence'," WPIDSY PILOSOPII, No 1. 1975, pp 97-‘...9.

'rikhonirov, 0. K.. “Artificial Intelligence' and the 'meoreticel Problem of.
Psychology,“ VOPIOSY PSIIOIOIDGII, No 2. 1976, pp 9-21.

'r'yuring, A. #1.. "lbzhet li whine welit'?‘ [Can e machine 'mink'n, Moscow,
Inoetr. lit., 1960.

Uvarove, o. 5.. "The Phetic Motion of Coaunication Resources,“ IZ‘IBS‘HYA AN
KIRSSR, Vol 1, 1972, pp 78-82.

"Upravleniye. Infomteiye. lntellekt" (Control. Information. Intelligence],
Moscow, Hyoil. 1976.

Uspcnskiy, B. A.. “'me Problem of Linguistic npology in the Aspect of
Difference: Between the 'sPoeker' (Addreeeer) and the 'Liltener' (Addreeeee),"

in "no honor Roman Jakob-on,” Mouton. Vol 3, 1967, pp 2089-2108.

Khant. E., Marin, Dzh.. and Stoun. 1-3, "Hodelimvoniye pmteesee fornirovaniyo
ponyatiy no vychislitel'noy neshine" [Corputer Simulation of Concept mutation].
Moscow. Mir, 1970.

"ﬁelootnyy nozg, evristika produktivnogo wehleniya i peikhointellektuelietike"

[me Integral Brain, the Heuristics of Productive Thinking and Psycho—Intellect-
uelietice], Tbilisi, 1973, Reprint.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101.

102 .

103.

104 .

105.

106 .

107 .

108 .

109 .

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chavchanidse. V. v., "The Abstract meory of Artificial Intelligence," in
"Haterialy IV Hezhdunarodnoy kcnterentsii po iekusstvemm intellektu"

[Proceedings of the Fourth International (hater-once on Artificial Intelligence],
‘milisi, No 1, 1975.

Gutterdzhi. 5., and Datta, 0., "Wedeniye v indiyskuyu filosotiyu' [Intro-
duction to mdian Philosophy], lbsccv. Izd-vo inostr. lit” 1955.

Glushkov, v. H. (Editor). “(melovek i vychislitel'naya told-mike" [Han and
Cosputer uchnoloqyl, Kiev, Naukove nuke, 1971.

'rikhomirov, O. K. (Editor), “melovek i konp'yuter" [Han and Comterl, Moscow
Izd-vo KSU, No 1, 1972.

Tikhonirov. 0. K. (Editor), "melovek 1 EV!" [Han and computer], Moscow,
Ekomnika, 1973.

Chcreyskiy, H. 11., "Simulational Modeling of 'Han-Oonputer' Dialogue System,“
in '"nezisy dokladov III Leningradskoy nauchno-tekhnicheskoy konferentsii
'Inzhenernaya psixhologiya v priborostroyenii" [Abstracts of Reports of the
Third Leningrad Scientific-Technical Conference 'mgineering Psychology in
Instrument Making'], Leningrad, 1976, uprint.

Shekhter, H. 5.. "Formation of Effective Identification Habits. Comication
1,“ NOWYE ISSLEDOVANIYA V PSIKHOIDGII, lb 1, 1974, pp 8-10.

Shteynbukh, K., "Avtomat i chelovek' [Autouaton and Han], Moscow, Sovetekoye
radio, 1967.

Eynsnteyn, IL, “Pizika i real'noet'“ [Physics and Reality], Moscow. Nauha,
1965.

"Bntsiklopediya kibernetiki" [Bicyclopedia of cybernetics], Kiev. Naukova
dunka, 1974.

Yakobson, P. M., 'Psikhologicheskiye probleuy notivatsii povedeniya cheloveka"
{Psychological Problems at the natives of Human Behavior), lbscow,
Proeveshcheniye, 1969.

Yakobson, R., “Linguistics and Conunication Theory,“ in 2vegintsev. V. A.
(priler) . "Istoriya yazykoznaniya XIX-XX vekov v ocherkakh i izvlecheniyakh"
[History of Linguistics in the l9th-20th Centuries in Essays and Excerpts],
Moscow, Prosveshcheniye. Part 2. 1965.

Abelson, R. P.. "Computer Simulation of Social Behavior,“ in Lindsey, 6., and

Aronson, 3.,(Editore) , “Handbook of Social Psychology,‘ Addison-ﬂeshy,
Mass., Vol 2, 1968. ~

Adler, M. J., “The Difference of Man .znd the Difference it ﬂakes," New York,
1967.

203
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122 .

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

I’m WIILIAI. USE. Ul‘lol

Barrett, D. A., 'Autolatic Inventory Control 'i‘achniques,‘ Londom Business
Book, 1969.

Chapanis, A., and Overbey, Oz. 8., “Studies in Interactive Comication: 111.
Effects of Similar and Dissiniiar Comication camels and 'No Interchange
Options on Team Problem Solving,“ 92m. AND m. SKILLS, V01 38, No 2,

1974, pp 343-374.

Cblby, K. BL, and mea, 8., “Heuristic lbthods for Counter understanding of
Natural Language on Context-mounted (Ax-Line nialoguesﬂ HA1“. BIOSCI.,
Vol 1, No l, 1967, pp 1-25.

Colby, K. 14., et a]... “Turing-Like Indiatinguishability ﬁsts for the Valida-
tion of a Computer simlation of Paranoid Processes," Amr. 1mm... Vol 3,
No 3, 1972, pp 199-221. .

Colby, It. It, “simulations of Belief Systeas,“ in Schank, R. 0., and Dolby,
K. H. (Editors), “Computer lbdels of Thought and Language," San Francisco:
w. H. Freeman, 1973.

Colby, It. IL, "Artificial Paranoia: A (bzputer Simulation of Paranoid Pro-
cesses," Perganon Press. 1975.

Coles, L. 5.. “Syntax Directed Interpretation of Natural Language," in
simn, H. A., and siklossy, L. (Editors), “hpresentation and Meaning:
Experiments with Information Processing Systems,“ New York: Prentice-Hall,
1972.

"Oonputers and the World of the nature," MIT Press, 1969.

Cornish, IL, and Horton, H. (Editors), 'mayuterired Process (bntrol: A
Management Decision," New York, Buenos Aires: Hobbs; Doraan, 1968.

Dreyfus, H. i... ”What Oouputers Can't Do: A Critique of Artificial Reason,”
New York, 1972.

Cordon, N. J., 'S‘Inecticu: The Development of Creative Imagination,” New York:
Harper, 1961.

Gordon, 0., and Lakoff, G.," Conversational Poatulates " in ”Papers 7th Region.
Meeting Chicago Linguistic Soc. ," Chicago, 1971-

Guilford, J. P., and Hoepfner, R.. “The Analysis of Intelligence," New York,
1971.

Gunderson, K., I‘Mcntality and Machines," Garden City: New York, 1971.

Halpern, 8., “Foundations of the Case for Natural Language Programing,"
IRES SPECTRUM, V01 4, No 3, 1967, pp 140-149.

Hilgart, 3., Atkinson, R. C., and Askinson, R. I... ”Introduction to
Pscyhology,” New York, 1971.

204

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hooper, D. 11., "the Computer as an Aid to Magellan," London: General
Educat. Trust Inst. Chartered Accountants in mgland and Wales, 1968.

Crosson, P. J. (Editor), "Human and Artificial Intelligence," New York, 1910.

Laver, J., "Conmnicative Punctions o! Phatic Gaul-anion," in “work in Progress,"
Edinburgh Univ. Press, 1974.

Halinowski, 8., "The Problem of. Meaning in Primitive Languages,“ in Ogden,
C. K., and Richards, 1. A., "The Meaning of Heaning,“ 2d Edition, New York;
London, 1927.

Malone, '1'. 19., “Computer Simulation of M Person Interactions,” BEHAV. scI.,
Vol 20, 1975, pp 260-267.

McGuire, H. 'r., "Dyadic Commication, Verbal Behavior, 'Ihinking and Under-
standing. I. Background Problems and meow,” J. NERVOLS AND MENTAL DISEASE,
Vol 152. No 4. 1971. pp 223-241.

mmire, M. T. , and Coleman, 8., "A Model for the Study of Dyadic Comica-
tion. II. Research Approach, Research and Discussion,” J. NERVOLS AND
MENTAL DISEASE, Vol 146, No 3, 1968. pp 230-238.

McGuire, H. 1'., and Larch, 8., "A M1 for the Study of Dyadic Comication,

I. Orientation and Abdel,” J. NERVOUS AND WM DISEASE, V01 146, NO 3,
1968, pp 221-229.

McGuire, H. '1‘., and Lorch, 5., ”Natural Language Conversation Modes,” J.
NERVOUS AND MENTAL DISEASE, Vol 146, No 3, 1968, pp 239-243.

McGuire, H. T., Lorch, S., and marton, G. C., “Ian-Machine Natural Language
Exchange: Based on Selected Features of “1:103th Input. II. The Use of
the Tine-Shared Conputer as a Research Tool in Studying Dyadic Oomunication,‘
J. PSYCHIATR. 1188., Vol 5, No 2, 1967, pp 179-191.

McGuire, u. '12, and Stanley, J., "Dyadic mication, Verbal Behavior,
Thinking and Understanding. II. Pour studies,“ J. NERVOIB AND MAI.
DISEASE, Vol 152. No 4, 1971, PP 242-259.

Anderson, A. R. (Editor), "Minds and Machines," Englevood Cliffs; New York:
Prentice-Hall, 1964.

Moyne, J. A., "Simple-English for Data Base Comication," INTERN. J.
COMPUT. AND INFORM. SCI., V- 1 6, No 4, 1917, pp 327-343.

Osborn, A. F., "Applied Imagination," New York, 1957.
Parkinson, R. C., Colby, K. 11.. and taught, u. S., "Conversational Language

Comprehension Using Integrated Pattern-Matching and Parsing,“ ARTIE‘. INTEL”
Vol 9, No 2, 1977, pp 111-134.

205
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.
153.

154.

155.

156.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Parncs, S. J., and “arcing, a. P., "A Source Book for Creative winking,” 1962.

Pylyahyn, 2. (Editor), "Perspectives on the (Jo-pater Revolution,“ mglewood
Cliffs, 1972.

Taylor, I. I... and GeCzels, J. 11., "Perspectives in Creativity.‘ 1975.

Polanyi, 11., "'me logic of Tacit Inference," in 'Hunan and Artificial
Intelligence," New York, 1970.

Quarton. G. C., McGuire, M. '1'., and torch, 5., 'ilan-Hachine Natural Language
Exchanges Based on Selected Features of Unrestricted Input: 'me Development
of the Tine-shared Couputer as a Mcarch mol in studying Dyadic amica-
tion,“ J. PSYCHIAT. 1185., Vol 5, No 2, 1967, pp 165-177.

Rechenberg, P., "Bin rekuxsives Program fur da- mah-8p1e1., mm.
REG-1W” Vol 12, No 1, 1970, pp 11-19.

SCIENCE NEWS, No 9, 1967.

SIGART MLETTER, No 36, October 1972, p 26.

sine, H. B. at a1.. “Psychological Evaluation of 'mo Conditional Constructions
Used in Computer Languages,” INTERN. MAN-m. 5mm, Vol 5, No 1, 1973,

pp 105-113.

Weizenbaum, 3., “Computer Power and Human mason,“ San Francisco, 1976.

ﬁnicky, Ex, ”Ibrphologische Porschunq" librphological Analysis], A. G. winter-
thar, 1958.

(DPYRIGHT: Izdacel'stvo "Nauka', 1979

11004
(30:

8144/0967

206

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY