FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10074
26 October 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 61/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
son omcuu. use ouur
mas L/lOO'l
26 October

JAPAN REPORT

(F000 61/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND 30010111510“.

Cancun Summit Meeting: Japan Must Speak Out
(Talcuni Hstsumoto; MAINICHI DAILY HEB, 9 Oct 81; ...........

JSP Elections Analyzed '
(Raisuke Honda; THE DAILY 1061181, 9 Oct 81) ................

Suzuki Policy Speech to Diet Criticized
(Editorial; mnucuI um me, 30 Sep 81)

Dimt Session for 'Refom' Exaggerated Advertisement
(Takuo Hayashi; MAINICHI mm m, 27 Sep 81) .............

Solxa Gakkai Applying Brake on Coalescence of Centrist Influences
(Takehiko Takahashi; MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 1 Oct 81) .........

Konoto Switches Strategy
(Raisuke Honda; THE DAILY IOIIURI, 27 Sep 81)................

How To Cope With Govermmt Reform
(Hideo htsuokﬁ; WICHI ML! NEW, 6 mt 81) eoeeeeeeeeeee

New Political Party's Impact Appears Slim
(“8380 Kmazashi; THE JAPA“ BCONGIIC JOURNAL, 6 wt 81) so...

MILITARY

U.3.-Japanese Friction on Defense Issues Examined
(CHUO Km, &p 81) 00.0.0.0...0.0!ICOCOOOOOOCOIOUUCOOOOCOOI

-a- [III-ASIA-lll Pt

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIIICE AN D TBCHNOHX‘II

Institute To Study Resources Using Satellites To 30 Set Up
("lam mxo W, 25 Aug 81) 00......0......OIOOOOOIOOOO.

Manufacturers To Cooperate With Fine in West Germany, France
(HIM mum mun, 19 Aug 81, union 1mm 3mm,

2 &:1 81) OOOOOIOOICIOOOOOOCOOO...0......OQOOIOOOOOCOOOOOOOO.

Fujitsu Fanuc, Siemens
Toshiba, French Line Group

Taiyo Iron Works To Start Robot Exports to Europe
("1M KmYo m, 8 Aug 81) .IIQOQOOOCOOOOOCOOOOCOOOOOOO

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOImI CAL

CANCUN SMIT MEETING:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN 3081' SPEAK OUT

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY KENS in English 9 0c: 81 p 5

[Article by Taken: listeurnoco, Snuff Writer:

Tea: for 'Peace Diplomacy”)

[Text 1

the W in the ll!"
ended international symposaun
on NMhéouth relations held in
Osaka reached
a coruensus on
three areas to
lacilitate lu-
lure interna-
tional cooperao
tion between
the indmtrial counties oi the
North and the developing
countrieeoitheSouth.

Tinthreeareasagreedupon
were it) hdmtrialcountriee
shouldaeehhlgheretilclency
lor their aid to developing

countries with a lull tan--

derstandlng oi it}: {mic
requirements oi atter
countries: m to attain this
goal. both developed and
developing countries should
increase the ilow of accurate
iniorrnation concerning their
motive stands; and (3) to
step up personnel eechanges
andmaintah dialoguebasedon
mutual trust and goodwill
between the wealthy countries
andpooreroomtries. -

The two-day international
Symposium on the “North-
South Dialogue - Energy
Challenge and Development

PerspectiveinAsia"eametoa.

successiul . conclusion Wed-

needay. ‘
The event. which was per-
Umled h by a mmher oi
dl gurshed persons and
experts lrom hoth Japan and
other countries. was a joint
undertaking oi the Asian
Development Bank. the Osaka
ﬁlm?“ “in it:
W
hiainichinmdwungSystem.
The iramework of discussion

inthe poeIunooveredwide
areas future alternatloul
mention incinang energy.
devebp t,tr-laulie

ment. . '
m... .mmmww
monetary iinanciallanree.

The Osaka sympoehlm was
also geared to work out
proposals-aimed at the Oct. 2.
23 Cancun. Intro. summit
meetingoitheieadersotarich
andpoorcormtriee.‘l'hennnmtt
meeting aims at iacilltating
glohelnegotlationstobridgethe
economic gap between in
dustrial and developing
comics. '

Teiiehh'n Yohoi. president oi
the Osaka Junior Chamber
inn. expreeed hope that all
countries. irrespective oi
Petr ditlerencee in political.
enonomicandaocialstrucmree.
will make every possible etiort
to mzke the Canclm mutt
meetineahuiliulone.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Cancun-Japan Mun: Speak Ouc-A

Theireetinnthenerlsee'asto
what strategy Japan should
take at the Cancun summit
meeting

Themappropriale answer
eeemstohetharJapanahouid
nail ior industrial
eotmtriee' aid to developing
normh'ies by reducing their
military spending. and ior
me: New“ u:
lecti y
developingoonntriee.

Dr. Fasihnddin Mahtah.
planning minister oi

saiduin the Osaklal
sympoeinmthat evenanna
portion of hrduruial normtries'
military spending. which
amounts to 3500 billion. is

The Japanese ap-
proach to the atmmlt meeting
comista at three stages.

Firstly. it will make an etiort

tohave the global negotiations
—theiorumoiwhlchwillhethe
gUNJsFeodahdAmculture
Organization: "energy and
monetaryandttnancial issuer
attheWorid Bank: aod“trade
issues" at the General
Agreement on Term: and
Trade. --
However; the Third Wortd
countries. including LDCs.
whose people are “terms
truth rock-bottom living
standards. have become the
target ot the M military
superpowers. the US, and die
Soviet Union. h the race to
increasethetrglohalinnuence,.
in last year alone. hath
Moscow and Washington were
reported to have sold at:
billion worth and SM: billion
worth oi military hardware to
those devetooto; countries.

respectively. - '
As a W. Jordan
was reported tohavespent 19

percent ot its you domestic
product on the purdtue pl
weapons;Chtle!.ipertentotita
GDP; mm 9.23m“ oi i:
GDP: pore . W

its GDP; and Nelaysia 31900.1

percehtotitsGDP. , .. 3..

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060051-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This fact suggest another
aspeetot the NorthSouth tune:
the developing countries.

whether they like It or not.
have become involved in the
"military expansion" game in
line with-the ra’
global strategies tor
stratum; their political-
aod military tnthieoce. This
certainly mhtiottzee the etiect
otoidproridedtotheinbythe
Wont-atria.

Janan's philosophy in this
rapecthasheenthaitahould
notexportanns. ’

ltJapanreaiiyhelieveathat
progress in North-South
relation is lamentable tor
mmmnyotpoimw.
mound-madam
Itwtllhecalledwootomaheah
etlort to unmade other to-
dostrtal countries to tahe a-
ppruoch to

developing
anonllahohecalledooto
maheastroog-appealtohoth
the W and other
McNamara
their arm exports to
deuterium -
Without this. no really eta

peopletnthederelopiug
through restraining their-
militaryeahenditwe. ~

COPYRIGHT: MINICHI DAILY NEWS 1981

C50: b120/27

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000400060051-6
JSP ELECTIONS ANALYZED

Tokyo THE DAILY YOH'IURI in English 9 Oct 81 p 3

[Article from POLITICAL BEAT column by Rhieuke Honda:

[Text]

mum pe'm use) is entirwith
ectivlty end epeculetion u electione of the
perty eheinnen end other executive noete

npproech.
AnelectionottheJOPleedei-ieeched-

nled for lete November or eerly Deceinher

with perticipetlon e: on petty where.

A new eeeretnry-genenl end other
member: or the 38? move committee
ereioheelectedin theiorlhoninlneperty
convention in thnnry.

It seems thet incumbent :8? Claim
Ichiomketnmyheveerurelnneeol
winning reelection for e third eoneecutive
two-veer tenn. . ' -

ao'em. there is no telling how the
linei mite oi the election oi :8? peak.
dent will than out. time In
nmheroinertymmheremmcdticnl
or Mann's leek ol’ leadership in running

the No l oppoeition petty.

In the next perty convention. on the
other bend. Shinnen Tenn. currently the
eecretery-generel, in certain to step down.
beceneeheiewithoutebletpoeterter
hledeteetinthelnetl-loueeolaepreo
eentntlvee election.

However, no “invorite” u Teeny“ euc-
eeeeor he: emerged, eo that the nee tor
themanoetlnoetukelywmhecolnee

mixed nght.

Monte. tonner nuyor. of Yohoheme.
m lnetelled in the :8? ch in
1977 u the “savior“ tor the party hettered
in the woke oi divisive gnu-rein between
the perty‘e Mamet-uniniet action. the
Shouting! mm isocleliet modetlon),
end it riveie within the 18?.

unchhoneweeplncedinuimnteue
leederoltheJSP.tlneehehedwonhlgh
popularity with Yokohama elm during
his mayoral any: in the extent of tuning
tune es n "star unong the netion'e re-
rormiet heed: of municipelitlee."

The 18? cheirrnnn. however. he bed
little success since then in twinning the

3

prolonged «ennui trend or the We
etrength.

Ae anon on he took once. mute
lennchededrive toremndlngtheJSP
membership to the 1.000.000 lurk. but the
pertymhenlnphuehovnelinoetno
intraneendreineineehoutss,m.

Beeldee. the :3? her. continued ioeing
Dieteeweileelocelelecﬂonemnei’ter
:2: lneugtmtim of the mute leader-

9.

In the ieet‘ilakyo metropoliten Aeeunhly
electton. the J8? steered mother crush-
undetecteothetiteetrengthinthe
emhlyottheceutelienovthelovmt
emgeiinolitlceinertiee.

Bende,the'ibhyochepterotthem
he: recently been epllt into two mane in
e li‘erce lnternei mule. thne hurther
meringthetuneot mute.

In eddltlon. the Mo chepter oi the
:8? hee recently been
gimme in.e ﬁerce lnternel 8W. thus
further lugging the tune of 1lgyeuketenm

Despite weningpopnier o -
hete.therelenootheri$l’memherin-_
neentm enough to renlece him. '

Such :39 ﬁgures to former eecretery-
gehernl mm Wham. Vice-Speaker
of the Boone of nepreeentetivee Reno
Ohde. end Vice-Chum“ ol the perty
Sholchi Shinodeirn hove been in tact
mentioned I! poeeihle rivel undidetee
egeinet ”ninth in the forthcoming elec-
tioguot JSPNcheii-mn. d M in m

tnny themehoul run
electionmldherdiy'lnenoughmpport
to deieet Minute, eocordlng to :8?
enureee. .

Induction ere thue thet mute will
prohehly eecure reelection in the party
election

Whetherhewlneeneuyvictoryinthe
election. however, will hinge tor the meet

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"JSP Electione Drew Nehr"]
portonbowwenheeendixpiuhiamd-
ennipinpreuincthelsrdemnndonthe
government (or 3 complete entoreement of
no boosts for government employee in
accordence With the reoommendoiiom b!
the Nation“ Personnel Authority end the
Public Corporotion and Netionnl anter-
priae Labor Relations Commission.

Reurdinc election 0! secretory-general,
there is no strong undid“: nt on.

However. such politicians or mm
Tannin uni Yuurn W on show
in: mm to ten the poet. end their
behind-tin-ecenee eﬂorte to win rapport
are certain to intensity right up to the
lebrnnry out! convention.

COPYRIGHT: THE DAILY YOMIURI 1981

050. 6120/27
SUZUKI POLICY SPEECH T0 DIET CRITICIZED

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY til-1J5 in English 30 Sep 81 p 2

[Editorial:

{Text}

“Prime Hinister's Speech"]

Prime Minister Zenlto Suzuki delivered a policy
speech on Monday. iirst before a plenary session of
the House of Representatives and later belore a
similar session of the House of Councillors. but to our
great regret it lacked both vigor and quality. As a
matter oi ceremony. he merely read a very
monotonous speech written by bureaucrats.

The prime minister failed to touch on whatever
political ideals he has and did not display any
determination to carry out his responsibility as
premier. deliberately. avoiding the pressing issues
with which the nation is faced today. His speech was.
in fact.- most symbolic of the general posture of the
Liberal-Democratic Party which has forgotten the

‘nation while enjoying its absolute majority in the

Diet. His manner of “reciting his speech" reﬂects the
inactive domestic political situation.

The prime minister said a lot of things which
amounted to nothing but words. For instance. he
stressed the need to carry out administrative and
fiscal reform to cope with the troubled state iinancial
situation. and expressed his determination to realize
the passage of bills necessary for such reform at the
95th Extraordinary Diet which convened for a 55-day
session last weelt. The prime minister added" that
whether or not the bills were passed by the Diet would
influence administrative and fiscal reform designed
to hold down government spending He should realize
that he sounded very hollow to theentire nation.

The government earlier designated fiscal 1982 as
the first year of fiscal reconstruction and established
a Second Ad Hoc Council on Administrative Relorm.
in July, the government received the ﬁrst recom-
mendation. which had been hurriedly mapped out by
the council to be in time for the start of budget
compilation. At that time Prime Minister Suzuki.
COPYRIGHT :

C80 :

5120/21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

declaring that he would stake ht political career on
bringing about reform. pledged that he would honor
the recommendation of the council.

A package of bills relating to administrative and
fiscal reform. drawn up by the government on the
basis of the recommendation. was submitted to the
Diet for deliberation. but the contents of these bills
were far from the original “spirit of administrative
reform." Under such circumstances. how can the
prime minister seek the understanding and
cooperation of the nation?

The bills are aimed at temporarily shelving the
burden of the state and shifting it to the shoulders of
local autonomiu and the private sector in order to
make the proposed cut in expenditures sound con-
sistent. The government convened the Diet session
with fanfare. but the package bills submitted to the
Diet without any effort on the part of the government,
hardly deserve our special attention.

What the nation wants to hear from him now is
whether ornotdrastlc reformplansareinstore. What
changes are needed in our concept to create a new
administration matching the march of the times? ,
Now that the nation is being compelled to share this
heavy burden. we would like to ask the government to
what extent it is determined to reform the ad-
ministrative system and sacrifice public servants.

In short. the government should unveil its
determination to introduce drastic measures im-
mediately after the implementation of the steps
designed to cut expenditures. The government should
also tell the nation directly in seeking the cooperation
and understanding of the people. Except for its
resolute posture. the government call for reform is no
more than another empty slogan. -

The prime minister' 8 speech was very abstract
with regard to the "equality of taxes. " He said
nothing about the controversial question of increasing

. Jap’an' 3 defense capability. or the discordant note be

tween Japan and the Republic of Korea over Japan’s
economic assistance to that country. or Japan-Soviet
relations concerning the northern territory now held
by theSovlets. .

It appears that the prime minister avoided
touching on these delicate issues out of consideration
for parliamentary management. Perhaps he wanted
to avoid possible friction with the opposition parties in
the course of deliberations in the Diet:

His low-key speech has discouraged the nation
whichexpectedhimtotaltethedrasticstepof
reformingtheadministration. _

MINICHI DAILY NW3 1981
DIET SESSION POR 'REFORM' EXAGCERATED ADVERTISER?!

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY SENS in English 27 Sep 81 p 2

[Article from "Political Periscope" column by Taltuo Hayashil

[Text]

it's the Liberawemocratic‘

Party that holds the reins oi
government in Japan. And it's
the LDP cabinet that maps out
and promotes the various
policies oi thestate. This is true
only on the suriace. say as a
matter oi principle. but the real
power to plan and push through
the policies is in the hands oi the
bureaucrats.

0i all the bureacrats in
Japan. the Finance Ministry
oiilciais are by tar the most
powerinl holding the purse
strings oi the government. As
the cream oi the bureaucrats is
iound in the Finance hlinistry.
their voices carry extremely
strong weight. Japanese
politics is. as a matter oi
principle carried on by “the
LDP cabinet." but in substance
polich "with the
oiiiclals

it tendstobe
Finance Ministry
takingthelead."
Viewed treat such a stand-
point. the policy oi the Suzuki
cabinet to “realize iiscal
reconstruction without in-
creased tases in the 1902
budget. by restraining govern-
ment expenditures through
administrative reiorm" is
unprecedented in history.
Because the Finance slinistry
never thought oi such a thing?
On the contrary. they have
maintained ior several years
that the introduction oi a

largescale consumption tax is a
prerequisite to iiscai recon-
struction

Their wish to realize it in the
loot budget was lrustrated.
however. in the lace oi strong
resistance staged by the
politicians who were then en«
couraged by solid public
opinion. Notwithstanding. they
were still coniident at llrst that
the introduction oi a oonatmp-
lion tax should be realized in the
tmhudgetandthatitwotddbe
realized without lailthistlme.

Determination

All their
again completely overwhelmed
by the determination oi Prime
Minister Zenko Sunni to “stake

‘his political career on iiscal

reconstruction by restraining
administrative spending not by
introducing a large- scale
consumption tax." ills decision
was prompted by Toshlo Doko
who assumed the presidency oi
a special council newly
established this spring to carry
out administrative return. in
return for the post. Doko asked
the prime minister to make
suchadecision.

Were the Finance Ministry
bureaucrats discouraged
because oi their original

disa ntment? The answer is
y are in high spirits as

no.
belore. because they were in

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

espectationa were

iavor oi restraining ad-
ministrative expenditures The
reasonthey thounit oi in.
inducing a large-scale con.
sumption tax at an early stage
wasbasedontheirbelieithat it
would be diiiicult to restrain
administrativespendlng.
it was a stroke oi good iucit
that. the issue became the

paramountgoaliorlheFinance
hlinistr bureaucrats to

achieve. protnptlysvriticha
ed with an eye to playinga
leading policy role it the work
oi "strictly restraining
government inthe
next ilacai budget." And they
did it quite well. ior they suc-
ceeded in setting the aero-
ceillng irame. so tospeak.. a
iramework that "the total
budget oivarlous mlnBirlesior
iiscai use. with some ex-
ceptionssuchasdeiense. should
not eaceed that oi the last
Mm].

In order to realise iiscal
reconstruction without in-
creasing taxes. the total
government spending ior iiscai
taro has to be seized at the
«.Mbilllon-yen level. up some
3 trillion yen over this year's
06.700 billion yen. Compared
with an estimated figure it the
restraining step were not
adopted. it is a trimming oi
1‘00 or 2.830 billion yen. A
cabinet decision on the budget
'uzZMofmmiioom‘i‘he
tut will be mad I: most
cases without revising related-l
laws. ‘l'bat'a ﬂy the-
deiiberationa attic Dict coo-1
«30¢me-
Mom at Mind to “l.
mammal."
nmmmmu:
cvaandaanvinmrJtis.
an exam-aid W
with pout cantata lot at] Ia“
showy display. and it tits in'
pericctiyviththeaneutoiet
session on administrative
MmitbnottheDietMthe
Finance Ministry human:
who are steadily carrying out
“that momma with an
incmaeiataaea." . -.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOC IOIDGICAL

SOKA GAKKAI APPLYING BRAKE 0N COALBSCENCE OP CENTRIST INFLUWCES

Tokyo MAINICllI mm news in English 1 0c: 81 p 2

[Article from "Nagatacho Doings" column by Takehilco Takebashi]

[Text]

The New Liberal Club and the
United Social Democratic
Party have tormed a new intra-
Diet alliance under the name ot
"New Liberal Clthemocratic
League." its representative is
Toshlo Yamaguchl. tormer
XLC secretary general.

Yamaguchl considers this
new alliance to be strictly an
intra-Diet entity and he
preterred being called “intra-
Diet eaecutive chairman." But
because such a desigitation is
uniamlllar. be accepted being
called the new group's
“representative secretary

TbeKomeito.theDemocratlc
Socialist Party. the New
Liberal Chat and the United
Social Democratic Party have
been regarded as the tour
middle-ot-the-road political
parties. Their coalescence has
been strongly urged by 05?
Chairman ityosaku Sasaki and
Adviser ihhoitasuga.

AtsuehatimeJoronlytwoot
the tour centrist partiestoiorm
an intra-Diet alliance gives the
impression oi cold water having
been poured on "the
coaiascence ot the tour middle-
ot-the-noa'd parties."

The New Liberal Club was
established by persons who
seceded trom the Liberal-

Democratlc {art . A; date.
' $1" 9' .
mum to a... ....
last long. its number at Diet
seats tell atone timeto tour.
That was the period when
Masayoshi Ohira and Taken
Fukuda were to conﬁrmation
over the election oi the prime

mhhtet‘tdtMDletJbeNLC'

supportedOhira.ittheKomeito
andDSPhadactadlathesame
way then as the N142. the

polltiealsitnationmlghtbave'

raider-gone a big dime.
' Coalition

this is because Ohira. ‘in
askingtorthe ot the
Komeito. DSP and h'LC. had to
accept a coalition government
as the condition The h'ew
Liberal Chm. having only tour
Diet seats at that time. sup-
ported Ohira. But the Kotneito
and Democratic Socialist Party
didnotdoao.

From this experience. the
then Secretary General

Yamaguchi oi the NLC had the
thought that "the ltomelto and
the Democratic Socialist Party
talk about a conversion oi the
political world but they do not
take action at a crucial
moment..1'here B little sense
dealing with political parties
that cannot bedepended wan to

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

act." This is what made him
more toward an intra-Diet
alliance with thetiSDP.

The NLC has tot-med an
alliance with the OS? in the
Tokyo htetropolitan Assanbiy.
Accordingly. it would not he

“the DSP's deienu policy has
aonetoctartotberlutml'his
isnottheentireieaaon

As tar as the coalescence oi
the mlddie-ot-theroad parties
is concerned. the 08? is acting
in concert with the Komeito.
When the course at talks in) to
now between 08? Chairman
Sasaiti and the Komeilo is
considered. it will not be
possible tor the DSP to exclude
the Komeito in allying with the
NLC and the 650?.

On their part. the inc and
080? are opposed to an
alliance with the Komeito. This
ﬁnal mysmamy the Komeito

a i called the
Sota Gairltal as its happening
organization. The big reason
seems to be that the ltomeito
doesnotliketoseetheh’LCand

others approach the Soita
Gahitai.

The Democratic Socialist
Party has a labor body called
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060061-6

COPYRIGHT:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Daniel (Japanese COD--
iederation oi Labori as its
supporting organization The
New Liberal Club's
brganiution is also open and
can be approached by anyone.
In the case oi Soha Galthai.
however. people oi other
political parties cannot even
approach it.

\‘anosulte Narazakl.
secretary general oi the United
Social Democratic Party.
declares. "they talk about the
coalescence oi the centrist
parties but We never dined

together even once with the .

executives oi the Komeito."

Executives Meet

Formal meetings have been
heldonntore than ten occasions
by the executives ot the .\‘LC
and the 050?. it is only

RAINICHI DAILY NEWS 1981

650: 6120/21.

10

throng: such meet

parties can gain
but

douwaeemtobt

In particular. it
know about the i
The NLC and US]
even it the centr
coalesce. it wilibe
work together I
"untouchable"
alstiocinthebac

For the DSP
alliance with ti:
USDP. an "on
ltotneito will be It
the DSP can hard]
an"0.i<."

The "New L
Democratic Lea:
tanned. But it Vt
tor it to become
point oi a new a:
the political silnat

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060051-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

KOMOTO SWITCHES STRATEGY

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 27 Sep 81 p 2

[Article from "Political. Beat" coluun by Raieuke Honda]

[Text]

COPYRIGBT:
6120/ 26

(.50:

“embership in the um Democretié
Perty (mm hes dresticslly decneeed.
meinlybeceuse oi doubts thet the primary
eiectionwilincnreintheelectionoithe
perty presidentin the eutumn oi next

mrymeioriectionwithinthepertyhes.

lost enthuslesm ior recruiting new petty
members.

men the tection led by Economic Plen-
nlnc Agency Director-Generel ‘lhshio Koo
min. which used to here nearly one third
or the perty membership on its side up
untiilestyeer.eppeerslnnomoodto
ember: on s new recruitment cempeicn.

A rumor is circulating emou politicel
pundits.thet the Komoto tectionheseben-
doned its strategy of trying to elect Ko-
motoontheetrenethothlewinningnext
yeer’s presidential primary election. it it is
held. '

The rumor seys thet the Remote tection

mnyhevedecided..inisctthetitlsed-_

visehie to ievor choosing e tor-president
next sutumn through negotietione emonc

isctionleedeuretherthenlinenelecr'

tion.

According to them? secreteriet. the
perty membership. the reeietrethn or
which is renewed every yeer. is new ehout
400.000. eithoneh the secreteriet omoiels
sey the number oi this yeer's totel 1.13?
members will not be eniisbte beiore the
end oi October, the deedline tor registrer

The ﬁgure oi 400.000 represents—e mes-
slve decline irorn lest yeer’s LDP member-
ship at 1.00.000 end 1mm 3.100.000.

The drestic decreeee in the perty mem-
bership is primerily ettributuble to the
strong suns thet the next LDP presiden-
tiel election et the expiredon oi Prime
Minister Suzuki's term oi oilice es LOP
heed in November 1002. will be cerried out
without e primer! election.

ThereisineoithehDPmembertlilpen-,

nueiteetomnmthisyeercomperedto
lH.000 eho may here something to do with
the decline in perty members.

In me, the LDP membership increased
sherply hitting the 3.100.000merk. them
tothestroncdrivesthntpertyiections
staged to recruit new members beiore the
perty presidentiel election scheduled for

THE DAILY YOMIURI 1981 11

'the liltm oi 19”.

~.—-.. .

or the 3.100.000 Ll)? members. e little
morethen 1,.0m000.oronetlurdoithe
toteul’wereseidiobesupportersoilco-
me

The eiiorts oi the Remote iection to
recruit .pro-Komoto members. however,
went tor nothins. beceuse Suzuki wee se-
lected es perty president through con-
sultedons emon: LDP lenders utter the
unexpectnd deeth in June 1000. at then
prime minister tieseyoehi Ohire.

1n the meentime. Komoto lest summer
wee on record so telling e lecture meeting
in his constituency in Kyoto-ken the:
there would be “more then tour condi-
detes" running in the next yeer's perty
presidentiel election. _

He else expressed his determination et
the meeting toseek me perty presidendsl
post. thus virtueliy mekinc e ”declere-
tion"oihiscendidecr iorthe 10011.0?
election. -

The Komoto tendon. like its rivel tec-
tions. thereetter mede no meior eilort to
set new pro-Komoto perty members.
More. it is obvious thet Komoto him-
eeliheseivenuptheideeoiplecinenrst
priority on e victory in e primery election
in competition with ell eligible LDP mem-

itomoto hes recently been intent on
strengthening friendly ties with the in~
iiuentiei iection heeded by iormer prime
mihhurxekoeimmwhileet theseme
time seine ell-out to seek support irom
enother iormer premier Tenn nude and
his tectiun.

Apperently emulntinc Administretive
Kenneement Agency Director-General Ye-
suhiroNeknsone.hiserchrivelintherece
to succeed Premier Suzuki. Komoto hsd
e tete-e-tete with ‘l‘enekn while he wee
on vecetion in iteruieewe. Neceno-ken.
lest summer.

W the end oi November. Premier
Sunni most likely will mum: his ceblnet
end perty executive lineup.

Whetwiilbeihietestlngtowetchinthe

' ceblnet mum. will be whether Komolo

steys in the cehinet thus meinteining his
stenoe oi remeininc not too close nor not
too distent irum Suzuki or bolts irom the
cabinet to launch his drive to cepture the

top LDPpost.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060051-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Hm T0 COPE "In! COVEWENT REFORM
Tokyo HAINICBI DAILY NEWS in English 6 Oct 81 p 2
[Article from "Zooming In" column by Hideo Hateuoke]

[Text]

ministrauve nlmbmnm' schedtﬂe to have them u-
highlighttsthepackegeotso- WMIWN
called "adnunistntm return. bulb- and secuttttee com-

h eminent At the end at the preeent
mime: yen ' M new year. the mutant/u
Otthestxoppoetuonputlee. mama/mural»:
four are to: the package. qmmmavmm
althoudtnotﬂthoﬂmer- «mama-totem
vetimJlotheum Mummm
Democrats'tho MWWWWW
rem-the package through mmmm
should manna with. any-stun. -
WW” '.5 "Bantams/snob
Saunanalwtmotthe' muttered
m1: a lawn-ho- WMMMM
mm”... gab... WMUM
tenet. there/curls. the ’ WWI/tum
strategies mun-"Im'm; ammuw
Writtemployto- wannabe/mitten
ngtthepechpsl' ~ ,’ '3 "Miami. Sun's out:
mMmthet/ﬂtothe] manhunt!“-
mmwnwamq Mmmm -
- nﬂoothetlonr‘ doo'tttttnke ”WW/05080!
Molnacﬂmovtllendeer WNW tebe
then eventothesoectaton Whitman/(heel
The twooppoeittoo putts tt Misdpllu 2!, was!“
tomdonthe wen!-
?m“mm' rum»

retenedtothetntenebleﬂsul mttonhrthemwpmu

mmummw onlytotthoukeotulns

the muslve Junence 0! m‘ '1‘ WI pollttcal
manhood: ' “WM“!

11: plmmﬂoet_ AMendo/mhemlsa

ammo». ea'srorthotboods Finance W name Is

thts m.,uustm MW--WW

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400000051-5

' ”The" Die'l'”is'$tod"tor edﬁ 'tilidtle'té are! up a mauve '

néchwocrvvr: (magnum:

ssxran‘swgnxgwr

9:3
politics.

No Finance Ministry‘

bureaucrat will risk a lailout

withLDP («learnt

my. None oi thee
oltlciolsis toquiton
theontsidevhentheythtnkthey
con noiom tene eon-
:ciedlouyotthetriohhthe
ministry

moles into n. poilticnl grab
bag to please 'their con-
otitoeots. and this has worked

topoeoenethoLDPmiorityln:

theDut. ...,.- ,. ._ .,
Through , public works

mm.mwp.

vote.
A ion oi lei-tithe: endangers
thelrneueiectionohm5o
they tum on getting enough
golden lertllieet' even it It
means
government. ‘As a result. the
.governmem to more than to
trillionyenlntotheoation.

It is to he noted. moreover.
that um I) trilial yen in out-
standing' comment bond:

lm.

hummuonthe"

washtnit upntthecostoitax.
relieithatothenhevotldhave.

heenpoeobleﬁ - -.

Foo sevenl'yeus,_now_we
have had no income tax cot.
which the oven»
thepeoplebyaomuchuprices
goupJ-‘arimcuttinglnootne
tax. the govemnent has en-
lotced and Is contemplating

' mmmwm‘mw ’
debt of at trillion yen. it ex-
plalnohowtheLDPleutedon
thenotionnltmdaetto
itsiegidetivemiotity.

Nov smm tolhhg about '
mum] extol: no it it just
iuppaidelongwithoutnnywi’ ‘
involvement. Whoever is
responsihhthelbcala'lsisiu ;
reality that cote: out tor od-
minlstrati'ereiom. ' -

The problem lshovtooilset
the budget shorttoll. The ‘
socialists and contaminate
WWW“? ”mm"

on no not ~
weiiore and‘ education for
major Win; cuts. 'Whot .
mmthomdethebluutm
istheioctthatdeleueluaeld
immune .to administrative-
reloom -

Retorm AiiPheees

mmdetoochail-
phooeoolodmlnlstntlon. in-,
eludlnpolcouroe. deiense

m '-

But-the oholeottheod-
' gametn'
thereiormployﬁhepvunw
mentmdecreedoniom
itemondetenoe. '
Tomorrow it could beenolling '
triendshipwiththeSoviets. ‘
One big envy l have con-
cerning President Reagan's '
administrative capabilities is
about his decision to scrap the
Energy and Education

enta In Japan. that
would ammmttoabolbhingthe
Education Ministry and the.
Energy Bureau oi the Ministry
oi. International Trade and
industry. _

Mr. Reagan issue/incite m _.
on administrative reiortn. To .
the Japanese. abolition oi the--
Education Ministry is least
imaginable in any government]
reform. ' .. ‘ '

At this moment. momma.
NEW POLITICAL PARTY'S IMPACT APPEARS SLIM
Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 111 English 6 Oct: 81 p 2
[Article from "Political Scene" column by Maeao Kanazeshil

[Text]

in late September, two minorpartiu -the
conservative New Liberal Chm (NLC) and
the reformist Socialist Democratic
Federation (SDF) — iormed a new political
youp called the "New Liberal Club-Deno-
cratic Alliance" in the House of Rep
reseitatives. it has stirred ripples among

'otherwise very quiet political cirle
recently.

The first and biggest concern is whether
this new group. whose political activities are
limited only to Diet affairs. could lead to the
ionnation or realignment oi new political

forces in the future. involving the Komeito '

(Clean Govertlnent Partyt and the Demo-
cratic Socialist Party (DSP). But. judging
from the conﬂict of interests and policy
differences among thae parties. a new
political iormation is very diiflcult to come
by.

me formation of this new group was. from
the beginning. contrary to the objectives of
Chairman . Ryosaltu Saltalti and Senior
Adviser iltlto Kasuga of the 05? who at-
tempted unsucceesiuiiy to form the new
group made up of four centrist parties tDSP.
the Komeito. NLC and SDF). Furthermore.
Toshio Yamaguchi. who was picked as
representative of the new group. said “There
has gt been a complete trust and policy
consensus among the new you: and the
Komeito and the DSP." indcating that the
group had no other choice but to exclude the
Komeito and the DSP.

in other worth. the new you; camot get
along with the Komeito and the 06? because
the Komeito's supporting organization is the

Buddhist Solta Gait!
Society) and the DSP
termed "more hawk
Liberal Democratic Pt
and its posture toward

A typical example 1
toward the policy oi
OS? on delense and K
Yohei Kono oi the NLC
not need two LDPa" 'l
tween the catnicting a
policy differences th
Especially since the it
the LDP. it completely
other OS? leaders wh
terms with LDP lead
for the initiation at a

0n the other hand.
have much in «mm
NBC is conservative a
both are splinters irot
and the Japan Social
for most of their at:
whimsical voters di
standing parties ant
Secondly. leaders of b
personalities and h
defense and foreiut p:

Furthermore. it go
both partie judged it
on that they iorm tbt
bright pospect is in
oi their party strength

It such a formation
reformist group had u
ago. sharp criticism
order. such as "parti
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

faith" and “illicit marriage." But no such
sharp rebukes have been heard of the forma-
tion this time. The biggest reason for this
might be that a merger ot‘such mini-parties-
has no direct eﬂect on Japan's domestic poli-
tics. but other reason migit have been the
atorementioned similarity at characters and
policies of both parties. an increasing ten-
dency among voters for nut-partisanship and
thewhimsioainattu'eoivotmwhodonot
diiierentiate between couemtive and
reformist.

But thetiaireotthenewgroupisnotthst
bcight at all us one member'bolted on the
very day the group was formed. Things will
not go easy when those “moody" parties
havetodecideon issuesinbtacitandwhite
terms in the comirg Diet sssions. The
biggest policy difference between the NLC
and the DSP lay in the ﬂeid oi delense and
security. Commenting on this diﬂerence. the
group‘s representative Yamaguchi said. "in
theory. an individual Diamsn shodd be
given a free hand on policy matters. but we
shodd not give the impression that the group
is in complete disarray. We would like to
hammer out the diﬂerenoes through
discussion and reach some kind of con
semus on policy matters." The problem
is whetherthis discussion will dothe trick [or
the grow in the com“ years.

Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

U.S.-JAPAN£SE FRICTION 0N DEFENSE ISSUES EXAHINED
Tokyo CHUO KORDN in Japanese Sep 81 pp 86-98

[Special Report: "National Defense at a Turning Point”; roundtable discussion on
"The Facts About the U.S.-Japanese Conflict on Defense Issues"; discussants: Joji
Onura, Japan Defense Agency Director General; Michita Sakata, Chair-an of the lower
House Special Connittee on National Security; chaired by Tonohisa Sekanaka, ASABI
SBIMBUN Editor]

[Text] The United States' Stern Posture

Sakanaka: with the inception of the Reagan adninistration's call for a "strong
America." the United States has been asking Japan steadily and sharply to bolster
its defense capability. It seeas that Japan's defense policy is now at a turning
point. Director General Osura, with us today. is in the position of for-ulating
and implenenting defense policy, while Mr Sakata. as chairman of the Lower House
Special Connittee on National Security, has the task of caning up with a national
consensus on defense and taking a critical look at and study of defense policy
fro. the people's point of view. Pros your respectiVe standpoints. I wish to
hear each of your opinions.

Director General Onura has just returned fron a trip, first to the United States
and then to Europe, while Mr Sakata followed the reverse course. Both conferred
with key officials on defense. Let's start with Director General Olura on what

the United States seeks of Japan.

Onura: During my visit to the United States in late June, I net with Secretary
of Defense Heinberger, Secretary of State Baig, Presidential Adviser (on national
security) Allen. and the chairmen of the Senate and House Arned Services Coaldt-
tees. It was shortly after both houses had passed the new fiscal year budget for
sharply increased defense spending. on the basis of the Reagan administration's
stand on restoring overall nilitary strength relative to the USSR, and while the
nuances differed. they all expressed their hope for cooperation fron their allies.

After being exposed to the most recent data at the headquarters of the Con-ander
in Chief, U.S. Forces, Pacific and at the Depart-ant of Defense, I was able to
appreciate the efforts being exerted by 0.8. leaders on the contention that the

East-"est balance of power would becone upset if nothing was done. I also under-
stood better why the United States. allied with about 60 countries, was seeking

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

our cooperation. Nevertheless, given Japan's constitutional restrictions and the
premise of defending Japan through the use of its own Self-Defense Forces, it is

only normal for there to be a limit to our capabilities, despite all the requests
for cooperation.

Sakanaka: “hat was the 0.8. perception on that point?

Omura: They said they understood this point well. However, the United States
feels that the Japanese Government's present efforts are insufficient, and that

it should move faster and on a bigger scale, in light of Japan's present status
and economic strength. For instance, Senate Armed Forces Comaittee Chairman Tower
stressed that greater efforts by Japan would be desirable because it would promote
trust between the two countries.

Sakanaka: From the Japanese point of view, that is where the gap is. Hr Sakata,
how do you feel about it?

Sakata: Before my recent visit to Europe and the United States, I visited Hashing-
ton from the end of November to early December last year and conferred with then
Secretary of Defense Brown, with Mr Allen, who was working on the transition tron
the Carter administration, and with Chairman Price of the house Armed Services
Committee. And during my last trip to Washington in June. I met with Secretary

of Defense Heinberger, Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Tower, and other
key Congressmen. Their contentions were just as the director general has de-
scribed.

The 0.3. view is: ”The 'Defense Program Outline' drawn up during Hr Sakata's ten-
ure as Defense Agency director general in 1975-76 was appropriate for the interna-
tional situation then prevailing. But today, it has changed dramatically. To
cope, we are hoping for greater defense efforts." Senator Tower clearly stated,
"The 7.5-percent ceiling on increases in the next fiscal defense budget came as a
disappointment."

Although he spoke in general terms, I felt that he was directing his statement at
Japan. What he was saying was, "The United States is merely seeking from its
Western European and Japanese allies what they should do in defense efforts as
members of the free society in order to cope with the Soviet threat." [he was
saying] that if such efforts were inadequate, the American people, in case of an
emergency, probably could not help but assume a negative stance in giving support.

Sakanska: when the "Defense Prograa Outline" was drafted, the international situa-
tion was that of detente. Today, however, there is the Soviet naval buildup in
the Far East as well as the deployment of 8820's, intermediate-range missiles, and
Backfire strategic boaters. More recently, there is the added problem of the Mid-
dle East. The United States wants to be in a position to confront the USSR on
three fronts-in the NATO area, in East Asia, and in the Middle East. The conten-
tion of the United States is that, despite the relative economic decline and its
consequent relative weakness of military power, it still assumes the responsi-
bility for protecting the sealanea for oil shipments. and that Japan, as a bene-
ficiary, hence ought to exert greater efforts. Considering the sentiments of the
American people, such a way of thinking cannot be helped.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0FTW(]AI.US£IJNLY

Sakanaka: In Director General Omura's meetings with key officials in the White
House, in the Department of State and Department of Defense, and in both Houses,
were there any differences of opinion among them?

Omura: The methods of expression varied, but there were no differences. During
a 4-hour discussion over lunch with Defense Secretary Heinberger, he explained
the recent dramatic increase in Soviet weapons production capabilities, the two-
fold increase in the number of strategic aircraft, and the 3.7-fold increase in
submarines as compared with the United States.

Secretary of State Haig spoke in broad terms. He stated that as a young second
lieutenant in General HacArthur's headquarters, he was familiar with the course

of enactment of the Japanese constitution and the trend of Japanese public opinion.
And he expressed hope, from the standpoint of Japan's economic recovery as well,
that [Japan] will assume a balanced effort for defense. Presidential aide Allen
commented that while he was not asking for the impossible, he would like to see
Japan take up the challenge against difficulties.

Sakata: Hr Allen, during a meeting last year, expressed hope for a full discus-
sion on what each country should do for the national interests of both. Defense
Secretary Heinberger also expressed a wish for talks on each country's share of
defense in spite of some differences. is added, "For America, it would be help-
ful to conduct talks with the USSR on arms limitation or reduction, but at the
same time, I believe that success can be achieved only through increased military
power. That, indeed, is the perception against the threat common to all freedom-
snd peace-loving countries."

Are Japan and the United States Really Pull Partners?

Sakanaka: He have discussed what the United States seeks of Japan. But to what
extent have Japan's thinking and contentions been conveyed to the United States?

Sakata: During a conversation with a young man named (Holhobittsu), chief of the
Policy and Planning Department, who had moved from the Defense Department to the
State Department, he stated, "As I said during the Hawaii conference, the present-
day Self-Defense Forces lack rear support capability and sustained warfare capa-
bility. Under such circumstances. a readiness capability cannot be acquired. A
combination of three capabilitiesu-frontal, rear support, and sustained warfare-
is required."

Hhereupon I stated to him and Assistant Deputy Secretary of State Holdrige: "Un-
der the 'Defense Program Outline,' the objective was to combine these three ele-
ments and create a unit, albeit small, with a readiness capability. Unfortunately,
that still remains unachieved. It is important, therefore, that the 'Defense Pro-
gram Outline' he achieved by fiscal 1987. "hen it is complete, there should be a
defense capability that is small but has a high-quality readiness capability. If
the United States asks for a bigger scale and a speedup, it will end up with only
the front without a sustained warfare or rear support capability. resulting in a
distortion with no readiness capability. This would he undesirable for Japan's

security and U.S. national interests."

19
FOR OFTﬂCIAl.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

Further, the Japanese people are beginning to develop a consensus on the security
issue. The Democratic Socialist Party has come around to recognizing the Self-
Defense Forces and the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty. The Komeito also is about to
shift to a realistic policy. And the opposition forces have participated in the
latest visit to Europe and the United States. If the United States seeks an un—
due speedup in defense buildup, despite such a favorable change, the consensus
that is developing could crumble. I explained that it was essential for the
United States to understand this point.

Omura: As Mr Sahats has said, our side expressed our minds quite openly. The
U.S. side did likewise, and while there were differences, we agreed to have con-
tinued meetings at every opportunity. In the fall, Defense Secretary Heinberger
will visit Asia and stop over in Tokyo. The regular conferences on equipment and
interchange of technology are also scheduled for this fall. Further, this will
be followed by studies, including the subject of assistance to U.S. forces in time
of emergency in the Far East.

Sakata: Because of the brevity of the meeting with Defense Secretary Heinberger,
I presented him with a text of my speech last year at George Washington Univer-
sity. In it, I mentioned that alliances in the conmuniat countries run vertically.
That is, the USSR maintains a command/obedience relationship with East European
nations, backed by military power, while the cooperative relationship in the free
society runs horizontally. Depending on the national situation and the strength
of each country. it is an alliance based on faithful cooperation for the attain-
ment of a single goal. Cooperation among the free society [nations] takes time
and requires adjustments. Yet, an alliance based on each nation's voluntary ac-
tion is more secure and effective than one based on the connand/obedience rela-
tionship. That. indeed, symbolizes full partnership.

Sakanaka: It means that a cooperative relationship must be constructed on sub-
stantive talks.

Sakata: Yes. For example. we allies were not consulted when the Carter adminis-
tration altered its policy to withdraw u.s. ground forces from the Korean Penin-
sula. Even the Reagan administration arbitrarily lifted the grain embargo without
consulting us, though we cooperated in the grain embargo against the USSR in the
form of economic retribution. I told Defense Secretary Ueinberger that this did
not represent full partnership, and that more talks should have been held.

Omura: In the United States, I made a visit to four military installations. At
one, the Jacksonville Naval Air Station, I uttered words of encouragement to about
100 men of the Haritiae Self-Defense Force who were there to take delivery of r-3c
antiaublarine-warfare planes. Hy purpose was to inspect one of the three aircraft
to be delivered. Thus, Japan-U.S. cooperation was steadily being promoted even

in this aspect. The P-3Cs will greatly iaprove antisubmarine-warfare capabil-
ities. Though it depends on the forthcoming budgetary measures, if more can be
assured under the next program, the controversial issue of greater antisubmarine-
warfare capabilities on the sealanes should be resolved for the tile being.

Saksta: In other words, there has been a gradual buildup of defense capabilities.
Assistant Deputy Secretary of Defense West described the Soviet threat in the Far

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR OFIHC1AL USEICMSLY

East. showing as data. also probably shown to Director General Olura, on the in-
crease of SS-20's and Backfires, and he noted the inadequacy of Japan's defense
efforts. whereupon I presented a chart colparing 0.8. and Soviet defense spending
and aired my views. In other words, the USSR steadily increased its defense spend-
ing in the 1970's, while the United States trinmed defense spending owing to its
withdrawal from Vietnam, and in part because of the domestic situation, including
the Watergate incident, uneaploynent, and inflation. During this period, while
total defense spending was small, Japan's real increase was 7 percent free 1970
through 1979. This time, it plans a 7.5-percent increase, in spite of the harsh
environ-ant of financial restructure and administrative reforn. This neans 3 per-
cent in real terns after adjustment for inflation, and is close to the 3 percent
for NATO nations. I asked for 0.8. understanding and declared that charges of
Japan's not doing anything are unjustified. Scratching his head, Best stated,

"In the 1970's, the United States was not a nodal allied power."

Current Situation in Europe

Sakansks: The other major pillar of the Western alliance is Europe. In the eyes
of the European countries, there seems to be a growing feeling of late that Japan
is not doing enough in defense efforts. In the Ottawa sun-it, Western Europe took
a hard line vis-e-vie the USSR. "hat is Director General 0nura's opinion after
conferring with top leaders of NATO?

Omura: I met with Secretary General (Luna) at NATO headquarters and with Rest
Gernsn Defense Minister Apel. Though the character of alliance differs between
Japan-U.S. and U.S.-Europe. there was a consensus on the question of defending
freedon.

Opinions were exchanged with Secretary General (Luna) on four points: First, the
defense efforts of NATO member nations, on financial efforts in particular; second,
the status of the ao-called ”double decision" pertaining to battlefield nuclear
weapons; third, the outlook on the Polish crisis; and fourth, the new French gov-
ernnent of Hitterrand, relative to its foreign affairs and defense policies.

0n the first point. many nations are beset by difficulties such as inflation and
unemployment, but except for a couple of nations, all are in virtual agreement
on a 3-percent hike.

Second point. To cope with the Soviet SS-20's, NATO countries have decided to
deploy Pershing 11's and cruise missiles in their countries. Today, 3 years after
the adoption of a resolution to hold negotiations with the 0883 in parallel. those
countries are preparing to deploy then. The secretary general noted that because
in a cauple of countries parlianentary approval cannot be obtained unless negotia-
tions are conducted with the USSR, he intends to ask the United States to open
negotiations on strategic arms limitation within this year.

Third point. On the Polish situation, the USSR probably wants to involve the
Harsaw Pact nations in order to avert any turmoil and to somehow maintain the
status quo. The possibility of military intervention is considered remote.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fourth point. As for the policies of the new Hitterrand government, they are in-
clined to have confidence in the official statement saying there would be no change
from the previOus government's stance as foreign relations and defense.

Sakata: The perception of Western Europe and the United States on the Soviet
threat is the same. but measures to deal with it differ. The Reagan administra-
tion. apparently feeling that negotiating leverage cannot be had without strength,
pieces priority on the deploy-eat of Pershing 11's and cruise missiles in Uestern
Europe. 0n the other hand, although Western Europe considers the deployment of
battlefield nuclear weapons and defense efforts to be essential, it also hopes for
U.S.-Soviet strategic arms limitation negotiations or arms control. in parallel
or in advance. Hilitary buildup and arms control are considered the "two wheels"
of the security policy.

Sakanaka: Director General clears, how did the conference with Defense Minister
Apel go?

Omra: He stated that he would like to see a 3-percent real increase in the fiscal
1982 budget. or 8 percent noninally. This does not differ much from Japan's 7.5
percent. Further. Social Democratic Party head Brandt told of his impression after
meeting with Secretary General Brezhnev that the latter was willing to enter into
arms control negotiations, and that Brandt would discuss this with the United
States in order to get the talks underway as early as this fall.

Sekanaka: Did you inspect the Heat German forces?

Omura: 1 made an inspection of a tank division and an air unit. The frontline
equipment, including tanks and aircraft, was on a par with Japan's. The only dif-
ference, for example, was the nobility of the armored personnel carriers accompany-
ing the tanks, the transport vehicles for missiles and a-unition. and operations
vehicles. There were shelters even at airbases. Terrain conditions my differ,
but Japan must do more to achieve a state of readiness.

Another point is that Heat Germany maintains a conscription system. with 500,000
men on active status, it is up to 93 percent of full strength. The reserve man-
power is about the same. It has been said that 700,000 men could be called up
within 72 hours. It is difficult for Japan to emulate this, but it should give
serious consideration to the issues of Self-Defense Force reserves and the attain-

ment of a full complement.

Sskata: A person named (Herutesu) of the (:00 (Christian Democratic Alliance), a
leading member of the Ger-an Federal Parliaaeot, said to Is: "It is doubtful that
the USSR will launch a nuclear war. The reason is that the USSR has desert-like
lands to the north and east. The nuclear destruction of Europe. with its rich
culture and industrial capacity, would transform Europe into another Siberia.
Hence, west Germany does not feel that the USSR would launch a nuclear attack
against Europe. Historically, the USSR‘a basic policy has been to exert polit-
ical and psychological pressure on neighboring countries by means of its tremen-
dous ailitary strength."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan-v.8. Differences in Perception of Soviet Threat

Sakanaka: The major problem between Japan and the United States in perceiving

the international situation has to do with the assessment of the USSR. Uhile there
is little difference in perception of the Soviet military buildup, there is a wide
difference of views on Soviet intentions.

Omura: The United States appears concerned not over the iminent use of military
power but with political pressure, backed by formidable military power capable of
fighting on two fronts.

Sakata: You nean political intimidation. with military power in the background.

Omura: Since irreparable harm could come from weakness or a vacuum, the United
States and its allies want to defend various regions together.

Sskanaka: Do you mean there isn't a wide difference of views between Japan and
the United States?

Omura: Japan is concerned over the Soviet military buildup centered around North-
east Asia, while the United States takes a serious view of the Middle East from a

global viewpoint .

Sskata: From a global scale, the military power between the United States and the
USSR is in balance. Though the USSR may have the advantage in some regions, the
United States does not feel the balance has been upset as a whole. In the Far
East, the USSR has strengthened its military power in the northern Territories
and has reinforced its naval power by such things as deploying the carrier Minsk.
But looking at the balance of power between East and Heat, [we see that] one-
fourth of Soviet military power has been nailed down along the Sino-Soviet border
as a result of China's alignment with the United States and Japan. This has
served to lighten the burden on the NATO front. From the Soviet point of view,
it fears a possible encirclement led by the United States and including Japan,
Western Europe, and China. Overall, the situation in the Far East is not neces-
sarily adverse for the Heat, there being no Asian nation friendly to the USSR
except for Vietnam.

But because of the Soviet deployment of SS-ZO's and Backfires, the 0.8. Seventh
Fleet or the Third Fleet will be under constraint and unable to assume a free
hand as before. This is of some concern from the standpoint of the United States

and Japan.

Omura: An immediate danger of large-scale war in which nuclear weapons are used
can be clearly ruled out. But Pacific Cot-lander in Chief Long regards an attack
using conventional weapons as likely and is focusing on that point. In the event
of an attack using conventional weapons, the war, in all probability, will not
be a short, decisive one, but a prolonged one. The U.S. Department of Defense
has not ruled this out.

Ssltata: Highly destructive. accurate nuclear weapons have been developed and are
increasingly difficult to operate. moreover, the mass use of conventional weapons

23
son omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is not so simple because of their linkage to nuclear warfare. As a result, dis-
putes are acquiring a limited character. The differences in the strength of snall
nations, with their conventional forces, and the superpowers have never been so
great as today. Yet the United States was unable to defeat Vietnam, and the 0881?.
is bogged down in Afghanistan. And the Iran-Iraq war has not flared into an all-
out war.

In the present situation, the use of military power in the nuclear era has been
restrained in many forms. Thus, at the time the "Defense Program Outline" was
drawn up, my thinking was that, against a linited attack, Japan would have its own
capability for fighting, without counting on the United States; on top of this,
there would be the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty and the spirit and determination of
each citizen to rise up in Japan's defense.

I agree that conventional power has never had so nuch impact as today. But its
employment can be very limited. The reason, first of all, is nuclear deterrent
and such other factors as the U.s.-Soviet talks on strategic arms limitation,
detente, mutually dependent economies, technology, and open availability of in-
formation. All of these deterrents are helping to safeguard peace. Basic to it
is the balance of power between East and Heat.

The preservation of peace, therefore, is difficult without the strict maintenance
of the balance of power. Since Japan pursues the "three nonnuclear principles"
and is under constitutional restraints, it met strive to work in the direction
of reducing, not expanding, the global military power while upholding a power
balance. To preserve peace, this should be Japan's role hereafter.

Conventional Forces Required of Japan

Sakanaka: With reference to your consent on the significance of modern-day con-
ventional forces, the United States has axprsssed fear that the conventional forces
provided for in the "Defense Program Outline" would be unable to meet the denands
of a changing era. I would like to ask Director General Omura this question. Do
you plan to revise the defense capability provided in the "Defense Program Out-
line" or make step-by-step improvements based thereon? What are your thoughts on
the future direction of defense preparations?

Omura: The government has no immediate plans to revise the "outline." To realize
the standards set forth in the "outline," it sees a need for acceleration. This
is because the standards provided in the "outline" do not conform to the present-
day situation. For example, the appended chart in the "outline" provides for
about 60 surface ships, but the actual figure is about 50, or a shortfall of 10.
Further. against some 430 operational fighters contawlated for the Air Self-
Defense Force, we only have about 320. or more than 100 shy. The urgent task is
to make up these shortages. Also, since the "outline" has received cabinet ap-
proval, and the basic thinking regarding the preparation of the next midterm pro-
gram estimate necessary for its implementation was approved by the National De-
fense Council this April. it would be unrealistic and unwise to effect a total

revision.

Sakanaka: I understand.

2!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Omura: The ”outline" was completed in 1976 in the era of detente. The 0.3. posi-
tion is that the thinking should be changed in light of today‘s changed interna-
tional situation, but, putting such abstract arguments aside, I stated that as a
practical matter, realization of the line provided in the "outline" could virtually
resolve the issue raised at the hawaii conference. \

At the administrative-level meeting in Hawaii. sole wild opinions were made by'
specialists. It was agreed not to let this out. but it leaked (laughter). For
exasple. it was claimed that a wide discrepancy existed between 0.3. figures on
antisubnsrine-warfare planes and the 45 aircraft provided in the current program.
The fact was that under the "outline," about 100 antisubnarine-wsrfare planes were
under consideration. Though the old program called for 45. the number would have
come closer to U. 8. figures if the obsolescent P-2J's were to be replaced in the
future by P~3C's.

As this example shows. there is not Inch discrepancy. The issue, rather. has to

do with rear support and sustained capability. Deep consideration should be given
not only to matters dealing with the front or increasing the quantity of ammunition
and nissiles but also in parallel with than.

Sakanaka: hr Sakats, you were the individual responsible for preparing the "De-
fense Program Outline." Within the Liberal-Democratic Party there are critics
calling for a much larger expansion. How do you feel?

Sakata: As viewed from the national consensus, I basically feel that the pace
described by Director General OIura is proper. Even though the "outline" was ap-
proved by the cabinet, I myself feel that I failed to do .7 best during the past
5 years. If I had worked harder, perhaps we could have responded better to 0.8.
requests. Therefore, I feel that the immediate problen is to achieve the stan-
dards set forth in the "outline."

This is not generally known, but the original draft of the Defense Agency's "out-
line" called for an increase from four to five in the escort flotilla of the Hari-
tine Self-Defense Force. But because of financial considerations and anticipated
future improvement of the draft, the National Defense Council decided to keep the
current number unchanged.

Sakanaka: You mean that the Defense Agency had plans to build up the Maritime
Self-Defense Force even before the 0.8. request was received?

Sakata: Yes. Of the four escort flotillas. one was to be kept in a state of
readiness. The Defense Agency felt that five flotillss would be required for the

increase to two.
Omura: That's true.

Sakata: But now I feel that outfitting the four.escort flotillas with modern
weapons such as antiair and antiship missiles, antisubnarine helicopters, and anti-
submarine torpedoes should take priority. In this connection, I wish to lake a
request of Director General Omura. As the Prime Minister also is anxious to see

25
Iron OFFICIAL use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

this accomplished by 1987, I hope the National Defense Council will hand down a
decision and, as the cabinet's position, achieve the standards set forth in the
"outline." If that can be done, we may be able to convince the United States of
our position on such things as the issue of next fiscal year's 7.5-percent in-
crease.

Amid Financial Restructure and Administrative Reform

Sakanaka: Under the present pace of increase in defense funds, difficulties could
arise in achieving the standards of the "outline" by fiscal 1987. What is your
opinion? Another problem is that, since a financial restructuring is underway.
strong resistance could occur even within the Liberal-Democratic Party, as well as
from the opposition forces, to the sacred treatment of only defense funds. What
is Director General Omura's thinking on this point?

Omura: with respect to the opinion against the sacred treatment of defense funds,
I feel, because of administrative reforn as well, that there should be rationaliza-
tion through the elimination of waste. Effective use of funds is only natural.

But changes in the international situation need to be considered, and Japan has
not done its part in defense efforts. Moreover, if we are to reach within a few
years the level of standards set forth in the "outline," some increases must be
made. After this point was appealed, the fiscal 1982 ceiling was raised to 7.5
percent. It was reached after negotiations with the finance minister and with the
Prime Minister's support of that figure.

Some have taken a dim view that last year's request for 9.7 percent had been whit-
tled down to 7.6 percent, but what counts is the substance in order to avoid sub-
sequent criticism. I have sternly told the Ground, Maritime, and Air staffs to
take positive steps for rationalization, and have warned against any indiscriminate
increase.

Sakanaka: Hr Sakats, I know there is strong criticism within the opposition forces
toward increased defense funds. “hat is the reaction in the Lower House Special
Committee on Security to the 7.5-percent increase?

Sakata: The Democratic Socialist Party will probably go along. As reflected in
the mass media's poll, the public supports a somewhat stronger defense, rather
than the status quo. Another point is that while I was Defense Agency director
general in 1976, the defense share of the general budgetary outlays was 6.2 per-
cent, but it gradually declined each year until it reached 5.2 percent in 1980.
Thus. at the time of the budget formulation for fiscal 1981, I felt that, apart
from the U. 5. request said the serious international situation, the government' 3
responsibility, in view of the cabinet' s approval of the move to achieve the stan-
dards set forth in the "Defense Program Outline," was to the people for its accom-
plishment. The share of defense funds had kept on falling from 6. 2 percent. With
5.2 percent as the bottom figure, I figured that a gradual increase was in order.
And when the defense fund's share was set at last fiscal year 's 5. 22 percent, it
turned out to be exactly a 9. 7-percent increase over the preceding fiscal year.

Last year, the argument was over an increase of 60 or $0 billion yen, but I feel
we should put in at least that such in order to truly ensure Japan' a security and

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the survival and freedom of each individual. Some contend that the smaller the
defense fund, the better. But when one considers the dramatic changes in the in-
ternational situation or the cooperative relationship with western countries with
the same sense of values, an effort to such an extent can be said to be unrelated
to any massive defense buildup but will help Japan gain persuasiveness in its
voice. It is not anything like major nilitarization. Precautions against being
called "an odd fellow" within international society contribute to the safeguarding
of peace in Asia.

Omura: Amid the no-tax-hike administrative reform and budgetary formulation, the
problem is how to increase defense cepabilities--a point of concern and obscurity
for the people. Of the natural tax increase on which the latest ceiling is based,
the surplus funds expendable as general administrative costs after deduction of
national bonds or ordinary increases in local finances amount to nearly 600 bil-
lion yen. In the latest negotiations, we asked for 30 percent of that for in-
creased defense funds, and we actually received 180 billion yen.

Defense Secretary Ueinberger cited that the United States will use its entire natu-
ral increase for defense and hopes for greater defense efforts by Japan. But in
order to increase defense capabilities while striving to gain the people‘s under-
standing, there is no alternative but to increase efforts step by step. Being
unduly impetuous may lead to problems later.

Sakanaka: After talking with you two, I am beginning to understand the framework
of the U.S. request to Japan on defense. The United States, in light of the rela-
tive decline of its strength, reflects an "urgency" on the question of its allies
sharing responsibility, whereas Japan assumes a weaker view regarding the "ur-
gency." 0n the other hand, I feel that the United States lacks a full understand-
ing of Japan's domestic situation and public opinion. Moreover, there is an "ur-
gent need" for more profound arguments on a national level regarding Japan's de-
fense policy, along with the question of the Japanese-0.8. alliance.

COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha 1981

9097
C50: 4105/250

27
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TEClMLOGY

INSTITUTE TO STUDY RESOURCES USING SATELLITES TO BE SET 0?
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 11

[Text] According to a report by informed sources on the 24th, the first Japanese
"Earth Resources Observation and Analysis Center" (tentative designation), whose
purpose will be the study of natural resources using satellites, will be established
at the end of September. The center will be built with the full support of “11!,
which has established an earth resources investigation promotion policy using
satellites. The basic structure of the center is that 1) it will be a foundation;
2) it will have some 30 participating enterprises from petroleum, mining, heavy
electric, and finance industries, including Petroleum Resources Development, Mitsui
Mining and Smelting Co Ltd, Toshiba, the Industrial Bank of Japan, and others. It
has been informally arranged that Seio Mari, an adviser to the Petroleun Resources
Development, will be appointed the first chairman of the center. with the establish-
ment of the center, there are plans to entrust the National Space Development Agency
to launch "Earth Resources Satellite No l" by 1987 and to begin an extensive survey
of resources in Southeast Asia and other areas.

As for satellite surveys of the earth's resources, such as petroleum, natural gas,
and minerals such as uranium, iron, and copper, the United States plans to launch
Landsat No 4 in 1982, and France will launch a similar satellite by 1986. At
present, various countries are showing strong interest in satellite surveys.

Japan‘s survey of resources, despite its heavy dependence on overseas mineral
supplies, has been conducted case-by-csse, either purchasing data collected by the
major powers or surveying jointly with the major powers or various other foreign
governments.

Host promising future sources of minerals are found in Southeast Asia and Africa,

so that in terms of securing a stable supply of resources, it is urgent for Japan

to conduct surveys in these areas. But since survey data on these areas are extremely
poor and maps are inadequate, there are many areas which remain unexplored.

Because of this, HITI, in cooperation with the Petroleum Development and the mining
industry, had been studying the possibility of establishing an agency which will promote
resources survey by satellite. The conslidation of the opinions of the participants

in the project is nearly complete, and a general meeting for the establishment of the
center will take place at the end of September.

28
FORtMﬂﬂClAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the time being, 29 companies participating in the center will include five
petroleum development companies such as Petrolem Resources Development and Teikoku
Oil Co Ltd; eight from the metal, mining, and coal industries such as Hitsui Mining
and Smelting Co Ltd and Nippon Mining Co Ltd; six principally heavy electric companies
such as Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, and Tokyo Electric Power Co Ltd;

and nine from the finance industry, including the Industrial Bank of Japan. Ultimately
the total number of participants is expected to reach 30.

In addition to the approximately 100 million yen fund, the center will receive mTI's
project subsidy of about 1 billion yen for the first year. The center will entrust
the National Space Development Agency to build Earth Resources Satellite No l, which
will be capable of detecting and analyzing earth objects 20 meters in size from an
altitude of about 560 kilometers. It will be launched by 1987. Using the satellite,
the center will conduct Japan's own surveys and analysis of resources for 2 years
and will cooperate with European and American agencies by exchanging the data.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1981

9711
C50: 6105/2138

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIWCE AND rmmocr

HAWPACTURERS 'ro COOPERATB um Press In WEST GERMANY, FRANCE

Fujitsu Panuc. Sic-ens
Tokyo NIKKAN Kosyo SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Aug 81 p 13

[1'er Fujitsu Panuc (president, Seizaenm Inaba) has
disclosed the firm's strategic policies regarding its chief
productununerical control (NC) system-4nd its leading
commodity for the next period--industrial robots. In the
industrial robot category: 1) it will develop an intelligent
robot--"I-series"--said to be the robot for the next
generation, in conjunction with Sienens of West Germany by
1984. 2) It is currently developing two types of assembly
robots ("A-robot“) and one of these--the o-type--is to be
exhibited at the Fourth mo (European International Manufacturing
Machinery Fair) to be held in Septesber in ﬂannover, west
Germany. The I-type robot will be canpleted before the end of
this year. 3) Monthly robot production volume will be
increased f row the current so units to 100 units as early as
October. 4) As a result of augnentation of the robot category.
30 to 40 billion yen of the Fuji plant's 1986 annual production
figure (50 billion yen) will be supplied by the robot sector.

Monthly Production To Increase to 100 Units Per honth 'i‘his Pall

Meanwhile. the NC device being nanufacturered at the head office plant: 1) has
denmstrated over 10 percent annual growth (monetary base). Soon annual production

volume of 100 billion yen per year will be acconplished. 2) But daeestic production
of the NC device will be held down to 3,000 units per month and the surplus production
will be net by Panuc USA, a joint concern with Korea and the knock down (RD) pro-
duction by Siemens. 3) In order to develop NC for the next generation, technical
experts from West Germany's Siemens are coming to Panuc in October for a year's stay
in order to inplenent joint research. d) The basic uachine type for the NC device

to be developed 5 years hence will have two 'bases'nsize and capability.

Regarding the strengthening of the industrial robot sector, President Inaba states
the company policy clearly: “We are doing it because there is a narket out there;
and the situation is vastly different fro. the lid-50's NC device era when research
developeent preceded market needs." The oonpany's policy regarding the larket for
industrial robots is equally specific. "Painting and welding operations do not
interest us; our efforts are focused on mechanized plants.‘

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fujitsu Fanuc's robots, developed and produced in response to the above described
market trends and company policy can be divided in three groups. The first category
is the manufacturing robot, M—series. Under this heading, there are four types:

00, 0, 1 and 3. The type 00 is scheduled to be annainced (ll 4 September. Next,
there are two types of assembly robots (A-series): 0 and l. The o-type is smaller
than the l-type: both, however, have an identical controller.

Third, the intelligent robot--I-series~-is being developed jointly with Siemens.
Completion is scheduled for 1984, and it will be displayed at the International
Manufacturing Machinery Fair in Tokyo. This joint development was suggested by
Siemens and “we (Fujitsu Panuc) responded in the affirmative because it would mean
double the research development funds.” (Inaba) Behind this move is the recognition
that the problem in I-series develqiment is the selling price. 'In intelligent robot
development, sensor and pattern recognition is crucial. If cost is no object,
intelligent robot production is easy, but the crux of the matter is to make it
cheaply,” President Inaba explains.

Fujitsu Fanuc claims that competition with other firms producing industrial robots

is not a problem because Fujitsu Fanuc's focusing on mechanized plants. In particular,
the firm's plan is to sell the A—series, which will be incorporated into an assembly
cell. to large businesses and a processing cell based on the III-series is to be marketed
to joint enterprises.

At present, the firm's Fuji plant is maintaining 1.5 billion yen mmthly production
of wire-cut/discharge processing machine and industrial robots. Once the assembly
robot production begins, the monthly production volume will becase 2 billion yen. The
annual figure will be 24 billion yen for 1981, and by 1986 the mnual production
volume is slated to be 50 billion yen.

In keeping with this trend. the mmthly production of industrial robots will become
100 units per month as early as October. In this instance, the selling ratio would
be 60 domestic, 20 General Numeric Corporation of the United States (at present, 15)
and 20 Siemens.

COPYRIGﬂT: Nikkan kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Toshiba, French Line Group
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI salmon in Japanese 2 Sep 81 p l

[rug The Government of France has requested the (Japanese) Ministry of International
Trade and Industry [any to bring abwt the Japanese manufacturing machinery
industry's capital participation and technical assistance to the Line Group (a large
machinery manufacturer headquartered in Paris) that is having serious econalic
problems. MITI has unofficially sought cooperation from the industry's leader-Toshiba
Hachine Co Ltd. Toshiba's response at present is this: “We have not as yet

decided to cooperate.“ But President hkinobu Kuno of Toshiba is scheduled to meet with
French Ministry of Industry executive members in Paris to attend to the matter in
concrete terms. The French manufacturing machinery industry is suffering entre-
preneurial difficulties as a result of a sudden increase in Japanese imports. If the
Toshiba and Line Group coalition does case about, it is expected to neutralize the
trade friction between Japan and France.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recently the export of Japanese manufacturing machinery has increased suddenly along
with autduobile, hate electric appliance md semicmductor exports. The trade
involving manufacturing machinery between the two countries in 1980 resulted in Japan
achieving a 985-million-franc favorable balance of trade. This is approximately

30 times the 29-million-franc favorable balance for 1919. Coupled with the
depressed econcmlic situation in the East Buropean cmntriesnPrance's chief export
outlets--this sudden upsurge in Japanese manufactured goods is causing a: all-round
slump for the French manufacturing machinery industry. The Hitterrand government

is attempting to revitalize the manufacturing machinery industry in conjunction with
its nationalization of the aircraft. chemical and textile industries. It is par-
ticularly concerned with the rebuilding of the industry's second ranking Ling Group--
which is in extreme difficulty as a result of making a belated start in oomputerizing
@enshikj the manufacturing machines.

According to HITI, the current request for cooperation is an aspect of the (French
Government's) recmstruction plan. It was addressed to Japan through the Prench
Embassy in Japan. The gist of the request was "a desire for capital participation
and technical cooperation by a leading Japanese firm which possesses a high technical

standard for large-scale aircraft. shipbuilding and nuclear power reactor oriented
manufacturing machineries."

In responding to this request and with view to practing industrial cooperation with
France, which would in turn neutralize trade fricticn between the two countries, HITI
selected Toshiba Machine Co Ltd, which is a leader in the Japanese machine tool
industry and whose chief products are large manufacturing machines.

Toshiba's President Kuno will attend the International Sample Fair at Hannover in
midmonth and then he intends to stop in Paris to unofficially meet with the French
Ministry of Industry executive members and the Line Group leaders to negotiate the
possibility of capital and technical cooperation.

Toshiba's present attitude toward this proposal is cautious because: 1) there has
not been a clear statement regarding the connection between the French Government's
Line Group reconstruction plan and its policy of nationalizing the leading industries
and 2) Toshiba already has a technical cooperation tie with the Line Group's competitor,
THI Corporation of France. In the meantime, however, Toshiba is worried about the
lack of growth in exports to the Soviet Union and Eastern Burope--the company's
mainstay-~as a result of econanic recession and lack of foreign currency in those
countries. Moreover, it is extremely aware of the agreement of Toyota Machine Works
Ltd with the smaxo of France, which has given the latter firm a foothold in the
European market. MIT! anticipates that 'the likelihood of a coalition becoming a
reality is fairly good.“

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

11460
C80: ‘105/230

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TmmmmY

TMYO mm Hours To S'rhkr m BXPCRTS '10 mm
Tokyo NIKKAN 1(er SBIHBUN in Japanese 8 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] The Taiyo Iron Works (l-l-l Kite-Bguchi, Higashi Yokogawa-ku, Osaka;

president: Kazuo Kitaura: Telephone: 06-340-1111) has decided to formalise industrial
robot exports to Europe. It will display its robot at three consecutively held
international sample fairs: Moscow, USSR; Paris, France: and Leipzig, Bast Ger-any.

Already there has been a direct negotiation with the Soviet People's Autcnobile
Corporation and there is official anticipation that the first robot talks will be
concluded on the occasion of introduction of the snple robot at the [ﬁascog fair.
Along the display items at the fairs will be the firm's most recent cauidityuthe
Sealing robot.

Many of the ‘raiyo Iron Works' robots are syste-s based on oil/air pressure products
and technology--the company's main business. Recently electrical control technology
such as D.C. Serbo has in part been adapted. Domestically, the firm is currently
supplying various types of robots--such as automated “sadly machines. loading
devices--aainly to automotive manufacturers. The overseas market is a new frontier.

This is not the first time that the company has exhibited its robots at overseas
sample fairs. This last spring, it participated in West Germany's aannover Hesse.
But the Moscow Sample Fair (October) participation is a new venture. It is «barking
on a direct export strategy with the Paris l'air in December and the Leipzig rair in
March next year. In particular, the USSR has put robotics induction and development
as a first item on its agenda in its industrial 5-Year Plan, and there is a possi-
bility of the conclusion of an export agreement between the 'i'aiyo Irm Works and the
People's Automobile Corporation through the trade fair.

As far as robot exports are concerned, loading robots (for vehicle wheel assemblyline)
have been sent to Korea's Greater Korea aeavy Machinery Caepany. Robots for vehicle
testing have been exported to Mitsubishi Auto'aobile's Australian Plant. Self-assembly
units have gone to Cannon's 0.8. production company-4:8! Corporation (California).

During the past year, there has been a steady stre- of export negotiations and
agreements.

33
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But the European market, where a large-scale desand is expected in the future. is
still unclaimed territory. A full-scale push is being planned toward the end of

this year and the beginning of next year. Now, with regard to production, as a result
of building additions to the culpany's systel machinery. a 50~percent increase in

the production format has been established. However, in anticipation of a future
increase in demand both at hose and abroad, a set-up whereby subsidiary coupanies and
cooperative venture plants will directly manufacture and distribute the robots will
be instituted as well.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1981

11‘60
CSO: 4105/233 DID

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY