FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10155
2 ”December 1981

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 10/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFNﬂAl.USE()NLY

JPRS L/lOlSS
2 December 1981

USSR REPORT
PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
(roco 10/81)

CONTENTS

LASERS AND MASERS

Numerical Study of C02 Process Laser with Closed Gasdynamic

cycleOOOOOOQ00......0.00.00.00.0000000000QOOOIOOlloloool.00.... 1
Copper Vapor Laser with Transverse Discharge..................... 9

Physicochemical and Electrophysical Properties of High-
Temperature Insulating Ceramics for Elemental Vapor

“serge...aseveeee-eeaeaseeeareseeeoeeaeaaaeeeeeeeoeeeaeeeseaee 21

Energy and Spectral Characteristics of co Gasdynamic Laser
working "ed“.eeeeeeaeoaeeeaeaeaeeeeassesseeeeeeeevsaeaoeeeoese 27

Copper Atom Laser Level Excitation Efficiency in Electric

Discmrgeeeeeeeeeeeeaaeeaeoeeeeeoeeoaeeeaeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeoae 33

Active Media for CO Gasdynamic Lasers Using Combustion
Products of Lou-Nitrogen Fuels................................. 38

Spectroscopy and Primary Photolysis Processes of Iodides for
Photodissocistion Iodine Laners (Eeview)....................... 63

Tunable Carbon Monoxide Laser.................................... 80

Efficiency of Li-Nd-La Phosphate Glass Laser in Low Pumping
Power Range: Free-Running Operation........................... 93

Requirements Placed on Punping X-Ray Laser Hith Ionization

sourceaeeseeeeeeeeessoeeeeeeaeeeeaeeeaaeaeeeaaaaaeeeoeeseeoeeaa 98

Dynamics of Hydroelastoplastic Systeas........................... lOl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculating Energy Characteristics of Electron-Bean Controlled
CO Process Laser With Turboconpressor Cooling..................

Theoretical Study of wavefront Reversal Efficiency in
Inmted c‘rwn DioxmeOOOOIOO0.000.00...IIQOOOOOOOOQ'OQO0.0.0.

0.5 G" Electron‘BCII Excited XOCI L..¢rsssseeoossoeesoosssosssoee
Dyna-1c Compensation of Iodine Laser Optical Inhonogeneities.....
PLASHA PHYSICS

Possible Hechanisn of Instability of Glow Discharge Arising
After Pulse Action of Extern‘l Ionizcr........o.....o..........

Particulars of Optical Discharge Slow Burning Initiation in Air
on Optical Breakdown Inoculation Plasna........................

Interaction of Strong Blectro-agnetic Hives Hith Collisionless

PIWssosssssossssoos900000.000.ssssssoososOOODotsooooooooosss

Influence of Laser Emission wavelength on Plasma Formation
Threshold With Irradiation of Opaque Materials.................

Theory of Steady Optical Gas Breakdown Close to Hetal Surface....

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

Analysis of Absorption Spectrum for D20, BDO and 820 Vapor in

1006 ”- RegionoststsoesssessssesossoooosDoss-000000000000sooese

Powerful Laser Probing of Physicochenical Parameters of

Atmosphere.....o...oo..................c...o..o.oo.........-...

OPTOELECTRONICS

Characteristics of Temperature-Sensitive Phosphor Screens for
IR Photoregistration...........o.......o.o.......uoa...........

Properties of Incoherent Fourier-Transforming Optical Systels....
Light Bean Amplification by Dynamic holograms in LZT-La Ceramic..

Correcting Inage Sharpness in the Case of Unknown 'Soooth'

“foe“.iseoeeasaoeeasoooosonos0sotOosooossosooooosooeooos . e

MATHEMATICS

Integral-Transform Method in Have Prohleas of Hydroacoustics.....

Problens of Analyzing Resource Distribution......................

- b -

FINICNHHCJAI.USE¢MVLY

108

116
120
123

126

130

133

138
163

152

157

162
169
176

177

180
186
INDR1OFINCJAI.IJBEICHVLN

LASERS AND HASIRS

UDC 621.373.826.038.823
NUMERICAL STUDY 0? C02 PROCESS LASER "1TH CLOSED GASDYNAHIC CYCLE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 8(110). Aug 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 8 Sep 80. after revision 23 Feb 81) pp 1656-1662

[Article by V. V. Breyev. A. V. Gubarev. A. V. Kazhidub. A. T. Kukharenko. P. V.

Lebedev and V. P. Panchenko. Institute of Atomic Energy imani I. V. Kurchatov.
Moscow]

[Text] The article briefly describes a mathematical model de-
veloped by the authors for complex calculation of a C02 elec-
tric discharge laser including discharge chamber. optical reso-
nator amplifier. radiation focusing system. nozzle. diffuser.
coolers, compressor and connecting tubing. A numerical study
of a 10 k" co, process laser is done on the basis of the devel-
oped set of programs.

The outlook that has been noted in recent years for using co; electric discharge
lasers in technology [Ref. 1-5) has brought to the forefront problems of design
calculations and optimization of the parameters of such facilities. These prob-
lems can now be resolved. as the physical processes occurring in co. electric dis-
charge lasers have been fairly well studied. Methods are also known for engineer-
ing calculation of all components of the gssdynamic circuit of the facility: com-
pressor. heat exchangers. tubing and so on.

Ref. 4 gives a detailed description of a mathematical model of a C02 electric dis-
charge laser with closed gasdynamic circuit. Our paper discusses the results of
an engineering study using this mathematical model of a CO; process laser with
power of about 10 RH [Ref. 3].

The mathematical model of the electric discharge CO; laser includes algorithms
for the following calculations:

flow of active medium in external electric field and in radiation field;
multiple-pass unstable amplifier cavity with arbitrary mirror arrangement;
distortions of radiation wavefront by inhomogeneities of the medium;

propagation and focusing of output emission;

FOIIOIIﬂC1A1.l!iE(lVLY
FINICNNHCJAI.IE§§(MNLV

pressure losses on different sections of the gaadynamic circuit and its hydraulic
and thermal closure.

To describe the flow of active medium in the gas discharge gap and on the section
of stimulated emission of light. we have used a quasi-one-dimensional approximation
for independent streamtubes. which enables us to get a nonuniform distribution

of the gain and density of the medium in accordance with the distribution of the
radiation field. The flow in a stream filament is described by the known system
of differential equations (Ref. 6]

thth-JV. (l)

where

F=|pu; pu'+p: pa (0+p/P+u’/2): 905.: out}: puEHI;
H-lp: M: P (e+plp+u'/2)+Q.: 95.47.: BEs'H’ﬁ N5, +le-

Herexl-pudA/Adx. A is the area of a stream filament proportional to the flow sec-
tion. 81. 2;. Eu are the energies of the lower and upper vibrational modes of the
C02 molecule. and of the vibrational mode of nitrogen respectively. The remaining
notation is obvious. and the expressions for volumetric sources are given in Ref. 6.

The geometric-optics approximation [Ref. 7] was used to determine the radiation
field in a multipass unstable cavity amplifier and the energy characteristics of
the laser facility. In doing this calculation it is necessary to assign the radii
of curvature of the opaque and output mirrors of the cavity. the dimensions of

the output mirror of the cavity. and also the coordinates of the centers of all
mirrors and of the output aperture. These data are sufficient for defining the
path of rays in the optical system filled with homogeneous medium (with constant
value of the index of refraction). The change of intensity of the light wave in
this case is

hummus-"kg. (2)

where R is the distance from the focus of the spherical wave. I is the intensity
of the wave. k, is the gain of the medium. The formulation of the boundary value
problem for equation (2) and algorithm for its solution are described in Ref. 6.

Theoretical studies and estimates have shown that the inhomogeneity observed in
C02 lasers has a weak distorting effect on the trajectory of rays. This enables
us to reduce the problem of determining the wavefront at the output of the optical
system to calculation of the phase advance due to the difference in optical paths
in homogeneous and inhomogeneous media. The change in the index of refraction
determined by the density of the medium is found from the solution of system of
equations (1). (2)-

In considering comparatively short-focus and low-power systems that are convention-
ally used in process lasers. nonlinear effects ofthe light propagation in atmos-
phere can generally be disregarded. Therefore the distribution of light intensity
in the focal plane of the lens is determined by the Kirchhoff integral written

for the complex electric field amplitude E(x,y.z) in the paraxial approximation:

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁC1A1.USEGNVLY
F1”!(Hﬂﬂ(lAl.USElMNLV

E (x. y. I) -£ﬁ-§;§ﬂ- EEG/11;!» up [aﬂﬁﬂ‘dﬂm (3)

where i- /:T, a and b are the dimensions of the rectangular aperture of the out-
going radiation.

1“.

The initial function
E (a. 1:. 0)=V‘Iexp Immmn'm. (a)

where I(€on). W(£.n) are intensity and phase (eikonal) of the radiation emanating
from the optical system. Considering function E(€,n.0) periodic with respect to
6 and n with periods 2a and 2b respectively. we can use the algorithm of fast
Fourier transformation (Ref. 6] to find the intensity distribution in the focal
plane.

To check out the mathematical model described in Ref. 6. we calculated a CO; laser
with closed gasdynamic cycle with test results described in Ref. 2-6. The gas-
dynamic circuit of this facility includes two parallel channels and a common dis-
charge chamber combined with the optical cavity. In the calculation. consideration
was taken of the experimentally determined coefficients of pressure losses in the
coolers. and the head characteristics of the compressor. The optical diagram of
the laser is shown in Fig. la. The four-pass unstable cavity consisted of opaque
mirror 1 with radius of curvature R1-26 m. three flat rotating mirrors 2-6, feed-
back mirror 5 with Rs- 13 m, and output flat mirror 6 with rectangular hole of
4.5x 2.5 cm. The static pressure of the working mixture N2:C02:820:02-0.874:0.OS:
0.006:0.07 at the inlet to the nozzle was 3.3 hrs. and the temperature at the outlet

 

Pig. 1. Optical diagram of laser (a) and the gain behavior
lengthwise of the discharge chamber in the midaection and on
the ends

from the coolers was 290 K. An electric discharge with fairly uniform energy input
over the volume of the discharge chamber was realized on the section from x-I0.8 to

3

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x- 0.38 m. Vibrational efficiency of the discharge based on experimental data
(Ref. 3. 8] was taken as equal to 0.85.

For purposes of illustration. Fig. lb shows the distribution of the calculated
gain of the medium along the flow at three levels with respect to the Y axis.

we see considerable nonuniformity of the field of ky. According to calculations
at an energy input “9- 62.5 kl! (this corresponds to the maximum energy input in
the experiment). the flow is accelerated in the discharge chamber by about 601,
and its temperature rises by about 352. At the output from the zone of stimulated
emission. about 281 of “e remains in vibrational degrees of freedom of CO; and

N2 molecules. The maximum nonuniformity of pressure and velocity of the flow in
the transverse direction reaches 3% and 22 respectively. This result confirms

the admissibility of the filament flow model. Notice should be taken of good agree-
ment of the calculated values of flow velocity and pressure at the output from

the lasing zone with the experimental data.

ﬁnk 5 «W

4' a
to

u
' " " “Nun:

Fig. Gas flow a in the dis-
charge chamber as a func-
tion of supplied electric
power (O—experimant) and
required degree of com-
pression ﬁx in the com-
pressor as a function of
supplied electric power at
constant gas flow

Fig. 2 and 3 show the calculated
curves for output power “A' elec-
tric efficiency of the laser n“.
and gas flow through the discharge
chamber as functions of the power
"e invested in the discharge. The
results of experiment as shown on
the same figures agree well with
the calculated curves.

 

Pig. 3. Emission power (a) and electro-

optical efficiency (b) as functions of

supplied electric power: gas flow variable

(1. 2) and constant (3); coefficient of

losses in the mirrors q- 2 (1.3) and 41 (2);
0--experiment

The distribution of gas density
found in the calculation in the
cavity zone enables us to calcu-
late the distribution of the
phase of the radiation at the output of the facility (cross section 7-7 on Fig. la).
and to find the structure of the radiation intensity distribution in the focal spot.

FOR‘OFFKJALIﬂﬂBONlY
FtﬂlfﬂﬂNCIAl.lEiE(MVLY

For the electro-optical laser scheme shown in Fig. la. at a power of 62.5 RH in-
vested in the discharge the phase difference of the outgoing beam does not exceed
3:. The calculated intensity field in the focal spot of a lens with focal length

of f- 50 m is shown in Fig. 4. The broken line shows the intensity distribution
for the case of a plane wavefront (without consider-
ation of distortions). In the center of the prin-
cipal maximum the intensity reaches about 16 kH/cmz;
however. this mathma contains only about 301 of

the emission power of the facility. Angular devia-
tion of the light beam from the optical axis (about
2010'”) is approximately equal to the angular di-
vergence of the radiation with respect to half

power level. Under real conditions the radiation
divergence was about 10" [Ref. 2]. which was caused
by considerable phase distortions in the output win-

 

‘6’! '1,” 0 1,25 a,r~

dows.
Fig. 4. Radiation intensity
distribution in focal cross Good coincidence of all calculated relations with
section for plane (broken experiment over a fairly wide range of variation
line) and distorted (continu- in working conditions of the laser shows adequate
ous line) wavefronts description by the mathematical model [Ref. 6]

of processes in the co, laser. which provides the
basis for applying this model to numerical investigation and optimisation of the de-
signs of such facilities.

Let us mention the principal results of the theoretical analysis of the 001 process
laser [Ref. 3] with optical diagram shown in Fig. l.

The main pressure losses in the circuit of the facility are due to the hydraulic
drag of the coolers (about 501). the drag of sections with high flow velocity
(nozzle, diffuser) and of the discharge chamber (about 20 and 122 respectively).
The drag of the discharge chanber increases with increasing energy input.

As the energy input increases on the discharge gap. the flow of the working mixture
in the circuit decreases. and at Rel-120 kw it falls to about one-half.

The change in the coefficient of losses in the mirrors from 2 to 6% (curves 1,
2 on Fig. 3) leads to a reduction in emission power by about 102.

Stimulated emission of light arises only with a power input of more than 20 k“
to the discharge.

As the power invested in the discharge increases. the electro-optical efficiency
rises rapidly, and at Ne>60 RH it reaches ~152.

As the power invested in the discharge increases. the radiation power at first
rises monotonically. reaching a maximum of 15-19 R" (see curves 1, 2 on Fig. 3)

at Ne: 140 k", and then drops sharply. The reduction of radiation power at N,
greater than 140 k" is due to the reduction in gas flow (see Fig. 2) and its strong
overheating. At constant gas flow through the discharge gap the maximum radiation
power reaches about 25 k9 at input power of about 200 k" and is limited by gas-
dynamic suppression. '

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.llﬂB(lVLY
FOR<0FFKJAL.USE|)NLY

     
  
  

s1

   
   

\\ .
\\
z .\\\\\\m

 

  

hrel. u. 'urel. u.

ﬁrel. u.

Fig. 6. Influence that location
of optical passages has on the
output power of the laser (region
“~ of energy input is shaded):
h NA-lo (l), 805 (b). 1008 (c)!
718- 5. Influence that the 8.9 (d). 10.5 (e) and 10.7 k" (f)
location of the energy input

zone has on laser output
power (region of energy

”to rel. u.

At constant energy input to the discharge
gap (Ne- 62.5 It"). a reduction in molar
concentration of CO: from 5 to 3: is ac-

:zgzz :aozh:::déx:::m:roken companied by a drop in emission power
limits of the 11 ht beams)' by ~202. Upon an increase in CO; content
Output power "A :10 (a) ' from S to 102 the output emission power

. Q O
10.6 (b). ll.b (c). 12.3 (d). at first increases by 82. and then mono

9 6 (e) 13 3 (f 8) and tonically decreases.
e s o I I

[3’6 k" (h) Theoretical power of the facility reaches

maximum at water vapor concentration of
0.6-12.

A change in oxygen concentration from ~7 to ~20: has almost no effect on the output
radiation power and electro-optical efficiency of the laser. This means that air
that has been dried to the necessary moisture concentrations with addition of 602
can be recommended for use as a working mixture. However. the final solution of
this problem must take consideration of plasma-chemical processes.

The above-described results of the theoretical study have been directed at investi-
gation of a specific C02 process laser (Ref. 3]. Obviously most of these results
can be obtained experimentally as well. The advantages of mathematical modeling
and numerical study show up most completely in solving problmes of design selection
of the parameters of the facility as a whole. and in particular in optimization

of the electro-optical system of the given facility. Experimental solution of

such problems requires large material investments and time.

6

FOR‘O!11CJAI.USE¢JNLN
F13R.Olil(JAl.lEﬂ§(N‘LN

To illustrate this. let us give the results of calculation of different designs

of the electro-optical system for the facility investigated above. It was assumed
that the outside overall dimensions of the electro-optical system. its flow section
and the joining components are retained unaltered. and coincide with the regular
system (see Fig. l). as does the total energy input to the positive discharge column
Ne-I62.5 kw. Let us note that these studies together with the development of the
methodology took a total of abOut six mannmonths, while the machine time of a BBSH—b
computer was approximately 10 hours.

Fig. 5 shows some investigated variants of the distribution of energy input in
the electro-optical system of the facility. The design of the optical system re-
mained unchanged (see Fig. l). The situation shown on Fig. 5a was realized under
experimental conditions. In this case the output power of the radiation was

9.6 kw (electro-optical efficiency nA- 152). Change in the form of distribution
of the energy input has a weak influence on the output power (see cases a. b. e
on Fig. 5). More significant is the upstream shift of the cone of energy input
relative to the cavity (cases c. f. g on Fig. 5). The calculations show that an
upstream displacement of the energy input zone by 8 cm should lead to an increase
in output power by about 302. A similar result is realized when the length of
the discharge zone is shortened due to an increase in specific energy input and
when its "center of gravity" is shifted upstream (cases d and h on Pig. 5).

The results of investigation of different designs of the optical system with un-
changed distribution of the energy input in the positive column (see Fig. 5a) and
cavity magnification are shown on Fig. 6. The resultant data show that the geometry
of the cavity passages used in the experiment is near optimum. A tendency can

be seen toward an increase of output power as the center of gravity of the radiation
field is shifted downstream. Let us also note that when the cavity is located

in the lower zone of the energy input. the output power should remain practically
unchanged even when the number of cavity passages is limited to three (see Fig. 6f).

The mathematical model of the process laser that was used in this paper does not
reflect such important points as the limitation on maximum energy inputs of a stable
discharge and the influence of plasma-chemical processes on vibrational kinetics.
Nonetheless, the modeling method that has been developed is very useful and can

be applied on the stage of design and development of process laser systems.

REFERENCES
l. Hoag. 5., Peaae. 3.. Steal, J., Zar. J.. APPL. OPTICS. Vol 13. 1976. p 1959.

2. Abil'siitov. 6.. Artamonov. A. V.. Velikhov. Ye. 9.. Yegorov. Yu. A., Kazhi-
dub. A. V.. Lebedev. P. V.. Sidorenko. Ye. 1., Sumerin. V. V.. KNANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980. p 2667.

3. Abil'siitov. 6.. Antonova, L. 1.. Artamonov, A. V.. Golubev. V. 5., Drobyazko,
S. V., Yegorov. Yu. A.. Katsuro. N. 1., Kazhidub. A. V.. Lebedev, F. V.. Sena-
torov. Yu. M., Sidorenko. Ye. H.. Sumerin. V. V.. Turundayevskiy. V. 3.,
Prolov. V. H.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979, p 204.

lNJI‘OFFICJAI.lﬂ§E ORﬂUY
4.

S.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Artanonov. A. V.. Yegorov. Yu. A.. Kazhidub. A. V.. Katsuro. N. 1.. Lebedev.
P. V.. Sidorenko, Ye. 11.. Smerin. V. V.. Prolov, V. 11.. KVAN'IDOVAYA EEKTRDNIKA.
Vol 5. 1978. p 920.

Letokhov, V. 8.. Ustinov. N. D.. "Hoahchnyye lazery 1 11th prineneniye" [Pover-
ful Lasers and Their Applications], Moscow. Sovctskoye radio. 1980.

Breyev. V. V.. Gubarev. A. V.. Kazhidub. A. V.. Kukhsrenko. A. '1'.. Mauser.
A. P.. Panchenko. V. P.. Rikenglaz. M. 11.. Preprint. 1A3. Hoacov 1980. No 3319.

Anan'yev. Yu. A., "Opticheakiye rezonatory 1 problem raskhodinosti lazernogo
izlucheniya" [Optical Cavities and the Problem of Divergence of Laser Radiation].
Moscow. Nauka. 1979.

Artsnonov. A. A., areysv. V. V.. Kukharenlw, A. ‘1'.. Snokhin. A. A., "Trudy
vtoroy Vseaoyuznoy konferentaii po fizicheakin protsessu v gazovykh 016"
[Proceedings of Second All-Union Conference on Physical Processes in Gas Lasers].
Uzhgorod. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronih". 1981

6610

C80:

1862/14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826.038.023
COPPER VAPOR LASER WITH TRANSVBRSB DISCHARGE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 8010). Aug 81 (manuscript re-
ceived 11 Nov 80) pp 1686-1696

[Article by A. V. Sokolov and A. V. Sviridov]

[Text] The paper gives the results of a study of a copper vapor
laser with radially transverse discharge at pressures up to 1.5
atmospheres. It is shown that when the parasitic inductance
of the laser discharge circuit has been sufficiently reduced.
high efficiency can be realized. A physical efficiency of 5.31
is attained in the copper vapor laser. It is also shown that
the use of vaporizere enables appreciable improvement of the
output parameters of a laser with radially transverse discharge.

It is established that circulation of the active Cu-Ne mixture
overcomes the restriction imposed on the pumping power by heat
release in the active median of the Cu-laser. Lasing of copper
vapor is achieved in a pulsed discharge with hollow cathode.
Lasing power was 1.2 ﬂ, physical efficiency reached 52. and the
specific energy output was 15 uJ/cm’.

1. Introduction

The possibility of realizing efficient lasing and attaining economic working con-
ditions in lasers with transverse discharge on vapors of copper and other metals
depends to a great extent on the resolution of two important questions.

The first is the question of transferring pulping energy to the active zone of

a laser with mini-tn losses. Studies on optimizing copper vapor lasers were begun
in Ref. 1. 2. This paper examines the influence that parasitic inductance in the
chain of transfer of pumping energy to the active zone has on laser operation.
Results achieved with lasers with transverse and longitudinal discharges are com-
pared with respect to the attained efficiency. The considerable difference between
lasers with transverse and longitudinal discharges is due to the great difference
in discharge currents. Operation of a laser with transverse discharge requires
punping currents nore than an order of magnitude greater than longitudinal dis-
charge currents. Because of this. the influence of the supply inductance is quite
appreciable in a laser with transverse discharge.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second question is investigation of different methods of producing the work-
ing mixture based on vaporizing metal. We have examined the following methods:
heating the walls of the active zone of the laser by a special heater (Ref. 3]

or by the heat released in the electric discharge [Ref. lo]; producing metal vapor
by using vaporizers; producing the working mixture by forming a flow of metal vapor
and inert gas without entrainment and losses of metal vapor (in contrast to the
method used in Ref. 5).

2. Experimental Facility

The research was done on an experimental facility based on a coaxial laser with
cylindrical metal electrodes between which a transverse discharge was produced.
The discharge zone 1:0 cm long was bounded by the walls of the outer electrode
(anode) 6 cm in diameter and the cathode 2 cm in diameter. The working mixture
of the laser consisted of neon and copper vapor [Ref. 6].

The laser was pumped by an oscillator with cable transformer described in Ref. 1.
Pulses of 200 na duration at the base with amplitude of 0.8-2 kV were transferred
to the laser cell through cables unifome distributed between the lead-ins. The
output impedance of the pulping oscillator. depending on the number of cables con-
nected to the cell. was 0.15 or OJ: 9. and the transformation ratio “tr' I0. The
excitation pulse recurrence rate was 2-6 kHz. Fig. 1 shows a diagram of connection
of the discharge gap to the pulping oscillator and to the sensors for registration
of pumping pulses.

The registration sensors for voltage and
current pulses were voltage dividers based
on low-inductance resistors and a Rogowski
loop. Provisions were made for monitor-
ing voltage pulses directly across the
electrodes of the discharge gap. To do
this, the inner electrode was connected

to one of the voltage dividers via a sepa-
rate high-voltage lead-in (see Fig. 1).
This eliminated the voltage drop across
the parasitic inductance of the high-
voltage lead-in transferring the pulping

 

pulses to the discharge gap. and enabled Hg. 1. Diagram of connection
registration of the true shape and ampli- of the discharge gap of the co-
tude of the voltage pulse across the laser axial laser to the pumping oscil-
electrodes. From the sensors. the pulses lator and to the pumping pulse
were sent to a two-beam oscilloscope with registration sensors:
nanosecond time resolution. enabling phas- l-c-high-voltage lead-ins; 2—anodc;
ing of the current and voltage pulses. 3—cathode

as well as the laser light pulse obtained

by a coaxial photocell. The mean output luminosity was measured by a calorimeter.
The electrode temperature in the discharge zone was measured by an optical micro-
pyrometer and a thermocouple with signal operating a chart recorder.

3. Influence of Supply Inductance on Laser Efficiency

Because of the large currents that are realized in the discharge of a transverse-
discharge laser. it is impossible to disregard the supply inductance. which has

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘0F11C1AI.USE!0NLN

impedance with a large reactance component. The supply inductance is an energy
reservoir that has a considerable effect on the fraction of energy released in

the plasma resistance in different time intervals of pumping pulse action. Thus

the efficiency of a laser on vapors of copper and other metals is intimately related

to the processes that take place in the electrical part of the laser. an equivalent
circuit being shown in Pig. 2.

As has already been stated. the measurement

from part of the experimental facility enabled
pulse V°1t‘se recording of oscillograms of the currents
generator

and voltages on different parts of this cir-
cuit. In this way oscillograms were obtained
of the pulses of currents and voltages on
the chamber, as well as of the voltages
Fig. 2. Equivalent electric circuit across the plasma resistance. A typical
°f laser chamber: oscillogram ofthepumping pulses is shown

U-voltage across lead-ins of laser in Fiﬁo 3. This same figure shows the lasing
chamber; L'--parasitic inductance; pulse phased with the current and voltage.
R3-lead-in resistance; Rn"91“" Graphic integration was used to determine
resistance; Un-voltage across dis- the energy supplied to the chamber and re-

charge 3‘9 °f laser chamber leased across the plasma resistance over
any time interval of pulse action.

 

The equivalent electric circuit of the laser
is described by the equation

Multiplication of this equation by idt and
integration transforms it to

IleH-II'RJH- yam-.5“. (2)

The resultant equation characterizes the

energy balance in the electric circuit of
across the electrodes (3) and the laser. where “var-w. is the energy

lasing (6) supplied to the chamber input without con-
sideration of reflections; WRJl-V. is the energy released across the lead-in
resistance; It'Rldt=W. is the energy released across the plasma resistance;
[Laﬁ = W; is the energy that is stored and returned by the inductance. During
the entire pumping pulse. 5Laﬁ..o in view of the reactive nature of the inductance
that stores energy E in the first half of the pulse (BI-Liﬁﬁx/Z at maximum current
inax) and returns it to the discharge circuit in the second half of the pulse when
dildt<0.

 

Pig. 3. Typical oscillograms of
pulses of voltage across the
lead-ins of the laser chamber (1).
discharge current (2). voltage

The advisability of accounting for the resistance of the lead-in when examining

the electric circuit of the transverse-discharge laser was confirmed. The results
of graphic integration of oscillograms of the pulses of current and of voltage
across the inlet to the cell and across the plasna resistance showed that the energy
released across the resistance of the high-voltage lead-in reaches 30% of the energy
supplied to the cell input. The results of calculations of energy losses across

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the lead-in resistance as measured by an 11-333 00 resistance bridge with shorted
electrodes with consideration of the temperature behavior of this resistance showed
good agreement with experimental data. The lead-in resistance of the investigated
laser was comparable with the output impedance of the puping oscillator, amounting
to ~0.l n with respect to order of magnitude.

Despite the fact that the parasitic inductance in the discharge circuit does not
consume energy during a pulse. it has a detrimental effect on lasing. With suf-
ficiently powerful pumping. the lasing pulse is observed in the first half of the
excitation pulse. Specifically. during the first half of the punping current pulse
(when di/dt>0). the lead-in inductance takes from the discharge circuit an energy
of LiI’Mx/Z, which it returns in the second half of the pulse when lasing has termi-
nnted. and therefore this energy is expended only on harmful heating of the active
mixture. In the given experiments at the maximum attainable currents the induc-
tance took up to 502 of the energy of the first half of the pulse.

Efficiency can be increased by shortening the duration of the pumping pulse before
the instant of lasing termination. The difficulty in this method is in the problem
of making a pumping oscillator that shapes a pulse with duration of the order of

10 ns. and a laser chamber with parasitic inductance of the order of 1 till.

Taking consideration of the losses on inductance in the first half of the puaping
current. we can get a criterion for determining the permissible parasitic inductance
of the laser discharge circuit. In the first half of the pumping pulse. which

is taken as triangular for the sake of simplicity, the pumping energy "C without
consideration of losses in the pumping oscillator during connotation. as well as
during transfer to and reflection from the cell. is cue/1.. where C and Uc are the
capacitance and voltage of charging of the cable line. for a reasonable magnitude
of losses of ~10% of this energy. we have 006/60. Setting this expression equal

to the energy stored by the inductance and equal to “max/2' we get an expression
for the permissible inductance:

L I: Gui/(20:3...) = “Ia-(loam)
Using this relation. let us determine the permissible inductance under some real
conditions. For example at a pumping energy of 1 J and maximun pumping current
pulse amplitude of 10 RA. the inductance in the laser discharge circuit should
not exceed 1 nﬂ.

This reasoning implies that when considering the problem of the potentially at-
tainable efficiency of a transverse-discharge metal vapor laser, one should take
account of losses on supply inductance and on the lead-in resistance. With con-
sideration of these losses. the efficiency of the laser is

'1' "out/(wu' Limax/Z ' "3) D

where "out is the lasing pulse energy [Ref. 1]. The efficiency defined in this
way enables us to evaluate the potential capabilities of transverse-discharge metal
vapor lasers. and to compare them with longitudinal-discharge lasers. It should
be noted that in longitudinal-discharge lasers the losses on parasitic inductance
and lead-in resistance are insignificant in virtue of the fact that their operation
requires pumping currents several orders of magnitude lower than in a transverse

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

discharge. while the plasma resistance. being tens and even hundreds of ohms. far
exceeds the lead-in resistance.

The maximum attainable efficiency of a transverse-discharge laser is 31 [Ref. 7].

In experiments on getting high efficiency in a coaxial laser, a method was used
that was suggested in Ref. 1. where it was shown that the physical efficiency of

a laser with respect to the energy supplied to the cell increases with a reduction
inthe'voltage across the laser chamber and the output impedance of the pumping
oscillator (we reduced the latter to 0.15 9). At a voltage of 0.8 RV across the
cell. the physical efficiency of the laser reached 2.52. The pumping energy was

determined, as in Ref. 1, by graphic integration of the pulses of current and volt-
age across the cell.

Such a determination of efficiency does not permit evaluation of the potential
capabilities of the investigated laser due to technical difficulties in making

a low-inductance laser chamber. Therefore. to determine the efficiency that can
be attained with transverse excitation of copper vapor. it is necessary to take
consideration of losses in the electric circuit of the laser.

1n the experiment under discussion, the lasing pulse was located on the current
pulse front, where di/dt>'0. and therefore part of the useful energy was released

on the inductance. Losses on inductance reached ~501. which was confirmed by graph-
ic integration of the pulses of current and voltage across the electrodes of the
discharge gap carried out up to the instant of lasing termination. Losses on the
lead-in resistance were disregarded. as steps were taken in these experiments to
reduce this resistance.

Thus the potentially attainable. but apparently not maximum possible efficiency

of the coaxial laser (efficiency with respect to energy supplied to the cell after
deducting losses on inductance) was 5.31. The obtained efficiency is almost twice
that of a longitudinal-discharge laser. and even greater than that theoretically
predicted for excitation of copper vapor in an electric discharge [Ref. 8].

The results show the considerable promise of lasers with transverse discharge of
copper vapor. and apparently of other metal vapors.

4. Influence of Methods of Producing the Working Mixture on Laser Efficiency

To increase the practical efficiency of the laser. we must reduce energy expendi-
tures on producing metal vapor in addition to overcoming the difficulties associ-
ated with energy losses in the electric pumping circuit. Considered below are
various methods of producing the working mixture from the standpoint of increasing
practical efficiency and achieving effective stimulated emission of the coaxial
laser. These studies were done with the described laser fed from a pumping oscil—
lator with output impedance of 0.4 n.

The most widely used method of producing copper vapor in a transverse-discharge
laser is heating up the entire electrode zone with special heaters. An external
cylindrical heater was used in the laser that we investigated. Provisions were
made for controlling the heater temperature by varying its power consumption. This
made it possible to establish the required temperature of the wall of the active

13

FOR OIIHCLALI£§B(HVLY
F0R10FFKJAI.USE<ONLY

zone on which the copper to be vaporized was located irrespective of pumping power.
Such a heating method is very convenient in physical research. and extends the
range of study as compared with the mode of self-heating due to discharge heat

that has been used in work with longitudinal tubes. where it is necessary to change
the pumping power associated with wall temperature.

An investigation of the output power of the coaxial

  
  

3 1 laser as a function of wall temperature of the active

g ' zone (Fig. 5) showed that lasing arises at a copper
vaporization temperature of 1200-1250'6. As the tea-

,; perature increases. the output power of the laser

2 rises. reaching a maximum at 1450°C. Then lasing power

‘19 falls, and stops almost entirely at about 1600’0.

II.

no At the optimum temperature and a pulse recurrence
rate of 3 kHz the laser output power was 10.5 H at
Fig. 6. Laser output power a laser efficiency with respect to the energy of the
as a function of wall tem- pumping oscillator accumulator of -12. The practical
perature efficiency of the laser with consideration of the

power expended on heating the electrodes was consider-
ably lower (20.1%).

These results show the necessity of looking for ways to reduce the overall electric
supply power of the laser. Experiments were done in which the electrodes were
heated via the pumping energy. To do this. the energy and recurrence rate of the
excitation pulses were increased while simultaneously reducing the heater power.

At a pumping pulse recurrence rate of 6 kHz the heater was completely disconnected.
and the laser operated in the self-hearing mode; however. the wall temperature

was below optimum. He were not able to achieve efficient stimulated emission by
using the energy released in the discharge to heat the electrodes. The output
power was only 1-2 H with yellow emission predominating, whereas a green line was
mainly excited at the optimum excitation rate of 3-4 kHz. Apparently effective
self-heating can be realized in coaxial tubes of smaller diameter with appropriate
heat insulation.

To find the second optimum with respect to noon pressure reported in Ref. 2. ex-
periments were done in which a heater was used to raise the temperature of the
entire zone, and the pressure in the cell was reduced from a starting point of

1.5 atm. In view of the instability of laser operation due to breakdowns of the
high-voltage lead-in at low pressures. we were unable to detect the second optimum.
At the same time. in the range of neon pressures below 5 mm Hg (measured in the
cold region of the chamber). breakdown in the lead-in had almost no effect on the
stability of the hollow-cathode discharge described below.

Laser operation at low buffer gas pressures or without buffer gas is of particular
interest and opens up definite prospects for realization of one of the principal
advantages of copper vapor lasers: high lasing pulse recurrence rate. A number
of causes have been suggested for the limitation on lasing pulse recurrence rate.
Among the most probable is the inSufficient rate of the process of deionization

of the gas-discharge plasma of the laser in the interpulse period.

To establish the nature of the deionization process in the laser plasma decomposing
in the space between pulses. a third auxiliary electrode in the form of a grid

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lﬂﬂE(N§LN

(collector) was inserted into the active zone. This grid had its own separate
current lead through which a certain potential could be applied relative to the
main electrodes. For constant voltage. the main electrodes were held under ground
potential in view of design particulars of the cable transformer of the pumping
oscillator. The collector was located at the same distance from anode and cathode.
Experiments showed that in the absence of a potential across the collector. the
latter had no influence on either the occurrence of the pulse discharge in the
chamber or the lasing parameters.

A positive potential was applied to the collector relative to the main electrodes
ofthe laser. In the absence of a pumping pulse. a semi-selfqmsintained discharge
could be set up between the collector and the main electrodes. and monitored from
its current-voltage characteristics. At the instant of the pumping pulse, there
was a sharp change in the number of charged particles in the discharge gap which
collected on the main electrodes and on the collector in the space between pulses
during plasma decomposition. The amplitude of the collector current and its shape
in different time intervals showed a reduction in the number of charged particles
as a result of plasma deionization. The time behavior of the collector current
was recorded by a resistor connected in the collector supply circuit; the signal
from this resistor was sent to an 81-54 oscilloscope.

Pig. 5 shows time dependences of collector
to current for different mixture pressures

, and pumping voltages. They all were ob-
tained at a collector voltage of +300 V,
excitation rate of 0.5 kHz and electrode
temperature of 1500°C. In the pressure
range from 100 mm Hg and up, the collector
(h current remains practically unchanged. and
depends only on the pumping voltage (curves

3 l, 2). Apparently the process of volumetric
recombination predominates at these pres-
: us sures. When the pressure falls below 100

mm Hg. the time behavior of the collector
current changes sharply (curves 3. 4).

‘ There is an increase in the rate of plasma
decomposition. When the pressure of the
working mixture decreases to a few mm Hg.

20 us processes of charge recombination on the
wall as a result of diffusion of charge

‘5 500 “8 carriers to the wall of the discharge cham—
ber begin to predominate. The role of volu-
metric recombination begins to fall off

‘ [Ref. 9].
Fig. 5. Behavior of deionization
process during pause between pump- This technique. which was used by gas-
ing pulses (5) for different pres- discharge classicists in various versions
sures p. of Cu-Ne mixture and v01- at the dawn of research on recombination
tages U cc across the accumulator phenomena [Ref. 10]. enables quantitative
(UK—-collector voltage; UP discharge determination of parameters of the investi-

gap voltage: "acc' 16 (l. 3. A) and gated effects, but on the first stage in
8 kv (2); po-IIOOO (l, 2). 100 (3) this work this problem was not raised. and
and 1-3 mm hg (A)) an express method was needed that would

15

FOR 0F11C1A1.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(3Al.lﬂﬂ!(ﬂWLY

enable keeping qualitative track of the deionization process in the active zone
of the pulse laser during the experiments.

The experiments done with the three-electrode laser show that metal vapor lasers
with low pressure of the working mixture may be quite promising. At low pressures
(1-10 mm Hg). effective plasma decomposition is possible in the period between
excitation pulses due to diffusion of electrons [Ref. 11]. ions and metastable

atoms to the walls with subsequent deionization of the ions and quenching of the
metastable atoms.

We were unable to achieve efficient lasing at low pressure in lasers in which trans-
verse and longitudinal discharges were used. Pressure reduction leads to a reduc-
tion in the discharge current, and thus to deterioration of the conditions of
excitation. This effect is especially pronounced with transition to the range

of pressures in which we are interested from a few mm Hg to a fraction of this
pressure unit. where multiple reduction of the discharge current occurs. Thus

the excitation of metal vapor in a laser chamber of about 1 mm Hg in conventional

types of discharges (longitudinal and transverse) is ineffective in view of the
low electron concentration.

There is a way out of this situation. For pulsed excitation of metal atoms at

low pressure it is advisable to use a hollow-cathode discharge [Ref. 10]. The
discharge with a hollow cathode is characterized by an anomalous current rise in
just the low-pressure region of interest to us at comparatively low voltages applied
to the discharge gap. In other words the hollowbcathode discharge most completely
satisfies the conditions necessary for metal vapor laser operation.

It should also be emphasized that in view of the possibility of using longitudinal
current components for pumping in the hollow cathode. the overall pumping current

is slight. perhaps an order of magnitude less than the pumping current in a trans-
verse discharge for the same active volumes. This circumstance relaxes requirements
for the supply inductance and thus simplifies the design of the discharge chamber,
minimizes inductive losses. and enables high physical efficiency.

Pulse lasing of copper atoms excited in a hollow-cathode discharge has been previ-
ously reported in Ref. 12.

The electrode configuration in the investigated laser enabled realization of the
hollow-cathode effect and stimulated emission of copper atoms without particular
difficulty. To do this. the inner electrode was made as a tube 0.8 cm in diameter
and 60 cm long with a slit made in the center. This electrode acted as a hollow

cathode. A planar cavity was formed by an opaque mirror with dielectric coating
and a glass plate.

Pulsed lasing of copper atoms in the hollowcathode was observed on both character-
istic lines: green and yellow at a cathode wall temperature of about 1500'C. At
an excitation pulse voltage amplitude across the electrodes of 1.2 kV and pulse
recurrence rate of 0.5 kHz. the output power was 100 mu. Increasing the excitation
frequency to 4 kHz led to an increase in the mean output power to 1.2 H. Specific
energy output was 15 uJ/cmJ at pumping current in the pulse of about 100 A. The
physical efficiency of the laser (calculated with respect to the pumping power
absorbed in the plasma without reflections (Ref. ll) reached 4.8-52. The effect of

16

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁ(1Al.USEGDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

superluninescence was observed in this mode. Increasing the excitation rate was
limited by the capabilities of the pumping oscillator. but we are assuming that
the optimum lasing frequency is considerably higher and may be tens of kilohertz.

The characteristics obtained in these preliminary experiments are on the level
of the best results achieved with copper vapor lasers. All this shows that the
hollow-cathode laser has a good outlook for operation with metal vapor.

A considerable percentage of the electric power in operation of transverse-discharge
lasers on copper vapor is expended on heating of the active zone from the external
heater.

Experiments with vaporizers without additional zone heating enabled a considerable
increase in the practical efficiency of the coaxial laser with consideration of
power going to the production of copper vapor. and also yielded efficient lasing.
In this case the copper vapor source was provided by vaporizers like that described
in Ref. 13. The vaporizers were placed in the lower part of the anode at a length
of 20 cm. The total area of the molten metal speculum was 6 sq. cm. Hith optimum
excitation, the output power was 8-9 H. The temperature of the metal melted in

the vaporizers was more than 1600°C, and the temperature of the electrodes heated
by the energy released in the vaporizers and in the discharge reached 1000-1100°C.
While raising the temperature in the vaporizers above the indicated value did lead
to a further increase in output power. there was a concomitant sharp drop in the
service life of the vaporizers because of intensive destruction of heating elements.

Some reduction in laser output power as compared with the case of zone heating

from an external source can apparently be attributed to intense condensation of
copper vapor on relatively cool electrodes. A confirmation of this assumption

is the presence of a considerable copper layer uniformly sputtered over the entire
surface of the electrodes. which was observed upon disassembly of the laser cell.
The power consumed by the vaporizer heater was reduced by an order of magnitude

as compared with the power required for heating the entire zone, and the luminosity
of the laser changed insignificantly. This led to an increase in the practical
efficiency of the laser. which was about 0.62 (with consideration of the power

of the vaporizers).

An investigation was also made of the working condition: of the laser with simul-
taneous activation of the overall heater and vaporizere. In the authors' opinion.
this somewhat increased the copper vapor concentration in the active zone as com-
pared with the laser operating conditions considered above. keeping the wall tem-
perature of the anode close to optimum (1400-1500°C). Results found in the course
of these experiments and reflected in Fig. 6 show that increasing the concentration
above that corresponding to the optimum temperature leads to an increase in output
power. As can be seen from the figure, there is a considerable region where the
lasing power in operation with a single heater is 2-3 times lower than the power
when the heaters are engaged with retention of temperature on the 1600°C level.
The saturation of laser luminosity when working with vaporizers can apparently be
attributed to disruption of the temperature conditions of the active zone of the
laser upon additional heating of the mixture by the energy released in the vapori-
zers. which is comparable with the heat from pumping.

17

FOR 0F1ﬂClAl.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the authors' opinion. the Optimum copper vapor
concentration is considerably higher than that
corresponding to the optimum temperature of the
electrodes of the zone. 1. e. higher than 1015 cm".
Therefore the temperature dependence of Output
power shown in Fig. 6 does not define the region
of optimum concentration, but characterizes the
change of temperature conditions in the active
zone. Although there is an increase in copper
vapor concentration as the electrode temperature
rises. the gas temperature also rises beyond the
limiting value, which may lead to deterioration
of lasing conditions. Gas superheating can also

0 kV explain inefficient laser operation in the self-

acct heating mode. as well as the presence of an optimum

Fig. 6. Laser output power as pumping power beyond which the lasing power begins
a function of accumulator vol- to fall. The optimum pumping power referred to

tage with vaporizer (l) and the length of the active zone was #0 H/cm.
without it (2)

In addition to gas superheating that leads to metastable states of copper atoms.
there may also be other causes leading to deterioration of lasing conditions as
there is an increase in the zone temperature. rate and energy of excitation pulses,
such as prolonged time of plasma deionization. discharge contraction and so on.
Determination of their contribution is a complicated and important problem.

P. rel. units

 

One of the effective ways of cooling the active mixture of gas lasers is circulating
the mixture through a closed loop from the active volume to the heat exchanger

and back. We did experiments with circulation of the Cu-Ne working mixture due

to natural flow of the heated gas in a gravitational field in the direction perpen-
dicular to the optical axis (Fig. 7). The gas heated in the discharge gap entered
the heat exchanger. and after cooling was again returned to the active zone. To
avoid metal vapor condensation, the temperature
of the electrodes and heat exchanger was main-
tained on a level of lbOO-lSOO'C. The gas heated
in the discharge to higher temperatures gave

up heat during motion to the relatively cool

heat exchanger and electrodes.

The use of such a method of circulating the mix-
ture in lasers on copper and other metal vapors
-Plow of is justified by the presence of a high temperature

Cu-Ne mixture head determined by the difference in temperatures

Heater of the gas in the active zone and the heat ex-
changer, which may be greater than 1000 K, al-

Fig. 7. Diagram of circulation though it is difficult to expect greater gas

of Cu-Ne working mixture circulation velocities in view of the technical

difficulties of making large vertical dimensions

of the laser and its components that are to be heated to high temperatures.

  

Despite the low velocities of gas flow (of the order of 10 cm/s), which are very
difficult to measure and estimate correctly [Ref. 14]. the luminosity of the laser

18

FOR‘0FFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FINI(JFFICL\L [ﬂiE(NVLY

was increased to 15 W instead of 10.5 H (i. e. by a factor of 1.5) as compared
to a laser without circulation, all other parameters being equal. There was also
an increase in the maximum pumping power, which was about 60 H/cm (Pig. 8).

u These experimental studies reinforce the confidence
in the advisability of cooling the working mixture
of the copper vapor laser. and show that an effective
method of doing this may be to circulate the mixture
through a closed loop. An appreciable effect should
2 be expected as the velocity of gas circulation is

P. rel. units

p increased. This is an indication of the necessity
for further development of this area of metal vapor
laser physics.
I .n .u r C
Pu/L. "Ice 5. onclusion
F18- 8- Output POVeT as a 1. In a pulsed transverse-discharge laser at currents
function 0‘ linear PumP1“8 of 1-10 kA, and also when the discharge currents
power Vith C1r¢018t10n (I) are increased to 1 kA in a laser with longitudinal
and without it (2) discharge, the influence of parasitic inductances

in the discharge circuits and its resistances is
quite appreciable, leading to a reduction in the physical efficiency of the laser.
A criterion is established for determining the admissible parasitic inductance
in the laser discharge circuit.

2. It has been shown that a physical efficiency of 5.3: can be attained in a trans-
verse-discharge laser when the lead-in inductance is minimized.

3. Copper vapor lasing has been accomplished in a hollow-cathode pulsed discharge
at low pressures of the mixture and insignificant inductive losses. Physical ef-
ficiency reached 51, and the specific energy output was 15 uJ/cm’.

4. It has been shown that the insertion of a third electrode for an auxiliary
constant semi-self-maintained discharge enables monitoring the the deionization
process in the decomposing plasma in the interval between pulses.

5. It has been shown that the use of vaporizers in a transverse-discharge laser
makes it possible to raise the practical efficiency to 0.61.

6. It has been established that circulation of the working mixture overcomes the
limitation on pumping power and improves the characteristics of the copper vapor

laser.

The results lead us to conclude that the possibilities of the copper vapor laser
are far from exhausted. and their study is a topical problem.

REFERENCES

l. Babeyko. Yu. A., Vasil'yev. L. A.. Sviridov. A. V.. Sokolov. A. V.. Tatarin-
tsev, L. V.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 6. 1979, p 1102.

19

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE10NLY
3.

lo.

5.

6.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

16.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Bokhan. P. A.. Shcheglov. V. 3., KVANTOVAYA W1“, Vol 5. 1978. p 381.
"alter. "a To. 801132110. No, Piltch' “a, IRE; J.) Vol 03-2, 1966' P 674.

Iaayev, A. A.. Kazaryan. H. A.. Petrash. G. 6.. PRIBOBY 1 mm EKSPBRIMENTA.
No 1. 1973. p 188.

Russell. 6. m. Nerhein. u. 11.. Pivrotto. r. J.. mn. pars. Len-5.. Vol 21,
1972. p 565.

Babeyko. Yu. A.. Vasil'yev. 1.. A.. Sokolov. A. V.. Sviridov. A. V.. Tatarin-
tsev, L. V.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1978. p 2061.

Bokhan, P. A., Gerasimov. V. A., KVANTOVAYA WI“, Vol 6. 1979. p 451.

Yelecakiy. A. V.. Zentsov. Yu. K.. Rodin. A. V.. Stsrostin. A. N.. DOKLADY
AKADEMII “AUX 8883. Vol 220. 1975. p 318.

Granovskiy. V. 1... RADIO'I'EKHNIKA I EEKTRONIKA. No 3. 1966. p 371.

Leb. 1... "Osnovnyye protsesay elektricheakikh razryadov v gaze" [Principal
Processes of Electric Discharges in Gas]. Moscow-Leningrad. Gosudartavennoye
izdatel' stvo tekhnichcskoy i teoreticheskoy literatury. 1950.

Gsbsy. 3.. Snilanski. 1.. IEEE J.. Vol 03-16. No 6. 1.980.

Fahlen. Theodore, J. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 65. 1976. p 10132.

Ferrar. C. “a. IBEB Jo. V01 08-9, 1973’ P 8560

Barnett and Irvine, eds.. "Uspekhi teploperedachi" [Advances in Heat Transfer].
Moscow, Mir. 1970.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya alaktronika". 1981

6610

C80:

1862/14

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMICNNNC]A1.USE¢DNLY

UDC 566.27+621.315

PHYSICOCHEMICAL AND ELECTROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES 0? HIGH-TEMPERAIURB INSULATING
CBRAHICS FOR ELEMENTAL VAPOR LASERS

Moscow KVANTOVAXA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. he 8(110). Aug 81
(manuscript received 13 Nov 80) PP 1697-1701

[Article by 0. l. Bushinskiy. V. V. Lopatin and V. P. Chernenko, Scientific Re-
search Institute of High Voltages. Tomsk Polytechnical Institute]

[Text] The paper gives the characteristics of high-temperature
ceramics that are widely used in the construction of elemental
vapor lasers. It is shown that ceramics based on pyrolytic
boron nitride have the best characteristics with respect to a
set of selected indices.

A facility is described for measuring low-voltage and high-voltage
electrophysical characteristics of dielectrics in a variety of
gases at pressures of 1-105 Pa and temperatures up to 2500 K.

The first experimental results are given on high-voltage elec-
trophysical characteristics of pyrolytic boron nitride.

Elemental vapor lasers are currently in wide use as they cover a broad spectral
band and have high efficiencies and gains. It would be impossible to increase

the efficiency. emission energy and other technical-economic parameters of such

- lasers without using insulating materials that retain their dielectric properties
up to temperatures of 2000-3000 K. The choice of dielectric materials for various
structural components is dictated by their temperature conditions. by the complex
of physicochemical and electrophysical properties of the material. and also by

the characteristics of the medium.

At present. structures capable of operation in weakly aggressive atmospheres (air.
nitrogen and commercially pure noble gases at pressures up to l kPa) utilize com-
ponents of high-temperature ceramics based on widely available and fairly well
studied oxides and carbides last. 1-3). as well as nitrides that are not yet so
widely available [Ref. 5]. The literature contains reliable low—voltage electro-
physical characteristics of oxides: volumetric 9V and surface as resistivities.
loss tangent tand and permittivity c. "hat we do not have are the high-voltage
properties at high temperatures (electric strength Ebr' surface arcover gradient
Bare) which significantly determine the emission characteristics of lasers. And
despite the publication of considerable research. we do not even have reliable

21

FOR OIINC1A1.lEi£(NVLY
F08‘0FFKJA1.U§E(NVLY

lowbvoltsge electrophysicai characteristics for nitrides. This is because items
made of SN and Al“ powders are not series produced. and their properties are de-
termined to a considerable extent by the impurities of the powder. and by the pro-
duction and sintering process. In addition. the differences between electrophysical
characteristics can he explained by the lack of a generally accepted method of
measurements at high temperatures. This is particularly important for measuring
the electrophysical characteristics of anisotropic polycrystalline materials such

as pyrolytic boron nitride.

In this paper a critical analysis is made of the properties of high-temperature
ceramics both from data in the literature and as measured by the authors.

Among the large number of high-temperature dielectrics. the beat insulating proper-
ties are shown by corundus «4120,. zirconiu dioxide 220.. brokerite BeO. nitrices
of aluminum Al“ and boron 3N (hereafter the adsodifications will be called simply
3N and A120,). Oxides of aluminum and beryllium. nitrides of boron and aluminum
are made in the form of powders. and items are produced from them by hot pressing.
In recent years (Ref. 5] a technique has been developed for making items from boron
nitride by the method of gas-phase deposition: so-called pyrolytic boron nitride
(PBN);despite identical chemical composition and aicrostructure. items made from
powdered 8N and PEN have different physicochemicsl and electrophysical character-
istics (Table 1. Figure). An advantage of powder materials is the capability of
molding "thick-walled" items. PBN can be used to make
"thindwalled" (down to 5 mm) items with large overall
dimensions and complex shape in the form of plates.
tubes. boxes and the like. A distinguishing feature

of 3N and P38 is anisotropy of their properties in nu-
tually perpendicular directions. which is a consequence
of the graphite-like hexagonal lattice. With respect

9v. Shem

and especially with consideration of the temperature
dependences of thermophysical and mechanical parameters.
the most suitable dielectrics for making items for work
at temperatures up to 2000—2500 K are ordinary and pyro-
lytic boron nitride.

  

__J—-—h—
000 an MI!

Tem erature de endence
of Solunetric :esistiv- high melting point. slow vaporization, fairly high me-

ity of ceramics: l--Zr0 chanical strength at high temperatures and a number
[8, 10]; 2--BN [6. 10); of other properties enable successful use of these ma»
3—-Be0 (8]; 4--Bh [15]; terials in high-temperature devices. PBN has high ther-
mal conductivity and diffusivity in the direction paral-
lel to the plane of deposition, and low values of these
parameters in the perpendicular direction. In addition.
because of its high thermal diffusivity. PB“ has excellent thermal stability: items
made from this material can withstand about 100 heat cycles of 300-2000-300 K with-
out cracking or peeling (the experiments were done with nitrogen cooling under
a pressure of 100-1000 Pa). The beat oxide ceramic. brokerite. withstands 25 such
cycles [Ref. 9] (hot—pressed--12 cycles with heating to 1500 K (Ref. 6. 8]). In
contrast to other ceramics, PEN is very resistant to heat shocks: in the thermal
stability tests. the specimens were heated to 2000 K within 15 minutes..

S—-PBN. from measurement
results for 10 specimens

22

INJR (NFFICIAJ.|£SI§CM§LY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The authors have developed a high-temperature facility for measuring low-voltage
(av. 95. t. tents) and high-voltage (Bbr' Bare) electrophysical characteristics

of dielectrics. The facility with resistive graphite heater can be used for mea-
surements in a variety of gases at pressures of 1-105 Pa and a temperature of up

to 2500 K. Techniques have been developed for preparing specimens and carrying

out measurements of low-voltage and high-voltage characteristics at high tempera-
tures. In measuring the temperature dependence of my and as of PIN. we observed
the standard technique approved for low temperatures (State Standard (3)512 6433.2-71).
The electrodes were applied to flat specimens by smearing with grade MPG-8 graphite
or by platinum sputtering. The measurements were made with a guard electrode at
constant field strength of E- 50 VIII: after settling of the absorption current.

The electric strength Bbr was measured on oscillating pulses with amplitude of

up to 40 kV. period of oscillations of 0.18 us, and logarithmic decrement of 2.

The permittivity of the ceramics is nearly independent of temperature, and the
loss tangent increases by about three orders of magnitude when the temperature
is increased to 1000 K.

The Figure shows temperature dependences of volunetric resistivity pv for B“ and
P33 in the direction perpendicular to the plane of pressing (curves 2, lo. 5).

Table 2 smarizes the results of measurements made by the authors of the surface
resistivity as for PM in the direction parallel to the plane of deposition. Un-
fortunately, the measurements of 98 for DH and PBN [Ref. 6. 8. ll, 15. 21] were
made in a two-electrode system. in which a combination of my and 93 is measured
rather than each one individually due to the anisotropy of the material. Besides.
these papers do not state the voltage and field strength at which the measurements
were made. This is apparently one of the reasons for the considerable divergence
of the results (for example, see the Figure. curves 2 and 4). It has been estab-
lished that the function pv- f (T) remains practically unchanged in air, nitrogen.
argon and heliun in the pressure range of 1-108 Pa.

The electric strength Eb, of PEN flat specimens 0.25 In thick in the temperature
range of 800-1900 K was 160-200 When. The electric strength of run under repeated
pulse action (multipulse Ebr) is considerably lower than for a single pulse. the
determining factors in reduction of Ebr being the repetition rate and amber of

the acting pulses. For example at a rate of 1 Hz and T- 1800 K, 3hr decreases

by 20-30% with breakdown occurring as early as the lOO-th pulse.

From our research. we can draw the following conclusions.

1. The literature does not give the high-voltage electrophysical characteristics
of high-temperature insulating ceramics.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 

Characterist ic

 
 
      
 

structure

Melting point. K ' am [51 mole; mom

  
    
 
    
   

Heat conduction 65— 27 6 6 I O 6 &
at 1300 K, “Km.” y" 23' l I l I I] I8) “8|
l5. 1%”
Ten erature coef- 2.6 —u
tic ent of line r [5. l9]
expasgioEJt l 0 11;]; 0.016] 8.6 m 4.810] 9.219] ".5181
D
S ecific h t at l.l—2.5 2 N) L! C I.” 6 8 0 2.
l K, kJﬁzkg-K) [5' l I l I l I II I 7 ('01
Va r zation te . _. _.
atpgs00 It. ks {6:31:40 ‘62-. £10) “Hm. “0-. “0|
V380: pressure at lo-sisl l '"01 “ram" .04 [5' 3.104 _
$0 011:, Pa h [10}
a re t at . ‘

1338:"ch 1:98 'H° 8'. I a

srecng 495 6—6 18!] ml: 309 —

bending ﬂit—{I .9 [£1] - -l- I nulls]: -
:é‘éiisbémzn<"::z. “H" W - 35x??? - -
in 10 hang}. 87“, "I o a 3
PenittiVity at «,0 ,I-4. 10"."! 0.511426] .assm Imus]
lO‘-10’ H: Ill. 2” [51

2—5 35—51 m]

Dielectr‘ic losses, «[11] 4-!0 H7] .85—6ll9) I717]

tan 5 ‘10 ll?)

 

Note: Ll is the direction parallel and perpendicular to
the plane of deposition.

The mechanical strength of PM (tensile. bending and compression) at low tempera-
tures is lower than for other ceramics. but at 1000-1100 K it becomes coaparable
to or even considerably greater than their strength. Table 1 gives the physica-
chenical characteristics of 3N and PM with density of about 2 g/ca’ (theoretical
density is 2.28 g/cm’). which should be considered the optimal from the standpoint
of both the process of item manufacture and resultant properties. Reducing the
density of PM to 1.7-1.8 g/cm3 cuts aechanical strength approximately in half
[Ref. 11]. reduces chemical stability and increases the probability of peeling

of items. PBN has higher chemical stability than other ceramics, shows almost

no tendency to react with nost elements right up to temperatures of 2000-2500 K,
does not dissolve in vater. and dissolves poorly in acids and alkalis. It is also
quite resistant to oxidation Ref. 5) as the boron oxide (830;) film that forms
on the surface protects it from further oxidation. PEN is easily machined. has
fairly high vacuum properties, and fetus vacqu-tight seals to titanim and copper
by the method of contact-reactive soldering with titaniuI-containing solders

[Ref. 16] .

23

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
2.

HO! “FINCIAJ.IISII¢IWLV

The use of ceramics like these in facilities that operate in multipulse con-

ditions requires measurements ofthe lifetime of insulation.

3.

In insulation components that operate at temperatures up to 2000-2500 K. items

made from PBN can be unambiguously recommended for use with respect to a number
of characteristics. where thick-walled insulators are necessary. hot-pressed BN.
brokerite or aluminum nitride can be used.

1.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

Is.

REFERENCES

Petrash. G. 6.. "Spravochnik po laseram" [Laser Handbook]. edited by A. H.
Prokhorov, Moscow, Sovetskoye radio. Vol 1. 1978. pp 183-197.

Issyev. A. A., Petrash. G. 6.. Kazaryan. H. A.. PRIBOR! I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHBNIA.
No 1. 1973. p 188.

Bokhan. P. A.. Nikolayev. V. N.. Solomonov, V. 1.. KVANTOVAXA BLEKTRONIKA.
V01 2. 1975. P 159.

BMMMMLO.L.mnmw.ksuxwumms.LetuHKuMWMAnmmme
Vol 4, 1979. p 2040.

Sharupin. B. N.. in: "Khimicheskoye gazofaznoye osazhdeniye tugoplavkikh ne-
organicheskikh materialov" [Chemical Gas-Phase Deposition of Refractory In-
organic Haterials], edited by V. S. Shpak and R. G. Arvabe. Leningrad. 1976.
pp 66-101.

Samsonov. G. V., "Nitridy" [Nitrides]. Kiev. Naukova dunks. 1969.

Kikoin. I. K., ed.. "Tablitsy fizicheskikh velichin" [Tables of Physical Quan-
tities]. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1976.

Samsonov. G. V.. "Fiziko-khimicheskiye svoyatva okialov: spravochnik" [Physica-
chemical Properties of Oxides: Handbook]. Moscow. Metallurgiya. 1978.

Belyayev. R. A.. "Okis' berilliya" [Beryllium Oxide]. Moscow. Atomizdat. 1962.

Kotel'nikov. R. B. et a1.. "Osobotugoplavkiye materialy" [High Refractories].
Moscow. Hetellurgiya. I969.

Bershadskaya. H. 0., ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA. SBRIYA HATERIALY, N0 6, 1978, p 68.
Libovits. 6.. "Razrusheniye" [Fracture]. Moscow. Mir. 1976. p 7.

Lukin. Ye. 5.. Sysoyev. B. P.. Poluboyarinov. D. 8.. OGNEUPORY. No 12, 1976.
p 34.

Repkin. Yu. 0.. OGNEUPORY. No 2. 1965. p 61.

Poluboyarinov. D. N.. shishkov. N. V.. Kuznetsova. I. 6.. IZVBSTIYA AKADEHII
NAUK SSSR: NBORGANICHESKIYB HAIRRIALY. Vol 3. 1967. p 1828.

25

FOR10FFHJA1.USE(NNLY
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

Batygin. V. N.. Kruchinin, V. P.. Kylaeova. T. H.. ELEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA.
SERIYA ELEKTRONIKA SVCh. No 3. 1977. p 71.

Koritskiy. Yu. V., ed., "Spravochnlk po elektrotekhnicheakikn materialuf'
[Handbook on Electronics Materials]. Moscow, Energiya. Vol 2, 1976.

Tareyev. B. H.. Lerner. .. H.. "Oksidnaya izolyatsiya" [Oxide Insulation].
Moscow. Energiya. 197$.

Andreyeva. T. V., Barentseva. I. 6.. Dubnlk, Ye. H.. Yupko. V. L.. TEPLOPIZIKA
VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR. Vol 2. 1966. p 829.

Novikova. N. A.. Vlasov. Ye. 0.. Neponnyaahchiy. L. 3.. OGNEUPORY. No 10. 1971,
p Sb.

Bershadekaya. H. D.. Avetlkov. V. 6., Shorupin. B. N.. ELBKIRONNAYA TEKENIKA.
SERIYA HATERIALY. No 6. 1978. p 61.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610

C80:

1862/14

26

FIMR13FFICIA1.1EIE(HVLY
INNR(NNN(1AI.lNﬂi(NNlV

UDC 621.378.33
ERERGY AND SPECTRAL CHARACTERISTICS OF 00 GASDYNAHIC LASER HORKING MEDIA

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRDNIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 8(110). Aug 81
(manuscript received 8 Jan 81) pp 1797-1801

[Article by B. s. Aleksandrov. G. A. Andronov. V. A. Belavin, B. H. Dymshits,
Ya. P. Koretskiy and V. F. Sharkov]

[Text] The paper gives the results of measurement of the power
and spectral composition of 00 gasdynamic laser emission. Good
agreement between the results of calculation and experimental
data justified the confidence of the mathematical model of the
C0 gaadynamic laser and of the earlier prediction based on this
model of an attainable specific energy output of 50 J/g for a
CO gasdynamic laser using a CO-Ar mixture.

Recent years have seen the publication of research dealing with 00 gasdynamie lasers.
None of them expresses any doubt as to the good outlook and high energy efficiency
of this system. of course. there is a realistic basis for the optimistic prospects
of CO gasdynanic lasers: 1) high quantum yield of the CO molecule; 2)the thermal
stability of the molecule. and consequently the capability of storing a large amount
of vibrational energy; 3) low vibrational-translational relaxation rate. However.
the mere fact of a large store of vibrational energy that can be retained during

gas flow through a nozzle does not in itself ensure high output characteristics

of the laser: the stored energy has still to be converted efficiently to emission.

The efficiency of co gasdynamic lasers still remains low, which is entirely natural
as experiments have been done only on small-scale facilities using shock tubes
under conditions that are obviously far from optimum. Suffice it to say that for
example the maximum specific energy output that has been experimentally attained

is no more than 2.2 J/g for a CO-“g-Af mixture [Ref. 1], and 5.6 J/g for a Co-Ar
mixture [Ref. 2]. These values are clearly far from the true capabilities of the
CO gasdynamic laser. Therefore theoretical predictions of the capabilities and
efficiency of this kind of laser should take on particular significance.

Some theoretical research has been done [Ref. 3-5] in which an investigation has

been made of kinetic processes in supersonic expanding flows leading to the forma-
tion of inverse population in media containing C0. and calculations have been done
on the energy and spectral output characteristics of the laser. However. it cannot
be said that we have yet achieved unanimity of views on the energy capabilities of

27

FOR OFFICLAl.lEiI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CO gasdynamic lasers. Predictions of the energy efficiency of C0 gasdynamic lasers
given by various authors differ by about an order of magnitude [Ref. 3-5]. Such

a discrepancy of results can be attributed both to the difference in mathematical
models used for the calculations. and to incompleteness of information on the kinetic
constants appearing in the equations. In this connection. the job of substantiating

the confidence of the mathematical model of the CO gasdynamic laser is of particular
urgency.

In Ref. 5. the first attempt was made at substantiating the confidence of the mathe-
matical model of a co gaadynamic laser by comparing experimental and theoretical
data. However. this comparison was not sufficiently complete. Comparison of calcu-
lated and experimental data at isolated points may be insufficient for the absolute
value of lasing power. More convincing would be agreement between several pars-
metric relations, assuming that the calculations were done with the same set of
semiempirical constants.

This paper gives the results of a study of spectral and energy characteristics

of a CO gasdynamic laser using a more imporved experimental method. The spectral
composition of radiation. the most important characteristic of a laser. so far

has remained practically uninvestigated for the CO gasdynamic laser. Ref. 1 gives
the results of measurement of the relative intensity (weak. moderate. strong) of
individual lines; the emission spectrum of the co gasdynamic laser given in Ref. 5
was recorded by a thermophosphor. i. e. it corresponds to the time-integrated radia-
tion over the entire pulse. The resturcturing of the spectrum that we observed
when the experimental conditions were varied has enabled us to refine the theo-
retical model.

The experimental studies were done on a facility described in Ref. 5. A mixture
of C0:Ar- 37:63 was heated and compressed in a shock tube. A supersonic tapered
nozzle was used with half-angle of 10' and an interchangeable critical section.
enabling variation of the degree of expansion of the nozzle from 200 to 6600. The
nozzle diameter in the vicinity of the optical cavity was 200 mm. An external
cavity was used, formed by an opaque metal mirror and a semitransparent mirror.
Lasing involved about 1/10 of the gas flow close to the axis of the nozzle bounded
by the aperture of the windows set at the Brewster angle. Emission power was mea-
sured in the standard way: simultaneous measurement of pulse shape and total energy
gave the time dependence of power. The duration of the quasi-cw period of stimu-
lated emission was about 1 ms.

An investigation was made of the way that lasing power depends on the transmission
factor t of the output mirror of the cavity. Flat dielectric mirrors (t-'0.15

and 0.35) and a germanium plane-parallel plate (t-0.53) were used as the output
mirror. The curve for output radiation power "0 t as as a function of transmission
factor (Fig. 1a) has a maximum in the vicinity of tI-0.lS-0.3S for the given spe-
cific conditions of the experiment.

The radiation power was also measured as a function of the degree of expansion

of the nozzle F/Fcr (Fig. lb). The output mirror with t-0.15 was used. These
results cover a different range of variation in PIPcr (200-800) than in Ref. 3
(500-3600). The level of "out in our research was considerably higher due to the
use of a more efficient optical cavity.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEGDNLN

Fig. 1 also shows the results of
calculations of the output radiation
power of the C0 gasdynamic laser

for the given conditions. The method
of calculation is given in Ref. 5.
The calculations were done at dif-
ferent loss factors a on one mirror.
It was assumed that the value of a
includes not only the losses imme-
diately on the mirror (thermal.
diffuse scattering, etc.) that may
be determined with satisfactory
accuracy. but also possible absorp-
tion in the boundary layer where

the gas temperature is high and the
state is close to equilibrium. losses
on the mirrors, losses on inhomo-
geneities of the medium distributed

    

«noon

 

Fig. 1. Emission power as a function of
transmission factor t of the output mir-

through the volume and so on. Obvi-
ror (a) and a function of the degree of
expansion of the nozzle F/Pcr (b): ously it is impossible to measure

the value of this quantity directly;
mixture CO:Ar - 37:63; pg - 90 atm; To -

2050 K; O--experiment; A--calculation 2:".vir.1c::p.r::°nd:§f::: :e:"1::h
with different values of the loss factor ca cu a on r n V

a on one mirror; F/Fcr' 800 (a); t-0.lS (b) ::::::::n:’:::::eaoge:isfactory

In comparing experimental and calculated data, it is also necessary to remember
that the cross section of the output window in the experiments had the shape of

an ellipse with axes of 30 and 15 mm. as did the working section of the mirror
surface. whereas the calculations were done for rectangular mirrors measuring

30x 10 mm with gaussian field distribution in the direction of gas flow and con-
stant distribution in the perpendicular direction. Clearly under such conditions

we cannot expect complete correspondence of values of the output power "out observed
in the experiment to the calculated value. The best confirmation of the correctness

of the computational method might be agreement of qualitative dependences of ”out
on various parameters of the experiment.

The calculated behavior of the function "out(t) satisfactorily reproduces the de-
pendence found in the experiment (see Pig. la). Obviously there is no question

of coincidence of absolute values in the given case since the value of a is arbi-
trarily chosen. and one can always select a such that absolute values will agree

at one point. However. if we consider the fact that the best agreement is observed
at a-0.03-0.l. and examine the results of comparison of the calculated dependence
Hout(t) with the experimental curve as an indirect method of determining a. then

in coloulations of other dependences at predetermined a. coincidence of the curves
and in particular of absolute quantities is a strong argument in favor of the confi-
dence of the mathematical model and the assumed kinetic constants.

He can see from Fig. lb that the theoretical model also correctly describes the
dependence of "out on the geometric degree of nozzle expansion. It should be taken

into consideration that in calculation and experiment. F/Fcr increases due to a
reduction in Far while F remains constant. which reduces the gas flow through the

29

F0810FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

optical cavity. For the given conditions. the calculation. like the experimental
data of Ref. 2, gives a maximum value of "out in the vicinity of F/Fcr- 800. The
less abrupt fall-off in experimental values of "out as PIP r decreases in comparison
with the calculated curves can be attributed to the fact t t with decreasing P/Fcr
there is a reduction in the thickness of the boundary layer and in its role in
absorption. The results shown in Fig. lb also confirm the assumption that the

loss factor is close to a-0.05-0.10.

The occurrence of the maximum on the curve for "emu/Per) (see Fig. lb) accompanied
by a reduction in gas flowrate G is due to a monotonic increase in specific energy
output "out/3 as F/Pc, increases in the given interval. This result agrees with

the conclusion of Ref. 1 on an increase in efficiency of the co gasdynamic laser

(a quantity that is obviously proportional to the specific energy output) with
increasing P/Fcr found experimentally.

The spectral measurements were made with a spectrograph with diffraction grating
of 200 lines per mm with intensity maximum at 4.3 um. A 6 «gram of the device is
shown in Fig. 2. The collimator objective was a system comprising Lil? lens 6 and
concave spherical mirror 7. The spectra: was re-
corded by lO-channel IR receiver 9 with reception
area of 3x 30 an built up of 10 Ge-Au cells measur-
ing 31. 3 In. The IR receiver was operated at the
temperature of liquid nitrogen. A wavelength band
of 4.7-5.6 mm could be recorded. The parallel
laser beam was focused on the reception area of
the IR receiver by relative shifting of the mirror
and lens in the collimator objective. Wavelength
tie-in was with respect to high orders (7-9) of
a hel ium-neon adjustment laser emitting on a wave-
length of 0.6328 um. This sue laser was used
Fig. 2. Diagram of spectro- for aligment of the entire optical system. A
graph: diaphragm lo was placed in front of the collimator
l--cavity mirrors; 2--nozzle; objective to reduce radiation intensity.
3~—Brewster windows; b—dia-

 

phragm; 5-flat mirror; 6-- The described system for recording the spectrum,

LiF lens; 7--concave mirror in contrast to the system that we had previously

of collimator objective; 8- used based on a thermophosphor [Ref. 5], enabled

diffraction grating; 9—1!!! as to record the spectral distribution of emission
radiation receiver energy as a function of time.

The random error in tie-in with respect to wavelengths, due mainly to the finite

dimensions of the lie-Ne laser beam in the plane of the IR receiver we estimate
at 61-24 cm‘!-:0.0l ml.

The relative sensitivity of the cells of the IR receiver was calibrated by a heated
nichrome filament by focusing the filament image on the reception cells. The rela-

tive error of measurement of the signal amplitude from each reception cell according
to our estimtes was 15-202.

Measurements were made of the spectral composition of emission of a CO gasdynamic
laser on a mixture of CO:Ar- 37:63 at p- 90 atm and To - 2050 K for nozzles with

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWC1A1.USEGDNLY

P/Pcr- 200, 400. 600 and 800. Fig. 3 shows oscil-
lograms of signals obtained from the IR receiver.
It can be seen from the oscillograms that the

us
2
;iE:::;j:::1::::: duration of quasisteady lasing is about 1 ms.
’ IL/‘W-

0n the whole. the reproducibility of the results
should be considered satisfactory: the boundaries

5 .\h’___’____‘____ of the spectrum and position of the maximum were
completely reproduced. The general shape of the
‘-\_______~_______ envelope curve of the spectrum was also constant
7 from experiment to experiment: a single maxﬂnul
a::::::::::::::::: in the short-wave part of the spectrum and a long

declining "tail" in the long-wave part. However.
the rate of decline of the tail as well as the
ratios of intensities in different parts of the
spectrum underwent considerable deviations from
experiment to experiment (Fig. 6).

Fig. 3. Oscillograms of sig-
nals from IR receiver. Con-
ditions the same as in Fig.
la: 1) 4.85-6.91 um; 2)

4.91-4.98 HI' 3) 6.98-5.04 um-
5) 5.10-5.17’um; 6) 5.!7- ’ Fig. 5 shows experimental and calculated spectra

. _ . of radiation for different values of F/Pcr at
5‘23 "D’S7ggfg2365‘29 um. 8) times corresponding to steady-state emission.
' ' "m The intensity of the maximum line in each case

[1:] ‘ ' .... ‘w
1:! I E : seems-m
HEM.
£11132... 3 assumes:
.T'EEDEEEﬁ. (1:555:55an

Pig. 4. Results of mea-
surement of the spectrum «I u u u n u A. um

of a CO gasdynamic laser
in series of experiments P13’ 5’ Experimental and
with fixed conditions: “hunt“ "°°"“" °f °°
P/F _ 400 gasdynamic laser at PIPcr
Ct -200 (a). 600 (b). 600
(c) and 800 (d). Remain-

ing conditions as in Fig. la

was taken as equal to unity. Pig. 5 illustrates on the basis of individual examples
the degree of agreement between the results of experiments and calculation done
eta-0&5. ‘

31

FINR()FF1(1A1.UEII(MVLY
FIMRCHHHCJAI.USIICMVLY

With a simultaneous increase in F/Fcr and the degree of cooling of the gas in the
optical cavity. there is an expansion in the overall limits of the spectrum. the
main fraction of emission energy is shifted into the short-wave region and there
is a transition to lower vibrational transitions. As PIPcr changes from 200 to
800. the gas temperature in the cavity changes from 75 to 50 K. A comparison of
calculation and experiments shows that the calculation satisfactorily reproduces
the range of wavelengths and the behavior of the spectrum with a change in the
degree of expansion. In evaluating the reproducibility of the experiments and
comparing them with calculation. it is necessary to consider first of all that
the tie-in of crystals recording IR emission to a certain wavelength range was
done with accuracy of 20.01 um. and secondly that defocusing of the collimator
objective of the spectrograph due to the dispersion properties of the lens caused
focusing of the spectral lines on the receiver surface in spots of finite dimensions
so that some of them cauld be registered by two adjacent crystals.

In addition to their independent interest. these results have confirmed the confi-

dence of theoretical prediction of the attainable specific energy output of a CO

gasdynamic laser based on a mixture of CO-Ar (-50 J/g). which was made in Ref. 5.
REFERENCES

1. McKenzie. R. L.. PHYS. FLUIDS. V01 15. 1972, p 2163.

2. Andronov. G. A.. Armer, A. 6.. Belavin. V. A.. Dymshits, B. H.. Koretskiy.
Ya. P., Sharkov. V. F.. KVANTOVAYA ELERTRONIKA, Vol 6. 1977. p 1799.

3. Kukhto. A. N.. TEPLOYIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR. Vol 1‘. 1976. p 1281.

a. Vasilik. N. Ya.. Vakhnenkn. V. A., Hargolin, A. 0., Shmelev. V. H.. ZHURNAL
PRIKLADNOY HEKHANIKI I TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIRI. No 5. 1978. p 16.

S. Aleksandrov. B. 8., Andronov. G. A.. Belavin. V. A., sharkov. V. P..
TEPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERATUR, V01 16. 1978. p 1112.

COPYRIGHT: ledatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

6610
C50: 1862/16

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢MﬂﬂC1Al.USEGMNLY

UDC 621.378.33

COPPER AIOM LASER LEVEL EXCITAIION EFFICIENCY IN ELECTRIC DISCHARGE

Moscow KVANTOVAXA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 8(110). Aug 81
(manuscript received 11 Dec 80) pp 1842—1865

[Article by 0. I. Buzhinskiy and H. L. Petrov]

[Text] 0n the basis of numerical solution of Boltzmann's equa-
tion for the energy distribution function of electrons. the au-
thors determine the rate constants of excitation of laser levels,
and the electron energy balances in a discharge in a Cu-Ne mix-
ture for different relative compositions corresponding to copper
vapor lasers with a heating method of producing copper atoms.

It is found that as the relative concentration of copper atoms
increases. the region of most effective excitation of laser lev-
els shifts toward larger values of B/N-the ratio of electric
field strength in the discharge to the total number of particles
in a unit volume. An examination is made of causes for the
change in specific energy output at high temperatures in lasers
with thermal method of producing copper atoms (heating by the
discharge. forced independent heating).

One of the ways to increase energy output in copper vapor lasers is to increase

the density of copper atoms in the working volume. However. experiments have shown
that energy Output increases with rising temperature of the active medium only

up to 31900 K [Ref. 1]. As temperature rises further, there is even a reduction

in energy output [Ref. 2]. 0n the other hand, when copper atoms are produced by
using the mechanism of explosion of conductors. an increase in energy output is
observed up to concentrations of =10“ cm" [Ref. 3]. which corresponds to "thernal
population" temperatures much greater than 2000 K. As yet there has been no expla-
nation for the causes of the difference in specific energy output of a copper vapor
laser as a function of copper atom concentration for the thermal population and

the explosive mechanism. Thereforeit is of interest to determine the electron
energy balance in a Cu-Ne discharge on the basis of numerical solution of Boltz-
nann'a equations for the electron distribution function and ascertainment of the
rate constants of laser level excitation for different relative compositions of

the Cu-Ne mixture, and to analyze the results as a basis for explaining the exist-
ing differences in the behavior of specific energy output of copper vapor lasers.

The electron energy distribution function was determined from solution of the iso-
tropic compondnt of the Botzmann's equation:

33

INJR Cl“ﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE(HﬁLY
FOR OFF‘IFIAI. IISl-I ONLY

H‘ﬂYW%)+;%n%("°~’+t_r“‘°~l %)+

‘
+ 3?” (u + nu) [(14 + au) 0.; (a + a”) ~ an.) Eng” (,0 - o, (l)

where yj is the relative concentration of atoms of the j-th type; Q. is the trans-
port cross section of collision between electrons and atoms; Q 1 is 1he excitation
cross section for the i-th level of an atom of j-th type; u i: the mass of an
atom of the j-th component; “11 is the corresponding loss 0 electron energy; f is
the symmetric component of electron energy distribution.

This equation is valid under conditions of spatial homogeneity and weak anisotropy
of the distribution function. where the frequency of elastic collisions of electrons
with atoms considerably exceeds the frequency of inelastic collisions. The first
term in equation (1) corresponds to the energy acquired by an electron in the field.

in the diffusion approximation. The last two terms of the equation describe the
losses of energy by the electron in inelastic processes. Equation (1) was numeri-
cally solved by using a method developed in Ref. 4. The transport cross section

and sixteen cross sections of lower levels of the neon atom were taken into consider-
ation in the calculations. The cross sections of processes of collisions between
electrons and neon atoms were taken from Ref. 5. At present there are no reliably
measured excitation cross sections for resonant levels of the copper atom. Experi-
mental results found in Ref. 6. 7 differ by an order of magnitude from the results

in Ref. 10. Calculation of these cross sections by oscillator strengths [Ref. 8]

in Ref. 10. and higher than those of Ref. 6. 7. The authors of 10 normalize the
results of absolute cross sections of the excitations by a factor of two. holding
the relative accuracy of the results to 302. Our calculations used cross sections
of excitation of resonant. metastable levels. as well as the transport cross section
of collisions of electrons with copper atoms from Ref. 10 with normalization by

a factor of two toward reduction. For the copper atom levels that have allowed
transitions to the ground state. the excitation cross sections by electron impact
were calculated by the Bethe formula in terms of the oscillator strengths of these
transitions [Ref. 9]. In addition to the above-mentioned levels. seven others
excited from the ground state of the copper atom were taken into consideration.
The ionization cross section of the copper atom was taken from Ref. ll.

rate constants of the investigated processes

m. - (-ﬂ'": unmade. (2)
electron drift rate
-(—::—)"’+(v‘v"-)I ~[2r-«~»1-'-sz—~ m
36

FORi0FFKJALlEE§ONLY
FOR<0FFIC1AI.USE¢DNLY

and the relative energy inputs (energy balance) to the various processes

2“ -(1§')—' Ir: '1‘: £2.81. = l. (a)
K. cm’ls
Vnp’ ca/s

         

(I “hunt, I
(BIN) ~10“. V-cm2 a r a
Fig. l. Constants K as a func- (E/N)-101‘, V-cmz

tion of EIN in Cu-Ne mixture at
x. [0-2: 1, 2--metastable levels Fig. 2. Electron drift rate in

of lines 510.6 (1) and 578.2 nm Cu-Ne mixture as a function of

(2); 3. 4--resonant levels of El"

lines 578.2 (3) and 510.6 nm (6)

Fig. 1 shows rate constants K for excitation of laser levels of mixture Cu:Ne-
1:1005 X as a function of ratio BIN of electric field strength to the total number
of particles in 1 cm’, and Fig. 2 shows curves of electron drift rate for different
relative compositions of the Cu-Ne mixture as a function of parameter BIN. As

we can see from Fig. 2. the drift rate increases with increasing concentration

of the mixture (or with increasing concentration of copper atoms) from X-IIO'~

to x- no" (at fixed BIN), and then falls at x-10‘1.

The specific energy invested in the discharge can be determined from the relation

"' Emvlvt (5)

where B is the electric field strength in the discharge, e is the electronic charge.
VAp is drift rate.

Relation (5) implies that a reduction in drift rate with increasing concentration
of copper atoms leads to a reduction in energy input to the discharge at the same
values of electron density.

Fig. 3 shows curves for energy balance of electrons in the discharge as a function
of EIN for different relative concentrations of the Cu-Ne mixture. As comparative
characteristics of the given variants we take the values (BIN)..‘ where the great-
est effective energy contribution is made to the resonant levels. and (E/N)cr where
the rate constant of excitation of the upper laser level for the green line (510.6
nm) becomes greater than the rate constant of excitation of the metastable level

for this same lasing line (see Fig. l). The results are summarized in the Table.
which shows that the quantities (KIN)Cr and GIN)!“x increase with increasing copper

35

FIHICHHHCJAJ.USE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Electron energy balance as a function

of EIN in Cu-Ne mixture at X- 10" (a). 10"1 (b)
and pure copper (c): fractions of energy expended
on excitation of metastable levels of lines 510.6
(1) and 578.2 nm (2). resonant levels of lines
578.2 (3) and 510.6 nm (4); fractions of energy
lost in elastic collisions with stoma of He (5)
and Cu (10); fractions of energy expended on ioni-
‘, . - zation (6) and excitation of electronic levels

- (B?N)-10“. chm‘ of Re (7). and also on ionization (8) and excitation
of electronic levels of Cu (9)

 

atom concentration. For example (ﬁlmmax is
equal to 2-10'” and 10-15 for X- [0’2 and 10‘1
respectively. Consequently at x- 10“. five times
the electric field strength compared with the
case of x- 10" is required to attain values

of EIN that maximize the energy expended on ex-
citation of resonant levels at the same density 10-0 0,04 I 0.2
of atoms. Thus. as the temperature of the active
medium in copper vapor lasers with neon increases.
there is an increase in the requirements for
electric field strength as a consequence of the

 

I04 I 0.00 l 0.6

 

increase in (BIN) r and (shown. and there is ‘0" 0-35 3
also a reduction in the energy input to the dis-

charge due to the decrease in electron drift lo—I I 1.2 I [0
rate with increasing X. In all probability.

it is these factors that lead to an optimum in pure

the relation between specific energy output and copper 10 so

temperature of the medixm: in a copper vapor laser

with buffer gas. This effect is not observed

in copper vapor lasers without buffer gas. Ac-

cording to calculation of the energy balance of electrons in pure copper (see Fig.
3c). the fraction of energy e ended on excitation of resonant levels first in-
creases to values of BIN: 10"1 V-(hlll2 as the copper atom density increases (at
constant voltage across the discharge capacitance in this case. BIN is decreasing).

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and then begins to fall. approaching zero at BIN=10""V‘cII2. For example, at

a voltage across the discharge gap of ~10 Id] and interelectrode spacing of ~2.5 cm.
such a value is realized only at a copper atom density of 6-10" on". Besides.

in the case of exploding conductors the atoms are dispersed and the vapor tempera-
ture drops. possibly below the temperature corresponding to thermal population

of the metastable state, which has been observed experimentally specifically in
Ref. 12.

Thus the results of calculations of electron energy balance show that in a discharge

in pure copper right up to copper atom densities of ~10" can". the upper laser

levels can be effectively excited. and the absence of appreciable population of
the metastable level is conducive to an increase in the specific energy output
in the copper vapor laser at vapor pressure close to the atmospheric level.

Our calculations did not take consideration of many processes responsible for the
emission characteristics of the laser. Therefore the results can only be used
to estimate the limiting copper concentration in the copper vapor laser.

REFERENCES
1. Buzhinskiy. 0. 1.. Krysanov. S. 1.. slivitskiy. A. A.. PRIBORY I TBKHNIKA 21(8-

PERIMENTA. No 10. 1979. p 2710.

2. Smilanski. J.. Ker-an. A.. Levin. 1.. A.. Res. 0. 3.. OPTICS COMMS. Vol 25.
1978. P 79.

3. lsakov. 1. 14., Leonov. A. c.. 913'!“ v 231mm. mmcunsxor mm. Vol 2.
1976. p 865.

lo. Sherman. 3.. J. MATE. ANALYT. APPLIC.. Vol I, 1960. p 3102.

5. Pevgov. V. 6.. candidate's dissertation. Moscow Physicotechnical Institute.
1977.

6. Aleksakhin. I. 8.. Borovik. A. A.. Starodub. V. 1... Shafran'osh. ZEURNAL PRI-
KIADNOY SPEKTROSKOPII. Vol 30. 1979. p 236.

7. Borozdin. V. 8.. Snirnov. Yu. M.. Sharonov. Yu. D.. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA.
Vol 103. 1977. p 384.

8. Corliss. C.. Bosman, 1).. "Veroyatnosti perekhodov i sil ostsillyatorov" [Proba-
bilities of Transitions and Oscillator Strengths]. Moscow, Mir. 1968.

9. Sobel'man. I. 1.. "Vvedeniye v teoriyu atomykh spektrov" [Introduction to
the Theory of Atomic Spectra]. Moscow. Fizmatgiz, 1964.

10. Trajmar. S.. Williams. 14.. Srivastava. S. K.. J. PHYS. 3.. Vol 10. 1977. p 3323.

ll. Pavlov. S. 1.. Rakhovskiy. V. I.. ZHURRAI. BISPBRIMENTAL'NOY I TBORB‘I‘ICIIESKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 52. 1967. p 21.

12. Shukhtin. A. M.. Mishakov. V. G.. Fedotov. G. A.. Ganeyev. A. A.. OPTIKA 1
SPEKTROSKOPIYA. Vol 39. 1975. p 785.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610
CSO: 1862/11.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
R”! OFFKIM USE GNU."

UDC 62l.375.82+533.601

ACTIVE MEDIA FOR CO; GASDYNAMIC LASERS USING COMBUSTION PRODUCTS 017 LOW-NITROGEN
FUELS

Moscow KVAN‘I’OVAYA BLEICI‘RONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 8010), Aug 81
(manuscript received 18 Dec 80) pp 1846-1849

[Article by N. V. Yevtyukhin. Institute of Chemical Physics. USSR Academy of Sci-
ences. Chernogolovka]

[Text] An experimental study is done on the way that optical
gain Kc depends on stagnation parameters in a co; gasdynamic
laser using combustion products of model fuels with low nitrogen
content: atomic fraction of N in the composition Ely-0.6. The
experiments were done in the following ranges of variation in
the pressure and temperature of the gas in the prechamber:

p- 4-25 atm, T- 1300-2300 K. It is shown that as the stagnation
parameters increase, there is a considerable reduction in the
range of working media with “-0.6 that show active properties.
The compositions of combustion products that are characterized
by comparatively high values of K0 are formed when fuel is burned
with an excess oxidant ratio different from unity.

l . Introduction

In Ref. 1-3 an experimental and theoretical study was done on the amplification
and energy characteristics of aulticomponent active media of (:02 gasdynaaic lasers
that are produced by burning different fuels with 0-. 8-, 0-. N-elemental compo-
sition. These papers determined the major principles governing the behavior of
laser characteristics with a change from one composition of combustion products

to another for fuels with fixed fraction of N in the composition ﬁlo-0.6. A value
of WI 0.6-0.7 is typical of compositions produced by diluting nitro compounds

and hydrocarbons with air. In this case the concentration of molecular nitrogen

in the working medium is approximately 60-75 mold [Ref. lo. 5]. To evaluate the
effectiveness of using high-enthalpy fuels that contain nitro groups and other
nitrogen compounds and are undiluted by nitrogen or air, it is of interest to study
the change in the way that the weak-signal gain Ko depends on composition and stag-
nation parameters for working sedia with a lower value of 5N in the composition.

This paper gives the results of an experimental study of aspiification of resonant
-ission in mlticomponent active media with Eu' 0.6 done in accordance with the
approach and techniques presented in Ref. 1. 6, 6.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIMHHCJAI.USE(MVLY

2. Method of the Experiment

The experiments were done on a gasdynamic laser with combustion chamber operating
in the quasi-cw mode. To produce and study high-temperature laser-active media

of predetermined composition and temperature. a method was used that is based on
igniting model mixtures of Czﬂz, H3. C0. 02. N10. 03 and N2 under isochronous con-
ditions [Ref. 6]. The combustion products expanded through a flat profiled nozzle
with height of the critical cross section of 0.03 cm. degree of expansion of 50.
and width of 60 cm. The active media were probed at a distance of 5.3 cm downstream
from the critical cross section of the nozzle by a cw C0; electric discharge laser
operating on transition P18. Processes of combustion and discharge of the gas
through the nozzle were monitored by two inductive pressure sensors located in

the wall of the combustion chamber (p1) and preceding the nozzle inlet (pg).

3. Results of the Experiments and Discussion

The initial data and major results of the experiments are presented in tables I
and 2 and in figures 1 and 2. Table 1 shows the compositions of ten model fuel
mixtures used in the work, initial pressures in the chamber p" before initiation

TABLE I

 

 
   

5 Model fue

 

 

      
       

      

      
     

   

  
      

l I.03 — 2.“ 10.48 — — I3.73 4.4' 2500 2l00
2 I .0] -- 3. l0 [0.7! — 0.“ 13.46 4 .4 2500 2370
3 LN — 3.49 II.” — 2.02 l4.0| 4.2 2500 2320
4 l.05 — 3.67 0.]3 — 4.0I I4.I3 4.2 2500 2320
5 I.07 — 2.32 — 0.14 8.30 0.02 4.0 20% 340
6 LI! — 7.23 — 7.25 5.60 7.12 4.0 25” 2330
7 1.09 — l2.02 - 6.” 2.57 0.42 4.0 2500 mo
0 L76 |.04 — 5.76 - 7.02 I5.09 4.2 2500 2270
9 L21 4.80 — 0.02 - 7.20 I0.06 4.0 2500 2150
lo — I230 - 6.00 - 5. I5 [0.32 4.0 25” mo

     
 

 

TABLE 2

'- com onents o e ul -r um coTpo-
n sition - com- .tionqproduct:. mo .1
I - u

1:- 1 m x . m '3'“ 7.”. K “11‘."
N- 0°- ”) mum
I 43.2 I3.0 3.2 — 40.5 — 0.I I0 I070 0.
2 44.6 20.I 3.3 — 3|,0 - 0.I 7.I I020 mg
3 46.2 27.7 3.0 — 2.2 — 0.I 0.5 I590 0.02
4 47.9 35.9 3.0 — I2.5 — 0.I 0.0 I070 0,49
5 49.7 44.7 3.7 - I.0 — 0.I 0.I 1500 0.5 -
6 47 . I 32.4 2.9 ".0 - 0.0 - 7.4 I020 0.04
7 44.0 I8.0 I.0 34.0 - I.0 - I0 I740 0.“
0 49.7 37 .3 I I .2 — I .0 — - 5 I440 0.“
9 49.7 29.0 I0.0 — L0 - — 5 I4” 0.27
I0 49.7 I4.9 33.5 — L0 - -— 4 I330 0.43
39

FOR 0F1ICLAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

 

Pig. 2. Optical gain Ko in GO:
gasdynamic laser using combustion
products as a function of the ele-
]'18. l. Recordings showing mental composition Of £0018 With
the change in the probing relatively low nitrogen content
radiation signal in active in the Convosition (CE-0.4):
media with “-0.6 for dif- P'5 (a) and 15 “I ( )3
ferent ratios of CO; and 0; T' 1450 (a) and 1950 K (b)
(compositions l (a), 3 (b)
and S (c) of the tables):
I.—-zero signal level; p1,
pz--profiles of signals
from pressure sensors in the
chamber walls and prenozzle
space respectively

 

of the combustion reaction. calculated Trp
and average experimental Tr3 values of
the maximum combustion temperatures.

It is clear from Table 1 that the values
of Tr: are an average of 72 lower than
the calculated values. This systematic

Table 2 shows the concentrations of major components of equilibrium compositions
of the combustion products of the fuel mixtures. These compositions are given

for a temperature of 1500 K. which characterizes one of the quasiequilibrium states
of the working medium in the chamber preceding the nozzle. Also given there are

40

F0! 0FF“JAI.USE|DNLY
FOR 0FFK1AI.U8£10NLV

the maximum values of gain Komax that were found in the experiments, and the corre-
sponding values of the temperature Topt and pressure pop: in the chamber.

The diagrams of Pig. 2 illustrate the principal trends in the behavior of gain

in media with low N; content with a transition from relatively low to higher values
of stagnation parameters in the prechsmber. Here K0 is plotted as a function of
the elemental composition of the model fuel mixtures at fixed values of T and p

in the prechamber. The elemental compositions corresponding to the compositions
selected for the study are located on two characteristic lines of the diagram:

1) a line on which the atomic fraction of the element H is fixed in the composition
£"-0.03 (compositions 1-7 of the tables); 2) a line that corresponds approximately
to the stoichiometric proportion of fuel and oxidizer in the model fuel-the line
of ternary mixtures Nz-Coz—Hzo [Ref. 1-3] (compositions 5, 8-10 of the tables).

The transition from composition 5 to compositions 8-10 is characterized by an in-
crease in the fraction of water vapor in the combustion products from 3 to 35 mol.Z
and a simultaneous reduction in carbon dioxide content from 65 to 15 mol. 1. In
turn, movement along the line 5“ - 0.03 from composition 5 to different sides from
the line of ternary mixtures also corresponds to a reduction of CO; content in

the combustion products. chiefly due to an increase in the concentrations of 02

or co. Let us note that on the basis of the results of Ref. 1-3 it can be stated
that the behavior of K0 along the given lines upon the whole determines the relief
structure of gain over the entire range of fuel compositions in which we are inter-
ested.

Typical recordings showing the behavior of gain in the gasdynamic laser operating
in the quasi-cw mode on combustion products of model fuels are given in Pig. 1.
The results of processing of these recordings and the way that they are distributed
on Fig. 2 show that for high-temperature working media of CO; gasdynamic lasers
that contain approximately 40-50% N; there is much less evidence of the peculiari-
ties noted previously in Ref. 1 in the dependence of Ko on composition and stagna-
tion parameters. As can be seen from a comparison of the diagrams of Pig. 2.
there is an appreciable reduction in the ranges of working compositions with E“-
0.4 that show active properties as the stagnation parameters increase. And compo-
sitions with the highest values of K0 are situated farther and farther from the
line of ternary mixtures Nz-coz-Hzo. Let us note that in our experiments the rma
error that characterizes variance of the reproducibility of K0 is approximately
equal to 0.05 m‘ on all levels of values of the measured quantity. The result

of estimation of the error of measurements of p and T showed that the error in
determination of pressure does not exceed 10%, and for pressure-152 of the true
value.

Generalizing the experimental data found in Ref. 1 and in this paper. we can con-
clude that for the entire aggregate of fuel compositions with c-. 3-. 0-. N-ele-
mental composition that yield a high-temperature medium (T>’1500 K) upon combustion
with nitrogen composition insufficient for 001 gasdynamic lasers (£N<{0. 8-0. 9).
preference should be given to compositions both with low hydrogen content (Eu 3
0.02-0.06) and with ratio of combustible and oxidative components in the fuel dif-
ferent from the stoichiometric composition. The excess oxidant ratio should differ
from unity (to either side) increasingly with decreasing nitrogen concentration

in the composition in the fuel mixture and with increasing stagnation parameters.

41

FOR OFFNJA1.USE‘0NLY
l.

2.

3.

5.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFERENCES

Yevtyukhin. N. V.. Genich. A. P.. Yudmov. A. A.. Hanelis, G. 8.. KVAN‘I'OVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. V01 5. 1978. p 1013.

Genich. A. P.. Yevtyukhin. N. V.. Kulikov. S. V.. Handle. 6. 3.. Solov'yeva.
N. Ye., ZEURNAL PRIKLADNOY Hmm I rmmcnnsm PIZIKI. No 1. 1979. p 34.

Cenich. A. P.. Kulikov. S. V., Handle. 6. 3.. ZEURNAL PM!” WI!“
1 THCIINICHBSKOY FIZIKI. No 6. 1979. p 11.

Genich, A. P.. Yevtyukhin. N. V.. Manelia, G. 3.. FIZIKA WREIYA I VZRYVA.
No S. 1975. p 755.

Kozlov. G. 1.. Ivanov. V. N.. Korablev. A. s.. Seleznevn. I. K.. ZHURNAL ms-
PERIHENTAL'NOY I TBORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 68. 1975. p 1647.

Yevtyukhin. N. V.. Genich. A. P.. Hanelis. G. 3.. FIZIJIA GORENIYA I VZRYVA.
No 4. 1978, p 36.

COPYRIGRr: Izdatel'atvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1981

6610

680:

1862/14

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 561.141.6

SPECTROSCOPY AND PRIMARY PHOTOLYSIS PROCESSES 0P IODIDBS FOR PROTODISSOCIATION
IODINE IASERS (REVIEW)

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 7(109), Jul 81 (manuscript
received 4 Dec 80) pp 1397-1424

[Article by A.H. Pravilov, Leningrad State University imeni A.A. Zhdenov]

[Text] The general laws governing diatomic and polyatomic iodide
spectroscopy in the ultraviolet and far ultraviolet regions of the
spectrum are treated. The spectroscopic properties are compared
with the existing data in the literature on their primary photolysis
processes: the major attention in this case is devoted to alkyl
iodides and perfluoralky1\iodides. An attempt is made to interpret
the observed laws.

Introduction

Lasing was produced for the first time more than 15 years ago based on the transi-
tion

J “Pl/g)" J ('P./g)+h\’. 131315 an (1)
with tho photolysis of a number of alkyl iodides and CP31 in their first absorption
bands [I]. Since that time, the power, efficiency and energy throughput of photo-
dissociation iodine lasers (PIL) operating with this transition have been increased
considerably: more successful iodides (RI) have been selected: the working materi-
als of photodissociation lasers and the secondary processes which govern the opera-

ting effitiency of photodissociation iodine lasers have been studied in considera-
ble detail.

Soneof the 40st important parameters which govern the efficiency of RI usage in
photodissociatien iodine lasers are the spectral functions of the absolute quantum
yields of the formation of 1(2P1/2) - I. and 1(2P3/2) - I with RI photolysis:

IR +J'. 01- (A); (2)
RJ "r lhv .
\R+J. MA) ‘2’

and the values of the integral quantum yields of these atoms in the first RI absorp-
tion band:

63

IN]R(Mﬁﬂ(JAl.lﬂNE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘-
op-Zop (1) ohm / {0(1) 0.;

M

I
o,- foumum/{omm
A. o

where 0(1) is the total RI absorption cross-section; Al and 12 are the boundaries
of the first absorption band. However, the methods of deriving information on
these quantities and the theoretical representations of the RI photodiasocistion
processes have been extremely unsatisfactory right up to the present [2]. For

this reason, the selection of the working material for photodisaociation iodine
lasers has been made empirically.

Despite the definite successes in increasing the efficiency of photodissociation
iodine lasers, the question of the choice of the most suitable working materials

for lasers of this type, from our point of view, cannot be considered closed, since
the limit still has not been reached here. As will be shown belov, when pre-

dicting the efficiency of various RI reactions, one must first of all take into
account the ratio of the reaction rate constants:

i2+n (+M)-> R. mu: (3)
J+R (+34)» RJ (+M).

A
J'+R (+M)» RJ (+M). :5;
J‘+R—> J+R (5,)

and the quantities 01* and 01. Since the synthesis of the materials and the
measurement of the values of 01* and kg-ks for then are expensive and lengthy
processes, then for a substantiated and economically expedient selection and
synthesis of new RI materials, it is essential to have concepts concerning the

spectroscopy of iodides and the mechanism for their photodiaaociation which are
as clear-cut as possible.

Unfortunately, these questions have not been discussed in sufficient detail in the
literature and there is only fragmentary information in the original papers of
Hulliken [10, 11, 17-21], Goodeve and associates [3], Donohue and Hiesenfeld [4,5],
as well as in the reviews and monographs of [6-9]. It is expedient for this reason
to discuss the spectroscopy of iodides and the existing experimental data on their
photodissociation processes within the framework of a single review for the purpose
of establishing the general governing laws for the quantities .It(X) and 01(X) in
the case of RI photodissociation.

The general laws governing the spectroscopy of the triplet state of the molecules
are treated in the first section of this review, including diatonic nolecules, for
the case of a large spin-orbital interaction, as well as some aspects of the theory

64

FOR.0F11CLAL.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFK3A1.USE(MHLY

of the photodissociation of polyatomic molecules which are relevant to the issue

under discussion. The existing experimental data on the processes of iodide photo-

dissociation are compared in the second and third sections with the information on

their spectroscopic properties; the treatment runs from simple molecules to com-

plex ones. .

1. General Laws Governing Iodide Spectroscopy. The Relationship of the
Photodisintegration Mechanism of Molecules to Their Absorption Spectra.

In terms of the A-s (or A-t) coupling [7, p 156; 10, 11], similar to the Russell-
-Saunders coupling in atoms [12], the ground states of all of the iodides under
considerations R'I (R' - a, X is a halogen atom, CH3 and other organic radicals)
are singlet states because of the closed nature of the electron shells in these
states (for example. see [7, p 251; 8, p 630]), while the first excited states are
triplets. The latter is a consequence of Hund's rule [13, p 81] applied to the
ground states of 1(2P) and R - “(28), x(2P), CH (2 "2), etc. For this reason, for
an understanding of iodide spectroscopy we shall briefly consider some of the
questions of triplet state molecular spectroscopy, including the case of large
spin-orbital interaction. The major question which will be of interest to us here
is which factors govern the probability of a radiation transition from the ground
state of R'I to states which correlate with the dissociation products of R'I:R' +
+ 1* and R' + I.

As is well known, the probability of an electrical dipole transition from the
ground state, described by the total electron wave function Yéé per unit of radia-
tion density, to a state described by Yés, is equal to:

B "gIRsl‘n (6)
where

‘R.=<‘P}.lM-.l‘|'§.> ‘7’
is the electron transition moment; He is the dipole moment operator [8; pp 128,
633].

O
In the case considered here, one of the states in the terms of the A-s coupling is
a singlet, while the other is a triplet. Consequently, in the absence of spin-
orbital interaction, i.e., when V", and Y; are purely spin states [13, p. 202],
the total electron wave function is described by the product of the orbital wave
function of Y2, Yé, which depends only on the spatial coordinates. by the spin
wave function 8. which depends on the spin coordinates: sea - pea. For this
reason, because of the orthogonality of the spin functions belonging to different
multiplet states, Re - 0 [1b, p. 288].

However, in real molecules, the interaction of the spin moment of an electron
with the magnetic field which causes its orbital motion leads to the presence of
spin-orbital interaction and the concept of a purely spin state is a rather rough
approximation. The total electron wave function in this case is not described

by the product 1,3. but has a more complex form Ye. - Y¢8 + Xea' where Xes depends
both on the spatial and the spin coordinates [8, p. 26]. All of this leads to

the fact that different multiplet states, if these are permitted by the selection
rules, can "interact" and "mix", i.e., their ”true" wave functions-are

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
superimpositions of unperturbed wave functions obtained in a zero approximation
(without taking spin-orbital interaction into account). In a first approximation,
without taking electron-vibration interaction into account, which plays a lesser
role in the case under discussion here than spin-orbital interaction, the true
wave function of a triplet state (in terms of the A-s coupling) is:

3 ('VLM,‘ '73)

while for the singlet state:

‘ I O: 1'0: ‘
"P“U' "+2 2 W’m. ‘ (9)

II :-—| l-Eas'u

where 1'23 and 3725' are the total electron wave f tions of the "unperturbed"
singlet and triplet states (r - -l, 0, 1); ng and En are their energies; as; is
the spin-orbital interaction operator: the sunning is carried out with respect to
the k-th singlet and m-th triplet states [13, p. 218; 14, p.292]. A precise cal-
culation of the operator Hal is not feasible. even when neglecting the interaction
of the spin moment of the i-th electron with the orbital moment of the j-th
electron:

, H“-.—.‘£'-OW‘VNP) (10)

(Here.o and p are spin and orbital moment operators; V is the potential at the
point where the electron is located). In some cases, for example, for a hydrogen
atom, this operator can be precisely calculated; the value of the spin-orbital
splitting in the triplet state, which characterizes the amount of spin-orbital
interaction Eel. is proportional to z‘ln3 in this case, where z is the nuclear
charge and n is the principal quantum number [13, p. 206; 15]. He will note
that in other fields also, the sharp dependence of the spin-orbital interaction

on the nuclear charge and distance of the electrons from heavy nuclei is preserved.
In calculating HS; in molecules, for example, McClure's approximation of the
central field can he used [13, p. 207; 16].

However. for the following treatment, the only fact of importance to us is that
because of the complete symmetry of as; in the point group of symmetry of the
molecule, including both the spatial and spin coordinates [13, p. 22310 the
correction terms in (8, 9) are other than zero if 1'2sk and 3Y28 or can and
‘vgs belong to the same types of synmetry (irreducible representations) in the
given point group. For equation (8) this means that at least one of the

b6

FOR'OFEKJAI.USI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

direct product compunents of the irreducible representations of the electron
orbital and spin wave functions of the r-th emponent of the triplet state should
match the irreducible representation of at least one of the orbital wave functions
of the singlet states, or what is the same thing, there should be the following
fully symetrical representation in the expansion of the direct product of the
irreducible representations of the total electron wave function of the triplet
state and of at least one of the k singlet states [8, p 27; 13, p 226]:

I‘,'::xl‘;':xl‘,’.= [3+ .l.. (11)

(the irreducible representation of the singlet state spin function is completely
syuetrical) .

A similar result is obtained for equation (9) if:
I‘.':xl‘,'omxl‘,'.-ri+... (11.)

The classification of electron motion in a molecule according to types of symmetry
in the case of a large spin-orbital interaction depends on the molecule geometry,
the nuclear charge, etc., and for this reason, it is necessary to become familiar
with the classification of various types of coupling in molecules for the group
theory analysis of equations (7) - (11) in the case where the electron states are
described in terms of the A-s coupling.

The spectroscopy of diatomic molecules with large spin-orbital interaction (includ-
ing diatomic halogens) has been developed primarily in the works of Hulliken [10,
11, 17-21] (also see [22-25]).

As is well known, in the case of spin-orbital interaction in even one of the stuns
incorporated in a molecule, the axial electrical field, if it exists in the mole-
cule, may not break the coupling of the orbital manent I of an electron to spin

moment a. In this case, the total electron moment of momentumj -1'+ s precesses

about the axis of the diatomic molecule 2, and only a quantum number corresponding
to the projection n of the total moment of momenta-‘7' - '1 onto the z axis is a "go

quantum number. The projections of the total orbital ents of momentum 5 - 211 am
the spin of the molecule S - 1 onto the Z axis (A and 12 respectively) become"
meaningless: the correspondi quantum mnbersA and S also become meaningless along
with them. This rough description of the coupling of the moments in a diatomic
molecule in the presence of strong spin-orbital interaction correspods to Bund’s
case c [7, p 165; 10].

Hulliken treated several variants of cases of Hund's C coupling in a series of
papers.

Case "C with close nuclei" [11, 17]. Because of the closeness of the nuclei, the
axial electrical field component is small, the precession of the orbital manent
about the Z axis is weak and L, 8. J3 (J in the atom) and n are "good" quantum
numbers (admittedly, the first three are not completely so). This case has no
direct bearing on the ‘ollowing presentation.

9-1» coupling [11, 18, 21, 24]. If the molecule can be represented as a charged
core. characterized by quantun numbers AC, 12‘, and ac with an electron sufficiently

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

remote from it (so that the interaction is weak), then the state of the molecule
can be described by considering the projections of the orbital and spin moments
of the core and this electron on the internuclear ax s. For example, for the Ryd-
berg states of diatomic molecules R'I, where R' - E( S), X(ZP). the electron con-
figuration of the valence shell has the form [18]:

R” 1","3’6) Ina/2° 1m.
R’J [(o'nIzﬁYﬂuw'lod; (13)
and the electron configuration 12 in this case is:
V. 2 s I 2 -' (16)
J: Kama!) l'l Iii-0112.!"
J: “again-i) 3"lawns. la (15)

(The configuration of the R'I“ ion is written in the parentheses). The state

R'J is characterized in this case by the quantum numbers Sc. Ac, EC and he,

I? - OCH/2; the spin quantum number of the molecule has no meaning. The states of
the molecule having identical quantum numbers A - Ac and 9, and naturally also

the parity g, u and the properties with respect to reflection in the plane pas-
sing through the Z(+,-) axis. the same type of synetry, they "mix" and "are
repelled". In other words. the "true" wave functions, i.e., those obtained in a
sufficiently good approximation, of the states belonging to the same type of

symmetry are the linear combination of "old" unperturbed states. This applies in
particular to the 3H1 and 1!! states (in terms of the A-s bond) of heteroatomic
molecules. For this reason, as cmpared to the case of the A-s band, the intensity of
the 1n + X“? transition falls off. while that of the transition I! e X1t+ increases.
The fact that the 8'! states described by configurations (12)-(IS) orm doublet

pairs ‘no, In and 3111, 3n2 (in terms of the A-s bond) with an energy interval

between these pairs on the order of the spin-orbital interaction energy 35;,

equal in this case to Align/2’ Zul/Z’ is also significant in this case; the

splitting in the doublet is on the order of the singlet-triplet splitting energy
AE3n.1n,‘ which is a great deal smaller here than 331 (Figure 1).

Case "C with distant nuclei", type I, type II. [11. 17. 21, 23, 24]. If the
interatomic spacing in the molecule is sufficiently great, while the dissociation
energy is small (for example, 12), then the spin-orbital coupling in the atoms
comprising the molecule can be preserved because of the axially molecular field
and the total moment of the stem .1. does not become meaningless. In this case.
the electron state of the molecule is characterized by only one of the quantum
numbers a (9 is the sum of the projections of J81 and J32 onto the z axis);

the quantum numbers A, S and 2 are meaningless. Naturally, the properties of

(08

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

symmetry (3, u; +. -) are preserved. Mulliken breaks the "C with distant nuclei”
caae down into "C. type I" and "C, type II". In the first case, the states with
same type of sy-etry belonging to different solecular configurations, but which
are formed froa identical static configurations or having the same types of sym-
metry within the framework of the A-s coupling "interact" and "mix"; in the second
case. states formed froa different atomic configurations and not having the same
types of synnetry within the framework of the A—s coupling can interact. He will
consider the details of these coupling types in the discussion of the 12 molecule;
we will only note here that in the case of the "C, type I, type II" coupling, the
3no state splits into 3h; and 3H5 (0+ and 0- in terns of the "C" coupling) and
there is a change in the mutual arrangement of 2, 31!, 3W5, 311; and II (in terms
of the A-s coupling; 2-,1. 0+.0- and 1 in terms of the "c" coupling) as cowared to
the 94» coupling because of the interaction of these states with higher states.

 

Figure l. The mutual arrangement of the molecular energy levels for an
electron configuration of ozn”n301 1'3“ (symmetry group c.v)
and ...e3a11-3E(C3v) for the case of large and small spin-
orbital interactions (based on the data of [8, p.348; 24, 63]).
The positioning of the levels is approximate; the spin-orbital
interaction increases in strength from the center towards the

edges.

Key: 1. Ion state;
2. C. type II;
3. c. type 1;
lo. 9-!» coupling;
5. A-s coupling.

It is also important for us that in the case of the "c, type I, type II" coupling,
the possibilities are increased for the "interaction" of states, since of the
quantum numbers, only 9 has any neaning.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁOl¢MﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

Thus. the difference in the ﬂ-u and "c, type I type II" couplings reduces to a
different classification of the electron states, and consequently, to different
prohibitions on "mixing", as well as to a different mutual arrangement of these
states. What this leads to will be seen in the review of the spectroscopy and
photochemsitry of specific iodide molecules. He will only note here that the
various bond types can be realized not only in different molecules, but in differ-
ent states of the same molecule or in one state of a molecule, but with different
interatomic spacings [24].

To estimate the probability of a radiation transition in various R'I molecules.

it is necessary to first of all establish what type of coupling describes the given
molecule in the Franck-Condom transition region or (when considering polyatomic
molecules), which of the types of couplings of diatomic molecules is most suited

to the description of the R'-I coupling in this molecule. One must further
establish which states can "mix" with states entrained in the radiation transition,
and to estimate, or if possible, calculate the effect of this "mixing".

As will be shown below. the consideration of just this aspect of the photodissoci-
ation process is insufficient to describe the photodecomposition of R'I and
estimate the quantities 01* and 01. Nonadiabatic processes of state interaction
are also of great importance, where these states correlate with R' + 1* and R' + I
in the Franck-Condon transition region as well as in the case of large values of
rc-1, i.e., processes. the influence of which can be manifest when the R' radicals
and the I, 1* atoms break up (see below for the theory of semicollisions).

The theory of photodisintegratien of polyatomic molecules has as yet been quite
poorly developed. In principle, any such theory should answer three interrelated
groups of questions which to some extent apply to the topic under discussion:

1. How do the spectral functions of the total or partial absorption cross—sections
of a molecule depend on its photodisintegration mechanism; what information can be
derived from these spectra? How is a molecule absorption spectrum to be resolved
into partial cross-sections corresponding to a transition to molecular states which
disintegrate via one channel or another?

2. How does the probability of molecular disintegration via any channel in-the

presence of nonadiabatic processes of state interaction of the molecule depend on
the Photon energy?

3. what should the distributions of the photodissociation products of a molecule
be via a given channel in terms of the kinetic energy, Vibrational—rotational
excitation of polyatomic photofragments, and the angular distribution of the
dispersal of all the photofragments with the absorption of a light quantum of
any energy throughout the entire absorption spectrum of this molecule?

The approaches to the solution of these problems which have been developed at the
present time do not make it possible to resolve them even in the case of the
photodissociation of triatomic molecules. Some of the literature known to us has

50

INDR OFFICIAL.USI2(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been devoted to attempts to obtain answers to the first of the questions considered
here. A critical analysis of this literature does not come within the scope of

our task, and for this reaon we will discuss only its applicability to the “My
of iodide photochemistry.

As is well known, the absorption spectrum of a diatomic molecule in the case where
it corresponds to a transition to the repulsion branch of the upper state or to a
purely repulsive state is approximated quite well by a gaussian distribution or a
gaussisn distribution corrected by a frequency factor [7'5 p. 282]. Since the first
absorption band of alkyl iodides and perfluoralkyl iodides likewise has a bell-
shaped form, while their photodissociation procesa' is basically described by
reactions (2) and (2'), it seals enticing to employ the diatomic approximation
(assming the mass of R to be concentrated in a point and neglecting the vibra-
tional-rotational excitation of R) to describe the photodiasociation of these
molecules and to resolve their absorption spectrun into partial cross-sections
corresponding to the dissociation of these molecules via the channels (2) and (2')
[3]. However, this model is too rough; naturally, it cannot yield any information
on the vibrational-rotational excitation of the R radical. The limited nature
of its application to polyatomic molecules also follows, if only fro- the fact
that in the case of certain properties of the upper repulsive states, at least of
linear triatomic ABC molecules, the vibrational excitation of the AB radical

ABC+hv¢AB*+C (16)

can lead to oscillations in the ABC absorption spectm [27, 28]. It is therefore
not surprising that no successful attempts to apply the diatomic model to the
photodissociation processes of polyatomic RI molecules have been described in the
literature, as far as we know.

As far as the second of the questions under consideration is concerned, there have
been successful attempts to calculate the relative yield of photodissociation
products in the presence of nonadiabatic processes for the photodissociation of
diatomic molecules [29-31]. we shall touch upon this question later in the
discussion of the photodecomposition processes for 1!, x - P, Cl, Br.

A discussion of the techniques of calculating the vibrational-rotational excita-
tion and angular distribution of the dispersal of the photo fragments with the
photodissociation of the molecules does not come within the scope of this review,
since we are directly interested here only in the spectral functions of the
absolute quantum yields of the atoms in the case of molecular photodiasociation.
He will note only that neither the quaaidiatoaic model (for sample, see [32])
nor the "semicollision" model (for example, see [33])?‘0‘11400 satisfactory agree-
ment with the experimental data on vibrational excitation of R' in the case of
photodissociation for even ICN [33, 31.], not to mention C1131 [32]. Satisfactory
qualitative agreemnt between theory and experiment has been obtained only in the
more precise models of thc photodissociation of linear triatomic molecules, in

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
particular, ICN [35-37]. One can become familiar with the various computational
models for the photo fragment excitation energy, for example, in [26, 37-39].

we shall now discuss how the general governing laws for iodide spectroscopy we
considered above are manifest in specific diatomic molecules; this will aid us
in the discussion of questions concerning polyatomic iodides.

An enormous amount of literature has been devoted to the study of the spectra-
scopic properties of diatomic iodides, especially 12. However, we will be
interested here only in those papers which deal with the photodisintegration
processes of iodides, i.e., the processes of photodissociation and predissociation.

The photochemistry of HI and D! has been poorly studied, and the only more or less
reliable data that we have are for only a few wavelengths in A band (see the Table).

The spectroscopy of HI in the first absorption band was discussed in detail for
the first time by Hulliken [11, 21]; essentially no substantial changes have

taken place in the interpretation of this band since that time (see, for example
[49]). Hulliken demonstrated that the type of coupling and the mutual arrange-

of ﬂ-w coupling, possibly with a slight addition of "C, type I" coupling [11].
Consequently, the first exicted states of H1 should comprise two groups of
doublets 3n;, 3n, and 3no'n (see Figure l). Transitions from the ground state of
HI (X 12+)to atatc3n,,1n should be observed, where the intensity of the latter
transition should "be pumped across" to the 3H] + x12+ transition; if there is
actually a slight addition of "c. type I" coupling, then the transition 3nt +

+ x 12+ should be observed (0+ + 0+ in terms of the "C" coupling) as a consequence
of the "mixing" of these states with higher states of this same symmetry type
(see [11, 51]). The latest experimental data have completely confirmed this
interpretation. The resolution of the HI absorption spectrum in partial cross-
sections. corresponding to transitions to the 3n1, 3no and 1n states, carried out
by wilson and his coworkers based on experimental data on the values of 01*

the rotational lines in their absorption spectra are predissociated [43]. Transi-
tions to Rydberg states are observed in this region of the spectrum, starting

with the B band [50] “max - 180 m), where these states converge to the doublet
:omponents of the HI+ ion (2H3/2 and 2n1/2). An interpretation and analysis of

52

FOR(HHWCJAL'USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.on .2. a: as can 8 can no 3583 25 a3 R... .3. .8 323 .H :82

    

 

   

 

 

    

.2. 5
8. 3a ”8.
.g. %M a... _
n a; 8? . 3.8
: Sales 8.91.»...
8 «68 26... . . .
a: .2: .8 _ ale; 3H8...
.m a“ .5...
o .n . 08 v6 633:3. 53.9000." 20..
a . Sales «.1...
Au .0 .5 .3 a:
Klan”. :sutsxacowo.
.36.... seizing a. alm.3v oélod J.
.3 .0 .318 o).
.85 «68 .I
.44. .év San
. 9 «av RNA
.3 E .1232. l l a:
7. «68 3.3.86
9 E?“ 3.3.9.6
I a D
....§muw.mmw _ IF... 3 _ .. .. _E.T.._ ... I.1... ....

  

8&3?! 3333209 3 23:30 uniqulsaeﬁzm.

auuwuawﬁouozm ovuvou no 3.5 Huang—«maﬁa—

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

8:. a.

“E

_m_

E:

.6...
Le:
.ﬁ:
4%
. m;

a .
4o:

ﬂ
8538... 1... u

£61...
3.6
:61...
8.1! 3.1... 132....
8.33... 87
3. gas. o oBA .
«8. ea"; c 8 cl m2. 5 ...u
8. ol . H . I _ 851... 31...
8.38 o 8 9+3 9 as m. o 2- 2-
.8 _ .
86A oSA _ _ 18
ii _ 25.
3.38... ”WA _ _ 8.386 _ 85H»; _ 1:05.15.
8.38... £6238

 

3.33... _ “MA I 3.385 _s.cf....o 1:6

..ov _ «WA 8.38... _ «out: _ £02646

 

. o n v _ a _ ... _ .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In:

.818.
.o: .2

L8:

.86..
.8.
.9 v

8:. «

 

voéﬁcvd

_ .oéﬂaod

1:...3-p o..=u!<o<oa:

3.0%86

8.9“36

 

 

3718-
ﬁnal»;

 

 

0.1..

90.35...
347.8; 8.6.45.0

°.o|8.o

8.918..

_.o+o.°

3.78..

 

1:6
836

 

3.8.8

1...?
3.6.6.38

End

3.3.0.

3.6

abaoamo
I 4.4;_...
i a u a usenar'

Figure 6. The total (5) and partial
absorption cross-sections
of I2 in the spectral
region A > 600 nu, corres-
ponding to tr rgneitions to
the sieteeM 3% u (1). 3H1“
(2), nu (3) (a) and a
schematic of the levels of
12 (b) [26, 61].

£00.15!" ‘

   

'I-Dl 0 O 1".
d-lfut' C

Figure 5. The absorption spectrum and
potential energy curves
of Int (based on the data.
of [29,67]).
FOR OfﬂﬂAL USE ONLY

the vibrational-rotational structure in the 42.5 - 180 nm region were made in

[43, 51]. and also presented there are the spectroscopic constants of the observed
electron states. We will note that the nature of the BI absorption spectrum in
the 220 - 190 no spectral region is altogether unclear.

Molecular iodine [21. 23, 24, 40, p 147, 181; 52-62]. As has already been mentioned,
considerable research has been devoted to the study of molecular iodine spectroscopy
(for a bibliography of the early.1itsrature. for example. see [23. 24]). However.
only those aspects of 12 spectroscopy and photochemistry which have a bearing on
polyatomic iodides will be of interest to us here.

The absorption spectra of 12 have been studied, for example, in [52-54] (also see
[23, 24]). There is sufficiently reliable data on the photochemistry of 12 for
certain wavelengths in the region A g 266 nm in [55-59]. Based on these data, the
12 absorption spectra in the visible and IR regions were resolved into partial
cross-sections in [54]. where these cross-sections correspond to transitions to +
lower excited states with a configuration of o saris: -- 2431 1 u (3n1u). 0: (3nou)
l u (‘ﬂu) (Figure 4). of these states, only 0§ correlates with 1 + 1*, being a
coupling state. in contrast to the similar stage of H1 (3n ). There is a detailed
expansion in [60] which was made on the basis of magnetic circular dichroism
spectra with measurements in a solution of 12 in hexane. A comparison of the

data shown in Figure 3 and 4 shows that for 12 as compared to 31, the contribu-
tion of the transition to a state which correlates with I + 1* is significantly
higher in the initial absorption bands. Simple calculations performed by Mulliken
[21, 23]. assuming the feasibility of "c. type 1 + type 11" coupling, demonstrated
that this effect is due primarily to the "mixing" of the singlet ground state
(within the framework of A—s cOupling) 2440 30; (11+) with the "triplet" state of
2441 0+ (3utg) lying 4.1 eV above it (this is the "8, type 1" "mixing" effect,
since ghe data on the state correlate with identical configurations of iodine
atoms pS ~ p5). This effect is also due to a certain extent to the "contribution"
to the "triplet" state2431 03 of the "sing et" ion state 1441 0: (11+). which is
realized through the "triplet“ 1342 0: (3“ state, i.e., the 1441 0£ "mixes" with
the 1342 0;, while this "new" state mixes with the 2431 at. This is an effect
within the framework of the "C. type 11" coupling. since the 1441 0: and 2431 03
states have different types of symmetry within the A—s coupling framework, and
moreover. are formed from different iodine atom configgrations (the 1441 0: and
1342 0: states correlate with 1+ + 1' ions. the p‘ - p configuration).

Thus. we see that thepresence of "c. type 1. type 11" coupling leads to "mixing"
of the “singlet and "triplet" states of symmetry 0:. in 12 and an increase in
the value of 01* as compared to the case of ﬂ-w coup ing.

A review and bibliography of literature devoted to the study of absorption and
fluorescence with the exicitation of vapors in the ultraviolet and far ultraviolet

regions of the spectrum can be found in [23. 62].

The interhalogens IF, ICZ, IBr [18, 24, 29, 31, 63-70]. Just as for the 12 mole-
cule, the probability of a transition to the 30+ (3ﬂt) in the first absorption
band of the interhalogcns is significantly higher than the probability of a

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKMltﬂﬂﬁ(JAl.USE(NULY

transition to the state A1 (3H1) [18, 24, 63, 64]. Thus, there is apparently

"C" coupling in Ix molecules (X - P, Cl, Br). Unfortunately, IX spectroscopy

and photochemistry have been studied unsatisfactorily in the second and subsequent
bands, and it is therefore difficult to establish the energy and electron config-
uration of the states which perturb the 3 state.

The photodisintigration products of Ic1 and IBr in the first absorption band should
be I + X or I + x*; in a zero order approximation, the coupling Al and epulsive
0+ states correlate with the first pair. and the Coupling state BO+ (3no corre-
lates with the second (Figure 5). In the IF molecule, the 80+ state correlates
with 1* + F [65, 66]; the authors of [67] suppose that yet another state can
converge to I + Br* for the IBr molecule (see Figure 5).

However, here the nonintarsection rule is manifest and in the IBr absorption
spectrum, for example, there is a system of bands corresponding to the transi-
tion to a "new adiabatic" coupling state B'0+. At the same time, in the case of
absorption in a continuum, corresponding to the transition 30* ¢ X0+, the major
photodissociation channel is (17), and not (17'):

/J+BF. (in

J Br (X0‘) + M
\J+Bn

(17')

as follows from the nonintersection rule. This effect is well explained both
semiclassically (within the framework of the Landau-loner model [29]) and quantum
mechanically [30]; the calculations are in excellent agreement with experimental
data [31, 64]. No states have been detected experimentally which correlate with
I* + X or 1* + X*; according to the data of [67], with the photodisintegration of
IBr, 01*(1) <10-4 in the region A > 300 nm. In the opinion of the authors of [67],
the reasons for this can be either the small relative values of the Pranck-Condon
coefficients or the "repulsion" of states which converge to 1* + Br and I + Br*
(see Figure 5). At room temperature in the gas phase, along with the vapors of
1C1 and IBr, there are always 12, Clz or Brz which are in thermodynamic equilibr-
ium with IX (the IF molecule is generally chemically unstable [65]), and for this
reason it is difficult to obtain quantitative data on the absorption spectra of
IX. We do not have such information on the ultraviolet and far ultraviolet
regions of the spectrum. and can mention only the papers [68-70] in which the
absorption spectra of 1C1 and IBr are graphed. and the Rydberg bands are refer-
enced to them.

3. The Photochemistry of Polyatomic Iodides
The major goal of this review is to consider the spectroscopy and photochemistry
of polyatomic iodides. primarily alkyl iodides and perfluoralkyl iodides, since

it is specifically these which are the working materials of photodissociation
iodine lasers. Along with the presentation of the experimental data, we will

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬁ(lAl.USEthLY

devote as much attention as possible to attempts to tie together the spectroscopic
and photochemical data so as to understand the factors which govern the value of
01* with the photodissociation of various RI's. The treatment of diatomic iodide

spectroscopy and photochemistry presented above, as we shall see, will be very
useful in this case.

cyanogen iodide It” [28, 33, 34, 71-81]. A rather large quantity of both experi-
mental [34, 71-79] and especially theoretical [28, 33, 35-37, 76, 77, 80, 81]
literature has been devoted to the study of ICN spectroscopy and photochemistry.
The theoretical interest is due to the relative "simplicity" of analyzing the
photodisintegration processes of a linear triatomic molecule in the presence of

a certain quantity of experimental data on the vibrational-rotational excitation
of the CN radical, which is formed with the photodissociation of 10“ in a rather
wide spectral range. Least well known of all is the spectral function 01*(l) with
the photodissociation of ICN. which is not surprising if one considers the diffi-
culties which arise with the quantitative recording of these atoms. Reviews of

the latest achievements in the study of ICN are found, for example, in [37, 76,
77, 79].

It is well known that with the absorption of a photon in the first absorption
band of ICN (A - 290 to 220 um), transitions are made to two states (both 0+ in
terms of the "c" coupling [37]). One of them (a linear one) correlates with
CN (x 252*) + 1*, and the other (bent or linear, but predissociated through the
bent one) correlates with CH (X 22*) + I (see the Table) [35]. At A - 266 an,
approximately 99 percent of the CN radicals (X 2£+) are forned primarily in the
vibrational state. The quantum 01*(1) has been measured sufficiently reliably
only for A g 266 nm (see the reference to the private correspondence from
Baranovskiy and MacDonald in [37]): 01*(1) - 0.6 - 0.3 at A - 266 ~ 280 nm. An ,
analysis of the reasons for the observed distribution of partial cross-sections
in the A band is extremely difficult because of the sparse information on ION
spectroscopy. Recent calculations show satisfactory agreement with experimental
data on the spectral functions of vibrational excitation of CN radicals, but are
either not completely satisfactory or unsatisfactory as regards the spectral
functions 01*(x) and CN rotational excitation (for example, see [37]). The
photochemistry of ICN in the far ultraviolet spectrum has been studied, for
example, in [76, 79] and the absorption spectra in [71-74, 79] (Figure 6).

{Ill-'00 a!) (lift/(aware!) (1)

    

Figure 6. The absorption spectrun of ICN [34].
Key: 1. 1/(mole - cm).

59

FINIC)FF1CLAI.IHHE(NVLY’
FOR 0F11C1A1.1EﬂE(NVLY

Alkyl iodides and perfluonolkyl iodides. RT spectroscopy. [2, 3, 8, 9, 19, 20,
82 - 103]. The spectroscopy of alkyl iodides and (to a lesser extent) perfluoro-
alkyl iodides has been studied rather well at the present time. The absorption
spectra of numerous compounds have been measured [2, 82-89] (see references to
other papers in [83, 88]) and the vibrational structure and association of bands
in the absorption spectrum in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum have been
analyzed for C831, CD31 [90-92], C2351 [93] and CP31 [96] (also see [8, pp. 132,
536, 540; 95, 96].

Data on the bond lengths and the sizes of the valence angles in R1 are given in
[97-98] and the spectroscopic constants of the ground and excited states of R1
are given in [8, pp. 636, 639; 90, 93, 99-102].

The configuration of the ground state of CH31 (and CF31). according to the

data of Hulliken [19], without taking into account the electrons of the inner
shells of the iodine atom, has the form: (13¢)2[sa1]2 (SsIa1)2 [we]4 [oa1]2

(5 pale)“ 1A1 (the noncoupling electrons are given in the parentheses, while the
ones in brackets are coupling electrons), where [sa1], [we] and [oa1] extend over
the entire molecule, but [me] is practically completely localized while [sell is
partly localized at the 683 radical. The c-I coupling.is provided for the
greatest part by the [oa1] orbital with the slight addition of the [sa1] orbital.
Absorption of C831, at least up to the first ionization potential (taking spin-
orbital splitting into account) inclusively, is due to the transport of the one
of noncoupling electrons from the (5 pr! e) orbital, the major contribution to
which is made by the 5px and 5py electrons of the iodine atom, to higher orbitals.
Hulliken has convincingly demonstrated that in the first absorption band of CH31
there is the transition ... (S pa;e)3 [0&111933 e ... (5 pi; e)“ 1A1, where

[sail is the antibonding orbital[l9, 20], in which case, just as for other iodides,
the state 33 is split into E + B + A? + A2 because of the strong spin-orbital
interaction, of which, only A* correlates with CH3 + 1*. The nature and similar;
ity of the initial absorption bands of the various alkyl iodides and pertlforo-
alkyl iodides (Figure 7) [83-86, 88-89] allow for the assumption that the .33
states are repulsive, while the [sat] orbital is localized near the C-1 bond.
These circumstances allowed Hulliken to classify the lower excited tates of

these molecules as components of Q complex [19] 1Q, 300, 301 and 02, similar

to the 3n, 3n0, 3n1 and 3n; states of diatomic molecules (see Figure l). Mulliken
came to the conclusion based on an analysis of the data of Porret and Goodeve

[3] that the most intense shortwave component of the first absorption band of

CH3! corresponds to a transition to the 3Q0 state [20], so that the type of
coupling in CH31 is similar to "c, type 1, type 11" coupling in diatomic molecules.

The absorption spectrum of CH3! in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum

has been studied quite well [82, 90-92, 95, 96]. In a spectral range of

l > 130 nm, it consists of intense bands which fall in the Rydberg series, super-
imposed on the continuum, where these bands converge to the first two states of
the 6331 ion formed with the separation of the 5 9'1 electron ... (5 p11 e)3
C1131+ (33/2, 21/2) (ionization potentials of 9.69 and 10.11 eV respectively [95]).
The first terms of these series form the well—known B, C, D, etc. bands of C831
and correspond to transitions to states just as for the A-states, with

60

FOR1OFFRJAI.USE(NVLY
FOI.0F11CLAL.USE1ONIN

configurations of ... (5 pal e)3 (noa1)3v1 B. where n - 6. 7, ... 0 - 0 transition
to the 8 state (type 2 symmetry). corresponding to the 3“: state with a linear
configuration, occurs at 203.13 nm; in the C state (3, 3n) - at 201.16 on; in
the D sate (E, III) - at 183.07 na) [90]. There are also transitions to the

(A1, A2, 3no) states and the 0 - 0 transétion at A - 185.05 on (see Figure 7).

The difference in the energies of 8 and states and all subsequent pairs of
similar states with identical values n, which converge to different states of

the ion E3/2. 21/2. is ap roxinately constant and close to the value of spin-
orbital splitting in CH3! = 4.900 cn-l) [8. p. 538; 83, aa, 90]. at will note
that there is also similar effect in other iodides (for example. see [83, 84]).
The intensities of the strongest vibrational bands in these transitions have the
following ratio: a 44 (3n2): 500 (3a,): . 30 (3na): 540 (In) (90]. A similar
intensity distribution in sinilar transitions occurs in HI: 0.01 (3112): l (3111):
0.1 Ono): 2.1. (In) for the o - 0 transitions [43]. m of this 18 evidence of
the closeness of the nature of the coupling in the Rydberg states of CH3! to the
(ho coupling in diatomic iodides, with a slight tendency towards a ”c" type
coupling (see section 1).

Transitions to states which are closer to the 6531* (33/2. 31/2) ion states are
placed in the Rydberg series, which. as a comparison of the absorption spectra of
CH31 and Xe has shown. correspond to the transition of 5 p3,, electrons of the
iodine aton not only in the ns-orhital. as at lower photon energies. but also in
the nd and even the np orbitals [83. 91, 104]. The continuum in the far infra-
red region of the spectrum for CH3I and other alkyl and perfluorallyl iodides, as
Boschi and Salahub propose [83, 84]. is due to the absorption of radiation by the
c-c and C-H bonds (this does not contradict our data [88]).

 

ﬁnqu'
a
n
l
0 innﬂm'
x w .1
ﬁlm.’ ’
in
o I
0mm mm new?» Mia I m'nnm Ann
I (c) I

Figure 7. The absorption spectra of CH31 (a) [82] and
cr31 (b. c) [88].

61

FKHR(HHWC1AI.USE‘0NlN
IN3R OFFICIAI.USEZ(MVLV

The absorption spectrum of C2H51 in the far ultraviolet. which is similar in nature
to the absorption spectrum of CH3I. has been much more poorly studied because of

the vibrational-rotational structure which is considerably richer than that of CH3I.
Assignment of some of the transitions in the first terms of the Rydberg series of
Czﬂsl (A > 175 nm) though has been done successfully [8. p 553; 83, 93]. We will
note that as compared to CH3! in ethyl iodide, the relative intensity of the trans-
itions to states similar to the 3n2 and 3n3 of the HI molecule is significantly
higher, something which in the opinion of the authors of [93] is due to the delocal-
ization of the nonbonding electron of the iodine atom and the reduction of the sym-
metry from C3v down to Cs.

According to data available to us, an analysis of the vibrational structure and the
assignment of the bands in the absorption spectrum of CF31 in the region of A >

> 130 nm were most completely carried out by Sutcliffe and Halsh [94]. In their
opinion. this spectrum is similar to the CH31 absorption spectrum. The B-band (A -
- 174 nno apparently corresponds to the C-band of CH31, i.e., is due to the transi-
tion to the 5(3n1) state; the C-band is complex and is due, in all probability, to
transitions to states A1 and 2(3nt. 1n). The relative intensity of the '
transitions to these states is ungnoun because of the impossibility of resolving
the vibrational structure of the C-band: to all apparent extents. the relative pro-
bability of a transition to a state similar to the A1 state in C331 is higher in

CF31 [94]. Just as for CH3I, these and the subsequent bands fall in the Rydberg
series [83, 84].

An analysis of the vibrational structure and the assignment of the absorption
bands of the more complex alkyl iodides and their perfluoro analogs have not been
carried out because of the fact that the vibrational-rotational structure cannot

bc resolved [83, 84, 88]. There is all the reason to assume that the nature of the
absorption spectrum of these compounds is similar to C831.

Procedures for studying primary iodide photolysis processes [2, 5, 32, 67, 88, 106-
-120]. The rather high deactivation rate, the relatively low excitation energy of
1* and the forbidden nature of the transition (1) (the radiation lifetime of iodine
atoms is 11* = 0.1 sec [104, 105]) makes it very difficult to obtain quantitative
information on the values of 01*(1) with the photolysis of RI. Obtaining suffici-
ently large monochromatic radiation fluxes in the ultraviolet and far ultraviolet
regions of the spectrum is a complex task. and for this reason, a considerable
portion of the data on the values of 01* and the reaction rate constants with the
participation of 1* has been obtained at the present time by kinetic spectroscopy
techniques with flash photolysis of R1 in a broad spectral range (A > 200 mm)

[4-6, 106-108]. The incorrectness of this approach to the study of photoprocesses
has been discussed in detail in a paper by the author on the technique for the
measurement of the quantum yields of photoprocesses [109] (also see [88. 110]). The
reason for the incorrectness consists of the following. If the quantum yield of

1* atoms, for example, is measured in a wide spectral range, 11 - A2, then only a
certain value can be measured:

in M
@32- - [0,. (A) 1..., (max [ I,.m (A) 41.

where Iabsorp (A) - 1...". (A) =- 1.“){1-0XPI-olu (1)0111") is the spectral func-
tion of the radiation absorbed by the R1 molecule; oRI(A) is the spectral function

62

IIHI(HﬂﬂC1A1.USE(ﬂVLY
billlﬂﬂﬂtbtl .HIHRNIN’

of the absorption cross-section; n31 is the concentration of RI; Z is the cell

length. The integral absolute quantrum yield of the 1* atoms in the range 11 - A2
is

l. M
0’. - ‘E 6’. (l)a/ £01" (1)0.(01- (1) - 0" (l) a” (x))

which is equal to .mgas only if in the region 11 - 12, 01a(l) - const., or the
measurements are e for the case of an optically thin RI layer and a constant
spectral composition of the light source (10(1) - conat.). It is practically
impossible to realize the latter condition with flash photolysis of iodides in
the 320 to 230 nm range. For this reason, the data obtained in [4-6, 106-108]

for 01*(1 i 1 or 0 throughout the entire A band areunot comparable and are
meaningful only for the experimental conditions realized in this literature. This
remark also fully applies to papers [45, 7b, 78] (see the Table).

Kinetic spectroscopy of photodissocietion fragments [32], a unique kinetic method
developed in [111] as well as the optical—acoustical effect [112] have also been
used to study RI photodiasociation processes; results of measuring 01a(x) were
recently published for the photolysis of 3312, obtained by observing 1* lumi-
nescence with the photolysis of “312 by the radiation of dye lasers [67]. We will
also mention papers [113] (the resolution of the C831 absorption spectra into
partial cross-sections by means of magnetic circular dichroism) and [116] (the
measurement of the angular distribution of RI photodisaociation fragments). Inform-
ation on the value of 01*(1) + 01(1) and a 0 photodissociation channel of RI,
different from (2) and (2'), was also obtained by classical photochemical tech-
niques (for example, see [115, 116]).

Hork has been underway for a number of years in our laboratory of the photon
studies department of the Scientific Research Institute of Physics at Leningrad
State University on the study of spectral functions of the absolute quantum yields
of the photodissociation channels for R1 into R + 1*, R + 1, etc. [2, 88, 89, 110,
117-120]. The method which we have developed numbers among one of the variants of
the classical technique of [109], in which the yield of atoms and radicals is
measured based on the output of stable photolysis products from mixtures of the
compounds being studied with acceptors of these particles and with other gases

and vapors. The essence of the technique used by us is set forth in detail in

[2] (also see [88, 118]). The basis for it is the strong difference (no less than
a factor of 10‘ times [2]) in the reaction rates of the 1* and I atoms with
nitrosyl chloride:

1* + NCCl + N0 + 1C1 (18)

I + “601 + so + 161 (19)

and the presenc of activation energy in the reactions of R with N061:

a + N001 -> N0 + RC1 (20)
63

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOI<0FFINAI.UNE(H‘£V

By thermalizing the hot radicals formed in the photolysis process with the intro-
duction of a thermalizer for the H radicals, for example, 002 molecules, and
bringing the intesity of the radiation absorbed by the iodine, uh, up to levels on
the order of 1014 quanta/(cm3 - sec), conditions can be created in the photolysis
of an RI—NOCl-H mixture where only the 1* atoms react with the N001, while the

I and R are expended in the following reactions:

21+n+12+n (21)

n + In -> R01 + I (22)

as well as (3) and (a). The absolute quantum yield of N0 (0“o(l)) under these
conditions is equal to 01*(1).

In the case where R is poorly thermalised or the reaction rate constant (3) is
small (5110-12 cm3/sec), any alkene (for example. B-butylene [2. 89, 117, 118])

is introduced into the system being studied to prevent reaction (20), or the
photolysis is carried out in the presence of small quantities of 12 and 101. The
sum of the absolute quantum yields of the 1* and I atoms is measured by means

of photolysis of the RI - N001 mixture under conditions where all of the iodine
atoms and radicals formed in the primary photolysis processes of the RI react with
the N001, and in this case, 01*(A) + 01(X) - (1/2)Oﬁ8x(l) [2, 117]. or when study-
ing the photolysis of an RI-NO—H mixture. in this case.OI*(l) + 01(1) . 20g“(l)
[2, 88]. The absolute quantum yields of RI photodissociation processes 2

which differ from (2) and (2') are measured by means of the photolysis of a mixture
RI - I; - H based on the yield of stable photodissociation products or the inter-
action of the radicals with 12 [88, 118, 119] (see below).

Primary RI photolysis processes. There is very little information on the primary
photolysis processes of RI, and for this reason, practically all of the existing
experimental data will be cited and briefly discussed below (see the table).

Cﬁsf, ultraviolet spectrum [5, S, 32, 106, 108. 112-117, 119, 122]. Experimental
data on the values of 01*(1), 01(1). °I* and .1 or their ratios were obtained in
[4, S, 32, 106, 108, 112, 117, 119] (see the table). Unfortunately, the data on
the quantities 01*(A)/[0I*(x) + 01(l)] were given in [32, 112] without indicating
the measurement precision. The reliability of the data obtained in [4. S, 106,
108] has already been discussed; one can only add that a comparison of the operate
ing conditions of the flash lamps in (A, S] and [121] make it possible to assume
that the radiation spectrum of the lamp used in [5, 5] is apparently different
from the radiation spectrum of an absolute black body. The maximum in the radia-
tion spectrum of this lamp possibly occurred at l < 250 nm. In this case, the dis-
parity in the data of [5, 5, 32] will be even greater. He shall note the earlier
work of Porret and Goodeve [3] as well as recent results in resolving the absorp-
tion spectrum of CH3I into partial cross-sections corresponding to transitions to
states, which in an adiabatic approximation should dissociate via channels (2) and
(2') (Figure 8) [113]. However, it is impossible from these data to derive the

66

ROI 0F1ﬂ€1hl.lﬂﬂ£(ﬂﬁlﬂ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spectral function 01:0). since the state which dissociages into CH3 4- 1 is located
in the region of the Franck-Condon transition above the 300 state which dissociates
into CH3 + 1*. Nonsdiabatic processes are possible in the dissociation of these
states where these processes are capable of substantially changing the form of these
partial cross-sections in the case where they are obtained on the basis of a study
of the photodissociation processes. It is possible therefore that the data cited

in [112, 113] differ markedly.

In the first absorption band with small yields (< 10-3), the following photodissoci-
ation processes apparently take place [115, 116. 122]:

,CHJ} H,._' (23)

CH J +hv
’ \I-scuwm-

(2’0)

01131, the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum [107, 116, 122]. The photochem-
istry in the far ultraviolet portion of the spectrum has been studied extremely
poorly. It has been shown that in the spectral region A > 1100 nu, the main primary
(2831 photolysis process is dissociation into CH3 4- 1 (1*) (the value of 01*“) is
unknown), and the probability of photodissociation into (:51 + 82 [sic] or

082 + 81 is less than 0.01.

d 1 l0 l{ml

Figure 8. The partial cross-sections of
61131, corresponding to transi-
tions to the states 3% (1),
3Q1 (2) and 10 (3); the total
absorption cross-section (from
experiment) (10); o - £01 (5)
[113] (see the text).

 

Other alkyl iodides, the ultraviolet portion of the spectrum [4, S, 32, 106, 118,
119]. The data obtained for Czﬂsl - (CH3)ZCHCH21 on the quantities 01*(1), 010)
and their ratios are presented in the table. As has already been noted, the
primary iodide photolysis processes can occur via channels other than (2) or (2');
for example. for C4H91, this is [119]:

,;C.H.+ HJ. on) .. (Li '1' 0.3).1'0'4. (25)

cm +hv
\QH.+CHJ. (3 :t IMO“.

(26)

65

FORWLUSIONLY
M OFFIﬂAI. USE ONLY

The values of the quantum yields of these processes are given in [11, 119]. Here,
we will only note that the most probable of these reactions is the regrouping of
111* with the splitting off of the HI molecule:

RJ +1». er» (R—HH-lll. <27)

The absolute quantum yield of these processes, 60), when A - 256 It varies from
0.008 ((013)201101121) to 0.1 (CH30HICH3). To all apparent extents, this regrouping
is accomplished when R and the I atom fly apart as a consequence of the excita-
tion of strong deformational vibrations in the 11 - C - I group.

An increase in the length of the c - C chain in RI leads to a monotonic increase
in the value of 0141(1), x - 25!. me. However, it is a complex matter to interpret
these data. since they were obtained for a single photon energy.

Vibrationslly excited radicals, which are formed with the photodiseociation of 111,
can either decay via a monomolecular mechanism. or react with the 1; molecule
[118, 119]. for example:

(28)

cm. + H.
J (28')

-c.H.-c,H. + CH..
\qu.+c,a,: (28' ')
. ,QH.+ HJ + J. (29)
C‘H’+J’-.C,H. + CH9} + J. '

\QH. +c.H.J + J. (:2? i

If meachanism (28) obtains, then the lifetime of vibrationally excited radicals
for R - C3117 and 611ch013, for example. exceed one microsecond and 80 nanoseconds

respectively [118] .

The primary photolysis processes of alkyl iodides, other than c1131. have not been
studied in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrun, as far as we know.

Perfluorodlgl iodides, the ultraviolet spectrum [2, lo, 5, 89. 101., 110, 111, 117].
The primary photolysis processes of perfluoralkyl iodides (RPI). widely used in
photodissociation iodine lasers, have been studied throughout the entire first
absorption band of 1 - 315 to 235 nm [2, 89. 110]. The spectral functions 019:0)
and 014101) + 010) have been obtained; the spectral functions of the partial RH
absorption cross-sections corresponding to transitions to states which dissociate
into RF + I*. RF + I(oI*(A), 0101)) and via other channels. as well as the integral
quantum yields 01*. 61* + 01, the oscillator strengths 11* and f1 and the

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!‘DFFKJAI.USIINVLV

energies for vertical transitions to these states; attempts were also made to
_ interpret the observed relationships.

64» Figure 9. The spectral functions 01a(l) for
the photolysis of szsl (1),

4’ ’ CP3CPICF3 (2) and (CF3)3CI (3)
[2, 89].

0,5

0,0

I
a!

200-250 M Jan,”

The values of 01*(h) in the first absorption band of unbranched RPI's with a
terminal position of the 1 atom (we shall call them "linear"), vary continuously
in a range of 1.0 to 0.8 (for example. CZPSI in Figure 9); an increase in the
length of the C - C chain leads to a shift in the minimum of this function to the
region of the maximum of the total absorption cross-section. The corresponding
cross-sections have a bell-shape (for example. CstI in Figure 10); with an
increase in the length of the c - c chain. the difference in the energies of the
photons. AB, corresponding to the namime of these bands decrease and the value of
01* decreases from 0.96 (CF31) down to 0.86 - 0.89 (C3P7I. 05F111) (see the table).
The spectral functions 01*(A), 01(1) and the corresponding curves of 01*(1) and
oI(x) with the photodissociation of branched RPI's or molecules without a terminal
position of the 1 atom have a somewhat different form. It is as if the 01*(1)
curve for (CF3)3CI is "inverted" with respect to "linear" RFI's and has small
singularities; for CF3CFICF3, these curves have an oscillating nature (see Figures
9. 10); in both of these cases, the values of 01s are substantially smaller than
for the "linear" compounds.

As has already been noted, it is impossible to compare the data obtained in

[4, 5. 106] directly with the data obtained in our laboratory. however. as
analysis demonstrates. the values of 01:39/(01a + 01), computed on the basis of
the spectral functions 91*(1) obtained by us and the possible radiation spectrum
of the pulsed source used in [6, 5], especially if one takes into account the
contribution of the reactions of I atoms with the radicals (which were not con-
sidered by the authors of [4, 5], and which should increase the value of 0&588,
especially with the photolysis of CF3CFICP3, see [2]), should be close to the
values obtained in [4, 5]. The analysis of the data of [106] is difficult because
of the inadequacy of the information on the conditions under which they were
obtained. The results of papers [2, 89, 111] for RFI f (CF3)3CI are close to each
other. One of the probable reasons which can partially explain the observed
divergence in the values of 01a(A)/IOI*(A) + 01(1)]. A - 265 an, as was shown in
[89], consists in the possibility of chemiluminescence being present in the
process of radical recombination with the 1* atoms, A g 1,315 nn; such processes
occur in the condensed phase at low temperstureq [123. 124].

67

FOI!0FFKJA1.IEHI(I§LY
FOI<0FFKJAI.USE(N‘LV

   

Figure 10. The partial absorption cross-sections of
Cstl (a), CP30FICP3 (b) and (CP3)3CI (c)
corresponding to transitions to states
which dissociate into R + 1* (l), R + I (2),
via other channels (3), as well as the
total absorption cross-section (4). The
spectral resolution is approximately b nm.

19 .n 9.0hw4
’ (c)

Perfluoroakbl iodides, the fhr ultraviolet region of the spectrum. [88, 120].

As far as we know, the photochemistry of RPI in the far ultraviolet has been
studied only in [88. 120]. In the first (3) and second (0) far UV absorption bands
of CF31, C3P7I, CF3CFICP3, 01s(k) - 0.0+0.l, in the B band, 01(1) 2 l (CPal);
0.77 (C3P7I); 0.9 (CP3CFICP3), in the C band for RPI I CP3I, only the breaking of
the C - C chain occurs with the formation of the CF3 radical (guess - 0.1 - 0.14
(C3F710; 0.3 - 0.1 (CF3CFICF3)). The excited states of RPI, which are formed with
the absorption of a light quantum in the C band, have a probability on the order
of 0.9 of undergoing nonradiative processes which lead to deactivation of RPIZ.

7he interpretation of RI photochemistry, the ultraviolet region of the spectrum.
[2, 5, 89]. The explanation of the general laws governing the priaary photolysis
processes of iodides. especially inrthe first absorption band, are of definite
interest from our point of view. If the relationship between the spectroscopic
properties and the primary photolysis processes of R1 are understood, then one can

predict the value of 61s with the photodissociation of iodides which have not yet
been studied or have not been synthesized at all and which for some reason are of
promise for use in photodissociation iodine lasers. The lack of reliable quanti-
tative information on the spectral functions 01*(l) and 01(1) as well as the
complexity of the object have until recently not permitted the reliable determina-
tion beforehand of which factors - molecule symmetry, ionization potential of the
radical R, as the authors of [4, S] assume, or which other factors determine the
probability of transitions to states which dissociate into R + 1* and R + I. An
analysis of the general laws governing the spectroscopy of triplet states, includ~
ing the case of large spin-orbital interaction, and the manifestations of these

68

lili‘OFITCJAI.lﬂ5E'OFﬂUY
POI OLW'IAI. US! ONLY

laws in diatomic molecules, an analysis Of Vhi¢h "‘3 81V00 above. should lid to
some extent in understanding this question.

As was shown in the first section of this review. in the case of weak spin-orbital
interaction in CHaX molecules (X is a halogen atom), the transition to a state
which correlates with CH3 + X (zPl/z) in their first absorption band should have
a very low probability, since this state is a triplet. Strong spin-orbital inter-
action with c331 and CP3I, which is due to the presence of a heavy iodine atom in
these molecules, can lead and actually does lead to a mixing of this "triplet”
state with the "singlet" or ground ”singlet" state with the "triplet" ones (see
(8) and (9)). It is only necessary that this "mixing" be permitted by the selec-
tion rules (see (11) and (12)) and be sufficiently "strong". It is therefore
useful to analyze the types of coupling which are realized in RI molecules, some-
thing which should make it possible to classify the excited states of RI and cor-
rectly apply the selection rules. Their formal application (especially within

the framework of A-s coupling) neither in symmetry group C3v (Cﬂsl, CP3I) nor,
even more. in the C3 (Czhsl and possibly. CZFSI) and C1 (other Rl's) is altogether
fruitful, since is does not provide an explanation of the large value of 01*(l)
with the photolysis of these compounds. This leads to the thought that during RI
photodissociation, processes which occur near the c - I bond are quite signi-
ficant; consequently, the application of the description of bond types which are
realized in diatomic iodides can be justified for R1 molecules.

Experiments show that in the CP31 molecule. the value of 01* is close to unity. i.e.
the probability of a transition to the 3Q0 state (according to Hulliken) is much
greater than to 301 (the 1Q state, according to Hulliken. falls in the higher energy
region, see Figure l). The value of the energy difference, A8, of vertical transi-
tions to states which dissociate into CF3 + 1* and CF3 + I in the region of the
Franck-Condon transition is also high in this molecule. An increase in the length
of the C - C chain leads to a reduction in AB and 01* [2. 89]. The analysis
carried out in [2] demonstrated that three questions must be answered for the inter-
pretation of these laws:

1. Why 18 fIg >> f]: in CF31?
2. Why does AB e 0 in "linear" RPI's with an increase in the C - C chain?
3. why does the value of 01* decrease when A! + 0?

A rather precise quantum chemical calculation is necessary to answer the first
question. However, based on the material presented above, it appears to us that
one can state certain concepts of the factors which govern the large value of 01*
in the photolysis of CP3I as well as concsrning the electron states of CF3I, the
"mixing" of which with the "unperturbed" and x states must be taken into ac-
count within the framework of the given calculation.

The type of coupling in the states under discussion for the CH3! molecules. and
moreso for the CF31 molecules which are incorporated in the Q—complex of Hulliken,
is undoubtedly close to the “C" type coupling of diatomic molecules. He shall
ascertain which "triplet" states, both in symmetry group 0.”, and ossible in group
C3” can be mixed in with the ground "singlet" state (X1£+. 0.0; X A1. 03”) and

69

FOI'OFFIJAI.USIINVLY
FOI{OFIﬂCJAl.USE10NlN

which "singlet" states can mix with the discussed "triplet" 300 (3H3. 3A1. symbols
in terms of the A-s coupling). It is useful in this case to take into account
the laws governing "C, type I" coupling (see sections 1 and 2 of this review).

The mixing of the 3 2. 3Q1 and 1Q states included in the Q-complex either with the
ground or with the 00 states cannot explain, from our point of view, the observed
effect. In fact, the mixing of the ground state (0*, A1 in the case of a strong
spin-orbital interaction) with the 3Q2 (2, B) state is forbidden in the C.” group.
and is permitted with the 3Q state (1, B) when the electron-vibrational or elec-
tron-rotational interaction is taken into account [8, p 472]. The conclusion can
be drawn, however. from an analysis of the factors which govern the size of 01*
during the photolysis of 12 (see [23] and section 2 of this review) that because
of the large energy gap between the states 301 and X (3.6 ' 10‘ cm’1 [2]). this
"complex”interaction can hardly provide for the observed effect (see (8) and (9)).
If mixing of the 3Q3 and 1Q states did occur, then the latter would be manifest

in the CF31 absorption spectrum, however, this state has not been detected in

the expansion of the CF31 absorption spectrum into partial cross-sections [2].

It remains to be hypothesized that the large value of 01* with the photolysis of
CF31 is due to the "interaction" of one or more Rydberg states (apparently, the
lowest ones) with 3q3. or 3Q3 with the ground state of C731. Apparently, a
similar effect takes place in the CH3I molecule. The absorption cross-sections

in these states are considerably higher (by a factor of 102) than the in Q—complex
states (see Figure 7). so that even their weak "admixing" can provide for the
observed effect. To all apparent extents, it is primarily necessary in the calcu-
lations to take into account the "triplet" A1(0+) state, which is incorporated in
the group of Rydberg states, converging to the 21/2 ion state. It is possible
that the value of 01* with the photodissociation CF31 [2, 112] which is greater
than for CH3I, is related to the higher probability of a transition to this state
in CP3I (see above, and [90, 94]).

The second and third questions which come up in the interpretation of the
observed change in the value of 01* in a nunber of RFI's have been treated in
detail [2. 89]. As has already been noted, the value of the spin-orbital
splitting between the terms of the Rydberg series with identical principal quantum
numbers n, which converge to different RT+ ion states, with a sufficient degree
of precision is independent of n, the kind of RI and is approximately equal to
0.6 cv. This effect occurs because of the small influence of a Rydberg electron
on the value of the spin-orbital splitting, due primarily to the unpaired Spx or
Spy electron which remains close to the iodine atom [2]. The hypothesis has

been advanced that the value of AB in the Q complex is determined by how much
this nonbonding (SPIIe)-e1ectron that becomes an antibonding [o*]-orbital,
neutralizes the spin density of the remaining nonbinding electron, i.e., what
portion of the time it is close to the iodine atom. Calculations of the electron
density distribution and the contribution of various atomic orbitals to the RFI
molecular orbitals. including the contribution of the Spx and 5py orbitals to

the molecular [0*] orbital, which were made by the no LKAO [molecular orbital,
linear combination of atomic orbitals] 38? [not further defined] technique in a
semi-empirical CNDO/BU [not further defined] variant, confirmed this hypothesis
[2]. In fact, the value of AB is smaller. the greater the amount of time this
nonbinding electron. which is incorporated in the [o*]-orbita1, is located

close to the iodine atom.

70

FOR‘OFIICIAI.IE§B(HNLY
8“. "Dailill iIN[¢NVlV

demonstrated, can be explained bythe"repumping of oscillator strength" from a
state with a greater f to a state with a lesser f. The "interaction“ of these
states in the presence of electron-vibrational or (and) electron-rotational inter-
action because of-their closeness (AB 3 103 cm‘1 [2]) can be rather strong (see
(8), (9) and [8. p. 472]). The given explanation is in good agreement with the
small change in the oscillator strength for the Arband, the weak change in the

molecule [2] (see Figure 10b), and possibly. (CF3)3CJ [89] (see Figure 10c) is
likewise quite well explained within the framework of this model, taking int
account the strong interaction ("repulsion") of the surfaces of the 303 and ng
states in the region of the Pranck-Condon transition [2, 85].

In a number of "linear" RPI's. CF3I - €5F111, the quantity AE does not fall below
800 cm'l, and correspondingly, 01* L 0.86. Considering the anticipated slight
change in the values of valence angles and lengths of the bonds [97, 98], there is
no basis for expecting a marked increase in 01s with a further increase in the
length of the C - C chain in RFI.

The branching of the RFI molecule or the rearrangement of the iodine atom, as a
rule, leads to a decrease in the quantity 01*, something which is apparently due
to a change in the nature of the [0*] orbital because of the P atoms which are spa-
tially close together [2, 89].

iodine lasers [2, 86, 89. 111, 125]. A comparison of the lasing characteristics
and the reaction rate constants (3) - (S) for these iodides (see the bibliography
on rate constants [2]), which was made in [89], shows that these reactions play e

Other iodides. [2, 67, 84, 116, 126-138]. Papers in which quantitative data is
presented for the spectroscopy and primary processes of the photolysis of other
iodides, including organic iodides, are not very numerous. The absorption spectra
of Hglz have been measured [67], as well as the spectra of partially fluorine
substituted alkyl iodides [86], iodine substituted unsaturated compounds with a
double bond [84, 126-130], with a triple bond [131], methylene iodide, iodoform
and carbon tetraiodide [132-136] (in [133, 136]. the measurements were made in
solutions and in [126], the information is of a qualitative nature). The absorp-
tion spectra of CF3OC2P41 has also been measured [88]. A detailed bibliography

of the earlier works is contained in [86] (also see [133, 136]).

Information on the primary photolysis processes of these compounds is also found
in [2, 88, 115, 127, 128, 132, 135-138]. We shall briefly consider the most
important data presented in the given papers.

71

FOR 0F?1ClA1.lEiE(MVLY
FOR OFIHCIAL.UGIICMVLV

Mercury iodide ugly. [67]. The spectral function 01*(1) with HgIz photolysis is
given in a recent paper [67] (see the table). Absolute calibration with respect
to the quantum yield was accomplished at l - 275 nm in this work using the data
of [5]: 01* ; C3F7I). Since 01*(1) - 0.80 with the photolysis of C3P7I. X -

- 275 nm, we consider the data given in [67] to be overstated by 20 percent.

CTaOCaFgI. [2, 88, 110, 120]. This compound has the greatest value of 01a(l) -
- 0.98 of the substances studied in our laboratory (see the table). Based on

what has been presented. it is not difficult to relate this fact to the presence
of an oxygen atom in the C - C chain, where the atom has a greater similarity to
an electron [139], something which should "pull" the [1*] orbital away from the

iodine atom [2]. The photochemistry of CF30¢2P41 in the far ultraviolet region
of the spectrum was studied in [88].

Acetyl iodide 083001, perfluoroatt’l iodide cpscor [137, 138]. It has been
shown by means of kinetic spectroscopy of photodisaociation fragments that the
absorption of a photon having an energy corresponding to A - 266 nm by the

CH3COI molecule leads to its dissociation into CB3C0* and an I atom (the yield
of 1* atoms is close to aero). and the lifetime of the hot CH300* radicals is on
the order of picoseconds; they decay into C83 + C0 [137]. The first state in the
photodissociation of CF3COI is similar to that of [138], however, the lifetime of
CF3C0* is very much greater (1 msec);'there is no data in [138] on the value of
01*(1) with the photolysis of CF3COI, A - 266 nm.

GeH3I. [135]. The photodissociation processes of Geﬂ31 were studied in the first
absorption band with excitation in a broad spectral range, and therefore, for the

reasons presented above. the data obtained will not be discussed here (see the
table).

Vinyl iodide C2H3I [128]. The major photodiasociation processes which have been
studied are:

/C'"' + J' (30)

HJ+h
C‘ ' V\C,H.+HJ. (30')

where ‘30'/.30 - 0.14 (313 n10 and 0.20 (250 an); 030' + ¢3o < 1. The value of
01*(X) is unknown.

Methylene iodide CllgIg, ioddfam, 01113. [132]. The main photodissociation
channel of Cﬂzlz and CHI3 in the 250 - 350 um region is:

R'J+hv- (Ir—1m (J'). ‘31)

The excited states of CH212 which are populated with the absorption of a photon,
belonging to the spectral region indicated above. have a 31 symmetry; CH13 - E.

72

FOITOFHKJAI.USE(HVLY
Unﬁinliﬂf1tl ‘lﬂf‘u‘k‘

Iodine substituted aranutic compounds. There is information on the lifetimes and

types of symmetry of the first excited states of some of these compounds in [11&,
136].

Conclusion

The treatment of the general laws governing the spectroscopy and photochemsitry
of iodides presented in this review sake it possible to conclude that a type of
coupling is realized in the initial excited states of alkyl iodides and their
perfluoro analogs which is close to "C" type coupling of diatomic molecules, with
the presence of interaction between states which dissociate into R + 1* and

R + I, which leads to a reduction in the quantity 01* with an increase in the
interaction. The size of this effect can be estimated if the RI geometry is
known or can be predicted with sufficient precision. The unbranched molecules of
perfluoroalkyl iodideawith a terminal position of the iodine atoms have a value
of 01* in a range of 1.0 to 0.86; changing the position of the iodine atom or the
branching of the iodides in the nolecules which have been studied leads to a
reduction in the value 91*. Apparently the other classes of compounds treated in
this paper hold little promise for use in iodine photodissociation lasers.

In conclusion, the author would like to thank v.s. Ivanov and Ye.P. Smirnov for
their useful discussions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1; J.V.V.Kasper,G.S.Pinentel, APPL. PHYS. LBTTS., i, 231 (1964).

2. v.5. Ivanov, A.S. Kozlov, A.M. Pravilov, Ye.P. Smirnov, KVANTOVAXA ELBKTRONIKA
[QUANTUM ELECTRONICS], 1, 993 (1980).

3. D. Porret, C.P. Goodeve, PROC. ROY. 800., A165, 31 (1938).

a. 'r. Donahue, 3.x. Hiesenfeld. cum. ms. Lms., 3_3', 176 (1975).
5. T. Donohue, J.R. Wiesenfeld, J. CHEM. PHYS., 9;. 3130 (1975).

6. R.J. Donovan, D. Husain, ADV. PHOTOCBEM., g, 1 (197A).

7. G. Gertsberg, "Spektry i stroyeniye dvukhatomnykh molekul" ['The Spectra and
Structure of Diatonic Molecules"], Moscow, GITTL Publishers, 1949.

8. G. Gertsberg, "Elektronnyye spektry i stroyeniye mnogoatomnykh molekul" [”The
Electron Spectral and Structure of Polyatomic Molecules"], Moscow, Mir Publish-
ers, 1969.

9. A.B. Nikol'skiy, OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKDPIYA [OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY], 32, 1,069,
(1971).

73

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
10.

11.

13.

16.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

NI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

11.8. Mulliken, REV. MOD. PHYS., 2, 60 (1930).
R.S. Mulliken, PHYS. REV., 11, 613 (1935).

8.8. Frish, "Opticheskiye spelttry stomov" ["0pt1csl Spectra of Atone"], Moscow,
Fimstgiz Publishers, 1963, p 212.

S. Msk-clinn. T. Adzuu, M. Kinosits, "Molekulysmayn epektroskoplys tripletnogo
sostoyaniys" ["Triplet State Molecular Spectroscopf'], Moscow, Mir Publishers,
1968.

R.l(hokhshtrssser, "Molekulysrnyye aspekty sinetrii" ["Moleculsr Aspects of Syl-
uetry"], Moscow, Mir Publishers, 1968.

E.V. Shpol'skiy, "Atomays Haiku" ["Atouic Physics"], Moscow, Nsuks Publishers,
1974, Vol 2, p 301.

0.8. McClure, J. CHDL PHYS., 1_7, 665 (19109).

3.5. Mulliken, 32v. MOD. ms.. ;. 89 (1931).

R.S. Mulliken, PHYS. REV. fo_6_. 569 (1934).

R.S. Mu111ken, J. CHEM. PHYS., 2, 506 (1935).

11.8. Mulliken, J. CHEM. PHYS., g, 382 (1950).

11.8. Mulliken, PHYS. REV., g, 500 (191.0).

J.H. Van Vleck, PHYS. R£V., l._o, 568 (1932).

R.S. Mulliken, J. CHEM. PHYS., 5_5. 288 (1971).

J.A. Coxon, "Molecular Spectroscopy", Vol. I. Chen. Soc. (1.), 1973, p 1.
ms. Mulliken, ANN. REV. PHYS. can!” 32. 1. (1978).

um. Gelbart, ANN. REV. PHYS. cum” _2_8, 323 (1977).

um. Pack, J. CHEM. PHYS., 9;. 6765 (1976).

J.A. Besuick, J. Jortner, CHEM. PHYS., a, 1 (1977).

M.S. Child, MOL. PHYS., _3_2, 1595 (1976).

M.S. Child, R. befebvre, CHEM. PHYS. I£TTS., g, 213 (1978).

M.S. De Vries, N.J.A. Van Veen, A.D. De Vries, CHEM. PHYS. 13115., S_6_. 15
(1978).

S.J. Riley, K.R. Hilson, PAR. DISC. CHEM. SOC., a, 132 (1972).

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
33.
31..
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

lol.
1.2.
43.
(do.
105.
46.
47.

48.

49.
SO.
51.
S2.
53.
5‘.
55.
56.

57.

mu (WHOM. l“ 0N“

LE. Holdy, L.C. Klotz, K.R. Wilson. J. CHEM. PHYS., S_2_, 132 (1972).
1.3. Ling, x.n. Hilton, J. cuzn. vuvs.. 9;, 101 (1975).

11.0. Horse, R.1-‘. Freed, 11.3. Band, CHEN. PHYS. 13118., lo_6, 125 (1976).
11. Halavee, H. Shapiro, CHEM. PHYS., _21, 105 (1977).

11.1). Horse. LP. Freed, Y.B. Band. J. cm. PHYS., _7_0, 3620 (1979).
v.3. sand. u.n. Horse, R.P. Freed, J. earn. PHYS., gg. 2702 (1978).
S.J. Heller, J. CHEM. PHYS., Q, 2066 (1978).

J. Calvert, J. Pitts, "Potokhimiya" ["Photochaniotry"], Moscow, Mir Publishers,
1968.

C.F. Goodeve, AJLC. Taylor, PROC. ROY. 8°C. (1.), El, 181 (1936).
3.9. Ogilvie. TRANS. FARADAY soc., g1. 2205 (1971).

8.6. Tilford, 11.1.. Ginter, A.H. Baas, J. n01. SPBC’I'ROSC., a, 327.
J. Round, ANN. PHYS. (Paris), 3, 527 (1969).

R.J. Donovan, D. Husain, TRANS. PARADAY 8°C., _6_2, 1050 (1966).

P. Cadman, J.C. Polanyi, J. Smith, J. cm. PHYS., Q, 14 (1967).
1..E. Coupton. Rm. Martin, J. PHYS. (211311.. _7_3, 3476, (1969).

G.A. Oldershau, D.A. Porret, A. Smith, J. CHEM. SOC. FAR. TRANS., I, _6§, 2218
(1972).

R.D. Clear, S.J. Riley, LR. Wilson, J. CHEM. PHYS.. Q, 1360 (1975).

u.c. Price, PROC. ROY. soc. (L), 5192, 216 (1938).

11.1.. Ginter, 8.6. Tilford, AM. Baaa, J. 1101.. SPECTROSC., i1, 271 (1975).

a. Rabinovich, u.c. wood, TRANS. FARADAY $00.. 2;, 540 (1936).

J.A. Hyer, J.A. R. Saloon, J. CHEM. PKYS., 3, 716 (1970).

J. Tellinghuiaen, J. CHEM. PHYS., 5—7, 2821 (1973).

J.I. Steinfeld, J.D. Campbell, N.A. Weiss, J. 1101.. SPECTROSC., 2_8, 2010 (1969).
1.. Brewer, J. Tellingshuisen, J. (211311. PHYS., _51, 3929 (1972).

R.J. Oldlan, R.K. Sander, K.R. Wilson, J. cum. PHYS” _5_lo., 10127 (1971).

75

FOIOI’FICIALUSIONLY
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.

65.

67.

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.

81.

82.

POI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

R.D. Clear, K.R. Vilson, J. HOL. SPECTROSC., £1, 39 (1973).
1.". Broodbent. AJ. Callear. J. CHEM. SOC. PAR. TRANS. II, 6_8.. 1367 (1972).
M. Btith, 0. Schepp, P. Stephens, CHEN. PHYS. LB‘l'l'S., Q, 549 (1974).

J.B. Tellinghuisen, "Coloques Intomuonaux, Aussoi 1977" ("International
Colloquium, Aussoi, 1977"], Paris, 1977, p 317.

H. Hemu. G.J. Collins, CHEM. PHYS. LBTTS., ﬂ, 5. (1979).

".6. Brown, 0.3. Gibson, PHYS. REV., 4—0, 529 (1932).

A.B. Petersen, 1.". Smith, cum. PHYS., Q. 407 (1978).

H.A.A. Clyne, S.I. HcDe‘rllid, J. CHEM. SOC. PAR. TRANS. II, E, 1644 (1978).
H.A.A. Clyne, S.I. Hebemid, J. CHEM. SOC. PAR. TRANS. II, 12, 2252 (1976).

5.1.. Baughcun, H. Hoffman, S.R. Leone, D.J. Neobitt, FAR. DISC. CHEM. SOC.,
61, 306 (1979).

R.J. Donovan, P.J. Robertson, SPECTROSCOP. 1311‘s.. 5, 28 (1972).

R.J. Donovan, P.J. Robertson, SPECTROSCOP. LB‘ITS., 2, 361 (1972).

P. Venkateswarlu, CAN. J. PHYS., a, 812 (1975).

0.9:. King, Am. Richardson, J. pm. spmosc” 3;, 339 (1966).

c.w. Kind, AM. Richardson, J. HOL. svzcmoscn _2_1, 353 (1966).

J.A. Myer, J.A.R. Samson. J. CHEM. PHYS., g, 266 (1970).

R.J. Donovan, J.R. Konstantos, J. PHOTOCHD4.. 1, 75 (1972).

A.D. Baranmkl. J.R. McDonald, CHE“. PHYS. 1311's., :42, 172 (1977).

M.N. K. Ashfold, J.P. Simon, J. CHEM. SOC. FAR. TRANS. II, 13, 858 (1977).
M.J. Sabcty-Dzvonik, R.J. Cody, J. CHEM. PHYS., 16, 125 (1977).

S.T. Animoto, J.R. Hicsenfeld, R.H. Young. CHEN. PHYS. 1311's., _6_5, 402 (1979).
G.A. West, M.J. Berry, CHEM. PHYS. 1311‘s., 5_6_, 423 (1978).

J.w. Rabalats, J.H. McDonald. V. Scherr. S.P. HeGlynn, CHEN. REV., 7_l. 73
(1971).

0. Atabeck, R. Lefebvre, CHEM. PHYS. LETTS., g. 29 (1977).

R.N. llaazeldine. J. CHEM. 8°C., [2. 1764 (1953).

76

FOIOP'FICIALUSEONLY
83.
84.
85.
86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.

98.

99.
100.
101.
102.

103 .

MWLWMY

R.A. Boschi, 0.x. Sslshub, not. PHYS., _2_1., 289 (1972).
R.A. Boschi, D.R. Salahub, HOL. PHYS” 23. 735 (1972).
K. Hohla, K.1.. Ramps, Z. NATURE, &, 938 (1972).

G.A. Skorobogstov, v.6. Seleznev, 3.“. Maksinov, 0.“. Slesar', 2111? [JOURNAL
OF TECHNICAL PHYSICS], 22, 21656 (1975).

v.9... Islesskiy. 1.1.. Yachnev, 0mm 1 spmaosxopm [omcs m spmoscom,
Q. 638 (1977).

AM. Prsvilov. F.I. Vilesov, V.A. Yelokhin, V.S. Ivsnov, A.S. Kozlov, WANTOVAYA
ELBKTRGIIKA. 2, 618 (1978).

A.S. Kozlov, A.H. Prsvilov, mmIYA WSW!“ ENERGIY [Ina ENERGY CHDIISTRY],
1_5. No 6 (1981).

".8. Felps, P. Hochmsnn, P. Brint, S.P. HeGlynn, J. 1101.. SPECTROSC., 2.
355 (1976).

uxr. Want, us. Felps, 0.1.. Findley. 1.3.1». Rsu, 5.9. McGIyun. J. cm. ms..
g. 3940 (1977).

J.D. Scott, ".8. Felps, S.P. McGlynn, NUCL. mm. METHODS, 12’ 231 (1978).
11.1.. Baker, 8.1!. Russel, J. 1401.. smosc., 6_9_, 211 (1978).

LR. Sutcliffe, A.D. welsh, TRANS. PARADAY SOC., 21. 873 (1961).

14.6. Price, J. CHEM. ms.. 3, S39 (1936).

R.S. Mulliken, B. Teller, PHYS. REV” _6_1_, 277 (1962).

A.L. Andreassen. 5.“. Bauer, J. 01811. PHYS., 5_6_, 3802 (1972).

1..V. Vilkov, v.5. Hestryukav, “.1. Ssdovs. "Opredeleniye geometricheskogo
stroyeniya svobodnykh nolekul" ("The Determination of the Geometric Structure
of Free Holecules"], Leningrad, Khiniya Publishers. 1978, p 125.

G.A. Gowder, 3. A11. J. HOLEC. STRUCT. _2_5_, 377 (1975).

6.1.. Gender, 5. A11. J. HOLEC. mucr. 39, 181 (1976).

J.C. eta-tings. 11.2. Palmer, D.P. Acschillsn. OPTICS CWS.. _2_7, 655 (1978).
(LA. Gander. J. "01.. SPEC1'ROSC., Q, 667 (1979).

0.1!. Sslshub, R.A. Boschi, in "Chemical Spectroscopy and Photochemistry in the
VUV", Dordrecht-Boston. 1974, p. 191.

77

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
104.
105.

106.

107.
108.
109.

110.

111.

112.
113.
1110.
115.
116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

F.J. Canes, S. Pionteck, BERICHTE BUNSENGES. PHYS. 6894., _8_1. 219 (1977).
F.J. Cones. S. Pionteck. CIlEH. PHYS. Lms., g, 616 (1978).

6.1.. Skorobogatov, v.6. Seleznev. 0.“. Slesar', v.n. Tret'yak, "Tezisy dokl.
III Vsesoyuz. soveshch. po fotokhinu" ("Abstracts of Papers of the Third
All-Union Conference on Photochuiotry'ﬂ, Rostov-na-Donu. 8 - 11 June 1977,
p 236.

".11. Levy, J.P. Simona. J. CHEM. 50C. PAR. TRANS. II. _7_1, S61 (1975).

R.E. Pal-er. 'r.D. Padrick. J. CHEM. PINS” g... 2051 (1976).

Am. Pravilov, KHIHIYA VYSMIRH ENERGIY, 12, No ’0 (1981).

A.H. Pravilov. A.S. Kozlov, F.1. Vilcm, KVANTOVAYA mourn, 2. 1161
(1978).

L.S. Yershov, V.Yu. Zaleukiy, v.1. Sokolov, KVANTWAYA BLEKTRONIKA, i.
865 (1978).

'l'.P. Hunter, K.S. Kriatjansson. cum. PHYS. LETTS., 5_8_. 291 (1978).

A. Gedanken, ".0. Rowe, cm. ms. 1.ms.. a. 39 (1975).

M. Dzvonik, J. Yang, R. Bersohn, J. cam. PHYS.. 6_1. 10408 (1974).
Tsao-Chi-Hing. J.H.A Root, J. cum. PHYS., 7_6_, 308 (1972).

C.C. Chou, P. Angelberger, P.S. Rowland, J. PHYS. CED!” ﬂ, 2536 (1971).

A.H. Pravilov, LG. Karpov, L.G. Smirnova, P.I. Vilesov, IGIIHIYA VYSOKIIH
ENERGIY, l. 335 (1973).

L.6. Karpov, A.H. Pravilov. P.I. Vilesov. IOiIHIYA VYSCXIKH ENERGIY. 8, 689
(1974)

LG. Karpov, A.H. Pravilov, P.I. Vilenov, KVANTOVAYA unmoum. g, 822.
(1977).

LG. Karpov. Adi. Pravilov. P.I. Vilesnv, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. i, 889,
(1977).

“1.6. Baaov. S.L. Boldyrev. L.I. Larionov. A.S. Doynikov. G.Ye. Tsvilyuk,
KVAN'I‘OVAYA ELEK’I'RONIKA, 3, 1850 (1975).

(LA. Tacacs. J.E. Hulard. J. PHYS. CHEH., 8_1, 13103 (1977).

LE. Brus. V.E. Bondybey, cm. PHYS. LB‘l‘TS., 3_6, 252 (1975).

78

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
126.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.

130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.

139.

POI OFFICIAL USE MY

LB. Brus. v.3. Bondybey, J. CHEM. PHYS., _6_5, 71 (1976).

V. Yu. Zslesskiy, AJI. Kokushkin, KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, 2, 1501 (1976).
R.F. Schoufele, L. Good-an, TRANS. FARADAY 8°C.. 6—1, 597 (1965).

R.C. Neunsn, Jr.. J. ORG. 611314., a, 1852 (1965).

s. Yanashits, s. Noguchi, '1‘. Haysksva. BULL. CHEM. SOC. JAPAN. 4_5, 659 (1972).

C. Sandorfy, in "Cheuicsl Spectroscopy and Photoch-istry in VIN". Dordrecht-
Boston, 1976, p 176.

J. Schsnder, B.R. Russel, J. 1101.. 98011086., Q, 379 (1977).

D.R. Sslshub, R.A. Boschi, cum. PHYS. 11118., E, 320 (1972).

M. Kawasaki. S.J. Lee, R. Ber’sohn., J. cam. PHYS.. 6_3, 809 (1975).

H. Ito. P.S. Kuang. 8.14. Kosower, TRANS. FARADAY $06., ﬂ, 1662 (1961).
K. Kimura, S. Nskagura, SPECTROCBIMICA AC'I‘A, _1_7, 166 (1961).

R.J. Donovan, C. Potskis, 11.11. Gillespie, J. PHO’IOGB‘I., g, 133 (1976).
H. Kawasaki. S.J. Lee, R. Bersohn, J. CHM. PHYS., Q, 2675 (1977).
PM. Kroger, S.J. Riley, J. cum. PHYS., ﬂ, M083 (1977).

m1. Kroger. S.J. Riley. J. cm. ma, ﬂ, 3863 (1979).

”Energii razryvs khimicheskikh svyszey. potentsisly ionizscsii i srodstvo
k elektronu" ["Chaicsl Bond Rupture Energies. Ionization Potentials and
Electron Affinity"), Handbook edited by A. P. Kondrst'yev,

Moscow, ﬂanks Publishers, 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvsntovaya elektroniks", 1981

8225

C80:

1862/252

79

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOI‘NHWCIAI.USE(NVLV

UDC 621.373.826.038.823

TUNABLB CARBON MONOXIDE LASER

Moscow KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 7 (109), Jul 81
(manuscript received 19 Nov 80) pp 1560-1550

[Paper by V.I. Hasychev, v.c. Plotnichenko and V.K. Sysoyev, Physics Institute
imeni P.N. Lebedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] The spectral and energy (power) characteristics
of a sealed carbon monoxide laser with selective and non-
selective optical resonators were studied. A diffraction

grating with 100 lines/mm and a blaze angle of 30 degrees
was used to make the selective resonator, which served as the

input element of the laser. The radiation spectrum of the
tunable CO laser contained 90 emission lines in a range of
1,626 to 1,910 curl with a power of 10 m” to 1.36 W. In the
case of the nonselective resonator, 36 emission lines were
obtained with an integral power of about 13 V.

1. Introduction

Several new experimental techniques such as calorimetry, interferometry, polari-
metry, photoacoustical spectroscopy, etc. have recently been proposed for the

study of the optical losses in highly transparent solid-state materials used in
high power laser equipment as well as in fiber optic devices [1, 2]. Their high
sensitivity (on the order of 10-5 - 10-7 cm'l) is achieved primarily through the

use of high power radiation sources (usually from 0.1 to 100 W).

The solid-state or gas lasers employed for this purpose usually emit either one
wavelength [3, h] or several wavelengths simultaneously [5]. This substantially
limits the capabilities of the methods enumerated above, since.spectral measurements
of the absorption and scattering coefficients in the materials being studied are
needed to obtain information on the kind, quantity and form of inclusion impurities,

which lead to additional optical losses.

It is necessary that the radiation source provide for the following for the spectral
measurements of optical losses in highly transparent solid-state materials:

80

F0!CIHHK1AI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

—1'he capability of tuning the emission wavelength in a maximally wide spectral
range;

”The capability of selectively segregating a rather narrow spectral range from
the entire tuning range (the width of the band singled out should be less than
the absorption bandwidth of impurities, which in solid state materials at room
temperature usually exceeds several cm-l);

-The capability of obtaining maximum emission power over the entire tuning range;

--Hinimun emission power fluctuations (= l 2) over the measurenent time (usually
from several seconds to several minutes).

In the central infrared spectrum (from 2 to 15 pm), in which it is anticipated
that optical losses will reach a level of 10'6 - 10-9 cm-l, a figure which is
several orders of magnitude lower than in the asterials based on quartz glass
[6, 7], where HP (2.7 pm), DP (3.8 ml). co (5.5 m) and 602 (10.6 um) lasers in
principle can be used as such sources.

The 10 - 7 un band is of major interest; in which both the mini-um of the internal
optical losses and a minimum of the material dispersion for many m materials
occur [8. 9]. This band can be almost conpletely covered by a carbon monoxide
laser, which makes it possible to obtain an emission of more than 270 lines with
intervals fro: hundredths to several Cl.)- [10].

The task proposed in this work was the design of a tunable CO laser suitable for
the measurement of optical losses in solid-state material. The studies made of
its spectral and energy (power) characteristicsareofindependentzscientific and
practical interest in view of the presence of a rather limited quantity of liter-
ature devoted to tunable carbon monoxide lasers.

2. The Structural Design of the Tunable co Laser and the Parameters of the
Selective Element

The tunable C0 laser was designed around the industrial 13-22-00 laser (C0
variant). The gas discharge tube of the indicated laser was fabricated from
molybdenua glass. The length of the discharge portion of the tube was 125 cm

and the internal diameter was 15 In. A completely reflective internal mirror
with a radius of curvature of 3 In was secured to one of the end faces of the tube,
where this mirror was aligned during the assembly of the tube. The output f-ace
of the tube was covered with a gallium arsenide window. which wss sealed to the
face at the Brewster angle. The working composition of the gas discharge tube
was a mixture of CO-He-Nz-ﬂe gases at an overall pressure of about 19.5 IIII Hg.

The discharge was excited by direct current and cooled by a water flow. The
t-perature of the cooling water was 12 to 1‘ 'c and the water rate of flow did

not usually exceed 5 to 6 Main.

81

MWWMY
FtﬂltﬂﬂﬂCthlliﬁiﬂﬁLY

A glass diffraction grating with an aluminum reflective coating having 100
lines/mm and a blaze angle of 30‘ was used for the selection of the vibrational-
rotational transitions. The grating was set up in an autocollimating mode and was
the output element of the optical resonator. The choice of such a grating con-
figuration was due primarily to the specific structural design features of the
laser gas discharge tube, which had, as was indicated above, a completely reflec-

tive mirror internal to the vacuum. A second order interference echelette was
used for feedback (k - 2).

The emission from the resonator was brought out through zero (k - 0) and first

(k - 1) orders at angles of 0 and -33° respectively to the normal of the grating,
which is in good agreement with the calculated value of the angles obtained from
the formula of a diffraction grating operating in an autocollimeting mode. A
linearly polarized plane wave with an electrical vector perpendicular to the
lines of the grating (perpendicular E polarisation) fell on the grating.

The dispersion resolution in a spectral range of 5.2 to 6.2 um was Av - 2.2 to
2.75 cm-1 for the given optical resonator configuration (radius of curvature of
the mirrors of R1 - 3 m and R2 - a; a spacing between them of 160 cm) and the
grating parameters (k - 2, N - 100 lines/nub. In this case, the grating makes

it possible in principle to single out one vibrational-rotational component of

any of the P-bands. 0n the other hand, since the energy levels of the C0 molecule
are almost equidistant, then because of the overlap of various P-bands, CO lasers
emit frequencies which are close. the interval between which can be less than
0.01 cm"1 [11]. For this reason, several emission lines could fall together in
the spectral range Av resolved by the grating being used.

It is necessary to know such parameters of the diffraction grating as the intensity
distribution in the working orders and theoveralloptical losses for the entire
spectral range in order to optimize the output parameters of the created laser.

The measurement of these parameters was made using the configuration shown in
Figure la.

The laser beam (in this case, one of the beams). brought out from the resonator,
is again reflected to diffraction grating 1 by means of rotating mirror 2. In
this case, the direction of the radiation reflected from the mirror is close to
the direction of the diffracted radiation of the gradient used for feedback.
ﬁfter falling on the grating, the beam is again diffracted in directions which
are determined by the grating parameters. By measuring the power of the diffracted
radiation, To. Pl. 92 and the power of the radiation incident on the mirror P'
(or, as it turned out, the power P? which is equal to it), one can determine he
reflection factors in the k-th order of kg and the overall diffraction grating
losses y as a function of the frequency of the incident laser emission (and
consequently, also as a function of the angle of incidence of the radiation on
the grating O reckoned from the normal to its surface):

R. - PJPQ: y - (5- F “M’s-

82

FOI.0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLV

 

Figure 1. The configuration for the measurements of the reflection
factors R}, in various spectral orders and the optical
losses 1 of the diffraction grating (a) and the spectral
characteristics of these quantities (b).

111e measured functions of MW) and 1(v) for the grating used in this work are
shown in Figure lb. As the measurements have shown, the intensity distributions
of the diffracted radiation in the zero and first orders proved to be practically
the same.

3. A Study of the Spectral and Energy Characteristics of a ‘hmable 00 Laser.

An overall schematic of the experimental set-up for the study of the spectral
and energy characteristics of the laser which was created is shown in Figure 2.

The emission from laser 1, after being reflected from rotating mirror 2, was
modulated by mechanical chopper- 3 and split by means of light dividing plate 6
into two parts. each of which was directed into the appropriate measurement channel.

One part of the laser radiation was focused by [01 lens, 5, on the input slot of
the infrared monochromator of an Its-29 spectrophotometer (6), after which it was
fed to Gezhu photodetector 7. The electrical signal fra the photodstector was
recorded by a KSP-lo autorecorder (9) following amplifier 02-8 (8). In the align-
ment of the readout circuitry, its operation was visually monitored by means of
the 81-483 oscilloscope 10.

The other, part of the radiation, intended for monitoring the stability of the
emission power during laser operation, fell on radiation detector 11, the signal
from which was amplified in 12 and recorded by autorecorder 13. To reduce the
thermal and mechanical drifts of the optical resonator, and consequently also the
power and frequency of the emission, the laser being studied was rigidly secured
on a special vibration resistant stand, made of invar.

83

summon“
FOR 0‘11CIAI.US€1JNLY

A calibrated IMO-2N meter, 16. was used for the absolute measurenents of the
laser emission power.

The monochromator and resulting laser emission spectra were calibrated based on
the absorption spectra of H20 vapors in the atmosphere, prerecorded on a type
FTS-lh Fourier-spectrometer with a spectral resolution of 0.1 cm'l. The mono-

chromator provided a spectral resolution of the recorded laser emission spectra
of no worse than 0.5 cm'l.

The frequencies of the vibrational-
rotational transitions observed in the
experiments and their identification
which we made in accordance with

[10, 12, 13] are given in Table 1. As
can be seen from the Table, the emis-
sion spectrum of the sealed CO laser
corresponded to transitions of the
P-branch of the ground electron state
X't* of the CO molecule between the
vibrational levels v e v - l rfmom
19 + 18 to 7 9 6 with rotational
quantum numbers of J - l + J from

9 to 23. The laser emission spectrum
was recorded at discharge parameters
corresponding to the maximum emission
power for all vibrational-rotational

transitions, i.e., for the operation of
the device with a nonselective optical resonator. The discharge current was 18
mA and the voltage across the tube was about 8 RV.

    

r-----—--— _ .-..

"-1

Figure 2. Schematic of the experimental
set-up.

The lasing region of the laser with the grating encompassed a spectral range of
1.626 to 1.910 cm-1 (6.15 to 5.23 um) in which 90 vibrational-rotational transi-
tions were observed. The emission power for the strong lines amounted to from
100 to 940 mu. He will note that the emission powers shown in Table 1 represent
the sum of the resonator output powers in the zero and first interference orders
of the diffraction grating.

An analysis of Figure 1b and Table 1 shows that the relatively low emission
powers in a range of 1,650 to 1,750 cm'1 are undoubtedly related to the large
optical losses in the diffraction grating which run up to 15 - 17 percent. As
was shown in [15], the optical losses of a resonator can have a substantial

impact on the emission power of CO lasers, which have relatively low gains at
the emission lines.

It should be noted that when tuning the selective resonator, it was possible to

have lasing both at one and at several transitions simultaneously. The vibrational-
rotational transitions at which simultaneous lasing was observed are noted

in Table 1 with the curly braces. It is characteristic that with emissions at
two and more transitions simultaneously, the difference between the rotational

quantum numbers IAJI - IJ; - J;_1I remained constant when tuning the diffraction
grating and was equal to -6.

8b

F0! OlllCLAI.USllDNlﬂ
POI OPﬂCIAL USE ONLY

Emission Lines and Their Power in a CO Laser with a Diffraction
Grating

 

 

 

Line Wavelength _ Olin-aunt all-A Mn mn- P. uh B)
Hon-p mm ”an. v. (C) . I 155
m" (r. . . o '. P- ‘

umber “-1 ’ '. ' I”) 5-“. bur.” on- '

u a a I... o 1
I new." I9-ol3 P l 0 30 IS
2 I63I.73 I8» I7 P 0 I6 1
3 163939 I3-ol7 P I I 24 I:
4 1643.26 I6» I7 P (I . I I6 II
6 I660.” I6» I7 P (I6) :0 60 w
{ 6 I666.” I6»I7 P I3) 0 40 12
7 I660J7 I7-ol6 P I9) 20 66 IS
6 I664.“ I7 » I6 P I6) 76 94 I4
9 1667.91 I1»I6 P l7) ” I16 [4
I0 16‘“ .16 [1» I6 ' P I6) 1! M II)
II I679.” I7»I6 P I3 :26 ”o I‘
I2 I6§JI I1» I6 P (I ' 4 64 I0
I3 I666.” I6» I6 P (I6) ” w I4
I4 IMJO I6» I6 P (I6) 64 76 I4
I6 INMJ3 l6-vI6 P H) 60 66 22
IIB I706.“ I6» I4 P 70 I) I4
I1 Iﬂﬂ.39 I6-l6 P I3) 0 I0 6
1101.69 I6» I6 P (I3) II) $0 I4
{I6 ”09.69 I6»I4 P09) I66 250 Q
I9 I1” .62 I6» I6 P (I2) 50 IN I0
20 I1l3.66 I6» I4 P (I6) son 320 I6
2| |12I.39 I6» I4 P I6) 220 2!) I6
22 "26.23 16» I4 P I6 460 460 I0
23 "2633 I4-0I3 P I I60 a» . 26
24 I129.W 16» I4 P I4 4% 400 I6
26 "32.66 I6»I4 P I II6 I” I2
26 "36.62 I6»I4 P I2) IN I60 I6
21 "36.40 I4»I3 P I6) 750 750 IS
28 "42.37 I4» I3 P 5|?) 560 5w I8
29 I146.” I4 » I3 P I6) 340 340 l8
30 "41.04 13» I2 P (22) I6 I6 18
3| 11501) 14" '3 P I15) 560 550 I8
32 "54.07 I4» I3 PIN) «0 m M
33 ”55.27 l3» I2 P (1)) $40 6” 25
34 I157.” I4» I3 P (I3) I” 260 I0
36 ”59.34 I3» I2 P (I9) 640 660 a)
”59.34 l3» I2 P (I9) IN I40 24
36 "63.36 I3» I2 P (I8) 620 6% I8
37 "66.50 I4» I3 P (II) 30 40 I4
36 ”67.36 I3» l2 P (I7) I0 30 I4
39 ”67.16 l2» II P (23) 640 540 I8
40 "75.25 I3» I2 P (I5) 6“ 6m I6
m I119.|6 I3» 12 P (:4) I64 180 20
N2 1790.23 12-. II . P (20) 350 400 25
43 ”63.02 I3» I2 P (I3) m 260 I0
{44 ”64.33 I?» II P (I9) m m 20
45 ”86.64 I3» I2 P (I2) 0 20 I4
{ "66.64 I3» l2 P (I2) IN I” I0
46 ”68.40 I2» II P (lb) 350 360 I3
47 "95.43 l2» II PII6) 2% 260 IO
4” IMAM II -o lo P (22) 320 400 25
I49 IMJO l2» II P (I6) 520 540 I4
150 IOOIJJ ll»l0 Pl2l) , $60 600 20
85

FOIOII'I'ICIALUSEONLY
é

§s§§§

no
9‘0
no

80
010
360
130
9.0
7“)

40
240
no

355

$585

88:35:

§§ §§§ 32‘: 3% 8§§ §§§

§s§

sag s2 2% Egg 35

253

3535

32:258

 

500823333333 83838;: a; 88 88:3 3; a; 8:8 mm
ma 0PM“. ‘5‘ MIX

         

§§
2 3~“
as
S tr
V l * . l
., as
- :2 s .h
,ﬁn'nbn'aw'a-Ms’» n v '5 5,, 17'» 's-ws» a :2 z:
a 0.00" I

Figure 3. The relationship between the intensities of some
emission lines with a change in the discharge current.

Thus. if lasing occurred at the 1,856.91 cm'l line (the 10 + 9 P transition (14)),
then the 1,855.61 cm-l line was also observed at the same time (the 9 ¢ 8 P transi-
tion (20)). If lasing with three lines was realized simultaneously, for example,

at frequencies of 1,823.61, 1,825.61 and 1,826.21 cm-l, belonging to three different
bands (12 + 11, ll 4 10 and 10 9 9), then the law indicated above was also pre-
served (Iul - L13“ - J31 - 3;; - :34] - 6).

It should also be noted that with sianltaneous lasing with two or more transitions,
the ratio between the intensities of the lines and the number of then depended
substantially on the angular adjustment of the echelette. This is apparently
related to the difference in the spectral-selective losses of the optical resonator
at various inclination angles of the grating. For this reason, in the case of
simultaneous lasing with several transitions, the diffraction grating was fine-
tuned to obtain the maximum total power with the minimum number of transitions
(usually two) with the minim-a frequency spacing between the- (less than the
spectral resolution of the selective element).

Additionally, attempts were made in the experiments to obtain the maximum emission
powers at each of the lines through the optimization of the discharge current. The
maximum enission powers obtained in this case for each line and the optimal dis-
charge currents are given in the right side columns of Table 1. Hith a change in
the discharge current, the ratio between the line intensities, as a rule. varied
considerably, and in a number of cases, the weakest of the generated lines was
successfully suppressed (Figure 3). The curves for the enission power are shown
in Figure 6 as a function of the discharge current for certain lines.

The typical emission power instability of the CD laser with a diffraction grating
which was studied here, recorded following preheating of the device for 1.5 to 2
hours, usually did not exceed 5 percent over S to 10 minutes.

87

INDI<OFIICIAI.IENB(IVLY
F0!‘0FFK3AI.US£(MNLY

4. A Comparison of the Emission Spectra of CO Laser with Selective and Nonselective
Resonators

It is of interest to compare the emission spectra of a carbon monoxide laser with
selective and nonselective resonators.

In the case of operation without selection of the vibrational-rotational transi-
tions. the diffraction grating was replaced with a flat semitransparent mirror with
a multilayer dielectric coating. The reflection factor of the mirror was 87 to 90
percent in a range of 1.650 to 1.950 cm'l.

 

Figure 6. The emission power of a laser with a selective resonator as
a function of discharge current. The numbers of the lines
are taken from Table l.

The frequencies, identification and emission power of the vibrational-rotational
transitions observed in the experiments are given in Table 2. As can be seen
from the Table. up to 36 transitions were observed which belong to the v r v - l
vibrntrational bands from 19 + 18 to 7 + 6 in a range of 1,626 — 1,91‘ cm-l. The
integral emission power. measured with the IMO-2N detector, amounted to about 13 H.
and in this case. the most intense lines had a power ofnmore than 1 H. We will
note that the laser emission spectra were usually recorded after heating the
device for 1.5 to 2 hours at discharge parameters which correspond to the maximum
integral emission power. The discharge current in this case amounted to 18 mA,
the voltage across the gas discharge tube was 8 RV and the water rate of flow

(at a temperature of 12 to 14 °C) was about 6 liters/min.

FI”!(HWHCIAI.USE(HNLY
POI OMCIAI. USE ONLY

 

  
 
  
  

TABLE 2
Emission Lines and Their Power in a C0 Laser with a Nonselective
Resonator
ission Power
”“1433.“3'252- ”sarx" ‘

I M

2 IO

3 P (I6) 1

4 P58) 04

5 P I8

6 P( 2

7 P ( 213

8 P ( I10

9 P ( 86
no P ( 16
II P ( 214
:3 2‘ 3:
I4 P (I3 I87
:2 2:5. as
[7 P (I9) loss
I8 P (l8) IIOI
I9 P (20) ms
20 P(I an
2| P (l 2
a: :0" as
24 I "24
as ‘3? u”
26 P 3m 2m
21 P IO) M
3's i‘Ii’ ‘éé:
so P 5| 1524
SI P (I 835
33 5‘? $
34 P {IQ I!
S P (I5) 63
as P (It) 2

 

It is interesting to compare the results obtained with the results of the known
literature on transition selection with sealed CO lasers with a diffraction
grating. in particular, with paper [lb].

The emission spectrua of the laser studied here proved to be considerably wider
than in paper [110]. in which there were no transitions belonging to the vibrs- :-
tional bands 19 + 18. 18 + 17 and 17 -> 16 in the low frequency band and 8 -> 7 and
7 -. 6 in the high frequency band. Iioreover, the overall nulber of lines segre-
gaLed in [11.] was considerably snaller than in the laser we studied (36 and 90

89

FOR ON]. USE ONLY
FtﬂltlﬂﬂCJAI.USIINULY

transitions respectively). The latter remark is also justified for a nonselective
optical resonator: 23 transitions in paper [16] and 36 transitions in this paper.
The maximul laser enission power densities we obtained were likewise higher than in
[14] (1.36 and 0.2 V respectively), despite the considerable diffraction grating
losses. whichreached 15 to 17 percent in the low frequency of the spectm. Appar-
ently, these differences are related to the substantial difference in the ratio of
the components of the working mixture. and primarily to the lack of oxygen in the
working mixture of the device studied here.

 

Figure 5. The contributions of individual vibrational transitions to
the output power of a C0 laser as a function of the number of
the lower vibrational level.

Key: a. Nonselective resonator, JP - 18 mA (1); selective
resonator. JP - 18 IA (2) and Jopt (3);

b. Nonselective resonator; the alignment settings of
mirrors 1 - 6 correspond to the columns of Table 4.

Now. if on analogy with the results of paper [14], the powers of the groups of
lines corresponding to different vibrational bands are suned. then the power
distribution in the vibrational-rotational emission bands of laser with selective
and nonselective resonators can have several naxina (Figure 5a, Table 3). We
will also note that the power distribution in the groups of lines corresponding to
the different vibrational bands in a laser with a nonselective resonator depend
substantially on the alignment of its mirrors. As can be seen frou Figure Sb and
Table 6, for the four emission spectra taken sequentially with the ease pre-
liminary align-ant of the output mirror, the power distribution in the groups of
lines proved to be substantially different. however. in this case. the integral
emission power of the laser changed insignificantly. This is in good agreement
with what was noted previously in paper [15] as regards the high stability of

the integral emission power of CO lasers, despite the relatively great fluctua-
tions in the emission power for each of the emission transitions.

90

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
POI! OFFICIAL [88 MIN

TABLE 3

Vibratlml Transitions and Their Powers in o co Loser with Selective
and Nonselective Resonators
HgnLv-ogu

(1)

ﬂoat III-en
owner.

you"

        
    

   

   

 

  

‘32 Common. poem,

' (’ovdﬂ'"

Line Nmber

  

P. '33!

II" I"

 

   

l 7-96 58 64
2 8-." l0” ll”
3 H 39“) m
4 l0»! 3924 4| l0
5 lI-OIO soon GSIC
6 12-." 3192 m2
7 lJ-ol2 m 3!”
8 14—43 ”10 m
9 lS—uM [m 20”
IO l6—>I5 SIO 7“
ll I7—>16 442 660

~—
“N

Key: 1. Nunber of the lover vibrational level;
2. Nonselective resonator. P, n“;
3. Selective resonator.

 

TABLE ’0

Vibrational Transitions and Their Powers in e co Laser with Four
Different Mirror Settings

 

       
   
 

  
 
 

'- (xi :3; mm Iuyum. I81
I 1.1” Huber a. macro
Moot, sul- melon
noon 1. l I It 2 I

 

 

 

‘ l 7 -. e 19 m s 53
2 a -. 7 530 no ms 539
| a o - a .I 557 2092 soon loss
I 4 IO - 9 was 4370 2355 5045
. 5 n - l0 I101 1m mo ms
6 :2 .. 11 1m 1m mo as:
7 13 -. 12 noon on 907 679
s u - 13 775 m «a 421
9 Is - u 753 273 no 272
l0 l6 -. I5 296 m zoo tea
n I? -. I6 :21 no: we so
I! 18 .. l7 :9 o u o
13 IS .. no so 0 o as

(C) Cympuss mm anywhe-

Key: A. Nulber of the lover vibrational level:
3. Emission power. I";
C. Total euission power.

____—____—__.——_——————-——-————

91

MWLWONLV
FOR OFHCIAL US! ONLY

We demonstrated the possibility of utilizing the laser described here for the
measurement of optical losses in highly trmsparant solid-state materials with the
atanple of caloroaetric neasuranents of the bulk and surface absorption coefficients
in nonocryatals and in a Tlcl optical ceramic, the results of which are given in
paper [16].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. L.H. Skolnik, "Optical Properties of Highly Transparent Solids", Ed. S.S. Mitre,
B. Bendow. Plem- Press. 1975, p. 405.

2. A. Hordvik. APPL. OPTICS, 1.2. 2828 (1977).
3. D.A. Pinnow, T.C. Rich, APPL. OPTICS, $3, 986 (1973).
4. 8.0. Allen, J.A. Harrington. APPL. OPTICS. l_7, 1679 (1978).

S. v.6. Artyuahenko, Ye.M. Dianov. L.V. Zhukova, P.H. Kozlov, V.H. Maaychev.
Ye.c. Morozov. v.0. Plotnichenko, KVANTOVAYA ELBKTJOHIKA, 6. 646 (1979).

6. H. Osanai, T. Shioda. 1'. Moriyana. S. Araki. M. Poriguchi, '1‘. Izawa, H. Takata,
ELECTRON. Lms.. l_2, 5149 (1976).

7. T. Izawa, H. Shibata. A. Takeda. APPL. PHYS. LBTTS., 11, 33 (1977).
8. LG. VanUitert, S.H. Hemple, APPL. PHYS. LB‘I‘TS., Q. 57 (1978).
9. C.H.L. Goodman, SOLID STATE AND ELECTRON DEVICES, Z. (5), 129 (1978).

10. R.M. Dale, M. Herman. J.H.C. Johus. A.R.H. McKellar. S. Hagler, I.K.M. Strathy.
CAN. J. PHYS.. ii, 677 (1979).

11. R.B. Dennis, H.I\. Mackenzie. c. McCleccand. F.H. Hana, 0PT. AND LASER TECHNOL,
E. 221 (1976).

12. "Spravochnik fizlcheskikh vellchin" ["Handbook of Physical Quantities"]. edited
by I.K. Kikoin, Moscow, Atalizdat. 1976, p 720.

13. "Spravochnik po lazeram" ["Laser Handbook"), edited by A.M. Prokhorov, Moscow,
Sov. Radio Publishers, 1978. p 108.

14. V.P. Avtonomov. M.V. Zavertayev. Yu.A. Kochetkov, H.H. Ochkin, N.N. Sobolev,
KVAHTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, g, 1556 (1976).

15. v.5. Aleynikov, V.N. Masyche. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. g, 1556 (1976).

16. Yc.M. Dianov, v.1. Maaychev. V.G. Plotnichenko, V.K. Sysoyev, KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, 1. 131.2 (1°80).
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 avyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika“, 1981

8225
C50: 1862/252 9;

WI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OIOFFIGALUSEONLY

UDC 621.373.826.038.825.3

EFFICIENCY OF Li-Nd-La PHOSPHATE GLASS LASER IN W PUMPING P0933 ms:
FREE-RUNNING OPBMTIGI

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian. Vol 8, No 7 (109), Jul 81 (manuscript
received 23 Dec 80) pp 1598-1600

[8.1. Denker, ILN. Il'ichev. G.V. Haksimova, A.A. Malyutin, V.V. Osiko and
P.P. Pashinin, Physics Institute ileni Ml. Lebedev of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, Moscow]

Free running operation of a laser using concentrated Li-Nd-La
phosphate glass was studied in a pumping energy range of l to
15 J. A laser efficiency of 2.9 percent was obtained at a
pmping energy of 16.5 J. The internal losses of the resonator
are estimated and the ultimately attainable efficiency is
determined. Laser operation was studied in one-shot and pulse
repetition nodes right up to a frequency of 25 lit.

Free-running oscillation was optimized and studied in [3] for s pumping range of
20 to 100 J for concentrated Li-Nd-La phosphate glass (KNPS [CPO] [1. 2]). The
results obtained in [3], as well as in [b], show that in the small pumping energy
range (less than 20 J), the parameters of CPC laser can be rather high. (btain-
ing the laxinum efficiencies in this puping range is especially important fron
the viewpoint of increasing the pulse repetition rate in neodymium glass lasers.

This paper, which is a continuation of [3], is devoted to the optimisation of the
free-running mode of a CPJ laser for one-shot and repeating pulses in s pulping
energy range of l to 15 J. where primary attention has been devoted to the question
of the efficiency of punping energy converstion to the inverted population. which
is of importance in laser design. This parameter also primarily governs the
utlimstely attainable efficiency of the lasers.

The studies were performed with cylindrical active elements (A3) with dimensions
of 6.3 In in diameter by 100 mm long made of CPG with an “(13+ ion concentration of

8 . 1020 cut-3. To strengthen the laser, the side surface of the active eluent
was etched to a depth of = 100 um. The end face surfaces were not transillulinated.

93

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

   

I J U 6.1!

Figure l. The output energy as a Figure 2. The average output power as a func-
function of the pumping tion of frequency for a pulping
energy for mirrors with energy of 2.6 J/pulae (l). 3.6
reflection factors of J/pulae (2). 4.9 J/pulse (3), 8.1
R - 83 X. r - 5 u (1) J/pulse (4). 10 leulse (5) and
and R - 96.5 x. r - 12 J/pulse (6); R - 96.51 (1-3) and
- 3 n (2). 832 (lo-6).

The pumping was accomplished with a Xe lanp (gas pressure of about 800 III Hg) with
discharge dimensions of lo Inn in diameter by 60 In- long. The illumination source
was a quartz nonoblock 40 III in diameter by 60 1:- long with a silver coating,
cooled with distilled water. The discharge circuit of the pulse tube was forned
by a 20 uFd capacitor and an inductance of 33 why. A slaved arc node with a
current of about 0.7 alps was employed.

The laser emission energy in a one-shot pulse node is shown in Figure l as a func-
tion of the pulping energy for two values of the reflection factor of the output
mirror: 83 and 96.51. It should be noted that the utilisation of a slaved arc made
it possible to obtain a gain in the output energy (for exasple, with a pumping
energy of 10 J, a gain by a factor 1.7). It can be seen from Figure 1 that with
10 J pumping. the effeciency is 2.6%. The threshold pulping when the denser of
the mirrors was used amounted to 1 J.

The results of measurements of the lasing characteristics of a CPG laser operating
in a pulse-periodic mode are shown in Figure 2. The family-[of curves is plotted
which show the average emission power as a function of the pulse repetition rates.
The pumping energy is fixed along each curve.

0f the greatest interest here are the results obtained for high pulse repetition
rates. Thus, at a frequency of 20 Hz and with an average pulping power of 260 H,
an average output power of 4.2 W was obtained (efficiency of 1.751) . In the region
of low pumping energies (2.6 J/pulse), the average output power was 0.5 H at a
repetition rate of 25 Hz (efficiency of 0.771). In an almost fully enclosed reso-
nator with the am frequency and a pumping energy per pulse of 1.2 J, the average
emission power (in one direction) was 3.3 a".

96

FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY
I‘DR‘OFFWCIAL IEHECMVLY

It should also be‘noted that the emission energy with pumping of 10 J/pulse for

a frequency of 25 Hz is only 402 less than the energy obtained in the one-shot
pulse mode (see Figure 1). Preliminary investigations showed that the major
reason for this reduction is the therno-optical distortions of the active element
during its pulping. which can be extremely effectively compensated for fixed
operating modes.

The internal resonator losses can be determined from the slopes of the curves
plotted in Figure l [S], as well as the ultimately possible differential laser
efficiency (i.e., the laser efficiency in the absence of internal resonator losses).
An expression was used for this which relates the lasing energy H to the para-
meters of the resonator. the active medium and the pumping energy Bu for a free
running laser. we shall write this function for a four-level medium [6], taking
into account the finite pumping pulse width, assuming it has a rectangular wave-
form:

n R '
v-%;',£.—s.(l+%), (1)

where R is the output mirror reflection factor; x is the internal resonator
losses; T is the pumping pulse width; r is the lifetime of the upper lasing
level; n is the efficiency of pumping energy conversion to the inverse popula-
tion; £0 -- uSIlnRI/Zo; o is the lasing transition cross-section; S is the
cross-sectional area of the active element; u is the lasing quantum energy.
Included in x are the losses due to absorption and light scattering in the
resonator eleaents, as well as diffraction losses and losses related to inaccuracy
in aligning the resonator. In particular, if only the absorption losses are
considered, then x - 211, where y is the coefficient of absorption in the active
element at the lasing wavelength; 1 is the length of the active element.

Formula (1) is quite well observed where the threshold is sufficiently exceeded
and where the lasing pulse width practically matches the pumping pulse width.
When a sufficient amount of experiaental data is available. this expression can
be used to find a nuaber of laser parameters: x, n, 80 and even R. The latter
is necessary when interference effects between the end faces of the active
element and the resonator mirrors have a strong inpact on the effective trans-
parency of the output mirror.

From the differential laser efficiency

“44%.... “'3 (2)

using two experimental curves for w (33) for different Ra and Rh, one can find
r and n. Thus, designating x - "a/"bv y - Inna/lnnb, and assuming that r does
not depend on R, we derive the following from (2):

95

FIIICIHHCJA1.USE(HVL¥
INDI‘OII1(1AI.USIGHVLV

_ . .._-._ (3)
w-(r—l) | InR.V(y—l)-

The quantity y can be found as the ratio H.(0)/Hb(0), extending the function

"(33) until it intereaecta the axis of the output energy on the aide of its
negative values.

He have the following for our experimental data from (1) and (2) (see Figure l):
x - 0.04 1 0.026 and n - 5 i 1.2 x. (The effective reflection factors taking

into account the influence of the end face of the active element were used in the
calculations).

Thus. an inveratigation of the lasing characteristics of a CPG laser in a pumping
energy range of l to 15 J has shown that a CPG active element of a couperatiVely
small diameter (6.3 In) efficiently intercepts the pumping radiation (n - 51).

A CPO laser also has a rather high efficiency in a pulse-periodic node, right up
to a repetition rate of 25 Hz.

The low internal losses of the resonator attest to the rather high optical quality
of the CPG active element. The numerical values of K and n can be utilized

in the design of lasers operating not only in a free running node. but also in a
Q-switched mode.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. s.Kh. Batygov, Yu.K. Voron'ko, 3.1. Denker, A.A. Zlenko, A.Ya. Karaaik,
c.K. Hakainova, v.3. Neustruyev, V.V. Oaiko. V.A. Sychugov, I.A. Shcherbakov,
Yu.S. Kuz'ninov. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, 2, 2243 (1976).

2. Yu.K. Voron'ko, 8.1. Denker. A.A. Zlenko, A.Ya. Karaaik. Yu.S. Kuz'minov, G.V.
Haksimova, V.V. Oaiko, A.H. Prokhorov. V.V. Sychugov, G.P. Shipulo, I.A.
Shcherbakow, DAN SSSR [REPORTS OF THE USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES], 227, 75
(1976).

3. A.G. Avaneaov, Yu.c. Basov. V.H. Garnash. 3.1. Denker, N.N. Il'ichev, G.V.
Haksimova, V.V. Osiko, A.A. Malyutin. P.0. Paahinin. A.H. Prokhorov, V.V.
Sychev, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, 1, 1,120 (1980).

4. A.c. Avaneaov, 1.V. Vasil'yev, Yu.K. Voron'ko. 3.1. Denker, S.V. Zinov'yev,

A.S. Kuznetaov, V.V. Osiko, P.P. Pashinin. A.H. Prokhorov. A.A. Senenov,
KVANTOVATA BLEK‘I'RWIKA, g, 1,586 (1979).

96

FOR‘OFFKﬂAl.USE(lVLY
FOI:OFIWCJAI.USEIMVLY

S. Yu.A. Anan'yev. A.A. ﬂak, 3.“. Sedov. ZhETF [JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND
THEORETICAL PBYSICS], ﬁg. 7 (1965).

6. A.A. mu, Yu.A. Anan'yev, ma. Yemkov, um [PROGRESS m m msm
scmaces], g, 373 (1967).

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "KN-ntovaya elektronika", 1981

8225
C80: 1862/252

97

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(IVLY
NI OHIO“. USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826

REQUIREMENTS PLACED 0N PUMPING X-RAY LASER WITH IONIZATION SOURCE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 7 (109). Jul 81 (nanuscript
received 28 May 81) pp 1606~l607

[Paper by F.V. Bunkin, v.1. Derzhiyev and 8.1. Yakovlenko, Physics Institute
ineni P.N. Lebedev of the USSR Acaduy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] It is shown that when pulping a nediun with an atomic
number of Z a 30 using shortwave electronagnetic radiation with

a wavelength of 79““? § 0.1 nu: and an intensity of = (1015 - 1016
“Ian2 over a time of cpulIP 2, 30 nsec, it is possible in principle
to achieve lasing with the n1 - 5.1. + nf - 3 transitions between
hydrogen-like states of nulticharged ions (A1“ I 1-2 on). The
active medium can be produced during the irradiation, for example,
using a copper or brass wire with a length of 1‘ I 1 n and an
initial radius of to § 0.3 not.

As is well known [1]. § 16). the reconbinational nonequilibriun of a plasma can
be maintained in the steady-state by an external ionizing source (for example, an
electron beam or short wave electromagnetic radiation), where the conditions for
lasing can be realized directly in the nediun during the action of the ionizing
source. Such a situation has been treated in considerable detail for visible
band plasma lasers. however. for the shortwave band (11“ < 50 nn), only pimping
has been discussed for which the energy input and the electron cooling are sub-
stantially separated in tine. This is explained by the lack of laboratory
sources of ionizing radiation with a flux adequate for pumping transitions in the
shortwave band. We shall estimate the requirements placed on the ionizing X-ray
radiation flux necessary to achieve lasing in the 1-2 m range in this paper,
considering the "exotic" sources of [2].

We shall base our work on the well known scheme [3, l] for the population in-
version of hydrogen-like levels of c - 5, A, 3. Inversion occurs with the hi -
- 5.1. -* hf - 3 transition as a result of the fact that the lower levels nf go
through a radiation decay faster than the upper levels n1. He shall not consider
inversion relative to the of - 2 level because of the reabsorption of the radi-
ation of the 2 + 1 transitions and the l + 2 pumping by fast secondary electrons
(see [1], 5.16). The transitions n1 - 5.16 * nf I 3 have 11” I l - 2 III for a
nuclear charge of Z = 30. For example, for Z - 26 (iron), 11.3 - 2.77 no and

98

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

153 - 1.9 no; for Z . 29 (copper), MS - 2.23 on and 153 - 1.52 nu; for 2 - 30
(zinc), M3 - 2.08 no and X53 - 1.62 no. The ionizaton potentials J2 - 13.6 22 eV
for the H-like ions of these elements are er I 9.2 Kev. JCu - 11.6 Kev and

Jzn - 12.2 Kev. It is necessary to steady-state paying that the puping quantum
energy hmpunp be greater than Jz. This corresponds to a pulping wavelength Am
of 0.1 nm and an effective source tenperature of 1'. Z 10 Rev.

In order that an inversion be realsed with the n1 - 5.5 * nf - 3. the plasm
electron concentration and teuperature should be comparatively low (see Figures

5 and 3 in [1]): Ne (5-10) . 1011 27 cr3 . 1022 ca" , T. (H) z2 eV a 1-2 rev.

If the medium is a solid in the initial state. for example, a brass wire with a
radius of r0 - 0.3 no, then the dispersal of the electron concentration from N i
= z . 1022 cm'3 - 3 - 1023 ca'3 to we . 1022 cn-S with a velocity of VT - Izre/ s
' “lie/up = 0.5 - 107 cn/sec (A = 22, up - 1.6 - 10'24 g) occurs in a tine of:

cdispersal I (to/VT) ("go/Ne) ' 30 nsec.

The time that the hard puping source acts ‘pulp should exceed the time for
dispersal to the requisite electron concentration: twin, 8 tug. We will note
that in the case of pulping due to thermal ionization and slbsequent cooling [1],
the pumping tine is not limited on the downside. but rather from above (tpup <

< tdis) -

The threshold ionizing radiation intensity 19!!!!” given the condition that the
number of ionization and recombination events are equal, is related to the thresh-
old gain x. by the following formula:

. 2
x“ (lbs/161m) (Nz_lopiclmplhwpup) .

where As» is the effective line width; ap1¢ is the photoionisation cross-section
of the z - 1 ion; “2.1 ~ NZ . nelz . 3 - 102° arl.

working frun a wire length of Z 3 lm, we set It“ I 10/1 '—‘ 0.1 earl. By taking the
Stark line width. with a slight excess in the following form:

Alo=ll

 

('2_':)(%_)2n 5.I0'°c-']i Sim-.3.
l

"e I“. c“ as 5-93.

He obtain the cmditions: - _1 -
a I. > 5-10.91 Mesa—so).
”W 3.100 cums—dado.
NI OMCIAI. USE ONLY

For the case of 091C 8 10"21 cm2, Yap; 10 Kev - 1.6 ' 10-15 J, we have the
..

condition of Ip 1015 H/cmZ for the transition and Ipms - 1015 VII/cm2 for
5 + 3 (Z - 30).mguch an intensity at a distance of about one meter from the
pumping source corresponds to the liberation of 1014 J over 50 nsec, if more than
10 Z of the energy is contained in the hard radiation. The divergence of the
laser emission in this case should amount to O - v-rtdull = 10-3 rad.

The estimates presented here show that lasing can occur at a wavelength of

A1” a 1.6 na, something which was nentioned in paper [2]. (the S + 3 transition
in zinc is closest to the indicated wavelength, see above). However, the inform-
atbon contained in paper [2] is completely inadequate both for assessing the
reliability of the experiment itself and for attempting to interpret it more
specifically. 0n the other hand, the consideration of the dynamics of forced
plasma dispersal with the action of high power electromagnetic radiation, similar

to that carried out in papers [4, 5], takes on additional interest because of that
presented above.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. L.I. Gudzenko, S.I. Yakovlenko, "Plazaennyye lasery" ["Plasma Lasers"], Moscow,
Atomizdat Publishers, 1978.

2. c. Robinson, Jr., AVIATION um sue: 1301111., m, No. 8, 25 (1981).

3. B.P. Gordiyets, L.I. Gudzenko, I..A. Shelepin, 2W. PRIKL rm. I m. FIZ.
[JOURNAL OF APPLIED ENGINEERING AND TECHNICAL PHYSICS], 2, 115 (1966).

4. V.I. Derzhiyev, V.S. Marchenko, S.I. Yakovlenko, 918'!“ V 2111'? [EMS TO THE
JGJRNAL OF TECHNICAL PHYSICS], _6_, 605 (1980).

5. A.G. Zhidkov, v.s. Harchenko, "Preprint IAE-3389" ("Institute of Nuclear Energy
Preprint No. 3389"], Moscow, 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

8225
C50: 1862/2 52

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FYII(Nﬂﬂ(JAl.U831MHLY

UDC S32
DYNAMICS OF HYDROELASTOPLASTIC SYSTEMS

Kiev DINAHIKA GIDROUPRUGOPLASTICHBSKIKH SISTBH in Russian 1981 (signed to press
2 Feb 81) PP 2-10

[Annotation. editor's message. preface and table of contents from book "Dynamics
of Hydroelastoplastic Systems", by Sh. U. Galiyev. Institute of Strength Problems.
Ukssn Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks". 276 pages]

[Text] The book deals with mathematical formulation of the problem of nonlinear
interaction of solid deformable and liquid media. development of algorithms and
numerical investigation of the response of complex hydroelastoplastic systems to
explosion in water. A solution is given for a broad class of applied problems.
Major emphasis is on studying the influence that other than one-dimensional cavi-
tation. as well as geometric and physical nonlinearities of shells have an un-
steady interaction of media; another topic emphasized is calculation of the three-
dimensional stress-strain state of cylinders under the action of hydraulic impact.
The developed algorithms are shown to be workable. and the principles that govern
unsteady nonlinear processes arising in hydroelaatoplastic systems are described.

For scientists. engineers and technicians dealing with problems of the mechanics
of continuous media. dynamic strength of structural components and high-strain
rate metalworking.

Figures [43. tables 17. references 199.

Editor's Message

A considerable number of works have dealt with the problem of unsteady interaction
of deformable solids with a liquid. Most have been based on assumptions permitting
linearization of the initial equations in whole or in part. Usually the simplest
structural components hmaerssd in an infinite fluid are considered. and analytical
methods are mainly used in the solution.

The present monograph outlines a theory of nonlinear interaction of deformable
bodies with a liquid. The author considers all major nonlinear effects that in-
fluence the dynamic strength of components interfacing with the liquid. and in
this way considerably extends the range of problems covered by theory. The main
new feature of the developed approach is that of accounting for other than one-
dimensional cavitation in the liquid. which is principally what has determined

lOl

FOR‘OFFNJAI.UBI(MVLY
F‘IlCMﬂﬂCJAI.USI§(MVLY

the originality of the proposed research techniques and the results. In addition

to nonlinear factors that influence unsteady behavior of multiphase systems compris-
ing a solid deformable body and a liquid. consideration is taken in the solution

of the problems of boundedness of the liquid volume. the products of explosion
expanding in the liquid. and three-dimensionality of the stressed and strained
state of the obstacle.

The book gives a complete presentation of the specifics of the problem of hydro-
elastoplasticity and the place that it occupies/in the mechanics of continuous
media. Based on solution of specific problems. the most significant factors are
revealed that influence unsteady processes in hydroelastoplastic systems, and their
interplay with changes in parameters is demonstrated. The results enable prelimi-
nary evaluation of the influence that various nonlinear effects have on the strength
of a structural element. and provide a sound basis for disregarding secondary ef-
fects. The method of finite differences is used in solving the problems.

The principal conclusions of the work and accuracy of results are confirmed by
a large number of calculations done with a variety of grids and computation algo-
rithms. as well as models of interacting media.

The book is structured around original material obtained by the author personnaly,
makes an appreciable contribution to the mechanics of continuous media and dynamic
strength of structures. and will merit favor by scientists and specialists working
with problems in this field of mechanics.

Academician c. s. Pisarenko.
UkSSR Academy of Sciences

Preface

Oscillations and movements of structural elements in a liquid are accompanied by
hydrodynamic loading that frequently is considerably dependent on the amount of
deformation, which depends in turn on hydrodynamic pressure. Calculation of such
structures involves the necessity of simultaneous solution of equations that de-
scribe the motion of the liquid and solid deformable media. Therefore the theory
of interaction between structures and liquid as component parts contains both hydro-
dynamics and mechanics of a solid deformable body. and also the conditions on the
contact surface of the media. Problems of interaction are considered in a number

of previous works.

of considerable interest are problems of unsteady interaction between deformable
solids and liquid. The calculation of dynamic strength of thin-walled and thick-
walled structures in contact with a liquid (the hull of ships. pipelines. under-
water structures. boilers in electric power plants and so on). as well as the theo-
retical study of the shape alteration of bodies that are worked by liquid or located
in a flow of liquid. reduce to problems of this category. Unsteady processes give
rise to complex wave processes in the liquid and deformed body. often with accompa-
nying physically and geometrically nonlinear properties of the interacting media.
The pattern of interaction is non-one-dimensional. the contact surface of the media
is deformed. giving rise to difficulties in formulation of the conditions of join-
ing on this surface. Because of the complexity of accounting for these nonlinear

102

IN)R‘OFF1CJAI.|£SI§(HNLY
FINICHWUCJAI.[EHE(MVLY

factors. until recently problems of interaction have been solved on the basis of
the following simplifying assumptions: 1) ideal liquid in motion without eddies;
acoustic approximation valid; 2) no cavitation in the liquid; 3) material of ob-
stacle conforms to Hooke law; 6) boundary conditions on the contact surface of

the media can be written without consideration of deformation of the surface. Of
all the possible nonlinearities. the geometric nonlinearity of the obstacle has
been taken into consideration in some cases. Many problems of interaction of an
underwater wave with obstacles that are important for practice have been solved

in such a formulation. However. the results are valid in a limited range of vari-
ation of the load. geometry and material of the deformable body.

In the general case. the given assumptions may not be satisfied. The class of
problems that require consideration of the nonlinear properties of the interacting
media is constantly growing due both to the increase in requirements for strength
of present-day supporting members and structures. and to the increasing use of
high-energy unsteady technological processes. For this reason. recent years have
seen research in which interaction problems are solved with consideration of the
corresponding nonlinear phenomena in the contacting media.

Journal articles have used a variety of approaches to the problems and the methods
of solving them. which has been an impediment to familiarity with the problem of
nonlinear interaction as a whole. and to analysis of the influence that different
nonlinear factors have on the behavior of a structural element. Inadequate atten-
tion is given to the influence that cavitation in a liquid has on the process of
interaction. This can be attributed to the fact that motion of a medium in cavi-
tation zones is not described by classical equations of hydrodynamics. as well

as to the fact that the boundaries of cavitation zones in the liquid are not known
at every instant. At the same time.even in the late forties it was noted that
it is important to account for cavitation as a factor that determines the destruc-

tive action of underwater explosions.

In addition to the given assumptions that allow use of mainly linear equations.
it is further assumed in calculations that obstacles can be treated as plates or
shells. Such an approach needs refinement for thick-walled bodies in the case
of short pulses close to regions of rapid shape change or points of attachment
of the body. This explains the interest that has arisen in the interaction of
underwater waves with three-dimensional bodies.

A previous work has made an attempt at systematic presentation of the nonlinear
theory of interaction of a liquid with deformable bodies. In addition. the same
work analyzes the influence of various nonlinear factors on interaction of under-
water waves with obstacles. and presents the results of numerical calculations

for thin-walled and thick-walled bodies. Despite isolated inadequacies. this paper.
published in 1977 [Ref. 32] aroused the interest of specialists (Ref. 25] and was
published in English translation in the United States in 1980 [Ref. 175].

Our book is a further development of the monograph of Ref. 32. It presents a non—
linear theory of interaction of deformable bodies with a liquid. accounting for

all major nonlinear phenomena in unsteady interaction between a liquid and obsta-
cles. Component parts of the theory are new models of a cavitating liquid with
regard to the fact that a real liquid does not work well on tension. The first

103

INJR‘OITNCLAL UEEZ(N€LY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

model is based on the assumption that zones of destruction (cavitation) in rare-
faction waves can be approximately modeled by some continuous medium in which pres-
sure is constant. In the second model the speed of sound in a mixture of liquid

and gas bubbles filling a region of destruction in the liquid is taken as a constant
quantity much less than the speed of sound in the intact liquid or gaseous medium.
The problem of calculating the interaction of pressure waves with obstacles with
regard to cavitation in the general three-dimensional model is formulated as a

new class of problems of mathematical physics.

Host of the book deals with solving topical problems. Equations that describe

the motion of liquid and deformable obstacles are numerically integrated by a fi-
nite-difference method. The behavior of thin-walled and thick-walled structural
elements in an underwater explosion is studied as well as the arisal and development
of cavitation accompanying wave processes in a liquid. It is shown that different
kinds of nonlinearities have different kinds of influence on thin-walled obstacles.
The geometric nonlinearity of an obstacle shows up only during flexures that exceed
its thickness. Nonlinear terms in the conditions on the interface between media
have less influence on interaction. Accounting for plastic properties enables
.determination of the residual change in shape of an obstacle.

An expanded description is given of algorithms used in the calculations for solving
the unsteady three-dimensional problem of hydroalasticity for thick-walled struc-
tural elements of cylindrical shape. Emphasis is placed on analysis of the strength
of structures. and on investigation of the diffraction of elastic waves at corner
points, stiffener ribs and joinings between components.

In constructing the theory. the author has used relatively "simple" models of the
interacting media: the liquid is taken as inviscid both inside and outside of
cavitation zones. plastic properties of the body are accounted for by the theory

of flow with isotropic strengthening. 0n the one hand. this is due to the fact
that the exactness of the models used for the media is not the same. Obviously

it does not make sense to improve the accuracy of equations defining the plastic
flow of material when the accuracy of theories used for the cavitating liquid has
not been fully determined. 0n the other hand. the use of complicated models (plas-
tic behavior of the obstacle material, gas-liquid mixture in cavitation zones.

and so on) is difficult in many cases because of a lack of experimentally definable
parameters. Finally. the author has aimed at simplicity in formulating the problem,
feeling that simple models (where they are successful) often contain the germ of
what is typical of the physics of the problem. Indeed. it is the "simplicity"

of the models used that has enabled solution of a broad range of heretofore un-
formulated problems of interaction of the given complex media. Let us note that
the behavior of each of them in high-speed processes has only recently come under

investigation.

The problem of interaction is considered as a problem of investigation of the beha-
vior of systems with parameters whose time and space distribution is unknown and

is to be found during solution. The inadequate coverage of this class of problems
has made it necessary to develop nonstandard solution algorithms that enable calcu-
lstion of the motion of cavitation zones in a liquid. plastic zones in a solid

and on the interface between media in space.

104

FOR OFFTC1A[.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considerable attention is given to investigation of accuracy of the results. In
some cases. an approach is used that is based on reducing (fractionating) the spac-
ing of a grid. However. for complicated problems this approach is limited by the
capabilities of the computer. Besides. it answers the question of the accuracy

of solution of the formulated problem. but not the question of correspondence of
the results to actual processes. and because of the novelty of the given problems.
this correspondence is very important. Therefore. in verifying the results. more
extensive use is made of calculations in accordance with different models of cavi-
tating and ideal liquids. the solid deformable body, and the process of interaction.
We assume that agreement of results found by different approximate theories (in
the solution of particular problems they get progressively more complicated) is

the most weighty proof of their objectivity. Theoretical results are compared
with data of experiments. It is shown that the proposed approximate models of

a cavitating liquid are completely satisfactory from the standpoint of problems

of unsteady interaction of deformable bodies with a liquid. At the same time.
differences between some results is an indication of the need for improving the
theory and the direction of future research.

The algorithms developed are general to some extent. They may be of use both in
the solution of problems of hydrodynamics and solid-state mechanics, and in the
application of other numerical methods. such as the finite element method, to the
calculation of hydroelastoplastic systems. The results can provide sounder prelimi-

process, and can also serve as a basis for a variety of simplifying assumptions
in formulation of problems. The list of references cites papers that have had
an influence on the writing of this book.

The author thanks Academician V. V. Novozhilov of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
professors A. K. Pertsev. V. . Hatveyev. L. I. Slepyan. R. I. Nigmatullin.

R. F. Ganiyev and U. K. Nigul for constructive cosmnnta on the manuscript. The
author is especially grateful to Academician G. s. Pisarenko of the UkSSR Academy
of Sciences for interest in the work. and for assistance in defining the aim and
nature of the research.

Contents P‘Se
Editor's Message 6
Preface 7

PART ONE: Nonlinear Interaction of Deformable Bodies With Liquid
Chapter 1: Theory of Nonlinear Interaction of a Solid Deformable and a Liquid

Medium 12
1. Equations of hydrodynamics of ideally elastic fluid 12
2. Cavitating liquid model based on constancy of pressure 18
3. Cavitating liquid model based on constancy of the speed of sound 23
6. Equations of motion of deformable body 27
5. Boundary conditions on contact surface of deformable body and liquid 33
6. Deformable coordinates in liquid 38
7. Principal equations of the theory 45
8. Liquid model with consideration of cavitation 67

105

F0lfﬂﬂﬂC1Al.lEﬂ!(NVLY
FOItOFIﬂCJAl.USEGDNLY

Chapter 2: Some Approaches to Solving Problems of Nonlinear Interaction of

Deformable Bodies With Liquid 50
l. One-Dimensional interaction of a wave in a liquid with a deformable body 50
2. Equations of theory of shallow shells $8
3. Finite-difference approximation of boundary conditions on an interface 66
4. Problems of high-strain rate working of metals by liquids 67
Conclusion 71

PART THO: Influence of Cavitation and Other Nonlinear Effects on Unsteady
Processes in Deformable Systems That Contain Liquid
Chapter 3: Cavitation in Liquid Arising Upon Interaction of Underwater Have

with Elastic Structural Elements 7b

1. Dynamics of linear interaction of plates with liquid 76

2. Influence that cavitation on plate surface has on deformation 82

3. Influence of non-one-dimensional cavitation in a pipe on bottom strain 89
6. Influence of non-one-dimensional cavitation on deformation of cylindrical

shell 110

5. Influence that cavitation on panel surface has on deformation 119

Chapter 4: Nonlinear Interaction of Liquid Uith Elastic Obstacles 123

1. Formulation of problem of interaction of hydraulic impact with pipe bottom 123
2. Finite-difference equations and algorithms for solving the problem of pipe

bottom strain by hydraulic impact 128
3. Numerical study of process of interaction of hydraulic impact with pipe

bottom 135
6. Investigation of accuracy of results found for pipe bottom 147
5. Comparison of accuracy of two mathematical models of cavitating liquid 155
6. Region of applicability of equations of acoustics in solving problems of

unsteady interaction of deformable bodies with liquid 157
7. Finite cylindrical shell under pulsed internal loading 162
Chapter 5: Plastic Deformation of Obstacles by Liquid 173
I. Deformation of tank bottom under hydraulic impact 173
2. Hydroelastoplastic processes in explosive forming presses 181
3. Pulse expansion of cylindrical shells by liquid 187
a. Hydroelastoplastic processes upon hydraulic impact in a pipeline, and

when a cylindrical vessel hits an obstacle 197
S. Sizing and joining pipes by hydraulic impact 201
6. Calculation of complex hydroelastoplastic system 206
Conclusion 207

PART THREE: Pulse Loading Response of Composite Circular Cylinders Submerged
in an Acoustic Medium
Chapter 6: Equations of Unsteady Hydroelasticity and Some Results of

Calculations 212
1. Method of studying interaction of cylinder with underwater wave 21b
2. Finite-difference approximation of boundary conditions on contact surfaces
of composite cylinder elements 221
3. Algorithms for calculation of displacements of corner points 223
4. Interaction of infinite cylinder with underwater wave 226
5. Influence of interaction model on results of calculations 232
Chapter 7: Results of Calculations of Reinforced Isotropic Finite and
Infinite Cylinders 235
1. Finite smooth cylinder 235
2. Finite smooth cylinder reinforced in the middle 2b!
3. Periodically reinforced infinite cylinder 268
106

FOR‘OFIICLAL.UBE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results of Calculation of Hultilsyered Composite Cylinders of

Finite Length

1. Hultilsyered cylinder
2. Cylinder comprised of butt-joined components

3. Ribbed composite cylinder

Conclusion
Re f e rences

Chapter 8:

COPYRIGRT: Izdstel'stvo 'Nsukovo dunks". 1981

6610
C80: 1862/262

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 537.53

CALCULATING ENERGY CHARACTERISTICS 0? ELECTRON-BEAM CONTROLLED CO PROCESS LASER

WITH TURBOCOHPRESSOR COOLING

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 259. No 5. 1981 (manuscript re-

ceived 21 Apr 81) pp 10910-1098

. Basov. Ye. P. Glotov.
Physics institute imeni P.

 

V. A. Danilychev, A. H. Soroka.

[Article by Academician N. G
N. Lebedev. USSR Academy of

L. H. Urin and V. 1. Yugov.
Sciences. Hoscow]

n-beam controlled (BBC) CO: lasers are currently in wide use in

lications [Ref. 1]. Ref. 2 demonstrated the feasibility of a
output and efficiency of BBC-CO:

o temperatures of 1‘~ 170—200 K, and

t of turboconpressor cooling in which a gas refrigeration
engine is realized on the working laser mixture. of even more promise is the use
of this arrangement in BBC lasers using carbon monoxide; these lasers. in contrast
to co; lasers, can in principle operate effectively only with cooling of the gas

mixture to cryogenic temperatures of 400 K lief. 3).

[Text] Electro

technological app
considerable increase in the specific power

At the present time. a lasing efficiency n¢> 602 has been experimentally attained
on an BBC-CO laser iRef. lo). At the same time, cooling of the laser mixture to

cryogenic temperatures requires large energy expenditures, which can appreciably
reduce the technical efficiency hr. the major characteristic of process lasers.
However. the active me er is fundamentally different from that

of the CO; laser in that during the lasing process the vibrational energy remaining

in the working medium as a consequence of the difference of n from unity is not
nearly instantaneously converted to heat. but remains stored or some time on vibra
tional levels. This peculiarity together with considerably greater quantum ef-
ficiency (-951 instead of 4:72) leads to a situation where the fraction of pumpini

energy that is converted to heat during excitation is externely low (~10!) in the
working temperature ran logous quantity for the C02 lase:

medium (-80-902). As a result. the effective specific heat of the CO laser mixtuu
cef- cp/GT is nearly an order of magnitude greater than that of the CO; laser (cP
is the specific heat at constant pressure. 6, is the fraction of pulping energy
expended on heating the gas). Another important peculiarity of the working medium

of C0 lasers at low temperatures (15200 K) is that the energy stored on vibra-
ion rather than due to colli-

tional levels is dissipated due to spontaneous eniss
sional relaxation. As a consequence. it is possible to attain high technical ef-
ficiency of the CO laser despite the need of intense cooling of the laser mixture.

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this paper. the authors calculate the energy characteristics of an 230 00 laser
with turbocompressor cooling.

1. The equations that describe changes in gasdynamic and optical characteristics
of the laser medium in a rectangular active volume take the form

d R d u’
(I) pu ‘ nouo. nil—"4 1- 0. p =;nT. ;[9u(cpT*—2')] ‘ 5:0.

£04”) ‘ "Hg " 0:0..-

where p, u, y. u, p are the density, velocity. adiabatic exponent. molecular weight
and pressure of the laser mixture; Q is the specific pumping power. the "zero" sub-
script refers to the input to the active volume. -l.et us note that the quantity

6., in optimum mixtures does not exceed 10-151. This is due to the fact that the
pumping efficiency neg (the fraction of energy expended on vibrational excitation

of C0. 82) reaches 90-951, while the energy expended on heating due to anharmonicity
of the molecules in V-V exhcanges, as well as due to V-‘l‘ relaxation at '1'5200 It is
extremely small. ch is the specific energy of radiation. w is the vibrational
energy of a unit of volume. 0. is specific power of relaxation losseao-power lost
due to spontaneous emission and V-‘l‘ relaxation.

The dependence Q*(p, 1‘) is determined by the dynamics of the change in populations
of vibrational levels of CO and the characteristics of the cavity. To determine
this dependence, numerical solutions were found for rate equations with consider-
ation of the populations of 30 levels of the CO molecule [Ref. 5]. Fig. la shows
the calculated dependences of specific lasing power on time at different tempera-
tures for a mixture of C02:Nz:ﬂe- l:2:3 at density 99-1/3 amagat unit and specific

QC”. “let:2 a w*. J/Z-amagat b 0*, H/cm’-amagat
2m

'50

 

0 50 ﬁnal! mu :00 mm

Fig. l. a--calculated time dependences of specific lasing power
at different temperatures (T-60 (I). 100 (2) and 200 K (3)) for
density of a laser mixture of cog: Name-1:23 of 90- 1/3 amsgat
unit. specific pumping power 0-300 “lean3 and threshold gain of
k- 5-10"~ cm"; h-—threshold pumping energy w* (l) and steady-
stnte power of relaxation losses 0* (2) as functions of laser mix-
ture temperature. Points show the results of experiments from
Ref. 3

109

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pumping power of Go - 300 w/cn3 (threshold gain k- 5.10" cm"). The density and
temperature of the mixture were held constant over the extent of the entire calcu-
lation. giving the universal curves shown in Fig. lb for threshold pumping energy

w and steady-state power of relaxation losses Q, corresponding to the flat sections
0 curves 1, 2. 3 on Fig. Is as functions of laser mixture temperature. Threshold
pumping energy is a linear function of density of the mixture. which is in good
agreement with experiment [Ref. 3]. Fig. lb also shows experimental points for

the dependence of wg/p (normalized to normal gas density) on temperature of the
laser mixture (Ref. 3]. The experimental points lie somewhat higher than the calcu-
lated curve. This is due to heating of the gas before the instant of lasing onset.

so that the observed threshold pumping energy corresponds to a temperature higher
than the initial temperature.

An important distinguishing feature of the CO laser is that even at normal gas
density. V-T relaxation becomes the decisive process of losses only at tempera-
tures higher than room level. At T<200 K the loss power is determined by the
rate of spontaneous decay of vibrational levels [Ref. 5]. Consequently at rela-
tively low temperatures the power of relaxation losses is proportional to p.

In an electroionization discharge at constant beam current density, the specific
pumping power increases with increasing gas densit more strongly than linearly:
Q-pf(p) (f(p)E l in the sticking mode and f(p)- p in the recombination mode).
Therefore in the C0 EBC laser it is advisable to increase the pressure of the mix-
ture, enabling not only a reduction in overall dimensions of the facility, but
also more efficient use of the advantages of the electroionization discharge. 0n
the other hand in the case of a continuous-wave CO; laser the Q* is determined

by V-T processes. and increases with increasing gas density more strongly than

the pumping power (0* ~92) [Ref. 2].

Integrating the systems of equations of gas dynamics and the balance of vibrational
energy with accuracy to 001’) (in present-day BBC lasers M2 50.1). we can get an
expression for the physical efficiency of an BBC C0 laser

- (7 " I) r0w9(rx) I, ‘ 'l I
2 I. — 5, .. __ -
( ) no "a I 1(1.‘ - 1.0),. 61 I 7 - lt,D¢U¢(TK To) g0.(x)dx,

 

where act is the pumping efficiency averaged over the entire volume of the active
medium, w*(TK) is the threshold pumping energy corresponding to the final tempera-
ture. TK is the vibrational energy of a unit of volume carried out of the active
volume; Z is the length of the active region along the flow corresponding to heat-

ing of the mixture to T“. In the sticking mode the value of l is determined from
the relation

1
(3) I- -L "m In—‘.

7'10100 To

 

where Q0 is the specific pumping power at the input to the electroionization dis-
charge.

In this paper calculations of the energy characteristics of BBC CO lasers were
done for three pumping powers: 00- 100. 300. 1000 H/(cm3-amagat).

110

FOR'OFFNJAI.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In connection with the fact that gas density in the heating process falls off

(p- const, 0" poTo/TK). the working voltages should decrease as the energy input
increases to prevent breakdown. This leads to a reduction of pumping power at
predetermined beam current density and, what is more significant, to s reduction

in the efficiency of pumping of vibrational levels. However. in the mixture under
consideration with a change of E/p by 2-2.5 times the quantity nef remains practi-
cally constant and fairly high. nef20.9 [Ref. 5]. Therefore conditions were calcu-
lated under which the gas is superheated by no more than a factor of 2.5.

      

to m m m :20 [K a tan no r, ,K

Fig. 2. andependence of efficiency my on the final temperature
of the laser mixture at initial temperatures T-60 (I. 11. III)
and 100 K (1, 2. 3). The fraction of energy input going to heat
6T- 0.1; bun-maximum physical efficiency n¢ sax (solid curves)
and technical efficiency 111. max (broken curves) as functions of
initial temperature in the case of turbocompressor cooling. The
temperature of the mixture at the output from the heat exchanger
‘l‘x- 320 K; “-9-!

Fig. 2a shows curves for the physical efficiency as a function of energy input
(GT- 0.1 - const) at different pumping powers and initial temperatures T- 60 K

(I, II, 111) and 100 K (I, 2, 3). The initial rise in n4, is due to excess of the
energy input over the threshold (see second term in (2)). while the drop with a
further increase in energy input is due to the abrupt increase in the power of
relaxation losses 0* as temperature increases (see Fig. lb). It can be seen that
as the pumping power 00 increases. the maximal value of n¢ rises and corresponds
to large energy inputs. For example at initial temperature T- 100 K. Qo-l kw]
(cm’mmagat) . the maximum value of n‘b corresponds to heating of the laser plasma

by AT- 9') K.

The solid curves on Fig. 2b show the maximun value of n as a function of the ini-
tial temperature of the mixture at different values of 0- As the specific pumping
power increases, the value of To at which lasing stops increases; however. even

at on = 300 H/(cm’oamagat) this temperature is only 160 K.

2. The problem comes up of getting low temperatures at the input to the active
medium of the BBC C0 laser by a method with maximum technological feasibility and

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

minimum possible energy expenditures. The most optimum method of handling this
job is to use an arrangement of turbocompressor cooling of the laser mixture

(Ref. 2] in which the mixture after the discharge chamber enters a compressor
where it is compressed by a factor of nK (the degree of compression), and then

a heat exchanger where due to the high density and difference of temperatures with
the cooling agent it is effectively cooled to a temperature ‘l‘x higher than room
level. and finally it enters a turbine where. in doing work it is adiabatically
cooled to the required temperature To. Realization of the refrigeration cycle
within the laser facility. 1. e. cooling the gas to a temperature lower than the
coolant. requires additional energy expenditures, leading to a reduction in tech-
nical efficiency. Additional energy expenditures on cooling are associated only
with the part of the energy input that goes to heating of the gas. Therefore it
is extremely important to select mixtures, temperatures and pumping conditions
such that the quantity 6, will be minhmua. As noted above, in the EEC CO laser

at T'SZOO K relaxation losses are due to spontaneous de-excitation. and consequent-
ly do not lead to volumetric gas heating. Besides, the threshold pumping energy
w* that remains in vibrational degrees of freedom is also dissipated mainly due
to de-excitation rather than V-T processes. and consequentlv does not heat the
mixture.

The expression for technical efficiency of the BBC CO laser with turbocompressor
cooling takes the form

(4) n. - ni/[l + s,(% - 91",," 'Tm’],
I _ °

 

where Tx is the temperature of the mixture at the output from the heat exchanger;
c“. t, are the degrees of adiabaticity of the compressor and turbine. In existing
aircraft engines (K, and especially t, are close to unity [Ref. 6]. In the case

of an ideal compressor and turbine (CK-c1.- l), relation (4) takes the form

”e
s , - .
U " “6.0.”. - I)

 

It can be seen that for completely adiabatic compressor and turbine, and predeter-
mined To. the optimum value of TK from the standpoint of n, is the same as for n¢.
since they differ only by a constant factor. 0n the other hand, in the case of

(K <1, (T <1 the optimum T“ are different for maxima of n¢ and n7.

0n Fig. 2b the broken lines show the maximum values of n.“ x as a function of
To for an ideal turbine and compressor and a value of rxu-"So K. The existence
of u maximum on curve 3 is due to the fact that the reduction in expenditures of
energy on turbocompressor cooling at low initial temperatures is more rapid with
rising To than is the reduction in . At comparatively high pumping power 00-
l kw/(ch-amagat) the optimum initia temperature is To: 90 K and the calculated
technical efficiency is greater than 502.

3. Thus the cw BBC C0 process laser with turbocompressor cooling has a number
of advantagesover analogous carbon dioxide lasers: high technical efficiency (up

to 502) due to a considerably lower percentage of the energy input going to heating
of the mixture at low temperatures‘rs 200 K and the use of an optimum system for

112

IND! (NﬂﬁCIAI.lﬂS£;(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtaining cryogenic temperatures T- 100 K; the possibility of reducing the overall
dimensions of the facility through an increase in working pressure due to linear
rather than square-lav dependence of the power of relaxation losses on the density
of the laser mixture at low temperatures.
REFERECBS
l. Basov. N. 6.. Belenov. E. H. et a1.. USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKB HAW. Vol 114. 1974.
p 113; Boas. 3., Pease. H. at a]... J. APPL. 0PT.. Vol 13. 1976. p 1959; Basorv,
N. 6.. Babayev, I. K. et a1.. KVANTOVAYA ELEMNIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 772.
2. Basov, N. 6.. Glotov. Ye. P. et al.. Ihid.. Vol 7, 1980. p 1067.

3. Basov, N. c., Danilychev. v. A. et al.. mum: nzrcutsxooo msnrun mm
p. u. uneven. Vol 116, 1980, p 98.

6. Mann. M. IL, Rice. D. K., 1332. QB. V01 10. 19710. p 682.

5. Vtorova, N. Ye., Dolinina, V. I. et 31.. TRUUY FIZICHESKOGO INSTITUTA DENI
P. N. LEBEDEVA. Vol H6, 1980, p 7.

6. Haslennikov. H. H., Shal'man, Yu. 1., "Aviataionnyye gazoturbinnyye dvigateli"
[Aircraft Gas Turbine Engines]. Moscow. Hashinostroyeniye, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

6610
(:50: 1862/3

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826
THEORETICAL STUDY OF WAVEFRONT REVERSAL EFFICIENCY IN INVERTKD CARBON DIOXIDE

Moscow IZVESTIYA AKADDHI NAUK SSSR: SBRIYA FIZICHESKAYA in Russian Vol 1.5, No 8,
Aug 81 pp 1412-1616

[Article by 1.. A. Vasil'yev. H. c. Galushkin. A. H. Seregin and N. V. Cheburkin]

[Text] The phenomenon of wavefront reversal during degenerate four-wave interaction
in amplifying media has been theoretically studied in Ref. 1. where the qualitative
patterns of this process were determined on the basis of a steady-state two-level
model of the laser system. However. in the experiment of Ref. 2, wavefront reversal
was realized in laser media with relaxation properties described by an unsteady
multilevel model. Therefore it is of interest to consider wavefront reversal in
amplifying media based on complete consideration of the kinetics of the specific
laser medium for optimizing conversion parameters under conditions close to those

of the experiment.

This paper analyzes wavefront reversal during degenerate four-wave interaction
in the amplifying medium of an electron-beam-controlled CO; laser. The initial
equation that describes this process is written in the form

”we-mu Mme-o. (1)

where a1l8’l) is the nonlinear gain for intensity. 3 is amplitude that is slow
compared with the period of the oscillations.

It is assumed relative to the pulses of the reference waves and the inverted radia-
tion that the characteristic time scale of their variation is considerably greater
than the time taken by light to cover the distance in the nonlinear medium where
wavefront reversal occurs. This condition is usually satisfied in the experiment.
He assume that the reference waves are planar waves

ls‘.-‘/.(A.(l)c“""”+x.c.). E.-'/.(A.(l)e“""'-"+x.c.).
lx.«:. is the complex conjugate] with intensity much less than the wave being re-
versed (£3) and the wave that has been reversed (3.). He will consider the most
general case of wavefront reversal during degenerate four-wave interaction where

it is realized within the cavity. Therefore the amplitudes of the reference waves
are functions of time.

In accordance with condition A£<E.. where AB-E,+E., E.--E.+E., we have the relation

114

FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a-¢( I8.|') Him. (2)

here 6a is the variation of the gain due to variation of field intensity ﬁll]:-
83A8+ swat as a consequence of the waves in the medium that are being and have been
reversed. The dependence of gain a on field intensity is determined from the Iti-
netic equations. In the thernodynamic approximation aodel based on introducing
partial vibrational temperatures. the kinetics of the (:0; laser for each node of
vibrations of CO; and N3 molecules is described by the following systeu of equations
[Ref . 3]:

0t 1’
-——.-- a I. I. -— "3D+ axes-4 I!” +
I (a e I) u 21 t ed]

 

 

0! u
+__‘-’1_+2"+P' .' <3)
"1.k (ea-8|)” 1‘

at: _. _ —_CI__
37... — [.(h. ta. Is. I) -P[D-1:Ku (In 3A)! 1.Nk(e.-6.) +Ps. (‘)
7:7..- .10 (£3. h) -Pl'IIK¢|(Ga-h) +1IKu(9|'-9‘) 1+?“ (5)
’ZTr-u-nne. [ gv-Kmuraa— e'zv’J'"(""”’]' (o)
ind—L. (1)

d! T!

where

 

8(I-ﬂa) pa
Da-OXP {9”}-

n - 21.x... “"‘" {—e " e'u+e.)—e.(2+e.)'}.

Here (.1 is the average number of vibrational quanta per molecule in the correspond-
ing vibrational nodes; the subscript i- 1., 3, 2 refers to vibrational levels of

N2. antisylnetric and defomtional nodes of vibrations of CO; respectively; P.

1‘ are the pressure and temperature of the gas; 7. are the mole fractions of con-
ponents co... N2 and Be in the mixture; 91 - 1980 K. 62-960 K. 63- 3360 It;

 

3e.‘+60.+2 p . a.
“—— k-—’ - .
" 2mg.» ' N r "$1.1m.

j, E are the current density and electric field strength in the discharge, 6 is
the relative fraction of pumping power expended on the vi-node. I is intensity

of laser radiation. y is the adiabatic exponent of the gas. :11- is the equilibrim
number of quanta in the nodes.

For the gain we can write the expression

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FEHRCHHHCJAI.IISEZ(HNLY

 

9 0 56 ”1
a-627-10‘109.(2!+” (”9 -—:'- '5 1:19 )}-

 

 

(8)
6 0 6 +1
-m {- F? iii}; ) T“(1m.+0.731-.+0-541--+°-383w) "-
where
I'm-8.1!!" (111.) e Ts-el in" ( 1:1.) 0

According to (8). we have the following relation for gain variation

6:: ~ 316.. +25“. (9)
8e, 0‘!

here variations 6:; and 6c; are caused by the variation of intensity. which we
write in the form

61-'/.o (A.ue""+A.ue"")v." (1) IA: (3. t) e‘”+A.' (z. 1) 6““l+u. 6-.

[K.c. is the complex conjugate] where a- c/br. ¢o(t) is the shape of time pulses
of the reference waves.

Calculating the variations of the left and right members of equations (3)-(5), we
find expressions for functions 6e; and 6c;. We seek the solution of the resultant
equations in the form

6¢‘-¢“ —;- (A .uG-“"+AwC'"’) c‘”+tu' 'Z—‘(AguC-“'+Ah¢-"’) 3-“'+K. c.
(10)

As a result. we get the following system of equations
a" all

den’ 3]: 01¢ , 'b .
.___....__ ’ .__ ’ ___ 4-——- I A .t.
a: 6:. t" + 0:. t” +0:.'“ 61 «p. ( ) ' (x )

(11)-

an: 3/. a]. a]. , a]: n .

_._-_ '+—— ’+—s +— {A 3.8.

a: as.“ hf“ ac.“ a:°‘”‘() .
With consideration of (2). (9), we define the solution of equation (1) in the form
Ea EI+'B,4-E,4-E. and. using conventional methods of nonlinear optics [Ref. 1. A],
we get equations for the slow amplitudes of the reversed wave and the wave to be

reversed:

DA... 1 i
7;...— —2- a.+ iat'.(lu+li)v: (‘)+a8’(ltli)*¢.(‘)) I
u. 1 “2)
_ T: .. 2 (a + ‘2 a.~(t.+l.)¢.“ (o +¢.’ (1.1.) *«p. (3)) .

where I1. I, are the maximum intensities of the reference waves during the pulse.

116

FOR 0FI1CJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8a 0 Be as
G" -— 8n, +-—a-Uu’c as, "'— ’ +"—'3u’-

dt; 68. as. 83'

Thus the solution of the problem of determining the phase-adjoint reflectivity
has been reduced to system of equations (11) and (12). in which the time-dependent
coefficients are found from equations (3)-(7). If amplitudes A3(z.t) and A.(z,t)
can be expressed in the form

A.(z.t)-o."(t).4.(x). A.(z.z)-¢.‘(¢>A.(s). (13)

then we can easily find an analytical solution of equations (12) that contains
parameters determined from numerical solution of equations (11). The functions
A§(z.t) and A§(z.t) are replaced by ”(0 and ¢.(t) respectively. Here ”(0 and
¢.(t) are the pulse shapes of the wave being reversed and the wave that has been
reversed. The solution found by this method implies that relations (13) hold at
small values of the phase-adjoint reflectivity R. For this case. which is fairly
typical in experiments. we find an expression for R:

1 «9.0) an , 31 . ' 1.1.1). (14)
8'7 9:0) (322” + as.” )

He calculated the phase-adjoint reflectivity seaming that condition (13) is met.
Equations (3)-(7) and (11) were numerically solved by computer, the pulse shape
of the signal to be reversed being taken as coincident with that of the reference
wave. Fig. 1 shows curves for the phase-adjoint reflectivity as a function of the

(um-mi .4 ,,

 

0 w on
t. as

 

r13. 1 . Fig. 2

Fig. 1. Maximum phase-adjoint reflectivity during the pulse as
function of maximum excess over the threshold for gas mixture
C0¢:N2:ﬂe. Curves 1--composition 1:2:3. 33-2010” Hucm"; curves
2--composition 1:5:4. 18-5010, H-cm" (a--ca1culation by formla

(18) . b—computer calculation)

Pig. 2. Phase-adjoint reflectivit as a function of time for

mixture C02:N2:He- 1:5:4, 13-5-10 when" at various threshold

values of a: Inat -0.387 m"; 2"“th'o‘58 IrI (a—calculation
by formula (18). b—conputer calculation)

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFFuJAl.USE(MNLY

maximum excess over the threshold during the pulse for two values of the weak-
signal gain. Fig. 2 shows values of the phase-adjoint reflectivity calculated

by formula (14) as a function of time. Calculation shows that for predetermined
pumping there is an optimum excess over the threshold equal to the double value.
where R reaches its maximum. Besides. the effectiveness of wavefront reversal
increases with increasing pumping level, i. e. with a rise in the weak-signal gain.

Now let us compare the results with approximate calculation based on the following
expression for the gain:

«(01.0)
l.(¢) +1 (I) '

 

- (15)

where no(t) is the weak-signal gain. In(t) is the saturation parameter.

If the gain is an explicit function of intensity I. then the analytical solution
of initial equation (I) is found in the form

A; (0) [tacos w(x-L) +0.59(l)ain w(z-L)]

 

4"“)- wcoawL+0.5Ml)ain wL w
A ( )__i do (’1)‘ A.’(0)ainw(x-L) ( )
' ‘ 2 TI‘ " ‘w"c'o.wL+o.spu)un wL'

From (16). we get the following formula for the phase-adjoint reflectivity

1 a“ ' lulaaln'mb 1
“7(7) W , (7)
where
1 0a ' ’ I1. L31 '
”7“?) "“9"” - I’m-«(n+2 “(m-1.).

Allowing for (IS). the parameter “/31 can be reduced to the form

0a a a
7"70‘:

which is convenient for the intracavity method of wavefront reversal where the
value of u is known in the steady-state lasing mode. besides. in the case of
wavefront reversal within the cavity, ’5(I;+lz) - I. l1lz I I2. and therefore the
phase-adjoint reflectivity is determined by only three parameters: can). a. L.

In the approximation of wL«l. which has already been used in deriving formula (14),
expression (17) takes the form

1 a ‘
R~[—aL(i-———)]
2 ad!)
This implies that at a given no. the phase-adjoint reflectivity is maximum at
e=0.5ao. which corresponds to double excess over the threshold.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F1)! OFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(HVLY

Fig. l and 2 show the values of a calculated from (17). It can be seen that in the
steady-state lasing mode the results of calculations by formulas (lb) and (17) show
good agreement.

In conclusion we point out that the method of calculating wavefront reversal during
degenerate four-wave.interaction developed in this paper can be used to determine
major conversion parameters. The calculations given here show that depending on
the requirements of the problem. we can optimize the process of wavefront reversal
during degenerate four-wave interaction in a laser medium with relaxation properties
described by kinetic equations.

REFERENCES
l. Abrams, R. L.. Lind. R. 5., 0PT. LETTS. Vol 2. 1978. p 94.
2. Fisher. R. A.. Feldman. E. J.. 0PT. LETTS. Vol b. 1979, p 160.

3. Eiryukov. A. 5.. TRUDY PIZICEESKOGO INSTITUTA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 83. 1975.
p [2.

a. Yarlv. A.. Pepper. D. H.. 0PT. LETTS. Vol 1. 1977. p 16.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Izvestiya AN SSSR. Seriya fizicheskaya”. 1981

6610
CSO: 8144/0101-8

119

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.378.325

0.5 GU ELECTRON-BEAM EXCITED XeCl LASER

Leningrad ZHURNAL TEKHNICEBSKDY ?IZIK1 in Russian Vol 51, No 6. Jun 81 (manuscript
received Zé Jun 80) PP 1323-1325

[Article by V. A. Adamovich. V. Yu. Baranov. Yu. 3. Smakovskiy and A. P. Strel'tsov]

[Text] High efficiencies. short wavelengths, and the capability for converting
excimer laser emission to pulses with duration of «10"9 s by using stimulated Raman
scattering for applications in laser-driven fusion experiments (Ref. 1] are the
factors responsible for the recent upsurge of interest in lasers of this type.

Previous research has resulted in lasing energies of the order of 100 J or more

and efficiencies of about 102 (see survey of Ref. 2) with excitation of KrP* lasers
by an electron beam or an electron-beam controlled discharge. basing pulse duration
was 0.5-! us. Ref. 3 gives the results of investigations of the KrP* laser under
conditions of excitation of 2-7 MH/cm’. demonstrating high efficiency of intense
pumping.

Recent results [Ref. 4. 5] show that a laser based on the XeCl* molecule may have
output parameters just as high as the KrF* lasers. And the capability of prolonged
operation without significant changes in its characteristics gives it certain ad-
vantages in the pulse-periodic mode.

This paper gives the results of studies of an excimer laser using an Ar/Xe/CCl.
mixture excited by an electron beam with duration of ~25 as.

The experiments were done on a facility described in Ref. 6. An electron beam

with electron energy of ~350 kev was coupled via an aluminum foil 50 um thick

into the stainless steel lasing chamber. The output window of the accelerator
measured b.5x 26 em. and the geometric transparency of the beam extraction system
was 752. The beam current density was measured by a Faraday cup. The experiments
were done on a mixture of CCl./Xe/Ar- l/lZ.S/1000. The pressure in the laser chamber
was varied from 1 to 4 arm. The laser cavity was formed by an aluminum-coated

flat mirror 8.5 cm in diameter anda plane-parallel lithium fluoride plate. The
distance between mirrors was #0 cm.

Lasing energy was measured by a calorimeter. A coaxial PK-Z cell with time resolu-

tion of 018 ns and a 6LOR-06 oscilloscope with 1.2 GB: band were used to record
emission pulse shape. The emission spectrum was taken by the 8115-1 spectrograph.

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rel. units

es

 

p. at-
Pig. 1 Fig. 2

Fig. 1 shows the radiation energy as a function of
pressure of the mixture CClslh/Ar- 1/12.5/1000.
At electron current density of about 110 A/cm’.
the energy increases linearly throughout the investi-
gated pressure range (Mg. 1. 1). When the beam
current density is reduced to half (about 65 A/cm’).
the energy dependence differs from linear (Fig. l, 2).
which is apparently due to an increase in the in-
fluence of quenching collisions as punping intensity
decreases. Let us note that at a current density
of abOut 25 Alas3 the lasing threshold was not reached
for the above-mentioned mixture and cavity.
308.: 17:23:03 MM nm The emission pulse shape (Pig. 2. time mark 100 MHz)
copies the shape of the beam current pulse. It can
be seen from this oscillogram that lasing is steady-state. which appreciably simpli-
fies analysis of systems of this kind.

The distribution of emission energy over the cross section of the output window

in the case of planar cavity geometry corresponds to the distribution of electron
beam energy losses in the mixture [Ref. 7]. Lengthwiae of beam propagation. this
distribution is described by the expression 5(a) - c(0)(l- z/zo). where z is distance
from the foil. 6(0) are the specific losses near the foil as determined by the
formula 5(0) - 2.9Bpjv, B is the stopping power of the mixture. p is pressure, 3

is current density of the beam, the coefficient 2.9 accounts for electron scatter-
ing in the foil. The quantity to in our experiments was 7.5 cm for a pressure

of 3 ate. Let us note that such a distribution of invested energy correlates

with our previous measurements of beam current density distribution.

Maximum lasing energy was attained on a nixture of 1/40/2000. At pressure of 3.5 atn
this energy was ~10 J. and the power was ~0.5 cw. This is the first time that

such power has been reached with the XeCl* laser. Average specific energy output
was ~7.5 J/Z at efficiency of ~61 relative to the energy invested in the gas. The
emission energy on IR transitions of Xei (Ref. 8] under the conditions of the ex-
periment did not exceed 60 m3.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 3 shows a densitomcter reading of the radiation spectrum of the Xecl" laser
from which it can be seen that lasing takes place on three lines corresponding
to vibrational transitions (0+1). (0+ 2) and (0+ 3) of band n+x. The lasing
intensity on the first two transitions is about the same. The lasing linewidth
is 0.3 A and is weakly dependent on pressure in the range of [-4 atm.

The laser divergence in our experiments was ~Io-10". Unstable cavities must be
used to improve divergence.

Thus the results of these experiments show that pimping by an intense electron
beam is one of the most efficient methods of exciting high-pressure excimer lasers.
Bilateral input of the electron beam is advisable to improve pumping homogeneity
of large-aperture lasers.
In conclusion the authors thank D. D. Halyuta for constructive discussions, V. I.
Rozanovn for assistance in processing the spectrogras and Yu. I. Abramenko for
taking part in the experiments.

REFERENCES

1. Murray. J. n., Coldhar. J., Eimerl, 9., Stoke. 11.. mar J. gum rumor”
Vol 05-15. 1979. p 31.2.

2. Rokni, H., Mangano. J. A” Jarob. J. H” H818, J. C., 1233 J. QUANTUM ELECTRON.,
Vol 05-11., 1978. p 10610.

3. Tisone. G. C., Patterson, E. 1... Rice, J. K.. APPL. PHYS. LETT. Vol 35(6),
1979. P 437.

4. Roche, D. T., Nest. J. 8.. Bhaumik. H. I... IRES J. QUANTUM ELECTRON” Vol (23-15.
1979. P 3110.

5. Bichkov. Yu.. Gorbatenko. A. 1., Losev, V. F.. Hesyats. G. A.. Tarasenko. V. P.,
OPTICS com, Vol 30. 1979. P 221..

6. Adamovlch. V. A., Bnranov. V. Yu.. Smakovskiy, Yu. 3.. Strel'tsov. A. P.,
KVAN'l'OVAVA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 5. 1978. p 918.

7. Long, U. H.. Bradford. R. 8.. IBEE J. QUANTUM ELECTRON” Vol 08-15. 1979. p 327.
8. Newman. L. A.. De‘l'emple, T. A., APPL. PHYS. LETT, Vol 27. 1975, p 678.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". 1981

6610
C80: 8144/0101-6

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DYNAMIC COMPENSAIION 0F IODINE LASER OPTICAL INHDHOGEREITIES

Leningrad ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY PIZIKI in Russian Vol 51, No 8. Aug 81 (manuscript
received I9 Sep 80) pp [764-1765

[Article by Yu. V. Dolgopolov. S. B. Kormer, s. H. Kulikov. V. H. Hurugov. S. M.
Pevnyy. A. V. Ryadkov and S. A. Sukharev]

[Text] More and more attention is currently being given to the possibility of
using the effect of wavefront reversal to compensate for optical inhomogeneities

of laser media and to guide radiation to a target [Ref. 1-6] in laser-driven fusion
facilities.

Since results found in Ref. 5-7 have shown the good outlook of iodine lasers for
laser-driven fusion. we have investigated [Ref. 3] the conditions of wavefront
reversal in induced Handelstam-Brillouin scattering, and dynamic compensation of
optical inhomogeneities of an iodine laser [Ref. 6, 8. 9]. This paper gives sub-
sequent experimental results on dynamic compensation of optical inhomogeneities
of a laser medium based on C3F71 in a two-stage scheme investigated in Ref. 3. 10
for interstsge decoupling.

 

Fig. l

A laser with unstable telescopic cavity was used as the master laser (Fig. l) for
shaping a reference emission beam with good spatial coherence and small divergence.
Induced Handelstam-Brillouin scattering was achieved by focusing (1) radiation

into cell 2 containing SF; compressed to 30 atmospheres. The Stokes frequency
shift with induced Handelstam-Brillouin scattering in SP; is 6v9'-0.006 cm”1 [Ref.
4], and therefore the luminescence linewidth of the amplifiers was increased to
Avamp- 0.032 cm'1 by adding buffer gas for more effective amplification of the
Stokes signal. To eliminate the influence of reflected Handelstam-Brillouin radia-
tion on operation of the master laser [Ref. 11], the amplification linewidth of
theactiveuwdiun of the master laser was reduced by selecting the pressure of the

123

FOR‘DFFKJAI.IEHE(”ULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mixture so that NHL/256%. In addition. the trans-

" 1 J mission of the beam-splitter mirror was correspondingly
, chosen.
M .
é 0; Emission energy at the output of A2 reached Bout'l‘m J.
§a9 which is 60-70! of the stored energy. Fig. 2 shows

the experimentally determined distributions of energy

a: with respect to angle at the output of Ill. (1). Al (2)
and A2 (3). Reference emission divergence of em,-

0 z 4 6 J to 1: 6-10”5 rad (at the half-energy level) after passage

0-10'“ rad through amplifier Al increased to eM-s-lo rad due
to the influence of optical inhomogeneities. At the
1’18- 2 output of A2. divergence decreased to flu-1°10" rad.

Thus. the inaccuracy of dynamic compensation did not
exceed A8 - [“10” rad. This corresponds in the main to the inaccuracy of coinci-
dence of the refraction index profiles of laser media, which is 6(Vn) ~2-10‘7 cm"1
[Ref . 9].

The results show the possibility of effective dynamic compensation of optical in-
homogeneities of an lodlne laser by a Handelstam-Brillouin mirror.

REFERENCES

l. Nosnch, 0. Yu.. Popovichev. V. 1., Ragul'akiy. V. V.. Payzullov, F. 5.. PIS'MA
V ZHURNAL EKSPERIMBNTAL'NOY I TBORETICHBSKOY FIZIKI. V01 16. 1972, p 617.

2. Kruzhilin, Yu. 1.. KVANTOVAYA ELﬂtTRONIKA. V01 5, 1978. p 625.

3. Dolgopolov. Yu. V.. Komarevskiy, V. A.. Kormer. s. B. et al., ZRURNAL EKS-
PERlHEN‘l‘AL'NOY l TBORL‘l‘lCHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 76. 1979. p 908.

1., Yefimkov. V. F.. Zubarev. l. 6., Kotov. A. V. et 31., ZHURNAL EKSPERIHENTAL'NOY
1 TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 77. 1979. P 526.

J. Brederlov. 6.. Fill. Ye.. Kholl. K.. Fol'k, V., Vitte. K. Y.. KVANI‘OVAYA BLEK-
‘l‘RONIKA. Vol 3. [976. p 906.

6. Busov, N. G.. Zuyev. V. 8.. Katulin, V. A. et a]... KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA.
Vol 6. 1979, p 3|].

7. Belotscrkovets, A. V., Gaydash. V. A.. Kirillov. G. A. et 81.. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL
TEIUINICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 5. 1979. p 2014.

8. Bclousovu. l. H., Danilov. 0. 3., Sinitsyn, I. A.. Spiridonov. V. V.. ZHURNAL
PKSPl-ZRIMPNTAL'NOY l TBORBTICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 58. 1970, p 11081.

9. Zykov. L. 1.. Kirillov. c. A.. Kormer. s. 3. et al.. KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA,
Vol 2. 1975, p 123.

ID. Kormer. s. 8.. Kulikov. S. H., Nikolayev, V. D. et a1., PIS'HA V ZHURNAL T8101-
NICIIESKOY FIZIKI. V01 5. 1979. P 213.

1210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll. Annn'yev, Yu. A.. Goryuchkin. D. A.. Sven1cekaya. N. A.. Pecrova, I. H” KVAN-
TOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, V01 6. I979. p 1773

COPYRIGHT: Izdacel'stvo "Nauka". "Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". 1981

6610
CSO: 8144/1935

125

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Off-10M. USE ONLY

PLASMA PHYSICS

POSSIBLE MECHANISM OF INSTABILITY 0P GLO" DISCHARGE ARISING AFTER PULSE ACTION OF
EXTERNAL IONIZER

 

Leningrad PIS'HA v zausm. mmrcrms’xov rum: in Russian Vol.7. 'No 15. 12 Aug 81
(manuscript received 8 Apr 81) pp 911-910

[Article by A. s. Kovalev. A. T. Rakhimov, N. V. Suyetin and V. A. Feoktistov.
Scientific Research Institute of Nuclear Physics. Moscow State University imeni
H. V. Lomonosov]

[Text] The semi-self-maintained gas discharge has recently been attracting the
attention of researchers in connection with the possibility of maintaining burning
of such discharges in dense media. However. after a certain time has elapsed.
ionization instability develops in semi-self-maintained discharges. the discharge
contracts. and arcing begins [Ref. 1]. Breakdown of the gas-discharge gap may
take place both during the action of an ionizing pulse [Ref. 1] and after its com-
pletion [Ref. 2-4]; in Ref. 6. instability develops after times considerably ex-
ceeding the characteristic recombination time.

It was shown in Ref. 3 that Joule heating of the gas and its displacement cannot
explain the effect of breakdown that develops after disconnection of the external
ionizer. The same conclusion is reached in Ref. 5. where the energy contributed
to the discharge was so small that it could not lead to appreciable reduction of
gas density.

In the present paper we turn our attention to the fact that the phenomenon of break-
down of the gas-discharge gap after disconnection of the source of external ioniza-
tion can be satisfactorily explained by taking account of processes of associative
ionization of vibrationally excited nitrogen molecules [Ref. 6]. Associative ioni-
zational instability may develop after times much longer than the characteristic
time of plasma recombination [Ref. 7].

Let us use the analytical theory of establishing the distribution function with
respect to vibrational levels of diatomic molecules developed in Ref. 8 to deter-
mine the nature of pumping in the experiments of Ref. 4. According to Ref. 8.
the characteristic time of establishment of the quasisteady distribution of mole-
cules with respect to vibrational levels is determined from the expression txs
v**/2vc. where v** is the number of the vibrational level on which V-T processes
begin to predominate over V-V exchange; \a- AAE6QIVQ19T'1. AB is the energy of an-
harmonicity. T is translational temperature. 5V-T is the inverse radius of V-T

126

ETHICNWHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

relaxation. Q” is the parameter of V-V exchange; c-(wnv/B1v)5. H is puwing power
per molecule; “v is the fraction of power expended on excitation of vibrations,

E; is the energy of the first vibrational quantum. For the parameters of Ref. lo.
txl 10'3 s. and the time of action of the pmping pulse tpi 25 us. i. e. tp<tx.
This means that pumping was pulsed. and for subsequent analysis it is important

to know only the integral of the input energy. Then the distribution function

of the molecules with respect to vibrational levels [f(v.t)] in the approximtion
of resonant V-V exchange for constant vibrational temperature is described by the
formula [Ref. 8]:

mm) - (2vt)"[(12hovt)“/(v+ 1)'!- n. (1)

where v is the number of the vibrational level. n is the average nusber of quanta
generated during pumping per molecule.

The process of associative ionization can begin if the population on some threshold
level v1 (for nitrogen v1- 32 [Ref. 8]) is non-zero. Prom expression (1) we can
estimate this time

 

t1-12n.v° (2)

After t> t1. the electron concentration is determined from the following equation:

dn
ati-s- mg. (3)

'v 2 u
where S-kiﬂ’l ﬂi‘hut) d0] ski- 3.5olO'”exp (- T60) [Ref. 6] is the constant

Us
of associative itonization. N is the concgntration of N2 molecules; 8 is the recombi-
nation coefficient; vm-min(v**;(12n.vt) ).Using expressions (1) and (3). let us
determine the time of increase (tn) in the rate of electron production due t as-
sociative ionization to its maximum. assuming that in this time v’*>(12novt) ,

but:
t,"- ”0V . (l0)

 

From (3) we can find the electron concentration after time t... assuming that
tm>lll3nc:

3 ”no
"a'ﬁﬁ’fi; ° (5)

Let us make estimates for “32-10" an". n.-o.03. v1-32. 3210" cu’ s". which
corresponds to the experiment of Ref. 1.. In this case. nei 2-1011 cm". i. e.

the shielding of the applied voltage by layers near the electrode is small, and
within tn: 300 us after disconnection of the external source. current will flow
once more. which agrees satisfactorily with the experiment of Ref. 6. Let us note
that flow of the current to be registered requires that the pulping level n. must
be sufficient for producing an electron concentration such that shielding by elec-
trode layers is not complete. In addition. the pumping level must ensure the

127

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘HCIAI. USE ONLY

condition v**>'v1. Since k1 is an exponential function of T, ne and t'- are also
sharply dependent on the temperature of the medium; therefore the given effect
may be absent at low temperatures.

we can see from (6) and (2) that t.>tb i. e. we can assume quasi-steady pumping
of vibrational levels of the molecules of the medium by current that arises due
to associative ionization processes. Therefore after a certain transient process
the electron concentration will be described by the following equations [Ref. 7]:

n.*

2
a?" kiNzLI. vi! 610] - 8n: . (6)
1r

 

As implied by Ref. 7, in this case associative ionizational instability should
develop, which leads to breakdown of the gas-discharge gap.

Thus for the case of pulsed pumping we have described a mechanism of development

of considerable electron concentration and breakdown in times that are longer by

a considerable factor than the characteristic recombination time. The case where
establishment of the distribution function of molecules with respect to vibrational
levels is commensurate with the duration of external pumping. while instability
develops on the decomposing phase. was considered in Ref. 9 with consideration

of processes of atep-by-step ionization, vibrational kinetics and Joule heating.

In addition. let us note that the process of plasma decomposition is deterained

not only by the recombination time. but also by the time of decomposition of layers
near the electrode. The redistribution of electric fields in the gap may have

a considerable effect on the electrical density of the medium [Ref. 10]. However.
numerical analysis is needed to explain the dynamics of independent ionization

in the plasma on the decomposition stage. He will be giving the results of such
numerical calculations in a later paper.

REFERENCES

1. Vellkhov. Ye. P., Pis'mennyy. V. D., Rakhimov, A. T.. USPEKHI F121CHESKIKH
NAUK. Vol 122, No 3. 1977. p 419.

2. Bychkov. Yu. 1.. Genkin. S. A., Korolev. Yu. D.. Kreyndel', Yu. Ye.. Hesyats,
G. A., Filonov. A. 6.. ZHURNAL EKSPERIMENTAL'NOY I TEOREIICEESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 66.
N0 29 19749 P 622.

3. Kostylcv. A. A.. Londer. Ya. 1.. Terent'ycv, A. P., Ul'yanov, K. N.. Fedorov.
V. A.. TBPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIXH TEMPERATUR. Vol 17. No 6. 1979. p 1167.

6. Gurevich. D. 8.. Kanatenko. H. A.. Podmoshenskiy, I. V., PIZIKA PLAZMY. Vol 5,
No 6. 1979, p 1359.

5. Aleksandrov, N. L.. Konchakov. A. H.. Son E. Ye.. FIZIKA PLAZHY. V016.No l,
1978. p 169.

6. Polak. L. S.. Sergeyev. I. A.. Slovetskiy. D. 1.. TEPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKH TEMPERAIUR.
Vol 15 No 1. I977. p 15.

128

FINI(NNN(]AI.USE¢MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

7. Zhdanok. S. A., Napartovich. A. P.. Starostin. A. IL. PIS'HA V ZIIURNAL mn-
NICHESKOY FIZIKI, Vol 5, No 3, 1979. p 155.

8. Zhdanok. S. A.. Napartovich, A. P., Starostin, A. N., leURNAL EKSPERDWN
NOY I TEORE‘I‘ICHESKOY FIZIKI. V01 76. No l. 1979. p 130.

. 9. Baiadze. K. V., Vetsko. V. IL. Zhdanok. S. A.. Napartovich. A. P.. Starostin.
A. N.. DOKLADY AKADEHII “AUX SSSR. Vol 249, No 4. 1979. p 832.

[0. Feoktiatov. V. A.. ZHURNAL PRIKLADUIOY WEI I TWICE!” FIZIKI. Vol 5,
I977. p 1d.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pis'ln v Zhuml tekhnicheskoy fiziki", 1981

6610
(:50: 1862”.

129

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARTICULARS OF OPTICAL DISCHARGE SLOW BURNING INITIAIION IN AIR 0“ OPTICAL BREAK-
DOWN INOCULAIION PLASMA

Leningrad PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHBSKOY PIZIKI in Russian V01 7. No 15. 12 Aug 81
(signed to presa2l Jul 81. manuscript received 6 May 81) pp 897-900

[Article by I. A. Bufetov. A. M. Prokhorov. V. B. Fadorov and V. K. Pomin, Physics
Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev, USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] In Ref. 1, 2 on investigation of optical discharge in the slowhburning
mode, the authors observed formation and prolonged existence (~l ms) of a break

in the plasma column at the point of discharge initiation when laser breakdown

of air was used to produce the inoculating plasma. It is shown in the present
paper that formation of the break is due to onset of a cool gas flow directed per-
pendicular to the laser beam that maintains the optical discharge.

Since the observed velocities of the slow burning front are of the order of 10 m/s.
the motion of gas at the same or higher velocity in the discharge region may have
a considerable effect on the conditions of propagation. Therefore we did experi-
ments to detect and study the motion of air upon relaxation of the cloud of heated
gas that is formed as a result of laser breakdown. Air breakdown was achieved

by focusing (f- 22 cm) the emission pulse (3- l J. r-40 ns) of a Q-switched neo-
dymium laser. Motion of the heated gas was registered by the TUpler schlieren
technique. It was found that by time t~ 30 us after the breakdown. a cool air

jet is formed that moves along the axis of the heated zone toward the laser with
initial velocity of 150-200 m/s. Jet diameter is about 1.5 mm. The jet arises

as a result of asymmetric compression of the hot gas after expansion is completed.
Upon passage of the jet through the entire heated zone with dimension of ~1 cm,

its velocity at t? 80 us decreases sharply to ~10 m/s. and then damps out within

a time of about 1 ms; the cool gas flow expands on the beam axis to a diameter

of 0.5 cm. At the same time. the hot gas region acquires the shape of a vortex
ring whose axis coincides with that of the laser beam. The rate of increase in
the outer radius of the ring decreases from 20 m/s at ti 100 us to 2 m/s at t-Il ms.

An investigation was made of the influence of the observed gas motion in the re-
gion of the laser spark that initiates the discharge on development of slow optical
combustion. A Q-switched laser with the above-mentioned parameters was used to
produce an inoculating plasma in a weakly focused beam of a millisecond pulsed
neodymium laser with power of up to 2 HH maintaining the discharge. The laser
beams are mutually perpendicular in the region of intersection [see Ref. 3]. If

130

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

     

0 0.2 0.0 0.6 t. ms 0 0.3 '03 0.6 t: I8

Fig. 1. Continuous slit scan of optical discharge plasma lumi-
nescence in the mode of slow combustion. The direction of ob-
servation is perpendicular to the initiating and maintaining
laser beams. 1he camera slit is located along the axis of the
millisecond laser. with beam directed from the top down on the
figure; a) ignition on the axis of beam with diameter d-lo mm;
b) ignition on axis of beam with d- h mm. unilateral pickup;

c) ignition at 3 mm from axis of beam with d- 4 an; d) ignition
on axis of beam with d- 10 mm. the arrow denoting the instant

of an abrupt change in velocity.

the point of focusing of the igniting radiation was situated on the axis of a main-
taining beam with diameter of 4 mm, formation of a break in the plasma column at
the point of discharge initiation was observed just as in Ref. 1. 2 (Fig. la).
Formation and reclosure of this break is completely explained by the arisal and
subsequent damping of a flow of cool air directed along the axis of the maintaining
beam. As it has high velocity. this flow carries plasma out of the beam in the
vicinity of initiation and prevents propagation of the discharge into this region.
In analogous geometry of the experiment it was also possible to observe "unilateral
pickup" of slow burning (Fig. lb): on one side of the cold air stream the inocu-
lating plasma is completely carried out of the beam as a consequence of some asym-
metry of the hydrodynamic motion, and on the other side there is pickup of the
discharge. But because of the presence of the cool gas flow. the discharge does
not cross the ignition point for a time of the order of 1 ms. In a subsequent
experiment with displacement of the ignition point 3 mm to the side from the beam
of the millisecond laser, the most intense part of the gas flow is on the outside
of the maintaining beam; n nonluminescent region does not form (Fig. lc). Finally,
with focusing of initiating radiation on the axis of a large-diameter maintaining
beam (beam diameter of the order of the dimensions of the inoculating plasma). the
nonluminesccnt region occupies only part of the beam diameter. ho break in the
plasma column is observed when photographed from the side (Fig. ld). 0n the other
hand, observation along the direction counter to the beam maintaining the discharge
in an analogous experiment shows (Pig. 2) that a luminescent ring is formed upon
pickup of the inoculating plasma. The central part of the ring corresponds to

the region of cool air flow. The symmetry of the ring is lost when its diameter
goes beyond that of the beam of the maintaining plasma. The shape of the plasma
column thereafter begins to approach a cylinder (Fig. 2, frame 3) [photo not re-
produced]. At the same time. there is an abrupt reduction in the velocity of

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plasma prepagation: from 80 rule. the rate of increase in the outer radius of the
plasma ring, to 60 a/s. the rate of propagation of the planar front (Fig. Id).
The tine coincidence of these two values (the change in discharge symetry and
the abrupt reduction in its propagation velocity) is evidence of the change in
the gasdynanic mode of propagation of the contustion front as the combustion nave
goes out to the lateral surface of the laser beam that maintains the discharge.

The results may serve as a basis for optimizing conditions of forced initiation

of slow combustion of optical discharges by optical breakdown. Let us note also
that the particulars of laser ignition considered in this paper explain the failure
of the attenpt in Ref. lo to initiate a discharge by gas breakdown with a giant
pulse, and the requirement for minimizing the energy of the initiating pulse to
ensure discharge ignition in Ref. 5. The fact is that under the conditions of
sharp focusing of the maintaining beam typical of Ref. lo and 5. the inoculating
plasma may simply be completely carried off by the cool gas flow from the region
with high intensity of the radiation that maintains the discharge.

REFERENCES

l. Bufetov. I. A.. Prokhorov. A. H.. Fedorov. V. 3.. P0111111. V. 11.. PIS'HA V
ZHURNAL EKSPERINENTAL'NOY I TEORETICHESKOY FIZIKI, V01 32, 1980, p 281.

2. Bufetov. I. A., Prokhorov. A. H.. Fedorov. V. 8., Fomin, V. K.. KVAMOVAYA
ELEK'I‘RONIKA. Vol 8. 1981. p 751.

3. Bufetov. 1. A.. Fedorov, v. 3., Pomin. v. x.. mum; sooasncmm P0 mm.
mm. No 10. 1930. p 21.

lo. Hul'chenko. B. F.. Rayzer, Yu. P., Epshteyn, V. A.. ZHURNAL EKSPERDIENTAL'-
NOY I TBORETICHESKOY PIZIKI, Vol 59. 1970, p 1975.

S. Franzen. D. 17.. J. APPL. PHYS.. Vol Mo. 1973. p 1727.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Pis'na v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". I981

6610
C50: 1862/10

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGMHWC1A1.USE(NVLY

UDC 533.951
INTERACTION 0F STRONG ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES WITH COLLISIONLBSS PLASMA

Gor'kiy VZAIHDDEYSTVIYE SIL'NYKH ELEKTROHAGNITNYKB VOLN s BBSSTOLKNOVITEL'NOY PLAZ-
HOY in Russian 1980 (signed to press 7 Jul 80) pp 2-5. 212-216

[Annotation. editor's message and abstracts from book "Interaction of Strong Elec-
tromagnetic Haves With Plasma". edited by Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
ences A. c. Litvak. Institute of Applied Physics. USSR Academy of Sciences. 500
copies. 214 pages]

[Text] The collection contains survey articles dealing with one of the urgent
problems of plasma physics: theoretical and experimental investigation of strong
Langmuir turbulence excited in a dense collisionless plasma by intense radiation.

An investigation is made of problems of the theory of modulation instability of
Langmuir oscillations, the dynamics of strong Langmuir turbulence. and self-stress
of radiation in a homogeneous plasma. deformation of the density profile and reso-
nant absorption of strong electromagnetic waves in an inhomogeneous plasma. The
results of theoretical research are supplemented by a survey of model microwave
experiments on the action of electromagnetic waves on an isotropic plasma.

The materials of the collection may be of interest to an extensive class of spe-
cialists dealing with the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter.
as well as nonlinear effects in the laboratory and in cosmic plasma.

Editor's Message

The problem of interaction of strong electromagnetic waves with plasma is among

the problems of plasma physics being most actively researched. The interest in

this problem is dictated primarily by the varied applications associated with rf

and laser heating of plasma. with research on laser-driven inertial fusion reactions.
or no less importance is the fundamental significance of this problem. since inter-
action of intense radiation with plasma is accompanied by arisal of some fundamental
nonlinear phenomena such as parametric plasma instabilities. deformation of the
plasma density profile under the action of pondermotive force. formation of self-
consistent distributions of plasma and field-cavitons--excitation of strong plasma
turbulence. generation of flows of fast particles and quasisteady magnetic fields
and so on. These effects must be studied for many other divisions of plasma physics
as well.

133

ll”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂi(ﬂdlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This collection is devoted to one of the key questions of the problem of interaction
of intense electromagnetic waves with plasma: investigation of processes of resonant

excitation of Langmuir oscillations by electromagnetic radiation. resulting in
strong Langmuir turbulence and collisionless absorption of powerful radiation.

Host of the content of the collection is made up of solicited survey articles on
the theory of resonant interaction of radiation with plasma. These articles can
be conditionally divided into two groups. The first includes two surveys dealing
with the theory of modulation instability of Langmuir oscillations and strong Lang-
muir turbulence in a homogeneous plasma. The results of these works are valid

for describing processes in a smoothly inhomogeneous plasma in the field of an
S-polarized electromagnetic wave as well.

The second group includes three works in which an examination is made of the in—
fluence of nonlinear effects on excitation of Langmuir oscillations by the field
of a n-polarized electromagnetic wave obliquely incident on an inhomogeneous plasma
layer. The first of the articles considers steady-state nonlinear models of inter-
action. the second examines the dynamics of interaction in an external quasistatic
r-f field. and the third investigates the dynamics of resonant interaction of an
electromagnetic wave with an extended plasma layer.

The specifics of the investigated problem are associated with the fact that in
most cases of practical interest it is impossible to use the well developed ap-
paratus of the theory of weak plasma turbulence since nonlinearity leads to con-
siderahle distortion of the dispersion characteristics of plasma oscillations.
Besides. as the plasma interacts with coherent radiation. nonlinear processes fre-
quently have a dynamic nature so that it is necessary to deal with investigation

of dynamic partial differential equations. All the theoretical papers presented
are based on a unified physical approach that turns away from investigation of

a system of equations of a collisionless plasma toward examination of comparatively
simple physical models described by equations of the field and quasihydrodynamics
of the plasma averaged with respect to the period of r-f oscillations. The com-
plexity of the problem is apparently the reason for the fact that despite a common
approach in some the articles of the collection in the examination of certain physi-
cal models. assumptions are made that are contradictory to some extent. and also
the evaluation of rigor and substantiation of fundamentally important statements

is sometimes subjective. Considering that more complicated models have to be used
to get closer in viewpoints. and especially to determine the conditions of applica-
bility of specific results. the editorial staff has decided not to try to reach
full "reconciliation" of factions. and has even welcomed the argumentative trend

of some papers. We hope that this will enable the reader to get a more complete
idea not only of the advances that have been made in studying the problem. but

also of the existing difficulties and contradictions.

Although a rather large number of surveys and even monographs have been published
heretofore dealing with the description of experiments on interaction of electro-
magnetic waves with plasma. we have also deemed it advisable to supplement the
theoretical articles in a special way with an attempt to formulate the results

of model microwave experiments of the greatest importance for construction of a
general physical picture of interaction.

A. G. Litvak

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 533.951

STRONG LANGHUIR TURBULENCB AND ITS HACROSCOPIC CONSEQUENCES

[Abstract of article by Galeyev, A. A.. Sagdeyev, R. 2., Shapiro. V. D. and Shev-
chenko. V. 1.]

[Text] An examination is made of the theory of strong turbulence based on the
concept of collapse of Langmuir waves as a mechanism of pumping short-wave oscil-
lations. A theory of quasi-steady turbulence is developed, assming that the energy
of Langmuir waves excited by an external source is transferred to the region of
strong Landau damping as a consequence of collapse. The turbulence spectrum is
determined, and the effective collision frequency is calculated that characterizes
the rate of absorption of energy of the external source. The authors discuss the
macroscopic consequences of the collapse of Langmuir waves upon absorption of an
electromagnetic wave in the vicinity of plasma resonance and in application to
relaxation of electron beans. Figures 9, references 43.

unc 533.951

MODULATION INSTABILITY 0F LANGI‘IJIR OSCILLATIONS IN THE FIELD OF AN ELECTRMGNBTIC
HAVE

[Abstract of article by Litvak, A. G. and Frayman. G. [L]

[Text] The survey presents existing notions on strong langnuir turbulence excited
in a homogeneous plasma by a monochromatic electromagnetic wave. A systematic
examination is made of substantiation of model equations -that describe Langmuir
oscillations in an external field. one-dimensional models of the nonlinear stage
of modulation instability. collapse of inhomogeneous Langmuir cavitons. macro-
scopic characteristics of strong turbulence. and self-stress of the electromagnetic
wave. Figures 5. references 61.

DIX: 533.951

DENSITY JUMP 0F PLASMA 1N FIELD OF A STRONG WWII: WAVE, AND ITS MOB
ON THE EFFICIENCY OF RBSONANT ABSORPTION

[Abstract of article by Gil'denburg, V. 3.]

[Text] A systematic exposition is given of the theory of steady-state nonlinear
deformation of the resonant region of an inhomogeneous plasma in the field of a
strong electromagnetic wave. 0n the basis of quasi-static models, the author de-
termines the conditions of onset. parameters and structure of a stepwise self-
consistent transition of field and density through the plssm resonance surface.
An investigation is made of the influence that such a transition has on the ef-
ficiency of processes of collisional absorption and wave transformation in an in-
homogeneous plasma. The paper gives the results of nmnerical calculation of flat-
layered plasma-field structures formed by a strong p-polarized wave. Figures 8,
references 41.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 533.951

DYNAMICS OF INTERACTION OI" R-F FIELD HITN MOMGENEDUS PLASMA AND ACCELERATION
OF PARTICLES IN PLASMA RESONANCE REGION

[Abstract of article by Kovrizhnykh. L. H. and Sakharov. A. 5.]

[Text] It is shown within the framework of the homogeneous pumping field model
that under conditions where the r-f pressure of a self-consistent field plays an
appreciable part in the resonance region. the solution goes out to the state of
quasiperiodic generation of peaks of Langmuir oscillations and ion density cavities
(cavitons). 0n the initial stage of development of the process, the electrons

are accelerated chiefly in the direction of reduction of plasma density. and then
upon formation of cavitons there are two-sided overswings of the accelerated elec-
trons. Bstimates are found for the energy of accelerated ions in a strong pumping

field, where an appreciable part is played by effects associated with electronic
nonlinearity. Figures 12, references «‘07.

UDC 533.951
DYNAMICS OF PARAMETRIC PLASMA TURBULENCE

[Abstract of article by Andreyev. N. Ye.. Silin, V. P. and Stenchikov, G. L.)

[Text] A numerical study is done on the dynamics of nonlinear interaction of a
p-polarized wave with an inhomogeneous plasma. The initial self-consistent homo-
geneous system of equations takes consideration of the influence of ponder-motive
force on hydrodynamic plasma flow and quasilinear relaxation of the electron velo-
city distribution function. The authors explain the dynamics of the change in
plasma density and absorption of electromagnetic field energy by the plasma and
the nature of the velocity distribution of electrons. An examination is made of
the generation of the second harmonic of radiation. It is found that there are
two qualitatively different modes of interaction that depend on the plasma flow

velocity gradient in the vicinity of the critical density. Figures ll. references
32.

UDC 533.951

EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF RESONANT INTERACTION 0F INTENSE ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
WITH ISO'I'ROPIC PLASMA

[Abstract of article by Brodskiy. Yu. Ya.. Gol'tsman. V. I... Litvak. A. G. and
Nechuyev, S. 1.]

[Text] The paper gives a brief overview of existing model experiments for the
purpose of formulating conclusions of importance to construction of a theory of
interaction of strong electromagnetic waves with isotropic plasma. In the first
part an analysis is made of the results of known quasistatic experiments on inves-
tigation of the structure and dynamics of an elementary cell of interaction—the
caviton. The second part gives information on nonlinear processes that has been

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained on the basis of the authors' measurements of the integral characteristics
of transmitted and reflected electromagnetic waves and plasma oscillations, and
energy functions of electron distribution. Figures 16. references 29.

COPYRIGHT: Institut priklsdnoy fiziki AN SSSR, 1980

6610
080: 1862/269

137

I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFFICJAI.IHNE(MNLY

UDC 621.378.325

INFLUENCE OF LASER EMISSION WAVELENGTH ON PLASMA FORMATION THRESHOLD WITH
IRRADIATION 0P OPAQUE MATERIALS

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 7(109), Jul 81 (manuscript
received 11 Nov 80) pp 1582-1584

[Paper by Ye. A. Berchenko, A.V. Koshkin, A.P. Sobolev and B.T. Pedyushin]

[Text] A large number of experimental results for plasma formation
thresholds is analyzed for the case where opaque materials are ir-
radiated with laser radiation. An empirical equation is derived
which makes it possible to predict the moment of plasma formation
for a wide range of irradiation conditions. Questions of the impact
of laser emission wavelength on the "flare" process and the preci-
sion of predictions of the moment of plasma formation are discussed.

An attempt is made in this paper to analyze literature devoted to the theoretical
and experimental study of the process of plasma formation with the irradiation of
an opaque barrier by a laser. In the modern theoretical "flare" model of laser
radiation absorption [1], the following physical factors are taken into account:
the reflection of radiation from the barrier; heat sinking into the barrier; the
change in the optical and thermodynamic characteristics of the irradiated material
as a function of temperature; fusion and vaporization of the material of the
barrier; gas dynamic processes upon dispersal of vapor and ambient atmosphere;
temperature nonuniformity within the vapors (the possibility of a break between

the electron temperature and the heavy particle temperature; ionization kinetics;
the actual laser emission power density as a function of time.

However, it is known that model [1] does not provide for satisfactory agreement
with experimental results, because of which, the opinion was advanced concerning
the possible influence on the "flare" process of some effects [2-4] which were
not taken into account [1], such aselectron emission from the barrier, anomalous
heating of surface defects, amplification of the wave field close to defects as
well as when reflected from the barrier and effects related to overheating of the
melt of the barrier material (dielectrification of the metal and explosive dis-
integration of the metastable liquid).

Moreover, the reflective and thermodynamic properties of matter at high temper-
atures are not sufficnelty well known, something which in turn leads to marked
errors in theoretical predictions. One way or another, an adequate "flare" absorp-
tion model should include an accounting for the considerable number of physical

138

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOI¢OFFICIAI.lEi!(HVLY

ﬂ'

“Thicrosecondsl

Figure 1. Plasma formation delay as a function
of the rate of rise in the laser
emission power density for the first
(squares) , second (trinagles) and
third (circles) groups of experi-
ments (see the text).

Key: 1. Log(é) [MU/(cm2 - usec)].

  

0

2
(nwﬁ'w/IH‘AEI]

Figure 2. Histograms of the probability density of
the quantity 8 ' t’l’t; with the irradia-
tion of a metal barrier.

 

effects and be extraordinarily voluminous (to the extent necessary). Because of
this, we have undertaken an attempt to establish the laws governing the plasma
formation process based on an analysis of experimental data.

For practical purposes. the question of the time of absorption "flare" develop-
ment. t*, for various irradiation conditions is of special interest. All of the
experiments considered by us were broken down into three groups: 1) A metal target
(as a rule. aluminum), A - 10.6 um; 2) Metal target, A I l um; 3) A target made
of a dielectric (glass fiber reinforced plastic), A I 1 um. Such differences in
the formulation of the experiment as the pressure and kind of ambient gas. the
dimater of the irradiation spot, etc.. were not taken into account within the

scope of each group of experiments. The permissibility of this simplification
follows, for example, the results of [5]. Subsequent analysis also demonstrated
that the influence of these factors does not exceed the scatter in the experimental
data. related primarily to the space-time inhomogeneity of the irradiation, the
natural difference in the properties of the samples being irradiated, the multi-
plicity of experimental techniques as well as a certain ambiguity in the concept of

"plasma formation" itself.

To simplify the procedure for taking into account the actual timewise form of a
laser pulse. only those experiments were selected in which the absorption "flare"
occurred at the leading edge of the pulse for close to its maximum. In this case.
the form of the pulse can be described by a single parameter - the characteristic
rate of rise of the emission flux density d - qn/t, where q. is the maximum value
of the emission flux density; r is the rise time of the laser pulse. Thus, the

139

F0. OFIICDUL‘EIEIH'L!
INJI‘OFfICJAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

plasma formation delay time, other conditions being equal, will depend only on the
rate of rise in the emission flux density: p* - t*(d). Experimental values [2.
5 - 19] of t* are shown in Figure 1 as a function of q for all three groups of
experiments. These data are satisfactorily described by the empirical formula:

t* - 7q-2/3 , (l)

where t* is in microseconds while 6 is in MH/(cm2 ‘ usec). The curve of (l) is
shown in Figure l with the dashed line.

This formula can be qualitatively interpreted as the time for heating the surface
of the target up to a certain fixed temperature as a function of 6, assuming that
the emission flux density rises linearly [20].

Having this interpretation in mind, as well as the approximate relationship
between the energy density at the target, the temperature of the surface and the

point in time, which follows from heat conductivity theory. formula (1) can be
generalized for the case of an arbitrary laser pulse shape:

e*//E? 3 B - 10 J/cm2 - usecll2 (2)
p
where “"Jq‘od’ is the emission energy density at the target at the moment

of plasma formation. Expression (2) is to be treated as an equation for the
quantity t*.

The aggregate of experiments considered here was subjected to statistical process-
ing to estimate the precision of (2) as well as to determine the plasma formation
threshold as a function of the wavelength of the acting radiation. Histograms of
the distribution function (probability density) of the quantity for laser emission
wavelength of A 3 1 and 10.6 um (aluminum as the barrier material) are shown in
Figure 2. It follows from these graphs that for both wavelengths, the maximum
value of the distribution function corresponds to a4value of 8 - 7.5. For a wave-
length of A = 1 pm. the mathematical mean value is B - 9.9. while the dispersion
(mean square dexiation) is a - 6.6. For the radiation of a 002 laser, these
quantities are 8 - 9.6 and a - 6 respectively.

Thus. the analysis of the experimental data performed here does not allow us to
talk of a marked difference in the plasma formation threshold for wavelengths
of A = l and 10.6 um.

160

ltllCﬂﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NVLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. B. Harkovich, A. P. Colub', I. V. Reachinov, A. I. Petrukhin, Yu. Ye. Pleshanov,
"Deponir. VINITI" ["Hanuscript Deposited in the All-Union Institute of Scien-
tific and Technical Information"), No. 3300-79 (1979).

C.T. Halters, ILN. Barnes, R.B. Beverly III. J. APPL. PHYS” fol. 2937 (1978).

. V.A. Batanov. F.V. Rankin. A.H. Prokhorov, v.3. Fedorov, mm um 0?

EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS], Q, 586 (1972).

8.14. Kozlov, A.A. Smokhin, A.B. Uspenskiy, KVANTOVAYA lemon“, _l_o_, 5210.
(1977).

N.N. Kozlova. "Kand. Dias. KFTI" ["Cendidate Dissertation, Moscow Engineering
Physics Institute"], Hoscou, 1975.

9.0. Thomas. AIAA J., 1;. 1279 (1975).
A.N. Pirri, AIM 1., g, 83 (1977).
v.8. Halter, 11.3. H.111, J. APPL. ms, ﬁ, 761 (1975).

V.A. Boyko, V.A. Danilychev, V.D. 2vorykin, N.V. lanolin. L.Yu. Chugunov.
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, 2, 1,955 (1976).

\'.P. Agcyev, A.I. Barchukov, P.V. Bunkin, v.1. Konov, 8.3. Puzhayev, A.S.
Silenok, N.1. Chaplivev. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, g, 78 (1979).

V.P. Ageyev, A.I. Barchukov, F.V. Bunkin. V.I. Konov, $.11. Hetev, A.s. Silenok,
N.1. Chapliyev, IZVESTIYA WZOV SSSR, 8311.. PIZIKA [PROCB-INGS OF THE USSR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES, PHYSICS SERIES], No. 11, 310 (1977).

V.A. Boyko, V.A. Danilychev, V.V. Vladimirov, 3.“. Duvanov, V.D. Zvorykin,

I.V. Kholin, PIS'HA V 2111'? [LETTERS TO THE JOURNAL OF TECHNICAL PHYSICS].

[1, 1,373 (1978).

A.V. Bessarab, V.H. Romanov. V.A. Sauylin, A.I. Puntikov, ZhTF [JWRNAL OF
TECHNICAL PHYSICS], lo_8_, 1,751 (1978).

A.V. Bessarab. V.N. Novikov. D.V. Pavlov, A.I. Puntikov. ZhTF, 22, 285. (1980).

N.N. Kozlova, A.I. Petrukhin, V.A. Sulyayev, KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. ;. 1,390,
(1975).

Ye.A. Betchenko, A.P. Sobolev, 3.1'. Pedyushin. WANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, g, 1,566,
(1979).

A.I. Korotchenko. A.A. Samokhin, A.B. Uspenskiy. KVANTOVAYA MK'I'RGIIKA, g,
210 (1979).

161

m OFFIGAL (SE ONLY
FIIICNWWCJAI.USE(NNLY

18. A.A. Bakeyev, B.A. Barikhin, V.V. Borovkov, L.A. Vasil'yev, L.I. Nikolashina,
A.I. Pavlovekiy, N.V. Prokopenko, L.V. Sakhanov, A.I. Fedoainov. v.1. Yakovlev,
KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA. l, 369 (1980).

19. 1.3. Harkovich. A.I. Petrukhin, Yu.Ye. Pleshanov, V.A. Rybakov, "Tezisy dokl.
IV Vsesoyuz. soveshchaniya po nerezonananolu vzainodeyatviyu opticheskoso
izluchenlya a veahchestvou" ("Abstracts of Reports of the Fourth All-Union
Conference on Nonresonant Interaction of Optical Radiation with Hatter"],
Leningrad, 1978. p 276.

20. J. Rodi. "Deystviye noshchnogo 1azernogo izlucheniya" ["The Action of High
Power Laser Radiation"], Moscow. Hir Publishers, 1974.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

8225
CSO: [862/252

162

FIHICHHHCJAI.USEGMNLY
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

UDC 621.373.826
THEORY OF STBADY OPTICAL GAS BREAKDOHN CLOSE TO METAL SURFACE

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8, No 7(109), Jul 81 (manuscript
received 1 Nov 80) pp 1485-1490

[Paper by A.A. Vedenov, 6.0. Gladush and A.N. Yavokhin, Institute of Nuclear
Power ineni I.V. Kurchatov, Moscow]

[Text] The causes of the formation of a plasma flare close to
the surface of metals are studied theoretically in this paper

for light power densities on the order of 1 HUchZ (low threshold
breakdown). It is demonstrated that the physical nature of this
phenomenon can be similar to the ignition of chemical combustion
reactions by a hot surface. The breakdown takes place because of
thermal ionization of the metal vapors, although the vaporization
of the material is insignificant in this case. The effect of
diffusion and overheating of the electrons on the amount of the
threshold power density is analyzed.

1. It is well known that the laser radiation power density at which a plasma
appears above a target surface can be several orders ofumagnitude less than the
breakdown threshold of the pure gases, in the atmosphere of which the laser inter-
action takes place [1 - a]. The presence of a plasma can become the decisive
factor in the interaction of the radiation and the matter, since it can both
strongly shield the surface [2] and promote the radiation heating of the material
[5]. The phenomenon of low threshold breakdown has not yet been uniquely
theoretically explained. Thermal breakdown is studied in this paper as one of

the possible reasons for the formation of a plasma at the surface of a solid.

In the case of a low incident radiation power density q, the ambient gas of the
medium is heated by virtue of the thermal conductivity from the surface of the
absorbing target. The essence of thermal breakdown consists in the fact that at

a radiation density which exceeds a certain critical value, q' [qp I. the gas is
heated up to such a high temperature that its further heating then becomes
possible because of the intense thermal ionization, with subsequent direct
absorption of the laser beam energy. Such a breakdown mechanism was used in paper
[6] to analyze the interaction of a radiation pulse with a metal, where vaporize-
tion is significant. while the heating of the vapors took place with the

163

FOI:0FFICIA1.lElE(l'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formation of an intense shock wave. For large values of 1, this approach yielded
good agreement with experimental data on the surface shielding tine. In the quasi-
steady-state case, where the pressure in the gas volume has time to equalize,
depending on the power density and the external pressure, two interaction variants
are possible. The vapors of the material can either slowly diffuse from the focal
spot into the ambient gas. or can displace it. forming a steady-state jet. A
theoretical analysis of optical breakdown in these cases was reported in [7]. The
results of analytical and manerical study of the first of the indicated variants
are presented below.

2. Although the occurrence of a plasma flare is a nonsteady-state process. we shall
initially treat steady-state problems, since the breakdown phenomenon can be
treated mathematically as the transition from one steady-state to another.

We shall assume that the laser beam is focused on the surface of the material in
a spot of radius R. In the absence of a well developed vaporization mode, the
energy carried away by the material vapors is small. and for this reason, the
temperature in the spot is governed by the thermal conductivity of the target:

To - null/it"l where Km and n are the thermal conductivity and absorption coeffic-
ienta of the target material. At a distance remote from the spot, the gas temper-
ature falls off , as with increasing distance from a point source: proportional to
r‘l. It will be seen from the following that breakdown occurs at a distance from
the target which is considerably less than the radius of the focal spot R. For
this reason. one can disregard side losses and limit oneself to the spherically
symmetrical or plane case.

To ascertain the main laws governing the phenomenon, we shall initially consider the
simplest case of an equilibrium isotemperature medium. In the steady-state case.
the temperature of this medium is determined by the energy balance equation:

_W°-x,a%-(2—a)x(r.mk'z

rm‘ I

K (T. N) =. m.(_2“l)lld pNI/1(hT)—l/O exp (—ﬁ);
NBN.(T.)3 T(R)-To. T(oo)--0, . (1)

where N5 is the equilibrium vapor density; p is the pressure of the ambient
medium; I is the gas ionization potential; u is the laser radiation frequency:
Oca. v9, n and e are the scattering cross-section. the thermal velocity, mass
and charge of an electron; K is the heat conductivity coefficient of the gas
medium. The Fact that the light absorption coefficient K is due to electron
scattering at neutral particles (for a C02 laser) is taken into account in (1).

The density of the metal vnpors which diffuse from the target and the temperature
full «Jr at a characteristic distance on the order of R. The absorption factor

K, in view of the sharp dependence on T, falls off over a significantly shorter
distance. and for this reason. the vapor concentration N can be taken as constant.

1101.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

we shall assume for simplicity that r does not depend on temperature; then, by
introducing the dimensionless variables 0 - (TITO - 1)I/2To, E - r/R and expanding
the exponent close to To [9], we derive the following from (1):

-3:%+%-3---1°re°z
0(l)=-0; 8(oo)- 4/27.;
at
DAR” :7,» ‘2’".— (2_a)_ (2)

Equation (2) is not integrated, but considering the fact that breakdown occurs
close to the surface (at a distance of E - 0-1/2 << 1), one can shift over to a
plane geometry. In this case. the problem reduces to a problem of asymmetrical
ignition or ignition by a hot surface [9]. Zel'dovich's condition for ignition
has the form:

D>'/.(l/2T.)‘. (3)

In making the transition to dimensionless variables, we obtain the condition
for the quantity q at which breakdown occurs:

q.-+(A+I)ﬁ-In-Ii’§‘£;

l = "“m" (321V luvs" (m ‘ "'- (4)

amm'

 

where A is the heat of vaporization; No is the coefficient in the expression
Ns - No - exp(-A/kT), which depends on the material; q* = l HH/cmz.

It can be seen from (k) that the breakdown flux density basically depends on

the properties of the target material: the thermal-conductivity, the absorption
factor, the vaporization energy and the ionization potential of the vapor atoms.
The properties of the surrounding gas and its pressure have a weak influence on
the breakdown threshold. The influence of the light frequency should be manifest
in the absorption factor. Estimates based on formula (6) for difficultly
fusible metals. for example, for tungsten, yield qP = l HH/sz, which is close
to that observed in experiments [6]. However, the surface temperature T, [Tp]
at which breakdown occurs is more important in this approach. It is essential
that the pressure of the saturated vapors of the material, which depends hharply
on the temperature offthe surface, does not exceed the ambient gas pressure.
Otherwise, as was stated in section 1, a hydrodynamic outflow of the vapor will
appear and the governing laws will be different. According to estimates, the
transition temperature is T* = 5,000 to 6,000 'K, and for this reason, even for
difficultly fusible materials, TP is close to the boiling point Tk (for H,

Tk r 5,800 °K). Consequently, it is necessary to calculate Tp more precisely.

165

FOI‘OFFHJAI.U§E(N'L¥
FTII()FFICJAI.l£3Ei(NVLV

Because of this. equation (1) was solved with variable coefficients. The metal
vapor density was calculated by means of the diffusion equation:

I 0 ON .
7170”?“-

(S)
NU?) * N.(To)‘- N0”) '0.

where D is the diffusion coefficient, which depends on temperature.

System (1) and (5) was solved by a plotting technique. Various distribution
profiles of the temperature T and the metal vapor density were established as

a function of the power density q. Curves for T as a function of the radius
are shown in Figure l for nitrogen at p - 3 atm and for tungsten. The thermal
physical constants expressed as a function of temperature were taken from [10],

m - 5 percent. Initially. the curve T(r) is close to r‘l. At a certain value.

q - qp, the temperature profile ceases to be monotonically declining. the value of
3T/3r at the surface of the metal increases with time and becomes positive. while
a temperature maximum appears close to the surface and the temperature subsequently
rises rapidly. Thus. a thermal breakdown of the gas occurs in the laser beam at

q - qp. The curves for qp and T are plotted in Figure 2 as a function of the
ambient nitrogen gas pressure. ghe curve for the boiling point is also plotted in
the same graph as a function of pressure [10]. It can be seen that the curve

for TP for a pressure above atmospheric runs below the boiling point curve. Thus.
for tungsten-nitrogen vapor, an equilibrium thermal breakdown in the target vapors
is possible. Since the thermal-physical coefficients of nitrogen and air are
close. these results can also apply to air. As follows from [11], the burning of
tungsten in air takes a course through a surface oxidation reaction. The heat of
the reaction is liberated at the solid surface. Since the ionization potential

of tungsten oxide, w03 (11.7 eV), is higher than the ionization potential of
tungsten vapors (8 eV), then the breakdown temperature Tp. taking the combustion
reaction into account. apparently does not decrease. The threshold light power
density is reduced in this case by virtue of the combustionpower, which is
difficult to estimate under the conditions because of the lack of data on the
reaction rates at high temperatures. In principle. an equilibrium thermal break-
down can also occur for other difficultly fusible materials, for example. molyb-
denum. titanium and tantalum.

Since the ionization potential of the metal atoms is markedly less than the
ionization potential of the ambient gas, despite the fact that the density of

uf the metal vapors is usually substantially lower than the ambient gas density,
thermal ionization of just the vapors governs the conductivity of the medium and
consequently. the absorption factor. The contribution of the ambient gas is small.
Estimates based on formula (4) for air assuming that the latter consists of the
easily ionized compound N0 (overstated conductivity) yield a value for the break-
down temperature which exceeds the boiling point of tungsten. A numerical solution
of equation (1) for an air pressure of l - 3 atm, taking into account the radiation
absorption factor by air where the radiation is at a wavelength of 10.6 pm [2].

166

I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂB(ﬂVLY
H0!(Hﬂﬂ€lAl.USE(N'LY

Figure 1. Gas temperature distribution as a function
of the radius, To - 5,600 'K.

Key: 1. Initial distribution;
2. Steady-state distribution at
q I q 3
3-6. The distribution of T(r) for
q 3 q ; t/r - 0.1 (3), 0.2 (A),
0.3 (E) and 0.301 (6); 1 - 5‘ mace
and qP - 0.9 HH/cnz.

 

Figure 2. The breakdown power density qp
and the surface temperature
5,: TP as a function of the external
T pressure.
,P

   

Key: 1. Nitrogen;

2. The functions specified by
formula (6);

3. The boiling point of
tungsten as a function of
pressure;

a. Nitrogen, taking into
account Te > T. points
A and B were calculated
taking plasma diffusion
into account.

yielded a breakdown temperature of 12.000 °K, something which is knowingly higher
than the boiling point of any material. This indicates the unreal nature of the
presuppositions of [13] and the erroneous conclusions of paper [16]. where it is
proposed that a low threshold laser breakdown be explained by the thermal breakdown
of pure air.

3. It was assumed above that the plasma is in a state of local thermodynamic
equilibrium, where the temperature of the electrons ‘l'e is equal to the gas temper-
ature.. Since the radiation energy is absorbed by the electrons, and the latter
give up heat to the gas as a consequence of elastic and inelastic collisions, then
it is possible. generally speaking, for the electron gas to overheat. The latter
is extremely important. since the plasma density depends strongly on the tempera-
ture of the electrons. These effects can be taken into account by means of thermal
balance equations for the electrons and heavy particles:

167

FOI!!HN(1AI.USE(NVLY
FCHI‘)FFICJAI.I£§E4OBHQV

I a or: R. awn -
~77xJ'T-‘T-‘Kv- TnMTe-T) "-(Nﬂv""'-°~)‘ (58)
| 0 r 3 I -
.7 -5:—xr' %r— = 703(1‘. _ T) or (”201 + "00“);
*1; 3d —— I
"-=(';—nr7)l V” ”"("'§ET.')‘ ”*‘Nww- (6b)

where ck is the coulomb cross-section; 6 is the inelastic loss coefficient; ‘e -
- venf/B ("toy + “5°k) is the coefficient of electron heat conductivity. Adding
(6a) and (6b), and considering the fact that for the given conditions re < x, we
obtain equation (1), in which, however, the absorption factor depends on the
electron temperature Te. The size of the latter is determined by equation (6a).
In the absence of electron thermal conductivity, Te will be maximal:

4 w ' (7)
7"T+'5%m§74-

It can be seen from (7) that for molecular gases, for example nitrogen, the
electron temperature exceeds the gas temperature by the small amount of a 300 'K
(for q = l Mule-2, r - R, 6 - 15 [15]). By substituting (7) in (1), one can, as
is done for example, in HMO generators with a nonequilibriun plasma [51], take
the impact of electron heating on the plasma conductivity into account, and conse-
quently, its impact on the breakdown threshold. Curve 4 in Figure 2 was plotted
taking this effect into account. It can be seen that the influence of nonequi-
librium is small for molecular gases. In reality, the heating will be even less
for molecular gases. since in prebreakdown modes, the frequency of coulomb col-
lisions is on the order of the elastic collisions and much greater than the
inverse energy time 3mdvy/H. This leads to more efficient energy transfer from
the electrons to the vibrational molecular degrees of freedom and the gas temper-
ature.

In atomic gases, the break in the temperature of the electrons can prove to be
substantial. For example, for Ar, in accordance with (7), Te - T = 6,000 °K.
However, the electron thermal conductivity will be significant at atmospheric
pressure. Dor this reason, it is necessary to solve (6a) and (6b) simultaneously
to find Te and I. At high pressures (p > 20 atm), the electron thermal conduc-
tivity becomes small, and for this reason, the influence of electron heating can
be taken into account just as for the case of a molecular gas. Calculations
based on (1) and (7) yield a breakdown temperature in Argon at a tungsten surface
substantially lower than for nitrogen: TP 3 3,800 ‘K. Such a low value of the
temperature also makes it possible to use this approach for less difficultly
fusible materials. For example, Tp - 3,050 °K for steel at p - 15 atm. Thus,
the breakdown power density depends on the properties of both the target material
and the ambient gas.

A. It was stated at the outset of this paper that the thermal breakdown was
analyzed for the sﬂmplest case: the case of an equilibrium plasma, where the
electron concentration is determined by Saha's formula. Because of the large

148

FOI¢0FFKJAL.USE(HULY
roe OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

spatial gradients for some parameters of the problem, the plasmallosses due to
diffusion from the surface of the metal into the gas can play a part. This cor- -
respondingly reduces the concentration of electrons close to the metal, but none-
theless increases far away from the metal and promotes light absorption in a wider
range as compared to the equilibrium case. At atmospheric pressure, as estimates
for N2 show. the diffusion ion flux is comparable to a Saba-Langmuir flow. With an
increase in the gas pressure, the relative role of the diffusion losses decreases
and the plasma concentration at the cathode becomes close to an equilibrium con-
centration. The condition of ionization equilibritnn in the volume is governed by
the diffusion recombination length l, - [pa/(332)]1/2. where B is the recaiiination
coefficient. For the given conditions (higher plasma densities), step ionization
and recombination processes play the decisive role [16], which, generally speaking,
depend on the individual properties of the ionizing atoms. It is difficult to con-
sider calculations reliable which utilize a general expression for 8, which does
not depend on the kind of matter [16]. The corresponding estimates for atmospheric
pressure yield a value of l: on the order of 0.1 sun, which does not exceed the
size of the focal spot R, but is comparable to the characteristic dimension over
which the plasma concentration falls. For this reason, diffusion could have an

influence on breakdown, generally speaking, though as numerical ca1cu1ations have
demonstrated. this influence is small.

Figure 3. The temperature distribution (solid lines)
and density (dashed lines) of a plasma
in nitrogen where p - 3 atm, To -
- 5,500 “K, q - 0.9 m/cmz, r - 0.58 nsec;
t/r - 0 (1), .51 (2) and 1.5 (3).

 

-._'__ Taro“: g... pain (I ——;-;-)-.
' (3)
we) . mm»: - n(°°)=-0; a=se"lm'I-(m"-

was solved simultaneously with the heat balance equation for the gas (1). The
plasma density (1) is determined from (8). Calculations for p - l and 3 era. of

1&9

”OFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nitrogen yielded a T which practically latched the values calculated for an equi-
librium plasma (see Figure 2). The development of the breakdown is shown in
Figure 3 as a function of time. It can be seen that the plasma layer is rather
wide and the equilibrium concentration curve which corresponds to temperature curve
2, on this scale coincides with the ordinate. However, as was stated above, a
thicker absorbing layer had no influence on the size of the breakdown, something
which is apparently related to the weak dependence of T9 on the dimension of the
system R (see (2) and 3)). The questions distussed in sections 3 and l. are close
to the approach developed in paper [17] for other conditions; the vaporization of
the target material, in particular, was not taken into account in [17].

Thus, we have shown that low threshold breakdown close to a target of materials
which are not diffiCultly fusible can be explained by thermal breakdown in the
vapors of the material. In this case, the breakdown occurs until the onset of
intense vaporization and destruction of the target. A comparison of the theory

and calculations with experimental data is necessary for a more detailed study of
the reason for the formation of the plasma close to the target.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ya. N. Gnoyevoy. A.N. Petrukhin, Yu.Ye. Pleshakov, V.A. Sulyayev, PIS'NA V ZhETF
[LETTERS To THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL PHYSICS], g. 460 (1970).

2. E. Locke, E. Boas, R. Hells, IEEE J., 05-8, 132 (1972).

3. A.I. Barchukov, F.V. Bunkin, V.I. Xonov, AM. Prokhorov, PIS'HA V ZhETF, £, 1013,
(1973).

la. N.N. Rykalin, A.A. Uglov, N.N. Nisanetdinov, DAN SSSR [REPORTS OF THE USSR
ACADEMY or scmncns], 2_18, 330 (1976).

5. V.P. Ageyev, AJ. Barchukov, P.V. Bunkin, et a1., IZVESTIYA VUZOV SSSR. SER.
FIZIKA [PROCEIINGS OF THE USSR HIGHER DUCATIONAL INSTITUTES. PHYSICS SERIES],
H, 31: (1977).

6. A.P. Golub'. I.V. Nemehinov, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRWIKA. l, 209 (1980).

7. ILA. Vedcnov, (LC. Cladush, FIZIKA I NIMIYA OBRABOTKI MATERIALOV [MATERIALS
PROCESSING PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY]. No. 1, 142 (1979).

8. Yu.P. Rayzer, "Lazernaya iskra i rasprostraneniye razryadov" ["Laser Spark and'
Discharge Propagation”. Moscow, Nauka Publishers, 1976.

9. D.A. Frank-Kamtskiy, "Diffuziya i teploperedacha v khinicheskoy kinetike"
["Diffusion and Ileat Transfer in Chenical Kinetics"], Moscow, Nauka Publishers,
1967.

150

FOIOI’F'ICIALUSEONLY
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

IS.

16.

17.

FOR OFFIClAl.lEﬂE(MVLY

"Tablitsy fizicheskikh velichin: Spravochnik" ["Tebles of Physical Quantities:
Handbook"], edited by I.K. Kikoin, Moscow, Atomizdat Publishers, 1976.

P. Kofated, "Vysokotenperaturnoye okialeniye metallov" [“High Temperature Oxida-
tion of Metals"], Hoseov. Mir Publishers, 1969.

"Opticheekiye svoystva goryachego vozdukha" ("Optical Properties of Hot Air"],
edited by L.H. Biberuan, Moscow, Nauka Publishers, 1970.

A.V. Bondarenko. Ye.v. Dan'shchikov, V.S. Golubev, P.V. Lebedev, A.P.
Nastoyaehchiy, A.V. Ryazanov, PIS'HA V ZhTP [LﬁTTERS TO THE JOURNAL OF
TECHNICAL PHYSICS], 2, 221 (1979).

A.F. Nastoyashchiy, KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Z, 170 (1980).

D. Sutton, A. Sherman, "Oenovy tekhnicheskoy magnitnoy gidrodinaniki"
("Principles of Applied Magnetic Hydrodynamics"], Hoecow, Hir Publishers, 1968.

B.H. Smirnov, "Iony 1 vozbuzhdennyye stony v plazme" ["Ions and Excited Atoms-in
a Plasma"), Moscow, Atoaizdat Publishers, 1974.

v.1. Hazhukin, A.A. Uglov, B.N. Chetverushkin, DAN SSSR, 359, 1338 (1979).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1981

8225
C80: 1862/252

151

FOItOFFKJAl.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPTICS AND SPECTROSCOPY

UDC 535.338539J94
ANALYSIS OF ABSORPTION SPECTRUM FOR D30, HBO AND 310 VAPOR IN 1.06 an REGION

Moscow DOKLADY AKADEMII NAUK SSSR in Russian Vol 258. No Is. 1981 (manuscript re-
ceived 22 Dec 80) pp 856-858

[Article by A. D. Bykov, Associate Member of USSR Academy of Sciences V. Ye. Zuyev,
V. P. Lopasov. Yu. s. Hakushkin, L. N. Sinitsa and 0. N. Ulenikov. Tomsk Affiliate,
Institute of Optics of the Atmosphere. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Vibrational-rotational spectra of molecules are a unique source of complete
and reliable data on the nature of intermolecular interaction, internal states

and physicochemical properties of molecules in a variety of external conditions.

Of special interest is the investigation of spectra of different isotopic varieties

of a given type of molecule since this gives significant supplementary information
on the sane or similar parameters and properties of molecules.

This paper gives some results of the first laboratory recording of the absorption
spectrum of 020 and H00 vapor in the 9160-9400 cn‘1 region together with a theo-
retical analysis. The measurements (P-l kPa) were done on a neodymiua laser spec-
trometer on the basis of the method of intracavity absorption [Ref. 1]. The spec-
tral range of operation of the spectrometer is 9100-9520 cm“. resolution 0.08 cm“.
threshold sensitivity to absorption 10" cm“. which corresponds to using 10 km of
absorbing layer in classical spectroscopy. The positions of line centers were
measured with accuracy of 0.08 cm" relative to the absorption lines of 1-120 mea-
sured in Ref. 2.

A mixture of H20. 010 and H00 vapors was used as the investigated medium The
width of the laser emission spectrum over a pulse is 7-10 cm“. Registration of
the absorption spectrum throughout the spectral interval of 9160-9400 cm" was
by wavelength tuning from pulse to pulse with overlapping of adjacent regions of
the spectrum.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F011 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the above-mentioned section of the spectrum a total of more than 300 absorption
lines was registered, belonging to bands (111) and (012) of H20, (112) and (013)
of 020, (310) and (121) of HDO. As an example. Fig. 1 shows a section of the ob-
tained spectrum. Theoretical analysis of the experimental results included inter-
pretation of the lines, determination of vibrational-rotational energies in upper
vibrational states. determination of rotational and centrifugal constants (in the
interpretation a preliminary theoretical estimate was made of the positions of

the centers of vibrational-rotational bands of the D20 and HDO molecules).

Indicea 1. II. 111, IV refer to bands (111) of 1120. (012) of 1120. (310) or
800 and (112) of D10 respectively.

Absorption apectruu of mixture of 320, D20 and HDO vapor in 9294-9325 cm"

Jvzznrar'

Pig. 1.
region.

 

153

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In analyzing the spectra of the water molecule and its isotopic modifications it

is necessary to take into consideration the presence of resonant interaction be-
tween different vibrational states. In our case it is difficult to use the tra-
ditional approach (see for example Ref. 3) to the determination of rotational and
centrifugal constants in connection with the necessity of simultaneously accounting
for a large number of resonating states. For example, for states (112) and (013)
of 0:0 in accordance with the traditional method it is necessary in addition to
these two states to account for eight others that interact with them. In this
connection. the resultant spectrum was interpreted by using a technique developed
by the authors and described in Ref. 4. S. enabling a reduction in the total number
of vibrational states taken into consideration in solving the inverse problem with
regard to resonant interactions. Analysis showed that in the case of interest

to us, states (112). (013) of 020 and (310), (121) of use can be treated with a
fair degree of validity as isolated. at least for small values of quantum nuaber J.

Another important point in solving the inverse problem is choosing the zero-order
approximation. The following procedure was carried out to calculate the initial
approximation of rotational and centrifugal constants of 010 and HBO molecules

and also to check the validity of line interpretation. The authors had previously
developed a method of analyzing the influence of isotope substitution on the param-
eters of molecules [Ref. 6. 7]. In particular. isotope ratios were found for some
spectroscopic constants of ng molecules of sz symmetry (the formulas were derived
within the framework of the harmonic oscillator approximation). In this research
it was shown that similar expressions

0) A'=f(M.m'.u.w')A + AA

can be obtained with isotope substitution in the anharmonic oscillator approximation
as well. In (1), A and A' are the spectroscopic constants of the fundamental modi-
fication and the isotope respectively. f(m. m', u. u') are known functions of the
masses of the nuclei; AA represents small corrections to the first term.

To estimate the rotational and A constants of bands of the 0,0 molecule that we
require, the corresponding constants of bands (112) and (013)'of the H10 molecule
were determined. To do this. an analysis was made of the 330 absorption spectrum
in the vicinity of 0.80 um. As the initial data. we used the experimental results
in the solar spectrum atlas of Ref. 9 with theoretical processing to determine

the rotational and centrifugal constants of the above-mentioned bands of the H20
molecule. The resultant parameters were used in formula (1) for estimates of ro-
tational and A constants of vibrational states (112) and (013) of 020.

Concomitantly. formulas were obtained enabling evaluation in the anharmonic oscil-
lator approximation of rotational constants for individual vibrational states
(in particular for states (112) and (013)). based on the structural and force con-
stants of 020. It is shown that in the case of paired Darling-Dennison vibrational
resonance the rotational constants 381v2v3 can be caJCulated from the formula

. . s
0) ”'HH'$“7kVthVﬂ3z ¢(K*m-
x2:

-- Thur, v,u, v| v,v,la}(V. 2 2 0 Mhaﬂl’, +K)0a3(y, $2 + M); o

{Aﬂgtylvi' .

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where ABX- Ant-0 (3,. and B; are the greater and average of the rotational con-
stants); Bﬁ are the equilibrium values of these constants; 13% are vibrational-
rotational constants (see for example Ref. 8); YZVIV1V3. V'Viv are the weights
with which harlonic functions IVIV3V3> and IV1V5VI> particlpat g in the Darling-
Dennison resonance enter into the total vibrational wave function.

Formulas were derived in a similar way for 11110 molecules. enabling estimation of
rotational and A constants based on structural and force constants of mo, and
also by using isotope ratios.

TABLE I

Rotational and centrifugal constants
of states (112) of 11.0 and (310) of 1100 (cm")

  
  
 

 

......_._.___T__ _ _. ;172)_D,_0_ _-_
Parameter Est. b; Bat. by leu- 39.36.
ormula ! orange _ rocessing

E 9207* 9205.86 9279* 9292.90

A 15.1 15.: 15.56 25.0 24.89

s 7.2 1.1 1.43 8.8 3.11

c 4.6 4.6 4.10 6.0 5.99

AK 10’ 11.0 1.9 as 26.2 21.3

A“ 10' -1.o -2.5 1.6 3.1

a, 10‘ 4.0 4.2 6.0 5.!

*Theoretically calculated with consideration of
vibrational resonances

TABLE 2

Vibrational-rotational energies of excited states
(112) of 030 and (310) of 800
(“I")

2121?“:

0 0 0 9206.81 9292.94 ' 3 2 l 93I9JI 9452.19
I I) I 92 I 7.99 930757 3 3 I 9363.97 9531 .04
l I I 9226.!2 9323.73 3 3 0 9364.” 9537.06
I I 0 922838 9326.“ 4 0 4 - 9435.30
2 0 2 924l .6! 9336.74 4 I 4 932150 9442.97
2 I 2 9247.58 9330.35 4 I 3 ~ — 9469.03
2 I I 9255.77 9350.40 4 2 3 - 9509.04
2 2 I 9280.20 9406.73 4 2 2 93“.“! -

2 .7 > 0 92KB.“ 9407.05 4 3 2 - 9396.03
3 (I 3 9273.85 9379.57 4 3 I - 9596.!9
3 I 3 9279.53 9390.“ 4 4 I 947b.l 1 97M.”
3 I 2 9406.40 4 4 0 94 78.1 7 97 I 4.38
3 2 3 - 9450.75

The parameters obtained in this way were then used as a zero-order approximation
for determining rotational and centrifugal constants of states (112). (013) of
D70. and (310). (lZl) of H00 from experimental data. As an example. tables 1 and
2 summarize some results of theoretical processing of the recorded spectrum.

155

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1 shows estimates of the values of rotational and centrifugal constants of
states (112) of 020 and (310) of BOO. and for comparison the values of these param-
eters obtained by formulas (1). (2) and used as a first approximation for 010.
Table 2 contains some vibrational-rotational energy levels obtained for two of

the above-mentioned bands of 020 and “DO molecules. Interpretation of the spectrum
was done simultaneously with determination of spectroscopic constants. The results
of the analysis enabled interpretation of more than 752 of the recorded absorption
lines. By way of illustration of the results of this interpretation. Pig. 1 shows
lines corresponding to Q- and R-branches of absorption bands of H20. 020 and EDO.

The results provide additional information that can be used for example in studying
the physical and chemical properties of the 8:0 molecule. They may also be of
independent interest. for example for atmospheric optics or physics of the inter-
stellar medium.
REFERENCES
1. Sinitsa. L. N.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 4. 1978. p 148.
2. Flaud. J. M.. Camy-Peyret. C. et al.. J. HOL. SPECTROSC.. Vol 75. 1979. p 339.
3. Kwan, Y. Y.. lbid., Vol 71. 1978. p 260.
a. Antipov. A. 3.. Bykov, A. D. et a1.. Preprint, Institute of Optics of the At-
mosphere. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences. 10A SO AN SSSR No 28,
Tomsk. 1979.

S. Antipov. A. 8.. Bykov. A. D. et al.. DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 251. 1980.
p 267.

6. Bykov. A. D.. Makushkin. Yu. 5.. Ulenikov. 0. N.. OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA.
Vol “6. 1979, p 673.

7. Makushkin. Yu. S.. Tcrent'yev. V. A.. Ulenikov, 0. N.. in: "Nolekulyarnaya
spektroskopiya vysokogo i sverkhvysokogo razresheniya" [Bigh- and Ultrahigh-
Resolution Molecular Spectroscopy]. Novosibirsk. "Nauka". 1976. p 3.

8. Kuchitsu. K.. Horino. Y.. BULL. CHEM. SOC. JAPAN. Vol 38. 1965. p 814.

9. Moore. C. E.. Minnaett, M. G. J.. Houtgast. J., "The Solar Spectrum 2935 A
to 8770 A". NAT. BUR. STAND. USA. I966.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatcl'stvo 'Nauka". "Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

6610
C50: 8140/063

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJIlOIIWCJAI.lﬂ§EZCMVLY

UDC 551.501.7:621.373.826
POWERFUL LASER PROBING 0F PHYSICOCHEHICAL PARAMETERS 0P AJHOSPHBRB

Tomsk ZONDIROVANIYE FIZIKO-KHIHICHESKIKH PARAMETROV AIHOSFERY S ISPOL'ZOVANIYBH
MOSHCHNYKH LAZEROV in Russian 1979 (signed to press 29 Dec 79) pp 2. 98-102.
220-221

[Annotation. paper "Method of Measuring Absolute Intensity of Intense Laser Beam
From Dynamics of Scattered Radiation". by G. A. Hal'tseva, and table of contents
from book "Power Laser Probing of Physicochemical Parameters of Atmosphere", edited
by V. Ye. Zuyev, associate member, USSR Academy of Sciences. Institute of Optics

of the Atmosphere. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences. 221 pages]

[Text] The collection is devoted to problems of the application of high-intensity
laser sources to purposes of remote probing of physicochemical parameters of the
atmosphere. Some papers deal with development of the physical principles of new
probing methods based on using a particular class of interactions of intense radia-
tion with matter-~nonlinear optical effects. An examination is made of problems

of self-stress of laser beams on direct and lidar paths. and also the particulars
of construction of systems of adaptive optics under conditions where nonlinear
effects show up.

The collection is written for scientific workers and graduate students specializing
in the field of atmospheric optics research. and also for specialists in related
fields developing and using laser equipment for studying and monitoring the state
of the atmosphere.

HETHOD OF MEASURING ABSOLUTE INTENSITY 0P INTENSB LASER BEANS FROM DYNAMICS OF
SCATTERBD RADIATION

[Article by G. A. Hal'tseval

[Text] An interesting question in propagation of intense laser emission in the
atmosphere is the capability of determining absolute intensity of the laser beam
along its path.

This paper suggests a method of determining the absolute intensity of a laser beam
in water haze from the dynamics of the scattered radiation.

For radiation 10(x,t) scattered at angle 6. we can write from the lidar equation:

157

FORlOFFKJAl.USE(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where
1610944: In 1 “(n-0’ :
”.THP 4'09)” 0;"- -_TN_("¢0: 0)

 

06a. 00" are the coefficient of aerosolic and molecular scattering [Ref. 1]; x
is the distance to the space to be probed; so is beam divergence; R9 is the initial
beam radius; 1. is the initial pouer density of the laser radiation; 10- (003+
“0")“; “on* °ou’ o" are coefficients of aerosolic. molecular and nonlinear attenu-
ation respectively;N N. “a are the concentration of molecules and of aerosols;
n is the size of an aerosol particle; n is the index of refraction; m-In- 1:3 is
the complex index of refraction,

1'- -I:d”:’(I(x)t)JXsf/Vaa:~§PRP D
where no is the initial size of aerosol particles, PK are coefficients in the asymp-
totic formula for the coefficient of attenuation of haze [Ref. 2].

8.
Djg:[751T[cw—n???”xc-r)-V"(¢(,,‘/:g)-¢(fa’))

ﬁzz-f,- 6'("2M('a1{""""?""1*)“—‘QAJJUMTP"2-0—0’ .

o is the probability integral; Pz-O; DK- IO; 7 is the density of water; L1. is the
specific heat of vaporization; Cp . 1‘1 are the specific heat and temperature of
the vapor- gas mixture; ‘1“.,. P, are the temperature and pressure of the medium; Al
is the coefficient of thermal conductivity of the mixture; R is the gas constant;
D is the coefficient of diffusion; u is molecular weight.

 

For vaporization of a droplet in the state of slight superheating AT/T <1 (Txis
the boiling point).

Armm'

if the condition of weak superheating is not met. then

A , =I/¢{[L,°C,Dl(o/r‘)] [Ref . 3] .

Fig.1 and 2 show the dynamics of the backscattered radiation calculated by formula
(I) for the following parameters: 110- 12 cm. 00-9 10’” rad, “a' lO’c m"’. L- 100 m
and t = 0.2 10"

On Fig. I. curves l. 2. 3 are for particles with dimensions of 0.5. l and 1.5 um
respectively. The prime indicates curves for radiation divergent at the same angle.
To determine the absolute intensity of a powerful laser beam from the dynamics

of radiation scattered at angle 6 we find the relation for the time derivative

of the scattered signal. For the case To. 1 "<1. and °ea>°en
d! /a’t
I,'(X)"2(—’j—, ))
158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI»0i1ﬂ(JALllSE1DNLN

 

Fig. l. Backseattering signal as a function of
intensity of incident radiation

I H
mar

” Ig"0‘ "/sz

 

340'

Fig. 2. backseattering signal as a
function of time

where

'II M: -I
q:(Sup(-01[n’oa':‘2n-1 ‘ T‘s) .
The dependence of n on A is shown in Fig. 3. and can be used as a calibration curve
for determining the intensity of a laser bean in absolute units over a path for
different wavelengths.

In conclusion I thank Yu. D. Kopytin for formulating the problem and constructive
discussion of the results of the work.

159

IN]! OWTNCJAI.USIZ(MﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

3910'
1. um

 

06 05 0310'

Fig. 3. Dependence of n on wavelength A

REFERENCES

l. Shiftin. K. 8., "Raaseysniye svets v nutnoy srede" [Scattering of Light in
a Turbid Medium]. Moscow-Leningrad. Gostekhitdat, 1951.

2. Zuycv, V. Ye.. "Prozrachnost' stuosfery dlya vidiuykh i infrakrasnykh luchey"
[Transparency of the Atmosphere for Visible and Infrared Rays]. Moscow. "Sovet-
skoye radio". 1966.

3. Zuyev. V. Ye.. Luzikovakiy. A. V.. Pogodayev. V. A.. Kluelevtsov. s. 8.. Chistya-
kova, L. K.. '“rhemal Effect of Optical Radiation on Hater Droplets of Snell
Diameter". DOKLADY AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 205. No S. 1972. p 1069.

Content 3 1’38e

Bolyayev. Yo. 3.. Godlevskiy. A. P.. Zuyev. V. Ye.. Kopytin. Yu. 0.. "Remote
Laser Spectrocluenical Analysis of Aerosols" 3

Balnndin. S. P.. Kopytin. Yu. 1).. Pletinin, V. V.. Solov'yev. A. A.. Tikhonirov.
V. V., "Investigation of Physicochenical Processes That Take Place in Model-

ing of Interaction of Laser Radiation With Aerosol" 57
Krckov. c. M.. Krekove. H. H.. "Evaluation of Parameters of Transilluninated
Zone of an Optical Channel" 80
Mal'tsevn. c. A.. "Method of Heasuring Absolute Intensity of Intense Laser Beam
From Dynanics of Scattered Radiation" 98
160

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI'OFFKJAI.USEGMNLY

Zenlyanov. A. A.. "Propagation of a Narrow Probing Bean in a Channel of Action
of Intense Optical Radiation“ 102

Zemlyanov. A. A., Kuzikovakiy. A. V.. "Calculation of Coefficient of Attenuation
of Fog Droplets in Explosive Vaporization in the Field of a Powerful Probe
Pulse" 111

Volkovitskiy. A. A.. Sedunov, Yu. 8.. Senenov, L. P.. "Sole Particulars of
Propagation of Intense Laser Radiation" 117

Akbaanov. S. A., Vorontsov. H. A.. Kandidov. V. P.. Cheanokov. s. A.. ”Phase
Compensation of Thermal Self-Stress of Light Beans" 116

Lukin. V. P.. "Using Lida: Signals to Correct Nonlinear Distortions of Optical
Beans" 132

Akhmanov. S. A.. Kovrigin. A. I.. Higulin. A. V.. Solonatin. V. 5., "Ik-Lidar
Based on a Powerful Parametric Light Generator and a Receiver With Up-
Conversion" 163

Harichev. V. N., "Altitude Probing of Hater Vapor in the Atnoephere by a
Powerful Tunable Ruby Laser" 150

Sizova. I. H.. Sukhorukov. A. P., "Nonlinear Effects in Laser Probing of Minor
Components of Humid Atnoaphere" 176

Kopytin. Yu. 0., Nal'tseva. G. A.. Shishigin, S. A.. "Laser Probing of Concen-
tration of Optically Inactive Nuclei. Size Spectra and Asphericity of
Aerosol Particles by Nonlinear Optics Methods" 185

Abramovskiy. A. P., Donchenko. V. A.. Lilenko. Yu. V.. Latyshev. N. N., 801-
datkin. N. P.. "On the Problen of Measuring Backseattering of Intense
Opt ical Emission" 202

Yeliseyev. A. A.. Ravodina. 0. V.. Filinonova. V. A.. "Liquid filter for
Increasing the Signal/Noise Ratio in Ranan and Fluorescence Spectra" 20k

Buldakov. H. A.. Kopytin. Yu. 0.. Lazarev. s. V.. Natrosov. I. 1.. "Lu-i-

nescent Analysis of Aerosolic Substance of the Ocean Atmosphere With

the Use of a Powerful UV Laser" 211
COPYRIGHT: Institut optiki atmosfery 90 AN SSSR. 1979

6610
C80: 1862/263

161

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(INLY
H03(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NVLY

OPTOELECTRONICS

UDC 621.373.8.029.7l:535.37
CHARACTERISTICS OF TEMPERATURE-SENSITIVE PBOSPHOR SCREENS FOR IR PHOTOREGISTRAIION

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 8. No 8(110). Aug 81
(manuscript received 10 Dec 80) pp 1756-1759

[Article by L. H. Klyukin. Ye. N. Koroleva and H. V. Senashenko. All-Union Scien-
tlfic Research Institute of Opticophysical Measurements. Moscow]

[Text] An analysis is made of the fundamental and actual thresh-
old energy sensitivity of thermographic phosphor screens for
registration of IR radiation. A technique is proposed for deter-
mining frequency-contrast characteristics by reconstructing them
from the function of response to a step signal. The limiting
resolution of the phosphorescent converter is determined.

1. Introduction

The thermographic phosphor screen is one of the most effective visualizers of IR
radiation due to stability of its characteristics. simplicity of manufacture and
high reproducibility of properties. The use of phosphor crystals for visualizing
radiation in the intermediate and far IR bands 002 um) has been discussed in
Ref. l-A; however. the capabilities for metrology of IR radiation by such screens
were not adequately covered [Ref. 5-7] because of difficulties that arise with
work in this band. In particular. it is quite complicated to make test patterns
for the intermediate and far IR band. and the use of a 6-signal to determine the
frequency-contrast characteristics is difficult because of diffraction limita-
tions [Ref. 8].

In this paper an analysis is made of the extremum values of major characteristics
of temperature-sensitive phosphor screens in registration of IR radiation: thresh-
old energy sensitivity. frequency-contrast characteristics and spatial resolution.
Some new experimental techniques are proposed for determining these characteristics
with consideration of their mutual relation to the temperature properties of phos-
phors. as well as to the parameters of the screen and the conditions of use. A
theoretical basis is given for the proposed techniques.

2. Fundamental and Actual Threshold Sensitivities of Phosphor Screens

The fundamental value of threshold sensitivity is determined primarily by the ther-
mal mechanism of recording information on the phosphor screen. In any system under

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions of heat exchange with the ambient nediua, the field of temperature fluc-
tuations 6(1‘) corresponds to the field of heat flows of the system

«mscam. (1)
where C is its specific heat. Introducing the time constant
r—C/2n [Ref. 9] (2)

that characterizes heat exchange with coefficient n on both sides of the screen,
and considering that by definition the fundamental threshold sensitivity is

p§h=mlsldsa (3)
where s is screen area. we get
Pgh -2n3——(T)|s. (4)

Since the screen has a finite time lag. estimation of the temperature fluctuation
by formula [Ref. IO] 6(1‘) - v’(lt/C)‘l', where k is Boltzmann's constant. would give
overstated results for P5,. An explicit form of the function 5(T) can be found
by using the fluctuation-dissipation theorem [Ref. 11] for thermal impedance of
the system:

pg, - 4n (Sinc'p'n-Irm. (5)

where K is the heat-transfer coefficient, d is thickness. c is the specific heat
of the screen. 9 is density. Substituting in (5) the tabular values of K, c, n,
n. d- 20 um and S= 300 cm’, we find the fundamental value of the threshold sensi-
tivity of such a phosphor screen: P5": 0.1 nH/cmz.

The actual value of threshold sensitivity P3 is naturally higher than the funda-
mental value, not only because of the random scatter of physical geometric perme-
ters caused by the screen manufacturing process or variance of other parameters
(for example fluctuation of screen luminescence intensity I). but mainly, as shown
in Ref. 12. because of the conversion coefficient RT-dl/Id‘l‘ that is characteristic
of the given material and plays the role of a transition characteristic from the
thermal to the optical field of screen luminescence. In this case

P‘Eﬁ - MT. (6)
where AT is the threshold temperature change.

The quantity AT can be found by using the experimental temperature dependence of
luminescence of temperature-quenched phosphors ZnSCdS-Ag. Ni [Ref. 2]:

l -1 .exp (—R,.,,AT). ( 7)

where IL?“ is the maximum value of the conversion coefficient of phosphor
Znssocd 59-Ag3-10‘”. M340" at the selected level of UV pre-illumination of
~50 wlcn’. The limiting value of P: is realized for a screen in vacuu, where
n-Io(c,+c2)u1‘3, where c; and e; are t e degrees of blackness of the two faces

163

M OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of the screen. a is the Stefan-Boltmnn constant, T.) is ambient temperature. At
threshold perception of the change of intensity Al/l-Kth. we get the actual value

of threshold sensitivity

93% 4(ea+e.)a1‘hnu +Kth ) R1“: (8)
after substituting appropriate values. we get Pgﬁ- 281 uH/cm’.
3. Experimental Estimate of Threshold Sensitivity

As experimental specimens. we used phosphor screens of composition ZnssoCdsso
Ag3-10‘“, 813-10' applied on mylar film with absorptive layer. The processes of
phosphor preparation and screen manufacture are described in Ref. 6. Threshold
screen sensitivity was measured in the continuous mode. using an incandescent lamp
as the source of IR radiation with filament stabilized at a definite temperature.
The purpose of the absorbing layer was to convert the radiant energy to a tempera-
ture relief. The wavelength of the registered emission has no appreciable signifi-
cance here; the coefficient of absorption of the given screen retains a constant
value over a wide range [Ref. 6] . The phosphor screens were excited by monochro-
matic radiation 0- 365 run) of a stabilized aercury vapor lsmpwith power density
of 50 uH/cmz. The spatial distribution of power density in the IR beam was de-
termined by an D40 power meter through a diaphragm with diameter of 0.1 m. The
pattern on the phosphor screen was photographed by the Kiev-15 camera. and the
negative was analyzed on an ll-‘O-loSl nicrophotaneter.

17 Since the threshold sensitivity is the signal whose
‘75 effect produces the same change in density of black-
ening of the negative as noise 6D [Ref. 6). it
I.“ can be detersined by using a characteristic curve
with consideration of the inherent steady-state
‘55 noise of the screen. Frames produced when signals
1r If” I!" p. U/cm' with different radiation power densities act on

the screen are used to plot a characteristic curve
Fig, 1, characteristic curve of the screen (Fig. l) as the dependence of blacken-
of phosphor screen ing density on the power density of the registered
radiation (the relation between the screen lumines-
cence intensity and the corresponding blackening density on the negative in the

experiment was taken as linear).

Since the inherent noise of the photographic film is much lower than for the screen.
the steady—state noise of the latter can be judged from the result of microphoton-
etry of the negative taken immediately before exposure of the screen. The value

of the mean-square noise 5!) was determined by microphotometry in two perpendicular
directions passing through the center of the screen. giving 60-0.062:0.001.

The graphic method of determining threshold sensitivity from the intersection of
M) plotted from initial level Do with the characteristic curve leads to an error
due to the inaccuracy of the graphic plot, which is especially large on the initial
section of the curve. For more exact deteraination of the threshold sensitivity
of phosphor screens. we approximated the characteristic curve on the initial section

by a polynomial of the form

164

FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

Pans-HD‘HD’. (9)

in which the coefficients were obtained with respect to points (0.?) near this
section. The working relation obtained for points (1.74. 2.55 mule-3). (1.73.
5.1 mH/cm') and (1.66. 15.3 chm’) had the form P--3.6298+ 5.5421» 1.35371)

[W/cmzlo

At a mean level of the initial background equal to 53- 1.75. the measured value

of 6D corresponded to a threshold power density Pth' 1.17 mH/cm’. If the rms noise
had been reduced by an order of magnitude, Pth would have been down to 0.37 mH/cm’.
i. e. it would have been close to the extremum value obtained above.

A. Resolution and Frequency-Contrast Characteristics

As pointed out above. the main difficulty in estimating these parameters of the
screen. especially in the intermediate and far IR wavelength bands. is production

of the appropriate test patterns. The method proposed in Ref. 13 for reconstruction
of frequency-contrast characteristics from the response to an output signal in

the form of a 6-function is not suitable under conditions of the far IR band. where

diffraction by the slit cannot be disregarded.

We have attempted to reconstruct the frequency-contrast characteristics by using

the response to the image of the edge of a step; as will be shown below. this re-
construction is possible in the thermal method of registration since we can get

an analytical expression for the response of the screen to a step signal. and ex-
perimentally verify the resultant function. Such a technique can be used if two
principal conditions are observed: the screen must be isotropic with respect to

its space-frequency properties. and the response must depend linearly on the input
signal. The first condition is met for phosphor screens; the condition of linearity
imposes constraints on the section of the characteristic curve of the screen (Ref.

6] on which an experimental estimate can be made.

To measure the frequency—contrast characteristics, a facility was put together
where the signal shaping system included an incandescent lamp. an IRS-7 light
filter. a lens for producing a wide uniform spot about 50 III in diameter. and a
steel razor covering half the spot on the blackened backing of the screen (the
edge of the razor was indicated by a taut fine filament on the phosphor side).
and the information extraction system was made up of the phosphor screen excited
by UV radiation. and a camera to record the steady-state pattern at the output.

Fig. 2 shows the arrangement for getting the response of the phosphor screen to

the edge of a step. The registered signal acting in zone A under steady-state

conditions leads to heating of the screen so that its temperature 6(x) is constant
in the region x+-~ (as will be shown below. the small dimensions of the transition
zone allow us to assume this). In the vicinity of xe-O. a transition temperature
is formed that is equal to zero at x-»a. The stepwise nature of temperature dis-
tribution corresponds to stepwise distribution of phosphor luminescence brightness

1(0) and density D(x) of the investigated negative.

By definition [Ref. 8]. the frequency-contrast characteristic is the ratio of the
Fourier transform of the output signal to the Fourier transform of the input signal:

165

FORIOFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

F(o) =F(U°uyF(Um).
A 5 Since I is exponentially dependent on 8, and D in
I turn is logarithically dependent on I, the output
H I ' ' signal can be approximated with accuracy to a con-
stant term by the function 0(x) that we get by solv-
0 ing the corresponding thermal problem.
0
i The initial heat conduction equation is determined
a by the following conditions: a) steady-state oper-

m) ation ao/at-o; b) n-const. which is dictated by
; heat exchange conditions at small 9; c) flux q is
formed as a step function q(x) -quY(x)I . Then for
’0'!) zones A and B (see Fig. 2) with consideration of
k: the boundary conditions that relate these zones,
K

the solution of the corresponding heat conduction

Fig. 2. Scheme for getting equation takes the £0“

response of phosphor screen o‘daJ/‘q

to step edge (We)

0‘ n'lJe-u' (lab)

where B- q/2n. n- J2n7k . The behavior of 80:) as plotted with consideration of
the parameters of the phosphor screen (n-S mW/(cnz'deg) . K- 26 mH/(cm-deg),

d- 2-10‘3 and B- 9.8°C) is shown in Pig. 3. which also shows the experimentally
measured characteristic D(-x) (both curves are normalized to facilitate cosparison).

  
 

I
' M-IJ‘DMM '9/. §
’1’ ”nun ' "

 
     

w.
b-
u
‘ . .
1 ﬂ QM"
- . , Fig. lo. Frequency-contrast
0 5 a 3
g 0' 1"" characteristic of phosphor

Fig. 3. Spatial distribution “we“

of negative blackening density
(l) and temperature (2) along
step edge on phosphor screen

He might. as suggested previously [Ref .
13]. have used any function. for example
00:) Hie”m . x>0. to approximate the
output signal D(x). However, passage to the frequency region gives rise to distor-
tions of frequency-contrast characteristics associated with discontinuity of the
derivative of 00:). and therefore it is advisable to use the physical model of

the response function (13), for which the Fourier transform is constructed; then

FlO(x)l~BFl—Y(:)I+BFI(¢")L (11)

where. Y(x) is the function of a unit step, and after Fourier transformation, we
have chf. 14]

F‘”)‘."%'("1Tﬁ'-%W«T)' “2’

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(MHHC1AL.USE(NNLY

Considering the fact that 2nm6(m) -O. we finally get

F(o)-—( 1-H) (13)

Fig. 4 shows the frequency-contrast characteristic of a screen as reconstructed
by formula (IS). The limiting resolution as found from this graph in accordance
with the Rayleigh test is 30 cm", which agrees with previous experimental data
[Ref. 1.].

5. Conclusions

1. Our analysis has shown that the fundamental threshold sensitivity of a phosphor
screen based on heat-sensitive ZnSCds-Ag. Ni phosphor, as determined only by the
thermal mechanism of data recording. is many orders of magnitude lower than the
actual value dictated by the mechanism of conversion of the heat field to the field
of screen luminescence. He found that the limiting threshold sensitivity of a
luminescent receiVer of lR emission may reach 0.1 mw/cm2 with improved manufacturing
techniqncs and reduction of noise through homogeneity of UV pre—exposure.

2. A physical model has been derived for the response function of a thermographic
phosphor screen that provides a most convenient method of reconstructing its fre-
quency-contrast characteristic. The curve is reconstructed for a screen receiving
a step-function signal, and the limiting resolution is determined.

The given methods of reconstructing frequency-contrast characteristics and deter-
mining threshold sensitivity can be applied to any other media that are intended
for imaging signals in the IR region as well.

REFERENCES
l. Urbach. F., Nail. N. R., Pearlman. D.. J. 0PT. soc. AMER.. Vol 39, l9b9. p 690.

2. Levshin, V. L., Mitrofanova. N. V., Iimofeyev, Yu. P. et a1., TRUDY FIZICEBSKDGO
lNSTlTUTA IHBNI P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEHII NAUK 8558. Vol 59. 1972. p 64.

3. Tinofeyev. Yu. 9., Fridman. s. A., IZVESTIYA mum NAUK sssn: SERIYA r121-
casswm, Vol 43. 1979, p 1303.

4. Timofeyev, Yu. P.. Fok. H. V.. TRUDY PIZICRBSKDGO INSTITUTA IHENI P. N. LBBEDBVA
AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 117. 1980. p 3.

S. Bazhulin. A. P.. Vinogradov. Ye. A.. Irisova. N. A. et a1.. TRUDY FIZICHESKOCO
INSTITUTA THEN! P. N. LEBEDEVA AKADEHII NAUK SSSR. Vol 117, 1980. p 122.

6. Klyukin. L. H.. Klyuchnikov, V. H., KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 3. 1976. p 1095.

7. Zaytsev. L. H., Zysina. L. Yu.. Senashenko. M. V.. Tsarapayeva. Ye. 1..
PRIBORY I TEKHNIKA EKSPERIHENTA. No S. 1978. p 253.

8. Collier, R. J.. Burckhardt. C. 3.. Lin. L. 3., "Opticheskaya golografiya"
[Optical Holography], Moscow. Mir. 1973.

167

FOR OFI1C1AI.USEIJNLN
9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

11..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kondrnt'yev. M. 0.. "Teplovyye izmereniya" [Thermal Measurements]. Moscow-
l.en1ngrad. Haslngiz, 1957 .

Landau. L. D.. Lifshits. Ye. M.. "Staticheskaya fizika. ch. 1" [Statistical
Physics, Part 1]. Moscow, Nauka. 1976.

Canon. H. 8.. Walton, 'r. A., PHYS. REV” V01 83. 1951. p 34.

Klyukin. 1.. IL. Stepanov, 3. IL, ZHURNAL NAUCHNOY I PRIKLADNOY MOGRAFII I
KINEMATOGRAFII. No 2. 1979. p 153.

Klyukin. L. H.. Namiot, V. A” Senashenko. II. V., PRIBORY I THU-HIM EKSPERIHZNTA.
No 1, 1981, p 53.

Soroko. L. H.. "Osnovy golografii 1 kogerentnoy optiki" [Principles of Holog-
raphy and Coherent Optics]. Moscow. Nauka. 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elekttonika", 1981

6610

C50:

l862/llo

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 531.715.l.(0.88.8)

PROPERTIES OF [NCOHERENT FOURIER-TRANSPORHING OPTICAL SYSTEMS

Leningrad OPTIKO-HEKHANICHBSKAYA PROHYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 8, Aug 81
(manuscript received 25 Sep 80) pp 7-9

[Article by I. N. Hatvevev. N. D. Ustinov and B. A. Shiryayev]

[Text] The process of imaging a spatially incoherent radiation source consists

in double conversion of the Fourier distribution of intensity over the source.
This conversion is done by using an objective lens. In this case. the image is
registered immediately at the output. Holographic devices enable a two-stage pro-
cess of image formation; the first stage is direct Fourier transformation with
registration of the spatial spectrum of the object. and the second is inverse
Fourier transformation and reconstruction of the image of the object. Measurement
and registration of the spatial spectra of objects rather than their images is

of both theoretical and practical interest for solving a number of applied problems.
The principle of measurements is based on spatial coherence that arises in the
process of propagation of initially incoherent radiation. In accordance with the
well known Van Zitter-Zernike theorem. the correlation function of the field in
the far zone is related by Faurier transformation to the intensity distribution
over the source. Thus the problem of obtaining the spatial spectrum consists in
measuring the correlation function of the field.

This paper analyzes two-dimensional Fourier-transforming interferometers for mea-
surements of this type.

I 1 I Let us consider the interferometer [Ref. 1]
r---1- a / shown in Fig. l. The light flux arriving

at the input of the device is divided in half
by a beam-splitter mirror. the fluxes are
then directed to the interferometer arms.

each containing Dove mirror prisms that rotate
the wavefront through 180° relative to the

'7 edge of the prism. Let us rotate one of the

5 5 prisms about the optical axis through an angle
rho/2. and the other through angle n-o/Z;
the corresponding wavefronts are turned through
twice the angle. and two waves are formed

at the output of the interferometer with rela-
tive rotation of wavefronts through angle 2a.

    

4/ 5--

  

Flg. 1. Optical diagram of

interferometer in Haeh-Zehnder

arrangement: I. 6--beam-spiitter

mirrors; 2. 5--Dove mirror prisms;
3. A—-suivel mirrors

169

FOR 0FFKHAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Let us find the intensity distribution at the interferometer output. Let the field
on the output aperture of the interferometer be a set of quasimonochr tic waves
from a remote source that are plane-polarized with polarization vector . The
polar coordinates in the plane of the source are designated by r1, 6;. and in the
plane of the output aperture of the interferoneter-by r2, 0;, and the distance
from the source to the output aperture is designated by 2. We write the complex
amplitudes of the field in the arms of the interferometer in the form

 

s. (a0, + 1:3)- e. j E (“.0 exp rig—”- cos (0. — a, + ' ‘4")1 mind...
' - (1)

E,(r.0. + ‘.—:') - of 6 (no. :19 1}" m (0; — c. + '53)] r.dr.¢o..

in expression (1). integration is carried out over the surface of the object. The
intensity at the output of the interferometer. considering that the waveforms are
independent of the various elements of the source, is equal to

I - 5 I (r...) Adm”. + V (a) fur...) cos [Rig—'3 to: (o. — 0,) m e] mm...

uhe re

V(e) - 9:0: - cos 2.,

Converting to cartesian coordinates with radiidvectgrs in the planes of the object
and the output mirror of the interferometer :1 and r2 respectively, we get

2.
I(n)-jl(n)dn+ V(.)Sm.)m(—’,"-’)dn. (2)

The second term of this expression is the Fourier transform of the intensity dis-
tribut ion over the object. The scale of conversion is determined by the exponential
factor 2 sin n.

Thus the given interferometer is a lensless Fourier-transforming optical system.
A similar result is obtained when a Michelson interferometer is used with the mir-
rors in the arms replaced by rectangular prisms (Pig. 2) [photo not reproduced].

Expression (2) can be written in a more convenient form that gives a clear idea

or how the intensity is distributed on the interference pattern. To do this. the
direction to some fixed point of the object is assigned by a unit vector drawn
from the center of the input aperture of the interferometer to the given point.

We denote the component of this vector in the plane of the aperture by 50. Obvi-
ouslv the vector 50 characterizes the angular displacement of the object from the
uptival axis. The position of an arbitrary point of the object is determined by
the vector ﬁod-h. which is also the projection of the corresponding unit vector.
We will carry out integration with respect to the solid angle from which radiation
arrives:

loo—5'16”; + V (a) Re up (ﬁlo-J \Iue) flu-)erp (2M3: sin chip. (3)
9 H
170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

As we can see from (3). displacement of the object from the optical axis leads
to a rapidly oscillating carrier in the interferogram, modulated by the spatial
spectrum of the object.

Inverse Fourier transformation of interference pattern (3). carried out for example
with the same kind of interferometer. results in reconstruction of the image of
the object:

HI) -SSI(3)JF + .s'V-wolluxssmjuiwi +812) 1(5)" I2 (I .t F t in sinus. (1.)
2 w

Here 5 is the area of the input aperture of the interferometer. The first term

of expression (A) gives the fixed background. the second is the peak of intensity
on the optical axis. and the third term describes two symmetrically located images
of the object. one of which coincides with the object itself. The function

II (2i sin a) — 3'- J exp (2th}, sin a) dr, (5)
5

determines the resolution of the system, which ranges from 0 to the diffraction
limit. depending an angle u. As can be seen from formula (5). maxummiresolution
is reached at a- n/Z. and at diameter D of the input aperture is w- A/ZD, which

is twice the diffraction resolution of lens optics. It should be pointed out that
the interferometer is apparently the only optical device with ideal resolution
that can be varied with a fixed aperture.

Thus the interferometric Fourier-transforming optical system can be considered

a two-stage imaging system. In essence. the production and processing of inter-
ference patterns is a holographic process of image reconstruction with spatially
incoherent illumination of the object. This is what dictates the capability of
using Fourier-transforming interferometers in holography. But since the intensity
spectrum is recorded in the given case. the reconstructed image. like an ordinary
photographic image. is not three-dimensional.

Another most interesting example of use of these devices is their application for
astronomical measurements of the angular dimensions of planets and stars. distances
between binary and ternary stars and the like. As pointed out previously. at an
angle of n- :12. sections of the wavefront interact at the output of the interfer-
ometer that are symmetric relative to its optical axis. Thus the two-dimensional
interferometer is equivalent to a set of two—slit stellar Michelson interferometers
with bases that change from zero to the dimensions of the aperture of the two-
dimensional interferometer and have all possible orientations from 0 to 2:.

It can be seen from formula (2) that the normalized function that describes inten-
sity distribution in the interference pattern coincides with the real part of the

complex degree of coherence of the field. For a source in the form of a circular
uniformly illuminated disk. the intensity is equal to

.. - .. Hm
Mr) -S lipid! Il +2¢ool2kw)"l‘§(ﬁ,—') -

171

INDRiOIHﬂCJAl.lISEi(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in view of the symmetry of the object. the envelope of the interference pattern
depends only on the absolute value of the radius-vector r and the angular size
of the object a. and coincides with band luminosity in the stellar interferometer.

Magnification of the input aperture of the two-dimensional interferometers can
be achieved when they are used jointly with large-diameter telescopes.

lnterferometers based on the Mach-Zehnder scheme can be set up in both convergent
and parallel beams. while interferometers based on the Michelson arrangement operate
only in parallel beams. Symmetry of the beam path in the arms of the interferome-
ters makes optical matching with telescopes simple. Simultaneous registration

of the two-dimensional correlation function considerably shortens measurement time
and enables analysis of the shape of complex objects. which is practically impos-
sible when using the Michelson stellar interferometer. This leads us to believe
that including two-dimensional interferometers in the instrumentation of present-
day large-diameter telescopes will appreciably improve measurement efficiency.

and thus extend the capabilities of the telescopes themselves.

Let us recall that the basic property of interference patterns is that the inter-
ference bands are displaced in the presence of phase distortions. while their enve-
lope and the band luminosity are retained. The size and shape of the investigated
object is determined from the luminosity of the interference bands. The size of
the object is determined from the zeros of the luminosity function. The shape

of the object can be determined from convolution of the image with itself. To

form the convolution of the image. it is necessary to carry out Fourier transfor-
mation of the luminosity function and square the result. Fig. 3 [photo not repro-
duced] shows the interference pattern of an object simulating a binary star ob-
tained under actual atmospheric conditions using a telescope with aperture of

0.5 m. As we can see from this picture. the interference bands are distorted by
fluctuations of the atmosphere; nonetheless. bands of zero and maximum contrasts
can he clearly distinguished on the interference pattern. The distance between
adjacent mnxima or ninima can be used to measure the angular distance between sources.

Let us briefly consider the aberrational characteristics of the optical system

with interferometer. and show that partial compensation of aberrations occurs in
such a system.

We write the equation of the spherical surface corresponding to the reception ob-
ject ivc in the form
U-W+9+n-M

. 324...:
pranding z with respect to powers of I , we get

 

9+ 9+?
‘__2’_‘I’+ win”

The phase of a wave propagating in direction 2 is determined by this expression.
The first term leads to focusing of the wave. while subsequent terms lead to dis-
tortions. i. e. to aberrations of the optical system. In the more general case

[Ref. 2]. the Seidel eikonal is used to describe optical systems with representation
by the Sum

s-s+&+&+a
U2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Term 52 characterizes the ideal optical system, sun S. characterizes third-order
aberrations. and is expressed through the eoordinates (my) of the image plane
and (run) of the pupil plane as follows:

$._|[£A(.r'+ y’)+ IM8(E’+'.’) +
+ mCm-I 15y+ I00u'+y’)(i’+ vi)+
+£(y’+x’)(yv,+xi)+F('f+£’)(ﬂ.+ 1'5).

where A. B. c, D E and F are constant coefficients.

Since the fields interact at points that are symetric relative to the optical

axis in formation of the interference pattern, it contains information on the phase
difference at these points. Therefore. the aberrational terms that contain even
powers of E, and n will be compensated. Thus the interference pattern has compen-
sation for third-order spherical aberrations and astigmatism, which are character-
ized by coefficients B and D respectively. It can be shown that spherical aberra-
tions of higher orders will also be compensated. Consequently. in small fields

of viwwhere the distortions of lens optics are determined chiefly by spherical
aberrations. the optical system with interferoneter has high instrumental resolution.

REFERBICES

l. Katorgin, V. F.. Shiryayev, B. A.. Soviet Patent No 395706. BYULLETEN‘ 1203KB-
TENIY. No 35. 1973. p l36.

2. Korolev. F. A.. "‘l‘eoreticheskaya optika" [Theoretical Optics]. Moscow, Vysshaya
shkola. I966.

COPYRIGHT: OP'l'IKO-HEKHANICHESKAYA PROHYSHLKNMST'. 1981.

66l0
CSO: Bllo/o/OIOI-A

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFIGAL USE ONLY

LIGHT BEAM AMPLIFICATION BY DYNAMIC BOLOGRAHS IN LZT-La CERAMIC

Leningrad PIS'MA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI in Russian Vol 7. No 15. 12 Aug 81
(manuscript received 8 Apr 81) pp 914-917

[Article by H. H. Butusov. A. V. Knyaz'kov. A. E. Krumin', N. V. Kukhtarev and
A. S. Saykin. Leningrad Polytechnicsl Institute imeni M. I. Kalinin]

[Text] One of the most interesting effects that is observed in recording of dynam-
ic phase holograms is energy exchange between interfering beams. The cause of
energy exchange between light beams is phase mismatch (displacement) of the holo-
gram and the interference light pattern. As a consequence of interaction of the
recording beams with the displaced hologram. one of the beams is intensified at

the expense of the other. Phase mismatch may be either steady [Ref. 1, 2] or un-
steady [Ref. 1]. producing holographic amplification of light beams either after
recording or during the recording of the hologram.

Steady—state energy exchange in crystals with linear electro-optic effect takes
place with the diffusion mechanism of hologram recording (LiNb03) or with the drift
mechanism of recording in an external or internal field B under conditions of non-
fulfillment of quaslneutrality (KNb03) [Ref. 2, 3]. In the latter case. the steady-
state energy exchange is controlled by the external field. The gain that charac-
terizes energy exchange in these media does not exceed 10 cm'l. This gain is calcu-
lated from the following formula:

1 In 1.10
r zln[T1--IF , (l)

where z is the thickness of the hologram. 110. 1-10 andll. 1-1 are the intensities
of the recording beans before and after passage through the crystal respectively.

This paper is devoted to theoretical and experimental investigation of steady-
state energy exchange in transparent LZT-La-9.2 [Pbo.go.Lao.092(Zro,gsTi¢ 35)03]--
a ferroelectric ceramic that has a square-law electro-optic effect (An~’B’). The
principal mechanism of photorefractive recording in LZT-La is diffusion and drift
of photo-excited carriers in the external field [Ref. b].

Calculation of gain based on the model developed in Ref. 2 for material having
a square-law electro-optic effect gives

r - EA“ . r 9‘ NM) (2)

174

F(”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1A1.USE!0NLY
FORi0FFKJAl.USE(NVLY

for the diffusion approximation. and
r~sn. Hum) (3)

in the strong-field approximation when the condition of quasineutrality is violated.
where A is the period of the holographic grating, m- Ila/1-1..

The holographic gratings were recorded by an He-Cd laser (XI-0.64 um) with power
of 5-10' 9. A conventional symmetric two-beam arrangement was used. Gratings
with spatial frequencies from I to 6.5 um were produced by changing the angle of
convergence of the beams. The plane of polarization of the light beams coincided
with the plane of incidence. Ratio of beam intensities was regulated from i to
0.015. The external electric field was applied orthogonally to the bands of the
interference pattern. and its magnitude was varied over a range from 0 to 10 kV/em.
The thickness of the LZT-La ceramic specimen was 240 um.

  
 
   

yum lines/II-

\ In“ Milan
. £27.? kv/cn

  

0 an (L8 N!
Fig. 1 Fig. 2

 

In recording the holographic grating, the steady-state value of energy exchange

was reached in a time of no more than 3 minutes. The direction of energy "transfer"
was independent of the ratio of intensities of the recording beams. but was com-
pletely determined by the direction of the electric field. The principal result
found in the research is an anomalously high gain r- 130 cm". which is an order
higher than in LiNbO; and KNbO; [Ref. 2. 3].

r increases with increasing 8 and as the period A of the holographic grating in-
creases (Fig. l). and changes fairly weakly with ratio of beam intensities m

(Fig. 2).

The dependence of steady-state energy exchange on A and B is qualitatively de-
scribed by theory with assumption of violation of the condition of quasineutrality
[Ref. 3]. However. use of the given theory for LZT-La is restricted by two circum-
stances. The theory considers a one-level straight-band model assuming monopolar
conductivity in the absence of light scattering processes [Ref. 2]. At the same
time. the high concentration of defects in LZT-La accompanied by low dark conduc-
tion as well as some other effects show that the bands in LIT-La are modulated,
and bipolar conduction takes place here [Ref. 5). Besides. the recording of holo-
grams in LZT-La is complicated by effects of light scattering. i. e. by the possi-
bility of recording noise gratings [Ref. 5]. Both of these aspects may reduce

P in the region of small A [Ref. 7].

175

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFIWCIAL.USEIDNLN

The theory that we have developed correctly reflects the experimentally observed
pronounced dependence r(£) and the weak dependence of r on the ratio of been inten-
sities. At the same time. the question of violation of the condition of quasi-
neutrality in LZT-La remains open. To answer this question. future research must

take consideration of the possibility of existence of bipolar conduction and scat-
tering of light.

The high gain in LZT-La-is due to the fact that at room temperature LZT-La-9.2
is in the region of diffuse ferroeleetric phase transition and has high values
of the effective linearized electro-optical coefficient. This paper has demon-

strated for the first time that the use of a square-law electro-optic effect

enables effective control of steady-state energy exchange by means of an external
field.

REFERENCES
l. Vinetskiy, V. L. et al.. USPEKHI FIZICEESKIKH NAUK. Vol 129, 1979. p 113.
2. Kukhtarev. N. V. et a1.. FERROELECTRICS. Vol 22. l979. p 949.
3. Krunins. A.. CUnter. P.. APPL. PHYS.. Vol 18, 1979. p 153.
lo. Burgess. J. H. et al.. APP]... 0PT.. V01 15. 1976. p 1550.

S. Dimzn. V. I.. Krumin'. A. E., IZVESTIYA AKADEHII NAUK LATVIYSKOY SSR: SBRIYA
PIZICHESKIKH 1 TEKHNICHESKIKH NAUK. N0 6, 1979, p 53.

6. Hagnusson, R., Gaylord. T. K.. APPL. 0PT.. Vol 13, 1974. p 1565.
7. Orlouski, IL. Kratzig. E.. SOLID STATE COMUN” V01 27. I978. p 1351.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "Nauka". "Pis'na v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki", 1981

6610
CSO: [862/4

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CORRECTING IMAGE SHARPNESS IN THE CASE OF UNKNWN 'Smﬂ' DEFOCUSING

Leningrad PIS'HA V ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI in Russian V01 7, No 15. 12 Aug 81
(signed to press 21 Jul 81. manuscript received 6 Mar 81. after revision 12 Kay 81)
pp 908-911

IArticle by V. N. Karnnnkhov and L. P. Yaroslavskiy, Institute of Data Transmission
Problems. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

lTextI Cor 'ection for sharpness of a defocused image usually requires knowledge
of the pulse response or frequency characteristic of the defocusing system and

the noise level on the image. In many practical cases such a priori information

is lacking, and the required parameters of distortions and noise must be determined
from the distorted image.

However, there is a rather extensive and important class of systems for which cor-
rection does not require exact knowledge of their frequency response and noise
level. These are systems that do not distort the phase spectrum of the signals.
In this class is defocusing due to atmospheric turbulence (see for example Ref.

I. 2). defocusing in systems that produce an image by electron beam and so on.

we will call these imaging systems with "smooth" defocusing.

The capability of correcting "smooth" defocusing of images is based on the fact
that experiments have shown the sufficiency of only a very rough reconstruction

of the amplitude spectrum of an image while retaining the phase spectra for satis-
factory image reproduction. It should be noted that this property of amplitude
and phase spectra has been mentioned previously (Ref. 3] and has been used in image
coding [Ref. 4. 5].

Such image stability in the face of amplitude distortions prompts us to suggest
the following method of correcting "smooth" defocusing: the phase spectrun 6f

the distorted defocused image is determined. and the amplitude spectrum is replaced
by one that is standard for the given class of images, after which the image is
reconstructed in accordance with such a corrected spectrum.*

*One of the authors discussed this method in 1977 with V. N. Dudinov and
V. s. Tsvetkova (Astronomical Observatory at Khar'kov State University). who had
come to similar conclusions in experiments on optical correction of astronomical
images.

177

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effectiveness of the proposed method is proved by the results or modeling the
correction of “smooth" defocusing as shown in the figure [photo not reproduced]
(a. b--defocused images; c. d--correction results). Gaussian "smooth" defocusing
of these images was by spatial filtration techniques in a digital computer. using
fast Fourier transformation algorithms. The frequency response of the defocusing
filter was described by the expression

S2 +52
”(CHO'G 2° ,

where C and n are coordinates in the frequency plane. The quantity 0 was chosen
in such a way that the radius of the circle of confusion in the object plane was
equal to 11 elements for the first image (a) and 3 elements for the second image
(b). The estimate of the amplitude spectrum of both images was obtained by using
the averaged energy spectrum of 29 fragrents of the initial image partly overlap-

ping with the fragment being processed (the energy spectrum of the initial fragment
was not used in averaging).

Thus the proposed method of correcting image sharpness in "smooth" defocusing does
not require exact knowledge of the frequency response of the imaging systems. and
roulizat ion necessitates only a priori information on the form of amplitude spec-
trum of the image class to which the image being processed belongs.

The proposed technique can be comparatively simply realized in an adaptive optical
system such as proposed in Ref. 6. In this system. a sandwich is placed in the
Fourier plane, made up of a nonlinear optical element that changes its transparency
in inverse proportion to the square root of the intensity of the incident light.
and a filter with spatial distribution of amplitude transmission proportional to
(5-1 required distribution of the amplitude spectrum that is standard for the given
class of images. The nonlinear optical element in such a system effects so-called
enhancement of the image spectrum. 1. e. it transforms the spectrum of the dis-
torted image to a uniform spectrum. and the spetial filter forms the required
standard amplitude spectrum characteristic of the given class of images.

The simplicity of correction of "smooth" defocusing allows us to suggest that in
cases where the danger of defocusing is difficult to avoid in designing imaging
systems. it would be advisable to select the construction of optical systems and
the photographic conditions so that defocusing will be "smooth," 1. e. so that
the phase of the frequency components of the image is retained.

REFERENCES
I. Pratt, H. K.. "Digital Image Processing". New York. Wiley. 1978.
2. Carasso. A. 5.. Sanderson. J. 6.. Hyman. J. M., "Digital Removal of Random
Media Image chradations by Solving the Diffusions Backwards in Time". SIAM
J. aunts. ANAL.. Vol 15. 1978. pp 344-36L

3. Huang. T. 8.. Burnet. J. H., Deczky, A. 0.. "The Importance of Phase in Image
Processing Filters". IBBE TRANS. ACOUS'I‘.. srsscn. SIGNAL PROCESSING, ASSP-23.
I975. pp 529-542.

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. Pcrlman, H. A., Gray, R. 31.. "Source Coding of the Discrete Fourier Transform",
[EBB TRANS. INFORM. THEORY. Vol. 11-26, 1973. PP 683-692.

S. Rohling. S. c.. "Fourier Transform Phase Coding of Image". 1333 TRANS. ACOUST..
SPEECH. SIGNAL PROCESSING, Vol ASSP-ZB. 1980. pp 339-341.

6. Yaroslavskiy. L. P., USSR Patent No 536497. BYULLBTEN' IZOBRETENIY. No 63. 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdocel'stvo "Nauka", "Pis'ma v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". 1981

66l0
C50: [862/6

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MATHEMATICS

UDC 517:536
INTEGRAL-TRANSFORM METHOD IN "AVE PROBLEMS OF HYDROACOUSTICS

Kiev HETOD INTEGRAL'NYKH PRBOBRAZOVANIY V VOLNOVYKH ZADACEAKR GIDROAKUSTIKI in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 18 Feb 81) pp 2-4. 283-285

[Annotation, preface and table of contents from book "Integral-Transform Method
in Have Problems of Hydroacoustics". by V. V. Dykhta. Design and Planning Office

of Electrohydraulics, UkSSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks".
288 pages]

lText] The book outlines theoretical principles of the integral-transform method
in coordinate systems allowing separation of variables in a wave equation. Main
emphasis is on applications of the method to solving unsteady problems of hydro-
acoustlcs. An examination is made of problems of emission and scattering of sound
by shells. problems of horns and resonators. and propagation of sound in wedge-
shapcd. conical and other regions. problems of combined radiators. on interaction
of complex fields with solid walls and the like.

The author gives the basic properties of special functions appearing in the kernels
of transforms that are in turn the result of expansion of sought functions in inte-
grals or series with respect to eigenfunctions of the corresponding Sturm-Liouville
problems.

For scientists. engineers and technicians interested in the mathematical aspects

of applied hydroacoustics. theory of emission and diffraction of sound by under-
water objects. and for graduate and undergraduate students majoring in correspond-
ing fields in colleges and universities.

Figures, 2|. tables 2. references 65.
Preface

in science and practice we are more and more faced with the necessity of calculat-
ing hydroacoustic fields. using the most diverse methods and means. Even now it
would be difficult to name the field of knowledge where solutions of applied hydro-
acoustics problems would not be of considerable theoretical and practical interest.
This interest shows up especially in areas involving deep ocean research. where

we have a veritably infinite treasure trove of food. water. raw materials. minerals.
energy resources and so on. Investigation of the propagation of sound in the sea.
the study of questions of its generation and scattering by various objects are

180

FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

problems that are intimately involved with many related fields of science (oceanology.
selsmology and geology of the ocean floor and so on). Thus in the final analysis
applied hydroacoustlcs can be defined as a branch of geophysics and other sciences
associated with the study of the seas. emphasizing the variety of problems that

are solvable by hydroacoustic methods.

A common feature of all these problems is the presence of an acoustic medium (more
precisr‘y the mathematical model of such a medium)--a continuous medium in which
the stress vector is normal to any elementary area. i. e. an acoustic medium is
understood as one such that propagation of shear (transverse) forces and waves
cannot arise therein. Many media have this property at high temperatures and pres-
sures. which further extends the limits of the concept "hydroacoustics" and enables
a unique approach to solution of a large number of applied problems from different
fields of science and technology. In this connection there is an increase in the
role of exact analytical methods of solving boundary value problems for partial
differential equations that deseribe fundamental properties of acoustic media,
since in many cases they enable representation of the final result in a form that
is convenient for analysis of a formula. and in the other cases-—in a form that

is comparatively easily computerized. Among the principal methods. mention should
he made of the method of invariant-functional solutions proposed by V. I. Smirnov
and S. L. Sobolev. the Wiener—Hopf method. generalized Volterra and Hadamard meth-
ads. the Fourier method. the integral-transform method and others.

The purpose of this book is to present and illustrate by specific examples the
basic concepts and mathematical aspects of the last of these methods-the integral-
transform method--as applied to the wave equation in coordinate systems that allow
separation of variables. Since in this case the integral-transform method and

the Fourier method have a common basis in the separation of variables. the expo-
sition is illustrated by examples in which both methods are sometimes used simul-
taneously.

The monographic contains elements of the theory and examples of applications of
Fourier. Laplace, ﬂankel and Legendre transforms to solution of some problems that
are encountered in practice. and illustrates the feasibility of using Laplace trans-
forms for describing moving acoustic fields. The first two chapters are introduc-
tory and contain information on equations of hydrodynamics and methods of inte-
grating them. and on the basics of the integral-transform method-expansion of

the sought functions with respect to systems of eigenfunctions of the corresponding
Sturm-Liouvllle problems. Since there are fundamental papers by both Soviet and
non-Soviet scientists on the theory of the integral-transform method [Ref. 7. 25.
36. 57 and others]. the presentation of the theory in this book is synoptic, but

it does contain the minimum of information required for understanding the essence
of the problem.

The book makes no pretense of completeness in presenting problems of applied hydro-
acoustics that are solvable by the integral-transform method.

Contents page

Preface 3

Chapter I: Equations of Hydrodynamics and Their Integration

1. Principal equations of dynamics of an ideal compressible fluid 5
181

FOR*0FWK]AI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Some possible ways of solving equations of hydrodynamics. and lineari-

zation of these equations 7
3. The wave equation and methods of integrating it 18
Chapter 2: Elements of the Theory of the Integral-Transform Method
1. Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions 27
2. Expansions with respect to eigenfunctions of the Sturm—Liouville problem 31
3. Integral transforms and conditions of their realization 35
a. Integral transforms in finite and infinite limits 42
5. General principle of using integral transforms for solving hydroacoustic

problems 45

6. Coordinate systems that allow separation of variables in the wave equation 49
Chapter 3: Laplace Transform and the Problem of Frequency Spectra in Unsteady
Problems of Hydroacoustics

1. Direct and inverse Laplace transforms 58
2. Cylindrical waves in a cavity of similar shape 66
3. Point source inside an undeformed spherical cavity 72
4. Relation between input and output signals of a linear system 84

5. Transformation of the spectrum by a spherical shell placed near a screen 89
6. Spectrum of radiation under the action of a source inside a spherical shell

with a hole 105
7. Problem of optimization of a hydraulic pulse vibrator 118
Chapter 4: Fourier Transformation in Finite and Infinite Limits
1. Fourier transformation in finite limits 132
2. Acoustic field in a homogeneous semi-infinite rectangular waveguide 140
3. Sound field inside a finite cylinder with radiating lateral surface 162
a. Planar waveguide with other inclusions 145
5. Fourier transformation on an infinite interval. Principal properties of

the transformation 15!
6. Diffraction of spherical waves by a circular cylinder of large wave dimen-

sions 159
7. Acoustic-hydrodynamic field due to oscillations of a section of the floor

of a body of water 168
8. The Hiener-Hopf method--a development of the Fourier integral-transform

method 176
Chapter 5: Hankel Transformation on Finite and Infinite Intervals
l. Ihnlkcl transformation for segments (a. c) and (o. c) 189
2. Sound field inside a cylinder with radiating end faces 196
3. Radially symmetric elastic waves in the material of shells 198
4. Acoustic field in a wedge-shaped region of limited dimensions 201
5. Hankel transformation on a semi—infinite interval 203
b. A circular cylindricalraxliator in a planar waveguide 207
7. Acoustic field of underwater electric discharge in a point-plane electrode

svslem 210
Chapter 6: Legendre Transformation
I. Legendre transformation in the axisymmetric case 215
2. Generalized Legendre transformation 222
3. Determination of eigenvalues 230
4. Internal problem of hydroacoustics for a hemisphere 234
5. Diffraction of spherical waves by a thick spherical shell with a hole 236
Chapter 7: Laplace Transformation in Moving Coordinate System
I. Laplace transformation as a result of Fourier inversion of some dual

transform 249

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Moving source near the tip of a wedge

3. Scattering of a spherical wave from a moving source on a long-wave cosine

curve that is the interface between two media

Chapter 8:
1. Meyer. Kontorovich

2.

Some Other Kinds of Integral Transformations

-Lobcdcv and some other integral transforms that con-

tain Bessel functions in the kernel

integral transforms with kernels containing prolate spheroidal functions

and Mathieu functions
Interrelation of different kinds of integral transforms

3.
Refe

COPY

6610
£30:

rences

RIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka". 1981

[862/261

183

FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY

252

257

263

270
276
279
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 512.25/26+Sl9.3:330.115
PROBLEMS OF ANALYZING RESOURCE DISTRIBUTION
Moscow IGRY. GRAFY. RBSURSY in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Apr 81) pp 2-4. 113

[Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Games. Graphs. Resources". by
Erik Georgiyevich Davydov. Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 7000 copies, 113 pages]

[Text] The book deals with problems of the distribution of resources on PERT nets
and transport grids. Both the deterministic case and the case where there are
indeterminate factors or an opponent are considered. In the final analysis. all
problems reduce to nonlinear programing probl-s.

The book will be of use to scientists and engineers dealing with problems of re-
source distribution.

Figures 6. references 29.

Preface

A great deal has been said about methods and techniques of resource distribution.
about their importance for working of economic. ecological. military and other
systems. Nevertheless. our understanding of problems of resource distribution

is too limited in the area of operations research and the theory of games. This
class subsumes mainly problems of the Gibbs lemma type and its generalizations.
stipulating however that most linear programming problems (and they are innumerable)
also fall into the class of resource distribution problems.

Our understanding of these problems is as follows. In any mathematical descriptions
of working systems subject to human action. resource limitations may be imposed

on these systems. and the evolution of the systems will depend on the methods of
distribution of the limited resources. The systems may be deterministic. operating
in the presence of indeterminate factors (including in the presence of an opposing
side) and adaptive (with random factors) systems. whose characteristics are known

or become known in the process of operation. In the most general description of
operation of large systems. obviously all factors will be present. In consideration
of such systems. the options for distribution of resources will be scalar or vector
variables. vector~functions. and even dimensions. depending on the capabilities

of the operating side.

This book examines two types of models: models of distribution of vector resources
on PERT nets or transport grids in the presence of indeterminate factors or an
opponent, and deterministic models.

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR40FFKJA1.USE(MNLY

Problems of resource distribution on PERT nets and transport grids in the determi-
nistic case reduce quite simply to nonlinear programming problems. On the other
hand. if there are indeterminate factors. the search for guaranteed distribution
of resources in a direct formulation reduces to a game problem of triple optimi-
zation with related constraints. and a certain art is required to reduce these
problems to nonlinear programming problems.

The book does not give problem solving algorithms. since there are very many known
algorithms for solving nonlinear programming problems. Selection of each algorithm
is dictated by the particulars of the problem and the software of available com-
puters. The list of references contains a fair number of handbooks that describe
algorithms of local. global and complex optimization. and even have programs for
these algorithms in algorithmic language.

At first glance it may seem that the author has narrowed the region of applica-
bility of the problems under consideration by limiting himself to the case of a
finite number of values of indeterminate factors. But this limitation in the first
place has enabled considerable simplification of the structure of the problems. and
in the second place has not been too restrictive since any continuous game on com-
pact sets of player strategies can be approximated by a finite game after choosing
sufficiently dense grids on the sets of player strategies. The latter fact was
first published in 1973 in a mimeographed version of a book by the author that

was put out by this same publishing house [2. G. Davydov. "Hetody i modeli teorii
antagonisticheskikh igr" (Methods and Models of the Theory of Antagonistic Games)].

In conclusion. the author considers it his pleasant duty to thank L. S. Gurin.
whose comments considerably improved the content of the book.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Required Information from Algebra, Analysis. Games Theory and the
Theory of Graphs -5
1.1. Necessary information from algebra and linear programming S

1.2. Convex and concave functions on convex sets. Necessary and sufficient
conditions of the minimum of convex functions on convex compacts. Punc-

tions of maximum and minimum 11
1.3. Necessary information from games theory 18
1.6. Necessary information from the theory of graphs 26
Chapter 2: Problems of Resource Distribution on PERT Nets
2.]. Principles of Program Evaluation and Review Technique 33

2.2. Optimum distribution of resources on PERT nets in the deterministic case 42
2.3. Optimum distribution of resources on PERT nets in the presence of inde-

terminate factors #8
Chapter 3: Problems of Resource Distribution on Transport Grids 74
3.1. Flows in grids 74
3.2. Problems of distributing resOurces on transport grids in the absence of

indeterminate factors 79
3.3. Problems of resource distribution on transport grids in the presence

of indeterminate factors 86

185

F0R10FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.6. Elementary problems of resource distribution on PERT nets and transport
grids and their relation to classical problo-s of resource distribution.

Gibbs lens V and Yu. I. Gerueyer's principle of equalization, and the
mutual relation between then

Bibliographic notes
References

Subject index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1981

6610
C30: 1862/267 - END -

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY