FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10240
7 January 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trenslitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names pro‘sded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TNAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HORLIMIDE REPORT

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(moo 1/32)

CONTENTS

EAST EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Phi-3652 Nuclear Power Station Diagnostic Systen Outlined
(Karel Prokop, et 61.; mm. HO 9, 1981) neeeoeeeeeeeeeeet

Direct Conversion of Nuclear mergy to Electricity Discussed
(Jiri Rscek; mom, Ho 9, 1981)

SUB-SAHARA! AFRICA
NIGER

Briefs
President on French Uranium Negotietions

SWAL

Agreement Establishing Nuclear Materials Canpemr Approved
(NAMES TROPICAUX ET minimums, 13 Nov 81)

“ST EUROPE
FRANCE

Briefs
Nuclear Research Discussions

ITALY

Nev Organization of National nuclear Enery Omittee
(AmmEImm’ lsep 81) IOIOOCOIIOUICIOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOO
FOR OFl-‘ICIM. NSF. ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

m-aesz 1:0ch Powrn smnou nmcms-nc srsrm 0mm
Prague ENERGETIKA in Czech No 9, 1981'pp 386-392

[Article by Eng Karel Prokop and Bug Milan Novak, E81, Dukcvany Nuclear Power
Station, and Eng Svatobor Stech, Dukovany Nuclear Power Station Concern: "The
PH-3652 Nuclear Power Station Diagnostic System")

[Text] Currently, industrial equipment is becoming increasingly complex and ex-
pensive. This also increases the need to assure its optimal operating condition,
reliability and technical safety. These requirements can be met only if we have
information on the processes.taking place in the equipment and on the devices and
structural members which assure proper operation. For this purpose it is essential
to monitor the condition of the equipment and processes taking place in it and to
provide for signaling of unsafe (i.e., extraordinary or emergency) conditions.

Modern methods for evaluating the state of processes and equipment include analysis
not only of short-term average values of measured parameters, but also of changes
in these parameters, for the changes brought about by a process contain important
information about it. The characteristics of a dynamic process are its amplitude
and frequency spectrum. In information engineering. the technique of evaluating
statistical fluctuations of signals has been called "noise analysis.“ This method
is particularly suitable for comprehensive monitoring of processes.

In continuous measurement of the characteristics of a process, we primarily monitor
the occurrence and development of deviations from measurement values corresponding
to normal states of the equipment. In this way, we can identify the cause of an
abnormal state and detect processes of equipment damage in their initial stages.

It is advantageous to use the period when the equipment is being broken in (e.g.,
the startup of a nuclear power station), when it is highly probable that the equip-
ment and components are functioning correctly, to measure the characteristics of
the normal state.

Analysis of the noise components of various signals, including pressure, temperature,
neutron flux, vibration and the like, has led to noteworthy results in diagnosis of
processes occurring in such pressure vessels as nuclear reactors and reactors in the
chemical and metallurgical industries. An advantage of these methods is that they
do not require direct contact of the sensor with the working medium.

1

FOR OFTWCIAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To solve the problems noted above for nuclear reactors, the rn-sssz noise analysis
system has been developed. This system allows diagnosis of damage to nuclear reac-
tors and has been tested under operating conditions for several years. It includes
monitoring of vibration in the reactor, its interior components and the control
equipment drives; in addition. the system records the pressure values of the coolant
in the reactor (pressure pulses) and the neutron flux inside and outside the reactor.
The system also has instruments to locate loose components in the pressure vessel and
primary circuit. All of these parameters are measured sﬂmultaneously by the PH-3652
system. Analysis of the noise components of the measured quantities (noise components
of signals) makes it possible not only to obtain short-term average values but also
to determine the temporal (long-term) trends of such parameters. This makes it
possible to monitor possible undesirable trends in parameters, which has special
importance for diagnosis of reactor states.

Purpose of the System
Measured Quantities. Measurement Locations and Sensors

For noise diagnosis in an operating nuclear reactor, the following quantities are
monitored:

a. The neutron flux density in the reactor core is measured by beta emission de-
tectors;

b. the neutron flux density outside the reactor is measured by ionization chambers;

c. the coolant pressure at the reactor inlet and outlet and at selected locations
in the primary circuit is measured by piezoelectric sensors;

d. vibration of the pressure vessel, the control assemblies and the main circulating
pumps is measured by piezoelectric sensors.

Choice of measurement locations is based on calculations using mathematical models.
The sensors are located where computations indicate that vibration problems are
likely to be indicated most clearly.

lnformatioa Content of Neutron-Flux Density Signals

0f the measured quantities listed above, neutron noise gives the most extensive
information. Almost all important processes in a nuclear reactor are reflected to
some degree in the time trend of neutron-flux density. Thus, evaluation of these
processes becomes possible through evaluation of neutron-flux density trends, using
computations based 0n mathematical models derived from nuclear reactor theory.

The noise composition of the neutron—flux density signals is influenced by the
following effects:

a. changes in reactivity produced by vibration of components inside the reactor or
by coolant inhomogeneities:

b. changes in the neutron-flux density produced by coolant inhomogeneities or
changes in the thickness of the water-filled space between the reactor barrel and

2
INJR OFFICIAL USEZCMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the pressure vessel resulting from vibration of the reactor barrel; in this case
we treat the core as a neutron source and the neutron detector is outside the
reactor;

c. changes in the neutron-flux denisty outside the pressure vessel resulting from
movement of the core as a whole or of its individual components; this involves
changes in the position of the neutron source relative to the neutron detector
located outside the reactor;

d. local disturbances in the neutron-flux density inside endpoutside the core
resulting from effects operative in a particular location, e.g., inhomogeneity of
the coolant, steam bubbles, local vibration.

Information Content of Pressure Signals.

0n the basis of previous experience, pressure pulse measurements can be used to infer
the following effects (sources of pressure pulses):

a. pressure pulses produced by the main circulating pumps; the frequency of the
pulses is governed by the rotary frequency of the main circulating pump vanes and
by their higher harmonics;

b. pressure pulses resulting from changes in the hydraulic resistance of the inner
fixtures of the reactor; these changes result from vibration of the components
inside the reactor produced by coolant flow;

c. pressure pulses resulting from the geometry of the reactor cooling circuit;
d. pressure pulses resulting from turbulence in the coolant.

Information Content of Vibration Sensor Signals

The signals from the vibration sensors include mechanical movements of the components
or connecting systems to which the sensors (accelerometers) are attached. However,
the sensors can also detect vibrations originating far away from them.

In order to be able to sense the most important vibration problems. we locate the
vibration sensors:

a. on the pressure vessel flange where the reactor barrel is suspended, making it
possible to sense hcrizontal and vertical movements of the barrel;

h. at suitable locations on the pressure vessel wall, e.g., in the zone of the
intake and outlet connectors, in order to sense their vibrations;

c. at selected locations in the primary circuit where maximum vibration may be
expected, i.e., the main circulating pumps, the steam generators, and pumps in the
primary circuit auxiliary systems.

There are various sources of'mechanicsl vibration, such as the main circulating’
pumps. movement of the main shutoff valves, the control-assembly drives. and coolant
flow.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l!”lOFFKJAl.USHiDNLY

The sensor placement described above'gives us the following main capabilities:

I. monitoring the functioning of the nain circulating pumps, the main shutoff valves
and the control-assembly drives; .

2. detecting the eaistence of loose parts in the primary coolant by evaluating
tapping (impact) against the walls and structural components:

3. sensing and monitoring the mechanical vibrations of structural components (e.g.,
seizing of bearings and the like).

Measuring Apparatus

The seasuring apparatus, a block diagram of which is given in Fig 1, consists of
the following components:

a. a signal sensor (detector);

b. a preamplifier located near the sensor;

c. the connecting cable between the sensor and preamplifier;
d. the amplifier;

e. a programming unit;

f. evaluating equipment.

Fig 1. Block diagram of PH-3652 noise
analysis system

Key:

a. Detectors

b. Preamplifier close to detector

c. Amplifier with programming unit
d. Evaluating equipment

e. Ionization chamber

f. Nuclear signal preamplifier box
g. Kain nuclear signal amplifier box
h. Vibration meter

1. Six-channel oscilloscope

1. Digital voltmeter

1:. Box containing evaluating equipment “'- '- W “MN W W Mm — PM 3652
l. Real-time analyzer

n. Stereo amplifier and speakers in housing

n. Vibration meter and coordinate plotter

0. Tape recorder (recording on magnetic tape)

p. Pressure pulse sensor

q. Preamplifier

r. Hecbanical signal amplifier box

a. Accelerometer

t. Emission Detector

 

b
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main technical problem in noise analysis is separation of relatively low~level
noise (0.01-2 percent) from the average values of the main signal. In the subse-
quent stage, the problem is amplification and transmission of the signal so that the
desired signal stands out clearly against the background interference. These re-
quirements are met by means of preamplifiers whose design allows a signal to be
transmitted over a relatively large distance without losing its quality.

Sensors

Available information on the number and location of sensors varies. A survey of
these data is given in Tables 1, 2 and 3. which show the numbers of individual types
of sensors according to references 1, 2 and 6. Fig 2 has been developed according
to the latest information [3, 4] supplemented with data from reference 5; it shows
the measurement locations in the primary circuit. The five sensors located in the
volume compensator [5} are, according to reference A. a special arrangement which
was used only during the startup period. Currently, the volume compensator at the
Bruno Leuschner nuclear power station has no sensors (units 3 and 4), but it is
planned to equip this important part of the primary circuit with some sensors in
units 5 and-6. However, no specific data are available. The location of sensors
in the reactor can be seen from Fig 3.

Table l. Sensors and their locations (data from technical information on PH-3652
system [1]).

Sensor Number Location
Emission detectors 30 Core
KS-30/l vibration sensors 1 Base of pressure vessel
A Plane of bottom of pressure vessel,
spaced at 90°
a Plane below level of pressure vessel
connections. spaced at 90°
A Plane of pressure vessel flange, spaced
at 90°
3 Main circulating pumps (one sensor
per pump)

2 Control-assembly drives

UDE—lSOe pressure pulse sensor 1 Pressure vessel: coolant intake
1 Pressure vessel: coolant outlet
2 Between main shutoff valve and main
circulating pump
5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Survey of sensors (data according to reference 2)
Sensors

30 Self-powered neutron-flux detectors in groups of five in six channels
inside the reactor vessel
10 Ionization chanbers for measuring neutron flux, in groups of two with
different sensitivities in five channels in the water jacket surrounding
the reactor vessel. The high-sensitivity detector is used during startup
and the low-sensitivity detector during power production
Piezoelectric vibration sensor on base of pressure vessel
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on surface of vessel below the core
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on surface of vessel above the core
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on surface of vessel between pipe connections
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on flange of vessel
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on control-assembly tubes
Piezoelectric vibration sensors on outlets of the three circulating pumps
Piezoelectric pressure fluctuation sensors on outlet piping of two circulat-
ing pmps
Piezoelectric pressure fluctuation sensor on vessel near one intake connection
Piezoelectric_pressure fluctuation sensor on vessel near one outlet connection

NWN§O~§£~H

0—H

Table 3. Survey of sensors used in units 3 and a of Bruno Leuschner nuclear power
station (data according to reference 4)

Type of sensor Number of sensors in:

One unit Two units
Self-powered (emission) detectors 60 120
Ionization chanbers 6 12
Pressure pulse sensors ' 8 l6
Vibration sensors 52 10¢

Total number of sensors 126 ' 252

Special attention must be devoted to transmission of signals from the sensors to
the preamplifiers and to the design of the preanplifiers themselves. It nust be
assured that during signal transmission over a relatively long path there will be
no undesirable attenuation or distortion resulting fron interference in the signal
path.

Emission Detectors

Neutron-flux density in the reactor is measured by beta-emission detectors. Rhodium
detectors 200 mm long are located at 5 vertical levels. in guide tubes.

Detection of local changes in the neutron-flux density requires neasurenent at a
relatively large number of points in the reactor core.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SI-f ONLY

Pig 2. Measurement locations in primary circuit (for information purposes)
Key :
s . Ionization chamber

1). Pressure pulse masurenent
c. Vibration sensor

 

06'. 1. Mlh'cl Imus v Mineral»; shrubs (Namath-l Mala)

Pig 3. Location of sensors on reactor

a. Ionization chamber
b. mission detectors
c. Pressure pulse sensors
d. Vibration sensors

   

6 Mind: {Wﬂmf c
amm Int-adjd

0M. 3. (Imus! mime“ no rectum

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z 0NI.\"

The instantaneous detector current value is used for noise analysis: the transfer
factor for the noise signal is:

K‘ - 3 x 10-21 [amp-sec-clzlparticle]

The signal is fed from the detector to a preamplifier located close to it. and fro-
there to the main amplifier.

Ionization Charter

The neutron—flux density in the space around the reactor is measures by ionisation
chambers located in the biological shield. The ionization chalbers are lovable

vertically along the core zone.
The transfer factors are:

K‘ - 6 x 10-15 [amp-sec-cnzlparticle] (power range);
Kb - 10"12 [amp-sec-cmzlparticle] (startup).

The signals from the ionization chambers are fed to preamplifiers located close to
then and from there to the main amplifiers.-

Vibration Sensors

Piezoelectric sensors capable of measurement in a range from 2 Hz to 10 kHz are
used as vibration sensors. The transfer factor is:

is - 20 [96/3]

The signals from the vibration sensors are fed to preamplifiers located,cloae to
then.

Pressure-Pulse Sensors

Pressure pulses at the reactor intake and outlet and at various locations in the
primary circuit are neasured by pressure-pulse sensors.

The transmission factor is:

Bq - 350 [pC/HPa]

with an average working pressure in the vicinity of 12 "We, the sensors can register
pressure pulses down to op - 2 Ida.

reanplifiers

The preamplifiers increase the power level of the neasured signal, thus allouing it
to be transmitted over some distance; otherwise there would be undesirable attenu-
ation and distortion. The preanplifiers must be located as close as possible to
the sensors or detectors, i.e.. within 5 to 20 meters.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preamplifiers for Nuclear Signals

The preamplifiers (current amplifiers) for the measurement signals of emission
detectors and ionization chambers are located. along with the power supplies for
the emission detector channels. in the preamplifier box, close to the reactor. The
signal input and output leads are joined to the box by connectors so that the box
can be disconnected when working with the reactor.

Vibration and Pressure-Pulse Signal Preamplifiers

These are symmetrical discharge amplifiers whose transfer factors aEe so chosen
that the output signal for vibration (acceleration) is 100 mV/m/sec - l V/g; for
the pressure-pulse sensor output signal it is 2 V/lIPa.

Main Amplifiers

The main amplifier unit consists of two boxes containing not only the amplifiers
themselves, but modular components for power supply, signal labeling, signal
division (splitting the signal into short-term average values and noise components,
amplification of noise components to a cannon level) and channel selection. All
modular components and functional groups, inserted units, chassis and boxes are
standardized. This design allowa effective use of spare parts and rapid repair.

Main Nuclear Signal Amplifier 30::

This box contains modular components of the main and dividing amplifiers for
processing the signals from the emission detectors, with two limiting value signals
(positive and negative limiting values) and modular signal labeling components.

The group of channels carrying emission-detector signals from the preamplifiers
which is chosen for evaluation may be selected Innually. The signals. from the
ionization chambers are amplified and monitored for values in excess of the limits.
Cmpensating and integrating amplifiers allow further processing of the ionization
chamber signals. An adjustable integrating amplifier is used to integrate the
signals from several ionization chambers when the reactor is at low power and to
determine average values of location-dependent effects.

The compensating amplifier allows precise measurement of deviations in the average
values of the ionization chamber signals; these are used to determine the effective-
ness of the control assemblies as a function of their position.

Main Mechanical Signal Amplifier Box

The main amplifier box contains amplifiers equipped with signals indicating that
limiting values have been exceeded; these amplifiers are used to process signals
from vibration and pressure-pulse sensors, which can be tapped with earphones or
loudspeakers. In addition. the box contains modular signal labeling and power sup-
ply components.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Evaluation Equipment

The I’M-3652.13 evaluation equipment consists of the following devices:

a. a six- channel oscilloscope;

b. a digital voltmeter;

c. a universal device for vibration measurement consisting of an oscilloscope, an
indicator, a narrow-band analyzer, a control unit for processing the signal and a
graph plotter;

d. a measurement point selector;

e. an output panel for a computer;

f. an output for a magnetic tape recorder;

g. a signal labeling unit.

Technical Data

Dimensions of box (meters):

preamplifier box 0.6 x 2.1 x 0.6;

main Amplifier box 0.8 x 2.0 x 0.6;

evaluation equipment box 0.8 x 2.0 x 0.6.

Sensors, Preamplifiers and Amplifiers

A survey of the transfer factors and output signals of preamplifiers and amplifiers
for various types of sensors is given in Table 4.

The OPD 280 U Six-channel Oscilloscope

This is a slow-speed oscilloscope:

sensitivity 0.5 V/cm

input impedance 5 megohns
input frequency 0-10 kHz

screen diagonal 280 mm.

The Q-1206.010 DC Digital Voltmeter

Measurement range 1 microvolt-l 16] (six ranges)
Maximum sensitivity 1 digit per microvolt
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (“W-N1 U. I'SF ()NU'

'l‘able lo .

700. G

1 ’ 2- .mm. 3! 4 PMs-alone i mum:
Mom.- n-lit-mn Tyn slim-tr Memory (elm ——

I .
“W M'm'“ ; ’1W’ 5; mm» anus. ’mﬂs: mum "‘“6

m-elulrnl 10 K5 30 l

I .
_____| ____
11 l ODE IMH'

humm- Ink“
quu.-I.u 12 «mm o.-
.ln-rorn

~01
—.g¢o:— co

IIIIII
“O
a

~b3=

~90:- 90
222 “iii...

2!

444444 444444
..
O

a

I.
444444 444444
.37???

o
opupg

E

bums Ioku women! Vssn‘
«mama 1 ton-9|? _ 17' :‘0' ‘ 10 u— ' ' ' ' ""‘l... Eliot
(ouhron) :5). s. M 12“ ' rm.

‘II
0.10 -—-I ION

nrulmno
(on! core)

komom

RS: 55 cause

\‘scu'
- 0
IO ensues

I
_—_l'—— .______ — —— \’ .
ballots toku 11; lo ulucsl _ _ I.lO.l0-' sen

444444
llllll

0.1 \':M

l 0.0! \‘IuA

 

Key:

1. Measured quantity 10. Acceleration

2. Type of sensor 11. Pressure

3. Sensor, transfer factor. 12. Neutron-flux density (in-core)
frequency range 13. Beta-ell“ n detector

lo. Preamplifier llo. Amp-sec-cm particle

5. Transfer factor 15. Volt-sec—cn [particle

6. Output signal 16. Neutron-flux density (out-core)

7. Amplifier 17. Ionization chamber

8. Transfer factor
9. Output signal

Vibration-Measuring Instrument

Section powered from electrical

System (11031) 220V/110V
External source-battery 12 V
11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

11 163 Narrow-Band Analyzer

Frequency range 0.2 lit—20 kHz

Relative bandwidth 31, 102, 302

11 018 High-Pass Filter

Limiting frequency 16-500 Hz (switchable by half octaves)
11 ozs Indicator Unit '

Indicator ' Effective, positive and negative peak
(mimm) value

Frequency range 1 lit-15 Idle
11 028 Oscilloscope

Frequency Range 2 112-15 kHz

Time base speed 300-0.03 msec/cm (tangential)
x: horizontal sensitivity 20 mlv'olt

Y: vertical sensitivity 8.5 or 22-75 Ill/volt

Real-Time Analyzer (External Device)
Frequency range 20 “2-20 kHz

Measurement capability Instantaneous, peak (maxim) value
Filter and broadband

channels 30 channels by thirds of an octave
5 broadband channels
Input resistance 100 kohm

Location of Devices

The spatial arrangement and location of the sensors and preamplifiera is described
in the section on measuring apparatus and in Tables 1, 2 and 3. For servicing
reasons. it is recommended .that the amplifier boxes and evaluating equipment boxes
be located close to the computer used for signal analysis.

Survey of Instruments Included in Noise-Analysis Syst-

 

Nane 2m
Sensors

Vibration sensor KS 30/1-
Fressure pulse sensor @E-lSOe

Mission detector (ED)
Ionization chamber (11)

Connector cable 5700/20

_12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PM 3652.10 Nuclear Signal Preamplifier Box

Emission-detector signal amplifier 6386-110
Ionization chamber signal preamplifier 6386-120
Sk—l3 stabilizer ' 6882-13
Transformer T'l388

Section powered by electrical system 3301-26

Plug-in unit with blower
Power system connection panel
Lamp and fuse panel

Connector panel

6386-335 Mechanical Signal Preamplifier
Preamplifier connecting block

PM-3652.ll Nuclear Signal Main Amplifier Box

Main emission-detector signal amplifier 6386-210
Compensating amplifier 6386-221
Compensating amplifier 6386-222
Integrating amplifier 6386-219
Separating amplifier: in

and signaling labeling 6386-211
Separating amplifier: - .

IR and 1! channels 6386-225
Main amplifier of IX signal 6386-330
Relay unit 6386-68601
Signal labeling unit switch 6386-215
Signal labeling unit matrix C 6386-685
Modular power supply - 3206/15
Modular power supply 3307/15

Power system connection panel

Power supply control unit

Program panel (manual program selector)

Output signal panel

Ionization chamber power supply 6686-50

PM 3652.12 Mechanical Signal Amplifier Box

Main mechanical signal amplifier 6386-330
Signal labeling switch 6386-2158
Signal labeling unit matrix C 6386-685L
Amplifier for earphone 6832-03A
Modular power supply 6882-33
Modular power supply ' 6837-20
Modular power supply 6387-31

Switch panel (monitoring)

Output signal panel

Rectifier and filter unit

Transformer

Power supply cable panel

Programming unit 6386-360
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PA 3652.13 Evaluating Instrumentation Box

Six-channel oscilloscope OPD 280/0

Digital voltmeter 6 1206.010
Vibration meter

Box 110 12 (36 601)
Power system section 11031 (SH 61)
Oscilloscope ' 11028 (SH 50)
Indicator unit 11025 (SH 40)
Narrow—band analyzer 11163 (SH 32)
Control unit PM 3310 (SH 71)
High-pass filter 11018 (SH 23)

Signal labeling unit

Measuring location selector

Panel for output to computer

Panel for output to recording device

Panel for connection to power system

Modular power supply (SV/GA)

nodular power supply 3307/15

Evaluating Instruments

Real-time analyzer 01012
Stereo amplifier RSV 921
Speaker box 39301

Note: The technical design of the system allows an increase in the number of
measuring locations.

System Capabilities
The noise-measurement analysis system has the following features and capabilities:

1. It has multiple uses in nuclear engineering and the chemical and metallurgical
industries.

2. It allows monitoring of the operating condition of equipment which is not
equipped with measuring and regulating systems.

3.- It gives timely signals of changes in an operating process or the occurrence of
damage to machinery and equipment. It can be used to evaluate the probable cause
of damage, and thus makes it possible to prevent breakdowns and emergency conditions

in process equipment.

a. It provides data for planning of inspections and repairs, and can be used to
plan the necessary scope of work during planned equipment stoppages. This raises
equipment maintenance to a qualitatively higher level.

5. Equipment repairs can be limited and the interchange system can be used for
smaller radioactive components.

1h
FOR 0F?1CLA1.USEI)NLY
6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It allows the detection and location of loose parts. This prevents major

damage to equipment, excess shutdons of the power station and the resulting loss
in power produced.

7.

It processes and evaluates signals from vibration, pressure, temperature and

neutran-flux density sensors, and can conduct frequency and time analysis of the
measured values.

1.

2.

lo.

5.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Rauchmesssystem PM 3652, Technische information [Technical Information on
FM 3652 Noise Measurement System]."

Jonak, F. "Hoderne metody registrace a hodnoceni mechanickych vibraci primarnych
okruhu .15 s 1ehkovodnymi reaktory a zakladny pristrojove vybaveni [Modern Methods
of Recording and Evaluating Mechanical Vibrations of the Primary Circuits of
Nuclear Power Stations Using Light-Water Reactors, and the Basic Instrumentation
Usedl." luv-43147, Rez, September 1978.

Trip report on business trip to East Germany on 5-11 October 1980.

Information presented by East German specialists at a seainar on the diagnostic
system for nuclear power stations using VVER-440 reactors, held on 15 January
1981 at UJV [Nuclear Research Institute}, Res.

Giera, 0.; Schumann, P.; Lot, K; and Eberbach, A. "Opyt razrabotki, proyektiro-
vaniya i primeneniya vo vremya puskonaladochnykh rabot i ekspluatatsii ABS
sistemy ustanovok dlya diagnostiki, rabotayuahchikh na osnove analiza shunov
[Development, Design and Use During Nuclear Power Station Startup, Adjustment
and Operation of a Noise-Analysis System of Diagnostic Devicesl," C-80-10/GDR.

COPYRIGHT: SNIL, 1981

8480

C80:

5100/ 3006

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

WWW

DIRECT CONVERSION '01" NUCLEAR NERO! T0 ELECTRICITY DISCUSS-
Prague ENERGETIKA in Czech No 9, 1981 pp 393-399

[Article by Eng Jiri Racek, Electrical Engineering Faculty, VUT [Technical Institute].
Brno: "Methods of Direct Conversion of Nuclear Energy to Electrical Energy"]

[Text] Types of Direct Conversion of Energy to Electricity

The main sources of energy for the production of electricity can be divided into
the following groups:

-the energy of solar radiation;
-cheaical energy;

-hydraulic energy;
-geothernal energy;

--nuclear energy.

The energy of solar photons heats and illuminates the earth and is converted into
the kinetic energy of asrine currents, wind in the atmosphere and waves on water
surfaces. into the gravitational potential energy of clouds and streams of water,
and into the energy accumulated in plants. He may consider chemical energy (parti-
cularly fossil fuels) as solar energy accumulated in the depths of the earth in the
course of its geological development. In the broad sense, then, we nay include all
of these energy sources in the category of solar energy.

The natural flow of geothermal energy is fed by two sources, namely heat accumulated
in the depths of the earth and heat newly created within the earth, primarily by
natural radioactive processes. In practice, it is frequently difficult to distin-
guish between use of the natural flow of geothermal energy and use of the stored heat.

The energy balance is shown in more detail in Fig l.

16
FOR 0F1l€1A1.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY
Pig

Key:

1.

There are various ways of producing electrical energy from the sources described
At the end of the 1950's there was a surge of interest throughout the world
The term "direct conversion" began

above .
in direct conversion of energy into electricity.
to be applied to methods of obtaining electrical energy which did without moving

components such as turbines. A systematic survey of the main energy conversion

a
.-/m.'leezw/rzz 10' m) Whumé) Cid/Mama amen/w

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

b amini ' Wi d nedmwgia-

   
    
  

0

v,“ .'.

rang/reg 51?,35 7W) h
:7)?” be": gammy

      

'e tern: rln

‘vﬁ*l‘?7 if
'0'.

mm: and

     
      

m’erné ejvyu .‘wa’ e-ema
.1 hulaém ens-3w c

{f 8 ":::':'r«' mm;
L '5?) m1] is!)

ON. 1. Scum wank“ 011mm 2m

1. Energy balance of the earth.

Solar energy m. Energy accumulated in plants
Radiation (short wave) n. Decay

Radiation (long wave) 0. Animals

Mechanical energy of the solar p. Conduction of heat

system q. Surface of the earth

Direct reflection r. Energy of the earth

Hydraulic energy s. Fossil fuel (600 million years)
Direct conversion to heat t. Nuclear energy, thernal energy,
Convection: volcanoes. hot springs gravitational energy
Circulation of water

Accumulated energy in Ha.er and ice
Wind energy, wave energy. energy of

currents

Photosynthesis

methods is given in Pig 2.

l7
FIMRCMHWCIAI.USEZ(MVLY
I”)! OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

Fig 2. Survey of the main methods of conversion of various forms of‘ energy to
electricity.

a b

Key:

a. Solar energy

1). Nuclear energy

c. water power

d. Chemical energy

e. Combustion chambers

f. Fission reactor

3. Thermonuclear reactor

h. Thermal energy

1. Hydraulic turbine

j. Heat turbine

k. Mechanical energy

1. Photoelectric converter

m. Rotary electrical generator
n. Chemical fuel cell

0. Galvanic cell

p. Thermoelectric converter

q. Thermionic converter

r. Parametric converter -
s. Electrohydrodynamic converter 0"- 2- mm W M m mam (om mic
t. Magnetohydrodynamic converter "W‘mu'

u. Radionuclide converter

' v. Electrical energy

 

Among the forms of direct conversion of energy to electricity, solar energy is used
as the source primarily in solar batteries and chalice]. fuel cells. Almost all other'
methods of conversion of energy to electricity use nuclear energy as the sauce.

Some methods of producing electrical energy from the energy of nuclear fission or
fusion are shown schematically in Pig 3.

Fig 3. Processes for producing electrical energy from the energy of nuclear fission
or fusion.

Key:

n. Energy of nuclear fission or fusion
b. Heat

c. Steam turbine

d. Mechanical energy

e. Generator

f. Electrical energy

g. Thermoelectric or thermionic converter
h. Plasma

i. MED generator

 

18
not omcm. use onu'z
FOR OFFICIAL “SI; ONLY

0f the methods for direct conversion of energy to electricity which have been des-
cribed, magnetohydrodynamic OHHD) and thermionic conversion are considered the most
suitable for large-scale power production in the near future.

Hagnetohydrodynamic Conversion of Energy

The operation of MED generators is based on the same principle as that of inductive
generators. with the essential difference that in the ME!) generator it is an electri-
cally conductive fluid (plasma or liquid metal), instead of a solid conductor, which
moves in the magnetic field.

A simplified diagram of an MED generator is given in Fig 4. The electrically con-
ductive material flows through a channel in the form of an expansion nozzle of
rectangular or square cross section. Two opposite walls parallel to the magnetic
field B are electrically conductive and form the electrode system; the other two walls
are nonconductive. The active part of the MED generator (in which the electrodes are
located) is in a magnetic field, with the pole pieces of the magnet located above and
below the nonconductive walls.

Electrical energy is obtained from the MED generator by converting some kinetic energy
and some potential energy. The transfer of energy from the flow of working medium to

the external load circuit results from a complex process of interactions between
electrically charged particles and the external magnetic field and between charged
and neutral particles.

The current densitys of a flowing gas moving with a velocity'QVin a magnetic field
of flux density

5‘ (3+W)’

where ifis the electric field intensity under universal external load resistance
and (r is the conductivity the working gas. Because the electric field in-
tensity during free passage is - -vi: we can use the load factor K, defined as
the ratio of the electric field intensity under load to the intensity in free
passage, 1. e.,

to express the specific electric power of the Hun generator, provided that tag
vectors of velocity v. magnetic flux density'i’and electric field intensity are
mutually perpendicular:

P - ovznz (1-K) K.

For given values of 6‘ , v and B, the power output is at a maximum at K - 0.5. If
the magnetic flux density is greater than about 1.5-2 T, the Hall effect begins to

become important, and instead of a Faraday-type HHD generator we have a Hall-type
generator.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY

Fig ‘0. Arrangement of a Faraday-type ‘ :
HHD generator and directions of y M

the principal vectors. ﬂ—Lg— — _ _. ._ _._..-___

 

0&4. WW Windy-Mao germ
rim mmWoueryam-nnm

As can be seen from the last enuation given, the electrical conductivity of the
working substance is an extremely important quantity. An inert gas is electrically
conductive only if it is at least partially ionized. Accordingly, it is heated to

a high temperature, 2000-3000" K. at which a low-temperature plasma is produced.

In order to increase the electrical conductivity. a certain quantity of an easily-
ionized alkali metal such as potassium or cesium (ionization potential of Cs ~ 3.89
v. of K N 10.34 V) is added to the plasma. Even in this case, the electrical con-
ductivity of the lay-temperature plasma is rather low, on the order of 10 S/m. In
order. to make tv reach the required value, the working median must he accelerated
to high speeds, on the order of 1,000 m/sec. This is generally done in a nozzle.

The electrical conductivity of liquid metals is high. on the order of lO6 S/m" . and
accordingly it is unnecessary to accelerate then to high speeds. They are accelerated
in an injector by a current of their own vapor, with which the liquid metal nixea,
producing a two-phase mixture. The liquid phase is the magnetohydrodynamic working
media and also the energy source. while the vapor phase is the thermodynamic working

medias during injection.
The working medium may flow in an Open or closed cycle.

In the open cycle, the working medial flows from the heat. source. (combustion chamber)
through the Mill) channel. the steam generator and the separator, to the atmosphere.
In this case the working mediu- is the gas produced by combustion, with an ionizing

additive.

Closed cycles, in which the working fluid moves in a closed circuit. can be divided
into:

-cyc1es using plasma (inert gas), in which the heat source may be, for example,
a high-temperature nuclear reactor (Figs 5 and 6) or a controlled thermonuclear re-
actor; combustion of fossil fuels may also he used, with the heat being transferred

to the working media in a neat exchanger;

«the liquid metal cycle. in which the heat source may be a breeder reactor (Pig 7),
a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor, a coal-burning fluidized bed and the like.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
U.

1

ON. 5. WWW-om, union! M I Win
m a 3 porn! alum

n-msmxm-Wumnm
"-Mcuhmc-cmw: dunnounummw

S |
. z. i
ON. 6. Wk" and!” 06M 1 Wanton

Wasmum

Q . vmxuuloul Inna: W - whim” “Mun
II. - nay-owl twins: 6 - another: K - low M - mu

 

Obi. 7. Mawmy union) M a Mlkwim
main man. a mm c 3 porn! mom

I - W van «that (all. in W '9!!th no“ I'lmim
a. Mutual calm): I . Mal-N: M06 - mmmdn‘nwaﬁ
Mon '1 - pun! "mu: 6 - memo:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the case of nuclear heat sources, where for safety reasons only the closed cycle
can be used, the situation is more complex than for nonnuclear open-cycle sources.

When we consider these possibilities we find considerable discrepancies in the re-

quired working parameters, i.e., tenperature and pressure, for the nuclear reactor

and the m generator, which must be taken into account in the design process.

Thermionic Energy Conversion

Thermionic energy conversion makes use of thermionic emission of electrons from the
surface of a heated metal. The basic structure of a thermionic converter (rm) con-
sists of a set of two electrodes, an emitter B and a collector K. The linear dimen-
sions s and of their surfaces (generally S - SK) are much greater than the dis-
tance dxbetween the electrodes. A schematic d ram of a mu is given in Pig 8.

Fig 8. Thermionic converter: a, with 1
load circuit; b, cesiu diode. -

u.—

K

LD"
0 R - . _
1) bl u:

05!. 0. mm armies!» Isl-lb
a) n munda- M. I) as“ 41049

In terms of the nature of the space between the electrodes we distinguish vacuum
converters and gas-filled converters. The purpose of the gas atmosphere is to fa-
cilitate ionisation in the interelectrode space, thus decreasing losses in the passage
of electric current between the emitter and collector; the atmosphere generally used

is cesius vapor, which is the easiest to ionize.

This electrode syst- is analogous to the design of vacuum or gas-filled diode tubes,
whose cathode and anode correspond to the emitter and collector of the m4. Like
the cathode of the diode tube, the emitter of the run is at a high temperature, pro-
ducing an electrical current by thermal emission of electrons.

A thermionic converter containing cesium vapor is generally called a "cesium diode":
a diagram is given in Fig 8. It consists of a closed bulb containing electrodes 3
and K, at whose coldest point is a container of liquid ces.-.n; the temperature TCs
of the cesium uniquely determines the (saturated) cesium vapor pressure p“.

The emitter temperature ranges from 1,500° to 2,200' K, and the collector temperature _
may be as high as 1, 000° K. To achieve a low-voltage arc discharge requires a high
cesiu vapor pressure (p as 0.13-1.30 kPa), which corresponds to a temperature

TCs as 550-650° K. hegistance d is generally 0.2-0.3 II.

The high operating temperature imposes extraordinary requirements regarding the
material and insulation of the electrodes. Accordingly, such refractory metals as
No, Nb, H and Re are used for the electrodes.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nuclear Sources Under Consideration for Direct ConVersion of Energy

A high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (area) is a graphite-moderated helium-cooled
reactor. The high temperature of the coolant exiting from the reactor is of interest
not only for direct use in mnufacturing processes or for combination of the high-
temperature reactor in a direct cycle with a gas turbine, but also in terms of the
possibility of using the M as a heat source is closed-cycle magnetohydrodymmic
systems (figs 5 and 6).

Basically there are two types of area: a reactor with hexagonal fuel elments and
one with spherical fuel elenents. Electrical power stations with capacities of 300
MB of each type are in operation or under construction (Table 1).

Table 1. Main parameters of operating and under-consturction nuclear power stations
with high-temperature gas-cooled reactors.

he. 1. M's-s: ”nun” mommy}. o bolus-M 5mm» divans a W m thousand nah."
——-————————___________

 

 

 

 

  
   
          

I
I mum Reactor ; m noun I ma mm I m St. Wain ; Tarmac
I sun Country I on I ran ' tn ' xsn
-_—_—————-_———- -————— —_—l
I no: endow do mvm Year commissioned I new ' no. mo mm
____—_—.___.__——___________
; I
g ‘a‘rpelu! vrtnn mm : um I so ' um no
mum-m x-ykon NW) I u . It: I no no
8 \‘Ilnpul u—plou Dina IR] 010 : 5” I 619 523
vmupu union nlnn m l on ma = mu m:
e 'n-t ply-u mm: ' m m i o I a a
f Pronto! mint-bu! fku") I “.1 18.1

m i 205.5

       

'ldrlnomowu ‘ me nu
'1 nlanoraul- uhllcnl tom-mum moron

Key:

a. ﬂeet output 04“) f. Mass flow (kg/sec)

b. Electrical output (IN) 3. West Germany

c. Intake gas temperature (°K) l) Disassembled in 1976

d. Outlet gas temperature (°K) 2) Planned beginning of commercial
e. Gas pressure (HPa) operation

The temperature of the gas in a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor is limited by
specific requirements imposed by the nuclear fuel.

Development of this type of reactor has proceeded the farthest in the United States
and West Germany. The prototype reactor of the Peach Bottom nuclear power station
(United States), with an output of 40 PM, was extremely successful from the beginning
of comercial operation in 1967 until planned disassembly in 1974.

The overall operating characteristics of the Peach Bottom ml were particularly
satisfactory in terms of fuel and of power plant requirements. There were no major
equipment malfunctions. In addition, there was excellent agreement between cal-
culated and actual core characteristics, which confirmed the methods used and
provided a reference data base for use in large power stations with HTGR's.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1979, commercial operation of a 330 We nuclear power station with an HTGR re-
actor was begun in Port St. Vrain (United States). A umber of difficulties were
experienced during startup, but they were not in essence caused by an erroneous design
concept, so that it may be expected that the advantage of this type resulting from
the high outlet temperature of the helium will make itself felt with time. The

Fort St. Vrain station is planned as a demonstration unit for systens and components
of the type, to be used in power stations with large HTGR's.

The AVR prototype high-temperature reactor in Julich (PRC), with a capacity of 13.5
ml, has been in operation since 1969. The spherical bed concept is attractive be-
cause it is suitable for high temperatures. This prototype reactor achieves an
output temperature of 950° C, while in the present state of develop-ant the output
temperature of a prismatic-core design is fully 100° lower. This reactor is expected
to be in operation until at least 1983. A power-station version with a capacity of
300 MN is being built at Schmehausen.

Operating experience with HTGR reactors at high temperatures is now being acquired.
Experience with a 330 MW unit and experience in constructing power stations with
advanced gas-cooled reactors (AGR) indicate the difficulty involved in achieving
the intended objectives. The advantages of the high output-gas temperature do not
particularly manifest themselves in increased steam parameters, but are the basis
for the high efficiency of a cycle including a gas turbine and HHD generator.

The concept of a gas-cooled fast-breeder reactor (GFBR) 'uses the core of a heliu-
cooled fast-breeder reactor to achieve a high reproduction coefficient in a gas-
cooled system. The operating pressure in the primary circuit will be about 9 KPa,
allowing a rather high power output per unit volume. '

Gas-cooled breeder reactors have been under consideration for many years, but the
combination of high pressure and high output per unit volume has posed difficult
safety problems. These problems have been satisfactorily solved by development of
a reactor pressure vessel made of prestressed concrete.

The development of gas-cooled fast-breeder reactors makes considerable use of ex-
perience from the operation and development of gas-cooled thermal reactors. Some
aspects can be taken over directly into gas-cooled breeder reactors (for example.
construction preparation and design approaches, quality assurance techniques and
research and development methods). Information on helium technology will be derived
from the high-temperature reactor programs and from operating experience with these
reactors. The fuel for the GPBR is similar to that of sodium-cooled fast breeder
reactors.

Development of a GPBR with a capacity of 300 H" has been proceeding in the Soviet
Union. Protocype GFBR's with capacities of 600 H“ are being proposed in Western
Europe and the United States.

With regard to the safety of GFBR reactors, it is generally agreed that they may be
treated in exactly the same manner as gas-cooled thermal reactors. The main
difference is the high power output per unit volune of the GPBR core and the re-
quirenent for renoval of excess heat.

2;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, solution of the overall problea of gas-cooled fast breeder reactors is
lagging rather far behind work on liquid-metal-cooled breeders.

It is also necessary to say a few words about the latching of reactors to MED
generators. To cut investment expenditures on gas-cooled reactors it is necessary
to achieve the highest possible power density, which requires a high coolant pres-
sure. In MED generators, on the other hand, a lower operating temperature increases
the electrical conductivity and thus the possibility of obtaining high generator
output. Ultimate optimization of this equipment will depend on the relative expenses
of the two main components, i.s., the reactor and the HUD generator.

Liquid-metal-cooled fast-breeder reactors (WBR) are also under consideration as
sources of heat for liquid-metal MED systems. The operating temperatures would
range from 950° to 1,300° K, only slightly higher than the operating taxperatures
planned for breeder reactors of this type. Fig 7 is a diagram of an MED generator
with an LMFBR reactor.

Initial ideas of the time required to develop comercial models of power-producing
breeder reactors have been considerably altered as a result of the extraordinary
technical demands involved.

The Soviet Union, France, the United Kingdom, west Germany, Japan and the United
States currently are in the forefront of fast-breeder reactor development. Small
nuclear power stations with experimental prototype breeder reactors having capacities
of 20 to 1.0 MW have been in operation for more than 15 years in these countries.
Experience obtained in the operation of the first generation of experimental
fast-breeder reactors is being used as a basis for design and construction of nuclear
power stations with second-generation fast-breeder reactors having capacities in the
vicinity of 250 MW. Three prototype power stations with such reactors have already
been in operation for several years, while a fourth was put into operation in April

1980 (Table 2) .

The Soviet BN-350 prototype fast-breeder reactor (Shevchenko) was first connected
to the power grid in 1973. It has a capacity of 135 MW and in addition produces
5,000 tons of desalinated water an hour. Operation of the reactor to date has pro-
vided valuable operating experience, including experience with repair procedures
involving disconnection of the main sodiun piping and cleaning the products of re-
action between sodiun and water or air from the steam generators and circuits. Bx-
perience has indicated the possibility of constructing commercial nuclear power
stations with such fast-breeder reactors.

The French Phenix prototype reactor (harcoule) has been in operation since 1971..
Technical data obtained during startup, operation and refueling have confirmed the
design assumptions.

The British PPR prototype reactor (Dounrey), went critical in 1974, and first pro-
vided electricity for the power grid in 1975. The behavior of the core, which uses
a Pu02-U02 mixed oxide fuel, and of the equipment and the primary and secondary
sodium circuits were in accordance with design calculations.

25
FOR OFHGAL USE 0!“ .Y
FOR OFFK'IAI. “SI-I ONLY

Table 2. Main parameters of prototype and demonstration nuclear power stations
uith liquid-aetal-cooled fast-breeder reactors.

To). 1-. Home; our-Imp M a 4M.» m eheudna a ”an”. "“7 dot-m mn tom

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

mm Reactor I 38-3” Ml: ; PIE 3340.
our Country sass b M a_ van sauna sass.
not mean do mm! Year comaissioned I 191: . 1m ' IO" mo
c roads! rrkonmm 1°00 ' 590 m ' mo
d semen rite-(31W! 356') I m I no no
e Teﬂon oodlkn II vistuou s rectum (‘0) 500 m an no
f ‘l'eoIoupdtyl'Cl I no I m I as 50;
m any mm 5.0 | 10.: : 1a.: “.0
R rmm ms , «.3 - 4.: us
(ll—O”) I ":43”
1 Whom ”Mr” I u u ' 5.: u 1
j om. minor-- I am", buts"! 1: bounovyl may,
H us my a 311-0 ms owl-elm. may as bodlau
Key:
a. France h. Charge (tons)
b. USSR 1. Burnup (TJ/kg)
c. Heat power (Mn) 3. Type of reactor
d. Electric power (m) k. Loop type
e. Temperature of sodium at exit 1. Pool type
from reactor, °C 1) 135 HP and 5,000 tons of desalinated
f. Steam temperature, '0 water per hour

g. Steam pressure ' (HPa)

Each of these three operating prototype ka's (BR-350, Phenix, PPR) has encountered
the well-known problems of lack of tightness in the steam generators and intermediate
heat exchangers, but the reactors themselves have worked exceptionally well. All
three have achieved record availability coefficients of 80-90 percent over the long
term. and their operators say that the stations are easy to control. Each of the
three stations has clearly shown its capability for safe operation at two-thirds
power while repairs are being made on one of the three circuits. Another canon
feature of the three stations is the extremely low radiation doses received by
operating personnel. Currently. radioactive leakage is almost too low to measure.

A fourth nuclear power station with such a fast-breeder reactor was put into opera-
tion at neloyarsk in 1980. The Bil-600 reactor had higher operating characteristics,
i.e., sodiu- tenperature, steam parameters, heat output, burnup, and length of. time
between refueling operations, than the 314-350, and also differed from the latter by
its integral (pool type) primary circuit design (like the Phenix and PPR reactors).
This made it possible to demonstrate even more thoroughly the advantages or short-
comings of integral design compared with loop design.

Currently, two more nuclear power stations with fast-breeder reactors are under con-
struction, namely Super phenix (France; output 1,200 MW) and the SNR (Vest Germany;
280 NH). The construction of others is planned in the United Kingdom (CDPR; 1,250
MW), Japan (HONJU; 250 MW), West Germany (SNR-Z; 1,300 MB), the Soviet Union

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-i ONLY

(BU-1600; 1,600 MW) and the United States (CRBR; 350 NH). The main characteristics
of the planned first col-nercial fast-breeder reactors is shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Main characteristics of demonstration nuclear power stations with large
fast-breeder reactors.

to. J mud cmuammy must-5o W 0:0le I velty’m "(NI-I mad-vim: norm

 

nutter Rene to: l Saw MI: I ODYR
Sm Country I French a Vol“ Munich:- '
e Tmlny when 231“? - I 6000 : as»
f rerun-u mm mm ' . 1M . mo E 1m
8 Teplota aodikn na n'nupu ' z .
1 mm: tony no) - sso ; 530-540 2 ass—u;
h mum pm l‘L‘; . 500 l coo—no | m—m
1 Thuluryanvu: - - ; IGJ . I‘m : IL“
VﬂmhnHTJu“l - as | no : aJ—np
a Generals! - startle“ “I Isms! 1 I sunken ll
Key:
3. France h. Steam temperature (°C)
b. United Kingdom 1. Steam pressure (HPa)
c. West Germany 1. Burnup CTR/ks)
d. USSR k. Design
e. Heat output (MW) 1. Integral
f. Electrical output (HR) m. Loop type

g. Temperature of sodium exiting
from core (°C)

As shown in Fig 7, high-temperature gas-cooled reactors with heat exchangers may
also be used as nuclear heat sources for liquid-metal mm systems.

The speed of comercial incorporation of the fast-breeder and high-temperature
reactors is difficult to estimate at present. and will vary from country to country;
but they are eventually certain to find extensive use.

It is advantageous to use cylindrical electrodes for nuclear thermionic converters:
an outer collector, with the emitter inside it, and the nuclear fuel undergoing
fission inside the emitter. A grOup of cylindrical TEN physically arranged end to
end and electrically connected in series creates a single thermionic nuclear rod.

A large number of such rods are inserted into the reactor and form part of the core;
this arrangement is called the internal arranganent. An exteml a;rangement of
nuclear TB! is also possible with cylindrical electrodes; the emitters are heated
by circulation of liquid metal or by a liquid metal-metal vapor system in high

temperature piping.

Series-producible components and systems for nuclear converters have been designed
and prepared for production, and plans for nuclear thermionic reactors with outputs
on the order of 10 to 100 k" have been developed.

The first thermionic electrical generator connected with a nuclear reactor was
built in the Soviet Union in 1970 and designated the TOPAZ thermionic reactor.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son omcuL use ONLY

The thermionic fuel rods, containing several cylindrical cesium diodes arranged
end to end, are located radially in the reactor in an nonuniform arrangement so
as to achieve a uniform temperature distribution.

Nuclear or isotope TEH have also been built and used as lowblevel power sources in
a number of special instances, such as in space research. Higher-power units are
also under preparation.

Conclusion

Even though the technical problems of MED generator systems using nuclear reactors
as heat sources have not yet been fully solved, the results obtained in research
on,HTGR and LHPBR reactors allow an optimistic view of prospects for using closed-
cycle MED systems with nuclear reactors for the production of electrical energy.
The high-temperature characteristics of MED systems with HTCR reactors make such
equipment more suitable for the production of electrical energy than the other
alternatives (nuclear reactors connected with steam or gas turbines), since MED
generators, like nuclear reactors, can achieve high unit capacities (hundreds of
megawatts). In addition, as a result of their high efficiency, they have con-
siderably lower waste-heat losses than standard nuclear power stations.

The development of liquid metal HHD systems has reached a stage at which larger units
have been built or are under construction. Tests of such equipment are yielding
more precise data on the processes that take place in them. The main advantages of
MED generators using liquid metal is their ability to operate at low temperatures.
However, there is no propulsion method available which allows the flow of liquid
metal to be accelerated with low energy losses.

Another possible source of heat for such systems which we have not yet considered

in detail is thermonuclear reactors. The use of controlled thermonuclear reactions
as a source of energy is still in the developmental stage. Scientific findings
gained thus far can be used as the technical basis for future thermonoclear reactors.
Thermonuclear reactor technology requires more research, and it will first of all

be necessary to demonstrate the physical principles involved. Although the constru-
ction of a commercial reactor of this type is still far off, many countries are
currently devoting research to the problem.

Thermionic conversion of energy to electricity, too, has thus far failed to achieve
extensive practical utilization because of excessive technical requirements re-
sulting from the high operating temperature of the emitters. Low-power converters
(most often isotope types) have been built for space research purposes and in cases
where expense is a secondary consideration.

Recently, research on thermionic converters has focused on both flame-type con-
verters and thermionic nuclear reactors-of course for the purpose of large—scale
power production, where they would help to considerably increase the degree of
utilization of fuel.

Physical and technological research on direct energy conversion has produced suffic-

ient results that individual conversion methods may be investigated further and the
design and technical aspects worked out. Developmental experience thus far has been

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

encouraging, but new proposals and requirements are also emerging, particularly in-
volving the development of processes and new materials which thus far have been un-
familiar in engineering.

1.

2.

3.

be

5.

6'

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chang, s. s. 1.. "Energy Conversion," Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1963.

Pye, S. I. "Magnetogasdynanics and Plasma Dynamics." Springer-Verlag, Vienna.
1962.

Rosa, R. J. 'Magnetohydrodynanic Energy Conversion,".uccraw-Hill Book Coapany,
New York-Toronto-london-Sydney, 1968.

Ushakov, 8. et al. "Oanovy tenoenissionnogo praobrazovaniya anergii [Intro-
duction to Themionic Energy Conversion] ," Atonizdat, uoacov, 1974.

Becvar, J. et al. "Jaderne elektrarny [Nuclear Power Stations]," sun/Alta,
Prague, 1978.

Veis, S. 'mgnitohydrodynamicke generatory [Magnetohydrodymic Generatorsl,"
Alia, Bratislava, 1980.

Racek, J. "Kniznice odbornych a vedeckych spisu M v Brae [Specialized and
Scientific Papers of WT, Brnol," B-32,1973, p 173.

Racek, J. "Kniznice odbornych a vedeckych spisu VUT v Brne," 3-59, 1975, p 173.
Goodjohn, A. G. WCLEAR ENGINEERS INTERNATIONAL, No 24, 1978, p 83.

Inyutin, E. I. AWYA TEKHNIKA ZA RUBHHOM, V01 12, 1977.

Lavrencic, D. ATWIRTSCHAFT—ATMBCHNIK, No 21., 1979, p 617.

Lehner, G. KERNTECHNIK, No 20, 1978, p 157.

Easy, J. H. P. et al. WCLHR SAFETY, No 19, 1978, p 369.

Bartl, J. et a1. ENERGE'I‘IKA, No 29, 1979, p 209.

Chalupa, 2., and Kranar, J. ELEICI'RO‘I'ECENIK, No 30, 1975, p 5.

Kranar, J. ELEKIROTBCHNICKY 03209., No 65, 1976, p 199.

COPYRIGHI': SNTL, 1981

8680
C80:

5100/3006

_ 29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

PRESIDENT 0N FRENCH URANIUM NEGOTMHWﬁ-Mger'e head of state, 001 Seyni Konntche,
said on 7 Novenber that, in his opinion, the initial negotiation with France on
the price of ureniun for 1982 indicate that there will be en "upturn" conpered to
1981, when there was a significant drop in the uranium revenues. linen he returned
to Niamey, the Nigerien head of state said, referring to French-Nigeria: coopera-
tion, that he we also pleased to see that the Joint Condeeion, which let right
after the French-African Conference in Patio. bed cone up "with eetiefectory
decisions in areas which are given top priority by Niger." [Text] [Paris NAMES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No. 1879 13 Nov 81 p 2887] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

(280: 5100/5607

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sermon.

AGREEMENT ESTABLISHING NUCLEAR MATERIALS comm APPROVED
Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITEWS in French No 1879 13 Nov 81 p 2878

[Text] On 12 September, Senegal's JOURNAL OPTICIBL published Decree No 81-658 of

6 July 1981 which approves the agreement establishing the General Company for
Nuclear Materials (COGEMA).

When this agreement was signed. the COGEHA held an exclusive exploration license
covering an area of 19,300 square kilometers in Eastern Senegal. This license had
been renewed on 27 November 1978 by Decree No 79-881-of 25 septa-bar 1979 and the
company had invested 900 million CIA francs in exploration operations in Senegal.

According to the terms of the agreement, the COGEHA is committed to invest at least
150 million CPA francs in exploratory borings during the first year of the period
covered by the present agreement.

If this period of exploratory borings yields successful results. the COGEHA will
proceed with additional investments of about 500 million CPA francs moving to a
development stage involving boring operations and, ultimately. mining work.

If this development stage is crowned by success, the COGEHA will spend around 300
million CPA francs on a feasibility study.

If the findings of the feasibility study warrant mining operations in one or more
uranium deposits, the COGEHA will be allowed to constitute a mining company.

The COGEHA will bring into that company the total sum of its investments prior to
the time when the company is formed at the discount value assigned to these invest-
ments at that time in accordance with applicable tax regulations and duly authorized
by Senegal's minister of economy and finance.

The mining company will be the recipient of articles of agreement in accordance with
the legislation contained in the Investment Code and providing that its investment
program meets the criteria required by that code for approval. These articles of
agreement will be signed before any capital formation starts.

The value-added tax based on the pithead value of the output sold will be at the
rate of 5 percent and this rate can be readjusted by agreement between the govern-
ment and the COGEHA.

31
FOR OFF1CLAI.lEﬂ§(NVLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operative provisions will fall within the legal tax system in force when that
agreeaent is signed, with a scheduled tax on industrial and conercial profits of
33.33 percent based on the aforesaid tax system and subject to the following
specifications: 100 percent anortization of exploration expenses; if amortisation
is deferred, it can be carried over from one fiscal year to the next without tine
linit; possible losses, which are not due to the amortization and which were
incurred prior to the fiscal year when production reaches its rated capacity. will
be allowed to be carried over for 3 more years after that level of production is
reached.

The articles of agreensnt mat also guarantee that the mining colpany has the right
to transfer capital and its revenues and they Inst include a provision allowing the
COGEMA to have first option to buy the company's output. The cospany mat sell to
the COGDIA at the price being offered in the world narltet for similar cos-odities
and subject to approval by the company's board of directors. If the com is not
the only shareholder, this right of first option to buy will be exercised on a pro
rata basis according to the COGDM's shares in the cospeny.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
CSO: 5100/5607

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

NUCLEAR RESEARCH DISCUSSIOﬂSu'Qop secret" discussions [ere taking place] between
France and Algeria concerning the eeteblistnent of a nuclear recurch center et

Ain Oueeera (near Algiers). Algerian [nuclear] technicians will also be trained

in France. [rm] [Paris PARIS HATCH in French 18 Dec 81 p 66] [COPYRIGB'h 1981
par Cogediprense S.A.]

C50: 5100/ 2066

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

' NEH ORGANIZATION OF NATIONAL NUCLEAR tum cm
[Ole am 8 INDUSTRIA in Italian 1 Sep 81 P 5

[Text]

mm! " m mu.
no
murrm cam «
mum
we: "31M.

”AID 0" mm

 

   

Tar—tic? o! lacun—
5mm up
sums mac-non

  

Im_ I- l. A" [Is

 
     
  

3%
§§
3
a

  
 

rmlw.
euowmnou.

 
 
      

[mum

 
 

All!" All)

     
  

&
E
r-
- E
5
B

     
        
 
 

 
   
     
 
   

 
   
 

 

    

.,
I
U
U
I
.
'
U
.
' 4
ask?” “I, not. om: we cam In .
uni-own“: mums. tum cvcu :
“mo. mmmou mum mam .
—-‘— um "noun. an own: -
.-......-.._. uncut. mm :
"M” "' mcnoul. .
munm mu .
summ nuns
M'mlu I
s~mmmu ' I'M?!“ J
.._..__ amen .
m___ mxmm .
mm "mm:- :
—--- non sumac - __ ,
mums, mu. 33mm mp | ;
annuals. . mam
m (unm-
um.

inc-non