FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10341
19 February 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
POLAND

Analysis of General .Iaruzelski by 'PARIS HATCH' Noted
(Marc Ullnann; PARIS HATCH, 25 [be 81)...............

Solidarity Heaters Koualewski, Blunsztajn Interviewed
(Seweryn Blumszcajn, Zbigniew Kowalewski Interview;
LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR, 9-15 Jan 82)........ .....

Polish Officials Discuss Crisis With LII Visitors
(THE SUNDAY TIMES, 15 Nov 81)........................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

ANALYSIS OF GENERAL JARUZELSK! BY 'PARIS MATOi' NOTED
Paris PARIS MATCﬂ in French 25 Dec 8i p 23
[Article by Marc Ullmann: "On whose Team is Jaruzelski Playing?"]

lTextI “ho is deceiving whom in Poland? is the Party deceiving the people. ad-
vancing in military disguise? Or is the Army deceiving the Party, by establish-
ing a new regime? The iuture oi the country depends on the answer to this ques-
tion. if the Army is acting on behali of a regime which has been discredited. it
will lose first of all its reputation and then its honor. for sooner or later the
anger of the people will turn upon it. if. on the contrary. the Poles decide that
the 13 December coup d'etat was one of nationalist inspiration, it is probable
that the Catholic Church will in the end reach an understanding with the Army.

General Jaruzelski is doing everything possible to ensure acceptance of the idea
that the "military council ior national recovery" is entirely independent of the
Conmmnist Party and that its roots go deep in Polish history. The stage has been
set with particular care. when the General appears on television. he is in uni-
form. and the only symbol visible on the screen is the traditional eagle. i.e..
the emblem of Poland. Before and after his speech. a military band plays the
Polish national anthem. the Mazurka by Dabrowaki. which no one could confuse
with the international. And the television announcers are dressed as soldiers.

The same is true where the content oi the proclamations is concerned. The speech
given by the General on ii December lasted 25 minutes. and contained not the
slightest reieience to the Cenmmnist Party. in his dry voice. the new master of
Poland stressed the fact that the ”military commissars" would be appointed on all
levels of the State appatatus and the administration. as well as to key posts in
the economy. "They will have the right." the General specified. "to dismiss any
individual who does his work badly." That is all very nice. but the Poles instinc-
tively mistrust it.

it must be said that the General's career does not advance his cause. His parents
were members of the gentry. and during the war they were deported to the USSR
with other iamily members. in l965. they did not choose to return. but their 22
year old son Nojciech, for his part. did. He rejected the family nationalism. en-
listed in the Polish Army established on Soviet territory. and participated in
the repression of the Polish anticommunist underground fighters. At 37, he found
himself head of the political department of the Army. and then. using that as a

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

springboard. made a parallel advance in the military and communist hierarchies.
All of this appears to have made him the perfect apparatchik.

However, while he was Minister of Defense in 1970. General Jaruzelski opposed the
use of force against the first strikers in Gdansk. Ten years later. his attitude
had not changed. and he went so far as to order Polish soldiers not to iire on
Polish workers. Lech Halesa regards him as "one of the lesser evils." However, he
has real authority in the Army, and this is an important point for the Poles, be-
cause two—thirds of the population (see poll on p 36) believe that the Army repre-
sents the nation.

Those who know the General state that he is perfectly well aware of the Polish
reality and that his purpose is to govern with the blessing of the Church. This
is doubtless true. The derree establishing martial law, if indeed it prohibits
meetings. marches and even performances, makes an exception for religious cere-
monies and public worship. This represents implicit recognition oi the lart that
the Church plays a more important role in Poland than in any other country. That
role is not of recent date. Since the baptism of Poland in 966. the Church has
exercised official functions which are deep-rooted in the life of the nation and
the state. Most important. from 1772 to 1917. Poland was divided and occupied by
foreigners who were Protestants on the one hand, and Orthodox, on the other. it
was the Church which first of all encouraged armed struggle against these
foreigners, and then became the embodiment of passive resistance. keeping alive
the very idea of an independent Poland. Since 1939, the heroic tradition has been
taken up again: the Polish soul took refuge in the Church and did not emerge
again until 1980, to pursue the revolution.

This is why the reaction of the Pope, Sunday noon, can be termed historic. This
reaction, despite its caution, constitutes an appeal for compromise. "Polish
blood," John Paul 11 said, "must not be spilled. There was already too much blood
shed during World Har ll. Everything should be done to ensure the peaceful build-
ing of the peaceful future." The Primate of Poland. Monsignor Jozef Clemp. wel-
conwd the message wholeheartedly. He made a pilgrimage to the lamuus “latk Virgin
oi Clestochowa, and then. Sunday evening, he delivered a homily which will hence—
iorth serve as an unnflitial Catholic Charter. it was skilllully organizvd.
lniiinlly, this clergwmuieehned the people's anger and condemned the authorities
"who have ceased to he the authorities of dialogue." in a second phase. he urged
moderation and condemned revolt. "There is nothing more valuable than human Itle.
i beg you on my knees. brothel workers, not to sacrifice your lives." Finally. in
a third section, be issued n discreet appeal for national unity. "Let us all pray
for Poland, and that it will be possible to build a peaceiul iuture together."
The least one could say is that these addresses do not constitute an appeal for
violent resistance. The authorities are very clear on this point: they are
having the homily read and reread on television and the radio.

This whole week, the fate of Poland has been hanging. 0n the one hand, the trade
union networks are reorganizing secretly, and what General Jaruzelski calls the
"adventurers" are seeking to launch strikes. 0n the other hand, Honseignor Glemp
is feeling the national pulse and trying to establish some idea of the reality of
the military regime. if Jaruzelski is but a communist disguised as a soldier, if

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. is appointing other communists disguised as soldiers to key posts. it would
If he worthwhile to tarnish the age-old prestige of the Church by compromising
in negotinitiens which will servr as an alibi for dictatorship. a kind of

illnhoration with a regime which would keep its prisons full of Christians on

in pretext that they are trade unionists. Ii. on the Contrary. the I3 December
>up d'etal was but a nnnenvet to remind the Poles that they should not dream of
‘90 elections under the nose oi th Soviet regime. it will doubtless be possible
- Jrhivve a sort oI national unity in which. under the nominal authority of the
rmy. the Chufth. reasonable elements in the Party and the moderate elements in

ilidurity will haVr their say.

JCh a compromise would be acrvptahle to the USSR, which wants neither to be
looted nor to be forced to intervene with its own troops. It would be acceptable
3 the West which, as is commonly noted. does not want to "get involved.“ It

nuld even be acceptable to the Poles, who no longer know what to do with their
lcrych in an economy which has reached the ultimate in confusion and in which

he shops are empty.
OPYRIGHT: l°81 par Cogedipresse SA

1-?
3:3: Emu/21:6

. 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (lFl-‘lf‘llll. USE ONLY

POLAND

SOLIDARITY MEMBERS KOHALEUSKI, BLUHSZTAJN INTERVIEHED
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 9-15 Jan 82 p hS

[interview with Seweryn Blumsztaln and Zbignlew Kowalewski. members of Solidarity.
by Pierre Blanchet and Henri Frydlender: date and place not specified]

[Text] In this interview, Seweryn Blumsztajn and Zblgniew
Kowalewski. members of Solidarity. explain why Jaruzelaki's

coup d'etat caught their trade union by surprise. Blumsztajn

is a former member of the KOR [Committee for the Defense of the
Worker] and editor of the Solidarity Press Agency. Kowalewski is
a member of Solidarity's executive presidium for the Lodz region.

[Question] what is your opinion nearly 1 month after the coup d'etat in Poland?
"as the coup failed? Has it succeeded?

S. Blumsztajn: The putsch surprised Solidarity and the entire Polish society.
Solidarity was prepared for confrontation but did not think it would occur in that
form. We were expecting the Sejm to act on the government's special powers bill.

He were preparing for a general strike. Following the events in Bydgoszcz last
March, we had also prepared ourselves for a general strike. That strike was never
called, but we did feel enormously powerful at the time. The government no doubt
realized then that such a situation must not he allowed to recur. How do I evaluate
the coup? It can he said that its first phase, the military phase. was successful.

I am convinced, however. that even though people in Poland are returning to factories
and other places of employment. nobody is actually working. This is what we call
passive resistance. even if the government appears to have succeeded in stifling all
highly conspicuous forms of resistance. Furthermore. Jaruzelski has nothing to offer
the Polish people. either politically or, above all. economically.

[Question] 00 van think that part of the Polish people. exhausted by the tension and
difficulties. mav have welcomed the coup d'etat with a sense hf relief?

2. analewski: i don't think so. If the dictatorship has a hose. it consists of those
individuals connected with the party apparatus and the governmental administrative
system. directly or indirectly. I believe this government will be the most isolated

of all the governments that have followed one another in Poland. Especially if the

new team is unable to solve food and other supply problems.

A

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFl-‘If'lM. USE ONLY

[Question] In the West, particularly in the German press. we frequently read that
Solidarity had gone too far....

2. Kowaiewski: Stated in that manner. your question is abstract. You have to know
what Polish society was like. He had never experienced such a crisis. Nor had we
ever seen such a paralysis of the governmental administrative system. The government
was incapable of doing anything at all to solve food supply problems. Because of this.
Solidarity members were naturally induced to ask more of the government.

S. Blumsztajn: The authorities resisted. Last November. it was obvious to us that
the government was prepared to keep society in a crisis situation provided its. the
:overnment's. interests Herc protected. That is how Solidarity got the idea of a
referendum on the government's methods.

[Question] But you know full well that such a referendum is impossible in an East
European country.

5. slumsztnjn: Solidarity had no intention of subduing the government. He were even
talking about self-limitation of our movement. Our idea was to monitor government
activity. It was the idea that pressure from the civil society would enable the
imVernment to function more effectively. Yet, after 6 months had passed. it became
evident that the government was incapable of functioning. Solidarity was thus forced
by circumstances to broaden its demands. Let me point Out here that finally Solidarity
was no longer controlling, far from it, all of the strikes. But I would especially
like to underscore the danger in the argument that we had gone too far. Saying that
Poles were asking for too much is actually tantamount to asking Poland to renounce
freedom and independence in the interest of peace in Europe. Such a request is
morally very dubious. No one has the right to ask a people to abdicate its
independence and freedom. The Yalta agreements were signed by Western governments!
Not by l'ol.mt|.

[Question] What do you think of the strategy and prudence of the Catholic Church?

2. Kowalewski: The Church has appealed for calm. It has asked Poles to avoid
bloodshed. and we concur. The national strike committee's appeal was similarly
oriented. in most cases. workers left their places of employment to avoid bloodshed.
Having said that. let me add that the Church is not Solidarity.

[Question] How do you interpret the military junta's chauvinistic and anti-Semitic
propaganda? Does it have a chance of succeeding in Poland?

S. hlumsztain' Snlidnrltv had adopted the symbols of the Polish nation. such as the
flag and patriotic songs. The new government is trying to do the same thing. but in
roVerse lashiou hv aereutuatinp what is most reactionary and most chauvinistic.

It's a good thing for Poles. however. that this government is proving to be anti-Semitic.
fhal cliort will backfire. 1hr anti-Semitic ploy was attempted in 1968. It failed.

[Qucsilon] what do you uxpvcl Irom the West?

5. “lumuziujn: Nora! support. such as that given us by France. for example. But also
rrunnmiv pressure which ran hv most effective. All economic aid should be suspended.

FOR OFFK‘IAi. USE ONLY
FOR OFFII'IAI. I'SI". ONLY

except for food assistance. And food assistance must itself be supervised and
addressed particularly to the Church. Lastly. serious thought must be given to what
can be done in the informational field. The worst thing is silence. Remember
Cambodia where everything happened in silence.

[Question] All things considered. Solidarity was taken unaware. Did you make
mistakes in your estimate of the situation?

2. Kowalewski: He thought that things would move more slowly. We were not expecting
a sudden savage coup. We do not have the army's technical resources. A trade union
is not an army.

5. Biumsztajn: We were perhaps too self-confident. We perhaps believed that because
the whole population sided with us nothing could happen to us. And then it did

happen. A coup which. by its magnitude and number oi arrests, has been unmatched in
Poland for the past 35 years. Lastly. I must add that everything has its other side.
Solidarity is a democratic movement. a movement obsessed with democracy and transparency.
We had no stand—by leadership or secret army.

[Question] How do you picture the situation in Poland 6 months hence?

S. Blumsztajn: That will depend on the West's reactions. As for everything else,
Solidarity will rebuild itself. He did it before and after 1970 and 197]. There may
be some terrorism. That would he a shame. But hatred has now established itself in
Poland. He thought that a general agreement with the government authorities was
possible. There may possibly never be such agreement again.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "le Nouvnl Observateur"

80b]
C80: 3100/24b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

POLISH OFFICIALS DISCUSS CRISIS WITH UK VISITORS
PMI61703 London THE SUNDAY TIMES in English 15 Nov 81 p 9
[Hugo Young dispatch: ”Empty Shelves Tarnish Polish Reforma"]

[Excerpt] Warsaw--With extraordinary canteur, a group of Polish politicians spoke
last week to a group of British visitors to Hhrsaw and frankly described the worsen-
ing crisis in their country. Their admissions of failure were remarkable even by
Western standards, let alone coming out of the sealed world of the Soviet empire.

Some of them were positively heretical. "If there were free elections in Poland
next year." said one senior communist, "the Polish Communist Party would finish in
a quite insignificant position."

The meeting encompassed British politians. journalists and academics, with senior
Polish participants who included ministers from General Jaruzelski'a governntnt,
hard "independents" and allies of and spokesmen for Solidarity, the free trade
union that now covers 90 percent of the workforce.

Conversations took place on condition that the Poles should not be publicly named.
But they revealed the two most striking truths about Poland today: First, almost
total collapse with a certain honesty and in open disagreement. The seriousness
and intellectual integrity of the debate made current events inside the British
Labour Party seem like the posturing of trivial opportunists.

There was no disagreement or pretence, for example, about the disastrous state of
the Polish economy. Any propaganda of success has long ago been overtaken by food
queues. falling production. unmotivated workers and a colossal international debt.

What is union on now is an anonising argument about how to square Solidarity's
massive dissent with the Lonlnist requirement that the Comaunist Party--in Poland
n corrupt and dwindling hndv--should retain the "leading role" in the state.

The most authoritative party leaders offered us a sombre tour of their minds. The
dismantling of authority has induced in them a paralysing anxiety. and they believe
the leaders of Solidarity do not realise what fire the union is playing with. They
claimed to want to find "lasting room“ for an independent trade union, but Solidarity.
they said. was permeated with "extremist adventurers," who did not understand the
cardinal proposition that Poland "can only exist as a socialist state."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H”! ()I-‘Fif'i-‘l. i'Si‘ 0V! \

"Uur neighbours are watching us closely," said the most senior man at the table. '
"At first, events here were regarded with sympathy. But empty shelves don't nmke

us admirable." The Hungarian leader. Janos Kadar, had changed his mind, and was
now letting it be known that the Polish experiment would fail. The Russians,

having reluctantly approved the reforms thus far. were getting frightened by "anti-
Soviet tendencies: and "by the evidence that the party is losing its influence."

"Are we threatened by Soviet intervention?" he went on. "As far as we know. the
Soviet Union would hate it. But it will come if bloodshed occurs in Polish cities:
If. in other words, the ﬂungarian events of 1956 are repeated in Poland." if
Poland were destabilized, what would be the effects in the world? No Polish city
must become the Sarajevo of the 1980's."

Solidarity defended a different order of priorities. Its leaders show a cavalier
indifference to the international scene. When it was suggested that a breakdown
in Poland could end all lingering hopes of detente. the reply was: "To bad.“ For
the suffering people of Poland, they contend. this is the only chance there will
ever be of breaking with a monolithic political system and a failed economy.

when. for example, the Solidarity tactic of ”active strikes" (in British parlance,
factory occupations and work-ins) was scathingly attacked by party men as revealing
"total unreality," the Solidarity response was instant: "if active strikes frighten
the authorities, then good--perhaps it will make them sit up." it was peculiarly
Polish that the weightiest of the party men should have had the grace to smile in
acquiescence.

But Solidarity is not entirely uncalculating. The orthodox strike weapon it now
regards as useless. because its original purpose--to expose the lack of support

for the government--is fulfilled. and anyway the economic situation makes strikes
counter-productive. Lech Halesa is therefore touring the country trying to get the
people back to work.

This illustrates, however. how Solidarity itself is sucked into the crisis of
authority. The workers aren't all going back. The union leadership reckons it has
Just one remnant of moral capital left unspent, with which to impose its will on
the masses. it has decided to hold this in reserve, until later in the winter.

The party men. excluding the Stalinists. did not deny that changes had been
necessary. But they kept accusing Solidarity of wishing to take over the govern-
ment. to which the moderate union leadership had a logical and evidently sincere
report. How. they asked. can IO million people he turned into a political party?
And if they were. what would happen to the union and to the "opposition" role which
its idealistic founders originally saw as necessary?
"We declare ourselves openly as a special movement." said the Solidarity man. "He
are trying to get new institutions." here the debate reached a semblance of agree-
ment. The party itself wants new institutions but how far and how fast should these
institutions develop? And what are they calculated to destroy?

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-1"“ 'l.-\I. I‘SE 0N!)

Apart from its demands for reform of the media and the judiciary. and its proposals
for Yunnsluv-stvic hmrkers' cooperatives in the factories, Solidarity specified an
economic and social council to watch over economic decisions. This weekend urgent
efforts are being made to put something like this together. Assuming it is enough
to stave off the uprising that some sober Poles fear within a matter of weeks. there
are broadly two directions. each fraught with considerable danger, which are en-

meulhw Umcmmml.

"nu is that it splits and eni'eebles Solidarity. The union knows it is taking a
great risk in entering even this far into the foothills of government. Responsi-
bility without power could destroy its leaders. Pessimistic though this is. it
is probably more realistic than Solidarity's counter-claim: that the Communist
E‘artv itself will split and founder.

A second possibility is equally radical. Some see the council as an embryonic
second chamber of parliament-~rather like a reformed House of Lords. with repre-
sentatives of the different estates of the realm nominated to talk. but not to
decide. As long as the communists ran the main house, it was argued, a new one in
this form could secure Soviet approval while beginning to re-create the Polish
people's belief that they had a system could they believe in.

CuVYRlGlnH Times Xewspapcrs Limited. 198]

CS"; 2020/28
END

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY