' JR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10476

22 Apr" 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0H1CIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also frc1 news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS BEPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND Socwtoemu. AFFAIRS

(7000 12/82)

Comeu‘rs

NATIONAL

Poll Identifies weekneeeee in Soviet Meet tutor-etion System
(V. A. Chernove; ossmsrvmn NAUKI. V 888R: SKRIYA
1, 1,30an mucmco mm“. No 1, 1982)
Nev Hbrk on Soviet Public Adninietretion Reviewed
(1.. I. Volkov; OBSRCIESW NAURI V 8883: SBRIYA I,
vacuum mucmoco moumzm, No 1. 1982)

Second tonne of Antircligiouo AIucnec -
(P. H. Konerov, et el.; ARGUMENTY, 1981) ............. ...

Bricfe
Conference on Siberia Reported

REGIONAL

Ueubeliyev on Socialist Internetionelie-
(WPROSY Flwsoplr' we 81) 00000 OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOCOCOOOO.

Stetue of USSR'e Kurds Diecueeed
(Nornnn cigar; ARABIA, feb 82) ...........................

- a - (III - USSR - 35

FOD‘OFFKIALIEﬁZONLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

NATIONAL

POLL IDENTIFIBS HEAKNESSES IN SOVIET MASS INFORMATION SYSTEM

Moscow OBSNCRESTVINNYYE NAUKI V SSSR: SERIYA I, PROBLEM NAUCIINOGO W12!“
in Russian No l, 1982 pp 166-15“

[Review by V. A. Chernova of book "Hasaovaya Informatsiya V Sovetskom Pro-yah-
lennom Gorode: Opyt Koapleks. Sotsiol. lssled. [Mass Information in a Soviet
Industrial City: Attempt at an Overall Sociological Study] edited by 3. A. Crushin
and L. A. onikov, Politizdat, Moscow, 1980, 446 pages]

[Excerpts] The monograph contains five chapters, an introduction, and three appen-
dices. lt generalizes the result of an overall study which was conducted for 76
independent programs during the years 1967-1976 in Taganrog, Moscow, and Rostov-
na-Donu. As the authors note. they set themselves the goal of a systematic study
of the information structure and information processes in socialist society and
the creation of a unique introduction into the sociology of information. The book
is dominated by the fundamental level of the examination of such problems as:

1) mass information--the subject of the sociological study; 2) the diverse activi-
ties of the propaganda and mass communications media in producing and transmitting
information; 3) information consumption by different groups; 4) the information
level of the population and of its individual groups; 5) the activities of the
population in producing and transmitting information.

Despite the enormous volume of_the information which is produced and transmitted,
it is relatively monotonous and poor in TAGANROGSKAYA PRAVDA of 1968-1973: 25
percent of the social objects are practically not reflected at all, 50 percent--
are reflected extremely poorly, 75 percent--quite poorly, and only 25 percent

are treated with a high degree of effectiveness. Over a period of three months
the newspaper provided extremely negligible treatment of the work of health care,
goods supplies for the public, municipal services. public catering, and the work
of pre-school institutions. Fifty percent of the foreign information was devoted
to five out of 26 spheres of international life. The intensity of the treatment
of the basic population groups was net in proportion to their actual weight in
the structure of the city's inhabitants. The attention of the diverse information
media and channels is concentrated approximately on one and the same group of
objects of each type. (pp 152-156) The authors emphasize that the "systematic
and intensive treatment of one and the same issues and problems of the life of
society and the systematic transmission of the same elements of content (this
shows up in its most vivid form in the frequent repetition on radio and TV of

the same plays, films, and soforth) combined with an almost complete oblivion

FOIiOIFIClA1.lEI!(ﬂVLV
INHI(NHHC1A1.US£GDNLY

to many (an enormous number!) othera results. given the population's orienta-
tion toward the mass communications media as a most important source of social
information. in depriving the population of many elements of culture and in nar-
rowing the population's information needs. and so forth." (p 157) The authors
see the solution of the problem in improving the structure of editorial boards.
increasing the range of the specialization of journalists. improving their pro-
fessional training. expanding the range of their social interests, and introduc-
ing the methods of content analysis into the work practice of the mass communica-
tions media.

The picture of the real consumption of information which has been obtained by

the investigators is such that "the more the consumer is connected with the reali-
ty that is reflected in the newspaper, the less newspaper information he obtains
about it." (p 239) Thus, the materials on industry to which the communicator
gives his greatest attention, just like the issues of party life. are read less
than others, and the important city problems, for which there is a great interest
among the public are insufficiently reflected on the pages of the newspaper.

The newspaper reflects reality inadequately with regard to those ideas which are
developed in the various social groups during the process of direct practice.
This inadequacy manifests itself in a litk of correspondence with the judgments
(opinions) of mass consciousness, in the use of concepts and terms which are un-
clear and for this reason alien to the consciousness of the public. and in the
fact that the newspaper does not give sufficient attention precisely to those
problems of the city's life which are in the consciousness of the information
consumers in the forefront.

One of the studies recorded a lack of coordination in the interpretation of texts:
in seven out of ten cases the texts offered to the readers were interpreted inade-
quately to the purpose of the communication. (p 242) Stereotyped verbal formulas
and cliches are a serious obstacle to the assimilation of information. This prob-
lem is especially acute in the sphere of newspaper headings. Suffice it to say.
that for this reason the losses of TAGANROGSKAYA PRAVDA with the reading public
came to: more than 60 percent with the regard to the materials under the headings
of "Raw Materials for the Blast Furnaces" and "The Kolkhoz Lands Are Flowering";
more than 50 percent with regard to "Ahead of Schedule!" and "There Is An Annual
Plan!"; more than 40 percent for "Let Friendship Strengthen." "Rapid Rates," and
so forth. In addition the readers give the words different nuances which do not
correspond to each other with the result that the reading of a word turns out

to be not only different in coloring but also in meaning.

The study of the attitude toward the information ”in term: of confidence in the
existing official channels of information, satisfaction with the information which
is provided, and motives for preferring one or another channel of information,

and so forth" leads to the conclusion that the prestige of the mass communications
media and the mass propaganda media is high among the population, and that the
attention of readers is attracted by materials which elicit a deliberately posi-
tive attitude toward themselves; the agreement (non-agreement) of the public with
the content of information is not marked by stability and depends first of all
upon the problem being discussed.

IKIICIﬂﬂCIAl.U§E(HNLY
From the point of view of the character of the consumption of mass infatuation

a "final typology" of the city population is given in the work: 1) a group of
extremely intensive consumption (1.5 percent of the city population); 2) a group

of highly intensive consumption (6 percent); 3) a group of intensive consumption
(35 percent); a) a moderate consumption group (25 percent); 5) a low consumption
group (29.5 percent); 6) an extremely low consumption group (2.5 percent); 7) a
group of the complete nonconsumption of mass information (.5 percent of the city
population). On the average. during an average day there is approximately 30 hours
of information on the channels of the press. radio. television. and mass prope-
ganda media per inhabitant of Taganrog.

This study. like others. showed a very small degree of dependence by information
behavior upon the demographic and social characteristics of the public. The char-
acteristics of peoples' activities in information consumption appears as a factor
which actively differentiates the population: the intensity of the consumption

of information is directly proportional to the degree of the development of a

need for information, particularly to the level of the awareness of these needs.
The level of the awareness of information needs among the surveyed public was un-
even. 0n the basis of the frequency of the coincidence between actual and verbal
behavior by the respondents the investigators broke the public down into four
groups. The terms awareness and unawareness were not used very strictly. but
quite justifiably. since the limits of their use were taken note of: the degree
of correspondence between declared and actually satisfied interests. At the basis
of the stratification of the public are such characteristics of the subject of
information behavior as participation in public work. the degree of involvement
in the system of mass information. and the fundamental characteristics of the
consciousness of people (system of value orientations. characteristics of linguis-
tic consciousness. and others).

COPYRIGHT: lNlON AN SSSR. l982

2959
CSO: 1800/382

3
FOI‘OIFICIAI.UBIIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAT! MAI.

NW PORK on SOVIB'I‘ PUBLIC AMMSMIOII mm

Moscow ossscnzsrvmms NAUKI V $88!: 8331“ 1, ”031.8!!! ammo momma
in Russisn No l, 1982 pp 154-157 J

[Review by L. B. Volkov of book "lhucl'usya Organisatsiys Upravlncheskogo Truds"
[The Scientific Organisation of Hensgerisl Work] by A. A. Atayev, Bkononih.
Moscow,l980,163 pages]

[Test] The book which is provided with s preface consists of an introduction.
three chapters, and a conclusion.

0n the basis of the rich practical work experience of the apparatus of the Council
of Ministers of the Dagestsn A888, it is stated in the preface which was written
by I. Ii. Solodovnihov, the nonogreph provides a detailed exsninstion of the or-
ganization of nsnagasent. the role of the correct use of structures and functions
and of intonation, end of the problens of work with cadres.

In the first chapter, "Theoretical Principles of a Study and Analysis of the 0:-
ganisstion of Labor in State Institutions," on the basis of an analysis of Lenin's
theses concerning the role of scientific lsbor organisation in state nensge-ent,
the idea is put forward of the necessity for a direct creative application of the
theoretical principles of scientific labor organisation when nethodologies for
analysing the work of the apparatus of concrete state institutions are developed
and introduced. This idea is illustrated by ears-plea iron the practice of or-
ganizing analytic and organisational work in the adninistration for the affairs
of the Coincil of Ministers Dageaten A883.

For the purpose of developing a sethodology in 1970 the author conducted a pre-
lininsry study of "all of the aspects of the work of the state adninistration
agencies of the Dagestsn Assn, and in 1974 of the Councils of Hinisters of the
individual autonomous republics of the ISPSR." (p 23) In the process of this work
classifiers were ude up which anbrsce the structure of the cadre contingaat, the
types and torus of work, and also the "notivea" for work and the relative indi-
cators oi the work of the apparatus' workers.

In making up the classifiers an attenpt was ends to correlste the individual
groups of the cadre contingent to the functions perforned by then, and to rational

MOMMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and irrational expenditures of tine for various functions. and to discover the

real significance of the distinctive characteristics relating to different func-
tions.

The special characteristic of the nethodology which has been developed by the
author is connected with the inclusion in the classifiers of both rational and
irrational types of work and of both creative and non-creative natives. and so
forth. This nethod nade it possible to coapose a quite detailed empirical pic-
ture of the work of the apparatus and to discover the real correlations between
the different types and foras of work and their results and resources expendi-
tures. but in order to achieve this effect it was necessary, in addition to

the actual data which had been discovered. to work out average normative data

for the individual types of work with the help of expert appraisals and con-
puters. This data was coordinated with the worker respondents. The book cites
tables of actual and normative data and proposes a aethodology for calculating
the coefficients of the use of working tins. and also "coefficients of efficiency"
which are calculated on the basis of a determination of the relationship between
planned and actual tine expended for the perfornance of individual functions (the
preparation of decrees. the fulfill-ant of assignments, and so forth).

The second chapter, “An Improvement of the Organization of the Bconoaic Manage-
ment Bork of the Council of Ministers ASSR" contains a description of the dif-
ferent netth of realising it differentiated for individual forns of work, and
some proposals on iaproving it. A nuaber of these proposals which are ained, in
the author's opinion, at increasing the practical thrust of the work of the Coun-
cil of Ministers are, as is emphasized in the preface, of a discussion character.
Along the reconendations which concern the organization of the neetings of the
Council of Ministers is the mggestion to linit the circle of participants solely
to people who have a direct relationship to the issue being mined, and, at
the sane tine. to invite "in the event of necessity" people who are not its neu-
bers for participation in the neetings. The author points to the necessity for
"establishing a strict procedure under which non-unbera of the government are
able to participate in the discussion only of those issues for which they have
been invited." (p 63) The question is raised of regulating the periodicity of
the meetings of the Council of Ministers of an ASSRnonce a quarter.

Dealing with the character of the aestings thenselves, the author enphasizes the
importance of discussing at th- opposing points of view. different decision var-
iants, and the weighing of all "pros" and "cons." "The Chair-nan of the Council

of Ministers must not impose his opinion, naking use of the authority granted him.
On the contrary. he nakes naximn efforts to convince the nenbers of the govern-
ment by argument. if he is confident that it is his point of view which is cor-
rect." (p 46) Various approaches and points of view which make it possible for
everyone to asks his own contribution to the decision of an issue does not get in
the way of the subsequent unity of opinions and actions. When decrees are adopted
by voting, the nanbers of the government who sometimes remain in the ninority
"exercise a certain influence on the remaining nenbers of the governnent, espe-
cially on the chair, and coapel then to be sore cautious and attentive to the
opinions of others." (pp lob-(.9).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

In the chapter there is also an maination of sons of the problems in the work
of the presidiuns of the Councils of Hinisters of the A881! whose decrees have
the sane force as the decrees of the full Councils of Ministers. There is a
detailed exanination of the interrogatory procedure for adopting decisions which
the author regards in a number of cases as practically advisable and effective.

Data is cited in this chapter which points to the aaount of the actual workload
of the individual elements of the apparatus of the Council of Ministers of the
A583 and of the individual nubers of government and which takes it possible to
arrive at a judgment about the structure of the problens being considered and
about the initiative level of the agencies being studied. (in the basis of this
data and of work experience the author makes suggestions on inproving the struc-
ture of the work of the Councils of Ministers and their apparatuses. The chief
idea in these suggestions is s refine-eat of and a strict conplianca with the
competence of each elenent and a profound professional study of all of the issues
being considered and decided upon.

The third chapter is "The Scientific Organization of Labor and the Efficient Use
of the Working Time of hployees." The central issue of the topic being con-
sidered is the usefulness and effectiveness of the use of the working tine of the
workers of the state apparatus. The book takes note as a defect of the "nosaic
character" of the working tins of employees, their constant switching free one
unresolved issue to another. and their great time expenditures in waiting. The
introduction of scientifically substantiated technological work schemes, of
thought-out correspondence circulation, self photography, organisational equip-
ment. and other scientific methods have made it possible to greatly ieprove the
work of the apparatus of the Council of Ministers of the' Dagestan SSR, although
they did not result in the complete elimination of the above-described shortcom-
ings. The. author regards the constant tendency to overload executive workers
and specialists with technical functions out of their range as being one of the
nest difficult defects to eliminate.

The inportance and cannon nature of the nanegerical functions of the Council of
Ministers of all levels, it is pointed out in the conclusion, requires a constant
scientific analysis of the organisation of their work in order to strengthen "the
beneficial influence of the top actuating and executive elements of state power
on the acconplisl'ment of economic tasks."

COPYRIGRT: INION AN SSSR, 1982

2959
680: 1800/381

MOWUSEONLY
5200“!) 1581! OF ANTIBBIJGIOUS WC

lbscow ARGUMENT! in Russian 1981 (signed to press 21 Aug 81) pp 1. 48—49. 58-60.

[Title page. table of contents and excerpts fro- boolt "Argmsnts". edited by
PM. Konarov. 8.1. Lissvtsev and P.V. Hsksrtsev. Politizdat. 200,000 copies.

127 pages]
[Excerpts] Contents Page

Introduction for readers ....... 3

Akhmdov. A. Under the Flag of Islan (Certain Theses of Hanist-Leninist
Theory in the Distorting Hirror of muslin Palsifiers) ...... .. .... S
Gol'denberg. H.A. Why Does the Vatican Need an Institute of Atheists? . .. .. 37

Balevits. Z. ”This is Vatican deio.... ..... lob
Zots. V.A. and Higovich. 1.1. The Truth of history and the Myths of

the P‘1.1f1". .00....OOOOOGOOIOIOOOOO0Oit0.0.00000000000000IOOOD...O... so
Dnitruk.K.Ye. AﬂopelessWager ......................................... 78
Gol'denherg. ILA. The Religious Fulcrum of Zionisn ... 96

Nikitin. V. lnthe Footstepsof the [inﬂux Klan .... 117

After John Paul II assuled the papal throne Radio Vatican patently reinforced

its attempts to oppose the legitimate process of the atrophy of religion in
socialist society. The reasons for this can be interpreted in different ways.
The fact that that a cardinal from s socialist country was elected as Pontiff

of Rome refuted the slanderous myth that the chuch there "is silent. western
journalists acconpanying the Pope on his visit to Poland (June 1979) "discovered"
there a religiosity free from sanctinony end demonstrative pomp and peculiar

to the parishes of the bourgeois world. To the point. the new head of the
Catholic Church strongly advertises precisely the kind of religiosity that
exists under the conditions of a socialist society. forgetting. however. that

it would be in vain to mechanically transfer it to the "free world" where there
is no true spiritual freed m—a freedon to make a deliberate choice between
religion and atheism. At ! meeting with teachers and students fro: the Catholic
Universir" in Luhlin on 6 June 1979, he said that people whose world outlook

is determined by conjunctural considerations and who choose it not by proceeding
from the voice of their own conscience are people who are dangerous and unnecessary

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH'IUAI. use own

both to the church and. he remarked. to the "other side." The Pope has also
repeatedly offered the assertion that the church does not desire privileges

for itself. It is not. however, understood how all these assertions tally

with the stateaent that freedom for atheistic propaganda is tantamount to an
infringement on freedom of conscience. 0n the contrary. it is precisely this
that creates the essential prerequisites for a conscious choice between religion
and atheism.

*tiit

In contrast to his predecessors. the new head of the Vatican regards their
flimsy claims more favorably. The very choice of Karol Uojtyla by the Pope

in Rome was the cause of great joy and greater hopes among the Uniate leadership.
Immediately after the synod, the secretariat of Cardinal Slipoy sent a greeting
to the new pope in which it stated that the leadership of "the Ukrainian Catholic
Church" hopes for his understanding and support since he. they say. has come
from the hierarchy of a "martyred" church and knows how to suffer. to be
persecuted and to have no rights. The letter expressed the conviction that

John Paul II will act decisively in defense of the "divine rights of man."

It particularly drew attention to the fact that this is what the "Ukrainian
Catholic Church" and people need most of all.

It should be noted that the the new Pope is justifying these hopes. whereas
Paul VI was not in favor of the idea of creating a patriarchy for the "Ukrainian
Catholic Church." and refused permission for the convocation of a synod of

the Uniate bishops, the new Pope immediately gave this permission. Literally
in November 1978 the bishops of the Ukrainian Catholic Church held their
meeting. after which the Pope received them and had a long audience with them.
According to the official report, at the meeting there was an examination of

the position of th ”ukrainian Catholic Church" and a document was agreed on
this matter and handed to the Pope during the audience.

On 12 March 1979 the Pope sent a message to Slipoy and the Uniate hierarchy
in connection with the preparations for the millenium of the Christianization
of Rus'. In this document the thought was expressed on the Catholic sources
of Christianity in Rus'. and the "deep" religiosity of the Ukrainians, and
the history of the Brest Union and of Greece-Catholicism as a whole was falsified
and its role in the social development of the Ukrainian people extolled. In
the message the Uniate was illegally identified as the national adjunctum.
and it spoke of some kinds of "sufferings" and "trials" of the nonexistent
Craeco-Catholic Church after World War II and stated that it should "enjoy
respect and religious freedom." and an attempt was made in connection with
the millenium of the introduction of Christianity in Rus' to activate all
religious life in the republic.

Along with this message. the new Pope took a number of other steps aimed at
suporting the Uniats. Re several times received Slipoy. the Canadian Metropolitan
[Haksin Germanyuk]. the Argentine bishop [Andrey Sopelyuk] and other Uniate
hierarchs. The thesis put forward in the program encyclical "Redemptor hominis“
(1978) that "No borders exist for Christ" and the Pope's support for a Catholic
Church of the Ukrainian rite. that is. the Uniate Church which dissolved itself

in 1946 at the Synod of Lvov, have a definite meaning in the context of bourgeois
anti-Soviet propaganda.

*tttt

8
FINI(Mﬁﬂ(JA1.USEIDNLY
The petty intrigues of the Zelenetskiys. the Slipoys and the Yanivs and other
supporters of fascism about the Polish-Ukrainian past cannot be regarded as
anything but pharisaical. Like the friendship of the Polish people with the
entire Soviet people. the friendship of the Polish and Ukrainian peoples came
about and was strengthened and aade indissoluble in the cannon struggle against
the exploiters. in the terrible years of revolutionary battles. in the general
heroic struggle against the Hitlerite invaders. In the struggle for this
friendship the peoples of the USSR and of Poland have always been on the same
side of the barricades. but the present "sponsors" of cooperation with Polish
antisocialist circles are on the other side. along with the deadly enemies of
the Poles and the Soviet people.

From what has been said it is obvious that in the Vatican. just as in the time
of Pope Benedict XV and his successors Pius XI and Pius XII. as before the
Uniate hierarchy is regarded as an instrument of anti-Soviet intrigue. as a
special kind of clan of the obedient executors of the will of the papacy. which
under the guise of "nissionary work" is to insure the penetration of Catholicism
to the East. In this connection it is iepossible not to draw attention to the
noisy propaganda campaign organized by the Uniate pilgrims and their sponsors

in the Vatican around the personality of the former Polotsk-Vitebsk Uniate
archbishop Iosafat Kuntsevich (1530-1623). well known for his strong-arm
methods in bringing Catholicism to the area and for his cruel reprisals against
the clergy and belivers of the Orthodox Church. In December last year Pope

John Paul II also joined this campaign. Speaking to participants at the "synod"
of the Ukrainian Catholic Church. he named Kuntsevich "an apostle of the unity
of the churches" and "a martyr for his faith" who. if you please.' 'as it were
sealed with his own blood" the Union of Brest in 1596.

Historical analogues are always dangerous. They are triply dangerous when they
pursue a definite political goal and are designed to resurrect old bankrupt
ideas. To set a "nartyr's" halo above a bellicose Jesuit who more than 350
years ago was killed by the revolting working folk of Vitebsk who had endured
gross social and national-religious oppression and to turn his name into a
banner for the struggle to resurrect the cadavers of the Union will scarcely
succeed. These times are gone!

Despite the widely advertised denial of the flagrant attacks on the theory and
practice of Herxism-Leninism and the Vatican's desire. on the official level.

to draw a veil over its anticommunist attitudes using religious terminology.

the direction of the present political course of the apostolic city is illustrated
also by the fact that during the 2 years of his pontificate. John Paul II. while
repeatedly declaiming for the more active penetration of clerical ideology into
the socialist countries. has been unable to find the words to condemn U.S.
imperialism and its aggressive militarist policy which has led to the present
exacerbation of the the sitauion on our planet. The silence--we say it with
forthrightness-is quite indicative.

tittt

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

Without a careful concealment of its true sins. any antipopular political
movement would be dead before it was born. This applies in full to Zionism-
the ideologues of chauvinism and a policy of anticonunism by the grande Jewish
bourgeoisie organically linked with inter-nationalist imperialist circles. It
would be no exaggeration to say that the supertaak of Zionist propaganda is
precisely this-~to conceal the social genealogy of Zionism and prevent Jewish
workers (and not just Jewish workers, either) from seeing its true class
penetralia. The "best minds" that determine the course of. the World Zionist
Organization consider one important method of masking and "sanitizing" the
theoretical postulates of Zionist doctrine and the practical actions stemming
from it on the explotation of "higher values" is through the Judaic religion.

9642
CSO: [800/327

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

CONFERENCE ON SIBERIA REPORTED—0n 13-15 October 1981, an all-union conference
was held in Novosibirsk on the problen "Siberia in the Past, Present and
Future." It was arranged by the History Departnnt end the Institute of His-
tory of the USSR Acsdeny of Sciences, the Institute of History, Philology and
Philosophy (N1?!) of the Siberien Depsrteent of the USSR Acedeny of Sciences
to coincide with the 600th anniversary of Siberia beconing a part of Mesis.
The conference use opened with introductory rensrke by Vice President of the
USSR Acadeey of Sciences Acedenicisn V.A. Koptyug. NIP? director Acadenicisn
A.P. Okladnikov presented s report ”Pour Centuries of Siberian History." The
Russian state and the opening up of Siberia (end of 16th to beginning of 19th
century) were the subject' of a telk by V.A. Aleksandrov. The econonic de-
velopment of Siberia Hes described by Academician A.G. Agmbegyan, director of
the Institute of Scone-ice and Organisation of Industrial Production of the
Siberian Departuent of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. [Excerpt] [Hoscov
VOPROSY 1810311 in Russian No.2.l’eb 82 p 1“) 7697

COPYRIGHT: .Iedatel'etvo "Prsvds", "Voprosy istorii”, 1982
C80: 1800/351

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUBALIYBV 0N SOCIALIST m‘raasanonausn
Moscow VOPROSY mosorn in Russian no 12, Dec 81 pp 10 - 23

[Article by T. U. Usubeliyev, first secretary of the Kirghiz (Jo-mist Party
Central Connittee: "The Leading Role of the CPSU in Strengthening the Unity of
the International and the National in the Soviet Ray of Life"]

[Excerpts] The Soviet nation is a fundamentally new historical coll-unity the

likes of which humanity has not knew before. The nultinational associations,

which now exist in the capitalist world, are torn -- just as in past social forma-
tions -- by antagonistic contradictions which have been engendered by the exploits-
tion of some classes by others, of backward nations by stronger ones. The Soviet
nation radically differs from then since it is a conunity which is free of antag-
onist-s of this type and which is based on the mutual trust, unbreakable friendship
and fraternal cooperation of all working classes and social layers, nations and
nationalities.

The dialectic of the whole and of the part is clearly demonstrated in the relations
between the Soviet nation as an international cownity and the nation and nation-
alities which compose it. The Soviet nation itself is not a social and ethnic
connunity which is similar to the nations or nationalities. At the same tine,

it is not a nation-less formation and not an alternative to socialist nations.

In this connection, the attenpts of bourgeois ideologists to depict the Soviet
nation as a "Russian-Soviet nation",in which the ethnic features of non-Russian
nations have allegedly been dissdved and disappeared are completely groundless.

In actuality, the Soviet nationis an international comity in which the un-
breakable unity of the nations and nationalities, who are preserving their distinct-
ive ethnic features, is being cemented by the social unity of all workers regard-
less of their national affiliation. Each of the nations and nationalities, which
compose the Soviet nation, is an integral part of it; and the Soviet nation is

a social and international whole- in relation to them. The interests of the Soviet
nation -- an international comity -- do not contradict the national interests
of any one of the national ethnic con-unities which cospose it, but enbody in them-
selves their main substance.

It is also impossible to six up the features and signs which are inherent in all
nations with those which are only characteristic of nations of a certain historical

type and which indicate their social and class nature. Thus, social unity. collect—
ivisn in relations between people, and the subordination of the workers' vital

12
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
activity to their common interests -- whose most consistent spokesman is the
working class -- are common to all socialist nations. These signs, which typify
the essence of socialist nations,are a concrete and historical commonality which
is international. It expressesthe vital interests and communist ideals of the
working class with whose origin the principles of internationalisa were developed
for the first time in history. It is necessary to emphasize that the internation-
al features and qualities, which characterize the social and class nature of the

socialist nations and their way of life, are the determining ones in their develop-
ment.

however. there is not only a commonality but also a peculiarit), which distinguish-
es one nation from the others, in the social and class nature of a nation and in
its ethnic features. V. l. lenin emphasized that it is extremely important in the
struggle for the socialist reconstruction of society "to explore, study, look for,
divine, and catch national peculiarities and national specifics in the concrete 1
approaches of each country to the solution of a unified international task ...."
Hithin such a multinational country as pre-revolutionary Russia it was very nec-
essary to bring out the peculiarities for leading the various nations, which
inhabit it, to the solution of the international task of constructing socialism.

As is known, one of the most important was the question concerning the peculiarities
in a transition to socialism by nations which had not undergone the capitalist
stage of social development. In justifying the opportunity for such a transition.
V. l. Lenin pointed out specific ways to realize the general conformities to law

of socialist construction, considering such peculiarities of the backward nations
as their underdeveloped economy, poor class differentiation, and the obstruction

of the people's consciousness by the remnants o f patriarchal and tribal notions
and religious ideology. In accordance with these peculiarities, specific measures
and transition forms: such as land and water reforms, tribal kolkhozes, etc. in
the economic sphere; peasant councils in the area of the political organization

of society; and others, were used in the practices of socialist construction in
Central Asia and Kazakhstan.

With all its peculiarities, however, the path -- which all the nations and nation-
alities of the Soviet Union followed to socialism -- was a common one for them.
This path meant developing the economy based on socialist industrialization and
the collectivization of agriculture, the improvement of social relationships based
on the growth of the leading role of the working class and the strengthening of
its union with the peasants and the intelligentsia. the unfolding of socialist
democracy and the development of a culture which was varied in its national forms
but unified in its international content.

The friendship of USSR peoples was, is and will be a very important feature in the
socialist way of life. It ensures their victorious movement toward communism. The
revolutionary transformations which have taken place in Kirghizia with the compre-
hensive help of the people of fraternal republics,especia11y the great Russian
people, are a convincing witness to this. It is possible to say without exagg-
eration that the unselfish and generous fraternal help of the Russian working class
and of the Russian people in eliminating the actual inequality of the formerly
backward outlying nationality districts is a great international exploit and a
concrete embodiment of the CPS" Leninist nationality policy.

13
FOR(Mﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(NVLY
Socialist Internationalist: was and remains an objective force in the development
of Soviet Kirghizistan and the other fraternal republics and the source of our
successes. The workers of Soviet Kirghizistan, just as all Soviet people, know
this; and all their achievements in the construction of comunism are linked with
the further deepening of the process of internationalizing the economy and social,
political, and spiritual life.

i * *

Social and political activity occupies a special place among the components of a
socialist way of life since the role of the popular masses as the creators of
history and the scale and depth of the consciencious creativity of millions of
workers are most clearly revealed in it. The qualitatively new nature of the
historical process under the conditions of a connunist structure is distinctly
revealed here. It is completely natural that the CPSU, as the decisions of its
26th congress once again clearly testify concerning this, and the columnist and
workers parties of the other countries in the socialist comonwealth are devoting

a great deal of attention to developing the social and political aspect of the
socialist way of life.

As the scales and complexity of the tasks in columnist construction increase, the
importance of subjective factors in their fulfillment grows more and more. This
requires an intensification of the role of the party, the common state, and the
public organizations of the workers; and an intensification of the activity of
worker collectives and of each Soviet citizen. The importance of the unity of

the international and the national in the sphere of social and political activity
is also growing correspondingly. This dictates the necessity for a further streng-
l honing of the social unity of the Soviet people and of all the nations and
nationalities forming them.

A developed socialist society is characterized by a high level of social uniformity.
This is reflected first in the fact that its social foundation is now the indestruc-
tible union of the working class, the kolkhoz peasants, and the peoples' intellig-
entsia-- which became possible thanks to the enormous changes in the make-up of
these basic social groups of workers and as a result of which they drew considerably
closer together in their fundamental qualitative indicators. Second, a uniform
social structure was affirmed for all Soviet republics. The fundamental feature

of this uniformity is the fact that the leading position in the social and political
life of the republics belongs to the working class -- the social nucleus of all

ilw Soviet people and of each of the nations and nationalities composing them.
Third, a uniform social structure took shape not only in all of our Soviet republics
in general with their multinational populations but also in the indigenous

nations and nationalities representing them. This is especially important in
strengthening the unity of the international and the national in the workers'
socialist way of life. Fourth, the ratio of the urban and rural population has

been brought considerably closer in all republics. This has great significance

for developing a socialist way of life since the city is the bearer of the most
developed state and public property in its industrial form. The vanguard of the
workers -- the industrial working class and the great bulk of cultural workers -—
operates here; and the predominant number of party organizations and party meabers
are concentrated here. All this permits the city to be -- in many respects -- the

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trail-blazer of what is new and progressive in a socialist way of life. Consequent-
ly until the essential differences between the city and the village are overcome,

the urban way of life will be the leading one in respect to the way of life of the
rural population. Fifth, the active involvement of women in all spheres of public
life has become typical of all republics and all nations and nationalities in the
country. This is especially remarkable and important for the republicsof Central
Asia and Kazakhstan where the position of women having no rights in society had

been cultivated for centuries.

The fundamental principle which insures the steady strengthening of the unity of
the international and the national in the social and political sphere of vital
activity and in the Soviet way of life on the whole, is the principle of democra-
tic centralism. The correct combination of centralism and democracy is an indis-
pensahle condition for this. The slightest retreat from this principle inevita-
bly [made either to strangling the initiative of the masses, production collectives
and individual persons -- i.e., to bureaucratic distortions of this principle;

or to an overstated and unjustified exaggeration of local interests to the detri-
ment of common ones. The 26th CPSU Congress directed party organizations toward

an uncompromising struggle against perversions of this type.

t t i

The unity of the international and the national, which is characteristic of the
Soviet way of life is also demonstrated in its spiritual sphere, in spiritual
culture. In this connection, it is necessary to pay attention to some methodolog-
ical items which have important significance for disclosing the correlation
between a way of life and a spiritual culture.

First, since a way of life is an integral characteristic of the activities of all
of society's subjects and is unthinkable without the-spiritual -- especially the
ideological and moral -- aspects, a spiritual culture itself is in a certain res-
pcct one of the necessary elements of a socialist way of life and an important
structural component of it.

Second, the place of culture in a way of life does not boil down to the use of
spiritual values, but assumes -— an this is the main thing -- creative activity
to create them -— work in which the active vital position of the Soviet people is
expressed.

Third, the national and specific is demonstrated to greater degree in spiritual
culture than in the social economic and social political spheres. This is linked
with the relative independence of national traditions, national psychology and
language. The ever more solid combination of the international and the national
in the spiritual sphere, which is prhmarily caused by such objective factors as
the development of the country's unified national economic complex and the
strengthening of the Soviet peoples social and political unity, is a character-
istic feature of mature socialist.

Fourth, although the spiritual side of a way of life is defined in the final
analysis by economic and social factors, it is at the same time not passive, but
plays an active role in the development of these factors.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth in the role of the way of life's spiritual sphere is caused by the
workers' ever deeper mastery of Marxist-Leninist ideology. The fornation of the
broad aasses' world outlook based on it and the development of their political
awareness arethe main content c' the party's ideological and indoctrinational work.

Socialist collectivisn occupies the central place in the system of the Soviet
people's convictions and moral qualities which form the spiritual features of
their way of life. Collectivisn and internationalisn in the convictions and
behavior of the Soviet people are inseparably linked with society's concern for
the welfare and all—round development of each person -- this concern is charact-
eristic of the socialist way of life. The essence of real huaanisn, which is
opposed to the individualistic tendencies and racial prejudices which permeate
the bourgeois way of life, lies in this.

Fraternal solidarity between workers, regardless of class and national affilia-
tion.engenders in each one of then confidence in their future and in the further
undeviating improvement of the conditions and content of their vital activity.
This optinisn of the Soviet people is radically different fron the fear of the
future and the pessimistic attitudes which the bourgeois way of life creates.

The confidence of the aenbers of Soviet society in their future is based on the
realization of the fact that it is being created by their combined efforts and by
their joint creative activity. The effectiveness of this activity, which is
directed toward the common good, essentially depends on the active vital position
of each one of its participants. This is also a distinctive feature of the
socialist way of life and an iuportant factor in its continuous inprovenent.

All these features, which characterize the spiritual side of a socialist way of
life, make up the general -- the international which is inherent in all socialist
nations and nationalities and which determines the nature of the process of draw-
ing together and the interaction of their national cultures.

Under the conditions of socialisn, the interaction of the national cultures of the
peeples of our country has permitted the separation and narrow~mindedness,which
was typical of then during the pre-revolutionary period, to be overcome and has
allowed them to enter onto a wide path of prosperity. Thus, under the beneficial
influence of the culture of the Russian and other fraternal peoples,the ancient
and distinctive culture of the Kirghiz people not only received powerful develop-
ment, but also acquired new forns which were unknown to it before. For exanple,
the Kirghiz people did not have an operatic art, but now they do. They did not
have classical dancing, but now the Kirghiz ballet is known far beyond the liaits
of the republic. Painting is being developed, and applied art has been signific-
antly enriched. The works of Kirghiz writers, musicians and cinenatographers
have received wide fame.

Therefore, the assertions of bourgeois ideologists that the drawing together of
national cultures leads to the extinction of national distinctions and to their
unification and leveling have been deprived of any basis. It is just the opposite.
It is only thanks to this drawing together that it is possible to reveal and
develop everything that is valuable. The richer that each national culture is,
the greater will be its contribution to the treasury of a culture which is cannon
to all nsnkind. L. I. Brezhnev has pointed out: "Any national culture, which is

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
buttoned up in itsglf, inevitably losses and sheds the features of its commonality
thh all mankind".

The international is an expression of the ideology, interests. yearnings, and
historical goals of the working class. Based on the ideology of the working class,
the development of elements common to all mankind in the spiritual culture of

each nation receives unlimited scope. Everything, which hinders their development,
is eliminated thanks to this ideology.

The Russian language as the language of international intercourse has enormous
importance in the intensive interaction and mutual enrichment of national cultures.
The mass yearning to study the Great Russian language has indeed become a new
social and general phenomenon which is exerting a deep influence on all aspects

of the socialist way of life.

The broad spreading of the Russian language and its ever growing role in the
development of the Soviet people are two of the clear manifestations of the unity
of the international and the national and an important feature of the international
nature of the Soviet way of life. For the first time in history, the common
language of a multinational state - the Russian language -- has become not only
the language of daily intercourse but also, speaking in the words of V. l. Lenin,
the language of the fraternal unity of peoples. In this regard. the maximum
favorable conditions for the development of the national languages and for the
flowering of the national cultures of USSR peoples are being created. The role,
which the Russian language as a means of international intercourse for the peoples
of the USSR is playing. can justifiably be called historically unique. This
objective evaluation is supported by the fact that the Russian language is
gradually becoming the means of interstate intercourse within the framework of

the world socialist commonwealth and one of the major world languages in many
international forums and congresses.

Under the conditions of nature socialism which is characterized by a growth in
the cooperation, mutual assistance and friendship of the country's nations and
nationalities and by their unprecedentedly intensive intercourse, the voluntary
use of an international language is an urgent necessity. The Russian language
well serves the cause of the international unity of Soviet nations and national-
ities, the improvement of the country's economy and the mutual enrichment of
national cultures; and contributes to the successful solution of the tasks of
constructing communism.

The representatives of more than 80 nationalities, who -- in maintaining contacts
between themselves in the Russian language -- are increasing the republic's
contribution to the general struggle for communism through their combined work,
live and work as a single friendly family in Soviet Kirghizistan.

The Kirghiz people, just as the other nations and nationalities of our country,
have been firmly convinced of the constructive role of the Russian language by
their own experience. The Russian language has opened up for the Kirghiz the
path to knowledge, science, technolosy. and the heights of native and world
culture; brought the Kirghiz people closer to all the fraternal peoples of our
motherland; and given them an opportunity to master the immortal teachings of
Marxism-Leninism and the theory of scientific communism.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Russian language is exerting an enormous effect on the development of the
Kirghiz language just as on the languages of the other Soviet people. The
creation of a national written language, the enrichment of vocabulary, the
formation of terminologies -- especially public, political, scientific, and
technical, and the development of their own expressive and artistic terms for the
Kirghiz and other national languages -- all these processes took place and are
taking place under the beneficial influence of the Russian language. In the
consciousness and spiritual world of a Soviet individual of any non-Russian
nationality, the Russian language as an inseparable part of his knowledge and
culture occupies a firm position along with his native language. Therefore, a
progressive bilingual process justifiably arose and is being rapidly developed
in our country. Today, we, the representatives of non-Russian nationalities.
call the Russian language a second native language with complete justification.

The higher the national culture interpenetration process -- in which the role of
the Russian language is so great -- is; the richer and more varied the unified
multinational culture of the Soviet people becomes, and the stronger its influence
on improving the socialist way of life is.

As a result of carrying out profound social, economic and political transformations
and the cultural revolution, the ideology of Marxism-Leninism -- the world out-
lOok of the working class -- has become the ideology of all workers and of all
Soviet people; the international basis of the spiritual sphere of the socialist
way of life was thereby formed and strengthened. At the same time, the national
cultures of all the country's nations and nationalities received a powerful impulse
in their development. The grand successes in developing the national cultures of
peoples who had been backward for a long time serve as a convincing example of
socialism's superiority over capitalism. They possess an enormous attraction for
all the pe0ple who have been liberated from the centuries-old colonial domination
of the imperialist states.

Thanks to the flourishing of national cultures, the truly widespread, truly
mass, truly multifaceted and equal cooperation of all our country's nations and
nationalities in cultural development -- a cooperation which leads to the ever
greater internationalization of the spiritual life of the Soviet people and the
spiritual sphere of the socialist way of life -- has become possible.

The development of literature and art in the Soviet republics ia'a clear indicator
of the spiritual flourishing of national cultures and of the ever greater enrich-
ment of their international content. Thus, Kirghizia, which several decades ago
did not even have its own national written language, now stands in the ranks of
tln more developed republics in the area of artistic creativity. The Kirghiz
Communist Party Central Comittee is seeing to the further development of the
republic's artistic culture, directing the efforts of artist unions and art
institutes toward raising the ideological and political level and the professional
skill of literary and artistic workers and toward the creation of a business-like

creative atmosphere in collectives.

The fostering of reasonable demands is an important feature of the socialist way
of life. The 26th party congress paid special attention to the need for a

18
FOR (NHHCIAI.IESE.(NNLY
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE|JNLY

purposeful formation of the interests and needs of Soviet people, corresponding
to the tendencies in the formation of communist social relationships. ih are
prﬂnarily talking about studying the improvements in the demand structure which
have taken place during recent years, analyzing the basic tendencies in this
process and the effect of the growth in prosperity on the development of the
people's spiritual wants, and -- relying on this analysis -- forming a series
of measures for overcoming the urge for incessant egotistical consumption and
the cult of things.

Literature. art and the mass information media, by helping to strengthen pro-
gressive traditions and the people's reasonable demands, are playing a large role
in the internationalisation of such an important component of the socialist way
of life as daily living. Basically, daily living is the same for all the nations
and nationalities forming the Soviet people. At the same time, certain differ-
ences have nevertheless been preserved in this important sphere of the social
life of the different nationalities. National peculiarities in daily living are
caused by the distinctive features of the natural and climatic factors and by

the historical development of the people.

The customs and usages, which are passed on from generation to generation, take
shape spontaneously for the most part. The force of centuries-old traditions
exert a large influence on them. Remnants of the past, such phenomena foreign
to the Soviet way of life as bribery, rudeness, drunkenness, nepotism, bride-
money. etc., are still adhered to in daily life. Their relatively large surviv-
ability in the consciousness of individual population groups is caused by the
fact that they are transmitted to the younger generation primarily in a daily
life which has been least of all subjected to public influence. L. I. Brezhnev
has pointed out: "Unfortunately, we still have occasion to often encounter
displays of egoism, money-grubbing and a consuming attitude toward life. It
would be incorrect to underestimate the danger of these negative phenomena".
The struggle against them forms one of the important tasks of the systematic,
purposeful. political, indoctrinational, and ideological work of party and
other public organizations.

However, as was pointed out in the CPSU Central Committee report to the 26th,
party congress, there are still "those individuals who desire to give less and
to snatch more from the state". Egoiam. petty bourgeoisie, acquiring, and
indifference towards the concerns and work of the people appear on the soil of
such a psychology. in this matter, we must be consistently guided by the
instructions of the 26th congress which require that ”conscientious workers be
encourage in every way possible and that no loophole‘be left for slackers and
bad workers to lead a good life with very bad work".

A very fierce ideological struggle is now taking place around the way of life
problem. It is connected with the fact that the merits and shortcomings of
this or that social system, which are reflected through the way of life prism,
are becoming more evident. It is natural that our party is devoting a lot of
attention to publicizing the socialist way of life and to unmasking bourgeois
fabrications.

19
FOR OFFNJA1.USE¢MVLY
I-OII OFFICIAL but ONLY

in examining the leading role of the CPSU in the formation of a Soviet way of
life and in strengthening the unity of the international and the national in its
development, we see with our own eyes how the scale of. the party's transforming

work is being expanded in the progressive movement of our society toward
communism. Based on :he creative development of Marxist-Leninist science and in
close union with the life of the people, the CPS“ is directing rIc activity of
the Soviet people toward the complex solution of all the main tasks in the
construction of communism, including the development of a socialist way of life.
The Soviet way of life not only is acquiring enormous significance in creating
the material and spiritual foundations of communism, but is also demonstrating
ever more clearly and fully to all the world the historical advantages of the

new social system.

FOOTNOES

l. v. I. Lenin, "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete works], Vol #1, p 77.

2. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leniniskim kursom. Rechi, privetstviya, stat'i, vospominan-
iya [A LeninistCourse. Speeches, Greetings, Articles, Reminiscences]. Vol 7,

Moscow, 1979. p 172.

3. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" [A Leninist Course, Speeches
and Articles I, Vol 5, Moscow, 1976, p 49.

A. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS [Materials on the 26th CBSU Congress], Moscow,
1981, p 217.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Tsk KPSS "Pravda". "Voprosy filosofii", 1981.

8802
CSO: 1830/291

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'IIK'lAl. USE ONLY

REGIORAL

STATUS 0? 0883'?» wens DISCUSSED
london ARABIA in bslish l'o 6.?eb 82 p 26

[Article by Korean Cigar]

[Text] @ Although numerically small. the Kurdish

community 0! the Sosiet Union is of
considerable interest. These Kurds are rela-
tive newcomers to the area. having arrived in
what was then Tsurist Rintsia during the lllth.
19th and early 20th centuries as a result oi
fleeing from various loans of repression in
Iran and the Ottoman Empire.

The exact number 0! Kurds now living in
the Soviet Union is a matter oi some conjec-
ture. While the most recent official ligure
available is ”6.000 0979). independent
sources make the total some three times that
number. Soviet estimates of minority ethnic
group are not always reliable and frequently
appear inconsistent. In the case of the Kurds.
pan of the inconsistency may arise [tom the
vagaries at local ptessures on them to register
with other ethnic groups.

Unlike other minorities. even smaller
ones. the Soviet Kurds no longer have a
separate administrative unit. although a Kur-
dish Autonomous Republic did exist in Cen-
tral Asia lot a short time during the l92lls. In
part. this is due to their geographical disper-
soon.

About 25 per cent live in the Caucasian
Republics nl Armenia and Georgia. while the
remainder art: In buth homogeneous and

mixed iiiiiem'iii Iii—ithe mainly mint Cen-

tral Asian Republics of Azerbaijan. Kazakh-
stan. Kirghizstan. Turkmenistan and Uzbekis-
tan. Some ol the latter were deported lrom
the Caucasus to Central Asia in the late 19305.

Living as they do in generally fertile agri-
cultural areas. the Kurds have been relatively
prosperous with about 60 per cent still work-
ing on the land. However. by lorce ol cir-
cumstance. most have had to adapt to their
surrounding ethnic environment. By 1970.
about 56 per cent of Soviet Kurds spoke
another language besides their nun. enm-
peted with a national average of 2” per cent
who were bilingual. Of this 56 per cent. twice
as many have leamed Soviet languages other
than Russian (nine times the national aver-
age). indicating assimilation into local society
more than “limitation." Only 88 per cent
of Kurds still consider Kurdish to be their
native language. which is below the national
average.

Assimilation has. to some extent. been un-
avoidable. In Central Asia. lor example.
Kurds have been pressure-ll into cmlmming
both linguistically and culturally. largely be-
cause separate ethnic lacilitics have been dis-
mttragcd. 'lhc [act that (“entrail Asia is mainly
Muslim has lacihtuled this process. Only ab-
out ") per cent nl Kurds are \‘ezidis. the rest

are all either Sunni or shia Muslin. Though the Soviets claim that religious
distinctions "are used only in the etlmosraphic aortas." now that "the bulk
of the Soviet Kurds have abandoned religion." it is clear that religious
distinctions still play an inortant role in the Kurds‘ identity. Religion

has. for exaqile. hindered assimilation with the non-lluslita population of
Armenia and Georgia.

Despite pressure and inducement, however, it seems that Kurdish awareness of
belonging to a wider calamity has by no means been entirely erased. llhile

21
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. 0ND

Soviet Kurds my have developed along different paths from their fellow Kurds
in the Middle Fast. they retain strong emotional ties. Host Soviet Kurds
still know the nanes of the villages and tribes left behind when they
migrated. They listened closely to the progra-es broadcast by the rebel
Iraqi Kurdish radio when it was in operation. Individuals are reported to

be eager to contact the Syrian and Iraqi Kurdish students who visit the Soviet
Union and there are even reports that lilatafa Barnani's photograph could be
found in many Soviet Kurdish homes.

It is. perhaps. not altogether surprising that the most self-aware and cul-
turally significant Kurdish counmity is to be found in Arnenia. Kurdish
language and literature are taught in school. a daily newspaper and hooks
(printed in the Cyrillic alphabet used for Russian) are published. and Kurdish
radio programs are broadcast. Kurds in Arnenia enjoy a high standard of
education and are well represented in the Party and administration.

In fact. the Kurds of Arnenia have produced a nunber of intellectuals who
have made significant contributions to Kurdish studies. There are several
flourishing research institutes devoted to this field which have provided
study facilities for Kurds fron the Hiddle East. thus boosting Kurdish self-
awareness and culture among the larger Kurdish co-iunity.

The Soviet authorities have actually encouraged these study centres. which not
-only serve as centres of attraction for non-Soviet Kurds but provide useful
information for governeent policymakers considering the question of "Kurdistan."

Given the stall number of Kurds in the Soviet Union. it seems unlikely that
the authorities see then as a serious threat. However. something which might
cause concern to the Soviet regime would be the challenge based on religion
in which the Kurds night unite with their nore numerous fellow Muslims.

C80: 1812/54 END

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY