FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10463

15 April 1982

Translation

OPTICAL METHODS FOR PROCESSING

IMAGES AND SIGNALS

Ed. by

V.A. Potekhln

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non

JPBS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also froe news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attizudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND RIGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED "EREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFKJA1.USEGONL¥

JPRS L/10463
15 April 1982

OPTICAL METHODS FOR PROCESSING IMAGES AND SIGNALS

Leningrad OPTICBESKIYB HBTODY OBRABOTKI IZOBRAZBENIY I SIGNALOV in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Jun 81) pp 1-101

[Collection ”Optical Methods for Processing Images and Signals,“ edited
by Doctor of Technical Sciences Professor V. A. Potekhin, Physica-
technical Institute imeni A. P. Ioffe. USSR Academy of Sciences, 500
copies, 101 pages]

CWTEN‘I‘S

Zinov'yev. Yu. 8.. Pasaurov. A. Ya.. "Using Holographic Principles
to Analyze Radar Stations With Synthesized Aperture" 1

Hush. B. 8.. "Equal Observation Principle and Economic Algorithms
for Signal Processing by Quasi-Holographic Pulse-Doppler Systems" 12

Hush. B. 5.. "Synthesizing Quasi-Holographic Syster Adaptive to

Reflecting Surface“ 18
Orlov. R. A.. "Determining Intercoupling of Spatially Combined
Antennas by Radio Holography Methods" 22
Pasmurov. A. Ya.. ”Measuring Parameters of Scattering Bodies by
Radio Holography Method" 28
Astaf'yev. V. 3.. "Functional Capabilities of Devices with Optical
Feedback" 35
Kulakov. s. V.. "Signal and Interference at Input of Acousto-
Optical Spectrum Analyzer" b0
Molotok. V. V.. "Frequency-Response Function of Real Acousto-
Optical Spectral Apalyzar“ 67
Kurichkin. A. v.. "Statistical Characteristics of Acousto-Optic
Receivers of Long Pseudorandoa Signals” 53
- a - [I - USSR - 6 F000]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
MWMUSEONLY

Kuzichkin. A. V.. "Acouato-Optic Correlation Analysis of Couple:

Signala with Juping Frequency" 59

Vasil'yev. Yu. 3., "Acouato-Optical Radio Signal Denodulation" 62

Vasil'yav. Yu. 6.. "Pcculiaritiea of Light Diffraction by

Couple: Ulttaaonic Signal." 69
- b -

I0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFI'ICIALIBEONLY

 

[Text] This collection contains individual reports delivered and discussed
at meetings of the section on non-optical holography at the Leningrad Regional
Board of the S. l. Vavilov Scientific and Technical Society of the Instrment
Making Industry. The section was organized in 1977 at the initiative of the
directorate of the section on holography at the Central Board of the S. I.
Vavilov Scientific and Technical Society of the InstrI-ent Making Industry.
This section now brings together Leningrad scientists and engineers from in-
stitutions of higher education and research institutes working in the fields
of applied use of methods of radio and acoustic holography. as well as optical
processing of radio and acoustic signals The articles mainly give the re-
sults of original research by the authors dealing with current problems of
using methods of holography and optical processing of information in micro-
wave engineering.

The Science Council on the Problem of Hologray’xy Affiliated with the Presidium
of the USSR Academy of Sciences was of considerable assistance in organising
and publishi-‘s this collection. The directorate of the section on non-optical
holography is sincerely grateful to Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sci-
encea S. B. Gurevich. and Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences

G. A. Gsvrilov for expediting publication of the collection. and also to Asso-
ciate Member of the USSR Academy of Scienc as L. ‘0. Bakhrakh for reading the
manuscript. The directorate of the section thanks the authors who delivered
these papers. and who offered them for publication in this collection.

UDC 773.4:523.l6lo.8

USING BOLOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLES 1'0 ANALYZE RADAR STATIONS wrm SYNTHESIZED APE!!-
TURE

[Article by Yu. s. Zinov'yev and A. Ya. Pasmurov]

 

 

[Text] An examination is made of major aspects of holographic
theory of radar with synthesized aperture [BSA]. The first
stage of holographic processes in RSA (formation of radio

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

hologram) is treated as recording of the field scattered

by an object by using an artificial reference source. The
second stage (reconstructing the object) is described on

the basis of physical optics. A classification is given

of radio holograms recorded in the RSA and conditions of
subsequent processing. A physical interpretation is given
of najor RSA parmneters. An examination is made of applica-
tion of the proposed theory to evaluating the influence of
trajectory instabilities of the RSA carrier. and to analyzing
images of loving observational objects.

1 . Introduction

Up until the present. the description of BSA has used mainly such methods

as the synthesized antenna technique. the method of signal selection by Dop-
pler frequencies. the method of cross correlation. which are based on princi-
ples of the theory of electronic systems. optimum reception theory and the
like. All three approaches enable evaluation of the influence that technical
paraneters of the use have on its tactical characteristics [Ref. 1. 2]. Re-
sults and conclusions practically coincide.

The RSA in combination with a coherent optical processor [Ref . 3] is a ”quasi-
holographic" systen in which resolution with respect to one coordinate (azi-
muth) is attained by holographic processing of a fixed signal. In the opinion
of Leith and Ingalls [Ref. lo] such a representation is the most flexible and
physically graphic and enables development of RSA components with working prin-
ciple that is readily explained by the theory of radio systems. This view-
point has been developed by Rock (Ref. 5]. with proposal of some new radar
systems based on principles of holograms. However. the use of the holographic
approach for analyzing the ISA has been limited until now to examination of
only optical processors. There is practically no mathematically valid view-
point enabling representation of the RSA as a whole as a holographic system.
Therefore description of the RSA from unified holographic principles is of
theoretical interest. Such an analysis gives the nest couplets elucidation
of the essence of physical processes that take place in the RSA. In addition.
it becomes possible to use concepts and methods developed in the theory of
optical holography.

2. Principles of obtaining holograms in 35A

  

Let us consider an RSA (Pig. 1) maunted on
a vehicle moving at velocity ”I! along axis
x'. The radar antenna has linear dimension
LR (real aperture). and width of radiation ,..
pattern 03 along the line of the path. The /
radar scans a strip in short pulses and - ,
fixes the pattern of diffraction of the “my -‘"'
probing signal by the observational objects /
sequentially in time. The amplitude and

phase of the scattered field are registered Fig. 1. Principal geometric re-

by interference of received and reference lations in RSA

,/
.2"
,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signals in a coherent (synchronous) detector. As a result. a radio hologr-
of eultiplicative type is famed Inf. 6], the part of the reference wave
being played by a signal introduced directly into the electronic channel (”er-
tificial" reference save). The radio hologran is usually recorded by nodula-
tion of CRT luminescence intensity on a photographic film wing relative

to the 631' screen at velocity ”a. To record radio hologrene of objects situ-
ated at different ranges R. from the line of the path. the pulsed node of
operation is used with vertical scanning on the CRT screen. The result is

a set of one-dinenisonal holograes recorded in different positions with re-
spect to the width of the file. depending on the range to the corresponding
objects.

Let us assme that all objects are located at a distance R. fro- the line

of the path. In this case the radiated signal can be considered continuous

since accounting for the pulsed nature of the radiation is important only

for analyzing the resolution of objects with respect to range. Fig. 2 shows

the equivalent diagrun of recording a one-

dinensional radio hologram. Situated at point

Q with coordinates (x'. 0) is an RSA (av-vat.

where t is elapsed tins). and at point I

(at. 2,) is a hypothetical reference wave were

with action sinilar to that of a reference

signal of the synchronous detector, while point

P (xo. so- 4%) belongs to the observed object

situated along axis In. If the scattering

Pig. 2. Equivalent diagram properties of the object are described by the

of recording one-dimensional function 170“), and dimensions are sufficiently
holograe mall conpared to the quantity 11.. we get the

well known Fresnel approximation [lef. 7] for
the diffraction field along axis x' (with consideration of propagation of
the probing signal from the 88A to the object and back)

 

(2-5!
0“" ix. .. (1)
t‘ ' -.= ,9 4‘ s
U.( ) ”no.1“ .

where K1. 2r/A1 is the wave amber. and c stands for some complex constant
both here and below.

The coeplsx amplitude of the reference wave is Ur(x')-Are1“. Usually this
is a plane wave. 1. e. Or' x, sin e:', where e is the angle of "incidence"

of the wave on the hologram. The inclination of the reference wave is equiva-
lent to a reference signal with linear phase advance. and introduces carrier
frequency ux- ‘1 sin 0. As a result of coherent detection. we get a radio
holograe with equation

Mrlmewﬂxwdw or “9- IN W'Wmow" ' (2)
with consideration of (I). it is clear that in the general case one-

dinensional Fresnel radio hologrens are formed in the ISA. In addition. the
folloving situations are possible. depending on the ratio of dieensions of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the object. the length of the synthesised aperture Ls-vﬂ‘r (‘1' is the time
of recording the radio hologram) and the quantity 8.. -

1. In the case where Ro>>nx§mn (Xom is a quantity that characterizes
the maxim:- dimensions of the object). instead of (l) we get the Fraunhofer
approximation

9“... 213‘“ -' A".
washcﬁ 9 '° hm): "‘ " dr. . (3)
c I "'

and as a result a Frsunhofer radio hologram is formed.

2
2. In the case where Ro>>K1xm/2' mtg/8. the torn e‘ “1". In. in (3) can
be omitted. Then a Fourier radio hologram is formed, and the condition of
formation in the RSA can be written as

l.‘ ‘ Nye—.71? . (a)

3. If the object is a point (F(x.) ~ 6(x' -xo)). the F‘raunhofer diffraction
conditions are automatically satisfied. Using the filtering properties of
the 6-function. expression (3) yields the following equation of the radio
hologram (without consideration of constant phase terns)

.9 - U
Mar): mummif- K.‘3‘ ' H.373) . (5)
0

where A. is the amplitude of the wave scattered by the object at the reception
point.

If in addition (6) is valid. than (5) implies

Mt" ' APAom'chT’ ”Hi?” . (6)
.

Thus a Frsunhofer or Fourier radio hologram is formed in the RSA for a point
target. In the former case the radio hologram has the form of a one-dimen-
sional Fresnel zone plate in accordance with (5). end in the latter case it
takes the form of a one-dimensional diffraction grating with constant spacing
in accordance with (6).

In the process of photographic recording. scaling of the radio holograms takes
place with substitution of coordinate x for x'. where x-x'Inx, and nx-vn/vn.
In this operation. a constant ter- ho ("displacement") is added to (5) and (6)

for photographic recording of the function h(x').

3. Image Reconstruction
we will analyze the next stage of the holographic process by the method of

physical optics. Illuminating a phototransparency by a plane wave with wave
nuber :2. we get a diffraction field with distribution at distance 9 from

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the hologram described by the Huygens-Fresnel integral
)
5 d: . (7)

Substituting (6) in (7) we have V(€) -V0(£)+V1(£)+V2(E). where W“) is
the zero order corresponding to displacemnt ho. V1“) and V3“) are functions
that describe the reconstructed inages of the point object and are equal to

MI! .0. 2K
‘W M e6 3 ’ lﬁk'e-‘Vf’ "W" “i‘g'ﬂ‘u. (a)
Vds) 1:".

We find the position of the images along the z-axis fro. the condition of
a zero value of the exponent in the first exponential function of (8). imply-
ing

2
I s t )‘Ro/tan: . (9)

(bviously one inage is imaginary and the other is real. Integrating (8) with
condition (9) we get

WI . c9" My ”623’ (U535!
2.1
I

W] (mu £3L‘(‘:'.; "sn.

 

(10)

Thus the image of a point object is described by a function of type sinvlv.
The position of the image is detenined by the zero value of the argument v.
i. e. by the relation

5‘30/"t O 0,!,/2a,n, . (11)

The first ter- in (11) corresponds to the coordinate of the object. and the
second term is due to the carrier frequency. The images of two point objects
that have identical coordinates x. but different ranges R1 and R; will be
characterised by different coordinates £1 and 5;. Thus the use of a carrier
frequency leads to geometric distortions of the image of the entire seaming
strip.

According to the Rayleigh criterion. two points are considered as separate

if the principal naxinun of one of the functions of the type sin v/v coincides
with the first zero of the second function. Prom this we get an estimate

of the resolution

‘1'.1.'3-. "'gl.‘qu. (12)

The given case (use of Prsunhofer radio holograms) has been called the
"focused aperture" in RSA theory. Focusing is understood as compensation
of the quadratic phase advance in equation (5) on the stage of inage recon-
struction (compensation is acconplished by transformation (7)).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICEAL USE ONLY

The case of the "unfocused aperture" corresponds to the equation of the
Fourier radio hologram (6). Therefore. Fourier transfornation of the function
of the radio hologram is used on the processing stage

VW" c1 u.;é"‘"!” a . (13)

From (13) with consideration of (6) we get

ﬂ!

2;
VJ‘) “ ullIE‘E-t e 3-: ﬂ; 1.)] T}
we} ---

x n. ’
[3,3, tloxnto 2f: 11‘s,), 521 .

 

 

 

In the given case the quantity 9 can he treated as the focal length of the
Fourier lens. The position of the image of the point object is deter-lined

by the equation

2.
‘..;-£—-(urn‘+ 3"; n.‘\..). (15)

The image of the entire seaming strip will also be distorted as a consequence
of the dependence of 5 on range Ra. Evaluation of the resolution according
to the Rayleigh criterion gives ‘

an: - a.“ - 3:}, uscu'xqur. (16)

The limiting attainable resolution in en 88A with unfocused processing with
consideration of (4) is

u”- Vﬁ,R,/'4 ~ o,u.Ya.p.'. (17)

It should be noted that radio holograms are recorded continuously on photo-
graphic film in the course of a prolonged flight. Therefore the focused or
unfocused mode is assigned only on the stage of reconstructing the image by
selecting the dimenaions of the diaphragm that determines the quantity Ls/“x'
and through corresponding design of the optical processing arrangement.

Let us now consider the RSA fron' the standpoint of the geometric nethod de-
veloped in Ref. 8. 9 and assuming analysis of the phase structure of the radio
hologram. For this purpose we rewrite one of the equations (2) in the form

M13) - A,A.M(¢r"’s, v
where e. is the phase of the wave scattered by the object.
For a point object situated at point P (Fig. 2). we can write (with consider-
ation of wave propagation from the RSA to the object and back): 00 -2x;(PQ-PO)

and Qr' 2x1(RQ- R0), where 110- R; is the distance from the hypothetical source
of the reference wave to the coordinate origin. Expanding Or and so in a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

series and limiting ourselves to first-order terns. we get
- _ . _1__ ,L - . - 29“
t v.1 gm", a.) uni: R31. ‘1‘”

In the simplest case where x. -0. "r' 0. Rr-u (plane reference wave without
linear phase advance). we get

v.-¢.- «W 21.9 .

The spatial frequency of the interference pattern is

«1.1- 59; Mg’#- 943/13. . (19)

At some value xér- I2. the frequencyv may exceed the resolution of
the field recorder. ich is deternined in the given case by the actual aper-
ture of the radar set. and is equal to Vcr' 1/141. This implies the condition

Ls.“ £ 1.9.0.. d3, . . (20)

Substituting the value of L in (12). we get the classical relation for
naximn attainable resolution the RSA:

Accounting for the pulsed nature of the signal enables us to determine such
an important parameter of the radar set as the minimal value of the probing
pulse recurrence rate “min. Obviously the pulsed node is analogous to dis-
cretization of the radio hologrn. The distance between individual readings
Ax' urn/x must satisfy the condition Ax' < [2v(xér)]". whence with consider-
ation of (19) vs have

‘nin - IVE/Ln.

Following the known procedure of Ref. 8. 9, we get relations that determine
the deviation of the phase front of the reconstructed wave from spherical
(third-order wave aberrations)

 

6"”"'{"”o%' ’6‘" be") . (21)
uhere
“ 1" 21¢ a: x:
”"15? n?’ m" n: a:) .

"c and 3c are coordinates of the source of the reconstructing wave. u- MIA;
n-ng‘. and the coordinates of the image of the point object are

'_.L.E'_-’_ and 3.3.9: 2-3
R; 9c. “'“(90 an) at RC- " '“s 2,).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The value x-O corresponds to spherical aberration. x- l to can. and x- 2 to
astigmatism. These relations can be used to calculate the sari-u pernissible
size of the synthesized aperture 1.9..“ on the basis of the Rayleigh condition
(wave aberrations on the edges of the hologral should not exceed 12/6). Con-
sidering that spherical aberrations are the nost appreciable in order of ngni-

tude. we get

‘ ——-\
L8~,'V.I).a:/n-4§) . (22)

For typical conditions of RSA operation, the quantity L calculated by
formula (20) is less than the value calculated by formula 22), i. e. the
influence of wave aberrations in the RSA is insignificant.

' lo. Influence of RSA Trajectory Instabilities

Instability of the vehicle trajectory is one of the major factors that distort
the images obtained by the RSA. The holographic treatment enables fairly
sinple evaluation of. permissible deviations of the trajectory iron linear
by the nethod of geonetric optics. Let us write the expression for the phase

of the object wave ¢.(x') in the torn
v.(m'):-2x.ll(z,-9)‘o (x'-a:,)'|"‘ -"R.} .-
whsre q-q(x') is displacement of the trajectory from the x'-axis.

Assuming that 89>“, x‘ and q. using the binonial expansion and dropping
all terms of the order of q2 and higher, we get the following approxinate

expression for ¢.(x'):

.11.: x__."-9.rg=: . _.._z‘~mx_'tas.r_~'£ '. _9_L.' i"_,_a- 21. io'r
u" a} n. as: '5? 2a, )-

The equation for the phase of the wave that forms one of the reconstructed
images-has the usual form

.1, - qc 2 No' .9») . (23)

On the other hand, the function 01 can be written as

|._ g( x245“: _ 352111;“ (unﬁt)
“1 l, 29‘ on: -

The phases .c and 01: are deternined by expressions analogous to (24). The
differences between phases of corresponding third-order terns relative to
1/81 in (23) and (24) are aberrations equal to

(24)

w - w“) + was

Aberrations A0“) are detenined by expression (21), and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ft‘gé' ' “2‘ ”39 ’ ”49" ‘ ’09“) . (25)

where
! .- try/9, , L,- r 2,1 1.x,lnl13, 15,-: ’dl./II‘R:

are aberrations due to trajectory instabilities.

Relation (25) that determines the distortions of the phase structure of the
radio hologram can be used for calculating the compensating phase shift di-
rectly in the process of synthesis. To do this. it is advisable to use digi-
tal methods of signal pr vzessing in the RSA.

Applying the Rayleigh criterion to each of the terms in (25). we get the fol-
lowing conditions for permissible deviations of the vehicle trajectory:

95‘ 3,“. ”’3' . A.R./M. - Mlacusé. , (26)
$53M" may,“ -3.|!.’/’0Ls’~.‘o « <27)
95‘ AIM- 'Ds'l‘imt. J'R:/Z.I.’3 (28)

On the other hand. knowing flight conditions and the characteristics of the
vehicle. we can use (26)-(28) to determine the limitations imposed on the

quantity cos 6., and the limiting permissible dimension of the synthesized aper-
ture:

—.‘

l
tos\’.‘ﬁ./‘9 s LSm‘aIRo/.Iro ‘ [ﬁn-on ‘ “Olin/9 '

As a rule, the relations L3<Ro and xo<<Ro are satisfied in the RSA. Therefore
the quantities D. and D5 can be disregarded. with account taken only of the
factor I); which according to (26) imposes severe conditions on the stability
of the trajectory.

5. Influence of Motion of the Object of Observation

The effects that arise in the RSA when observing moving objects can be evalu-
ated from the standpoint of the method of physical optics. Let a point object
move at low velocity vo in the radial direction (along the z-axis). so that
for the time of synthesis 1' the displacement of the object does not exceed

the resolution with respect to range. In this case. the equation of the radio
hologram takes the form (disregarding constant phase terms):

. " n 2. .
Nthmelgntsdnanxx-x'nﬁ rain—5:? - ﬁx?) n; x‘). (29)

Substituting (29) in (7). we get the following condition of observation of
a focused image:

9-4.5:- 5%)/[1'(%:)'}

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the quantity v./va<l. the inage will be obaerved practically in the

same plane as for a atationary object. Conaidering this fact. and carrying
out the integration. we get a function that deacribee one of the reconatructed
ilagea:

The position of the inage is determined by the equation

’50 «0.9. ”3.0. it

I —- O —'- '

"I 2“,!” "g 0‘

(bvioualy notion of the object in equivalent to introducing an additional
carrier frequency on the stage of recording the radio hologram. and it leada
to displacement of the image. The optical proceaaor uaea the real image that
is recorded on photographic film. The field of view on this film ia linited
by a diaphraga that cuts off backgromd illuaination. The quantity v. nay
reach a value such that the image of the object will not be registered at
all because of the shift.

Motion of the object in the azimuthal direction (along the x '-axia) with ve-
locity vo is equivalent to a change in the flight velocity of the vehicle.
In this case. relation (9) that determinea the poaition of the focuaed inage
along the a-axia can be rewritten as

p" 2 1.2.12A,n§ . : Annoy Mm..- v.)' .

Thus notion of the object along the x'-axia leada to a change in conditions
of focusing by the quantity

Sp 9'- p- 21"”...(1'207VH' 4)! ‘30)
where o is defined by expression (9). I
If vo<va, then
5:“ 21W"- - (31)
From equation (30) we can get
It. . It.” . WWW]?
0n the other hand. fronthe ainpleat geometric conaiderationa we find the fol-

lowing expreaaion for resolution of the RSA along the z-axia (longitudinal
reao lut ion) :

Ap'2(da:‘0.)‘/J,ﬂ: - “try/1.”: . (32)
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The depth of focusing An is defined as displacement from the focal plane along
the z-sris by a distance for which the azimuthal resolution Ax' detrriorstes
to half as compared with the diffraction limit (12).

To observe a focused image of an object moving at velocity v.. additional
focusing of the optical processor is necessary. The velocities of the object
at vhich focusing is necessary we get fron the condition “<69. where do is
assigned by (31). Using (9) and (32). we get

v,>lux')'v./A,n, .
At lower velocities of notion of the object. refocusing of the processor is
not required. and deterioration of inge quality can be considered insignifi-
cant.

6 . Conclusion

To describe the working principles of the RBA. in addition to known methods
[Ref. 1. 2) that have been extensively used heretofore. a holographic approach
can be used that represents the RSA and the optical processor as an integral
unit. The given examples confirm the physical clarity and fruitfulness of
the proposed approach for analyzing the RSA.
REFERENCES
l. Reutov. A. P.. Hikhaylov. 3. A.. Kondratenkov. G. s.. Boyko. B. V..
"Radiolokstsionuyye stantsii bokovogo ohzora" [Side-Looking Radar]. Moscow.
"Sov. radio". 1970.

2. R. o. Hsrger. "Synthetic Aperture Radar Systems. Theory and Design".
AC. Press. Ne Yep 1970’ PP 18-580

3. hithTIIER. Vol 59. No 9. 1971. PP 25-44.
6. Lelth. 8.. Ingalls. H.. APPL. OPTICS. Vol 7. No 3. 1963. PP 539-546.

5. Koch. H. 8.. "Recent Developments in Holography", P3063. ELECTED-0PT..
REV. RECENT DBL. 1975. PP 65-66.

6. Popov. s. A.. Rosanov. B. A.. Zinov'ysv. Yu. 8.. Pasmurov. A. Ys.. "Sh.
Haterialy VIII Vsesoyuznoy shkoly po gologrsfii" [Collected Materials
of the Eighth All-Union School on holography]. Leningrad. 1976. pp 275-286.

7. A. Papulis. '“l‘eoriya sistea i preobrazovaniy v optike" [Theory of Systems
and Transformations in Optics]. Moscow. "Mir". I971.

80 “121'. Rs ".. JOSAO v01 55. NO 7. 1965. pp 987-9910

9. Champagne. B. 3.. JOSA. Vol 57. No l. 1967. pp 51-55.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL use ONLY

we 621.391.266

EQUAL OBSERVATIW PRINCIPLE AND me W m SIGNAL nocnssnlc
nu QUASI-WIC PULSE-WEIR SYSTDS

[Article by B. S. Hush]

[text] in equation in given that relates the sipal of a
quasi-holographic pulee-Doppler syste- to a function that
describes reflective surface properties. This is celled
the principal equation. An equal observation principle is
introduced that nininizes uncertainty in evaluating the
reflective surface function that arises in solving the
principal equation. Algoritlns are considered for solving
the principal equation by a direct nethod and by the eethod
of fast Fourier transforna to cslculate correlation sun.
and the efficiency of these algoriths is evaluated with
respect to a criterion of the minim nulber of operations
per unit area of the surface being evaluated with consider-
ation of the equal observation principle. It is shown that
there is an optin- ratio of sides of the correlation eatrir.

The concept of the quasi-holographic pulse-Doppler span was qualitatively
introduced in Ref. 1. The signal 8(t) at its input can be represented as
an integral equation of the first kind with a difference kernel and unknown
reflective surface function:

.ﬁfJW -x)k/U?(I-y/ 1/. 3/4.»; . s,(I/.¢~,Iog,;(f'
j m; - sm- 1/910, 2/1))

I‘ , Xiezthe wevelen ho theesen,
K}; 6.1/9!!!) ‘V’f‘t‘ “I ' y t

“(t}- 'Q’) e716”:

9'7: )- Silt/4;“

J(J,\4?)'—V;'G:( 5"”)!13/7

Q(t) is a coeplex function that characterizes the share of the enitted signal;
X(t). Y(t). 2(t) are the projections of the radius-vector of the phase center
of the antenna on the x. y, s exes of the coordinate eysten fixed to the sur-
face on which the region [Low Loy ] of definition of f(x.y) is assigned. the
y-axie being collinear with the ray corresponding to the anxiet- of the an-
tenne radiation pattern G(x.y.s). and

(254,2); (ﬂigi‘ fax 53,).

 

12

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
The initial equation. which will hereafter be called the principal equation.
can be represented as a systen of two honogeneous difference equations:

'— -- ._-.

1’9”?” 5,;1 "{gly, l/ééiﬁ—sja ,
A‘K, (X(//'3/'./(-r,’)r/a'a {IQ/’0'

Systesatic solution of this equation leads to finding the reflective surface
function - a procedure corresponding to the main job of the radio-holographic
system.

To analyse the problen of synthesizing econonic algoritlIIs for solving the
principal equation. it is sufficient to consider a procedure for solving
either of the equations of this systen. To be specific. our further analysis
will apply to the first equation. and we will suit the subscript y in denoting
the interval of evaluation of the reflective surface function.

In actual systesa. the signal is measured on the finite interval 1., over which
the estinate of the reflective surface function is defined on sons interval
1.0. If the interval of surface coverage LG is co-enaurate with 19:. then

a contradictory situation must he considered: either the reflective surface
function is evaluated fron signals generated by a reflective surface function
with region of definition nuch greater than L0. or the tins of observation

of ele-ents of the reflective surface function on interval 1.0 is inconstant.
both factors cause uncertainty in estimating reflective surface functions
when solving the principal equation. In connection with the given signal
fornation property due to the structure of the kernel of the principal equa-
tion. we formulate the equal observation principle: when solving the princi-
pal equation with respect to signals assigned on a fixed interval of observa-
tion life the intervals of estination of the reflective surface function 1.0 mat
be selected such that all its infinitesinal elenents are observed for an equal
tine.

Calculation of the estiaete f of the reflective surface functionby neens of
the kernel I! of the inverse transfor- causes considerable difficulties that
are associated with the necessity of carrying out a large meter of arithstic
operations for computing correlation suns of the for:

£ " gpll'”/'SM

mo (1)
k - Q I] ' ' I I) .l I
where f“ and 8.. are discrete readings of the functions for) and S“).

In the direct neth of calculating fx. 2N? nultiplications and additions
nust be carried out. Use of the nethod of generalized Fourier transform
enables us to apply effective fast Fourier transform nethoda lief. 2]. Let
us consider estinates of f“ obtained by the nethod of fast Fourier transfer-s.

13

P0! 01-1-10“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY

Let P<h. ‘l'hen nestling periodicity 3(a) with period I

~ ,g - p‘ [g (M- I?) (M1,

where §: (1!) and Kim) are generalized tourier transforea of 8.. and l(n) on
the interval 1-0. 1,... 11-3 with period a. and r1 is the inverse gener-
alized Pourier transforn. In the following. we will lieit ourselves to the
use of fast Fourier transform to the bane 2. “than to calculate f' it is
necessary to perforn (3 log; 8+2)! arith-etic and logic operations (3!! log: I
in calculating the fast Fourier transform. 1! in multiplying spectra. and h
in transposition of data).

bet P>N. Then the assuption of periodicity 1(n) with period II is not per-
niasible. Let us turn to a widely used nethod: we write an (1) as

1:" S?! [QM-n] 5’”,

"‘O

5.. 5n 1: amt/V4
0 I if fL)/\l’
”L“ -o,!, . ,’ Ibrl.

ﬂow the assumption of periodicity Mn) with-period Pie pernissible. Then we
have - _

f-P'lglplﬂzu-VI,

froe which it followa that to calculate o‘- (1) it is necessary to carry out
P(3 log: [N 2) operations.

The given formulae for calculating the nuIber of operations still do not de-
tereine the aconouy of one nethod or another. The fornal index A that charac-
terizes the econony of a neth is the number of operations per unit of area
of the surface to be evaluated.

The indicea obtained above for the nuber of oparationa must be norealired
to a quantity proportibnal to 1.0. According to the equal observation princi-
ple. the quantity L0 is related to let. vim:

Lo ‘ [‘0 .10' e (2)

Using the notation P/u- t. we write

L. 4.4,,
whence

(1-1 m
19.4 ,. "1w. (3)

ll.

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
momc’uuuscouur

where Lg) ie the vidth of the n-th Ireenel tone. equal to

(no) I"
Lo.» ' ﬂm-l [5pc

anduiethenunherofthel'reeneleonecorreepondingtotheedaeottheradi-
ation pattern.

In accordance vith the condition of inpernieeihility of frequency euper-
poeition [Bah 3]. the nuﬂuer of readinge II on interval to: met eatiafy the

inequality
IV) é! . (‘)

where 6‘ ie the diecretization etep equel to hUEu- 1- v‘Zu- 3 .

Band on formulae (2). (3) and (lo). we have

f]; 2 £937.. ‘ 8
VET/277?: w

5.: 472:: .

The reeultent fornula ie a generalization to the cone (#0 of the well known
rule of couple: eignal theory: the product of the eignal hand (denouinetor
in (5) - I. H.) nultiplied by ita duration (numerator in (5) -- I. I.) in _
equal to the nunher of readinge of the diacretieed eignel lief. 2]. which

is valid only for c-O.

It can he proved that

I
am Natl-I 'mfm)'0

u-v J"

Pron thie. ueins (3) and (S). we get the aeynptotic equality

L a-L—w _ I “I
r M “w (6)

0f

2.
E: 4.2/0?) M4? for the direct eethod.

15

MMLWONLY
I Mlle .-
. "T'IE-‘N'?3‘fﬂ/V*JI. 1f 7‘1 for the neth of

‘f ‘ feat Fourier trm
[hm-w (“y/V“) . 1: r>1 ‘°"'
(1,5: “““"""‘~""'"’* :. h Fig. 1. liter of operatione A
-/ / per unit of eurface aa a function
i , ff: of the nuher of readinge on the
c —"-._ -2—\- _ ,, ’ ,/, 3 interval 1.,- of aignal oheervation
'L\ 1/ 5-, ’ g with nee of the direct neth (1)
s' ‘- /,y, " ' and the feat Pantier trenafora
I r ” ‘ neth (2) for veluee of 1- III
’ //' z’ ,,-’ ' (-----). l (—-) “3.0
’. "
/:/ l <---°--->
’L
a e e' I a :o 4.7"“,

The reaultant relatione inply (Pig. 1) that when uaing ayateea with one or

a few raadinga (1.030) the direct nethod is preferable. the advantage of the
neth of feet Pantier trenaforne increeeing with It. When a nay-reading
eyetua in need. beginning at none value r> III. the faet Fourier traneforn
lethod hen the advantage over the direct nethod at any valuee of N. Analyeie
of the relation A- {(r) above that when 1’81. the method of feet l'onrier trane

tom given the next-tn gain colpared with the direct nethod for any I! (Fig.
2) e

 

Pig. 2. lit-her of operationa A per unit of area ae a func-
tion of the ratio L ll.r for II- 32 when naing the direct '
neth (1) and the gut tourier traneforn neth (2)

16

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of lisited processing intervals consideraly .aller than 1.9.

2"-stags signal processing can he used lief. b] in which so-called preveighted
accuulation on the first stage lieits the hand of the signal 8(t). and the
main processing is done on the second stage. Such a structure reduces require-
Ients for speed of processor devices. In this case the considerations given
above concerning A are suitable for each of the processing stages individually.
Let us anelyse the necessary productivity A for 2‘~stage processing. at the
first stage. the paraneter r- l/an (no, is the Mr of readings of the
input signal) is snell. and consequently on the first stage the direct nethod
has an obvious advantage over the nethod of fast Iourier transform. 0n the

second stage the par-eter 1- 1’le (v1. is the nulher of signal readings at
the input of the second stage). 0n the whole, the productivity A for the
ZK-stage processing can be written as

”" .1 ﬂ")+/]‘z’

where A") and A“) are the nders of operations on the first and second
processing stages per unit of area of the reflective surface function to be
evaluated. based on the above discussion. we can write for the direct nethod:

991/0?) ( ﬁr:
10-2 "’ 2 '0
’4 z. ’ ‘ﬁfh-«S— 2' ,

)p ' (7? A d.
”a; 2», a 9C" . { ,. )
L’ La" 1-1,, '
and for the nethod of fast Fourier transforms

d
.2” Qatarévﬂézvpéﬂupﬂﬁfﬁ “j 1r 1" 1.

' i I. r
iwwltféﬁTMII’V*‘é&Z:r-*d if r) 1.

Analysis of these functions shows the presence of an optimu- for the function
A- f (r) at fixed values of and L 1). Calculations show that for different
values of these paraneters t quant ty r nay differ considerably fron l.

and the gain fron using the fast Fourier transforn nethod hecones less pro-
nounced than for one-stage processing. Thus the selection of the nethod of

calculating correlation suns must he acconpanied hy conputation of K in each
specific case.

I thank L. s. Al'tnan for constructive discussion of the letters considered
in this paper.

17

POROH'ICMLUSEONLY
5‘0! OFFICIAL USEONLV

l. Leith. ”Quasi-Bologrsphic bthods in Microwave land" in: 'Triaeneniye
golografii [Using Holography]. edited by J. Good-an. Iloscov. "Mir". 1973.

2. Rabiner. 1... Gold. 3.. ”Teoriya i printsipy tsifrovoy obrsbotki signalov”
[Theory and Principles of Digital Signal Processing]. Roscoe. "nit". 1978.

3. king. 1!. m. 'Chislennyye aetody" [Ruerical Methods]. Moscow. "lauka".
1968.

at. brown. ".11.. nouser. G. 6.. Jenkins. 3. 3.. "Synthetic Aperture Process-
ing with Liaited Storage and Pram-sing". m TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE
LID “MIC swans. Vol ABS-9. No 2, lurch. 1973.

"DC 21.391.266
mmsnntc QUASI-WIC SYSTEM ADAPTIVE 1'0 REMIX: summer
[Article by B. 8. Hueh]

[Text] The paper notes difficulties in practical realiza-
tion of optimum aethods of solving the principal equation
of a quasi-holographic system that are related to absence
of a priori data and in large aeasure are eliainated when
algoritlns are used that are adaptive to a reflective sur-
face function. The principal equation of a pulse-Doppler
quasi-holographic systsn is given with its_optimn solution
in tha'sanae of the uni-us rlas deviation of the estinste
of the reflective surface function froa its exact value.

An algorithn is described tint is adaptive to the operator's
”signal when the structure of the operator is identical to
that of an optima operator and realizes an iterative pro-
cedure of successive approxiastions. The article presents
the proof of convergence of the iterative procedure and
gives the results of a mnerical experiment on studying
effectiveness of the constructed adaptive algoritll.

Optima asthods of solving the principal equation of a quasi-holographic sys-
tea lief. 1. 2]. despite all their advantageous properties in the sense of
estiastiou of the reflective surface function f . cannot be realized in cover-
ing real surfaces. since in east cases even the energy spectra of the reflec-
tive surface function are a priori unknown. However. optim- operators enable
us on the one hand to synthesize suboptin- and adaptive algoritlns that in-
prove the estiaate of the reflective surface function by ”signal tuning”.

and on the other hand to evaluate the quality of these algoritl-s with respect
to the degree that the estiaste appreciates the optima. The problen of
constructing an adaptive algoriths should be considered solved if "vs aenage
to construct algoritbs... that use only realisations accessible to ensure-
asnt" (Ref. 3].

18

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Taking our lead free Ref. 2. we write the principal equation as
J . .
3K1 XIII-.1! 1":le . saw/m yap/at), (1)

where S(t) is the signal at the input of the antenna oysten,

“0 and Y(t) are projections of the trajectory of the phase center of the
radiating and reception systole with polar pattern 6(xly(t)) on the x and

y axes of the coordinate systen fixed to the reflecting surface. 1921/),

A is the wavelength of the systen. n(t) are noises of the system y~§e+y(t).
@- t- Tu. In is the repetition period. and n is the probe mater.

In the following we will examine equation (1) as an integral equation of the
first kind. and treat its solution as a fornalized target of a quasi-holo-
graphic systen.

The optima estimate f of the reflective surface function can be found by
using the Hiener-Kohogorov operator with kernel so” [Ref. 2. lo]:

(f)
where

_K'(/.’)._, x
9’7"” jﬁ’f’ﬂm’)!‘ ”W7"

8(p) -N(p)/If(p)l2. Mp) is the energy spectrum of n(t). ‘l’ is the processing
period. the synbola ( ) and (*) denote the Fourier transform and the conplex
conjugate respectively. or in the fore of the spectrum of the estiaate

HfFW‘ 37f): (2)

where Vopt is the optimum value of the Tilthonov stabilizing factor [Ref. lo]

which is equal to 1 2
., (1,, Mg)! "<9"! ‘ L.
Mp)” [all (f)! (3)

A special case of the optimal operator when B(p)>>ﬂaxIK(p)I is an operator of
the type "notched to a point object":

p(-"~‘)~IK( K03) :7): 17/) (1.)

l9

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us now consider the structure of an adaptive operator. Let us have a
zero approrieation of the estimate of the reflective surface function fo(x)
that can be obtained by an operator that does not depend on the reflective
surface function or noise. e. g. of type (6). Let us call the function fn(x)
the estimate of the reflective surface function in the n-th approximation.
The Fourier transforn of this function takes the fore

. . ,h

1' I") s. A 2
f( _ 02..-‘§c)_r/.4I .K 43’ _~
(m

where vein is obtained from formula (3) by replacing If] by its (n- l)-th
approximation and n-0, l, 2.... This formula. conbined with the formula
that assigns i0. describes the iteration procedure. Let us prove existence
of convergence of the sequence to a limit that in the sense of me deviation
is closer to 1 than any estimate fa at least at a sufficiently low noise
level.*

we assume that

~~

E=K€SI

then
f_IKI"/?"'§“ ,g
‘ W’lkl’li’l! '

Let us consider the positive definite function

u” ’1 ‘

”J;

9 ( )= —-- —.

s. /’ ’7" r,

If 09,1(p)> l. the first-approximation estimate of the reflective surface func-

tion on the interval of assignment of spatial frequencies p gives a gain in the
sense of ms deviation as compared with the zero-approximation estimate.

we can see from the expressions for f. and f; that
I-IKI’
9‘4”" I W,

which implies that the function 9..;(p)-M° as mo.

Analogous arguments are valid for an arbitrary function an.“ n- Consequent-
ly. at least for a sufficiently low noiee level. the n-th estimate of the
reflective surface function gives a gain conpared with the (n- I)-th estimate.

 

*An operator of type (6) is optimum at high noise level.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To verify the conclusions drawn above. a coaputstional experiment was done.
The conditions of the experiment consisted in assigning the reflective surface
function as a data file of complex nuwers f0). l-O. l..... “-1 with Ray-
leigh distribution of the modulus and uniform distribution of the phase on
interval ‘£.J]. The signal was formed in accordance with equation (I). The
estimate n(t) of the reflective surface function was calculated from formula:

(2) and (5). Quantitatively. the quality of the estimate was defined by the
quantity 3 calculated from the formula

whagth} leg—ll)”

The function n(t) in (l) was simulated by an uncorrelated amber sequence.
and the noise level was assigned by the quantity 1:

X' [1/ [3307!—

where the symbol (-) denotes averaging of the sample.

where 0<B< l.

 

Normalized rms deviation of the estimate of the reflective
surface function as dependent on the number n of the step
in the iterative procedure of the adaptive algorithm

The figure shows the results of the experiment for 1-100. The experiment

demonstrated convergence of the procedure described above. in which there

is an appreciable gain in quality of the estimate of the reflective surface
function up to the fourth step of the iteration.

I thank Yu. V. Kunetsova and I. V. Carina for their contribution in doing
the experiment.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFERENCES

l. Kondratenkov. G. s.. "Synthesiaing an Optimus lbthod of Processing Radio
Hologram", RADIOTEKHNIKA, Vol 33, No 5. 1978.

2. Hush. B. 8., "Synthesising Artificial Aperture for Microwave Radio Holo-
grams Reflected from the Surface of the Sea", RADIOTEKHNIKA I WEN.
Vol 25. No 7, 1980.

3. Tsipkin. Ya. 2.. "Osnovy teorii obuchayuahchikhaya sistem" [Principles
of the Theory of Learning Systems]. Moscow. "llauka". 1970.

lo. Tikhonov, A. IL. Arsenin, V.»A.. 'Metodyresheniya nekorrektnykh zadach"
[Methods of Solving Incorrect Problems], Moscow, "Nauka". 1976.

UDC 621.396.67.001.26:778.38

DETERMINUG INTERCOUPLING 0F SPATIAILYCMINEDANTENNAS BY RADIO BOLOGRAPHY
METHODS

[Article by R. A. Orlov]

[Text] A method is considered for determining the mutual
inittance between two spatially combined reciprocal antennas.
The method is based on using radio holograms recorded on

a closed reference surface covering the interacting atnennas.
A basis is proposed for describing the radio holograms with
arbitrary distance of a spherical reference surface from

the antenna to be analyzed. A solution is given for the
problem of finding the iuittance of two collinear dipole
antennas.

Finding the mutual coupling between antennas that are spatially combincd in
the limits of a single radio engineering complex. or between elements of the
same antenna system is a problem of considerable current interest both for
analyzing electromagnetic compatibility and in the design of complex antenna
facilities. An examination of the voluminous research devoted to solution

of this problem shows that the measure of intercoupling in all these cases

is the mutual impedance determined by various methods, including the acthod
of induced emf's [Ref. 1], the method of the angular spectrum of plane waves
[Ref. 2]. etc. However. all these methods make essential use of the structure
of the interacting antennas. which at times is a severe impediment to solution
of the formulated problem. especially when it involves antennas of different
types. A way out of this situation might be to use a method of analyzing
intercoupling relying only on the distribution of the electromagnetic field
set up by the antennas being studied on some surface in the vicinity of the
facility on which they are installed. 1. e. a method that utilizes radio holo-
grams of the fields of radiation of the antennas. The reference surface must
be situated in the near zone of the antenna system to be analyzed. and the
algorithm for calculating mutual impedance must enable simple and effective
use of computers.

22

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These requirements are most simply realized if the analysis of intercoupling
uses a law of conservation of electromagnetic energy in the space that con-

tains the interacting antennas [Ref. 3]. This law can be written as

 

 

:¥§([E..h:ln)ol$ ' §(2.%%"~Uh. ﬁiﬁvh interim - o. m

c." I I"! V

where ii,kv ﬁi,k are fields set up by antennas "i" and "k" at an arbitrary
point of the volume V bounded by surface S; 3 is the unit outer normal to
surface S; 1k are the currents in the antennas; N is the number of interacting
antennas. The surface integral in the braces in (1) defines the flow of ener-
gy from all sources to the surrounding space, and the volume integral defines
the total energy of the overall electromagnetic field stored in V. The last
term characterizes the balance of the powers in each of the interacting an-
tennas as determined by the power fed to the antenna from the oscillator.

and the sum of the partial powers induced in this antenna by all other radi-
ators.

Let us assume for the sake of simplicity that the interacting antennas are
located in free space, and that the radiated fields are monochromatic and
are linear functions of their generated current distributions. Then, repre-
senting the values of the powers in each radiator as the product of currents
1k multiplied by the equivalent applied voltages Uk (comprised of the excita-
tion voltages and the sum of the induced emf's). writing the system of equa-
tions for the currents in rue antennas with consideration of their mutual
impedances. where the corrcnponding Uk are in the second members of these
equations, and solving this system with respect to impedances. we get the
following expression for the mutual impedance of an arbitrary pair of radia-
tors:

2- v ‘2 s 2;. ;
it? ' §§(IIBL,HT] ~. [Elli I L») d3 . (2)
at? - ‘1“; ékcist') ~ (12:12:). was . (ntfumdv.

where the primes denote fields set up by antennas in which the current dis-
tribution is normalized to unity.

An examination of expressions (2) shows that radio holographic information
can be used only to find the component 2“) determined by distributions of

the fields of radiation of the antennas over the surface s that encompasses
these antennas. Moreover, we can readily see that to get this component it

is sufficient to integrate the radio hologram obtained by using the field
distribution of the other interacting antenna as a reference signal. However.
there are considerable difficulties involved in directly producing such radio
holograms. and it is preferable in this problem to use holographic information
in the form of distributions of the amplitude and phase of the field of radi-
ation of each of the antennas individually. Such information also enables us

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to find the para-stars of the antennas with consideration of their interaction
and conforms to present-day nathoda of recording holograms in the radio wave

band .

Sequential registration of radio holograms assxnes storage of data files on
anplitude. phase and polarization of the field over the entire surface s.

i. e. a large volune of operating conputer mory. a requirenent that in-
creases with increasing ratio between the linear dinensiona of the investi-
gated antenna system and the wavelength of the radiated field. and involves
a cusbersone procedure of successive computations with the use of these data
files. Therefore when finding '8.) it is desirable to use a nethod of field
representation that sharply reduces the volume of stored information while
retaining data about the radio hologram on the entire surface s and to de-
scribe the field distribution at an arbitrary distance from the antennas (in-
cluding in the near zone). which corresponds to conditions of radio hologran
registration on neasurenent stands.

The simplest closed surface is that of a sphere; when such a surface is used
as S. we can represent the aapliphase distribution of the field on s as an
expansion with respect to spherical vector wave functions (Ref. lo]:

I " é. . - .
H. = Z L. I ammo») - % rot whammy)“;

 

El ' i; ;\%ml[5.L(r)x.le.v)]+ 8;.t")x(m(9.tr)l; (3’
where -
mm) twig? wage») -. I». - -; [m1

is a vector differential operator; Yum,» are scalar spherical harnonics
that take the form

, t a“ 4].: ,.
Ye...(9.‘f) : {if—{4' gar)” F; (maesplamﬂ.

Outside of the sources. the radial functions can be written in the form

mo ? a‘.(¢.m)h‘2‘(kr) 2 9.10) . (21.0») #30:»). (’0

where hi1)(kr) are spherical Bankel functions. and the coefficients aéﬂm)
and (than) in the general case are defined by the following formulas:

0; (2.») ' {ﬁt—$7 §Ycl(0.w)h5 ng'jJW} '

. 5.! (ammo) - n- anv([r,n])j.(kr)] dv;

'a1.(e.-) #471491 3 Y;(9.w)‘div(£'[r. 1'1) 1.0m

. davﬂ gym]- k‘(r,n)j.th)]d\'.

 

(5)

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFFICIALUSCONLY

in which jlﬂtr) are spherical Bessel functions of the first kind. integration
is carried out only over the region that contains the sources. and 1! denotes
nsgnetic current density. In practice. these eupressions are considerath
sieplified since Us 0. and the charges and currents are related by the equ-
tion of continuity.

The given expansions are valid at an arbitrary distance fron source‘ of radia-
tion with the exception of a sphere of nininua radius that contains the syst-
of interacting antennas and is deternined by the nexi-n overall dilensions

of this systen. Thus. ”Ct-1.03 that the surface s has the for. of a sphere

of radius h. substituting (3) in (2) and considering the absolute convergence
of the series with respect to vector spherical hernnnics. as well as the con-
ditions of orthogonality for these series and the fact that the normal 3 coin-

cides with the radial unit vector 30 of the spherical coordinate systen. we
find

my; 9:;ez..- 95.93:.
. . . M
r 5.... u: ‘ 5w- 5::.]* 9:0- gag"; r..- (6)
.. d I. . (I . O
- 'ig'g' as. 3“:- 9%?an 1;. ¥an

Now let us consi r the contribution ends by the real and inaginary conponents
to the quantity z t). “to do this. we will assuns that the surface S is situ-
ated rather far away (radius R is large) and we will use an asyntotic repre-
sentation for the spherical lanhel function at large values of the argunent.
Then we get the expression

ll.
25.“: :h mine... a::a:.d..a::o «2:4.»
9' O I I I. ' .
’ did-«an. " Quag‘ 0'... 0,. . a; as".

iron which we can see that the conponent of mtual inpedance ea) in the gen-
eral case has a reactive component that approaches zero as radius 3 increases.
Carrying out an analogous study of the other part of the nutual iepedence
that differs only in the fact that integration in this case is carried out
over the space external to a sphere of large radius. we can establish the
purely reactive nature of coeponsnt 4123‘

(7)

Thus. radio holographic infatuation enables direct detereination only of the
resistive conponent of nutual inpedance between spatially costined antennas.
Let us deal briefly with finding the reactive conponent of eutual impedance
In an. Here as a rule we use indirect nethods based on utilising additional
intonation concerning the resistive component of nutual i-ittance. and none-

‘.y the way that Re 21k depends on electrical distance between antennas or on
frequency.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLISEONLV

The first such nethod lakes use of the fact that the dependence of lam on
spatial separation of the antennas is oscillatory and vanishes at values of
the phase of en equal to w-«IZ-eﬂt- 1) (Ref. 5]. Taking these points

as nodes of interpolation. we can find the phase function of nutual inpatients.
the nodnlua of an and than Inca. At anall distances between antennas. the
phase function is daternined by extrapolation only to the niddle of the 'Ssin
lobe" of the function lean. since in a close approach the inductive and stat-
ic fields of the antennas begin to lake the najor contribution to the reactive

conponent of en.

The second uthod uses the frequency dependence of the resistive coeponant

of nutual inpedance Berna»). While a sinilar approach was suggested in Ref.
3. the method considered there for detersining the frequency dependence of
the Green's function and subsequent m-ation with consideration of the dis-
tributions of currents and charges as well as the configuration of the an-
tennas to get the couplets reactive cowonent of 31k in rather awkward and
cowlicated. Besides. it is conpletely unsuitable if we are using only radio
holographic intonation. Therefore when finding In: it is advisable to
use direct reconstruction of this couponent free the td‘ependance Barnum) based
on algoritlu available in the literature [Ref. 6]. The resultant error due
to the fact that in the general case the syste- of interacting antennas is
not a nininal-phasa systen in view of the presence of nultiple scattering

is a call error. and the accuracy obtained in any event is no poorer than

in the nsthod of induced eef's that accounts for only one-tins interactions.

In conclusion. we give a solution for the problem of deternining nutual in-
pedances of two thin dipoles of arbitrary length. Let the antennas be situ-
ated on sepents r€ (a. h]. z 6 [-a. -b] of the z-axis. and let than have
snsll gaps in the center for excitation. We take the current distribution

to be the sane in the antenna syste-a. and we assume that this distribution

is described by an even function of r and vanishes on the ends of the antenna.
Since the currents are radial. (1'. 31-0. and all components of nagnetic nulti-
poles are equal to zero. The current density appearing in expression (5)

is detenined in spherical coordinates for r € la. b]. and in the case of he:-
nonic tine dependence. it can be written as

1.. (r) - 53;. 150) 3(oss9 : 4) up I-iu“. (a)

where 6 is the Dirac delta function. Deteraining the charge distirbution
on the basis of the equation of continuity. and calculating the integrals
appearing in (5) over 9 and e. we find as already noted in Ref. 6 that for
such antennas only eultipoles with indices n-O are excited. To calculate
the radial integral we aust know the current distribution along the antenna
normalised to the naxim. Considering that this distribution can be
represented as a Fourier expansion. and for the sake of sinplicity taking
11,1(r) as coincident with only one spatial harnonic of the expansion. the
renaining integral can be coeputed fairly easily. yielding

(9)

 

3; (an) - gym flu-($1; (ﬁnd)- high.» thﬁuﬂ,

(Red)

26

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the general expression for the active coeponsnt of nutual iepedence in the
given case takes the fora:

Pangaea—ate?

Substituting expression (9) in this expression. we get the following relation
for calculating the resistive coqonent of i-ittance of the two entemes:

" {X} ;77'1. lk'tmbu. 1mm). t‘a ' 'ua).

~ *‘b‘l'tm ak' «(avbmuoudnvhymen“). <10)
- j.(*b)j.(§(mb)) . 2?abj,(to)_j,{lrb)‘.

In accordance with expression (10). calculations of in were done for dipoles
of length m as a function of the electrical distance 2e/X between antennae.
Conparieon of the results of the calculation with a curve for the nutual re-
sistance under the sale conditions calculated by the Isthod of induced nf'e
[Ref . I] showed that both solutions give sieilsr relations for 1“. Maxi..-
diecrepency is no lore than 52 with 10 terns retained in the series. It should
he noted that when the distance between dipoles is increased a greater nuher
of terns lust be considered. involving an increase in the radius I. of the
sphere that contains these antennas. which agrees coupletely with results
obtained previously on the necessity of accounting for terns with indicss
13m. in calculations [Ref. 7].

l. Lavrov. G. A.. "Vzaienoye vliyaaiye lineynyhh vibratornykh antsnn" [Mutual
Influence of Linear Dipole Antennas]. Moscow. "Svyaz'". 1975.

2. Deshpande. M. 0.. Des. B. M.. ”A New Approach to the Mutual Initance
Between No Radiators". J. m. amen. AND mum. ENG” Vol 23.
No 6. 1977. PP 359-366.

3. Vendih. 0. 6.. "Detenining Mutual Iepedence Between Antennae Pro. Known
Radiation Patterns in the Far Zone". mxmm. Vol 17. Mo 10. 1962.
pp 11-20.

lo. Jackson. J.. "Klaseichesksya elektrodinuike" [Classical Bleetrodyneaicel.
Moscow. "Mir". 1965.

S. Saronov. D. M.. "Reechet vaaimyhh inpedansov proirvol’nykh entenn po
ikh diagr-an napravlennosti” [Calculating Mutual Ilpedancss of Arbitrary
Antennae Pro- ‘rheir Radiation Patterns]. mmrmmm I umm.
Vol 15. Mo 2. 1970. PP 376-378.

6. Gsdel'ehin. R. M.. Golubhov. A. 6.. Gonostarev. V. A.. "Method of Deter-
aining the Phase-Frequency Response of a Mining-Phase Target Pros: the

27

POI “MCI/.1. USE ONLY
POIOFFIGALISEONLY

Amplitude-Frequency leaponee Aaeigned in a united frequency Band".
IZVBS‘I’IYA "SSH!!! mm zavronm: mrm. Vol 22. lo 3.
1979. pp 89-92.

7. Ludwig. A. 6.. "hear-Field Par-Field ‘l‘ranefornetiona Being Spherical live
Expanaiona". manners (I Aims All) mum-Ion. ”-19. lo 2.
1971. Pp 216-220.

UDC 535.317.!
MEASURING PM 0? stamina WES BY IADIO noon!!! moo
[Article by A. Ya. Pamov]

[‘l'extl An edge wave nethod Ref. 1) ia need to get ene-
lytical reletione for calculating the ecattering charac-
terietica of individual ”ehining" points of an ideally con-
ductive cylinder of finite dinenaione. 0n thie baaia an
equation ia derived for a a etandard coupler Fourier radio
hologrn, end a teat algoritt- ie developed for nodeling
the radio holographic process. It is shown that the poten-
tial accuracy of neaouring the effective ecattaring eurface
of "ehining" pointa of an object by the nethod of Fourier
radio holography can be brought to 0.5 dB.

The reaulte of theory. nodeling and erperinent ere conpared.
end race-endatione are nede on etandardiring neeeurenente
of local ecattering characteriatica of bodies.

‘l'o eolve verioue applied problene in diffraction of electronegnetic waves

a. the high-frequency approximation requires diagram of the effective acet-
tering surface of individual ”ehining" points of an object. Such acattering
cherecterietice. tar-ed "local" [lef. 2]. can be obtained analytically or
experinentelly. It in advieable to uoe theoretical nethode for calculating
local ecattering cherecterietice of ideally conductive bodiee of aimle geo-
netric ahape (cylinder. cone and the like). The local ecattering character-
iatice of a conplicated ahape can be deternined’only experinentally an a rule.
nethode of radio holography are need to do thie. in particular the nethod

of invermd eyntheaie of one-dineneional Fourier radio hologram by rotating
the object around ite center of naee (Ref. 3. lo].

A fundanental condition of doing experinente of thia kind is the availability
of a reference ecatterer for which analytical expreaeione can be found that
deecribe ite local ecattering cherecterietice. The reference is neceeeery
for getting a quantitative neaeurenent atandard. for checking operation of
the experinental facility by co-paring theoretical and experinental data.

and for evaluating the experimental error. In addition. the reference can
he need to nodal the radio holographic proceea. the latter circuetance ie
the noat inportant since the nethod of Fourier radio holography hae e funda-
nentally inherent error of neaeurenent of local ecattering characteristice
uhoce cancer will be elucidated below. Co-periaon of reeulte of theory and

28

FOIOFI'ICIALIBEONLY
”OFFICIALUSBWLY

nodeling haaed on general analytical relatione enehlea evaluation of the ag-
nitude of thie error. i. e. deter-inetion of the potential accuracy of the
nathod. Cmarieon of the given reenlta with erperinantel data enablee de-
tereinatinn of the inetrunentel error of a apecific neeenr-ent facility.

Up until now. analyeie of the nethod of radio holography hae relied on nee

of a hypothetical body nade up of a eet of point ecatterere (let. 3]. @-
viouely ouch an object cannot nerve no a etandard. In our paper. an ideally
conductive cylinder of finite diaeneione ie taken ea the reference ecetterer.
The edge veve nethod in need to get analytical expreeeione for calculating
the local ecettering characterietice of this reference. 0n the haeie of theee
erpreeeione. an equation ie derived for a couple: one-dinneional ’ourier
radio hologrn. and e teat algoritl- ia developed for nodeling the radio holo-

graphic proceee.

Upon diffraction of a plane vave by an ideally conductive cylinder of length
I and radine a (Pig. 1), a scattered field ie for-ed in the far acne vhoee
cowonente for B- and B-polerization are reepectively equal to [let X]:

' in.
E'-%£‘%MZ(O.0.) o a)
o‘?‘ .‘7 20.0.). (2)

 

‘rranaaitter

‘ Receiver
Pig. 1

in contract to Ref. 1. the angle functione Ewe.) and :(e.e.) are rcpreeentcd
in the fore of three terns. each characterized by a correeponding ecattering
center of the cylinder (Fig. l).

mom-250.0,» 2149.0,» 240.1.) , (3)
zwﬂﬁ‘ 810,0.) .2.( o, o.) ’ 8"”.0.)e (‘)
29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“)3 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

f3.(\’.0.)'f.ﬂ.(pvwz‘§’l 9‘ $130.“). (5)
Z.u.m-:.t-s.m*wz‘me‘"“‘”""". <6)
Ema-Mamus.(me"¥"'"""’. m

where J; and J; are tassel functions of the first kind of first and second
. order respectively.

S’ «aw-come.) .'

For the functions 1140.0.) (n- l, 2. 3) we can get expressions analogous to
(5)-(7) by replacing the functions fn with 3n defined by relations

- I
it -“-:.4«~%-~’—.:5>';(«s-~!%=5)"1. m
t;
3:]13-"4‘ %- 157‘"':(m:'~'—3-")"]. m
~l . - - -
{1 Jain % -m'—;5)‘:(~%-~"T'—")‘. w»
3-3/2.

Expressions (3) and (6) are valid under condition that e<s/2 end r/2+8<e.<s.
Otherwise the nuber of terns in these equations nay be less than three due
to eclipaing of other scattering centers. Setting e-e. everywhere we can
easily pass to the single-position case of observation (8-0). The resultant
fornulss enable calculation of the local scattering characteristics of an
ideally conductive cylinder as a reference standard.

Siaultaneously froa equation (1) we can find the amplitude A; and phase 93
of the wave scattered by the object for E-polariration (analogous expressions
follow fron (2) for An and on in the case of B-polariration):

”V." E.‘ f- M204), . (11)

150.0,)- .a um . M, 20.0.), (12)

where Hod_and Arg denote respectively the aodulua and arg\ment of the cleex
quantity £(0. 0.).

Using the latter equations and choosing the appropriate per-etera of the
reference wave. we get the following function of the couple: reference Pourier
radio holograa for an ideally conductive cylinder in the case of finite disen-
sions in the case of l-polarizstion:

”WISEONLY
FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY

‘3‘?)0Mﬂitad.)ew’u«’o (13)
By analogy we have for napolerisstu .
t,(e)em$3(¢.ﬁ)¢“’m“’. (u)

The x-coordinate on the surface of a radio hologrsn fixed in acne way is re-
lated to the angular coordinate a hy the expression

' {”190 (15)

where u is the angular velocity of spin of the ohject. v. is the rate of regis-
tration of the radio hologras on the recording saterial.

Reconstruction of the insge corresponding to the position of the object at
tine t-o (t6 (-172. 1/2]. where 'l' is the interval of synthesis of the radio
hologrn) reduces to truncated lourier transforution of the function of the
radio hologran [Ref . b]:

w: .
V(0,)- I mums-‘4: . (16)
"M

where tax is the coordinate in the inage space.

The intensity of the inege. free which the local scattering characteristics
of the object are detersined [Ref. 2], is

WmJ-sznz. (17)

The algoritl. of digital nodeling of the radio holographic process reduces

to the following procedures based on expressions ([3), (lb). (16) and (17).
Assigned as initial data are the dimensions a and l of the cylinder and wave-
length A. The functions hams-p) and mum -p) are calculated in discrete
fora. where p is a whole-outer parameter that ensures a range of the arguent
in the interval 0<0<2n The discretitetion step A8 is deterained in accor-
dance with the theores of readings free the condition AO< All. For subsequent
processing. readings are selected fron the total data file of values of the
functions h3(A6'p) and ha(A60p) that correspond to the angular interval

0 - Yg/2<Aeop<oa+Ys/2. where on is the required radius of observation of
the ohject, Ys-u'l‘ is the angular site of the rad o holograe. The latter

has an optimal value (Ref. 3] equal to '8' (1/21) . ‘l‘he insge of the object
for aspect on is reconstructed from the corresponding ample hy the fast Pour-
ier transform algorith. In this connection the step of image discretization
is equal to Aw,” X/sz. Finally. the inages of individual scattering centers
are identified with respect to function (17). and the local scattering charac-
teristics are detersined.

ln Fourier analysis of linited data files. the phenanenon of "blurring" of
spectral conponenta arises [Ref. 5]. which corresponds to the apectrun of

the scattering function of an object with a function of the type sin 2/: in
the inage space. Therefore. instead of a set of 6-functions corresponding in

31

MWJSEONLY
POROFF'ICIALUSBONLY

the linit to the insges of the "shining" points. functions of the type sine/s
arise. The side lobes of these functions cause en error in neasur-ent of

the locsl scattering charscteristics that is fmds-entelly inherent in the
given nethod end restricts its potential eccurscy. In other words. the issues
of the scattering centers are "blurred" by the edge wsves that erise at the
ends of the bologna. The level of the aide lobes can be uni-ind by spodi-
rstion. i. e. by Iultiplying the s-ple to be processed by e certain weighting
. function list. 5]. He used two weighting functions in our work:

mu a» mum)
uo-{m . Q‘GmendQ-m . (18)
Mtg-a —4 )‘
cs“) - 9 0-0 ' . (19)

where q is the ordinal mﬁer of the discrete reading. end Q is the value
of the sanple to be processed

nqé, an S

 

:1 imm“ (1°) ' ' I .-function (13) | |
.-.:.“°.;:3h$é ’ ! -- funcuon (19) :
a-no spodisstion

  
   

   

 

M O U m Q-deg

m. 2

Fig. 2 shows the results of digital nodeling for s cylinder with dinensions
a- ISA. 1- In em! disgrace of the effective surface scattering of scattering
centers of the seat object calculsted in the single-position csse by using

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY

the relations

cfuhnnglm’ } . (20)
DOLLS .
6:( o) . In“ ZJM‘ (21)

I

aviously the error of neasuring local scattering characteristics that is in-
herent in the Fourier radio holography eethod nay reach 3-5 d8. Use of weight-
ing functions (18) end (19) can reduce this error to 1 dB and 0.5 dB respec-
tively. Apodisation leads to "expansion” of the image of each scattering
center. i. e. to deterioration of resolution. For ex-ple on Fig. 2a, in

the case of using weighting function (19) the values of effective surface
scattering of scattering centers 1 and 2 are lacking for certain aspects

(0- 110'. 120'. 111‘). This is due to the fact that the inages of these cen-
ters eerged into one another. This effect is observed to a lesser extent

when weighting function (18) is used. Thus the weighting function for process-
ing radio hologrlls lust be selected fro. the condition of eininizing the
eeasureeent error and maximizing resolution.

These analytical relations were verified experimentally by the nethod of Four-
ier radio holograns under conditions of an anechoic charter. The procedure
for conducting the experiment is given in Ref. 2-4. The corresponding part
of the nodeling algoritlls was used for digital reconstruction of images.

 

 

 
 
 

 
  

Scettering
center 1

 

{mz

Scattering rexp .
center 2 mt! .

       

 

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 3 shove measured values of local scattering characteristics of an ideally
conductive cylinder of length 51 and radius x. diagrams of the effective scat-
tering surfaces of scattering centers. and also the results of modeling (using
weighting function (19)). The estimate of the rms deviation for the experimen-
tal values of the local scattering characteristics was 1.8 dB. In addition

to the error of the method itself. which in the given case was 0.5 dB. the
overall measurement error includes components due to background reflections

in the snachoic chamber. signal fluctuations in the reception and transmitting
channels. nonideslity of isolation between polarisation channels. etc. thus
the error of measurement of local scattering characteristics introduced di-
rectly by the experimental facility is approximately 1.3 dB.

For H-polarisation (Fig. 3b). the results of theory. modeling and experiment
coincide within the limits of the total measurement error. In the case of
B-polarization (Fig. 3a). the discrepancy between data of modeling and experi-
ment (especially noticeable for scattering center 1) can apparently be attrib-
uted to the approximate nature of the initial formulas. The absence of ex-
perimental values of the effective scattering surface of scattering center 3
(Fig. 3a) is due to the fact that the intensity of its image did not exceed
the level of the general background.

In summing up. we can draw the following conclusions. for measuring the

local scattering characteristics of various objects. it is advisable to use

an ideally conductive cylinder of finite dimensions as a reference standard.
An edge wave method is used to get analytical expressions for this cylinder
that describe its local scattering properties and ensure satisfactory coinci-
dence of theoretical and experimental results. In virtue of the approximate
nature of the resultant formulas in the case of B-polarisstion. only the char-
acteristic of the scattering center situated on the joining between the illu-
minated end face and lateral surface of the cylinder can be used for refer-
encing. The algoritha developed for digital modeling of the radio holographic
process for reference objects enables verification of the efficacy of the
measurement facility. evaluation of instrumental error of measurement and

the error introduced by the method of Fourier radio holography itself. The
potential accuracy of measuring local scattering characteristics can be im-
proved to 0.5 dB by using spodization on the stage of reconstructing the image
of the object.

The proposed algorithm can also be used to solve the following problems:

I) determination of the permissible extent of action of various distorting
factors on accuracy of measuring local scattering characteristics;

2) selection of optimum parameters for recording radio holograms;
3) investigation of different methods for digital processing of radio holo-

grams for the purpose of correcting and eliminating distortions. improving
the signal-to-noise ratio. implementing spatial filtration. etc.

34

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WC“

1. Ufiatsev. P. Ya., "Hetod krayevykh voln v Eizicheskoy teorii difraktsii"
[Edge Have liethod in Physical Diffraction Theory]. Moscow. "Sow. radio".
1962.

2. Zinov'yev, Yu. 8.. Pasmurov. A. Ya. in: 'Teoriya difraktsii i
rasprostraneniya voln. VII Vsesoyusnyy simposium po difraktsii i
rasprostraneniyu vein. 3. Rostov-na-Donu. 1977. Kratkiye teksty dokladov"
[Theory of Wave Diffraction and Propagation. Seventh All-Union Symposiua
on Have Diffraction and Propagation. Rostov-na-Donu. 1977. Abstracts
of Reports]. Vol 3. Moscow. 1977. pp 279-282.

3. Popov. s. A.. Rosanov. I. A.. Zinov'yev. Yu. 8., Pasaurov. A. Ya. in:
'ﬂaterialy VIII Vsesoyuznoy shkoly po golografii" [Materials of the Eighth
All-Union School on Holography]. Leningrad. 1976» PP 275-297.

to. Zinov'yev. Yu. 8.. Pauurov, A. Ya.. PIS'MA V ZWAL TWICHESKOY PIZIKI.
Vol 3. No l. 1977. pp 28-32.

5. Bergland, G. D.. mm 39mm. Vol 6, No 7, 1969. PP 41-67.
unc 621.391.156

FUNCTIONAL CAPABILITIES 01’ Dr. 'ICES WITH OPTICAL FEEDBACK

[Article by V. B. Astaf'yev]

[Text] An examination is made of the functional capabili-
ties of devices vith optical feedback. It is shown that

the increase of inforsation input to devices with optical
feedback that realize transformations in the spatial co-
ordinates of the device is limited by the time required

for the optical signal to pass through the optical feedback
circuit. A further increase in the rate of information

input enables expansion of the functional capabilities of

the device with optical feedback by synthesis of an optical
digital filter. The weighting coefficients of optical digital
filters are functions of two arguments and act on the spatial
characteristics of the optical signal propagating in the
optical feedback. In this way it becomes possible to process
three-dimensional information in which one of the coordinates
is time. while the other two correspond to the spatial co-
ordinates of the device.

The development of optical data processing is determined both by the develop-
sent of an element base of optical computer facilities, and by expansion of
the class of optically realizable transformations. Devices uith optical
feedback have enabled expansion of the algorithmic capabilities of optical

processors. Devices with optical feedback can be used to synthesize a real-
tiae amplitude-phase filter [Ref. 1]. to synthesize an inverse filter (Ref. 2],

35

FOR OFFICIAL L'Sb‘. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to eliminate multiplicative interference [Ref. 3] and nonlinear transformation
of images (Ref. a], to solve Prehohn'a integral equations of the first kind by
synthesis of Wiener and Tikhonov filters and by the iteration method lief.
5-7], and to solve Predholm's integral equations of the second kind [Ref. 5.
6, 8].

The widespread opinion that the rate of data processing in optical computing
devices is limited for practical purposes only by the the time of data input
(Ref. 9] is not completely valid in the case of devices with optical feedback
at high rates of data input since the time for feeding information into a
device with optical feedback may be comparable with the time that the optical
information signal is in the device repeatedly passing through the optical
feedback circuit; furthermore, delay of the optical information signal in

the optical feedback circuit does not lead to simple time shift of the pro-
cessing result as is the case in devices without optical feedback. Thus in
realizing transformations [Ref. [-8] the time of information input (and there-
by the time of transformation) must be greater than the quantity NT, where T
is the time required for an optical information signal to pass through the
optical feedback circuit, N is the number of passages of the light through

the optical feedback circuit that are taken into consideration in synthesizing
the transformation; T-ILoc/c. where Loc is optical length of the optical feed-
back circuit. c is the speed of light.

On the other hand. in the case of matching the rate of information input to
the delay T of the optical signal in the optical feedback circuit, the possi-
bility is opened up for expansion of the functional capabilities of the device
by using a time coordinate in addition.

8 3'4” a 02 e: Let us consider the device shown in the diagram.
which is analogous to a device with optical wedge
in the optical feedback circuit [Ref. 6].

     

Device with optical feedback:
01-05—-Fourier transformation
lenses; Kn-optical wedge; P1
and P;-—input and output planes;
P2, P5. P3 and P5-- frequency

a —0 . and object planes respectively

The device is a correlator of diffraction type (Ref. 9] consisting of Fourier
transformation lenses 0; and 02 with the addition of a feedback circuit formed
by mirrors 3;. 32. 33. at and Fourier transformation lenses 0;. 0.. 05. Opti-
cal wedge Kn is introduced in the object plane of the optical feedback circuit
to shift the optical beam by an amount Aux in the space frequency plane. A
plane-parallel plate inclined to the optical axis and located in the frequency
plane of the optical feedback circuit can also be used as an element for shift-
ing the beam by the ampunt [Aux].

Let the distribution of light in plane P; be equal to S(x, y. t), and let
the transmission of transparencies be An(mx. my) in plane P2. and 3n(”x' my)

36

FOR‘OFFﬂﬂAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in plane P5 or P5. transparencies A3(. ) and Bub, -) being localized in the
neighborhoods of points “‘x' nAmxa “’x" (n- mm“ respectively. and being

of size Aux x Amy, where Aux and My are the dimensions of the spatial spectra
of signal 80:. y. t) along coordinates x and y respectively. The transmission

of the optical wedge is equal to exp (iAuxx). Then the distribution of light
in the output plane P3 is equal to

3&1; {ll/30:2e50/i new ”I”; J/ngij, (1)

0:0
where £01) is an operator equal to

14:: 5/!) 1’)” ‘ﬂ”;f) 047(0177:
- Isa/20994,? Hip/r tar) //,/p)

4’ ”(5’) is the inverse Fourier transform of function Kuhn,“ my) .

/(/al,.gu): “I n/“fn‘5J6 /M;“'Mz/“5a‘f)"' 6/901"
= ”Ir/“30“?) ’78 a(“’n")'

I’ll

The factor exp (inwa;» in (i) arises as a consequence of the optical wedge
in the object plane of the optical feedback, and leads to nonlinearity of
the optical system as does any transparency in the object plane of the optical
feedback circuit [Ref. lo]. Asst-lug the influence of the phase factor is

eliminated by one of the methods given below, (I) is transformed to the fol-
lowing expression:

”(ﬁll
5:” (nu/,0:- >31, III/Ix), (2)

["0

that dcscribes a linear system with transfer function

(Mi/J I”): ”I” n‘ﬁ'yhyﬁngnﬂ, (3)

I" a

where w: is the angular time frequency.

Expression (3) is obtained from (2) by triple Fourier transformation of both
sides of the equation with respect to coordinates x. y. t.

Comparing transfer function (3) with the transfer function of an electronic
digital filter [Ref. 10]. which takes the form

KM) 1“; K” «so/"M ~77.

we can treat the system with optical feedback as an optical digital filter
that is an optical analog of the electronic digital filter. the weighting

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coefficients in front of factors exp(-iutn1‘) in the optical digital filter.
In contrast to the coefficients of the electronic digital filter. being func-
tions of the spatial coordinates ax. my.

The analogy between optical and electronic digital filters shows up most com-
pletely when

”a; {“fn‘ﬁ": (I/oﬁ‘w “”IO/m-

'l'hen

K/u“ I arﬁ’y/i I "/aq, l/(yaﬁ ,wnro)(7g/.,;.’nij

0:0

In this case. the digital filter realizes st—ation of the weighted signals
80:. y. t) shifted not only with respect to time coordinate by n‘l'. but also
with respect to space coordinate by nXo.

If Auk-0 (no optical wedge in the object plane in the optical feedback cir-
cuit). the transfer function of the system takes the form

/(MM$~;“4)= 35.; many/6 ”m.«g,;ryw.~7/=

= w... (a)
- [fag ,[a’pﬁ 1 'u/( )7
and corresponds to a recursive optical digital filter of first order. Let

us take up methods of compensating the phase factor in sum (1). We note that
if wa-O. this problen does not arise.

l. Incoherent smation of lminous fluxes in the output plane [Ref. 14].
In this case the coherence length ‘10 rof the light source mst be less than
Loc. The class 0‘ transformations in rspatial coordinates is fairly narrow.

2. Multiplying the spatial spectrum of light distribution in the output plane

P; with subsequent filtration using a spatial slit filter of size [-Aux/Z,
Aux/2] by the algoritl'n

5“,] MjﬂF {3.3" (r, ,I)Ze1;o/-.hu; 9}”.- "‘7" an
295.2? W" In W W’ 3’7'wJ/W3'L‘iz’3/QMJ

N ma
where’z’ﬂflwﬂgaﬂs the transmission function of the spatial spectrum mul-

tiplier. The condition onr>Loc must be met.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The holographic method of owning light fluxes lief. 71. A special case
of the holographic method is heterodyning. by using a device analogous to
that in the diagram (p 36) and including a tile modulator for shifting the
frequency of light by an amount (ago. a fan of reference light bans is pro-

duced
_ .
i cyzxnueuxwmua, m

080

that are combined with information signal (I). each intonation light flux
appearing in sun (1) corresponding to a reference heme in sun (5) that is
collinear and coherent only to that particular flrnt. Quadratic detection

of the output signal at each point of the output plane by a photocell with
subsequent electronic filtration of the time signal using a filter with trans-
mission center on. ensures electrical st-nation of the terms of sun (2).

In this case it is necessary that LK°,<L°c.

The base of the three-dimensional signal to be processed in a device with
optical feedback is determined by the product of the signal base with respect
to the time coordinate and the signal base with respect to space coordinate.
The base of the signal being processed with respect to time coordinate is
determined by the nunber of filters located in plane P2 and is equal to the I.
Since 8+1 and N filters are situated in the respective frequency planes P2
and P! of the device. the information capacity in spatial coordinates of a de-
vice with optical feedback is IHI times less than that of a device without
optical feedback. Thus the information capacity with respect to time and
space coordinates is redistributed in the device with optical feedback. The
quantity N is limited chiefly by losses of light in the optical feedback cir-
cuit. Inclusion of an optical wedge in the output plane of the optical feed-
back circuit enables use of a mirror with reflectivity near 1001 as mirror

3.. by oblique input of the optical been into the optical feedback circuit
[Ref. ’0]. which considerably reduces light losses. Besides. an active aediu
can be used for light amlification in the optical feedback cirCuit lief. 2].
In case of necessity. the luminous fluxes that pass through the optical feed-
back circuit can be equalized in intensity in plane P2. where N is determined
by a reasonable value of efficiency of \tiliaation of the power of the light
source.

The time for passage of a light signal through the optical feedback circuit
at LOCI-2 m. c- 3 10 ' m/s. is 6.7 us. which corresponds to an upper limit-
ing time frequency of the signal introduced into the optical digital filter
of 75 m2. whereas existing electro-optical and acousto-optical light modu-
lators enable data input to optical computers with speeds in excess of 1 Ghz.

Thus the time aspect when considering devices with optical feedback is useful
since in the first place it enables estimation of the limiting speed of devices
with optical feedback that realize transformations in spatial coordinates.
and in the second place it opens up the capability for synthesis of optical
digital filters that realize transformations of three-dimensional infomtion.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWUSEONLY

RIMES

l. Gallagher. I. C... APPL. 01m. Vol 15. No b. 1976. p 882.

2. Nagler. n. 0.. mm. on” Vol 10. No 2. 1971, p 2783.

3. Mullet. 3.. Ruler. V.. on. cms.. V01 23. No 3. 1977. p 352.

«'0. Mezlnnko. Ye. 8.. Sepktot. B. 1.. AWHA. No 3. 1976. p 98.

5. Astaf'yev. V. 3.. "Daisy dokladov II Vseaoyutnoy shkoly po opticheskoy
ohrabotke infernatsii" [Abstracts of Reports to the Second All-onion
School on Optical Data Processing]. Gor'kiy. 1978. p 36; also in:
"Opticheskaye obrsbotka infornatsii" [Optical Data Processing]. collection
of papers edited by S. D. Gurevich. Leningrad. 1979. p 139.

6. Vasilenko. G. 1.. "Teoriya vosstanovleniya signalov" [Theory of Signal
Reconstruction). Noscow. "Sov. radio". 1979.

7. Aataf'yev. V. 3.. "l‘ezisy doklsdov lll Veesoyuznoy shkoly po opticheskoy
obrabotlri infomtsii" [Abstracts of Reports to the Third All-Union School
on wtical Data Processing]. Riga. 1980. p 116.

8. Auslender. A. I... Viahnyakov. G. N.. Levin. G. 6.. Stepanov. D. K” in:
"Opticheskaya obrabotlta inforeatsii". collection of papers edited by
s. D. Gurevich. Leningrad. 1979. p 107.

9. Vasilenko. c. 1.. ”Golograficheakoye opornavaniye obrsrov" [Bolographic
Pattern Recognition]. Hoscow. "Sov. radio". 1977.

lo. Gonorovskiy. l. 5.. "Radiotekhnicheskiye tsepi i signaly" [Electronic
Circuits and Signals]. Moscow. "Sov. radio". 1977.

one 621.391.“

SIGNAL AND mmcr A‘l‘ INPUT 0! ACOUS‘rO-OPIICAL SPECTRUM ANALYZER
[Article by 8. V. Kulakov]

[Text] The paper analyzes passage of a normal steady-state

randoe signal and a useful signal through an electro-optical

spectral analyzer.
The acousto-optical spectrun analyzer (Lasbert analyzer) is attracting particu-
lar attention in connection with the fact that it can be used for real-tine
processing of radio signals with spectral width of several hundred NH: ("super
wide-band signals") on carrier frequencies up to several Gilt.
A large nuﬁer of papers have been devoted to studies of this device. which

is shown sclneatically in Fig. 1. In particular. the following frequency-
response function (response to a-action in the frequency region) was found

40

FOR OFHCIAI. [SE ONLY
MWALIMONLY

 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of acousto-optical spectra: ena-

lyzer: l—coherent light source; 2--condenser lens; 3--

collimator; b-acoustic light modulator; 5-integrating

objective lens; 6--registration device (photodetector);
7—piezoelectric transducer

in Ref. 1. 2:

7’ t

. - - (M), VIM)

61w»... é)-"”——ll—(“’ “”’ e’ e .
' “Md:

where ”as is the frequency of the harmonic input signal; 1‘- L/v is the dura-

tion of the sample being analyzed: 1. is the dimension of the aperture of the
acoustic light modulator in the direction of elastic wave propagation; v is
the velocity of the elastic waves in the mediu- of acousto-optical interaction.

(1)

It can be easily demonstrated that when the passband of the acoustic light
modulator is limited and the elastic waves are damped in the nodulator nediua.
the frequency-response function is defined by the relation

. .41.»); we»)! .61.: (am. ,1». «a» } ova-w)!
. . -—-——- P

where linouae) is the complex transfer constant of the piezoelectric transducer
of the acoustic light modulator “(”30) is the frequency-dependent daQing
factor of elastic waves in the median of acouato-opticel interaction.

The frequency-response function of the analyzer enables us to find the output
spectral distribution in accordance with the expression [Ref. 1. 2]:

5,4140% 1'3/meiom . (a)

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI omcuu. [SE “V

where 30») is the spectrun of an arbitrary input signal ; §m(e.t) is the
instentaneoue output moth-3 Ac is the mduletion index corresponding to

a harnonic input signal of unit anlitude. He will use this defining charac-
teristic of the device to analyse tran-ission of tendon signals through it.

For linear systene. including the Laden analyser at low input signal level
lief. 2). the energy spectra end autocorrelation function of a tendon input
signal are neat simply (and (let. 3. e].

Let a continuous randon steadyostate (in the broad sense) ergodic process
x(t) with nornel distribution law he sent to the input of the device. Its
energy spectra. is Wu). autocorrelation function - Mt). end variance -
0‘. Let us find analogous characteristics of a rando- signal in the output
plane of the analyzer. i. e. in the spatial frequency plane.

Let us isolate one realization of the randon signal x1“). Its spectral den-
sity is

'~

,
$;(w)'/ ”£109” a". a.)

In accordance with (3). the spectral distribution in the output plane of this
realization can be written as follows:

-. ‘.._._.

sits-(“0' 4' 5.14.) 5W. m, 4) dun . (5)
u I.

Relation (5) defines the instantaneous spectrum of realization 11(t). lists
the duration of the eenple being analyzed is T-L/v. It is obvious that
giant“, t) varies in a rando- wey fron one realisation to another.

Let us find the square or the nodulus (5):
£‘ 0. - ‘ i I (6)
. I ' -' l I I
Ste-WP i‘MM‘ﬂmm 0' 7174f] $;(ou)4(vq)ém u’u,‘)«§(“’.“’u. 044, We.
(here and below * is the sign of complex conjugation). Let us carry out sta-

tistical averaging in (6). In doing this. we consider the fact that operations
of integration and averaging are cc-autative.

Thus we have
t e- I.

l k . I s .; . , 0 I o
< s. (a. 0 3,77 / I <5. (Mammamt‘w, <7)
.- 0- -
(As a consequence of ergodicity of the process. averaging over the set of
realizations is replaced in (7) by tine averaging within the limits of one
realisation of duration 1'). We note than in accordance with Ref. 3 (p 90)
1.2

FORWUSEONLY
P0. “MAL USE ONLY

23.-mém>-uﬂv’-J7w(i§5) , (a)

where "0») is the energy spectra of the input signal. Mstituting (8) in
(7) and carrying out integration over age. we have

 

 

 

(simhk‘ﬁ; I ‘ ' ‘ ‘
.J-i / w(u.)é(«zou.o&m«-u,om-
u ,, (9)
"' e
. f; wank-WNW.
For steady-state processes (9) can be written as
_. - ‘n w ..
v4.1») - 3‘17] wwm‘hmawéoh. (10)

a”

where wmm) is the energy spectrue of the randon output signal; ¢;(w. «’35)
is the aperture-frequency function of the sodulstor.

The aperture-frequency function is obtained by dropping cofector e’J (to-use)!
in (2). and it depends on am“). the shape of the aperture of the acoustic
light nodulator. end the bandwidth of its piezoelectric transducer. For the
centered processes with which we are prilsrily concerned. the variance is

 

ll

Thus (9). (10) and (ll) define the statistical cherecteristics of a randoe spa-
tial signal in the output plane of the analyzer. Since this is a linear de-
vice. when the input process is nor-a1. the output signal will also have nor-
nal distribution. The sutocorrelation function of the output signal in ac-
cordance with the Hisner-Khinchin theoren will be defined by the Fourier trans-
forn of (10). In this operation. it is necessary to convert to spatial fre-
quencies u; by the substitution (Ref. 2] u-uzv.

6}..- ' / whim/a! . (11)

Let us now find the signel-to-noise ratio in the output plane of the analyzer
and at the output of the photodetector. Each point of this plane situated
on the spatial frequency axis can be treated es an individual optical output
of the device. while the photodetector (see Fig. l) trensfores the optical
output signal to an electric signal.

Let us assue that a photodiode netrix is used as the photodetector. Such
extraction of the optical output distribution can be used in analyzing periodic
signals or signals with slowly changing spectra.

when photodiodes are used to transforn the optical output eignsl to an elec-
tric signal. linear detection of the noduleted luninous flunt takes place.

#3

5‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSIONLY

Thus the electric output signal is proportional to the square of tho enli-
tude of tho light wave at a given point in the output plane. here the naming
of ”point in the output plane" is arbitrary since the luinous flux to one
ele-ent of the photodiode ostrix nanotos fro. sons stall area. latent.

this "point" concept can be used if the size of such an area on the spatial
frequency axis does not exceed the extent of one el-snt of resolution

Afp- 1/1. The under I of olenents of resolution is usually deter-ined fra
the relation

ll
Mutt/757‘,- v (12)

where 2“; is the hand of simultaneous analysis.

The useful signal at the J—th point of the plans is dotsrnined by the her-onic
component of the input siml of frequency a . Interference at this point
depends on the conponent of the rando- signs at the input of forn

0-m- flaw/a}! ‘ $11)) ’ (13)

where A1 (t) and 01(t) are randon processes with distribution laws that in
the general case are different fron nor-a1.

Thus the signal-to-noise ratio at the j-th point of the output plane of the
analyzer andsisbon its j-th electric output can he obtained by ex-ining
the tranuission of an additive nixture of useful hot-Ionic signal and a ran-
dos signal of type (13) through the device. i. e. the signal

e,/¢)- Val/e) tau/I, (11.)

He disregard the set noises of the analyzer. asstning that conditions are
not that appreciably reduce their level Ref. 5]. Let us assme that the
interference at the input of the device is a steady-state rando- ergodic pro-
cess with norsal distribution law. and U0»). Oh) and 0,.

Let us also sssuoe that signal (13) is likewise a normal steady-state ergodic
process met. lo]. At a low level of signal (13). we get narrow-band random
light fluctuations of frequency uc3+uj (or u¢,- )also with a nonal dis-
tribution law (”cs is the light frequency of the coarsnt light source). Let
us determine the variance 03 of these oscillations. ln virtue of additivity
of the variances of conponents of the tendon spatial signal in the output
plane of the analyzer. finite resolution. and a limited mﬁer of elenents
of resolution of the analyzer. we can write

 

6,5, ad,“ 6.5 o8: - it?! (15)
. ' l I
where _ '
1 I la
6,- - 37mm»- A,“ . <16)
and 266° - 2126(0.
at

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFI‘IOALUSEONLY

Considering (12). we have

of - Malena. ' Wat-M)?" (m

The lean square of the envelope of the rando- siznal at the j-th point lief.
b] is

< '9'.) ‘ “‘1" (la)

The anplitude of the useful signal at this point of the output plane in ac-
cordance with (13) is deterained by the relation

1,. .4 11.3%] ”(w-watt“; 3509-1. % may). (19)

Thus the signal-to-noise ratio (with respect to power) at the output of the
i-th photodetector can be written in the following fora:

A; . 3—. KM— , (20)
. as}: «I; /: who; (4., .94..)

Relation (20) shows that when the resolution of the analyzer is increased.
there is an increase in the signal-to-noise ratio at its output. Such a con-
clueion is readily explained. Actually. the higher the resolution of the
device. the sore "nerrow~handed" is each of its outputs. And in narrow-band
systems it is easier to isolate the signal tron the band noise.

It can be readily shosm that in the case of white noise (Mu) His). relation
(20) easily reduces to the for. a

a ll '
~ 7' 3
.4; . 7‘- - . —— . (21)
(q! ‘ W. ' M
where 3 is the energy of a radio pulse of duration 1*. i. e. of the wk

of the haraonic input signal deternined by the dimensions of the aperture
of the acoustic light nodulator.

 

Now let us find the signal-tomoise ratio at the output of the photodetector.
To do this. it is necessary to consider the action on the quadratic photo-
detector by an additive mixture of harnonic signal and narrow-band noise.

1. e. a signal of the for-

46/0-4oev(u&:*«¢)h4ﬂ)~€vdw41e>). <22)

An analogous problem was solved for example in Ref. lo (see p 622). He will
use the results obtained there.

The variance of the output process is

‘5‘... '° 4’: / 4:4. ’51“). (23)

65

MWLLBEONLY
POIOII'I‘IGALIBEONLY

where 0. ie a parneter that accounte for the propertiae of the photodetector
and the cherecterietice of the luv-frequency filter that acte ea the load.

The uaeful aim! ia

U. 43 £21 (2‘)

The eignal-to-noiae ratio at the output of the photodetector in

l
i. all—1131.?" , (25)

Substituting (20) in (25) we get relatione for calculating the eisnal-to-
noiae ratio on the j-th output of the analyzer.

Let ue note that at low eipal-to-noiee retioe Inf. lo]

3
.14. . .40... . (26)
93a- “9‘
and at high ratioe ‘

 

u ._I 121‘
q‘. a (a ' (27)

In the caee of white noiae at the input of the epectrun analyzer. the variance
of the tendon eignal in the bend of analyeieuu. ie deternined by the relation

6'" - (aﬁw. . (28)

Then the eisnal-to-noiae ratio (with reepect to power) at the input of the
analyzer can he written in the following fora:

 

u. . u.
at. “‘6“ . (29)

Coneequent 1y

I
as:

4.3251070” (30)

- 2':
rd}.
‘l'hue the "narrow-hand filtration" that occurs in the apoctrun analyzer leada

to inprovenent of the eisnal-to-noiee ratio at a given point of the output
plane by a factor equal to the umber of ale-ante of reeolution of the device.

46

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WES

l. Kulakov. s. V.. Hostalets. 0. 1)., Razehivin. 3. P.. "Sons Questions in
the Theory of the Optical-Acoustic Spectra Analyser". mm mmeamooo
INSTITIITA AVIA'I'SIGIIIOGO “WWA. No 64. 1969. pp 96-108.

2. Kulakov. s. V.. "Akustooptichaskiye ustroystva spektral'nogo i
korrelyatsionnogo analisa signalov" [neonate-Optical Devices for spectral
and Correlation Analysis of Signals]. Leningrad. "Rania". 1978.

3. ‘l'ikhonov. V. 1.. "Statisticheskaya radiotekhnika" [Statistical Electron-
ics]. Hoscov. "Sov. radio”, 1966.

lo. Gonorovskiy. I. 8.. "Radiotekhnicheskiye tsepi i signaly" [Electronic
Circuits and Signalsl’. Moscow. Sov. radio". 1977.

S. Preston.l(. . "Kogerentnyye opt'icheski'ye vychislitel'nyye sashiny" [Coherent
Optical Computers]. Roscoe. "Mir". 1976.

um 621.317
FREQUENCY-RESPONSE FRICTION OF REAL ACOUSTO-OI’TICAL SPRTRUH ANALYZER
[Article by V. V. holotok]

[Text] The paper emines operation of an acousto-optical
spectrum analyzer vith consideration of oblique incidence
of a plane light wave on a light nodulator. attenuation
and diffraction divergence of the elastic wave.

The principal comprehensive characteristic of a spectrun analyzer as a linear
device is its frequency-response function (Ref. 1]. i. e. the response to

a d-action in the frequency plane. which corresponds to harnonic oscillation
of unit amplitude. The input and output of a linear instrunent are related
by the superposition integral. which for the case of a spectral instrulsent

is written:

5‘4»). ] 5,1w9j/u,u94w’,

where go». u') is the frequency-response function. é“ 520») are spectral
distributions at the input and output of the spectn- analyzer. The frequency-
responae function of an ideal acousto-optical analyzer is described in Ref. 2,
and takes the fora:

(0 " .mt’II'N')
9' "f' ) 4114’)?

where T is the duration of tine sapling. This paper exanines only inter-
action of a plane light wave and an undo-pad non-diverging elastic save for
Roman-Hath or Bragg diffraction conditions. In real acousto-optical spectru-

 

c¢t[!:f?v-aivl,

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

analyzers that have a band of analyeable frequencies of up to several hundred
megahertz. apectma reproduction is influenced by absorption and diffraction
divergence of the elastic wave. In this connection. we can no longer speak
of a pure Bragg or Italian-Kath diffraction node since the angle of incidence
of the plane light wave on the light modulator is adjusted to get a predeter-
nined band of analysis. Therefore we vould like to get an expression for

the frequency-response function of an acousto-optical spectrun analyser con-
sidering the influence that diffraction divergence and attenuation of elastic
waves as well as oblique incidence of a plane light wave have on the light
aodulator.

An optical diagran of an acousto-optical spectrum analyzer with arbitrary
incidence of a plane light wave on the light nodulator is shown in Pig. 1.

 

In the front focal plane of the collineting lens (plane x1) is. a point light
source e(t. x;)- (n- xi) exp (jucet). where “c eis the frequency of the light
waveforns. The light signals in the rear focale plane of the collineting lens
(plane :2) are defined by

ck x.)- j!!! 4'de —:m)dr.-«ww0'w 3,1: )7,

where A is the wavelength of light. 1’ is the focal length of the collimating
lens. Then the light nave incident on the light modulator can be written as

elin.I)-‘9[/(«kf ' fab 994491WUMC’W ‘1‘")1

where c and Rec are the speed of propagation and wave nunber of the light
wave. 6 is the angle between the direction of the z-axis and the normal to
the vavefront of the light wave incident on the modulator. That is. a plane
light wave is incident on the light modulator at angle 8. This wave is nodu-
lated by an elastic wave propagating in the aediun of interaction. that is
excited by a piezoelectric transducer upon transnission of an electric wave-
form. For determining the frequency-rotzponse function. such a waveform is

a harnonic signal of unit amplitude. and an elastic wave

8/¢,g). 34'» (J!- A 731-450],

Ml

FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

propagates in the nediul of interaction of light and sound, where L-Iv-T;

v and K' -(n'/V are the velocity of propagation in the medium of interaction
and the wave number of the elastic wave. The light wave in the output plane
of the light nodulator that forms the first diffraction order is defined as

eo.(‘.;,!) ' ”/1:le omﬁi’O-qtyéaﬁéyq-d'xzi},

where 8(K‘. e) is a weighting function that accOunts for the geosetry of
interaction of light and sound. The weighting function H(K'. 0) describes
the amplitude-frequency response of acousto-optical interaction independently
of the node of diffraction. and is defined as [Ref. 3]:

 

 

.-.. I

 

am ' (moms-‘5 ,5 ,, ,
m»- P? 1“” [lemme-)4.
ﬁaumqsﬁku

where i is the interaction length of light and sound. The light waveforms

in the output plane of the spectrum analyzer (plane x;) are defined as the
Fourier transforl of luainous distribution in plane X2. 1. e. the light signals
in the Output plane of the spectrun analyzer in the vicinity of the first

diffraction order are defined as

411
651/!.33)'j{ 55¢ﬂ%'*3)‘9’C/}ségl43‘5)46§ .
«m

. up {jw-M vwxvvasﬂ} ¥H(n'€’)ﬁ&40:'f)

where go(w1. m3. u', t) is the frequency-response function of an ideal acou-
sto-optical spectrum analyzer. Thus the frequency-response function of an
acousto-optical spectrum analyzer with consideration of obliQue incidence

of a plane light wave on the light modulator is defined as

M. ‘4, N5!) - ”(40);.(4, ‘4,- wja) .

 

Fig. 2 shows the results of calculation of the amplitude-frequency response
of acousto-optical interaction for different angles of incidence of a plane

49

FOR1)FFN]AI.USE(MVLY
FI”!(HHW(]AI.USEGJNLY

light wave on the light modulator where the material of the interaction medium
in mm, (z-z m. v-6.57°10‘ Inn/s, n.-2.2).

An examination is made in Ref. «‘0 of the influence that daaping of elastic
anes in the material of the median of interaction of light and sound has
on the frequency-response function of an acousto-optical spectrum analyzer,
i. e. the case is considered in which the elastic wave

511,43). cyI-auﬂlx, oqunsmfu'é «I‘M v0.50]
propagates in the interaction median. where 0.0.52) is the coefficient of daup-

ing of elastic waves in the material of the interaction medium, e§-;;‘/v is
spatial frequency. 0.SL< 3:60.51. [sic]. The frequency-response function of
the acousto-optical spectrum analyzer with consideration of damping of elastic

waves in the material of the interaction medium is defined by
- I I ‘0 tdhﬁﬁjh' ":3 I
a! - L— --,-L usual-ml
M4 . ) WEN.” M.” 0'1“ )u apt/L

Considering that over a broad frequency range the absorption of elastic waves
in solids is a square-law function of frequency. 1. e. 01(0),") -I‘f'2. the
frequency-response function of an acousto-optical spectrum analyzer can be
written as

, ' cam/£- l/- 77‘ ,
WM'WW’” Ekﬁﬁg‘ﬂ/VJWWM

In the case of snail elastic wave damping. i. e. 0.5rv‘rf'240. the expression
for the frequency-response function with consideration of damping is written as

ﬂail" ' 4""‘91W7/"Hi1(1.137).

W94!

4,... [77L

'94-'91]

    

S

 

Fig. 3

Fig. 3 shows the results of calculation of the frequency-response function
of an acouato-optical light analyzer with consideration of damping of elastic
Haves by exact and approximate formulas (curves 1 and 2 respectively). The
material of the interaction medium was PbHoOu (T- 5 us. v- 3.75-10‘ tun/s.

r- 11.5 dB/cul 6112’).

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In considering the diffraction divergence of the elastic waves. it is assured
that z> h. where 9.x h is the area of the transducer. In this case the elastic

wave can be considered divergent only with respect to the dilension h of the
piezoelectric transducer. Then a wave

83,24): [Inﬁmfvi‘ at": 'Vlzyﬂ

propagates in the material of interaction of light and sound (Fig. 4; . where
A(x. y). ¢(x. y) are the amplitude and phase of the wave excited in the
interaction medium when a harmonic waveform

of unit amplitude with frequency w' is ap-

I
m V ‘9 plied.
:
4!“ To deter-inc the saplitude and phase of the
wave, we consider oscillations (pressure

Fig. lo change in the interaction medium). Perturba-
tions of the interaction medium caused by the

transducer can be defined as [Ref. 5]:
a.
. I A’ZZCZZ‘
:r - ‘ J c ‘ d
J’iﬂml/ﬂﬁdl 1: 1.?»
where A is the wavelength of the elastic Have, f(y) is the pressure distribu-

tion over the transducer. We assume that pressure distribution over the
transducer is uniform, i. e.

 

’0 'ilﬁ £- -

f - ,

(y) {0. '7“?-
then

’ “ . 7 1 s
ﬂ‘w'm'L whiff/114,.
.41“; {Ir-7t.) cm» 715(5)- s(r.)J] uél/w’hﬁijﬂ

where

‘ , L a: -
New); To- a“? w
'
Cl!)- 1 an (ﬁg-74.x is the Fresnel cosine integral;

I ‘ '
5(3) 0 / lin(—’i-t-—)n/x is the Fresnel sine integral;

'”/'vr7"{l‘/*->-¢m>1“tsm-wfff «ma-MI? 73%

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The given elastic wave interacts with the plane light wave incident on the
light nodulator. The light signals in the output plane of the spectrum ana-
lyzer in the region of first diffraction order are defined by

t 4’4
e,,/w._«,,¢). egof/(Mtllb’ﬂl/l mﬁaypmm
a 1“

"'f U1“: '4’ 7‘} (“P/ﬂ"; 174-? ~a’y'.

This expression defines the frequency-response function of the acousto-optical
spectrun analyzer with consideration of the diffraction divergence of elastic
waves. Direct calculation of the function fro. the derived formula involves

calculation of triple integrals since the amplitude and phase of the elastic
wave are determined by Fresnel integrals. Therefore to reduce the multiplici-
ty of the integration we use a representation of Fresnel integrals in the

form of suns (Ref. 6]:

 

      

0, lxlcqn; ‘
Jun! - 3’ -350 ' .
51x). ”TH—3r *3"; T!) “"4“”.
“I!
05- I: > 4:!
o W p I O
we
“hi-5:3" , |x|3415mra.!j§5
(7:) s C .
m 52—: -‘—"§5 , Luau.
W“ ------ 5,3)
45
so
a:
d—A—l—b—l—‘J a:
a u 4‘ a u 1.6
Fig. 5

For negative values of x: c(-x)--c(x); s(-x) --s(x). Fig. 5 shows the re-
sults of calculation of Fresnel integrals by the exact formula (curve I) and
by the approximate formula (curve 2).

52

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Khurgin. Ya. 1.. Yakovlev. V. P.. "Pinitnyye funktsii v fizika i tekhnibs”
[Finite Functions in Physics and Engineering]. lioscov. "lauka". 1971.

2. Kulakov. s. V.. "Akustoopticheskiye ustroystva spektral'nogo i
korrelyatsionnogo analiza signelov" [Acousto-Optic Devices for Spectral
and Correlation Analysis of Signals]. Leningrad. "Hausa". 1978.

3. Cohen. H. 6.. Gordon. B. J.. "Acoustic bean Probing Using Optical Tech-
niques". 1112 321.1. srsrm TECHNICAL JOURNAL. April 1965. pp 693-721.

6. Holotok. V. V.. Rauhivin. V. P.. "Influence of Acoustic Wave Damping
on the Characteristics of Acousto-Optical Spectrum Analyzers" in:
"Akustoopticheskiye metody i tekhnika obrabotki informatsii" [Acousto-
Optic Hethods and Data Processing Techniques]. Leningrad. 1980.

5. Papulis. A.. "Teoriys sistem i preobrazovaniy v optike" [Theory of Systems
and Transformations in Optics]. Hoscow. "Mir". 1971.

6. Abramovits. it. Stigan. I. It. editors. "Sprevochnik po spetsial'nym
funktsiyam" [Handbook on Special Functions]. manta", 1979.

000 621.396:S35.8

STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF ACOUSTO-OPTIC RECEIVERS 0? LONG PSBUDORAM
SIGNALS

[Article by A. V. Kuzichkin]

[Text] An exaaination is made of the problem of finding
pseudo-random signals from code sequence delay by using

a system comprising an acousto-optic convolver and recircu-
lation delay line. Expressions are obtained for the proba-
bility of correct determination of the time position of

a pseudo-rando- signal and the average duration of the sig-
nal detection procedure for the case of reception against
a background of white gaussian noise. It is assumed that
the duration of the received signal considerably exceeds
the tine of signal delay in the region of acousto-opticsl
interaction of the acousto-optic convolver.

Correlation reception of pseudo-random signals is one of the most promising
areas for using acousto-optical processors. The interest that has arisen

in the design of pseudo-random signal receivers based on acousto-optical pro-
cessing systems can be attributed primarily to the comparative simplicity

of realization by using algorithu of matched filtration of pseudo-random
signals under conditions of considerable uncertainty in the tine position

of signals to be received. Fro- the standpoint of maxiniring flexibility

in adaptation of receivers to changing conditions of pseudo-random signal
reception. it is advisable to make the processing systen in an acousto-optic

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL use MY

convolver arrangensnt lief. l] in which the processing algoritl- is restruc-
tured by changing the lav of for-etion of the reference signal.

In the general case. the acousto-optic convolver is not a processor that is
invariant to the tine position of the signal to be processed. however. if
the duration of the received signal does not exceed the tins of delay ('1'.)
of the signal in the region of acoueto-optical interaction of the aconeto-
optic convolver. then detenination of the tile of pseudo-rando- aignsl ar-
rival can be ensured for practical purposes within a single reception cycle
at the expense of slightly increased complexity of the receiver and the use
of continuous-wave transsission of the reference signal. Unfortunately in
nest actual cases the pseudo-randon signal duration is considerably greater
than tine 1.. To eliminate the energy losses that arise when processing such
signals in an acouato-optic convolver. the output responses of the convolvsr
are accumulated by using recirculation delay lines [Ref. 2] or photo-060's
Inf. 3]. As a result. the acousto-optic receiver loses the capacity for
searchless deternination of pseudo-randon signal arrival tins. and requires
the use of special synchronization procedures (Ref. 5].

This paper evaluates the statistical characteristics of procedures of pseudo-
randoa signal search and processing by using an acousto-optical receiver con-
sisting of an acousto’optic convolver and recirculation delay line. A block

 

Fig. l

diagral of the device to be analysed is shown in Fig. l. where R86 is the
reference signal generator. AD!) is an adder. Di. is a delay line, MP is an
aaplifier. cc is a gating circuit that cuts off accuulation of the output
signal of the acousto-optic convolver IMO. and m. is the recirculation delay
line]. The choice of the recirculation delay line as a cmulative elenent

is dictated by the fact that in any cases the use of a recirculation delay
line gives the required accu-Ilation interval (up to a few nilliaeconds).

and realization of an acousto-optic receiver vith recirculation storage is

far simpler than for a receiver with photo-CC!) storage.

In the nest general case. the procedure of searching for pseudo-random signals
by using an acousto-optic convolver with recirculation delay line consists

in sequential step-by-atep correlation analysis of the signal being received
at different delays of the reference signal. The decision on detection of a

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLIISEONLV

acouato-optic convolver is node with respect to the maxim output signal
of the recirculation delay line after analyzing the entire region of tanporal
uncertainty of the signal being received.

BValuation of the statistical characteristics of pseudo-randon siml detec-
tion by an acousto-optic receiver of the given type will be based on the
following quite general assumtions.

l. The size of the region of acousto-optical interaction of the convolvsr
is selected in such a way that a whole nmer of recirculation cycles 1- Tc/T,
is required for processing a pseudo-rando- signal of duration Tc.

2. The signal arriving at the receiver input is for-ed by pseudo-undo. signal
repetition formed in accordance with a law of the sac pseudo-random sequence.

3. The reference signal sent to the acousto-optic convolver is for-ed by
breaking dorm the initial pseudo-randon signal into [nisaing letter] «pants
of duration I; each.‘ and by tine inversion of the resultant sag-ants.

lo. The beginning of the recirculation period coincides with the beginning
of the first sepent of the reference pseudo-rando- signal.

Let us use the symbol AT to denote the time nianetch between the beginning

of the received pseudo-rando- signal and the beginning of the reference pseudo-
random signal. In doing this. we will scene that if the input siml leads
the reference signal. AT<0. while if the input signal lags. A190 (IATI‘Tc/Z).

He can readily see that the output correlation peak of the recirculation delay
line and the time of its appearance are linearly dependent on the instantane-
ous value of AT. and are determined by expressions of the form

3 - t.“ - UPI/2?.) : (1)
“.t-.f/z, -- (2)

where C. is a proportionality constant and At is the interval between the
beginning of the reference signal and the occurrence of the correlation peak.

The principal characteristics of a correlation receiver operating in the node
of pseudg-randon signal search are mean duration of the signal detection pro-
cedure (To) and probability of correct determination of its tine position
(Pup). we will find these characteristics for the most typical case of inco-
herent reception of pseudo-tendon signals against a background of gaueaian
white noise with zero average and correlation function of the form whom-:1).

The average tine of pseudo-random signal detection by the slgoritll considered
in this paper will be found as

1'. - u, «nu-map ...rs1'.(i-P.,)H9q - t/e. '. “173. (3)

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WISEONLY

here '1'. is the duration of the procedure of analyzing the output signal of

the recirculation delay line in investigation of the entire region of moral
uncertainty of the pseudo-rando- signal being received. The quantity 1.

is determined by the duration of the received signal. the tins of delay of

the signal in the acousto-optic ccnvolver. the amber of recirculation cycles
required and the search step AT. (i. e. the tine shift of the reference signal
of the acouato-optic convolver in step-by-step exanination of the tone of
possible tine position of the pseudo-randa signal):

t - tT,I/a1'..

In this paper the statistical values are analysed for two values of the search
step: AT-1 -'r, and Al"; - 21's- 'l‘he selection of just these values of or. is
dictated by the following factors.

1. To get correlation peaks at the output of the recirculation delay line
with anplitude at any initial tenporal nisnatch or that would be sufficient
for coqarativaly successful detection of pseudo-randon signals against a
background of intense noises. relation (1) tells us that the condition

s’o ‘ 81'.

must be set.

2. Displacenent of the reference signal by an mount that is a nultiple of
‘l', considerably sinplifies realization of a tunable reference pseudo-tendon
signal generator and a generator control systen.

In the case of search for signals with step arm- 1". the procedure for anal-
ysis of the output signal of the recirculation delay line takes up tine inter-
val ‘l'un‘rck. and in searching for the tine position of the pseudo-tendon
signal with step 61.: '21,. the duration of the analysis procedure is equal
to “fulﬁl/2. In the case of search with step 1', for analysis tine 1'31.
four signal correlation peaks will be observed at the output of the recircu-
lation delay line. uhereas there vill be inly tvo correlation peaks in the
case of search with step 21', for analysis tine r“. The occurrence of such
a masher of correlatic. peaks is due to the fact that for the given search
steps the tenporal nisnatch between the received and reference signals falls
within the principal correlation region given by (l) (IA‘l‘I (21's) several
tines (four times for Mm -l', and twice for A‘rgz- 21,). Then since the tine
position of the signal being received can be deternined froa the
the of occurrence of any signal correlation peak. probability Pup is found
as the probability of detecting at least one correlation peak:

0

PIN ' 1-9399.) '- (a)
s

P”. . ‘- n (‘-P‘) . (5)

H
where P! is the probability that the anplitude J of the signal correlation peak
is greater than anplituda z of all noise spikes at the output of the recircu-
lation delay line.

56

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHOAI. USE ONLY

In the case of incoherent reception of e pseudo-radon signal
- 3 a
R ' .IMM [mun] a , (a)
s

where

a"

II is the total umber of noise spikes (li- S-l. for um and h-B-Z for 413:);
B is the base of the pseudo-radon signal; ninth/m; 33 is the energy of

the signal that yields a correlation peak of napitude J at the output of

the recirculation delay line; 190) is e nodified Bessel function of the first
kind of zero order.

Transforming expression (6) by a technique such as that described in “sf. 5.
we finally set

«I
uu'[~(u‘o gall] 1,“,11‘1' 0 ﬂ 0!“ . (7)

on“.

"o

where u- J/ho.

 

r13. 2 mg. 3

Fig. 2 and 3 show the average tine of pseudo-tendon signal detection as a
function of the signal-tomoise ratio hi for different values of the base

of the pseudo-rando- signal with naxinun Iisnatch between the received and
reference signals. The curves on Fig. 2 are plotted for a search step 1'3.
and on Fig. 3 for a search step 21,. Fig. 4 and 5 show the way that ‘1'. de-
pends on hi at large excesses of the signal over noise (1. 5- 4096. A‘l'm- 21";
2o 5- ‘096. Arll'Tgﬁ 3. 5.512. AT-l'Zi‘g; ‘0 3-5‘2. ”1.31.1.3; 5. 5.163“.
AT" -r,; 6. 5-16384. A?“ - 21“,). All calculations were done by fornula

(3) with consideration of relations (4). (S) and (6). Analysis of the re-
sultsnt curves shows that at conparatively low values of hi ((10-15) the

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Formosan“

 

6 an as a an :5 a :5
Pig.6 Fig.5

greatest rste of search of pseudo-rendon signals is reached st a search step
equal to T3. In the case of signal reception at week noise levels (h3>20)

it is advisable to use search with s step 21', for rapid determination of the
tine position of psmdo-rsndon signals. The nesn duration of the procedure

for pseudo-rando- signal detection is close to R'l'c/Z in this case, which is

SIR tines faster then for the case of search using conventional correlation

receivers "Ref. 6].

I.

2.

3.

b.

6.

armors

Kulskov. s. V” "Akustoopticheskiye ustroystve spektrsl'nogo i
korrslystsionnogo analire signslov" [Acousto-Optic Device for Spectral
and Correlstion Analysis of Signals]. Leningrad. 'Wauka". I978.

Itorgsn. D. P.. liannnh. J. H.. "Surface wave Recirculstion Loops for Signal
Processing". 1332 TRANS. SONICS AND mmrcs, Vol 25. No l. 1978. p 30.

Sprague. R. A.. Koliopoulos. R. l... "Tine Integrating Acousto-Optic Cor-
relstor". APPL. OPTICS. Vol 15. 1976. p 80.

Kuzictdrin. A. V.. "Optical Processing of Couple): Signals Hith Unknown
Tins Position" in: "Tesisy dokledov III Vsesoyuznoy shkoly po opticheskoy
ohrshotke infomtsii" [Abstracts of Reports to the Third All-Union School
on Optics]. Data Processinsl' Rigs. Psrt l, 1980. p 135.

Viterhi. z. 0.. "Printeipy kogerentnoy svyszi" [Principles of Coherent
(Io-nunicstions]. "Sov. rsdio". 1970.

Tuzov. G. 1.. "Ststistichssksya tsoriye priyene slozhnykh signalov" [Ste-
tisticel Theory of Couple): Signal Reception]. Hoscov. "Sov. radio". 1977.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 6213965318
WSW-OPTIC CORRELATIM ANALYSIS OP emu SIGNALS vrm mom WC!
[Article by A. V. Kuzichkin]

[Text] A method is proposed and analysed for constructing
acousto-optic correlation analysers that enable determination
of the arrival timeand carrier frequency of complex signals
with jming frequency practically within the limits of

a single reception cycle.

The solution of many problems in present-day electronics involves correlation
analysis of signals of complex shape. The use of conventional methods of
acousto-optic data processing Ref. 1. 2] enables correlation analysis only
when the carrier frequencies of received and reference signals coincide. which
considerably complicates processing of signals produced by codaining pseudo-
random nodulation and stepwise change of carrier frequency [Ref. 3]. The
case of frequency uncertainty of the received signal necessitates either con-
siderable conplication of the acousto-optic analysis system, using a large
number of processing channels with different reference signal carrier fre-
quencies. or else considerable time expenditue; on determining the program
for tuning the received signal.

In the simplest case. rapid correlation analysis of signals with jusping fre-
quency can be realised by repeatedly shifting the spatial carrier frequency

of the reference signal fed to the input of an acousto-optic convolver, which
in virtue of its advantages [Ref. 1) is the main elaent for acousto-optical
processing of complex signals. The necessary displacement of the carrier
frequency of the reference signal is most simply accomplished by an optical
deflector placed in front of an acouato-optic modulator with reference signal
to change the angle of incidence of light on the modulator. A considerable dis-
advantage of such a processing algorithm is the difficulty of realization when
searching for signals with a large nuaber of possible values of the carrier
frequency. Since the spatial frequency of the reference signal must vary

over the entire range of frequency uncertainty of the received signal within
a time interval equal to the duration of a single symbol of a pseudo-random
sequency of the complex signa1*, presently unattainable requirements are in-
posed on the number of positions of the optical deflector and on the switching
speed: in the case of discrete tuning of the carrier frequency of the refer-
ence signal. the required speed H; for switching the optical deflector. and
its capacity 31 (the nmber of deflection positions that are resolvable for
the Rayleigh criterion) are defined by expressions of the form

wt " ”z/l's 0' E! . ”I a (1)

*Only in this case can we get simultaneous coincidence of received and
reference signals with respect to frequency and delay of the pseudo-random
sequence. and consequently only in this case will a correlation peak of maxi-
mal possible anplitude be obtained at the output of the acousto-optic process-

ing system for any values of the time and frequency mismatch between the re-
ceived and reference signals.

59

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
MWLISEWLY

Where Rf ie the total amber of poeeible frequency poeitione of the received
eignal. and r. ia the duration of one eylhol of the peeudo-rendnn aeqnenoe.

The requiraente for B; can be considerably relaxed for emle by enaurin;
repeated coincidence of the received and reference eignele with reapect to
delay of the peeudo-rendoe aequence during propegetion of one period of the
received eisnal in the region of ecouato-optic interaction of the convolver
(1',). In thie caee the initial region of frequency eeerch in broken down
into n upente (- ie the neceaaery amber of coincidencee of the received
and reference eignale with reepect to delay of the peeudo-randon aequence
for tine 1“,). each of which in analyzed in different tine intervele of dura-
tion Isle. The requir-ente for para-etere of an optical deflector that ree-
lizee euch eeriee-parellel eeerch for the carrier frequency of received eig-
nela are defined by the follovin; relatione:

M- Ms. : ind/”o (2)

shoving a reduction in the neceeeary cepecity of the deflector by a factor n.

 

The capability of setting repeated coincidence of one period of the received
end reference eisnele with reapect to delay of the paeudo-rendon eequence
ie ieplied by the theore- on diaplceeent fron the theory of Fourier trane-
forna (Ref. 6]:

nut-t); - Fawn-gum. (3)
vhere P ie the operator of Pourier transformation.
The output electric aim]. for-ad at the output of the photodetector of the
ecouato-optic enelyeie eyetee in an ecoueto-optic convolver errengenent (Ref.

1] ie obtained by inveree Fourier treneforeation of the product of the epetial
apectee of the received eignel ’nﬂo- um) end reference eignal Pom-mo):

l..m - s‘l aroma-«.11 . m

where u... :90 are the angular carrier frequenciee of the received eiynel and
the reference eignel reepectively, end relation (Io) ie one of the poaeible
forms of writing the field of uncertainty of the coeplex signal “let. 5):

U» . 1mm) - i‘iw.)gué‘"}, (5)

If the epetial apectrua of the received signal ie phaee-nodulated in accor-
dance with (3)

ﬁ(a-q.)o""" , (a)

and the epatial epectru of the reference eignal ie diecretely ahifted in

frequency
elk-u.) - mm] .

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than the output aignal of the proceaaing eyatem will be defined by an em-
preaaion of the following form:

1-1:) - xix-«m. u- mo] .

where o(t) ie the lav of pheae modulation of the received signal epectrum;
mun) ia the law of frequency modulation of the reference signal.

By appropriate aelection of the modulation lava Ann“) end o(t). we can make
the output signal of the acouato-optic convolver proportional to the eought
correlation function

1...“) - afar-d») when u. aw).

Consequently. at the time when o(t) - or. a correlation peak of maxim- ampli-
tude will be formed at the output of the ecouato-optic analysis ayetem. One
of the poeaible versions of variation of Awu(t) and a(t) ie ahown in the dia-

gram. where Ara. a», are respectively the greateat time and frequency mismatch

wu-

   
 
   
 

corre ation
peak

 

between the received and reference aignala. and the broken line shove the cur-
rent value of time mismatch that variea due to the movement of accuatic waves
in the acoustic light modulator. the dot denoting the inatant of formation

of the maximum correlation peak.

The phase nodulation (6) that is neceeaary for implementing the given algo-
rithm can be realized by using an optical deflector placed in the region of
the spatial spectrum of the received aignal. In the caae of discrete phase
modulation of the received aignal apectrtm. the speed and capacity of thia
optical deflector are defined by a relation of the form

w.‘ ‘/‘. o E..6 a (7)
where 8 ie the baae of the complex aignnl.

Thus. if 5¢Nf (a condition that is met no a rule when aignala with etepwiae
variation of the carrier frequency are need). with proper choice of the param-
eter n

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.USS(NULY

"1‘ ' J‘s/5

we can considerably relax the requirements for capacity of optical deflectors
that are used without increasing requirements for maximum speed:

W... ' la/ﬁ 3%... '15/51. : E... . E. - 5.
mess

I. Kulakov. S. V. "Akustoopticheskiye ustroystve spektral'nogo i
torrelyetsionnogo analiza signalov" [Acousto-Optic Devices for Spectral
and Correlation Analysis of Signals]. Leningrad. "Neuka". 1978.

2. Krupitskiy. B. 1.. Yakovlev. V. I.. "Akustoopticheskiye protsessory radio-
signalov" [Acousto-Optic Radio Signal Processors]. in: "Akustoopticheakiye
setody obrabotki informatsii" [Acousto-Optic Data Processing methods].
Leningrad. "Hanks". 1978. pp 30-65.

3. Dikson. R. K.. ”Shirokopolyusnyye sistemy" [Hide-Band Systems]. Moscow.
"Svyas'". 1979.

b. Goodman. J.. "Vvedeniye v Fur'ye-optiku" [Introduction to Fourier Optics].
Moscow. "Mir". 1970.

5. Slots. V. 1.. "Voprosy obrabotki rsdiolokatsionnykh aignalov" [Problems
of Radar Signal Processing]. Moscow. "Sov. radio". 1970.

UDC 621.376.2.:S35.42
Acousfo-OPTICAL RADIO SIGNAL DZHODULATION
[Article by Yu. G. Vasil'yev]

[Text] The paper describes an acousto-optic method of de-
uodulating amplitudeqnodulated (An) signals. A method of
perturbation theory is used to solve the problem of light
diffraction by a complex AH signal when light is obliquely
incident on an ultrasonic column. Expressions are derived
for distribution of the light field in the region of acousto-
optic interaction. and for the intensity of the diffracted
light in the spatial frequency plane. Computer-calculated
curves are given for the amplitude distortions of the light
field as a function of the radio signal frequency bandwidth.
as well as the results of an experimental study of an acousto-

optical AH signal demodulator working in the Bragg diffrac-
tion mode.

Acounto-optical methods are currently being used extensively for radio signal
processing. They are used for spectral and correlation analysis [Ref. 1].
filtration [Ref. 2] and time scale variation [Ref. 3. 6]. Acousto-optical
devices are also known for demodulating frequency-modulated (PH) signals [Ref.
5. 6] that dsmodulste signals of unit amplitude. However. the need arises in

62

FOR OFTNCJA1.USE1DNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uunv processing problems for isolating laws of amplitude modulation (AH) of
wide-band radio signals. Besides. when a collimated luinous fl!“ is dif-
fracted by a complex signal, amplitude distortions of the space-time spectrum
arise that are due to frequency selectivity of Bragg diffraction. It is neces-
sary to account for such distortions for selecting the frequency band of the
linear mode of demodulation.

Let us consider diffraction of a plane light wave
WM) ' °.m{i[&(asmousn- will

by a phase diffraction grating excited by an Ali-PH radio signal in the acouato-
optical demodulation system depicted in Pig. 1

sm- amulnltwml. (1)

Here C. is the amplitude of the light; k-wclc is the wave nuber of the light;
c is the speed of light in vacuum; we is the cyclic frequency of the light;

fo is the carrier frequency of the radio signal; 2W“) is the slowly varying
part of the signal phase.

 

Fig. l. Acousto-optical demodulation system: l--luminous
flux; 2--aperture diaphragm; 3--ultrasonic light modulator ;
lo--l-'ourier lens; S--photocell

The distribution ot light along the cross section of the ultrasonic column

in direction 0y is taken as constant and equal to unity in the interval
0€y<h. where h is the dimension of thc- ultrasonic column in direction 0y.
Since the frequency of light («ac/2r) considerably exceeds the frequency

f(t) - fo+w(t) of the radio signal. we can limit ourselves to the quasi-steady
case in solving the diffraction problem [Ref. 7].

Distribution of the index of refraction of the acoustic line of the ultrasonic
light modulator is described by the relation

n(1.t)an.[h “(N-)1.

63

FOR OFI'1CIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where no is the index of refraction of the unperturbed medhnn; 1- (An/n.)
is the relative change in amplitude An of the index of refraction of the dia-
turbed mde ital;

um - mealtime - I - é) ° "'3’”?

T- Zlv is a time sample corresponding to the working aperture of the acoustic
line of the ultrasonic light modulator; v is the velocity of propagation of
ultra-sound.

When the quasi-harmonic condition

lm-MG)‘ “-5 ‘2’
“Na-n] elA(t~})| (3)

are satisfied, the amplitude A(x. t) and phase w(x. t) of the ultrasonic wave
can be respectively represented in the form

Mun - M14) .
n2.“ - ﬂt-f) - ﬁc-I).

Conditions (2. 3) mean that within the limits of the aperture

l ‘ '[ﬁrml

a quasi-harmonic ultrasonic wave propagates with frequency that varies with
elapsed time t according to the law

m -i, 0 Om.

The amplitude Mn, t) of the wave is a slowly changing function within the
limits of the working aperture of the ultrasonic light modulator.

and the inequality

Taking our lead from Ref. 7. let us determine the spectral component E(u. p)
of the light field in the region of acousto-optical interaction that is de-
scribed by the equation

I C
#50:.» . yin.» . [v . m(t-I)m]t(u.n - o <0

and boundary conditions of continuity on the media interfaces:

E‘ufO) ' E0130) . (5)
I (LIFO): E(\l,“°0) .

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI€HWJC1AL.USE!JNLY

where p-kz; u-K(t)x; B- iK(t)/k]2; K(t) -%{f°w'Ct--§)l is the wave nuaber
of the ultrasonic wave.

It is convenient to seek the solution of equation (6) in the form of s seires
with respect to powers of y:

(tum) - [calcium «'40:.» ‘ -- ' IWIKW’" $31)]. ‘6’

Let us limit ourselves to the function C1(u. 9) that describes the first dif-
fraction orders. he seek the solution in the form

mu.» . Meant-M0B..(u.r)m(iu). (7)

where the 831(u. p) are components of the amplitude of the light wave that
forms the first diffraction orders.

Substituting expression (7) in (6) and then in equation (4) with boundary
conditions (5). we get the following expression for the coefficients:

_ , . - «(u - - e
s..t=.r.u=:c.m-D.‘;—a W “‘1‘” “Ml““z‘a-v l “P H [1' “mimics?! -
where sinc u - sin nu/ﬂu.

Then light field 8+1(x, a, t) that arises in the plus of the first diffzsction
order is described in the region of acousto-optic intersecion at z- i by the

expression .
f“(r,!,t| - ‘3..(*»‘»‘) upl-jﬂtﬂ upwizom- $9)” .
where ﬂu- U.t-n[s.(t-}) .m-hl- um -

Considering that light distribution along the y-coordinate is constant. we
can represent field 2+,(x, i, y. t) in the form

E..(i.¢.y.tl- g(§)E..(x.¢,t) .

where

‘ 4, 0r$tl
l“) {0, ”<0 *""

If the Brain condition
. l
Sud.- 5 ‘0

is satisfied for carrier frequency f0. then intensity 1+)(i, i. t) of the

diffracted light in plane (C. C) of spatial frequencies of the Fourier lens
takes the form

I..(t,i,t) - usma‘a-Dm'}, [H.- %F*'(¢'§)]}s€~c'(;§-«). <8)

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where H- (“mo/A20”. V- Zlh is the volume of the region of acousto-optic
interaction; 1’ is the focal length of the Fourier lens; A is the wavelength
of the light incident on the ultrasonic light modulator;

G(t) . sine‘ unpaid".

{if

a(t) - [w' gtn- -)/fo] is the relative change in frequency of radio signal (1);
Q- (nu/A ) ii the wave parameter; Ao-v/fo is the wavelength of ultrasound.

It can be seen from expression (8) that the intensity amplitude is proportional
to the square of the envelope of the Ali-PH signal A(t-5’r) except for a factor

wuusiu‘ {Mt-r; gym-{)1} “(£9 .

where G(t) describes distortions that arise due to violation of the Bragg
condition on frequencies f(t)f fo.

6“!

 

a...” 0 M u In)
Fig. 2. l—Q-r; 2~-Q-lnr; 3—0'8'; 4"9'161'

Curves for G(t) as a function of the relative frequency change a(t) for dif-
ferent values of Q calculated on a BESH—loﬂ computer are shown in Fig. 2

It can be shown that the frequency band Au' in which the relative change G(t)

does not exceed 52 of the maximum of its value G(t) - 1 is defined by the
formula

of'- I,( {dig-9 A).

If the function w'(t) of signal frequency change satisfies the inequality

lf'ml c .

then we can set G(t) :1 in expression (8) with accuracy to 5%.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The voltage of the electric signal coming from the photocell (see Pig. 1)
with center of the photocathode situsted at point (5.. 0) is determined from
the formula

In! 1'

mu-° T. 31.4“th . (9)

H i
where D is a constant that depends on the photocathode material; R is the

load resistance of the photocell; A. A; are the dimensions of the photocathode
in directions 05 and 0; respectively.

Omitting intermediate calculations. we get from formula (9)

. a ' " ' ‘e' M",
U'hh "An“,niﬂamll- 1%? - chum...“ . ‘1”: ‘Jnl

where U'(t) - (rU(t)AA1/WDRdd1) is the relative change in voltage;

 

sin2(0. 51-319
n- $10.31- -———L;

clWIS)

Si: is the integral sine; b(t)- TO' (t-- +73; d- (XE/Z). d1 - (AF/h) are the
dimensions of the light field along 0: and 0; respectively.

If
r-gnt‘o u

then the output voltage

0
v'm arm (Pi)
is identical to the square of the signal envelope (1).

The given method of acousto-optical demodulation was experimentally verified
on a pilot model of an acousto-optic demodulator. The LG-78 laser was used

as the light source. The acoustic line of the ultrasonic light modulator

was made from a crystal of lithium niobate Limos; the pieroelectric transducer
was a plate of lithiun niohete LiNb03 (Y+ 36°). The ultrasonic light modulator
operated on a frequency of fo - 100 MHz in the passband of 20 mm. The luinous
flux was focused by a Fourier lens with focal length of f- 200 In. and con-
verted to an electric signal by an I’D-21K? photocell.

To check the efficacy of the demodulator. an Alf-FM signal was used with dura-
tion of 1 - [0 us with sinusoidal frequency modulation:

m)- f. osfn’uérm) ,

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

where “I 100 H32. “-1 Has. f1-0.25 His.

Oscillograns of input and output signals are shown on Pig. 3. lo.

 

Pig. 3. Input signal Pig. 6. Output signal

“we described scousto-optic method of deuodulating coupler aaplitude-aodulated
signals enables us to distinguish laws of alplitude nodulation of both cw

and pulse signals. In addition. the technique enables us to measure time
intervals such as signal duration and recurrence period. The results of this
paper can be also be used in calculating the geometry of acouato-optic inter-
action in acousto-optic devices for couple: signal processing.

REFERENCES

l. Kulakov. s. V.. "Akustoopticheskiye ustroystva spe‘stral‘nogo i
korrelyatsionnogo analiza signalov" [Acousto-Optic Devices for Spectral
and Correlation Analysis of Signals]. Leningrad. "Naulm". 1978.

2. Catrona. Leith. Palermo. Parcello. "Optical Systems for Signal Filtration
and Processing". ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOELHTRONIXA. No 10. 1962.

3. Kulakov. S. V.. Kludzin. V. V.. Yezhov. V. 1.. "Acousto-Optic Time Scale
Converters" in "Golografiya i obrabotka informatsii" [Bolography and Data
Processing]. Leningrad. "Nauka". 1976.

lo. Shulz. H. 3.. Holland. H. 6.. Davis. "Optical Pulse Coupression Using
Bragg Scattering by Ultrasonic Haves". APPL. PHYS. LEI'L. Vol 11. No 7.
1967.

5. Yegorov. Yu. V.. Naimv. K. P.. "Acousto-Opric Denodulator of Frequency-
Hodulated Signals" ln "Voprosy analisa i sinteaa radioaignalov i ikh
ohrabotks" [Problems of Analyzing. Synthesising and Processing Radio Sig-
nals]. interinstitutional anthology. RRI. LB‘II. HA1. NPI. No l. 1976.

6. Vasil'yev. Yu. 6.. Karpov. Yu. S.. Snirnov. L. 1.. "Optico-Acouatic PM
Signal Denodulstor”. mm SRZDS‘I'V SWAZI. SERIYA 01'. No 403). 1978.

7. Rytov. S. H.. "Light Diffraction by Ultrasonic Haves". IZVBS‘I‘IYA AKADEHII
NAUK SSSR: SBRIYA PIZICIIBSKAYA. No 2. 1937.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFF1CJAI.I£SEZ(NULY

UDC 535.62
PECULIARITIBS OF LIGHT DIFFRACTION BY COMPLEX ULTRASONIC SIGNALS
(Article by Yu. G. Vasil'yev]

[Text] A solution is found for the problem of light dif-
fraction by a wide-band ultrasonic signal with arbitrary
phase function. Computer plots are given of distortions

of the diffracted light as a function of width of the sig-
nal passband and wave paraneter Q- «Xi/A3. where i is the
acouato-optical interaction length. l is the wavelength

of light. Ao-v/f. is the wavelength of ultrasound on car-
rier frequency f.. v is the velocity of propagation of ul-
trasound. An expression is derived for calculating optimum
length t.

In Ref. 1-3 an investigation is made of the diffraction of coherent light

by an ultrasonic harnonic wave. The problem of light diffraction by an ultra-
sonic wave with linear frequency modulation is fairly well covered for cases
of collineted (Ref. 4, 5] and divergent (Ref. 5. 6] light beams. Diffraction
by a complex ultrasonic signal with arbitrary phase function is described

in Ref. 7, 8. However. the results found there are either applicable to the
case (Ref. 7] of a quasi-nonochronatic wave (Am/wo)¢1. where Au. u. are the
cyclic width of the frequency band and the carrier frequency respectively.

or else are quite cunbersone and require considerable expenditures of conputer
fine in calculations (Ref. 8]. Besides, in solving some applied problems.
such as hen designing acousto-optic devices, the necessity arises for eval-
uating distortions of the diffracted light field. Such calculations have

not been done up to the present for the case of interaction of light with

an ultrasonic signal having a phase function of arbitrary shape.

- .__ The problen of diffraction of a plane light wave

8
by ultrasound excited in an acousto-optic system
XI); \Z (Fig. l) by a wide-band radio signal of duration 1
O .
— «truncate-ram»). m
t
v

where w(t) is a phase function; B(t) is amplitude
equal to unity over time t. is solved by s. H.
Rytov's perturbation nethod (Ref. 2].

   

The plane light wave

line.” . hawks“? . m6) at“,

where k- n/vc is the wave number of the light;
8'2. vc are the cyclic frequency of the light and
its velocity respectively. is incident at angle
0 to the 0: axis.

Fig. l

Acousto-optic systen
l--1ncident light wave;

2--acoustic line. 3--
diffracted light

69

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Electric field strength [(u. p) satisfies the scalar wave equation

3%: . p Sift o [1 ~ “Sign“. - o (2)

and boundary condit ions

Hard-Hun»,

E 0’. "4). [(8,1‘ O.) o
in the re ion of acousto-optic interaction 0<e<i. where p-kz; u-Kgx;
B- (lo/k) ; to - (mo/V) is the wave nuiasr of ultrasound on carrier frequency
mo; v is the velocity of propagation of ultrasound in the acoustic line;

y- (An/no) is the relative change in amplitude An of the index of refraction
of the acoustic line; no is the index of refraction of the unperturbed nedim;
s(u. t) - s(t-%--i:— ; 'r- (LIV) is the ties ample corresponding to aperture 1..

Limiting ourselves to light waves of the zero and first diffraction orders.
we will seek the solution of equation (2) in the form

“I,” o [q o "4“")1"? {} [fen-{g $19.!” . (3)
where

m - «(on - .. ~ 10-37 {:17
QM) {Antone-[mo] + Muwﬂltuq ,

A3101. p) are the amplitudes of light waves that describe "plus" and "aims"
first diffraction orders.
Since a phase diffraction grating is being used and the angles of diffraction

are snail. changes of amplitudes A3; at distances of the order of a wavelength
of ultrasound can be considered small; consequently

‘1“ Anita), a hum)

and when expression (3) is substituted in (2) we get the following equation:

 

a
a Ave”) ’ 3i eat :3 Auk.” ' ”u ‘3: (“.0 - - (3, (lo)
with boundary condition
‘u(‘o°) ' 0 a
where
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘2‘. ":1.” o (:1')‘_(&*)(um)oﬂrh): (5)
m . acid/ii"

The quantity g” is complex, and
. ._
JR,“ ' t i1,.%’(£)].

where was 0 (t) is the rate of frequency change of signal (1), c- t-§-V'

For high-frequency asignals lng_ 1/Re g;1«l. and therefore 3.; 3 Reg”. Then
disregarding ter- 37:7»; in equation (4) in virtue of its smallness, and
assuming that the angle of incidence o of the plane light wave satisfies the

Bragg condition
K
it . (6)

we get a solution Mﬁu. p) of equation (6) that takes the form

W» -(ma;a.)v~w'(-s%n...) .

V" s “(g- mmyg uh.) .

Q- (nu/A5) is the wave parameter. A. - (Zn/mo) is the wavelength of ultra—
sound on carrier frequency (.30. Reg“. -a(l +a).

1 3
”ﬂaw m)

is. the relative frequency change.

vhe re

Then the light field E+1(x. l. t) of the "plus" first diffraction order is
described by the expression

E“ 3.13) -u“(;,t,qm‘imz.!.u‘. (8)

uhere

mam - tut-n -m- umpmmﬁqwq-»

7!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted that the function "+1 in expressions (7. 8) describes the
changes in alplitude of the diffracted light field on frequencies

w(t) - (no +33?” (c) ..

when the elastic medium of the acoustic line is perturbed by a hernonic signal
u(t) - m. the mlitude factor “+1 is equal to unity and the resultant ex-
pressions coincide with those of Ref. 2. The occurrence of the additional
factor ﬂu in solution of the diffraction problem is due to violation of con-
dition (6) on frequencies w(t)fu..

Conputer plots of 9+; as a function of relative frequency a at different values
of the wave paraneter Q are shown on Fig. 2

\L. __

 

Pig. 2
Curves for "+1 as e function of relative frequency end wave per-meter:

l—Q- n; 2--Q-4s; 3--Q-16s

It can be seen from Fig. 2 that when light is diffracted by a complex wide-
band ultrasonic signal, asymmetric distribution of the light field results

in the scousto-optical interaction region. "ith increasing frequency band

Aw of the radio signal and wave paraneter Q. there is an increase in amplitude
distortions of the diffracted light.

If permissible changes of "+1 are assigned. e. g.

m [g away]
[g «(903‘

 

.3.

then by finding the value

Q
2- 0.0““ O !_'

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we can readily determine the frequency band

“'“{W 41 .. (9)

where Q... t 3. wherein changes of a-rplitude do not exceed the value of b.

Frou expression (9) we detemine the wave paraneter

T.‘ - --
I
Q [(9.34]
«h.
with respect to the given frequency band. and calculate the optima length
l. of acoustc-optic interaction:

to

It should be noted that the resultant expression (l0) can be used for calcu-
lating the length l of the piezoelectric transducer of an ultrasonic light
nodulator with respect to given values of the carrier frequency (no. frequency
bandwidth Au of the signals to be processed. and the wavelength of light A.

where 2. - eons/n.

Thus the results feund in this research enable us to use relatively simple
formulas (7. 8) to calculate the diffracted light field 3+1“. 9.. t) in the
region of accusto-optical interaction. and the optinua length l (10) of acous-
to~optical interaction.

The results of rats paper may find application both in physical research on
the diffraction process and in calculations of acouato-optical devices for

processing conplex wide-band radio signals.
REFERENCES
1. Raman. C. V., Nagendra hath, N. 5.. "ﬂue Diffraction of [Light] by [High-l
Frequency Sound Haves". PROC. IFDIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCE. Vol 2A. 1935.

2. Rytov. s. 11.. "Eight Diffraction bv Ultrasonic Haves". IZVESTIYA AKADEHII
NAUK SSSR: SERIYA PIZICHBSKAYA. No 2. 1937. p 223.

3. Parygin. v. N.. “Light Diffraction by Traveling Acoustic Waves in Isotropic
Medium". RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELBKTRONEKA. Vol l9. No l. 1976, p 38.

b. Bakut. P. A” Chunk. V. 0., "Optiko-akuaticheskiy korrelyator dlys
signals a lineynoy chastotnoy nodulyatsiyey" RADIOTBUINIKA I RETRONIKA.
Vol 15, No 9. 1970. p 1916.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Karavayav. V. 0.. Iayzulin. 2. 1.. "ﬂuoratical Analyaia of Actuate-Optic
Systm for La: Radio Signal Conpreasion". nun! mmrmmmsxoco

HIS‘I'I‘I'U'I'A MADE!!! WK 3851". No 5. I971. p 125.

6. Shulz. H. V.. Rolland. H. 6.. Davis. 1... "Optical Pulaa Conpruaion Using
Scattering by Ultrasonic Ham". APPL. ms. “11.. Vol 11. no 7. 1967.

p 237.

7. Hartynov. A. 11.. Hirar. I. 5.. 'Terturbation ﬂatbed for Calculating Light
Diffraction by Ultraaound". IZVES‘IIYA WSSBIIE 0mm ZAVBDH'IY:

RADIOFIZM. Vol 18. No 12. 1975. p 1865.

8. Hartynov. A. 11.. "Diffraction of Arbitrary Cylindrical Light lean by
Hide-land Ultrasonic Signal". mlmm l unmm. V01 22. No 3.
1977. p 533.

COPYRIGHT: LIYaP. 1981

6610
(280: 81106 [0669

-END-

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY