FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFiS L/10296
2 February 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/ 82)

Soviet Studies of Religion and Nationality;

Fifteen Years of 'PROBLEMS OF SCIENTIFIC ATHEISM'

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030004-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SCCIOLOGICAL AFFA
(P000 3/82)

SOVIET STUDIES OF RELIGION AND NATIOI
FIFTEEN YEARS OF ’PROBLEMS OF SCIENTIFI(

Moscow PROBLEM! NAUCHNOGO ATEIZMA in Russian No 1
No 14, 1973; No 17, 1974; No 22, 1977

CONTENTS

Cmtenporsry Islam Modernization Process Characterized
Nationalities. Religion Questions' Solutions Sought
Socialist Natlons' Role in Overcoaing Vsstigcs of Islam
Chechencrlngush ASSR Subject or Sociological Study

-, Islamic Studies Problems Discussed

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500030004-9
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

SOVIET STUDIES OF RELIGION AND NATIONALITY: FIFTEEN YEARS OF 'PROBLRHS 0P SCIEN-
TIFIC «IHBISH'.

CONTEMPORARY ISLAM MODERNIZATION PROCESS CHARACTERIZED

Moscow PROBLEHY NAUCHNOGO ATEIZHA in Russian No 2 1966, pp 322-334

[Article by: YutG. Petrash and R.M. Khamitova: "Toward a Characterization of
the Process of the Modernisation of Conumponrylslam in the USSR"]

[Text] Islam long ago proved its ability to adapt to changing conditions and to /
one or another concrete situation. In this it in no way differs from all other
religions. A study of the changes in Moelem ideology, especially the changes
which are taking place in the conmmpmmry epoch. is one of the most important pro-
blems of Islamic studies. Unfortunately. these changes have not yet been studied
sufficiently deeply. In some cases science simply does not possess the necessary
materials. In particular, the current state of Islam in the USSR is known only

in the most general features. The authors of this article have set themselves the
task of acquainting the reader with certain facts which characterize the process
of the modernization of Islam in our country. The material being presented shows
basically the kinds of positions taken by the clergy as it reforms dogma and rit-
ual. The article was written chiefly on the basis of the materials of Kirghiziya
and Bashkiriya.

In speaking about the views of present-day Hoslem ideologists in our country it
should not be forgotten that reformist teachings among the Hoslems of Russia took
shape as early as the end of the last century. One of these currents was Djadidism.
Its basic idea consisted in a rejection of the medieval methods of teaching in
Hoslem educational institutions and in the introduction of a Europeanized system
of teaching with a mandatory study of general educational subjects. The reformist
ideas attracted definite strata of the national intelligentsia of the peoﬂes among
whom Islam was widespread also during the first years of the existence of Soviet
power. The struggle hetweenDjaﬂdist and Kadimiat currents in Mohammedism had

not ceased when the October Revolution occurred and. to a certain extent. contin-
ues to exist in our day also.

This has to be kept in mind when we are dealing with the questions of the present-
day ideology of Islam in the development of whose official cannons the top Moslen

1.
SNJI10FF1C1AI.!EHE(H¢LY
FOR OFT-1G“. USE ONLY

clergy takes part. The process on renewing and adapting lslam to changing so-
cial condﬂdons already has certain traditions. This is an objective process which
reflects the progressive movement of the development of society.

What are the basic features of official Islam in our day?

First of all. loyalty to the Soviet state. After suffering defeats in open act—
ions against Soviet power, the clergy quite rapidly began to state its devotion

to socialism. The decisive role here was played by the feelings of the broad
masses of believers who approved the socialist transformations in our country.
There are known facts showing that many representatives of theclergy sincerely wel-
comed Soviet power, seeing in it a defender of the interests of the workers.

Loyalty to the Soviet state is based on the fact that every state power is from
God. sent down by Him "as He understands."

In their sermons, especially those of a didactically moral character, the mullahs
attempt to convince believers to piously perform their civic duties to their home-
land. for. in carrying out the orders of the authorities and supporting the pol-

icies of the Soviet government,believers perform their "Hoslem duties" to Allah.

Not so long ago in one of his holiday sermons the Imam of the Dzhalal-Abad mosque
(Kirghiz SSR) said. addressing his parishioners: "We, like true Hoslems, in keep-
ing with Allah's commands, have to honestly observe the order which has been es-
tablished in our country and be disciplined in production and honest citizens of
our country. We have to be ready to carry out all of the orders of the Soviet
government, for they are directed toward strengthening the might of the Soviet
Union and towards the attainment of cherished goals. Our Holy Book al-Koran
teaches us to obey Allah, his Emissary Mohammed, and our leaders--those who have
power." We have had occasion to hear similar sermons in other mosques-~in Moscow
(from the lips of the lmama Hustafin and Salikhov), Alma-Ate, Osh, and Ufa. The
clergy presents religion as the natural ally of Soviet power, equally responsible
for the fate of the people.

The Hoslem clergy supports the peace-loving policy of the Soviet government. The
theme of peace is constantly present in sermons; the struggle for peace is con-
nected with the teachings of Islam. The mullahs find passages in the religious
books and see in them a statement of the necessity to maintain peace in the entire

world.

The Hoslem clergy attempts to identify communism and Islam, saying that the ideals
of both teachings coincide. More than that, one can hear that the doctrine of
communism was already being disseminated by the ancient prophets, and that Ho-
hsmmed who formulated Islam in the most harmonious way sought throughout all of
his prophetic work to realize communist principles. The Arabs, led by Mohammed,
are said to have struggled for a universal "communist kingdom," but the material
and cultural level did not permit its realization. Now, however, all of the con-
ditions exist for this, and the efforts of the workers have to realize the "ideals
of Mohammad" --to build communism. "The goals of Mohammed and of communism are
the same;“ "We. Hoslems, are the continuers of the work of the Prophet Mohammed;

FOR¢0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

communism is our dogma." All of this can now be heard from authoritative repre-
sentatives of the Hoslem clergy. The words of the Osh mullah K. in a personal
conversation are curious: you. Marxists, simply do not understand the deeply com-

munist essence of Islam. If you think about the meaning of Mohammed's teachings.
it will become clear that we, Hoslems and Marxists. are going forward shoulder

to shoulder--for the realization of the ideals of Mohammad." K. believed that in

the not too distant future misunderstandings will be dispelled and the alliance of
Marxism and Islam will be realized.

It has to be said that such arguments exercise an influence on believers. Fre-
quently one can hear from ordinary believers that the mullahs "are probably com—
munists." To the question of why they think so, the answer follows: "But you lis-
ten to what Imam so-end-so says about communimml" Frequently believers try to
prove with enviable conviction that Ielamisanecessary means in the struggle for
the construction of communism.

When it attempts to present Islam as a communist teaching the clergy bases itself
on the moral and ethical side of religion. Nowadays in the mosques there is con-
siderable restraint in speaking about the miracles of the prophets and the pious.
More attention is given to the questions of morality. The preachers and activists
in the local parishes seek to convince the simple believer that the moral princi-
plts of the builders of communism are in full accord with the moral prescriptions
of the Koran and the Sunna. The clergy compares certain passages from the sacred
books with the norms of morality which are accepted in our society; hence. the con-
clusion regarding the identity of Moslem and communist morality. Under the influ-
ence of these sermons, many believers today reason as follows: "In our Koran every-
thing was long ago said that is in the moral code of the builders of communism.
Islam teaches us only the good...." Frequently Islam is understood by believers

in general as a universal moral system which embraces the moral code of all of
mankind.

Today literally not a single sermon takes place in which the Imams do not touch
upon the questions of morality and do not seek to convince believers of their duty
to observe the "Hoslem laws" and the rules of behavior which have been approved

by Soviet society. The ministers give praise to the Communist Party and the
Soviet government for seeking to achieve so firmly and consistently the complete
triumph of "true" morality whose basis is made up of the teachings of the Koran.
In one of his sermons the Imam-Khatib of the Moscow mosque Salikov reminded his
parishioners of the harm ofalcohadic drinks which are prohibited to Hoslema. "It
is necessary," he said, "to give every welcome to the measures of the Soviet gov-
ernment which are aimed at a struggle against alcoholism. This corresponds en-

tirely to the demands of the Prophet Mohammad."

Approximately the same presentation is given in the sermons of the activities of
the Soviet government which are aimed at strengthening labor discipline. improving
the everyday life of the workers. and so forth. The clergy summons Moslems to
honest labor and production and to strengthening the family. According to the
mullahs. any labor for the good of society is as compulsory and good a deed as
reading prayers, maintaining fasts, and the other prescriptions of religion. Hon-
est 1abor by Hoslems will be evaluated by Allah no lower than God-serving acts.

3.
FOI:0I1WC1AI.IEH!(NVLY
”M omen. L as; two.

in a card. if one believes the sermons. Moslem morality is the most humane and 5;
morality: it is an all-embracing moral code by which people will always be guideJ
the renewed Shariat does not contain divergences from Soviet laws and is in full
accord with the interests of strengthening the Soviet family and developing com-
munist relations among people. Islam allegedly cultivates honesty. mutual respect
and a feeling 0! comriJolincss in peuple and promotes spiritual perfecrion; the
morality of islsm helps to cultivate feelings of patriotism in Soviet people.
From all of this it has to follow that the education of the youth carried out in
accordance with the principles of Hoslsm morality can only yield good fruits.

"hat is one to do with those religious prescriptions of the Koran whose :nsctlon-
ary nature and medieval cruelty are clear to everyone? The clergy either pastes
over these prescriptions in silence. or interprets then in such a way that gives
them a completely new meaning. For example. the calls to wage an implacable war

( jihad) against those who believe in other faiths and against non-believers are
interpreted as calls to struggle against all kinds of evil, deceit, and insincere-
ity which violate Moalem piety. The preaching of the exclusivenesa of Hoslema
which is clearly expressed in the Koran is explained in the same spirit. We see
that the clergy here. without giving up the letter of the "eternal" and "immutable"
Koran. undertakes direct falsifications of individual propositions in it. It is
not accidental that one is able nowadays to hear that every word of the Koran
allegedly has 70 meanings. At the same time, the clergy asserts that the Koran

is inaccessible to the understanding of the "unfaithful" and of doubters, and that
the secret meaning of every word and every letter in it can be understood only by
a deeply believing Hoslem. In confirmation. reference is made to an ayat of the
Koran: "He is for those who have believed guidance and healing; but tnose who do
not believe have deafness in their ears. and he is for them blindness." (61, 44)

It should be noted that, unfortunately. the attempt to depict Islam as a complete
collection of general human morality finds support among a substantial section of
believers.

The present-day theoreticianSOf religion devote a large amount of attention to
smoothing over the contradictions between science and Islam. Basically there are
two conceptions here. The first: the Koran contains everything that is known or
will be known to science; one only has to be able to understand this. Today many
people assert that Islam provides answers to all of the questions posed by life

or by science. The other conception is more modest: Islam is presented as a "true
ally" of science. It should be noted that in defending both of these theses the
clergy tries to keep itself informed about scientific achievements: it is no long—
er possible to close one eyes to the gains of modern science. How are these con-
ceptions proven? In the traditional way: the preachers use individual passages

in the religious books as arguments. For example. the mullahs and imama go into
raptures over two ayats from the chapter of the Koran "Galyak" (“Clot"). The
ayats begin with the word "Read!" This call is interpreted in the spirit of
Lenin's behest: "Learn, learn. and learn." The beginning of these ayats is pre-
sented as an immortal motto for all mankind. Inkyatl79 of Chapter 7 there is
nothing resembling calls to engage in science; however its meaning is interpreted
in such a way that Allah is allegedly calling Hoslems to strive for knowledge and

6.
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FORG3FFKJA1.USE¢DNLY

for science. The words ofAyathI of Chapter lO--"look at what there is in the
heavens and on the earth!" -—which call for signs of Allah to be seen in the phen—
omenon of nature are presented as an order to scientifically study the earth end
the cosmos.

All of the achievements of science are explained by the clergy as the charity of
Allah. Han only comprehends what has been established by Allah, comprehends the
wisdom and might of Allah. For example, the launching of space ships with men on
board gives rise to such opinions: Allah is so great and mereiﬁﬂ.that he had per-
mitted (and helped) the launching of artifical satellites and missiles. Individ-
ual representatives of the clergy who are acquainted with the latest scientific
theories are inclined to also recognize the existence of other worlds besidesour
galaxy. And if science comes from God. is it possible for a Moslem to deny the
achievements of science? In his 1960 fatwa the Mufti of the Spiritual Adminis-
tration for Hoslemc of the European Part of the USSR-Id Siberia (the cityof Ufa) mlcuned
the flight of Yu. A. Gagarin into outer space and emphasized that only our coun-
try was capable of accomplishing such a feet.

In his address at the festive meeting devoted to the 70th anniversary of the Mufti
the chairman of the Spiritual Administration for Moslems of the European Part of
the USSR and Siberia, the Mufti Khiyslitdinov, said: "The happiness of man in real
earthly life consists in physical health, the mastery of knowledge, of science and
technology, in the all-round enlightenment of himself. and, in accordance with our
greatly revered morality. in the defense of peaceful life." "But in the life in
the other world," the Mufti continued, "happiness and bliss can be secured for a
man through an unqualified knowledge of the great Allah and his Prophet Hohammed.
the precise performance of the rituals and customs of the Prophet Mohammad which
have been established by Allah and which are mandatory for Hoslems, and, finally.
through absolute submission to the great Allah."

Thus, the contempory clergy attempts to prove that both scientific knowledge and
a belief in God are necessary for complete happiness.

The clergy is not inclined to speak about the fact that religion is being reformed.
In every fatwa the Spiritual Administration for Hoslems of the European part of

the USSR and of Siberia emphasizes that it is guided by the Koran and the sayings
of the Prophet Hohamned. "The strict and absolute fulfillment of the precepts of
the Koran and of the teachings of our Prophet Hohammed has been and remains for

us, orthodox Hoalems. a sacred duty." it is stated in the fatwa of 18 June 1961.
"Any deviation from these norms will be regarded as a gross violation of the laws
of the Sura." The necessity for the explanations which are contained in the fat-
waa results from the fact. it is said. that the Spiritual Administration "is guided
by the demands of every epoch and of every period regarding the judiciousness of
rules of behavior."

The silent "cleaning up" of dogma from the absurd views which have been left over
from the early Middle Ages is one of the widespread methods of modernization.

S.
INDR‘OFTWCJAI.I£512CNVLY
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USEZONLY

Here is an interesting example. The Mufti of the Spiritual Administration Khiyalit—
dinov has published an abbreviated exposition of the Koran in the Tatar language
under the title of "Islam and Cult" (Ufa, 1958). Here we do not have the myths of
the Koran about the creation of the world and of man by God, the Fall of the first
people, and the activities of the first prophets. The Korsn's directions onthe st-
titude toward the unfaithful, toward women, and toward private property and explc"~
ation are also missing here, and there is no description of Heaven and Hell and

of the threat of Judgment Day.

The content of the seven ayats of the first sure is basically set forth in a single
sentence which praises Allah. 0f the 286 poems of the second sure, the incomplete
contents of only several of the first poems are taken. All of them carried through
the idea that only the God-fearing believe in the fact that the Koran is from

God and that it points to the way to truth. God-fearing people believe in Heaven
and. by carrying out all of God's directions, they will get into Heaven, and not
into Hell. All of the rest--sncient notions of the world. tales of the cruelties
of God toward the unfeithful-is omitted. Hhile he sets forth the basic duties

of Hoslems in detail, the author remains silent about the ”jihad" ~-the Holy Har
against the "unfaithful." o-a of Allah's features-his punishing cruelty-is not
noticeable in the mufti's book. Allah here is an absolutely perfect and good be-
ing and a just judge.

The mullahs state that Islam is an enemy of prejudices and that it has nothing in
common with ignorant superstitions (this was said, for example, in one of his
sermons by the Imam-Khatib of the Prunze mosque M. Dzheyenbekov). The mufti of the
Spiritual Administration writes: "If someone becomes sick it is absolutely necess-
ary to take measures for treatment. since our Prophet prescribed that when there is
an illness a doctor must been seen. The treatment of sicknesses by means of sense-
less charms snd talismans and various kinds of writing on paper and plates, or the
making up of love talismans and a belief in their action is a belief in polytheism.
This makes Allah angry."

In this way. the Hoslem clergy tries either to igmm: everything that does not cor-
respond in the Koran to modern scientific knowladge or to present it as an allegory.
Nowadays it would be difficult to convince believers that man is made of clay,

that the dome of the sky is a solid, the vault of the seven heavens. and that
earthquakes occur when the bull who carries the earth throws it from one horn to
another. However, it is still possible to convince believers, especially those
with a low cultural and educational level. of the fact that the Koran contains all
of the wisdom of the world and that it is only necessary to know how to correctly
understand it. This is the role which is taken by the clergy in order to pre-
serve in the believers a feeling of reverence for Moslem dogma.

All of the aspects of Hoslem dogma are undergoing reform. Here, for example, is
how the concepts of "Heaven" and "Hull" are interpreted by certain representatives
of the clergy. In reply to the question as to whether it is possible to believe

in the existence of that Heaven and Hell with which the Koran frightens and en-
tices the orthodox, it is sometimes possible to hear the following in discussions
with the clergy: "Only ignoramuses understand the holy al-Koran in such a liter-

al manner." Heaven and Hell. it turns out, are spiritual states of man. If some-

6.
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NHLY
FOI:0FINCJA1.IEHE(MSLY

one experiences bliss because of his good deeds he is in Heaven; if he is tor-
mented and suffering he is in hell.

It is known that Hoslems are prohibited from using alcoholic beverages. In this
connection, we have a curious reply from the mufti of the Spiritual Administration
to the question: "Is it correct to have funeral rites for a deceased person who
died from drunkenness?" The mufti said that the "use of alcohol or death from
drunkenness still does not mean that a person became an unbeliever. For this rea-
son, such rites are permitted. These funeral rites will become a prayer to God to
forgive the sinner" (reply to the third question in the 22 December 1963 fatwa).

The clergy permits appreciable indulgences in the observance of the rites which

are prescribed for Moslems. 0n 8 March 1957 the Central Asian Spiritual Adminis-
tration for Hosiems published a fatwa on the 30-day fast during the month of Rama-
den. The fatwa contains an order to imam-khstibs to explain to believers who are
employed in production that "the observance of the fast by them must not have a
negative influence on the performance of their work. They have to be told that in
necessary cases they can make use of the releases which are granted by the Shariat."

In the fatwa of 18 June 1961 the mufti of the Spiritual Administration for Hoslems
of the European Part of the USSR and of Siberia writes: "The performance of the
fast during the month of Ramadan is no: obligatory for adults in the following
groups: nursing mothers, men and women workers employed in factories, plants, trans-
portation, and agricultural production, and, finally, sick people." Every be-
liever who has not performed the fast for the reasons indicated in the fatwa has

to beg God to forgive his sin by means of performing philanthropic actions and
prayer. By philanthropic actions is meant the giving of aims to the poor and the
unfortunate; however, the muftiwrites in the fatwa of 18 June 1961 that "there are
absolutely no such people in our state and, therefore, to give charity to loafers
and simulators is forbidden by the Shariat of Islam." The following conclusion is
drawn from this: philanthropic actions are monetary gifts to the mosque and the
Spiritual Administration. This kind of interpretation has been advantageous for
the mosque. Now during the holidays of uraz-bairem collections have been increased
by several times, and by means of these offerings the believers "cleanse their con-
sciences."

The clergy is careful to see to it that services in the mosques are not a reason
for lateness by believers to work and do not get in the way of work. For example,
local mosques try to conduct holiday services a bit earlier, before the beginn-
ing of the work day. And the Friday and other daytime services are timed to the
dinner break in production (from 1:00 to 2:00).

In the 10 Hay 1952 fatwa of the Central Asian Spiritual Administration for Mes-
lems the arrangement of a festivity on the occasion of circumcision is recognized
to be non-mandatory. This fatwa was later supplemented by an information notice
on 26 January 1955 which explains that circumcision is not a fard, that is, a
mandatory establishment for Moslems. The Spiritual Administration for Hoalema in
the European Part of the USSR and Siberia takes the same view of the rite of cir-
cumcision. To the question asked by believers-"would it be correct to marry peo—
ple who have not undergone the rite of circumcision if such a person affirms that

7.
FtHICHﬂHCJAl.USl2(NNLY
IN)! 0F?1C1Al.lﬂiE(MNLY

he is a Hoslem?" --The Mufti answered: "It would be correct, for the absense of
circumcision does not mean that a man is not a believer" (reply to the fifth
question in the 1963 fatwa).

A fatwa of the Spiritual Administration for Hoslems for the European Part of the
USSR and of Siberia already regards blood sacrifice during the holiday of Kurban-
bairam to be non-obligatory. The sacrifice can be made in the form of money.

The position of the Moslem clergy in the woman question has also changed. It is
well known that during the early years of Soviet power the clergy opposed equal
rights for women. In particular, the clergy was against the destruction of the
parandja. According to incomplete data, in the Uzbek SSR in 1928 alone the mullahs
instigated the murder of 270 women who had opposed their rightless situation and
had thrown off the parandja. with time the mullahs became more conciliatory. They
already proposed that women cover their faces only in the presence of men. Then
the opinion became established that it was sufficient for a woman to cover only

her head. And in a decree adopted on 27 October 1952 by the Second Plenum of the
Central Asian Spiritual Administration for Moslema it is stated that "the going

of women with an open face is, according to the Shariat, correct and possible."
At the same time, the plenum decided to issue an explanation in which it is stated
that women have the right to participate in public and state affairs and that those
wishing todissolve a marriage can do so not in accordance with the Shariat, but
through the Civil Registry Office.

And here is a curious extract from a reply in the fatwa of 22 December 1963 of

the Spiritual Administration for Hoslems of the European Part of the USSR and of
Siberia to the questions of believers. The Hufzi writes: "As has become known to
us, in certain places women and girls are being prohibited from going to evening
courses. Our holy Prophet said: An endeavor to master knowledge is obligatory for
men and for women. The prohibiting of women to go to educational institutions at
any time of the day under the pretext that this contradicts Islam and the sayings
of the Prophet is an unforgiveable sin before God."

Today, when most of the believers are women, in many places they have been permit-
ted to go to the mosques together with men (although.during the prayers they are
located separate from the men so as not to distract them). The mullahs commission
certain women to talk with female parishioners in order to strengthen their relig-
ious faith and see to it that they perform the essential religious requirements
punctually.

Let us note one more interesting detail.

In Bashkiriya during the first years of Soviet power the clergy prohibited playing
on the accordian. mandolin, and guitar and prevented the development of the the-
ater and youth entertainment in clubs. This, incidently, is reflected in the novel
by G. lbragimov "Young Hearts" and in the play by 6. Renal "Theater." Now, how-
ever, the clergy is a supporter of art and music. Let us turn to the replies of
the Spiritual Administration for hoslems of the European Part of the USSR and of
Siberia to the questions of believers in the fatwe of 22 December 1963. a be-

liever asks: "Is it correct to buy and to keep at home musical instruments, for
example, an accordion, a phonograph, violin, radio, and so forth?"

ITJI4OFIICIA1.INSIICNVLY
F1Nl(nﬂﬁClA1.USE(NNLY

This is the reply: "All of these instruments are works of art invented on the
basis of science and enlightenment. We have not seen any proof either in the Koran
or in the sayings of the Prophet that their use is a sin. But the opposite proof
exists. Once, after a holiday morning prayer cur holy Prophet was sitting in the
home of his close friend Abu Bakr. At that tile Abu Bakr's wife Geisha began to
play on the kuray a national melody of that time. Abu Bakr grew angry with her
and said: "Stop playing, show some shame in front of our Prophet." Then the Pro-
phet said: "Every tribe has its joyeus day. And for us today is also a great and
joyous holiday." This saying, it seems, clearly proves the permissibility of the
use of musical instruments. If it were a sin. the Prophet would not have permit-
ted the playing."

What is the attitude of believers to the modernization of religion? The meat fan-
atical section of the Hoslems, especially amongst those who are literate and know
the dogmas of Islam, is dissatisfied with the latest interpretations and does not
agree with them, regarding the innovations as an arbitrary handling of religion.
Some of them believe that all of these attempts at adaptation have been leading to
the fact that "today real faith is being extinguished." It is for this reason that
some believers withdraw from active participation in the life of the mosques and
prefer to perform their personal obligations as a Moslem chiefly at home. But
the great majority of believers simply does not notice that Islam has changed and
accepts the iatwas of a modernising character and the various new interpretations
of a number of theses of Islam for the true word of religious authorities which
must be carried out.

How should the process of modernisation be appraised? It would be to the greatest
extent untrue to think that the religious reforms have been caused solely by the
calculating aspirations of a farquuhtedclergy. Of course, it can not be denied
that in certain cases the propaganda of religious ideology is engaged in by peo-
ple who are prepared to preach anything at all.

We believe that the modernization of religion is an objective process caused by the
tremendous changes in the social life of the country, the achievements of science
and technology, and the higher cultural level of the masses. As a result of this,
both believers and the clergy itself are unable to maintain their religious views
in their previous form. They attempt to bring traditional religious ideas into
correspondence with the changed conditions of life. Conversations with represent-
atives of the clergy have convinced the authors of this article that many mullahs
sincerely believe in the correctness of their modernized religious views and do not
believe that they have departed from the fundamentals of dogma. Cases are well
known in which the process of the rethinking of one's views goes so far that peo-

ple (including representatives of the clergy) reject their former ideas and break
with religion.

The fact that a substantial number of believers adhere to religious views in their
modernized form has to be taken into account in our scientific atheist propaganda.
Our argumentation has to be more convincing so that believers can become convinced
of the correctness of the scientific materialist worldview.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mysl'", 1966

2959
C80: 1800/15?

9.
FOIIOFFICIAI.USE(HQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONALITIBS, RELIGION QUESTIONS SOLUTIONS SOUGﬂT

hoscow PROBLEMY NAUCHNOGO ATEIZMA in Russian No. 10, 1970 pp 167-186

[Article by Lu. Nishanov: "The Solution of the Nationalities Question in the USSR
and the Overcoming of Religion in the Light of Lenin's Teachings")

[Text] The great Lenin left behind the richest ideological heritage. Soviet peo-
ple and all progressive mankind turn again and again to Lenin's works, drawing
from them strength and inspiration for the successful struggle for the construction
of a communist society.

Among the very important and fundamental problems of the conunist transformation
of society, V.t. Lenin gave an exceptionally profound scientific substantiation
to the positions of our Marxist party and state regarding religion and the church.

Proceeding from the dialectical principle of the interconnection, interaction, and
inter-deteriination of social phenomena, v.1. Lenin pointed to the organic unity
of thc solution of the national, state, and ideological problems of a number of
national outlying districts, including questions concerning atheistic activities
by the party.

The nationalities question had always troubled the minds of the advanced people of
many generations. Hovever, under the system of exploitation it was impossible to
solve it. The ruling classes strove to increase national oppression, to sow dis-
cord and hostility snong peoples, to isolate then, and to oppose the interests of
one nation to another so as to distract the attention of the workers from the joint
class struggle. Bourgeois ideologists tried in every way to prove the racial and
national inferiority of enslaved peoples. The thousand-year dominion of the ex-
ploiting classes sowed distrust, a pathological intolerance, and discord and
hatred in the relations among peoples. Truly titanic efforts were needed to change
this.

The national minorities were subjected to the largest extent to persecution and
oppression by the stronger nations. National oppression in Tsarist Russia which,

10.
FOR OFFICIAL [Bl ONLY
FOR'OFFﬂJAl.USE20NLY

in Lenin's definition, was a “prison of peoples"1 was especially severe and soph-
isticated. The non-Russian population of the national outlying districts was
doomed to poverty, a lack of rights, and darkness. The representatives of the
ruling classes scornfully called the inhabitants of these districts "aliens" and
carried out a policy of victimization, oppression, and persecution.

After the Great October Socialist Revolution in the national Outlying districts,
particularly in Central Asia, the questions of national state construction and of
economic and cultural transformations were closely interwoven with those of ideo-
logical and, first of all, etheistic work. Moreover, all of this had not a narrow-

ly local, but an all-union significance and was closely connected with the con-
struction of socialism in the USSR.

Socialism in our country could only be built over its entire territory, including
those outlying districts which were the so-called domestic colonies of Tsarism.
All of this demanded the involvement in socialist construction of Russia's nation-
al districts which had not gone through the capitalist stage of development.

The equalization of the eonomic, social, and cultural levels of all of the peoples
of the USSR could only be achieved in one way-through the elimination of actual
inequalities amongst peoples and through bringing backward peoples up the to level
of advanced ones by unprecedented rates which are unattainable for capitalism.

One of V.I. Lenin's greatest services consists of the fact that he worked out and
formulated a theory of the transition of previously backward countries to socialism,

bypassing the capitalist stage of development, and pointed out the class, economic,
and cultural preconditions and paths for this transition.

In a number of articles on the nationalities question V.I. Lenin stated that after
the victory of the socialist revolution the advanced socialist nations would give
comprehensive economic and cultural aid to previously backward countries and a
fraternal socialist commonwealth of free peoples would be really created such as
the world had not yet known. He wrote: "We shall try to give these backward and
oppressed, more than we, peoples 'disinterested cultural aid'... That is, to help

them to move on to the use of machines, the easing of labor, and to democracy and
to socialism."2

Putting Lenin's plan for the construction of socialism into practice, at the 10th,

12th, and other congresses our party worked out the concrete tasks in the field of
nationalities policy.

Hhat were the tasks?

The rallying and unification of the working masses of the eastern districts around
the Soviets, and in the development and strengthening of Soviet national statehood

in forms which correSponded with the national life conditions of the peoples of the
Soviet East.

The rallying of all of the workers around the Communist Party on the basis of pro-
letarian internationalism and of a resolute struggle against anti-party currents

ll.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and groupings and manifestations of bourgeois nationalism, great power chauvinism,
and bourgeois ideology.

The creation and development of a national industry in the districts by means of
the organization of new and the shifting of old industrial enterprises to raw ma-
terials sources and consumption markets and the creation on this basis of an in-
dustrial proletariat as the chief bulwark of Soviet power.

The economic organization of the workers for the purpose of changing over from
backward economic forms to higher ones--from nomadic life to settled land cul-
tivation, from shop and home crafts to factory-plant production, and from small-
scale farming to the planned public cultivation of the land.

The realization on a wide scale of a cultural revolution embracing all of the
spheres of the spiritual life of a people and the creation of a culture national in
form and socialistin content. The liberation of the women of the East and their
active involvement in production and public political life we): of paramount im-
portance.

By destroying social inequality and exploitation the Great October Socialist Re-
volution at the same time eliminated national inequality and all forms of national
oppression. The victory of the socialist method of production was the basis for
the correct solution of the nationalities question in the USSR, for the elimina-
tion of national distrust and national narrow-mindsdness, and for the strengthen-
ing of the friendship and fraternity of Soviet peoples.

The historical experience of the peoples of Uzbekistan, like that of any other
Soviet republic, is one of the proofs of the correctness and vitality of the the-
ses of Harxist-Leninist theory and of the CPSU Program on the nationalities ques-
tion.

Socialism eliminated economic and cultural backwardness in previously oppressed
nations. The peoples of the backward districts of former Tsarist Russia put an

and once and for all to their patriarchal-feudal system and, bypassing the capit-
alist stage of development, took the path of socialism and formed into socialist
nations. This is the way, for example, the Uzbek, Turkmen, and other nations arose.

During the years of Soviet power striking changes have occurred in all of the
fields of the economic, public political, and cultural life of the national dis-
:ricts of Russia. This can be clearly seen in the example of the Uzbek SSR.

v'bekistan has become a soveign Soviet republic with solidly established social-
irt production relations. In the past industry was represented here only by
several dozen semi-home craft enterprises. while today this is a republic with a
powerful industry which includes more than 100 breaches of industry and more than
1. 7.00 large enterprises.

Uzbekistan has become the basic cotton base of the Soviet Union. For four years

in .— row the republic has been giving the country nore than four million tons of
"wLire gold," which comprises more than two-thirds of the all-union production

12.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of this highly valuable raw material. In addition to cotton, in 1966 Uzbekistan
provided 53 percent of the silk cocoons, 92 percent of the kenaf, 35 percent of
the astrakhan, and 17.5 percent of the rice produced in the country.

Uzbekistan's share in the USSR economy for the production of industrial output is
also substantial. According to the data for 1966, the republic occupies first
place in the country for the production of cotton harvesters, cotton tractor sow—
ers, pile cleaners, and cotton ginning equipment; second place for the production
of cotton textile fabrics; third place for the production of vegetable oil; and
fourth place for the production of electric energy, coal mining, and the produc-
tion of mineral fertilizers and cement. There is not a corner in the country where
Uzbekistan's output is not used. And there is not a republic in the USSR whose
workers would not make gifts to Uzbekistan of the fruits of their labor.

The Soviet peoples are united by their efforts in economic construction. Togeth-
er they create irrigation complexes and power systems, build electric power ata-
tions and water reservoirs, construct canals, petroleum and gas pipelines, and
railroads and highways, and open up new lands. Shoulder to shoulder, the peoples
of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan built the Great Fergana Canal, developed the Vakhsh
Valley, and erected the Parkhad and Kayrakkum hydro-electric power stations. In
fraternal collaboration the workers of Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan created the
large Lake Collector which made it possible to drain hundreds of thousands of hec-
tares of swampy lands on the territory of both republics. The workers of Uzbekis-
tan, Tajikistan, andKazakhstan and the representatives of many other national-
ities of the country are participating in the development of the Golodnaya Steppe.
The world's largest gas pipelines-obukhara-Ural and Central Asia-Center--have been
laid through the efforts of the workers of many republics.

The borders of the union republics are amended for the purpose of making more ef-
ficient use of natural resources and in the interests of international tasks. In
1959, on the basis of a mutual agreement, the Uzbek SSR gave Tajikistan 50,500
hectares of land in the Golodnaya Steppe, and in 1956 the Kazakh SSR gave Uzbek-
istan Bostandykskiy Rayon. In January 1963 the Kazakh people performed still
another notable act, giving the Uzbek SSR more than 3,000,000 hectares of arable
and pasture lands bordering on the Uzbek Republic and the kolkhozes and sovkhozes
located on them. Only peoples educated in the ideas of internationaliam and in
the spirit of Leninist friendship and fraternity can act like this.

Their participation in eliminating the consequences of the earthquake in Tashkent
was a vivid demonstration of the fidelity of the Soviet peoples to the ideas of
indissoluble friendship and proletarian internationalism. From every corner of
the Soviet Union reports came of a readiness to help Tashkent. A month had not
passed since the first destructive underground shock, when construction trains
from the fraternal republics and trains containing construction materials, equip-
ment, and machinery began to arrive in the capital of Uzbekistan. Construction
workers from Moscow, Leningrad, and many other cities of the Russian Federation,
the Ukraine, Belorussia, Moldavia, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Georgia, Azerbaijan,
Armenia, Kazakhstan Tajikistan, Kirghizistan, and Turkmenistan took part in the
creation of the new Tashkent. In a short period of time Tashkent was reborn from
its ruins and acquired a completely new look. A little more time will pass and

13.
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and it will become one of the most beautiful cities in the country. Tashkent will
stand forever as a magnificent monument which personifies the power of the Leninist
friendship of the Soviet people.

The culture of the Uzbek people, national in form and socialist in content, is
flourishing. Every socialist nation selects from the cultures of other peoples
everything that is best and acceptable for it, absorbs progressive forms, and
transﬂnus them into a component part of its own natural culture. This, for example,
is how there appeared in the culture of the Uzbek socialist nation the genres of
the novel, story, essay, ballet, opera, choral and multi-voice singing, symphonic
music, and cinematography which in the past the Uzbek people did not have.

The contempory Uzbek reader is able to read in his native language the works of
many writers from the fraternal republics. All of the best has been published

in the Uzbek language that was created by Pushkin and Gogol', Tolstoy and Gor'kiy,
Sholokhov and Pedin, Shevchenko and Rustaveli, Ayni and Abay Kunanbayev, Kerbabeyev
and Aytmatov, Raynis and Yakub Roles, Mirro Tureun-zade, and many other masters

of literature. Plays and musical works which have been created by the writers

and artists of the fraternal peoples are successfully produced in Uzbek theaters.
Every year the "Uzbekfil'm" film studio dubs into the Uzbek language a large
number of films released by the studios of Moscow, Leningrad, and the union re-
publics. This helps the Uzbek people to gain a knowledge of the treasures of world
culture and enriches its spiritual life. In their turn, the works of Uzbek writers.
composers, and film makers are extensively translated and dubbed into Russian and
the languages of the other peoples of the USSR and become the property of all of
the socialist nations.

The traditional reciprocal ten-day period and weeks of literature and art play a
great role in the development of the cultures of the peoples of the USSR and in
their mutual enrichment. They develop into a vivid demonstration of the indes-
tructible friendship of the Soviet peoples and into a review of their achievements
in economic and cultural construction.

The process of the coming together and mutual enrichment of the cultures of the
Soviet peoples, their international growing together, is closely connected with
such an important form of social intercourse as language. All languages in the
USSR have equal rights. Every person may speak and bring up and educate his
children in any language.

The Russian language is one of the most widespread and richest languages of the
world. Its serves as a very important means of inter-national intercourse and
cooperation and of providing each nation with access to the cultural achievements
of all of the peoples of the USSR and to world culture. V.I. Lenin emphasized the
progressive character of the voluntary study of the Russian language by non-Russian
peoples. He wrote: "...we. of course, are in favor of having every inhabitant of
Russia have the opportunity to study the great Russian language.

There is only one thing we do not want: the element of coercion."3
This Leninist instruction has been embodied in life. Soviet peoples of all nation-

alities study the Russian language voluntarily and lovingly, regarding it as their
second native language.

14.
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USB(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The social structure of the Uzbek people changed in a fundamental way during the
process of socialist construction. An Uzbek socialist nation was formed. A mod-
ern advanced working class has arisen, a kolkhoa peasantry has taken shape, a
national intelligentsia has formed. and the everyday lifestyle of people has chang-
ed. The genuine revolution which has occurred in the minds of millions of work-

ers has been a remarkable victory for Leninist nationalities policy. Socialist
ideology has been victorious fully and completely.

The creation of the material and technical base of communism leads to the even
closer solidarity of the Soviet peoples and to the unification of their efforts

in the struggle for a further growth of their international econony. The compos-
ition of the population becomes more multi-national and, then, international, which
intensifies the direct economic, political, and cultural intercourse of the dif-
ferent nations which are united together by a single goal, ideology, and by the
leadership of a single multi-nstional party of internationalist communists. All

of this leads to a further growth of the spiritual community of the workers of

the different nations and to the formation of international features in their so-
cial psychology.

A struggle against the survivals of the past in the consciousness of people and,
above all, against the ideology of Islam was a component part of the solution of
the nationalities question in Central Asia.

The difficulties which arose in the struggle against religious survivals and in
the normal process of the departure of believers from religion during the period

of socialist construction in the Uzbek republic were connected with the following
factors:

the many centuries of dominion in pre-revolutionary Uzbekistan of the feudal
method of production, economic, cultural, and daily life backwardness, and the re-
tention of the most backward forms of class enslavemant and oppression;

the social structure of the region's population in which the basic mass was the
peasantry; the almost complete illiteracy of the broad strata of the popular mas-
ses. As V.I. Lenin pointed out, "it is impossible to build a com-unist society in
an illiterate country;"“

the enslaved condition of women and their isolation from public political, pro-
duction, and cultural life. The backwardness and oppressed condition of women
showed itself in a blind reverence for the dogmas of religion and for the ex-
tremely reactionary norms of the Shariat;

the reactionary role of the Moslem clergy in social, political, and cultural life;

the complex interweaving oforthodox Islam with pro—Islamic beliefs, rites, and cus-
toms.

The ideology of Islam had a decisive role in the republics of Central Asia. The

Hoslem religion regulated not only all of social and political life, but also em-
braced all of the aspects of the daily life of the people: it told them how they

roe omculi‘uss on“
INDR‘OFIRCJAI.IESEI(HVLY

must pray and work and provided a family code which included not only the legal
and everyday relationships between family members. but also the most intimate as-
pects of the life of spouses. All of this was instilled in the psychology of
the people over a period of centuries, established itself in its daily life, and

became interwoven with national customs.

The religion of Islam has attempted and continues to attempt to playtherole of a
expressor of national customs and traditions and enkindles feelings of national
exclusiveness, and nationalism frequently hides behind a religious form. We have

here a direct endeavor to groundlessly identify the concept of "Hoslem" with nat-
ional membership.

It is not accidental that v.1. Lenin demanded a more careful and attentive approach
in performing atheistic educational work with peoples who professed the Moslem re-

ligion. At one time it was only necessary to make a criticism of the Hoslen clergy
and it would begin screaming about national oppression and the infringement of na-

tional interests, skillfully identifying relgious concepts and national ones.

v.1. Lenin demanded maximum attention and carefulness in the nationalities ques-
tion in order to overcome the distrust of previously oppressed nations for the
workers of the nation which had oppressed them; in Central Asia this applied in
full measure to overcoming religion. he recommended that anti-religious propa-
ganda be conducted in the republics with a Hoslem population with regard to lo- .
cal conditions. This required from local party organizations that in performing
anti-religious propaganda they skillfully separate genuinely national customs and
traditions from religious features.

However, there were definite difficulties here. The struggle against religion in
Central Asia had not only an educational but also a political character with res-
pect to the Hoslem clergy which with its reactionary activities violated revolu-
tionary laws and openly opposed all measures by the Communist Party for the so-
cialist transformation of society. Local party organizations had to skillfully
unmask the alliance between the Hoslem clergy and such reactionary political cur-
rents as Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism. It is not accidental that when he became
acquainted on 13 June 1920 with a draft decision of the CC on the tasks of the
Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) in Turkestan, V.I. Lenin proposed that "spe-
cial work be done on developing methods of struggle against the clergy and Pan-
lslamism and against the bourgeois nationalist movament...."s

v.1. Lenin sharply condemned the attempt by the national deviationists to justify
Pan-Islaaism and Pan-Turkism. As is known, the national deviationists led by T.R.
Ryskulov attempt to revive the nationalistic theses according to which reactionary
Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkiam had allegedly lost all of their nurturing soil under
the conditions of Soviet Turkestan.

Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism not only gave political nourishment to Islamic re-
ligion, but were also a definite ideology. For this reason. a resolute struggle
against the reactionary ideology of Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism was of great
importance for unmasking the essence of the religion of Islam.

16.
liliCMﬂﬂClAl.UEEi0Nl¥
FOI‘OFFHJAL.USE(MSLY

Before the revolution the Tsarist government which had turned Central Asia into a
colony and which conducted a policy of Russification in a number of aspects of the
life of its peoples did not touch upon the questions of the religion of Islam. In
Central Asia the Orthodox Church adhered to a policy of cnnprehensive support for
the Moslem clergy in order to keep the people obedient and cooperate with the lo-
cal feudalists and bais who in essence were the executors of the Tserist adminis-
tration' s will and its faithful accomplices. It is for this reason that the
Turkestan governor-generals who were Christians ordered the Hoslem population under
the threat of severe punishment to strictly observe Islam and to follow the orders
of the clergy in everything.

After the October Revolution the situation changed in a fundamental way. Soviet
power which was interested in the education of the people, in the development of
science, and in effecting a cultural revolution could not but clash with the re-
actionary Islamic religion.

V.I. Lenin called especial attention to the pursuit of flexible tactics by the com-
munists of Turkestan under such difficult conditions. Speaking at the Eight Con-
gress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) in 1919, he said; "What then can
we do with such peoples as the Kirghiz. Uzbeks. Tajiks, and Turkmen who to this
day are under the influence of their mullahs? After long experience with priests,
our population in Russia helped us to overthrow them.... Can we go to these peo-
ples and say: "He will get rid of your exploiters"? We cannot do this because

they are completely under the subordination of their mullahs. Here we have to
wait for the development of a given nation, for the differentiation of the pro-
letariat from bourgeois elements which is inevitable."6

V.I. Lenin warned against a blind and mechanical copying of the tactics and pol-
ities of the Russian communists in the national districts where the conditions
were essentially different from the conditions of Central Russia. He condemned
attempts to carry out revolutionary transformations wnich had not yet reached
the point of readiness in the backward districts and opposed "leftist" excesses
in this question.

An address by the Council of People's Commissars "To All Moslem Workers of Russia
and the East" stated: "Henceforth your beliefs and customs and your national and
cultural institutions are declared to be free and inviolable. Arrange your na-
tional life freely and without hindrance. You have the right to do so. Know

that your rights. like the rights of all of the peoples of Russia, are protected
by the full might of the revolution and its organs, the Soviets of Workers' , Sold-
iers' , and Peasants' Deputies."

Among the specific characteristics of the situation in Central Asia one must list
the fact that, in contrast to Central Russia, in Central Asia before the October
Revolution the necessary preconditions for the dissemination of atheism did not
exist. Due to the absence of an industrial proletariat, there did not exist here
a more or less powerful and influential revolutionary social democracy which would
have been able to conduct effective work among the Moslem workers.

Whereas in Central Russia atheistic ideas became increasingly widespread among the
proletariat of the city and the village, in the national republics they could not

17.
F0!‘DFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR 051NC]AI.[£HE(NHLY

be disseminated. The proletariat, when it came to power, rapidly eliminated the
remnents of the Middle Ages.

Even before the revolution a majority of the Russian workers and the advanced sec-
tion of the peasantry saw in the clergy faithful accomplices of autocracy, the
bourgeoisie, and the land owners. in the national republics such views were ex-
tremely weak, althOugh atheistic ideas and free thought existed in the works of
the progressive thinkers of the people of Central Asia and, in particular, of the
Uzbek people--Beruni, Farabi, Navoi, Hukumi, Furkata, Khamzy, and others.

After the October Revolution, when the reactionary part of the clergy allied itself
with the Basmach- movement and came out against land and water reform, the liber-
ation of women, and industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture,
atheistic ideas became widespread.

Decisions by the party which were adopted during the first years of Soviet power
were of great importance in the struggle against religion and religious survivals
in everyday life. They include, in particular, the political directive "Toward
Work Among the Peoples of the East" which was adopted on 21 February 1920 by the
CC of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), the resolution of the 12th Party
Congress "On the Organization of Anti-Religious Agitation and Propaganda," and
others.

Guiding themselves by the instructions of V.I.Lenin to the effect that a success-
ful struggle against the clergy and for the minds of the popular masses demanded
above all the unmasking of the connection between the class interests and class
organizations of the contempory bourgegisie and the organizations of religious
institutions and religious propaganda, the communists of the Turkeatan directed
especial attention toward unmasking the class essence of the Hoslem clergy and of
those social strata whose interests it represented. In 1923 the agitation and
propaganda section of the CC of the Comunist Party of Turkestan distributed to
all party cells the theses "On Anti-Religious Propaganda in Turkastan." 0n the
basis of a large amount of factual material, the class roots of the Moslem re-
ligion were revealed in the theses. Later a letter was sent to the localities--
"0n the Struggle With lshanism and Other Religious Currents" --in which the re-
actionary essence of Ishanism was unmasked and the real nature of the Khodzhey
and anti-popular activities of the Maddalhs was explained.

in time the struggle against religious prejudices took on a mass character. The
special conditions under which the communistsof Central Asia had to wage their
struggle against religious prejudices dictated specific methods. Thus, beginning
with the end of 1925 a cycle of natural scientific lectures with an anti-religious
bent was given in Tashkent.

Party and government workers had to show especial vigilance with the clergy which
used every opportunity for religious agitation. Thus, in August 1927 there was

a powerful earthquake in Khodzhen; and there were deaths. The clergy hastened

to declare this earthquake to be a "payment for lack of faith." Public lectures
and reports explaining theclmrscter and nature of an earthquake were organized.

18.
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the end of the 1920's and the beginning of the 1930's wide use for agheietic _
propaganda at the residences of workers was made of the red chaykhany [toahouseg/
which in Uzbekistan were not only a place for spending leisure time after the
workday, but also the place where lively discussions on various topics were held.
Taking account of this, local party organizations began to use the chaykhany for
loud readings of newspapers and magazines and for discussions on natural scientific
topics which forced the formation of a materialist worldview. Visual agitation was
organized especially successfully in the chaykhany.

Work in the mosques was one of the specific forms of the agitation and propaganda
work of local party organizations. The mosques played a much larger role in the
life of the Moslems than houses of prayer. After the divine services there were
often meetings here, various questions were discussed, and so-called local public
opinion was formed. In view of this, during the first years of Soviet power party
and government workers came to the mosques so as to participate in the discussions
there and explain the policies of the Communist Party and of Soviet power. Thus,
in 1920 in a mosque in Bukhara a large meeting was held at which around 6,000 peo-
ple were present. v.v.Kuybyshev.nd workers from the "Red Bast" agitation train
spoke at the meeting and explained the tasks of Soviet construction in Turkestan
and the attitude of the party and Soviet state toward religion.

We know that the clergy connected most of the national customs, traditions, and
holidays of the Central Asian peoples with the Koran. In this connection, the
board of the People's Commissariat of Nationalities of the Turkmen Republic which
carried out the party's nationalities program found it to be very desirable to
establish, in addition to the existing religious holidays, national and national-
revolutionary holidays of the native peoples of the Turkmen Republic. Many work-
ers began to take greater part in revolutionary holidays which soon became gen-
uinely mass holidays. At the same time, the influence of religious holidays de-
creased.

Party organizations increased their work during the month of Ramadan-~the long
Hoslem fast. long before the onset of Ramadan the local party organizations to-
gether with associations of the poor outfitted the red chaykhanya. During the
holiday crowded meetings took place at which there were discussions of the pol-
itical and economic measures of Soviet power and of local problems.

Anti-religious work which was interesting in form was conducted in Uzbekistan.

In Central Asia there was the widespread institution of the so-called gap-tra-
ditional men's clubs in which in the past religious booksweresometimes read and
various questions of public and family life were discussed. From the very first
days of Soviet power the "gap" began to be used for anti-religious propaganda and
for unmasking reactionary customs and their concrete carriers.

There were also certain shortcomings in the anti-religious work in Uzbekistan.
Thus, in 1919 the clergy's lands were confiscated, shariat courts were prohib—
ited, and religious schools-maktaby were eliminated. As life showed, these mea-
sures were premature, and on 14 October 1921 the CC of the Russian Communist
Party (Bolsheviks) adopted a decree in accordance with which the Shariat courts
and religious schools were restored in Turkestan and the lands were partially re-

19.
FKIICHHHCJAI.U§E(NVLY
FOR OF‘WCJAL USEIDNLY

turned. Once again the correctness of V.I. Lenin‘s instructions regarding the
impermissibnity of haste and administrative methods in solving a number of problems
in the national districts was confirmed. Other forms, chiefly persuasion. were
necessary here.

In March 1923 the communists of Khodzhent conducted an"education week" during
which public examinations for the pupils of the old and new schools were organized.
After one of the exams on the Uzbek and Russian languages which took place on the
premises of the Dzhami mosque the teachers of the religious schools were com-
pelled to admit their defeat. Frequently the local population appealed to the
People's Commissariat of Education to eliminate the religious schools. Such exam-
inatims were held repeatedly and were very effective. The same fate overtook the
Shariat courts which had lost their influence and finished their activities towards
1928. When the workers of the districts had begun to build a socialist economy

the Kaziyskiy court with its Shariat law became a foreign body in the system of so-
cial relations. At the the end of the 1920's the conditions ripened for the con-
fiscation of the clergy's lands which came to 35,000 hectares. In this way the
economic base of the Hoslem clergy was undermined.

In 1925-1930 in Uzbekistan a number of decisions were adopted by party congresses
and CC Plenums on the struggle against religion. conferences were called. unions
of atheists were organized, the extensive publication of azheistic literature was
begun, and mass meetings and debates and other measures were conducted aimed at
unmasking the reactionary activities of the Moslem clergy and at the complete li-
beration of ordinary Moslems from the influence of religion. The rapid develop-
ment of an atheistic movement in the national republics began. of great import-
ance was a special decision of the 12th Plenum of the Central Asian Bureau of the
CC of the All-Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) in January 1927 which discussed
the question of the struggle against the Hoslem clergy. All of these decisions
and instructions were reinforced by practical deeds.

Party organizations began to give more attention to the training and retraining
of atheistic cadres. In Uzbekistan anti-religious universities and faculties and .
divisions at vuzes were opened. and seminars, courses, and circles were created.

During the course of the industrialization of the country, the collectivization
of agriculture, and the carrying out of the cultural revolution the collapse of
the economic, social. and domestic-family foundations of Islam took place. The
solution of the nationalities question in the USSR on the basis of the principles
of Harxism-Leninism united all of the peoples of our homeland into a single fre-
ternal family. The anti-popular and anti-humane idea of the "national exclusive-
ness" of Hohammeduusmznu of the peoples of Islam crashed to the ground.

In the republics of Central Asia, as in the country as a whole, religious ideo-
logy was bankrupted and the prestige of religion and the clergy fell. The victory
of the materialiste and scientific worldview over the reactionary ideology of
Islam became a fact. The peoples of Central Asia achieved enormous successes in
the field of science and culture; they are equipped with Heraist-Leniniet ideol-
ogy, and their psychology is collectivist, based not on religious ethics. but

on the principles of the moral code of the builder of communism.

20.
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(MULY

however, it would be premature to regard all of the tasks in the field of the
struggle against religion as being accomplished. The facts show that clergy,
including the Moslem clergy, is even today struggling not only for the preserva-
tion, but also for the expansion of its influence.

In the republics of Central Asia there are instances of the observance of certain
religious rites at the time of marriages, the birth of a child, and funerals, the
income of certain mosques has been increasing, there are unregistered Moslem as-
sociations, and in certain places wandering mullahs and ishanys are active. There
are cases of the worship of so-called Holy Places and of various kinds of Masaram.
Various kinds of tharlatans and religious crack pots are active at the "Holy Places."

To this day individual representatives of the intelligentsia observe religious
rites and customs which have outlived themselves. Thus, in 1968 in Andrizhanskaya
Oblast among the performers of various religious rites there were 70 workers from
public education agencies, 62 students, and 10 doctors. There are also cases

when individual communists show a tolerant attitude toward churchmen and even them-
selves sometimes observe religious rites.

After discussing the question of the state of and measures to improve scientific
atheistic propaganda in the republic, the CC of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan
condemned the facts and demanded from party organizations a strict observance by
all communists of the part Charter. The Council of Ministers of the Uzbek SSR
adopted a special decree:' Intensifying the Struggle Against Violations of the
Soviet Laws on Cults."

At the present time, when the profound revolutionary changes in the life of so-
ciety and the achievements of science have undermined the foundations of religion,
the clergy has been compelled to work with especial zealousness on "cleaning it
up." They try to "prove" that religion does not contradict modern scientific,
moral, and social progress and they strive to make its broken down dogmas up to
date.

Striving to pnnerve its influence on the masses, especially on the youth, the
Hoalem clergy resorts to various kinds of tricks. Attempts are made to tempor-
arily get rid of the most reactionary slogans of Islam and even to find something
in common between them and communist ideals. Religious ideologists are perform-
ing a large amount of work to modernize the dogma of Islam, are adapting its ideo-
logy and tactics to the spirit of the time, are making use of the humane princi-
ples of Soviet law on cults, and are makingacareful study of the needs and inter-
ests of belﬂwinghoslems.

The modernistic-minded Moslem clergy, like its like-minded colleagues from the
camp of Christian theologians and bourgeois religious scholars, assert that re-
ligion has always been and continues to be a source of morality. Proceeding from
this, the muftis in their fatwas, the imam-khatybs in their khudbye, and the mul-
lahs in their sermons place the chief emphasis on the moral commandments of Islam
(be honest, do not commit adultery, work honestly, respect your elders, be patient
and humble, do not resist evil. and so forth). Speculating with these moral
precepts which are taken from the arsenal of general human morality and have been

21.
INJR‘OIIHCIAI.IIBIICHNLY
FIHRCMWUCJAI.USEINVLY

treated by religion, the Hoslem clergy tries to preserve its influence on belie-
vers.

The work experience of the party organizations of Uzbekistan has shown that the
scientific worldview has become widespread among the masses. Never before in the
history of mankind has it been proven with such fullness and clearness, as

has been the case in the history of the peoples of our country, that the social

and personal life of an individual does not need religious sanctification and sanc-
tions, but, on the contrary, liberation from this speeds up social progress.

The work of the Communist Party and Soviet state convincingly testifies to the great
importance for social development of the mass dissemination of scientific and
political knowledge and the propaganda of an stheistic and materialist worldview.

The Moslem clergy today does not openly come out against the ideas of internation-
alism and of the friendship of peoples, seeing in that an indestructible and un-
shakeable force. However, religious prejudices continue to remain to one degree

or another a reason for throwbacks to nationalism which manifest themselves in
localism and national narrow—mindedness. Religious survivals hinder the growth

of the socialist homogeneity of nations, the development of common and interna-
tional features in the spiritual makeup of socialist nations. and a profound per-
ception by all Soviet citizens of the common nature of their goals-~the construc-
tion of communism.

The current period of the struggle against religious ideology is connected with
the accomplishment of the tasks of the complete overcoming of nationalist and
religious survivals and the education of all Soviet people in the spirit of inter-
nationalism and in the spirit of a materialist worldview. This presupposes the
wide develop-ant of a struggle against religious prejudices and the creation of

a deeply thought Out system in the organization of scientific atheistic propagan-
da among the population.

In Uzbekistan a large amount of work is being conducted on the atheistic educa-
tion of the workers. A number of measures have been carried out to strengthen
scientific atheistic propaganda among the population, stricter control has been
established over the activities of churchmen, mullahs, and the unofficial clergy
and over their observance of Soviet laws on religious cults, and especial atten-
tion is devoted to the training and retraining of cadres of atheists.

In view of the fact that most of the traditions, customs. and holidays of the na-
tive population had a religiOus coloring, the republic's party organizations att—
ribute enormous importance to celebrating new, civic customs and rituals.

Soviet reality has given rise to new traditions in family and domestic relations.
New civic rituals are entering into life. In Uzbekistan it has become a tradi-

tion to hold komsomol-youth marriages and to make presentations of birth certifi-
cates and worker and mechanization specialtns documents; the number of inter-nation-
al marriages is increasing.

The introduction of new traditions is frequently discussed at party committees and
at the ispolkoms of local Soviets. In Uzbekistan councils on the introduction of

22.
FOR OFFKJAJ.USEGNVLY
IN)! OFFICJAl.lEﬂE(MVLY

new rituals and customs and on raising the cultural level of people, especially
of the rural population, operate on a voluntary basis. Especial attention is
given on improving atheistic education at places of residence and among students
and pupils.

Party organizations enlist teachers and the party,government, and Komsomol aktiv
in participating in the atheistic education of the pOpulation at places of resid-
ence. The assignment of communists to large residential buildings and dormitories
for the performance of atheistic work is practiced. In cities and workers' set-
tlements atheistic propaganda is conducted by Makhallin committees. All of this
provides positive results.

Hork connected with the international education of the workers promotes the for-
mation of an atheistic worldview. These purposes are served by the evenings of
international friendship, the ten-day periods of fraternal cultures, and the ex—
change of radio and television broadcasts which are held in the republic.

Definite experience has been gained by the republic "Znaniye" Society which suc-
cessfully makes use of such forms of work as lecture cycles on atheism, patronage
over schools of scientific atheism, meetings with scientists and engineers. ques-
tion and answer evenings, oral magazines, traveling plantetariums. the organiza-
tion of atheist houses and corners and of universities of scientific atheistic
propaganda. Along with oral propaganda. wide use is made in the republic of print—
ed and graphic scientific atheistic propaganda. Movie houses and theaters and red-
io and television are used for the purpose of strengthening atheistic education.

The historical experience of the USSR is the property of all Harxist-Leninist par-
ties and all peoples which have taken the path of the construction of socialism.
The program of struggle for the construction of communism in our country is the
general property of mankind. for Harxism-Leninism and its practical realization is
the international duty of all workers and of all of the fraternal communist and
workers' parties.

The 23th CPSU Congress once again confirmed the enormous importance of the great
transforming force of the Harxist-Leninist teachings and of the practical solu-
tion of the nationalities question in the USSR. At the present time enormous so-
cial transformationsare being carried out in a number of Asian and African coun-
tries. The processes of the renewal of social and economic life in the differ-
ent countries are occurring in different ways. The countries which are taking
the path of a struggle for national freedom and independence, for the creation
of national economies, and for democratic transformations and spiritual libera-
tion are making their contribution to the movement toward social progress.

The power of socialism is great and the ranks of our friends are growing. And
the stronger the world socialist system becomes. the more maliciously our enemies
attack socialism. Under these conditions it is the duty of all honest scholars
to unmask all forms of anti-scientific ideology and to wage an active and sgres-
sive struggle against the idealistic and religious worldview.

23.
F0! OFFVJAI. [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOUINO’I‘BS
l. v.1. Lenin, "Collected Works," Vol. 25, p 66.
2. Ibid, V01. 30. p 120.
3. Ibid, V01. 24. p 295.
6. Ibid, V01. 61, p 315.
5. Ibid, Vol. 101, p 1036.
6. Ibid, Vol. 38, pp 158-159.

I
7. "The Formation of the USSR." A Collection of Documents. 1917-1924, Moscow:

Leningrad. 19109, pp 21-22.

8. v.1. Lenin. ”Complete Works," V01. 17, pp 615-126.

 

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hysl'" . 1970

2959
cso: 1800/157

I. .
FOR OFFICIZAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFIHCJAI.lEﬂE(NVLY

SOCIALIST NATIONS' ROLE IN OVERCOHING VBSTIGES OP ISLAM

Moscow PROBLEMY NAUCHNOGO AIBIZMA, in Russian No 14, 1973 pp 23—60

[Article by I.M. Dzhabbarov: "The Coming Together of the Socialist Nations and
Its Role in Overcoming the Survivala of Islam in Everyday Life")

[Text] In a developed socialist society two interconnected progressive tendencies
actively manifest themselves in the nationalities question: there occurs a flour-
ishing of the socialist nations and peoples and a rapid growth of all of the as—
pects of their economic, political, cultural, and social lives, and, at the same
time, on the basis of proletarian internationalism and as a result of an intensi-
fication of the mutual influence and mutual enrichment of the different national
cultures and of fraternal mutual assistance and friendship there occurs a coming
together of nations and peoples. "Socialism,“ V.1. Lenin wrote, "by organizing
production without class oppression and by ensuring the wellvbeing of all of the
members of the state thereby provides a full amplitude for the 'sympathies' of
the population and precisely because of this facilitates and enormously acceler—
ates the drawing together and merging of nations."1 Both tendencies operate, de-
velop, and intensify at the same time, since they are two aspects of one and the
same process. Thanks to the realization of Lenin's nationalities policy in the
USSR, in a brief historical period not only was a gigantic leap accomplished in
the economic and cultural development of the previously backward and oppressed
peoples of Taarist Russia, but a new historical community of people has taken

shape-~the Soviet people.

The basis of the formation of the new historical community in the economic field
was the elimination of private property over the implements and means of produc-
tion, the establishment of socialist public ownership and of a socialist economic

system, the elimination of the actual inequality of peoples, and the complete and
final victory of socialism in the USSR; in the political field-the establishment

of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the elimination of exploiting classes,

the solidification of the alliance between the working class and the peasantry,

and the unification of the Soviet republics to a single union state--the USSR; and

in the ideological field--the victory of the Harxist-Leninist worldview and of the

principles of proletarian internationalism and the ideological defeat of great

power chauvinism and local bourgeois nationalism. "0n the basis of a community of
' economic and social interests,“ it is stated in the Theses of the CC CPSU "Fifty

25.
FOI‘OFIHCJAI.USI§0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Years of the Great October Socialist Revolution," "in the socialist nations inter-
national features are actively developing and the general Soviet traditions of the
builders of comunism are being established. A unity of goals and of Marxist-Lenin-
ist ideology, devotion to the cause of connunism, a.respect for national dignity,
and friendship and fraternity—these are the characteristic features of the workers
of our single and, at the same time, multi-national socialist society."2

The Soviet people as an international conunity of socialist nations and peoples
which has a single socialist fatherland, a single all-union socialist state, a
connon social structure, a single ideology, and com-on goals and interests repre-
sents a specific social phenomenon which is characteristic of the new comunist
socio-economic formation which arose at the first stage of its development.

Since it is a conlnunity of people at higher level than a national community, it has
absorbed all of the best and most progressive from every nation and people which
inhabits our country, has been enriched with all of the achievements of general
human culture, and has created its own way of life which is characteristic only of
Soviet people. Having appeared on the basis of the common nature of the socio-
economic, political, and ideological interests and goals of the nations and peoples
of our country the Soviet way of life exercises an ilportant influence on the de-
velopment of specific national features, including national everyday life, greatly
enriching and supplementing them.

The process of the establishment of international and connon Soviet features in
the culture and life of the socialist nations occurs on the basis of continuity
and of the use of all that is positive and progressive in the specifically na-
tional.

The changes in national life and culture which arise as a result of the increased
exchange of material and spiritual riches between nations and peoples strengthen
the international and the national. The strengthening of the international and
general Soviet in the contenpory life of the individual nations does not decrease
the role of national characteristics, but leads to their leveling off and math-
ing out. Thanks to the Soviet way of life, the international and the national
is established with the retention of the lost important and typical features of
the national. Thus, in the process of the formation and functioning of the new
historical community of people in each Soviet socialist nation and people inter-
national and comon Soviet features in the asterial and spiritpal aspects of their
culture and everyday life are established.

A very important characteristic of this process is the fact that it is connected
with the freeing of society froa all kinds of religious influence. As research
shows, a further development of the Soviet way of life and the reorganization of
the everyday life of the Soviet people on a communist basis serves as an active
factor pronoting an intensification of the secularization of the entire mode of
life and of falily and domestic relations. Even such stable elements of everyday
life as housing, clothing, food, family and sarriage relations and rites and rit-
uals, when they become subjected to the influence of the process of international—
ization and of the Soviet way of life, gradually become free of religious
survivals. As a result of the internationalisation of social life and of culture

26.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FVNICHHWCJAI.IEHE(NVLY

and everyday life there occurs a substantial weakening of the connections and

then a complete break between the religious and the national moments, which can
be observed on the example of the peoples of the Soviet East, particularly Uzbeki-
scan.

The practice of socialist construction and the experience of the transition by the
peoples of the Soviet East to socialism, bypassing the capitalist stage of de-
velopment, has proven that religion, contrary to the assertions of bourgeois ideo-
logists. not only does not express the interests of national community, but. on
the contrary, promotes a strengthening of nationalistic tendencies and is a brake
upon the social development of a nation. These tendencies manifemndthemselves
clearly during the first years of Soviet power in Central Asia when the party was
compelled to wage an implacable struggle against Pan-lslamism, Pan-Turkism, and
other varieties of bourgeois nationalism.

In the current ideological struggle between socialism and capitalism bourgeois
ideologists make wide use of the religious forms of philosophy and of certain tra-
ditional social and everyday institutions which are most frequently given out to
be national institutions.

The national characteristics of everyday life, as is known, have a very stable
character and manifest themselves in the national psychology of peoples and in
the relationships of people. Pursuing anti-communist ends, the defenders of im-
perialism try in vain to "scientifically" validate the identity between a relig-
ious community of values and national and religious psychology--national psychol-
ogical and everyday relationships--and thereby propare the soil for the propaganda
of bourgeois nationalism among the peoples of the Soviet East.

Distorting the essence of atheistic propaganda in our country, Halter Kolarz, a
vehement preacher of anti-communism, tries to prove that "nationality and religion
are almost identical in the eastern provinces of the Russian Empire, as everywhere
in the East,“ and therefore "the struggle against religion in these territories
was a struggle against national culture and also national traditions."3

of course, many national traditions in the past (and some now also) appeared in a
religious form. but bourgeois ideologists because of the faultiness of their meth-
odological principles are unable to draw a separating line between the national and
the religious. Metaphysically carrying over to socialism the characteristics of
the interaction between the national and the religious which took shape under the
conditions of feudalism, they attempt to discredit the nationalities policy of the
CPSU in Central Asia. It is difficult for them to understand that the interaction
between the religious and the national moments during different historical periods
has its own specific characteristics. It is determined by the content and functions
of the basic economic and political social structures, and also by the position
and development of each of the two above-mentioned moments.

Bourgeois ideologists would like to return their pre-revolutionary past to the
peoples of Central Asia and to establish again the complete dominion of Islam

in their social and family lives. Very characteristic in this respect is the
collection "The Current Situation of Islam in Russia“ which was published in btambul

27.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKMICHHNCJA1.USE(N‘LY

in 1966 by the so-called "Society of West European Hoslems."a The authors of

this anti-Soviet book believe that "the principle of red ideology with respect

to religion consists in denying it and recognizing atheism as the state religion."5
In their opinion, Islam for the Central Asian peoples alegedly is an inalienable
part of their national life. "Religion and the national customs and traditions

of the Turkestan (that is, Central Asian--I.D.) Moslems are so interwoven and
interconnected, that attelpts to divide them will be unsuccessful.... Islam in
Turkestan serves as a national fogtress which defends the Turkestans against
Sovietisation and Russification." In the opinion of the authors, the vitality

of religious-nationaland everyday rites and customs as a form of the manifestation
of nationalism is a characteristic property of all of Turkestan.

However, these religious idealistic and nationalistic conceptions of the defenders
of Islam cannot withstand criticism. Thanks to the rapid development of the econ-
omies and cultures of the peoples of Central Asia and their unprecedented social
progress, there is occurring not only a natural secularization of all society,

but also a gradual liberation of national elements from their connection with re-
ligion, which is weakening at the same time both religious ideology and nationalism.
Moreover, the dying away of Islam and of its attributes promotes the development

of the nation and the enrichment of its life and culture and opens the way to so-
cial progress for previously oppressed peoples.

Bourgeois ideologists understand that nationalism and religion are two ideological
phenomena which are capable of playing a substantial role in social and political
processes and in the life and culture of peoples. Substituting for the concept of
the "coming together" of nations the concepts of "blending," "dissOIution," and
"Russification," they are conducting a ferocious attack against the basic princi-
ples of Soviet nationalities policy and against the theory and practice of national
relations in our country.

Especial activeness is shown in this direction by the “Committee for the Unity of
National Turkestan" which was created by the Nazis in 1942 and which has its own
magazine, MILI TYURKISTAN. Prom issue to issue this magazine preaches the ideas
of Pan-Islamism and Pan-Turkism which were long ago rejected by life itself and
consigned to oblivion. Advancing the far from new anti-national conception of

the "unification" of all of the peoples and nations of the Hoslem faith into a
single religious and spiritual community--"Moslem-Turks." --it puts forward uncon-
cealed propaganda for anti-communism. anti-Sovietism, and bourgeois nationalism.
Unsubstantiated assertions run through almost all of the articles like a red thread
to the effect that national sntagonisma in daily life and culture on a religious
basis exist and are constantly growing stronger in Central Asia, theses regarding
national inequality and discrimination are put forward, the still existing differ-
ences between the individual republics and nations for a number of indicators of
socio-economic and cultural development are absolutized and falsified, and so
forth.

The theses of the identity of nationality and religion and of the unchanging relig-
iosity of the peoples of our country is not only one of the chief directions of
anti-communism, but also the basis for all other constructions both theoretical

and propagandistic. It is used to strengthen the shaken positions of modern Islam

28.
INJI'OIIHCJAI.UEIZ(NNL¥
lN)!‘0F1ﬂC1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY

and for a purposeful interpretation of the role and place of Islam in the social
and spiritual life of the peoples of the East.

The theory of the identity of religion and a nation is also the basis for the re-
actionary idea of the "unification" of all of the people and peoples of a single
"Hoslem" faith, but of different nationalities, into one "unified" Moslem "nation,"
which found its completed expression in the ideas of Pan-Islamism with its various
branches.

The Moslem clergy not only identifies religion and the nation. In its sermons

it makes efforts to bring the dogmas of Islam into "agreement" with the present
day, with the economic and political circumstances in a country, including Uzbek-
istan. thereby attempting to impart to all reactionary religious traditions, rites.
and customs the appearance of a national and "folk" tradition. The Islamic clergy-
men assert that only the Moslem religion makes a person a highly moral person,

and attempt to prove that belief in Allah is the true source for a man's morality
and for his correct behavior in daily life and in society while, on the contrary,
the reasons for the amoral actions of people are rooted in retreats from the
demands of Islam. Certain non-believers who think that religion allegedly has a
favorable influence on the behavior of people and on their manners and relation-
ships and holds them back from bad actions are also prisoners of these harmful
conceptions.

The confusion of morality, religious rites and customs, and national traditions
sometimes give life to nationalistic feelings among the backward part of the popu-
lation. The data of research conducted in the republics of Central Asia and the
Caucasus testifies to the interweaving of national and religious prejudices. Thus.
for example, a.v. Avksent'yev writes that in the Northern Caucasus a part of the
populatign perceives the prescriptions of Islam as national features and folk tra-
ditions. "Under present-day conditions the survivals of Islam,“ N. Kuliyev (Turk-
menhss observes, "are interwoven with survivals of nationalisa, vi h surviv In

of tribal-kin relationships, and also with survivals of localism." H.H. Sattarov
(Azerbaijan) writes: "...The defenders of Mohammednusmaunmpt to present religious
traditions as folk and national ones. It should be noted that not only ordinary
believers, but also certain representatives of the intelligentsia fall under the
influence of these arguments and in practice do not distinguish which traditions
should be classified as religious and which as national."1 Similar phenomena
occur in Uzbekistan also.

The First Secretary of the CC C? of Uzbekistan Sh. Rashidov writes: "Connected with
religion is the observance by a certain section of the population of various kinds
of old rites and backward family customs and an incorrect attitude toward women.
Frequently the representatives of the clergy, appealing to the religious feelings
of people, try to present the reactionary customs of the past as national tra-
ditions, and the struggle by the public against their customs as an attempt to
infringe upon the national feelings of the people."11

we know that inter-national relations as a specific expression of the full aggra-
gate of socio-economic, cultural, and psychological relations is a very subtle
and complex sphere of human intercourse. "Its complexity is explained above all

29.
FORAOFFKJA1.USE|DNLY
FIKICNHWCJAI.(ERE(MVLY

by the overall character of the problem of national relationships which have never
existed and do not exist in pure form, but are always interwoven with diverse
social, class, geographical, ethnographic, cultural, ideological, and psychological
factors." It is here, perhaps more than in any other sphere of human intercourse,
that historical traditions, views and hazgts inherited from past times, and other
subjective factors make themselves felt.

Due to the fact that the question has been little studied it is sometimes still
difficult to explain the reasons why the burial of the dead in accordance with re-
ligious ritual is widespread both in the cities and in the rural areas of the Cen-
tral Asian republics. The reason is hardly in the absence of new rituals which
correspond to what is specifically national, aldnugh this is of great importance
in overcoming the old rites. A definite role is probably played here by deeper
national psychological factors which can be discovered through concrete socio-
logical studies of social psychology.

From the data of sociological studies it has been established that a substantial
number of inhabitants of Ferganskaya, Bukherskaya, and Kashkadar'inskaya oblasts
still recognize circumcision as mandatory. Moreover, many people explain the
mandatory nature of performing this rite by the fact that it is allegedly an
attribute not so much of religious as of national membership. Frequently such re-
ligious rites as "Nikakh" (religious marriage), concealed forms of Kalym, cases of
giving minor girls in marriage which can still be encountered, and other harmful ‘
customs and rites are presented as national customs and rites (or rather, are as-
cribed to them).

Attempts to consolidate or revitalize old and obsolete national forms of life and
certain religious rites are not only a testimony to the national narrow-mindedness
of individual people who have fallen prisoner to these ideas, but also hinder the
introduction into life of everything that is new which does not fit within the
framework of the old traditions. Such attempts create obstacles to the internat-
ional education of the workers, to the formation in them of new communist relat-
.ionships, and to the emergence and development of common international features

in the everyday life and spiritual makeup of the Soviet nations which unite and
bring them closer together. For this reason, any custom which holds back the
natural process of the renewal of life and which hinders the introduction of the
new and progressive into the daily life of the workers merits not support, but
condemnation. The dignity of any nation consists not in preserving everYthing old
only because it is connected with history, but in an aspiration for progress and
for mastering the achievements of modern civilisation.1

The culture and everyday life of every people which inhabits our country is now
developing on the basis of a single communist ideology and is permeated by a
spirit of the indestructible friendship and fraternity of the socialist nations
and peoples. These factors ensure the complete flourishing of the culture of

all of the peoples of the USSR, on the one hand, and the formation of a single
multi-nstional Soviet culture and way of life, on the other. The higher the level
of a national culture and the richer its content and more perfected its forms,

the more the number of aspects and properties in it thanks to which it becomes
increasingly understood by and close to other nations and peoples. As the nation-

30.
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

al cultures develop there occurs not a strengthening of their differences, but,
on the contrary, their growing together and the formation and strengthening of
common international features and traditions which are free of the influence of
religion.

The distinctive characteristic of the process of the growing together of nation-
al cultures which is occurring at the present time consists not in the disappear-
ance of the diversity of their forms or of their specific coloring, but above all
in a constant strengthening of their interpenetration and mutual enrichment, in
the overcoming in them of obsolete archaic elements which limit the sphere of
their interaction, and in the increasing development and strengthing in them of
those highly moral and highly artistic (and for this reason common human) inter-
national features and traditions thanks to which each national culture and life

becomes increasingly capable of satisfying the cultural needs of people from other
nationalities.

"In the diversity of the national forms of Soviet socialist culture," it is noted
in the report by L.l. Brezhnev "0n the Piftieth Anniversary of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics," "common international features are becoming increas-
ingly marked. The national is becoming increasingly enriched by the achievements
of other fraternal peoples. This is progressive progress. It corresponds to the
spirit of socialism and to the interests of all of the peoples of our country.

it is precisely in this way that the foundations are laid for a new conmmnist
culture which does not know national barriers and which serves all people of la-
bor in equal measure."1

The existence in their everyday life of similar and related aspects is an import-
ant condition for the internationalization of the life of the socialist nations
and peoples. The centuries of economic and cultural inter-national relations
between the peoples of our country which are especially close in their ethnogenesis,
language, culture. and natural and climatic conditions have fostered the formation
of cannon historical-cultural types and the establishment of similar features in
their psychology and everyday life. As a result of many centuries of close com-
munion the peoples of Central Asia, for example, show a similarity in their cloth-
ing, housing, domestic utensils and furniture, cuisine, and family rites and cus-
toms. Ihe process of the internationalization of life takes place in the direction
of the dying out of old outmoded forms and features which are under the influence
of religious ideology, and in the creation of new types and forms which correspond
to modern conditions by means of the assimilation of the best achievements of the
national and a strengthening in it of common international features.

As is shown by the research of ethnographers and sociologists, compared to the
spiritual and espeigally the psychological, the material side of life is the most
internationalized. Despite the fact that national life is very stable and con-
servative, as has already been noted, the exchange of material and spiritual val-
ues among the Soviet nations and peoples inevitably leads to an organic combin-
ation in it of the best and most progressive elements which have been developed
through centuries of practiCe with new contempory motifs. Thus, for example, in
housing construction standard houses of the urban type are being intensively de-
veloped and introduced in all of the Central Asian republics and in them certain

31.
FOR 0i11C1A1.lEﬂi(HVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

elements of national architecture are preserved; however, these houses no longer
have divisions into ichkari and tashkary which are connected with the former se-
clusion of women that resulted from Islam.

In order to combine the national and the international, in the present-day archi-
tectural structures of Uzbekistan there is basically an overall combination of
construction materials and layout, a sensible adaptation to local natural and geo—
8raphic conditions, the use of national ornamentation and national esthetic devices,
and so forth. In present-day Uzbek houses, both multi-saxey houses and cottages,
the standard solutions which are characteristic for the entire country are com-
bined with traditional national styles which take account of the distinctive fea-
tures of national architecture. decorative art, and natural conditions, the ex-
perience of national craftsmen. traditional construction methods, and the use of
local natural materials (frame masonry, wood cutting, ceramic facing, colored
stucco, and so forth). This has been reflected in the newly risen post-earthquake
Tashkent which has become a symbol of the international friendship of peoples.

According to the data of sociological studies, the process of the secularization

of everyday life in the different districts of Tashkent which differ from one anoth-
er in the national composition of their populations is occurring in a variety of
ways. Among the Uzbeks in the new housing construction districts where the repre—
sentatives of many nationalities live together religiosity is substantially less
than in the Hakhalli where a population that is more homogeneous in its national
composition lives.

The greatest conservatism is characteristic of the ethnic features and differences
in the interior of housing. The original features of the traditional culture of
everyday life can be traced more clearly in the decoration of the house, and in
the character of the use of things, the placement of furniture, national coloring,
and ornaments. But even here there is occurring an active interpenetration of
cultures which manifests itself in the combination of the traditional national
forms of home decoration with new forms, with the decoration of other. especially
neighboring, peoples. Frequently in houses there are rooms which are furnished
in a new manner, and rooms in whose interior the national traditions have been
completely preserved. In almost all of the apartments in multi-suney houses in
which Uzbeks live one can find trunks or cupboards containing carefully folded
quilts for bedding, the traditional decoration of the living room with a rug or
syuzan. carpeted floors, and other national elements of decoration. And even to-
day new household goods sre not always and not everywhere used for their direct
purpose, but serve as adornments or are designated only for the reception of
guests.

At the present time, thanks to the final formation of an Uzbek socialist nation,
with the Uzbeks, as with other nations, local characteristics in the material
forms of everyday life have not only greatly disappeared or been leveled out, but
have been replaced predominately by national elements. This is witnessed by the
appearance in the vocabulary of the Uzbek language of many new everyday terms
which have been borrowed from the Russian and from other languages of the peoples
of the USSR and which are connected with clothing, housing, and domestic decora-
tion. Moreover, the linguistic borrowing which demonstrate a substantial enrich-

INDR 0i!ﬂ(1%ﬁ:lﬂﬂi(ﬂﬁlv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ment of all of the aspects of everyday life do not affect everyday religious
terms, which indicates the positive influence of this process on strengthening
the secularization of life.

In this connection it is interesting to note that during the years of Soviet power
thanks to the rapid development of the economy, unprecedented social progress, and
the mutual influence and enrichment of the cultures of the different nations and
peoples which inhabit our country (the representatives of more than 100 national-
ities live and work together in the republic), the Uzbek language has been greatly
enriched. Whereas in 1927 the first scholarly Uzbek-Russian dictionary had 9,000
words, and on the eve of the war it included 17,000 words, the latest unabridged
dictionary of the Uzbek language contains 60,000 words.16

At the same time, a process of the mastery of the Russian language as a means of
inter-national communication is going forward intensively. Around 80 percent of
the adult urban population of the republic speaks conversational Russian within
limits which satisfy the needs for labor and everyday intercourse. The percentage
of people who know the Russian language among the rural population is also high.

Sociological studies and historical ethnographic data show that the relationships
of different nations and peoples in the sphere of spiritual culture exercise the
most intensive influence on the process of freeing everyday life from religion.
The formation of international convictions and habits in the consciousness and
behavior of Soviets at work and in everyday life is occurring in organic connec-
tion with the assimilation of the achievements of Soviet and world culture and

is inseparably connected with the establishment of a communist morality and with
the realization of the humanistic ideals which have been developed by all of
progressive mankind.

In present-day Uzbekistan there is not a single enterprise, sovkhoz, or educa-
tional institution which is not represented by people from dozens of different
nationalities.

The Tashkent Textile Combine has the representatives of 51 nationalities working

at it. the Chirchik Chemical Combine--32, the Uzbek;HetallurgicalPlant--30. the
Bekabad Cement Combine--30, the Plant imeni the October Revolution—~27, the kolkhoz
imeni K. Tursunkulov--l8. and the kolkhoz "Savay"--l8. Students representing

47 nationalities are studying at Tashkent State University, 42 at the Tashkent
Polytechnical Institute. 28 at the Tashkent Institute of the Economy, and so forth.17

The mutual influence and enrichment of the spiritual world of people from dif-
ferent nationalities and the formation in them of new communist relationships

and new cultural, moral, and everyday features is achieved most intensively and
directly in these unified international Soviet collectives in joint work and study.

With the construction of socialism and communism the appearance of international
collectives in industry, agriculture, and other branches of the economy and cul-
ture is an objective law. We know that during the course of industrialization

and especially during the years of the Great Patriotic War and during the postwar
period ina number of union and autonomous republics, including Uzbekistan, at the

3.
FOR OFFICI3AI. USE ONLY
INIR‘OF1WCJAI.thEI(NQLV

same time that there was a substantial natural increase in the native population,
the number of inhabitants increased on the basis of an influx of people from other
republics. This was connected with the re-basing to the east of many industrial
enterprises, with the development of extensive industrial construction, and with
the opening up of virgin and unused lands. The objective migrational process has
occurred and is occurring on the basis of the voluntary organized resettlement

of people from different nationalities into areas with large construction projects
which have become the common work of the workers of the entire country. The repre-
sentatives of various nationalities, especially the youth, voluntarily go to places
where the front line of the struggle for the creation of material and technical
base of communism can be foundzto the virgin lands, to shock Komsomol construction
sites, and to new industrial areas.

The Conunist Party of Uzbekistan-ﬁne of the fighting detachments of the CPSU--

is a genuinely international organization. As of the data for 1 January 1970,

the republic's Communist Party had in its ranks the representatives of 82 nations
and peoples, including Uzbeks--Sb.9 percent, Russians--20.6, Tatlnb~5.3, Kazddmr-
6.4, Tajiks--2.8, Ukrainians--2.6 percent and so forth. This multi-national

army of communists is an active transmitter of the communist party's international-
ist policy.

The party organization of Uzaekistan organized all of its ideological educational
work with regard to the multi-national composition of the republic's population,
being attentive to national characteristics and showing care and sensitivity in
deciding questions of national relations. Children are taught in the republic in
eight languages, newspapers are published in seven, and radio and television broad-
casts are condugted and national concert teams work in six languages (excluding
foreign ones). Studies in the system of party education are conducted in the
languages in which the students wish to work.

The process of the secularization of everyday life is also influenced by the
fact that the best models of nulti-national Soviet and of Russian and world class-
ical and present-day progressive literature translated into the Uzbek language are
distributed in enormous editions among the Uzbek population. In five years alone
(1960-1965) translations into the Uzbek language were published for around 400
works by writers from the fraternal republics and the countries of socialiamuend
also progressive writers of the world in a total edition of 7.6 million copies.19

Inter-national marriages,the number of which is steadily increasing,is one of the
important factors promoting a strengthening of the process of the secularization
of everyday life and of family relationships. During the prerevolutionary period
such marriages were almost impossible on account of national and religious pre-
judices which were fixed in state legal norms. According to the data for 1936,
the proportion of mixed marriages in the cities of Uzbekistan came to 17.3 percent
of the total number of marriages, and in rural areas-9.6 percent. whereas in
1936 mixed marriages in Samarkand came to 26.5 percent and in Tashkent to 18.3
percent.20 in 1950 such marriages in the two cities came to more than 35 percent
of the total number of registered marriages. In 1965 the number of children born
in mixed marriages came to 14.2 percent of the total of newborn children.21

34.
INJI OWHHCJAI.IISE2(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interesting data has been obtained as a result of a study of an increase in the
number of inter-national marriages in two rayons of Tashkent. The new Kuybyshevskiy
Rayon has long been regarded as a mixed one with respect to the national composi-
tion of its population, while the old Oktyabr'skiy Rayon is basically populated by
Uzbeks. however, compared to 1926, in 1963 the number of mixed marriages in
Kuybyshevskiy Rayon increased apgsoximatsly by two times. while in Oktayabr'skiy
Rayon it increased by 3.5 times. Special note should be taken of the fact that
today not only in the cities but also in remote settlements marriages with repre-
sentatives of other nationalities have been registered.23

According to the data for 1967, over a period of five years mixed marriages came

to 15 percent in Paktaaral'skiy Rayon and around 10 percent in Dzhetyssyskiy Rayon,
both of which were previously in Syrdar'inskaya Oblast, and in the city of Yangiyer
of 71 respondents, 22 people wrote in reply to the question on the national com-
position of their families that their families contained representatives of two
nationalities, that is, their families were formed from mixed marriages. In al-
most two-thirds of the questionaires there is the statement that nationality is
not important in marriage, but that love, respect, and mutual understanding are
important.

Serving as a vivid testimony to the elimination of previous national alienation
as a result of the coming together of the socialist nations and peoples, mixed
families frequently perform the function of transmitters of the new relationships
between family members. for the skillful family education of children, and for
more advanced forms of domestic life, and thereby exercise a positive influence
on the family life of neighbors. Being free of religious prejudices, most such
families foster the formation of a single spiritual community of people and of
communist social relations, thereby strengthening the process of the BeCPlari'
zation of everyday life.

In order to educate the workers in a spirit of internationalism the republic's
party organizations make wide use of various forms and means of ideological in-
fluence. Evenings of friendship and the reading of lecture cycles devoted to
the friendship of peoples are widely practiced. International education is re-
flected in the work of the people's universities, in the organization of visual
agitation, and in the work of political information offnnrsand agitators and
of the local press and radio broadcasts.

The international education of the workers is promoted by performances by cre-

ative collectives and individual performers from the fraternal republics, film
festivals, and meetings with Soviet and foreign writers and scientific and cul-
tural figures from other republics.

Concrete sociological research hasdenonstratad the enormous changes in the spirit-
ual world, national character. and psychology of all of the strata and national
grOups of the population. In questionaires workers have cited the names of around
100 of their favorite writers and poets who represent the various literatures of
the people of the USSR and the world and have noted that they receive esthetic
pleasure from the canvases of painters, the works of composers, and the perfor-
mances of artists from our multinational homeland. To the question--"Which customs

FOR‘0i11C12251EHECNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and traditions of our nation and of other nationalities do you like? "--A sub-
stantial number of the respondents in the city of Yangiyer stated that they were
impressed not only by their national customs, but also by many of the customs of
other nationalities. Many representatives of different nationalities take note

in their questionaires of the progressive folk customs of Uzbeks and other Central
Asian peoples, particularly, hospitality, mutual assistance, a respectful attitude
toward old people, and so forth.

Special note has to be taken of the fact that the process of the internationali-
zation of such stable aspects of life as national everyday traditions and family
and marriage relationships which were especially dominated by Islam for centuries
occurs more intensively in those places where there is purposeful, systematic,
constant, and active work by ideological organizations and institutions. And,

on the contrary, in those places where they perform this function of theirs poorly
the way is opened up for the penetration into family and personal relationships
of religious and nationalistic ideas which hinder the process of the mutual in~
fluence and mutual enrichment of national cultures and of their coming together.

v.1. Lenin wrote that the differences between nations and countries "will maintain
themselves for a very very long time even after the realization of the dictator-
ship of the proletariat in the entire world..." and for this reason, he taught,
that in order for the socialist revolution to be victorious and for the new so-
ciety to be built it is necessary to "investigate, study, seek, guess, and grasp
the specifically national in the concrete approaches of every country to the so-
lution of a single international problem...."24 One of the most subtle and com-
plex elements in the specifically national is national character and psychology
without a concrete study of which it is impossible to understand the complex
processes of the secularization of culture and everyday life which are occurring
under present-day conditions.

The emergence within the new historical community of people-~the Soviet people--
of a new way of life and of new family relationships, and of social labor and
everyday traditions which are completely free of religious prejudices and have
been formed on the basis of the assimilation and creative reinterpretation of
all that is best in the national cultures and national psychologies of all of

the Soviet socialist nations and peoples serves as the basis for the formation
of communist everyday life.

FOOTNOTES

1. v.1. Lenin. "Complete Works," Vol.30, p 21.

2. "Fifty Years of the Great October Socialist Revolution," Decree of a Plenum of
the CC CPSU. Theses of the CC CPSU, Moscow, 1967, p 38.

3. Walter Kolarz. "Russia and Her Colonies," New York, 1952, p 18.
a. "Rusyada Islamiyetin Bugunku Durumu." Beyaait-Istambul, 1966.

5. Ibid, p 9.

36.
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
6.

7.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibid, p 25.
Ibid, p 12.

A. Avksent'yev, "Islam and Everyday Life," Stavropol', 1964, p 40; B. Kh.
Tsavkilov, "The Morals of Islam," Nal'chik, 1967, pp 194-195.

"Materials of the Scientific Conference' the Modernization of Islam and the In-

portant Problems of the Theory of Scientific Atheism . Theses of Reports,
Moscow, 1968, p 107.

Ibid, p 25.
Sh. Rashidov, "The Banner of Friendship," Moscow, 1967, p 146.

E.A. Bagramov, "The Nationalities Question and Bourgeois Ideology (A Critique
of the Latest Sociological-Political Conceptions)," Moscow, 1966, pp 88-9.

N. Dzhandil'din. "Comaunism and the Development of National Relations," Moscow,
1964, p 192.

1.1. Brezhnev, "0n the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics," Moscow, 1972, p 21.

"The Peoples of Central Asia and Kazahkstan.‘ Vol. 1, Moscow, 1962: Vol. 2,
Moscow, 1963.

K. Kh. Khanazarov, " The Role of the Russian Language and the International Ed-
ucation of the Workers." "Party Education and International Education." Mater-
ials of a Scientific Theoretical and Methodological Conference on the Problem
of "The Problems of International Education in the System of Party Training,"
which took place in Tashkent 24-27 April 1968. Tashkent, 1968, p 299.

M.M. Rakhmanklov, "The Education of the New Man (From the work Experience of the
Party Organization of Uzbekistan)," Tashkent, 1968, p 84.

Ibid, p 185.
R. Nischanov, "Internationalism--The Banner of Our Victories," p 225.

N.P. Borzykh, "The Extent of Inter-national Marriages in the Republics of Cen-
tral Asia and Kazahkstan in the 1930's," SOVETSKAYA ETNOGRAFIYA, No, 4, 1970,
pp 92,94.

R.N. Nishanov, "The Great Accomplishment of October (23th Congress of the CPSU
on the Nationalities Policy of the Party During the Period of Communist Construc-
ztion)," Moscow, 1967, pp 32-33.

1.R. Mullyadzhanov, "The Population of the Uzbek SSR (Socio-Economic Essay),"
Tashkent, 1967, p 180.

37.
IIHICHHHCJA1.USE‘ONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

23. 5.“. Abramzon, "Reflection of the Process of the Coming Together of Nations
on the Basis of the Family Lifestyle of the Peoples of Central Asia and
Kazahkstan," SOVTSKAYA ETNOGRAFIYA, No 3, 1962. p 25.

2h. v.1. Lenin, "Co-plate Works," Vol. 41, p 77.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hysl'", 1973

2959
C80: 1800/ 157

38 0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OWWHCIAI.IISE:(MVLY

CHRHENO-INGUSH ASSR SOME? OF SCXZIOIDGICAL STUDY

Moscow PROBLEMY NAUCHNOGO ATEIZMA in Russian No 17, 1974 pp 310-319

[Article by v.6. Pivovarov: "A Sociological Study of National Life in the Checheno-
lngush ASSR"]

[Text] As a result of the use of sociological methods, in recent years scientific
studies of the problems of religion and atheism in the USSR have been enriched

with new theoretical and practical conclusions. The data of sociological research
has made it possible to gain a deeper understanding of the state of religiouaness
and of the special characteristics of the process of secularization in socialist
society. The use of an overall methodology for the gathering of primary infor-
mstion and the employment of high-speed equipment for processing it has made it
possible to operate in theoretical work with fundamentally different than in the
past masses of sociological information and to move on to a study of large objects--
oblasts and autonomous republics.

In 1970-1972 overall sociological research was carried out in the Checheno-Ingush
ASSR on the topic of "The Everyday Life, Culture. and National Traditions and Be-
liefs of the Population of a Republic" by the Institute of Scientific Atheism of
the Academy of Social Sciences at the CC CPSU and the Laboratory of Sociological
Research at the Checheno-Ingush obkon of the CPSU which was created on a voluntary
basis for the performance of joint work.

Along with the general principles and directions which characterized the sociolog-
ical study of the problems of research and stheisn which was performed by the In-
stitute of Scientific Atheism and its support points at all of the previous objects
(for example, in Kazan', and in Penzenskaya, Voronezhsksys, Ivano-Frsnkovskaya,

and other oblasts), the study in the Checheno-Ingush ASSR had a number of special
characteristics.

First, this was the first attempt at a mass study in a new region-one of the auto—
nomous republics of the North Caucasus. The process of the formation of the spirit-

roe omifvss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ual culture of the peoples of Checheno-Ingushetiya was complex. it could only be
deeply penetrated with an historical approach to the problem and a comprehensive
study of the activities of party organizations in the communist education of the
workers and of the entire population of the republic. For this reason, a char-
acterization of the development of the economy and the culture of Checheno-Ingush-

etiya both in its historical and in its contamora'y aspects was a necessary com-
ponent of the sociological study.

Secondly, the researchers made an attempt to perform an overall study. In our
view, the criterion of overallness in a study of the problems of religion and
atheism is the kind of approach in which an analysis is made of the full aggra-
gate of social relations and dependencies in which mass atheism and religiousness
as phenomena of social life are included. Therefore, in this study characteriza-

tions of everyday life, culture, national traditions, and so forth occupied a
substantial place.

And finally, thirdly, a distinctive characteristic of this study was the except-
ional diversity of the objects and groups of the population which were studied:
industrial enterprises, kolkhozes, sovkhozea, populated points both in rural and
in urban areas and in mountainous and flat areas. all of the social groups and
categories of the population, representatives of all of the nationalities inhabit-
ing the republic, and among believers--representatives of the different faiths,
including the followers of Islam who are united into Hurid fraternities.

Along with the traditional methods of sociology (questiomaires, observation, an
analysis of documents and statistical data, and a study of the work experience
of party and public organizations), the method of expert appraisals was employed
in this study. The groups of experts consisted of workers from party and public
organizations and scientific institutions and workers, peasants, and members of
the intelligentsia. With their help research tools were perfected, the charact-
er of religiosity in one or another locality was refined, and a preliminary eval-
uation of the effectiveness of various forms of atheistic work was made.

In conducting the questionnaire-interviews especial attention was directed toward
observing anonymity and holding conversations with the respondents in their na-
tive language. The performance of interviews after the appropriate preparations
was entrusted to people whose age, nationality, and life experience disposed the
respondents toward a frank conversation.

The task of the given study was to disclose on the basis of a concrete object
both certain and general processes in the field of religion and atheism which
are characteristic of all of the republics of the North Caucasus and specific
problems which are characteristic basically of Checheno-Ingushetiya. Especial
attention was directed to the process of the rapid development of the culture of
the socialist nations in the republics of the Northern Caucasus, to the place of
atheism in their spiritual life, and to a study of the experience of party organ-
izations in atheistic work. A deep study was made of the ideology, activities,
and social makeup of the Moslen Murid fraternities and of the specific nature of
the interconnections between religiousness and survivala of nationalism.

‘0.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The study which has been performed has placed at the disposal of party and scient-
ific organizations a large amount of sociological information which permits
Judgements about the dynamics of the spiritual culture of the population of
Checheno-Inguahetiya. Some 0 the materials have already been published or are
being prepared for the press. The scientific treatment of the sociological in-
formation which has been obtained is continuing and because of its large amount
will still require considerable time and effort. In the present article we shall
deal with a characterization of only some of the most general results of the study.

The sociological study of everyday life, culture, and national traditions and be-
liefs was performed in the republic for the first time.

The fundamental changes which have occurred in the life of the people of Checheno-
Ingushetiya during the years of Soviet power are reflected in the materials of

the study. The socialist transformations and the triumph of the Leninist national-
ities policy of the CPSU and the Soviet state were the basis for the liberation

of wider and wider masses of workers from the influence of religion and for the
internationalization of their spiritual and everyday lives.

During the years of Soviet power Checheno-Ingushetiya has become a republic with

a highly developed industry and a large mechmuzed agriculture. The amount of in-
dustrial production during this period has increased by almost 50 times. The pet-
roleum industry which is the leading branch of the republic's economy has develop-
ed at especially rapid rates. Large enterprises in machine building, chemistry,
instrument making, and electric energy have been built, and the food and light
industry is developing. A fundamental reorganization of agriculture which is now
equipped with powerful modern equipment was carried out on the basis of the high-
ly developed industry.

These transformations have changed the social structure of the population in a
decisive way. By the end of 1970 the republic's economic branches employed 50,300
specialists with higher and secondary specialized educations.

Enormous progressive changes have occurred in the cultural development of the
peoples of Checheno-Ingushetiya. whereas before the revolution the Chechentsy
and Ingushi did not have their own writing and almost the entire population was
illiterate (there were nine literate people per 1,000 rural inhabitants), at
the present time the number of pupils in the republic's general educational
schools has increased by 22 times. The number of teachers and educators in the
schools has increased by 30 times.2 In recent years there has been a substantial
rise in the educational level of the entire population. Out of 1,000 workers,
there are 54 with a higher education, 87 with a secondary specialized education,
115 with a secondary general education, and the total number of people with a
higher and secondary (complete and incomplete) education comes to 516 per 1,000
workers. At the present time 360,000 people, or every third inhabitant of the
republic, is studying in 2 vuzea, 12 secondary specialized educational instit-
utions, 470 general educational schools, and other educational institutions.“

The formation in the broad masses of workers of a materialist worldview is in-
separably bound up with the decisive overcoming in the consciousness and behavior

. bl.
FOR1OFFNJAI.USI¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of pcopie of the survivals of the past, including religious survivals. Party or-
ganizations and ideological institutions in the Checheno-Ingush ASSR conduct
active and well-directed atheistic work among the population, making use of the
diversity of its forms and methods with regard to local conditions. One of the
task of the study was a study and generalization of this experience.

Along with the traditional forms of the work (lectures and reports on atheistic
and natural scientific topics), the use of literature and films and of radio and
television broadcasts, and the dissemination of new Soviet customs and traditions
in the republic, home lectures became widespread. In every village there are se-
veral houses in which, in accordance with established tradition, neighbors and
relatives gather for meetings with the lecturer. This form of social inter-
course between the lecturer Ot agitator and the POPU1°ti°0 makes

it possible in an unconstrained atmosphere which is customary for the listener

to bring the word of the atheist to aged people, housewives, and mothers with many
children who for variOus reasons infrequently go to clubs, libraries and movie

theaters where such measures are carried out.

Schools of popular knowledge for mountain women have become another form of mass
propaganda. These schools are directed, as a rule, by teachers who plan their
work with regard to their classes, the needs of their students. and so forth.
All of this promotes the political growth of the mountain women and the develop-
ment of their public activeness.

Rural meetings are a widespread form of the development of the social activity

of inhabitants and of the directed formation of public opinion. At them the con-
crete tasks which face a kolkhoz or the inhabitants of a village are collectively
discussed. One of the important tasks which are successfully accomplished by
rural meetings is the struggle against conservative public opinion and against
obsolete mores and customs which are based on the laws of the Shariat and the
Adar. A deeply grounded explanation of the common nature of the fundamental so-
cial and political interests of belindng and non-believing workers and of the
importance of their joint contribution to the successful fulfillment of a collec-
tive's production assignments promotes the creation of a situation of mutual
trust and takes away the basis for the propagation of religious intolerance which
is spread about by certain fanatics. As a rule, the most respected people in the
village take the floor at such meetings. Special commissions which control the
precise execution of all of the points of the decisions adopted at such meetings
are created for the execution of the decisions which have been adopted. The sur-
veyed population and a group of experts made up of propagandists of scientific
atheism placed a high value on the role of these meetings in overcoming patri-
archal-kinship and religious survivals.

All of these mass measures have a direct influence on increasing the public act-
iveness of village and city inhabitants and on activating the positions of athe-
ists in their daily practice and intercourse with the people around them.

The studies showed that most of the believers had a respectful attitude toward the
activities of the lecturer and the propagandist of scientific atheism. This in-
dicates that the propaganda of scientific atheism is conducted skillfully and

k2.
FOR'OFIHCIAI.IEHE(NVLY
FIHICHWWCJA1.USE(NVLY

tactfully, that the forms and methods of atheistic education are suéessfully put
into the work on general communist education.

The materials of the study registered the changes which are occurring in the con-
sciousness of believers. Religious ideas which correspond most fully with the
dogma and mythology of Islam are. as a rule, characteristic only for the believing
older and aged population. Believers of middle and, especially, youthful age are
characterized by thefragmentariness and imprecision of their religious ideas. A
more or less argumented and conscious acceptance of religious dogma is character-
istic approximately for one-half of the believing Chechentsy and Ingushi. The
others preceive their religiousness rather as a tradition, an element of everyday
life, and frequently as a characteristic feature of their national membership.

In this respect, the participation of the respondents in religious rites and holi-
days is especially instructive. Thus, the observance of fasts is a customary
phenomenon for believing Chechens and Ingushi. They are observed by practically
all believers.

A very important characteristic of present-day religiosity which has been re-
gistered by the materials of the study is the tolerant attitude of believers to-
ward non-belief or toward the different beliefs of other people.

As has already been noted above, the Hurid fraternities are a characteristic form
of religious associations for those who profess Islam in Checheno-Ingushetiya.
Hore than one-half of the believing Hoslems who live in the republic are members
of them.

In its dogma Moslem Muridism is a branch of Sufism which includes two currents:
the Kodyrit and the Nakahabandiya. which in their turn are divided into a large
number of interpretations (wirds).

Among the Chechentsy and the Ingushi the most widespread teaching is the Kodyrit
current, which is otherwise called Zikrism (from the Arab exclamation "Zikrullyakh"
--"rememberance of Allah" and from the demonstrative performance of the Zikr--a
ritual dance). The dissemination of Zikrism in Chechna and Ingushetiya goes back
to the middle of the 19th century.

The essense of Zikrism is in the following interpretations of the basic dogmas
of Islam: periodically. when there is a weakening of faith, Allah sends to the
earth. to the real world. holy sheikhs in order to revive orthodoxy and to put
those who have erred on the true path. In the opinion of the Zikrists, the
Sheikh-Ustaz. as a mediator between Allah and believers, takes upon himself the
responsibility for his myurid, a true follower of his tarikat, and "makes him
comfortable" in the life beyond the grave until the day of universal resurrection,
is entirely responsible for him. and on the day of judgement brings all of his
myurids into heaven. For this reason, for the myurid the controler of his fate
in life and in eternity is his ustaz, or myurahid, to whom he has entrusted his
life in both worlds. A sacred duty of the true myurid is faithfulness to the
usraz of his wird, and the strictest fulfillment of its prescriptions which
allegedly removes responsibility before God from him. In the opinion of the
"holy" ustazes (most frequently in the person of certain sheikhs: Kunta-Hadji,

43.
ltﬂ!(lﬂﬂ(1kl.USE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFIWCJAI.USEIDNLY

Bamat-Girey-Kadji, Betal-Hadji, and so forth) individual wirds obtained their
names.

The preachers of Zikrism strive to direct the will and all of the aspirations
of myurids toward the observance of the principles of the Tarikat and to dissolve
the human essence in the mystical fog of superstitious prejudices.

with the previous unlimited dominion of religion, for example, in prerevolution-
ary Checheno-Ingushetiya Islam and its ideology regulated almost all of the as-
pects of the life of the "orthodox" mountaineer. These memories are still alive
among the people of the older generation. For this reason, the ideologists of
modern myuridizm actively include in the arsenal of their methods of influ-
encing the belhndng section of the population national traditions and customs.
hoping to spread their influence on the youth with the help of the believers of

the older generation. The purveyers of Islam seek to find a support in the na-
tional feelings of people.

A study of the ideology and activities of the myurdin fraternities of different

sects on the territory of Checheno-Ingushetiya shows that the Hoslem groups, which
are an historically developed type of religious organization for believing Chechentsy
and Ingushi, are not limited, however, solely to the celebration of a religious

cult. Basing themselves on the authority of kinship relationship, the leadership

of the myurdin comunities and groups tries to actively intervene in the family

life of the mountaineers and to form a religious public opinion. In this way,

the activities of the myurid fraternities and of their leaders represent a ser-

ious barrier to the international and atheistic education of the Chechentsy and
Ingushi.

The study made it possible to arrive at a clearer idea about certain reasons
for the vitality of religious survivals and old reactionary customs and tradi-
tions among some Chechentsy and Ingushi. The highest level of re1191081ty was
established in groups of the population which were poorly connected with public
production. among elderly people who had a low general educational level. and
among women engaged in household work.

Remnants of patriarchal-kinship relationships among the Chechensy and Ingushi al-
so have a negative influence on the process of overcoming religiousneas.

Conservative group opinion which stands for the preservation of harmful traditions
and customs in a restraining factor in the process of the withdrawal from reli-
gion and its traditions. especially in the villages. Under its pressure, certain
non-believers conceal their atheistic convictions from their relatives and acquain-
tances. So-called religious authorities which seek to regulate family relation-
ships according to the laws of the Shariat and the Adat play an active role in the
formation of this kind of conservative group opinion.

The interconnection between religion and the survivals of nationalism plays an
especial role in maintaining the religiosity of a part of the population. It
finds various forms of expression: the endeavor to present harmful traditions
(Kalym, blood vengamne. the giving of minor girls in marriage, and so forth) as

(.0
IIIRCHHﬂCiXI.USE(NVLY
Ff”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USE¢DNLN

national traditions, attempts to present Islam as a preserver of the national,

moral, and cultural values of the Chechentsy and Ingushi, as a force which pro-
motes the preservation of the national independence of the mountain peoples in

the complex difficulties of their historical fate, and in an endeavor to depict
a negative attitude toward religion (toward the "faith of our fathers") as na-

tional renegadism, and so forth.

A deep analysis of the materials of the study, in particular the study of the
reasons which promote the preservation of religiousness among a section of the
population of the republic, will make it possible for party organizations to in-
crease the effectiveness of their system of stheistic education.

Especial attention should be turned toward the ideological and educational ef-
fect of this study. It is not only a matter of the enormous sociological infor-
mation which equips party organizations and ideological institutions with a pro—
found knowledge of the state and tendencies of overcoming religiousnesa. The
very fact that the representatives of party and public organizations who took
part in the questionaire addressed questions about the needs. feelings, views,
traditions, and so forth of many of the inhabitants, held discussions in the un-
constrained atmosphere of families and places of residence. and had a large ideo-
logical response in the mass of the population promoted a greater mutual under-
standing and trust between the republic's aktiv and the unseen of the mun-national popu-
lation of Checheno—Inguahetiya. These conversations helped to make clear a num-
ber of important issues which are connected with the conditions of the produc-
tion, daily, and cultural life of people.

cheno-Inguah ASSR provided party organizations with the possibility of posing,
along with the problems of atheistic education, a large number of practical
problems in the development of economy, culture, everyday life, and communist
education. An example of this is the holding by the Checheno-Ingush obkom CPSU
with the participation of representatives of the Institute of Scientific Atheism
of the Academy of Social Sciences at the CC CPSU, the "Znaniye" Society of the
RSFSR, the scientific research institutions and educational institutions of the
Checheno-lngush and Dsgestan ASSR's. and others of a scientific practical con-
ference on the topic of: "The 24th CPSU Congress and the Problems of the Further
Development of Spiritual Culture and of Education in Internationalism and So-
cialist Patriotism."

During the preparations for and the performance of research in the republic a
sector of sociology and scientific atheism of the Scientific Research Institute
of the History of Language and Literature at the Council of Ministers of the
Checheno-lngush ASSR was created.

It also has to be noted that the very process of the sociological work helped
party, trade union, Komsomol, and other public organizations in improving their
atheistic education and increasing its effectiveness. As a rule, the prepara-
tions for the study were discussed in the party rsykoms, in party primary or-
ganizations, at party and KOWSONOI aktivs, and at meetings of the intelligentsia.
During the study concrete plans for the performance of atheistic work were made

up and cadres of lecturers and propagandiats were trained.

65.
IKIICIHWCJAI.IEHE(NNLY
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

The results of the work which has been done have become the property not only of
scientific and party workers. Thanks to the radio, the press, television, and
the efforts of lecturer-propagandists and agitators, they have entered into the
social consciousness of the widest strata of the population.

1.

3.

S.

FOOTNOTES

Materials of the Practical Scientific Conference 'The 24th CPSU Congress and
the Problems of a Further Development of Spiritual Culture and of Education
in Internationalisn and Socialist Patriotisn', Groznyy, 1974; "Sociology,
Atheism, and Religion," No 1, Groznyy, 1972; "Sociology, Atheism, and Re-
ligion," No. 2, Croznyy, 1976; H.M. Hustafinov, "Zikrizn and Its Social Es-
sense," Groznyy, 1971; V.G. Pivovarov, "At the Stages of a Sociological
Study," Groznyy, 1976. In 1975 an additional two issues of "Sociology, Athe-
ism, and Religion" on the results of the sociological studies of 1970-1972
Here being prepared for publication.

"Fifty Years of the Autonomy of Checheno-Ingushetiya," Statistical Handbook,
Groznyy, 1972, pp 194-195.

Ibid, p 19a.

Ibid, p 196.

The characteristics of believing Christians living in Checheno-Ingushetiya
which have been obtained as a result of the study basically repeat the ten-
dencies and laws for a change in religious consciousness which are already

known from studies in other areas.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hysl'", 19?“

2959
C50: 18C3/157

roe omdh us: on“
lNJI‘OﬁIHCJAI.lh5!2(HVLV

ISLAMIC STUDIES PROBLEMS DISCUSSED

Moscow PROBLEM! NAUCBROGO ATEIZHA in Russian No 22, 1977, pp 267-276
urticle by R.R. Havlyutov: "Urgent Problems of Islamic Studies"]

[Text] The decrees and documents of the CC CPSU in recent years on the problems
of communist education have played an important role in the development of all

of the directions of research and prOpsganda work in the field of scientific
atheism. They have also had a great and fruitful influence on Soviet Islam
studies.1 works have appeared which respond to the growing needs of the time,
the range of scientific research has been broadened. and it has become more close-
ly connected with the practice of party work in communist education and in over-
coming the survivals of the past, especially in the sphere of national and every-
day relstionships. The range of directions in scientific research has become
more diverse, the analysis of the survivsls of Islam has taken on a differen-
tisted character, and more attention is being devoted to the situation of Islam
abroad. The increase in the number of specialists in the various fields of

Islam studies in the national republics of our country must also be noted as a
gratifying phenomenon of recent years.

Of the monographic works of recent years note should be taken of the book by

N. Aehirov "The Evolution of Islam in the USSR" (Moscow. 1972, 1976) which has
come out in two editions, his work "Islam and Nations" which was published in
1975. the collection under the editorship of G.P. Snesarev and v.n. Basilov ”Pre-
Hoslem Beliefs and Rites in Central Asia" (Moscow. 1975), and the book by N.P.
Lobacheva "The Formation of the New Rituals of the Uzbeks" (Moscow, 1975).

In the republic publishing houses the general theoretical problems of atheism
have had works devoted to them by Isa Dzhabbarov "Social Progress, Everyday Life,
and Religion" (Tashkent, 1973); A. Kh. Khashimov "The Formation of New Family
Relationships Among the Peoples of Central Asia" (Dushanbe. 1972); R.H. Hsdzhidov
"The Overcoming of Religiousness under the Conditions of the Transition to
Socialism, Bypassing Capitalzrm" (Dushanbe, 1973); I.A. Hakatov "Islam, the Be-
liever, and the Present Day" (Makhschkala. 1974); R.G. Boltanov "Sociological
Problems in the System of Scientific Athaistic Education" (Kazan', I973); H.H.

47.
FOR40FFIJII.USI(HWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hustafinov “The Anti-Scientific Nature of the Idea of the Identity of the Na-
tional and the Religious" (Groznyy, 1975); K. Sh. Shulembsyev "Magicians, Gods,
and Reality" (Alma-Ara, 1975), and others.

It should also be said that during the last five years the publication of books
on the problems of scientific atheism in the national languages has become act-
ivated. First of all. note should be taken here of the good teaching aid "New
Life--New Traditions" which was published in the Uzbek language in Tashkent in
1973 under the editorship of H.H.Khayrullayev,8. Yusupov, D.N. Ganiyev,

n.c. Ganiyev and R. Rakhmanov. It generalizes the experience of Uzbek pub-
lic workers-communists, komsomol members, and non-party propagandists of atheism--
in introducing new Soviet customs, rituals, and traditions and raises important
questions connected with the development and strengthening of new social and fam-
ily relationships during the period of developed socialism. The authors' ideas
on national coloring in the new rituals deserve attention in this book.

In speaking about the publication of atheistic literature in the national lan-
guages one would like to nateits generally higher scientific level. Take, for
example, the monograph by 6.1. Hustafayev "The Ideology of Islam and the Criticism
of It in the Beginning of the 20th Century in Azerbaijan" (Baku, 1973). Islam
is studied in it as an ideological system which was widely used by bourgeois and
land owning circles in the beginning of the 20th century as a weapon in their
fight against Harxiam~Leninism and as a means of distracting the masses from
genuinely democratic and revolutionary ideas. This book which contains a crit-
ical analysis that is performed on the basis of good quality factual material
has undoubtedly played a positive role in the struggle against contemporary
bourgeois-clerical ideology. Its strikes against the Husavatists who have dug
themselves in in Turkey and unmasks the slanderous fabrications of such cler-
ical anti-communists as F. Kyazimzade, B.H. Hamedzade, H.E. Rasulzade, and others
who in their writings and radio essays intended for Azerbaijan falsify the so-
cial role of Islam.present its place in the spiritual life and culture of the
people in a false light, and spill tears about the "lost values" of Moslem
religion. In uncovering the reasons, character, and directions of the modern-
ization of Islam and its specific characteristics and manifestations in Azer-
baijan, the author takes note of a contradiction which stands out very clearly
in the ideological life of the foreign countries of the East. This is the con-
tradiction between attempts to achieve a rebirth of "pure" Islam as a phil-
osophical, social, and political teaching uniform for all Moslems, on the one
hand, and the desire to strengthen it on a national soil by means of the mod-
ernization of individual dogmatic and cult aspects, on the other, which because
of their orthodoxy clearly stand in the way of social and cultural progress.

The works by H.A. Usmanov "Dogmas and Rites of Islam" (Tashkent, 1975, in the
Usbek language), L.I. Shaydullina "The Modernisation of Islam and the Helen's
Question" (Kazan', 1975, in the Tatar language), and 0.6. Shigayev "Islam Be-
fore and Now" (Ufa, 1971, in the Bashkir language) are of great educational
and scientific importance.

Important successes have been achieved by our specialists on the East in work
on the problems connected with a study of the place and role of Islam in the

48.
FOIRCMﬂﬂCJAl.USII(lVLY
lt”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(lAl.lEﬂE(ﬂQLY

political and social life of present-day foreign countries. Note has to be
taken here first of all of the collections published under the editorship of
Academician 3.6. Gafurov of the Institute of Eastern Studies of the USSR Acad-
emy of Sciences "The Religion and Social Thought of the Peoples of the East"
(Moscow, 1971), "The Religion and Social Thought of the Countries of the East"
(Moscow, 1974), and also the book "Ideological Currents in the Countries of
Tropical Africa" which was published by a collective of authors from the Instit-
ute of Africa of the USSR Academy of Sciences (Moscow, 1969). These books ex-
amine questions which concern the forms, essence, and evolution of current ideo-
logical trends and conceptions which are characteristic of the developing coun-
tries and the connections between nationalism and religion, reveal the role of
Christianity, Islam, and traditional cults in such underdeveloped regions as,
for example, tropical Africa, and analyze the conceptions of ”Islamic,“ "Afri-
can," and other national theories of social developnent which are widespread

in the "third world" countries.

0n the basis of a large amount of factual material it is demonstrated in these
works that "under present-day conditions the ideological demarcation of the
forces of progress and reaction and, in the final analysis, of the forces of

a socialist and bourgeois orientation is made difficult in the countries of
Asia and Africa by the fact that the consciousness of the masses which have
lived through an epoch 3f colonial slavery is burdened by stable nationalistic
and religious notions." The dislodging of these notions is taking place under
the very difficult conditions of a struggle against domestic reaction and neo-
colonialism which allies itself with clericalism and is attempting to use the
religiousness of the masses in its own interests. The success of the atheistic
and internationalist education of the workers in the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries convincingly shows that the conditions for a complete li-
beration from religious and nationalistic prejudices are Only created in a so-
ciety in which there have been profound aocio—economic and cultural transfor-
nations.

Quite a few works by Soviet scholars are devoted to a critical analysis of the
contemporary ideology of Islam on the basis of the materials of concrete coun-
tries. Such, for example, are the works by A.F. Korobkov "Bourgeois Socio-Poli-
tical and Philosophical Thought in Indonesia" (Moscow, 1972), A.I. Ionova "Mos-
lem Nationalism in Contemporary Indonesia" (Moscow, 1972), M.T. Stepanyants
"Islam in the Philosophical and Social Thought of the Foreign East" (Moscow,
1976), 2.1. Levin "The Development of the Basic Currents of Socio-Political
Thought in Syria and Egypt" (Moscow, 1972). and Ye.A. Doroshenko "The Shiite
Clergy in Present-Day Iran" (Moscow, l975). Note has to be taken,-however, of
the unevennesaof the concentration of scholarly forces by regions. Thus, the
socio-politlcnl and religious thought of Pakistan and Indonesia is being work-
ed upon by many well-known scholars, which is reflected in the publication of

a large nunber of articles and books. We have less research for the countries
of the Near East, and even less for the Sudan, Somali, Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Libya, Tunisia, Morocco, and Mauritania. Unfortunately, we have almost no in-
teresting and substantive books about the struggle of progressive scholars,
public figures, and communists in the countries of the East for the spread of
science, enlightenment, and a democratic path of development, and about their

49.
FDR‘OFIICIAI.IENB(MVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nwthudu of overcoming religious and nationalistic barriers in the way of the in-
Lcruutlonui solidarity of the workers of different countries. There are too few
texts for a study of the atheistic legacy of the outstanding thinkers of the East.
A study and use of the atheistic thought of the peoples of the countries of the
East is all the more necessary in that the conviction is quite widespread abroad
that allegedly all of the cultural and spiritual values which have come down to
the present-day eastern peoples as their heritage from the past are the result

of the favorable influence of Islam. It has to be said that the atheistic thought

of the peoples of the repubﬂcs and oblssts of the Soviet East has also been far
from fully studied.

islamic specialists who work in the field of the dissemination of scientific mat-
erialist knowledge and atheistic education in our country and scholars who work
in the field of studying Islam in foreign countries have to work in close con-
tact. To date they have been meeting with one another quite rarely and irregu-
larly and on occasion. Their meetings, mutual exchange of opinions, and dis—
cussions have to have a more systematic character, and the results of the r joint
research efforts have to be embodied in collective works which could prov de sub-
stantial assistance to our propagandists and to everybody who is working in the
field of the atheistic and international education of the workers.

in this respect the experience of recent years of periodic meetings between party
organization workers and propagandlsts of atheism and scholars is worthy of im-
mitation. in 1973 there was a conference of the ideological workers of the re-
publics. oblasts, and krays of the Northern Caucasus on the problems of strength-
ening the atheistic education of the population. Atheism propagandists and
scientific research institution workers took part in it. Such important issues
were discussed as the theoretical and practical aspects of the process of inter-
nationalization and its influence on overcoming religious survivals; the specific
characteristics of the ideology and activities of religious societies; the re-
lationship between the national and the religious in present-day Islam and the
special characteristics of the propaganda of scientific atheism among the fol-
lowers of Islam; the ideology and activities of contemporary Muridism and Christ-
ian secrarianism; and a study of the religiosity of the population of the North—
ern Caucasus by sociological methods. In their talks the leaders of party or-
ganizations described their work experience in educating the workers in the spir-
it of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism and of an implacable
struggle against religious-nationalistic manifestations. In 1976 the "Soviet
Russia" Publishing House published the book "Experience and Problems of Inter-
national and Atheistlc Education." Its value is in the fact that it generalizes
the enormous experience which has been gained by party organizations over a per-
iod of many years. This generalized and critically interpreted experience is

now returning to practice, helping to improve and perfect the work in the athe-
istic and international education of the workers.

in 1976 the "Kazakhstan" Publishing House published the collection "Important
Problems of Atheistic Education." The idea of creating this collection arose dur-
ing a scientific practical conference on the important problems of atheism which
took place in June 1975 in Alma-eta. its authors are party workers, scholars,

and atheism propagandists. In its two sections-"Scientific Fundamentals of

ROI'OFIWCBSLIJSBfﬂﬂlv
FOR OI-TICIAI. USE ONLY

atheistic work" and "Atheistic Education: Experience, Methodology, Problems" --
there is a discussion of the contemporary tasks of the atheistic education of the
population, of the role of sociological research in increasing the effectiveness
of atheistic education, the importance of developing and introducing new rites,
the special characteristics of the ideological and cult activities of Hoslem rs-
ligious organizations under present-dayccndicions,the evolution of religious
sectarianism, atheistic propaganda at enterprises and in institutions, the scien-
tific atheistic education of pupils and students, and others.

It can be seen from the review of Islamic studies and atheistic literature which
have been published in the last few years that quite a bit has been done. But
life races ahead raising new problems before the workers of the atheistic front.

Our party is devoting a large amount of attention to increasing the efficiency

of work in all spheres. including the efficiency of measures connected with the
atheistic education of the population. The quality and efficiency of the latter
is connected in the most direct and closest way with a profound and concrete
knowledge of the object which we wish to influence and which we wish to change.
Concrete data about the religiousness of the population can be extracted from the
experience and from the practice of party organizations in their work among the
population and from sociological research. Quite a bit of this kind of research
has already been performed and is being performed in the different republics.
oblasts, and rayons of the country. But it has to be said with all frankness:
the generalization of the results of concrete sociological research and the appli-
cation of its conclusions in practice is clearly still lagging behind its de-
mensions.

If we are to speak about research on such an important problem as the evolution
of Islam, then here we base ourselves, as a rule, on the sermons and articles of
the Hoslem clergy: the mullahs, akhunds, muftis, the rescripts of the spiritual
administrations, and articles in religious periodicals. But how this evolution
is occurring among believers, how it is perceived by them, and how under the in-
fluence of this evolution there are changes in their eachatalogical and cult ideas,
their attitude toward moral norms, and their behavior in everyday life and in
the collective and so forth we have a far from concrete and sufficient know—
ledge. The question of the evolution of Islam in our country, of the attitude
of ordinary believers toward its modernized dogmas, ritual and cult system, and
morality and of the attitude of believers and of the non-believing mass toward
its survivals can only be fully answered through a further development of socio-
logical studies.

Such a phenomenon of our reality as mass atheism in regions whose population in
the recent past lived under conditions of clearly expressed social and economic
and cultural backwardness. in the captivity of religious ideas, is also worthy

of profound study in all respects. As yet there are no special works devoted to
mass atheism in places of the former undivided dominion of Hoslem ideology.

The tasks of researchers are still far from exhausted also in the field of the

study of the social role of Islam. Frequently in contemporary imaginative and
journalistic literature we encounter an excessive magnification of its import-

roa omnibus: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum in tho Mutory "1' peoples. At the sums time, in a number of articles and
books it is possible to find overly abstract and, for this reason, incorrect com-
parisons between Islam and other confessions, and conclusions to the effect that
Islam is "the most reactionary of all of the world's religions." A scientific
approach to evaluating the place and role of a religion in the life of a people
demands the consideration of the full complex of concrete conditions in which it
exists.

K. Harx had a deep understanding of the specific nature of Eastern religions, in-
cluding Islam, and of their role in the history of peoples suppressed by despoe
tism. At the same time, he warned against a one—sided approach to evaluating the
role of the religious factor in the life of a society in general and in the East-
ern question in particular. Thus, here also an enormous field of activity is
open for Soviet scholars.

There are a few works in the atheist literature which are devoted to a study of
the influence of pre-Moslem beliefs on the consciousness and behavior of relig-
ious people. Heanwhile, this question is important. "When you become more deep-
ly acquainted with the forms of religious survivals among the peoples of Central
Asia in our day," C.P. Snesarev writes, "a very noteworthy and, at first glance,
even paradoxical phenomenon comes to light and consists in the fact that the sur-
vival which goes back genetically to pre-Hoslem beliefs slows greater stability in
everyday life than ”‘3 survivals of orthodox Islam whose degradation takes place
at more rapid rates." As observations show, to one or another extent this con-
clusion of a well-known ethnographer is in effect for all of the regions where
Islam is widespread and, therefore, it has to be considered in atheistic work.
Relic phenomena in the field of family relations and in everyday life very often
do not have a direct relation to othodox Islam and to its dogmas and cult. The
present-day Hosiem clergy does not leave this circumstance without attention.

In the part reconciling itself with pre-Hoslem beliefs and the survivala of pre-
Islamic cults, today, in keeping with modernistic tendencies, it opposes all kinds
of absurd superstitions and is for "the purity of true faith." This aspect also
must be taken into account in the criticism of modernized Islam. Nor can it in
any way be ignored in the solution of the problems connected with the introduction
of new non-religious rituals. Thus, here also there is still, one may say, a

lot of work for Our scholars and propagandists of scientific atheism.

The introduction of new Soviet civil rites and holidays is closely connected with
the criticism and dislodgement of religious rituals. Unfortunately, we do not
yet have solid monographic texts on this question. The existing literature takes
insufficient accOunt of the specific nature of Islam, and also of the national
characteristics of the peoples who ior a long time were under the influence of
the ideology and ritual and cult practice of Islam. There has been no study with
sociological efforts of the reasons for the vitality of such phenomena as the
nikah, sunnet (khatna) or ritual circumcision, kalyn, and the employment in every-
day life of certain Adat and Shariat norms. The existing articles, pamphlets,
and books do not contain sufficient material and the necessary information on
these matters which could be used by propagandists of atheism in their practical
work. The dislodgement of old, survival rites and rituals and their replacement
with new ones is a complex process. Party organizations and Soviet public-minded

52 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people are performing a large amount of work in this direction. It is the duty
of our Islam specialists to give them all of the assistance they can.

As is known, survivals, including religious survivals, have their roots in the dis-
tant past and bear the strata of different epochs. They have taken deep root

in the consciousness of the people, in its habits and customs. It is now some-
times very difficult to separate them from genuinely national values and eject
them from the consciousness and life of people. An overall approach is essen-
tial here. Take, for example, the kalym. Removing it is closely connected with
the struggle for actual equal rights for women, and with educating them in the
spirit of comunist ideas about love, marriage and the family, family happiness,
friendship, faithfulness, and comradeliness.

The accomplishment of this task is at the same time a contribution to improving
social relations. This example shows that the problem of survivals takes on a
multi-aspect character and that posing and solving it has not only a purely scien—
tific but, above all, a practical goal.

Propagandists who conduct work among the followers of Islam have more than once
noted the necessity for the creation of solid text-books containing a scientific
criticism of Hoslem morality. of incorrect ideas concerning the connection be-
tween the national and the religious in the psyche and in culture, and of modern-
Ist interpretations of the social role of religion. For a number of these pro-
blems there are books, articles, and pamphlets. However, Soviet Islam special-
ists have a great debt to our atheistic public activists. We do not have funda-
mental works on the problems of morality, on a scientific criticism of the Koran,
modernist interpretations of its precepts, and on a study of Shariat norms and
their role in the philosophy and behavior of people who have been subjected to
the influence of Islam. Nor do we have books criticizing such an important source
for Islam as the hadiths. It is not to be excluded that to a certain extent this
explains the widespread, especially during sermons. "free" hadith creation by
present-day mullahs for the purpose of modernizing Islam.

in recent years Soviet scholars have done, as has already been said, a consider-
able amount in the field of studying Islam and criticising its survivals. how-
ever, the tasks facing them, both with regard to volume and to difficulty, are
still very substantial. There accomplishment will require the application of the
coordinated efforts of all of our Islamic specialists.

FOOTNOTES

1. N.I\. Smirnov, "Fifty Years of Soviet Islamic Studies," VOPROSY NAUCHNOCO
ATEIZMA, No. 10, 1967.

2. "Religion and Social Thought in the Countries of the East," Moscow, 197‘. p 3.
3. (LP. Snesarev, "Relics of the Pre-Hoslem Beliefs," Moscow, 1969, p. 18.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mysl‘", 1977

2959
CSO: 1800/157 END

FOR OFFIGSAi USE ONLY