FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10087

2 November 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 56/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOI

2 Novembe

REST EUROPE REPORT

(POUO 56/81)
Comsms

ECONOMIC

BELGIUM

Citizens Polled on National Debt, Budget. Finances
(POURQUOI PAS7. 1 oct 81) osassssl.Cosaascnsssoossssosssoso

Continuing Problem of Cockerill-Sa-bre Steel Cmany
(Paul Colson; POURQUOI PAS‘l, 24 Sep 81) ...................

FRANCE
Need for Antitrust Law Emphasized, Explained
(Raymond Bourgine; VALBURS ACTUELBS. 1!. Sep 81) . . . . . . . . . .

POLITICAL

FRANCE

Responses to Detente, Cold Hat Views of Wenthal, Labedz
(COMMENTAIRE, various dates)...

Neutralism, Pacifism, Pinlandization, by Pierre ﬂassner
Arms Control; Econo-ic Relations, by Theirry de Hontbrial
Results of Vietnam, Detente, SALT, by Raymond Aron

FOO (\l‘lﬂf" A I I ICI‘ AMI V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EXIONOMIC BEGIUH

CITIZENS POLLED ON NATIONAL 1331‘. 30mm. FINANCES
Brussels POURQlDI PAS? in French 1 Oct 81 pp 0-?

[Report on survey, conducted by scam between 27 May and 25 June 1981: "The
Belgians Accuse! . . ."]

[Text] The public opinion poll was conducted by SOBEHAP [expansion
unknown] between 2? May and 25 June 1981. with a sample of 2,000
individuals. representative of the Belgian population. 18 years of
age or older.

This sample was determined by a random selection from a list of
addresses based on voting lists. The persons thus designated were
interviewed in their homes by the team of interviewers from
SOBEMAP.

SOBEHAP adheres to the ethical code of £3011“! [European Association
for the Study of Public Opinion and Marketing]. It is. moreover. a
member of panama [Federation of Belgian Institutes for Met and
Public Opinion Research].

Power void. Freezing of all political decisions. An increasingly clear cut econo-
mic break between the northern and southern parts of the country. A nearly complete
drying up of the state coffers: willy Class is afraid that soon we will no longer
even be able to pay the unemployed!

In the face of this dramatic situation. which adds a frightening dimension to the
current political crisis. how are the citizens reacting?

They hardly get an opportunity to be heard these days as their voices are covered
by an absurd cacophony of slogans. demids and other ultimatums from pressure groups
of all kinds. Hence, the public opinion poll conducted by sow. which we are
publishing exclusively for the French speaking part of the country -- KNACK MAGAZINE
is doing the same for the- l‘lemish side -- cane Just at the right moment: it finally
allows us to know the opinion of the citizens-taxpayers on the management of their
public monies. Of our monies!

Will you be surprised? The Belgians accuse: too many expenditures. distributed
too badly. and also too much bureaucracy! However. there is nothing perfunctory
about this opinion: as they were being questioned. these perceptive citizens also
showed that they know what they want. For those. whoever they may be. who will
take the country's rudder. there are lessons here which would not be forgotten.

FOR OFFICIM} USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let it be said!

The first reaction. probably an immediate one, but impressive. to the first ques-
tion: an overwhelming majority of Belgians -- 83.6 percent -- believe that the
state is doing badly or very badly financially speaking. Politicians, take note!
Based on the sample of 2,000 respondents, according to the SOBEIAP criteria this
represents some 6.2 million angry citizens over the age of 18. And along these.
‘he men and especially the Isle inhabitants of Brussels are the most discontented.

Table 1. Do you think that the Belgian state is doing well financially speaking?

State doing Very “ell Ias0000000000000concealeleieelel 1.2
State doing “31]. ebe!sees...OD00...OOODOIIIDIIOCOOOOOO 204
State doing neither well nor badly ................... 12.0
State doing my oneness...eaeeeoonee'eeeetooeoecoano 35.6
State doing ven my 0.....00........C........“.... wio
mnot km" ...U...0..5..C........................'... 0.8

The indictment is terrible. To be sure. these taxpayers do not appear to be very
well informed, as individuals. about the ayeteries of internal revenue. about the
weight of what they pay to the tax collector in relation to the effort made by the
enterprises. nor about the distribution between direct taxation and the TVA [Value-
added Tax]. But is this important? As we will see later on, a large majority of
them (65.4 percent) in any case believe that the taxes on earned incoae are too
high. and especially that the state must reduce its expenditures: 77.8 percent of
them. or 5.6 million -- out of the 7.2 million voters represented by the survey
sample -- are demanding a change of course. Is this not clear enough?

Table 2. Knowing the indebtedness of the stzie. do you think that it should ...

ReduCe its expenditures IlaOOQOODIOOCOOOOOO.DOOOOOOOOD 7708
Increase taxes or social contributions ...............
m mth 00.0....OIOIIODO0...0...OOOOOOOI‘IOOIOOOCIOIOD

Neither, leave the situation as it is ................ 1

m not knOH oeaeeoeeeecso...sees.oesoelaleeeeeoeleeeae

cum»
vtnocncn

But it would obviously be a good thing to further analyze and detail these sharp
reactions. As a matter of fact. it is true that the Belgians have very precise
ideas as to the form of state spending in the major sectors. The following table
is very enlightening in this regard. The higher the score. the more the people
surveyed believe that the particular expenditures represent a large amount. In-
versely. the negative scores indicate the sectors in which the state effort is con-
sidered to be below the overall average.

FOR OFFICIAL?USB ONLY
36R OFFICIAL use ova

Table 3. Here then is how. in the eyes of the voters, the state spends our money:

Scientific resemh neoeeeeeeoeeeaeeeoesoseeeseeeeeeeee “10088
National education. instruction ....................... 5.81
Police. gendarmerie. security of persons and property..
Health and disability lunar!“ oeoveneeeooeeeneeeeetec
Aid. subsidies to private enterprise ..................
Unemplonent I......".0.3.0.......U...................
Common Market castleseeessIOeOeOOeOeeOeeesesOassesses-I
Public transportation (trans, buses. trams. subways)..

Ol—‘I—ePShUVm
$88$SB

Natiom defenw. my. NATO IOOOIOOOOIIOIC0.0.0.003... .‘65
Culture. radio and television. that” seleeseeeeeeeeee -1 .“1
Cooperation aid to developing countries ............... - 8.164
Pensiom so.IDOIIIOODOOIIOIOOIOIIOIICOOO0'00...30.0.0.0 2.25
Institutions: national. regional. community,

municipal, government ............................... 5.78
Salaries of civil servants ............................ l5.65
Construction and maintenance of roads. expressways .... 10.91
Reimbursement of loans, interest ...................... 3.2?
ley alouuces DI.OllI000!00....OOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO - 2.55

what is noticeable when reading these "scores"? First of all. that for the voters
in this opinion poll. 3. super maximum is spent on the construction and maintenance
of roads and expressways. That the second place on the hit parade of public monies
is taken by the social budgets (health and disability insurance, and unemployment).
That for everything that concerns our security, we pay the prices police. gendar-
merie and other forms of protection of the security of persons and property obtaimd
a perfectly respectable score. That. on the other hand. national education rated
an honorable score. whereas our various institutions. administrations and our civil
servants together cost us a pretty penny.

On the other hand, it is in the negative scores assigned by the persons in the
survey (for the sectors in which the state spends little money) that we find the
sectors most likely to have a future and to provide personal enrichment: scienti-
fic research. apparently very much neglected. cultm. radio and television, etce-
tera. aid to developing countries, but also aid and subsidies to private enterprise
and family allowances.

without once again making a value judgement. the Belgians hava thus noted to what
extent an imbalance does exist to the disadvantage specifically of scientific re-
search, in spite of all the pretty speeches we are being showered with which tell
us about lovely tomorrows.

Could these Belgians be sceptical then? Not at all: rather realistic. looking at
things directly. but with a touch of resignation when they consider the manner in
which our money is being managed. Which does not prevent them in the least iron
responding very clearly when they are asked to give an opinion on a series of sug-
gestions submitted to them.

- Nearly 8 out of every 10 citizens (79 percent) either agree or fully agree that
taxes on earned incose are too high. And it is the Halloons. the inhabitants of
Brussels and the workers who are most sensitive to this tax pressure.

FOR OFFICIALJUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- Nearly 2 out of every 3 citizens (61.5 percent). and even more Flemish and shop-
keepers. would like to see a. reduction in the number of civil servants.

- Likewise. 2 out of every 3 citizens reject a further increase in private contri-
butions to social security.

- An even larger majority (69.4 percent). and even more in Hellonia (79 percent).
on the other hand. believe that the national wealth should be better redistributed
through social achievements.

- Attaching an essential value to our currency. an overwhelming asjority (78.6 per»
cent) believes that the Belgian state should defend the franc at any cost.

- Finally. 2 out of every 3 citizens firmly believe that they are being treated
unfairly by the state.

I

Table 1.. Knowing that the public debt a-ounts to 2 trillion francs. I would like
to know again to what extent you personally agree with the statements I
read to you earlier.

FullyAaI‘ee Hare Do Do Do

Agree - or Not Not Not
- Less Agree Agree Know

Agree at

all

 

Taxes on earned income are too high...... 33.9 31.5 12.9 4.2 1.0 1?.2
Number of civil servants should be

reduced Itotleoooe.O'ODOOODOIOOOOODCIO 2501 ”I8 1500 805 3.5 1901
Private contributions to social security

Should m increased eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 008 9.6 1310 37-“ 19-8 1903
Taxes on dividends should be increased... 11.0 23.1 17.4 19.? 6.1+ 22.1;
The state should better redistribute

national wealth thmugh social

achievements eneeeeeeeeeoegeeeeeeeesee 27.? 3‘08 110° “'5 007 21.3
It would be better to increase TVA

on products and reduce income taxes... 6.6 15.“ 2M3 19.3 9.1; 21;.9
Companies should pay less income and

other taxes OQOIOOIDOeIOOIDODIOIOII... 6.9 20.0 20.5 1801 12.3 22.1
One has feeling of being treated fairly

bystate eoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoesleoeeele 201 70“ 13e9 2500 3206 1900
State should defend Belgian franc at

311c°3t eeeeeoteleooeeoﬂtt eeeleeeele ﬁe? 27.9 11.5 3-“ 102 19e3

True. these large main themes are slightly mitigated when the respondents are asked
the same questions over again. after having been told about the enormity of the
amount of the state's indebtedness. witness the table above. where it is shown

that the positions remain oriented in the same direction. except that the propor-
tion of "do not know" increases noticeably.

Evidently. the fact of being informed of the seriousness of the country's financial
situation and of the catapulting amounts of indebtedness does not cause the Belgims

FOR OFFICIAL“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to lose their head. Is this a mistake? No, to the extent that, as we saw earlier,

they loudly demand a reduction in state expenditures. which allows them to look at
the debt problem from a certain distance ...

Table 5. In fact, the public debt. that is to say what the state owes to those who
have lent it money. amounts to 2 trillion ﬁance. which means that a
Belgian owes 203,000 Belgian francs at birth. or that a Belgian household.
on the average. owes 600.000 Belgian francs.

a) What do you think about the situation?

It is not worrisome at .11 eeeeneeecoveeneeeeeeoeeeee
It is mt maimme .I...'....‘C..................I'.
It is neither worrisosenor not worrisome ............
It 18 "011180”: .DI‘...'.'.C.....'I................'.
It 13 Very mnisone up.eon-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeoe.new
m not km" so...soeenvoeeeseeeneeoeeeeeoeeeteoetooee

I I O
@OOUON

05§5ww

b) And you personally, do you feel ...?

Very concem“ 0....'0...‘....'....."...........OI.I
concerned noaceseon-ea.eaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
Neither concerned nor not concerned .................
Not concema ‘OUCCOICUCCOOOOCCO.‘O..........C.....CC
Not concerned at all eeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeceecte

lb not know eeeeenveeeolossl'sIIIIOOIICIOIIICOIOQOOse

HP N
OO‘OOSO

mwbcmv

c) And your children. or the next generation. are- they .. .7

Much mre concerned .0...‘...................'.......
Mrs concerned orrootsloossnol¢|llictoctlOOOIIOIOODOU
Neither more nor less concerned .....................
Less Concerned O....UII....O.......'..'...'..........
Much less concern“ "O.U'......................."..
mmt know O....O...’..'.....IIIC.'..'...........'..

N
unease
V‘OO\U\\ON

One will notice that the respondents are much more worried about the consequences
of the state's indebtedness for their children or the next generation. Hence, to
protect them against it. and because they are clasoring for a reduction of public
expenditures. what solutions do they have to offer? How would they go about it if
they were minister of finance or of the budget instead of hessrs Vandeputte and
Mathot? The following table, listing the same Iain sectors of expenditures that
were listed above. shows the score given in terms of the importance of the efforts
to be agreed on with regard to the current situation. The negative scores indicate
the areas where there is a shortage and where investsents should be made. whereas

the positive scores indicate the areas which are favored too much and where more
or less serious cuts could be made.

FOR OFFICIALSUSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. here then is, in general terns. the way the Belgians would put together
the state budget:

Scientific research I000!out.0.000.000IIODOOOODIIUIOII
National education. instruction ......................
Police, gendsrnerie. security of persons and property.
"Bath a-nd disability insurance oooooeoeeeeeooeoneoooe
Aid, sulBidias to ”into enterprise oeooeeeoeeeceeeoe
[menplonent ..I.0.C...'U..'...‘O...’.................
comn Mket .‘OC.....'.....0.'..".........U.....‘..
Public transportation (trans. buses. trains. subways).
National defense. my. NATO ea.oeeooeeeoq-cacosaceeoe
Culture. radio and mansion. tmtu oooeeneeee-eeoe
Cooperation aid to developing countries ..............
hrﬁions ‘........0"00...C..............’.'.....I....
Institutions: national. regional. couunity.
mmicim, government ononeneeaeoeeeoeoeeeoeooneoeoe
Salaries of Civu 83mm“ ooeeooeueeeoeeeoooeeoeeseeo
Construction and maintenance of roads. expressways ...
Reilmemnt of 10m. “WCQt eooeeoeoneoe'eooeeeue
any allowances 00050000000Iolosoosotoleoloeeoooeeoo
Other responses on.oeeeoesoeooeeoeeeoeeooeoeoeoeoeeoeo

III
see-ee-

ssssss sshsssssssss

I II
p
N‘OHMUW OONFUWNNO‘HG’Q

Roughly. one might say then that the Belgians are:

~ Allergic to excessive expenditures for everything touching the various institu-
tions. the bureaucracy. and the civil service. 1b a soaewhat lesser degree. they
would readily give up on too such spending for roads and expressways. A few de-
grees lower yet. public transportation. aid to private enterprise. unenploynent
and debt service should receive the same fate.

- Allergic to a. reduction of expenditures. and even in favor of an increase in
them, in the social sectors (pensions. family allowances. health and disability
insurance). and in the sectors affecting the future -- scientific research -- or
the coming generations -- national education. Defense probless would apparently
also warrant an effort.

As far as the social budgets are concerned. however. we haVe seen above that the
Belgians demand a better distribution of their expenditures.

Regional Angle

HoweVer. when these issues are examined m: a regional or comunity angle. one
often obtains notable differences in attitude. even if the majorities are all going
in the same direction.

Thus. without distorting too much. it could be said that the Fleaish are clearly
more in favor of a. reduction of the size of the bureaucracy and of the institutions
than are the inhabitants of Brussels or the Valloons. Sinilarly. they wuld look
with were favor upon a reduction of expenditures in terms of health and disability
insurance. than would the citizem of the other two regions of the country. The

FOR orncmﬁusn ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Flemish would also. but preceded by the inhabitants of Brussels. more easily accept
parsimony in terms of unemployment expenditures. whereas the Halloots refuse to al-
low then to be touched. Identical divergences exist with rear-d to aid to enter-
prises. a reduction of which would be more easily accepted by the citizens of the
northern part of the country. whereas the inhabitants of Brussels reject it. On
the other hand. the citizens of the capital and of Hallonia are much more concerned
about the efforts to be made in terms of scientific research than are their Flenish
neighbors. Identical cleavages also in terns of defense: only the Flemish are
publicly more in favor of an increase in expenditures.

Co ncl us ions

By developing. on these bases. a kind of rather coarse profile. it could thus be
concluded that the Flemish are definitely more open to the liberal trance advoca-
ting a. reduction of the burden of the state and of bin-saucracy. as well as the
"skimming off" of certain social budgets. All things being equal. they are also
more "militaristic" in that they would accept greater efforts in letters of defense.

The Hallows. on the other hand. are clearly more characterized in terns of theses
likely to strengthen the welfare state and bm'eaucracy. relying more on public as-
sistance than on private initiative.

As for the inhabitants of Brussels. they represent a special case. They are the
ones who. throughout this survey. showed themselves to be the most gruapy. the most
civic. the most oppositionist. But they are also aware of their own needs. and
they let it be known. To the point that it could be said that. even if our new
institutions leaVe then sitting between two stools. they for: a distinct entity.
The candidates presenting themselves at our elections should also take this into
account. As a matter of fact. in the next part of this survey. which we will
publish next week. they will find other subjects for thought of this kind.

Fay this be of some use!

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POL'RQUOI PAS?

8&6}
cso: 3100/29

FOR OFFICIAL7USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC BELGIUM

CONTINUING moans or cocmm-smms s'rsn. comm!
Brussels POURQUDI PAS? in hench 2“ Sep 81 pp 8-11
[Article by Paul Colsou: "The Big Halts of the Billions"]

LTextj "New. at the end of 1978, a stimulation of investments is
imperative and actually appears to be well under way. However.
it will be able to succeed only to the extent that the authori-
ties as well as the ofﬁcials of the private cospaniao have a
real drawing power for investors."

The author of this semi-prophesy in the form of a pious wish
was the acting mayor of Seraing. addressing those in the mecha-
nical engineering division of S.A. Cookerin who had been deco-
rated, on 11 December 1978. His name was Jacques Vandebosch.

Three years later, this same Vandebosch. a colorfast socialist. is president of the
executive committee of Cookerill-Sambre. ’Ihe hopes of 1978 have long vanished into
thin air. In this last quarter of 1%1. the situation of Halloon steel is drama-
tic! One would need an avalanche of billions of francs into the coffers to re-
trieve the situation. And quickly. Very quickly!

Capital Increase

Let us take a look at it: with the current state of orders. the loss of substance
-~ cash drain in the parlance of the econonists -- will amount to 1.2 billion
francs next October. 1+00 million francs the month after that. and 1.3 billion
francs in December. Let us round it off at 3 billion francs. Plus 4 billion
francs in investment needed if we do not want the holes to become any deeper. That
makes 7 billion! Not to mention the debts. the burden of which shows signs of be-
coming rapidly worse because the company had to subscribe to short tern loans which
will do badly during the coming weeks.

At the end of June, the state -- who is the main shareholder -- had decided to in-
crease the capital up to 11 billions of our francs. But barely 25 percent of this
amount has been freed. which is no more than 2.?5 billion francs. a mere drop of
water in a sea of financial difficulties. Very inadequate. even to soak up the
operating losses for the first 6 month period of 1981. The accounts were quickly
worked out: 6.2 billion francs minus 2.?5 billion francs in capital increase.
leaves 3.55 billion francs to be urgently found.

8
FOR OFPTCTM. "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the request of the ampean Commission. the balance of the capital incmaee was
replaced by a short term credit: 700 million of our francs in July; 70 million I)!
and 70 million Swiss francs the following month, which represents a total amount of
3 billion 1132 million of our frames. with various interest and commission ename-
ments whose expiration dates fall on 26 October (1 billion 138 million). on 25 No-
vember (1 billion 30h million). and on New Year's Eve. happy and Joyous New Year!
(700 million).

Here then is. as it is. the mathematics of anguish. which would in principle be
gripping the managers of Cockerill-Sambre if they were anything but administrators

appointed by the public sector and the holding companies. those who are referred to
as the .PS (stable private shareholders).

Head Above Hater

Each manufactured ton. especially of the least profitable products. is manufactured
below cost price. Under those circumstances. the temptation to stop the march of

the severely wounded who with each step lose a little more blood, is great. It is
the theme defended in certain Flemish circles. accompanied with the old nationalist

slogan: "Flemish money for the Flemish." But Sidmar is less sick than Cooker-ill-
Sambre.

The overall state of the treasury in Liege and Charleroi and the state of affairs
are such that any capital input -- and we should count exclusively in billions of
francs -- would be immediately absorbed by some improvised salvage operation or
other. This is what is seriously referred to as the head above water policy.

It must be acknowledged that when they perform the noble and sentimental waltz of
the billions. the socialist comrades put feeling into its allesro con trio!

within the enterprise itself. two sides confront each other. That of the pessi-
mists (or of the realists. the future will tell us) who estimate the chances of
survival for Halloon steel at the lowest level: one out of three perhaps. or one
out of four. And then the side of the optimists (or opportunists, we will soon

find out). The president of the executive committee, Jacques Vandebosch, is one
of them:

"All the Eurepean steel nanufacturers are in the same boat. Nearly all of them
are convinced that solidarity will allow us to save the equipment during the diffi-
cult poriod while they wait for a change in the overall economic climate."

Last week. at Birefer (Eurofer is a kind of club of the big steel manufacturers in
Europe; nothing official; it involves a union of interests) the Germans apparent-
ly demanded a price increase to be applicable as of next 1 January. This is sur-
prising news. in the sense that it is known that a few iron-asters from across the
Rhine are fierce advocates of war to the knife among the mmpean producers and
which will be won by the best. Apparently they are no longer the only ones to be
heard in the PRC and in the European caucuses.

Price Decrease per Ton

Jacques Vandebosch estimates that: “11‘ prices could increase from 1.000 to 1. 500
francs per ton, we would once again be able to sell above cost price."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without for all that getting out of the red. because the liabilities are heavy.

"The enterprise owes 28.8 billion francs in short term credits and 31 billion francs
in long term credits. of which a large part however are SNCI [National Company for
Credit to Industry] credits. The interest tux-den to be paid by us can be estimated
at 2.5 billion francs."

It is true that the crisis has thinned out the European ranks. lhe Bresciani. thou

small producers from Northern Italy who 5 years ago struck fear along the soundest
steel empires, have in turn been routed.

As for the big producers such as Cookerill. part of the tragedy was acted out on an
overwhelming combination of circumstances. At the very moment when the crisis pro-
duced a price collapse on the international markets. it proved to be necessary to
modernize without delay.

"He know that we will be able to influence our cost price only by acting on the
'process' (the production techniques -- editorial note). The continuous casting
and modernization of equal scope are allowing for an 800 to 1.000 francs price re-
duction per ton," said the manager of Cockerill-Samtn‘e. "If we limit ourseIVes to
simple replacement changes of one kind of equipment or another. then our profits
will not go beyond 100 to 200 francs per ton."

Up a Tree

In such a context. last week‘s chance mishap could only take on catastrophic pro-
portions.

Hithout going into details billion by billion, the stakes are clear: the financial
extension is not sufficient to hold Cockerill-Sambre until the economic climate
recovers. In other words. salvation will have to come from the outside or circum-
stances will have to be willing to intervene. There are still more than 38,000
workers and employees in the steel industry in Hallonia. of which 25,000 are at
Cockerill-Sanbre alone. This represents a large number of ballots in the ballot
box in case of elections and a large number of people on the street if the unions
decide to take up the battle ax.

But is the survival operation as urgent as is claimed by the socialists of Guy
Spitaels and the PGTB [General Federation of Labor of Belgium] supporters of that
union hero named Robert Gillan?

"If there is no overall and certain financial solution by Dacenber," said Jacques
Vandebosch, "then we will be up a tree. we can no longer gallq) here and there
every day to try to find a little money."

With each new move. confidence in Cockerill-Sambre goes down a notch among the
suppliers and financiers in the foreign markets. The socialist lobby maintains
that if we wait too long. it will no longer even be possible to collect a single
additional franc to salvage the Walloon enterprise. And this would mean death.
period.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Additional guarantees

Our bankers have already stopped believing in it. There have been doubts for se-
veral months. Last week. pressed to make a statement on their previous commitments,
the bankers had no other recourse. seen iron the left. than to set their demands
high. Under conditions that the government could no longer afford.

"It has become evident to us." consented Jacques Vendebosch. "that the private fi-
nanciers refused to take risks and that. in order to commit themselves. they deman-
ded complete coverage from the state. which did not correspond at all with the pre-
ceding agreements. "

It should be noted that the opinions of the accused are very different. The So-

ciete Generals [see]. the Brussels Lambert Bank [m]. the Kredietbank [n] and
Paribas all deny with utmost energy that they issued an edict last week.

“First remark." explained the bankers. "You should not confuse holding companies
and banks. The money we loan to the steel industry is not ours. We are respon-
sible for it to our clients. Second remark: for us, the negotiations concerning
the steel industry have been going on since 1976. Over time. the options and the
tone have fluctuated. In this case as in others. our line of conduct consists of
assessing a risk. If it seems to be getting worse, then we demand additional gua-
rantees from the client. 'de did indeed consider that the risk was getting worse
these days in the Walloon steel industry. On the other hand, we had been promised
that the financial operation would be based on a precise restructuring plan. Hence.
we requested that an outside auditor keep an eye on the precise implementation of
that plan. What could be more natural?"

is for the asked for but not obtained guarantee from the state for the opening up
of adequate lines of credit. the bankers have a different version from the one cir-
culating in Liege.

“The position of the state does not necessarily have to be interpreted as the re-
jection of an edict. The truth is that any guarantee granted by the state must be
charged against the budget. Which seemed impossible to the government in the cur-
rent state of public finances."

Greater Clarity

Iihat did the bankers demand then? me finicky application of the restructuring
plan as specified last thy. A yearly verification (external audit). Substitution
of the private company by a parastatal organization in case of failure by the
debtor. In return for which the banks maintained the current credits and uncondi-
tionally assumed the strictly commercial credits.

"‘de also regret," said the bankers, "that this smer's contacts took place between

experts, those from the state and ours. without the discussion ever reaching a
higher level. Except for last week."

.. . At the time of the meeting which resulted in the consequences we know about.

"As the situation of Halloon steel had deteriorated." the four (868. KB. BE. and
Paribas) explained, "we could no longer content ourselves with vague declarations

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of intentions. He had to have certainties. Actually. we didn't ask for anything
new, but greater clarity in the financial contract we were to adopt."

Let us note in passing that the bankers did not take kindly to serving as ball

boys for everyone. including for the savms in the government. while at the same
time the state was insistently seeking their cooperation in investing the Municipal
Savings Bank loan which is supposed to provide a ﬁnancial extension to two cities
in desperate plight: Liege and Antwerp. Cuddled on the one hand, kicked in the
behind on the other, the least that could be said is that they did not appreciate
it.

Contagious
And now?

"For us. nothing has been broken off," stated the four. "and we remain open to any
proposition. Indeed. there is the question of whether they can do without us?"

For Vandabosch. the answer is yes.

"with a fallen government," he said. "the only thirg left for us to do is go for-
ward until the financial difficulty becomes too specific. In which case we will
turn to the main shareholder. And he had better stick to his commit-ents."

Since Honday. the union organizations have been on the war path.

"However. I remain convinced." said the president of the executive committee. "that
a social agreement is possible. But it is a fact that the rank and file will ac-

cept the implementation of the plan (laying off 5.000 workers between now and 1985.
and wage reductions) only on the condition that investments are actually achieved.”

In the overall maneuver. this confirms the fact that the union threat is speciﬁc:
no money. no truce!

Right before the fall of the Ehrskens I administration. Jacques Vandebosch asserted
that there were three chapters to his bible: the report of the presidents (Frere-
Charlier). the conclusions of the Japanese expert Nippon Steel, and last May's
government plan. In short: social sacrifices. yes. but fresh money to Iodernize
the plant. On this point. all the figures do not agree. concerning the benefits.
for example. of continuous casting on the cost reduction per ton produced.

As a matter of fact. the overall impression is one of great confusion as soon as
figures are involved, that everyone has his own and uses them for his best inter-
ests. And shame does not stifle anybody.

'n'hen it heard about the government's false note on Monday evening. the first con-
cern of the management of Cockerill-Sambre was to find out whether the granting of
the necessary credits actually comes under current affairs. Well. those current
affairs could go on for quite a while. Apparently. the response is yes. Sigh of
relief on the Halloon side.

Nevertheless. what takes place on the stage is only the reflection of what is
stirring in the wings.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In one of those popcorn books. Philippe Bouvard, who is a more serious boy than
one might have thought. notes that ideologies are like the plague: contagious.

Hell, the last remaining question about Cookerill-Sanhre is to find out what dirty
disease it might die from.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POURQIDI PAS?

8&63
cso: 3100/23

FOR OFFICIAL1 {183 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

NEED FOR ANTITRUST LA" EHPHASIZED, EXPLAINED
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 14 Sep 81 pp 24-26
[Article by Raymond Bourgine: "More than Ever We Need an Antitrust Law"]

[Excerpts] The Socialist government could have done
without nationalization. It is imperative that it
develop for France a law against schemes and abuses
by those in positions of power.

So, we are going to nationalize! However, as regards "sacred and inviolable" property,
the Constitution sets precise limits to the ruling party's authority. Good sense
and the public interest set additional ones.

Rather than nationalize, it would be better to develop in France a substantive law
against schemes and abuses by those in positions of power and to apply the lav
effectively. It would have been better to develop “mass capitalism."

Let us turn to Francois Hitterrand. As French chief of state he is at the head of
an enormous enterprise, the French economy, which is entirely dependent on inter-
national competition. Hith a foreign trade of about 600 billion francs each for
exports and imports, France must export over 40 percent of its industrial and agri-
cultural production, and it imports more than 30 percent of the industrial products
sold on its domestic market.

Industry is the concrete foundation of the economy. Trade, administration and social
services are only the auxiliaries, the accessories, sometimes even the parasites.

Industry ensures the existence of productive jobs. It is the primary tax base. Its
prosperity furnishes the state with taxes and assessments upon which administrative
and social jobs depend. Its ability to compete is the prime imperative.

At this very moment. our competitors are undertaking some formidable measures.

In the United States, Ronald Reagan has started a fiscal revolution. This new
American fiscal reality will give a spectacular boost to "mass capitalism."

Imagine similar accounts [IRA accounts] in Franceo-at least a million and a half
taxpayers would benefit! It would be a net influx of 20 billion francs of savings

per year.

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It has been repeatedly said that French firms are in danger because of their lack
of equity. This will not appear miraculously; it will only happen through profits
(prices higher than costs) or through stockholders.

The firms that are going to be nationalized earn large amounts of foreign currency
on international markets. Would it not have been better to have reinforced their
capital by reinforcing mass savings?

lhere is talk of monopolies, but it would be more accurate to say that there are
abuses by those in positions of power which skew the competition. Nationalizations
will only aggravate this tendency. There must be an antitrust law. It will be
needed more than ever after the nationalizations-the state must guard itself against

its own temptations and protect the economy against possible abuses by the nationalized
firms.

If we call things by their right name, we see that prior administrations were grossly
at fault. They should have thought of a policy similar to Reagan's, but they did not
dare. Their economists were like frightened birds, twittering over Margaret Thatcher's
obvious failure. But it had two causes: an overly strong pound which ruined British
industry and caused it to export factories and jobs overseas, and the inability to
reduce public spending.

Reagan’s experiment is altogether different: expenses are being cut in correlation
with the reduced taxes. The expensive money is actually a sign of the size of profit
margins in an economy where most of the large firms are not net borrowers but lenders.

0n the world market we are going to encounter an overactive American effectiveness.
The Germans are benefitting fully from the present overevaluation of the dollar and
franc compared to the mark. Not to speak of the Japanese, whose trade surplus

is staggering.

In short, our competitors are well supplied with capital, and their modernization
and sophistication will increase.

Why are we nationalizing?

Because of the socialist ideology which says that "the nation must take over the
handling of its economic policy." A pointless argument, since the large companies
were already, and in the most regrettable fashion at the government's disposal.

But the Socialists also claim to be religiously attached to democratic law. They
must abide by the Constituion, which proclaims the permanence of the 1789 Declaration
of the Rights of Man: "Property is an inviolable and sacred right. No one can be
deprived of it except when demanded by legally determined public necessity, and on
the condition of a just and prompt compensation."

who is to judge the evidence? The legislator.

But who is to be the judge of the "jus: and prompt compensation"? Article 55 of
the Constitution states that international agreements overrule laws.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nationalization will affect foreign property owners protected by treaties, especially
by the Treaty of Rome which applies to the Europeans.

In addition, the European Convention on Human Rights provides that the right of
property is protected by "general principles of international law," with, moreover,
no discinction between foreigners and nationals. (Refer to Alain Hargaron's article
on page 61 of this issue: "The Battle of the Law.")

In 1956 the Socialist government of Guy Hollet emphasized, in opposition to the
nationalization of the Suez Canal, the internationally accepted principle of a
"prompt, adequate, and real" compensation.

It may be that foreign states will defend their nationals for the simple reason that
the interests of individuals are part of the nation's assets.

For example, rest assured that the U.S. Congress has a sense of authority at least as
keen as that of the French parliament.

How effective will our large firms be after nationalization?

If as realists we could tolerate some obsessional fixation, we admit that it would
be contained in the word "effectiveness."

1n the American magazine FORTUNE (September 7 issue. page 97), Michel Rocard,
planning minister, expressed a wish: "I hope that we will not try to apply the
same to all the nationalized firms."

He explained that the most well managed ones are those, such as Renault and Air France,
that have tough bosses capable of resisting the government's injunctions. He made

the following very significant remark: "When managing a large firm, the horizon is

at least 10-12 years ahead. It is much different than the government's. No one
expects a minister to look 12 years ahead."

"Thus," the minister concluded, "the management of large companies must be divorced
from governmental concerns." He then added, "He are looking for a system of management
by contract between the state and the nationalized firms, and this contract would be
linked to the national plan. The more successful the enterprise, the less it will be
under public control."

This must indicate that firms will be keeping their autonomous identities and that
their presidents will be protected from ministerial mood changes.

How?

Let us see how Albin Chalandon, president of Elf-Aquitaine, was treated by Andre
Giraud, minister of industry. (The same issue of FORTUNE has some interesting
comments by Chalandon about his relations with the Elysee.)

in the present state of affairs, the lack of small scale savings is such that large
companies quoted on the stock exchange now have, for the most part, state organizations
as their major stockholders. True individual capitalists in France can be counted

on one's fingers.

16
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In other words, the Socialist government could just as well not have nationalized at
all. It could have exercised the sane power as its predecessors without any difficulty.

How many presidents of large firms have been asked by prior administrations not to
close this or that factory for local, political or electoral reasons? They were
compelled to finance the deficits of dead branches with the profits of advanced
sectors, and thus became extremely weak thanks to the whims of irresponsible leaders.

Enormous losses of this or that firm are not due to the incompetence of the bosses,
some of whom, on the contrary, are remarkable. They are due to public constraints.
In any case. the government has never hesitated to use other means of pressure:
controlling access to capital markets. public decrees, or numerous administrative
authorizations.

A young, high-level civil servant said one day: "It's a pleasure to see an important
boss tremble before you while asking for something.“

An inmmral pleasure--if this important boss was trembling, it was for the tens of
thousands of jobs for which he was responsible.

we must now wait for the laws on nationalization. The fate of our large industry hangs
in the balance.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"

9720
C80: 3100/986

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

RESPONSES TO DETENTE. COLD UAR VIRUS 0F mm, LABEDZ
Neutralism. Pacifism, Finlandization
Paris COWTAIRE in French Spring 81 pp 22-27

[Article by Pierre Hassner--foruer Bcole normals superieure student, passed the
philosophy agregation examination, researcher at the International Research and
Studies Center of the National Political Science Foundation; has published numer-
ous articles in France and abroad on problems of political philosophy and inter-
national relations»: "Holding On 10 Both Ends of the Chain: Comntary on a
chate' ]

[Text] Wanting to settle things between two friends as formidable and easily pro-
voked as are Richard Lowenthal and Leo Labedz, who for a generation now have been
accustomed to delivering and exchanging blows, runs the risk of leading the novice
mediator to the fate which often awaits his kind: reconciling the two adversaries
but bearing the brunt himself.

If, nevertheless, I eagerly accept this challenge, it is specifically because
nothing seems more important to me at the present time than fighting on two fronts.

A Fight on No Fronts

Lowenthal's article and Labedz's (which is worth reading in the long and complete
ENCOUNTER version) are interesting not only in themselves but also because they
display misunderstandings and conflicts which risk dividing the Hestern world and
the various countries which make up that world, not to mention a milieu such as
that of ENCOUNTER's and SURVEY's regular readers. a milieu that many of com-
TAIRE's authors have felt quite close to for a long time. Without a doubt it is
the fault of the times. a period in which there is no longer a prevailing consen-
sus on international problems, in which sone hang on to the discredited assumptions
of the seventies come hell or high water. while others, without mch more success,
try hard to regain the lost innocence of the fifties. The objective of this set
of articles should be to help to rise above that conflict instead of aggravating it.

Nothing seem more important to me during these first months of the Reagan Admin-
istration than to have Americans and French Reaganites hear bowenthal's message

about the need to combine rearmament with negotiation, and above all to whine
opposition to Soviet policy with understanding of autonomous sources of conflict-

' 18-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particularly in the Third Vorld-an awareness of the role of military force with
awareness of its limitations. Nothing more important, that is, other than having
Europeans, even those taking part in summit meetings of governments (Franco-
German or Scandinavian), hear Labedz's message, according to which the cult of ne-
gotiation for negotiation's sake and optimism as to Soviet intentions or talk

about the impotence of military might can be excuses for appeasement or self-
Finlandization.

In this fight on two fronts I would like to salute (for a last time, though perhaps
that is temporary) a third duellist of the same family, the inventor of the term
"self-Finlandization" (as is Lowenthal of the term "Finlandization" and Labedz

of the term "competitive decadence"), the man who has succeeded in making himself
equally hated in Moscow, Bonn and Washington, Zbignisw Brzezinski. whatever his
numerous intellectual transformations and political mistakes, he knew how to ex-
press better than anyone, particularly in his last speeches, the need to hold on to
both ends of the chain, by denouncing the blindness of liberals confronted with the
USSR's actions and the role of military force, and the blindness of "hawks" faced
with the historical upheavals which are tearing societies apart and with the rise
of new forces and aspirations. Like Brzezinski, I think that in order to understand
and respond to this crisis on its own level one must start out by looking at all
societies; but, in the second place, one must see how much the crisis is exploited
by the Soviet Union and how futile it is, for example, to be devoted solely to the
problems of development and North-South relations without at the same time resist-
ing Moscow's maneuvers by military force if need be; and finally, in the third
place. that in order to simultaneously exploit Soviet vulnerabilities, to con-
struct a balance more favorable to peace and to the West, and to respond to demo-
cratic,needs in the East as well as in the Heat. one must be sensitive to the posi-
tive changes which can occur within the international communist movement (the

PCI's evolution), the Soviet bloc (Poland events) and the USSR (need for cooperation
in the economic field and, to a certain extent, in the field of arms control).

Both Lowenthal and Labedz would undoubtedly agree with this program at a level of
sufficient generality. But Labedz puts so much emphasis on head-on resistance

to the USSR that other aspects are always likely to seem premature, illusory or
dangerous to him. Thus he runs the risk of neglecting the dangers which brought
about the Vietnam catastrophe as well as neglecting the possibilities that an ac-
tive detente policy much needs make use of in order to protect, for example, the
Polish experience. As for Lowenthal. a certain rationalistic optimism makes him
perhaps underestimate the illusions and dependencies which the balanced policies
he advocates, perfectly reasonable in themselves, are likely to entail.

Those two brilliant dialecticians, both the one and the other, seem to me to under-
estimate somewhat the paradoxes, contradictions and inevitable trend reversals
which East-Nest relations bring about. In particular, they are barely sensitive

to the dynamic of public opinion shifts and to automatic chain reactions except when
it is a question of policies they are criticizing whereas they exist just as much
for the policies they defend.

'19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Consequences of Vietnam and the Role of Shifts in Public Opinion

Let us go back to the history recounted by Lowenthal. Re is right to emphasize
the importance of the Vietnam "at which Labedz, like most "hawks," tends to skip
lightly over. Lowenthal could recall his prophetic article on "The American Com-
mitment in Asia" (ENCOUNTER, 1965) in which he predicted that the implementation
of military "containment" on unfavorable political terrain would lead to a profound
crisis in the American conscience and its involvement in the rest of the world.
That is in fact what occurred. It was indeed the Vietnam War and the rebellion
it provoked among young Americans which led the "Establishment" (personified by a
Fulbright, a McNamara, and indeed a Vance) to repudiate what “containment" policy
had that was worthwhile and to sink in varying degrees into pacifist or neoisola-
tionist temptations.

Starting from there, I think like Lowenthal that Kissinger, at the beginning of
the seventies, did what he could to carry out an active foreign policy in spite

of a hostile Congress and public opinion, and that he succeeded pretty well.

But like Labedz I also think that this in no way prevented the military rise of
the USSR in relation to the United States, and that detente was presented by Nixon
and Kissinger, at least up until 1973, in terms which encouraged instead of dis-
pelled illusions. But they could respond that this was the only way to give
Americans 3 minimum of confidence and to suggest a minimum of "restraint" to the
Soviets at a time when exaggerated reactions to the Vietnam “hr tied the hands

of the masters of American diplomacy and arse programs.

Whatever the responsibilities or the weaknesses of men, the main factor is the pen-
dulum swing of opinion (also, even more so the swing in the political elite than

in the general public which is more balanced than the professionals). A. Vohl-
stetter has often said that the worst consequence of the Vietnam failure lay in
the mistaken lessons Americans were going to draw from it. He was certainly right,
but it seems that that is still going on, that the lesson of Vietnam, after hav-
ing been "underlearned" or forgotten by Reagan's policy as that is taking shape
from El Salvador to Namibia and in a form of which Labedz seems to approve. Per-
haps one could say that the worst consequence of Carter's failures is likely to
consist of the mistaken lessons that the Reagan Administration and its supporters
are likely to draw from them. That is all the more likely since certain failures
among these indeed resulted in part from post-Vietnam pacifist illusions, but at
least as many resulted from a Kissinger legacy made up of pre-Vietnam conservative
illusions, particularly in Iran and in Angola.

European Detente: From Cold War to Hot Peace

Similar paradoxes are found when one examines European detente. Labedz only sees
Soviet traps and Western capitulations. Lowenthal sees a stabilization agreement
which accepts division and permits equilibrium to be reestablished. In compari-
son with both (and, moreover, in comparison with the conceptions of President
Reagan on the one hand, and Presidents Giscard d'Estaing and more ambiguously Hel-
mut Schmidt on the other), I personally would tend to find that events have
confirmed the thesis I had set forth in 1969-1970. This was that detente had
destabilizing as well as stabilizing effects in the East just as in the West,

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

albeit in different ways. That is why I suggested the term "hot peace" to indicate
that, in comparison with "cold war." detente would involve more instability, more
conflicts, and more vulnerability for the two systems.

Using Labedz's term "competitive decadence." I thought that the central problem
would be the comparative effect of diminished war fears and of increased contacts
between societies on the decay of political systns, and I set up a parallel be-
tween the eroaion of military budgets and defense spirit in the "sat and the
erosion of legitimacy and authority in the East.

Western criticisms of detente were mistaken when they believed that detente would
only affect the Heat; detente's supporters were mistaken when they expected from
it a harmonious evolution moving from stabilization to liberalization in the East.
In fact, detente was to give rise in the East to contradictory movements of politi-
cal liberalization and “Abgrenzung [limitationl','" of anti-establishment activity
and repression, the outcome of which. as we all know. is uncertain. But these
contradictory movements call for reactions in Eastern countries which are as far

removed from the automatic workings of detente as they are from those of the Cold
War.

The Intersection of Cycles

But are western countries able to react in the fashion called for? I am sometimes
tempted to think that the traditional short-term cycles of detente and cold war,
described well by Labedz, tend to be fouled up by the medias—term cycle of Ameri-
can policy which emerges from 15 years of retreat to start up 15 years again of
assertiveness. indeed expansion, and by the long-term cycle of Western European
countries too worn out by their historical experience to risk their existence any
more for any cause whatsoever. In other words. even if the Soviets withdrew

from Afghanistan and dismantled their 85-20 missiles. the American moral and
material rearmament machine would not stop for all that. and even if they invaded
Poland, many Europeans and at any rate Germans would see in that a reason for even
more trade and detente.

The Change in German Public Opinion: Prom Atlanticism to Neutralism?

Let us leave these philosophy of history perspectives for the Cafe du Comerce and,
equipped with a specific tool. that of opinion polls. let us look closely at an
equally specific point which both our authors mention. the change in West German
public opinion as between Atlanticism and neutralism. Labedz asserts that one of
detente's effects has been to bring 48 percent of the Germans close to neutralism.
Lowenthal retorts that on the contrary neutralism declined during the years of
detente and has started back up since detente has been in trouble. An examination
of polls gives the latter a certain advantage; it does not allow the matter to be
settled, but it suggests a set of more complicated explanations.*

The high point of neutralism seems to have been reached at the beginning of the PRC
at the time of the decisions about rearmament and before the S?!) was won over to

*Cf. U. Kaltenfleiter. "Public Support for NATO in Europe" in K. Miyers, ed.. "NATO:

The Next 30 Years" (London, 1980), pp 397-1017 and the forthcoming article by A.-H.
Le Gloannec, "Self-Pinlandization or Germsnization?" (OOWTAIRE, Sumner 1981).

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATO. A gradual increase in support for NATO was recorded, interrupted by a neu-
tralist upsurge in 1971-1972 at the time of the euphoria over the treaties with the
East. Then during the seventies there was a new change in the Atlanticist direc-
tion: "Ostpolitik" was disappointing, and the German public wanted a tougher
policy toward the con and considered the presence of American troops indispensable.
Finally, in 1979-1980, other polls indicate a new rise in neutralism (also, it is
quantitatively smaller) to which Labedz refers. The USSR's image is not improving;

quite the contrary. But it is confidence in the United States which is deteriora-
ting.

A first explanation. perhaps a rash one, might be that the neutralist trend of
1971 and the one of 1979 are fundamentally different. In the first case, it is a
matter of optimistic neutralism based on the idea that the Soviet threat is no
longer so dangerous. In the second, it is a matter of pessimistic neutralism ba-
sed on the idea that American protection is no longer as credible or that it runs
the risk of attracting unexpected disaster or hazard.

Rebirth of Pacifism?

But that does not explain a second phenomenon, no less interesting, which is almost
totally missing in the Romance-language countries but is taking on more and more
importance in Germany, Great Britain, and the small Northern European countries:
this is the rise of a pacifist, anti-militarist and in particular anti-nuclear

and anti-American movement in the social democratic parties, in the churches and
among young people. Without any doubt there are multiple causes: ecological con-
sciousness, search for a "cause" after the end of the Vietnam Her, Soviet propa-
ganda, etc. The point which interests us here relates to the effect of detente
and the effect of its crisis. From this standpoint I would be tempted, in order

to make Lowenthal and Labedz see eye to eye, to suggest an analogy with the cele-
braced "Tocqueville effect." As Lowenthal suggests, the detente experience may

in fact have held neutralists in check by warding off the specter of nuclear war
and by warding off anti-Americanism because the United States was not militarily
involved anywhere. If the Cold War reopens, even if it is as a consequence of
SS-ZO's or the invasion of Afghanistan, there is a rejection phenomenon (here is
Labedz's reality) resulting from the accustomed experience of considering military
questions outmoded and, on the other hand, from the idea that this time the neutron
bombs or cruise missiles might well be used.

This refusal to give up priorities which detente had set up or legitimized and to
recover reflexes or get back into ruts which were thought to be outmoded, made

by the times to seem more preposterous and by the international situation to seem
more dangerous than in the past--this cannot help but be heightened by the Reagan
Administration's apparent orientation and, in particular, by American military
interventions in the Third Uorld or by a halt to arms control negotiations. That
is why Lowenthal is right to think that a daily, concrete demonstration of Western
and in particular American willingness to negotiate and make peace initiatives is
the necessary requirement for avoiding polarization within European countries and
as between Europe and America, polarization which would make any serious effort to
reestablish the military balance impossible. The pursuit of negotiations regard-
ing, in particular, SS-20's and NATO's missiles pretty much seems to be the condi-
tion nowadays for those missiles to be accepted by Germany, not to mention the
other countries on the continent which must accomdate then.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arms Control?

Where I stop agreeing with Lowenthal is when he seems to adopt this new European
"arms control" religion with enthusiasm and more particularly when he considers
halting the quantitative strategic arm race and negotiating a Euro-strategic bal-
ance one of his top priorities. I personally believe in the need for arm control
as a means of maintaining contact between the big nuclear powers and avoiding
certain mismderstandings and certain dangerous choices on both sides if possible.
But I hardly believe there is a possibility of bringing the arms race to a stand-
still. Nor do I believe in the distinction between a qualitative and quantitative

am race, nor in the idea that a quantitative arms race in the nuclear area
must lead to war.

But above all, in the European area, I believe the idea of an independent Euro-
strategic balance is both confused (for the notion of quantitative parity between
intermediate missiles which do not have the same characteristics or mission scarcely
takes any sense) and dangerous (since it encourages "decoupling" of the United
States and Europe). In the military field I believe in the need for a nuclear
modernization of NATO matching that of the Warsaw Pact but without allowing inter-
mediate missiles or tactical nuclear weapons or intercontinental missiles to be
separated out. In the political and deterrence area, I consider U. S. basing of
missiles in Germany capable of reaching the Soviet Union to constitute a recomit—
ment by both countries in the alliance. which is the best response to tanptations
and mutual suspicions with regard to decoupling for one and self-Pinlandization
for the other. This would seem to me to be necessary even if the SS-20's did not
exist. It constitutes a response to the SS-20's on the syﬂmlic level of general
equilibrium and not on the Operational level or the level of any realistic nego-
tiation.

In this last area of realistic negotiation, Lebedz's criticisms, aimed at Men-
thal's anxiety when confronted with Brezhnev's initial refusal and aimed at his
enthusiasm at Brezhnev's acceptance of a separate negotiation, seem to me to be
quite valid.

To sum up, it seems to me that the necessity for European arms control negotia-
tions can be justified by the concern not to intentionally sacrifice butter for
guns and to maintain dialogue with the USSR. It does not seem to me to be free
from tactical considerations which have nothing to do with arms control and much
to do with "Ostpolitik," detente, or the SPD's left wing. To satisfy the last-
mentioned is undoubtedly a political necessity but is in large part somthing like
a concession to sympathies which Lowenthal deplores. In the area of military se-
curity and balance, it constitutes a difficulty and a danger rather than an advan-
tage.

Speaking more generally, I completely support Lowenthal's formulation—which pre-
dates by several years the invasion of Afghanistan and has often been used ever
since to explain it--according to which the USSR no longer has much to fear or much
to hope for from the West. However, I have less faith that the positive dimension--
that of the carrot. if you will—is to be sought in the area of am negotiation,

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

especially in Europe. I believe that this dimension consists more of naintaining
a political dialogue achwledging, under certain conditions of course. world eu-
perpower status for the USSR (particularly with regard to a settlement in the Mid-
dle East), and, most of all, consists of a flexible and discreet relationship (or
"linkage") between economic and technical cooperation (for which the 0883 is in
the position of having to request. for itself and its bloc) and human contacts
(where those benefitting the most up to now have been West Germany, on the one
hand, and the populations of the Eastern countries, at any rate certain countries
and certain dissidents in all countries on the other hand). And it is at this
point that we run up against the burning issue of Poland.

Poland

It is paradoxical that while arms control is Lowenthal's weak point Poland is
Labedz's weak point. Not that his analysis of the Polish crisis is not penetrating;
on the contrary, it seems to me that it is too sound and finely shaded to fit in
well with the somewhat assertive and one-sided character of his general position.

Labedz ridicules the desire of menthal and Schmidt to have the advantages of
both military balance on the global level and detente or "0stpolitik" on the local
level. He riducles the Helsinki process and the idea that the situation in Poland
or in Hungary can be attributed to it. But then he writes that in his opinion
the principal reason why the Soviet Union does not invade Poland is its desire to
separate Europe from America and to exploit their differences. It not that some-
what contradictory? Should not one believe that detente's particular situation in
Europe, though it is not without risks for Europe. at least is not without advan—
tages for the Poles and more generally for Eastern Europe?

The Objective: helping to Finlandize Eastern Europe

To be sure, there is no question of asking Western Europeans to let themselves be
Finlandized, indeed even made comnist, in order to keep Eastern Europeans from
being even more so than they are today. But it is a matter of recognizing that
Europe's particular situation is ambiguous and that it can be used by both sides
provided they have both sufficient political will and tact. Helsinki did not
transform the Soviet bloc into the home of human rights. but, (with the aid of
Carter's policy) it put it on the defensive in that area. As per Paul Thibaud's
expression, it opened up a European political space which facilitates activity

of Western governments if they so desire. Detente did not cause the Poland events
or Hungary's evolution but it raised the threshhold of Soviet tolerance relative
to them. The idea that Moscow's political designs vis-a-vis Usatern Europe as
well as its economic cooperation with Western Europe would be jeopardized in the
event of invasion is undoubtedly not enough to impose "restraint" on the Soviets

if they genuinely are afraid of losing Poland. But that idea cannot help but have
a role to play, if only at the margin. A Reaganized West supplying the USSR with
pretexts rather than both positive and negative incentives would have trouble play-
ing that role. Now then, if nobody plays that role, and in the absence of military
pressures nobody is dreaming of. what tools would still remain to influence the
fate of Eastern Europe and Poland most of all?

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet it is still necessary firstly for these tools to exist and secondly that they
be used. The first requirement rules out unconditional cold war and indefinite
reduction of economic cooperation. The second one rules out unconditional detente
and refusal to contemplate breaking off that same cooperation in the event of inve-
sion. The contrast between Europe, where an imperfect "structure of peace" exists.
and the rest of the world, which is increasingly the scene of violent global con-
flict, is a reality. and a reality which is good both for peace and for western
and Eastern Europeans. But in order to preserve that peace, it must be risked.

The mistake of the leaders of western Europe has not been to want to preserve de-
tente: it has been to conceive of detente as a "modus vivendi" with leaders such
as Honecker or Gierek and to believe that it could be isolated in relation to both
Soviet activities in the rest of the world and the evolution of societies of Bas-
tern Europe. The idea of European peace is not an illusion, nor is that of "re-
straint" or of "moderation;" on the other hand. what is an illusion is to conceive
of detente as static, and indeed even identify it with stabilization.

The situation of the two Europes is essentially dynamic even though it progressively
unfolds in a relatively fixed framework; everything lies in knowing from what side
the wind is blowing. A mixture of competition. cooperation, and deterrence can be
used to mitigate the division and dependence of all Europe. Yet in order to have
that we must, on the one hand. have both the courage to resist and the courage to
conduct a dialogue, and, on the other hand, know that our destiny is being played
out beyond our borders. Western Europe will only keep its particular peace and
prosperity if it contributes towards containing Soviet expansion in the rest of the
world, in particular in the Persian Gulf. It will only avoid being Pinlandized if
it devoted itself to the goal of helping to Finlandise Eastern Europe.

Arms Control; Economic Relations
Paris COMMENTAIRE in French Spring 81 pp 20-21

[Article by Theirry de Montbria1-government-certified chief mining engineer; pro—
fessor and chairman of the Department of Economics at the Ecole Polytechnique

since 1976: director of the French Institute of International Relations since 1979;
among his publications are: "Economie theorique" [Theoretical Econonics] (P. U. F.,
1971), "Le Desordre economique mondial" [world Economic Disorder] (Colmann-Levy,
1974) and "L'Energie: 1e compte a rebours" [Energy: The Countdown] (J. C. Lattes,
1978)-—: "On East-west Relations: Remarks on the Arguments of R. Lowenthal"]

[Text] Richard Lowenthal's argument is built around the idea that the preserva-
tion, or the restoration, of a balance of strength and the pursuit of negotiations
with the Soviets to reduce the risk of war are not alternative solutions but are
complementary ones which are important to carry on in parallel fashion. The ar-
gument therefore challenges the dominant current of opinion in the United States
which attributes current Western weakness to "illusions" about detente and deni-
grates the work of Kissinger, who is relegated to the camp of the doves. However,
Lowenthal emphasizes that Kissinger'e mistake was to contribute-in what he said
rather than what he meant-~towards detente being interpreted as a process leading
ultimately to a "stable structure of peace."

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He distinguishes five sources of instability in the current international system:
military balances in the strategic field (above all in the area of medium-range
missiles) and on the regional level (temporary Soviet superiority in certain re-
gions including the Gulf) being called into question; "territorial gains" in favor
of the Soviets but also in favor of the West (China); spontaneous developments in
the Third World which have affected the West more than the East; Western problems
(economic crisis, American demoralization connected with the Vietnam War) which
have allowed the USSR to gain ground; and. preparation for the leadership change
in the Soviet Union. The crisis in East-Heat relations was precipeted by the
USSR's rejection of the negotiating offer made by NATO in Decanter 1979 and by the
invasion of Afghanistan. Three options were possible then: to take measures
which would reestablish balance (theater forces modernization and "Rapid Deploy-
ment Force"); to further "punish" the Soviets, particularly by calling the SALT
treaty into question; and, to use the effort to reestablish balance in the military
field to lead the Soviets to the negotiating table. Choosing the third option.

Lowenthal concludes by proposing an overall policy set out mainly along four
lines:

1) “ﬁne reestablishment of the balance of strength by building up a capability for
intervention in the Third World; Americans must reinstate the draft and Europeans
must take on responsibilities in this area effectively.

2) Simultaneous resumption of negotiations with the Soviets on arms control mea-
sures: Lowenthal rejects the policy of "linkage" and feels that resistance to the
Soviet Union in the Third world must be organized with appropriate means.

3) Preserving East-Vest economic relations: Lowenthal does not believe that the
capitalist system offers many means for maneuvering in this area. lie supports the
argument according to which the Nest must help develop the USSR's energy resources,
and he hopes in this way for less pressure on the Near East from that country.

4) Rich regard to developments in Eastern Europe, maintaining the policy of the

last few years (encouraging a certain amomg of liberalization but not anti-Soviet
rebellion).

Richard Lowenthal feels that the effort to reestablish military balance will be
more easily accepted by public opinion in Europe if at the same time all roads for
making peace are emplored.

I share the author's views completely regarding the complexity of the current in-
ternational crisis. The strength of American reaction matches their torpor of the
last few years which has allowed the Soviets to take greater advantage of all op-
portunities. In addition, the causes of most problems in the Third World are, at
least to begin with, extraneous to East-West rivalry. With regard to solutions,
Lowenthal's recomended policy seems in the median term quite reasonable to me.
with one or two reservations which I will point out below. Besides, General de
Gaulle's famous three-part ensemble (detente, defense and cooperation) surfaces
again. Nevertheless. one must not advance in this direction with great haste.

Is not the relative moderation which the USSR has been showing for a few months the
direct consequence of the fierceness of American reaction?

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without that fierceness, would not the Europeans have continued on their merry way,
and would they have adapted themselves to the idea of a necessary reestablishment
of the military balance to which they must themselves contribute? (On that subject
I leave aside the question of Europe's small countries whose self-Finlandization,

to use a word which has unfortunately become generally accepted, is already quite
advanced).

In the area of "arms control." there is still considerable danger of confusing
ends and means. Negotiation per se does not increase the chances for peace. The
idea, which Lowenthal shares, that the mere existence of negotiation on "arms
control" reduces the risk of a nuclear conflict seems to me to be without a logical
foundation. Before negotiating one must know exactly what one is asking for and
what one can get; that requires some time. In fact, a pause is probably neces-
sary after a period in which too much has been asked of "arms control." As for
the idea of "linkage," it will not be possible to eliminate it totally, especially
as long as the means of local resistance are insufficient or inappropriate. Be-
sides, can one conceive, for example, of a Soviet intervention in Poland not af-
fecting the resumption of strategic talks?

In these very delicate setters, Americans and Europeans (regarding the latter, the
use of the plural is essential here) will have to make an effort at mutual under-
standing which on the part of statesmen will necessitate great efforts varying
according to the different reactions of public opinion in the various countries

of the Atlantic Alliance. In any event there is a very real danger of a serious
"transatlantic" crisis in the months to come.

My principal reservation to Lowenthal's arguments relates to East-Vest economic
relations. The need for detailed reflection on the different aspects of their fu-
ture development seems imperative to me. The growing interdependence resulting
from trade expansion is probably not symmetrical in this case. Have the possible
consequences of massive imports of Soviet natural gas been assessed, imports which
5 years from now could represent more than 20 percent of France's supplies and 30
percent of the FRG's? Moreover, the argument according to which it is in the West’s
interest to help the Soviets develop their own energy resources must be subjected
to criticism to say the least. Would not such aid be an indirect way of further-
ing Soviet efforts in the defense area? would their pressure on the Gulf really
be lessened?

I do not claim to have the answers to these questions. Still, they must be asked.
Results of Vietnam, Detente, SALT

Paris COMMENTAIRE in French Summer 81 pp 181-187

[Article of Raymond Aron: "The Shattered Balance: Comments on a Debate"]

[Text] Pierre Hassner has performed the role of mediator between R. Lowenthal

and L. Labedz with his customary and unsurpasssble sublety. I will not commit

the folly of competing with him, especially since I subscribe to most of his con-

clusions. I shall propose to pick out some themes from the debate and make several
comments on the subject.

27

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The debate starts out from an observation that nobody disputes: the deterioration
in the balance of strength between the two big powers at the expense of the United
States, and between Warsaw Pact and NATO troops at the expense of the Western coun-
tries. Once this fact is acknowledged, several questions arise.

Responsibilities: Vietnam or Detente?

By way of simplification, one can say that some put the emphasis on Vietnam and
others on detente. I am inclined toward the side of the first faction when I argue
as an historian. Quite obviously it was the war, ended by a humiliating defeat,
which gave rise to the turnabout of opinion in the Congress. in the political seg-
ment of the population, in the universities, and finally among the people them-
selves. It was the Vietnam syndrome and not detente which paralyzed American di-
plomacy during the 1970's. Statesman and journalists who had criticized American
intervention in Vietnam, Kennedy's and Johnson's policy, were right; events jus-
tified their fears or their warnings. Let us add that Watergate was not fore-
seeable nor was it a necessary effect of the Vietnam War. In the absence of
Watergate, the North Vietnamese would not have unleashed the broad attack of 1975.
In the last analysis, the South Vietnam regime was not overthrown by revolution
but was destroyed by a military invasion.

If I am writing no longer now as an historian but in a political vein without ques-
tioning the causal relationship of Vietnam to the decline of the United States,
there also appear to me to be other things which themselves bear obvious responsi-
bility. What right did the Democrats, the Kennedy followers, have to turn them-
selves into prosecutors of Nixon and Kissinger, men who received Kennedy's and
Johnson's legacy? Democrats, who to a greater extent than Republicans had provided
the inspiration for the postwar diplomacy of the United States, ended up repudia-
ting themselves. "Containment" was condemned because it had led to the Vietnam
War. On the other hand, no one, or almost no one, asked himself about the causes
of the defeat itself. Could the war have been waged differently? Was it strength
or will which was lacking? What lessons were to be drawn from the experience?

Detente, a French word adopted by the entire world, entered into diplomatic parlance
in the 1950's after Stalin's death. Detente rapidly replaced "thaw" and its use
was recognized on a lasting basis after the missile crisis in Cuba in 1962. The
first arms control agreement was signed in Moscow in July 1963 (partial suspen-
sion of nuclear tests). From that time until his retirement in 1969, General

de Gaulle argued for and started off detente policy (diplomatic trips to Moscow,
Warsaw and Bucharest, and trade between East and West, with the prospect of "de-
tente, friendship and cooperation").

Willy Brandt's "0stpolitik" started in 1969 when the SOP-FD? coalition was cemen-
ted. H. Kissinger followed the first steps of German diplomacy with suspicion.
Was this diplomacy connected to the Vietnam War? Perhaps it was indirectly. 0f-
ficially the Bonn Government supported American action in Vietnam. Public opinion,
especially leftist opinion in the Socialist Party, was inclined towards the cause
of the Vietminh. The initiators of "Ostpolitik" were being prompted by several
considerations. Since the French were taking the road to Moscow, why not follow
their example? Since Western countries were not able or did not want to set about
doing anything for Germany's reunification, why not try another route? To offi-
cially accept the territorial status established in 1945 was to favor movement
since tension was having the effect of freezing the "status quo"; the treaties

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signed by Bonn with the Soviet Union and the Sovietized states of Eastern Europe,
treaties which were a substitute for such treaties as traditionally record the
results of hostilities, did in fact facilitate relations between the two Germanies,
between the two European blocs.

Detente in the old world resulted not from an American decision or preference but
from decisions which were first French and then German. The Americans-Kennedy,
Johnson, Ford-dwere interested above all in their privileged dialogue with the
Soviets on two subjects: arms control, and the forms of their competition in the
rest of the world. Therefore, if detente is being called into question, it seems
to me only appropriate to differentiate the three meanings or applications of that
word: the Franco-Soviet rapprochement, the "0stpolitik" of the Germans, and the
arms control of the Americans (the 1972 agreement and the treaty's apparent
"linkage" with a code of good conduct signed by the two superpowers). Thus we
come to a second question: assuming that the Vietnam War was the major cause of
American weakness of the 1970's, what were the consequences of Soviet-European
detente on the one hand and Soviet—American on the other?

Detente

The Americans took the initiative in arms control. Starting at the end of the
1950's a powerful lobby made up mostly of academics, particularly scientists, de-
voted itself to convincing the government that negotiations with the other super-
power would lessen the major peril, that of nuclear war. Little by little a doc-
trine came to be dominant in Hashington: the radical separation between, on the
one hand, long-range nuclear weapons, the subject of an agreement, and, on the
other hand, other weapons and diplomatic conflicts. Now then, these agreements,
called SALT (strategic armaments limitation talks) presuppossd the acceptance by
the two big powers of equality or equivalence. If equality or equivalence implies
the lack of capability of the Soviet Union as well as the United States for a
counterforce first strike, is there a form of deterrence remaining other than
"mutual assured destruction," so-called HAD?

Whatever the circumstances, a HAD situation weakens deterrrence. If one's capa-
bility to destroy the other one is accompanied by the certainty of being subjected
to the same fate as one's enemy, the threat to carry out such a threat becomes
credible only in extreme situations. One can certainly conceive of using nuclear
weapons against enemy military strength without bombings of cities. The accuracy
of missiles in fact makes exchanges plausible which would not entail the destruc-
tion of the belligerents. But the acceptance of HAD doctrine logically called for
strengthening of conventional weapons, because of a heightened probability of hos-
tility on a lower-level than that of nuclear weapons. However, in the course of
the 1970's the Americana did not react to the excessive Soviet arms build-up.

They did away with conscription and strove to deal with the 85-18 threat hanging
over the "Minutemen" by negotiations. Of course they did not succeed. SALE 11

is not satisfactory because it reflects the relative inferiority of the United
States.

It seems that Nixon, Ford and Kissinger attached extreme importance to arms control

negotiations and agreements. Arms control alone made up at least 50 percent of
detente.

29
F0R40FFﬂﬂAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Carried along by the irresistible fervor of politicians to "sell" their exploits
to the public, neither Nixon nor Kissinger enlightened public opinion as to their
Underlying thouﬂxt, that is to say the thinking that I attribute to them. I doubt
that they believed in detente as the dawn of a new international system; I doubt
they believed in the Soviet Union having been converted, having case aside expan—
sionism and been reconciled with the current state of the world. In order not to
capitulate in Vietnam, Nixon and Kissinger took up again with Beijing-which was

good--and spoke, if not acted, as if Moscow would help them to get out of Vietnam
at the lowest cost.

After the Treaty of Paris, Kissinger had the dubious glory of maintaining the

United States presence in the world while the president, besieged by his domestic
enemies. was sinking gradually into nothingnesa. Nixon had done away with conscrip-
tion, and Kissinger did something foolish by delcaring one day that, in the area

of nuclear weapons, superiority and inferiority had no more meaning. During the
Vietnam Har, tens of billions of dollars were going up in smoke, in bombs, in
weapons at a time when the Soviet arsenal on land, on sea, in air and in space was
being added to. To see a military budget increase get back on the agenda people

had to wait until the second part of Carter's term of office, at a time when can-
didate Carter in his election campaign was promising a reduction in that budget.

Was the ideology of detente the cause of the Nixon-Pord-Nixon [as published; pro-
bably should read "Nixon-Ford-Kissinger") policy? Instead it served to transform
a policy which was partially constrained by circumstances and partially adapted

to the state of mind of the Congress. The Vietnam War cost much money, and Nixon
resigned himself to a military budget which was tolerable for the Senators and
Representatives. when the war was over neither Nixon at the start of 1973, already
a condemned man, nor Ford, nor Carter had the courage to alert public opinion and
to explain that the dollars saved thanks to the end of operations in Vietnam should
be used in restoring the military machine.

Today Kissinger argues that Congress would not have granted him more funds than

he asked for in the event, that he was never fooled by detente, and that he coun-
tered the Soviet Union whenever he had the means to do so. This defense, which

in large part I accept, has a flaw. As a democracy, can one simultaneously praise
detente and warn against Soviet expansionism? To be sure, that expansionisn, which
as distinguished from Hitlerian expansionism exploits opportunities but does not
seek large-scale war, does not preclude the possibility of specific agreements

on this or that subject (for example on nuclear weapons). Intellectually speaking,
a policy of simultaneous rearmament and negotiations is in no way contradictory
but, on the contrary, is unavoidable. However, the vocabulary of detente must

not make the arms effort incomprehensible and unacceptable. The fact that Nixon
and Kissinger, who belong among the hawks, most often spoke the language of the
doves weighed heavily on the diplomatic debate for a long time, and it still does.
The Reagan team will come up against Democrats who will hark back to the words of
Republicans between 1969 and 1977.

Detente did not exert the same degree of influence in both Europe and the United
States. Trade between the United States and the countries of Eastern Europe only
increased modestly. Some advanced technology items and grain were bought by Moscow
without either of the two countries feeling commercially dependent on the other.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was another picture in Europe: trade between the two German republics are of
more use to East Germany than Vest Germany, but the latter would not willingly
give up that trade because it maintains in some fashion the unity, past or future,
of the German people. For the PRC, France. Great Britain. and Italy, Eastern Eur-
ope now constitutes a market which is not to be looked down on although it only
represents a few percent of their total trade (oetween 3 and 5 percent). In times

of unemployment and slump, capitalist democracies have difficulty in giving up
orders for their goods.

But the point should be clearly made that governments are leaving themselves open
to forceful arguments. If we must rearm in order to face up to a Soviet threat,
why are we selling goods which contribute to the military power of the state which
we point to as a potential enemy? It is one thing to maintain trade relations

of a conventional nature which are possibly of use to all trading parties, but why
give particularly favorable credit terms? I am not going to concern myself with
the argument. to so-called Pisar argument. which was in some favor in France's
governing circles a few years ago. Both J.-J. Servan-Schrieber and Valery Giscard
d'Estaing wrote prefaces for books by Mr Pisar. I doubt that the latter still

has many disciples today.

Detente's Consequences, In the East and In the "eat

What conclusions can be drawn about detente's advantages and drawbacks for the one
group of countries and the other? P. Hassner is inclined toward a general conclu-
sion: that detente weakens the cohesion of the two blocs and destabilizes both
one and the other. Perhaps he is right. However, I wonder if the Polish revolt

is in fact connected to the semi-reassured climate of relations between the two
parts of Europe. The modes of government in each of the Sovietized countries de-
pend more on national circumstances than on broader politics. Czech normalization
is still harsh. and Hungary continues to have the benefit of allowances and free-
doms which Bulgaria's party does not demand. Internal Stalinism as well as the
relative autonomy of Romanian diplomacy owe more to Ceaucescu and his team than

to Moscow and Washington. Assuming that a new "cold war" were to replace the
present "detente," would Moscow be tempted to bring all of its allies to heel
again? It is doubtful; with or without detente, time passes and situations change.
The countries of Eastern Europe have adapted themselves to geopolitical constraints.
each one in its own way. A new East-West tension would not restore the Soviet bloc
to the Stalinist discipline of the late 1960's.

The impact of detente on Hestern Europe seems to me both deeper and more danger-
ous. In spite of the existence of the two German states and in spite of Berlin's
"abnormal" status. Europeans have gotten accustomed to the "consequences of the
last world war" and make jealous efforts to maintain this "status quo." the pre-
cariousness of which seems to gradually lessen the longer it lasts. The Germans
look to Washington to maintain their security for the time being and look towards
Moscow to restore their unity some day in the more or less distant future. At any
rate they do not intend to get involved in conflicts outside Europe. The small
states of Western Europe respond even less to the American request that they
shoulder their part of the defense burden. Great Britain would like to be faith-
ful to its imperial tradition and to the extent its resources allow would agree

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to cooperate with the United States in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Among
all the European Cmmnunity partners, France, though it very loudly proclaims its
diplomatic independence, is becoming the ally of the United States most disposed
to participate in the "new containment" in Africa or even in the Near East.

Hhatever the shades of difference in attitude among the different countries of
Europe, the tendency common to all on crisis occasions (for example when Soviet
troops entered Afghanistan) is clearly demonstrated: the tendency to blame Soviet
behavior. to approve American sanctions as a general rule, and not to jeopardize
European stabilization. Curiously, the same Europeans who became indignant at

the words of Henry Kissinger (the Europeans have regional interests, the Americans
have global responsibilities) are trying hard to confirm the former secretary of
state's opinion. From their side, the Americans are inviting the Europeans to be-
come aware again of their place in the world and of their dependence with regard
to events occurring far away, in Kabul or in rehran, around the Persian Gulf.

In Carter‘s time European governments deplored most of all the weakness of the
governing team in Washington, unable to speak with a single voice and to make de-
cisions. A president who exhibits his resolve to restore a balance of strength
and stand up to Soviet expansionism is being welcomed with hope, not without
anxiety in Bonn and staunchly in Paris. But at the same time B. Schmidt and Gis-
card d'Estaing would both one and the other like to jeopardize their "privileged"
relations with Moscow as little as possible.

What Is To Be Done?

Having said that, what is to be done? Broadly speaking, all those who are saying
something in the debate agree on several directives: increase military expendi—
tures, in Europe as well as in the United States; toughen up the rules of cocoa
[coordinating committee] (the Atlantic alliance committee which authorizes or pro-

hibits technological exports to the Soviet-bloc countries); and restore political
as well as military balance. But all one has to do is move from the general to

the specific in order for the differences in opinion to emerge.

Is it advisable to teach the Soviets more effective methods to exploit their pe-
troleum reserves so that they will have less need to buy any in the Gulf region
and to destabilize the countries which produce black gold? R. Lowenthal recormends
this gamble, seemingly without hesitation. Personally, I would not do it. To
strengthen the enemy in order to divert his ambitions or appease them rarely seems
advisable to me, and never does vis-a-vis the Soviet regime. Its oligarchs would
despise us even more and would once more recall Lenin's phrase about the rope on
which capitalists would be hung after having put it together themselves.

Another more important question relates to arms control and negotiations regarding
theater nuclear weapons. On this point I share P. Hassner's skepticism. when it
comes down to it, "arms control" doctrine has done more bad than good, more bad
than has detente's rhetoric. The first SALT accord did not slow the Soviet nuclear
armament effort in any way. On the other hand, it gave people to understand that
it was preventing an imbalance between the two big powers. But it did not prevent

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Soviets, who were entitled to a number of missiles nearly 50 percent greater
than that of the Americans, from "mirv"ing those missiles in turn and from insert-
ing large missiles (SS-18's) into launching pads, missiles which the American nego-
tiators dreaded and wanted to prohibit. Negotiating from a position of weakness.
the Americans justify SALT II by the argument that in this treaty's absence the
Soviets would be assured of an even greater superiority (they would be able to put
not 10 but 20 nuclear warheads into 58-18 missile heads). The Americans have con-
vinced themselves that an agreement on limiting nuclear weapons constitutes an ob-
jective in and of itself. The Soviets, more like politicians than technicians.

are seeking via these agreements political or strategic advantages.

Nowadays it is the Europeans who are pushing the Americans to ratify SALT II and

to negotiate with the Soviets concerning SALT III, with regard to the moderniza-
tion of theater nuclear weapons-an irony of the workings of diplomacy. The few
European statesmen who attentively follow arms control negotiations and understand
their subtleties have no liking for SAL . Generally speaking, an agreement limited
to "transatlantic" arms as it were tends to separate the "central balance" from
balance regarding the European theater (to speak in the jargon borrowed from the
Americans). This feeds the anxiety of Europeans: the territories of the two big
powers would be spared. and hostilities if they were to arise would occur in the
intervening area, therefore in Europe. 80, rationally speaking, Europeans must
wish for "recoupling" between the "European theater" and the "central balance," a
recoupling which SALT II shatters. Therefore, they must not merely accept in a
hesitating manner but must actively call for the modernization of theater nuclear
weapons (intermediate-range missiles). To counter the Pershing II and cruise mis-
siles program. the Soviets have set off an intimidation campaign which has not

yet succeeded but which strengthens individuals and parties in the Federal Republic
of Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands hostile to rsarmament because of their
pacifism or neutralism.

would not manage to obtain the support of his majority and the German people if
the United States rejected dialogue with the Soviet Union. Such negotiations have
little chance of succeeding. The Soviets want to stop the installation in Europe
of missiles able to reach their territory. The goal of completing theater

missile modernization for those in the Nest is specifically to install missiles
which reach Soviet territory and which at the same time restore continuity between
regional deterrence and central deterrence.

Why the hesitation from a number of Europeans? There seems little doubt to me
about the answer to that question: it is pacifism or neutralism, nourished by,

to be hones, fear. Europeans do not believe that the Soviets are contemplating a
direct military offensive against NATO-and rightly so. They also know that the
Soviets are confident of an increased superiority in Europe in conventional wea-
pons and, in addition, in missiles such as SS-20's which because of their accuracy
can destroy the vital centers of NATO's defense without devastating the whole of
western Europe. From that certain people conclude that Europe's security depends
less on the American umbrella than it does on Soviet prudence. Suddenly it seems
more important to them not to provoke Moscow's oligarchs than to strengthen the

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system of deterrence. Less confidence in American strength-less fear of a mili-
tary attack coming from the East—~reaignation to and accommodation with Soviet
predominance in advance-these feelings are mingled in the consciousness of Euro-
peans and particularly Germans. Now then, the future of Europe during the next
few years depends on the Germans, on public opinion in the EEG. And the under-

standing reached between Bonn and Washington will in large measure determine public
opinion in the PRC.

What are the prospects for dialogue between H. Schmidt and R. Reagan? Leaving

aside imponderables and personal affinities or antipathies, there remain, under
Reagan just as much as under Carter, two subjects about which differences of op-
inion seem more probable than harmonious cooperation: the financial participa-

tion of each one in the rearmament effort, and the German (European) contribution
to the "new containment" outside Europe.

As Laulan writes in his latest book, the Europeans up to now have not paid for
their security themselves, and the Americans no longer have at their disposal a
sufficient lead in productivity to let the Europeans have the economic benefit

of a lesser responsibility for arms. And the controversy over percentages of na-
tional product devoted to defense or over the annual rate of increase for the de-
fense budget normally ends up in compromises rather than in a commotion.

On the second subject, the attitude of Europeans with regard to what goes on out-
side their little promontory sticking out from Asia, there is a danger that the

difference of opinion is more serious. With his usual aptness, Pierre Hassner
specifies what is desirable:

"The contrast between Europe, where an imperfect 'structure of peace' exists, and
the rest of the world, which is increasingly the scene of violent global conflict,
is a reality, and a reality whirh is good both for peace and for Western and Eas-
tern EurOpeans. But in order to preserve that peace, it must be risked."

Let it be risked. That structure of peace would be less imperfect if the Soviet
Union did not regularly strengthen its army which in East Germany is not meant to
maintain the cohesion of the "imperium" but to intimidate Western Europe by a
threat of invasion--a threat which compels Western countries to make an arming
effort themselves. Beyond the basic imperfection of this structure of peace, a
major question arises: do there exist statesmen as intelligent as Pierre Hassner
to hold on to both ends of the chain? Are they in fact able to hold on to both
ends of the chain? Are they able to revive a spirit of defense in their nations
if they are granting favorable credit terms to the enemy against which they are
rearming? Can they risk the "structure of peace" in Europe tomorrow by interven-
tions Outside Europe against Soviet expansionisn? Can they keep their freedom

of action in spite of an increased dependence via-a-vis trade with the East and
delivery of Soviet natural gas? How will Europeans become aware that "our destiny
is being played Out beyond our borders" when leaders at every opportunity remind
them of the higher imperative of safeguarding detente?

A mixture of competition, cooperation and deterrence: the analyst is not mis-

taken. But what will be the statesman's rhetoric? And will the peoples understand?
Can action be inspired by the subtlety of the analyst?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 S. A. Commentaire

9631 END
C50: 3100/953 3’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY