FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10129
20 November 1981

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 19/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli—
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMIKATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I-UK Uri-tum. var. mun

JPRs L/1012
20 November

USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(P000 19/ 8 1)

CONTENTS

ELECTRICPOHER

Thermoelectric Power Station Construction Problems at Kansk-

Achinsk Complex
(V. N. Okhotin, A. A. Titov; MOW STANTSII,

Jun 81) on0..00-0.0000'oto.coco-onooootooovococooooOoocuncco'

-a- [III-USSR-37E
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC Pom

UDC 620.9l:553.94.006.llo"3l3"

WOELBCTRIC POWER STATION CONSTRUCTION PROBLB‘S AT KANSK-ACHINSK CMPISX

Moscow WHICHBSKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 2-8
[Article by V. N. Okhotin and A. A. Titov, Teploelektroproyekt engineers]

[Text] A characteristic feature of the present-day stage of development of the
domestic thermal-power industry is the transition to a new level of unit outputs

for generating sets and for power stations. The soc-m units fired by Ekibastuz
coal and introduced in the 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans ('l‘roitskaya and Reftinskaya
CRBS's) and the BOO-MU fuel-oil units (Zaporozhskaya and Uglegorskaya GRES's) have
been mastered and the first SOD-MW power units have been introduced at the Ekibastuz
GRES-l. Finally. a unique 1,2004!" power unit has been put into experimental-pro-
duction operation at the Kostromskaya GRBS. Installed capacities of 3 million k"
and greater have been achieved by the Krivorozhskaya GRES-Z and the Zaporoahskaya,
Uglegorskaya. Raftinskaya and Kostromskaya 6328's.

The develoth of the Soviet thermal-power industry at the present time is a cowo-
nent of the strategy intended to solve the fuel and power problem of CBHA meter
nations in the period to 1990. This strategy. agreed to by the 22nd cm Session
(1978). is directed at the maximal involvenent of solid fuels in the production

of electric power and the maxim utilization of power-production facilities in

the economic turn-around II]. A most important position in this strategy is occu-
pied by the construction of the Kansko-Achinsk Fuel and Power Complex (KATEK), begun
during the 10th Five-Year Plan.

In view of the certain complexity of this issue, this article examines only some

of the problems relating to the design of the KATEK power stations which the
Teploelektroproyekt Institute--the general designer of the power-production portion
of KATEK and the Ekibastu: fuel and power coupler-has encountered [2].

The requirement for the construction of the KATEK is dictated primarily by the prov-
en reserves of Kansko—Achinsk coal. coaprisiug alnost one-seventh of the country's
known reserves. and by the geographically advantageous location of these reserves
cowaratively near to the consumers and in the innediate vicinity of the Trans-
Siberian railway. It is likewise dictated by the deposit conditions of the Kansko-
Achinsk coal which make it possible to strip-mine the coal with a mining cost one

to three tines lower than the cost of Kumets coal, four times lower than Karaganda,
eight tines lower than Donets and fourteen times cheaper than Pechora coal [3] with
sufficient quality of the Kansko-Achinsk coal.

FOR Ml. USE ONLY
INDR‘OFFICLAL llﬂidlﬁldf

To this it must be added that serious factors have appeared at present which require
that measures be taken to hasten the construction of the KATEK. The most important
of these are the growing demand for electric power for the rapidly developing Siber-
ian economy and the requirement for an optimized regional structure of generating
capacities. Historically. this structure has been poorly established as a result of
the one-sided development of hydraulic engineering and a reduction in the construc-
tion of thermal condensing electric power stations. This introduced an element of
unreliability into the electric-power supply to the Siberian region, particularly

in lowbwater years.

Out of the many alternative methods for incorporating the reserves of the Kansko-
Achinsk Basin (KAB) in the economy, the one recognized as the most suitable is the
construction of the KATEK in two industrial centers-North and South--with a com-
bined output from their electric-power stations of 80-100 million kw and the power-
industry processing of Kansko-Achinsk coal in an effort to utilize more efficiently
the products of this processing.

It has been proposed that the development of the KATEK be accomplished in two stages.
In the iirst stage to 1990-1995. designs suggest the construction of four or five
stations in the southern industrial center with individual outputs of 6.6 million kw
and a plant for the repair of power-production equipment (ZRZO) in the complex; the
creation of a new high-output power-supply network; the development of western coal
deposits (Berezovskoye. Uryupskoye and ltatskoye); the construction of complex facil-
ities for housing and utilities and mass cultural purposes, etc. At this stage.
plans have also been made to undertake a number of measures of a scientific-research
nature as well as to develop central heating in western Siberia on the basis of the
KAB.

At the second stage (after 1990-1995). proposals have been made for the development
of power-engineering reprocessing of Knnsko-Achinsk coal and the construction of
new. large-scale TES's in the KAB and "esters Siberia on the basis of experience
acquired during the first stage.

It has been suggested that the KATIK be constructed at s rapid pace, for which plans
have been made for the construction of a powerful construction and installation
base.

A powerful impetus to the utilization of Kansko-Achinsk coal was provided by the
resolution of the 25th CPSU Congress: "Expand the work being done to accelerate
the creation of the Kansko-Achinsk Fuel and Power Complex." As a result of a de-
tailed examination of the designs. the stage-by-stage construction of KATBK facil-
ities has been established.

It has been established, in particular, that construction be begun on the top-
priority facilities comprising the southern industrial center: the Berezovskaya
GRBS-l with its total output of 6.4 million kw (8 x 800 H"); the first three BOO—HR
generating units of the Berezovskaya ones-2; a plant for the repair of power-produc-
tion equipment for electric-power stations and open-pit coal mines; and 220 to
1.150-kv electric transmission lines.

IN)R!O$FICIA1.IIHE(HNLX

FORIOFFﬂﬂAl.U§£40NLY

The geological mining conditions in combination with the known balanced reserves
of coal provide the grounds to expect the conversion of the RAP into one of this
country's most significant fuel and power bases.

Provisions have likewise been made for prospecting for new sources of drinking-
water and process-water supplies and for nonmetalliferous raw materials. Provisions
have also been made for the construction and expansion of a number of other facili-
ties, including new roads. plants for the repair of strip-mining and transportation
equipment and the production of hoisting-and-conveying equipment, etc.

In order to accelerate the construction of KATEK installations. provisions have
been made for the construction of a powerful construction and installation base.

In particular. this includes the construction of power-industry facilities using

a high-speed industrial production-line method: a regional industrial procurement
base (RPKB). which is a complex of enterprises and production boards for the opera-
tion and maintenance of construction machines and transportation equipment. for
material and technical supply and for the manufacture. procurement and asserbly

of construction elements and equipment.

Emphasizing the attention that the party and the government devote to these issues.
at the conference of power engineers and workers in the power-industry and power-
machine construction enterprises and institutes dealing with the development of

the power industry which took place on 2-3 June 1980 in the CPSU Central Committee.
Comrade a. P. Kirilenko said: "One of the most important tasks for 1980 and subse-
quent years is the accelerated development of the work being done to create the
Ekibastuz and Kansko-Achinsk fuel and power complexes. They have great significance
for the entire economy. for the development of Siberia's and Kazakhstan's productive
forces and for the supply of electric power to the country's central regions" [4].
This thought was continued in the "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social
Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990."

In developing the designs for all the installations in the complex's power-produc-
tion section, the institute proceeded from the most important principles for the
development of our country's economy; in particular, the principle of intensifica-
tion and acceleration of central heating. This in turn required new engineering
solutions, the most important of which is the standardization of the designs of
all the electric-power stations. The first work was carried out on the basis of
the detail design for the first KATEK station-the Berezovskaya GRBs-l (fig. 1).

As a result of the standardization of the primary and auxiliary equipment and the
configuration. a standardized detail design was developed for the first KATEK GRES's.
This design provided for the installation of eight BOO-MU power units at each GRBS

in a standard-type main building. This building is an eight-bay structure. 264.5 m
in total length (based on the addition of a modular control panel). This includes

a Sb-m machine room. a lZ-m hopper-type deaerator. a Shdm (12 + 30 + 12) boiler

room. a 12-m hopper compartment, a 30-m regenerating air-heater chamber and a 54-m
electric—filter room. The modular control-panel chambers (each composed of two
modules) are accessible from the "A“ level. The overall length of the main building

is 696 m.

h
FINI(MﬂﬂKJAl.lIiE(HVLY

I13R‘0FFIC1AL.UEIE(MVLY

In addition to the eight 72—m standardized modular cells. provisions have been made
for two free bays to be situated in each of the following locations: at the perma-
nent and temporary ends and between the fourth and fifth modules. Repair areas

as well as equipment used throughout the station are situated in these free bays.
In adition. there is one bay in the machine room of each nodular cell used for re-

pair needs.

The thermal system of the GRES is purely modular without connections across the
main flows of steam and water.

Mechanization of the coal storage has been adopted using continuously operating
machinery as was done at the Bkibastuz 6335-] (fig. 2). This made it possible to
increase considerably the productivity and to improve working conditions and the
reliability of the fuel supply.

One of the serious problems which had to be faced during the design of the KATE!
electric-power stations was the problem of transporting the Kansko-Achinsk coal

from the open-pit to the GRES. The considerable drawbacks of the Kansko-Achinsk

coal are its tendency toward rapid disintegration and spontaneous combustion. Losing
its moisture quickly in air. the coal disintegrates above 0° and turns to powder.
Below 0°, however. it freezes. Berezovskiy coal belongs to the class of coal having

the greatest explosion hazard.

The proximity of the power stations to the coal mines (10-15 km) also had a great
influence on the solution to this problem. A number of alternatives for transport-
ing the coal were examined during the design process: large-capacity cars on an
individual coal-hauling rail line. conveyer belts. large-capacity vehicles and a
pneumatic method. As a result of studies done on these methods. the conveyer method
was adopted on the recommendation of the USSR Ministry of the Coal Industry. Two
eonveyers 1,800 mm wide with a capacity of 5.250 m’lh each and a speed of 2.5 m/s
will be employed. Specific designs for the conveyer method are being developed

at present.

As is well known. foreign practice provides examples of similar designs. In the
United States. in particular, a belt conveyer S.é km long (belt width 1.370 mm.
speed 4.5 m/s) with a capacity of 3.700 t/h has been in operation since 1976. The
same type of conveyer more than 80 km long is being designed.

According to the authors' opinion. only the closed-conveyer version can be adapted
from the specific designs examined for the KATEK. Considering the characteristics
of Kansko-Achinsk coal noted, the application of the open conveyer in the geographic
zone of the KATEX will lead to an acute reduction in the operational reliability

of electric power stations due to systematic interruptions in the supply of fuel.

Another serious problem was the selection of a pulverization system and the corres-
ponding grinding equipment. The characteristics of the KATEK dictated an arrange-
ment for direct injection of the fuel into the combustion chamber using grinding
fans. At the time the Berezovskaya GEES-l was being designed, however, our domes-
tic industry had not yet manufactured grinding fans of the required capacity for
800-mw units. Positive results obtained from the testing of a prototype H—V 3300/
800/490 unit was of ineatimable value. This unit with a capacity of 62 to 63 t/h

6
FOI:OFFIC1AI.USIZ(H'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Bulgarian liyxite (W' - 50.6 to 55.6 percent. As - 27 to 45 percent, X” - 1.1)
demonstrated the basic soundness of the design selection.

According to data from the TsKTI [Central Scientific Research, Planning and Design
boiler and Turbine Institute imeni I. I. Polzunov]. an output level of 70 t/h was
achieved during a short-term test grind in the same grind fan using Berezovskiy
coal (5" - 33.5 percent, As - [6 percent). In this test, R“ ~ 48 percent.

Ru" " 1.7 percent. the gas consumption was 195,000 m’lh. the developed head was
150-155 kgs/cm’ and the specific consumption of energy was 7.5 k" ' hlt. with the
same head and a rate of gas consumption of 175,000 I lh, the output level was 80-
82 t/h [5]. In this manner, the validity of the method selected is basically con-
firaed. For a conclusive solution to this problem. however, these grinding fans
must be operated at the Berzovskaya GRES-l.

A most vital problem determining the specific design features of the GEES was the
selection of the design of the boiler unit. In addition to the Teploelektroproyekt
Institute and its Rostov and Tomsk sections, the TsKTI, the All-Union Institute

of Heat Elgineering imeni F. E. Dzerzhinskiy. the Podol'sk Machinery Plant imeni
0rdzhoniltidze. the Special Design Office for Electromechanical Production of the
All-Union Institute of Heat Engineering imeni F. E. Dzerzhinskiy and other inter-
ested organizations took part in resolving this problem. The difficulties in this
problem were dictated by requirements to standardize the boiler for all GRBs's in
the southern industrial center. These GRES's are designed to burn coals from dif-
ferent mine sites with characteristics that vary appreciably (see table). These
coals also have the specific properties of the mineral portion of Kansko-Achinsk
coal (a tendency toward intense slagging, infusibility of the ash. etc.). Moreover,
for example. it has been found that in a section of the future No. l Berezovsltiy
mine, the bulk of dense, unoxidized coal is interbedded with oxidized (sooty) coal.
This coal differs noticeably from the bulk of Kansko-Achinsk coal because of its
elevated moisture content (38 to 48 percent), the ash content (20 percent. on the
average), sulfur content (up to 1.0 percent). irregularity in the organic mass make—
up and a reduced heat of corbustion (to 1810 kCallkg [5].

It is also believed that the quality of the coal will change noticeably after some
time (after the transition from selective bulk mining).

Furthermore, difficulties specified are caused by the lack of experience in burning
Kanslto—Achinsk coal in high-output boilers.

Based on this, a single—unit, suspended. gas-tight, T-shaped boiler unit with an
output of 2,650 t/h and parameters of 255 kgs/cmz and 545/545" C was designed for
the KATEK GRES'a. It burns Kausko-Achinsk coal at low temperatures with reduced
thermal stress in cross-section and volume of a square (in layout) collimation cham-
ber with a tangential arrangement for the burner location and a relatively low exit-
gas tempcrature (990° C). Provisions have been made for drying the fuel using ex-
haust gases at temperatures of up to 800‘ C. The tocal recirculation of the gases
is up to 25 to 30 percent, and slag removal is dry.

These designs set very large dimensions for the boiler unit and the boiler room:
the dimensions of the contustion charter in the plan are 23.08 x 23.08 m. the

7
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000‘00070044-2

- FOIOFF'ICIALlSEONLY

     

tpumm mammal m and
paw: an mummy awn-paw)

a. AV.‘.v‘v.v‘~

6'9

r—-—-‘_——-——1————_———‘-\

 

Hg. 3. Main Building of an Analogous GILES with 800-!“ Power Units Bqulppcd
um: Sun-Scale Swirl-wine Boilers Compared to Design for the Berezovakaya GEES-l

8
MWWONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000400070044-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

height of the chamber ceiling is 91. m and the height of the boiler room is 122 m.
Such dimensions contributed to insuring the necessary operational characteristics
of the boiler. nub: . 92 percent. as well as the conditions for "suppressing" nitric
oxides. This is of great importance when such great boiler capacities are concen-
trated in such a limited area. The dimensions of the main building of the GRES.
however, proved to be greater than those for 6315's built during the Ninth Five-
Year Plan. A number of new. serious problems arose during the manufacture. instal-
lation. operation and repair of the boiler, as well as during the construction of
the power station's main building. The most important of these is the suspension
of the boiler on unique center beans 3.7 m high. covering a span of 33 m.

The solution to these new problems for the first-priority KATEK 6828's was reflected
in the design features of the Berezovskaya 01133-1. We plan to elucidate these prob-
lems in a special article in the near future. however. the fact that the boiler
unit selected caused complicated problems demonstrated the ambiguity of such a se-
lection. Therefore. work continues on the development of a more modern boiler for
800-?!“ units fired by Kanako-Achinsk coal. In particular. in the interest of cre-
ating a small-scale boiler which would make it possible to improve considerably

the characteristics of the main building (fig. 3): the specific volume would be
reduced from 0.871 to 0.3710 Ia/k"; the specific structure area from 0.012 to 0.009
mzlkw; and the cost from 103.6 to 83.1 rubles/kw.

A Teploelektroproyekt Institute design for a similar 6.60041" 61128 with 800-HH units
fired by Kansko-Acbinsk coal shows that the utilization of a small-scale boiler

as well as the introduction of other progressive designs (a deaeratorless thermal
circuit. a unifilar high-pressure heater. a new layout for the unit with a reduCed
compartment. etc.) will make it possible to improve the technical and economic in-
dicators for construction in comparison with indicators for the Beresovskaya

GRES-l. including a reduction in the total cost of the main building of not less
than 20 percent as well as an increase of approximately 1.5 percent in the unit's
economy of operation while achieving an effective reduction in the nitric oxide
content of the exhaust gases (fig. 4).

The practical application of small-scale boilers. however, is possible only after

a serious check of all modifications for operation on Kansko-Achinsk coal. including
the modernized boiler vessel for the SOO-MH unit at the Nazarovskaya GRES and the
experimental-production boiler with a swirl-type furnace and a capacity of 500 t/h

at the Novosibirskaya TETs-3 (planned for introduction in 1981). This application

of small-scale boilers cannot be accomplished until we obtain the results of research
done at the experimental base of the All-Union Institute of Heat Engineering imeni

F. E. Dzerzhinskiy (Krasnoyarskaya TETs-Z). etc.

The search for optimal designs in these areas is being conducted jointly by inter-
ested organizations of the USSR Hinenergo and Hinenergomash, including
Teploelektroproyekt. Soyuztekhenergo, the All-Union Institute of Heat Engineering
ineni P. E. Dzerzhinskiy. the Central Scientific Reasearch. Flaming and Design
Boiler and Turbine Institute imeni I. I. Polzunov and boiler-construction plants.

Serious difficulties in the construction of KATEK electric-power stations and. in
particular. in the design of hydraulic structures were caused by the fact that,

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in

 

Fig. la. Deaeratorless Layout of the soc-m:
Power Unit at the Berezovslraya GILES-l

l. Steam—generator. DP - 2,650 t/h 8. Second-stage condensate pulp

2. K-800-2Io0 turbine 9. No. 3. lo, 5 low-pressure heaters

3. 'l'W-800 generator (surface)

la. Condenser 10. Overflow pumps

5. First-stage condensate pump 11. Supply pumps

6. Sealed heaters 12. High-pressure heaters .

7. No. l and 2 (mixing) low—pressure Solid line-analogous ms with sull-
heaters scale steam generator

Broken lineuBerezovskays 6328 with P-67
steam generator

on the one hand, the construction zone for these stations has an insufficient supply
of water reserves and, on the other hand. has conditions favorable for the formation
of fog. The installation of water-cooling towers at GRBS's under these conditions
vould contribute to the contact of moisture from the water-cooling tower with ex-
haust gases from the GRBS smokestacks and, as a consequence. to the formation of

fog carrying harlful aerosols and the dispersion of these over an area of dozens

of square kilometers. Moreover, the region does not have surface water sources

for a drinking-water supply.

For these reasons, a reverse system of process-water supply with cooling reservoirs
on the Beresh and Chelym rivers was adopted for the first 0338's. This will make

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it possible to limit the possibility of fog formation brought about by conditions

of a local nature. Provisions have been made for a maxim return (after neutrali-
zation and purification) of industrial and domestic water flows for subsequent utili-
zation in the cass's production cycle. The feasibility of installing air ("dry")
water-cooling towers is being studied for the GRES-lo. Provisions have been aade

for burning oil and fuel-oil residues in the boiler furnaces.

A system for domestic water supply will be implemented in the first stage using
artesian wells. Pertinent studies are under way to resolve definitely the problem
of the drinking-water supply.

The issue of the ecology proved to be a serious problem for the GEES design. The
solution to this problem takes the form of the study of the most important scientific
and technical problems which, at times. would seem to have nothing in comon with
the developmt of thermal-power engineering. In order to understand this, we must
turn our attention to one geographic feature of the KATEK, using the examle of the
southern industrial zone. At a radius of up to 27 km from the city of Sharypovo.
now under construction and planned for a population that will exceed 250.000.

4-5 unique pulverized coal GRES's. each with an output of 6.4 million k“, are being
built. Also under construction are: a plant with high-capacity foundry facilities
for the repair of power equipnent; a plant for the repair of mining equip-eat. also
with foundry facilities; large-scale construction-industry enterprises; open-pit
mining enterprises with a yearly capacity of 100-110 nillion tons of Kansko-Achinsk
coal; high-capacity enterprises for the power-engineering reprocessing of raw coal
and still others. If scientifically grounded measures are not taken, such a concen-
tration of industrial sites under construction is capable not only of destroying

the existing ecological balance in a given limited area. but also of causing irre-
versible shifts in the entire region. For this reason. the designers make provi-
sions for measures to protect the environment both for the period of construction

of all the installations, including 6838's, as well as for the period of their nor-
mal operation. in particular:

protection of land resources and, first of all, agricultural lends--a minimum of
earth removal for installations under construction with total compensation of lost
land through special land-restorative operations; recultivation of teaporarily de-
stroyed (during the construction period) lands (the renoval, stockpiling, storage
and subsequent restoration of the topsoil layer); the development of bush regime;
special measures which make it possible to discontinue the conservation of mineral
resources; measures to prevent the pollution of land and ground water. etc.;

protection of the air basin in the area of the KATERm-in particular. the cats design
provides for the construction of smokestacks up to 620 m in height; the installation
of 118-3 electric filters with an efficiency of up to 99.5 percent; measures taken

to prevent dusting of the ash dump as well as measures to "suppress" nitric oxides
and cowat sulfur oxides during conbustion of the coal in the boiler furnace;

protection of the air basin from chemical and thermal pollution and measures to
restore the biological environment of the reservoirs--the construction of "drain-
less" process-water circuits for GRBs's; the location of ash and slag dumps based
on the hydrogeologicsl situation with the organization of antidrainage measures
to prevent the pollution of the ground water; the construction of plants to breed

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whitefish, sturgeon and other small fish; the establishment of rest zones for the
workers, including the construction of water-sport and spa facilities. etc.;

utilization of secondary resources--low-temperature sources for hot-houses and fish
hatcheries; ash and slag wastes for construction (s reduction in ash and slag in
the hydraulic ash-removal system increases the operational reliability of the ash
pipeline and. consequently. of the GRBS itself, since the ash. which has self-
cementing properties. will not be hydraulically tranported as far);

creation of a continuously operating fully automatic service for observing and con-
trolling the level of pollution of the environment by each facility in the couple):
(RSK KATEK [expansion not provided]) with a central regional organ-the
Sharypovskaya hydrometeorological observatory.

Under the guidance of the Institute of Applied Geophysics (IPG), the scientific
research organizations of the USSR Geological Committee for Hydrometeorology and
Control of the Environment have completed the first stage of the on-going investi-
gation into the question of the KATEK's effect on the environment. This stage con-
firmed the correctness of the nature-protecting design measures for the southern
industrial zone. In a new stage of this research, the program of works and the
composition of the participants (the Siberian Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences
and the Siberian and Par-Eastern organizations of the USSR geographic society, etc.).
Plans have been made for the study of the topographic-geochemical situation. changes
in the hydroclimatic factors, economic-ecological issues, medical and biological
aspects. etc.

Particularly worthy of study are the problems of the power-engineering reprocessing
of Kansko-Achinsk coal and the effect of these problems on the structure, profile
and design of future CRES's. In particular, although for the first KATBK GRES's

a classical arrangement for the collimation of ordinary Kansko-Achinsk coal was
adopted, development is underway of a GRBS variant operating on the products of

the power-engineering reprocessing of Kansko-Achinsk coal. In this case, provisions
have been made for various alternative methods of maintaining the production links
between the power-engineering installation (BTU) and the GRES: the BTU at the strip-
mine with the delivery of the reprocessing products to the cans sites. etc. It
would be advisable to examine this problem separately and in detail.

At the present time, the study of this problem for the KATEK has not been concluded
entirely. A definitive solution can be adopted only after testing of the experi-
mental units using the layout of the Power Engineering Institute ineni G. H.
Krzhizhanovskiy at the Krasnoyarsk TE‘l's-Z (mm-175) and a layout for the heat pro-
cessing of Kansko-Achinsk coal using a thermal-contact method for coking the coal

[6].

At today's level of knowledge about this problem one can speak of the unsuitsbility
of uniting energy technology with the GRBS's (that is, refraining from burning or-
dinary Kansko-Achinsk coal) within the confines of the Kansko-Achinsk basin. If
further studies make it possible to disprove this belief , it will pose the question
of the new industrial-technical conglomeration of the BTU and the GRES. the nature
of which is difficult to determine at the present time.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on

.s

\

H N

é .. 'f .. .0 .0 9 9

a as > a O a a n

"‘09 g 0: u> all!“ u“ u“ an
Deposit — —- — — — _ _ __
Berezovskoye 3760 33 6-7 68 0 . 3 1270 1290 1310
Itatskoye 3060 60.5 11.5 68 0 .7 1200 1220 1260
Irsha-Borodinskoye 3760 33 9 67 0.3 1180 1210 1230
Barandatskoye 3560 37 7 68 0 .3 1300 1320 1360
Bogotol'skoye 2820 66 12 68 0.9 1150 1170 1190
Abanskoye 3520 33.5 12 68 0.5 1160 1160 1180
Uryupskoye 3760 33 7 68 0 . 3 1270 1290 1310

Note: For coal from the Iraha-Borodinskoye deposit "a: - 36 1. Age): - 20-28 1;
for coal from the Berezovskoye deposit ‘1'.“ - 6-71.

A serious problem which will exert an influence upon the quality of operation of
future 611398 as well as upon the nutter of inhabitants of the city of sharypovo
and other matters is the determination of the organizational structure of industrial
magement and the establishment of a system of operational-repair service for the
electric-power stations. This being the case. we must first of all keep in mind
that the primary reason for the appearance of this problem is the creation from
scratch of a new, mighty power system with a great many industrial and production
personnel in this little-developed region. The seriousness of this problem lies
not only in the difficulties of the demographic plan but also in the unique nature
and novelty of the installations constructed and their equipment. which must be
serviced by these personnel. It also lies in the unprecedented (in physical quan-
tities) consumption of production which can be expected.

For example. if one begins with the average specific repair expenditures for power
units achieved today, the yearly outlay alone for the repair of the first four GREs's
can exceed 100 million rubles. For this reason. beginning with the accumulated
domestic and foreign experience, the Teploelektroproyekt Institute proposed a func-
tional organizational structure for management of GRES's and power-equipment repair
plants in the southern industrial zone headed up by a consolidated board of directors.
It has been proposed that all the administrative and management functions as well

as the planning and organization of industrial activity be centralized in the con-
solidated board using modern automatic control-system equipment. In this case.

the GRES would be charged with the operational functions, while the tasks of mainten-
ance and repair and the responsibility for the condition of the equipment (excluding
matters associated with the activities of the operations personnel) would be en-
trusted to the power-equipment repair plant which performs total servicing for all
the GREs's.

In accordance with the teclmical and economic substantiation of the KATEK, the
Giproenergoremont specification envisions the power-equipment repair plant as part
of the internal plant production and, so to speak, of the "out-of-house" sector

13
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which carries out repair operations at the GEES sites. The material base for the
plant production proper provides for the accomplishment of industrial plant repair
of all transportable equipment. including transformers and feed pumps, the manufac-
ture of spare parts, fittings. accessories, etc., and has a foundry with a designed
capacity of 30,000 tons of castings annually. For the year-round steady operation
of the power-equipment repair plant with small-scale and regular batch production,
provisions have been made for the centralization at the plant of spare parts. assem-
blies and parts for equipment and individual units in the form of an exchange stock
supply. This stock supply, moreover, is the basis for the unit-assembly method

of repair of all GRES equipment at its installation site using resources from the
repair plant's "out-of—house" sector. The material base of the "out-of—house" sec-
tor is the training. preparatory, warehousing and other sections at the plant's
working area as well as the sections at each 6828 equipped on the basis of overall
mechanization of all operations. It also includes the creation of normal industrial
and public-snd-domestic sanitation conditions and sdminiatrative-and-management ac-
tivities.

As the "general repairman." the plant attracts the corresponding enterprises and
organizations in order to carry out the specialized operations at the 6828. In

the GRES designs, the same conditions are envisaged for these personnel as for per-
sonnel at the power-equipment repair plants.

The design repair system provides for reducing the specific repair expenditures
for the first four GRES's in the southern industrial complex to 2.34 rubles/k“,
that is, more than 50 percent below the level achieved for BOO-HR gas and fuel-

011 units in 1978.

Considerable difficulties in the realization of the design system of operational
repair service are caused not so much by a lack of experience (elements'of such

a system were successfully introd ed in a number of economic planning departmentssnd
RU'SZEBSSibIY,r3J0“ administration in particular, in Hosenergo) as by the presence

of a certain "psychological barrier."

Not pausing to dwell on other problems because of limited space in this article,

we must mention the difficulties not only in the development but also. to a greater
degree. in the realization of designs to set up high-speed flow—type construction

of the GRES complex on the basis of the regional industrial procurement base (RPKB).
whose industrial capacity is determined considering the yearly introduction of two
800-HH power units and the assurance of 150 million rubles of construction and in—
stallation work for industrial buildings annually. For these conditions, owing

to the bulkiness and great mass of the assembled units, it is necessary to expand
considerably the volume of motor-vehicle transportation; to create new, specialized
motor-vehicle equipment-vspecial and modular trailers with a freight capacity of

30 to 200 t; and to build the corresponding road network. According to a preliminary
estimate, the creation of a regional industrial procurement base and its introduction
based on high—speed flowbline construction can increase the productivity of labor

by not less than 8 to 10 percent, improve the quality of construction and installa-
tion operations and reduce capital investment.

In view of the facts presented. the first results from the construction of the
Bkibaatuz fuel and power complex (ETEK). the designs of which are similar to those
used in the KATBK, present some interest. An analysis of these results provides

1
FOI‘OFFICdiLIﬂﬂECNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a basis to believe that the shortcomings and delays that were caused can he explained
to a certain degree by:

first of all. the lack of unified management for such a gigantic construction
project, as a result of which there have appeared and continue to appear a nunber
of problems brought about by bureaucratic dissociatim--in particular. prohlens
of personnel and housing;

secondly, the underestimation on the part of construction and installation organi-
zations (unable to overcome the "psychological barrier" on the way to new designs)
of the progressiveneas and advantage of industrial methods incorporated in the de-
signs for constructing electric-power stations. In Ekibaatuz. in particular, con-
struction has not been completed on the RPKB's envisaged in the designs nor have
the roads been graded as necessary, etc. In other words, the material basis for
industrial construction has not been created;

thirdly. the lack of unified management for the coupler which would insure the har~
monious development and strictly coordinated functioning of all units in the complex
in both the production and nonproduction spheres.

The KATBK is a gigantic construction project for the national economy which will
give new life to this little-developed region. It will not only transform this
region but will turn it into one of the most important regions of the country. '

The construction of the KATBK is not a task for a single year nor even a single five-
year plan. This construction project. naturally, will cause a great many new, ser-
ious problems. We can say with assurance. however, that. while changing with re-
spect to time, circumstances and the experience of the complex's builders. the prob—
lems of the interplay between nature and projects under construction will continue

to be of urgent concern for many years to come. Also of current interest are the
improvement of the production process. the introduction of new, more modern equip-
ment for electric-power stations and the developmmt of the economic activity of
electric-power stations. including an operational repair service system for GREs's.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bogomolov. 0., “The Fuel and Power Problem in cm Countries." PROBLEM! um
I SMSIALIZHA, No. 8. 1980.

2. okhotin, V. N. and 'l'itov, A. A., "Designs for the Power-Production Sector of the
Ekibastuz Fuel and Power Complex," ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII, No. 11, 1979.

3. Novikov, P. N., Boyarahinov, s. N., Hyslin, G. A. and Hyuntser. 6. (3.. "The
Bkibastuz and ltat Fuel and Power Complexes," TRUDY TBPLOELBKTROPROYEKTA, No 5,

1967.

lo. PRAVDA, 6 Jun 1980.

5. Komarov, N. F., Moiseyev, G. 1., Petrosyan. R. A., et. al.. "Kotel'nyye i
turbinnyye ustanovki energoblokov moshchnost'yu 500 i 800 MBt. Sozdaniye i

osvoyeniye" [Boiler and Turbine Installations for 500 and 800-!“ Power Units.
Construction and Familiarization], Moscow, Energiya. 1979.

15
son omau. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Boyershinov, s. 8.. Vshivkov. V. A.. Goldayev. A. IL. et. a1., "Promising

Methods for the Efficient Utilization of Coal From the Kansko-Achinsk Basin,"
ELBKTRICHBSKIYE STANISII. No In 1974.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Eletricheokiye suntan". 1981

9512
650: 1822/220 END

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY