FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10662
16 July 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 42/82]

U. S. - JAPAN VLSI WAR

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no wny represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTHI FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOI:0FFKJA1.USE(MULY

spas L/10662
16 July 1932

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 42/82)

U. S. - JAPﬂN VLSI WAR

Coureurs

Japan's Strength in 6b K RAH. Anxiety Discussed
(SHUKAN ASAHI, 1 Mar 82).................................... 1

VLSI Her Expected To Becone More Pierce
(Tetsu Seko; TOSHI Tacuo, Her 82)........................... 9

NBC President Sekinoto Interviewed on VLSI Her
( NIKKEI BUSINESS, 22 Her 82)............................... 13

Background of VLSI war with United States Reviewed

(Karo. Nonaka; NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN, 15-20. 22. 26.

27. 29 Her 82)............................................. 19
Japanese-0.8. Semiconductor Coupetition, Cooperation

(DBNPA SHIHBUN, 29 Mar 82).................................. 50

NBC Vice President Ouchi Intervieued on Seniconductor Issue
(SAHKEI, 30 Mar, 1, 2, 5 Apr 82)............................ 90

Confronting U.S.-ananese Semiconductor Industries Analyzed
(Biichi Hesegewe; NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN, 16.17.22.24 Mar,
7 Apr 82)................................................... 100

- A - [III ~ ASIA - 111 PO

INDR‘OFFICtnL USEZCHULY
.‘F'
c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN'S sums Ill 66 K RAH, ANXIETY DISCUSSD
Tokyo SW ASAHI in Japanese 1 liar 82 pp 76-60

[Text] "The American semiconductor industry has been lauded as the strong-
hold of technological innovation and industrial genius. but now it is facing
the Japanese forces, and it is experiencing its first setback and is stagger-
ing in its struggle for survival," according to an article in the American
economic magazine FORTUNE entitled "Semiconductor Chips-Routine Japanese
Victory" (26 December 1981 issue). The article .further says: Japan has cap-
tured 70 percent of the world's market in 610 kilobit RM (Random access
memory) and has won an overwhelming victory. Uith this victory, Japan has
probably won supremacy over the RAN market for the rest of the century."

The 610 kilobit RAM-~an item only a few millimeters square made from sand
(silicon)-has entwined; the major semiconductor makers of Japan and the
United States in adecisive conflict, and in the background is the situation
that this memory will be the strategic product which will herald the attain-

ment of the V1.81 (very large scale integrated circuitry) age.

VLSI usually refers to a single chip within which more than 100,000 elements
are integrated, and this degree of integration is at least an order of magni-
tude greater than the 10,000 or so elements to he found in the LS! (large
scale integrated circuit) of the past. In the usual RAH, called the dynamic
type, each hit (a bit is a unit of memory capacity) is comprised of a transis—
tor and condenser, and a 66 kilobit (a kilobit is 1,026 hits) together with
its accessory circuits represents an integration of 150.000 elements. It is
in this sense that V1.81 is called an entry product.

The reason the domestic and foreign semiconductor makers are waging such a
desperate market battle over the 64 kilobit RAM is because of the almost un-
limited development potential of its market. As was pointed out in the afore-
mentioned POR‘I‘IJNB magazine. last year's sales (1981) still amounted to only
about $100 million more or less. which was less than 1 percent of the output

of the world’s semiconductor industry.

On the other hand, this market is expected to increase to $2 billion by 1985,
and its fraction of the saliconductor market overall is expected to come up
to about 10 percent. Assuming that these figures are realized, this will be
a record for sales of any single semiconductor product. and "the fact that
it will be the best selling chip in the 25-year history of the semiconductor
industry" (roman: magazine) is almost a foregone conclusion.

-1-

ma orncm. wa'ouu
FORAOFFKHAI.[EHE(HVLV

The semiconductor makers in Japan, the United States, and Europe which have
eyed this "treasure mountain" and have entered the field include roughly 15
companies. The principal participants are Motorola, Texas Instruments (TI).
Intel, and Hostec of the United States, Hitachi Limited, Fujitsu, Nippon Elec-
tric, Oki Electric Industry, and Toshiba Corporation of Japan, and the Siemens
Company of Heat Germany from the European sector; however most of these com-
panies still have not gone all out to exploit this item.

As a result, there is fierce competition between makers where the 66 kilobit

RAH market is concerned, and it was inevitable that a Japanese-American clash
would occur.

The Japanese semiconductor industry had already had a confrontation with the

emerican side in the matter of the 16 kilobit memory, which was the predeces-
sor to the bk kilobit RAM, and Japan had waged a "successful battle" by cap—

turing a 40-percent share of the market. What is taking place now is said to
be the ensuing battle over VLSI.

Now, the 4-,anese makers on the first round of this present confrontation were
able to do even better than with the 16 kilobit item, and they came very close
to achievingan "overwhelming victory" according to the results at hand.

Japanese Forces Emphasize Investment inthe 66 Kilobit Battleline

The reader is referred to the accompanying table. This table, compiled by
the Dataquest Company, an American survey company, shows the 6‘ kilobit RAH
output by different makers. It can be seen that since the start of mass pro-
duction in 1979, the Japanese makers have consistently led the field.

The American share of the output for the third quarter of 1981 (3,495,500
units) was 33 percent and the Japanese share 67 percent; Hitachi ranked first
and Fijitsu ranked third, indicative of the Japanese strength. The United
States still has double Japan's output where the overall semiconductor indus-
try is concerned, and one can readily see how the Japanese makers have gone
all out in this leading technology product.
"Certainly the Japanese forces are strong." This was the frank statement of
President G. Hoore of the American Intel Company when he visited Japan late
last year. The Intel Company is one of the well-known companies of Silicon
Valley (the leading semiconductor industrial belt in the worlo which
stretches along the southwest shore of San Francisco Bay) which since its
inception in 1968 has become a microcomputer giant and "memory king." 0n the
other hand, its 1981 sales suffered a setback to about $800 million from the
preceding year's $650 million because of the recession. “here the memory
business is concerned, it does not come in the top five category, showing its
lack of strength in this area, and n "pullout statement" has often been made.
"The term 'pullout' is not appropriate." said President Moore emphatically.
"Intel is putting all its strength into BPRDH (special memory with readout
which can be changed electrically), which is another promising market in the
memory area, and that may be the reason for such rumors to be floating about.

If we look back, we see that when the world's influential semiconductor makers

- 2 -

F08‘0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIX

rushed into the 16 kilobit RAH market in 1977, Intel remained the only company
which supplied both EPROH and 16 kilobit RAH. Since that time, in order to
fulfill our responsibilities to our users, we have shifted our production sys-
tem to EPROH. We like to think that the objective situation is the same right
”'0

But when we pointed out that despite all that has been said, the American
share of the 66 kilobit RAH market is small, Hooreanswered: "The Japanese
makers, after producing their first 64 kilobit RAH, put all their investment
into this area, and this is the margin by which the Japanese makers are lead-
ing the American makers." He added the following, as though it were an after-
thought: "To be sure, we don't expect this situation to continue indefinitely.
The American makers are gradually building up their mass production systems,
and they should be able to recover some of the share gradually."

The American makers seem to be planning a recovery policy to regain their
ground in one sweep. 0n the other hand. the present situation is such that,
putting President Moore's thoughts aside, the lack of corresponding successes
and pullout behavior stand out.

The American semiconductor industrial leaders which had been wielding their
strength as leaders in this field, including companies such as National Semi-
conductor, Pairchild, Advanced Hicrodevices (AND), Hostec, and Intel, which
comprise a series of technology-oriented firms, have done very little up to
now regarding mass production efforts in the area of memory. There are many
reasons, and these reasons differ with the various companies, but it seems
that they have not established mass production technology and have been de-
layed in investment in facilities because of the lack of funds.

Hhile that may be so, the AND Company which is one of the influential busi-
nesses in the Valley declared at a top business meeting last fall that it
would get out of the 66 kilobit RAH market. President J. Sanders, loudly
lamenting the situation, said: "The onslaught of the Japanese makers has
left us no room to enter," as he threw in the towel.

American Makers "In Bondage"

Among these makers, the ones which have assured themselves a fixed share of
the market are the second-ranking semiconductor maker, Motorola, and the top
maker, TI. 0n the other hand, lastyear TI revealed plans to switch its
Austin, Texas plant, which was just completed last year, from mass production
of 66 kilobit RAH to 16 bit microprocessors. The main supply plant for

64 kilobit RAH which TI has at present is its Hiho plant (Hiho-mura, Ibaraki-
ken) in Japan.

According to FORTUNE magazine, such moves on the part of American makers
represent none other than"complacency with one's business." When one delves
into the factors responsible for such a situation, it may be said that the
"strength" of Japan's semiconductor industry emerges as a major factor.

Take, for example, the difference in fund acquiring capability. As the semi-
conductor industry aspires toward development to the VLSI age, the specter of

a 3 -

FOI10$FICJAI.USEGMNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the high cost of new facilities looms, and the price tag of 10 billion yen for
a new plant is not surprising. This is an area where the Japanese makers have
greater capability because they are also involved in heavy electrical equip-
ment, computers, and household electrical appliances and they are, for the
most part, giant industries.

0n the other hand, the American makers (particularly the Silicon Valley makers)
are mostly of the venture business scale and of the meditmi- or small-business
level, so funds to expand the business or renovate their facilities do not
come readily. This is why there are any cases in which a business puts it-
self into bondage to domestic conglomerates or to Buropean industries; however,
such businesses do not fully understand the semiconductor business and the tim-
ing of their investments is frequently badly misplaced.

There is also a wide difference in production technological strength. One
such example is where many of the American makers resorted to narrowing the
pattern width and decreasing the chip dimensions in order to maximise the num-
ber of chips to be made from a single wafer (thin circular plate of silicon),
but this practice resulted ins lower yield (rate of acceptable products turned
out).. Lower yield leads to higher cost and detracts from competitive strength,
and this was the adverse situation they found themselves in.

in contrast. the Japanese makers place assurance of yield as a primary prem-
ise, and they allow a large margin in their circuit designs. This does not
make the size of the chip any smaller but eases the pressure on the production
process, and the net result has been increased productivity. "In the midst
of the Japanese-American semiconductor friction, the American side claimed
that larger chips do not make possible lower cost and it accused the Japanese
of 'duwing,’ but the actual situation is just the reverse," said Vice Presi-
dent Jungi Ouchi of Nippon Electric. Former President 1.. Sabin of the Hostec
Company said: "The Japanese makers, in setting out on mass production of the
61. kilobit product, considered it sufficient to expand and improve the tech-
nology used in the production of the 16 kilobit product, and that turned out
to be the proper course."

The Japanese superiority also stands out on the quality front. At the "Semi-
conductor Seminar" held in Hashington in March 1980, section chief R. Anderson
of Hewlett Packard, which is one of the larger users in the United States,
stated: “The Japanese memory (16 kilobit RAH) has a reject rate upon receipt
and a damage rate in the field which are roughly 10 times superior to the com-
|)arable rates for American products" (the so-called Anderson bomb). He later
came out with the statement that "We now find this difference cut down to a
3:1 ratio," indicative of the improved quality of the American products. On
the other hand. this gap has not seen much improvement with the entry into

the 64 kilobit age, and "there is still a 2:1 difference," according to
FORTUNE magazine.

Industry related parties in Japan made the following statement with regard to
the reason Japan is surpassing the United States in the matter of quality.

"While there is no denying the fact that quality control is rigorously prac-
tiCcd in the Jaraneae plants, there is also the synergistic effect of the

-4-

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICMI. USE ONLY

industry and knowledge level of the workers who man these plants, so quality

is built into the products they make" (Vice President Ouchi of Nippon Elec-
tric).

"Hhen the 'finishing precision' approaches 1 micron (l/l,000 of a millimeter),
there is a battle with dust particles, and the focus of the operation is to
render them dustfree and unmanned. This is an area where Japanese plants
have done well in the matter of automation and theuseof clean rooms, and this

has also improved productivity" (Kasuo Kanehara, head of the Semiconductor
Department, Hitachi).

Japan's strength comes from the advanced state of its lifetime employment sys-
tem and its reassessment ofthe group principle, but FORTUNE magazine especi-

ally pointed out "Japan's organisational strength" for evaluation, and this
is a point worth noting.

The magazine stated: "where 64 kilohit class chips are concerned, establish-
ment of long-term plans, continuous teamwork, and great improvement in con-
trol on the production front have become necessary, and 'the situation in the
U.S. companies' where technologists and design people are continually shifting
between different companies, which in the past was considered essential to the
'crossbreeding effect,’ has now become a tremendous burden.”

Price Will Be 1/20 Hithin 2 Years

In a situation in which the "treasure mountain" in the form of the 66 kilobit
RAN is well in hand, while the American makers are in a state of stagnation
and the Japanese makers have achieved a resounding victory, the top makers of
Japan are not relaxing their guard.

One of the reasons here is that while the Japanese have been able to lead the

Americans, there is the need to win out in the production battle with the
other domestic makers.

Among these companies the top struggle is between the two semiconductor coup
panics: mnber one, Nippon Electric, and ntnber two, Hitachi. Hitachi plans
to "use its superiority in the memory market to overtake Nippon Electric"
(Semiconductor Department head Kanehara) as its strategy; it came out with
plans to increase productionto700,000 units per month by the end of last
year and to 1 million units by the end of March.

Then, Nippon Electric, which had been producing only 300,000 units as late as
last October, suddenly announced plans for greatly increased production, which
left Hitachi uneasy. This plan called for a monthly increase of 150, 000 units
to a system capable of producing 1.05 million units by the end of March.

where Nippon Electric was concerned, "there was a sudden increase in demand,
and we had to change our policy" (Vice President Ouchi), but Hitachi con-
sidered that "to tack on an extra 50,000 units by a later announcement is not
acting responsibly" (Hitachi top executives).

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USEINNLY
INDI‘OFFICJAI.IJSI:(HVLY

In addition to these two companies. Fujitsu laid plans for 600,000 units,
Mitsubishi and Oki for 500,000 units each, and Toshiba for 300,000 units by

their production systems, and these companies plan to maintain their world-
wide rankings.

Another reason the top makers cannot rest easy is the price battle, which has
sunk into the depths. Where a unit price of $100 was the prevailing level
about the beginning of 1980, when this item appeared on the market, it had
dropped to $30 by the end of that year and further to $15 by the end of

April 1981, to $10 by the end of September, and still further to $6 by the
end of the year. In other words. the price of this item dropped to about
1/20 of the initial price in the course of a scant 2 years. This trend is
underscored by the following statement from one of the top personnel of a

large maker: "The price is moving like a nightmare even before the product
itself."

The 256 Kilobit RAM "111 Be the Strategic Battle

Even before the 256 kilobit RAH market has become firm, plans for the produc-
tion of the 256 kilobit RAM with four times the capacity have taken shape,
and this is again source of anxiety. The capacity of semiconductor memory
quadrupled in 2 years over the 1970 decade to come to the 6b kilobit level.
As the VLSI age was entered, this rate of development was blunted, but even
then a doubling every 2 years is expected.

If we accept these figures, then the 256 kilobit age should be upon us in
1984. but in this world of "first in. sure victory," the theory is that if
one can be just a year ahead of the others, he can win out. This is why
makers such as Hitachi, Nippon Electric, and Toshiba set out early in the
game to establish their production systems and hope to enter the production
phase sometime between the latter half of thisyearandthe start of next year.
There is a consensus in the industry that "the 256 kilobit market will deter-
mine the fate of the VLSI conflict," and themoves by the various companies
from here on will bear watching.

In the midst of such a situation, the sentiment of other countries against a
"strong Japan" may become even more severe. There are strong feelings within
the industry that "Japan acquired a hO-percent share of the 16 kilobit RAH
market and created trade friction. It has acquired a 70—percent share of the
64 kilobit RAH market, and if it should make a single error, there may be an
instant recurrence.

At the present time, the SIA (American semiconductor industrial group) is urg-
ing the government to establish import regulations, while the government is
said to be studying regulations to be applied to items of national security.

The dire premonitions experienced by those in Japan's semiconductor industry
on reading the FORTUNE article have already proved to be true.

FOI(HﬂﬂClAL.USEioNLY
(7)

(3)

(9)

(10)

(11)

:hip (12)
: RM

1979 1980

S 105

10 150

24 130

2 20

8 17

0 S

0 8

0 0

0 7

0 3

 

16 kilobit
6 k1lob1t
Double each year
1 kilobit
256 bit
Year
__________._________________.____________________
1981
Ptrot Second Third
Quarter guatter Quarter
200 700 1.100
125 350 725
110 360 550
35 130 370
36 70 320
50 100 250
S 30 100
S 10 60
10 20 20
S 10 20

S 13 onlple output (Unit: 1,0005

- 7 -

IORIOFIIJAI,U§E(MNLY
l-‘OROMCIALUSEONLY

Because of the Pierce Conpetition.
Bach Maker Sees-a To. Be Adopting Sane Port of ”Inauranca"

(1) Banya-a-ﬁthell

IRIIVAC

w

 

0‘7) mum-1e 3260—. mama

 

 

"31!“! RUCRt’!

 

('c‘l- ) JECCI- tin—j
Key:
(1) United States-Japan Computer (14) Mitaubiahi
Industrial Syaten Chart (15) Oki-Univac
(2) United Statea (16) Japan Univac
(3) Japan (17) To end of Harch 1976
(1.) Toshiba (18) Ilitachi
(‘3) 1970 (19) Fujitsu
(0) Nippon Electric "Is (20) Capital agreement
(7) Nippon Electric (21) Sales agreement
(8) 1962 (22) Technology agree-eat
(9) VLSI Technology Research Group (23) Includes mall conputers, peri-
Harch 1976 pheral oquipnent, production
(10) Joint research laboratory coupaniea, or aalea colpaniea
(11) A Group Laboratory (24) Fran .1800 Notes
(12) B Group Laboratory
(13) (Fuj itau-lli “chi-Mitsubishi)
(Nippon Electric-Toshiba)
COPYRIGHT: Anahi Shinbunaha 1982
9923
C80: 8129/ 1084-A - 8 -

momauuuomv
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

VLSI “AR EXPECTED 10 am MR2 PIERCE
Tokyo T0931 TEGIO in Japanese Mar 82 pp 310-36
[Article by analyst Tatsu Seko]

[Text] The semiconductor industry joined the ranks of l-trillion yen indus-
tries in 1981. when compared with the promiction total of 540 billion yen in
1978, this represents a sharp growth of almost double in the course of 3
years. with the accelerating trend of the industrial world in adopting the
electronics revolution, growth is expected to continue at the rate of 20 per-
cent or better each year, and the semiconductor is tabbed as the top growth
item for the eighties.

Furthermore, the semiconductor technology as represented by V1.81 (very large
scale integrated circuit) is the backbone of the electronics industry, and its
strategic importance is increasing by the year. This is why the various com-
panies in this industry are fighting to out produce each other and are putting
forth every effort for technological development and investment in facilities
as they prepare for all-out war.

This VLSI war is taking place with great vigor everywhere, and a report on
this situation is presented here.

The Semiconductor Industry Is a "First In, Sure Victory" Situation

The IC (integrated circuit) invented by Kilbey of the United States in 1958
possessed only a few elements in its degree of integration. Next, Pairchild
of the United States developed the planar technology by which a number of
elements were formed on a silicon base plate; this was the event which trig-
gered development of double the degree of integration each year, and it was
not long before a degree of integration of more than 100,000 elements on a
chip a few millimeters square was developed, and the age of V1.81 was entered.

The item which opened the curtains for the entry of the VLSI age was the 66
kilobit RM (write in and read out memory). The degree of integration of a
66 kilobit RAM is roughly 150,000. At present, the previous generation

16 kilobit RAH is still the nainstream of domestic and foreign memory markets,
but recently there have been moves by the large American computer makers to
install 66 kilobit RAH, while there is a trend in Japan to exploit the wave

-9-

MWLWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of interest in OA (office automation) to put these units into personal com-
puters. as a result of which the market has been expanding sharply. The be-

lief is growing that the 6b kilobit RAH will take over the main role in the
memory market by the latter half of this year.

The semiconductor industry since its inception has followed the basic business
"first in, sure victory" concept. One of the reasons Japan's lc industry was
far behind that of the United States up through the first half of the 1970's
was, if one looks very closely, the fact that it came in late and was the
loser. For a whi 1e, the royalties the Japanese saliconductor makers paid to
American industries for the basic patent on the IC of Kilbey, the planar
patent, the selective diffusion patent, and other patents amounted to more
than 10 percent of the sales volume. This sun alone made the price of the
American product cheaper, and there was a large import volume while domestic
technology had difficulty in developing. ‘-
But the establishment of MOS (metal oxide membrane semiconductor) technology
and desk calculators became the starting point for the rapid expansion of the
private industrial market, and the gap between Japan and the United States was
reduced at a sharp pitch. The present situation is that Japan has surpassed
the United States in some areas, but the agony of coming late into the field
is one every semiconductor maker has experienced.

Even the mass production war presently developing within the country on the
64 kilobit RAH shows this line of thinking on the part of all the companies
as they try to grab prior advantage. If one is late in entering the field.
he will find all the large users completely sewed up, and he will be in the
very bad situation of being unable to finance the next round of investment
in facilities if there should be an easing in the market situation.

Let us look back at the intensity of the increased production battle. Hitachi
Limited was the first to set up a system to produce 1 million 64 kilobit

RAH's per month. This was achieved on 26 October 1981. When this news hit
the headlines, it was not more than aweek before Nippon Electric, which was
the tip in the industry, succeeded in producing 1 million units per month, on
2 November of the same year. Then as the year closed and the new year was
ushered in, Fujitsu also disclosed that it was producing 1 million units per
month, and these three comyanies were each producing 1 million units per month
as of the end of March.

At the same time, Mitsubishi Electric and Oki Electric were stimlated by the
actions of the aforementioned three companies and modified their initial plans
to produce 300,000 units by the end of March to aim at production of 500.000
units per month. Since then, Mitsubishi has decided to increase its production
also to the 1 million units per month level by October of this year, but every
company keeps its plans for increased production under cover, and the end of
this mass production battle certainly is not in sight.

This mass production battle is not limited to the memory area. There is also
increased production conflict in the micon area. which seems to be expanding
with a limitless field of application. "hen a micon is coupled to a sensor

-10-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(detection element), the combination can greatly promote the conversion to
electronics of household electrical appliances, automobiles, robots, various
types of medical equipment, and the communication and information areas.
This is an area in which Hatsushita Electronic Industrial, Tokyo Sanyo Elec-
tric, and Sharp. which are saliconductor makers for household electrical
systems, are expected to play leading roles.

Other electronic items which are also basking in the limelight are 661) (charge
coupled element), sound synthesis 1.81, and semiconductor lasers, on which the
different companies are placing their strength as future strategic products.

in this manner, the battlelines for the VLSI age are spreading laterally
through product diversification.

Companies which shifted from production only for their own use to production
for external sales such as beco, Suwa Seikosha, liippon Gakki Coqany, and hip-
pon Denso, which had been dealing in item other than electrical equipment,
have found opportunities to become intermediaries in IC production and have
seized the chance for spectacular development in a leading industry, and the
VLSI age has taken on the atmosphere of rivalry between local barons.

will a 1 Megabit Make Its Appearance in 1985‘!

Part of the fate of being in a first in, sure victory industry is to be en-
meshed in a fierce technological innovation wave. The race to improve the
degree of integration is such a situation. Even while mass production of the
64 kilobit RAM was being put into practice, the semiconductor industry was
already engaged in laboratory testing of the next generation 256 kilobit item
and making plans to come out with conercial production. Hitachi Limited,

if it can put everything together, plans to make sample shipments this fall
and shift into real production next spring, while Toshiba Corporation, which
was delayed in its entry into the 6b kilobit RAH field, is making plans not
to fall behind in the 256 kilobit race and is planning to produce this item
next year. At the same time, Nippon Electric has invested 27 billion yen in
the construction of a new VLSI production plant at its Sagamigahara site
which is expected to start operation in 1983, and the other companies in this
industry are all planning quick entry into production of the 256 kilobit RAH.

"mile continually engaging in this fierce competition, is it safe? when do
the semiconductor makers hope to recoup their investments?" It is not sur-
prising for such statements to come from the heads of other businesses.

It is definite that the Japanese forces have prevailed and the American makers
have been bested where the 64 kilobit RAM is concerned. The share (percent of
the market) which the Japanese makers have captured for this particular item
is about 70 percent. This situation is verified by the fact that many Ameri-
can semiconductor makers have suspended production of 66 kilobit RAH or cut
down on the production and thereby backed away from confrontation with the
Japanese makers. Only two companies, Hotorola and Texas Instruments. are

left in the field. It is pushing the point to judge future trends based on
just the 6!. kilobit RAH situation, but it seems definite that the American
makers are facing some difficulties in getting into the 256 kilobit RM race.

.11.

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the matter of degree of integration, Japan's semiconductor makers Imvo
already begun laboratory research on the l megabit RAM. The 256 klloblt RAM
represents a degree of integration of roughly 600,000 elements. Simple cal-
culation shows that a l megabit RAH will have a degree of integration close
to 2 million elements. It is possible that this product will appear by 1985
at the earliest, and some of the American makers are already voicing senti-
ments of "giving up."

In another direction, the legal period of amortization for semiconductor pro-
duction facilities is 5 years. reflecting the fierceness of technological in-
novations. 0n the other hand, nobody waits that long. This is manifested
by the situation that "the semiconductor area must recover its investment
completely in 3 years and produce a profit," which is a view shared by top
business management. This viewpoint further spurs the increased production
conflict aimed at large-scale profit. Once one becomes enmeshed in the back-
bone technology of electronification, one cannot relax or backtrack.

In addition, research and development and investnent in facilities for VLSI
eat up gigantic sums of money. According to some test calculations by a well-
known semiconductor consultant in the United States, the cost of constructing
a VLSI level plant will increase from $23 million in 1980 to roughly double.
or about $50 million in 1985. Already semiconductor industry tap maker Nippon
Electric spends more than 10 percent of its total sales on plant investment,
and the other co-panies are assigning the major part of their investments to
the semiconductor area.

In order to survive in this VLSI war, high technological development strength
and a strong sales force are required, in addition to abundant fiscal strength.
The fact that all of these companies have put considerable effort into the
acquisition of funds attests to the situation that this is an important sec-
tor in the overall battle.

Improvement in the degree of integration other than in the memory area, the
mass production conflict, and the diversification of products to respond to
the rapid electronification in the industrial world present a vast number of
problems which the semiconductor maker mat resolve. The food for new indus-
tries and the real conflict in IC is just beginning.

COPYRIGHT: Asahl Sh inbunsha 1982

9923
C80: 8129/1084-8

-12-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NBC PRESIDENT SWIM!) INTERVIEW!) 0N VLSI “A!
Tokyo NIKKBI BUSINESS in Japanese 22 Her 82 pp 26-28

[Interview with Tsdahiro Sekinoto, president of Nippon Electric Conpany. by
Ryoki Sugita of NIKKBI BUSINESS; date and place not specified]

[Text] "Japan, which had been the student, is now threaten-
ing to take over the professional seats of the leading
countries of the Hestern world." This is the factor re-
sponsible for the eaotional reaction of the Hester-n coun-
tries, according to President ‘l'adhiro Sekinoto of Nippon
Electric, which is in the forefront of this high-level
technological friction. Ila further said that there will
he "self-propelled technology” from here on, as he put the
spurs to develop-eat of independent technology and pro-
claimed that "He would like to get rid of the criticism
that we just join the bandwagon of technology." "A
researcher nust hinself banner out his standards and make
his challenges,” he said in expounding his offensive
technological business theory.

There Is a Belief That the U,.S. Governnent Is Inciting the Industry in the
Second Seniconductor Conflict

Question: It see-s that it is your thesis that Nippon Electric, which has
developed the ao-called "C and C" technology which ties together cowuters
and co-unication, is in a very enviable position to cater to society's needs
f ron here on. You actually aredirecting an aggressive business. but is it
not also the situation that because you represent the main force of a high-
level technology. you are continually exposed at the front lines of the
Japanese-American business friction? I would like to ask you, first of all,
just how you regard the present conercial friction, going back to the ex-
perience of the initial "Japanese-herican seliconductor war" and thereafter.

Answer: Focusing on seliconductors, at the tine the first sniconductor war
occurred inl977, the 0.8. Government made the following statement, despite the
efforts on the part of industry: "Pros the standpoint of free trade, it he-
hooves you to build up your co-petitive strength." 0n the other hand, when
this second seniconductor war energed, I received the ilpression that it is
the goveruent which lay be inciting the industry. This is a feature which

is coqletely different fro. the first.

-13-

“WISE”?
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact that the safety assurance problals has been included in the discussions
is also a new point. Despite these tough times, the United States is putting
up money for the defense of the free countries. but it says that Japan‘s de-
fense load is too small and that this situation needs to be resolved. I once
said that this was a problem of jealousy. To be sure, this trade friction is
not simply one of econonic fundamentals; this is the view I have taken and it
is gradually becoming more enhanced.

As trade friction develops over a wide front, as is occurring today, it is no
longer a problem for a single industry or a single business. It lust be
handled as a problem of all industry or a national problem, and if we link
ourselves to Ic (integrated circuits) to argue over the situation on a narrow
front, the solution will not be forthcoming in my opinion.

The Reason U.S. Products Do Rot Sell in Japan Is the Lack of Sales Know-how

Question: Even if one night say that the 11.3. Covert-cut is not inciting the
industrial world, it is true that the government approves the hard stand the
industrial world is taking against Japan. Up through last year, the attitude
within the Reagan administration was: we should learn from Japan. This
situation has now changed. Can we say that this was the result of a careful
study of Japanese business. from which it was discovered that it could not be
readily duplicated?

Answer: President Reagan has not departed from his stand on the free trade
principle. but he has been saying that there must be a better balance in trade
and the red ink on the American ledger needs to be reduced so that the admin-
istration can breathe easier. Let us look at a problem which is separate from
the introduction of Japanese business practices and that is the subject of QC
(quality control); there are efforts onthe part of Anerican industry to in-
crease this progra. The Americans have only started their efforts. and it
has not reached the stage where voices are being raised tOthe effect that

they cannot compete with Japanese business. First of all, there is no beaten
dog aspect in their makeup.

They are wondering why, in spite of their high-level technology, they cannot
sell to Japan? Could it not be the nonduty barriers? Certainly. there is
wonderful technology in the United States. If we were asked to duplicate the
technology that enabled the United States to launch the Saturn explorationob-
scrvation ship Voyager, we would be unable to do so.

Now. just the possession of high-level technology does not allow one to engage
in business. Besides good technology and a good product. sales knowledge or,
in other words, sales know-how lust be at hand or good business is not possi-
ble. The reason the share of Alerican products on the Japanese market is low
is not just one of superior or inferior technology but the great lack of sales
know-how. It is 20 years since Nippon Electric established its NBC-America in
1963, but we were active in the United States even before then. It is through
the selling experience we accumlated that we have come to today's position.

-11.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICHHWCJAL USIZCHﬁLY

That is why even when the Japanese market is opened up exactly the way the
Americans want. there will be no avalanche in sales of American products.
This is an area in which there is "misunderstanding" either intentional or in
good faith.

The Problem Is "Bngulfing Friction"; It Will be Structurslly Unfavorable to
Electronic Products

Question: Electronics related activities involve high-level technology pro-
ducts, and a competitor is necessarily subjected to extreme nervous strain.
When Japan is pressing along a technological front, if a misunderstanding is
left untended, could the situation be amplified emotionally and eventually
wind up a major problen?

Answer: The present commercial friction is not a "forcing friction" but an
"engulfing friction." In another direction, even though we do not use force,
the other side is buying Japanese products at a good clip and is, in fact, en-
gulfing our products. Since the need for electronics is on a single path to
expansion, the goods that we handle will probably continue to be swallowed up.
That is why it may be said that this friction will not becone a structural
affair. I believe that friction is an adjunct to huaan society. 0n the other
hand, I do not believe that unnecessary anxieties should be left untended to
start unwanted friction.

The problem Japan presently faces with IC is the 66 kilobit RAH, which is the
gateway to VLSI, and the fact that we have acquired 70-80 percent of the share
in the American Iarket. 0n the other hand, if we conpare the situation to a
Iarathon, we are still only 100 to 200 aeters from the start, and the Japan-
ese industries, which have been embroiled in their own domestic competition,
came out of the starting gate as though in a dash. It is not because Japan
is so technologically superior that it is ahead at the present tins.

Looking at the 1981 IC trade with the United States, the excess of exports
over inports is only on the order of 700 aillion yen. The experts also in—
clude some products which American coapanies produce in their Japanese subsi-
diary plants. This is why the problem which is being regarded with such
anxiety is something which the Americans should understand if explained
properly.

This is why this company has set up a subsidiary plant for production in the
United States: to jump into the rival community, become part of it and main- .
tain a conversant stance. 0n the other hand, as was mentioned before, this

is a problem between countries. and there is a limit to such measures.

Japan which Had Been the Student Is Now the Instructor, and This Must Be a
Source of Irritation to the Hestern Countries

Question: when we look at the true source of American irritation. the fact
that Japan had been getting a free ride on the technology train may be a fac-

tor. According to foreign comments, Japan is lacking in creative ability and
depends on foreign efficiency application end. what do you, the international

- 15 -

ItIICMﬂﬂCJAl.USBIMVLY
FORi0¥FK1Al.USE(NHLY

satellite communications company, think about the research and development
system of both Japan and the United States and how do you react to such
criticism?

Answer: The statement that Japan is relatively lacking in innovative work
possibily was true in the past. Even in the electronics area, our efforts to
date have been concentrated on catching up with and overtaking the United
States.

He can now say that while we have not overtaken the United States, we hove
risen to a level that rivals the United States. To say that we had a free
ride till then is somewhat ludicrous, but if the Americans believe "we have
been copied a lot," this is something we cannot deny.

In the past. the Hestern countries were the professors and we were students.
The students are now in the assistant professor class who occasionally write
papers and threaten to take over the professional rank. This situation has
led the other side to have mixed feelings and to think that it would not have
been teaching if it had known this was to be the result. I think that from
here on, Japanese research and development should pursue the creative and
more intensively so we can say that we are not just freeloading by the time
the let century rolls around.

Shouldn't We Study a Matrix Organization Which Exploits Individual Creative
Ability?

Question: If we keep the Comsat experience in mind, what are the areas of
American knowledge which we should emulate in setting up our future research
and development system?

Answer: Vertical and horizontal control matrix type work promotion is under
study in the United States, and it is now thought that creative work is not
possible without such a setup. The usual organization consists of a verti-
cal functional organization split according to different specialties and a
lw>riaontal type project organization in which the necessary specialists from
the necessary functional organisations are assembled. An example of a large-
scale project organization is the Apollo project organisation in which work
is performed very efficiently under a single head. 0n the other hand, if the
capabilities of the man heading a special area are wanting, the whole system
will suffer.

If there are an abundance of researchers above a fixed level, the project or-
ganization will be good, but the actual situation is that such a situation is
seldom realized. This is where the matrix organization concept emerges.

In the COHSAT project, I placed the various researchers under different func-
tional organizations into a nulber of projects, and a total force of 20-30
people were engaged in parallel participation in five projects. In this
system, I did not assign only a single manager per project, but I also
assigned an "alternate." The head of project section A handled not only his
project but also served as deputy manager for the sections in which his

- 16 -

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people were involved. It became possible mmake an individual evaluation of
every researcher in this aanner. The matrix organization is also a syste-
which improves the capability for exploiting the individual's creative ability.

Question: That is to say, when a party working in the organization partici-
pates in research and development, the ability to correctly evaluate a given
party is oneof thekeys in drawing out his creative talent?

Answer: In a leading area where individual brain power is relied on to come
up with ideas, unless individual evaluation is given greater weight, it will
probably be difficult to draw forth creative ideas.

Question: In the area of technological development there is usually the
question of whether the need (demand) intent or the seed (seed) intent should
prevail. What do you think the future direction will be?

Answer: He are engaged in research and development as a business, and unless
the final product we come out with is accepted by society, our work will be
meaningless. That is why it is very important to know just what is needed in
the Iarket, and this is where the statement ”Listen to the aarket with regard
to new technology" applies.

And that is not all. I also use the ter- "technology runs by itself." That
is to say, this is the "seed" approach, and this is something which comes
closer to a pure research effort of a scientific nature. 0n the other hand,
a general type of research and development can give rise to something en-
tirely new for which there seems to be no application. At the same time,
research can take place cleetely independent of market trends, and the
research can run by itself , as the words imply. This is where one creates
a market for the creation.

If we are to pursue creativity, then we tend to go toward the seed concept,
and just how many seeds we come up with in the future to contribute to inter-
national society is going to be a major subject.

Julp at Chances; Uncertainty Is To Be Expected, Anticipate Takeover
Question: What are the researchers doing at the present time?

Answer: A researcher must himself keep a rein on himself. That is to say,
he must establish a goal, set up his own timetable, and conduct his work in-
dependently. Hhether one goes at this work with full force marks the divid-
ing line of a good researcher.

While not united to researchers. mankind has nodes at frequent intervals
just as a baﬂaoo rod. This is chance, and one does not know which direction
to proceed with this node as the boundary. The greater the chance, the lar-
ger is this node, and the more difficult the future is to see. The situation
when I was asked to join OOHSAT was such a case, and I was full of uneasi-
ness. what had once been a straight path in the past was now being criss-
crossed by intersecting paths.

-17..

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A chance is something like that, and one jmpe at it. Uncasincse is to be ex-
pected. It is the ability to suppress this anxiety and seize the opportunity
that is desirable.

Question: I an asking for a very positive opinion, but please define the
future dreae for technology.

Answer: Information will be treated not only by conversation but by eight
and exchange of data. in other words, by creating a c and c system Not only
electronics but other compound technologies such as biotechnology will be
exploited to develop c and C, giant "artificial servants." The hands and feet
will extend to the ends of the earth, and the brains will be vested in the con-
puter. 0n the other hand, it will eventually be man who operates this system
in the "artificial servant" that will be developed, and this is the drean by
which I hope we can contribute to society's well-being.

[Interviewer] These are the impressions fro. Hr Sekimto, who gives you 10
answers to each question you ask. He is a man whose nind works very fast,
and he presented himself as a polenicist of the top class where research and
development was concerned. In addition, he was well versed in theory of life.
The statement "suppress the anxiety and seize the opportunity" has deep lean—
ing. It is only when one throws his whole effort into his assigned work,
whether technological or administrative, that new paths are opened to nan-
kind; this scene to be his iron rule for salaried people. Colbuetible man--
this is not for the business but eventually for himself.

Tndah i to Sekimoto

He was born 14 Novelber 1926 in Kobe, and is now 55 years old. lie graduated
from the Faculty of Science of Tokyo University as a physics najor in 19158
and went to work for Nippon Electric. lle was engaged in research and develop-
ment at the Central Laboratory until May 1969. During the interval between
August 1965 and August 1967 he went to the international satellite communica-
tions company COHSAT in the United States, where he directed research on the
PCH satellite comnications system as research department head. In Noveﬁer
1976 he was elevated to a director, in June 1977 to executive managing direc-
tor, and in June 1978 to senior executive nanaging director where he was in
charge of donestic sales. He replaced former President Tadao Tanaka (pres-
ently director and consultant) as president in June 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McCraw-Hill, Inc 1982

9923
cso: 8129/1084-c

-13-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BACKGROUND OF V1.81 UAR H1111 UNITED STATES REVIEHED

Tokyo mm: SANGYO SW in Japanese 15-20, 22, 26, 27. 29 ﬂat 82
[Article by reporter Karo)

[15 Mar 82 p 5]

[Text] The Japanese-American semiconductor friction has been reignited. The
Anerican side has its sights on setting up anti-Japanese regulations to squeeze
down on VLSI (very large scale integrated circuits). The nost advanced
Japanese semiconductors and technological developent systea have becone ob-
jects of criticise. The Japanese and Anericans are about to engage in a life
or death struggle. The factors responsible for this Japanese-Anerican seni-
oonductor friction and the Japanese response are sought in this article.

81A Is Lighting the Fires

1 February 1982. The top executives of STA (Anerican Selioonductor Industry
Association). which is nade up of lb leading semiconductor nakers of the
United States. secretly made a visit to Deputy Representative MacDonald of
the Office of the USTR (United States Trade Representative). The SIA dis-
closed to the [1311! the situation with regard to the 610 kilobit RAH (random
write in and read out nenory), which is the top batter in the V1.81 lineup, in
which roughly a 70 percent share (fraction of nsrket) of the Alerican market
for this iten has been captured by the Japanese, and stated that "if this
situation re-ains unchanged. the Ansrican narket will be taken over by the
Japanese." as it strongly urged "goverrssent aid to improve" the situation.
This is the beacon signalling the rekindling of Japanese-Alerican seniconduc-
tor friction.

This was the opener initiating anti-Japanese criticisn spearheaded by Anerican
seaiconductor esters and scoonpanied by high goverment officials and uses
co-unication nedia. There are still accusations on the part of Anerican in-
dustries of Japanese duping and cries for investigation, and nsny fires are
being started all around which nay not be extinguishable even with large

fire trucks.

The concerned people in Japan were shocked by this recurrence of friction.
Vice President Jungi Ouchi of hippon Electric, who serves as spokesman for the

-19-

MWIBEONLY
Hill (WIM'IAI. USE “NIN

Japanese semiconductor industry. made the following unhappy statement: "He
have done nothing wrong."

The Japanese cannot be faulted for the dile-a. This is because the IC (inte-
grated circuit) duty problen, which had been a thorny issue since the first
semiconductor friction starting in 1977. had just been resolved. This issue
came to the forefront during the Japanese-American summit meeting in May last
year between Prime Minister Suzuki and President Reagan. and there was joint
agreement to lower the duties. The United States lowered its duty to 6.2 perk
cent starting in January of this year (it was formerly 5.6 percent). while
Japan lowered its duty to 6.2 percent (formerly 10.1 percent) in April of this

year. and although there was some discrepancy in time. the final rates became
the same.

The trends in IC exports to the American narket, which are carefully monitored
each month by responsible people on the Japanese side. were "good" throughout
last year. The cumulative exports for the January-December trade registered
;|dccreaseof 1.7 percent from the previous year. to 71.2 billion yen. while
imports increased by 1.3 percent. to 70.5 billion yen. and the net balance
was a plus 700 nillion yen (compared to 2.8 billion yen for 1980).

Compared to the 1970's. when Japan's balance of trade was consistently nega-
tive, there is a change in the situation. but the balance of trade where
Japanese 1c is concerned is at equilibriun. "The Americans have nothing to
pick on even where export-import balance is concern " is the Japanese comnent.
Exports to the United States have leveled out at about 30 percent of total

exports, and concentrated exports to the United States such as those of auto-
mobiles are not seen in the 10 area.

At the same time. mutual exchange is advancing between the large semiconductor
makers of the two countries, and not only sales centers but also production
plants are being started on both sides. The disclosure of VLSI related patents
was settled 6 years ago. and closed licenses are popular between the Japanese
and American makers. It is not strange to hear statements such as "The semi-
conductor makers of these two countries are in a mutually supplementary rela-
tionship" (Japanese Electronic Machine Industrial Association).

66 K RAH ls Initial Point of Conflict

Even regarding the 66 kilobit RAM. which has become the main focal point in
Lhis friction and in which Japan has captured a 70 percent share of the Amer-
ican market. the Japanese say: “The fight over the 66 kilobit RAM has just
begun. Compared to a marathon. only the first 200-300 meters'have been run
so far. It is not yet time to be arguing about one’s share of the market.
and there is no telling what will happen to the Japanese share once the mass
production systea of the American makers gets rolling" (according to Managing
Director Toshio Takai of Japan Electronic Machine Industrial Association).

0n the other hand. the actual situation is that such statements on the part of
the Japanese are essentially unheeded. Semiconductors are associated with

different backgrounds and factors compared to the fibers, steel. and automo-
biles which were the friction-creating items of the past. and the outstanding

- 20 -

FOR1DFFI3A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFK'IAL USE ONLY

feature of this present situation is that the anti-Japanese regulations cane
into the picture so quickly.

The industries which crested friction previously were all well-established
industries. There is an altogether different picture where semiconductors
are concerned. At the time of the first friction in 1977, Japan's export of
1c to the United States was only 1.3 billion yen. The Japanese production
was only 208.5 billion yen. In 1981 Japanese exports to the United States
exceeded 70 billion yen while production exceeded 1 trillion yen (including
all semiconductors), and the real growth started here. It has been predicted
that the developments in electronics innovation will create a market in the
1990's which will be four-five times that of the present.

This is why the first friction was compared to "an adult picking on an ele-
mentary or middle school child" (industry top executive). It may be said

that Japan has taken the lead over the United States where the 66 kilobit RAH—-
the present sore point--is concerned, but nany of the areas such as nicons and

logic (logic circuits) are areas of American superiority which are in no
danger.

Control Leading Industries

There is no doubt that the reason the American side is presently trying to
curb Japan is because semiconductors have strategic value. In Japan, semi-
conductors are used in all types of household electrical equipment, various
private industrial items, NC (nunerical centrol) machinery, medical equipment,
autonobiles, and robots, and the field of application is broadening each year.
Semiconductors are taking the role of a heart to promote the development of
new products and differentiation of products. In the United States, there is
great awareness of the semiconductor's role in improving performance in the
areas of space, aircraft. conputers, and communications-type leading technol-

osy.

There are also strong feelings that if the present situation is allowed to
remain unchecked, there will be successive erosions of the American side.
This is why the Americans are waging a fierce war. even throwing in some emo-
tional overtones.

- 21 -

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE¢NULY
H)! «mm». US}: “NIX

”7‘78 8 I 8| 8?

 

Japanese-American 1c Duties

Key:

(1) Japan (5) Exports

(2) United States (6) Import

(3) Trend in Ic Exports-Imports (7) 100 million yen
with the United States (8) Year

(6) American export dependence
[lb Mar 82 p 5]

[Article by reporter Kate]

[Text] The top micon maker, Intel of the United States. released its annual
statement for 1981 at the end of January this year, just before the
Japanese-American semiconductor friction recurrence emerged. The company
reported a decrease in sales of 7.7 percent below the previous year's

788.7 million, and net profits of 27.4 million yen, which also was a 7.17
percent decrease.

Intel is the company which was the first inthe world to develop the micon,
in l971. Riding on the micon boon which followed, it increased its sales by
an astonishing rate of95 percent per year over the 5-year period 1971-76,
essentially doubling its sales each year. This annual increase in sales was
blunted to 39 percent per year for the 5 years 1976-80. but it had already
come to be known as a success story in the annals not only of the American
semiconductor industry but the entire industry as well.

1 never thought that Intel would experience so much business instability
and drop toward the red; said the head of a certain large Japanese semicon-

ductor maker.

- 22 -

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SIA (American Semiconductor Industry Association), which is the stronghold
of this anti-Japan regulation movement, is a group which was formed in March
1977 with five companies--Inte1. Pairchild, National Semiconductor (US),
Motorola, and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)--as the nucleus. Even today cadres
of these companies man the main posts of SIA.

1s NS Falling Into the Red?

The financial reports announced by the various companies following Intel's
disclosure were also on the dark side. In addition to Motorola, which suf-
fered a 6.0-percent decrease in profits in 1981 compared to the previous year,
AMD (9 months statement) showed a 70.3-percent decrease from the same period
last year, and NS (28-week statement) reported a decrease of 95.7 percent and
barely preserved its black ink status. It is being said that MS will not be
able to avoid falling into the red in its 34th half-year period. Pairchild
was acquired by theSchlumberger Company of France in 1979. and no company
statement was forthcoming, although it is estimated that it had suffered a
con lderable loss in profits.

In t.. United States, a businessman's capabilities are severely questioned on
the 1.31s of a single year's performance. Recently, Mostec, a large maker in
the memory (memory element) area, held an emergency board of directors meeting
in February. at which time the business capabilities of President C. Vin Prosso
were questioned and he was replaced. In 1977 this company was able to grab a
38.3-percent share of the market (fraction of market sales) in 16 kilobit RAM
(successive write in and read out memory), which is the generation preceding
the 64 kilobit RAM. and was way ahead of second-place Intel with 28.2 percent
and Nippon Electric with 15.6 percent and was even called the "memory king"

in the United States.

The principal factors responsible for the large decrease in profits of the
American semiconductor makers in the United States were the high interest
rates, which resulted in a depressed situation and poor market conditions, so
they picked a scapegoat (sacrificial lamb) and stepped up their anti-Japanese
attack, which is manifested in the present recurrence of friction it seems.

20 Percent of Sales to Research

with the entry into the VLSI (very large scale integrated circuit) age,

there have been sharp increases in research and development costs and invest-
ments in facilities, and this has proved to be another source of irritation on
the part of American semiconductor makers. The standard construction costs
for a VLSI mass production plant are said to be about 15 billion yen, which
represents a large increase over the IC (integrated circuit) and LSI age
plants which were in the 5-10 billion yen range. The new mega (1 million) bit
VLSI plant which Toshiba Corporation is soon going to start constructing is
expected to cost 20 billion yen just for the research and development building.

in addition, research and development costs to upgrade capabilities and devel-
op the next-generation products are usually allotted the vast sum of 10-20
percent of total sales. In Japan, during the past few years many industries

- 23 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FORiﬂﬂﬂf1hl.|ﬁﬂi(ﬂ¥lh

other than electronics industries have entered the electronics field, hoping
that they have not been left too far behind, and have also joined in the IC
contest. but at the present time, these entries have been limited to the top
members of the respective industry, such as the pioneer in the audio industry
and automobile parts maker Nippon Denso. the watcluaking industry's Seiko
group. and the pharmaceutical industry's Nippon Yskki. These companies are
entering this field because they can afford the vast investment required.

Japanese Companies Can Handle Large Loads

In this respect, there is a wide gulf between the American semiconductor
makers. which are large in nudist but represent small specialty businesses.
and the Japanese semiconductor makers. which are large integrated electrical
makers, possess a large internal market within their own company and can asst-1e
risks (danger) much greater than the American companies.

Assigning a value of 100 to the total sales of Hitachi, Intel's sales come up
to only 8.5, while the investments in facilities between the two oomanies are
in 43:2 ratio and the research and development costs in 22:3 ratio (these
figures for Hitachi are the estimated values for 1981; Intel's figures are
those reported for 1981). This situation reflects the desperate efforts not
to fall behind in the VLSI race. In the midst of this VLSI age entry, the
foreign and domestic semiconductor industries are seeing demand for capital
increasing, and the construction of facilities is becoming a large industry.

The realization that because of differences in the scale of business and the
industrial structure the open water between Japan and the United States is
widening is thought to be the factor that is spurring this recurrence of
friction.

Key:

(1) Total sales (100 million yes)

(2) _Intel Hitachi

(3) Gross profit (100 million yen)

(4) Net profit (100 million yen)

(5) Capital invested (100 million yen)

(6) Own capital (100 million yen)

(7) Fraction supplied by own capital
(percent)

(8) Research and development costs
(100 million yen)

. (9) Investment in facilities

' ”""“"“ "" mm" (100 million yen)

' £er4" “LL—"'“w (10) (No ) Co 1 d 1 I Hi hi
. te mpar son as e w t n tac
(.omparison of Principal Business 818 d a value of 100.

Scales Between Hitachi and Intel $1 . 230 yen. (1980 estimates for
Hitachi, 1981 reported for Intel)

 

-21.-

FOR OFFICIALUSE ONLY
'I-‘os omcw. use ONLY

1981 Performance of hajor American Semiconductor Makers
(Unit: 1 million dollars, percent. A: minus)

Growth Increase

Over Over

Previous Previous
Name of cmany Total Sales Year Net profit Year
Texas Instruents b,206.0(4.076.7) 3.2 108.5(212.2) “8.9
Motorola 13.335.90.086.” 8.1 175.0(186.l) A 6.0
Intel 788.7( 854.6) A7.7 27.“ 96.7) 071.7
Analog Devices 156.2( 135.7) 15.1 lo.6( 9.3) A50.5
American Micro Systems 160.7( 129.6) 8.7 7.9( 5.3) 83.7
Advanced Micro Devices 206.“ 229.1) 139.9 5.8( 19.5) A70.3
National Semiconductor 580.5( 593.0) A2.1 1.3( 30.2) 1395.7
Perkin Elmer 251.0( 252.1) AOJO 14.2( 16.6) A13.lo

Note: The values in ( ) are previous year's (same period) values. This
period is 9 months for Advanced Micro Devices, 28 weeks for National
Semiconductor, and 3 months for Perkin P.1mer. All other companies are
on an annual basis. Perkin Elmer is a maker of facilities to produce
semiconductors.

[17 Mar 82 p 5]
[Article by reporter Nonaka]

[Text] "The challenge from Japan regarding the silicon chip" has been the
wedge to rekindle the Japanese-American saiconductor war and even to esca-
late it as the VLSI era is entered (FORTUNE magazine of 23 March 1981). On
the other hand, the greatest challenge to the semiconductor makers of Silicon
Valley over the past several years has come from the majors (international oil
capital) and the giant conglomerate industries. These companies have highly
evaluated the future potential of IC and [.81 makers with high-level technologi—
cal strength and are using their abundant capital to launch a buying attack.

Seen as Forward Looking Moves

As shown in the accompanying table. the rate of purchase of American selli-
conductor companies increased sharply as the seventies was entered. Among the
industries interested in buying are Eamon and Schluaberger of France. which is
a major figure in oil exploration. and General Electric (62) and Phillips
which are integrated electric equipment makers of the United States and
Europe. General Electric has the special distinction of having retreated
from the semiconductor business 8 years ago. but it has ideas of making a
comeback and is said to be thinking of acquiring a leading company. lntersil.

This type of industry acquisition differs from what takes place in Japan. it
is only because the semiconductor. which is the prime force behind the elec—
tronics revolution. assures a future as a growth industry that giant indus~
tries rush in to try to buy them. while, on the other hand, the semiconductor
makers are eyeing the assurance of capital which they seek by all-out

-25-

MOFFIOALIISCONLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“. USE ONLY

participation in such deals. The valley people look on this series of buying
dramas as forward looking moves reflecting a dynamism which should he welcomed.

A symbolic example of the allure semiconductor makers have to the giant indus-
tries is the case of the takeover last December of American Hicro Systems
(AMI) by the Could Company, which is a large electronics, electrical machines.
and battery maker in the United States. Gould first displayed its interest

in the semiconductor industry in 1979 when it attempted to buy Pairchild and
Hostec but failed in its haste. but on the theory of "third time is the charm"
it acquired operating rights to AMI.

Aim for Industries With Technological Strength

It is only natural that takeovers are limited to those industries with techno-
logical strength. Ever since it became clear in January that the top maker of
micons, Intel, had its worst year last year, the talk among Wall Street stock
analysts has concerned "who will take over Intel." The same story may also be
applied to the third-ranking American company, National Semiconductor (us).
which also seems to be having difficulty with figures running in the red.

It may be said that the American semiconductor industries are in the midst of
readjustment and change from an age of ease. As the VLSI age is about to be
entered, the question of where the vast capital will come from has emerged.
and these trends have suddenly accelerated.

"Among the 36 companies which started operation before 1966, there are only
7 companies which can stand on their own in a completely independent manner"
(Survey Department of the Japan Choki Shinyo Bank).

Just as the American semiconductor makers were faced with this structural
change situation. the Japanese semiconductor makers grabbed the lead in pro-
duction of the first-generation VLSI product, the 64 kilobit RAM (random
write in and read out memory), and rushed into the American market. These
Japanese companies included Nippon Electric, Hitachi Limited. and Fujitsu as
well as many which were active in production of the 16 kilobit RAH which pre-
ceded the VLSI and latecomers to the 16 kilobit RAM field such as Mitsubishi
Electric and Oki Electric.

The American companies which were able to attempt to counter this onslaught
were limited to the large. independent maker Texas Instruents (this company
actually produced its goods at its plant in Japan) and Motorola, while a com-
pany such as Hostec which had come under the wings of another giant industry
was in the midst of revising its VLSI strategy and could not counter. At the
onset of the 66 kilobit RAH war. it was only natural that "the Japanese forces
took over a 70-percent share (fraction of the market) of the American market."

Aim for End of the 1980 Decade
0n the other hand. the VLSI war is "not limited to the 66 kilobit RAM but

concerns a long-term technology that will go into the l megabit class and
extend to the end of the 1980 decade" (President G.R. Moore of Intel).

- 26 _

FOR OFFIC1A1.U5210NLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ThoueAmerican semiconductor makers which have been able to fend off takeover
efforts and which have assured capital certainly can be making such long-range
plans and engage in active investment in facilities. looking at the trends
among semiconductor makers which have been taken over or have entered into
capital participation plans and the large independent makers with regard to
the scale of investment in facilities, it is evident that the investments by
those companies which came under the aegis of giant industries increased
tremendously, although they still fall below those of the giant industrial
systems where absolute sums are concerned. Among these conpanies, Hostec.
which was acquired in 1979 by the conglomerate United Technologies (UT)
which came to the fore as a primary air and space industry. doubled its
investment in facilities in 1980 to $850 million.

There is an overriding feeling that these reorganizationa within the American
semiconductor industry will be mostly completed within this year. The only
companies left for takeover are Intel and NS. The American strategy for the
cntlre 1980's decade will soon start revving up its engines. Should the
Japanese challenge escalate too much, the anti-Japanese criticism will not
only echo through the valley but will also incite the big businesses under
which these valley companies now operate.

Investment in Semiconductors (Unit: $1 million)

Large independent makers 1978 1979 1980
Texas Instruments 115 190 190
Intel 85 82 125
Motorola 72 159 200
National Semiconductor 69 70 90
Makers tied in to external capital 23 58 70
Fairchild 60 50 80
Slgnetics 22 42 65
Hostec 19 62 85

Note: Compiled with data from Morgan Stanley Electric Rater Dataquest
Company

-27-

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
o.oou
o.oou
o.ooa
o.ooa
o.ooa
o.oo~

Anouuum vau«==v vuaoo
Auouqum vouuaav no

Aaoaqnv acuucuonhoo unanaoh
Aooaduhv uuquAIsagom

Aooanuhv weaken-:Hzom
Amaulhoo uaolv acuﬂuam

°.ooH Accuaum vouunav unauoaon:OOH vouuun

o.ooH

..ooo
883388
a H

c o .
Q «1
«SN

Hc-C H

O
888

:5
c:
H

IAMMImwuomM

.3 1318
no couuuunm

GOOOOOOOOOOO

NB
HUN

Amounum vouuaav "Hosaocoa
Annuaum vouaaav “#035060:
Audacnv oauuooau gonna:
nuacuaun uaouov econ;
Aaauauoo uaosv on>
aquauoo noose ecu-own
Axon-you uaosv acoﬂuam
Aauqauoo uuoﬁv noaon
Acuauuun uaouov oucuuuom
Anvacquv BOUOAOH cuuzuuoz

Aauaasonv Augeauucu0ucn enouglaoo
Anal-sanv Hadoauucuoucu ouovoliou

Auouaum vauucpv :oﬁuu

$538: 2:32.— Soil: ﬁuoz

Asa-3 2.938 «38
onocaov shamans anonuuoz

 

naouomm one“: cooauoa<
Hanuouan

nunsuuuu vouuuuouau donut:
venues:

vauzuuwom
ououoavcoouaum o>dzonuuz

oouno:
zooudnhm

«oucouuoonm

oouaa< oacouuooau
nounoonaum

oauuuuoaom unaum nanom
noou>ovouowz coon->o<
wouuouuaa

nuouomoouuax anouuua<
cuunovuouau

HanuOuaH

suoucoum

huoaoazooh mo:

«OMAN

ooauocuam

nosonouuaz

D88. 35:28:

 

uo>o :oxaa unavcu

uo>o coxuh coon o>qm noun: unoxqz nauosvcouuaom :uuauua<
POI OFHCMI. USE ONLY

[l8 Mar 82 p 5]
[Article by reporter Monaka]

[Text] Every time friction in leading technological areas such as semiconduc-
tors surfaces between the United States and Japan, the name of the computer
giant IBM comes forth in line with the instigstor. During the open-door
problea involving the Japan Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation 3
years ago, IBM, which was aiming at taking over Japan's communicatons market,
appeared prominently. At that time, IBM stressed its "main role as shadow,"
but it is a fact that the presence of IBM served as a bluff (threat) in the
Japanese-American negotiations. The result of the public corporation situa-
tion was that IBM and the corporation entered into a closed license agreement
(mutual exchange of patents agreement), and the merit of an open-door situa—
tion was clearly demonstrated.

Agreement in Recognizing Anti-Japanese Strategy

The rapidly accelerating introduction to the American market since the begin-
ning of the year of the Japan-produced 66 kilobit RAM (random write in and
read out memory) has become a new hotspot in Japanese-American trade friction.
The SIA, (American Semiconductor Industry Association) with deep ties to the
government in Hashington, has escahted its anti-Japanese criticism. 0n the
other hand, the event that shook the concerned Japanese parties was the
appearance of the name IBM on the stage since the start of the ”Japanese-
American semiconductor war.”

it was said that IBM was talking to the Silicon Valley American semiconductor
makerg unorder to enter into joint production to counter the Japanese. This
news appeared in the 21 February edition of the San Francisco EXAMINER. This
was just preceding the Visi' of Mr Braki. chairman of the Special Investigat-
ing Committee on International Economic Measures and a Liberal Democratic
Party member, to the United States to discuss trade problems.

A secret meeting was held on 20 February at Oakland in Florida. Those present
besides IBM were the fourth-ranking National Semiconductor and eighth-ranking
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), and these companies were represented by vice
presidential level people. Although Hewlett—Packard and Intel also had been
invited, they were have said to have declined. The names of those participat-
ing are not accurately known, but a consensus was reached to the effect that
”in order to counter the Japanese makers. which possess such vast financial
strenguaworking under the subsidy of their government, American industry must
unite as one and enter joint production type cooperative efforts.”

Formal Participation in SIA

Talk that IBM would eventually be coming to the forefront of this Japanese-
Amurican semiconductor war was heard continuously during the past year. IBM,
which is the world's largest semiconductor maker, had joined the SIA, which
is the foremost critic of Japan, as the 66th regular member in December 1980.

- 29 -

FOI¢OFFKJAI.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SIA was organized in March 1977. spearheaded by five large nakers of the
valley including Intel and Mostec. The suiconductor makers, which were be-
coming increasingly aware of the Japanese menace, gradually were taken into
the SIA fold, and en lo April 1977 when then Prime Minister Fukuda, on a visit
to the United States. net with President Sanders of AMI) serving as a represen-
tative of the American industry, Sanders asked for the lowering of Japanese
duties and relief from the government-backed sales to the United States. This
was the starting skirmish of the Japanese-Aurican saiconductor war.

Tho entry of IBM. which in the past had been loath to join any specific trade
organization and now had becone a flag waver, into the SIA was a shock to
Japanese industry. with this new meaber, the SIA secured its position as the
sole representative of the American semiconductor industry. The only maker
which is not a meiaer is possibly Texas Instruments. which has production
plants in Japan. The SIA activities suddenly intensified. Hell-informed
sources say that ever since fellow state resident Reagan became President

of the United States, lobbying by the 81A in Washington has intensified to the

extent that it has been said: "There are many empty seats at board meetings
in the valley."

Various speculations have come forth with regard to the conference on joint
production between IBM and the valley semiconductor lakers. IBM adopted a
policy of outside purchase of the 60 kilobit RAM, which is the focal point
of the present Japanese-American semiconductor war. and the Japanese side has
taken over a 70 percent market share (fraction of thesarket) of this product,
so that IBM's source of supply may be endangered. If it acts in concert with
the SIA to fight against importation of the 66 kilobit RAM from Japan, it can
deal a blow to rival American computer lakers such as Honeywell. This is the
rationale given for engaging in these high-level tactics.

In any event, it is a fact that IBM has contributed to this reenerging seni-
conductor problem, md the SIA has begun to flaunt the threat of this power-
ful new "aid." where IBM is concerned, "the computer problem follows the
semiconductor"; IBM is probably planning to exploit the large administrative
force it displayed during the public corporation problem once again.

"It is said that the research and development budget for 1981 was more than
$1.6 billion, of which the greater part was seliconductor related," and for
this company which is also a "giant" in the semiconductor area to be pushed
to center stage shows the threat the Americans feel regarding the latent
capability of the Japanese makers.

-30-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Yorktown [Rights (Nov York)

:nt Rochester (Minnesota)
urtllcnt1 ilopovon Junction (Nov York)
nrtlnant2 Bone: Junction (Var-ant)
lrtncnt San Jon (California)

Tucson (Arizona)

mt Austin (Texas)

Int Kansans (Virginia)
Sindolfinsnn 00cc? Ger-any)
Cobolonmo (France)

Boobrinxcn ("not Gamay)

Zurich (Switzerland)

Noshu. Shin-ken (Japan)
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[19 rm 82 p 5]
[Article by reporter Kato]

[Text] Although it is not apparent on the surface, the 11.8. Department of
Defense is said to be strongly stressing an anti-Japanese regulatory stance.
The rise to the fore of Japanese semiconductors, and particularly VLSI (very
large scale integrated circuit) products such as the 64 kilobit BAH (random
write in and read out memory), has brought forth the statement that "This
production has risen to a level that will. overpower American domestic indus—
try, and this will make difficult any effective countermeasures in the event
of war” (HALL STREET JOURNAL of 5 February).

VLSI has become an instrument of national security and a strategic military
item in the United States. The cooon (anti-cmnist country export regula-
tory comittee) product list includes military goods, nuclear power related
equipment, and high precision tool machinery, together with single crystal
silicon wafers, semiconductor diodes, Ic (integrated circuitry). and many
other semiconductor and related industrial products.

Large Subsidies for VHSIC

The history of semiconductors from transistors to V1.51 is said to run on the
same track as that of American military technology. The military's VHSIC
(very high speed integrated circuitry) plan started in 1979 is an important
example in which military technology and VLSI development are codained into
a single development.

This plan has already gone past the preparatory research stage and is now on
the performance demonstration stage (1981-1984). This is a project in which
six large companies—Honeywell, Hughes Aircraft, Iii. Texas Instruments (TI),
TRH, and Westinghouse-are acting as prime contractors for the Department

of Defense and are working with their own cooperative makers with vast subsi-
dies from the army. navy and air force to further development of the next-
generation VLSI.

The developmental objectives include a microcomputer with the capability of
performing 12 billion multiplications and additions per second and an element
with a circuit line width of 0.5 micron (1 micron - l/l,000 millimeter) (a
M kilobit RAH has a circuit line width of 3 microns) which are "super-
super 1.81" with performance several stages above the 6b kilobit RAH or the 16
bit micon.

At the same time, these products must be able to operate normally under very
harsh conditions such as exposure to high-level ionizing radiation and temper-
ature extremes of -55'C to +125'C.

The Defense Department hopes to apply this "super-super LSI" develOpment to
set up a battlefield information system or in radar in fighter planes to
assure itself military superiority. The 0.8. Government plans to provide
$200 million in subsidies to promote the VHSIC plan, and this sum is expected

to grow considerably .

-32...

PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

0.5. Government in Anti-Japanese Regulatory Stance

Preceding these events, although limited toonly a single product, the Japanese
forces overwhelmed the American forces in the initial conflict over the 64
kllobit RAM, and the Defense Department is seen to have increased anxieties
over future national security. The 0.8. Government, which had played a paci-
fying role with regard to the complaints of the SIA (American semiconductor
Industrial association) during the previous friction, made a complete turn-
around this time to take the lead in the anti-Japanese movement.

Secretary Baldridge of the Commerce Department said: "He cannot ignore (the
Japanese onslaught)"; the move by one sector of the top-level executive arm of
the government to evoke the provisions of the 1962 commerce expansion law on
"national security items," Article 232, to clamp down on Japaneaeomade semi-
conductors is none other than a manifestation that the direction taken in the
VLSI war was having great influence on the development of military technology.

The military is waving the flag for a "strong America," while President Reagan
has made balance in military might with the Soviets one of his "sacred areas."
The retaliation against anyone who trespaases on these "sacred areas is
severe." nmmediately after the rekindling of friction, the Department of
Commerce directed a statement to the six large makers "to promote development
and production of 256 kilobit RAM and the 1 megabit RAH and to be prudent

with statements that incite the country"-an unusual request. This, too,
eventually boils down to a violation of sacred areas and calls for a special
alert against uncalled for counterreactions.

The American semiconductor industry aside, in the midst of the uncertainties
of the private and industrial areas, there is continued growth in the mili-
tary, space, and air spheres. According to a survey made by the American
large semiconductor company ICE, the market scale for IC in 1981 for military,
space, and air increased 23 percent over the previous year, to more than

$600 million. Individual companies involved include Texas Instruments,
National Semiconductor, and Signetics, which are supplies at the $70 million
level.

In Japan, the Defense Agency recently issued contracts to large semiconductor
makers for research and development on a CCD (charge coupled device) with
infrared detection capability for missiles and tanks to be used as enemy
search units; this country has recently become very aware of the ties between
defense and LSI. 0n the other hand, the main strength of the Japanese semi-
conductor industry has been in the private and industrial areas, and there is
little likelihood of any change in this situation in the near future.

Cost Difference Between Military and Private Sectors

The production cost of ordinary IC in the United States is said to be $2 per
unit in the private area and $40 in the military area--a wide difference.
The government takes care of the cost end where the military is concerned,

and there is no reluctance to allow high-level leading technology development.
This is an appealing market for the semiconductor maker. 0n the other hand,

- 33 -

FOR¢0I11C1AI.1EHE(HVLY
[C Plan: Performance Demnstral

Subsidy Branch of
Q1 million) A331 Force:

19.9 0.5. Air Fot
27.4 0.5. Any

19.9 11.8. Navy
22.7 0.8. Any
34.1. 0.8. Navy
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(MVLY

too much dependence on the military results in loss of cost control, as well as
the fact that development of other market areas and of new products suffers.
lho clash between the private industry-oriented Japanese forces and the mili-
tary-oriented American forces is now about to commence.

[20 liar 82 p 5)
[Article by reporter Kato]

[Text] A party to announce the formation of the "High-Speed Calculation Sys-
tem for Scientific and Technological Research Use" was held at the Hotel Okura
in Hinato-ku in Tokyo on 12 March. The party was attended by President Takunao
Yamamoto of Fujitsu, who will serve as chairman of the board of directors, as
well as by executives of semiconductor and computer companies along with top
government figures. and talk was directed at developing production for the

21st century.

Director Seiichi lshizaka of the HITI's Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology made a speech which was prefaced by the statement that "Recently
we have had the opportunity to read more articles written by foreign corre-
spondents," followed by "When the Americans hear of this party, concerned
people in the United States will become even more excited."

Director Ishizaka was right. "The advancement of large sums of money by the
Japanese Government to subsidize VLSI (very large scale integrated circuit)

development is outrageous" is the criticism which has flared up anew on the

American side.

Large Makers Take Divided Charge of Element Development

The objective of this group is the establishment of a practical technology

for a super computer to perform work such as aerodynamic computations asso-
ciated with aircraft and treatment of graphic information transmitted by
satellite which cannot be undertaken by the present generation computers. One
phase of this project is the development of new high-speed logic (logic ele-
ment) and memory (memory) to replace the silicon used at present; this effort
is being broken down into different categories, of which the large makers of
the industry will take charge of development. including: 1) Josephson
coupling element. 2) BENT (high degree of electron mobility transfer)
transistor, and 3) gallium arsenide electric field effect transistor.

On 12 February. about a month before the organization of this group, a party
commemorating the formation of the "New Capability Element Research and Devel-
opment Association" formed in conjunction with the establishment of the basic
technological research and development system of the neat-generation industry
by MIT! was held at the same site. This association also announced targets
for development to be used in the next-generation VLSI:. 1) super lattice
elements, 2) three-dimensional circuit elements. and 3) environment resis-
tant elements. At this party. former Prime Minister Takio Tanaka of the
Liberal Democratic Party wore a necktie pin adorned with an IC (integrated
circuit) which had been presented by Mr Suzuki 10 years before when he had
visited a certain semiconductor plant, and he encouraged the industrial
leaders gathered around to "dig in.”

- 35 -

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOI!OFFK1AL.USE(MNLY

Both of these organizations are slated to receive more than 200 billion yen in
subsidies from the government over the next 10 years. The contributions of the
constituent members, which are private companies. are expected to top the gov-
ernment subsidy level. It is easy to see why the American side. which fell
behind in its initial skirmish on VLSI. is keeping a very wary eye on the re-
search and development system for the next-generation VLSI on the part of the
Japanese.

There Are Also Large Subsidies in the United States

On the other hand. it cannot be said that the American criticisms are COIP
pletely on target. There is the VHSIC (very high speed integrated circuit)
which is being promoted mainly by the Department of Defense, in addition to
subsidies granted by NASA (National Air and Space Administration). the USP
(National Science Poundation), and the Department of Energy to promote VLSI
research and development. It may be said that the Americans and Japanese are
roughly on an equal footing where research and development systems and govern-
ment subsidies are concerned.

In fact. the Japanese subsidies have provisions for some form of return through
profit payments after a fixed period, which is very close to a no-interest loan;
the Japanese companies have to operate under more severe conditions compared

to the one-way handout of the U.S. Government subsidy plan.

Certainly, the Japanese Government has played a major role in the development
of Japan's semiconductor industry. The "Kiden Law" enacted in 1971 (special
law on management of certain electronic industries and electrical machine in-
dustries) clearly spells out the plan to raise the level of the semiconductor
industry (Article 3) and even states that the government will serve to assure
funds and make loans (Article 5). One factor responsible for the growth of
the Japanese semiconductor industry to the l-trillion-yen level in 1981 is
the government and the skillful manner in which the Ministry of Industry and
International Trade guided the development.

In other words, the criticism the American side levels against the Japanese
VLSI research and development system may be a rehashing of the "criticism of
Japan Inc." in somewhat modified form. Recently, the influential American
economic magazine FORTUNE compiled a survey of Japanese and American business
leaders' opinions. One of the questions asked was: "Of the two countries,
the United States and Japan, which gives its businesses greater capacity
where regulations and administrative actions are concerned?" and 76 percent
of the 491 American business heads who replied cited Japan.

SIA Looks for Favorable Plan

As a result, there is considerable feeling that the true aim of the recent
SlA (American Semiconductor Industry Association) criticism of Japan is to
make Japan the scapegoat and thus extract very favorable treatment from the
U.S. Government. The fact that it even criticizes the adversary country's
research and development plan on the next-generation VLSI indicates that
should it change its stance, this will result in internal government inter-

ference.

- 36 -

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
POI OFFICIAL USEONLV

up that as it may, it is evident from the fact that the 0.8. Department of
Defense has been drawn into the picture that this present friction has gone
beyond the private sector and industry level to come to the national security
level where the electronics revolution and VLSI development are involved.
Thus. we can expect some emotional outbursts as this friction develops from
industry versus industry to the stage of govern-cot versus goverment.

Research and DevelopIIent Organisation for Meat Generation V1.81

Research Theme Private Contractor
New Capability 1. Super lattice element Fujitsu. Sumitomo Electric
Element Research 2. Three-dimensional Industries, Hitachi. Nippon
and Development circuit elusnt Electric, Oki, Sharp, Toshiba.
Association Mitsubishi mectric,

Matsushita, Sanyo Electric
3. Environment resistant llitachi, Toshiba,

reinforced element Mitsubishi Slectric
High-Speed Coaput- l. Josephson element Fujitsu, Hitachi.
ing System for Nippon Electric
Scientific and 2. m Fujitsu, Oki
Technological Re- 3. Gallium arsenide (Logic) Hitachi, Mitsubishi
search Use (new electric field Electric
element research effect transistor (Memory) Nippon Electric,
section only) Toshiba.

[22 Mar 82 p 5]
[Article by reporter Nonaka]

[Text] On 16 February, the seventh ranking semiconductor maker in the world,
the American Pairchild Company, disclosed its plan to move into Japan. Presi-
dent Robert Skarko of Pairchild Japan, which is this coupany's Japan-based
corporation, who was interviewed by this reporter at the Keidanren liall in
Otc-machi, Tokyo, announced: "He will invest about 21 billion yen in the
construction of an integrated IC plant at the Isahaya industrial park in
Isahaya City, Nagasaki Prefecture, which we hope to complete by M85."

Ain at Opening Market in China

Pairchild merged with Tokyo Denka Kagaku Kogyo (TDK) in 1971 and has a history
of making plans to enter the Japanese market while retrenching. Despite such
a background, it now plans to start a lavish production program at its lsahaya
plant, but when the reporter asked "What will be the production scale?"

and "Hhat sales volt-e will you be striving for?". President Skarko avoided
any definite answers. ”He will initiate operations next August for asselialy
of the logic 1c and linear 1c which are in such high demand in Japan" was all
that he would offer.

it is said that the key to this closemouthed stance is China. Schluberger of
France, which took over Fairchild in 1979, held a directors meeting which acted

-37-

POI OFFICIAL l5! ONLY
FOR (WI-THAI. USE ONLY

upon the plans to enter Japan and at the same time reportedly made the decision
to route the production of its lsahaya plant to China. Schlulberger, which is
known worldwide as an oil eXplorer, previously put forward a plan to partici-
pate ln the technological end of oil field exploration in China and has long
had its eye on the Chinese market. The reason behind the decision to locate
its semiconductor production site in Japan at Isshaya is said to be the proxi—
mity of this city to the Nagasaki airport. which is one terminal of regular
China-Japan air service which will facilitate any approach to the Chinese
market.

This is the first effort by any American semiconductor maker to initiate a
trade strategy aimed at China, and one can understand why Fairchild is unwill-
ing to reveal the production plans for its Isahaya plant.

The world's largest semiconductor maker, the 0.8. Texas Instruments (TI), has
started production of 66 kilobit RAM at its Hiho plant in Ibaraki Prefecture
and has assigned this plant to be its VLSI supply base.

The design center which will be the site for circuit design and development
which the top micon company. Intel of the United States. constructed at the
Tsukuha Research and Academic City in Ibaraki has been completed. This com-
pany will set out to develop new products here destined for the world market.

The top radio communications maker and sec0nd semiconductor maker in the
United States. Motorola. merged its three subsidiary plants in Japan for which
it advanced all the capital and established Japan Motorola, and it plans to
set up a VLSI mass production plant in the Kyushu area.

Exploit Superior Brainpower

These arc all events which have taken place during the past year. The various
American makers are stepping up their activities in Japan and have made their
Japanese companies large pillars in their worldwide strategy. "Japan is the
second largest market next to the United States and it has great growth poten-
tial" (President Condon E. Moore of Intel) is typical of the expectations of
Americans. and they intend to exploit to the maximum degree the concentration
of hrainpower and the highly productive labor force.

0n [7 March, TI gave the recession (business stagnation) as the reason for
releasing about 3 percent of its work force. 1,700 workers. indefinitely (no
definite rchiring date. temporary discharge from work). These layoffs were

to Lake place at the Houston and Dallas plants and to involve workers in semi-
conductor plants. This is a good reflection of the status of the American
semiconductor industry, which is suffering from the longlasting recession,
while Ti's Japanese company is putting fancy ads in newspapers and magazines
to the effect that "Join J. Kilbey (the technologist who developed the first
[C in the world in 1958) in his second effort to push the micron limit" as

it goes all-out for manpower.

Following Fairchild and its decision to locate a production site in Japan,
intcl, which completed its design center to give it a foothold in this busi-
ness, and AMD laid plans to build plants in Japan in 1983: the activities of

- 3g -

INDR 0F1ﬁ(]Al.lEﬂE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIM. US}: ONLY

American companies have become quite noticeable. Leading American maker Analog
Devices, eyeing development in Japan for semiconductor type products such as
the ADconverter (semiconductor which converts analog information into digital
infatuation) used in VTR and audio, completed a technical center at Taukui in
Kanagawa Prefecture and will soon start actual production. In this way, the
number of companies locating plants in Japan is increasing.

Japanese Side Strengthening Its Plants

0n the other side of the picture, leading Japanese makers such as ﬂippon Elec-
tric, Hitachi Limited, Toshiba Corporation, and Fujitsu all are producing to

at their plants located in the United States. and some rapid moves are being
made to locate second plants. Nippon Electric is investing roughly 20 billion
yen to build a VLSI production plant in Roseville City in California, where it
plans to produce 3 million units of VLSI products including the 66 kilobit RAH;
this will be its second plant.

That is to say. the business strategy of the Japanese and American semiconduc-
tor makers has shifted from semiconductor trade to emphasis on locating plants
on the other country's home ground. Electronic Industrial Association of

Japan (president, Sadakuzu Shindo, president of Mitsubishi Electric) which has
been keeping close watch being concerned about the rekindling of the Japanese-
American semiconductor war refuted that “capital investment and technology
exchange have already been actively conducted in the form of mutual extensions,
and the semiconductor industries of both countries are in mutually supplemen-
tary relationships' based on the above stated background.

This era of mutual extension on the part of Japanese and American makers
actually involves the siting of plants on the home soil of the adversary.
Compared to the situation in which all four of Japan's top makers are "in
step" locating in the American market, the advance of the American companies
into Japanese territory is only just beginning. As can be seen by Pairchild's
move to construct a plant for production aimed at China, the strategies of the
American makers may involve some very clever ideas. The Japanese companies,
which know only too well the "threat of the United States when it gets down to
brass tacks," are increasing their guard against the moves of the American
makers, which threaten to jump in and reach deep down into the pockets of the
Japanese market and establish VLSI production strongholds.

- 39 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hutual Extensions of Japanese and American Semiconductor Halters
(* Indicates Planned Contraction)

Name of Egan: Plant Site

(Japanese side)

Nippon Electric NBC Semiconductor America Mountain View. California
Roaeville, California

Hitachi Limited Hitachi Seniconductor America Dallas. Texas

Toshiba Toshiba Semiconductor USA Sunnyvale, California
Corporation
Fujitsu Fujitsu Hicroelectronics San Diego. California

(American side)

Texas Instruents Japan Texas Instruments Hinode-nachi. Dita-ken;
Kamogaya-shi. Sait-a-ken

Motorola Japan Motorola Shiokawa-machi. Pukushima-
ken (Joint with Kaiau Toke)

Fairchild Pairchild Japan Isahaya-shi, Nagasaki-ken

Analog Devices Analog Devices of Japan ShiroyaIa-nachi. Tsukui-gun,
Kanagawa-ken

Intel Intel Japan Tsukuba Research and

Academic City . lbaraki-ken
[26 Mar 82 p 5]

[Article by reporter Nonaka]

[Text] It was when the deputy 0811! (United States Trade Representative),
MacDonald. visited Japan to attend a Japanese-American trade subco-ittee
meeting and American denands to open up the Japanese market were increasing
day by day that "Japanese challenge in the leading technology area of seni-
conductors" (Secretary Baldridge of the Department of Co-erce) had become
the top focal point in the Japa'neseAmerican friction.

ilitachi with Pine Act

Hitachi stepped forward to play the role of temporarily pacifying this "con-
centrated firepower" (industrial leaders) of anti-Japanese criticism with
regard to semiconductors. Hitachi on 2 March had announced a technological
agreement with the large American electronic equipment maker Hewlett-Packard
(IIP) in the field of 66 kilobit RAM for VLSI (very large scale integrated
circuit). Just when the SIA (American Semiconductor Industry Association)
was screaming for import regulations on Japanese-Iade 66 kilobit RA“, Hitachi

demonstrated a stunt blowing away the rumor that Hitachi is lacking in poli-
tical sensitivity.

-40-

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry, which has the role of being
a leader for the development of the Japanese semiconductor industry, praised
this effort highly. The Hitachi statement coincided unexpectedly with a
press meeting following a cabinet meeting and the minister of international
trade and industry made the following statement:

"There has been an active interchange of capital and technology in the past
regarding semiconductors between the United States and Japan. The ii? and
Hitachi agreement is one of good exnples that show the fact that Japan recog-
nizes the importance of cooperative relationship and the need to exist even
in the foremost technological field of the 66 K RAH.

This agreement stipulated that Hitachi would provide ii? with N channel nos
(metal oxide film semiconductor) process technology to produce 3-micron-width
(a micron is 1/1000 of a millimeter) circuits for the 610 kilobit RAM and the
mask-producing technology which HP hopes to use to mass-produce 6b kilobit
RAM for use in minieowuters and measurement equipment. This is the first
case in which a member of the Japanese semiconductor industry has entered into
a cooperative agreement with a foreign comany on the 64 kilobit RAM.

The Japanese makers succeeded in capturing 70 percent of the market share
(fraction of the market) for 64 kilobit RAH. Hitachi is the top maker and has
garnered 50 percent of the share. so it has been subjected to fierce criticism
from the American side. and it probably considered that it had the responsi-
bility of taking the lead to avoid this friction from the standpoint of "the
nation's interest" (Hitachi top figure).

It is known that HP had previously given a high evaluation of Japanese-made
semiconductors based on their exceptionally low reject rate. When computer
makers and similar cowanies purchase semiconductor products, they try to
diffuse the risk by making product purchase contracts with two or more com-
panies. 0n the other hand, this present agreement between these two com-
panies relates to the provision of production technology, and even though
HP had favored Japan, the shock was nevertheless great.

Unexpected Reaction by American Side

However, the reaction of the American semiconductor makers of Silicon Valley
was not what Uitachi (or the ministry of International Trade and Industry) had
expected. Hell-informed sources had reported that: "They in the valley who
have been worried that the Japanese are rapidly gaining upon them feel that
our self respect has been trmled." As proof of this statement. the sources
state that the U.S. semiconductor industry suddenly started to move toward a
duping suit for the principal instigator).

Hitachiand lil’ are chanions of leading technology and this agreement between
the two drew attention to the situation that the cooperative efforts between
industries in the semiconductor area was accelerating on an international
scale. There is particularly fast formation of the second-source (secondary
supplier) family among leading semiconductor makers of Japan. the United
States. and Europe in securing the microcoqiuter which is the promoter of the
electronics revolution.

-41-

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This family inturrclutioushlp network links Intel with Nlppun Electric and
Fujitsu and also Motorola with Hitachi. so that companies which are fiercely
fighting each other in the semiconductor friction are holding hands. 0n

2 March when Hitachi announced its agreement with HP, it had people present in
New York at the announcement of the 32 bit micon by Motorola, and they stated
there that Hitachi will develop a peripheral equip-ant business as a second-
source maker for Motorola.

To be sure, cooperative agreements between American industries are also popu-
lar. Among these, the agreement between Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) and
Intel which is slated to continue for more than 10 years was a source of great
surprise to others in the industry. This involves AMD becoming the second
source for the 16 bit micon "8086" developed by Intel, which is why the con-
tract was signed; the scope of the agreement includes semiconductor devices
which will be developed in the future.

In addition, three companies-RCA, semiconductor maker Signetics of the United
States, and Phillips of Holland-have entered into joint development of CMOS
(complementary metal oxide film semiconductor) structured logic IC (integrated
circuit for logic circuit use), while Intel and General Electric are planning
to enter into a technological agreement on production of new semiconductors.
It is a busy situation at present.

As the situation of "bitter enemies in the same boat" was about to appear
among the giant makers as the VLSI age was being entered, Hitachi, which had
previously been active in cross license agree-ents (technological exchange),
hoped to exploit this approach to dissipate the friction. This is a situa-
tion in which national boundaries were crossed over, and a Japanese maker
took the initiative to participate in agreements. Toshiba Corporation had
beat out the sparks of this friction before they got to Europe, and it
announced technological cooperation with the Italian semiconductor maker
SGS-ATES.

while trade friction including semiconductors was spreading. there was a ten-
dency for the castigation fight to escalate between Japan and the United
States and even Europe. but there is a good probability that there will be
agreement between giant industries on the basis of a single technology,
multiple technology, or joint management in order to assure a future.

- 42 -

FOItOIWWCJAI.USl1MMLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL [88 ONLY

16 Hicon Family Relationship Diagra-

?roduct Type and

)eveloat Maker Second Source

V8086

Intel, United States llippon Electric
Fujitsu

Hitsuhishi Electric
no. United States
ﬂarris, United States
Sis-ans, west Gamay
lutora Barrio. France

V68000

Motorola. United States Hitachi Lilited
Hostac, United States
Rockwell, United States
Signetics, United States
Tho-son 681', France
Phillips, Holland

VZBOOO

Zylog, United States Sharp
SOs-A118, Italy

VTHS9900

Texas lnstrulents. United States Mil. United States

111, Best Ger-any
[27 Mar 82 p 5)
[Article by reporter Kato]

[Text] At about the tile of the rekindling of the Japanese-Merican seni-
couluctor friction in the niddle of February, the 1982 1880c (International
Solid State Circuit Conference) was opened in San Francisco in the United
States.

The Isscc provides the platform to which leading specialists from the seni-
oonductor lake" and research organscole to disclose their latest leading
technology and new products; a 32 bit nicon was announced last year which
drew great interest fro- people concerned both in the United States and
abroad.

To Be Developed by 1985 Period

0n the other hand, there was no single iten at this year's Isscc which drew
such interest. In its place special-use 1.81 (large scale integrated circuit),
with the custoners needs the prinary consideration. and design techniques for
VLSK were proninent in their umber. ‘l'he specialty of the Japanese semicon-
ductor mkers,'the low power consuqtion ODS (complementary netal oxide film
seniconductor) product. was the Iain attraction at this conference. It nay
be said that this conference was one which featured illprovenent of present
technology and discussed possible extensions.

-43-

POI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

)in-ctur Hakotn Kikuike of Sony's Central Laboratory said: "The world's seni-
mnductor industry has (setting aside product growth but considering the tech-
nological aspects) reached a stage of maturity." Hr Kikuike is one of the
pathfinders of Japan's semiconductor industry. "The news of the invention of
the transistor was one such event, and up till the present time, one never
knew what new seaiconductor developments would be forthcoming"; this has been
an age when this stimulating situation continued. But now. basic technology
and material development and discovery have virtually been completed.

The Kilbey patent, which involves placing a number of transistor and resis-
tance type elements on a single chip (small piece) of silicon base plate, and
the Planar patent by which a thin Mane is utilised to form many elenents
on a silicon base plate type basic technology came to the fore before 1975,
while the eighties are expected to be taken over by nos (metal oxide film semi-
conductor), semiconductor laser, and optical fiber type main line products of
the present electronic revolution. The basic research and development stage
for the one chip micon and (:00 (charged coupled device) were essentially com-
plete by the sixties. The Josephson element. which is in the spotlight as the
lost promising element of the next generation VLSI, already had its basic
theory developed about 1962.

Fmphas i a on Imp rov ing Product ion Technology

Certainly. semiconductor industrial technological development is continuing at
a rapid tempo at present, and the race to produce a higher degree of integra-
tion or reduce computer computation time is taking place with no respite in
sight. 0n the other hand, these are only extensions of existing technology;
the developmental objectives are already fixed to a certain degree. "Devel-
opment is such that the end result can be foreseen, and it is not true
technological innovation" (Hr Kikuike) is the type of statement one hears.

Certainly there still remains the possibility of some epochmaking technological
revolution rivaling that of the transistor and 10, but the activities in the
semiconductor field. which is now entering the stage of aaturity, are now be-
ing shifted to application technology, cost reduction, and higher reliability.
The technological agreement between Hitachi Limited and Hewlett-Packard and
the recent wave of technological agreements between giant American industries
are all part of this same trend.

Japan is weak in developing creative technology but is superior in applied and
production technology-«he present resurgence in friction between these two
countries probably incorporates some of the Anerican irritation caused by this
Japanese trait.

Very recently. two cowanics. Toshiba (brporation and Hitachi Limited.
announced a new element separation technology which allows circuit design of

1 micron (1/1000 of a millimeter) and submicron (less than 1 micron) width.
Nippon Electric is presently constructing a new plant which can handle 5-inch-
diameter silicon wafers (present 4 inch) in order to improve yield. Fujitsu
has developed gate arrays with a gate nuber (volume of information by logic
circuit elements) of 10.000, placing this inthe top class in the world as a

-44-

FOR OFFICIAL L88 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rcprt‘st-ntntlvc product ur ILM semicustoe (partially special order) LS! nim'k,
while SONY has developed a new method for mamfacturing high class silicon
single crystals called the "H02 (crystal drawing utilising strong magnetic
field) method." In this manner. developments in application and production
technology are actively continuing in Japan.

"hat la the Friction?

These abundant application and production technology efforts are being
achieved by the large Japanese semiconductor makers, most ofwhom are entering
into closed license (technological exchange) agreements with large American
makers. thereby mutually canceling technological cost payments. The payments
made by this country's semiconductor makers in technological fees maounted to
about 10 percent of the total sales up to the latter part of the sixties,
about the time mass production of 1c was becoming a reality. "He paid high
tuition" (head of industry) was the type of co-ent made. On the other hand,
the timelimit of 15 years has expired for basic patents such as the Kilbey
and Planar patents. and there has been a large decrease in such payments, so
that top coapanies such as Ilippon Electric now only pay out about 1 percent
for such rights.

In this period of maturity where development and discovery of creative tech-
nology are dying down, high reliability and low cost are taking over. The
Japanese export of memory to the United States had its start with the 6 kilo-
bit RAH (random write in and read out memory) in 1975, followed by the 16
kilobit RAH that captured #0 percent of the market share (fraction of the
market) and still later by the 64 kilobit RAH which took over a 70-percent
market share. all of which were the result of superior mass production tech-
nology and quality quality. Assuming there will be no new development similar
to the one chip micon, which utterly devastated Japan, Japanese-American
seaiconductor friction nay only now be starting.

Main Technological Innovations in Semiconductors

 

Year
191.8 Junction transistor
1950 Single crystal drawing nethod
1951 Electric field effect transistor
1951. Vapor phase diffusion nethod
1959 Kilbey patent (1c)
" Planar patent
1960 nos transistor
1962 Semiconductor laser oscillation
" Josephson element theory
1965 Optical fiber
1968 Hos-1c
1970 CC!)
1971 Hicon
1970 Electron beam exposure system

-45..

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ'lf‘Ml. IN: ONLY

I29 Mnr 82 p 5]
[Reporters roundtable]

[Text] The conflict between Japan and America over the standardbearer V1.81
(very large scale integrated circuit) of the electronics revolution is expected
to intensify and will certainly not abate. This series has discussed the back-
ground of this Japanese-American semiconductor friction along with the responses
to the various attempts at resolution. and has described the status of past
Japanese-American struggles over VLSI. This final article consists of a
roundtable discussion among desk people and the various reporters.

Complexity of Background Is Problem

Desk: The semiconductor is one of the items of great concern to the ‘J.S.
Covert-est, which is actively trying to open up the Japanese market. After
being excluded from the Versailles sun-it, the Japanese-Andean friction
seems to have the potential of turning around.

A: Hardly anybody even in the industry expected that the 0.3. Government would
step to the forefront in the semiconductor problem. There are some who say:
"This is the result of President Reagan being from California. where Silicon
Valley is located." Such being the case. there are other products of great
concern to the u.s. Government such as oranges and beef, which are also pro-
duced in California. President Hiroji Kobayashi of Nippon Electric said:

"This present friction is not one which will be resolved by semiconductors
alone" as he alluded to the comlexity of the background of this present
controversy.

B: The elevation to the forefront of the opening of the Japanese market to
semiconductors by the U.S. Government has been met head on by the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry. The duties have dropped to the same level.
mutual advances in construction in the other's country and technological
agreements have multiplied. so there should be no cause for complaint. Even
regarding the issue of participation by American industries in Japan, at the
government-industry research and development organ meetings we have no recol-
lection of the American tubers being barred from participation. As Under
Secretary Fujiwara of the Hinistry of International Trade and Industry said
at the outset of this recurrence of friction: "The semiconductor war is a war
without a battlefield." as he pointed to the difficulty in attaining a solu-
:10".

A: Even at that, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry has consid-
erable concern with regard to the United States. The statement to the heads
of the large semiconductor makers "no not make any statements that will incite
the United States" is an extreme example of this stance. At the same time,
ever since the recurrence in friction. all the companies have had to keep
their mouths shut with regard to plans for future increase in production of

64 kilobit RAH (random write in and read out memory). It is now almost impos-
sible to discuss any plans on next-generation VLSI development. If the U.S.
Government is out to suppress leading technology in Japan, there is no telling
what unreasonable demands will be forthcoming.

-46-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL lSE ONLY

Dispel the buying Problem

Desk: There was a time when dumping of Japanese semiconductors seemed to be
emerging as a problem. "hat is the situation today?

I: There is no clearcut picture as yet. but the su (American Semiconductor
Industry Association) did ask the Department of Co-erce to investigate dimp-
ing. and it is said that one cowany, Motorola, is pushing this request. The
0.8. (Ioverl-ent does not appear likely to act on this request without definite
proof and seems to be simply making some checks.

A: There is one industrial leader who said: ”If there is to be a check on
duping. let them do it right." The dumping problem has been a bitter exper-
ience for many of these companies became they experienced the sue problem
which required 12 years to resolve in the matter of color TV. They seem to
be saying: "There is absolutely no dumping." There have been some companies
which since the recurrence of this friction have issued strict orders not to
be stuck with trifling incidents when dealing with American sales bases.

3: it is said that all of the Japanese makers with plants in the United States
are consistently making a profit, while the American companies are feeling the
effects of the recession, and the dumping problem is not one which any of the
companies seems to be deeply concerned about. An official of one company with
small export volume said: "If we should go to any excesses to expand our ex-
ports. we will be under severe peer pressure."

Desk: It seems that the formal announcement by Fairchild, which is nimber 7
among the world's semiconductor makers, that it will locate a plant in Japan
came directly after this friction flared up again.

8: Setting aside this recurrence in friction, there is considerable desire on
the part of American semiconductor makers to locate in Japan. The success of
Texas Instruments (Tl), which advanced to Japan in 1968, seen to be serving
as a stimulus. The profit statements of Japan TI have trended toward higher
levels over the past years tothe lo—billion-yen level, and last year the profit
statement was also good. The reason TI is able to supply a large volume of

64 kilobit RM to the American market along with the Japanese makers is be-
cause its plant in Japan (Hiho in Ibaraki-ken) is well equipped for mass
production.

A: The head of a certain foreign financed firm said that there is no other
customer like a Japanese user who sets such severe standards on quality and
delivery time. These practices, on the other hand, have contributed to the
improved reliability of Japanese products. The feedback effect of production
technology acquired in Japan is not something that can be taken lightly.

B: Ti, which early in the game established an internationally diversified
industrial system, has been at odds with the SH on this semiconductor fric-
tion problem from fairly early in the game. At the time of the previous
friction. President Shefford said: "Criticism of Japanese semiconductors is
off base. Rather than complain. you should be working toward expanding ex-
ports." Last year President Busey said at the stockholders general meeting:

-47-

me OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"He will not knock our competitors at this meeting. He will bring our fight
to the market." This is why there even has been a statement from among the
American makers that "anti-Japanese criticism is most vehement from the
median- and small-business located in the valley. The real source of this
criticism is the American meditr and small-business problem.

A: This is why the changes taking place on the American scene. such as take-
overs by large industries and cooperative agreements between giant industries.
may serve to ease this friction somewhat.

Do Not Trip in the Moves to the United States

Desk: "Hhat about the advances of Japanese makers in locating plants in the
United States?

A: It is said that very recently a certain Japanese maker was approached by
an American firm to ask if it could make use of an idle production line. The
labor situation and improved service to customers are still strong incentives
to locate plants in the United States. This can also be an excellent means to
further Japanese-American exchange and equalize opportunities.

3: It is not as simple as that. The problem in the United States at present
is not whether a semiconductor is made in Japan but whether it is made by
Japan. There is probably some emotional factor that a VLSI upon which Japanese
breath has spread itself is not good. This is not a problem to be solved
simply by locating plants in the United States.

Desk: If that is the case, it would be difficult even to set up a counterplan.

A: President Kobayashi of Nippon Electric said: "The Americans detest ambig—
uous responses most of all," but it is possible that Japan may develop its own
technology that is so creative that even the Americans will have to show
respect and thus put an end to this friction. Very recently, Japan's semi-
conductor technology has closed up considerably on the United States and has
own been able to surpass the Americans in some products. although it still
lags considerably behind in basic research and future technology creative
strength.

3: Adults and children do not engage in fights. In this sense the semicon-
ductor conflict signifies that the Japanese have come rather close to the
Americans. Hhen we look at the situation in the United States. where the
major oil companies and integrated electrical makers are getting into the
semiconductor field. future Japanese-American semiconductor production will
become adult vErsus adult confrontations. Both sides have strong parental
(goverment) support, but there is a good chance for this friction to take
on other forms.

-43-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

History of Japanese-Alerican Semiconductor Friction

1977 Harcb
April

1978 March

Decedaer
1979 Hove-bar

1980 January
1981 March
Hay

Septedaer
December

1982 February

81A is formed

81A leaders confer vith visiting Prina Minister Pukuda on
It: problem

81A ne-bsrs call for boycott of Japanese products

Hinistry of International Trade and Industry established VLSI
patent disclosures

General survey by 11": on 18 initiated

Semiconductor white paper submitted by 110 on Japan-nade
semiconductors

SIA submits complaint to 0813
USTR announced the SM complaint is without foundation
SIA proposes industrial promotion plan to government

Prime Minister Suzuki announces plan to lower duties on 1c
at meeting of heads of Japan and the United States

Japanese and 0.8. Covert-eats fornally announce lowering of
1c duties

Share of Japan—made 66 K R»! on the American market hits 70
percent

81A proposes anti-Japanese regulations to USTR. Secretary of
Comerce Baldridge makes severe anti-Japanese criticism

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shilbmsha 1982

9923

C80: 8129/1084-0

-49-

roe omcm use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPANESE-0.8. $34100"me CGiPBTITION, CMPBRATION
Tokyo DBRPA SHIHBUN in Japanese 29 Mar 82 pp 17-32
[Text] Japanese-American Semiconductor Friction, First Establish Facts

The semiconductor trade problem has again been stirred up since the beginning
of this year. The American criticism of the Japanese is almost as intense as
though it were breathing fire.

The bone of contention this time is that the Japanese have captured a 70-
percent share of the American market in 64 K RAM, and if this situation con-
tinues, the United States will be ousted from the top rank in the matter of
leading products.

The Japanese contend that the 66 K RAM is a product whose market is only now
developing and that crying about the share of the market at this time is pre-
nature.

Because the Japanese reply seems to make sense. the Americans havacome out with
a complaint of dumping and special management in the interest of national
security-which are problems which the Japanese have difficulty comprehending.

0n the other hand. the Japanese industry is fearful that this incident could
become an administrative problem that could twist the problem between the in-
dustries of the two countries into something mre serious. healthy competition
is the driving force behind development, but the Americans claim unfair prac-
tices and say the Japanese are driving for a one-sided advantage.

Many unfair practices have been pointed out by the Americans, but the freedom
or trade and financing adopted by the Japanese Government plus the lowering
of tariffs have wiped out any unfair relationships, and the Japanese consider
that they can go no further in trying to appease American business.

These unreasonable demands and criticim are not completely beyond comprehen-
sion. It is not entirely clear that the Japanese-produced 6!. K RAH have actu-

ally captured 70 percent of the American market. but assuming it is true, this
is only an initial trend in the market.

-50-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even assuming that the market is just on the threshold of growth. why did the
American side allow the 64 K RAH market to be taken over by the Japanese. This
is something for considerable consideration.

In order to assure themselves a stable supply of important parts, computer
makers order their parts from three or four semiconductor makers at a time,
and the com-on practice in the United States is to use a domestic maker as
the first choice in this matter.

In the situation that the American semiconductor makers are delayed in their
ability to supply 6!. K RAH, important uses are shunted aside where introduc-
tion is involved, and the market has difficulty expanding. It is not that only
the Japanese can supply this product but that the Americans take the initia-
tive and work toward mrket growth-that is the desire of the Japanese.

it is the industry's view that the present trend of events was completely un-
expected, although there were signs 2-3 years before. There are a amber of
versions, but what is clear at present is that the Americans were somewhat
delayed where the 610 K RAM is concerned. They were found wanting in the
structural design, process, materials, manufacturing equipment and various
other areas.

The Japanese side was able to come up with silicon material with planar
quality of 2 microns deviation, masks which can respond in 12 minutes to 3
micron finishing, resists with very high purity, easily sectionable dry
etching and optima structural design compatible with mass production.

Japan-made 6!. K RAH are finding ready sales overseas, and the necessary mater-
ials and equipment are increasing. It might be better to state that they are
keeping up.

Two or three years ago the large computer makers and semiconductor makers of
the United States with sufficient insight into evaluating technology had al-
ready become aware of the superiority of Japan-made 64 K RAM and reportedly
were formulating some type of countermeasure.

This series of events and the moves on the part of leading American industries
such as Texas Instruments, Motorola, Pairchild, and IBM to reinforce their
semiconductor production in Japan are not completely unrelated.

In certain areas Japan has superior ability to improvise and it possesses
technological development strength such as large volume supply through mass
production. Then one looks at the successive development of new technology
and superior materials which even American industry purchases in large
volume. there are some aspects of this anti-Japanese criticism which seem
beyond reason.

The seaiconductor market is more and more going toward "aass production” and
"large voluae utilization," and Japan is fast becoming "a country well suited
to semiconductor production." It is hoped that this situation can be compre-
bended.

-51..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ‘lCIAL USE ONLY

Greatly Reinforce Onsite Production To Avoid Trade Friction

It is anticipated that Japan‘s semiconductor production will exceed the pre-
vious year's production by some 20 percent, indicating a large rate of growth.
The entire semiconductor industry recorded l-trillion—yen business last year,
and the industry expects this sun to reach 1.3 trillion yen this year.

Among the products which are expected to attain great growth are the micro-
processor and memory. while new products such as gate arrays and voice syn-
thesis LSI are expected to expand very rapidly this year.

The economic situation around the world makes predictions difficult, but limit-
ing ourselves to this particular area, considerable growth can be expected as
the result of automation, greater conservation of power, conservation of re-
sources. and conservation of energy demand of society overall.

Criticism of Japan Intensifies

Although this is a very favorable area, the trade friction as represented by
the American criticism of the Japanese 64 K RAM is a major problem. The semi-
conductor market in the Hestern world is in a state of recession, and the
criticism of Japanese industry, which is maintaining a good rate of growth
despite this situation, is increasing.

The recovery of the overseas market is awaited, and there are signs that this
might be on the way. It seems that the situation in the United States and
Europe is that semiconductor sales, which fit right in with automation and
conservation of power movements, are casting aside the effects of the reces-
sion and are beginning to expand.

Half Onsite Production, Half Export

This trade friction is not limited to semiconductors. but Japan's semiconduc-
tor companies are reinforcing their plans for production in the other coun-
tries' home ground in an effort to avoid this friction. According to the
plans of these companies, their overseas production is expected to increase
over the next 2-3 years. In the system that is being established, a large
portion of the semiconductors for the Western markets will be provided by
products made in the respective countries. with the remainder coming from
.Inpan.

Location of American Plants in Japan Is Also Active

The situation is so favorable that the Japanese semiconductor market has grown
to the point that it has now attained the l-billion—yen level. Last year's
production is estimated at 950 billion yen, while the l-trillion—yen mark is
expected to be broken this year, reaching as high as 1.1 trillion yen.

Because of this large market, there is activity among the American semiconduc-
tor makers to enter the Japanese market. The movement in the semiconductor

industry is taking place as though national boundaries do not exist, which is
one of the features of this industry.

- 52 -

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reason this market is expanding in this manner is the regularly increasing
growth in portable calculators, watches, television sets, stereo, VTR, comput-
ers, and co-mnnications equipment. Portable calculators, watches, and small

game sets are VLSI application products which are Japanese in origin and are
used throughout the world.

Sustain Growth of the Electronics Industry

The advances in 1.81 are sustaining the development of the entire electronics
industry, mddespite the somewhat depressed state of the overall economy. seni-
conductors are pulling the development of the semiconductor industry along.

and their role is becoming more important.

”Diagnosis" of the 1982 Semiconductor Market

According to data of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Japan's
semiconductor (semiconductor elements and I0) production last year attained
the l-trillion-yen level for the first time. The growth rate was 23.5 percent-
a high rate of growth. All of the companies are anticipating growth this year
between 15 and 25 percent. Although the market is experiencing very harsh con—
ditions, growth products and growing markets are acquiring strength, and this
is giving rise to large growth. This article will deal with "1982 Semiconduc-
tor Market Prospects" and present a compilation of the expected developments.
According to Ministry of International Trade and Industry statistics. last
year's production total (unless otherwise stated, these statistics will be the
source of information, while import and export data will be taken from the
Ministry of the Treasury overall was l,067,309,000,000 yen, or just barely
over the trillion level. of this total, sales of semiconductor elements such
as transistors and diodes increased 28.8 percent over the previous year to
378.5 billion yen. while those of 1c increased 20.8 percent to 688,754,000.000
yen. These results show that the rate of growth in 10 production was slightly
below that of "semiconductor elements" last year, the first such instance
since the 1c industry became established in Japan and contrary to the initial
predictions of the industry. Several hundred semiconductor elements are used
in a VTR set, and the great growth in VTR was responsible for this increase in
semiconductor element production, while the decrease in demand for memory
resulted in the relatively inactive 10 market.

30 Percent Reduction Prom Peak

The reduction in production of audio equipment which surfaced in early autumn
last year greatly affected Japan's semiconductor company sales records.
Limiting ourselves to audio equipment, the present sales are about 30 percent
below the peak period; this is a serious problem even in the semiconductor
business world which is blessed with a comparatively wide application field.

This recession in audio equipment sales has continued since last fall; due to
this factor, the semiconductor makers in preparing their statements as of the
end of March are allowing for a 5 to 10 percent reduction in sales from the
originally estimated values. Furthermore, the calendar year statistics will
reflect the full effects of the recession and show even greater effects.

- 53 -

FIMICHHIKIA1.USE(NNLV
FORioFFNJA1.USElﬂVLY

VTR, which was instrumental in greatly improving semiconductor demand last year,
has been undergoing regular growth this year as well, and although there are
wide differences between set makers, the demand is continuing to expand later-
ally in an orderly manner.

Thus, the overall private sector picture is one of recession, and the depen-
dence of the various semiconductor makers on this market is very large, so
various countermeasures are being developed. The problem is just when recov-
ery will come; the prevailing opinion is that the situation is at its worst
now and that there will eventually be a return to increased demand. This
recovery may come as soon as July, according to many observers. In any event,
the audio picture is expected to recover during the latter half of the year.

At the same time, the various semiconductor makers are hoping that the set
makers will become active in new product development in order to ride out this
recession and thereby increase orders for semiconductors. It is said that when
there is a recession, new semiconductor applications become very active, and
this situation seems to be emerging at the present time.

When the question concerns what type of semiconductor product is in demand,
the greatest demand seems to be for miniaturized and lightweight sets. In
addition, great expansion in the area of application is expected, such as
introduction of new technology to the signal treatment system of linear Ic to
cut down noise. Demand for micons and optical devices for automation and
power conservation of sets seems to be increasing.

Demand for Continued Development

in the same private area, apart from the production trend of VTR, it is said
that demand for development of new IC and LSI is becoming active. For exam-
ple, it is said that 1,000 elements or more of bipolar LSI may be introduced
in the signal processor of the central section, and CHOS microprocessors and
logic circuits introduced in the peripheral section control system.

Supplement the Private Situation Suffering From Recession

Thus, the various semiconductor makers are introducing new equipment in hopes
of expanding sales in order to bolster the recession-plagued audio area and
the dull VTR market.

On the other hand, demand for semiconductors used in computers and 0A equip-
ment is increasing favorably this year; all the companies regard this area as
a promising market to supplement the other semiconductor areas where the over-
all market picture is concerned. To this end, the semiconductor companies are
placing emphasis this year on intensified development of the 0A equipment mar-
ket; the market in semiconductors for DA equipment use is expected to be the
top battleground this year.

According to some test calculations by a one semiconductor maker, semiconduc-
tors for on equipment use will increase on the average 25 percent per year up

to 1990, and the sales will expand from almost 100 billion yen this year to
170 billion yen in 1990. The market makeup this year is 35 percent memory,

- 54 -

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

22 percent micon. 22 percent bipolar digital. ll percent nos digital. and the
remainder individual semiconductors.

Many Experienced Industries

As is evident from these test calculations. memory and micon products account
for more than half the 0A equipment use semiconductors. and the remainder are
for peripheral circuit use such as for interfacing. The feature of this mar-

ket is that the companies involved include many more experienced members com-
pared to those of VTR. while the life of the products is between half a year
to a full year--extremely short. There are about 20 companies just in pancon.
It is said that there are more than 30 companies inword processors, including '
the on makers.

It is to be expected that the race to sell saliconductors for DA use will in-
tensify just as the 0A equipment market is being bitterly contested, and the
product development strength and sales strength of the various semiconductor
makers will be sorely tested. 0n the product front, high-speed operating
microprocessors and memry products along'with short delivery time gate array
stand out, and the general view is that technology and particularly soft sup-
port capability will be in the limelight on the sales front.

Foreign Funded Systems Entry

There was essentially no foreign funded maker present in last year's semi-
conductor market's prime battlefield. the VTR, but this outside influence
will be seen in the 0A area, and competition in this area is expected to pick

up.

To the Japanese makers, which led the world in the matter of VTR, the 0A equip-
ment represents a new market for the future. The interchangeability of soft-
ware for microprocessors for pancon use is becoming an important ita, and

the narket development plans seem to be completely different from those of
VTR.

Growth Companies Are “icon and Memory

“her are the products which are expected to show great growth in this year's
semiconductor market? The following is a compilation of the views of various

semiconductor coQanies .

The top product is considered to be the mioon. This involves a large market
(presently estimated at 10 million units 1.81 per month); the monetary value
is expected to increase a minimum: of 30 percent this year. It is expected
that the general-use 8/16 bit used in pancon will have to grow at least 50
percent.

Memory is another product that should be ranked with the micon as a promising
product. Even though the price war in 66 K RAM is an item of concern, this
year's production is expected tohit the loo-million mark, or roughly five
times last year's production of slightly under 20 million units. Mask R0",

-55-

ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BPROH, and static RAH are expected to be great contributors to the profit

picture, and there is good possibility that various non for Kanji use will be
the star of the memory area.

The market for gate array and voice synthesis L51 is small at present, but
these are promising products whose applications are expected to increase this
year. Both tend toward customwmade products and thus are not sold immediately.

so the market is expected to expand gradually, and its movement is being closely
watched.

In addition to [C and L51 products, there are digital interface products used
in micon periphery, linear products, and small-package standard digital IC
which are expected to see good growth.

ln another area. since last year the so-called discrete semiconductor element
has shown an increasing rate of use in the form of small package flat back pro-
ducts. Other products are switching type devices for power source use, power
devices for automation and power conservation applications, and optical de-
vices, and all of these are expected to experience good growth.

Semiconductor Market Viewed Through Statistics

The various semiconductor companies have various views on just how Japan's
semiconductor industry will grow this year, and here we will use some statis-
tics to make a simple analysis of the situation.

50 Billion Reduction in Audio

First, we will look at one of the areas that is relatively depressed and see
what effect it will have on the semiconductor demand. The area which was de-
pressed this spring was audio equipment (including automobile use radio/
stereo); production is down 1.3 percent from its onetime peak. There has been
growth in some areas of microcassettes and headphone type stereo, but assum-
ing that this present situation will continue for the rest of the year and
with semiconductors and IC used by the audio equipment industry accounting for
nearly 20 percent of the total production and being a large market, it can be
expected that there will be a reduction of roughly 50 billion yen in sales.

At the same time, the market in color TV has been stagnant, production has not
increased, and only lateral movement is expected this year. He will assume
here that demand for consumer-use electronic goods other than audio equipment
will decrease by 10 billion yen.

In addition, household-use micon-equipped products are increasing, and even
assuming consmption has leveled off , the related semiconductor demand is
expected to remain firm.

Thus. market demand is expected to decrease by 50 billion yen in the audio
equipment area. while television is expected to decrease 10 billion yen. The

demand for pocket calculators, watches, cameras, and musical instruments is
of some concern, but the fraction of the market accounted for by these products

- 56 -

FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
IN]! (IHHCJAI.I£§E.(MVLV

ls relatively small, while. on the other hand, growth in games is large, so
that no great change is expected in this area.

0A To Increase 30 Percent

0n the other hand,the extent of growth in the areas where growth is expected

is the item of concern. The product which all the companies are looking at

is 0A equipment, and a large growth rate of 30 percent is predicted for this
area. Uhen it is considered that 0A accounts for 5-6.5 percent of the coun-
try's semiconductor production, a 30-percent increase is equivalent to a
little more than 10 billion yen. The computer and its peripheral and terminal
equipment are also expected to grow by 30 percent, and this will be accompanied
by a 25-percent increase in IC and a little less than 3 percent in semiconduc-
tors, which spells out a 25-billion-yen expansion in sales this year.

Firm growth is also expected in other semiconductor using products, such as
measurement equipment and co-unication equipment. The rate of use by auto-
mobiles is said to be only 2-3 percent of the total, but this is an area which

has the potential of increasing with the greater electronification of automo-
biles.

_Totaling the increases and decreases in semiconductor demand for the different
product areas, the minus quantity attributable to audio equipment type private-
uae products of 60 billion yen compares to the 35 to 60 billion yen increase

by GA and computer related areas, to show an overall decline of 20 to 25 bil-
lion yen.

New Demand for VTR Uae

At this rate, the semiconductor market in Japan would be in a minus situation,
but this picture may be greatly affected by the trend in production of
household-use VTR.

The VTR-use semiconductor demand last year, including that for cameras, was
more than two times and close to three times the preceding year's total, at
about 120 billion yen, and the associated increase in IC was 13.0 percent of
the total domestic consumption, while the increase in semiconductors was 16.7
percent.

Even assuming this year's VTR production will not match last year's sharp
growth and will probably become more stabilised, the trend to 1c use has
intensified, which necessarily means that there will be new demand for semicon-
ductors on the order of several tens of billions of yen.

Looking at the overall picture, it cannot be denied that this is a harsh envi-
ronment, and the efforts of the companies to develop new applications will be
reflected in their records. New developments can be classified into short-,
medium— and long-term developments, but the increase in sales in this area
comes from general-use products rather than custom-made products, and the
differences in sales strength and new market development will create the
differences in company records.

- 57 -

FINIC"HN(JAI.USE:€HVLY
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

Stern book at Exports

0n the export front. the ccommic situation in the Western countries remains

in a state of stagnation. and a stern view of this situation is the prevailing
attitude of the various companies. Exports of semiconductor elements last
year increased 15.8 percent over the preceding year to 72.17 billion yen. while
IC showed an increase of 8.9 percent to 199.639.000.000 yen. The IC exports.
which for the past several years had been doubling annually. were thus blunted,

and this was attributable to the recession in the memory market and the reces-
sion in the Western countries.

while sales of LSI for calculator and watch use to Southeast Asia have bottomed
out. the memory products destined for the United States and Europe have been
joined anew by the 610 K RAH, so substantial growth may be expected.

0n the other hand, anti-Japanese criticism has been escalating in the Western
count ties. as a result of which the domestic semiconductor makers are taking a
discreet attitude toward 6!. K RAM. The total production of 6!. K RAH through-
out the world last year was 100 million. which is expected to increase sharply
to 600 million this year; the market scale is expected to increase from less
than 20 billion yen last year to just under 70 billion yen this year. display-
ing its promising nature. The Japanese semiconductor makers. while reinforc-
ing exports to the Hestern countries, are also increasing their production in
foreign countries in an effort to avoid friction.

Import Semiconductors Also on Trial

imports overall totaled 155.6 billion yen. an increase of 9.7 percent; the
small rate of increase has continued for the past 2 years. This breaks down
to an increase of 27.5 percent for suiconductors to 37.253.000.000 yen. and
an increase of [0.9 percent for re and total value of 162.53 billion yen. The
reason this growth in semiconductor elements was greater than 1316. just as
with domestic production. is the reverse export from the Southeast Asian
plants of the domestic makers and the new activity an the part of Korean
makers.

The domestic market is less active this year than last. and imrted semicon—
ductors are expected to face rough going overall.

Despite this situation. technologically advanced products such as microproces-
sors. memory. and linear 1c are expected to show large increases. and the
desperate struggle in the export picture is expected to intensify greatly.

-53-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 1. Trends in Japan's lc Prediction Over Preceding Year (Records fro-
l97b through 1981; 1982 data are estiaatee of the Japan Electronic
Machine Association)

Key: (1) Growth rate (percent) (2) Batilated (3) Year

 

Figure 2. Classification of Production, Shin-eats for 1981 (Unit: 1 Million

Yen)
Key: (1) Donestic production
(2) Donestic shipments (6) Domestic total
(3) Semiconductor iaports (5) Departs
.. 59 -

”WI-MONEY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

 

 

Figure 3. Domestic Semiconductor Figure 6. Domestic IC Use Classifica-

Key

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(In)
(I l)
(12)

Element Use Classification
for 1981
: Key:
Automobile use (1)
Measurement use (2)
Co-unication equipment use (3)
Audio equipment‘ use (6)
Office equipment use (5)
Television use (6)
Others (7)
VTR use (8)
Coo-pater terminal equipment use (9)
Camera use (10)
Household electric equipment use (11)
Compiled by new sumnus (12)
(13)
(1’0)
(15)
- 60 -

tion for 1981

Counter terminal equipment use
Audio equipment use

Portsble calculator use
Consolation equipment use
V11! use

Office equipment use

Toy use

TV use

Hatch use

Automobile use

Vending machine use

Facsimile use .
Household electric equipment use
Camera use

Compiled by DNA sumwu

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FINI(MWW(1AI.USI(HVLY

Recession Is a Good Opportunity

"A recession is a good opportunity" is a tern often used in the seliconductor
field. New product develop-ant becoaes sore active the lore serious the state
of the world econon, and seliconductors are the tickets to develop-eat.

This is not s recession year. but talk of the type presented above has been
asking the rounds aaong concerned people in the industry.

Hicon Is Representative Era-ple

The tern "the deeper the recession. the better the opportunity" was aptly
de-onstrated by the perforlance of the aicon during the dark days of the oil
crisis in 1973. Up till that tile. about the only aicon use was in electronic
registers, but the oil crisis was the dividing point when the aicon began to
be used in various types of equipsent. It was about this ties that the Iicon
kit aade its appearance. and the aicon in s box developed in the United
States. which was the predecessor of the pancon. also appeared about this tile.

while this situation say have been the result of a chance overlapping in tin-
ing. the aicon kit and the aicon in a box rolled up unexpectedly good sales at
that tile. The econoly was in a highly stagnant state, and if everyone had
been occupied with his daily duties. these products night not have found such
ready sales. according to those in the seaiconductor industry.

Fling Aside Reverse Boundary

Looking still further back into history. to the days when seliconductor work
involved a very difficult environ-ent with a strong so-called reverse boun-
dary. it was only by cutting through this reverse boundary thatthe buds of
develop-ant were able to grow. The 10 developed for the Iilitary case into
general use in the United States about the latter half of the 1950's and into
the 1960's. along with the end of the first stage of Apollo and the end of
the Vietnaa war, and the linen-entered into the race for lower cost portable
calculators and other sideproducts which weathered this crisis.

Judged by past trends, the seliconductor say be said to be in allost a blessed
state regarding the way it has developed. Japanese production has passed the
l-trillion—yen oath and has reached a state in which it can rennin unaffected
by small econoaic instabilities.

Expect 18 Percent Growth This Year

Even though everyone says things are bad this year. according to the data put
out by the Japan Electron Hachine Industrial Association last year, 18.1 per-
cent growth is expected this year. to a sales total of 1.26 trillion yen.

A growth rate of 18 percent in the face of a declining GNP is. objectively
speaking. a high rate of growth. but this is an industry which has Iaintained

an average 25 percent rate of growth through 1979. 1980, and 1981. and the
stateaent the greater the recession. the better the business. seens to apply.

- 61 -

FOIiolFKJAl.USI(NVLV
l-‘OI OFI'K‘IAI. USE ONLV

why are the leaders of the semiconductor industry using such terms? Hhile it
may be true that investments in the semiconductor area require vast sums which
must be amortized in order to continue this development, the potential for much
greater growth in this area also seems to be a factor. This is evident when

one sees that not only the development end of LSI is under fire but the sales
end as well.

The practice on the sales front of holding honeycomb structured target ful-
fillment conferences and pep rallys which include the agencies is one which
all the semiconductor makers have adopted since last fall.

Aim at 0A

The aim here is to attack a market such as that of 0A equipment which seems
destined for great growth, but the companies are not forgetting that robots.
tool machines, and amusement equipment are areas where utilization of semi-
conductors is expected to increase. "here sales of LS! are concerned, there
are plans looking 2-3 years ahead to enter the home automation market;
lumseowners and home builders will be the targets of this move, and the
respective market battles are developing.

Savings on New Harket Development

When one analyses the situation of better opportunity the more depressed the
situation, one finds that a period when there is not too much activity such
as the present is a good time to develop new markets. This is the time in
which the markets one has in mind but usually does not have the time to
develop can be attacked, as seen in many examples to date.

The semiconductor industry often has been described as "an area of fierce
competition of a varied nature," in that the main market is constantly a

scene of fierce conflicts centered on the large makers. The markets for port-
able calculators. watches, VTR, television, and automobiles are said to be
areas where one cannot relax for a moment. It seems certain that the 0A equip-
ment market will be where maximum confrontation will take place. but even when
the market scale is small, the development of new markets is what will deter-
mine the future standings of the various makers.

How To Avoid Overseas Friction

"Won't this fierce competition be settled one way or the other?" is a state-
ment often made in regard to the intensity of the rival efforts of the
Japanese semiconductor makers. It is said that if one can survive in the
domestic semiconductor war, he will have no trouble in the world market.

The reason the competition is so fierce is that the Japanese semiconductor
makers are all headed in the same direction, and theproducts also are in
exactly the same area.

Taking the 64 K RAH as example, there are six large makers in Japan-—Hitachi
Limited, Fujitsu. Nippon Electric, Mitsubishi Electric, Oki Electric. and

- 62 -

ROI OFFICJAI.lEﬂE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sharp. Five companies--Hotorola, Texas Instruments, Hostec, Pairchild, and
Intel--ere the corresponding American makers.

As has often been said in the past, American companies are quick to retreat,
while such behavior on the part of Japanese companies is essentially nil. The
Japanese companies are still for the most part producing old-type memory even
though the price has dropped. This is one of their services to their users,
although it has been said that the situation in Japan is one of too highly
competitive a nature.

There seems to be no countermeasures or solution to this situation. Every
maker has the attitude that this competition will not go away as long as semi-
conductors are undergoing development. If things continue in the present way,
then the Japanese will eventually be supplying more than half of the world's
need for semiconductors just as in other electronic parts (such as Brsun
tubes, resistors, condensers, and coils). This will be the result of the
fierce domestic competition and the reward for each company's efforts, but
this is not a situation which may be appreciated by foreign countries.

It may be said that the industry hopes that further escalation in domestic
competition can be arrested and useless mistakes in production can be avoided.

American Criticism of Japanese 64 K RAH
Events Since February

Ever since February of this year, criticism by the Americans of the export of
64 K RAH by Japan has erupted in a tirade. The Japanese are on the alert for
future moves.

The critical attack by the Americans on Japanese IC exports surfaced in 1977,
and the problem has smoldered since then. 0n the other hand, since February
of this year, in addition to the complaints of the industrial group which was
directly carrying on this fight (the SIA - American Semiconductor Industry
Organization) and part of the American semiconductor makers, the U.S.Govern-
ment (in particular, the Department of Comlerce) and members of Congress,
have joined the ranks of the criticizers, and there is deepening feeling that
the American side hopes to make this an administrative issue.

The principal events in regard to the American moves are listed below:

1 February: SIA representatives met with deputy trade representive MacDonald
in Washington and asked for government intervention to cope with the Japanese
export of 6“ K RAM. The New York TIMES carried the following article.
"Japan Controls 70 Percent

'NJnly 3 years ago, the United States was leading in the production of chips.
However, this situation no longer exists. Japanese makers such as Hitachi,
Toshiba, Fujitsu, and Nippon Electric have invested huge sums in production

facilities, which, together with government-financed research and development,
short-term amortization, and domestic market protection, enabled these

- 63 -

INJI1OIIHCJAI.IISIICNVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

companies to challenge California's Silicon Valley. and this has brought con—
cern to the administratlon in Hashington.

"the United States has shifted from a chip exporting country to a purely import-
ing country. The Japanese already control 70 percent of the American market
in 6!. K RAH. This was only 100 percent in 1979.

What concerns the U.s. Government is not just protecting the American market.
“hat is of greater concern is the anxiety that the Japanese will usurp leader-
ship in the leading high technology semiconductor area. A certain high-ranking
government official said: 'The country which controls chips over the next 10
years will be in a position (advantageous) similar to that of an oil-exporting
country today. '

"The present problem is the claim by some American industry members that the
Japanese in their efforts to foster their coqetitive edge are resorting to
'dumping.‘ The Japanese claim that their profits from this American trade are
snail and that duping is out of the question. Nevertheless, the American
semiconductor industry is drafting a formal duping charge against the Japanese
makers."

Bring Forth Safety Assurances

An AD-DJ-KYODO NEWS AGENCY report carried in this paper on the 6th said that
high American officials were investigating the possibility of invoking the
provisions of the American trade law empowering the President to limit im-
ports which were threatening national security and thereby protect against
the Japanese control of the 66 K RAH market.

At the Joint congressional hearings on trade problems held on the 10th, Com-
merce Secretary Baldridge said: "The Japanese semiconductor industry, with
government research and development subsidies in the form of nonduty barriers,
has accelerated exports to the United States."

Japan Follows With Its Counterargument

0n the 12th, directly after a cabinet meeting, the Hinistryof International
Trade and Industry announced to reporters that top officials of the govern-
ment were trying to pacify the protectionist movement demonstrated by the
series of anti-Japan criticisms.

0n the 18th, President Hirokichi Yoshiyala of Hitachi Limited in speaking to

a Chuhu financial seminar at Inyuams-shi in Aichi-ken touched on the 610 K RAH
friction problem and said: "They (the Americans) may have their points, but
the information industry must take into account demand, and the actual situa-
tion is that there is a balance in figures, and certainly no imbalance. The
610 KRAH is the leading technology for L8! in which Japanese technology is lead-
ing at present. but this is simply a manifestation of the technological devel-
opment level of the industry. It is not fair to claim trade imbalance based
on a single product," rebutting the American attack.

-64-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢NHHC1A1.USE(HVLY

The FNS news item appearing in this paper on the 20th introduced the subject
of trends in the American ea K RAH market, and said that the increasing capa-
city of computers has lengthened the lead time (acquisition period) of 66 K

RAH, while the price dropped from the $13 per unit to $6-$7 in a year's time.

On the 20th, the joint economic cosmittee of parli-ent issued a report
entitled "Semiconductor Industry Trade and Development" (part of the contents
were given in this paper from the 22d through the 25th).

0n the 25th, the Japan Electronic Machine Industrial Association gave to the
Keidanren reporters club the Japanese industry's interpretation (appended) of
the anti-Japanese criticism on the part of the American semiconductor industry
in which it claims that the Americans are misguided and there is actually no
problem.

Propose Mutual Principle Plan

A news item dated the 25th in this paper reported that Sam Gibbons. who is
chairman of the Congressional Trade Subcommittee, proposed a mutual principle
plan aimed at the high technology area which will enable a limitation on pro-
ducts such as the 64 K RAN.

Secret Conference for Anti-Japan Resistance

The 1 March edition of the WALL STREET JOURNAL reported that some 50 executives
of the principal semiconductor and computer makers of the United States exclud-
ing IBM met at Oakland, Florida in a secret conference with high government
officials including the secretary of defense in order to draft a plan of
resistance against the Japanese makers and to study a plan to establish a

new joint activity for promoting basic research and development.

0n the 2d, Hitachi Limited announced that it had entered into basic agreement
with Hewlett-Packard Company, the sixth-ranking American electronic equipment
maker. on supplying the company with 60 K RAH technology. The Ministry of
International Trade and Industry came forth with the comment that it evaluated
very highly this agreement as an important step toward promoting joint exis-
tence and activities between Japanese and American semiconductor industries.

This paper reported on the 3d that American trade groups such as the SIA had
contacted House members and concerned people that they would support a mutual
principle plan which would limit imports of 64 K RAH from Japan and seek to

open the Japanese market.

On the 5th. this paper carried a KYODO NEUS SERVICE item reporting that the
U.S. Government was making an unofficial survey of the effects of Japanese IC
on American industry.

This paper carried an account on the 6th relating the rebuttal by Vice Presi-
dent Jungi Ouchi of Nippon Electric to the semiconductor friction and specific-
ally to the American criticism, claiming the American statements were off base.

-65-

FOI1MHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(NNLV

(hi the 8th, this paper reported that a complaint had been made to the vauft-
ment of Commerce by the 81A, headed by Motorola, calling for an unofficial
study of the price of Japan-made 64 K RAM to verify charges of dumping.

0n the 9th. this paper carried an FNS report to the effect that Executive

Vice President John R. Helty ofﬂotorola spoke at a SEMI (American Semiconduc-
tor Equipment and Material Association) meeting and claimed that the low sell-
ing price of 64 K RAM was raising havoc with VLSI research and development
funds and that protective legislation was necessary.

0n the 10th, an article in this paper discussed the subject of government
assistance to leading technology industries such as the computer industry, and

said that government assistance in the United States was one order of magnitude
greater than in Japan.

An item in this paper on the 16th reported a followup to the account of the
8th on pri survey and said that an unofficial survey was being made by the
Department of Commerce.

Problem of Anti-Japanese Criticism Regarding Semiconductors
View of the Japan Electronic Industry Association

He heard recently that a section of the U.S. Government (particularly the
Department of Commerce)has taken a very critical stance toward the Japanese
semiconductor industry and the Japanese Government's handling of semiconduc-
tor affairs. and the Japan Electronic Industry Association presents its
views on this problem below.

Status of Japanese-American Trade in Semiconductors

The trade in semiconductors between Japan and the United States and the in-
vcstment activities in the respective countries are shown in an appended

table. in which it can be seen that there has been activity in the area of
mutual entry into each other's country. This movement is the response to the
expansion in the market accompanying developments in semiconductor technology,
in which the supply industries are seeking to locate themselves in the world's
two largest consumer countries in this area, the United States and Japan. This
is a movement which we applaud as exemplifying the basic concepts of free
trade.

- 66 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢0FFIJAI.USE(HNLY

«m (1)

7" (2)0)
amucvk

{71.2
a 3“

     

I” (

mnnmmumnrﬁ
um me .., m tantrum

. m 7 A 29 A 3.” A m 23 1
| (52,!" kllimf— (9)..' -.H. 5

Figure 5. IC Export-Import Trends to the United States

Key:

(1) 100 aillioa yen (6) Ratio over previous year

(2) Exports (7) Trade balance

(3) Inputs (8) Source: Ministry of Treasury
(lo) Iten Statistics

(5) Year (9) Unit: 100 million yen, percent

0» the Argument That the Japanese Market Is Closed

Recently a faction in the United States has reopened the issue of Japan hav-
ing placed restrictions on seniconductor exports and investments, claiming
that while Japan is allowed free access to the United States market. a free
approach to the Japanese market is closed. This is an issue we have repeat-
edly denied; as mentioned above. the present Japanese-American trade situation
is one of an open market, and we wish to reiterate this position once more.

. .

l. Couplers Freedol in Finance and Trade
Both the financial and trade aspects of Japan's semiconductor market were
Iade free in 1974, and this market is coapletely open to foreign capital.

-67-

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

2. Inules Are on the Same Level Between the Two Countries

In the HTN (Tokyo round) agreement in 1979, both Japan and the United States
agreed to lower their duties in steps by 1987 (the duties in 1978 were 6 per-
cent for the United States and 12 percent for Japan), but last year there was
an urgent request from the United States to lower these rates as quickly as
possible, and Japan agreed to this request from the standpoint of maintaining
and expanding the free trade system. The Americans lowered their.rate effec-
tive 1 January 1982 while the Japanese set 1 April as the starting date, and
both countries lowered their rates to 5.2 percent (the EC has the very high
rate of 17 percent).

3. There Are No Non-Tariff Barriers

There are accusations and slanders citing cartels and buy Japanese policies as
hen-tariff barriers, but such accusations are completely without foundation.
Japanese semiconductor users are for the most part private businesses, and they
order what they need freely, paying particular attention to quality, price,
delivery time, and after service.

6‘ K RAH

This is a new LSI memory for computerusefor which demand is expected to in-
crease in the next few years; a fierce fight is being conducted between the
Japanese and Americans for this market. but this is just the initial stage
for this market. Japan's share of the market grew rapidly (the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry claims 80 percent, but definite proof is not
at hand), and because this is a product from the leading technological area,
semiconductors, the Americans sense a possible national security risk. 0n
the other hand. this product is presently in short supply in the United States,
and the completion of more American facilities is anxiously awaited. Some on
the American side claim that the Japanese are dumping and using pirate-type
price strategies to increase their share and are being criticized as a result,
but absolutely no such incidents are taking place.

On the So-Called National Security Items

In order to rescue the American industry from this increased share of the
American market captured by the Japanese, the U.S. Government activated Article
232 of the 1962 trade expansion law relative to national security items and

is said to be considering limiting imports.

0n the other hand. the following situation needs to be considered. The Ameri-
can nndJapanese international trade in semiconductors is in a mutually supple-
mentary relationship. In addition, the United States has overwhelming super-
iority in areas such as microprocessors and bipolar digitals, and to single

out one area of this diverse semiconductor product array in which the Japan-
ese share has increased and attack it on the basis of national security seems
to be stretching a point. Japanese products are highly evaluated for use by
American computer Iakersand other users and are contributing to American indus-

try (including defense).

- 68 -

FIIRCNHWCJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, elaborating further on the national security viewpoint,
Japan depends on the United States for a large portion of the weapons it
needs. Also. in a broad extension of the term security, Japan depends on the
United States for a large portion of its food.

Conclusion: Free Competition Is the Source of the Semiconductor Industry's
Development

The semiconductor has served as the foundation of electronic industry growth
through unceasing development of new technology and the offering of new pro-
ducts msde possible by new technology and is playing a major role in making
possible an abundant life for the people and for a good economic society.
These technological advances in semiconductors are only possible through con-
petition in the area of the technology itself.

Semiconductor technology and industry are expected to expand greatly from
here on; this is an area which has the potential of having a great impact on
all industries and economies and of achieving great growth. If an attempt is
now made to artificially suppress this competitive situation, there seems to
be no question but that the development trend will be hurt.

Great Expectations of Hicon (Remarks by Director Tomihiro Hatsuura, Nippon
Electric)

The plans for the new fiscal year have not been made final and the figures are
not yet firm. He expect the semiconductor market to undergo some rough times
during the first half. The following is an account of what might be expected.

In Japan. the decline in consumer goods has gradually come to affect demand
for semiconductors. This decline in consumer goods activity is also affect-
ing our activities. and we cannot hope to see any growth in sales during the
first half of this year. He hope to see some increased activity both in the
private and industrial areas in the latter half of the year.

On the other hand. the overseas market. if compared to the weather. can be
described by saying that the United States is unfortunately cloudy with occa—
sional rain and. to be honest, there seems to be no way out of this situation.
0n the other hand, the off-year elections are caning up, and it can be anti-
cipated that the government will come out with a nuber of vigorous recession-
defeating proposals, which are expected to cone in the latter half of the
year.

The situation in Europe is even worse than in the United States; it is await-
ing American recovery. Thus, we cannot hope for much in the way of semiconduc-
tor exports. there was a time in the past when exports increased by 50 percent,
but now we are beginning to sense that this growth will be on the same level as
that in our domestic trade.

The first problem is trade friction. "here some of the American users had
been buying about 10 percent of their memory in Japanese products and only

three or four Japanese companies were the suppliers, the American users are
now in the mood to buy these from one or two American companies.

- 59 -

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NHLY
F0]! (WHOM. USE ONLY

This change in the attitude of the user isprobnbly a factor which needs to ho
gIVen considerable weight in the solution of this trade problem.

There is no such situation in the semiconductor trade with Europe, and there
is no problem.

Thus, while there are some very sticky factors, still the semiconductor indus-
try overall is expected to grow an average of 15 to 20 percent per year in the
1980's. It may be prudent to consider the present period as one of haziness
and readjustment following growth.

Our company is in such a situation. but we hope to develop new products and in-
vest in facilities and not fall behind other companies. The largest market we
will tackle this year will be the domestic industrial market. and we have
placed great hopes on the micon. The position of this company is at the upper
level even on a worldwide basis, and going by numbers alone, we consider we
have surpassed Texas Instruments. The monthly production of LSI for sicon

use is expected to reach 6 million by March ofthis year, and all of our plants
are in full production. He refer to this as 110 percent operation; our Kyushu
Nippon Electric and Yanagata Nippon Electric are working two shifts per day,
while the Saganigahara plant is working three shifts.

11w micon is in a position of no problem, while memory is adaptable to many
new applications, and is an area we want to reinforce. The mini-flat series
is going well in the bipolar area; we cannot produce enough.

Telecon (electrical communication) use products have somehow registered good
results in our overseas trade. These products are technologically advanced
and are free from concern over trade friction. Honetarily, this is a 5-6
billion yen market, while microwave transistors and diodes have no American
makers. so this is an area in which we expect considerable growth.

He will continue veryactive plant expansions again this year. The Sagamiga-
hara plant will be our development center where we will concentrate our tech-
nologists and where 64 K RAM and bipolar CHL (current mode logic) will undergo
test mass production. Already plant A is under full operation. while construc-
tion of plant 8, which will cost 5 billion yen, is almost complete and equip-
ment will be installed starting next year. This plant is 50 meters wide and
110 meters long and is designed to work on 2 micron technology. We plan to
invest a total of 27 billion yen in our Saganigahara plant.

Overseas, our NEC Electronics USA is in full operation, and the results are
exceeding the planned levels. Mask ROM production is proceeding exceedingly
well, and following the assembly of 16 K RAM, 610 K RAH will be produced start-
ing this April. He purchased a 72-acrc tract outside San Francisco for our
second plant, where construction is about 80 percent complete and where we
hope to start operations this fall. At first this plant will just handle
assembly, but the second building will house a wafer process as well, and we
plan to end up with an integrated system.

- 7o _

ms omcw. Us: on“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Sales of Cate Arrays To Hit 10 Billion Yen in 1985 (Remarks by Director Katashi
Kawanishi, Business Depart-ant, Toshiba Corporation)

Despite this situation, we plan to engage in vigorous development. Our plans
are based on an estimated 18 percent growth.

Looking at the individual areas, we do not expect much to happen in AV (audio
video equipment) up through June or July. Now, what will be the prime lover
which will pull us through this growth? The entire world is in a stagnant
condition, some even call it depressed, but there will be moves to use semi-
conductors. This is why we do not believe that semiconductors will suffer.

Regarding the market, the trends will be toward OS and logic systems, and we
are anticipating semiconductor needs for these areas. At the same time, this
company has for some time been directing its strength to developing the autono-
bile market, and semiconductor‘sales in this area account for 8 percent of the
total. Since the worldwide average is 6 percent, this automobile use is ex-
pected to see large growth and contribute to our sales record.

Good growth in portable calculators using solar batteries is being experienced.
It was said that watches were in a bad state, but as a result of the efforts
put into exports, growth was attained to the extent that it could even make up
for the decline in AV. Cameras and automobile-use products are registering
good records. These L81 nake good use of this company's CHOS technology, and
they are in a state ofgpod growth.

He are placing our greatest hope in micons. In the past, Toshiba was not as
capable in this area, but now we have come abreast of the times. Our monthly
production of LS! exceeds 1 million units, and we plan to increase this pro-
duction monthly from here on. The micon has a wide field of application, from
GA to toys, and the toy market in the United States is expanding.

The fraction of total sales belonging to 00$ micon is 1:0 percent, large for
this company, and this mayincrease to 60 percent in the next period.

We anticipate that sales in gate arrays will total lo billion yen in 1985; this
will be achieved through sales of 3 billion, 6 billion and then 10 billion yen
over successive years.

Another product on which we place high hopes is bipolar VLSl. This company
announced its NSA (nitride self align) technology last year, and it has been
highly evaluated. We anticipate an expansion in applications such as VTR in
custom LSI and camera use. Our bipolar plant in northern Kyushu will start
operation in September, and we hope to be in actual production of bipolar
products by NSA technology during the last period of this year.

A number of things have been said about memory, but theVLSI line at our Oita
plant will start actual operation, and we expect to plan for great develop-
ment in this area. Already the “MOS and CHDS of the static RAH (88AM) have
been shifted from the transistor plant to Oita. and some leeway has been
created so that we are planning large development in 64 hilobit DRAM during
the last period. where this company is concerned, SRAH accounted for 50

- 71 -

FOR OFFHJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

percent of all memory, and this is 50 percent of all DRAM in the market in num-
bers and 25 percent in total money value. displaying a varied makeup.

Re believe that we are the world's largest maker in the area of SRAH (in order
to avoid misunderstanding) and we also have large interest in DRAM. In fact.

there is actual demand for DRAM, and we hope to expand this area while paying

attention to cost.

we plan to expand our monthly production of 6!. K nm from 100,000 to over a
million by the end of the year, and since this product will have to have higher
performance and cost less than the cometitors' products. it will come in a

plastic package and will be capable of high-speed operation, according to our
plan.

He are wondering when recovery in discrete (semiconductor) elements will come,
since 60 percent of our business comes from Av directed products which are
presently suffering about a 30 percent decline. We are awaiting AV recovery
because of its large impact, but we are planning to reinforce the industrial-
use end next period.

In addition. this company has a (as-percent share of the mos standard logic
market in Japan. Our present target is 20 million per month, which we hope
to attain by June if at all possible.

Toshiba Semiconductor American is mass producing 2 million memory units per
month, of which a half is general-use memory and the remainder is custom
memory. This company was considering emphasis on general-use memory, but the
fierce price competition caused a shift in memory to custom memory and to

mask RON, making possible business operations in the black. Re are placing
importance on 16 K SRAH in the area of general-use memory and have intensified
production control so that the mask ROB yield has been increased. We plan from
here on to export half of our general-use memory from Japan to the United
States, with the remainder coming from onsite production in the United States,
as a way to avoid trade friction, as a result of which it is possible that we
may be going into assembly of 66 K RAH.

0n the foreign front, this cowany supplied the Italian SGA Ates Company with
CHOS technology. Furthermore, the sac company bought our CHOS memory and
logic technology as well. Semiconductor sales are expected to increase 1!.
percent this period. to 170 billion yen. This is somewhat below the initially
projected 180 billion yen: there was a 5-percent decrease in AV sales.

According to the directives of President Sanami. construction of a submicron
VLSI research and development building with super clean rooms has been
decided. and plans for a future of great expansion are in the offing.

To Produce Million 6!. K RAH Per Month in Face of Expanding Demand (Remarks by
Director Suteso Hata. Hitachi Limited)

According to recent reports, the 3/3 ratio (semiconductor orders/sales ratio)
in the United States was 1.06 in February. This ratio fell below one last
June and remained there. and it finally made a turn for the better after

9 months.
- 72 -

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This all ratio is 1.02 in Europe, and although it is not certain whether recov-
ery is on the way, still it is one indication that recovery may be on the way.

From our viewpoint, the overall situation is rather poor, and we are beset

with problems such as the trade problem. The audio and television areas have
not recovered very much. The private market is expected to undergo some cri-
tical times during the last period of this year. Some activity is expected
during the latter half of this year; semiconductor demand for information in-
dustry, computer, 0A, FA, and co-unication equipment is expected to pick up.

He believe that we should try something, but the trade friction is of some
concern, and we cannot fully respond being just one coqasny. Making a sober
judgment of the situation, the market (which the Americans are criticizing) is
open and duties have been lowered to 4.2 percent, so the market seems to be
fair on all counts. He would like to see ourselves free of this situation (the
trade problem), but this is something difficult to predict.

The March record in the semiconductor area went according to plan. In the
past, demand for 16 was only in small calculators and production varied accord-
ingly, but recently the demand for IC is being met (by different applications)
in one way or the other, and the overall picture is a favorable one.

we are planning for a large expansion this next fiscal year, but since we will
be entering American soil and issue ADR, we are unable presently to offer any
figures.

0n the product end we expect great things from memory and nicon, and we hope
to put some effort into gate arrays. The demand for 6!. K RAH has expanded
considerably. Because every company has emphasized this product, the market
has experienced considerable growth, and the drop in price might stop. This
company will follow last year's plan and attain l-million-unit production in
April.

He had a request from Hewlett-Packard to provide it with 61. K RAN technology;
HP has been a favored customer which has been patronizing our products and
has great desire (to introduce technology), so we think this transaction will
proceed in an orderly manner. HP is blessed with a nulber of specialists,
and we expect to have their specialists come to our plant where professionals
from both sides can get together and we can anticipate some good results.

On the production front, we have been studying the establishment of a new
plant at the Chitose Industrial Park in Hokkaido, and the possibility is good.
We are still conferring with the local people, but if the plans are realized,
we hope to establish an asseably plant. In any event, this is something we
will need in the future, and we definitely are naking plans.

In the area of domestic production, bipolar is handled mainly at the Hisaahi
plant and also at the ‘l'akasaki plant, while HOS is handled at the Kofu plant
in the production system that has evolved, and we have some flexibility in our
production capacity. The basic line of thinking of this company is to perform
only the front end processes at these plants, and the back end processes in-
cluding assembly at the many associated plants.

-73-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our American plant (Hitachi Semiconductor America) is presently constructing a
new plant where test production of 66 K RAM is scheduled to start next month.
The building is expesoedto be completed in the fall, and this site will serve
to reinforce our production system. The plant in Europe (Hitachi Semiconductor
Europe) is a specialty plant for memory in which the structure has flexibility
and which eventually is expected to be the site for production of 66 K RAH.

The investment in the semiconductor area for this period is expected to total
35 billion yen, which is a considerable increase over last year's 25 billion
yen.

Advance Into Industrial Use in 1982 (Remarks by Vice President Vasuo Fujimoto,
Hatsushita Electric Industrial Company)

The industrial environment from the latter half of 1981 until this spring has
seen the former sharp expansion in video ease off, while audio has experienced
a sharp decline in the unfavorable state of business that has taken place, but
we believe that this situation will be improved by the latter half of this year.
Semiconductors have made a large impact in the world, and we can expect even
greater things this year. It may be said that the semiconductor industry has
shifted from a basic industry to the area of leading industries. It has become
more sophisticated, and it is an industry where many new products are created,
so that last year there was no other industry that was watched more intently
than the semiconductor industry.

When we consider those products which are made possible because of the power
of semiconductors, we can list such products as the digital audio disk (DAD),
the video solid state camera, the Captain system, and the individual telephone.
How will it be possible for the market for DAD to appear? This will depend a
great deal on new developments such as the semiconductor laser.

Hatsushita Electric lndustrial's semiconductor business showed an increase in
sales in 1981 that was 14 percent over the previous year and totaled about
100 billion yen.

During 1982, we plan to take up semiconductors for industrial use in earnest,
and together with our record as having been tops in private-use semiconductors,
we will move toward a role as an integrated semiconductor maker. More speci-
fically, we will expand sales in the digital area on a three-pillar base: not
only microcomputers, but memory and logic as well. This year marks the 30th
anniversary of the founding of this company, and efforts in new directions
will he significant this year.

In the area of new products to be placed on the market, we will come out with
general-use interchangeable products and will come forth with new products
such as panaflat packaging by new resin mold technology, to enable thin
miniature products, compound semiconductor technology, and VLSI technology.

In the memory area, the 6b kilobit static RAH will be followed by the dynamic
RAM and the mask RON where our strength will be directed. The large-capacity
memory, which will be put on the market in the latter half of the year, will
be mass-produced at the VLSI plant.

- 74 -

INJRiOFINClAL UEEZCHULY
FOR 051WC1AI.lEﬂE(NHLY

Uc were producing industrial-use linear 10 in the past, but in March we sud-
denly added 27 products such as the optical amplitude comparator and regula-
tor, for a total of 55 products which we will produce at the rate of 3.8 mil-
lion units per month.

logic includes CHOS logic and LS-TTL, and we are building up a mnltiproduct
mass production system. VLSI technology is used for custom products, and
already products of 2-3 micron line width are coming off the production line.
The general-use logic #000 3 line was built up to 60 products with a monthly
production of 500,000 in 1981; this will be increased to 100 products and

2 aillion units per month in 1982, and to double that in 1983. In addition,
30 products will be given multifunctional, high-speed capability during 1982.

Production of 32 products covering the greater half of the market will be
initiated in the LS-TTL area in February, and we are expecting monthly produc-
tion of more than 2 million units. The production equipment of the high-speed
series ALS-TTL is being put in readiness for initiation of operations, which
is expected to be announced sometime this year.

There are 4 bit, 8 bit, and 16 bit microcomputers; the 4 bit is the top num-
ber in its class, while the 16 bit will be represented by the maximum speed
HN 1613, for which mass production was initiated in 1981. The year 1982 will
be the year for the micon; a SO-percent or more increase in sales and monthly
production of 3.5 million units are anticipated. Future development products
include the CPD solid state projection element and blue color LED.

In 1982, among the present mass production items, LED is expected to hit 350
nillion units per month and bipolar Ic also 350 million units per month, while
small signal transistors will be produced at the high level of 210 million
units per month. In addition. HOS LSI including VLSI technology products is
expected to rise to monthly production of more than 10 million units per
nonth.

He are actively working toward development and mass production as described
above, and we hope also to invest in facilities to enable this production.

In 1982, we intend to put up 26.5 billion yen in facilities investment, of
which 22 billion is earmarked for three new plants for VLSI products produc-
tion. These constructions are expected to be completed within this year.

Running Alone Hith Cate Arrays, Expanding IC Expecred To Grow Still More
(Remarks by Director Sadao lnoue, Fujitsu)

Describing the semiconductor demand for this new year in a concise manner. it
can be said that the worldwide picture is worse for the first period, and
there are hopes that this situation may improve during the latter half. of
all the markets, that in Japan is in the best shape, indicating that it has
not suffered as much as the others. Among this company's products, audio is
not doing well while VTR production is undergoing readjustment, but they have
been essentially unaffected by the recession. He do not depend veryheavily on
audio and VTR use products; the products we supply in the audio end are MET

- 75 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOI!0FFK]AI.USE(HULY

(mesh emitter transistor) and one chip micon in the VTR area. which are both
high class products and will not be affected. Also. we do not handle very many
portable calculators and watches. as a result of which we may be able to
realize the anticipated sales this period. The sales of pancon are particu-
larly good.

During this new year, IC is expected to grow by 20 percent worldwide, while

the discrete product is expected to undergo lateral growth. This conpany is
overwhelningly involved with IC, and we are planning to continue this great

growth during the new year. This growth must be at least an average 20 per5
cent.

Looking at the novements in the world narket, the situation in the United
States is expected to remain bad this coming year, and while Europe has been
sinking, the bottom apparently has been reached. The price of nemory dropped.
thereby putting pressure on sales. Even though recovery does not seem on the
way in the United States, product shortages have been reported. indicating
that all is not completely lost. This is why it is expected that reduction
in prices will not be too prevalent in the United States during the latter
half. and there are hopes that recovery is on the way. Although there is the
problem of trade friction, Fujitsu will continue to reinforce its present
production.

Among our products, gate array was one of which we were the sole producer. but
the recent picture is that competition has entered this area. We plan to
reinforce the development and CA system to assure ourselves an advantageous
position. Increased production is necessary in the memory and micon areas.
and we expect the market to expand considerably.

0n the domestic front. we have decided on construction of new sites. first at
Kaizu. then Iwate. and now Miyagi; this company's position is that there is a
shortage in the absolute number of production units and we have to carry out
active development.

When a leeway is created in the discrete line of an integrated semiconductor

maker, other products can be produced, thereby enabling the supplementing of

other products. In this company's case. IC is the main product, and there is
need to expand our plants by a wide margin.

Semiconductor sales for the first half including electronic parts totaled
77.8 billion yen. and this is expected to increase to 100 billion yen this
next period.

The evaluation of Fujitsu electronic devices has been firm both in Japan and
abroad. and this trend has increased particularly overseas. The products we
manufacture, such as micon. nenory, and gate arrays, not only are expected to
experience great growth. but even greater growth is expected in the future.

- 76 -

90! 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬁﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO: ONLY

Ma (or 20 Percent Increase This Period (Remarks by Managing Director Klaio
Sato. Mitsubishi Electric)

Audio equipment sales this period are expected to increase 20 percent from
the depth to which they sank. but there seems to be no way to achieve the 25
percent that had been planned at the start of the year.

He believe that private-use sales will improve slightly this new year, but not
as rapidly as last year; we are planning for a 20-percent increase.

Portable calculators seem to be making a sort of comeback, but no large
recovery is expected. He do not believe that watches have recovered; both
small calculators and watches are expected to remain in a depressed state
as they were last year.

In contrast, office equipment and the 0A market are in a favorable situation.
and parts for use in robots are expected to increase greatly.

Looking at the market overall, the recession in audio will probably continue,
but there seems a good likelihood that this new year will see demand for ca-
related and robot-related energy-conserving phases of production emphasized,
which is expected to greatly sustain semiconductor growth.

In the private sector, household-use VT! has been in a readjustment situation
and should recover. He anticipate the appearance of a number of new products,
by which this company plans to be active in responding to the demand.

Model changes are tending toward more compact design, and these are tied in
to demands for related semiconductors.

The 66 K RAM is in a verygood situation; we upped our production to $00,000
in March. He are planning to produce 1 million by early autumn of this year;
we are in very good situation because of the reinforcement of our Kumamoto
plant facilities.

Introduction of 66 K RAM to computers and paacon is actually going on; the
present situation is that there is a lack of these semiconductors.

It is said the price competition is extremely fierce. but my belief is that
there will be an end to this price cutting.

This is because: 1) there is large demand, and 2) there will be an accompany-
ing price stabilization. I have always maintained that the price of the 66 K
should be six times that of the 16 K, and there seems to be a nove in that
direction at the present time.

The 64 K RAM is also being exported; the present status is that American
computer nakers have been running evaluation tests, and the real exports will
be from here on. "here this company is concerned, the export ratio of semi—
conductors is about 11 percent, which is low, but it is possible that a sudden
sharp increase could occur.

- 77 -

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

1 have no comment to make at this time with regard to the joint company estab-
lishment with Westinghouse of the United States that was brought up last year.

This year's scale of investments has not yet been established, but it is cer-
tain that last year's total will be exceeded.

0n the domestic front, we shifted production of discrete products to the north
Itami plant and the Fukuoka plant, while assembly of mass-produced IC is being
handled at the Kumamoto plant. In the area of new plants we hope to start
operations next year at our new plant, for which a site was acquired at
Nishijo in Aichi-ken.

He had initially planned for semiconductor sales of 80 billion for this first
period, but 74 billion yen seems more likely. The total was 60 billion yen
for the previous period; the discrepancy can be attributed to the S—percent
decline in audio sales.

He are planning for sales of 90 billion yen for the next period; the market
situation is not necessarily good, but we are planning all-out development.

Reinforce lnsumer, Quickly Attain 100 Billion Sales Per Year (Remarks by
Managing Director Hiroshi Yoshie, Tokyo Sanyo Electric Co, Ltd)

Market movements are bad, and the audio situation is particularly bad.

There are some who believe that audio will beginaiecovery starting about July,
but it may be necessary to continue to tread water for some time. Because

this company has been supplying Sanyo Electric in the past, the ties with cone
suner geods are strong; we are consumer oriented. We are particularly strong
In signal treatment systems, and this is a reflection ofthe situation that

our world is consumer oriented.

0n the other hand. what was once called industrial has entered the consumer-
usc picture, and we have directed our strength to a total use area type
business.

In order to make this change, it was necessary to divest ourselves of signal
treatment systems; we are now promoting expansion of control and servo system
devices. These devices are in demand for information equipment; one phase

of this activity is the plan to market in May a thin membrane motor drive use
‘C. This will use a Darlington connector and diodes, and is expected to find
application as the drive for floppy disks and solenoids.

As is evident from this example, what was once used in consumer goods is now
being used in industrial applications; I have termed this type of demand
"insumer" as a synthesis of industrial and consumer. He hope to use develop-
ment of this area to balance the decline in the consumer area.

To be sure, we are in the stage of developing second-generation and even
third-generation products. even in signal treatment systems, and we hope to

complete them. For example, we hope to use L8! to make completely noise-free
audio or introduce high integration of 1,300 eleasnts for picture circuit use

- 78 -

FIIRIMHHCJAI.U8£ZONLN
I-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of VTR in the bipolar area and thereby reduce the under of parts; we hope to
introduce these products in the fall.

He plan to initiate sales of one chip voice synthesis [.81 using the Percole
[phonetic] mde in August; this unit will incorporate son and will be capable

of external connections. It is planned to increase memory products such as
the 228 K mask ROM to this end.

This coqany places its greatest hopes on the micon market; this is a large
market for 1.81 on the order of 10 million per month. He are producing both

lens and 0308 and we hope to supply 6 nillion of the 10 million total, or 60
percent.

This is why we plan to reinforce micon; we plan to increase the breadth of
the memory capacity of the nicon and also put in 008.

Thus. this company has begun to shift its strength from consuer goods to in-
dustrial goods. We are aiming for sales of 100 billion yen in semiconductors

in 1984; this will probably be accomplished through large expansion in the
industrial area.

I would like to see the lO—billion-yen level attained earlier; the semicon-
ductor area overall will grow greatly. It is said that the country's produc-
tion last year totaled more than 1 trillion yen; this is expected to expand
to 1.5 trillion yen in 3 years. so that a mere lo billion yen seems trifling.

See 30 Percent Increase in "-82. Establish Mass Production Technology
(Remarks by Director Kosaku Okano. Sharp)

There are a number of areas which are not clearly predictable when envisaging
this year's semiconductor market. Electronic equipnent is expanding on the
basis of exports, but there is a need for downward revision. Audio is not
doing well and one wonders at what point it will settle down, while no great
growth can be expected in caneras. The growth rate in VTR has been blunted.
Electronic products have shown a muted increase whenever a new product is
introduced, but we can expect growth this year in DAD, video disk related
items, and 0A and PA-IIA (factory automation and household automation) nove-
ments. Because of its broadness and the good development of the lower peri-
phery. the seniconductor area is expected to grow at least 20 percent this
year. regardless of the depth of the recession.

He at Sharp are anticipating an increase of 23 percent in semiconductor busi-
ness over last year. Foreign sales will account for 60 percent and domestic
sales 60 percent. The feature of ”-81 sales is the domestic market being the
main force; the sharp increase in micon cowuters is outstanding. The pace
for the entire industry has been a l60—percent increase in nos micon. but
Sharp's growth here has been 260 percent. The 6 bit one chip micon makes up
the najor part. The monthly production of nicon as of March was h0,000-50,000
for the lo bit product and 30,000-40,000 for the 8 bit nicon. Demand in game-
related products has increased to the stage that it has to be given serious
consideration. There seens to be a trend toward increased denand ‘.'or the 8
bit product.

-79-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 1982. we are planning for a l30—percent increase in sales over the previous
year.

IC is down in the area of integrated circuits, while LSI is growing; we are
expecting growth slightly under 130 percent. While IC seems to be in low
key, we will set out anew on a new hybrid 1C. Potential uses for a super
hybrid 1C include television, audio, and micon.

Place on Market for Use of Micon

'rhere are some items which are expected to grow, such as the 8 hit one chip
mlcon in [.51. devices in the conunication equipment area, and the 64 K RAM.

Applied semiconductor business includes light related devices and watch
modules. counters, and day and hour display data packs.

Light is an area of long-proven record with items such as phototransistor,
photointerrupter, photocoupler, and photothyrister; we are expecting a growth
of close to 200 percent over the previous year.

Photo related products have been compiled monolithically under OPIC; we are
planning further development of this cosmrrcialized series and a cut in price,
seeking a 200 percent jump over last year. This is a product which together
with the micon is indispensable ixlthemechanical electronics area, which has
adequate demand, and we will regard this as our future strong point.

There are LED, EL, and semiconductor lasers in the display business; new plants
at Nara and Koriyama will start production of BL during the latter half of 1982
and full—scale production will begin in 1983; we have to make good this slid-
ing type production.

Four Items Will Be Theme

'rhere are long and short wavelength semiconductor lasers under consideration,
and Sharp is developing the short wavelength area. We will initiate mass
production of 780 nanometer and 10 milliwatt products in April of this year.
we will also mass-produce a 720 millimeter product, and we will attain commer-
cialization through the V818 structure.

The themes to be emphasized in 1982 will be four items: OPIC, hybrid IC.
la5er and EL.

Our investment in facilities was 14 billion yen in 1981. and there will be a
slight increase to 14.4 billion yen in 1982. A companywide project. a semi-
conductor laboratory, will be completed in September at a cost of 12 billion
yen. so the total increase in plant investment this year will be close to
l90 percent.

Thr breakdown for 1982 investments includes 2.1 billion yen for BL related
products and 7.3 billion yen for LSI related products.

- 80 -

F ‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investments in new areas include the industrialization of CCD. the CCD licen-
sers have already shipped their samples, and research and development on plane
sensors has been completed. Hhat remains is the establishment of mass produc-
tion technology and investment in facilities to industrialise the product; we
hope to start mass production and sales in 1983.

Development of New Products as Hell

He will also engage in development of new products such as bipolar 1C, which
is used in peripheral post treatment, in the couercialization of COD.

In the [.81 related area, we will renovate our V1.51 facilities and introduce
various fine working tools such as alignars and ateppers.

Attention to Mask Rm, Aim at 50 Percent Increase Next Period in Electronic
Devices (Remarks by Managing Director Yoshio Hasuda, Oki Electric Industry Co,
Ltd)

It is fairly difficult to predict what the overall semiconductor market will do
in 1982. But if we look, for example, at the predicted American market in 1985
of 550 billion yen for dynamic RAM, 360 billion yen for static RAM, 260 billion
yen for mask ROM, and 220 billion yen for BPRDH, a quadrupling in the rate of
growth each year can be anticipated.

We are paying great attention to this rate of growth; we don't expect to see
much change in this basic trend.

This company is paying particular attention to mask R0)! in the memory market.
Games in which mask RON are put up in cassette form are flourishing in the
United States, and this trend may grow still more. To be sure, we are direct-
ing considerable strength at DRAM such as 610 K RAM, and in the area of mask
ROM this company has an array of the l )1 bit jumbo chip with memory for Kanji
and the general use 32 and 6b kilobit chip to be followed by the 128 kilobit
chip, and we consider this is a fairly powerful area.

We do not have a department type organization such as the system used by the
large makers but are concentrated according to specific areas, and this has
helped to increase profitability.

He are considering dividing the company into thirds, with products with memory
type general use items comprising one-third, customs items as one-third, and
pseudo custom as the remaining one-third. Mask ROM will be handled as pseudo
custom, and together with gate arrays will be expected to undergo great growth.

He hope to promote reinforcement of the general-use products this year. Last
year, Hiyazaki Oki Electric went into Operation a month and a half ahead of
schedule, but production of RAM and RG4 on stream without mishap, and will be
in full production this year.

The Hiyazaki Oki Electric plant can mass produce 3 micron rule products, and
because of the availability of space, more installations will be rude to pro—

duce memory, micons, and gate arrays.

-31-

FOR OFFICIA' 3 ONLY
F0I10FFK1ALl£ﬂE0NLY

0n the overseas front, we have installed a design center at Okl Semiconductor
(sales company) in the United States where we will start operations and expect
to be in full swing by the end of 1982. The business office of this company
was relocated in April to assure the design center adequate space; we hope to
increase this center to about a 20-man operation using for the most part Amer-
ican technologists.

We hope to reinforce our master slice market development in the United States
in this manner; we plan to make tapes for mask 30H there and make possible
immediate mass production and activities as in Japan there.

we are‘studying production in the United States. but there are advantages and
disadvantages, and method and site surveys are underway. In any event, this
company has adopted a design center concept which differs from what other
companies are doing in order to make close contact with the American market.
Sales to the United States accounted for 10 percent of total sales in 1981
and they may increase to 25 percent in 1982.

The major products we export to the United States include custom and semi-
custnm products; in view of the trade friction and the situation that these
products are not without competition from American products, we would like to
pursue their export with vigor.

The sales of electronic devices this period comes up to 35 billion yen; we
anticipate a 63-percent increase in total volume next period and a mini-um
of 30-percent increase in total sales.

The development of Hiyazaki Oki Electric accounts for the major portion of
our investment in facilities; since there is no need to build an entirely new
plant from scratch this year, as was the case last year, plant investments
will decrease by that amount, or about 10 billion yen.

These funds are intended mainly to reinforce production facilities.
New Moves Between Japan and the United States

The world's semiconductor industry seems to be on the threshold of change to
a new era. The critical stance of the Americans against the Japanese semicon-
ductor industry is one such move, but when this situation is reviewed from a
broader viewpoint, the competitive and cooperative aspects of the world's two
largest semiconductor producing countries, the United States and Japan, are
even deeper.

looking back at the events in the semiconductor industry over the past 2-3
years, the outstanding trend is the mutual entry of Japanese and American
industries into each other's countries. Japan Texas Instruments had already
been producing IC in Japan for over 10 years, while Motorola has been in pro-
duction as a joint venture with Toko at the Kaizu plant, and now since the
end of last year, IBM and Pairchild have started production of IC in Japan.
At the same time. Intel and Advanced Micro Devices also have expressed their
intentions to start production in Japan.

- 32 -

F0ﬂ.0l1ﬂ(]Al.LEﬂ£(HULY
FOIiDFFKJAL.US£(NNLY

0n the other side of the picture, the Japanese have seen Nippon Electric.
Hitachi Limited, Fujitsu, and Toshiba Corporation set up plants in the
United States during the past 2-3 years. Even before then, Rome had entered
into capital participation and technology introduction with the Bass Company,
while the watchmaking Seiko group aided in the establishment of the American
CMOS and LS! maker Hicropower Systems Company and holds stock in that company.

The objectives of these mutual entries are: l) to produce within the export
market, 2) to avoid the risk of being embroiled in the protective trade prin-
ciple, and 3) to make use of technology and manpower in the country in

which the plant is located. These moves are considerec natural consequences
for countries such as these two where semiconductor expvrt-import is so active.

0n the other hand. there is a strange difference between thewe two countries

in that the United States is in a state of recession, while the Japanese are

overcoming this recession and are maintaining good sales in the American mar-
ket, which they sustain through these plants in America, while the Americans

are trying to maintain what was once their superior posizion in the Japanese

market and have located their plants there for this purpose.

Hhat is interesting here is that both sides basically have displayed welcoming
attitudes to these mutual entries, and the overriding logic seems to be that
production under the same conditions is fair competition.

It may be prudent to consider that this mutual entry of plants followed by
technology exchange and joint development of products is an indication that
cooperation between the industries of these two countries has deepened. A
well-known example of such cooperation is that between Hitachi Limited and
Motorola Company in supplying microprocessor technology, and partially divided
responsibility assignment or the technology exchange program between the Tele-
graph and Telephone Public Corporation and IBM.

Complaint Against 66 K RAH Export, Americsnlndustry Aims To Obtain Government
Protection

0n the competitive front, the problem which the Americans are stressing is the
export of 66 K RAH by Japanese industry to the United States. The issues over
which the Americans are distressed are given in detail in another section and
will not be repeated here. "hat has not changed since the start of this prob-
lem is that the Americans are always in distressed state compared to the
Japanese. and they want government aid for some measures to combat the reces—
sion and protect the industry.

The Japanese industry claims: "He are being made the scapegoats (sacrificial
offering)" (Vice President Ouchi, Nippon Electric) and "They are aiming for
subsidies" (Director Kaenhara of the Semiconductor Department, Hitachi LimiunD.

It is a commonplace practice of the Americans to moan over the Japanese indus-
try in order to evoke some sort of government response, as mentioned before.
One result of such actions has been the American industry receiving contracts
from the Department of Defense for the VHSIC plan (development of LSI tech-
nology with 100 times the capability of the 1978 technology, with a development

- g3 -

FOBiOFFKJAl.USEil‘LY
NOR‘OF’ICIAL USEGDNLY

period from 1980 to 1986 funded at $225 million) taken from the Japanese VLSI
project.

The disparaging attacks culminating in this 6‘ K RAH attack seem to be aimed
at: l) limiting imports of 64 K RAH. the price of which has dropped too low.
thereby enabling American industry to recover its competitive edge; 2) devel-
oping markets for American IC and lowering Europe's l7-percent duty; and

3) obtaining some sort of government encouragement and subsidy.

Japanese Production with Preeminent Yield

0n the other hand. as evidenced by mutual entry activities, the world's semi-
conductor industry is heading in a new direction and is now in a large inno-
vative period. Although there is no definite proof, it is said that 3 years
ago a certain American large computer maker analyzed the Japanese made 66 K
RAM and decided that the Japanese overall sass production technology was

superior to the American technology based on both design technology and pro-
cess technology.

The report entitled "Semiconductor Trade and Development," issued by a joint
congressional committee on 18 February, stated without elaboration that Japan-
ese 6b K RAH production technology is associated with greater yield, and this
is something that is common knowledge among those in Japan's industry.

The reason for this superior yield is not limited to production technology
alone: design methods and the solution of production problems are important
factors which enable the Japanese to top the Americans. The Japanese not
only solved practically all of the problems necessary to increase the yield
of 64 K RAM but also removed any obstacle which could possibly be a detriment.

Put simply, it is a sort of blind type development activity, but both the
transistor and IC in the initial stages of development in the 1950‘s and
1960's were products of the discovery of new principles which occurred rather
naturally, and in the case of a leading technology such as the 6‘ K RAH such
activities are very important.

The Americans are putting forth similar efforts, but it has been pointed out
that there is a vast difference in degree from the Japanese. It is not clear
just what this difference is, but as has often been said, Japanese products
combine completeness of both product and production to the extent that they
are items of superior quality. while the Americans are content to stop at some
adequate level.

This is something which one can quickly understand when one looks at LSI for
a small calculator or watch which Japan supplies to the world as top class
items. These LSI are produced by a rather complex CHOS process; "Initially
the yield was only 30 or 40 percent. but at present it is over 90 percent.
and there are hardly any rejects“ (department head Kawanishi of the Semicon-
ductor Department, Toshiba Corporation).

If this situation did not exist, an LSI chip for watch use would increase in
cost from 50 yen to 60 yen. while that for a calculator would not be able to
cost only 100 yen, nor would the price remain stable fornanyyears.

- ga _

FINI¢HWHC1AI.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yuahizaki, the former assistant chief of the International Trade Bureau (now
international Trade Policy Bureau) of the Hinistry of International Trade and
Industry, who later entered the service of Japan Texas Instruments and at
present is president of that company. said: "Japan holds the dominant posi-
tion in the world with regard to IC. 16 production is similar to the produc-
tion of rice crackers in that the Japanese have the ability to put paintings
on the individual rice grains. IC is perfectly suited to Japan.“

President Yoshizaki made the following statement on recent movements: "What I
predicted has come to pass. The situation in the United States is that the
people serving different companies undergo a complete change every few years,
whereas in Japan the same people keep on working and piling up experience.

II

It is clear that a plant where the personnel does not change is stronger, as
he came forth with a new viewpoint.

Japan Texas Instruments is reinforcing increased production of 66 K RAM at its
Hiho plant in Iharakl Prefecture, just as its president said. and is exporting
a portion of its wafer product to its assembly plants in Southeast Asia, where
they are assembled into complete parts for export to the United States in the
international strategy the company has developed.

As of the middle of March, this company was supplying plastic packaged 64 K
RAM to domestic makers in Japan, running alongside the Japanese forces which
were behind in the plastic area but are not undergoing development to a super-
ior position; users' evaluation has been favorable.

Even though it erred by falling behind, Japan IBM will enter into mass produc-
tion of to next year at its Noshu plant in Shiga Prefecture, according to an
announcement by the company. It is believed that this company also plans to
exploit the superior Japanese attributes.

Back in 1973 or 1974, when importing Ic into Japan was far from free, spot
imports of 10 from west Germany increased suddenly, drawing the attention

of the concerned bureau. It was ascertained that this importation was from the
IBM Best German semiconductor plant, but now the reverse situation may be on
the way .

The Not To Be Despised American latent Strength, the Unrivaled High Technology

When we consider these events, it becomes evident that mass production of
general-use IC and LSI is well suited to Japan. On the other hand, high-
level microprocessors and innovative devices are where the Americans hold the
center stage.

That being the case, a pattern in which general-use devices would be mass-
produced in Japan while high-class products would be produced in the United
States should take over, but the United States, which is the leader in the
world market. will not stand for such a system. and this is what is bringing
distress to the Japanese.

0n the other hand, like it or not, the trend for Japan. which is superior in
mass production of general-use devices, to continue that way is being enhanced
still more.

- gs -

FOI‘OFEKJA1.USE(NVLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a sidelight to this discussion, it has been noted here that "At the last
Isscc (International Solid State Circuit Conference) the technologists who
were assembled drafted a report that the United States is many stages above
Japan in advanced products and that this difference is increasing, and I
believe that this is something we should note very carefully" (Director ﬂats
of Hitachi).

Semiconductor Companies Reinforcing Sales Strength

The semiconductor companies are putting strength into their sales force be-
cause of the expanding applications for semiconductors and the growing market
scale. The competition for a share of the domestic market is intensifying, as
a result of which each company's activities in the sales area are becoming
more and more hectic.

Establish Fully Funded Sales Companies To Respond To lntensifying Battle for
Share

A recent development that has attracted attention is the establishment by
Hitachi Limited of its "Hitachi Electronic Parts Sales Company," to which

the company subscribed 100 percent. This new company, which went into action
on 1 April with capital of 80 million yen, will operate initially with a
force of 30 people and will conduct yearly business of 7 billion yen.

To Direct Lineage Sales Cowany

what is of interest here is that heretofore sales agencies were the main-
stream for sales in semiconductors, and Hitachi is trying to convert this
into a direct lineage sales company system.

Director Sutezo ﬂats of this cowany said: "He considered reinforcing sales
in a number of ways, and this new company is one of these approaches."

At the same time, "Hith certain users we hope to have direct dealings (with
Hitachi) and there are some instanceswhen the use of an agency where the
name Hitachi does not come out directly may be possible and a diversified
sales system is preferable," he said.

In the area of semiconductor sales system for the domestic semiconductor
market, Nippon Electric is rated tohave the top system in its agency (this
company calls it special contract stores) network. The four large special
contract agencies--Yosan (September 1982 period sales of 88.8 billion yen),
Hitsunobu Denki (sales for same period of 62 billion yen), Shinko Shoji
(October period sales of 50 billion yen), and Sajima Denki (46.7 billion
yen)--arc not only active in sales but carry on vigorous new market devel-
opment; their technological strength and service strength are evaluated very
highly.

Both Hitachi and Toshiba recognize the Nippon Electric strength in sales of
electronic devices, but realize they cannot duplicate such a system, so both
companies are looking into other new sales systems.

-86-

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ext reme ly Busy

The semiconductor industry department and electron tube industry department
(Braun tube is main line) at Hitachi are under the control of the electron
industry headquarters which conducts sales; the electronic parts business
headquarters within the main headquarters is in direct charge of sales, and
agencies are also used. J'he electronic parts business headquarters has a
total of 250 employees in the Tokyo district and sells semiconductors as well
as Braun tubes, from which it is evident that this is a very busy organization.
In contrast, the sales department of Nippon Electric, which handles sale of
electronic devices, totals 800 people~-a sales staff at least double that of
any other.

Director Katashi Kawanishi of Toshiba's semiconductor industry department
states: "Semiconductor sales at this company are through direct sales and
agency sales under the semiconductor industry department; we are increasing
the number of people in the applied technology area apart from the business
department to engage not in pure business but to reinforce technological serv-
ices.‘

Two Types of Transactions

Tokyo Sanyo Electric, which plans for a lOO-billion-yen business in semicon-
ductors in 19810, is reinforcing its development of the industrial-use market
and hopes to achieve great growth; it plans to reinforce its agency sales as
one phase of this project. Managing Director liiroshi Yoshie of this company
said: "There are two types of users, those who purchase through the median of
agencies and those who prefer making direct purchases," as he indicated that
sales were not simply resolved. The present direction of this company is to
depend as much as possible on the agency line for sales of semiconductors for
industrial use and reinforce the direct sales setup to develop two lines in
its efforts to spur sales.

Whether to go through direct sales or through agency sales seems to be the
prerogative controlled mainly by the wishes of the user. For example, indus-
tries outside of the regular semiconductor area such as toys. watches, ma—
chines, and tool machines seem to have more who prefer direct purchases from
the semiconductor maker, while, on the other hand, many of the computer,
comnications equipment, and office equipment type electronic equipment indus-
tries prefer purchases through agencies.

Establish Special Subsidiary Company

"He can even use a cat's help" is an expression indicative of how busy the
present state of the various semiconductor companies is. mittedly this is
a growth industry, but IC, [.81 development, related software, and then appli-
cation software type related industries are growing so rapidly that the situ-
ation cannot be adequately digested in the situation in which each company
finds itself.

This is the background which prompted semiconductor companies to set up sub-
sidiary companies 1 or 2 years ago to specialize in software or system design.

-87-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table of Subsidiary Soft/Design Companies of the Semiconductor Makers

Name of
Com an NEG Ic Hicon S stem Hitachi Microc uter inaari
Date
established...23 Hay 1980 7 June 1980
Capital.......50 million yen 50 million yen
0vner.........Pully owned by NBC Fully owned by Hitachi
Name of
president.....Kiyoshi Uchimsru Genichi Kamoshita
8usiness.....oSystem design for micro- shard and soft design for micro-
contenta computers computers
sApplicationa design sDesign of microcomputer applica-
oLSl circuit design tion products
oLSI circuit pattern design onevelopment design for semiconduc-
tor 1C and L51
sSoft development for L8! design
and technological calculations
oSpecial survey of electronics
Hanpower......300 employees 900 employees (as of March 1982)
Annual
business......2 billion yen (planned) 4.8 billion yen (FY-81)
Location......l933-19 Shimonumabe, 1479 Kami Hizumoto-cho,
Nakahars-ku, Kawasaki-obi Kodaira-shi, Tokyo-to
________________________________________________________________________.__________
Name of
Company Toshiba Hicon Engineering Fujitsu Micro Systems
Data
c3tnbllshcd...l April 1981 20 April 1981
Capltal.......50 million yen 50 million yen
0vncr.........Fully owned by Toshiba Fully owned by Fujitsu
Name of
president.....hiromu Yamamoto Hiroyuki Nakano
Business.....s8asic and applied soft de- oBasics related to semiconductor
contents velopment for microcomputers products (mainly microcomputers)

sDesign business in Ic/LSI and their application product
shovelopment of test programs development
and CAD programs sSales of soft and application
soft
onesign and sales of semiconductor
products and microcomputer appli-
cation products
oDevelopment, orders. and sales of
software related to semiconductor
production facilities
Hanpower......250 men (as of 1 April 82) 110 men
Annual
business......l.8 billion yen planned FY 82 --
Location......1 Toshiba-machi, Komukai, 1015 Kami Kodanaka,
Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki-obi Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki-obi

-33-

FOR Oifﬂﬂhl.lliE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Nippon Electric 10 and Hicon System," "Hitachi Hicrocomputer Engineering,"
"Toshiba Hicon Engineering," and "Fujitsu Hicon Systems" are four such com-
panies already in operation; their general makeup is given in another section.

Adopt Flexible System

As may be deduced from their names, these new companies have strong ties with
an engineering image. The functions of these four companies are very similar
in nature, which in the main are: 1) L51 circuit pattern design, 2) hard and
soft design for micon, 3) applied software development for LSI and micon,
and 6) CAD/test program development. These companies have flexible systems
which enable them to accept orders and make sales.

Each semiconductor company points out that these subsidiary companies have
been brought up to possess great competitive strength, and their role is in-
creasing as support forces.

As can be seen from their business activity makeup, these companies are ex-
pected to go into gate array development, which has great possibility of devel-
oping into a specialty area.

Sharp Increase in Each Company's Manpower

Of special interest is the sudden increase in each company's manpower. Nippon
Electric IC Micon System started out with 200 employees; and its annual busi-
ness of 700 million yen grew to a 2-billion-yan scale requiring 300 employees.
Hitachi Microcomputer Engineering started off with an even larger staff of

700 people with annual business of 3.5 billion yen, which increased a year
later to a staff of 900 people and business of 6.8 billion yen.

Toshiba Hicon Engineering is planning to increase the number of its employees
by 100 this April. All four companies are planning even greater increases
from here on, and they seem likely to become powerful support forces to their
parent companies in the areas of micon and LSI.

What worries these new companies is that despite the sharp increases in
business volume. there is great difficulty in acquiring the necessary manpower.
Restricting ourselves to events of this year. the new graduates in the area of
electronics and mathematics related areas are being fought for by the elec-
tronics industry, and it is even more difficult to hire people in the soft
development areas. Despite this situation, the parent companies are shifting
various activities such as LSI, micon, soft, applied soft, and system design
to these subsidiary companies and are anticipating satisfactory performance.

Expect Active Reinforcement

According to a certain semiconductor maker, assuming that the company overall
was able to land 500-600 new graduates. the number allotted to the semicon-
ductor department would be much fewer than the number requested. Since it is
impossible to increase the number of graduates hired to resolve this lack, the
engineering company has to revert to great reinforcement of its activities.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimhunsha 1982

9923
cso: 8129/1086-8 - 89 -

Itll(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂi(lULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

NBC VICE PRESIDENT OUCliI INTERVIMD 0N smroomcron ISSUE

Tokyo SANKBI in Japanese 30 Mar, 1, 2. 5 Apr 82

[Interview with Atsuyoshi Ouchi, vice president of Nippon Electric Company,
by editorial staff member Hiroyuki Kanbara)

[30 Mar 82 p 10]

[Text] Japan's economic friction with the United States and Europe is shift-
in; fron television and automobiles to semiconductors. when tne situation is
such that the semiconductor trade does not favor the Japanese, why is the
United States unilaterally attacking the Japanese? At the same time. how far
will Japan's semiconductor technology advance and how will our country's in-
dustry and daily life be altered by these changes? He asked Vice President
Atsuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon Electric. who is the acknowledged head of the semi-

conductor industry for his views.
Technology Innovation Advancing at Super Speed

[Question] The semiconductor makers at present are engaged in hot competition
in putting up facilities. Can you say something about this situation?

Ouchi: Take our company. for example. He invested 38 billion yen in plant
facilities during FY-Ol. The total sales of all of Nippon Electric is about
1 trillion yen. of this total, semiconductor sales account for close to one-

fourth. about 220 billion yen.

The total investment in facilities for the same year was 85 billion yen. Of
this total. the investments under my jurisdiction totaled over 60 billion yen.
The semiconductor area alone accounted for 38 billion yen. so our investment
in facilities was close to half the total. This should give a good idea of

how much investment is required.

Furthermore, the legal period of amortization of these facilities is 5 years,
whereas it is 7 years for the usual type facility. He have been able to make
this period specially short for the IC (integrated circuit) industry. The
actual situation is that the period does not even reach 5 years. I tell my
subordinates: "Once we install our facilities, we must be able to recover the

investment in 2 years." He should be able to replace it in an average of 3
years, at least; otherwise we will be standing still in a respondent manner

- 90 -

INJI<OIIHCJAI.USI:(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL IISIE ONLY

using a slow wood and old machinery. This is how fast technological innova-
tions are developing.

[Question] I guess the investment speed will see no abatement.

Ouchi: That is so. If we preview the 1980's decade. on the average lC-related
investments will increase about 20 percent per year (monetary base). The
expansion in transistors will not be as great. 0n the other hand, 16 is the
area of greatest attention, and ms type 10 such as for microcomputer use is
expected to increase about 30 percent per year.

Furthermore. the value of the machinery depreciates 36 percent per year. The
nuber of capabilities which the world's semiconductor industry gives to
society is doubling each year.

if this situation were applied to automobiles, the highways of the world would
be jawed with automobiles, making movement impossible and creating a serims
social problem. However, we do not concern ourselves with such a possibility
because of the small scale. That is why I believe that the semiconductor
industry will expand at least until the end of this century.

Americans Faced With Structural Disadvantage

lQuestion] Is that magnitude of growth possible? Hith an expanding market,
why should competition between makers be so fierce?

Ouchi: It is because this is an industry in which the learning curve (learn-
ing curve) and scale merit (mass production effect) are influential factors.
No matter what is said, this is a narrow industry. and everything does not
follow logic. If we conduct our business strictly on the basis of the exper-
ience we have accumulated, our basic value will depreciate. In addition,

technological innovation will continue for the rest of the century, and a vast
army of research and development personnel will be required. In order to re-
cover the cost of such operations, small voluse Ic production not only will
make impossible a reduction in cost but will cause us to lose out in the

marketplace.

This Is why the world is in an oligopoiistic trend. I will apply this to the
Japanese—American semiconductor friction. The small and medium Inkersoi'liurica's

Silicon Valley (semiconductor industrial belt on the southwest shore of San
Francisco Bay. where a timber of leading semiconductor makers are located)
are. generally speaking, in a state of structural disadvantage. Since no one
cones to the rescue in such a situation. they pick on Japan as being the
villain, and the idea of attacking Japan becomes a popular trend.

Need for Vast Investment

[Question] Is there not a minus side to the concept of learning curve and
scale merit?

-91-

ms OFFICIAL [.88 ONLY
Fillcuﬁﬂfth USEGNVLY

Ouchi: There is. Although this is an industry with a rosy future. everybody
is striving "to be bigger than everybody else," and the semiconductor makers
throughout the world are locked in a terrific contest.

There is no doubt that a large scale results in lower basic price. If the
lowest price possible becomes the market price, the other industries will be
operating in the red. and this is why there is a race to achieve the top rank

in the world. The rosy situation and the simultaneous fierce competition are
two of the characteristic features of the semiconductor industry.

[Question] I guess a vast investment is required in order to win out in this
contest?

Ouchi: Research and development and investment in facilities cost a good deal.
Up to a few years ago, about 5 billion yen was thought necessary in order to
expand sales by 10 billion yen. However. the facilities are becoming more high
priced. and at present about 7 billion yen investment is required to expand
sales by 10 billion yen. It can be expected that it won't be long before 10
billion yen investment in facilities will be required to increase sales by

10 billion yen.

[Biographical Note] Atsuyoshi Ouchi graduated from the Department of Electri-
cal Engineering, Faculty of Engineering. University of Tokyo, on 17 September
1942. he entered service in Nippon Electric immediately after graduation and
in March 1962 received a doctoral degree on a dissertation entitled "Research
on Application of Negative Impedance Converter" in the area of a new electron-
ic circuit theory. In chember 1966 he became director of the Integrated Cir-
cuit Design Headquarters, where he faced the challenge of IC development.
Since then he has served as head of the Department of Integrated Circuit Indus-
try. He became a managing director in 1973, executive managing director in
1977. senior executive managing director in 1978. and vice president in June
1980. He is respected as Japan's leading man in semicOnductors and is
acclaimed even in foreign circles. He is presently vice president of the
Electronic Communication Society and is active in the Keidanren Industrial
Policy Research Committee. He is the author of the text "Introduction to
Hicon" (Kosaido Shuppan); from Tokyo-to, age 60.

[1 Apr 82 p 10]
[Text] Unreasonable Anti—Japanese Attitude

lQuestion) He now shift to the Japanese-American problem. First of all, what
is the present situation in the Japanese-American semiconductor friction?

Ouchi: when then Prime Minister Fukuda stopped in California on a visit to
the United States in 1977, the Silicon Valley representatives confronted him
with "The Japanese IC makers are attacking with Ic (integrated circuits). and
this must cease. We ask the prime minister to come up with some countermea-
sures," and this was the start of this present friction.

In the steel. automobile, and television friction which preceded this present
situation. it was the overwhelming Japanese exports which caused resentment on

- 92 -

IN). OWNWCLAl.lEl£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[hr part of the Americans. 0n the other hand, the amount of 1c entering Japan
from the American side at that time was greater than what was being exported
to the United States. This excess in imports continued, and it was only for
a short period near the start of last year that exports temporarily topped
imports; there is good balance at the present time.

Furthermore, the products Japan exports to the United States include a high
portion of NOS type LSI. This is a special area for Japan which was developed
in connection with portable calculators. The U.S. military and NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) advanced funds for study of the bipolar
type, which is presently being shipped to Japan. Thus, there is a good over-
all balance in IC, and both sides are experiencing increased volume. This is
a very ideal situation.

This, however, is the Japanese reasoning. If we listen to what the Americans
have to say, they claim IC is the "oil for industry" and they believe it will
play a major role in all areas in the future. Japan succeeds in anything it
.strives for. It will be too late if they let the situation develop to the
stage that steel, automobiles and television attained, so now is the time to
come out with rhetoric and hold back the impending flood, is one of the reason-
ings. He would like to see something done about the structural inadequacy of
Silicon Valley, but this is not something public opinion would approve if the
aid were free, so the rationale seems to be that aid has been requested be-
cause the Japanese have launched an attack.

[Question] Such being the case, would not a counter argument that the export-
import situation is in balance put then in a troubled position?

Ouchi: They will come forth with "You are bombarding us with a very great
concentration of MOS, and that will not do" type retort. Now, it may be

the result of high unemployment in the United States, but they are in a posi-
tion that even if they were operating at full force, they would be unable to
meet the demand at this time. this is why the criticism of concentrated ex-
ports does not hold water.

American Occupied Europe

[Question] Such being the case, is it the result of poor Japanese public
relations that is causing misunderstanding?

Ouchi: Yes. Furthermore, the Japanese contribution to American imports of
1c is a few percent; more than 80 percent is imported from plants the Ameri-
cans set up in Southeast Asian countries. That is why, if the unemployment
in the United States is truly the problem, rather than raise a din about
Japanese exports, they could squeeze their Southeast Asian plants a little to
alleviate unemployment in the United States.

Nevertheless, let's consider what it will be like if our experts to the
United States keep increasing in the future. For example, there are the
following type of statements coming from the Department of Defense: 16 and
LS! are important from a military viewpoint as well. As long as the IC and
LSI of the United States are several steps above those from Japan and Europe,
the military order of the West can be maintained. If now the technology of

- 93 -

FOR OFTWCIAI.IENE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan or Europe were to become superior to that of the United States, this
would be a serious military problem. If this type of attitude is adopted,
there is nothing we can do.

[Question] Let us now turn our eyes toward Europe.

Ouchl: Europe is already occupied by the United States, and what Japan does
is of slight concern. Although it is said that the European people‘all use
1C made in the BC, the truly European makers such as Phillips and Siemens
produce only a slight amount. and it is the large American makers located in
Europe such as Texas Instruments, Fairchild, and Motorola which are reaping
the profits on the products, which are then carried back to their country.
Because such a history has been recorded, rather than hate the Japanese, the
Europeans have the feeling that they would somehow like to reverse the situa—
tion once more with regard to the Americans and Japanese.

Putting Plants in the Other Country Is the Key

[Question] Isn't there some specific move that can be made to fight this
situation? '

ouchi: Yes. Nippon Electric has an IC plant in Ireland and one under con-
struction in Scotland, and we are being greeted with open arms. Nippon Elec-
tric is making a top-class technology transfer to Europe. The engineers we
will hire at our plant in Scotland are all graduates of Scottish universities.
To be sure, we will dispatch some engineers from Japan in order to transfer
the Japanese technology. “hen this is done and the engineers from both sides
work together, the true worth of the engineering graduates of the Scottish
universities will assert itself. This technology, which cannot be purchased
even with billions of yen, will become commonplace by next year; technology
transfer is not possible.

Hawaiian] Is that so?

Ouchi: That is why the European plants will be manned by European technolo-
gists, as the plants purchased in the United States are completely manned by
Americans, from the manager down to the lowest level technician. 0f the total
of over 400 workers, only a handful are Japanese. We bring these American
technologists uaour plant in Kyushu where they study quality control and other
subjects before they return to the United States so that they can bring the
level up before it goes awry.

lQucstion] Could you by being so overly generous risk losing these people to
rival companies along with the technology and cause a dilution of advantage?

Ouchi: If that happens, so what? People who have studied in Japanese QC
circles are proselytized with promises of increased salaries. Even if they
are acquired by other companies, the technological innovations which I men-
tioned before are so fierce so that we will not be losing that much. while,
on the other hand, why should we stop them from making this advance? There
is no point in trying to protect today's technology. Rather than trying to
keep the technology to ourselves, would it not be better to locate plants in

_ 94 -

FOR OFIWCIAL USIZCMNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USI'I ONLY

the United States, hire American technologists and laborers, and thereby pre-
vent trade friction fron arising? Even 1fthey leave, only 10 or 20 percent at
most will leave; it is not a case of everybody leaving.

[2 Apr 82 p 8]
[Text] The Greater Part of Electric Equipment Is Semiconductors

[Question] Do you think that as the speed of semiconductor development picks
up, some immeasurable effects on the industrial structure will arise?

Ouchi: Yes. Already considerable effect is seen in the area of the electri-
cal nachine industry which produces semiconductors. That is to say, the parts
which had been used in these machines in the past are now being replaced by
LS! (large integrated circuit). As this change takes place, the greater part
of the added value to the electrical machinery in the area of hardware will

be nearly all 1C and semiconductors; the remaining added value will come from
the software. Dr Jonas of Stanford Research Institute in the United States
jokes that the total number of software technologists required in the world in
the year 2025 will outnumber the total population of the world, as hedescribes
the increasing density of software efforts.

[Question] That is incredible.

Ouchi: 0n the other hand, one large influence IC possesses is that it per-
meates various areas which are in no way related to electrical equipment.

One such example which is a hit is the microcomputer. This product will most
likely be responsible for greater electronification of automobiles. Up to a
few years ago. machines werethe sole domain of mechanical engineering, while
electrical engineering was limited to the motors used to operate the machines.
but today the situation is such that a machine which is not electronic will
not sell. This is the situation with cameras. The same applies to reproduc-
ing equipment. Hatches have become completely electronified. Furthermore,
the prices are ridiculously low. This is because the price goes lower as
more electronic parts are introduced. The stock page in newspapers today re-
quires electric equipment. chemical equipment, and machines to be printed;
this will all become electrical within a few years.

[Question] Such being the case, would not the party making the earlier intro-
duction win out?

Ouchi: That is so.

Increasing Number of Parts With Conversion to 16

[Question] would there again be a fierce fight for front position?

Ouchi: Yes. The Japanese tend to do something just to be doing something.
In essence. they dash around madly without seeking a goal. The Europeans are

of an opposite mold. and that is why they fell behind. Among the Europeans,
mechanical engineering was very advanced in Germany, and electronics was not

- 95 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFNHAI.USE(NVLY

able to simply break in because of the main position occupied by machines.
'nnls was compounded by labor belonging to different unions.

[Question] Were not both capital and labor conservative in Europe?

Ouchi: Truly conservative. It is only now that the United Kingdom, Heat
Germany, and France have all started giving subsidies for VLSI. I believe
they were considerably delayed.

[Question] As the degree of integration in semiconductors becomes higher,
doesn't the need for the hard area become unnecessary in the area of elec-
trical equipment.

Ouchi: Such is not the case. The electrical equipment industry is in a good
position. Along about 1965, when 16 first made its appearance, resistance
makers and 1c makers were in a turmoil. They worried that they were slated
for extinction.

0n the other hand, the end result has been exactly the opposite. That part
taken over by IC has been surpassed by that part which increased because of
IC. As machines and knitting machines successively introduced Ic, the print _
base became marketable. This is where condensers and resistors find applica-
tion. This is how these products expanded along with IC.

[Question] To be able to do all this, didn't it require considerable reac-
tion, including investment in facilities?

Ouchi: Yes. I believe that even in the future, the peripheral parts indus-
try will deVelop along with IC, although it may not be as large as the IC
rate of growth that was mentioned earlier in this discussion.

[Question] What will be the effect on the people's living standard? Can we
eXpect it to be a very comfortable existence?

Ouchi: So-cslled office automation, factory automation for plants, and re-
placement of labor by robots will become more popular, and it will be 1C
technology and software technology that will support the base periphery. This
is why it is possible eventoday to combine a household telephone, television,
and radio, which at present are separate, into a single system. On the other
hand, such a set would cost 10 million yen, which is beyond the means of the
ordinary household. However, if 1C drops to 1/100 of its value based on
capability, what is today only a dream will be available tomorrow at a price
that one can afford.

[Question] if something that now costs 10 million yen were to become avail-
able for 10,000 yen, the product would go like wildfire.

Ouchi: what will drop in price to 1/100 of the present cost will be the chip
section, while the price of theiron which is used to make the case will not

drop very much, so my statement was very symbolic in nature. Please don't
think that the price will fall to 1/100 level in the course of 10 years.

- 95 -

FIHIIDFI1C1AL.USIZ(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electronic Computer Home Not For May

[Question] Let us take, for example, the large computer made by Nippon Elec-
tric, the ACOSIOOO. How compact do you think it will be in 10 years?

Ouchi: That is something I cannot tell you off-hand. That is because we do
not know today how small the core section, the memory, will become. 0n the
other hand, the typewriter has a keyboard which must be large enough so an
operator can punch the necessary keys, while the peripheral equipment nust
be easy to use and is becoming more elaborate, so there does not seem to be
room for much miniaturization. The main section will become smaller. As the
unit is made smaller, there will be no limit to how small people will want to
see them reduced, and it becomes necessary to compensate using only the caps-
city of memory actually required.

[Question] This brings upanother difficult problem.

Ouchi: Take for instance the personal cowuter costing 168,000 yen. This is
a good price, and it is provided with the capabilities of a much larger com—
puter. In the area of portable calculators, the first ones which were made in
1967 using our 1c and Sharp's hos type 10 cost 600,000 yen. That calculator
cannot hold a candle to today's model costing 3,000 yen (laughs).

This is why factories and households will be automated, and this will all be
at a price that is affordable. 0n the other hand, the real problea is jmt
what sort of products needs to be developed for household use.

[5 Apr 82 p 6]
[Text] Performance to Quadruple in 4: Years

[Question] How far do you think this technological competition in semiconduc-
tors will continue? It is said that memory capacity will go from the 6!.
kilobit RM to the 256 kilobit RAH.

Ouchi: The degree of integration of [.81 (large scale integrated circuit) is
not only the result of how fine the physicist and chemist can make the inte-
gration. At the same time, the circuit itself nust consume power of an order
of magnitude less than what is now consumed, and an on-ofi' circuit must be
invented. In addition, dust damage will be an order of magnitude greater than
what it is now, and a technology to enable even better clean rooms has to be
developed. Furthermore, it may require a whole day just to examine a single
chip into which more than a million elements are compressed. we will have

to develop a technology that will enable the examination of the numerous ele—
ments crashed into these chips at fantastic speeds.

[Question] In other words, unless all these different areas are developed,
the technology cannot advance very far?

Ouchi: That is right. This is why when you ask how far development will go,
it is not an easy question to answer. What I can say is that this is the
year when there definitely will be a takeover from 16 to 6/0 kilobit RAM in

-97..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the memory area. I have been saying for several years that this takeover will
come about the middle of 1982. But because you people of the mass co-unica-

tions media have been flaunting 6!. K W so insistently, the world thinks that
the 66 kilobit RAH took over several years ago, when it was actually this year.

I suppose we will be going to the 256 kilobit product next. This will come in
a few years. The 256 kilobit product has been produced in the laboratory, and
test production has been attempted. This is the actual situation. Our company
already had this product at hand 2 years ago. On the other hand, it is my be-
lief that it will be about 1986 before it will become advantageous to use the
256 kilobit over the 64 kilobit. Re have come through a stage in which there
was a quadrupling in performance every 2 years, but the situation is closing
down to a point when this quadrupling in capacity will require lo years. This
Is 1982. Adding lo years to 1982 gives you 1986. Then add another ’4 years and
it will be 1990, and that will be the tine for the one megabit chip.

Conditions Becoming More Difficult
[Question] Then what do you think will happen?

Ouchi: At the present rate, I am not sure whether this development will con-
tinue at the present pace. This is because of the conditions I listed before.
In any event. I believe that one is not wrong to assume that this age of IC
and LSI using silicon will continue for the rest of this century.

0n the other hand. there are some who will argue with this statement and say
what about the gallit- arsenide semiconductor. They will also ask about the
Josephson effect (the effect in which cooling the electronic element to -273°c
enables the operating speed of the element to approach the speed of light).
Hnn't silicon be replaced by these other materials? however, both gallium
arsenide and the Josephson element require cooling to very low temperatures.
These will be indispensable in the high-speed computers of the future. Take.
for example, this watch. This is adequate for my needs, and to introduce a
Josephson element to make it more accurate is a meaningless improvement, so
that although the Josephson effect and the gallium srsenide element will see
their development, I still believe that at least 90 percent of the needs for
the rest of this century will be provided by the present materials.

Awesome Latent Strength of the United States

[Question] "hat do you believe will come out of the Japanese-American compe-
titive strengths? Can you say they are at the same level?

Ouchi: At present Japan is slightly in the lead in the matter of the 6!: kilo-
bit. 0n the other hand, wecannot look too optimistically into the future.
This is something I do not really want to interpret or discuss, but there is
a need for our research and development to take a considerable lead. That is
to say, where the absolute number of researchers and developers is concerned,
the United States, with double the population of Japan, should have twice the
number we have in this area.

-93..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Just how nany are there at the present time?

Ouchi: I cannot give you the actual figures. 0n the other hand, their papula-
tion is double ours. Looking at the nuﬂer of colleges and universities, again
they have double our nudaer, and about 50 percent of the research and develop—
nent funds are of a "boss stars and stripes" origin. The Alericans criticize
our subsidy systen. The Americans certainly are not lacking in subsidies.

They get it from the ailitary and NASA, although it is described as being used
for training purposes, but it all boils down to the sue thing.

There is profit even if free, and a country with such a large population de-
pends on the nation to provide 50 percent of the research and develop-eat
costs. Japan is limited to the swaidies of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, which accomts for 2-3 percent of our research and devel-
opment costs. We have to scrape around to cone up with the balance. This is
the handicap we are faced with.

That is why the Americans wouldn't even dream of letting a Far East island
country overtake it and cone up to their level. This is another case of
"Remenber Pearl harbor. " ' Use leading technology to set back the Japanese.
If the Department of Defense and NASA shell out the money and the universi-
ties work feverishly, they not only can overtake but surpass.

[Question] It has always been said that the Japanese lack creative ability.

Ouchi: I do not buy that theory. That is because in the 30 years since the
end of the war, all the time of the Japanese technologists was taken up in the
pursuit of the United States until very recently. That is why there is no
tine for a leisurely snoke or thinking up new creations. 0n the other hand,
this situation has reversed itself dramatically during the past few years.

For example, there is the prestigious International Solid State Circuit Con-
ference which is held in the United States in which only 90 papers from all
over the world are presented each year. Up to a little over 10 years ago,
there were at best one or two papers presented by the Japanese fron snong the
90 papers, and we were happy just to be represented. But last year the
Japanese papers accounted for about one-third of the total. Such being the
case, one can say that Japanese creativity blossonsd forth suddenly over the
course of 10 years. Thus, Japan has developed the margin to overtake the
Alericans in the latter of exploiting creative strength.

[Question] The technological develop-cut of semiconductors occurred in the
30 or so years since the war, and it is quite an accomplishment.

Ouchi: It is quite sole record. Even at that we still have no title to relax.
It nay be an exhilarating experience for a young technologist. 0n the other
hand, for one who handles the business end, he must always think about how to
make things pay off, and this is somewhat of a pressure sit cation.

COPYRIGIT: Sangyo Keizai Shisbun 1982

9923
C80: 8129/ 1084-!"

-99-

MWMWLY
FOI‘OFFNJAL.USE(NULV

CONPRONTING U.S.-JAPANESE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRIES ANALXZED

Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese l6. 17, 22, 24 Her. 7 Apr 82
[Article by reporter Eiichi Hasegawa]

[16 Her 82 p 8]

[Text] The recent report released by the 0.5. Department of Commerce titled
"1982 American Production Estimates" predicts that Japanese-made 66 kilobit
DRAM will take up 80 percent of the share of the American market and sent out
emergency warnings. while the Department of Defense used this situation to
point out the danger to national security; the drive to limit Japanese exports
to the United States is attracting attention. In this respect, the domestic
semiconductor makers (Japan Electronic Machinery Association) have received no
unsettled items in JapaneseoAmericsn semiconductor trade," as it made public
its interpretation of the situation and displayed its complete opposition to
the American moves. "The anti-Japanese criticism is certainly a misunderstand-
ing on their part" (Vice President Atsuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon Electric); the
domestic semiconductor industry is searching for the true intentions of the
Americans and is becoming more deeply confused. This is why a survey was made
of the Japanese-American semiconductor trade situation and future through the
statements of semiconductor industry leaders, including those from the United
States.

Government Functions as Central Figure

At this time, anti-Japanese criticism is mounting on the American side with
regard to the semiconductor trade. Unlike the past, when the SIA (Semiconduc-
tor Industry Association) was the principal instigator. government circles
headed by the Department of Commerce have been spearheading the criticism
which characterizes today's anti-Japanese movement. And the present situation
is such that the Japanese are wondering just what the true intentions of this
movement could be.

Semiconductors are "rice for industry" (Japan) or "prime oil for industry"
(United States), as they view the situation. Unlike former objectives of
trade friction such as color television or automobiles, the present situation

is tied in heavily with the competitive strength of the entire industry;
there have even been statements to the effect that "he who limits 1c limits

industry."

- 100 -

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USBIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electronics is not only the backbone of the computer and private-use electronic
equipment but all areas of industry including conunications. automobiles, and
industrial machinery as well as products of the future. In the United States,
this industry since its inception has been considered to have deep ties with
military technology. and there are many who voice their concern from the stand-
point of national security.

There is presently in the United States a prestigious "VHSIC" (very high speed
IC) plan, of which the pentagon (American overall military consnd) is sponsor-
ing development. while in Japan a research and development project on new caps-
bility elements has been started. with the Hinistry of International Trade and

Industry calling the shots from the next-generation industrial base research
and development system.

Reinforce Onsite Production

It was because of the loud anti-Japanese complaints from the Americans that the
concerned Japanese parties decided it would be useless to treat these voices as
purely the result of economic friction. If the Americans still dare to treat
this situation as trade friction, "we cannot help but feel that we are being
made the scapegoat within the framwork of the entire Japanese-American trade"
(Vice President Atsuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon Electric). This is because the
problem areas in the Japanese-Mariana trade friction which the Americans
point out are "all misconceptions of the actual situation" (Ministry of
International Trade and Industry) and "there is no problem item in the entire
field of Japanese-American semiconductor tr " (Managing Director Toshio
Takai of the Japan Electronic nachine Association).

Japan's semiconductor industry at present is hastening to reinforce its produc-
tion on American ground while: 1) asking the Americans to get the true pic-
ture of the present Japanese-American semiconductor relationship, and

2) promoting public relations regarding the Japanese semiconductor industry by
holding seminars where the industrial base is concerned. However, the seeming-
ly unilateral, emphatic conplaints of the Americans with regard to this semi-
conductor trade friction has the Japanese wondering what it is all about.

They have become su‘picious of the "true intentions" of the other's actions
and agonize over the understanding as their confusion intensifies.

Reports From Both Houses of Congress

Let us now look into what is considered the most complete compilation of the
present distress with the Japanese that is given in the joint congressional
economic connittec report titled "Report on the International Competition in
the Semiconductor Industry." The following seven items are offered.

In order to protect its domestic industry in competition with American inaus-
try. the Japanese Government limits the access of imported goods to the Japan-
ese market in the policy which has been in effect for several years. Even
today, when formal restrictions have been removed. the ties which have been
formed between the industries in this interim are so strong that any advance
into Japan by American industry is difficult.

-lOl-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! Olﬁﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂ£(HNLY

Japan has placed emphasis on price reduction and quality of product rather
than on development of new technology where the semiconductor industry is
concerned, and there is the inherent risk that should this situation continue
for long. the American semiconductor industry's research and development funds
will be in jeopardy because of the low profit margin.

As long as Japan's semiconductor market remains closed, the worldwide compe-
titive conditions will favor the Japanese. Japanese industry gives great
preference to domestic products.

If Japan is to enter into the international market in the matter of electron-
ics, it should open its domestic market to foreign makers and give resident
status to those Americana whohave a foothold in Japan.

There is need to view carefully the position in which American products find
themselves in the Japanese market. as well as to review the export strategies
the Japanese use with regard to the American market.

The ultimate condition for ending trade discrimination is the complete open-
ing of the market for electronic products. To this end. there is need for
the Japanese Government to grant foreign industries the same status as domes-
tic industries in the matter of government purchases and to cease encouraging
its people to buy domestic products.

Excluding those products manufactured by foreign industry in the United

States which ultimately come under security regulations, theseindustries are
granted the same privileges of participating in the fight for orders and in
research and development plans. At the same time, American industries located
in Japan should be granted the right to participate in Japan's research and
development projects.

Pear Japan's Technology

The item of greatest concern in this state of distress is memory products, and
in particular, the high share Japan holds in the 66 kilobit DRAM market.
Japan, which held only 40 percent of the 16 kilobit DRAM market.acqu1red 70
percent of the market share in 64 kilobit DRAM during 1981, and this may eVen
rise to 80 percent in 1982 (u.s; Department of Commerce 1982 v.8. trade esti-
mates). It can be said that the effect of Japan's victory in the matter of
the 64 kilobit DRAM, which is the gateway to V181, will have some very large
effects on the future semiconductor industry.

[17 Mar 82 p 8]

[Text] Initiate Total Rebuttal

The Japanese side. which had been maintaining silence in the face of a series
of anti-Japanese criticisms, addressed the reporters group in a meeting at
the Keidanren Hall of the Japan Electronic Machinery Association (president,
Sadakazu Shindo) in a torrent of rebuttal, releasing its pent-up feelings.

The following is the gist of these talks.

- 102 -

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(N‘LY
FINICHNNC]AI.USE‘DNLN

The Japanese-American 1c trade is presently in a state of balance.

There is active eutual interchange in capital investments and technological
exchange. and the semiconductor industries of both countries are in a mutually
supplementary relationship.

In Septeaber last year. the two governments agreed to a final duty rate on
semiconductors (6.2 percent), and the free trade principle was bolstered.

Even without waiting for the current supplementarydata, it is evident that the
Japanese-American semiconductor trade is in a state of balance. Japanese ex-
ports to the United States during 1981 totaled 72 billion yen (decrease of

1.7 percent from the previous year). while the imports for the sane year
totaled 75 billion yen (increase of 1.3 percent over previous year): the
difference was so small that it could almost be disregarded.

This is why it is clear that the balance in trade is not the bone of conten-
tion for the Americans. The first semiconductor friction which arose in 1977
was the excessive import imbalance (25.3 billion yen). There is no sign of
concern about the balance of trade in any of the present criticism.

Japan's Share Declined

The problem now is Japan's lead in the matter of leading technology as repre-
sented by the 64 kilobit DRAM, which is said to be the gateway to VLSI. and
the insecurity over the possibility that Japan will be running alone in future
semiconductor developments.

The Japanese forces which succeeded in acquiring 40 percent of the market in
the 16 kilobit DRAH built up their market share in the 6b kilobit DRAH to

70 percent in 1981. This share is expected to go as high as 80 percent in
1982 (0.8. Department of Commerce forecast for 1982).

The Japanese. on the otherlmmd,have a completely reversed view of the situa-
tion. Considering first of all, the establishment of the technological posi—
tion of the 64 kilobit DRAM, its importance (among the leading technology pro-
ducts) is only "one of them" (Vice President Ouchi of Nippon Electric);

they point out that the superiority of the American microprocessor systems
remains unaffected.

Even with regard to the high share which is the basis for the strength of the
Japanese forces. the Japanese say: "It is still in the stage of an expanding
market. and it is premature to be arguing about one's share" (Managing Direc-
tor Toshio Takai of the Japan Electronic Machinery Association).

This will be thr year when American mass production will start out in earnest,
and "Japan's share of the u.s. market may fall to 50 percent" (Managing
Director Tomihiro Hatsumura of Nippon Electric) has been predicted.

At this stage. the American plants of Japanese companies have started opera-
tion and 64 kilobit DRAM production on American soil is increasing, but even

- 103 -

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then "this is not considered a solution to the trade friction but just a con-
tinuation of the cost battle in the United States, which seems to he the main
theme" (Vice President Ouchi of NBC).

Be that as it lay, the share the two sides are battling over will not be known
until the actual records are in, but this is a situation in which there mar
be some reason for the Alerican argunsnt.

Lowered Price Makes Entry Difficult

Excluding the large in-house makers such as 1m and RE, the large 66 kilobit
DRAM makers in the United States are two conpanies, Texas Instruments and
Motorola, and these two makers have production scales which surpass the
Japanese makers.

0n the other hand, the other takers such as Pairchild have only now begun su-
ple shipments, and their opportunities in this business do not seen to be the
greatest.

It is to be noted that the continuing criticisms on the American side all focus
on this point.

It is said that the sudden influx of Japanese products together with the supply
of the large makers such as IBM and A11 (HE) being satisfied internally in the
matter of 66 kilobit DRAM, the resulting pincering effect has caused any
medium and snail makers to retreat fro: the market. President Sanders of AMD
(Advanced Micro Devices) said in an interview with the New York TIMES: "He
(Anericans) have been defeated in the 256 kilobit DRAM. The Japanese have

won out inthe mass production RAM aerkat." This is the "retreat" related
response that American industry is receiving.

In the background of this sense of danger on the American side is the market
price of the 66 kilohit DRAM. This price dropped from the $20-$30 in 1980
to 57-610 at the present time (refers to price per unit). Hith such a drop
in price, it becomes very difficult for a lsteconer to break in and make a
profit.

The Americans claim that this sharp decline in price is caused by duping
practices on the part of the Japanese. Reportedly, the v.3. Government has
initiated an unofficial survey to check out this dumping complaint. The
Japanese have cowletely denied any such action, as is to be expected.

[22 Mar 82 p 6]
[Text] Exasperated Americans

"The Japanese IC makers already have had a bitter experience with color
television. There is no reason for then to be engaged in dumping practices"
(Vice President Atsuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon Electric), is representative of the
opinions of the domestic semiconductor industrial heads as they deny the
charges of duping. The price of 1c on the American market is set at the
level on the domestic narket, and should there be a sudden sharp drop in

-1“-

momanussomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

price at some local level, the price on the Anerican narket conversely could
be higher than that in Japan.

Even in the latter of the suspicion of dunping internally cast on the 6b kilo-
hit ORAN, "the price initiative on the narltet is held by Alerican industry;
the Japanese have no responsibility for middling the price situation,"

(Hr Ouchi) laughs. It may be said that what is presently promoting the on-
site production plane for semiconductors in the United States is the need to
assure future price cometition. Even assuming that the Japanese items are
the price leaders for the American Iarket, it is a fact that the price of 1C
is greatly influenced by the supply and den-ad balance, and the influencing
power of the Japanese who hold such a large share of the nsrket cannot be
overlooked. This is the source of Inerican exasperation.

The large volume export of 16 kilobit DRAM from Japan which created the ini-
tial Japanese-Aurican semiconductor friction is said to have been caused by
an inadequate supply on the herican mket. The basic pattern of the present
friction over the 66 kilobit DRAM is following the ease pattern. Now. the
reason for the inadequate supply of American industry was, in the case of 16
kilobit DRAM, simply the delay in investment in facilities and liscalculation
in predicting the expected demand. In contrnt, the present situation seems
to be the result of nanufacturing technology and associated yield.

To be sure, TI, Motorola, m, and VB have lass-production capabilities equal
to or greater than those of Japanese industries, and it is not fair to state
flatly that the Japanese have the edge in lass-production facilities. 0n the
other hand, it seens to be generally accepted that the Japanese do have an
edge where lass-production technology is concerned.

hook at the “Ouchi Thesis"

There is a paper entitled "Comparing Japan's 1c Technological Strength" by
Vice President Atsuyoshi Ouchi of hippon Electric which appeared in s 1980
issue of the ELECTRONIC WICATION SOCIETY JOURNAL. Although there has
been considerable change in the situation since then, it is a good reference
to make a technological level conparison. He will extract a few itens on
various technologies.

Product planning strength: The overall judgment gives American industry super-
iority. They are particularly superior in the area of industrial IC; almst
all the IC products held up as standards throughout the world are of American
design and narketed as such. 0n the other hand, the Japanese excel in the
private-use area.

Device technology: where device design technology is concerned, the
Mericans cone forth with sore proposals for new devices, and the Americans
are slightly ahead in the natter of bipolar and nos. "here mnufscturing
technology taking into consideration lass-production is concerned, the Amer-
icans are ahead in bipolar and the Japanese are slightly ahead in nos. Over-
all, the Japanese are even.

- 105-

FOIOI'IICIALUSEONLY
“”10“.”le

Assedyly, testing technology: The Japanese lead in automation, the two sides
are even in testing technology, and the Japanese lead in screening.

Quality control: The Japanese are superior. The Japanese are particularly
superior in the matter of reliability design, process control, and quality
control in the narrow sense.

Ic production facilities: kcepting part of the assembly facilities, the
Americans are superior.

In emery, there are more areas in which the Americans are superior and
Japanese industry needs to improve itself at least one step.

It is now 3 years since that paper was written, and the pattern of American
superiority in product development strength and Japanese superiority in usa-

production strength has not changed, but it may be said that the respective
differences have narrowed considerably. The difference in quality control over

the 16 kilobit DRAH which previously had shocked American makers was cited by

the most recent report of the HP (Hewlett-Packard) Company to give the Japan-
ese the edge.

Could this be true? At least the Americans will say, "no." Hhen President
Kozo Imei of the Japanese corporation Analog Devices, which is a subsidiary

of the American Analog Devices and which has Jmt coqleted a technical center
at Shiroy-e-machi in Kanagswa Prefecture, appeared at the opening reception,

he said: "We have finally developed a system whereby the regular products
can be produced."

The presidents of other Japanese corporations of American semiconductor makers
who were present said in subdued voices: ”what Imsi says is true." That is

to say, only in Japan can these "regular products" or IC with standard perfor-
mance be produced.

Difference in Experience Is the Spurring Factor

"It is evident once you give it some thought. 'Jhere the worker in a Japanese
plant has a history as long as the plant itself, an American plant operates
with workers who have only a year's experience."

The semiconductor industry is seeing increasing automation and becoming more
and more a facilities industry; there is an aspect that whispers "saiconduc-
tor fishing theory and agricultural theory." The element that is the final
determinant of the yield, which is a major factor affecting cost, is the
"quality" of the worker or "morale." To be sure, American industry realised
the importance of this element early in the game, and one finds many indus-
tries in the Valley which have adopted the Japanese industrial system.

On the other hand, the ones whohave been talking about the "quality of the
workers" are the so-callad cum laude matters represented by the managing

directors of the Japanese corporations of the American industries, and this
is an extreme entanple of the agony of the American semiconductor industry.

- 106-

“MUSIONIX
"WWWLY

[21. an: 82 p 11]
[Text] If Only Quality Here Important

The focal point of the present Japanese-American semiconductor friction is
directed at the degree of freedom of Japan's semiconductor aarket, which is
strange in view of the essential balance in the semiconductor trade recently.

The report of the Joint congressional economic cmittee of 23 February on
the international cognition in semiconductors was devoted almost in its
entirety to this subject.

One of the important item cited was the "buy Japanese" slogan which devel-
oped as the result of the strong ties between industries in the period when
the Japanese were nurturing their suiconductor industries. while another

important subject was the new technology projects such as, for example, the
national projects which were closed to American industries located in Japan.

This report stated: "If the Japanese market were truly open, there would be
need to demonstrate its openness," but the best testimonial for this situa-
tion probably cones from the American businesses located in Japan which carry
on their daily businesses. would it not be prudent to hear sons of these
businessmen lift their voices?

First, let us hear from R. Darby, head of the Intel Nonvolatile Memory Market-
ing headquarters. who until recently resided in Japan as marketing manager for
Intel Japan. lie said: "A product which is good and priced right will sell no
matter whether it is made in Japan or in America. Our 66 kilobit EPROH holds
about 60-70 percent of the world market. and our share of the Japanese market
is even higher."

Next, we hear from Ray Stator of Analog Devices Company. He cue to Japan
recently to attend the celebration of the completion of this company's plant
in Japan, and made the following statement to the assembled reporters. "We
sell 63 percent of our products to lurkets outside the United States. Japan
is our largest market outside of the United States. Our share of the Japan—
ese market is 39-63 percent."

Also present was the manager of a large American semiconductor company's
Japan subsidiary, who will remain unnamed, who stated: "we have achieved
satisfactory success. Good, low-priced products will sell not just because
they are produced by American industry."

Same Conditions as Japanese Industry

nearly all of the other American semiconductor related people shared the same
understanding of the degree of openness of the Japanese market. Above all,
the success of their business ventures is the best proof. Now comes the
question of just how far these voices carry back to the heads of their parent
semiconductor companies. their govertment, and the heaters of "ongreas.

Considering the participation of these Japan subsidiary comanies in the new
technology development project previously mentioned, some incredible differ-
ences come forth.

-107-

MWWMY
INJIIOIIWCJAI.IISI:¢M€LV

This report claims that these American companies should be allowed to parti-
cipate in the VLSI development plan and the fifth-generation computer develop-
ment plan, but a member of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
said: He recognize completely the resident status of American businesses
located in Japan and their participation in these projects (Kaauyuki Hakasone.

department head of the Electronic Machinery Department. Machine Information
Industry Bureau).

"The reason there has been no participation by American companies up to now

is because they showed no inclination to participate; there has been no re-
striction preventing their participation just because they were American busi-
nesses" (same source). The actual situation is that these companies are nearly
all in the mass-production area and are outposts of their American companies;
they do not have the organization to participate in research and development

in the leading areas. On the other hand, if they express a desire to partici-
pate, they will be examined under the same conditions as Japanese industry and
will be invited to participate if it can be shown they have the capability.

"we have had no instructions whatsoever from the United States with regard to
semiconductor trade" (Hakasone), and assuming that there are no formal con-
tacts under these conditions, it is difficult to believe that the report of
the 0.8. Congress should incorporate such a gross misunderstanding. How did
such a misunderstanding come about? The Japanese claim that "this round of
semiconductor friction is due to lack of understanding on the part of the
Americans." 0n the other hand. there are many who believe that the Americans
understand the situation but are trying to force their will on the Japanese.

Bold Unreasonable Proposition?

They add that ”If the semiconductor industry is a strategic industry which
America as a country cannot turn over, IC is to Japan a life or death situa—
tion," and "the structural inadequacies of Silicon Valley medium and small
industries (this does not include all of the American semiconductor industry)
resulting from the conversion of the IC industry to a facilities-oriented
industry is trying to make Japan the scapegoat." indicating the severeity of
the rebuttal.

"If the interrelationship with military technology is the reason for the criti-
cism of Japan, this is certainly no problem. There is no other course but to
have faith in the good sense of the Department of Defense" is the all-is-lost
attitude of the head of one large semiconductor company.

"If we take the present status of the Japanese semiconductor industry as a base,
we cannot understand just what the United States is trying to do" seems to be
the consensus of the concerned Japanese people.

[7 Apr 82 p 8]

[Text] American "Lack of Awareness"

The items which stand out in a check of the events of the Japanese-
American trade friction to date are the extreme weakness in the factors

- 108 -

F0.‘DIFKJA1.USE¢HVLY
mamsussomx

comprising the trade friction at the present time and simultaneously the con-
siderable lack of awareness on the American side. On the other hand, what
seems at first glance to be simply "lack of mreneas" has characterised the
situation since the first Japanese-American semiconductor friction in 1977.

"hat is seen in this background is the high evaluation of Japanese production
technology and production efficiency, which had already earned a reputation in
other industries, and the thought that the level of the American position in
the matter of future suiconductor production will be lowered comparatively.

As claimed by the Japanese side, even today American superiority is unques-
tioned when the entire semiconductor industry is considered. 0n the other
hand, as this industry made the transition from the technology innovation
development stage on the strength of creative technology to a production tech-
nology development race which included rapidly developing targets and mass-
production scale competition involving vast investments in facilities, not only
production technology but industrial structure, labor situation, and business
technology type knowhow became involved, which provided the Japanese forces
with some advantageous positions.

Among the American semiconductor makers who are locating plants in Japan,
there are many who state that one of the purposes of locating in Japan is

"to absorb the active strength of the Japanese industry." President Ray Stator
of the American Analog Devices Company, which recently constructed a technical
center in Kanagawa Prefecture where 10 production has been started, said: "To
date we have incorporated a nuﬂaer of quality menagnent methods such as QC
circle activities which are indigenous to Japan. With the construction of
plants in the United States, we expect that these innovations in the produc-
tion area will spread from Japan to the United States."

This nuance is seen paradoxically in a dispersed manner in statements by domes-
tic large semiconductor makers who deny Japanese superiority. "ﬁle should fear
the American suiconductor industry," and "Production of 6!. kilobit DRAM by
American makers will rise sharply." "The decrease in the (Japanese) share of
the market is something that cannot be avoided" shows the need that prevails
as Japanese industry awaits the rise in conetitive status of the Americans.

Dangerous Underevaluat ion

The automobile industry, which is also agonizing over trade friction, has in
the past (and even at the present time) been saying: "The United States is

to be feared," emphasizing that the latent strength of the American automo-
bile industry was being treated more than as an indulgence. To be sure, the
giant American automobile industry at that time was in a healthy state, and
the constant confrontation in the market with the American forces built up the
Japanese automobile industry of today; it was not necessarily an exaggeration
to say that it was partly a sensation of threat.

0n the other hand, when one looks at the present situation of the American
automobile industry, the excessive evaluation of the American automobile indus-
try then and the self-underestimation were in error. There is a good possi-
bility that the sac thing could happen to the semiconductor industry. Self-
underevaluation gives rise to "overstrong Japan."

-109-

mammal“
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An overstrong Japan necessarily invites trade friction. This is a trend which
has been experienced in a number of different industries. The automobile is
one such example. as is iron and steel. Certainly, the real strength of Japan's
semiconductor industry on a scale of 10, which is the rank of the United States.
would put Japan at about 6 or less; this great strength of the United States is
evident in everyone's eyes. Nevertheless. soae facets ressﬂaling the automo-
bile are seen. That is to say, likening the 6'. kilobit DRAM to s coqact auto-
mobile is not necessarily off target.

This is why a situation of an overetrong Japan will be sure to evoke trade
friction, just as with the automobile. Even the semiconductor situation

10 years in the future predicted by Vice President Ateuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon
Electric has as the premise "equalized technological development." Fortunately,
there is a time margin for technological equalization, and the heads of the
large makers are aware of this necessity along with the heads of Japan.

That is to say, this involves promotion of a desire to engage in mutual tech-
nology transfer. Japan's semiconductor industry historically has been engaged
in putting forth every effort to absorb American technology, and this enthusi-
asn is still healthy today, as is seen in the family structure centered on
American nakers such as that of the micon. At least those American industries
which put plants in Japan have the same enthusissa as they engage in absorp-
tion of Japanese technology in the broadest sense.

Powerful Competitive Adversary

Hitachi Limited, Toshiba, and 0&1 Electric are in all-out technology granting,
and top-level Nippon Electric has clearly indicated its plan to engage in in-
direct transfer of technology to the United States and Europe through loca-
tion of its plants there.

All of these projects have just started so there are no results to evaluate
as yet. but there is room for a great deal of future activity in this area.
It may be that the United States will continue to be a powerful competitive
adversary in the future, and the catastrophic development of semiconductor
trade frictions may be something which cannot be avoided.

wP‘IRIGIT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbun Tokyo lionsha 1982

9923
C80: 8129/1084-G - m ..

- 110-

MWWMY