POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10684

26 July 1982

USSR Report

SPACE
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
SPACE

(P000 3/82)

CONTENTS

HAW MISSION ﬁIﬂLIms

Resulta of Inventigation oi Refraction During Third
”ditto“ 1n '“lwt'ﬁ. orbit.1 sutMaoooooooooooaaIooooooo 1

LIFE SCIENCES

sﬂcc cutmmtuolou: rmblo‘ic‘l B..mo o o a a o a o o a o c o o o o o o o 11
fornation of Couple: Behavior Skilla in Albino Rata After

kpoaure to Artificial Gravity Aboard 'Coa-oav-936'
B10“t.111t...00.00.00...0....OO...IOOOOOO.....0.00.00.00.0000 15

Influence of Space Flight ractora on Streaa Reaction of
mleic Ac“. 1“ ht L1v.r Nucleic00090000900000.0000aacoooooo 22

Paychological Training—One of the ﬂoat Important Pactora o!
Incru.1us s‘fCt’ of spec 'luht.ooonooooooooocoooooooooootao 26

SPACE ENGINEERING
Laaar Intonation Syatcna for Spacecraft........................ 30

Building Scientific Inatn-entn for (Joe in Space................ 36
Syntheaia oi Algorithn for Controlling Motion in Vertical

Plane of Transport Spacecraft at Stage of Amoach for

“Ming .nd Leveling.a...ocoo.ooooooooaaooaooo-oooooooooaooooo ‘7

Synthesizing Planning Para-stern for Artificial Earth
s‘tellite'. PM s’.taoocooooooooato...ooaoaoooooooooooaoooo s3

Automating Proceaaing of Scientific hperinent Reeulto During
Operational Control of hperinenta Conducted With Spacecraft.. 66

- a - [III - USSR - 211. 861‘ 300

M» «mt-cat OI” AINV
FOR 0FF1CJAI.IISE(MNLY

Analyaia of Effect of Swaral Para-ctcra of Landing Vchiclc
of 'Vcncrav9'-'Vcncra-12' Automatic Intarplanetary
Stationa on Stability During Landing..........................

SPACE APPLICATIONS

Barth Obacrvation by First-Crow Commuta of Salyut-6
orbital st.tun000000000000.00.00.00.000IOIOOOIOOOOO0.0.0.0...

'Khalong' Technological Expcrincnt in craving Cryatala of
Sqiconducting Coupounda and 'Iaitator' kperincnt for

Haaauring Tapcrature Profilca of 'Kriatall' Furnace
on 's.1wt-6‘ orbiul su~1°n09.OOOOOOOOOCIUOOOCOC0.0.0.009...

Orbital Hathoda in Spaca Gaodaay................................

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

76

81

91
96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm HISSIO! HIM!“

UDC 551.501.7lx551.510.61:551.524.7

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION OF 82?“me DURING THIRD EXPEDITION IN
'SALYUT-G' ORBITAL STATIW

Moscow IZVESTIYA m1! NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA AMSP’BRY I omens in Russian Vol 17,
No 11. Nov 8) (manuscript received 3 Feb 81) pp 1123-1133

[Article by 6.“. Grechko. 3.5. Gurvich. VJ. Lyakhov. 5.3. Savchenko and s.v.
Sokolovskiy. Institute of Physics of the Atmosphere, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Test] On the basis of aeasureuents of distortions in the shape
of the solar disk during observations made through the atmosphere
from space. the authors obtain estimates of variations in refrac-
tion. ‘rhey show that refractive attenuation of light intensity
is subject to variations that are several times greater than the
average value. On the basis of measurements of refraction. they
obtain vertical profiles of density and temperature disturbances
in the atmosphere at altitudes of 5-25 kn.

(beervations made by the first crew of the "Salyut-S" orbital station (06) showed
that refraction in the Earth's atmosphere leads not only to oblateness of the images
of the Sun and Moon, but also to the appearance of perturbations--'steps'--on the
edge of a heavenly body's visible disk. 'lhe amplitude of these perturbations can be
so great as to result in a gap in the image. Most interesting was the fact that
these severe refractive perturbations were observed not in the layer of atmosphere
nearest the ground (which would not have been unexpected [1]). but at levels right
up to several altitudes of the uniform atmosphere. This Issue that the analy-

sis of refraction phenomena during observation of a heavenly body near the horizon
must allow not only for the regular decrease in air density with altitude. but also
the presence of perturbations existing in the real atmosphere.

On the basis of quantitative processing of the data that were obtained [2.3]. as
well as a qualitative analysis [4], it was possible to construct a unified picture
of refraction phenomena manifested during observations of the Sun and Moon through
the real atmosphere from space. The results of these investigations were not only a

basis for explaining the previously mentioned effects from a unified viewpoint. but
also indicated new possible ways for using refraction phenosena to investigate the
atmosphere's structure on the basis of observations of extraterrestrial sources frost

on board spacecraft .

As the next stage of the investigation of atmospheric refraction, it was necessary
to obtain not individual. random photographs of the most characteristic effects, but

1

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:wrhm of sequential photographs that overlap in altitude and, in connection with
this, improve the resolution in the photographs by choosing better exposure times
and photographic materials and improving the optics. After the preliminary work was
done, this assignment was given to the third crew on the 'Salyut-G' OS, and in this
article we present several of the photographs taken on this expedition and the re-
sults obtained by processing them.

The third crew of the “Salyut-6" OS photographed the Sun and Moon above the horizon,
using a lens with a focal length of 0.5 m, Nil-20 film and an exposure time of 1/500
s. The distance 1 from the 06 along the tangent to the Earth's surface was ~2-10
“3. Figure l [omitted] consists of two series of photographs (negatives) of the
Sun, each of which was taken during a single setting of the Sun. The outlines of
all photographs of the Sun and “con, which were obtained with an angular resolution
of s~lo'5, differ strongly from those calculated on the basis of the soaol of a
standard atmosphere [5], in which only regular oblateness is seen. In the photo-
graphs we see the characteristic deformations caused by refraction as steps of
greater or smaller size. As a rule, these deformations are maximal in sections of
the outline having a ¢5° inclination to the horizon. The largest deformations in
the form of steps are basically symmetrical on the left and right halves of the im-
ages, although the fine details do not coincide. All of this indicates that the
corresponding refraction perturbations are caused by horizontally layered irregular-
ities in the distribution of the refractive index; thus, the visible displacements
of different points in the image occurs basically along the vertical. Such irregu—
larities can play a large role in the distant tropospheric propagation of ultreshort
waves [6]. It is also important to note that in many cases the outline deformations
have a quasiperiodic structure, which is particularly noticeable (for example) in
photographs NR-Z-ls and hR—3-l7 and -18. This makes it possible to assume that ob-
served deformations of this type are the manifestation of a system of internal
waves. Radar investigations of the atmosphere on meter wavelengths also indicate
the presence of severaly anisotropic irregularities in the refractive index at alti-

tudes of 8-16 km [7].

The photographs taken of the Sun give the values of the angles of atmospheric re-
fraction on a certain scale. The quantitative processing of the series of photo-
graphs was carried out in order to derive from them large-scale variations in the
vertical density and temperature profiles and to evaluate the variations in the in—
tensity of a signal from an extraterrestrial point source caused by refraction.

In order to determine the variations in the refractive index's vertical profile on
the basis of measurements of refraction angles, in this work it is assumed that in
some neighborhood of the perigee of the rays, the atmosphere is spherically synet-
rical and that refractive index n depends only on the distance (r) from the origin
of coordinates (the center of the Earth). Naturally, this approximation does not
enmass all the details that are manifested in the photographs to some degree or
another. however, it can be asslmed that such an approach does not lead to substan-
tial distortion of the largest details in the vertical structure of air density.

Let us impose a system of angular coordinates on the photographs, using 0 and x to
designate the zenith and azimuth angles, respectively, of a ray at the observation
point. Angle O is read from the local vertical, while angle x is read from the
plane passing through the center of the Sun and the local vertical. net the outline

of the Sun's visible image be described by the equation x - 11(6 - 01), where 01 is

170! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the direction of a ray to the Sun's lower edge. Let us designate as t the zenith
angle of a ray in the case where there is no atmosphere; in connection with this,
the outline of the Sun's image would be described by the circumference equation

o = 00 1 (dz/4 - x2) . where so - direction to the center of the Sun, d - angular a1-
aneter of the Sun. Considering that the refraction angle is t I O - v. we can write

cw) -v-¢-*ld'l4-t’(v-vn)l"- (1)

Function tn), determined in this manner according to the shape of the outline of
the Sun's visible iaage, is known with accuracy up to that of the two constants 91
and 0°, which--generally speaking--can be computed if the relative positions of the
Sun. Earth and OS are known at the moment of photographing. However. the surveying
was done manually and the photographic equipment was not oriented rigidly relative
to the station. Consequently, this method of computing constants 91 and *0 could

not be used. Therefore. in this article we used a neth for determining 01 and 00
according to the Sun's visible vertical dimension d' , the theoretical possibilities
of which are discussed in [8].

Let us determine the value of 01 by solving the equation

do.) -z(v.+d’) dd-d’. (2)

where function 3(0) is calculated for a standard atmosphere and a known 06 altitude.
Let us determine the value of 00 by requiring fulfillment of the natural condition

In" .
j [c(w)-r(¢) Ids-=0. (3)

h

when using conditions (2) and (3), it was assumed that observed deviations of re-
fraction from the standard values are small.

Henceforth, instead of O we will use the value of a ray's sighting parameter p -

= R sin 0. where R is the 05's radius. It should be mentioned here that determining
¢1 with the help of (2) essentially ties it not to the sighting pareneter's absolute
value p1 = R sin 91. but to the difference p1 - a, where a is the Earth's radius.
Actually, function E(p) that is used for the tie-in is computed by the formula

dln 13(1) d2

C(P)'_2PITTx,——_7)To (4)

where x - rn(r). since refractive index 5 is actually known as a function of alti-
tude z - r - a, function E(p) (as determined by (4)) depends implicitly on the value
of a in such a manner that difference p1 - a (that is. the rays' altitudinal tie-in.
for all practical purposes) proves to only very slightly sensitive to latitudinal
variations in the Earth's radius and errors in determining the 05's altitude that
are of the same order of magnitude [8]. Besides this. in [8] it is shown that when
recovering small-scale density profile perturbations on the basis of measurements of
refraction perturbations. a change (within reasonable limits) in the average pro-
file's parameters leads to altitudinal displacements in the small-scale irregulari-
ties within limits of 30.5 km, with small deviations in their shape and alplitude.
Among the shortcomings of this tie-in method, we should include the impossibility of
determining density variations on scales corresponding to the visible vertical angu-
lar size of the Sun.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. Results of measurements of refraction on the left and
right sides of photographs in the Nit-2 series.

Figure 2 shows the results of determining refraction variations 6: (p) - C(p) - E(p)
for each photograph in the Nit-2 series in figure 1. The functions 6c(p). as comput-
ed for the left and right edges of the image. are plotted in the graphs. For the
greatest values of p - a (> 22 km). refraction variations are basically the result
of errors in the measurement of the shape of the outline of the Sun's image, mainly
because of washout of the edge of the image. The refraction distortions sre mani-
fested quite clearly at lower altitudes and the differences in fine details between
the left and right sides become noticeable. If we take into consideration the fact
that the distance between the perigees of the rays connecting the observation point
and the ends of the Sun's horizontal diameter is about 20 km. this makes it possible
to make a rough estimate of the horizontal dimension of the irregularities in the
refractive index.

Using the sane scale. in Figure 3 we plotted variations in refraction as computed
f. r all the photographs in each series. So as not clutter up the figure, we used

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

25 p-qm
um
20
15
70
5
-5 0 5 _-8 I 5 0 5 10 is

. u, 10" mo"
Figure 3. Results of measurements of refraction based on photo-
graphs in series Nil-2 and Nil-3.

the data obtained by processing the left side of each photograph. Comparing Figures
2 and 3, it is obvious that the difference between the variations in refraction. as

determined for different photographs in sensing sections that do not overlap as far
as altitude is concerned. is greater than for the two sides of a single picture,
since the distance between the sensing rays at the same altitude is less at a single
mnt of time for each of the photographs than for different photographs (as a re-
sult of the 05's notion). However (as can also be seen in the graphs in Figure 2),
it is worthy of note that the largest-scale changes in refraction in individual
photographs basically match each other (photograph NR-3-l7 is an exception). In or-
der to show how the deviations of refraction from its standard altitudinal depend-
ence are correlated. in Figure 3 we also give the theoretical refraction values for
the standard model of the atmsphere. By comparing the variations in refraction

with its standard pattern. it is possible to conclude that the relative changes are
sufficiently great so that they can be recorded and used to obtain infatuation about

the state of the atmosphere, which was already obvious free the distortions of the
outline of the Sun's visible image.

The functions 6: (p) that were obtained on the basis of the processing of the photo-
graphs give a visual representation of the actually existing refraction perturba-
tions in the atmosphere. In order to evaluate the magnitude of refraction perturba-
tions having different vertical scales. the “(53) functions that were neasured for
each photograph were snoothed by sliding averaging with respect to sons interval of
values of sighting parameter tip. The root-nean-square deviation a: of the original
6c(p) functions fro- the snoothed ones 6: (p,Ap) was then conputed:
h-bﬂl

o.'- I loam-om»)rap/(harm. ‘5’

’0 "PI‘ '

5
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

where p1 and p; are the minim and marina-
values, respectively. of the sighting pa-
rameter for which function 6e(p) was meas-
ured. figure 4 depicts two functions
ach) . each of which was averaged for all
the photographs in one series. The curve
in Figure 4 corresponding to series I'll-2
has a bending point, which may indicate the
presence of some characteristic scale of
refraction perturbations on the order of
approximately 2 la. The root-mean-sguare
deviation of the refraction perturbations
corresponding to this scale is about 10"

 

rad.
1p,“
Figure 4. Function 0.;(Ap) for photo- 0n the basis of the measurements that were
graphs in series Nil-2 and Nit-3. made. it is possible to evaluate the re-

fractive changes in the power of the signal
received on board the spacecraft from the
extraterrestrial source during observations
through the atmosphere. It is necessary to
have such estimates in order to make the
correct choice of the parameters of the
equipment used to study the atmosphere by
the radio-occultation nethod [10]. Ignor-
m - ,5 a ing horizontal refraction. we can write re-

”"m fractive attenuation coefficient K for an
Figure 5. Function Up) for photo- infinitely remote source as

graph NR-Z-lé. K(p) -| i—Ids/dpl -'. (6’

 

In order to calculate K(p) with the help of (6). it is necessary to differentiate
the experimentally determined function Up). In order to improve the stability of
the obtained result. the experimental data in which the values of c were obtained
with a step Ap - 0.1 km were smoothed by sliding averaging with respect to the in-
terval 6p I 0.5 km and the smoothed result was used to calculate coefficient Up).
The graph in Figure 5. in which the results of the calculation of Mp) for photo-
graph us-z-le are presented as an example. shows that the changes in signal power
can exceed loo percent. This is obviously the bottom estimate. since the calcula-
tion of K(p) on the basis of the smoothed function C(p) leads to understatement of

the values of R. If the variations in c are so great that they result in interrup-
tion of the image. interference pulses that are the result of multiray propagation

will also be observed during the reception of the monochromatic signal.

The mentioned change in signal power because of refraction variations is a cause of
variations in the shining of stars and planets when they are observed through the

atmosphere from on board spacecraft [9] that is different from the one discussed in
[ll]. The data obtained about the structure of irregularities in the refractive in-

dex and the estimates of the variations in refractive attenuation can be useful when
investigating planetary atmospheres on the basis of observations from Barth of

changes in the aaplitude and frequency of the radio signal during occultation of
automatic interplanetary stations [12] or the shining of stars as they move behind
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

planets (13]. The data obtained in this work also indicate that it is necessary to
allow for refractive attenuation when investigating atmospheric transparency on the
basis of observations from spacecraft. Significant variations in refraction can
lead to a noticeable redistribution of the light field's intensity in the atmosphere
itself, which--naturally--can affect the results of observations of aerosol scatter-
ing.

After the dependence of refraction on the sighting parameter has been determined on
the basis of photographs, in an approximation of a spherically symmetrical atmos-
phere it is possible to proceed to the recovery of the refractive index's vertical
profile [8].

I

Refraction €(p) and the refractive index n(r) are related by the integral relation-
ship

' dlnn(:) d:
c(p)--2pIT—(7_;r)?' (7)
P

where x = rn(r). When the variables are replaced (:2 - u, p2 I v) in equation (7),
the result is an integral equation of the Abel type [14]:

e (u) ..- _¢!"__

relative to the unknown function f:u) = d in n/du. It is not difficult to write a
formal solution of Abel's equation, and since in the future we will need the refrac—
tive index instead of function f(u), by omitting the intermediate calculations let
us write the expression that is derived for it. having returned to the old varia-
bles:

' .
n(r) -exp [—n— I—(‘j—f517);dp]. t--r+6s. (9)

Mathematically. the solution of equation (8) for f(u) is a poorly stipulated prob-
lem. However, since n(u) is derived as the result of integrating function f(u), in
the final account the determination of n(x) from equation (8) on the basis of meas-
urements of C(p) is a mathematically correct problem that is not difficult to verify
by using the definition in [15] and formula (9). The solution of (9) gives the val-

ues of refractive index n as a function of x - rn(r), and the conversion to a de—
pendence on altitude z a r - a presents no difficulties. In order to calculate n(x)

on the basis of measured function 8‘?) with the help of (9), the integration inter-
val was divided into two parts: 1 < Pmax and x > Pmax' where Pmax is the maximum
value of the sighting parameter for which 6e(p) can be determined from the photo-
graphs. For the calculations. experimental data were used for x < Pmax' while the
model of the standard atmosphere was used for x > Pmax' Since refraction diminishes
exponentially with altitude. the error from this replacement is sunstantial only in
the upper part of the recovered profile of n(x).

As the original experimental material. we used the functions 6t(p) shown in Figure
6, which were obtained by averaging for all the photographs in each series (except

for NR-3-l7) and encompass a correspondingly large interval of altitude values. Re-
covery of the refractive index values on the basis of the averaged function 6s(p)

7

FOIioFFKJAl.USE(MNLY
FOR(Nﬂﬁ(]Al.USE(NNLY

l5 p-O‘IM

NP-l

20

15

   

7 th—JJLiJ—lJ—J Ll_l_.|.'_LLI_L_'_l_
'5 0 5 ‘5 0 5
It, 10"

Figure 6. Averaged results of re-
fraction measurements.

15 um
lP-1
20

15

10

   

a . Ll.ii_|_i_i-e_'_u.l—L
-5 0 J '5 0 5

- Jf/f, to"
Figure 7. Results of recovery of den-
sity profiles.

made it possible (to a certain degree) to
allow for refraction variations in the up-
per layers of the atmosphere for which
there would not have been data if each
photograph had been used separately. In
addition to this. the conversion to aver-
aged functions 68(p) apparently reduces the
effect of irregularities not allowed for in
the model of the spherically symmetrical
atmosphere. The method used to tie in the
rays results in a situation where retrac-
tion variations with a vertical scale
greater than the difference in the alti-
tudes of the perigees of the rays from the
ends of the Sun's Vertical diameter turn
out not to be allowed for to a certain de-
gree.

In the optical band, the refractive index
of air depends only on density 9 [16]:

H 'H-cp (10)

and. consequently, 6n - cép, while for
light on wavelength 0.7 um, c - 2.25-10'4-
~kg'1-m3. In order to obtain a more visual
idea of the recovery of meteorological ele-
ments on the basis of measurements of re-
fraction, Figure 7 depicts the dependences
of the relative variations in density on
altitude for the two series of photographs
presented in Figure 1. In order to demon-
strate with the experimental material the
correctness of the mathematical problem of
recovering the refractive index's (densi-
ty's) vertical profile on the basis of
measurements of variation in refraction,

in Figure 7 we present the variations in
60/3, calculated both on the basis of func-
tion 66(p) that was determined from the ex-
periment with a step Ap - 0.1 km (solid
line) and the same function that had been
preliminarily smoothed by sliding averaging
in the interval Ap - 1.5 km (broken line).
A comparison of these two curves shows that
the presence of small-scale variations in
function 56(p) does not lead to variability
in the results of the recovery of 6n(z),
thereby confirming the mathematical cor-
rectness of the problem.

If function 9(2) is known, by using the equations of state of an ideal gas and stat-
ic equilibrium, it is not difficult to also obtain the dependence of temperature T

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on altitude:

 

mature pron lea .

cant attention and
r asslstance in preparing for and conducting these investi-
gations
BIBLIOGRAPHY
. mnnart. 1a.. svet 1 tsvet v prirode" [Light and Color in Nature], Moscow.
Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", 196 . 344 p

‘ Grechko, 6.14., Gurtich. 5.5.. Romnenko, Yu
S.V., "Vertical

.v.. Savchenko. 8.11., and Sokalovakiy.
Structure of the ‘nempgratuze Field in the A
Observations of Refr the 'Salyut-S’ Orbital Stat‘
4.

6.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

I‘DR‘OFFIC1AI.IJSEI(NNLV

Grechko, G.H., and Romanenko, Yu.V., "On the Horizontal Irregularity of the
Earth's Atmsphere‘s Brightness Field," in "Issledovaniya atlnosferno-
opticheskikh yavleniy s borta orbital'noy nauchnoy stantsii 'Salyut-6'" [Inves-
tigations of Optical Atmospheric Phenomena From the 'Salyut-6" Orbital Scientif-
ic Station), Term, 1979, pp 122-132.

Cameron, H.s.. Glenn, J.H., Carpenter, M.S., and O'Keefe, J.A., "Effect of Re-

fraction on the Setting Sun as Seen From Space in Theory and Observation.“
ASTROH. J., Vol 68, No 5, 1963, pp 348-351.

Wedcnskiy, B.A.. editor, "Dal'neye troposfernoye rasprostraneniye Ultv" [Distant
Tropospheric Propagation of Ultrashort Haves] , Moscow, Izdatel'stvo ”Sovetskoye
radio", 1965, 415 pp.

Gage, K.S., and Green, J .L., ”Evidence for Spechlar Reflection Prom Monostatic

VHF Radar Cbservations of the Stratosphere,” RADIO SCI., Vol 13, No 6, 1978. pp
991-1001.

Sokolovskiy, S.V., "On Recovering Perturbations in the Density Profile in the
Atmosphere on the Basis of Measurements of Refraction From an Artificial Earth
Satellite," Izv. AN SSSR: PRO, Vol 17, No 6, 1981. pp 574-580.

Grechko, 6.14., Gurvich, A.S., and Romanenkc, "u.V., ”Structure of Density Irreg-
ularities in the Stratosphere. Based on Observations From the 'Salyut-6’ Orbital
Station.“ IZV. NI 5558: no, Vol 16, No 4, 1980, pp 339-344.

Lusignan, 8., Hodrell, G., Morrison, A., Pomalaza, J., and Unger, 5.6., "Sensing
the Earth's Atmosphere With Occultation Satellites," PROC. 1523, Vol 57, No 4,
1969, pp 458-467.

Kan, V., “On Evaluating Density Variations in the Stratosphere on the Basis of
Observations of the Flickering of Stars," 12V. AN SSSR: FAO, Vol 17, No 8, 1981,
pp 755-757.

Kliore, A., Levi, 6.5., Cain, D.L., Fjeldbo, 6., and Rassool, s.J., "Atmosphere
and Ionosphere of Venus From the Mariner-V S-Band Radio Occultation Measure-
ment," SCIENCE, Vol 158. No 3809, 1967, pp 1683-1688.

Veverka, J., wasscrman, L.H., Elliot, J., Sagan, C., and Liller, $1., "The Occul-
tation of B-Scorpii by Jupiter,‘ ASTRON. 3., Vol 79, No l, 1974, PP 73-84.

Yutteker, E.T., and Vatson, D.N., 'Kurs sovrenennogo analiza" [Course in Con-
temporary Analysis], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo “Pimtgiz', Vol 2. 1963, 515 pp.

Tikhonov, A.N., and M'scnin, V.Ya., "Hetody resheniya nekorrektnykh zadach"
[methods for Solving Incorrect Problems], Moscow. Izdatcl'stvo "Nauka', 1979, p
16.

"Spravochnik po geofizike" [Handbook on Geophysics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
'Nauka”: 1965' 571 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nauka", "Izvestiya AN SSSR, Fizika atmosfery i okeana",

1981

11746

C80:

1866/ 37
10

USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIFE SCIENCES

UDC: 613.693+612.3
SPACE GASTAOENTEROLOGY: TROPHOLOGICAL ESSAYS

Moscow KOSHICHBSKAYA GASTROENTEROLOGIYA: TROPOLOGICBESKIYB OCHERKI in Russian
1981 (signed to press 30 Jun 81) pp 6-7, 11-12

[Annotation, foreword by Academician 0. G. Gazenko and table of contents from
book "Space Gastroenterology: Trophological Essays" by Konstantin Vladimirovich
Smirnov and Aleksandr Hikhaylovich Ugolev, Department of Physiology, USSR
Academy of Sciences, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2400 copies, 278 pages]

[Text] This book defines the subject and methods of a new direction of space
biology and medicine, space gsstroenterology. For the first time, the results
of investigations of the digestive organs, obtained from clinical and physio-
logical examination of cosmonauts, who were crew members aboard the Soyuz series
spacecraft and Salyut-Soyuz orbital complexes, were synthesized and analyzed.
There is comprehensive discussion of the findings from studies of the digestive
system of animals flown aboard biological earth satellites of the Cosmos
series. Model studies established the functional phenomenology of the human
and animal digestive system with exposure to hypokinesia and accelerations;
there was demonstration of adaptability to the onboard diet of cosmonauts;

some mechanisms of digestive organ reactions to spaceflight factors are dis-
cussed. In the final part, the prospects of development of space gastro-
enterology are discussed. This book is intended for specialists in the field
of space biology and medicine, clinical and theoretical gastroenterology,
physicians, biologists and physiologists. Tables 7, figures 87, references
cover 37 pages.

Foreword

Among the problems of space biology and medicine, physiology of nutrition and
digestion had remained in the shadows until recently. However. as the flights
into space are changing into man's existence under unique ecological conditions
for increasing periods of time, problems of nutrition and digestion are

growing increasingly important and, to some extent, limiting. When the first
space flights were planned and even made, most attention was given to the so-
called technological aspect of organizing man's nutrition. It appeared that
the main difficulties consisted of finding the most suitable means of taking
meals under weightless conditions, making up rations, preserving foods, heating
them. etc. As time passed, many of these problems were resolved, although

some require further refinement. At the same time, it was found that man's

11

FOI<DFFEJAI.USE(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reactions to spaceflight conditions and factors involved changes in different
aspects of metabolism. Moreover, these metabolic changes acquire importance
to a man's general condition, his tolerance of stress situations and work
capacity.

The practice of manned spaceflights put to space biology and Iedicine the
task of comprehensive study of the digestive system which, as we know, is

the active apparatus of metabolism in the body, a system through whose multi-
faceted function there is not only hydrolysis and transport of nutrients, but
correction of metabolism.

The extensive data accumulated by researchers, both during space flights and
in ground-based laboratory studies, require systeaatization and analysis.
For this reason, it should be considered quite valid for a fundamental
survey to be published on matters of space gastroentsrology.

He cannot help but experience much satisfaction with the fact that this book
was published in our country and written by scientists who participated in

our joint work for many years. He should like to stress in particular the
unquestionable tiaeliness and novelty of the monograph. The main asterial in
this book is original. The research dealing with the effects of spaceflights
on functioning of the human and animal digestive system is really unique.

The monograph has not only applied value, but is of great importance to theore-
tical gastroenterology.

There is no need to specially introduce the authors of this work, who have
been long known as major specialists in their field. It should be stressed
that collaboration between labora=aries of the Institute of Biomedical Prob-
lens, USSR Ministry of Health, and Institute of Physiology imeni l. P.

Pavlov, USSR Academy of Sciences, is an excellent example of combining applied
and basic research, which has already benefited practice and enriched gastro-
enterology with basic information.

He hope that the book will be useful to a wide range of specialists in space
biology and medicine, physiologists and gastroenterologists. Since the

work being offered to the attention of readers is the first attempt at an
overview in this branch of science, while this area of research is developing
rapidly and quite successfully on its own, it is hoped that there will be

a need for another analysis and generalization of accumulated data after

some t he .

Contents Page
Foreword 11
Introduction 13
Chapter 1. General Problems of Space Gastroenterology 15
1.1. Modern gastroenterology and its trends 15
1.1.1. General description of digestive system 15
1.1.2. New trends in gastroenterology l6
l.l.2a. Main types of digestion l7
1.1.2b. Defense systems of the gastrointestinal tract 19

12

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.1.2c. Unutilized fibrillary structures and functions of the

digestive system 21
1.1.2d. Microbiology of the gastrointestinal tract and problems
of endoecology 23
1.1.2e. Gastrointestinal hormonal system 26
1.1.2f. Absorption 29
1.2. Functional changes in the gastrointestinal tract 35
1.2.1. Preliminary remarks 35
1.2.2. Adaptive changes 37
1.2.3. Adaptation to quality of food as a dynamic integrative
reaction 40
1.3. Methods of studying the gastrointestinal tract in space
gastroenterology 47
1.3.1. Preliminary remarks 47
1.3.2. Significance of model experiments 48
1.3.3. Possibility of extrapolating data obtained on animals to man 50
1.3.4. Methodological aspects 51
Chapter 2. Spaceflighta and the Digestive System. Manned Flights 55
2.1. Preliminary remarks 55
2.2. Short-term flights 57
2.2.1. Characteristics of enzymatic systems of the gastrointestinal
tract 57
2.2.2. Motor function of the stomach 61
2.3. Long-term flights 61
2.3.1. Characteristics of enzymatic systems of the gastrointestinal
trdct 61
2.3.2. Motor function of the stomach 71
Chapter 3. Spaceflights and the Digestive System. Flights of Animals 80
3.1. Preliminary remarks 80
3.2. Experiment aboard the Cosmos-782 bioaatellite 82
3.3. Experiment aboard the Cosmos-936 biosatellite 101
Chapter 4. Spaceflight Factors and the Digestive System. Hypokinesia 119
4.1. Preliminary remarks 119
4.2. Exposure of man to 120-day clinostatic hypokinesia 128
4.3. Exposure of man to 49-day antiorthostatic [head tilted down]
hypokinesia 132
4.4. Exposure of man to 182-day antiorthostatic hypokinesia 137
4.5. Restriction of animals' motor activity 142
4.5.1. Proteases 143
4.5.2. Csrbohydrases 144
4.5.3. Lipases 145
4.5.4. Carbohydrate absorption 147
4.5.5. Exocrine function of the liver 149
Chapter 5. Spaceflight Factors and the Digestive System. Accelerations 156
5.1. Preliminary remarks 156
5.2. Early studies of effects of accelerations on the digestive
system 160
5.3. Effects of +6x accelerations on functions of human and
animal gastrointestinal tract 166
5.3.1. Preliminary remarks 166
5.3.2. Studies of man 168
5.3.3. Experiments on dogs 171
5.3.4. Experiments on rate 178
13

FOR‘DFFKJAI.US£¢HVLY
FOR 0FFHJAI.US£10NL\

Chapter 6. Effects of Onboard Diet of Cosmonauts on Digestive
System Functions
6.1. Preliminary remarks
6.2. Effect of onboard diet made up of natural preserved and
dehydrated foods on digestive system functions

Chapter 7. Mechanism of Effects of Spaceflight Factors on the
Digestive System

7.1. Preliminary remarks
7.2. Significance of different conditions during exposure to
extreme factors to development of functional changes

7.2.1. Effect of intensity of a factor

7.2.2. Role of duration of exposure to a factor

7.2.3. Correlation between intensity of extreme factor and
duration of recovery period

7.2.4. Significance of conditioning to effects of extreme factors

7.2.5. Relationship of changes in digestive organ function to

initial functional state of organs
7.3. Role of the vagi in changes in activity of the digestive
system with exposure to +61 accelerations
7.3.1. Preliminary remarks
7.3.2. Experiments on dogs
7.3.3. Experiments on rats
Chapter 8. Achievements and Future of Space Castroenterology
8.1. Some general patterns of digestive system reactions during
spaceflights
8.2. Correction and prevention of changes in digestive system
8.2.1. Pharmacological correction
8.2.1a. Preliminary remarks
8.2.1b. Use of pharmacological agents related to hypokinesia
8.2.1c. Use of pharmacological agents related to accelerations
8.2.2. Physiological correction
8.3. Role of condition of digestive system in professional
screening and conditioning
8.4. Basic difficulties and unsolved problems
8.5. Space gastroenterology as a branch of ecology and trophology
8.6. Principles of inflight research and actual results thereof
8.7. Problems requiring studies of the digestive system during
long-term spaceflights
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: hdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

10,657
cso: 1866/81

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

185
185

185

192
192

192
192
200

201
202

203

205
205
238
213
219

219
221
221
221
221
226
230

231
232
233
235

237
241
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 612.821.6+613.693

FORMATION OF COMPLEX BEHAVIOR SKILLS IR ALBIRO RATS AFTER EXPOSURE TO
ARTIFICIAL GRAVITY ABOARD 'COSHOS-936' BIOSATBLLITB

Moscow ZHURNAL VYSSHEY NERVNOY DEYATEL'NOSTI IHENI I. P. PAVLOVA in Russian
Vol 31. No 3, Hay-Jun 81 (manuscript received 12 May 80) pp 564-569

[Article by N. N. Livsbits, Z. I. Apanasenko, H. A. Kuznetsova and Ye. S.
Heyserov, Moscow]

[Text] Our objective here was to study the behavioral distinctions of albino
rats during formation of complex labyrinth skills at the relatively long

term (18-26 days) after landing of the biosatellite, aboard which artificial
gravity was created. The flight conditions and centrifuge parameters for
creating artificial gravity were described in the article by Ye. A. Il'in et
al. [2]. In addition. problem solving in the mazes we used required rather
fine spatial orientation. Both these factors (complicating the tasks and
increased demands of spatial orientation) increased the sensitivity of the
method to changes due to the effects of accelerations and angular velocities
related to creation of artificial gravity.

Methods

The work was done with the same rats as in experinents with the use of rela-
tively simple maze problems. The arbitrary designations of groups, informa-
tion about distribution of anisals in them and characteristics of factors

are listed in Table 1.

By the time this study was conducted, there was cosplete normalization of
alimentary excitability of the animals and it could not have an appreciable
effect on the results.

Test problems were presented to the animals in two different mazes.

On the lBth-22d day after landing, we developed in the rats the skill of
finding food in the maze, which precluded the possibility of retracing a
previously traveled route. The maze was proposed in 1971 by S. Lachman
[9], and it consisted of a starting compartment, viewing platform and three
lanes giving off from it. closed by doors that prevented return to the

viewing platform.

15

F0810IMKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l. Experfmental conditions

Group Rats Accele- Angul.
Exposure conditions design- per ration, veloc. Scope of experiments
nation :rou- G rad
5 0

On Stationary Complete (all methods)
Cosmos-936 Centrifuge Same
(r - 320 mm)

Hock-up on Stationary Same
earth Centrifuge
(r - 320 mm) Reduced (only for RNA)
(r - 98 mm) Couplete (all methods)

Vivariun Main group Same
Additional Partial (one~:hird of
group methods)
Intact group

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  

(without
implanting Reduced (only for RNA)
asnsors)*

*Temperature sensors were implanted in the abdominal cavity of animals
in the other groups.

During the experiment, the animal was given feed only when it first went in a
passage. A second appearance in the same passage was considered a mistake and
no food reinforcement was used. The experiment continued until the rat had
been in all three passages. If the rat did not move from the starting place
for 3 min or remained motionless on the viewing platform, it was considered to
have refused to "solve" the proposed problem. The experiment was stopped if
there were three successive refusals. It was considered that the rat "did not
solve" the problem in such an experiment.

During the experiment, we recorded the number of correct and wrong runs, number
of refusals and time spent by the rat to pass from the starting compartment
into a passage.

Another rather complex maze, which was developed in our laboratory, was used
on the rats on the 23d and 26th days after the flight. The system of passages,
locked and unlocked doors, open gates and dead-ends enabled the animals to
reach their goal over several possible routes. On each of these days, the
maze test was used three times. He recorded the number of refusals to solve
the problem, distance of the route used and time spent to travel it from the
starting compartment to the additional feeding place. The length of the

route was determined by the number of working units ("steps“) of the more that
were traversed. Each "step” was 10 cm in size and the optimum variant of

the route consisted of 10 "steps."

All of the results were submitted to statistical processing using the criterion
proposed by N. A. Plokhinskiy [7] for comparing two regression series.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results and Discussion

Analysis of our data revealed that development of the behavior algoritl- in
Lachmsn's maze was easier for the groups of animals that were not rotated on the
centrifuge. Animals flown on the biosatellite showed virtually no differ-
ence from either the main vivarium or mock-up control (not submitted to

rotation).

Difficulty in developing this still was observed only in centrifuged animals.

The number of tests in which the animals coped well with their problem was
appreciably smaller in the reg. SC; and C3 groups than in the PH,, VC (P<0.05)
and SH, groups 00.01; Table 2).

Table 2. Mean parameters of rat behavior throughout period of working in
Lachman mare

     
 
   
 

Control

 

Parameters

Experiments (1) in which problem

was solved
Time spent to enter into passage
from starting point, e

The most serious disturbances were noted in animals submitted to rotation in
flight. The changes in this parameter were the most marked in this group,
although the differences between them and c! and SC; were unreliable.

Table 3. Mean parameters of rat behavior in Lachman maze in experiments
where problem was not solved

 
   
 
   

Parameters

Number of attempts at solving problem
Failures (Z) of these attempts

The PC; group of animals spent reliably more time (P<0.05) on choosing a passage
in each run than all other groups (Table 2).

The same animals were also notable for less activity in attempting to cope
with their task. They presented fewer attempts at solving the problem
(Table 3), although this was unreliable, and moreover most of the- failed;

failure of such attempts occurred in appreciably fewer instances in other
groups of animals. The differences for this criterion from SC: and PH; groups

were reliable with P<0.01 and from c! with r<o.os.

l7

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The group of animals rxposed to angular
velocity (C!) on the ground had consider-
ably less difficulty in the Lachman maze.
They solved the presented problem in an
appreciably higher percentage of cases
(differences from the PCz group are un-
reliable) and manifested somewhat greater
activity in trying to solve it. Although
they made just as few attempts in the
experiment with unsolved problem as the
PC; group, as we have already mentioned.
they failed in a reliably lower percentage
of cases.

 

Figure 1.
Change in number of failures in the

complicated mare on 2d experimental _
day, as compared to 1", 1. Group Among the animals submitted to centrifug

ing, the SC; group had the least diffi-
:ggignations are the same as in culty in assimilating the proposed algo-

rithm. They showed virtually no differ-
ence from the c! group with regard to number of tests where the problem was
solved. However, they differed from both groups described above in that they
displayed considerably more activity in attempting to solve the problem. In
the experiments with unsolved problem, more attempts were made at solving it,
and they ended with failure in an appreciably smaller number of cases. The
differences in number of failures were reliable with P<0.05. as compared to
the c! group and P<0.0l, as compared to the PC; group.

Analysis of rat behavior in the complex maze revealed that it was the most
difficult for the PC; and c3 groups of animals.

Table 4. Mean parameters of performance of different groups of animals in
complicated maze

  
  

Parameters

Ex rimental ran 8
VC “13-: PC: sw, I sc: I C!

 

   

Failures, b 13.3 ”.7 0 0 41.7
Number of steps 95.: 137.0 86.6 84.8 ' 103.8
Tile, 8 123.3 ”1.0 81.1 78.1 131.0

 

 

 

 

As can be seen in Table l, expressly these animals refused to solve the problem
much more often, they chose the longest route to their goal and spent more time
on it. The changes in the TC: group of rats were more significant than in C3.
The former animals differed from the main vivarium control group for all three
of the above-mentioned paraawters (P<0.00l in all cases). The differences from
the control were unreliable in the c! group for length of route and time, but
this group of rats refused to solve the problem more often than all others
(P<0.001).

The animals in the PH; group presented poorer behavior parameters in the complex
maze than the control (P<0.01 for distance and time). However, the changes were

18

FOR<0FWKJAL.US£(NNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

less significant (particularly in number of failures) and were manifested
at a later time than in the PC; group. No appreciable differences fro. the
control were demonstrated in the SH, and SC; groups for any of the tested
parameters (P>0.0$).

as
a?

”0

II

70

50

    
 

10

”MINIMUM

Figure 2. Changes in number of "steps” (a) and tine (b) of passage
through conplex maze on 2d experimental day, as compared
to the lat. Group designations are the sane as in Table 1.

It should also be hated that virtually all of the animals. with the exception
of the intact control group-VC1-failed to perfect skill in solving the
problem in the complex maze during the experinent. As a rule, the parameters
were worse on the 2d day of performance than on the lst (Figures 1 and 2). A
negative difference (A;) was demonstrated between parameters for the 2d and
lst experimental days only in unoperated control animals (VC1). Performance

19

FOI‘OCINCIAI.UBIGMVLN
FIIICMWWCIAL.USIZ(NHLY

deteriorated the most on the 2d experimental day also in the PC; and C! groups
of animals. The PH; group presented less worsening. The difference from the
control (VC) in this criterion (Ai) was statistically unreliable (with the
exception of the PC: group), but the above tendency was consistently manifested
and very distinct.

Our findings warrant the statement that weightlessneas and readaptation factors
did not have an appreciable influence on performance in the Lachman maze and
coaplex maze on the lBth-thh postflight day. There were very insignificant
changes in the rw. group. He had already made a similar finding after flying
rats with implanted foreign bodies aboard the Cosmos-782 biosatellite, where

it was assessed as the result of the combined effect of flight factors and
surgical intervention.

The difficulties that rats in the Pcz, CS and, in some cases, SC; groups ex-
perienced in the test indicate that centrifuging worsered their problem-
solving capacity in such complex mazes. The adverse eﬂfect of the centrifuge
was the most uarked in the PC: group. Since the gravity experienced by animals
submitted to centrifuging was close to that of earth, it may be assumed that
angular velocity was the most active factor here. The presence of appreci-
able deviations in the C! group of animals confirms this assumption.

The most significant changes in behavioral reactions of the PC: group are
probably attributable to the fact that the influence of angular velocity

was not obscured in the set of flight factors, rather it was somewhat inten-
sified. Apparently, it is for expressly this reason that we were unable to
demonstrate a beneficial effect of artificial gravity, according to the
criteria we studied.

0n the contrary, centrifuging animals aboard the spacecraft aggravated the
adverse changes in their higher nervous activity (RNA).

The characteristics of behavioral reactions of animals in the SC; grOup
differed when solving different problems. Some additional factors that
appeared for technical reasons (greater alimentary motivation after a period
of underesting, minimal burden referable to experimental examinations, etc.)
distorted the effect of the factor. Nevertheless, here too, the adverse
effect of angular velocity was distinctly evident in some tests.

Thus, it is apparently expressly angular velocity that determined the direction
of changes in HNA parameters in our experiments. Studies of other authors

also reported poorer “NA reactions with exposure to angular velocities [1, 3,
4, 6, 8].

Our findings warrant the statement that the effect of the above factor is
more demonstrable when animals perform more difficult tasks which make greater
demands of analytical and synthetic function of the brain.

Hhen working in a simple maze, even at earlier postflight stages, HNA charac-

teristics of centrifuged animals were not always manifest and to a lesser
extent [5] than when working in complicated mazes at later stages.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFilCJAl.USIZ(”HLY

Since the influence of angular velocity is implemented through the vestibular
analyser, it is also obvious that the greater the fine spatial orientation
involved in solving the presented problem, the greater the difficulties the
animals experienced.

Conclusions

1. Centrifuging rats aboard a spacecraft worsened their poatflight capacity
to learn new algorithms of behavior in mazes of the design used here.

2. The absence of beneficial effect of artificial gravity is apparently
related to the fact that this effect is canceled out by the adverse effect
on higher nervous activity of angular velocities during centrifuging.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Vasil'yev, P. V. and Kotovakaya, A. R., "Prolonged Linear and Radial
Accelerations," in ”0snovy kosmicheskoy biologii i meditsiny" [Fundamentals
of Space Biology and Medicine], Moscov, Nauka, Vol 2, Bk 1, 1975, p 177.

2. Il'in, Ye. A., Korol'kov, V. I., Kotovskaya, A. R., Noskin, A. D.,
Kondrat'yeva, V. A., Shipov, A. A. and Britvan, I. 1., ”Objectives and
Conditions of Physiological Experiments on Rats Aboard the Cosine-936
Biosatellite,” KOSMICH. BIOL. I AVIAKOSHICH. “30., Vol 13, No 6, 1979, p18.

3. Kislyakov, V. A., "Effect of Rotation on Conditioned Food Reflexes of
Dogs," TR. IN-TA FIZIOL. 1H. 1. P. PAVLOVA, V01 5, 1956, p 156.

4. Klimovitskiy, V. Ya., Livshits, N. N. and Rodionov, M. 1., "Systemic and
Cerebral Henodynanics and Central Nervous System Function Under the
Effect of Accelerations. A Literature Survey," in "Nehotoryye voprosy
kosmicheskoy neyrofiziologii" [Some Problems of Space Neurophysiology],
Moscow, Nauka, 1967, p 57.

5. Livshits, M. M., Apanasenko, Z. 1., Kuznetsova, M. A. and Meyzerov, Ye. 8.,
"Effect of Artificial Gravity During Space Flight on Integrity of Motor
Skills of Albino Rats," 2H. VYSSH. NERVE. DEYAT., Vol 31, No 2, 1981, p 261.

6. Nudman, S. 1., "Effect of Rotation Conditioning on Conditioned Motor
Reflexes of Rats," Ibid, Vol 16, No S, 1964, p 885.

7. Plokhinskiy, N. A., "Biometry," Moscow, MGU [Moscow State University], 1970.

8. Savin, B. M., "Mypergravity and Nervous System Functions," Leningrad,
Hanks, 1970.

9. Lachman, S. J., "Behavior in Complex Learning Situations Involving Three
Levels of Difficu1ty," J. PSYCHOL., V01 77, No 1, 1971, p 119.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Zhurnal vysshey nervnoy deyatel'nosti", 1981

10,657
080: 1840/ 200
21

FOI‘OFIICLAL USIICHULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 629. 783612. 398. 145. 1. 014. 24 3576. 315. 42

Hoscow DOKLADY AKADBHII NAUK $88!! in Russian Vol 260, No 1, Sep 81
(manuscript received 7 Apr 81) up 236-239

[Article by c. s. Xomolova and Ye. u. Troitskeya, Institute of Biochenistry tun!
A. N. Bakh. USSR Academy of Sciences]

liver. moles). There are grounds for suggesting that changes in the nucleic acid
system play an inortant role in these processes (1). In times of long space flight
the animal body experiences both acute stresses (for esasple during launching and
landing of the spacecraft) and chronic stress elicited primarily by weightlessness.
Our objective was to study the stress reaction of nucleic acich in the animal liver
following space flight. 'nne experiments were conducted on Histar line hale rats
weighing about 300 gm. The space flight lasted 18.5 days aboard the biosatsllite
Cosmos-1129. Animals maintained in a vivariu on the same diet as experimental
animals served as the control. In a synchronous variant of the experiment we simu-
lated the dynmaic factors of space flight (except for weightlessness). and the ani-

mals were maintained in the sue life support systus as in space flight.

In each variant of the experiment the aniaals were divided into three groups de-
pending on the time of killing: l--6 hours after termination of the experinent;
2--6 days after: 3--6 days after, but the rats were isnobilised for 2.5 hours on
days 0, 3, 4, 5 and 6. The reactivity of the analysed nucleic acid systens was
determined on the basis of the reaction to this additional stress. nuclei were

isolated free liver tissue by Chauveeu's method (2). ‘ib determine the intensity of
m biosynthesis, nuclei were incubated at 37‘C for 15 minutes in a nediu having

the following ingredients: 47 M tris-Bcl (pl! 8.0), 5 ma Hclz, 15 an Kcl, 7.7 an
nercaptoethanol. 1.6 an ATP, 0.08 ml each of deoxytriphosphates (dM'P, cm, 6C”).
0.02 m 3n-m (specific activity following dilution with unlabeled m was 280
nillicuries per millimole). The reaction was halted with perchloric acid. follow-
ing repeated washing, the obtained precipitate was hydrolysed (or 20 minutes at
90°C in 0.5 N HClOu. The radioactivity of the hydrolysates was analysed using a
toluol scintillation lixture containing triton 3-100. '11» radioactivity of the
samples was neasured in an Sic-£00 liquid scintillation counter (made in France).
Transcription in liver nuclei was studied by a nethed described earlier in (3).

The unit radioactivity of nucleic acids was calculated (pulses per ainute per
microgram). The concentration of m and m in nuclei was determined spectro-

photoutrically. In all variants of the eaperinents the results obtained with ani-
nsls in groups 2 and 3 were expressed as percentages of the results obtained for

anilals in group 1.

22
Iron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
        
    
 

  

      

   

   
      
    
   
    
  
 
 
 

    

I" .
at 3
U / , 3'.‘
~ (1) ¢V 531'.
“ ¢ ¢ 3:: ‘e e‘
//
~ gag. ﬁﬁ
. ﬁg? nga
a 4 AA :‘°‘:§°:°:".

i

(3) 'w dim (“have

Figure l. Intensity of m Biosynthssis in Isolated Liver nuclei
(Mill): Anilal groups 1-3 (labeled correspondingly 1-3).
In variant 3 rats were i-ahilised for 2.5 hours on
days 0, 3, d, S and 6. A single asterisk indicates
significant differences with respect to 1: two asterisks
indicate significant differences with respect to 2

Key:
1. Radioactivity, t 3. Synchronous experiesnt
2. Vivariua control 4. Flight experiasnt

me results of our research on the intensity of m hiosynthesis in isolated liver
cells are shown in Figure 1. It follows frost the obtained data that for vivarit-
control aninals. ma radioactivity decreased by about a factor of 2 in group 3 in
cosparison with group 1. Six days after the experiments the rate of nuclear m
biosynthesis decreased by 22 and 31 percent for animals in the synchronous and
flight experi-ents respectively. Immunisation caused an additional decline.
with the final effect being practically the sane as in the Vivariun control. In
the experinental variants. however, the additional stress was applied on the
background of ma biosynthesis that was already soaewhat disinished, and therefore
in this case the effect of imbiliution was in fact lower than in the control.
The possibility is not excluded that a slight decline in Duh-polynome activity
in liver nuclei 6 days after the experiments was elicited by stress developing in
the animal body durim; the period of "adaptation. Absence of differences in the
reactivity of the nucleic acid system to additional stress along aninls in the
flight and synchronous experiments pernits the conclusion that weightlessness does
not have a significant influence on the stress reactivity of systess responsible
for DNA biosynthesis.

Table 1 illustrates the intensity of m biosynthesis in isolated liver nuclei in
the absence and presence of o-uaanitin in the reaction nediu. o-Ananitin is an

inhibitor of m-poly-rase II, responsible for biosynthesis of matrix an (em).
The easy-e mA-polyurue I, which is synthesized by ribosoual m (ram), is not

23

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uble l. Intensity of m nioaynthesis in Isolated Liver molei (Radioactivity, \)

   

I too.» sea «m was 15:15 63:3
p.<dos . 9.50.05

. ”com 990.05

c neon: use «a! mono ens. suns
n<m h<m r90.“ r90.“

. p,>o.es

n moms nus "all Icons sons 10:"
p,>0.“ ppm '90.“

r.>0.05

note: 3. c, II—Vivarius control. synchronmas and
flight experiments respectively. 1-3-dvariants of

the eaperinent corresponding to different aninsl
groups. Additional streee was applied in variant 3 on
days i. 4, S and 6. Significance indicators 1); and
p2 were calculated in coeparison with results ob-
tained correspondingly for mini grows l and 2

hey:
i. Variant 3. with o-e-snitin
2. lithout o-ananitin

sensitive to o-ananitin. 1n the absence of additional stress. the inhibitor
suppressed transcription in liver nuclei by a factor of about 2-2.5 in control and

eaperinental animals.

In aniesls participating in the flight and in rats subjected to the synchronous

eaperinent, 6 days after the end of the experiments the intensity of nuclear m
biosynthesis in the liver in the absence of o-asanitin was found to be lower than
6 house after the experinents. ‘mis decline was 28 and 46 percent for the flight
and :3an experiments respectively. l-obilisation elicited inhibition of

m-polyneraee activity in nuclei of the liver of control animals: the effect was
54 percem if the intensity of m biosyntbesis was deter-med in the absence of

o-aaanitin, and 37 percent in its presence.

insults of sinilar naqnitude were also obtained in the synchronous emeriaent,
while in the absence of o-ananitin the effect in aninals participating in the fligat
eaperiaent Ianifested itself sore weakly. Thus aninale in group 2 and 3 exhibited
only a tendencv toward lower intensity of m biosynthesis (the differences with
respect to control were statistically insignificant). Of interest is the fact

that there are practically no differences between the results obtained for rate in
ms 2 and 3. It nay be suggested that during the readaptaticn period a stress
reaction developed in the soils). body. one which should be interpreted in our re-
search as a stress load additional to that to which the body was subjected in the
period before the end of the experinent. dwiously the decline in reactivity of
the m biosynthesis system to additional-stress was the product of exhaustion of
nolecular nechaniene responsible for adaptive processes in cells. The fact that

2!. 3

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a decrease in the reactivity of this system was noted only after the flight and that
it did not occur aftr: the synchronous experiment isplicates the weightlessness of
space as a factor ; .aying a role in this phenomenon.

Investigation of the intensity of nucleic RNA biosynthesis in the presence of
a-amanitin did not reveal any noticeable changes in the reactivity to stress ex-
hibited by the m biosynthesis system in the liver of animals participating in the

flight experiment (Table 1). Consequently it is primarily the biosynthesis of
mRNA that experiences stress in flight. while bicsynthesis of rm was found to

be more stable. Our data on the reactivity of the system responsible for bio-
synthesis of nucleic acids in rat liver nuclei to additional stresses permit classi-
fication of the stress factors operating in space flight as moderate.

The authors express their deep gratefulness to Prof R. A. Tigranyan for graciously
providing liver tissue for analysis.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Ger-anyuk, G. l... in 'Novoye v gormonakh i mekhanizme ikh deystviya' [Advances
in Research on neurones and the Hechanisns of Their Action] , Kiev, Naukova
dumka. 1977, p 91.
2. Chauveau. J., and Mule, Y.. EXP. CELL. 335.. Vol 11, 1956, p 317.
3. Troitskaya. Ye. IL, Kim-clove, G. s. et al., DAN, Vol 250, No 6, 1980. p 1.483.
4. 3101781. 6., and Potter, V. R., 81001111. 31‘ BIOPIIYS. ACTA, Vol 166, 1968, p 48.
CDPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka', ”Doklady Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

11004
C80: 1840/82

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYQIOIDGICAL mute-om: O? '53 KB? IMPORTANT PACK)” OF INCREASING 5m
01’ SPACE FLIGI'I'S

IDSCOV PSIKI‘IOIDGIOIBSKIY mum in Russian V01 1, lb 1, Jan-Feb 80 pp 104-107
[Article by G. ‘1‘. Beregovoy]

l‘l‘extl ‘lhe pace of exploration of outer space by tanned spacecraft is increasing
today. New spaceships supporting an extensive program of exploration in behalf of
mankind are undergoing develop-ant and testing. m role of crew safety is growing
disproportionately in this connection. nu. is why ensuring safety in lengthy space
flights is one of the priority tasks.

While the possibilities of space exploration are broadening owing to the achievements
of technical progress. man's reliable fulfillment of increasingly sore coqlex tasks
aboard spacecraft depends on prior professional and psychological training.

The reliability of the equip-ant is not absolute, and therefore an energency situa-
tion may arise at practically any accent: when the crew takes its place within the
spaceship prior to launching, in all phases of flight, and when the crew leaves the
spaceship after landing.

Space flight safety depends not only on the reliability of the spaceship and the
system and gear it contains, but also on the quality of the crew's training and
its ability to capitalize on its knowledge and endurance at the mutant an easrgency
situation arises in the presence of the unfavorable factors of space flight.

Psychological training plays the lost iuportant role in solving the problem of
space flight safety. and especially in emergency situations. me generni psycho-
logical training a cosmnaut receives includes an entire intricate dynamic comlex
of pedagogical, methodological and psychological influences aimed at raising the
quality of preparation for a space flight, with a consideration for the particular
features of the flight program and the individual psychological characteristics of
the persons participating in its inlelaentation.

Psychological training lust take sensible and axial account of the individual
psychological features of the cosmnaut's personality, and of the laws governing

arisal and occurrence of mental processes, to include ones associated with his pro-
fessional activity. These questions have been studied in anple detail by I. V.

Davydov, N. v. Krylova and I. B. Solov'yeva.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Psychological training basically consists of purposeful pedagogical and psycho-
logical methods directed at mbilizing the mental functions needed of the cosmonaut,
helping him to actively form a conceptual sodel of the forthcoming flight and teaching
hin to utilize his psychophysiological reserves with the greatest effectiveness.

As space flight program grow more coupler, psychological training becomes are
extensive and diverse. Factors such as longer flight. inclusion of various cycles
of scientific research and colplex experiments into the program, and prolonged
presence of the crew in an ecologically closed, restricted space causing deforma-
tion of the sensory field, are isposing new requirements on training.

ﬁnch attention nust be devoted in professional training to measures havizrt the pur-
pose of forning and reinforcing the needed psychological qualities. ones which would
ensure that the cosmonaut would act effectively in the complex conditions of space
flight.

The effectiveness of a crew's actions in a couples flight situation depends on the
capability the cosmonauts have for behaving actively in emotionally tense conditions.
Therefore a certain system of psychological qualities lust be shaped within the
cosmonaut: emotional stability. the capability for self-regulation, and a prepared-
ness for possible surprises and stressful effects.

All of this justifies maintaining a psychological approach to organizing the pro-
fessional activity of cosmonauts--that is, concentrating on simulation of various
sental states that would be typical of real activity in the flight. In other words
preparation for flight lust go beyond the limits of professional training with the
existing training equipment. and it presupposes incorporation of special psychologi-
cal methods and experiIental procedures.

uow productively we can develop professionally seaningful psychological qualities
depends directly on how purposefully we esploy effects in training that produce
particular emtional responses.

Various so-called exogenous test fixtures, trainers, simlators and soundproof
drawers used in the cosmonaut training system permit the individual to acquaint
himself with individual factors of space flight, and they form certain professional
habits. But this training, which is performed on the ground, does not proceed in
real conditions. No matter how comlex the emergency situation reproduced in a

trainer is. it cannot elicit the sen stress which would arise in a real situation,
when the individual would know that his mistakes might cost his: his health and.
possibly, his life. 'merefore despite the organizational difficulties that would
be encountered, we feel it suitable to use real elation-producing situations in
cosmnaut training. ones which would cause reactions to real stressful effects
(hydraulic laboratory. centrifuge. pressure chasber, aircraft simulator. parachute

junps, flying).

By analyzing professiograu of cosmonaut activity in real flight, we can distinguish
the moments which are sufficiently couples from the standpoint of psychological
effects upon the individual. ”is main tin interval is the period of psychological
adaptation to the unusual conditions of flight.

27

MWUSIONLY
"mummy

Che prerequisite of maintaining the individual's ability to perfore in this period

is to preserve his operational stability. Hence one of the concrete tasks of psycho-
logical training is to teach the individual to purposefully perfora his activities

as an operator in unusual. emotionally saturated conditions.

The next category of couples flight situations that should be considered is various
deviations froa the normal situation. M euergency situation elicits two levels of
responding reactions and actions: adaptive-protective (biological) and psychological.
forning a behavior strategy and ensuring fulfillment of new actions not foreseen by
the program. It is precisely the second level which lust be developed during the

war-unaut's training. Ibis can be done by siaulating different mental states in
trainers.

Plight training and parachute jusps provide effective training situations in swport
of these tasks.

An airplane is viewed as both an emgenom and a professional trainer. one creating
a angles of influences upon the individual and causing his to experience unusual
conditions. risk. responsibility. physiological stresses and conditions typical of
an operator controlling a traveling vehicle.

Because parachute junpe (both parachute and free-fall) produce real stressful condi-
tions that recreate the emtional backgromd inherent to comaut activity to a
certain extent (unusual conditions, tine deficit. sensory load. sensation of risk.
responsibility and independence) . and because they can be performed in conjunction
with the primary objective--fulfilling the elenents of professional activity, we can
consider parachute training to be a necessary resource of cosmnaut psychological
training.

Another nerit of parachute and flight training is that they afford a possibility
for teaching the cosmnaut to sake optisun decisions on the background of rapidly
changing processes.

me experience of flying aboard airborne platforms. to include spaceships, shows
that situations nay arise in which a flight would have to be borted and a forced
landing would have to be nade outside the intended area.

In what way would such a situation be couples? It would be cosplex in that the

crew will have experienced stress resulting fron the particular nishap. and it
would be landing inediately, having no prior knowledge of the nature of the landing
procedure or the natural and weather conditions within the given region.

A umber of experimental studies have shown that on occasion. stress arising during
landing in extreee conditions in one of the critical zones of the earth (in a desert

in the presence of higl telperatures and strong winds, on the steppes in winter in
the presence of winds and low temperatures. in high nuntains offering hypoxic con-
ditions, on a storey sea) nay disorganise the crew's activity to such an extent that
it would not be able to comlete its task.

here have been cases in which test pilots who had not been psychologically prepared
for the possible influences of the external snvironmnt have had to abort an experi-

ment early.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Psychological factors-~confusion. passiveness. lack of will, fear. pain, loneliness
and so on--nay lead to illness amng the crewaesbers, or even to their death.

Oasmnauts are trained in various climatic and geographic zones with the purpose of
surmunting these unfavorable factors and eliminating stress in the case of forced
landing in extreme conditions. The main goal of such training is to psychologically

prepare the crews of spaceships for possible hazardous influences, and to teach them
the things they must do after landing.

’me conditions of such training sessions are made as similar as those of real
critical situations in order that the crewmeﬂoers would begin to feel that they

could survive a complex situation owing to their knowledge, ability and endurance.

It should be noted that the experience of such training sessions has produced its
fruits. Cosmonauts have had to utilize this experience several times in the final
phase of space flight.

The clearest examle of this can be found in what happened after cosmonauts

V. G. Lazarev and O. G. Makarov made a forced landing on the steep slope of a snow-
covered mountain. The stress of the emergency landing. which was coapounded by the

considerable G-forces experienced, was not made worse by the additional stress of
being in uninhabited, inaccessible terrain, since the cosmonauts had undergone

winter training in forested terrain. me crew displayed courage and steadfastness,
and it was able to survive a very difficult situation.

No less endurance and steadfastness had to be displayed by v. D. Zudov and v. I.
Rozhdestvenskiy. who made an unplanned night landing on a partially frozen bitter
salt lake. Because they had been psychologically prepared by marine training the
situation did not catch them unwares, and consequently they were able to act effi-
ciently and correctly.

mus psychological training, in the course of which professionally iQortant quali-
ties of the personality. the individual's capabilities and a system of certain
knowledge. skills and habits are fomd and reinforced (and all of this, taken
together, makes the cosmonaut certain of his readiness to perform his missions).

is the most important condition for raising space flight safety.

wPYRIGI‘r: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka'. "Psikhologicheskiy shurnal'. 1980

11004
CSO: 1866/25

29

MWUBONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPACE WINNING

UDC 629.78x621. 396.624

LASER INPOM‘I'IGJ SYSTEMS FOR SPACECMF‘I‘

Hoscow uzzmmta Im‘I‘SIOﬂNYYB 51m KOSHICBESKIKH 09mm in Russian 1981
(signed to press 14 Sep 81) pp 2*!» 268-269

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book ”Laser Intonation Systess for
Spacecraft". by Igor' Viktorovich Minayev. Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Mordovin and
Aleksey Grigor'yevich Sheremet'yev. lsdatel'stvo "hashinostroyeniye'. 1.900 copies.
272 pages]

[Text I WATIGI

The authors discuss the theoretical foundations and principles of the construction of
laser information and leaeuring instruments and systems designed to operate on board
spacecraft. ‘l'hey explain the principles of the construction of laser search. detec-
tion. tracking. conunication and location systens.

This book is intended for specialists engaged in designing and operating laser in-
struents and intonation systems.

WORD

Ken's conquest of space is opening new areas for the use of laser inforlation sys-
tems (US). Among these areas. the slain ones are: studying the Barth's remrces:
investigating the nave-eats of the continents: analysing cloud cover and wind move-
ment and velocity and. consequently. predicting Earth's weather: controlling the
novenents of artificial Barth satellites and spacecraft: cosnunication between
spacecraft and ground points; tracking meteorological rockets and satellites and so
on. Laser information measurement, collection. processing and transnitting systems
are already used extensively in these areas. Industry is developing laser short-
and long-range cos-imication systems, laser measuring systems for highly accurate
measure-ants of the paruseters of motion of objects and so forth. This is explained
by the fundasental special feature of lasers: the capability of generating coherent
optical radiation. This feature makes it possible for laser system to have a huge
infomatim content, co-unication channels with high resistance to interference.
instantaneous perfornance of the nest conplicated mathematical operations in the
processing devices (integration. Fourier transformations and convolutions, spatial
filtration. the finding of correlation functions. retention of large masses of in-
fomtion and so forth). The state of quantum electronics and laser technology
makes it possible to solve scientific and technical problems that are of great in-
portance to the national economy.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ser technology. However, along the way to the creation of laser information systems
for use in space there still exist many difficulties. They include inadequate de-

perience in designing and building laser information systems on the part of the en-
gineers. In addition to this. the traditional scientific potential of radio engi-
neers and the frequent inadequate understanding of the theoretical principles and
possibilities of laser technology are retarding progress in this area. This book
should. even if only to a small degree. contribute to an inpravenent in the level of

vice that makes it possible to allow for its quantum-statistical properties in the
simplest way possible. Using the entropy approach, we determine the density latri-
ces that characterize the state of the optical field. 'l'here is an analysis of quan-
tum measurements on the basis of which we determine the observed variables corres-
ponding to coherent and noncoherent reception methods and find the statistics of the

atmosphereless. digital. optical comication systems for different types of modu-

in which the radiation passing through a space channel is even partially propagated
through the atmosphere. The atnosphere's effect on optical radiation is analyzed.
There is a discussion of the resistance to interference of optical systems under
conditions of fluctuations in the parameters of an optical systeu caused by turbu-
lence in the atmsphere. There is an investigation of the effectiveness of several
methods for weakening the effect of atmospheric turbulence, such as averaging with
respect to the aperture, dispersed reception of optical signals, the use of correc-
tive feedback in information systems with amplitude and polarization modulation and

so on. There is a brief discussion of the basic features of a space mication

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We also list the special features of the construction of spatial optiooholographic
systems for processing digital radio engineering information; derive analytical ex-
pressions for the average probability of incorrect reception of binary signals and
encoded mssages. as well as during the reception of sessages in general. we dis-
cuss adaptive optical systems that make it possible to comensate for disturbances
of the wave front of an optical beam propagating along a channel. as a result of
which the intensity of the useful signal when it reaches the spacecraft's receiver
is saxi-al. Ive also present nathenatical models and efficiency indicators that are
used to investigate the process of 1.15 control.

The special features of the support of the search node cf spacecraft (RA) LIS's are

discussed in Chapter 6. where-on the basis of an analysis of the sources of the ap-
pearance of indeterminacy of the KA-subscriber positions at the moment of the begin-
ning of a coauunication session--the statistical characteristics of the zone of de-

terninacy are detersined, as well as the parameters characterizing the subscribers'

relative notion in the nth-observer search plane.

Chapter 7 is devoted to a discussion of autosatic Kit-subscriber tracking in the con-
nunication maintenance node. Within the frasevork of a general mathematical model
of the control process. there is an analysis of the accuracy characteristics of the
basic methods of autosatic tracking in the optical band, including allowing for the
effect of a turbulent atmosphere in the "KR-Barth“ cosnunication link. The possi-
bility of synthesizing a tracking system, according to the basic operating criteria,
is also discussed.

chapters 1 and 2 and Subsections 3.1-3.3 were written by ILA. Hordovin and mo.
sherenet’yev. Subsections 3.4-3.6 and Chapter 4 (except for Subsection 4.4) by LG.

Sheremet'yev. Subsection 4.4 by 3.1‘. Serobabin and A.G. sherelet'yev. Chapters 5, 6
and 7 by I.V. Minayev.

TABLE OF comm-rs

Foreword.................................... 3

Chapter 1. Statistical Distributions of (mtical Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.1. Representation of the Field at a Receiving Device's Input . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2. Density Matrix of States of an Optical Field. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.3. Analysis of giantum Measuring Devices . . . . . . ...... . . . .
1.4. Quantur Statistics of the Optical Field at a Receiving Device's Input . . . 21

Chapter 2. Resistance to Interference of Optical Conunication Systems with Dif-
ferent'rypesofnodulation......................31
2.1. Resistance to Interference of an Optical Cos-unication System with a Non-
coherent Carrier of Digital Intonation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2. Resistance to Interference of Binary Comnication Systems with Alplitude
andPhaseModulation............................ 34
2.3. Resistance to Interference of Binary Commication Systess with Polarisa-
tionandt‘requencynodulation.......................38
2.4. Quantum Synthesis of Binary, Optical-Band Cosmnication Systens . . . . . . 44

32

.088le
Chapt

3.1.
3.2.

FOR 0511(1A1.USIE(NULY

Page

er 3. Resistance to Interference of Atmospheric Optical Communication Sys-
tems and Maya of Improving It . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Atmosphere as an Optical Communication Channel. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Effect of Atmospheric Fluctuations on the Resistance to Interference of
Laser communication Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3. Methods for Heakening the Effect of Turbulent Fluctuations. . . . . . . . .

3.4.
3.5.
3.6.

Chapt

Efficiency of Optical Information Systems with Feedback . . . . . . . . . .
A Two-Channel Optical Communication System for Spatial Dispersion . . . . .
Experimental Laser Communication and Location Systems . . . . . . . . . . .

er 4. Optimum Measurement of signal Parameters and Holographic Processing
of Digital Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1. Measurement of Signal Parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2. Quantum Theory of Evaluation of Signal Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.
4.4.

Chapter 5. Principles of the Theory of Control of Laser Information Systems.

5.1.
5.2.

5.3. Mathematical Models of the Control Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.4.

Chapt

Chapt

Bibli

classical Theory of Evaluation of Optical Signal Parameters . . . . . . . .
Holographic Processing of Digital Radio Engineering Information . . . . . .

Principles of LIS Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Physical Principles of the Construction of LIS Control Systems. . . . .

some.
0

Effectiveness of LIS Control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

er 6. Special Features of the Search Process in Laser Information Systems
for Spacecraft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indeterminacy of the Initial Position of LIs Subscribers. . . . . . . . . .
Effect of Errors in Predicting KA Motion on the Pormntion of the Zone of
Indeterminacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. Effect of Coordinate System Plotting Device Errors on the Formation of the

Zone of Indeterminacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. Evaluation of the Characteristics of Indeterminacy of the Subscribers'

Position in the Search Plane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

er 7. Spatial Tracking of the Subscriber in Spacecraft Laser Information
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. Principles of the Construction of Automatic Subscriber Tracking Systems . .

Requirements for Angular Tracking Accuracy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. Accuracy Characteristics of Angular Tracking Systems. . . . . . . . . . . .

Effect of a Turbulent Atmosphere on Tracking Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . .

. Optimization of the Parameters of Angular Tracking Systems. . . . . . . . .

Structural Diagram of the Synthesis of an LIS Tracking System . . . . . .

. Definition of the Parameters of a Mathematical Model of the Control Process

in the Communication Maintenance Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Mashinostroyeniye', 1981

11746
C50:

1866/66

33

F(”l(lﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(NNLY

53
53

60
64
69
80
84

92
92
93
100
108

136
136
141
145
164

179
179
184
187
193
215
215
216
222
234
245
253
255

263
FIRICNWWCIAL USIZCNRLY

UDC 629.78.05

BUILDIN SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS FOR USE IN SPACE

Hoscou NAUCRNOYB KOSHICHBSKONE PRIBOROSTROYBNIYB in Russian 1981 (signed to press
4 Sep 81) pp 2-3, 194-203

[Annotation, introduction, table of contents and abstracts from collection
"Scientific Space Instruments", edited by V. I. Puke (responsible editor) et a1..
Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1‘00 copies, 206 pages]

[Text] WATIOR

This collection of works is devoted to questions arising in the fields of planning.
designing. systems analysis and production of instruments for space research. The
subjects discussed include scanning devices. stringed position sensors. ground
equipment units built according to the 'Vektor" standard, and methods for designing
printed-circuit boards. ,

This book is designed to be used by scientific. engineering and technical personnel.
INTRODUCTIG!

The planning. development and production of scientific instruments for the study of
outer space has been developed considerably in recent years and is now distinguished
as an independent branch of instrument building.

This book contains materials obtained as the result of work done by design offices
and experimental production facilities. For the reader's convenience all the mater-
ials have been divided into four categories: "Organizing and Planning the Develop-
ment of Scientific Instruments.“ "Planning and Designing Scientific Equipment,”
"Systems Analysis of Scientific Equipment" and ”Equipment Production Technology.”

The first section contains one article that is devoted to the problems involved in
organizing and planning experimental design work with the help of a computer.

In the second section there is a discussion of the basic principles of the construc-
tion of a telescope for studying gamma radiation. There is a description of the in-
dividual assemblies of a multispectral scanning system that is used to investigate
the Earth's natural resources. Questions on the thermal conditions of a system
based on a specially developed program for calculating thermal fields are discussed.
There is a description of methods for increasing the density of the layout of elec-

tronic radio parts onhoards,as well asboardgof an original curvilinear design.

36

)I‘OIWNCLQL USEICNNLY
FOR 0FFK]AI.USEGDNLV

The third section contains solutions to the problems involved in developing the ba-
sic electrical circuits of scientific instruments. As was the case with previous
collections. there is a discussion of electrometic amplifiers and secondary power
sources. A series of articles is devoted to describing blocs of ground monitoring
and measuring equipment built according to the ”vektor' standard (KAHAK).

Individual questions of scientific equipment production technology are the subject
of the articles in the fourth section.

Naturally. this collection of works does not encompass all the questions that have

arisen in connection with the building at scientific instruments for use in space.

Nevertheless, the editorial board hopes that the materials in it will be useful for
engineering and technical personnel engaged in solving practical problems encount-a
ered in building scientific instruments for use in space.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

l. Organizing and Planning the Development of Scientific Instruments
’rganizing and Planning Experimental Design Hork on the Basis of a Third-

Generation Computer
(T.I. Kurmanaliyev, A.B. Kuritskiy, A.N. Maksimenko. D.H. Neyman). . . . . . . 4

2. Planning and Designing Scientific Equipment
Possible Principles for the Construction of Gamma-Telescopes and Logic of the

Discrimination of Registered Particles

(V.V. Akimov, S.A. Voronov. A.M. Gal'per. V.A. Grigor'yev, M.B. Dobriyan. L.P.

Kalinkin, V.G. Kirillov-Ugryumov. T.1. Kurmanaliyev, L.v. Kurnosova, 8.1.

Luchkov. A.S. Helioranskiy. V.Ye. Nesterov. S.R. Tabaldyyev, Ye.1. Chuykin). . 20
Multilayer, Broad-Gap. Spark Chamber-Converter for Recording Cosmic Gamma Radia-

tion

(A.S. Belousov. S.A. Voronov, A.H. Gal'per. V.G. Kirillov-Ugryumov, 8.1.

Luchkov, A.A. Moiseyev, Yu.V. Oserov, A.V. Popov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Spectral, Polarimetric and Modulation Instruments for the Long-Have Infrared

Band

(6.0. sholomitskiy, 1.A. Haslov, S.A. Ignatenko, 5.6. Ramsstnik. v.3.

Soglasnova, v.0. Gromov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Light Source for the Absolute Calibration of Upper Atmosphere Luminescence

Photometers

(A.V. Rabinkov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Scanning Device With a Magnetoelectric Propelling Unit

(P.A. Horozov, I.A. Grishin, 5.6. Namestnik) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Power Characteristics of a Scanning Mirror's Oscillatory Motion

(v.1. Terent'yev). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Lightened Mirrors for the Scanning Devices of Scientific Instruments

(V.N. Polukhin. T.H. Podol'skaya. H.s. Gomel'skiy. V.A. Gryasnov, s.G.

Namestnik, P.A. Morozov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
The UKS-l Scanning System Monitoring Unit

(V.A. Busargin, A.R. Naumov, n.v. Popkov). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A Radiant Flux Commutator for Om-Board Spectrometers

(A.S. Derevyanchenko, S.A. Ignatenko. S.G. Namestnik, 2.1. Rozhavskiy) 59

o
o
e
s

35

IN)! OFFIChkl USEZCHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P690

Synthesis of a Spatial Transfer Device According to the Condition of Affiliation
of Its Positions to a Single Assenbly
(K.s.1vanov.1.A.Grishin)..........................

a: the load on the Flexible Element of a Sealed 'No-Have Transmission Prom the
Have Generator's Side
(K.m.Kozhakhnetov.A.H.Klimov).......................

Determining the External Therllal Loads on Instrueents Mounted on the Outside of
an Artificial Barth Satellite, with Due Consideration for Shading
(3.1. Andronnikov. A.G. Bruit. A.A. Dudeyev, luv. Mariya) . . . . . . . . . . .

Experimental Investigation of Phase-Transition Materials Used in Devices for the
Thermal Regulation of Spacecraft
(N.D.Gudkova,A.1.Petrov)..........................

Research and Development of Progrumed Optimm Control Systems
(2h. Sharshanaliyev. A.I. Romashchenko). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Insuring Data Reliability in Information Systems
(Ye.A.Morozov)................................

Stringed Information Sensors Based on Optically Pure Fused Quartz
(V.Ye. Hel'nikov, A.I. Kin, Ye.N. Hel'nikova, 7.1. Kurmanaliyev. V.A.
Tsyshnatiy)..................................

Special Features of the Hetrology of Linear and Angular Movements of Space
Equipment Assemblies by Stringed Information Sensors
(v.Ye. Hel'niknv, N.v. Volkov. A.1. Kim, A.A. zinov'yev) . . . . . . . . . . .

On the Possibility of Creating a Frequency-Controlled characteristic of a
Floating-Core Sensitive Element
(V.Ye. Hel'nikov, Ye.h‘. Mel'nikova. V.Ch. Drobatukhin. 'r.1. Kurnanaliyev, A.1.
Ki.) 0 s a O o e O O O O s I I O I O o O O o O O O O O O C O 0 O 0 O I O O o O

Electrometric Amplifier Heasurenent Band and Operating Node Switches
(P.G.Sopin,A.l'.Nazarenko).........................

increasing the Layout Density of Multilayer Printed-Circuit Boards for m-Board
Scientific Equipment
(6.1'.Panfilova,K.s.Sadykov)........................

Curvilinear Printed-Circuit Boards in On-Board Scientific Space Instrument Build-
ing
(6.1. Velichko, LS. Sadykov, 1.1. Chernyshova. O.P. Gol’tsova. N.v.
Davlyatshina).................................

3. Systems Analysis of Scientific Equipment

Some Questions on the Construction of Aperiodic Automatic Equipment
(o.v.Hayevskiy,¥u.v.uanrukov) .

Planning Autanatic Actuating Units for Automatic On-Board Systems
(Yu.N.Arsen'yev)...............................

Counters with Preliminary Scaling and Methods for Building Them
(D.G.Shevchenko)...............................

A Spectrosctric Amplifier Hith a Broad Dynamic Range for Semiconducting Detect-

ors

(Ye.A. Kornev, n.1‘. Kulikov, V.N. Lutsenko). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Selecting the Rational Electrical Circuitry for a Secondary Power Source With a

BoosterUnit
(V.1.0sadchiy)................ .......

A Precision. High-Voltage. Stabilized Power Source
(D.A.Burgeyev)................................

36

' )l OFII'IGAL USE ONLY

62
67
72

79
83

89

99
103
107

113
116

119
125

132

141

144

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

An Electrometric Amplifier for Measuring mrrents with Different Polarities

(K.l. Guseva, V.A. Notkin. 8.6. Kozlov. I.s. Gorbunova). . . . . . . . . . . . 155
The BUR-52? Composite Programmed Unit for Controlling "Vektor'-Standard Equip-

ment

(O.V.Mayevskiy)...............................160
A "Vektor" System Comunication Unit With a lSVSH-S Computer Keyboard

(A.N. Tsyganov, Yu.F. Yermolayev, V.A. Yefremkin. I..I. Morozova) . . . . . . . 162
A Unit for Coupling the Small MPUl6-3 Printer to a Channel in a 'Vektor"

(A.A. Genvarev. Yu.1-‘. Yerulolayev). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
A Unit for Coupling the MT 1016 Digital Printer to a Channel in a ”Vektor" nous-

mg

(ILA. Genvarev, Yu.P. Yermolayev). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
An Instrus ant for Testing Remote Switches

(B.G.Kozlov).................................l73
A Photoelectric Position Sensor

(v.v. Golbachan, A.V. Izherovskiy) . .
An Analog Voltage-Multiplication Circuit

(N.N. Pankratov, A.I. Romashchenko). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
A Device for Galvanic Uncoupling

(A.V.nogunov)................................181

176

o
o
e
a
u
o
a
e
e
a
v
a
a
e
a
o
o
v
a
e

4. Bqui pment Production Technology -
Production Technology for Reflecting B-Particle Targets ,
(A.H.Sasov)................... . ...........184
Optical Testing of the Planeness of the Grid Reflectors of a Pabry-Perot Inter-
Eormeter During Operation in the Infrared Band
(A.N.Belorukov)...............................186
A Vacuum Installation for Ground Testing of Instruments That (perate Under Outer
Space Conditions
(A.s. Denisov. S.S. Velikasov, A.N. Pilatov) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190

ABSTRACTS
UDC 001 . 89+681 . 3

ORGANIZING AND PLANNING EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN WORK ON THE BASIS OF A THIRD-GENERATION
C(MPUTER

[Abstract of article by Kurmanaliyev, T.I., Kuritskiy. A.B., Haksimenko. A.N., and
Neymnn, D.M.]

le'tl The authors discuss questions related to the planning and operational con-
trol of experimental design work (ORR) based on network planning methods. Special
attention is given to the most important aspect of the use of network planning meth-
ods. which is related to the compilation of calendar work schedules on the basis of
the solution of problems concerning the optimum distribution of resources among deb
velopers working in different areas. The authors explain their experience in solv-
ing these problems with the help of packages of applied programs for a third-
generation computer. They also discuss organizational questions concerning the for-
mulation of an OKR planning and control system based on the package of applied pro-
grams for the "Resursy" SHO [probably software system]. References 6.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 529. 1.07:629.7B

POSSIBLE PRINCIPLES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF GAMMA-TELESCOPES AND LOGIC OP TEE DIS-
CRIMINATION OF REGISTERED PARTICLES

[Abstract of article by Akimov, v.v., Voronov, 5.3., Gal'per, A.M., Grigor'yev,
V.A.. Dobriyan, H.B., Kalinkin, L.F., Kirillov-Ugryuuov, V.G., Kurnanaliyev, T.I.,
Kurnosova, L.V., Luchkov. 8.1., Melioranskiy, A.S., Nesterov. V.Ye.. Tabaldyyev,
S.R., and Chuykin, Ye.l..l

[Text] The authors describe a gamma-radiation telescope and its individual systems,
which must satisfy requirements emanating from the problems involved in recording
very small flows gamma-quanta against a background of charged particles. They also
describe the logic of the discrimination of the registered particles. Figures 3;
references 3.

UDC 539.1.074.24
MULTILAYER, BROAD-GAP, SPARK CHAMBER-CONVERTER FOR RECORDING COSMIC GAMMA RADIATION

[Abstract of article by Belousov, A.S., Voronov, S.A., Gal'per, A.M., Kirillov-
Ugryunnv, V.G., Luchkov, 8.1., Hoiseyev, A.A., 02erov, Yu.V., and Popov, A.v.]

[Text] The authors describe the design and power unit of a gamma-radiation tele-
scope's basic detector. which is a broad-gap spark chamber. They present the re-
sults of an investigation of methods for reducing fluctuations in brightness and
spark alignment. which have a significant effect on measurement accuracy during vid-
icon information output. Figures 4: references 2.

UDC 681.78
SPECTRAL. POLARIMETRIC AND MODULATION INSTRUMENTSPORTEE LONG-WAVE INFRARED BAND

[Abstract of article by Sholonitskiy. 6.8., Haslov, I.A., Ignatenko, 5.3.,
Namestnik. 5.6., Soglasnova, V.A., and Gromov, V.D.]

[Text] The authors describe an adjustable Fabry-Perot interferometer and a polarin-
eter for extra-atmospheric astrophysical investigations in the long-wave infrared
band with waves longer than 40 pm, as well as a focal infrared modulator with a
swinging mirror. Figures 8: references 10.

UDC 535.8:681.7

LIGHT SOURCE FOR THE ABSOLUTE CALIBRATION OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE LUMINESCENCE PHOTOME-
TERS

[Abstract of article by Rabinkov, A.V.I

[Text] The author describes the design of a light source that is intended to be
used for absolute calibration of upper atmosphere luminescence photometers. He also

presents a technique for calibrating the light source and gives the power parameters
of its emissions. Figures 2; references 6.

38

FOR OFITCJAL USE‘DNLY
FOR‘0FF"HAI.USE|DNLY

UDC 681.783.323.3
SCANNING DEVICE WITH A NAGNETOELECTRIC PROPBLLING UNIT

[Abstract of article by Horosov. P.A.. Grishin, I.A., and Nanestnik, S.G.]

[Text] The authors describe the design of a scanning device with a eagnetoelectric

propelling unit. The device has a plane mirror that oscillates according to a saw-

tooth rule, with a forward and backward notion ratio of 2:1 and a frequency of 12-15
Hz. Figures 2.

00¢ 531.6:681.783.323.3
POWER CHARACTERISTICS OF A SCANNING NIRROR'S OSCILLATOR? MOTION
[Abstract of article by Terent'yev. V.I.]
[Text] The author demonstrates how to calculate the parameters. The rules that he
derives can be used as a basis for designing scanning devices that have (for exam-
ple), a nagnetoelectric motor. Figures 1.

00C 535.312'

LIGHTENED MIRRORS FOR THE SCANNING DEVICES OP SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS

[Abstract of article by Polukhin, V.N., Podol'skaya, T.H., Gonel'skiy, M.S.,
Gryaznov, V.A.. Nanestnik, 3.6.. and Horozov. P.A.]

[Text] The authors describe the design of a lightened. metallic mirror backing. as
well as the glass coatings used and the technology for applying them. The mirrors
were developed at the USSR Academy of Sciences' Design Office. Figures 2.

00¢ 531.749:621.396.965
THE UKS-l SCANNING SYSTEM MONITORING UNIT
[Abstract of article by Busargin. V.A., Naunov, A.N., and Popkov. A.V.]
[Text] The authors describe the design of a unit that is used to measure the basic
parameters of the oscillatory motion of a scanning system's mirror. They explain
this unit's operating technique and present the results of tests with scanner mod-
els. Figures 2; references 2.

BBC 535.241.13:778.S34.8
A RADIANT FLUX COHNUTATOR FOR ON-BOARD SPECTROMETBRS

[Abstract of article by Derevyanchenko, A.S.. Ignatenko, 5.3.. Nanestnik. 5.6., and
Rozhavskiy, 8.1.]

[Text] The authors describe a radiant flux commutator that is used for spatia-
temporal separation of radiant energy flows striking tle matrix of a fiber-optic

39

FOI‘OFEKJAI.USE(MNLY
F‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

splitter and originating on the Earth's surface and in the internal calibration
sources of a multispectral scanning system. Figures 1.

UDC 531.8

SYNTHESIS OF A SPATIAL TRANSFER DEVICE WORDING TO THE MDITION O? AFFILIATION OF
ITS POSITIONS TO A SINGLE ASSEMBLY

[Abstract of article by Ivanov, x.s., and Grishin, 1.A.]

[Text] The authors set up the problem of formulating the geometric conditions for
affiliation of the different positions of a spatial mechanism to one assembly and
use these conditions to synthesize a crank-balance beam transfer mechanism with a
given forward and backward notion ratio. Figures 4; references 4.

UDC 621.833.7:539.5

on THE W0 ON THE FLEXIBLE ELEMENT 0? A SEALED TWO-HAVE TRANSMISSIW PM THE HAVE
GENERATOR'S SIDE

[Abstract of article by Kozhakhmetov, K.Kh., and Klimov, A.H.]

[Text] The authors derive an analytical expression for the load on the flexible ei-
ement of a sealed two-wave transmission that is imposed by the wave generator. The
rigid ring's reaction is not taken into consideration. They use a computer to make
the numerical calculations of the load and its resultant. Figures 2: references 1.

UDC 519.67 : 536+629. 78

DETERNINING THE EXTERNAL THERMAL IDADS on INSTRUI‘IENTS NGJNTED (N THE ”SIDE OF AN
ARTIFICIAL EARTH SATELLITE. WITH DUE CWSIDERATION FOR SHADING

[Abstract of article by Andronnikov, 3.1., Bruk, A.G., Dudeyev, A.A., and haziya,
L.V.]

[Text] The authors discuss numerical methods for determining the external thermal

loads on externally mounted equipment, allowing for the mutual shadings of different
parts of instruments. They analyze the accuracy of the results when the calcula-

tions are made on a computer. The algorithms and programs they have developed are
suitable for calculating the thermal conditions for a multispectral scanning system.

Figures 3; references 6.

000 629.78:536.24.08

EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF PHASE-TRANSITION MATERIALS USED IN DEVICES FOR THE
THERMAL REGULATION OF SPACECRI‘JT

[Abstract of article by Gurikova. N.D., and Petrov, A.I.]
[Text] The authors present experimental data during an investigation of two phase-

trnnsition materialsulithiun trihydrate nitrate and disodium phosphate dodeca-
hydratcuunder a broad rage of thermal loads. Figures 6; references 3.

1.0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFTCJAL.USIZ(NULY

UDC 6&1.51-529

RESEARCH AND DEVEIDPHBNT 0P PROGMD OPTIMUM CMROL svsms
[Abstract of article by Sharshanaliyev, zh., and Romashchenko. A.I.]

[Text] The authors present the full synthesis of an automatic control system (3A0)
that is optimum with respect to energy consumption and is used. for example, to con-

trol the angular position of the shaft of a direct-current microelectric motor in
the presence of a static reactive moment. They discuss the possibility of realizing
the control algorithms for a programmed SAD that is optimum with respect to energy
consumption and operating speed on the basis of monotypical analog computational el-
ements. Figures 5: references 3.

00¢ 681.322.002.2
INSURING DATA RELIABILITY IN INPOMTICN SYSTDQS
[Abstract of article by Morozov, Ye.A.l

[Text] The author discusses the question of insuring intrasystem reliability. as
well as the question of the functioning of an information system. and presents a

model for determining the optimum interval between monitoring points. figures 4:
references 2.

UDC 531
STRINGED INFORMATION SENSOR: BASED ON OPTICALLY PURE FUSED QUARTZ

[Abstract vi article by Hel'nikov, V.Ye.. Kim, A.I.. Hel'nikova. Ye.N.,
Kurmanaliyev. T.I., and Tsyshnatiy, V.A.l

[Text] The authors discuss the possibility of improving the metrological accuracy
and technological and operating characteristics of stringed information sensors

made of optically pure fused quarts. They present some output characteristics of
stringed senSOrs that have already been developed: these characteristics indicate

that quarts stringed sensors are promising. Figures 3; references 4.

UDC 531.7+629.78

SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE HZTROWY O? LINEAR AND ANGUIAR MOVEMENTS OF SPACE SWIM"?
ASSEMBLIES BY STRINGED INPORMATIGJ SENSORS

[Abstract of article by Mel'nikov, V.Ye., Volkov, N.V., Kim, A.I., and zinov'yev,
A.A.l

[Text] The authors discuss various types of stringed sensors for multipurpose use.
determine the factors that affect the stability of a sensor's frequency. and make

recommendations for the conditions under which several different element designs
should be used. Figures 3; references 6.

61

FIHI()FFICIAI.IJSEI(ﬂ‘LY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 531+S39.67

ON THE POSSIBILITY OF CREATIM A EMMY-W CHARACTERISTIC or A PIDATING-
CORE SENSITIVE mm

[Abstract of article by Hel'nikov, V.‘!e.. Hel'nikova. Ye.N.. Drobatukhin. V.Ch..
Kurmanaliyev. T.l., and Kim, A.I.]

[Text] The authors discuss one of the possible versions of a controllable damping

device that creates periodic braking forces along a sensor's measuring axis. They
present calculating relationships, oscillograms of modeling performed on an DIN-7H,

and the results of an experimental test of the proposed damping device's basic pa-
rameters. Figures 31 references 2.

00¢ 621.316.5+621.375
BLEC‘I'WRIC AMPLIFIER MEASUREMENT 8AM) MID OPERATING noon sums
[Abstract of article by Sopin, P.G., and Nazarenko, A.l'.]
[Text] The authors describe the designs of the measurement band and operating mode
switches for electrosetric amplifiers carried on board spacecraft. Figures 2: ref-
erences 5.

00¢ 621.3.049.75

INCREASING THE MYW‘I‘ DENSITY OF HUL‘I'ILAYBR PRINTED-CIRCUIT BOARDSPOR Oil-BOARD
SCIENTIFIC EWIPHENT

[Abstract of article by Panfilova. G.T., and Sadykov, 1.5.]
[Text] The authors describe the design and technological improvements used in
multilayer printed-circuit boardSmanufactured by the open contact area method. as a
result of which it has been possible to reduce the unit's size and the number of
layers in multilayer printed-circu lt boards. Figures 2: references 3.

00¢ 621.13.049.75
CURVILINEAR PRINTED-CIRCUIT BOARDS IN ON-BOARD SCIENTIFIC SPACE INSTRUMENT BUILDING

[Abstract of article by Velichko. 6.1., Sadykov, K.s.. Chernyshova, T.I., Gol'tsova.
O.P.. and Davlyatshina. N.V.]

[Text] The authors discuss the design and production technology for curvilinear
printed-circuit boards. Figures 2.

00¢ 681.5

SW6 QUESTIONS ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF APERIOOIC AUTOHATIC EQUIPMENT

[Abstract of article by Mayevskiy, O.V.. and Hamrukov, Yu.V.]

(02

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] The authors discuss questions concerning the element base of aperiodic de-
vices and the construction of indicators of the completion of transient processes.
They also substantiate a new approach to the synthesis of aperiodic devices based on
arbitrary logic elements. Figures 4: references 4.

One 681.5
PLANNING AUMATIC ACTUATIK: UNITS FOR AUMA'I‘IC ou-sonns SYSTBIS
[Abstract of article by Arsen'yev. Yu.N.]

[Text] The author investigates several questions concerning the rational construc-
tion of commutators from a given element base and questions on the encoding of in-
ternal states with due consideration for functional reliability and simplicity of

control. he also presents a generalized technique for planning automatic actuating
units. Figures 4: references 13.

one 621.374.32.037.372.2
COUNTERS NIT‘H PRELIMINARY SCALING AND METHODS FOR BUILDING THE!
[Abstract of article by Shevchenko, 0.6.]

[Text] The author presents a classification of counters with preliminary scaling
and variants in the design of their electrical circuitry, as well as the basic meth-
ads for selecting these counters according to given parameters. Figures 3: refer-
ences 2.

UDC 621.37S:S39.I.074
A SPECTROMETRIC AHPLIPIER HIT" A BROAD DYNAMIC RANGE FOR SEMICONDUCTING DETECTORS

[Abstract of article by Kornev, Ye.A.. Kulikov, A.T., and lutsenko. V.N.]

[Text] The authors describe a spectrometric amplifier with automatic high-speed
regulation of the amplification factor. which makes it possible to cover a broad dy-
namic range of signals from semiconducting detectors. Figures 3; references 3.

BBC 621.316.?

SELECTING THE RATIONAL ELECTRICAL CIRCUITRY FOR A SECONDARY POWER SOURCE WITH A
BOOSTER UNIT

[Abstract of article by Osadchiy, V.I.l

[Text] The author presents an analysis of the known circuitry of secondary power
sources with boosters. which sources are designed to provide the maximum possible
efficiency from the smallest size. He makes recommendations for selecting circuits
and presents an engineering method for calculating efficiency. he also describes a
secondary power source with a booster that has increased efficiency and reduced di-
mensions in comparison with known systems. Figures 6; references 5.

‘3

FOI¢0FFIJAI.USE(NVLY
POI OFFICIAL I55 ONLY

one 621.316.?
A PRECISIW. HIGH-VOLTAGE. STABILIZED ms swncr.
[Abstract of article by Burgeyev, D.A.l

[Text] The author describes a precision. high-voltage. stabilized power source, the
special feature of which is the use of gaivanically uncoupled feedback and a split-
ter with an increased transnis‘sion factor. Figures 1: references 2.

one 621.375.132
AN BEWIC AMPLIFIER FOR MEASURING CUM WITH 01m POLARITIBS

[Abstract of article by Guseva. K.I.. Nothin, V.A.. Kozlov, 3.6.. and Gorbunova.
1.5.]

[Text) The authors describe the layout of an electrouetric amplifier with a
piecewise-linear characteristic that is used to convert positively and negatively
polarized direct current from high-resistance current sensors into an outset voltage

of 0.1-6.1 V. The range of measurable currents is fro. ~-l-lo'9 to +110” The
operating tesperature range is from -20 to 050°C. while the power consumtion is
less than 300 Ill. Autosatic switching of the conversion conductance has been real-
ized. The authors present the results of temporal drift measurements when HOP
[metallic oxide eeniconductor] transistors fro. different batches in a

shipment are used. Figures 1; references 3.

one 681.3
1142 BUR-$2? cosmosm PMRAMED URI? FOR CONTROLLING 'VEKTOR'-STANDARD MIME“?

[Abstract of article by Nayevskiy. o.v.]

[Text] The author describes a unit built according to the “Vektor” standard that
snakes it possible to organize program control of a branch in the "Vektor' standard
with one additional frue. he suggests that the unit be used with a wry having a
capacity of up to 6.096 x 18 words and the industrially produced sun-90 unit. r19-
ures 3: references 2.

00¢ 681.327.8

A "VEK‘I‘OR" SYSTDQ CGHUNICATIGI UNIT am A ISVSH-S KEYBOARD

[Abstract of article by 'rsyganov. A.N.. Yernolayev, Yu.r., Yefrenkin, V.A., and
Horozova, L.I.l

[Text] The authors describe the BUR-100 coununication unit. which organizes the
coupling of the standard data transmission channel of "Vektor" systens with a
lSVSH-S computer. The unit performs the following functions: reception of data and
comands from the coqmter and transmission of then, in repackaged fern. into the

frame channel; reception of data and readiness patterns from the frame channel: or-
ganisation of provisional OH and (“’2 transitions in the computer's program. Pig-
ures l.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00c 681.327.8
A UNIT FOR CGJPLIM 1‘83 58AM. HPUlG-J PRIMER TO A W IN A 'VZXTOR" PM
[Abstract of article by Genvarev. A.A., and Yer-clayey, Yu.F.]

[Text] The authors describe a module. built according to the "Vektor' standard. for
coupling the slall 0016-3 printer to a frame channel. Figures 2.

00¢ 681.327.8

A UNIT FOR CWPLING THE HT 1016 DIGITAL Plum '10 A CHML IN A 'VEKTOR“ FRAME
[Abstract of article by Genvarsv, A.A.. and Yermolayev. Yu.F.]
[Text] The authors describe a unit for coupling the MT 1016 digital printer with a
'Vektor" frame channel. They discuss the coupling unit's functional diagram and
temporal operating diagram. Figures 2.

UDC 621.317.004
AN INSTRIMBNT FOR TESTING we SUITCBBS
[Abstract of article by Kozlov. 8.6.]
[Text] The authors describes an instrument for testing remote switches with a trip
voltage of no more than 100 V. The input signal has positive polarity of any form
and an amplitude of 3.5-7 v. The operating mode is autauatic. and it can be set to
operate either one time only or manually. Figures 1.

00¢ 621.383.!)

A PHO'I‘OBLECTRIC 9051le SENSOR
[Abstract of article by Bolbachan, V.V.. and IzherovsLiy. A.V.]
[Text] The authors describe a sensor that is used in a mobile mechanical system's
monitoring system. The sensor forms a pulse, the forward front of which corresponds
to the moving system's passage through a given point, with due consideration for the
direction of movement with respect to a single coordinate. Figures 2; references 3.

use 681.322.51
AN ANMOG VOLTAGE-HULTIPLICATIGI CIRGJIT -
[Abstract of article by Pankratov, N.N.. and Ronashchenko. 3.1.]
[Text] The authors describe a circuit for the multiplication of alternating voltage
into direct-current voltage. The circuit is based on two bipolar and one HOP [prob-

ably metallic oxide semiconductor] transistors. and its energy consumption is about
4 an. Figures 2: references 4.

65

MONICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.372.832 .8
A DEVICE FOR GALVARIC UNCGJPLIM

[Abstract of article by Logunov. A.V.]
[Text] The author describes the operating principle and technical characteristics'“
of a device for galvanic uncoupling that is based on a modulator-demodulator system.

with keys based on mop [aetallic oxide seaiconductor] transistors.
Figures 2 .

UDC 681.586.38
PRCDUC‘I‘IW TECHNOLOGY FOR REPLECTING B-PARTICIJ TARGETS
[Abstract of article by Sasov, A.M.]

[Text] The author discusses questions concerning the technology for producing re-
flecting B-particle targets based on bismuth. Figures 1: references 3.

UDC 53.082.54

OPTICAL TESTING OF THE PLANENESS 0? NE GRID REFLECTORS OF A FABRY-PEROI‘ INTERPERGI-
ETER DURING OPERATION IN THE INFRARED BAND

[Abstract of article by Belorukov, LIL]

[Text] The author describes a technique for the optical testing of the planeness of
grid reflectors of a Fabry-Perot interferometer. Figures 5; references 1.

UDC 621. 52

A VACUUM INSTALLATIQ] FOR GRGJID TESTIm W INSTRUMENTS THAT OPERATE UNER GJTER
SPACE CGIDITIWS

[Abstract of article by Denisov. A.S.. Velikasov, 5.5., and Pilatov. A.N.]

[Text] The authors describe an installation for ground testing of instruments that
are intended to operate in outer space. A vibrationless evacuation system is
achieved by replacing the mechanical pre-evacuation pump with an adsorption one.
Figures 2: references 2.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel’stvo "Nauka", 1981

1 1746
C80: 1866/39

66

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 629. 78

SW18 0’ mm FOR WILLIE; M10" Ill WICAL PLANE or mean SPACE-
CRAP‘I' AT STAGE or ”PM FOR mm: AND mum

Moscow KOSHICIIBSKIYE ISSUDOVMIIYA in Russian Vol 20. No 2. Mar-Apr 82 (unuscript
received 2 Jun 80) pp 206-210

[Article by La. zhevnin and VJ. strebkoval

[Text] The authors discuss questions related to the synthesis of
laws, formulated in accordance to the feedback principle. for
controlling the notion of a transport spacecraft. The synthesis
is done on the basis of the inverse problu of dynamics. The val-
ues of the control effects are determined from the solution of a
first-order differential equation.

This article is devoted to synthesizing a system for terminal control of the speed
and altitude of a transport spacecraft (TX!) in the vertical plane. m basic dif-
ference betveen our results and those available in the literature [1) is that the

algorithm for the formation of the control effects, as created by an aerodynamic el-
evator and thrust, is synthesized in accordance with a closed cycle.

The mathematical model of a m can be described by a systs- of nonlinear differen-
tial equations that allow for both the forward notion of the center of nass and ro-
tation around it:

H- V sin 0.
L-Vmo. g;
0-(nQ-cos only, (4)
0-0.. (5)
e.- (m.+m.*bm./V.+M."6.) bus/1.. (6)

n..- (P cos a- (c.(a.) cos lie—Ma.) tin Au)qS)/G.- q-pVHZ.
n..- (P sin n+ (c,(a.) cos Aa+c.(a.)sin Ac) qS)/G. W-(W.'+W,') ".
Aa-atcig ((W, cos 0—W. sin 0)/( V— (W.cos 8+W, sin 0) ) ) . a-m—Aa.
V.—(V'+W'-2V( W. cos 0+W. sin ow, 0-0“;

The dynamic properties of the autothrottle control are allowed for by the differen-
tial equation

p-a.P—b.-b.v.+b.¢,, (1)

where H - vertical distance from the center of use to the landing gear wheels'
point of contact with the runway during a horizontal landing; I. - horizontal

‘7

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distance from the m's center of mass to the runway at the point of contact: 0 I
angle of inclination of the trajectory to the horizon: 5b I angle of deflection of
the elevator; G I weight of the m: I, I nt of inertia: s I wing area: b“

I aerodynamic mean chord of a wing: :5,“sz b I aerodynamic coefficients: a I den-
sity of the air: c, I cxiob). c I cy ( ) I IIzprescribed functions: 9 I gravitational
acceleration; Rx, IIg I effect 0 they ium (horizontal and vertical cosponents of
the wind): b1. b2. 3, b4 I constant coefficients: a“, I deflection of the throttle
quadrant: a I angle of attack. The change in the m s weight will be ignored.

He will consider the effect of the medium to be uncontrollable and assure that its

effect on the flight up to current moment t is manifested in the state being real-
ized at this moment:

Xvi-(V. V. H. 8. o. 0.). ' (e)

where V I ground speed; {I I acceleration: 1.! I vertical speed: 0' I angle between the
object's longitudinal axis and the horizon: in: I angular velocity.

For the sake of determinacy we will assume that the information about state (8) is
both errorfree and timely.

here we will understand synthesis of a system for controlling the ma vertical
maneuvering to mean the construction of an algorithm for the formation of the con-
trol effects guiding the m from its current state to a given final state by a cer-
tain moment of time t3. The flight begins from state (8) and should end with the
N reaching the following state when t I t3:

”(m-H» ”mm-Hi". k-i.z....4; van-v.
wan-v“. "-1.2.3.

(9)

In this article the control algorithm is constructed on the basis of the inverse
problem of dynamics [2 3]. First, let us solve the problem of constructing the al-
gorithm for the formation of control effects 52) (t) and deg“). which insures that
the T10: goes from the initial state

xm-x. (10)

to the final state (9) , with disturbing effects I" - ﬂy I 0. it being the case that
the motion should. take place according to the known programs of motion H(t) and
Vit). which connect the onset of motion (10) with its completion (9).

In order to find the control effects. let us formulate a system of differential
equations [2), the order of which must coincide with the order of the original sys-

tem of differential equations (1 ) - (7) . This system can be derived by successive
differentiation of equations (1) and (3):
ll‘" -g/G (Pm sin 0+2».P cos 0-Po.’ sin 0) -4k. VV (died-0k.) -
-2I:.k,(V'+ VV'”) +0"’Ic.V'(k.—k.) -l:.V'(ZA («3' sin 0+
+240c.’ (2114:, cos Main 0) -0k.) +0. (t/GP cos O—k.k. V’) . (1 1)
1"" —I"”(/G cos a-m.k.+ +0‘" (In—g cos 0)— 2k.c.(V’+VV“’ ) +‘0' sin 9..
-2d(P;/G sin a-HAk .cA'W) —a' (g/GP cos u+2Ak (e, ',V)')
where ‘0." (m.+m," bah)./V+M..’Os) bags/Ia. kn-P‘S/(ZG). c,-c,.+c,‘a C.-
-C..+Ac,' . m.-m..+m.‘ a, q-pV'IZ k.-c. sin O-c, cos 0. k.-c. coo 0+¢, sin 0.
k.-c.' (MC, sin O-cos 0). k.-P(/G sin a+ 2k.c,c,'A V’ I’m-b. P_— -b.V+b.a.,

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

---------

o"*-—VOIV+ (Pg/G sin a+a(P(/G cos a-l-k. V’c,') +2k.c, VIN-go sin 0)]V,
where 6 and § are determined by expressions (4) and (7). respectively.

Let us rewrite system (11) in the following fora:
P‘”k.+e. k.- [I‘M-M" P‘"I:.-o. k. - "MAI, (12)
where “0.1/6 sin 0 k1- (Pt/G cos O—k. I: ..V') h—g/G cos a. - -
H.--g/G (2P0. cos 0-Po.’ sin 0) +2k .Ic.(V'+ VV‘”) +4k.Wx
X (ah-+01“) +1: .V‘(0‘” (ks—k )+2A (c,' d)‘ sin o-o'k.+2aoc,-x
X(2A¢.cos0+sin o) ) u, -—o"’(k.—:cose)+2¢(PslG sin a+Mk.c.c.'W)+
+a' (Pg/G cos n+2k. (c, V) '+2k.c.(?'+VV‘”) -l0' sin 0).

In system (12). let us replace Pu) and ‘I‘z with the expressions for than. 'l‘hen, af-
ter transforuation, system (12) will have the form

1'32. -::::)(‘:. )- (i 1)

E.-ll“’+M.-k.k..—k:ku. Sg-v"’+Ml-klku+kikllu
ko-M.“bsqS/l.. k..-b.P+b;V. ku- ("n+m1‘ba01/V) bags/1..

where

Having solved system (13), we have

dq- (E.k.+£.k1)l(be(ktk0+k1kl) )s (1‘)
&- (E1kg-Egkq)/(k.(klke+k1kl) )0 (15)

Solution (14). (15) exists if

ans-o. mo. (16,
k.k.+k.k.9‘0, (Cm, 1.].

From an analysis of equations (6) and (7). coefficients b4 and k9 determined the ef-
fectiveness of the control effects and cannot be zero. After transformation, the
last relationship in system (16) is written in the following form:

P(sin a sin Moss 0 cos a) +c,'pSV' (c.A (sin 0- (17)
-cosasin 0)+0.5cosecos (1)9‘0.

An analysis of (17) shows that relationship is fulfilled. For real modes and aero-
dynamic aircraft layouts.

cososiztnlz, Msin¢+0,5eosa>0. (18)
then. having transformed (l7) , we obtain the inequality
cos0(P+c, -.psv'(c,.4a+o 5))9‘0. (19)

which is always correct when conditions (18) exist.
‘mus, we can conclude that system (13) is solvable.

Further, by giving the motion program H(t) and V(t) in the form of polynomials [3]

i O
u (c) -u.+ 2H.” (:-:.)~m+ 20: 0-1.)“. (20)

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL.USE(NNLY

vm-v.+ vi" (t-u)‘/kl+ Bro—1.)“ (21)

and substituting then into (14), (15), we obtain expressions that will be used'to
determine the control effects 5b and “c9' Coefficients C1 (1 I l,...,5) and 33

(j - l,....4) in (20) and (21) are determined from the conditions of the passage of
programs (20) and (21) through their final states.

In order to fulfill the condition of monotonicity of the trajectory "(t), we have
derived the following relationship for selecting time t3:

_ 210("g—llp) _ “NIL-Ila) (22)
1201mm). + “<“< 5043.+33w.+ "‘

 

Now, in order to formulate control in accordance with a closed cycle, we make the
following substitutions [2,3] in equations (14) and (15):

¢.-:. Hal/(I). m-nm. .‘”-um(¢). lam-mun.

. (23)
V.- V0). V.-V (I). V.‘ '-V"’ (t).
We then obtain the system of equations
a,- (B'Ik.+E.’k1)/(bg(kgk.+kyk.) ). (24)
6.- (E1’k3—53Iks)/(ke(k|ko+k1kl) )1 (25)

where
H.) "'" I'!".'MI"koku-k1kn. 31,-3‘B|'+‘!1-kﬂku+k9klI.

c.’ - -- (1680(u—II.)-+840(H+H.) (u—t) +180(H“'—II.‘") (u-t)’+
+2u(I/~v+ll.‘")u.—¢)'+u.‘"(:.-:)')/(41(¢.-¢)'). B.'--(120(v—v.)+

+6()()’+V.)(h—l)+12(V"’—V.‘")(¢.—1)’+me(‘b-‘)’)/(3'(la-0’).
Ilm-V sin e+vo we 9. ll"’-:IGP sin (Hg/GP». cos O—Zk.k.VV-
—- k. V’ (ak.+0k.). I’m-93m oos a-ak.—2k.c.VV—go cos I).

HéZ). H53), H(4) and VéZ), V53) can be chosen on the basis of the condition of mono-
tonicity of tae process by zero-order points and defined more precisely during the
modeling.

Equation (25), for 5b , is computed at each step of the integration of equation

(24), for the initial condition acg(tg) I “cg u' the right side of which is a non-
linear combination of phase coordinates. The coefficients of the nonlinear combina-

tion are functions of the TKx's aerodynamic, geometric and weight parameters. Be-
sides this, they include time t and terminal state (9).

Thus, we have derived the law for controlling a TKK's motion in the vertical plane,
with both altitude and velocity control, as formulated in accordance with a closed

cycle.

The proposed algorithm for the formulation of control effects (24) and (25) can be
used for stabilization purposes if "B - const, VB - const, t8 - t - At - const, and
for tracking purposes if “8 - f1(t), V8 - f2(t), t3 - t - At - const. In this case,
lim (f1(t) - H(t)) + 0.

t-Oo

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

        
 
  
 

\
J!

I II
- I _/ 50 l/\ I 6,!
-t -2 I
'I 'I
Z
-0 w \J
Qﬁ MAI/1

Figure l. Degendence of H, B, e, , v on time. carves: l -
=H‘t).2'“(t);3-e(t).4- (t)15-V(t).

’1' 4‘0“”

m In 150 :3

Figure 2. Dependence of 6b, °cg and overloads "x' n on time.
Curves: l- 6b(t), 2 - ucg(t), 3 - nx(t). 4 =- ny(t .

We carried out digital modeling of the closed system of an equation including the
object itself (l)-(7) and control algorithm (24). (25). The following maneuver was
examined. The first section consists of horizontal flight at an altitude of 450 III
for a period of 8 s. in this case, in algorithm (24). (25). it was assmed that
t8 - t = At in coefficient C1. In the second section, there was a descent from a1-

titude "a - 450 m to H3 = 414 In. Here the M's motion was for-ulated according to
the tracking principle. Function f1(t) is given as

1 i ’ N
1.0) -H.+H.1' + 7.113% + 3311:” r+ 24m _

lul

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where di (i=1,...,5) is calculated from the condition of the fulfillment of the
final state. T - t8 - t + AT, and t8 - t - At in coefficient C1.

The next section consists of rectilinear motion along the glide path to an altitude
of 24 n, with a vertical descent rate H(t) of 3.2 m/s. Here function filt) is given
in the form f1(t) - "a + (H8 ' Ha)“: + AU/CB-

The maneuver is completed with a leveling-off section and descent until the landing
gear wheels come in contact with the runway. Here we examined the bringing of the
TKK to the point H(t8) - 4m, ﬁ(tB ) - -0. 7 m/s by moment t8 = 10.2 s. as computed
from monotonicity condition (22)8 The speed was regulated during all sections of
the maneuver, and kept constant at V a 67.5 m/s. For this purpose, in coefficient
81 it is necessary have the difference t8 - t - Atl. From the results of the model-
inq. the values At = 1.At1 - 0.5 were chosen. The modeling was carried out with
due consideration for disturbing effects "x H, = 5 m/s. with a wind shear at alti-
tude N= 24 m.

The results of the modeling are presented in Figures 1 and 2. They confirm the ef-
fectiveness of the algorithm for controlling altitude and speed that was obtained.
An analysis of control algorithm (24), (25) showed that it can also be used as an
on-board one.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zhevnin, A.l\.. Toloknov, V.I., and Shevyakov, O.V., "Programed Control of Trans-
port Spacecraft Landings on Earth," KOSMICH. ISSLED.. V01 13, No 6, 1975. P 935.

2. zhevnin, A.A., and G_lushko. Yu.V.. "Synthesis of an Algorithm for Controlling
Nonlinear. Nonstationary (bjects on the Basis of the Inverse Problem of Dynam—
ics.“ DAN. Vol 256, No 5. 1981. p 1057

3. Zhevnin, A.A.. and Krishchenko. A.P., “Controllability of Nonlinear Systems and
Synthesis of Control Algorithms,“ DAN. Vol 258, No 4, 1981, p 805.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", 'Kosmicheskiye issledovaniya", 1982

l 1746
C50: 1866/86

52

FOR OFHC'iAL USE ONLY
IIIIOFFKJAI.USE{DNLY

UDC 629.783.064: 519.863
SYNTHESIZIBG PLANNING PARAMETERS P03 ARTIFICIAL EARTH SAIBLLITB'S POWER SYSTEM

Moscow KOSHICHBSKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA in Russian V01 19, No 6, Nov-Dec 81
(manuscript received 9 Apr 80) pp abs-ass

[Article by Yu. N. Chilin and h. A. Kus'nin]

[Text] The authors explain a technique for determining the opti-
mum planning parameters for an Isz's [artificial Earth satellite]
power system. As the optimisation parameter they use the minimum
total mass of the solar and storage batteries and propulsion sys-
tem used to compensate for aerodynamic resistance. They analyze
the effect of several operating conditions on the choice of the
solar batteries' planned electric capacity, the storage batteries'
capacity, and the specific impulse of the electric-heating reac-
tion engine.

Propulsion systems based on low-thrust, electric-heating reaction engines (END) that
receive electricity from orientable solar batteries (58) are extremely promising as
a means for maintaining an Isz's orbital parameters [1]. At the same time, these
batteries can supply electricity to other equipment installed in the 132.

The existence of shaded sections in an orbit results in the necessity of using stor-
age batteries (AB) in combination with the 58's; under conditions of irregular power
consumption, the ”'3 can also be used to cover electrical load peaks in illuminated
sections of the orbit.

Thus, the power system (88) for covering irregular on-board equipment load schedules
and to compensate for an Isz's aerodynamic resistance consists of sets of 83‘s and
AB's and a propulsion system.

An analysis of the 85 shows that among the masses of the 53's, AB's and propulsion
system there exists an optimum relationship that corresponds to their minimum total

mass [2].

Consequently, in the initial stages of preliminary planning, the choice of the plan-
ning parameters should be made with due consideration for the mutual effects of the
SB', AB's and propulsion system. In connection with this, the development of the

appropriate techniques is an important problem.

The purpose of this article is to explain one of the possible ways of determining
the optimum values of the saw planned electric capacity, the AB's planned capacity
and the END's specific impulse, as well as to analyze the effect of the operating
conditions on these parameters.

53

1‘0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chet-a

 

tn; m

tation and G
AB - Height ot- a]

e as.“ and their
1 regulﬂtion 3”:
the tank

3 Specific
Its in the

(1
FOI.OITW(1AL.USEJONLY

Technological. operational and other limitations are placed on the values of the
control parameters.

The AB's planned capacity is selected on the basis of the following conditions: 1)
not exceeding the maximum allowable charging and discharging currents of the indi-
vidual storage batteries; 2) observation of the the maximum (for considerations of
reliability) depth of AB discharge CAB.

These limitations are taken into consideration by the relationship

u‘lr’ UTF' 5.0T
where "Egg and “3:3 are the AB's maximum charging and discharging capacities.

 

        

(2)

The AB's maximum depth of discharge is determined as a function of the required num-
ber of charge-discharge cycles. in accordance with the empirical characteristics of

the cycling that are inherent in the given type of storage battery.

A limitation is imposed on the 280's specific impulse. based on considerations (for
example) of not melting the heating chamber:

-
1,51,, . (3)

The 83's planned electrical capacity is selected with due consideration for redun-
dancy of the photoelements for the purpose of insuring the given level of reliabili-
ty. as well as with due consideration for the losses caused by an increase in the
photoelements' temperature. the effect of numerous factors encountered in outer
space. the transmission and conversion of electrical energy. and the amount of power
used to power the electric panel orientation motors:

Iva—"3'1... (4)

where "gut = the 83's electric power output; aSB = a coefficient allowing for the
factors isted above.

The 88's electric power output is determined on the basis of satisfying the on-board
equipment's electricity requirements, providing the END with electricity. and ob-
serving the AB power charge and discharge balance during a single :52 orbit. It is
obvious that it is rational to use the END during the illuminated section of the or-
bit. when electricity is supplied to the motor directly from the 88's. In the gen-
eral case, therefore (when the question of using the As's to cover electrical load
ieaks in illuminated sections of the orbit is not answered). these conditions have
the form

N13” -N.‘..+N,:, +N.', m'+ut..-N!..+N:,,+N,-. --
n..(Nc1.z.'+N!..x,-)-N.'..:,-+N..'x. ‘5’

where NEAB' "8A3 - charge capacities of the he's in the "duty“ and peak modes in the
illuminated section of the orbit: "8A3 - discharge capacity of the AB's when cover-

ing the peak electrical load during the illuminated section of the orbit;N

"END = electricity required by the END in the duty and peak modes during the mgllumi-
nated section of the orbit: 18. ‘p - durations of the duty and peak modes.“

SS

FOI:0FIIC]AI.USI‘0N1¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

determined by the expressions

-.N N H-N
_ ”N: es s. s
t.‘ _ N . n. 1"- -.—.—N'o- -N. (6)

In the general case. the AB's maximum charge and discharge capacities are found from
the conditions

”(z-m (”51“ Mel). N]: -m (ﬂu; Np'} . (7)

The dependence of the 85's mass on the parneters characterizing the external and
internal factors enuserated above is represented. in accordance with expression (1) .
in the following form:

t
’"es'lhoNu +Mn+nm(1-M)N5 “”19 ’24.. (e)

The END's single-orbit thrust pulse 1m must the sun of the pulses of the aero-
dynamic resistance of the 152's hull 1152 and the SB panels 153 for one 132 orbit:

lug-ln‘i'lu. (9)
where
" ‘l v' 1)
I.“ - jet" (z) Luz—‘4‘“ ( )d. (10)
O
V. I,
1,. - IC.” -P(—')2ﬂ3asoosp(1)dt (ll)

sSB - "SB/"SBEc - area of the SB panels; 8(1) - angle between the 152's velocity
vector and the cnornal to the 58's surface. the law governing the change of which is
determined by the SB orientation method.

In order to reduce 158! when the 182 is in the shade it is advisable to arrange the
SB panels parallel to the 152' s velocity vector. In this case, 8(1) - 1/2 in the
shade and expression (11) acquires the form

 

r
l»-€:%Nm5u “-21.3. P(r)2v'(f) ”"0”“. ,_z. (12)

where :53 - average (during the illuminated period) pressure of the aerodynamic re-
sistance forces on the SB panels.

The BND's specific impulse can be expressed by the well-know: formula

 

Btu
1"-2 . I.” , (13)
where am a electricity used by the END during one 152 orbit:
3‘”-N':“t.'+N!”t'.. (14)

The problem is formulated in the following manner: for given values of the parame-
ters characterizing the external factors and the group of fixed internal factors,

56

‘10“. USE ONLY
FOI‘OFWKJAI.USE(HNLY

and allowing for the negative nature of all the 25's characteristics and limita-
tinns (2)-(S). (7), (9) and (12)-(14). find the values of the control parameters
(N53, 9A8' 1.?) that provide the minimum value of purpose function (8).

An analysis of the purpose function and the limitations shows that this problem be-
longs to the class of nonlinear programming problems. There exists no general meth-
of for soling problems in this class, so it is necessary to develop a specific opti-

mization algorithm, based on allowing for the special features of the system being
modeled.

An analysis of the interaction of the as‘: elements makes it possible to reduce the
problem of multiparametric optimization to several simpler problems of minimizing

the function of a single control variable in the presence of additional limitations
on the range of the change in it.

It is not difficult to show that it is sufficient to examine three competing vari-
ants of BS operation (a graphic interpretation of them is presented in Figure lb-d)
that are realized in connection with the following additional conditions:

 

 

Variant 1: N: ‘Np'. Wan-”m“ (15.1)
Variant n: N '<N“‘ < N o+N° " (Wu-AL, -o. (15.2)
r so P am. ' v
v ria t 111: v (15.3)
a n ”:>N'.+Nun. Nils-0. A'gb-Nch-II...

M70
since the algorithms for finding the optimum solution are analogous for all the var-
iants. we will examine in detail only the first one, which is the most typical from
methodological viewpoint.

Having combined expressions (2)-(9), (12)-(14) and (15.1), with due consideration
for the condition of non-negativeness of all the variables in them. after making
some transformations we obtain

 

m 'ﬂaNu+Mv(i-M)(A-BN ”pr (”x”)

 

 

“-17
as- 4' (A-BN );
Unclgn‘ “
9
4-9»le OQ-ﬁ—(Np ‘Cgﬂuh o (16)
- N v N r
- ._"’L- __"L
9“ ""4 "ml-- ' gut/.9}
D \
?-~:‘.<N’°<::-(N5. )lp (17)
amp +—. "11"“ .
2M5 ' n ..
nuik”
57

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

where
s 1 0+1.) 6 '
‘g" ”m 2“” “(”80

A _ Nz‘ (”of-N3) +N..'(N£'-N.') (flu-i) .
M(Np°-Nos')

- .‘(N.'.—N..) . - .EI . . (N...—N..) . (19)
a “(N'.-Nep.) ' c (N'.-N.') [(N' -N.’ )+T]o
- No" (l_ ‘) + N .(N.’O_N.O)+N;s(” s_N“c)M .
M " ”AO(N'.-N..)

‘l’c - 1c/t3 - relative duration of the illuminated portion of the orbit.

let us mention here that inequality (17) follows free the condition of nonneqative-

ness of variables w . while inequality (18), which expresses the linita-
tion on the 8180's nan poss ble specific impulse (3). lakes sense only when

5‘; ‘ugnmmcrﬂf.’ (20)

Otherwise, lieitation (3) is immaterial, since it is observed even when 1153..., which
is explained by the proportional increase in the 53's aerodynanic resistance inpulse
as their planned capacity is increased.

Let us also note here that the set of allowed values of N53 (17) is not empty only
when _

N.,' i
'> 0 _. .
N, Inn—(h s). (21)

‘l'hus. the first variant of the 25's operation can be realised only when there is a
certain relationship of the load schedule's characteristics (clearly expressed un-
evenness in power consusption).

In the case where condition (21) is fulfilled. optimisation of the variant under
discussion consists of nininising purpose function (16) in the presence of the bi-
lateral lieitation

maﬁa“. «m
where

m“"::)ﬁ (”g-3.)». ‘”<5‘-‘-".

It is not difficult to demonstrate that function (16) over interval (22) is unieodal
and, by using any of the well-known methods for finding the extrenun of functions of
this class [3]. to determine the optimum value of 853 with the required degree of
accuracy.

At the same time. there exists the possibility of finding an exact numerical solu-
tion.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From function (16) let us form three auxiliary functions that differ fro. each other
by the following caponents:

m; -..,.+N,+..:,'.(1—n..)(A-BN,,)+

(”354'3)’ . - 3 (23)
+“m CN“_D +M‘." ‘ ‘02. ‘

After reducing the similar term, auxiliary functions (23) acquire the torn
(N,.+S)'

Fer—v. i-m «w

"‘3 ‘ -8¢+’.”” +~~

where

 

 

M a My as
_ ‘+ _ . - a. - ~
8. AL 7:“ Ila-"(I na)]. 1’. u” Bl” qr. +|Icn(l Md].

__Mr , as _ .
E. UJ¢~,+Amn a»).

 

M ’

n-Mnuucﬁu—w; r.-u,.-au::.a-n..).
it is obvious that

ﬂow“) 'ﬂf‘jﬁd’vﬂ- (25)

An analysis of the auxiliary functions shows that they are all convex in the down-
ward direction. For Pic * ”K00 \< O. the function mas‘msa) decreases monotonically
over the interval D/C < N53 < 0. while for Pic + um > 0 it has a minimum that is
reached at the point

 

D o ' u
N ...._ _ __'~£’_.
5.. c + 0 +3”, (CF.+».o.)' (26)

The abscissas of the auxiliary functions' points of intersection
Avu'lr-N ‘Un‘lf'.

N . - —— .
" omega-a, u..‘1c
_ .
Ng,-L(N'-___t_”"” Q“); (27)
‘m 9r

N“.-%(A -ﬂ0u.)

9r

are determined from the conditions Q - Q 3 Q ' Q 3 Q ' Q . and the
abscissas of the possible minimums (98}. begggon'gméo inggvalwsz), 89%;“ the lat-
ter into intervals inside which each auxiliary function is monotonic and does not
intersect the other two. This means that the unknown minima- of function (25) is
reached at one of the division points or on the right boundary of interval (22).

$9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIiOFFKJAl.USE(ﬂNLV

Thus.
”fen-(N, ),..,..,n(N:.".N;')U(N;'}

and

m“ “-muwm- min max mu,(l\h)-Inhllu(Ns-)

I“.- ‘-l” I“ O.

Fixing the optimum value of the planned electrical capacity for the first variant is
the only thing remaining to be done.

Optimization of the second and third BS operation variants is done analogously. He
will mention here only the fact that for clearly expressed unevenness of power con-
sumption by the on-board equipment, inequality (3) and the inequality from condition
(15) for the corresponding variant can'prove to be contradictory. This means that
it is technically impossible to realize the given as operation variant. it being the
case that from nonrealisability of the second variant naturally follows the conclu-

sion that the third variant is unrealizable. Thus. as the result of the preliminary
analysis the number of optimizable ES operation variants can be reduced.

The solution of the problem is completed by comparing the optimized variants. As
the'- final optimum value of the 58's planned electrical capacity we select the value
No that corresponds to the variant with the smallest m". after which the 58's
at or planning parameters (9A3 and 1,9) are determined unambiguously.

In accordance with the technique that has been developed. a program for the solution
of a specific problem on a computer was compiled. It was assumed that the 182's or-

bit is circular and is located in the plane of the ecliptic and that the 58's orien-
tation is biaxial.

In this case. parameters 553. ;;
istic--its altitude h:
“pmu'm _ 1+”. 9.0) . “-9.00 . 2n(R.+b)

- t-
2 _ 3-9.0) ' ' n ' . v(h) -'
where v(h) is tabulated in [4]; v(h) I 83/90/(R3 + h): 0T(h) - arcsin (RE/(RE + h) -
- half the angle of shading of the orbit; R3 = radius of the Earth: 90 - free fall
acceleration at the Earth's surface. The expressions for the single-orbit aero-
dynamic resistance impulse of the 152's hull (10) and parameter s (19) have the form

and 13 are functions of a single orbital character-

 

 

 

 

5“-

 

Sm

"',,' mpmv'm , _ ac. ME- ,
"“‘ds 2 "' s c.5[1+mo.(h)l

where
_- ‘ '
El 3;“— S c',“ (E) st.“ (63?. i — my
0

As our initial information we used data from the literature [1,2,4-6] on nickel-
cadmium AB's, silicon SB's, radiative heat discharge systems and electric-heating
engines. The relationship between the dimensions of the Isz' s hull and the amount

of power consumed by the on-board equipment was characterized by the provisional pa-

rameter C 5m /Ng - 2m2 /kw.

60

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

The characteristics of the on-board equipsent's energy consulption were represented
by the following values of the load schedule's dilensionless parameters:

N..'/N"-0,5; N.‘/N"-0.25;

awn/m

 

I
‘ I, I. u m
a,"

Figure 2. Dependence of minimized
provisional power system mass on or-
bital altitude and duration of 152
functioning.

: unt-
i” 3“", #

 

Figure 3. Dependence of optimum power
system planning parameters on orbital
altitude and duration of 152 func-
tioninq.

N.,'/N,'-o.4; N,’IN"-0£.

Two types of SN!) working body-~hydrogen and
anoniauwere discussed. Cryogenic storage
of them on board the 152 was assumed.

The altitude of the orbit varied from 180
to $00 kn. The duration of the system's
functioning ranged from 3 to 12 months.

As a result of the calculations. we ob-
tained values for the power system's mini-
mum mass and the optimum values of the

planning paraseters for the indicated range
of changes in the initial data.

Figures 2 and 3 show the effect of orbital
altitude. duration of operation and type of
END working body (hydrogen or amnia) on
the minimized provisional (with respect to
the maximum required power capacity "5)
mass H and the optimum values of the previ-
sional power system planning parameters.

From an analysis of the graphs (Figure 2)
it follows that preference can be given to
either of the working bodies under discus-
sion.

For orbits at altitudes of less than 260
km, it is advisable to use ammonia as the
END's working body. At higher altitudes
(h > 260 km). hydrogen works better. The
duration of the 182's functioning has no
practical effect on the boundary for the
rational use of the given working bodies.

The preferential use of amnia in low or-
bits is the result of the lower (in compar-
ison with hydrogen) relative mass of its
tanks (the optimum value of the END's spe-
cific impulse is still far from the maximum

possible one (see Figure 4)). In higher orbits the possibility of selecting the

maximum specific impulse takes precedence (the mass of the tanks is an insignificant
percentage of the entire power system's mass) and it becomes advisable to use hydro-

gen .

An analysis of the graphs in Figure 3 shows that the strongest effect on the choice
of the planned electrical capacity of the 58's and the capacity of the ”'9 is ex-

erted by orbital altitude.

61

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.. As the orbital altitude increases, the op-
ﬂ,"ﬂh timum value of the 58's planned capacity
"' decreases because of the reduction in the
M’ percentage of the electricity needed to
power the END.
t!
The optimum value for the planned capacity
I of the as': first decreases as the orbital
an, altitude increases, because of the reduc-
7 tion in the relative duration of the shaded
' period. and then increases. The latter
fact is explained by the need for an in-
!” ”l ”I t, In crease in 9A3 for the purpose of observing

Figure 4. Dependence of optimum spe- the limitation on the maximally allowable
cific END impulse on 152 orbital al- charging current (AB charging for this band
titude. of altitudes is carried out only in the in-
tervals between power consumption peaks
and. consequently, the charging current is a high one.

The increase in planned $8 capacity as duration of functioning increases (see Figure
3) is caused both by the need for photoelement redundancy for the purpose of insur-
ing a given level of SB reliability and (in low orbits) the increase in electricity
needed to power the END as the result of the increase in the optimum value of the
BND's specific impulse as t increases.

Figure 4 depicts the graphs of the dependence of the END's optimum specific impulse
on orbital altitude and the type of working body used.

From an analysis of these graphs it follows that each orbital altitude value has its
own optimum END specific impulse value 133‘. As the altitude increases so does
128:. moving toward some limit Igax imposed by the type of working body used and op-.
erational. structural and other i mitations. for low-orbit Isz's with power systems
based on orientable 58's, it is necessary to select specific END impulse values that
are lower than those maximally possible. This is explained j the fact that in low-
altitude orbits, an insignificant increase in the sun's specific impulse is. the
purpose of reducing the working body reserve requires a large increase in the

58's rated power. since increasing the amount of electricity used to power the END
for the purpose of compensating for a braking impulse results. at the same time. in

an increase in this impulse because of the increase in the area of the SB panels.
Conclusion

1. A technique for selecting the optimum planning parameters for an 152 power system
has been developed. This technique makes it possible to allow for the mutual effect
of its most important subsystems. The discrimination and analysis of a finite num-

ber of variants for the power system's operation makes it possible to reduce the sap
lution of the formulated problem to the minimization of a function with one variable
and to the coordination of the obtained solutions. which makes it possible to formu-

late rather simple calculation algorithms.

2. An analysis was made of the effect of orbital altitude, the duration of an Isz's
active functioning and the type of END working body on the choice of the planned

62

FOR 0FFK]AI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vlnctrical capacity of oricntablc 58's, the planned capacity of the AB'a and the op-
tima specific ilpulsc of the END.

3.

The technique union baa been developed and the reco-eMationa that have been ado

can be and in the initial stages of the preliminary planning of prospective Isz
power ayatene.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

axauocnamv

Hikelaen. 'Preeent and Future Auxiliary and Service Propulsion Electric Reaction
Bnqinea,’ mu MINA I KOSWVTIKA. No 12. 1967. p 181.

Grodzovakiy. 6.1... Ivanov, Yu.N.. and Tokarev, v.v.. 'ueknanika koanicheekoqo
poleta“ [Heclnnics of Spaceflight], Koaoov. Izdatel'etvo "Nauka". 1975.

Yayld, 0.0:)», "netody poiaka ekatraula" [Hethode for Finding an Extreme].
Hoacov. Izdatel'atvo 'Nauka', 1967.

Solodov. A.V.. editor. "lnzhenernyy apravochnik po koaIicheakoy tekhnike" [Engi-
neering nandbook for Space Technology]. Moscow, Izdatel'atvo 'Voyeniadat". 2nd
edition. 1971.

Vasil'yev. 3.!" and undanan. A.P., 'Poluprovodnikovyye fotopreobrazovateli"
(Se-iconductinq Photooonvertere]. Moscow. lzdatel'atvo 'Sovetakoye radio“, 1971.

Kulandin. LA” and Tinahev. S.V., editors, "Voprosy koenicheakoy energetiki"
[Questions on Space Power Engineering]. Moscow. Indatel'stvo "Mir". 1971.

COPYRIGIrr: Iadatel'atvo 'Nauka". 'Koeeicheakiye iaaledovaniya'. 1981

11746
C80: 1866/44

63
MOMMUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 681.3.01:629.7

ANTI“; P80038311” 0P SCIENTIFIC mum RESULTS DURING
OPBMTIGIAL CMROL (1" EXPERIMENTS commerce H111! SPW

Moscow IZHERENIYA, WU. AVTGIA‘HZATSIYA in Russian No 6. Nov-Dec 81 pp 43-41
[Article by H.Yu. Belyayev. candidate of technical sciences]

[Test] In both our country and abroad. much scientific research and many experi-
ments are being conducted with the help of spacecraft (m) . with a multitude of
different measurements being nade by instruments installed in these mu that. in
particular. operate under extremely favorable conditions because of the lack of at-
mosphere at the altitudes at which spacecraft fly. Experience has shown that for
the efficient execution of a progrm of scientific investigations with a m, it is

necessary to exercise operational control over an experiment during spaceflight.

The concept of controlling an experiment in space includes the problnas of evaluat-
ing the status of the scientific research systems and working out control laws that
insure the realisation of an investigative program's goals with simultaneous mini-

misation of the criterion of loss of control quality.

Information: arriving at the flight control center ('rsUP) from the scientific equip-
ment can be categorized as service or scientific information. The problems involved
in automating the operational analysis of service information have been discussed in
detail in [1). At the present time, methods for the automated processing of the re-
sults of scientific measurements in connection with operational control during
spaceflight are being developed intensively. The purpose of this article is to elu-
Cidate on the experience gained in developing these sethods.

In space. research is being done in different areas of science and technology:
astronomy. geophysics. technology and so on. Rockets. manned spacecraft and orbital
stations (06). artificial Barth satellites (152) and automatic interplanetary sta-
tions are used for the realization of scientific programs. As a rule. the creation
of specialized KLA's (technological. astronomical. geophysical and so on) is preced-
ed by the development of the investigative techniques and equipment on board space-
craft and orbital stations. For example, the development of methods for the practi-
cal investigation of the Earth's surface was based on scientific and applied experi-

ments conducted with the help of cosmonauts [2) .
since the first investigations in space lasted a comparatively brief amount of time
and the techniques used in them were relatively simple. the scientific information

was. as a rule, processed after the flight. with the development of methods for
space research on long-term KLA's. the problem of the operational processing of

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v'vn-ntil'ic information arriving at the TsUP during a flight has become an urgent
nllI'. The basic purpose of this processing is to obtain objective data for the pur-
pose of working out recommendations for the further conduct of the scientific exper-
iment: thnt is. to control the experiment [1.3]. At the same time, a number of oth-
er problems that facilitate the postflight analysis of the scientific information
are also solved. Large flows of information (up to 1012 bits per day) are generated
during the conduct of astronomical and geophysical experiments. Comparatively com-
plex algorithms must be used for the operational processing of this information.

Let us discuss questions concerning the automation of the operational analysis of
scientific information obtained during the ccnduct of the most complicated experi-
ments on board spacecraft and orbital stations. First. however, we will give a x
brief description of the methods and equipment used in geophysical and astronomical
investigations.

Curophysical Research. When our planet is studied from a KLA. observations are made
in the most variegated bands of the Earth's spectrum of electromagnetic radiation.
The following are typical of geophysical investigations [2]: visual observations
(in the 0.40-0.64 um band of wavelengths): photography (0.40-0.92 um); televzsion
.‘ZUI’VE‘YInQ (0.45-0.75 um); infrared surveying (0.72-14.0 um); microwave surveying
(0.3-8.5 cm and longer); multizonal photography (0.40-0.92 pm); multispectral sur-
veying (0.3-14 um); spectrography (0.4-0.7 um). Initially, investigations from
space involved primarily visual observations and photography. After that. other and
better remote sensing methods began to be used.

It should be mentioned here that only simultaneous surveying of the Earth's natural
formations in different and quite narrow spectral intervals is capable of producing
reliable and versatile information about the natural medium. Therefore. multi-
spectral systems based on photomultipliers are used extensively to carry out geo-
physical investigations. The first multispectral space survey in the United States
was conducted in 1969, with the ”Nimbus-3" 152, in five spectral intervals, using a
mdiim-resolution camera. An improved multispectral scanning system was installed
in the ER‘l‘S-l artificial satellite (United States). which was to investigate the
Earth's natural resources after being launched into orbit on 23 July 1972. During
the year the system was in operation. variegated data on the structure. composition
and dynamics of the natural medium were obtained. At the same time. there arose
difficulties in the processing of the information because of the extraordinarily
large number of measurements that were made. These difficulties, in particular, de-
layed the launching of the ERTS-B 152 by 2 years. In the USSR, multispectral sur-
veys (on wavelength intervals of 0.5-0.6. 0.6-0.7, 0.7-0.8 and 0.8-1.1 um) were car-
ried out with the help of a four-channel system and a ”Meteor"-series Isz launched
on 9 July 1974.

The great promise of space surveying of the Earth's natural resources is related to
the possibility of measuring the intrin5ic radiothermal radiation of its surface in
the microwave band (0.1-30 cm). The basic advantage of microwave ‘urveying is that
it makes it possible to obtain information about the Earth's surface almost without
reward to the presence of cloud cover. In the USSR, microwave surveying has been
vomluch-l with "(hwy-series 152's, while in the United States it has been done
with the ”Nimbus-S" 152, the "Skylab" OS and other KLA's.

Astronomical Research. Astronomical experiments are conducted on m's over almost
the entire spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. X- and gamma-rays are recorded

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by counters that register the arrival of photons within the instrument's field of
View. Because of the high energy of photons, when they interact with a special sub-
stance-~sueh as argon in x-ray instruments--charged particles are formed: electrons
in X-ray telescopes and electron-positron pairs in the crystal scintillator of an
gamma-ray detector. A Geiger-Muller counter filled with gas is the counter most of-
ten used in x-ray telescopes. Photons enter the counter's chamber through a special
port covered with beryllium foil or capron. When the operating gas mixture is ion-
ized by a rapidly moving photon, a current pulse is generated and registered by the
counter; after conversion, it is then sent into the telemetry system.

Investigations of x-ray radiation are sometimes conducted with the help of mirror
telescopes with glancing incidence of the rays For instance, x-ray sources have
been investigated by the American 'Uhuru" 152, the “Salyut-d" station and other
KLA's [4-61. The RT—4 equipment, developed by FIAN [Physics Institute imeni P.N.
Lebedev, USSR Academy of Sciences]. and the "Filin" installation, developed by IKI
AN SSSR [Institute of Space Research, USSR Academy of Sciences] and GAISh [State As-
tronomical Institute imeni P.K. Shternberg], were used for this purpose on the
"Salyut-a“ station [4,5]. Gamma-rays were registered by the American “Explorer-11'
satellite.

The Earth's atmosphere is almost completely opaque to ultraviolet radiation (30-300
nm: electromagnetic rays with wavelength A < 300 nm are absorbed by the ozone lay-
er), so the observation of ultraviolet sources must be done at altitudes of more
than 60 km. As a rule. KLn's are used for this, although—-generally speaking--
rockets can also be used. Ultraviolet radiation receivers consist of photoelements,
ultraviolet photon counters and photomultipliers.

As is the case with emissions ir the ultraviolet and visible bands, investigative
techniques for the infrared band (1-100 um) differ little from the techniques used
in terrestrial observations. Infrared radiation receivers are usually subdivided
into photoelectric and thermal types. depending on their operating principle. Ther-
mal receivers, which measure the increase in temperature of sensitive elements acted
upon by infrared rays, can function over the entire band of investigated wave-
lengths. whereas photoelectrie receivers register only radiation with a wavelength
less than some critical value. When measurements are made in the infrared band.
there arises the problem of distinguishing the useful signal against the background
of noise caused by the emissions of the KLA itself. In some cases this problem in

a serious engineering problem. The submillimeter (far-infrared) band from 100 um to
3 an has been studied the least, although the investigation of radiation in this
band is a matter of considerable scientific interest. Radiation sources in the
ultraviolet, infrared and submillimeter bands have been investigated with the help
of a EST-1H telescope, from on board the "Salyut—6' station.

For investigations in the radio band (A < 10 mm) it is also advisable to lift the
radiotelescope into space, because radio waves with A § 2 cm are absorbed in the

Earth's atmosphere and those with A b 30 cm are reflected by the ionosphere. Radio
research conducted on KLA's differs little in its techniques from research done by

ground stations. The only differences are in aiming technique, telescope antenna
stabilization and the method for transmitting the measured information to the con-
sumer. The first such investigations were carried out from the 'Salyut-S“ station
in the summer of 1979, using the KRT-lo telescope. In connection with this, in ad-
dition to the study of astronomical sources, the cosmonauts did radio mapping of the
Earth's surface [7].

66
FOR OFFICIAL l SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In all of the experiments that have been mentioned

inlormdtion characterizing the physical processes taking place in the objects under
investigation. The makin

In connection with this, pulse signals ca
since a very high request frequency would be req '
der to transmit them. As a rule, modern scienti

tration of pulse signals contain special devices for t
them [8]. The method used most trequen

amount of time (in such cases the
-counting signals). signals re-

are transmitted to the T30? over radiotelenetry
cal processing [9,10].

information flows. For instance. for KLA's that ha
flows of 107-109 bits per day are typical.

case (dispersion. the form of the spectrum and so fort
tions of the process's realization, however, after
formation it can be assumed that Mtt) - const, the
no.ed, and the algorithm for processing the signals
can be simplified. However. if the assumption about

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

      

”mm: at
naplbvwan
odpaiomm

13L”

ﬂpohpaa
cyan/m u

 
 

  

’7 0660 “(MD-
M0 unwa-
“(Ill

 
   
     

(2)

      
        

(Imodparelme lb mum
WWWMW ~ ' « wav-
WWW
art's: ,w
. Manure:
’ MI: ”007”“ ( 9
Figure 1. General diagram of automated processing of scientific information.
Key:
1. Selection of filter parameters 7. Conversion of investigated signal for
2. Reception and primary processing of the purpose of removing periodicity
TM! 8. Determination of optimum parameters for
3. Conversion of obtained TM! for processing steady-state random process
analysis 9. Construction of investigated process's
4. Checking of signal for nontransience correlation function
5. Conversion of investigated process 10. Plotting of spectral density of inves-
by filtration methods tigated process
6. Detection of hidden periodicity in 11. Depiction of information on screens;
investigated signal; determination plotting of graphs: printing of tables

of frequency of periodic component

primary processing, the TM! is presented in a form that is convenient for automated
analysis: that is. it is enscribed in masses of a given form and volume on a carrier
that can be used by a computer. The following processing phases are carried out
preliminarily: data array redundance that appears as the result of the simultaneous
reception of the TH! by several measuring points is eliminated. and unreliable in-
formation on the carrier is detected and marked by a special service character.

It should be mentioned here that during a KLA flight. Operational processing of the
telemetric information in the T80? according to this system can be accomplished only
when the information's qualitative level is quite high. The presence of intermit-
tent failures lowers the probability of a correct interpretation of measurement re-
sults. In the case of the obtaining of TM! with intermittent failures and im-
possibility of its operational processing in the TsUP, either the experiment is re-
heated or the accumulated data are retransmitted from the KLA. The quality of 1H1
depends on a number of factors. including the organization of the process of trans-
mitting and receiving it. The information is transmitted to the T50? through meas-
uring points [1]. It can be received and processed during a communication session
with a KLA or with some temporal delay. During processing with a delay, there may
appear additional interference caused by the preliminary recording and storage of

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the information flows by the measuring points' facilities. TMI quality also depends
on the method used to transmit it to the TsUP (broad-band and telephone channels and
satellite communication are used for transmission), the time the KIA is in the meas-
uring point's zone. the number of simultaneously transmitted TH! flows and so forth.
Thus, 1“! quality and, consequently. the quality of its subsequent processing are
more or less determined during the stage when the flight and experimental programs
are being planned.

In order to increase the accuracy of the determination of measurement times. special
precision on-board clocks are used; their readings are registered simultaneously
with the scientific measurements. After the unreliable THI is determined, signals
carrying additional information (about the orientation sensors. overloads and so on)
for the analysis of an experiment's results are processed. since we are specifying
the automated processing of nontransient signals. they are first tested for non-
trensionce (see Figure 1). If a signal is transient. it is subjected to filtration.
The filtration methods and filter parameters are selected automatically or are en-
tered in the processing program from the computer's console. Hidden periodicity in
the investigated signal is then detected.

All conversions of the obtained scientific information should be approached cau-
Liously. and at each stage of the processing it should be shown on display facili-
ties for visual monitoring and analysis by the experimenter. There should also be a
capability for changing the processing parameters according to instructions from the
specialist who is analyzing the TMI. After signal filtration, the function charac-
tcrizing the physical process can be regarded as random and the average and correla-
tion functions, as well as the spectral density function. can be constructed. The
optimum values of the statistical processing parameters are found by a dialogue pro-
cess. The constructed functions are entered in a printer in the form of a graph and
are used for the operational analysis of the results of the scientific experiments.

The system depicted in Figure 1 reflects only very general principles for the pro-
cessing of scientific information during a KLA flight. In order to make a number of
its aspects more specific. let us discuss how the automated operational analysis of
TMI obtained from the equipment during the conduct of astronomical experiments is
carried out. In accordance with the general principles for the automated analysis
of scientific THI when controlling a flight. the processing of information from as-
tronomical equipment is carried out in two stages. In the first stage. the process-
ing proceeds at the speed of TH! reception. The equipment's fitness for operation
is determined, the correctness of the transmission of the control commands is con-
firmed. the degree of execution of the planned program and intensity of the observed
sources are evaluated, and events corresponding to a change in intensity are regis-
tered. In the second stage, after the comnmnication session with the KLA, the sta-
tistical characteristics of the obtained measurement results are determined and the
spatial orientation of the KLA is refined.

Astronomical observations are made by aiming at the source or by surveying the ce-
lestial Sphere. In the aiming mode. the KLA is stabilized in inertial space in such
a fashion that the telescopc's sensitive axis is directed at the object being inves-
tigated; in the survey mode, the spacecraft is oriented relative to the Earth ac-
cording to the observation program (in connection with this, either triaxial or uni-
axial orientation can be realized). The celestial sphere is surveyed because of
the spacecraft's orbital motion. In connection with this. one effective method is

69

Fl”!!”ﬂﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
F0! OMCML USE ONLY

  

ﬂburu u nep-
duvwaa odou-

        

famine/me
mm“? m-

                

avhuuumuw puuumwulns
the! annular
(2) Ipeamm a 7‘3

 

   

     
 

Ikwnumuuue

   

outlaw: tonne/noun” dude/mm:

   
       
   

nepuaduuuo- nannwuuuwxqpaa adhmunnpennqq nanauwum
[my (MIM- WM”! a’MO' 1 ”NA Willllllll maﬁa/yd
wad auwuna ' 3 ”ﬂ” (duvunumm

 
 

we)

   

(6)

 

(9)
Figure 2. Diagram of automated TM! analysis when aiming mode is used.

 

Key:
1. Reception and primary processing of 7. Construction of autocorrelation func-
TMI (decommutation of frames, tem- tions and frequency spectra
poral correlation and so on) 8. Comparison of obtained and model char-
2. Rejection of group and solitary in- aracteristics: determination of parame-
Lermittent failures ters of spectra models
3. Averaging of values of parameters 9. Detection of periodic signal fluctua-
over time interval AT tions
4. Determination of root-mean-square lo. Correlation and frequency analysis of
deviation diminishing section of radiation
5. Registration of radiation surges surges: determination of parameters of
6. Useful signal discrimination (sub- spectra models

traction of background)

torsion or controlled rotation of the KLA around an axis perpendicular to the tele-
scope's sensitivity axis. When the passive torsion mode is used. it is necessary to
allow for the KLA's angular position in the telemeasurement data.

let us trace the organization of the operational processing of TM! during a flight.
using the interesting example of experiments with x-ray equipment (in the case. the
processing of the information reflects most fully the principles described in this
article). Let us examine a system for the automated operational analysis of TH! ob-
tained from an x-ray telescope in the aiming mode (Figure 2). In the X—ray equip-
ment. the telemetry encompasses the outputs of differential discriminators in all
the energy bands of a spectrometer, the output of an integral channel. service pa-
rameters and so forth [4]. After reception and primary processing of the 1M1, group
and isolated intermittent failures are discarded. Rejection of group intermittent
failures is accomplished most frequently with the help of 0 and 100 percent levels
transmitted from the spacecraft. while rejection of the isolated ones is carried out
when the condition limiting the relative increase in reading speed is not ful-
filled.

In the computer complex. the parameters' values are averaged over a given time in-

terval AT and the root-mean-square deviation OAT is determined. If the reading

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.US£IMNLY

”nah/mo

mneﬂlmpuvcamd
WWpMauuu

Pcaucmpauu:
ucmawvuxol
«Myrna:

Both/mule
ﬂOﬂC’IlOcW wen/m
Manama/vac mom)

 

ﬂbcnﬂn
diamuumuvmnvé
”ﬁﬂnnvduuu,onwmua
ﬂannel/mull u mn.

onptaemue OHM/"4'
«uuﬂﬂluluvuanwua

qwucanxanmwwmnﬁ
~ , ward ”mg/cum“)

ununumwwqaukmw~od
¢nauu

Figure 3. Diagram of automation of operational TH! analysis when

survey node is used.

Key:

1. Processing of telemetric informa-
tion

Calculation of ballistic informa-

tion, reference directions and so

on
Averaging of values of parameters

and computation of root-mean-square
deviation

Processing of signals of stellar
photometers, solar sensor, magne-
tometer

8.

9.

Registration of radiation sources
Determination of KLA orientation and
calculation of coordinates of registered
sources

Useful signal discrimination (subtrac-
tion of backgrouns)

Approximation of pulse by a theoretical
function in triangular or trapezoidal form
Allowance for distortion in shape of
pulse

speed deviates from that of the neighboring points by more than a given value (“i -
- X1+1| ; 3°AT' for example), information on the presence of a surge of x-ray radia-

tion is printed out.

mined by subtracting the background reading speed.

The true speed of reading from the observed sources is deter-

Information processed in this

manner is displayed on television screens and printed out.

71

FINICHHWCLAL USIZCHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

after the results of the preliminary processing are analyzed. autocorrelation func-
tions and frequency spectra are constructed. The observed characteristics of the
processed information are compared with model spectra and the parameters of the mod-
els of the spectra are determined (exponential and power dependence: of the flow on
the energy of the quanta are used as models [4,5]). In addition to this. any perio-
dicity in the fluctuations of the signal being studied are detected. The results of
the analysis carried out during the second stage of TH! processing are used in the
operational planning of the program of experiments. The characteristics found after
processing are compared with those obtained earlier and a conclusion is reached on
the value of the information obtained. after which reco-aendations on further imple-
mentation of the program are made.

An algorithm for the operational processing of information during astronomical ob~
servations in the survey mode is presented in Figure 3. After primary TH! process-
ing and computation of the statistical characteristics. the observed sources that
came into the telescope's viewing field are registered. Information on the possible
registration of a source is displayed when the reading speed deviates from that for
the neighboring points by more than a given value (3°AT' for example). The back-
ground (particularly that measured before and after registration of the source) is
then substracted from the signal in order to determine its true intensity.

Hhen making observations in the survey mode. it is important to determine the regis-
tercd sources' coordinates accurately. This problem is solved by determining the
spatial orientation of the KLA's axes. given the known orientation of the tele-
scope's axis of sensitivity relative to the KLA's axes. The KLA's angular position
is calculated on the basis of information from orientation sensors (solar sensor.
magnetometer, stellar photometer and so on). Algorithms for determining m orien-
tation according to measurement results. with due consideration for the specifics of
operational information processing in a TsUP. are explained in (11.12]. a signal
from an x-ray source that is registered in the survey mode is approximated by a the-
oretical function of triangular or trapezoidal form. The method of least squares is
used to find the numerical values of the parameters (base of the trapezoid, height
and so forth). Distortion of the shape of the pulse is also taken into considera-
tion when processing a signal registered in the celestial sphere survey mode.

BI BLIOGRAPHY

l. Bclyayev. M.Yu.. "Automation of the Operational Analysis of Telemetric Infermar
tion During the Conduct of Scientific Research on Board Spacecraft." IZHERERIYA.
KONTROL', AV'I'OMATIZATSIYA, No 6, 1979. pp 57-63.

2. Vinogradov. B.V.. "Kosmicheskiye metody izucheniya prirodnoy sredy” [Space Meth-
ods for Studying the Environment,“ Moscow, lzdatel'stvo 'Hysl'", 1976. 287 pp.

3. Gernet, Ye.D.. Zabiyakin, 6.1., et a1., “Rapid Processing of Information From
Scientific Experiments on the 'Venera-ll' and 'Venera-12' Automatic Interplane-
tory Stations." KOSMICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA. V01 17, No 5, 1976. pp 686-689.

4. Babichenko. 5.1.. Goganov, D.A.. Grechko. G.H.. et al., “Some Results of Investi-

gations of Cosmic x-Ray Radiation on Board the 'Salyut-4' Orbital Station,‘
KOSHICI'IESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, Vol 14, No 6, 1976' PP 878-891.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Novikova. G.V., Yerokhina. Ye.v.. Kurt. v.c.. et a1., "Observations of x-Ray

Sources in the Area of the Galactic Center and the Constellation Cygnus,"
KOSMICMESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA, Vol 15. No 2, 1977. pp 321-323.

Giacconi. 8., Murray. 5.. et al.. "the Uhuru Catalog of x-Ray Sources.‘ THE
AS‘l'R. JwRNAL, Vol 178. l Decelbar 1912, pp 281-308.

Belyayev, M.Yu., and Tyan, 7.1%.. “Research and Development of Economical Methods

for Conducting Geophysical Experiments.” ISSLBDOVANIYB MI 12 KOSMOSA. No l.
1931. pp 90-95.

Yevdokimov. V.P.. and Pokras. V.M.. “Metody obrabotki dannykh v muchnykh
kosnicheskikh eksperimentakh" [Methods for Processing Data in Scientific Experi-
ments Conducted in Space]. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo ”Mauka". 1977, 176 pp.

Boks. 0211.. and Dzhenkins, 6., “Mali: vrenennykh ryadov: Prognoz i

upravleniye" [Analyzing Time Series: Prediction and Control] . Moscow.
Izdatel'stvo “Mir". lst edition, 1974. 406 pp.

Anderson, 'l‘.. "Statisticheskiy analiz vrenennykh ryadov“ [Statistical Analysis
of Time Series), Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Mir", 1976. 758 pp.

aclyaycv. M.Yu. . ”Determining the Angular Position of a Spacecraft According to
Telemetric Measurement Data,” uca. ZAP. TSAGI. Vol 9, No 4, 1978, pp 115-121.

Bclyayev, M.Yu.. "Determining Spacecraft Orientation According to Measurement
Data." ”Tr. pyatykh chteniy RA. 'rsandera. Sektsiya 'Astrodinamika" [P.A.
Tsander's Fifth lecture Series: 'Astrodynanics" Section]. Moscow. 1978. pp 116-
129.

COPYRIGHT: 'rsentral'nyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut lnforuatsii i tekhniko-

ekono-icheskikh issledovaniy priborostroyeniya. sredstv avtouatisatsii i
sisten upravleniya (TaNII‘l'EIpriborostroyoniya), 1981

11746

CSO:

1866/43

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms U ' .(‘IAL USE ONLY

UDC 543.876

ANALYSIS 0? EFFECT OF SEVERAL FARMERS 0P LANDING VEHICLE 0F “INN-9'-
'VENBRA-IZ' AUTOM‘X'IC Immune! STATIGIS OH 81'”le DURING LANDING

Moscow KOSHICHESKHB ISSWYA in Russian Vol 19, No 6. Nov-Dec 81 (manuscript
received 25 Jun 80) pp 913-918

[Article by P.P. Karyayev, Ye.1. Grigor’yev and 5.“. Yermakovl

[Text] The authors use mathematical modeling of the performance
of an automatic interplanetary station's landing vehicle during a

landing on a planet's surface to find several design cases for the
development of landing gear. The results of their calculations
coincide quite well with the results of experiments.

One important characteristic that determines the fulfillment of its task by the
landing vehicle (PA) of an automatic interplanetary station (ANS) when landing on
the surface of a planet is the Pa's stability when landing on a surface about which
little is known. Initially, experimental methods of investigating the landing char-
acteristics of a vehicle were used to evaluate PA stability during landing. These
methods were frequently based on scale modeling [1.2). The inadequacies of these
methods were the impossibility of modeling several PA characteristics. such as the
characteristics of the landing gear, and the complexity involved in modeling the
characteristics of the planet being studied under terrestrial conditions. Later.
methods for the mathematical modeling of the landing process with subsequent experi-
mental testing of the results obtained [3.4] were developed and realized during the
planning of a number of Soviet and American 1045's. In this article we explain a
method for evaluating PA stability during landing that utilizes mathematical model-
ing of the landing process with correction on the basis of test data, as a result of
which we were able to define several design cases for the development of PA stabili-
ty. This method was used during the planning of the Soviet "Venera-9"-"Venera-12"
ms's.

In order to define a design case for the development of PA stability by mathematical
modeling of the process of a PA landing on the surface of a planet. we determined
the effect of parameters characterizing the PA and the conditions on the planet. We
will understand “design case for stability" to mean that landing situation in which
is achieved the maximum value of the angle between the PA's longitudinal axis and
the local gravitational vertical. which determines the PA's limiting state in ac-
cordance with the chosen criterion for stability during landing O.

Structurally. the landing gear of the 'Venera-9”-"Venera-12' ms's consisted of a
toroidal shell that was deformed during landing and absorbed the PA’s energy at

76

NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the women: of input. a shell attachment frame and a rigid truss
I'y Inn-ans of which the frame is attached to the PA's hull.

In order to formulate the mathematical model of the PA landing process, we used the
equations of motion of a perfectly rigid body with attached, deformable landing
gear; in connection with this, the toroidal shock absorption was represented by l0
separate legs. The experimentally obtained elastoplastic force-displacement diagram
for each leg, which represents the dependence of the compressive force on the path
of the compression, was approximated by a parabola. The flat, perfectly rigid land-
ing surface was modeled by a set of planes in which each of the 10 landing gear legs
had its own plane. The landing gear legs' coefficient of sliding friction on the

surface was assumed to the constant for leg speeds not equal to zero and zero for
zero velocities.

Using theoretical calculations only, it
proved to be impossible to determine the
force-displacement diagram of the landing
gear because of the elastoplastic shock ab-
sorption characteristics and the elasticity
of its design, which has a considerable ef-
fect on the amount of recoil H (here we
will understand recoil H to mean the ratio
of the elastic part of the landing gear's
deformation under standard compression to
the magnitude of this compression). At the
same time, experimentally obtained shock
-/: 'N -I I I I ll :0 absorption force-displacement diagrams can;
' '50"(3) not, in principle, allow for the dynamic“
Figure 1. Effect of PA's initial an- nature of the landing process. Calcula-

 

glc of inclination a on stability: tions showed that the shape of the force-

H u 0.1; u = 0.3: VB - 8.4 m°s : I = displacement diagram for direct compression

a to (2, 4): I I 1.1.10 (1, 3, 5): has little effect on PA stability when it

1 = 10' (l, 2):_f 8 5° (3, 4); O = 0“ changes within reasonable limits, so for a

(S); VH - 0 m-s (l, 2): VB - good approximation it is possible to use a

- -l m-s'1 (3, 4); V" I 1 ms'1 (5). static compression diagram by correcting

Key: 1. 9, deg the shock absorption recoil. Besides this,
2. Area of instability for all practical purposes the recoil de-
3. a, dog fines unambiguously the height of the PA's

rebound after the first impact: that is,
the time between the first and second impacts. Thus, by knowing the calculative re-
lationship and using bounce test data it is possible to determine the unknown shock
absorption recoil.

The parameters affecting PA stability during landing were divided into several
groups. Consideration was also given to the effect on PA stability of the following
parameters, which characterize the physical properties of planets: angle of incli-
nation 6 of the planet’s surface to the PU's [landing gear] base, the load-bearing
capacity of the planetﬂs soil, gravitational acceleration, atmospheric density.

Calculations showed that, within given limits, the landing area's angle of inclina-
tion is not definitive from the viewpoint of PA stability. The angle between the

75
FOR OFFKJAI.U5810NLY

. .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

slope and the PU's plane (see Figure 1) turns out to have a much greater effect on
stability.

Bounce tests using an area of porous agglomerate sand (similar to yielding soil).
with the angles of inclination to the horizon substantially exceeding the given
ones, demonstrated the Ph's stability. Thus, the worst case from the viewpoint of

stability is a landing on hard ground. which is why a model of this type was used in
the calculations. As an analog of perfectly hard ground we used cellular concrete.

The calculated value of the shock absorption pressure on the area was 26 kg/cmz. In
the jump tests it was possible to achieve some increase in the calculated pressure
by uneven distribution of the pressure forces over the contact area. Nevertheless.
the deformations of the area were insignificant when compared with the deformations
of the landing gear. Thus. cellular concrete with a load-bearing capacity of 30-40
kg/cm2 differs little from perfectly hard ground as far as its effect on the stabil-
ity of a given PU design.

 

a: 4:: at 0,5: 47 x,-

Pigure 2. Effect of PA mass (M (1-4)). position of center of PA
mass (x (5)). shock absorption recoil (H (6, 7)) and coefficient
of friction (u (8-10)) on stability: o I 5': 0 I 10'; H I 0.05
(5. 9): H = 0.1 (1-4, 10); H - 0.2 (8); u I 0.3 (1-4, 6): u I 0.5
(5, 7); I I Io (1. 2, 9); I I 0.735-10 (10); I I 0.85.10 (3, 4);
I I 1.06-10 (6. 7): I I 1.1‘10 (5. 8); H = 0.836-H0 (10): M I

= 0.9139-n0 (6-8); M = “o (s. 9); v3 - 3.4 n-s'l (1, 3. 5-10):

Va = v30!) (2. a): n - MHO'I.

Key: 1. 3, deg 2. Area of instability

An increase in gravitational acceleration is analogous to an increase in the PA's
mass and results in improved PA stability (Figures 2 and 3).

A planet's atmosphere has a complicated effect on the dynamics of PA landing. In
the first place, a buoyancy force acts on a PA, causing its stability to deterior-

ate; in the second place, the presence of an atmosphere results in the appearance of
associated masses that are comparable to a PA's mass-inertial characteristics. The

accurate determination of the elements of the associated masses‘ tensor for a PA of
such a complex shape proved to be a practically unsolvable problem. On the one
hand, the associated masses caused an increase in the Pn's moments of inertia and
caused its stability to deteriorate (Figure 3), while on the other, an increase in

PA mass within certain limits caused it to improve.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ml‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our analysis of PA stability. as the
Pu's structural characteristics we used the
following parameters (Figures 2 and 3) :
coefficient of completeness K of the shock
absorption force-displacement diagram:
shock absorption recoil m the landing
gear's coefficient of friction on the
ground u.

 

The coefficient of completeness K of the
__I,I shock absorption force-displacement diagram
5.7.4“an equals the ratio of the shock absorption
Figure 3. Cooperative analysis of the work on some compression path to the work
effect of PA mass (M (1)) . the PA‘s that would have been done by the maxim
transverse moment of inertia (I (2)). force on the same path. As has already
the height of the PA's center of mass been mentioned, the shape of the force-

(X (3)). the PA's vertical landing displacement diagram and, consequently, its
velocity (V3 (d) and the PA's coeffi- coefficient of cospleteness K have little
cient of friction on the surface (:4 effect on stability. The insignificant de-

40 u u

(5)) on stability: H I mo‘lz '1" -_ terioration in stability when K increases
= ”0'1; X a xxo'lx VB - VBVB '1: u - is within the limits of accuracy of the
- uu -1; X0 - 0.611 m; V30 . 8.4 initial data. such as the coefficient of
m-s‘ ; uo :- 0.3. friction u or recoil H.
Key: l. L deg

2. Area of instability Recoil H has a substantial effect on PA

stability (Figure 2). For a certain combi-
nation of PA parameters. even an insignificant increase in recoil can lead to a
sharp deterioration in stability. For the PA under discussion, the recoil was with-
in lo percent limits and was basically rebound of the truss and the landing gear
frame. so the problem of reducing the recoil was an extremely complicated one.

The coefficient of friction also has a considerable effect on stability. From Fig-
urea 2 and 3 it is obvious that the effect of coefficient of friction It increases as
the zone of instability is neared. The value of coefficient of friction in is deter-
mined by the ”shock absorption shell-ground" pair. and when material samples were
dragged along the ground analog. values u - 0.4-0.6 were noted. However, tests
showed that a coefficient of sliding friction of the landing gear on the ground of
about 0.3 is realized. This is explained by shock absorption deformation in the di-
rection of the slope when there are insignificant movements of the landing gear over
the surface. Thus, replacement of the force of tangential shock absorption deforma—
tion by the force of friction is an adequate approximation, as demonstrated by a
comparison with the experimental results. for engineering calculations; and. by re-
ducing the rigidity of the landing gear's shock absorption in this direction it
would be possible to reduce the effective coefficient. thereby improving stability.

As our calculations showed, the value of the maximum coefficient of friction--that
is. that value for which the PA is still stable--increases as the angle between the
landing area and the landing gear's plane of shock absorption does. This can be ex-
plained by the increase in shock absorption compression as the 'scissors' grow
larger and, as a result. the arm of friction forces relative to the PA's center of
mass is reduced.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in our analysis of PA stability we discussed the effect of the following inertial
characteristics of a PA: its inertia tensor, its mass “0 and the position of the
center of mass along the longitudinal axis X.

since a plane situation was used as the design case for stability during landing.
we examined the effect of the greatest (relative to the transverse axis) PA assent
of inertia I. From Figure 3 it is obvious that when the moment of inertia in-
creases. stability deteriorates considerably, which is particularly noticeable on
the edge of the area of stability.

when the other parameters remain unchanged and the Pa's mass is increased, there is
an improvement in PA stability. However, the positive effect of an increase in mass
is reduced substantially because of the simultaneous increase in vertical landing
velocity (Figure 2). At the same tine. the force that the PA's shock absorption ap-
paratus has to absorb increases proportionally to the square of the mass. For low
PA shock absorption energy reserves, an increase in its mass could result in a sharp
deterioration in the landing gear's shock absorption characteristics and the Ph's
stability.

Iran! (1)
ahwan» , Vsﬁnav

/ .»/// .1 1 1

e' .
. \
.‘\m
7%,» I, \K \-
o _;——-—~—--
~—-: —.—'
" --—.r —..—r -
-:-/,z - -c/ at u I try-a"
-0 -.r '-2 -/ i I z I o .r ,3
‘0 I I . a 4: a ,."
__.1 0 on u ., 7" ,wn)

at -u 1: ~40 -I,l mac-i"

Figure 4. Effect of original horizontal (Va (1)) and vertical (VB
(2)) components of the velocity of the Phjs center of.nass, the
components of the PA's angular velocity (V (3)) and ( (4)) and
the PA's original angular position (v (5)) on stability: o a 5‘
(1-4): a I -15° (5); H I 0.05 (2. 5, 4); H I 0.1 (1. 3); u I 0.3
(l, 3, 5): u I 0.5 (2, 4); I - 1.065‘10 (3); l I 1.07.10 (1); I I
n 1.097-10 (5): I - 1.1-!0 (2. 4): M I 0.989-no (3); M I Ho (1,
2. 4. 5).

Key: l.‘0. deg 2. Area of instability 3. W, deg

Given a constant landing gear base, the location of the PA's center of mass deter-
mines its static angle of stability. It is obvious that as the height of the PA's
center of mass increases. this angle decreases and stability deteriorates, which is

confirmed by the graphs in Figures 2 and 3. It should be mentioned here that in the
calculations we discovered an angle of dynamic stability that was less than the
first angle by lO-lS‘.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 'JNLY

In our calculations we also took into consideration the effect of kinematic charac-
teristics on PA stability during landing: the velocity of the PA's center of mass.
the PA's angular velocity relative to the center of mass.

As our design case we took the case of a plane landing. so we examined the effect on
stability of the vertical and horizontal components of the velocity of the PA's cen-
ter of mass. In the area of stability (Figure 4) there existed a practically linear
dependence of stvbility on the vertical component of the velocity of the PA's center
of mass (VB)' but it existed only when shock absorption was carried out correctly.

Prom Figure 4 it is obvious that it is possible for the PA to overturn for some hor-
zontal velocity v" value if it is negative. However, according to data gathered on

preceding flights the horizontal component of the velocity of the PA's center of
mass should be no more than 1 m/s and its effect on PA stability can be ignored.

The calculations showed that the components of the PA's angular velocity, which re-

sult in its movement through space. have little effect on stability when landing on

a flat surface (Figure 4). Overturning of the PA is possible for some negative val-
ue of the component of angular velocity that is parallel to the PA's transverse axis
(0).

The calculations also showed that the PA's initial angular position. which leads to

its spatial motion during the landing process, does not cause its stability to de-
teriorate (Figure 4). Some deterioration in stability was observed when the PA's

longitudinal axis was tilted downward along the slope (Figure l), with two-
dimensional motion of the PA. Given a certain combination of PA and shock absorp-

tion parameters. the appearance of areas of instability determined by the initial
angular position of the craft (angle a) is possible.

Thus, a comparison of the results of the mathematical modeling and experiments with

flight results confirms:
l) the suitability of our method for investigating the stability of an AHS's PA dur-

ing landing. which reduces considerably the amount of experimental development work
needed for landing gear;

2) our conclusions on the effect of parameters characterizing the landing process on
PA stability during landing.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Herr. Robert w., "Outriggers as a Means of Improving Landing Stability of Legged
Vehicles.” NASA. Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia; AIAA Paper, No 68-
307. 1968.
2. Bazhenov. V.I., and Osin, M.I.. "Posadka kosmicheskikh apparatov na planety"
[Spacecraft Landings on the Planets], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo ‘Hashinostroyeniye'.

1978.

3. Polhen. J.C.. "Planetary Lander Concepts Dictated by Touchdown Parameters,"
Martin Marietta Corporation, Denver Cclorado: AIAA Paper. No 68-306. 1968.

79

FINI(NHWCJAI.USE(MNLY
so: (than. use ONLY

4. Jones, R.H.. and ﬂinchcy. J.D.. editors. “Some Basic Guidelines for Establishing
Structural Design Parameters for the Landing Gear of Stable. Soft-landing Space-

craft.” Hughes Aircraft many, El Segundo, California: AIM Paper. No 68-345.
.1968.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka", "Komicheskiye iasledovaniya'. 1981'

11746
CSO: 1866/44

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F‘1C1Al.lﬂﬂE(HVLY

SPACE APPLICAIIONS

UDC 525:551:629.78
EARTH OBSERVATION BY FIRST-CREW COSHDNADTS 0P SALYUT-6 ORBITAL STATION

Hoscow lSSLBDOVANIYE ZEHLI lz KOSHDSA in Russian No l. Jan-Feb 82 (manuscript
received 19 Mar 80. after revision 19 Mar 81) pp 5-13

[Article by G. H. Grechko. USSR cosmonaut. Yu. V. Romanenko. USSR cosmonaut.

I. K. Abrosimov. L. V. Desinov. A. D. Koval', G. A. Nosenko. V. Ye. Permitin

and V. V. Kozlov, "Priroda" State Scientific Research and Production Center;
"Aerogeologiya" Geological Production Association for Regional Study of Geologi-
cal Structure of the USSR. Moscow]

[Text] During recent flights of Soviet manned spaceships and obrital stations.
broad studies have been made of the geological and geographic peculiarities of
the earth's surface by visual-instrument observations. The possibilities of
this method were manifested especially clearly during the long expeditions by
cosmonauts such as the long phases of manned operation of the "Salyut-6" orbital
station. High resolution of the visual analyzer of man and the capacity of the
cosmonaut to solve complex logical problems offer the possibility of assigning
the crew of an orbital station the duties of observing natural objects and
analyzing their state under conditions of dynamic variability of the landscape.
These observations can be made both by using the naked eye and using various
instruments: binoculars. optical range finders. colorimeters. and so on.
Cameras, television and spectrometric systems can be used to document the
observation results. We call such observations visual-instrument studies of
the natural environment.

when preparing for the flight of the "Sslyut-o" orbital station on the basis

of reports of Soviet cosmonauts in space in 1961 to 1977 [1-9]. a program was
developed for visual surveying of the land masses and bodies of water of the
world ocean. A characteristic feature of this program was the fact that
planned observation problems could be more precisely defined by the specialists
and the cosmonauts themselves in flight. In addition to traditional operations
of controlling the remote sensing equipment. this program assigned the crew
the duty of more precise definition of the objects of investigation and selec-
tion of the time to study them as a function of illumination conditions.
meteorological situations and other factors. Thus. the success of the entire
experiment was determined by the creative capabilities of the crew. their train-
ing and fitness, and also the level of operative consultations between the
cosmonauts and the assigners of the individual missions.

81

FIIICIHHCJAL USEZCHNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A characteristic feature of the ”Salyut-6" orbital station is flight in the drift
mode acaoQanied by arbitrary rocking of it and rotation around the center of masses.
In order to survey the earth's surface by camera or apectromters. usually active
stabilization of the station by low-thrust mtors is used. In this case the
longitudinal axis of the "Salyut-6"-"Soyuz" cowlex is maintained perpendicular to
the local vertical, for which an economical orientation and stabilization system
is used. but it still consumes fuel. During the operations of photographing the
earth by the stationary cameras. both crew meters were heavily loaded with opera-
tions of servicing of the photographic and spectral equipment and monitoring the
stabilization of the cowlex. The necessity for studying operative surveying
assignments. recording the results on the on—board documents and preparation of

reports for the Flight Control Center also require defined time from the tin
allotted for the experiments.

The crew was .ctmlly erqlniﬂl (Iv: possibility of visml-instrumsnt observations of the
earth only when the station was in the drift mde. At the same time. in a nuiaer
of cases when approaching the research area where the cosmonauts, having prepared
binoculars and cameras. took their places at the windows, the station was turned so
that its solar cells cut off the view of the earth.

Quite quickly the crew became aware of the obvious 1m: that the station always
rocked around the transverse axes. on the average maintaining orientation with the
solar cells down or up, and somtimes it did not move quickly from one orientation
to the other. This fact gave the cosmonauts the idea of orienting the station by
the longitudinal axis with respect to the local vertical and giving it an angular
velocity in the plane of the orbit equal to the velocity of orbital rotation aromd
the earth. extinguishing all other orthogonal components of the angular velocity.
In other words, the cosmonauts decided to realize in practice the theoretically
well known possibility of gravitational stabilization. Since the station had no
special dampers to extinguish the natural oscillations in the orbital coordinate
system. the required initial conditions were obtained by manual control of the
micrometers. using a wide-angle viewer.

The effect from such dynamics as rotational motion of the station turned out to be
excellent. The image of the earth in the viewer was almost stationary, and the
rocking around the given position was minimally noticeable. There were periods
when the station was in a state of gravitational stabilization up to 7 days. from
one dynamic condition to the other. The crew was able to have an almost panoramic
View from the u.“ ion's transfer compartment. which had five windows. Creating
a type of visual-instruIent observation post of the natural environmnt here. the
crew transmitted several hundreds of reports on the objects of investigation,
accompanying many of them by pictures taken by a portable on-board camera.

In the future it is possible to imagine a station in which the remote sensing
instruments are aimed at the earth along the longitudinal axis of the orbital
complex. and pictures will be taken in the gravitational stabilization mode. of
course. such a station will be distinguished by an increased ballistic coefficient,
increasing the rate at which it drops into the dense layers of the atmosphere.

This effect reduced the lifetime of the American "Skylab" orbital station.

However. in contrast to "Skylab." automatic refuelers can be regularly docked with
the "Salyut-6" type stations. in practice sustaining them indefinitely.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A characteristic feature of the flight of the "Salyut-6" station is the fact that
its path passes every two days over the sue regions of the earth. Therefore,
even during a prolonged expedition using stationary equipment it is not possible
to sake a continuou survey of broad regions or significant areas of the ocean.
The use of annual caneras in my cases offers the possibility of filling this
gap. The results of such work are determined by the actions taken by the crew.

As a result of analyzing various visual eaperinent control system, preference was
given to the version in which the cosmonauts are given the authority to select the
objects of observation in fliynt from a large number of previously planned assign-
ments. For example. in order to estimate the possibility of observation of glacier
pulsations from orbit, it was reconended that attention he paid to the mountainous
regions of Pamir. Karakorun, the western part of the Himalayas and the ice fields
of Patagmia. Considering the season of the observations (sinner in the southern
hemisphere). the orbital peculiarities and meteorological conditions, the most
successful region turned Out to be the last-mentioned one.

All of the flight ssaignmnts with respect to observations of the natural environ-
lien: were grouped into six sections: geology. geography. oceanology, glaciology.
mteorology and environmntal control. Beginning with ballistic data. the
specialists calculated the time of passage of the station over each object of
observation and reporL-‘d this time and the distance of the object from the path

to the crew. It turned out that such information helps the cosmonauts to plan
visual observations of the earth efficiently and accent attention on the key
objects of the flight assimnents.

The first weeks of on-board work demonstrated that in a large meter of cases the
mission of the specialists could not be carried out as a result of cloud cover

over the selected part of the earth's surface. By the suggestion of the cosmnauts.
they were granted the possibility of altering the choice of observation time.

This solution was quickly felt. and positive results were recorded not only by
those setting up the visual experiments. but also the medical flight support

grow. noting positive emotions in the crew camed by perforating the visual-
instrument observations.

The mission of the crew included evaluation of several types of different-scale
topographic and geographic maps in order to select the lost convenient of then

for location and fixing of the objects of visual observations. It was established
that the stated requirements are most completely satisfied by a l:2.500.000 scale
up. The crew poposed that the image of the earth’s surface be brought into
accordance with the true color of different landscape zones on the maps. Binoculars
were delivered to support the on—board experiment. Trying them out. the cosmonauts
foumi that six and twelve power binoculars are the most convenient. than observing
bodies of water, a multicolor atlas was tried out. The experiment demnstrated

that in order to obtain objective color indices of various parts of the dry land
and water, it is necessary to use colorineters. The am conclusion was also
drawn during the lloO-dsy flight of the second expedition when the mater of

shades of color on the atlas was increased to 196.

83

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Attention should be given to the conclusion of the iaportant role of standard
objects well known to the cosmonauts from deannstration training flights on air-
craft. Thm. when detecting linear geological structures the cosmonauts cowared
their observations with images of the Talaso-Pergan fault in Central Asia. the
Dzhalair-Nayman fault and the Glavnyy Karatauskiy fault in Kazakhstan. Hhen study-
ing the hydrogeological peculiarities of arid regions the standards were the
indicators connected with the developmt of vegetation. various types of sand or
ancient river valleys within the territory of Turkmenia and Uzbekistan. Observing
familiar natural training areas in the southern part of the USSR, the cosmonauts

made reco-endations to inrove the theoretical training and the preliminary
aerovisual observation program for subsequent crews.

During the 96-day stay on board. the influence of weightlessness on the results of
visual examination of the earth's surface was evaluated. It was noted that during
the first days of the flight the sharpness of vision decreased insimificantly.
and after adaptation to weightlessneas. it remained almst mchanged. The general
indices of the incoming scientific infornation about the natural environnent are
increased as a result of the observers' acquiring experience in visual study of the
earth's surface. This is taken into account when planning the visual-instrument
observation program for the crews making short visits. including international
crews. The basic crews are assigned the duties of preliminary examinatimof the
objects of observation in order to estimate the optimal surveying conditions and to
accumulate experience in quick detection of then by lmdmarks which can be seen
well from orbital altitude. The main crew assists the visiting cosmonauts on

short expeditions in iaplementing the program; for studying the natural environ-
ment.

Among the new organizational forms. attention must be given to the operative

report to the crew prepared in the form of an express report about the course

of the performance of the visual-instrument experiments and the first results from
analyzing then. This type of report was delivered for the first time on board the
"Salyut-6" station on the first expeditionary visit. The report contained a
survey of the cowleted steps of the studies and focmed attention of the cosmonauts
on the primary goals of the upcoming period.

On completion of the 96—day flight of the first basic expedition. it became possi-
ble to develop recomendations with respect to the procedure for visual studies of
the natural environment which included the following operations:

The study of the flight assignment by the on-board documents and operative ample-
ments to it. preparation of observation and recording means;

Checking the stability of the position of the station with respect to the velocity
vector of it in orbit and the perfornance of dynamic operations when necessary;

Detection of the object of observation on the terrain, using the cartographic
material available on board and space photographs (SP) with respect to
characteristic landmarks, in particular, fluctuations of the shorelines of the
seas, large lakes, the drainage system. and with respect to segregated forms of
relief;
POI OMGAL [SE ONLY

The discovery of peculiarities of the object in accordance with the usimnnt;
Photographing the observation areas by an on-board manml camera;
Plotting the object on the nap, schematic or S? in the flight log;

Recording of the observation and survey results (filling in the corresponding
titles) and asking drawings when necessary;

Reporting to the Flight Control Center tout work performed, consultation with
specialists who set up the experiments;

Additional study or photographing of the object upon receiving new reco-endations
from the specialists.

Let us discuss some of the exaqales of visual observations of the earth's surface
fron on-board the "Salyut-6" station. liere an important role has been attached to
studying various geological objects. The performed experiments demnstrated that
even by the naked eye numerous faults. folds, ring structures, volcanic system,
form of relief of different genesis, area of propagation of various types of
surface deposits are clearly observed. With respect to their scope and direction,
the geological problem which were solved by the crew can be divided into global.

regional and local. The operative observations of certain geological phenomena
made to a special group.

The global problem included, for example. the problem connected with determining
the significance of ring structures in the earth's crust. Such structures were
already known to geologists of the last century, but the developsent of cosm-
geological methods has attracted special attention to them. Therefore the mission
was stated to observe the known structures and discover new ones. As a result of
the studies. broad material was gathered on the possibilities of orbital study of
ring formations. From an altitude of about 350 km individual unique ring struc.5
tures such as Rishat in Mauritania. the El-Uveynat group in the Eastern Sahara,
Konder in the USSR Far East are especially clearly visible. However. the nuiaer
of such exceptionally clearly segregated ring structures of exceptionally regular
shape is cowaratively smll. Hush more frequently sections with concentric
structure of the hydrogeological network, nomtain ridges and other form of relief,
rock nassifs of circular and oval shape are observed from orbit. Such structures
are noted in large number, in particular, in the momtainous southern part of the
USSR where their role in the structure of the earth's crust has still been far
from completely established.

For sxbsequcnt orbital flidits the goal can be stated of fixing all the observed
large ring structures, giving a brief description of then. The result of such
work (contained with deciphering the SP) can become a nap of ring formations of
the earth‘s surface, the scientific and practical significance of which is diffi-
cult to overestimate.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

C37 [le IE'

Figure 1. Diagram of deciphering the geological structure of

the northern part of the Red Sea Rift by a space photograph
taken by the KATE-160 camera from the "Salyut-6" DOS [pernanent

orbital station]: 1 -- regional faults along the outlines of a
rift basin; 2 -- other dislocations with a break in continu-
ity; 3 - tectonic scarps along the faults; lo -- halfarches
along the outline of a rift valley (the arms of the rift);

5 -- horsts inside the rift system; 6 -- volcanic plateaus

made up of Quaternary basalts; 7 - depressions nade up of
Quaternary deposit; 8 -- volcanoes; 9 -- caldera; lO -- tectonic-
plutonic ring structures;ll -- structural lines corresponding

to bedding; 12 - sections covered with clouds

Red Sea

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another goal of global order was connected with studying the largest faults in
the earth's crust. The Yuzhno-Atlasskiy, clavnyy Karatauskiy and many other
faults extending hundreds and even a few thousands of kilometers were clearly
visible from orbit. For exasple, the fault zone along the Hinlayas was traced
for almost 2000 km. Since such tectonic lines were observed in very high relief,
an entirely defined mission has been planned with respect to discovering the
principal faults of the earth. Such lines have been shown by different
researchers for from madaigmusly. Visual-instrument observations contained
with interpretation of SP can provide the basis for making a more precisely
defined map of the chief faults of the earth's crust. ﬂaking such map will pro-
mte the solution of a nunber of problem of geotectonics and more precise
definition of the concepts of the seisnogenic structures of the earth.

The regional problem of orbital pological observations are highly varied and
consist in fixing various geological structures within the limits of a defined
region and discovering the specific problems of the geological structure. For
exanple, an orbital study was made of the Red Sea rift system to discover the role
of trmsform faults in its structure and to discover other structural peculiarities
(see Figure 1). Visual observations were accompanied by purposeful photography
using stationary and hand cameras. The materials obtained demnstrate that
genuine transform faults that clearly conpletely intersect the entire Red Sea rift
as shown on some tectonic schemes are not detected here. At the same time. numer-
ous transverse fractures and secondary dislocations with a break in continuity
are obvious in the Red Sea mountains and Khidzhaze. 0n the northern end of the
rift system. the trmsverse Hedi-Arabs graben is noted, the fault boundaries of
which are clearly visible on prospective photographs of this region, although they
usually do not show up on geological naps.

Large faults which form the bomdaries of the rift basin are especially clearly
distinguishable. They are emhasized by straight or zoniculﬂn' scarps nming alone
the coasts. On the Arabian side a basalt plateau is distinguished with rows of
well expressed volcanic Syswmvthe high degree of preservation of which indicates

recent, possibly Late Pleistocene or even Holocene age of the volcanic eruptions.
It is remarkable that the basalt fields as a whole extend in the direction coin-

ciding with orientation of the Red Sea rift. Therefore from the geodynanic

points of view not only the rift basin. but the entire Red Sea system as a

whole must be considered as a broad region of crustal tension with creviced rifts
and additional jointing with volcanic systems spread over then.

The regional problems were connected with studying the structural pattern of the
dislocations with a break in continuity or folded form. A characteristic fracture
pattern was observed, for exanple. in the southern part 0-” the Patagonean Andes
where the system of fjords in the form of rectilinear segments forms a couple:
network. The dislocations with a break in continuity and fracture zones are
emphasized here as a result of activity of the ancient glacial cover. The reticular
pattern of the faults is especiallv characteristic of regions of widespread mag-
matic or metamorphic rock, in sections with relatively shallow occurrence of

the consolidated base. The discovery of such sections is important to the solu-
tion of many regional tectonic problems.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFHOAL USE ONLY

The problem of orbital geological observations of local order are connected with
the solution of specific problem of discovering certain geological structures.
including those that play an ilportnt role in the location of ore regions md
zones of oil and gas accmulation. In particular. this pertains to individual
ring structures which are noted when deciphering the SF. The study of then by
traditional methods encounters great difficulties. Observation experience shows
that here it is efficient to state missions to study ring structures no less
than a few tens of kiloseters in disaster.

Examples of such problem of local order which are accessible to study fro. orbit
include the following:

Tracing individual large faults in sections where they are masked by surface

deposits. for exasple. the northwestern continuation of the Glavnyy Karatsuskiy
or Dzhslair-Naynanskiy faults in Kazakhstan:

Confimtion of the possibilities of visual segregation and determination of the
structural peculiarities of large arched uplifts (for eunple. the Astrakhan and
Severo-Buzachinskiy arches in the Cupian region):

Discovery and fixing of dislocations with a break in continuity of defined rank
within the liaits of a given region;

Discovery of fragmnts of the ancient drainage systen. for example. a
regions prospective for finding placers;

Confirmation of individual local structures segregated on the basis of deciphering
SP and which are favorable for planning oil and gas exploration.

Operative geological observations from space offer the possibility of tracing the
processes of an elemental nature, for example, volcanic activity. Volcanoes are
sharply distinguished along other mountain structures from orbit. The crew
observed such large volcanoes as Aetna. Fujiana, Klyuchevsksya Sopka. ancient
volcanic structures of the type of the Eni-Kmi caldera 0f the Central Sahara
(Figure 2) and ssny others my tines. The visual observation progras of the crew
included following the state of all the volcanoes of Ksnchatka and the Kuril
Islands. During the work period of the cosnonsuts in orbit, no shows of volcanic
activity were noted. which agrees with the ground data. At the sane tine eruptions
of an explosive nature were recorded at Aetns and an entire series of volcanoes

in Central and South Anrica. Gas and ash plumes were noted at the volcmic peaks,
gas flames were noted above the craters and traces of fresh discharges were seen
at the feet of the volcanoes.

A simificant role in the flight program was given to observations of the snow
cover. mountain glaciers. and the ice situation at sea. A survey of these studies
is presented in reference [10].

.1'he geographic peculiarities of the natural environment and results of anthropogenic
activity were periodically traced from on board the station. Hence we have

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observations of the sharpness of the limits of propagation of vegetation, wind
and sand flows, water percolation out of canals, atmospheric and sea water pollu-
tion. and fires. Especially serious forest fires were noted in Australia.

Studying wind and sand movementsxhe crew established that the most favorable con-
ditions for observing such phenomena exist when the am is low above the horizon.
The dimensions of wind and sand movements. their color and structure, the direction
of transport of the dust were noted. The crew gave attention to the characteristic
striated pattern of the lmdscape in the vicinity of Lake Eyre in Amtralia. in

the southern part of Angola and near Lake Chad in Africa. This pattern wu formed
by alternating strips of stabilized sands. lakes and elongated solonchaks.

Analogs of this pattern can be seen near the Volga River delta. The origin of such
relief has still not been exactly established. Future orbital studies can provide
data for solving this problem.

The cosmonauts observed the Nasca plateau in South American near the Pacific coast
many times. No traces of so-cslled extraterrestrial civilization were detected

from orbital altitude here. To counterbalance this. the cosmonauts saw the Pyramids
quite clearly in the vicinity of Cairo.

Observing the ocean. the cosmnsuts turned attention to the fact that as a rule,

the currents are distinguished by color from the color of the water surface
surrounding then. A series of color photographs obtained after short, approximately
equal time intervals offer the possibility of estimating the space-time variability
of the water masses. The ocean currents and eddies were observed by the

crew in close connection with the meteorological situation. The cosmonauts noted
the interrelation of the hydrographic map with clouds many times. This was
especially clearly obvious at points of appearance of mesoscale eddies which serve
as one of the basic nehanism of heat transfer.

The experience in purposeful visual-instrument observations Indus by the cos-manta
in close contact with specialists in different earth sciences gave results which
serve as the basis for statement of a broad cmlex of experiments to study the
lithosphere. hydrosphere and atmosphere of our planet from space.

PHOTO CAPTION

l. p 12. The Emi-Kusi shield volcmo in the Tibesti antains in the Central
Sahara. The caldera with a white spot, the incrustations on the
bottom of the crater where fumarole activity was manifested'ds
clearly distinguishable. In appearance, this volcanic structure is
very similar to Mount Olymus on liars. which indicates the possibility
of using the materials from orbital observations for comparative
planetology.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

So

6.

8.

9.

10.

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPH!

Beregovoy, G. ‘l'., at al.. ISSLEDOVAIIIYA rumm SR3!!! s nmmurmm
ORBITAL'm STARTS“ [Studiea of the Natural Environ-eat fro- Manned

Orbital Stationa]. Leningrad, Gidraaeteoizdat, 1972. 399 papa.

Deainov. L. V. and Koalov. V. V.. ”Viaual Observation of the Natural. Environ-
Iant fro- the 'Salyut-S' Orbital Station." PRIRODA [Nature], In 12, 1977,
pp 56-61.

Koval'. A. D. and Uapenakiy. c. 11.. loans - CEBWVEKU [Space for Han].
Moacov, Haahinoatroyeniye. 1976, p 200.

Nikolayev, A. c. and Popovich. P. IL, "ﬂow Dona the Earth book fraa Outer
Space?" PRIIIODA, No l. 1963. pp 1-10.

Ruraviahnikov. N. 10., "Role of the Coanonaut in Scientific hperinanta in
Space." PRIRODA, No 10, 1977, pp 137-1101.

Sevaat'ymov, V. I. , "Scientific and Technical Bxperinenta on Board 'Soyua-9'."
VBSTNIK AN SSSR [News of the USSR Acadeny of Sciencea]. No 11. 1970,
pp 31-39.

Khrmov. Ye. V., Obaervationa from Orbit," AVIATSIYA I ROSEMAVTKA
[Aviation and Coeaonautica], No 8, 1971. pp 38—39.

Kurdinavakiy, 0. Yu. , "A Progran of Scientific Experiments to Study the
Earth'a Resources Uaing the 'Skylab' Manned Orbital Station," 12V. VUZOV.
GEOLOGIYA l. RAZVEDKA [Neva of the Inatitutiona of Higher Learning.
Geology and Exploration], No 2, 1976, pp 131-133.

El-Baz. F., "Aatronaut Observation from the Apollo-Soyuz Hiaaion,"
SHITllSONIAN SWO. AIR AND SPACE, V01 IX, No 1. 1977, p 400.

Deainov. L. V., Noaenko. G. A., Grechko. G. H., Ivanchenkov. A. S. and
Kotlyakov. V. H., "Glaciological Studies and Raped-eats on Board the
'Salyut-G' Orbital Station," ISSLED. 23111.1 12 KOSWSA [Studies of the Earth
from Space]. No 1, 19”. pp 25-36.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". "Iaaledovaniye Zenli i: koamaa", 1982

1086 5

C50:

1866/k8

9O
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\-

UDC 542.65:629.786.2

'KHAIDM' TECHNOLOGICAL EXPERIMENT IN WING CRYSTALS (F SDIICONWC‘I‘IM mamas
AND 'IHI‘I‘A‘I‘OR' EXPERIIIENT FOR WORM MEMWRE PROFILES OP 'KRIS’I'ALL' FURNACE
w 'SALYU'P-G' ORBITAL STATIGI

Moscow KOSMICHESKIYE ISSLEDOVANIYA in Russian Vol 20. No 2. Mar—Apr 82 (manuscript
received 24 Dec 81) pp 310-312

[Article by VA]. Gorbatko, LA. Il'in. I.P. Kazakov. A.V. Korovin. L.I. Popov, v.v.
Ryumin, 5.P. Tikhomirova, V.N. Truzhenikov. H.B. Shcherbina-Samoylova. Newen van
Vyong, Nguyen Van Sung. Nguyen Tkhan' Ngi. Nguyen Khong Khuyen, ram Tuan, Chan Suan
Khoay, V. Aykhler, Kh. Zyusmann, Kh. Kvaas. R. Kul'. Kh. banger, S. Langkhalner and
K. Shtekker]

[Text] Six technological experiments in growing crystals of semiconducting com-
pounds in "Itristall" and "Splav-Ol" units and two 'Imitator" experiments in measur-
ing the temperature fields in a "Kristen" unit were developed and conducted in ac-
cordance with the "Khalog" and "Imitator' programs, with the participation of USSR
and SW [Socialist Republic of Vietnam] specia1ists ("lOIalong—l, -4. -5, -6" exper-
iments) and USSR. SW and 603 specialists ('Khalong-Z, -3" and 'hitator-l. -2").

l. The subject of the "Khalong-l, -2, -3" experiments was the production of semi-
conducting ccnpounds. by the directed crystallization method, in a "Kristen" unit.
The solid solution BizTe2.-,Seo.3 was investigated in "IOulong-l." the solid solution
BiSbTe; in "Malong-Z" and the solid solution Bio_55b1.5’l‘e3 in "Khalong-J.” The
"Khalong-d. -5“ experiments were also conducted with the 'Kristall" unit and con-
cerned the growing of semiconducting GaP crystals from a melt bath by the moving
solvent method (MDR) (the "Khalong-Q" experiment) and ‘he growing of GaP crystals
alloyed with zinc and oxygen from a melt bath (by the MDR method). In the
"Khalong-G" experiment. which was conducted with a "Splav-Ol" unit. PbTe and
BizTcZJSeoJ crystals, with an excess of tellurium, were grown in two separate am-
pules in a single capsule.

The "lmitator-l" experiment involved measuring the axial temperature fields of the
"Kristen" furnace by the method of shaped, meltable wires with different melting
temperatures, for given control panel modes. In the 'Imitator—Z' experiment, the
"Kristall" furnace's temperature profiles were measured in both steady-state and dy-
namic modes, using 10 Ni-CrNi microthernocouples in a shell; the microthermocouples
were firmly attached at different points in a simulating ampule place in a contain-
er. The themelectromotive forces were measured with the help of a special elec-
tronic digital voltmeter.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§EZONLV

L‘c T.'c
1:00 lWWﬂ
”a ’00
570
it”
, 4W0
cow
2 200 a
m 3 a
g ’ 50 [M I” Lam
g ' Figure 2. Steady-state temperature pro-
,” 'aa ’57 I“":~' files of ”Kristall” furnace obtained in
'lmitator-Z“ (fine curve) and
Figure l. Steady-state axial tempera- ‘Imitator-l“ experiments for T: s
ture profiles of “Kristall” furnace = 1,100‘C (circles) and Tz - 900°C
obtained in “Imitator-Z" experiment. (squares). The location of the con-
The location of the container is indi- tainer is indicated in the figure. The
cated in the figure. The plunger is plunger is to the right.

to the right. Circles - average val-
ues of two measurement cycles made on 2. The purpose of the experiments in grow-
28 July 1980; triangles - values ob- ing crystals of semiconducting compounds of
tained in experiment on 17 September as? and PbTe and solid solutions of BizTe3-
1980; the temperature. as set on the BiZSe3 and BizTea-szTe3 under conditions
control panel, was: 1. 1,100°C; 2. of microgravitation was to study the pro-
900‘C; 3. BOO‘C; 4. 600'C: S. 400‘C. cess of crystallization of these binary and
ternary semiconducting systems under space
conditions and to determine the effect of the crystallization and the thermal-mass—
transfer conditions on the growth kinetics, impurity segregation and physicochemical
properties of the materials that were obtained.

3. The Ca? and PbTe semiconducting compounds and the BizTe3-Bizse3 and BizTe3-Sb21e3
solid solutions were selected on the basis of the following considerations:

a) these materials have been studied quite thoroughly on Earth and it is known that
their many electrophysical properties are extremely structurally sensitive and de-
pend on the growth conditions;

h) these materials are used extensively in electronics technology and instrument
building. and the improvement of their properties would be of great practical value:
c) the technological parameters of the processes involved in growing these crystals
correspond to the operating characteristics of the "Kristall' and “Splav-Ol' units.

4. All the experiments in the planned program were conducted, according to the staff
cyclograms. in July-September 1980. As far as the technological ampules delivered
from Earth were concerned. the cosmonauts discovered no mechanical damage and no un-
foreseen shifts in the locations of the crystals inside them, which indicates the
suitability of the ampules‘ design and production process for similar types of ex-
periments with substances that undergo a considerable increase in volun. when melt—
ed.

Morphological investigations were conducted for all the samples that were obtained.
The results of the "Imitator-l. —2' experiments have been processed. Figure l

92

FOR OFF1CJAI.USE‘0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JvPiVLs th 'Kristall“ furnace's steady-state temperature profiles that were ob-
Lainvd during the 'Imitator-Z' experiment. In Figure 2, for the purpose of compari-

son, we show the average values of the steady-state temperature profiles obtained in
the "Imitator-Z' experiment and the values obtained in the "Imitator-l" experiment.

The structural and electrophysical properties of the materials that were obtained
are being investigated at the present time. The results that have already been ob-
tained enable us to reach some conclusions about the special features of the crys-
tallization process in space and their effect on the quality of the crystals pro-
duced, as well as the feasibility of conducting further, analogous erperiments in

space.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Kosmicheskiye issledovaniya‘. 1982

11746
C502 1866/86

93

FOI:OFIWCJAl.lEﬂi(NVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLV

UDC 528:629.195
ORBITAL METHODS IN SPACE GEODESY

Moscow ORBITAL'NYYE HBTODY KOSHICHESKOY GEODEZII in Russian 1981 (signed to press
12 Aug 81) PP 2, 255-256

[Annotation and table of contents from monograph "Orbital Methods in Space Geodesy",
by Hikhail Sergeyevich Urmayev, Izdatel'stvo "Nedra". 2250 copies, 256 pages]

[Text] Annotation. The monograph deals with the problems involved in the use of
orbital methods in determining the coordinates of artificial earth satellite ob-
servation stations and also in the coordinate-time tie-in of the results of space
surveys of the earth's surface. The monograph gives the reading systems, necessary
information from the theory of motion of artificial earth satellites, methods for
computing the matrices of iaochronal derivatives and problems in the numerical in-
tegration of the differential equations of artificial earth satellite motion in
application to space geodesy. The book is intended for scientific specialists and
engineers in the field of geodesy, geophysics. practical astronomy and geology who
in their activities must use orbital measurements for determining orbits and coor-
dinates of stations. It was written with the intent of use as a study aid for stu-
dents in advanced courses at geodetic colleges and universities studying space
geodesy. Tables 11. figures 19, references 76.

Contents

Fbreuordoosessaoooeoooosaoaosssasoseoooooossssssssssoosoasoasseosssosaoseossse‘si 3

Introduction...oasassosoa-sasssseaseasoseoooessossosoosooesaoooeaassseassesses... 6

Chapter 1. Fundamental Principles of Use of Orbital Methods in Space Geodesy.... 9
'1. Read1ns systm. constants and unitﬂo....u...u...u........u..u.uou.- 9
’2. Fundamental equation of orbital mthodgo-oooossaassessooaoassaoooo-ooasoos 19
'3. Linearization of fundamental equation..................................... 22
'4. correction equtionBOODIOOOIOOOOOCOOOUOCOOOOOIOODOOOOIOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOO... 25
IS. Newtonian iteration process and minimization of sum of squares of correc-

tions to maQUrennt resultBOOOODOOIOOOOOOOII...QOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOCOOOOOI 29
I6. Considerations on setting measurement weights............................. 31
I7. Convergence of iterations in Newton method................................ 36
#8. Sequence for processing measurements in determination of coordinates of

Stations by orbital methods”........................................... 38

96

FIHICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Elements of Theory of Two-Body Problem.............................

'9'
l10.
I11.
'12.
'13.

I16.
I15.
016.

'17.

Acceleration in generalized curvilinear coordinates.....................
Integration of differential equations of unperturbed motion.............
Determination of coordinates and velocity corponents of artificial earth
satellites for arbitrary time t on basis of stipulated orbital ele-
ments and initial epoch to (direct problem of unperturbed motion).....
Determination of orbital elements on basis of coordinates and velocity
component (inverse problem of unperturbed motion).....................
Integration of differential equations of unperturbed motion in form of
expansions of coordinates in powers of time...........................
Different1.1 for.ula‘ of two-body problel..oco...............o..........
orbital Vator elmnt’IOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIODOOOIDIOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOO.
Method for computation of matrix elements of derivatives of coordinates
and velocity components of orbital elements based on use of vector

elemntsooamosesseoooeeessooveoeeeoseesooo'oseeooeooeosasmoaleooooooeo

Transformation of coordinates and velocity components with change from
inertial coordinate system to Greenwich system and vice versa.........

Chapter 3. Models of Perturbed Motion of Artificial Earth Satellites..........

'18.
'19.
'20.

'21.
522.

Model of perturbed motion in inertial rectangular coordinates...........
Models of perturbed motion in osculating e1ements......................
First-order secular perturbations in orbital elements caused by earth's
flatteninSOIOO0.00000...OIO..-IODOC...OO00......OGDOOOOOIOOOOOIOQOOO.
Linearized models of perturbed motion. Encke method....................
Intermediate orbit based on solution of problem of two fixed centers.
Ye. P. Abenov nthod...00....OO..C..I..O......l.CDUOUI...0.0.0.0....

Chapter 6. Matrizant and Methods for Its Computation..........................

'23.
'24.
025.
'26.
'27.

028.
'29.

930.
'31.

Matrizant and general solution for homogeneous linearized models.......
Solution in the case of an inhomogeneous linearized model..............
Principal properties of matrizant....................................c.
Representation of matrizant in form of multiplicative integral.........
Precise analytical methods for computing matrizant. De Bellis and

Escobal algorithm.Ineeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeseeeel
Computation of matrizant in case of inhomogeneous linearized model.

v. "Q hula .ethodl00....O...-OOOIOIVOOOOCOIIOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOQOOQ
Computation of matrix of coefficients of vector of corrections of

initial conditions for artificial earth satellite motion.............
Approximate analytical methods for computing matrizant.................
Numerical ”thoda for computing mtrlzant...u..............o..........

Chapter 5. Numerical Methods for Integrating Differential Equations of

I32.
333.

'34.
I35.

I36.
I37.

Artificial Earth Satellite Hotion........o....-.......a.........
Runse-Kutta mti'odolt.00.00.0000...-0.00.0000...OOOOOOOOOIIIIOODOIOOIOI
Algorithm for numerical integration of equations of motion of

artificial earth .‘cellite by Range-Kat‘s .‘thodmmmmes00.006.00.00...
Ada” “chadOCOOOO0.....I.0.0.0....O..00...0.0.00.0..00IOOCOOIOCOCOOOO.
Successive approximations method.......................................
Use of numerical integration methods for linearized models of motion...
Interpolation of coordinates and velocity components of artificial

earth satellite at times tv of orbital measurements..................

95

ltll(lﬂﬂC1A1.USl(lNLY

63
63
50

60
63

51.
69
77

84
87

90
92
109

116
119

125

132

133
136
139
161

162
153
157

160
161

166
168

171
175
183
186

189
INJI‘OF‘TCJAL USEZCNNLX

'38. Conclusions and recommendations on numerical integration of differen-

tial

equations of motion of artificial earth satellite................

'39. New methods for numerical integration of differential equations of
motion of artificial earth satellite..................................

Chapter 6.

'40.
061.

962.
9‘3.
#66.
:45.
'46.
067.

'68.

Chapter 7.

049.
I50.
051.
#52.

Orbital Method for Coordinate-Time Tie-In of Results of Space

Surveys of the Earth and Moon....................................

Fundamental equation of space photogrmmmetry............................

Model of motion of coordinate system of space photograph relative to
center of mass of space vehicle.......................................

Parameters of orientation of coordinate system of photograph in initial
coordinate system. Kinematic equations................................

Determination of orientation of "star" photograph in inertial coordinate

systnsoooassosssosoeosoossssossassssossossosssssooooaosssssosssoooosm

Determination of Nb operator in relative orientation of coordinate
systems of topographic and star cameras...............................

Preliminary determination of orbit of artificial planetary satellite
from space phonographs when initial points are present on photographs.

Differential reanement of orbit of artificial planetary satellite using

space photographs...o..oo...uuooo...-oo.......sn..........uo....oa
Accuracy in determining orbits from orienting angles of space survey
base...0000000000I.0...I...OODOOOOO'IOO0.000.000.0000.0.00.00.00.00...

Features of use of orbital method in coordinate-time tie-in of space

SurVst of ”on...asssososssssosooossesooosaassessessossssssssoooseoos

Makeup of Measurements in Orbital Methods and Observability

Problmoosaeaessoaoosssosassalsooasssaseossssssoaossooossssesssao

Measured position and velocity functions................................
Linearisation of position and velocity functions........................
observabilitycoOO.9.00to...OOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOO00....COOOOOOQOOOOOOOOO

Some considerations on planning of studies on determination of planetary

coordinate Points by orbital nethod....n.u”on...o.........o.......

Bibliography-aosoosssseeossseasassossssaossosssasassossosasassoossssooooossooss

Subject indeXsooesossssossosoeoeolssssossoossaomascomes.ooooooosaosassooeosaeos

COPYRIGHT:
5303
080: 1866/57

lzdatel’stvo "Nedra", 1981

96

FKIICMHHCJAl.lEIE(M§LY

191
192
200
202
205
207
209
217
219
223
231
235
280
261
243
245
259
251

256