FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10114
12 November 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 59/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(2000 59/81)

CONTENTS

mum M033
UNITED ICING]!!!

UK Journalist: Heat Huet Maintain Balance of Force:
(”180 mi; THE W, 5 "0' 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIQO...

mmc

FWWCOFGM

Hatthoefer Optimistic on Effects of 1982 Financial Policy
(“8 mthoefer; mm, at 81) oo-‘eooeeooooooooooeooooo....

SPAIN

1982 Budget to Result in Higher Deficit, Inflation
(cho 16, 12 wt 81) .0............CCOOOOOIOOOOOOIOIOOOIOOI

P01111011.
FEDERAL PINBLIC 0? GM

Biedenkopf, Geissler Bepouec New cw Ostpolitik
(Werner P. D'hein, Due Zinner; STERN, 15 Oct 81) ............

ITALY

Reactions ir. PSI Against Crexi ' a 'Dictatorial' Hethode
(P‘lippo ceccuellig Pmmw, 10 Aug 81) eooooooeo-oeoeoooe.
mu “NM i“ "SN ONIN

THEATER FORCE UNITED mom

UK JWRNALIST: REST MUST MAINTAIN BALANCE OF FORCES
P11051257 London THE TM in English 5 Nov 81 p 10
[Report by Arigo Levi: "A Personal View"]

[Text] Europe's peace narches and supporters of nuclear disarmnt would be

more credible and convincing if they sinultaneously preached the strengthening
of NATO's conventional forces.

General Rogers, the suprene allied contender in urope, once defined the present
NATO strategy as a "delayed tripw'ire strategy." Theoretically NATO has had, for
a number of years, a strategy of "flexible response."

This would require NATO to be able (and to be seen to be able) to answer a Soviet
attack at any level. But we actually lack that capability due to my weaknesses
in reserves, manpower, amnition as well as to the fading of our former qualitative
superiority.

Today, NATO would hardly be able to resist a "second echelon" conventional attack
without having to employ sane tactical nuclear weapons.

At present the Soviet Union enjoys superiority in the field of theatre nuclear
weapons. That should, however, be taken care of either by the construction and
deployment of NATO's new TN? weapons, the cruise and Pershing 2 missiles, or by

a successful negotiation reducing, pwsibly even to zero level, Soviet and Western
werns of that kind.

T. believe that, in spite of the efforts of the ppm-:- mnrchers and unilateralists
(if their views were to prevail, the-r».- euclzf be no chance of cancelling Soviet
superiority), the key countries in Europewltaly, Germany and Britain-will not
abandon their plans to acquire the new weapons. By so doing, they will create

the necessary precondition for a serious attempt. to bring under control these
terrifying weapons.

But even if that happens, there would remain a dangerous imbalance, to the West‘s

disadvantage, on the central front. Indeed, NATO'a inferiority would because even
more glaring once the problem of TN? were out of the way.

FOR omcnu. use out:
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We know everything about NATO's "conventional" inferiority. To compensate for
that we have always counted upon our relati.“ . superiority in tactical nuclear
weapons, as well as in the global strategic power relation. Re have now lost that
superiority.

The new "Euronissiles" would have represented, as a matter of fact, "an additional
American strategic option against the Soviet Union, on top of America's strategic
triad." I quote from Gregory Treverton's recent ADMI paper on "Nuclear weapons
in Europe."

It nay still be worth doing without them, in order to eliminate or reduce the
nunber of Soviet SSZOs; but America' s possibly temporary relative inferiority
in strategic weapons would then be more emifeet to all.

But even in the field of tactical nuclear weapons, as shown by the above quoted
paper, the modernization of Soviet shorter-range nuclear weapons (tactical
missiles, nuclear-capable fighters and mediun baabers), has counterbalanced NATO's
for-er superiority.

In Gregory Treverton's conclusion, this new situation "nay give rise to the
possibility that NATO would either be deterred from using (tactical) nuclear
weapons in a losing conventional conflict, or that NATO's existing nuclear delivery
systems would be destroyed before they could be used."

Another quite new ADELPBI paper by Desmond Ball (a piece of superb research,
with the title: "Can Nuclear war Be Controlled7"), shows convincingly that it
is not reasonable to expect that control can be kept and that all-out nuclear
war can be prevented, once strategic weapons are used (except, perhaps, for
"small, carefully conducted attacks" for demonstration purposes).

But even the use of tactical weapons on Europe's central front, which would
produce fatalities ranging fra two to one hundred million, would give rise to
an almost uncontrollable and unthinkable situation.

In such circumstances, NATO's present "delayed tripwire strategy" may come to
lack the minimal necessary credibility.

So, even if it ransins true, as "military balance" of the institute of strategic
studies keeps on saying year after year, that "the overall East-"est balance in
Europe is still such as to make military aggression appear unattractive" since
"the consequences for an attacker would be incalculsble" the awareness that a
relative imbalance exists could have dramatic psychological and political conse-
quences at the time of a confrontation between East and Rest.

This could increase the ever-existing danger of s miscalculation leading to

nuclear war. In conclusion: If a certain degree of control must be kept on
nuclear weapons, so as not to foreclose the chance for future generations to achieve
disarmament, we must maintain a clear, undeniable balance of forces in all fields,
starting with conventional forces. This is the only rational though costly answer
to the present upsurge of nuclear fears in Western Europe.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981
cso: 3120/12

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NI.\'

ECOMHIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Hmaom OPTMS‘I'IC 0]! EFFECTS OF 1982 mm. POLICY

llalburg CAPITAL in German Oct 81 pp 12-13
[Interview with no Minister of Finance Bans Hatthoefer: "Change in Etchange Rate"]

[Text] In the opinion of Minister of Finance Hatthoefer,

the Germn mark is showing new strength thanks to increased
exports and future investmts. It presmts an opportunity
for the Gernan Bundesbsnk to consider a reduction in interest

fit“.

CAPITAL: Herr Hatthoefer', your tanned face seena to be an indication that the
ninister of finance survived the dispute about austerity measures for the 1982
budget without any apparent wear and tear.

Hatthoet'er: Nobody wanted to believe me what I predicted that in the end the coali-
tion government would emerge united iron the discussion, although one interesting
round is still to come when the Bundearat will have its say.

CAPITAL: Apparently there is little danger that the Union states will force you
to accept an employment program in the Bundesnt, something which you denied your
own party.

Hatthoefer: That is not quite correct. After all, we not only saved mney, but
we also created tax incentives within a franework which permits additional sedim-
tern investments that may go as high as 2-hillion digit figures.

CAPITAL: But it is not an emolumu program that will he financed through tax
increases, smething that was also delanded by the cabinet.

Hatthoefer: All my life I have taken pains to avoid word fetishisn. Nevertheless,
it is irrefutable that the fiscal policy of the. Federal Government will contain
employment impulses. They will be inherent in the 1982 budget and the laws which
accompany ‘.t.

CAPITAL: It is a conservative fiscal policy. bearing the nark of the Social
Demcrst’r Per: "attlnefer.

Matthoe-im: '15 that it. the way you want to put it, it is all right with me. I am
cont inuousiy asking myself the question: Whatever you are doing, is it sensible?

'4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPITAL: In your opinion. what is sensible?

Matthoefer: The current economic situation must be taken into consideration and
the realization that'employment cannot be guaranteed solely and exclusively through
fiscal and budgetary policies. Other elements, particularly interest rate policies,
play a much more decisive role than use the case even a few years ago.

CAPITAL: According to one of your old and frequently repeated sayings, a reduction
in the interest rate is the best economic progrem....

Hstthoefer: ...which makes sense. Investment decisions are certainly affected by
interest rates, and it makes a difference whether they are 15 or 6 percent.

CAPITAL: And at the present time you cannot offer a more favorable alternative to
the lé-percent rate.

Hatthoefer: Right, the decisive disturbing factor is the deficit in our balance of
payments. He have to keep our interest rates high to prevent the outflow of capital
to foreign countries on top of foreign-exchange payments for our balence-of-payments
deficit....

CAPITAL: ...which happened in the past and contributed to the strong decline in the
value of the German mark....

Matthoefer: ...snd we have to keep our interest rates high to attract foreign
capital to Germany to coepensate for the outflow of foreign exchange and remain
competitive with high American interest rates. It is working right now. If, more-
over, the balance—of-payments deficit decreases-either because of an increase in
exports or a decrease in oil inports-the Bundesbank nay consider a reduction in
interest rates.

CAPITAL: But did you not forget soeethingt Paul Volcker. the president of the
American Federal Reserve Bank, just announced that the phase of high interest rates
in his country will have to continue for a while.

Hatthoefer: I admit that the high level of American interest rates is a problen
for us, but it is not the only one and not the most important one. There is a
slight indication that the German mark is beginning to regain strength; the German
mark is enjoying international confidence-the most recent influx of capital is
proof of it-vhich is occurring in spite of the fact that there is a difference of
approximately 5 percent in the interest rate, when compared to the United States.

CAPITAL: "hat are the reasons for this confidence?

Matthoefer: We all put in a lot of effort to put our house in order. The fact that
we are trying very hard to bring about price stability, although it is difficult for
us to avoid certain inflationary pressures because we import 30 percent of our
commodities and their prices have risen 20 percent, is one of the reasons.

CAPITAL: Another reason is the fact that the Ger-an nark is undervalued. As long
as the 6.8. interest rates are high, the dollar will be at a premium.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hatthoefer: It depends on many other inponderables, for instance. whether the
optinisn will last about the economic policy of the Reagan administration, whether
the Americans will actually be able to bring down their high rate of inflation.
effectively reduce maploynent and whether the United States will be able to Iain-
tain the surpluses in its balance of payouts.

CAPITAL: And if this is not the case?

Hatthoefer: I would have an inediate effect on the exchange rate of the German
nark. Because the consequence night be a reversal in the flow of capital.

CAPITAL: In other words, it would flow back to Germny.

Hatthoefer: Under certain conditions it would occur very rapidly, because a cur-
rency that is suspected of being revalued attracts the interest of international
investors.

CAPITAL: If that should be the case. the Ger-an mark would rise as quickly as
it fell.

Matthoefer: Nevertheless, we will have to sake sure that the German nark does not
rise too fast. The Americans, who are still leading in technology, have lower

wages and social expenditures. If the exchange rate of the dollar should drop
sharply, the combination—leading technology, low wages and an undervalued currency-
would under certain circumstances have disastrous effects on our exports.

CAPITAL: Is that not an exaggerated interpretation?

Hatthoefer: Nobody is able to predict the future. but one mat be prepared for
all eventualities.

CAPITAL: we have seen in the past that substantial dollar fluctuations within a
short period of time have disadvantageous effects on the world econony. In your
opinion, is there a possibility that the German mrk can be nade indepaident from a
volatile dollar.

Hatthoefer: He are using the opportunities that are available to us. The key word
is: Elinination of the balance-bf-paynents deficit. There is only one conponent
which we will not be able to influence- -'.he Aw." ‘- 1-- ‘WmMI-y and economic policy.
we have to leave fluctuations in crehmgc rat-:- 0-3 the wake”. Furthermore... the
note-issuing banks are in agreaent that they must prevent wild Junps in exchange
rates through intervention, and they are doing it. Nevertheless, we all are not
strong enough to apply the neans of intervention against any change in the exchange
rate. I do not even think that it is desirable, because it must be regulated by
the market.

CAPITAL: Looking at the matter realistically. where will the German mark be in
1982. considering the conditions you mentioned”

“ﬁnialuyd'er: A preliminary remark; i as one of the new people who predicted a
revaluation of the dollar during the 1979 World Currency Conference in Belgrade.
Because at that tine the dollar was undervalued.

5'
roe omcuu. use omx
um nm: 1 \I m;- "N! \

CAPITAL: Nov it is overvalued.

Hatthoefer: Yea. But it cannot be petunent that a currency can rise so high of. a
country that-is menacing an inflation rate which is up to 8 percent higher when
conpamd to the PRC. The foreign and the domestic value of the dollar are no
longer in agreenent. I predict a change in 1982.

CAPITAL: The Gemn uark will riae again.

Hetthoefer: I believe eo.

CAPITAL: Interest rataa will decline.

Hatthoefer: I hope no.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jehr A6 I: Go.

8991
C80: 3103/39

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC SPAIN

1982 BUDGET T0 RESULT IN HIGHER DEFICIT, INFLATION
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 12 Oct 81 p 67
[Article: "Stopgsp Budgets")

[Text] The government has now introduced to Parliament its propOsal for public
revenue and expenditures for 1982: a state budget vhich amounts to 3.5 billion
pesetas, and another 2.4 billion pssetaa for social security. In all, the expen-
diture amounts to nearly 6 billion peaetaa, which cannot be covered by taxes and
other revenue anticipated by the public treasury. hence the 1982 budget has come
into existence with a deficit of 698 million pesetss, although many experts agree
that the "red figures" may actually reach a billion peaetsa.

In submitting these voluminous accounts, the minister of finance, Jaime Garcia
Anoveros, stated: "These budgets are a reflection of the crisis being experienced
by the country on the one hand, and the government's economic policy and the agree-
ments reached with the social and political forces in the areas of employment,
sutononies, local corporations and industrial restructuring, on the other."

To seal gaps caused by the serious economic crisis and to respond to the labor,
autonomous and municipal consensus are the bases for this 6 billion pesetas that
will come out of the taxpayers' pockets next year, and the justification for a
high deficit. which is of particular concern to business owners and to the govern-
ment itself. "We would have liked to submit a lower deficit, but in order to do so
it would have been necessary to increase the tax pressure further, which does not
seen reasonable, or to fail to meet urgent needs caused by the crisis, which does
not see" possible either."

On the revenue side, the Finance Ministry has taken care not to increase the tax
pressure greatly (0.6 percent), indicating that Spaniards will pay only about 40
million resetas more in 1982 than this year, in taxes, and that the greatest reve-
nue will come from an improvement in tax administration. To encourage the taxpayer,
next year the exemptions for families will increase (2,000 peoetas more for wives
and children), and savings will be given an impetus.

The crisis herrs 9 large share in the item of expenses. To improve the coverage of
.v;-,yed, ;."':~ p‘e!ond in the Narion a] Accaxd on Employment (ANE) entails

184 nil.l on pesetas for the lhiﬂ (I5 parceut more Lhah this year). Another 35%

million pesetus will go to social security, to ease the burden of business firms

7
FOR urrzcm. car out:
and workers in their finances. The public enterprises will receive 186 million,
while 32.7 million will have to be allocated for the reconversion of sectors in
a state of crisis. The territorial entities will receive 19‘ million, and an

additional 161 million peaetas will be shared between town councils and chambers
of deputies.

The black area of the budget is still, for another year, the deficit, and its
financing in particular. That 698 million will be financed with a long-term public
debt- (127 million), a foreign debt (100 million), e short-term public debt (120
million) and a mere appeal to the Bank of Spain, which will give it the "litt1e
noney machine" to make up the remaining 350 million. This could increase inflation,

while at the sane time the public debt is a risk for the procurement of sufficient
financing on the part of business firms.

The Distribution of the Budgetary Pie (millions of pesetas)

Sections Personnel Investments Other Expenses Total
Salaries

Household of His
Majesty the King - - 255 255

General Cortes 2,312 - 1,583 3,895

Office of the
Controller of

Currency 209 5 25 239
Constitutional Court 283 37 12!. (old.
Council of State 175 5 32 212
Public Debt - - 132,696 132,496
Retirees 224,844 - 58,692 273,536
Judicial Branch

General Council 232 - 136 366
Presidency of the

Government 53,096 992 17,814 71,600
Foreign Affairs 7.221. m 9,700 17,698
Justice 30,506 10,783 17,959 59,268
Defense 207,520 123,911 77,851 409,282
Finance 23.393 688 14,030 38,111

Interior 135,033 19,886 11,363 166,682
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070029-9

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

Sections Personnel Investments
Salaries

Public Horks and Urban

Development 25,1062 53,880

Education 303,075 316

Labor, Health and

Social Security 30,437 2,210
_ Industry and Energy 3,120 1,137
‘ Agriculture and Fishing 10,219 3,010

Economy and Comerce 6,2310 4,761

Transportation, Tourism

and Communications 63,265 21,151

Culture 9,460 6,699

Territorial Administration 697 11

Ministerial Foreign Exchange

Expenses 65 ,818 3 ,038

Territorial Entities - -

Intertsrritorial Compensation

Fund - 89,616

Industrial Reconversion - -

Total 1,183,012 362,910

ﬂow the State Spends Our Honey

Item 1962 Budget

Personnel salaries 1,203,866

Assets 980,200

Lia3£lillrs 223,646

Goods and services 135,696

Defense 61,851

"i

Othe

2,:

1901 I
1,062
863
199
112

67

FOR 071nm“. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070029-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Item 1982 Budget 1981 Budget Increase (2)
Others ' 73,643 65,192 12.96
Interest 83,891 57 ,267 46 .49
Current transfers 1,247,756 877,240 42.23
Social security 358,499 216,870 65.30
Unemployment 174 ,400 100,000 74 .40
Territorial entities 167,353 135,760 23.27
Civil War pensions 48,693 24,382 99.70
Enterprises and OAC 184,913 136,902 35.06
Free education 72,454 57,299 26.44
PORPPA [Fund to Regulate Farm .

Products and Prices] 34,174 22,982 48.69
Others 207,270 183,045 9.39
Total current operations 2,670,987 2,109,588 26.61
Real investments 342,987 271,806 26.18
Capital transfers 486,652 392,689 21:24
Total capital operations 829,639 664,495 24.85
Various financial assets 19,288 18,594 3.73
Various financial liabilities 58,086 30,523 90.30
Total financial operations 77,374 49,117 57.52
Grand total * 3,578,000 2,823,200 26.73

* The 1982 Budget has increased in the estinata of expenses that had to be met owing
to the transfers of authority to the Basque Country.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Infornacion y Ravistss, S.A.

2909
080: 3110/24

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE OI'LY

POLITICAL mm REPUBLIC 0? GM

BIEDMOPF, GEISSLm 390033 m cm OSI'POLITK
Hanburg SIM in German 15 Oct 81 p 256
[Article by Homer P. D'hein and Uwe Ziuer: 'Fond Greetings to Hosoowﬂ

['1‘er Biedenkopf and Geissler are espousing a new cw oetpolitik,
but party chief Kohl is still hesitant.

(lateral Secretary Heiner Geissler and his predecessor bdlind the party teenager's
desk, Kurt Biedenkopf, have climbed aboard the one boat. The two proninmt Union
politicians, who once were rivals, have been putting their heads together and con-
qwiring bdiind the back of opposition leader Helm Kohl to get the cm loving
instead of waiting around for the SPD/F'IP alliance to collapse.

Geissler and Biedankopf went to kindle a discussion of subjects that have thus far
been taboo. Kohl's rival as the next candidate for the chancellorship, Xial's
Minister-Presidmt Gerhaid stoltenberg, intends to support the party's internal con—
frontation course; he gave aswances to this effect in a confidential meeting a
week ago Sunday. Berlin Govening Mayor Richard von Heissaecker is also in on it.
startled by the great response angmdered by the new peace novuant in the PM, this
self-proclaimed philosophical vsnguerd's first resolve is to lead the Union to a new
ostpolitik.

".eissler's longer-range perspective is this: We have a real chance with the voter
only if we can sell people on two things: The can can get along with the trade
unions and with the missions.II He and Biedmhopf worked together on a main lotion
-.‘or the upcoming cw Party Congress in Hanhm‘g ectpressing the come readiness I'for
'2 continuous exchange of ideas and information with the Soviet leadership." The
document, approved in the meantime by the party's executive oomittee, is not con-
tent with the Union's previous formula of 'ohservance of existing treaties"; in-
stead, it subscribes to "further concrete steps designed to improve and expand co-
operation in economic, sdmtific, technical and cultural spheres" with the Harsaw
i’act states. Says Biedenkopf: The Soviet Union must not rush "a black hole" to
the Union.

These new accents come at an inconvuiimt time for Kohl -- now on a trip to the
united states - because he wants to represent himself and the Union to Presidmt
“laugh as the only solidly loyal partner in the alliance. Kohl's entourage be-
Lluvus that advances Iade to Moscow just at this tine would have "to be perceived
by our American friends as a slap in the ﬁceﬂ

.I.
.4.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although Kohl does meet regularly with Eastem diplonats —- fro- East Berlin's
resident minister, Moldt, to Moscow's Ambassador Suyonov, with when Kohl spent

35 hours over dinner last week -— he leaves "no doubt, even with these gentlnm,
that a govermsmt headed by him" would stand "1111steg at the side of the United
States," according to a close Kohl associate.

President Reagan noted Kohl's vow of loyalty with satisfaction and appreciation, but
Aaerica's leaded-s intend to avoid any iapreeeion of moons-aging a change of govern-
ments in Bonn, let alone a Chancellor Kohl. The cm chief is an unknown quantity
for the Reagan adainistration. The qublicana in the white House are far acre fan-
iliar with leading cw politicians experienced in the ways of the United States --

people like walther Leisler Kim, Manfred Homer, Kurt Biedenkopf and Richard von
Heizaaecku‘.

A wed: ago Monday, when 90 Chairman Hilly Brandt had to wait for acne time in 0.8.

chiefly because the Union is making light of the peace aovenmt in the m, is in-
deed largely ignoring it.

The Americans would have to be even more sober in assesmg the results of an opin-
ion poll circulating secretly in Bonn. According to the dandy, only one out of three
CDU/CSU voters thinks it is better for the United states to have a greater defense
capability than the Soviets; 61 percent of Union voters favor immediate disarmth
negotiations with no attendant arse aodernization. One out of every three CDU mp-
porters would even forgo the modernization if negotiations should cone to a stand-
still, since "the west is strong enough as it is.‘ And 50 percmt favor depending
on the United States militarily but not socially.

that "we definitely also have interests in coll-on with the Soviet Union and the
other East European countries" (Biedenkopf). Says Geissler: I'It im't mough Just
to keg: on counting missiles and bolbs."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 8: 00.

71.58 "
cso: 3103/55

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I POLITICAL 1m!

REACTIONS IN PSI AGAINST CRAXI'S 'DICTAIORIAL' METHODS
Milan PAHORAHA In Italian 10 Aug 81 pp 32-34
[Article by rilippo Ceccsrelli: "Autocraxi"]

[Text] He decides, he does and undoes without listening to anyone, just like_an
absolute boss. But the despotic nethods of the PSI secretary, Bettino Craxi, are
beginning to provoke reactions. And not only within a small minority of the party.

"And I still represent it." For the fifth time in a row in less than 2 months.
Despite four failures.

For Bettino Craxi, for exactly 5 years the head of the PSI, the socialist jurist
Federico Mancini is the best possible candidate for the constitutional court. But
above all he is "his" candidate and therefore he cannot lose. He must not lose.
The treacherous allies of the government who promise their support and then do not
keep their word, they do not scare hin. Still, he is worried about the snipers
harbored by the PSI.

No socialist, none at all. at any level, can interfere in the matter. If the PSI,
now. were to change its mind and present another professor instead of Mancini, it
would simply be because Bettino has changed his. he alone.

These are Bettino Craxi's rules for the PSI. "Autocraxi," as someone has already
called it.

On the very same day, Thursday the 30th. a few hours before the 62 members of the
socialist leadership met, a raised eyebrow on the part of the secretary was enough
to cause the failure of a project which they had been talking about within the PSI
for years: the creation of an executive committee, a more flexible and smaller
executive body (at most 7 to 9 menbers) intended as the first step of the organiza-
tional restructuring of the party of the carnation. They wanted it to be 15. Too
many. And everything was blocked. So strong is Craxi: he has governed alone up
to now, he can continue very well this way.

That the leader of the Italian Socialists has a rough and authoritarian way of making
policies is certainly not a revelation. But the fact is that for some time his
political style has become even more radical. And within the PSI there are quite

a few, not only among the adversaries of the left, but also among the friends of

the inner majority (72 percent). who consider with some concern the current record

of the secretariat and who are stirring up grumbling and intolerance with the PSI,

13
I“)! OF?1C1AL.USE OhﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the center as well as on the periphery. Up to now, the Craxi style had only
brought advantages to the party. First of all, in the area of socialist leadership.
it had practically solved one of the most delicate problems of the PSI: political
indecision and slow progress. "There is no doubt." maintains Gennaro Acquaviva,

the head of Craxi's political secretariat, "today, the P81 is the party with the
greatest capacity for decision." More manageable than any other. with dissension
reduced to the minimum.

Furthermore, it is Craxi who decides the electoral line, supervises the lists of
candidates. resolves the delicate local situations. It is Craxi who writes and has
others write in AYANTI, who decides whether to respond and how to respond to the
other parties. It is Craxi who chooses the dates. prepares the Palermo congress
and who officiates. Furthermore. it is Craxi who alone sees to international
contacts, Craxi who intends to change for the nth time the symbol of the PSI (the
hammer and sickle, which are already hidden. would completely disappear).

After the Palermo plebicite, with his direct investiture as secretary by almost
three fourths of the delegates, and especially after having led the PSI to success
in the recent administrative elections, Craxi has had some justification for making
his own power even more absolute within the party and protecting that style of
governing which Michele Achilli. the leader of the extreme internal left. is one
of the few to have the courage within the PSI to define publicly as despotic. But
the autocratic model does not always benefit the party's own image. Especially,
when Craxi's broadsides serve to confirm Silvano Labriola (in the lists of the P2
of Licio Gelli) as head of the socialist group in Hontecitorio; to cause to fall
on his feet the former minister Enrico Hence (another suspicious P2) procuring for
him the office of president of the Chamber's Industry Committee; to torpedo Franco
Reviglio as minister of Finance (an old grudge); to force on the groups. without
even dreaming of consulting than. the candidacy of Federico Mancini.

Even the lack of interest which he demonstrates toward the traditional structures
of the party enters into the laws of sutocraxi. In April 1980, when the socialists
returned to the government, the sections on economy, organization, problems of
state, health and women's rights have been without leadership. The old PSI
apparatus. of "norandiane" origin, is falling.to.pieces.and.nothing specific seams
destined to substitute for it.

"The result is that the PSI intervenes only on the questions which interest the
secretary. There is no position, for instance, on the current government-union
confrontation." accuses Achilli. Luigi Covatta adds thoughtfully from the left:
”The almost [translation unknown] real for lack of organization is certainly a
function of the Craxi philosophy. The trouble is that it has negative consequences
in the internal life. It discourages political debate, certainly damages the
selection and the formation of new leadership.

It is a fact, for instance, that in the last government, to place a capable and
aggressive man as minister of Finance, Craxi had to select Rino Formica who had
already been chosen by the deputy secretariat of the party, precisely with the task
of watching over reorganization and the education of new cadres.

Anthoritariansim, self-confidence. a touch of arrogance. In a party governed
according to these principles, it is natural than that every slip. every old style

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

agreement should clash and stand out much more than in the past. That is the
embarrassing situation in which the Central Collittee of the PSI finds itself.

In Palermo, on the last night of the congress, in the clinate of a bravl, which is
always present on these occasions. a glaring mistake use nude: the delegates
approved a list of candidates in which had been forgotten six authoritative leaders.
among them the sinister of Transport. Vincenzo Balzano.

Now the six excluded candidates are trying desperately to have the mistake corrected.

But the trouble has not been resolved. Bettina Crsxi has not yet found time to
think about it.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore s.p.A. Hilano

8956
650: 3104/350

13
roe omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

GONZALEZ SUPPORTS GOVEW DESPITE DIMRBNCES
Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 21 Sep 81 pp 36-37

[Interview with Felipe Gonzalez. secretary general of the Socialist Party, on
Calvo Sotelo's government, by correspondent Jose Manuel Arija; date and place
not given]

[Text] whether the government governs or not creates fictitious problems for
the citizens, according to Felipe Gonzalez in his interview with CAHBIO 16.
The socialist leader cannot understand how, after a few nonths--fron March to
July--of negotiations and agreements to resolve the state's problems, at the
return of summer politics are again fraught with tensions among the parties
and a crisis in the centrist party and its government.

The NAIO discussion, the letter fron the Soviet Embassy. the statements made by
Ferrer Salat and the next P80! [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] congress are
other subjects on which the secretary general of the Socialist Party will con-
nent. 1982. which in the opinion of Felipe Gonzalez could be a year of calm
dedicated to thesolution of problems and the routing of coup attempts and ter-
rorism, is now obscured by groundless confrontations.

Two letters are on the socialist leader's table: that of President Calvo
Sotelo's response to the centrist accusation that the P803 was maintaining
secret agreements with the USSR and the astonishing note from the Soviets on
Spain's entrance into NATO. Also the recent speech given by Ferrer Salat,
president of the employers' association. "I would say that Hr Brezhnev and
Ferrer Selat are alike in their intentions to damage the socialists," and a
relaxed Felipe Gonzalez laughs at his joke with his morning cigar in one hand
and a cup of coffee in the other.

Felipe Gonzalez [PG]: President Calvo Sotelo's letter of response is respect-
able and respectful and a denial of any poisoning of that type. However, in
the last analysis, the slandering has been done and the affair is in the hands
of our attorneys. Now with more reason than ever, after Soviet interference
in Spain's internal affairs, which, it seems, was not expressly intended to
favor the interests of the Right.

L‘I‘HBTG ‘1. £136} Dc. "4.": got elem; hotter wi th Calvo Sotelo than. previously,
with Suarez?

16
FOI<0FFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

F6: I have had important conversations with CaJvo Sotelo for our mutual knowl-
edge and, I believe, in the country's interest. The talks were not devoid of
difficulties, both in substance and style, and even relative to negotiation,
for, on one occasion, it was plain to see how the interests of the UCD [Demo-
cratic Center Union] were put on the table.

In any case, the level of communication and understanding was reasonable. Not
much better than with Suarez. with Suarez relations deteriorated for various
reasons; one of these was that the agreements reached were not kept. However,
he is quick to judge people and interested in knowing if the agreements on em—
ployment and self-employment will be carried out.

616: What are the best and worst features of the president of the government
and his cabinet?

PC: I should like to describe what has happened in the past few months. I am
astonished and concerned about our present situation, for September is a month
in which we are again speaking of a government crisis; just as the school year
is now scheduled to begin, so is the government now scheduled to take off, and
talk reverts to crisis, simply because it is September.

616: What is at the root of your astonishment and concern?

PG: After the vote of investiture and the events of 23 February, the logical
description of the political process is simple: First, there is a socialist
government offer of a broad majority to protect the executive branch from
attacks of violence and involvement and endow it with the strength necessary to
defend the democratic institutions. That offer by the P802 is refused.

To continue, the government offers a negotiating policy on state matters which
the P803 accepts and supports in its entirety, not only participating but also
frequently offering a work method, program and time span for carrying out pro-
jects. Therefore, my party is playing a role in the strengthening of our insti-
tutions which no one can deny and which gives me the right to say what follows.

From February to July, the government has had: an economic policy partially
carried out through an agreement with the social forces-namely, the National
Agreement on Employment—-where there are no attacks by leftist forces against
the government, and agreements on the subject of self-employment which will
enable the government to adopt a political program to confront what has right-
fully been called the major problem of the democratic state.

In addition, in the struggle against violence, the government has the explicit
and implicit support of all the country's democratic forces. This means that
the government can concentrate all its forces on combating coup attempts and
terrorism.

I believe that with the program I have just outlined, which affects 36 million
Spaniards, governing properly means being able to govern Spain by successfully
facing up to its major problems. With that political capital accumulated by
the government and--I am not betraying a trust in saying so-by President Calvo
Sotelo, the month of July ends.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And September opens with an absolutely forced and fictitious confrontation with
subjects such as NATO, or private television, when there is an Executive branch
with a possibility of stabilizing hisregime by the end of 1982? Let them come
and explain that to me. For I am able. through my behavior and that of my per-
ty, to demand that the government govern. Let them concern themselves with the
resolution of Spain's problems, the real ones, and let them take us on to 1983

or until the next elections which must be-snd I believe they should be in 1983--
held in peace and tranquillity. Hey no false problems be invented.

C16: But NATO and private television are also important problems.

PG: 1 do not say that those problems are not important, but they are also im-
portant for 1983. They can wait a year and a half; they do not need to occupy
the attention of the social forces at a time when the country needs stability
and concentration of its efforts. However, I continue to have grave doubts as
to why elements of discord keep cropping up when our efforts should be devoted

to overcoming all divisiveness and trying to unite all our wills to the maximum
to help our country progress.

Clo: Hhat explanation do you have for this?

PC: I have none, to be truthful. There is a sophisticated answer and one which
is less sophisticated; I accept- neither. The sophisticated answer says that
the policy of socialist responsibility is such that the P803 has more credibil-
ity in public opinion and, therefore, it was necessary to shatter that image of
understanding to overcome the major problems, and we are covering up the objec-
tive weakness of our government team for which we are responsible. Then, there
is another less sophisticated explanation: That the government cannot stand

the pressure being put upon it from abroad.

C16: Is there not a third explanation? That they cannot govern with their own
party divided and with opposition from within?

PC: That wOuld place a lot of responsibility on the DOD. For many months I
have been saying that the UCD should straighten out its affairs. That it is
important for Spain that it do so. how will this be done? That is not my prob-
lem, but it is obvious that the UCD cannot hide its responsibilities by provok-
ing groundless confrontations. With NATO, private television and the subject

of rapeseed, it might have adopted a position which would pacify the country
until rne end of 1982.

C16: But could not UCD's internal problems begin to affect everyone?

PC: Certainly, but democracy has certain rules which must be respected. One
of those is not to play pim-pam-pum in terminating one government to promote
another without respecting the people's will. By a majority of votes the peo-
ple have chosen a UCD regime which is to govern from election to election.

When it is time for the next elections, the people will be able to evaluate the
results obtained by those in vhom they placed their confidence. I must not act
otherwise. for I cannot meddle in the internal problems of another party.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me “N“ I“ \‘it §|\| \

C16: In your opinion, what is at the root of Calvo Sotelo's haste to enter
NATO?

PC: I find no explanation. It is an obscure discussion in the eyes of the
citizenry, in which they are hearing the strangest things. For example, when
it is said that no country submitted to a referendum. But that was in 1969.
Spain's present situation is different, and the people are divided. That is
why we are requesting a popular opinion. For a referendum can be held, no mat-
ter what they say. And perhaps the safest thing is to hold it. The UCD will

then be in the minority, but the Spanish citizens will say whether or not they
want to be in NATO.

The Alliance has a historic logic which I would like to see changed, so that
military blocs would disappear and true detente and an atmosphere of peace
would follow. However, in the meantime, NATO and the Harsaw Pact are with us.
PSOE's position is clear: we are not against it, but we do not want to enter
NATO. Therefore, our campaignis not based exclusively on a negative approach
but, rather, on the possibility of informing and consulting the people.

016: “hat is the significance of the letter from the Soviet Embassy?

PG: To me the USSR's interference in Spain's internal affairs is intolerable.
And in addition, the sane style is always repeated: the domineering style
which the Soviet Union and Americans use. For in that domineering style there
is always a certain underlying threat which makes it more intolerable.

Moreover, the Soviet Union has never agreed that Western Europe should try
alternative models of leftist government which might put their own Iodel in
jeopardy, the model they call socialism but which I call communism. It is

more than clear that throughout the political struggle of the past 20 years

in France the USSR has supported De Gaulle, Pompidou and, later, Giscard
against the candidates of the Left and, in the last three elections, Hitterrand.

ls such evidence to be found in Spain? I have not seen it that clearly, for
all in all, we have had only a years of democracy. But what is clearly seen
is that the USSR's interference in Spain's internal affairs is damaging the
position of the parties which do not want Spain's entry into NATO. It is a
ploy which appears intended to make a campaign gift to those who want to enter
NATO, using a negative argument: as the Russians do not want us to do so, it
will be good to enter NATO.

C16: The P503 congress is to begin within a month. Hill a government program
be prepared there as though the socialists will win the next elections?

PG: That congress will deal with the broad lines of a political, social, eco-
nomic and cultural strategy, which is what an ordinary party congress should do;
and not, in my opinion. succumb to the temptation of discussing all the problems
which would be incorporated in a program of government action. Later, through
representative conventions and meetings of the organization, it will be neces-
sary to deal with each of the aspects programmed for possible government action
in addition to what has been accumulated throughout the years.

19
FKﬂICHHNCJA1.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
FtNRIJFIHC1A1.lJSEI(NNLY

I an reluctant to speak of the next congress, for, as I am now secretary general,
I do not want to condition the delegates in their options or thinking. However,
by definition, there is no doubt that there will be no other ordinary congress
before the general elections. Thus, we shall consider the hypothesis that the
party night take over the reins of government. And that, more than anything
else, should mark the sense of responsibility the delegates feel toward the
citizenry. It should be such that when it is said that a certain thing should
be done, there is no doubt that it can be done; so that we do not indulge in

theory until the end of the century.

616: Hill the congress mark the passage from Marxian to social democracy within
the P803?

PC: I do not think so, because, among other things, such polesics are rather
groundless and are not the polasics of the true citizens...

C16: will the congress tone down the difference in Opinion held by radical nea-
bers and a moderate leadership, as sometimes mentioned?

PG: There are two or three comments frequently heard: that the bases are more
radical than the leadership,-thst the party has no skilled personnel, how will
they govern, and the like. The people-and the socialist bases are people, in-
dustrious people-hsve many times demonstrated their strength and patience with-
out, at the same tine, failing to express their desire for change and their
denunciation of the inequalities and injustices of this society.

It appears to me difficult to have valuable opinions of that nature when part of
the bases of the Socialist Party are represented in union activity within the
labor movement, basically in the UGT [General Union of workers], but also in the
CCOO [workers Commissions], and outside both union organisations. And when
those bases are capable of making a wage agreement in solidarity with an em-
ployment policy, what more can be asked of that capacity for sacrifice?

C16: Socialization can be asked, as Ferret Salat has said.

PG: here the On‘y element in the country which is hard and intranaigent is a
sector of the Right which wants to go on maintaining the inequalities. There
are personages who utter dogmatic opinion regarding these evils, like Perrer
Saint, who says that the governneut is doing badly because it does not lean

far enough to the Right; and that the battalion Party, despite its moderation,
would like to socialize society. Obviously.

If we had to wait for social changes by persons of that nature, children would
still be working in the mines and we would not have an 8-hour work day but
rather r:ill one of 16, for it is never the right tine to decrease hours, have
more vacation tine, cope with social welfare and share the national wealth.

That is precisely why there is a struggle in society. What is happening in
Spain :1 that tLis social struggle now has a greater snare of civilization, of

respect. I would say of truly admirable hiotoric patience.

20
FT”!(N"W(JAI.USEGDNMX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C16: How do you think 1982 will be?

$6: According to the analysis made at the beginning, I see 1982 as a rather posi-
tive year. First, we have node an effort to strengthen the government by
broadening its parliuentary and social support; second, we have urged that
government to take the necessary action to resolve its problems and to cone up
vith a program of action which will solve problens of state; third, we think

the goverment should concentrate its efforts on crushing coup attapts and
deterring violence.

I think of l982--and I say this in all sincerity—as a year of tranquillity in
which the Spanish people will devote their efforts to resolving their problems.
The question asked now, in September, truthfully does not have the same answer;

but there is still tine, for the government has a program which has been agreed
upon in all important areas.

But let it govern. If its party has problems, let it resolve them; let it still
have political capital for that. He can paya price: that of having aided a gov-
erment whose overall policy is not the same as ours. But we are villing to pay
that price for stability. For it is the goverment which pays the price for be-
ing firm and conducting the country's policy with steadfastness.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8568
CSO: 3110/16 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY