FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10395

6 March 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 18/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Bnglish~ianguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATIOII BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/103
16 March 1

JAPAN REPORT

(F000 18/82)

Comems
ECONOHIC

Global Approach to Trade Friction Urged
(Editorial; ASAHI EVENING KENS. 26 Feb 82)

'HAINIGiI DAILY ms' Urges lbre Liberal Trade mm:
(Editorial; MINIGI MILY NEWS. 27 Feb 82)................

Trade nispute, Strained U.S. Ties Discussed
(Editorial; NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBW, 2 Mar 82)................

Trade Friction, Eaaki Mission to U.S. Viewed
(Editorial; ASAHI EVENING NEWS, lo hr 82)..................

Ill Report on Japan's Tariffs (kiticized
(Editorial; NIKON KBILAI SHIIBUN, 3 hr 82)..........,.....

Independent Sanctions Against USSR Questioned
(Editorial; NIHW KEIZAI sunnm. 25 Feb 82)...............

'HAINIGII DAILY “35' View: Sanctions Against USSR, Poland
(Editorial; HAINIQII DAILY NM, 26 Feb 82)... ..............

Cigarette Sales Liberalization Urged
(Editorial; NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBIN, I: Mar 82)...... ... . ...... .

GATT Advice 'Irritntes Japan
(mum KEIZAI SHIWUN. 18 Feb 82)-oo- .osaoosoosossooossooos

Govern-ant, LIP To Work Out Open Ibrket Package
(w JAPAN TIES. 3 hr 82).oooaoosanssaoocolouooooo00010.0.

-a- [III-ASIA-lll!‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND WG-0“

NTT'R)

Launch Satellite via Space Shuttle
(NIKON KBIZAI SRDBIN. 23 Feb 82, MI EVENING ms, ~

3 hr 82)ens-seassssosoneooeosesesoossssaosssosssseassoaess

lower Costs Expected
Project to Pace Opposition

IC Industry's Activities as of Decoder 1981 Reported

Recent

Sensor

(m mac 58mm, “no“ datet)...o..................

Ibshiba's VISI Technology

Production for 1981

JBOL Export to Dell

(111's Sanicuston 181

VLSI “at in Japan

Hitachi's 256 K RAM Dhss Production
Sharp's 66 K RAH Production
Hatsmhita's 8 Bit All) Conversion ISI
Hitsubishi's 610 K RAM Mass Production

Activities in Integrated Circuit Industry Reported
(Various sources, variom dates)..........................

New Function Element Research Foundation
Establishment of Foundation

Poundation Projects

ad's 256K RAH

Hitachi's 64K BAH

NEC's 256K BAH

Big Price Drop

NBc's Factory for 256K RAH

“[1 Entry Into Japanese Phrket

NTT's 20,000 Gate Array

miichi Seiko’s Fully Automatic Packaging
NEC's Expansion of 66K RAH Production
NBC, Hitachi 64!. RAM Production
Shortage of 32K arrows

Hitachi's Snail Outline Package

Dbre on SOP

Nippon (hkki's VHSIC Hith SIT
Mitsubishi-Westinghouse Joint Venture
Fujitsu's High-Speed ODS

Toshiba's Expanded 0.8. Production

'l'I's Expanded Production in Japan

iba' E rte of MK SW
3%": @323 Production of 641: RAM

Developmnt for Robot's, TV Reported
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHDIBW, various dates)......................

Kawasaki Torque Sensor
Electronic Industry Association's Project

Sanyo's Color Sensor b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL EBB ONLY

Green Cross Bioengineering Activities Described
(Noritoehi hukadn; SHUKAN BIRION. 11 Dec 81). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Cometition Among Nuclear hautectﬁrers Intensiﬁes

(hanks Niahi Interview; NIKKI SANGYO 33mm.
":10“ date.)ooooeooeeoeeoeoooeoeeoeoneueoeooeooeoeeoeeoooo

Brie fa
Semiconductors Export
Supercomputer Plan

-c-

FOR Oman. “5,; on“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOH IC

atom APPROACH TO TRADE FRICTION URGHJ
W270955 Tokyo ASAIII EVENING NEWS in English 26 Feb 82 p 5
[ASAHI SHIHBUN 25 February editorial: "International Bcononic Diplonacy")

[Text] There are increasing signs of friction in the economic relations
between Japan and the nations of Europe and the United States. u.s.
President Reagan, while praising Japan's cooperative attitude toward the
United States, did not fail to strike home the message to a visiting
delegation of Liberal-Democratic party Dietnen that he hopes that 0.8. goods
can enter the Japanese market in the same way that Japanese goods have
become widespread on the U.S. market.

The 0.8. Congress is considering various reciprocity neasures to equalize
market openness between the United States and other countries. The European
Comunity, on the other hand, is investigating a plan for bringing the
subject of the closed nature of the Japanese market up for discussion by
GATT (General Agree-ant on Tariffs and Trade).

Since the new Suzuki cabinet was announced about three months ago, two measures
have been taken toward resolving such friction with foreign countries: first,
the timetable for enacting the Tokyo romd of tariff reductions has been
advanced; second, non-tariff barriers, such as inport inspection procedures,
have been changed. Critics in the United States and Europe agree that while
these steps represent a step in the right direction, they are still not
enough.

Japan intends to participate at the summit conference of advanced nations
scheduled for June and must again examine how to make progress in its
economic diplomacy. Regardless of what the BC decides to do, Japan itself

should make it clear that it is following the rules of international trade
set forth by GATT.

Trade issues should not be settled politically in such a way as to disregard
the existazce of GATT. as happened at the time of last year's agreement to

exercise self-restraint on automobile exports to the United States. At the
same time, it is useless to try to avoid a re-exsnination of certain issues

related to the principles of GATT, such as those on residual import restric-
tions.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Of the 27 items presently restricted by Japan, 22 are agricultural, fish or
forest products. In regard to agriculture, there are many cases where
advanced nations have taken protectionist measures. Even the United
States. which is the world's largest exporter of agricultural products,
maintains an existing import restriction on one product and restrictiO' a
authorized by GMT on 13 products. The EC nations maintain a generous
system for protecting their own agricultural sectors by adding import
surcharges to offset the price advantages of imports which are cheaper
than the BC products and by providing export subsidies when the prices of
BC exports are above international levels.

Considering the poor geographical conditions of Japan. appropriate protection-
ist policies are unavoidable. However, efforts must be continued to permit
liberalization and lower agricultural prices regardless of whether there

is foreign pressure to do so or not, so that consumers can buy meat and other
products less expensively.

A special feature of the reciprocity measures before the U.S. Congress is
that they aim not only at transactions in goods, but also at the issue of

the exchange of services. This issue should be seen. first of all, in
relations to the irritation that the United States and European nations feel
over the difficulty of penetrating the Japanese market. The Ministry of
Finance, for example, recently announced that it did not discriminate between
domestic and foreign enterprises in its administration of banks. insurance

companies and security companies. Clearly. foreign complaints are off the
mark in several places.

Behind this issue, however, there is another inportant concern, how to handle
foreign dissatisfaction when it results from the fact that Japanese customs
differ from their own. Taking orders for special treatment is going too far,
and such orders should be resisted. Nonetheless, we should reconsider from
an international perspective whether Japan itself retains a tradition of
excess administrative intervention in business.

In any case. neither GATl‘ nor the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OED) have established international rules for regulating
the various service industries. Japan should participate aggressively

in the discussions on this issue which are being called for by the United
States.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

080: 4120/179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'HAINICHI DAILY NEWS' URGES MORE LIBERAL TRADE MARKET
M11253 Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 27 Feb 82 p 2
(Editorial: "Japan and Trade Friction"]

[Text] we do not deny the principle of free trade; however. on the pretext of
following this principle, the United States Government and Congress are
exhorting national interests. According to Hasumi Esaki. chief of the
Liberal-Democratic Party delegation to the u.s., the American attitude can

be compared to a ball game where "American players and umpires get together
and make decisions as they please."

This attitude is amply reflected in draft bills shortly to be sent to Congress
aimed at restricting Japanese exports to the 0.8. to the aacle of 0.8. exports
to Japan. We believe that world trust in the American leadership will diminish
if Congress passes the bill.

The American measures are based on the irrigation they feel toward the "closed"
Japanese market. In his meeting with Eaaki. President Ronald Reagan, while
appreciating Japan's efforts to improve the nontariff barrier issues, said

that American goods are not penetrating the Japanese market.

He partislly'agree with Reagan. Japan has improved its nontariff barrier
system but still maintains complicated import procedures. The Japanese
distribution system is so complicated that even domestic dealers cannot join
existing distribution routes, while the overprotection of small- and medium-
sized retailers has proved an obstacle to improving their productivity.

In the agricultural field, we do not see any noticeable improvement in its
structure, although the beef and orange import quotas were set temporarily

in anticipation of future liberalization. Agricultural organizations in Japan
claim that an acceptance of American liberalization requests means shifting
pressure to Japanese agriculture from other industries which enjoy profitable
exports.

At present, we see tension between American nationalism, trying to protect
its manufacturing industry while putting up free trade signs and at the same

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time indicating possible retaliatory measures, and Japanese nationalism, which
does not want to accept further liberalization of the agricultural and
distribution sectors. The clash between the two must be avoided at all costs
because it will only result in intensified protectionism.

In this respect, we would like to point out the lack of self-consciousness
of the Japanese people about the status of Japan. which has become a leading
economic power with 10 percent of world gross national product [GNP]. We call

Japan an economic power but we must remember that free trade is the only way
to enrich Japanese life.

We believe that Japan must open its doors to the agricultural and distribution
sectors. In this way, these sectors can improve their productivity. we know
that changing these systans will not be enough to fully implement liberaliza-
tion; however, some sectors obstinately adhere to their characteristic
traditions and custom. In other words, Japan's group-centered way of
thinking is different from American individualism. American criticism of
such a social structure is arbitrary.

The psychology of the Japanese refuses to accept "foreigners." regardless of
whether they come from different Japanese groups or foreign countries.
Japan must correct this isolationistic character.

To avoid criticism that Japan is unfair. it must drastically increase its
official development Assistance (ODA), whose ratio to the gross national
product is relatively low among the industrially developed nations. This
must be raised to the ratio of the military expenditures of major European
nations to their GNP.

Japan must adopt reasonable policies so that there remains no room for
criticism from the United States and Europe. Moreover, we call on the
government of Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki to inform the U.S. Government that
President Reagan's economic policy with emphasis on military expansion has
accelerated the recession and unemployment in the United States and caused
the huge Japanese trade surplus. Reagan's economic policy is preventing the
American economy from restoring its competitiveness in the international

market. We urge the Japanese Government to point this out to the u.s.
Government.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Daily News, 1982

CSO: 6120/179

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

TRADE DISPUTE, STRAINED U.S. TIES DISCUSSED
0HD30601 Tokyo NINON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Mar 82 Morning Edition p 2
[Editorial: "Strained Japan-U.S. Relations and Japan's New Response"]

[Text] The U. 3. Congress has opened a series of hearings on Japan. In this
country, the ministerial conference on economic countermeasures is scheduled
to meet today, 2 March, to hear reports from Hasumi Bsaki and his LDP trade
mission which returned from Washington late last week. and to begin a study
of new measures to ease economic friction with the United States. Japan-
U.S. relations are thus entering a crucial phase in a strained atmosphere
that threatens to culminate in Foreign Minister Sakurauchi's visit to
Washington in late March.

Judging from complaints heaped on the LDP mission by U.s. officials and
legislators during its visit. the atmosphere of those congressional hearings
will most likely increase its harshness. There is a strong possibility that
U. s. demands on Japan will further escalate on the strength of the reciprocity
bills now before the congress. It is perhaps true. too, that Japan is being
turned into a scapegoat in connection with the deepening recession and the
off-year elections scheduled for this fall in the United States. However.

it can be said with certainty that. as 0.8. demands continue to grow, Japan
is left with less and less room for effective response. One cannot deny that
the increasing gap thus created is contributing to Japan's difficult plight
and to the intensity of friction.

However, in view of Japan's position that she must attach importance to her
relations with the United States and defend free trade, she is required to

go through the list of potential measures, no matter how limited, pick any
effective ones and put them to work. She is also required to move into

areas that were not touched in the past and seek out whatever can be :1 ne there.

Secretary of Connerce Baldrige urged Japan to do "something dramatic to open
her market" without explaining what he means specifically by that. The
ambiguity surrounding his consent is one of the factors adding to the diffi-
culty of the Japanese plight. Judging from the substance of the Baldrige
remarks, however, there is no doubt that the U.S. demand is mainly for the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORioFFKJAl.USE10NLN

elimination of residual restrictions on the imports of beef, citrus fruit
and other farm products, expanded tobacco imports, and the opening of the
banking, insurance and other service markets.

".8. complaints are not confined to these items. They are complex and cover
a broad range, including those about Japan's meager imports of manufactured
goods, the structure of her foreign trade, with excessive emphasis on raw
material imports, complicated exchange systems, and the nation's unique
economic quality based on customs and traditions.

If the disputes should encompass these problems, too, it would be difficult
to reach a settlement, because they are not the type of p"oblems which can
be resolved overnight. The United States should also understand that it is
not in her interests to generate unnecessary antagonism among the Japanese
people and aggravate the situation with too hasty and too high-handed demands.

For this reason, it is more important now than before that the two sides
discuss problems with patience and without allowing themselves to become too
eager for a settlement. Especially, it is important for Japan now to review
pending Japan-v.3. issues once more from an unbiased viewpoint, clearly
define what can be done and what cannot be done; what can be done on long-
and medium-range bases and what can be done on a short-range basis; and to
express her resolve to open the market, beginning with short-range items.

Farm products are one of the key items. Aside from the strong domestic
resistance to their liberalization, it is doubtful if liberalization. as in
the case of beef, will actually benefit the United States; there are other
countries which are as competitive. Nevertheless, it is necessary for Japan
to take another look at the possible scope of liberalization. It is true
that under the present circunstances, Japan cannot afford to leave farm

products off the liberalization list in demonstrating her resolve to open
the market.

More ”pains" will accompany the nation's trade liberalization efforts from now
on. we should be prepared to undergo them during certain phases of the process.
Free trade is the way for Japan to follow. At the same time, it should be
remembered that liberalization under foreign pressures will not necessarily
keep Japan on the losing side all the time, as we see it, in the liberaliza-
tion of trade and the capital market.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

CSO: b120/179

FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

BCOMHIC

TRADE FRICTION, ESAKI MISSION '10 11.5. VIEWED
ou051237 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING mzws in English I. liar 82 p s
[ASAHI SEIHBUN 3 March editorial: "Trade Friction"]

[Text] How should we cope with the growing trade friction between Japan and
the United States and Europe? Hith the return to Japan of the Liberal-
Democratic Party mission to the 11.8., which was headed by Hasumi Bsaki, the
government has begun studying some comprehensive nessures. A series of
hearings on U.S.-Japan relations have started in the 0.8. Congress, and
American pressure on Japan, in connection with both trade and defense, is
expected to become stronger.

We should not allow ourselves to be bemused by the vociferousnesa of our
American and European critics; instead, we should listen diepassionately
to their arguments. The Council of Economic Cabinet Ministers, in its
meeting on March 2, was right to agree that it was inortant properly to
comprehend American demands before deciding on the measures that should be
taken.

Of course. the greatest problem is how Japan should respond to the American
and European demands.

The government will naturally have to take a variety of measures. But if the
other parties to the dispute take account only of their own interests, the
goverment should be prepared to say bluntly that they should not measure
everything by their own yardsticks. 0n the other hand, in cases where the
responsibility for trade friction clearly rests with Japan, the government
must seriously consider inediate steps.

At the same time, a basic long-term strategy is needed. Cosmetic measures
like those hitherto taken will not be acceptable in the future. The situation
is much more difficult.

From this point of view. the results of the Esaki mission to the 0.5. must
be considered inadequate.

The Americans openly criticized Japan, and said that unless Japan quickly took
some fundamental steps, there was the danger of reciprocity resolutions being

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

passed by congress. It is very doubtful that the Americans changed their
thinking as a rault of the rebuttals made by the Esaki mission.

While the mission was in the 11.8., chief cabinet secretary Kiichi Miyazawa
counterattacked by saying that Japan had moved up the lowering of tariffs

and removed non-tariff barriers. He even spoke in terms as strong as those
used by high American officials, as when he said, "Our feeling is, 'try taking
the same steps if you think you can.'" But Prime Minister Suzuki, who re-

ceived a report from Esaki after the mission's return, said, "I can definitely
understand the American position."

This raises the question whether Esaki's main duty was to listen to the
American arguments.

It has been said that when the LDP established its special coamittee on inter-
national economic measures, Esaki was made chairman and given the duty of
visiting the U.S. principally because of his status as a high official in
the Tanaka faction. It has also been said that his visit was designed to lay
the groundwork for Foreign Minister Sakurauchi's coming visit to the U.S.

or to ensure that Sakurauchi was not held solely responsible for bilateral
problem on his visit.

It is a matter for great regret if such speculation at the party level had
an influence on an important issue of foreign policy. But even greater
doubts should be voiced in connection with the fact that Eaaki was sent to
the 0.5. at a time when the government had no clear policies or measures.

The government must make studies of the import of individual items. such as
beef and oranges. the liberalization of which the 11.8. is demanding.
Nevertheless, it must be recognized that the roots of the trade friction are

so deep that they cannot be resolved through measures that concern only
individual items.

Surely, some long-term measures are needed to bridge the various differences
between Japanese social conditions on the one hand and American and European
social conditions on the other. He should again study steps to improve the
standard of living of the people; these would include increasing wages,
introducing a five-day workweek and long paid vacations, and constructing
housing. waterworks, sewerage systems and public parks.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

080: 4120/179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

UN REPORT ON JAPAN'S TARIFFS CRITICIZED

OWOIoOlol3 Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 Mar 82 Morning Edition p 2
(Editorial: "Is Japan a High-Tariff Nation?”

[Text] A UN organization has now joined with the United States and the EC
nations in criticizing Japan for the exclusivity of her market. The
organization in question is UNCI‘AD, which has made its criticism in a report
to be submitted to a meeting of its trade and development board, opening in
Geneva on 8 Hatch. Stern voices demnding that Japan open its market wider
are increasing in the United States and the European industrialized nations,

with reciprocity bills introduced in the U.S. Congress. and the ac Council
in a move to appeal to GATT against Japan.

According to KYODO Press Agency, this report, entitled "Protectionism in the
World Economy and Structural Readjustment," warns that, as a result of mounting
world protectionism, trade has become sore and more discriminatory and
exclusive and points to the need for each nation to readjust its economic and
trade structures so that the international market can function more effectively.

What attracts our interest most, and arouses our misgivings in the reported
summary of the UNCTAD report, are figures giving the impression that Japan is
a high-tariff nation and is still trying to keep foreign goods fron its
domestic markets through high tariffs. The report asserts that Japan charges
import tariff rates of 7 percent on a weighted average against the European
Common Market's 2.9 percent and the United Statea' 6.3 percent.

These figures differ so widely from what the Japanese Government used to tell
its people: That is, in brief, that, particularly as a result of the Tokyo
round of multilateral trade negotiations, Japan's tariff level is among the
lowest of all major industrialized nations. We fear that the UNCTAD report
will spur complaints against. and trade frictions with, Japan.

It has already uncovered the difference between UNCTAD and the Japanese Govern-
ment over tariff figures being attributable to the difference in cosputation
bases. To be specific, the EC, for instance. included, in the computation

of its tariff level, those preferential tariffs charged on developing nations
under the Lone convention. Needless to say, giving goods from developing
nations easy access to developed countries constitutes an important pillar

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in North-South cooperation. That is why GATT introduced a general preferential
tariff system, to which Japan also subscribes. Nevertheless, the regional
preferential system is, by nature, discriminatory. Therefore, it is regrettable
that the UNCTAD report, which censures discriminatory trade, should criticize

Japan's tariff level on the basis of figures which include preferential tariff
rates.

The UNCIAD report is said to be harshly critical of the mounting protectionist
tendencies in the United States and BC countries. 80 it seems it does not
necessarily echo the chorus of criticism against Japan by the United States
and the European countries. Therefore, it must contain many suggestions which
deserve our close attention. In this connection, we want to emphasize that
what is needed in curbing protectionism is, instead of finding a scapegoat

and engaging in a verbal war, that we should, as the UNCTAD report points out,

promote active international cooperation in achieving a readjustment of our
economic and trade structures.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

650: 6120/179

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCDNOHIC

INDEPENDENT SANCTIONS AGAINST USSR QUESTIONED

(”260633 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SUIBUN in Japanese 25 Feb 82 Morning Edition
p 2

(Editorial: "Sanctiom Against the USSR and Unstable East-Vest Relations"]

[Excerpts] One wonders what place future historians will assign to the current
sanctions against the Soviet Union in the big tide of East-West relations.
U.S.-initiated sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union began by criticiz-
ing the imposition of martial lav in Poland and the behind-the—scenes Soviet
intervention. But the disarray among Western countries over sanctions has
given rise to the argument that it is threatening the very existence of the
Atlantic Alliance. As a matter of fact, concrete measures taken by each
country seen to serve as a test of loyalty to the Alliance. Japan has
announced sosswhat weakpknesd sanctions of her own. which are different from
those adopted by other western countries. But we are afraid that Ispan seems
to lack a convincing reason why she has gotten out of step with othe: Western
countries and taken these independent measures.

It is worth special mention that the U.S. sanctions against the Soviet Union
did not come into being overnight. but are closely linked with the under-
current of America's economic strategy vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. which
began to take shape slowly in the mid-1970s. True, the Reagan administra-
tions Soviet strategy appears rather overbearing and seems to lack muscle.

But when it comes to economic sanctions. the U.S. administration is apparently
set to tackle the matter on a long-term basis from a security point of view,
with the Department of Defense playing the central role.

In formulating and executing foreign economic policies, the Reagan administra-
tion follows the same pattern as the preceding administrations, nanely unfold-
ing them through coordination between the Defense, State and Commerce Depart-
ments. But the position of the Defense Department, which advocates the
"criticial technology" concept from a security point of view, has gained in
strength over that of the State Department, which is in charge of negotiations
on matters pertaining to the Coordinating Committee for Export Control [cocoa].
Conspicuously, under the Reagan administration, those officials in favor of
restrictions against the Soviet Union are said to have gained more ground than
they did under the Carter administration. The concept of "critical technology"

11

FIHR(JFFICLAL'IEHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aims at controlling transfer of know-how useable in military high technology
and equipment. European countries are strongly critical of this concept,
because the scope of its application is rather obscure. Nevertheless, the
concept is reflected in the 1979 Export Control Act, according to some
observers. At any rate, all evidence strongly indicates at least that the

Reagan administration has adopted sanctions against the Soviet Union apart
from COCOH restrictions.

The COCO“ embargo list for controlling the West's exports to the comunist
bloc is a kind of gentlemen's agreement and has no binding force. It lacks
adaptability and propaganda effects due to its principle of no publicity

and its failure to keep pace with rapid technological development. Certainly,
OOCOH operations face a great turning point. That is why the United States
may be feeling all the more keenly the need for a dynamic economic strategy
toward the Soviet Union on the basis of domestic laws. But, generally

speaking, European countries are skeptical of the idea of anti-Soviet
sanctions themselves.

0n the other hand, some people in the United States conspicuously talk of a
"crisis of the Atlantic Alliance," irritated by the weak stance of European
countries towards economic sanctions against the Soviet Union. Occasionally,
others argue, in relation to the issues of how to readjust America's European
policy and how to settle the Polish issue, that the Yalta arrangement, which
has reigned over postwar Europe, should be reviewed. It is an undeniable
fact that the antinuclear movement and the neutralist tendency, which surged
through Europe last year, are partly responsible for the advocacy, in the
United States, of a review of its policy toward Europe.

A review of the Yalta arranganent, needless to say, is easier said than done.
Take the question of reunification of Germany for instance; the difficulty of
revising the agreement will become clear at once. Behind the argmnent in
favor of revamping the Yalta Agrczesent, one may see a U.S. threat to reduce
its military deployment in western Europe.

The question of sanctions against the Soviet Union seems to have highlighted
difficulties involving, not only East-West relations, but also relations among
Uestern natiom. That is why Western leaders may be insisting that Western
nations should consult with each other all the more closely. What kind of
long-term economic strategy the West should formulate toward the Soviet Union
is one of few themes on which western Europe and Japan can consult on an

equal footing.

We cannot but admit that in this regard, Japan's position is weak compared with
the United States, which can use the Helsinki Accords as a basis for sanctions,
and western Europe which can cite EC and NATO as the ground for sanctions.
Therefore. it is urgent for Japan to enhance her role in the OOCOH functions
and take other necessary steps to consolidate her position so that she can at
least avoid losing ground to Soviet counterargunents.

COPYRIGlT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunaha 1982

C50: 10120 78
ll 12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'HAINICHI DAILY NBHS' VIEHS SANCTIONS AGAINST USSR, POLAND
0H280719 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY “HHS in English 26 Feb 82 p 2
(Editorial: "Sanctions and After"]

[Text] The government has announced sanctions against the Soviet Union and
Poland, claiming that the situation in Poland has not been improved.

The Polish military regime has been suppressing human rights and the Soviet
Union has been indirectly intervening in the internal affairs of Poland.
With this belief in mind, Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki issued warnings to
Moscow. The government has taken the latest step because the Sovi‘t Union
and Poland had turned deaf ears to such warnings.

He do not deny that the present situation in Poland, which has been under
military control for the past 2.5 months. is liable to develop into a world
crisis. The United States and other western nations have imposed sanctions
on the Soviet Union and Poland in some form or another and under such
circumstances, Japan's action can be interpreted as an option which demands

that the two communist nations in question give serious thought to what has
taken place in Poland.

Japan's punitive measures are not necessarily strict. Sanctions against the
Soviet Union comprise: 1) Japan will not agree to the opening of the
Commission on Science and Technology Cooperation; 2) Japan will not accept

a call for the holding of the annual Soviet-Japanese trade talks; 3) Japan
will not study the possible expansion of the Soviet Office of Trade Repre-
sentative in Japan; and 4) Japan will carefully study the possible extension

of the stay in Japan for the Soviet purchasing mission members. whose visas
are to expire in December this year.

Against Poland, two measures were added to the travel restriction imposed
on Polish diplomats in Tokyo on February 18. The two measures are: 1) Japan
will not agree to hold talks on the rescheduling of the $100 million debt

payment due this year; and 2) Japan will not study the extension of new credit
to Poland.

It may be true that we cannot expect effective results from such moderate
measures. We must remember that a wide difference of views exists between
the United States and Western nations on practical measures for sanctions.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The difference of views between the United States and Western European
nations is seen most clearly in their policy to cooperate with the

Soviet natural gas development plan. On December 29, President Ronald Reagan
announced seven-point sanctions against the Soviet Union which said, among
others, 'iicenses will be required for export to the Soviet Union for an

expanded list of oil and gas equipment. Issuance of such licenses will be
suspended. This includes pipelayers."

On this specific point, the U.S. State Department, in its background briefing,
said the same day: "The energy area. particularly oil production, is one of
the sectors most dependent on outside equipment and technology. This is a
field where U.S. exports are particularly valuable to the Soviets."

Some Western European nations reacted strongly against the U.S. policy because
these nations, especially West Germany and France, are expecting to purchase
Siberian natural gas in the future. Some U.S. officials, including those

in the Defense Department, believe that Western European dependence on Soviet
energy is dangerous but as long as the United States is unable to guarantee
the supply of energy to these nations, the United States has no practical
measures to prevent them from promoting their programs.

The difference of views is based on the basic policy of the United States and
Western Europe-the former adhering to the way of thinking that regards the
East-West relations in the cold war concept and the latter having closer
economic relations with the Eastern bloc which developed rapidly during the
detente in the 1970s.

To effectively implement the sanctions, we believe that the Western nations
must resort to a reverse measure—closer relations with the Soviet Union and
Eastern European nations which, in turn, will increase dependence on the West.

Japan and the Soviet Union will exchange net abassadors shortly. The latest

sanctions should not become obstacles for continued dialogue with the Soviet
Lhion.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, 1982

680: (0120/178

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

cmmms SALES LIBERALIZATION URGED
05051225 Tokyo NIHON um: snow in Japanese I. Mar 82 Morning Edition 1) 2

(Editorial: "Liberalize Cigarette Sales and Compete Face to Face!"]

[Text] The issue of liberalizing cigarette sales has been rekindled as part
of the controversy over trade friction between Japan and the United States.
The United States is demanding that Japan open its market to U. S. -Iade
cigarettes on the ground that market share for U-. s. cigarettes in Japan is.
only 1 percent due to Japan's monopoly system, another trade barrier.

The U.S.-made cigarette sale expansion measure which was agreed upon in the
fall of 1980 and put into effect in April last year provides that the Japanese
tariff rate will be lowered to 35 percent at one swoop from 90 percent which
was equivalent to the ac rate. The measure also provides that the nulber of
stores selling U.S. cigarettes will be increased by 40 percent and that .
U.S. cigarette manufacturers can spend up to 1 billion yen in advertisement
and sales campaign outlays. When the measure was adopted, the Japanese
Finance Ministry and the Japan Tobacco and Salt Corporation must have felt
that they had taken a bold treasure.

Yet in less than a year after the implementation of the measure, the United
.States has come out with another demand by taking advantage of the current
wave of criticism against Japan. It is fully understandable that Japan feels
a sense of distrust of the U.S. attitude. While raising the prices of

tobacco products exported to Japan by I!) percent. the United States is demand-
ing that Japan keep the retail prices at their present level. This amounts

to demanding that the 35 percent tariff rate be abolished. Generally speaking.
the U.S. demand is too hasty and smacks of a poor policy.

Aside from its hastiness, the 11.8. demand touches the heart of the matter.
This is because Japan's cigarette nonopoly systal hampers a free mrket
system. From the beginning, there would have been no U.S. demands with regard
to the sales prices and the number of retail outlets but for the monopoly
system. Nor would there have been such a strange thing as a limit on outlays
for advertisement and sales campaigns. The Finance Ministry and the Cigarette
and Salt Public Corporation are still urging the preservation of the monopoly
system. but their basis of argument lacks persuasiveness. We will touch it

very briefly here since we dealt with it at length in this paper 's 30 Novedaer
1981 issue.

9

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First, as for securing a revenue source, which is cited as the format
basis of their argment, it will be possible to raise as much revenue as
now even if the cigarette industry is turned over to private firms. Second,
the counterargunent that sales campaigns by 0.3. cigarette firms will most
probably result in an increase in cigarette consumption is quite absurd.
when this argument is stretched to the extreme, it will negate the reason
for existence of the cigarette manufacturing industry itself, whether it

is run by a public corporation or by private enterprises. if the matter is
considered from a point of view of public health. Third, the argument that
private firms manufacturing cigarettes will [be] squeezed out by foreign
competitors stems from a bureaucratic via: of one who does not understand
the qualities of private businessmen. Fourth, if the public monopoly
corporation has a high productivity, it is only true with its factories.

0n the whole, the corporation is inferior to private firms in productivity.

Lastly, there remains a problem concerning domestic tobacco growers. It
should be a duty of the government to lead them in a desirable direction
while giving them an ample time to readjust. Some Dietmen'a out-and-out
opposition to liberalization may inevitably be viewed as steaming from a vote-
getting motive just as some U.S. congressmen‘s unreasonable demands.

The Japanese monopoly system consists of three divisions. namely, purchase of
materials, nnufacturing, and sales. of the three, the sales division is the
one the United States is most concerned with. The United States produces
large quantitiesof tobacco leaves at a cost about one-third of that in Japan.
With the low cost of tobacco leaves and the latest technology, the United
States is strongly convinced that the 0.8. cigarettes are No l in the world.

No wonder U.S. cigarette have secured a between 10 and 20 percent market
share. or even more in some cases, in European countries. In the 0.8. opinion,
it is due to the high tariff rate and the monopoly system that the market
share of U.S. cigarettes in Japan is unusually low.

However. the Americans make light of the differences of taste among various
nations. They also underestimate the level of Japan's cigarette manufacturing
teclmology. Even if Japan liberalizes the cigarette market. it is doubtful
whether things will turn out as the United States is figuring out. For this
reason, it will be in the interest of Japan, from both short and long-term
points of view, for it to eliminate the tariffs on cigarettes, liberalize
their sales and compete with the 0.3. cigarette industry face to face.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

650: 4120/179

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

GATT ADVICE IRRITAIES JAPAN
0011910109 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 18 Feb 82 Morning Edition p 1

[Text] It was disclosed on 17 February that Dunkel, secretary general of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), had strongly urged the
Japanese Government to promptly take drastic action to open the Japanese
market. It is a very exceptional case for the GATT secretariat, a neutral
international organization on trade issues, to make a request to a specific
country that can virtually be taken as an advice. Specifically, the GATT
secretary general asked that Japan further accelerate the lowering of
tariffs, improve the situation in nontariff barriers and remove import
restrictions on farm products and other remaining items at an early date.

Counting on the Dunkel statement, the government said, "We will continue
our efforts to open our market," but voiced strong opposition to it, saying,
"It is a statement with strong political overtones, providing lateral support
for the call of the United States and the BC on Japan to open its market."
The government is even considering lodging a protest to Secretary General
Dm'lkel, depending on circumstances.

Secretary General Dunkel has met separately with Japanese Government repre-
sentatives, including Deputy Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Matsunaga and
Yamada, director of the HITI international economic affairs department, who
recently visited Geneva to attend a meeting of 18 GATT member countries (CG-18).
At the meetings, the secretary general said: "Now that the United States,
which has propped up the postwar GATT system, has been weakened economically,
due to recession and other factors, Japan should take the place of the

United States and perform a central role in promoting the free trade system.
This would result in checking the emergence of protectionism." He then told

than, "Japan should take tangible measures to open its closed market
immediately . "

As drastic measures, the secretary general cited the further expansion and
strengthening of the lowering, ahead of schedule, of tariffs, mainly on
electronic computers, which Japan decided to carry out last November, and
the improvement in nontariff barriers, involving 67 items. In addition,

he called for an early removal of import restrictions imposed on 27 remaining
items, comprising mainly farm products.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Noting that Dunkel placed emphasis on the removal of import restrictions
still in effect, a top-level HITI official has said, "Hhat he calls tangible
measures is nothing but a review of import restrictions still in effect."

Since Dunkel made his remarks at official meetings, the government takes
them as a virtual advice.

The govern-eat said, "There is nothing particularly new about the advice,
because the question of opening the Japanese market has been discussed at
Japan's talks with the United States and the BC." However, it voiced
strong opposition to the virtual advice given by the secretary general,

who should play the arbitrator's role in GMT, whose highest decision-making
organ consists of its member countries, including Japan. The government is
afraid that, if GATT, a neutral organization, makes its pro-0.8., pro-BC
position clear and criticizes Japan, an impetus might be given to the moves
of the United States and the EC in strongly demanding the opening of the
Japanese market and the closed nature of the Japanese market might be
mphasized internationally. The government takes the Dunkel statement

as international approval of the pressure on Japan to open its market.

A wide section in government quarters holds the view that "the Dunkel state-
ment obviously has its origin in the Euro-American pressure on Japan" and

is considering taking one countermeasure or another, including a protest
to be filed with Secretary General Dunkel.

Of late, the U.S. and European pressure on Japan has been further strengthened
against the backgron of continued businas recession. In the United States,
Congress and other quarters are making all-out efforts to enact reciprocity
bills and, in Europe, the EC Comittee has recently announced : plan to file
an action with can: against Japan, saying that "while keeping its market
closed, Japan is unilaterally launching an export drive, thus violating the

GATT agreement." In either case, they both strongly demand that Japan open
up its market.

However, the government is holding fast to the position of defending the free
trade systan of the Western nations and is put in a situation in which it
finds it inevitable to take concrete measures to open up the market. In

this case, Japan is expected to notify the Euro-American countries of its plan
to further promote the lowering of tariff rates and the removal of nontariff
barriers on one hand and take sone measure with respect to a reviw of the
import restrictions still in effect on the other hand. A ranking HITI official
said, "It may be impossible to go so far as to remove the restrictions, but

we will study the expansion of the framework."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiﬂaunsha 1982

080: 6120/180

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONGIIC

(”VERMNT, LB? 1'0 HORK OUT OPEN MARKET PACKAGE
W040141 Tokyo THE JAPAN TIMES in English 3 Mar 82 p 1

[Text] Government and ruling Liberal-Democratic Party leaders agreed on
March 2 to work out another package of measures to open the Japanese market
wider to foreim isports at the earliest possible date.

The agreement was reached at a meeting of economic affairs ministers called
by Prime Hinister Zenko Suzuki to hear a report on the outcome of a U.S.
visit by an LDP mission from its leader, Hasmi Esaki chairman of the party
committee on external economic relations.

During the mission's U.s. visit last week, U.S. government and congressional
leaders expressed dissatisfaction with two earlier Japanese packages for
opening its market, and urged the mission to take further measures.

Chief cabinet secretary Kiichi Hiyazawa said the government hopes to complete
a new program of market liberalization before an econmic Omit meeting of
seven major industrial democracies scheduled for June in Paris.

Hiyazawa, however, told the press that before working out such measures, the

government must "closely watch" the outcome of the current u.s. congressional
hearings on Japan-American relations.

The government also has to "carefully listen" to the 11.8. requests on bilateral
trade in farm and other goods at a meeting of the Japan-U.S. subcommittee on
trade to be held in Tokyo on March 9-10 and learn the result of a planned
Liberal-Democratic Party mission to the European comunities, he explained.

The LDP mission, also to be led by former International Trade and Industry
Minister HaSumi Esaki, is due to leave Tokyo for the BC meaber states around
March 10, and will complete its tour of Hestern Europe by around March 20

when the BC Council of Foreign Ministers calls a meeting to discuss Japan-m
trade problems.

Meanwhile, referring to the contents of the new package, government sources'

said the government is at a loss as to what measures should be incorporated

in it because American requests for further Japanese market-opening measures
are not necessarily clear.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sources said the U.S. appears concerned mainly about expansion of
Japanese imports of agricultural products through removal of quota

controls and liberalization of the service industries. such as banking
and insurance.

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1982

C50: [0120/180

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NTT To LAUNCH SATELLITE VIA SPACE SHUTTLE
Lower Costa Expected
0:1250517 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 23 Feb 82 Morning Edition p 1

[Text] In view of the importance of co-unications satellites Nippon Tele-
graph and Telephone Public Corporation [an] has drawn up its own commits-
tion satellite development plan by separating commication satellite
development from domestic rocket development. This separation stems from
the fear that if NTT were to stick to its present course of developing
satellites and rockets simultaneously, Japan would lag behind the rest of
the world in the communications satellite field.

MT will shortly consult the Space Development Conittee {$00}, the govern-
ment's space development agency, on the new plan. The soc is headed

by Ichiro Nakagawa, director general of the Science and Technology Agmcy.
The 800 plan to launch a second-generation conunications satellite for
practical use in fiscal 1987. But at that stage, NTT will separate the
combined plan of simultaneome developing rockets and satellites into two
separate plans, launching a large satellite, using America's space shuttle,
under its own comunications satellite development plan. MT's adoption
of a ma: plan will make it imperative for the Japanese Government to review
its space development program.

Space development in Japan has been undertaken mainly by the space develop-
ment consortium and the Education Ministry's Space Science Research Institute
under overall planning and' coordination by the 800, with the cooperation of
various organizations such as NTT, MK and National Research Institutes.

According to the current plan, a "CS-2" communication satellite for practical
use will be launched into a stationary orbit by a domestically built “-11
rocket in 1983. The Ibo-kilogram satellite will have a transmission capacity

of 4,000 circuits (in terms of telephone circuits) in 6 subnillimeter bands
and 2 microwave bands.

0f the total, NIT will use the two microwave bands and four subnillimeter
bands, with the remaining two submillineter bands to be used by the police

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
agency, the national railways and power companies. MT plans to me this
communications satellite for emergency comunications during natural
disasters and comunications with remote islands.

However. the cost of using this satellite is so high, compared with the
existing ground circuits. that its use is not profitable unless the
communication distance exceeds somewhere between 6,000 to 10,000 kilometers.
80 it is not practicable for connunications inside Japan.

Under the present plan, another connunications satellite, "CS-3," is to be
launched by a domestically built 1! rocket in 1987. The weight of the

satellite proper is to be 550 kilograms. The projected transmission
capacity is 10,000 circuits. But it weighs only half as much as the world's
average comunications satellite. So it will still be a costly satellite.

That is why NTT has decided to separate comnications satellite development
from domestically built rocket development at the CS-3 stage and has firmed
up a plan to launch a large satellite weighing 1 ton by using the space
shuttle, scrapping the 550-kilogram satellite plan. According to “11's pre-
liminary estimte, whm the space shuttle is used, the launching cost will
be just one-sixth of the cost incurred using a 3-stage rocket. The trans-

mission capacity will also boost to somewhere between 20,000 and 25,000 cir-
cuits. Furthermore, twice as web fuel for attitude control can be packed
into the satellite and the satellite's lifespan will be doubled to 10 years,
thereby drastically reducing couunications costs. Compared with ground
circuits. the comications satellite will cost less if the distance covered
exceeds 1.000 kilometers.

As a second manna; CS-3, NTT plans to launch a 4-ton
comunications satellite in 1995. Its transmission capacity will exceed
100,000 circuits and the comunications cost will be drastically reduced.
Compared with ground circuits, this satellite will cost less if the distance
exceeds 300 kilometers.

N11 has no intention of putting these plans into practice separately from the
government's space development plan. It will implement them only after the
government's space development plan is reviewed.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

Project to Face Opposition
OUOAIZIS Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NBJS in English 3 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] Nippon Telegraph and Telephone [NTT] Public Corporation has decided
to put two massive business comunication satellites into orbit by 1992.

But the plan seems likely to run into opposition from the Space Development
Committee headed by Science and Technology Agency chief Ichiro Nakagawa over
plans to use America's space shuttle instead of domestically produced rockets.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NTT will launch a one-ton satellite similar to America's successful Intelsat
in 1988 to handle the mounting flood of international business comunications.
While the satellite would contain some 10,000 telephone circuits, it would

be a baby compared to the second stage of the project: a four-ton giant

that could simultaneously handle 100,000 circuits. It would be launched
in 1992.

MT will debate the proposal further with the Ministry of Posts and Tele-
communications and other organizations before taking it to the space
committee this smumer.

But the sumer presentation is not likely to be a rubber-stamp affair.

One of the basic goals of Japan's space program is to build up the country's
technological capacity by using domestic technology. However, the H-lA,

a three-stage liquid-fuel booster that is Japan's hope for the late 19803,
will only be able to put 550 kilogram into orbit.

That is far short of what would be needed for NTT's business satellites, lead-
ing the comunication giant to decide that the cavernous cargo bay of the
0.8. space shuttle is the only place where its satellites could fly into orbit.

The Space Development Committee already has plans of its own to launch two
business connunications satellites, the 350-kilogram 08-2, with 6,000 circuits.

in fiscal 1982. and the SSO-ton CS-3, with a 6,000—circuit capacity, in
fiscal 1987.

MT, however, says demand will far outstrip Elie limited capacity of the CS
series, which it labels uneconomical. It is going ahead with its plans, and
has already established a research section for the giant satellites.

"Satellite communications once had an image of being used during disasters, or
for communicating with distant islands," NTT official Koji Maeda said.
"Satellite communicat ions also cost more than ground-based comunications.

"N'l'r has offered as inexpensive a service as possible, which is why we thought
of using the space shuttle at less than one-third the cost of domestic rockets."

A spokesman at the Space Development Committee offices in the Science and
Technology Agency said recently that NTT had yet to contact the comittee

directly. But he warned that any plan to use the space shuttle would run
counter to the Japanese space program's policy of using domestic technology.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

650: 4120/174

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIEHCE AND “GEOLOGY

IC INDUSTRY'S ACTIVITIES AS OF DEW 1981 REPORTED

Toshiba's V1.31 Technology
Tokyo NIKKAN K0610 serum in Japanese 8 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Toshiba Corporation (Shoichi Saba, president) has developed a dynamic 10-16
megabit dynamic memory (nmry element consisting of silicon chips, each a few

mm square, containing 10-16 million transistors) capacity revolutionary type VLSI.
This technology is called the no: method and represents a new element separation
technology produced by embedding two layers oi silicon oxide film within grooves
dry etched into silicon base plates, thereby separating and insulating the elenents
from each other. There are a nnsber of technological barriers which stand in the
way of development of V1.81 with a nininum line width less than 1 nicron and with
more than 1 megabit degree of integration, and it has been said that element
separation is the most important obstacle to be overcome to realise such a product.
_The new technology developed by Toshiba eliminates the unused section (bird's beak)
which was unavoidable in past methods while making an element separation which
opens the way for submicron line widths of between 0.2 and 1.0 aicron and
associated high densification. It is said that a design line width of. 0.6 nicron
will enable the crauing or 2.38 times the present number of transistors per square
centimeter. This company considers that it has established the basic technology
for developing VLSI of over 1 megabit capacity, and it hopes to market this

product in the latter half of the 1980's.

Blasent Separation without Bird's Beak

The memory (RAM - memory element in which read-in and write-in can be conducted
freely) with the maximum capacity presmtly available in the world today is a 66
kilobit member (design line width, 3 microns), and presmt technology allows pro-
duction up to 256 kilobits (design line width 1.5-2 microns), but once this
capacity goes up to the l megabit level (design line width 1 micron), a number of
technological obstacles loom. It is generally believed that the development of
submicron class VLSI can become possible through the establishment of lithographic
technology using electron beam engraving or plasma etching, but the actual situa-
tion is that considerably more important technology needs to be developed. This
includes manufacturing technology such as: l) ale-ant separation technology by
which electrons cannot leak over into the neighboring elemmts, 2) gate insulating
film forming technology of the order of 50 Angstrom thickness, and 3) technology
for installing low-resistance distribution lines. Circuit design technology

210.
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

problems include how to control hot carriers and the creation of new melaory cir—
cuit designs. In this manner, the l-micron barrier sears very formidable. This is
why there is a general feeling among engineers in the IC industry that "it will be
enough if a product with a line width of 1 micron and a l-megabit degree of inte-
gration can be mass produced."

The breaking of this l-micron barrier is the most important achievement for this
el-ent separation technology. Up to the present time, the LOCOS method developed
by Phillips Company of the Netherlands has been the most widely used method for
HOS type LSI element separation; this method employs silicon nitride film to form
insulating film of silicon oxide by heat treatment of 7 hours duration at 1,ooo°c.
This treatment often forms swellings on both side of the oxide film gas mask
called a bird's beak (the cross-section resembles a bird's beak), as a result of
which an 0.5-micron-wide bird's beak is formed on either side of a 1.0-micron
line. and the net effect has been that an effective line width of less than 2
microns could not be attained. At the same time, the appearance of crystal defects

is accelerated by the high temperature treatment. Because of this situation,
Toshiba developed its elaaent separation method called the "5390)! method," which

enables finishing to 1.2-2 micron, and it had been studying application to the mass
production step which followed; however. meanwhile it developed its BOX method,

which enables an even finer degree of finishing, to less than 1 micron.

The BOX method involves, first of all, removal of silicon by a dry etching pro-
cedure and embedding insulating film into the excavation by a two-step process.
The first step leaves only a very thin groove around the element periphery to.
embed the insulated item. and the second step coats insulating film over the first
in a selective manner. Because both the elnent forming region and the separation
region surfaces are flat, it is claimed that this technology can be adapted to the
use of optical microproj ection lighting devices (steppers) which can operate down
to about 0.7 mm at shallow focal depth (large number of openings). Although the
BOX method requires a greater number of steps, the time required is shorter (two
30-minute intervals) and the treatment is under comparatively lower temperatures,
thereby minimizing any effects to the dues“. The company claims that it has
produced circuits operating properly with a line width of 0.6 In by the application

of this BOX method.

Comparing the degree of integration with a product of the 1.0008 method, assuming a
design rule of 1 micron design width, 3 30): product incorporates 6.5 million bits
(transistors) per square centimeter, which is 1.8 times that of a IDCOS product.
Going down to a design width of 0.6 micron, there is an increase to 2.38 times, to
12.5 million bits. It is said that a lo megabit dynamic chip produced by the sox
method will be roughly one-third the size of a chip made by the woos method, at

about 70 square millimeters.

These research results were announced on the 8th at the International Electronic-
Device Society ﬂeeting held in San Francisco.

Ideal Element Separation

Professor Shoji Tanaka, Department of Physical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
University of Tokyo said: Submicron line width becomes a must if memory is to

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attain the megabit level, particularly above the 4 megabit level, and element
separation technology is an important adjunct to this technology. The SD! method
proposed by Toshiba seems to be an ideal method. There are a number of obstacles
to submicron widths such as 0.5 micron, but this method enables good separation,
and good transistor properties without the narrow channel effect have Been
realized. This technology has resolved one of the major difficulties.

 

Key:
1. Bird's beak
2. 2.5 million bits/square centimeter

3. 6.5 million bits/square centimeter

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

Production for 1981
Tokyo DENPA SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Increase of 20 Percent Over Previous Year, Close to Half That of the United
States

Estimating Japan's semiconductor (saliconductor el-ents and TC) production based
on the production statistics of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry,
this will be the first year for attainment of the 1-trillion-yen level. This
year's semiconductor element production is expected to show an increase of 370
billion yen over the preceding year, or 28 percent, while IC production is expec-
ted to be 690 billion yen over the previous year, or 21 percent. Semiconductors
and IC together are expected to increase 20 percent, to 1.6 billion yen. Exports
are estimated at 230 billion yen and imports at 130 billion yen, and the flourish-
ing electronics development is the prime mover for this well—founded development.
The production ratio with respect to the United States has been increased from
the previous 1:5 or 1:3 ratio to close to 1:2, and Japan has secured its position
as one of the large semiconductor producing countries of the world.

80 Percent for Domestic Needs

It had been expected from the beginning of the year that semiconductor production
would top the l-trillion-yen mark; the contents of the production items are under-
going changes while overall production is following the lines of the initial

progress rather closely.

26

FOR‘OFTWCJAI.USEGDNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abetted by VTR Developments

Increases in VTB for home use have compensated for the poor performance of deal:
calculators, watches, and nenory type L81 use products, and even then there has
been a 20-percent level of increase in production, indicating the diversification
in saniconductor demands, and there seems to be an indication that a solid founda-
tion for develop-eat is being established.

According to the production statistics of the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry, Japan's semiconductor-IC production was at the 500~billion-yen level in
1978 and it was expected to exceed 1 trillion yen 3 years later, corresponding to
an annual increase of close to 30 percent. The growth in the Ic area is close to
the very high level of «'00 percent.

10 Percent of Electronics Industry Production

A production of 1 trillion yen is roughly 10 percent of this country's expected
electronics industry production of 10 trillion yen, and this industry is now
capable of production to rival television, VTR, teleconunications, comnication
equip-ent, computers, and general electronic products. Every one of the other
areas enhances saiconductor developnent and also uses suiconductor products to
abet its progress, making for a very favorable environment.

This is why Japan's semiconductor industry depends on doaestic daland for about
80 percent of its production, and despite the increase in exports. the aphasia
is on domestic sales. Imports, which are chiefly from the lhited States, come
close to half the export level, and growth in this area is small. 0n the other

“'11:“, Japan-based corporations are making sore seesa—theis—Iapanaamkets,
indicating that stabilized imports will continue. There will be a decrease in
import duty on IC to 6.2 percent in April next year.

In another direction, suiconductor production in the United States, which leads
the world in this category, was $9.3 billion (about 2 trillion yen) for 1981,
according to figures released in Septuber by the Saiconductor Industry Associa-
tion (SIA). Reflecting the depressed state of the Western world, this was a 6.9
percent decrease from the 1980 total of about $10 billion. The production for 1982
is expected to be about $10.9 billion.

The American semiconductor makers have plants distributed worldwide and can be
said to be promoting multinational activities. 0n the other hand, a simple con-
pnrison of production totals shows the ratio with Japan has narrowed down to

2:1 this year, whereas 5 years ago this ratio was close to 5:1, and only 2-3 years
ago it was 3:1. The present situation seems to belong to an altogether different
world.

To Retain High Growth Rate From Here On

According to Ila-hers of Japan's saniconductor industry, even though production
will attain the l-trillion-yen level this year, development will continue unabated,
and even though there may be some stabilization in the base, this high rate of

27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

growth is expected to be maintained. The VLSI production which is expected to
come onstream about the middle of the decade is certain to have a major impact,
and the establishment of overseas plants to avoid trade friction as the result
of the inpact of such technological innovation is expected to increase.

Where the semiconductor makers are concerned, the assurance of manpower and the
development of new technology that will enable them to sustain future growth are
major problas, but even the industries within the framework of the industry
consider this growth to be assured. It is expected that many other industries
are eyeing this area and the entry of new candidates will probably continue.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunsha 1981

JEOL Export to Bell
Tokyo NIKKEI SANCYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Dec 81 p 1
[Text] Export of Electron Exposure Device to Bell

The most advanced main device used in the production of semiconductors will be
exported to the United States for the first time, according to an announcement

by the parties involved in the situation, on the 8th. JEOL [Japan Electron
Optics Laboratory] succeeded in receiving an order for its super-high-preciaion
electron beam exposure device for circuit making from the world leader in semi-
conductor development, Bell Laboratories of the United States. Bell Laboratories
intends to use this device as the main cog in the development of VLSI (very large
scale integrated circuits), which is expected to become practical in the 1990's.
In the past, Japan's saaiconductor production Md production machinery
were imported from the United States, and this present order is an indication that
Japanese technology has developed to the level of the world’s best even in the
lost advanced areas.

Form 0.01 Micron Unit Circuitry

Technology to fora very fine circuits, called "microlingraphy," is the decisive
technology which determines the capability of producing saliconductors of the
degree of integration required in V1.51. It is in such application that the
electron beam exposure device is replacing the optical uposure device of the
past, in a notatorthy trend.

The device which Japan Electron Optics Laboratory (JEOL) is to supply to Bell
Laboratories has the capability of engraving line widths, which are a measure of
the ease of circuit fouling, of 0.01 micron unit, which is the best presently
possible in the world. The VLSI 66 K W (instantaneous read-in and read-out
memory), which has recently come into mass production, has a line width of the
order of 2 microns, while the super-high-speed IV being developed by the Defense
Department of the United States has a line width of the order of 0.5 micron, and
the .1801. device makes possible line widths which are even finer.

28.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bell Laboratoria is looking ahead to the 1990's and is working on new elaents
such as the Josephson elasent to Be incorporated into VLSI; it decided to make
this .1301. device a central part of this production system after a battle for
orders. This unit is expected to be delivered next su-er to Bell's Hurray Bill
Laboratory, and the order is said to total about 200 million yes. .1301. plans to
use this sale as the ioebreaker to mgage in serious exports to the United States.

Japan's saioonductor production technology was accumulated initially through
importation from the United States, and even now mre than half the production
equipment used by semiconductor makers is imported from the United States. On
the other hand, during the 4-year period starting in 1976, the Ministry of Inter-
national Trade and Industry took the initiative to form the ”VLSI Technology
Research Group" to engage in V1.81 production, which was the wedge for the rapid
emergence of domestic technology and domestically produced equipment. It is said
that dry etching devices and VLSI testers used in VLSI production have cone to be
ranked with the best in the world, and these equipment makers all are eyeing

exports to the United States. .1301. is in the position of having cut through the
front line.

Bell Laboratories of the United States developed the transistor in 1967, opening
the way for the transistor age, and this company has since been the leader in

the world in the matter of seniconductor development. So the present situation is
equivalent to "bringing coals to Newcastle." Japan's semiconductor products
already have rapidly moved to the fore where the world's semiconductor products are
concerned, and now its production equip-ant is basking in the limelight.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

Oki's Semicustom LSI
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 10 Dec 81 p 5

[Text] Oki Electric Industry initiated full-scale efforts to cater to the users’
needs in the gate array market, which is considered one of the promising areas for
the 1980's by the large semiconductor companies. Gate array refers to s-icustom
(partially according to special order) LSI (large scale integrated circuitry) in
which the user makes the decision on the basic circuitry makeup, which the semi-
conductor maker makes into the final product according to the design submitted.
Since ﬂippon Electric entered the market this month, the battle revolving around
gate arrays was suddenly intensified. Oki Electric Industry has Just established
-its gate alley production system at its VLSI production stronghold at the
Hiyazaki plant (Hiyazaki Oki Electric) and has embarked on production mainly of
CHOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) gate array developed for the so-
called first watch use saniconductor.

Design at ﬂachioj 1, Final Process at Hiyazaki
Oki Electric entered into a "3 H conflict" in order to reinforce its semiconductor
sales strategy this year. The 3 H conflict is the emphasis on sales activities

involving three areas--memory. micons, and master slice. Hester slice is this
company's special reference to gate arrays.

29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Together with the 64 K RAM (instant read-in and read-out memory), which it plans
to produce at the rate of 300,000 per month by the end of next March at its

Hiyszaki plant, will be the positioning of the third masher gate array production
project.

At the present time, this company's gate array products include the "1131. 82000/
86000 series" for the T11. (transistor-transistor logic circuit) and the "HSH
60300/60700/610m seria, for ODS structures, both of which possess thousand gate
(a gate -is the minim- unit of logic circuits) class capabilities, and this com—
pany is picking up orders for development from users and requests for production.

This company has a CAD (computer aided automated design) system at its Bachioji
plant in Tokyo, which is the base for production and development of semiconductor
products by the Semiconductor Device Industry Department as part of its production
system, which designs a series of circuit designs such as logic simulation, timing
simulation, and automated master pattern design. At the same time, the stage is
set for the Higazaki plant, which has VLSI production line facilities, to put

in the rinishing touches, including circuit distribution lines.

The record of orders includes many of the large instrument makers in the country
as the main customers, but "there are limits to the number of technologists who
can handle circuit design and logic design, and we cannot handle as many orders
as we would like" (Director Shimitsu Sawamura of the Electronic Device Industry
Headquarters).

This is why plans are for further reinforcement of technological support of the
gate array area, and "gate array sales of 1 billion yen in 1982" are anticipated.

com Nihon Keizsi Shimbunsha 1981
VLSI War in Japan
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIN!!!" in Japanese 18 Dec Bl p 1

[Text] The VLSI (very large scale integrated circuit) war is belching flames.
This is the result of Hitachi Limited having decided last August to enter into
sales of the ultimate product, the 256 kilobit RAH (instantaneous read-innand
read-out memory). Sales conflicts in the semiconductor industry have been of the
"first move, certain victory" pattern; companies such as Nippon Electric,

Toshiba Corporation, and Fujitsu lost no time in becoming fiercely embroiled, and
the American semiconductor makers have come forth with a volley of return fire.
Industries on the users side have been reinforcing research and development capa-
bilities to make practical use of the latest technology and shift to electronics
through establ islnent of long-term business plans, even to the point of revolu-
tionizing business concepts. This acceleration to a greater degree of integration
of ,VLSI is making a large impact not only on the saiconductor industry but on the
technological development conflict covering the entire industrial society.

Users "111 Also Rise or Fall with Practical Application

Next fall, Bitachi plans to initiate production of the 256 K PM at its Hasashino
plant in Kokubunj i, in the Tokyo metropolitan area, and send out samples to a

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hundred or so prospective users and seek orders. It also hopes to have a mass pro-
duction capability of 100,000 units per month by the spring of 1983.

Casting sidelong looks-at Hitachi's activities, near the end of October Nippon
Electric started construction of a new facility at its Sagamigahara plant
(Kanagawa Prefecture). This will be the world's largest class VLSI production
facility, for which a total of 27 billion yen has been earmarked, and mass pro-
duction of the 256K MM will betarted in 17-83. Fujitsu is pushing research on
its super-high—speed semiconductor element EDIT (high degree of electron nobility
transistor) with computing speed of l nanosecond (one-billionth of a second, the
tine required for light to travel 30 centimeters) at its Kawasaki Laboratory in
Kanagawa Prefecture, and increasing the degree of integration of this unit is the
top research subject at present.

Toshiba has completed development of its static type 64K FIN. which has roughly a
600,000 degree of integration on a chip a few millimeters square, which it plans
to place on the market next March. All the other companies have been pushing
toward development of next-generation VLSI.

The American semiconductor makers, which saw their domestic market being rudely
upset by the invasion of the Japanese 66K RAH, are displaying signs that they will
launch a counterattack in the area of the 256K an. A fire has been lit on the
subject and an anti-Japanese attack under the guise of trade friction, and the
supply of leading teclmology to Japan and moves to locate plants in Japan are now
becoming specific.

lncited by Hitachi's 256K RAE strategy, the latent capabilities of other domestic

_and.£oreig:Lmkers have surfaced and they are expected to speed up greatly their
development and sales plans on the nut generation V1.51; the semiconductor industry
is seeing the total competitive strengths of its individual members being rein-
forced. One of the principal factors responsible for the ”—82 plan requirement
for funds from the financial market continuing at a high level is said to be the
large fund requests on the part of the saniconductor industry.

On the other hand, the -ergence of the 256K RAH has had a major impact on the
industrial world. "If VLSI production is left to special makers, and a company
regards this as a black box, the future of car electronics will be left in a state
of instability? (Director Kenichi Uatanabe, Electronics Laboratory, Carrel
Laboratory, Nissan Hotor 00.). Nissan is putting strength into its own indepen-
dent research. The same situation of soundness, precision, and equipment con-
fronts every industry which plans to engage in electronics, and each company is
rushing to establish new intracompany systems to come up to the V'LSI age. An
investigator for a certain large bank said: "From now on the banks will be more
concerned with evaluating technological strength in place of real assets strength."
In other words, VLSI is even altering the manag-ent of financial organs.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1981

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hitachi's 256 K RAM Mass Production
Tokyo “IRON KBIZAI snmwn in Japanese 18 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Bitschi Limited announced on the 17th that it plans to start production and
marketing next fall of the 256 kilohit RAH (instantaneous read-in and read-out
memory), which is the large capacity muory for IheVLSI (very large scale
integrated circuit) which is presently the key to the electronics revolution. A
256 K RAH can retain roughly 30,000 bits of infatuation on a base plate a few
millimeters square, and the powerful semiconductor makers of Japan are waging
fierce battles to market this item. ﬂitachi was successful in completing its
experimental phase so as to begin embarking on commercialization at an early
stage. Once this product comes on strean, high-performance computers the size of
ordinary television sets will become possible. robots with capabilities very close
to man's can be developed, and household electronics will see great strides for-
ward. This alone should have a major influence on Japan's pursuit of the leading
technology, which has been intensifying recently.

Development at the laboratory stage has been under way in a number of other com- ,
ponies, such as Nippon Electric and Puj itsu, but Hitacﬂ. is the first to enter actual
production and sales. It plans to send out samples of its product to ahundred or
so large users next fall and to start sales. Once the users have tested the per-
formance of this product, orders are expected to come in starting about the spring
of 1983, at which tine this company plans to start production-.Of several hundred
thousand units per month, expanding this production to the million units per month
level from the latter half of 1983 to the first of 1984. Production is expected to
be at the Hussshino plant in Tokyo, where construction of the most recent produc-
tion line fa'cn'ity'has quietly-been-mder-waya—iihe—ea-l-k in the world's semicono
ductor industry had been that the real appearance of the 256 K RAH would be about
1985 (Shows 60), but Hitachi greatly advanced the date of initial production and
sales as if to refute this story and to launch its attack to expand its share
(fraction of the market one supplies) and regain the top seat in the saiconductor
market, which Nippon Electric took over in the 1970's, and to close in on the
world's top semiconductor maker, Texas Instruments (TI).

The 66 K RAH, which is the main VLSI product on the market at present, has suf-
fered a sharp drop of about 10 percent during this past year and the companies

are trying to weather this production battle in the face of unexpectedly poor
conditions. At the same time, the principal markets for saiconductors such as
audio, VTR, and desk calculators are cutting production, and the sharp growth which
was experienced in the past is no longer easily attainable. In this respect,
Hitachi seems to be looking for a new market with the introduction of this high-
performance product.

Since the fourth ranking semiconductor maker in the world, hitachi, has taken the
lead to cone forth with the productiond the 256 K RAH, it has become imperative
that the domestic and foreign semiconductor makers also venture into the same

area. In the particular situation of the American semiconductor makers, who saw

the Japanese makers precede than into the 66 K RAH market, it seam very possible
that they will put up a fierce counterattack to avoid having their position usurped

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

once more by the Japanese in the matter of the 256 K RAH. Increased criticism of
eapanding Japanese LSI imports is expected, as well as efforts to introduce the
superior Japanese mass production technology. At the same time, there may be
efforts to enter into plants in Japan iitilizing Japanese business ruources.

As the shows ’00 decade (1965) was entered, low-cost desk calculators and watches
with 1c (integrated circuits) suddenly became popular and changed people's habits
from the use of high-priced calculators and watches to low-cost throw away types.
should the 256 K RAH-which has roughly 1,000 times the m'aory capacity of the IC
and which is expected to be the cause of electronifying all the various industrial

areas--become a reality, certainly great changes are forthcoming to the industrial
world.

The emergence of the 256 K RAH has reinforced the Japanese semiconductor industry's
ability to compete and it is expected to be a great impetus to the electronics
revolution. '

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Sharp's 64 K RAH Production
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBW in Japanese 18 Dec 81 p 13

[Text] Sharp (Asahi Saiki, president) announced that it will start production nut
spring of the 66 kilobit RAH (instantaneous read-in and read-out memory) at a
monthly rate of 200,000-300,000 units, together with an all-out plan for semi-
conductor production. Up to the present time, this company was involved primarily
with CHOS (complementary metal oxide film semiconductor) ROM (read-out memory)
where masory was concerned, but it entered the 64m production picture as
all the semiconductor companies began reacting to increased production of the 64

K RAM. It expects to put up half of this production for external sale. At the
same time, the can (charge coupled element), which is basking in the limelight as
a new electronic eye, has seen the partial transition from the laboratory to the
semiconductor industry department, and starting production will be 20,000 to
30,000 units. In addition, sample shipments of the 16 bit micron (Xylog system -
2-8000) have been started, and preparations for mass production are under way.
This filling in of the lineup, and the buildup in capabilities are expected to
increase monthly product ion from the present 5 million semiconductor units to 6
million units by next spring.

Nippon Electric and Hitachi Limited announced previously that they will increase
their monthly production of the 64 K dynamic RAM to a million units each, and both
these companies are engaged in a fierce contest to increase production. On the
other hand, there are also some sharp price cuts, and the market is undergoing
extreme fluctuations. For Sharp to start making provisions for production of the
64 K RAM is the result of "We were watching the situation while we were shifting
use to other units such as the 16 K" (Director Tadashi Sasski). In addition. in
the past this company was in the top class in the matter of going from electronic
translators and word processors to the 256 m. "He cannot deny that we have
been late in developing RAH related areas, but demand for the 66 K suddenly in-
creased, and a reasonable state has developed" (Director Yasashi Inouchi, Sani-
conductor Industry Department) as the rationale for going into mass production
was explained. '

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time, CCD represents VLSI technology involving the placing of 200,000
elemmts on a chip a few millimeters square, and its development has been under
way at the Central Laboratory. Tuture plans call for improving the resolution
further as well as improving the yield. Part of this work will be shifted to the
Semiconductor Industry Deparrnent, but a program of parallel operation between the
department and laboratory will be adopted. In addition, there has been a sharp
increase in orders for photosensors, along with the start of exporting telephone
use LSI, and there are many bright prospects. The photosensor is a single smsor.
and efforts are also being directed at making optical 10 where there are no
peripheral circuits and the sensor and logic circuit are coupled directly.

Along with increased production has been reinforcement of the research and develop-
ment front, and the semiconductor laboratory will be made independent of the Central
Laboratory. This plan will be activated next July; work will start first on the
256 K RAH and the l megabit ROM, and research and development will be directed at
the entire semiconductor area, including revolutionary compound semiconductors and '
t hree—d imens ional semiconductors .

Reverse Export of Semiconductor Technology to the American Rockwell Company

(New York, 16 December) Involved parties announced on the 16th that Sharp will
supply production technology for semiconductors to Rockwell International, which
is the parent company of the large American air and space company, which also has
electronic subsidiaries; general agreement in principle has been reached. This
technology supply agreement contract is to be signed next January.

This involves the so-called (MOS type semiconductor technology, which features low
power consumption. Sharp___ introduced technology from Rockwell in 1970 to initiate
semiconductor production, but it has since gone into desk calculator and watch
product ion, during the course of which it developed its indepmdent semiconductor
technology. There was a request from Rockwell for introduction of the Sharp
technology, and the talks were started. "here once the technology was obtained
from the American side, the situation now is that the reverse process is taking
place, making for an interesting situation.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Hatsushita's 8 Bit AID Conversion [.81
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 23 Dec 81 p 9

[Text] Hatsushita Electrical Industrial (Toshihiko Yamashita, president) and
Hatsushita Electronic Industry (Seiji Hiyoshi, president) announced on the 22:!
that they had succeeded in becoming the first in Japan to develop and market a
super-high-speed, low power consumption 8 bit AID conversion LSI "AN6857" for
graphics treatment through their "LOPAC technology," which is their independent
semiconductor fine finishing technology. Production is at the Matsuahita Elec-
tronics Arai plant (Niigata Prefecture), and sample sales will be initiated start-
ing nut March. The sample price will be about 150,000 yen per unit. This type
of 1.81 has been imported from the TR" Company of the United States at the rate of
about 10,000 units per year. Compared to the imported product, this new unit

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consumes roughly 700 milliwatts or about one-third the power consumed by the import-
ed product, while the maximum conversion rate is 50 magabits/second, which gives
this unit twice the performance. These companies are anticipating increased demand
for industrial applications.

The All) conversion [.81 is an integrated circuit which converts analog signals to
digital signals. Digital technology is the best mode for bringing out the best

in electronic equipment quality and diversification and is considered a must for
future television, video, intelligent robots, and MB equipment. When used for
graphics treatment, not only is there no deterioration in picture quality but the
intonation can be stored in floppy discs, from which it can be retrieved at any
time, making possible computer treatment and enabling the breaking of the tech-
nological barrier which has beset analog technology. Conversion modes include the
so-called "scale" mode, which in the past involved the use of micons and the
successive comparison made such as in PCH audio; however, treatment time by either
method is slow, making them unsuitable for graphic treatment. This new AID con-
verter uses what is called a parallel comparison mode in which 256 resistors along
with corresponding comparators are used, enabling super-high-speed treatment. Its
speed is said to be 1,000-2,000 times that of the audio mode.

The technological difficulty is said to be at the VLSI level. This is because‘a
bipolar integrated circuit is used (which uses electrons and positive holes to
achieve amplification, which is a technology where integration is difficult. "here
once the limit to the number of transistors confined in a several-millimeter area
was of the order of 1,000 units, this new unit accommodates about 8,000. This
has necessitated the fine pattern width being reduced from 6.7 microns to a
3-micron level. Despite this refinement, there is no decline in the voltage it can
withstand, 10 volts, and precision has nor—suffered. The differential gain is

1 percent and the differential phase is the superior value of 0.5 degree, which
gives promise of an ability to respond to the high quality demands of graphics
treatment such as for broadcast purposes. This development was possible through
the "LOPAC technology" developed by these two companies, and the presmt AID
conversion L5! is the first practical application. These companies will go into
all-out development and commercialization of various devices applying this new
LSI.

COPYRIGH‘: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Mitsubishi's 66 K RAH Mass Production
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 24 Dec 81 [page not given]

[Text] Mitsubishi Electric is to greatly increase production of the 66 K RAH
(instantaneous read-in and read—out memory), which is the entry product to VLSI
(very large scale integrated circuits). The initial plans called for monthly
production of 300,000 units by the end of next March, but this scale has been
increased to 500,000 units per month. There has been a great increase in demand
for 64 K RAH both in the domestic and foreign markets, along with the earlier
than planned purchase of high-level production equipment for VLSI use which are
responsible for this move. In semiconductor industrial circles, both Nippon

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric and Hitachi Limited announced plans to produce 1 million 610 K RAH units
by next-March, forcingsthis company to push ahead its plans to close in on the
other companies.

Determined chase of Nippon Electric and Hitachi

Sales of the 64 K RAH by Mitsubishi Electric have increased sharply. Sales in the
principal American market for the third quarter period of 1981 (July-Septuber)
represented a 10.6 fold increase over the second quarter period, to 320,000 units.
The share for the same period attributable to the 6’4 K RAH climbed to 9.2 percent
(it was 4.0 percent for the second quarter period), and this record put this
company in third place amng the Japanese makers, next to Hitachi and Fujitsu.

Sales of the 64 K BM are still increasing in the American market during the fourth
quarter period, and it is said that orders are coming-from many new large users.

At the same time, use of this unit is increasing in the computers produced by this
company in Japan. while computer peripheral and terminal equipment seems to have
been stimulated by the lower market situation, and sales to games makers have in-
creased greatly.

In response to these changes, this company had already laid plans in September to
increase production of its 66 K RAH from 150,000 per month to 300,000 per month,
but because of the unexpected buildup in danand, it decided to increase production
to 500,000 units per month. Construction to enable this increased production is
being pushed at the Kumamoto No 2 plant, and facilities to produce 250,000 per
month will be ready by this Decenber.

In addition, provisions for acquiring high class semiconductor production equipment
for VLSI, the bulk of which is imported from the United States, are being completed
Inch sooner than had been anticipated, and this is also one factor abetting this
large increase in production. Because of the instability of the American semicon-
ductor industry, the present semiconductor productionequipment makers are

putting greater efforts into sales directed at Japan, and delivery dates have

been greatly accelerated.

With this large increase in 64 K RM production on the part of Mitsubishi, the
domestic V1.81 conflict is expected to become even more fierce.

COPYRIGlT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9923
080: [0106/ 32

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RECENT ACTIVITIES IN INTEGRATED CIRCUIT INDUSTRY REPORTED

New Function Element Research Foundation
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Aug 81

[Page numbers for all items not given]

[Text] Hitachi Ltd. Fujitsu Ltd. Hatsushita Electric Industrial Co. and seven
other representative Japanese manufacturers of heavy electrical equipment, compu-
ters and household appliances have decided to join together for the purpose of
research and development of new types of high-performance semiconductors which are
essential to advanced technology for such areas as development of outer space and
creation of aubminiature computers that can be held in the palm. 0n the afternoon
of the 4th they will establish the New Function Element Research Foundation (to

he headed by President Jowa Shindo of Mitsubishi Electric Corp). The Ministry of
International Trade and Industry (HITI) has taken a positive stance with regard

to fostering basic industrial technology for the next decade-its goal being "a
technological power for the l990's-—and so 10 companies in Japan which pride them-
selves on advanced technology have set about to create a structure for joint
research at the private level. They decided on the foundation format in order to
fend off foreign criticism that "government and private enterprise have joined
together to foster a high-technology industry." and to enable a flexible response
in the event that European or 0.8. manufacturers ask to participate in projects.
In view of the high level of technology among the companies involved. the results
of research can be expected to gain international attention.

MITI's Agency for Industrial Science and Technology wants to allocate more than

100 billion yen in research and development funds for the 10 years beginning with
FY-81 for all basic industrial technology for the next decade. The development of
new semiconductors, including superlattice elements. three-dimensional circuit
elements and high-tolerance elements (new function elements) will be a national
project with a planned research budget of about 25 billion yen. HITI has decided
that it will soon recruit agents to handle research and development of new function
elements.

The 10 participants in the New Function Element Research Foundation will he the
heavy electric equipment and computer companies Hitachi Ltd. Toshiba Corp,

Mitsubishi Electric Corp, Fujitsu Ltd, Nippon Electric Co and Oki Electric
Industry; the Kansai home appliance manufacturers Hatsushita Electric Industrial

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M Ul’l’lUlAL USE UNI-X

Co. Sanyo Electric Co and Sharp Corp; and Sumitomo Electric Industries. which has
recently gained much attention for its optical fibers and synthetic semiconductors.

The New Function Element Research Foundation will carry out research and develop-
ment on three new types of high-performance semiconductors: 1) superlattice

elements which can perform arithmetic operations at ultrahigh speeds; 2) three-
dimensional circuit elements which layer elements vertically from the surface; and

3) high-tolerance elements which will remain stable in hostile operating
environments.

If superlattice elements materialize, computer arithmetic capabilities will speed
up several hundred-fold and operation at normal temperatures will become possible.
If three-dimensional circuits are created. the scale of integration can be increased
40 or 50-fold and superminiatura computers which fit in the palm of the hand will
become commercially feasible.

Elements with a high tolerance of operating environments can be used in outer
space (subjected to high levels of radiation) and will be suited to satellite

electronics and atomic reactor control equipment. As resistance to heat and
vibration increases, it will become possible to incorporate computers in industrial
equipment.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Establishment of Foundation

Tokyo DEHPA SEIHBUN in Japanese 5 Aug 81

[Text] 0n the 4th. 10 companies representative of Japan's heavy electronic
equipment. computer. telecommunications and home appliance manufacturers estab-
lished the New Function Element Research Foundation (headed by President Jowa
Shindo of Mitsubishi Electric Corp) for research and development of new types of
semiconductors.

This will serve, in connection with the HITI Agency for Industrial Science and
Technology's national project of developing basic industrial technology for the
next decade, as a channel for the research and development budget of about 25

billion yen planned for development of superlattice elements. three-dimensional

circuit elements and high-tolerance elements.
HITI is to give its approval on 13 January.

Ten companies will participate in the New Function Element Research Foundation:
the heavy electric equipment, computer and telecommunications companies Hitachi
Ltd, Toshiba Corp, Mitsubishi Electric Corp. Fujitsu Ltd, Nippon Electric Co and
Oki Electric Industry; the Kansai home appliance manufacturers Hatsushita Electric
Industrial Co, Sanyo Electric Co and Sharp Corp; and cable and optical fiber
manufacturer Sumitomo Electric Industries.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HITI will invest 670 million yen from its 1981 budget. The foundation plans to
begin research and development as soon as this September.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunsha 1981
Foundation Projects

Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUR in Japanese 6 Aug 81

[Text] The New Function Element Research Foundation. a national project to create
next-generation semiconductors which surpass the capabilities of the silicon
semiconductors now being sold, has made its start. To create capabilities not
available in the most advanced VLSI's (very large scale integrated circuits)
today, it plans to invest a total of 25 billion yen over the next 8 to 10 years.
The technology which will serve as a model does not exist overseas as was the case
with past high-performance computers and VLSI development projects; the challenge
is presented by completely unexplored technology. For that reason the "research
foundation method." not seen in HITI's earlier national projects. has been intro-

duced; government and business are to combine their strength to carry out lengthy
research and development.

Recruitment of groups which wish to participate in research and development of new
function elements began on the 5th. The New Function Element Research Foundation

(headed by President Jowa Shindo of Mitsubishi Electric Corp) was inaugurated the

previous day; in actuality, the foundation will do research and development as an

agent of HITI's Agency for Industrial Science and Technology. This is a method of
development by a purely private organization.

This method was adopted because the technology involved is completely new, and so
the foundation will have to deal with patents and promulgate the results after
development. And because development will take a long time, a project manager with
specialized knowledge will administer the overall research plan from within the
foundation.

At present the foundation has 10 members: computer companies Hitachi Ltd. Toshiba
Corp, Mitsubishi Electric Corp, Fujitsu Ltd. Nippon Electric Co and Oki Electric
Industry; the Kansai home appliance manufacturers Hataushita Electric Industrial

Co. Sanyo Electric Co and Sharp Corp; and Sumitomo Electric Industries. which has
put its efforts into optical telecommunications. Other companies. however. will

be allowed to join the foundation at any time. Even Japanese corporations of
European and u.s. companies will be able to participate.

The foundation will begin research and development on three topics as projects
commissioned by the government: superlattice elements, three-dimensional circuit
elements and elements with a high tolerance of operating environments. but
peripheral technology will be developed independently by the companies whose
contributions the foundation recruits.

In the case of superlattice elements. research will center on synthetic semicon-
ductors to replace silicon on the basis of technology put forward by Dr Reona
Esaki of IBM. If it succeeds, it will lead to computers which can calculate at

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

several hundred times the p.esent speeds. The technology will be the most
difficult of the three topics because it will involve research in new materials.

Present VLSI's pack 100.000 or more elements onto a silicon surface a few
millimeters square; three-dimensional circuit elements will "stack" such surfaces

in two or three or more layers. One LSI chip now can store about 100 Chinese
characters. but if the three-dimensional elements materialize. it will immediately

become possible to store several thousand characters per chip. It will also become
possible to build hand-held word processors. The ultimate goal is to stack up 10
layers. but even two layers would yield a great advance over VLSI capabilities.

The high-tolerance elements are to be 10's with unusually great resistance to
vibration. shock and radiation. Simple versions are already in use in the United
States for military. space flight. atomic reactor instrumentation and automotive
applications. But development of elements integrated on the scale of LSI's and
VLSI's is a matter for the future. Because this will be in part an extension of
present technology. it is thought that these elements can be developed in 8 years.
2 years sooner than the other two.

The present advanced microcomputers rival the capabilities of the large computers

of the past. There are more and more opportunities for manufacturers in the fields
of home appliances and telecommunications. as well as computer manufacturers. to

introduce semiconductor technology into new markets such as 0A (office automation)
and unmanned factories. The plan to develop new function elements will bring
together in one place the manufacturers in various fields which harbor such
intentions.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Oki's 256K RAH
Tokyo Nikkei Sangyo Shimbun in Japanese 11 Sep Bl

[Text] 0ki Electric Industry 00 revealed its next-generation VLSI (very large
scale integrated circuit) memory development plan on the 10th. In addition to
completing testing on its 256 kilobit dynamic RAH (random access memory) high-speed
mask printed ROM (read only memory). Oki has begun planning of a 64 kilobit static
RAH and a 128 kilobit EPROH (erasable programmable read only memory). As the
development of these memories goes forward at a rapid pace in the VLSI section of
the technical research laboraroty in Tokyo/Bachioji. the VLSI mass-production plant
at Hiyazski Oki Electric Industry Co (Kiyotakemachi. Hiyazaki) began full-scale
operations at the end of August. Because it is equipped. from research and develop-
ment through mass production. Oki plans to join the group of world leaders in the
VLSI field in a year or two.

What are being developed now are VLSI memories of the next generation which have
minimum line widths of 2 eicrons. Under Oki's product plans. samples of the 6bK
EPROH (HSMZ766) will be shipped early next year. followed by the 256K high-speed
mask printed ROM (MSH38256).

In 1983. the 256K static RAH (HSH37256). the 128K EPROH (HSH27128) and the 64K cms
static RAH 018145188) will be available. A 1.5-mitronlo megabit 30!! is scheduled for
completion by the end of 1984.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of this stream of Oki VLSI memories. the most noteworthy is the 256K dynamic RAH.
Academic announcements of such a memory have been made by Nippon telegraph and

Telephone Corp and by NBC-Toshiba Information Systems. but Oki is the first to
announce a tested product.

The memory Oki has announced can be used to store 256.000 characters at 1 character
per bit with an access time of 100 nanoseconds (1 second - 1 billion ns). a cycle
time of 200 ns. and power consumptions of 300 milliwatts during operation and 28

as standing by. It uses a S-volt power supply and fits in the sane 16 pin ceramic
package as the 61.! RAM. The size of a cell to store one bit is 6 x 13.5 microns.
and the chip measures 9.76 x 5.89 ll.

Because Oki did not participate in the NIH-guided joint government/private
"next-generation computer VLSI research and development" project which was com-
pleted in March 1980, it was considered a late starter in this field. Nevertheless.

at the beginning of this year it announced the 66K dynamic RAH (“$137610 and the
1H mask printed ROM (P81428100). which were completed with the technical cooperation
of the Husashino Telecomunications Laboratory of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone

Corp .

Using its own technology, Oki has developed and produced the 128K high-speed mask
printed RON (MSH38128). the 32! mos (148142732), the 16K static RAM (118112128) and

the 16K ems (complementary metal-oxide film semiconductor) printed static RAH
018115128). These used VLSI technology with a 3-micron (1 micron - 1,000 In)
minimum line width.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Hitachi's 6“ RAM
Tokyo NIKKAN K0610 SHIHBUN in Japanese 22 Sep 81

{Text} In the second quarter of 1982. Hitachi Ltd (Katsushige Hits. president)

plans to announce a high—speed 64K dynamic RAM with an access time of 120 ns. This
will represent a full response to the demand for high-speed 64! chips for computer

main frame memory in 1982. and a diversification of 64!! products. This high-speed
W86“ will be Hitachi's third 66K chip. joining the ceramic or cerdip [ceramic
dual inline packaged] M6864 (access times of 150 and 200 ns) and the plastic
packaged “114866? (same access time) which will be available beginning 1 October.

Hitachi now produces 500,000 66K DRAM per month, and has plans to produce 700,000
per month by the end of the year; it has been battling with Fujitsu Ltd for top
place in the world 64K RAH market.

But the present 6“ chips are used primarily for peripheral terninals and for
microcomputers which require miniaturization; they have not been adopted for the

main memory of large computers. and so demand has not yet fully developed. The
price of 16K memory dropped sharply for that reason; 64K memory has also come down.
but it is not yet near to or below the cost per hit of the 16K.

Another consideration is that the performance of the 610K chips cannot rival that
of the 16K. The fastest 64K access time at present is 150 ns. a speed inferior to

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the 120 ns chips on the market and the 100 ns 16! chips Hitachi uses in its own
computers. Thus. although Hitachi sells 65K memory. it still uses 16! rather than
64K in its most advanced large computers; improvement of the speed aspect is one
task involved in replacing 16K memory with 66K. INMOS, the British national VLSI
company. also hopes for a high—speed 641 chip and is developing a 100 ns product;
samples have now begun to be shipped to Japan.

The high-speed type hitachi says it will sell beginning in the second quarter of
1982 will have an access time of 120 ns and will be in a cerdip package. Both the
mask and the chip size will differ from earlier 64K chips. They will not be pro-
duced by shrinking to 2 microns: a 3-micron process will be used. Hitachi has also

revealed that it has begun to develop a 1°C ns product to follow the 120 ns chip;
it intends to bring out a product line to respond to the 66K market.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
NEC's 256K RAH
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Oct 81

[Text] Nippon Electric Co (Tsdahiro Sekimoto. president) has succeeded in
developing a truly VLSI 256 kilobit dynamic RAH (random access memory of the
dynamic type) with a high-speed access time of 100 nanoseconds. NEC attracted
attention in February 1980. when NBC-Toshiba Information Systerms announced the
world's first practical 256K chip; now it has developed a new 256K memory (NBC
V7607) with a 1.5-micron rule using existing stepper technology along with usc's
"soft error" strategy and improvements in terms of speed. This is a very practical
item which can be mass-produced immediately if the demand exists. It is packaged
as a 16 pin DIP, and the pin arrangement is completely compatible with 16K and 6hK
memories; it is expected to become the world standard of 256K memories. The fact
that Japan's semiconductor industry has put out a VLSI product which leads the
world sh0uld be noted as evidence that it has caught up with the United States in
the development aspect as well.

There was a previous announcement of development of a 256K chip. but it was
inadequate in terms of speed--although an access time of 150 ns is adequate for
present computers. it is not really suited to the high-speed systems of the
future-or of measures against "soft errors" from alpha radiation (the phenomenon
whereby occasional errors arise from low—level radiation from the packaging
material). Consequently. NEC has developed a component which is more practical in

those two regards. This time. as previously. the mask (reticule) was produced
with an electron beam using a 1.5-micron rule. Only practical. existing technology

has been used. including an exposure device with a 10:1 reduction ratio. the dry
etching method and an ion injector for diffusion of impurities.

Thecnmponent is characterized by the following: 1) it is mounted in a standard
16K pin case and its pin allocation is compatible with present 16K and 64K memo-
ries; 2) delay is reduced by using molybdenum rather than polysiliconforinternal
circuitry, and so (typical) access time is sped up to 100 ns; 3) the condenser
film is thinner and the volume of the memory cell is slightly larger. and a chip
coating is used--soft errors from alpha radiation are thus reduced to a level of

52
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 per 200.000 device hours. Moreover. power consumption is 300 it, the same as
the 66K. and there is no problen with generation of heat.

Primary specifications: 262,164 words at 1 bit; 100 as access time; 270 as access
time; 16 pin dual inline package; +5V single power source; 0 to 70 degrees C
operating teaperature; T11. level input and output; 300 II! (active). 20 Iii (standby)
power dissipation; 256 cycle refresh cycle; 4 ms refresh tine; 6.25 x 11.5 micron
cell size; 10.96 r 9.63 In chip size.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shiubunsha 1981
Big Price Drop
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO 8111113011 in Japanese 16 Oct 81

[Text] There has been a big drop in the price of semicmductors--IC's (integrated
circuits). LSl's (large scale integrated circuits) and so on--that form the main-
stay of the electronics revolution. Specifically. the price of the 66 kilobit RAH
(random access usury). which arrived with the opening of the V1.31 era. has
dropped 90 percent or sore in the past year; the all-out price cospetition for
this product of advanced technology is appalling. Recently the suppliers of
America's "Silicon Valley." anticipating the cut in Japanese semiconductor tariffs
in Arpil 1982. have intensified the V1.81 price war by attacking with decisive price
cuts.

This October. 66! W's have begun to appear in some spot distribution markets at
1.000 yen apiece. This product. the V1.81 "entryway." was first announced to the
world by Fujitsu Ltd 3 years ago. and is now produced by more than 20 companies

in Japan. the United States and Europe. When sample shipments got underway last
fall the price was 20.000 yen. but it dropped to 2.000 yen by the tine companies
were geared up for mass production in the second quarter of this year. and recently
they have become as cheap as 1.000 yen.

The computer industry and other 64K RAH users had expected the price to drop by
some percentage when mass production began. but the recent drop was much greater
than expected. The 64! RM! arrived on the scene about It years after the era of the
16K RAH began. but the unit price of the 16K RAM was 1.000yen3years after it began
to be mass-produced and widely distributed. The 6611 RAM. by contrast. dropped to
that low price in only 1 year.- This has stimlated the users' desire to buy and
hastened the V1.51 era.

As the degree of integration of masory circuits has increased. the price per bit

of memory has dropped greatly. (Sea accompany graph) with a market price of 1,000
yen. the price per bit was 1 yen in the 1K era. but with 16K chips it is 6 sea.
and with 64K chips it has become 1.5 can per hit.

This price weakness has spread to the most sophisticated seniconductors--the
microprocessors and memories. The 16! microprocessors and 16K EPROH's (erasable
programable read-only mories) which have begun to be sold this year are in the
VLSI class of semiconductor technology. Although a full-scale effort to see these
advanced technological products to users has not been nsde yet. they have recorded
price drops of 90 to 95 percent in only half a year. In the competition of this
confused market. the manufacturers of Japan and the United States have found that

(in the words of a major producers of semiconductors) "the price is loving like a
phanton before the product is even available."

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 66K RAM is a strategic product for the survival of Japanese and 0.5. semi-
conductor manufacturers in the market competition of the VLSI era. The phenomenon
of price drops. which could also be called a "price breakdown." has continued for
that reason.

This price war has been escalated by a series of price offensives by U.S. forces
such as T1 (Texas Instruments). These U.S. companies have dropped to a 20 percent
share of the Japanese market with the rapid growth of domestic companies such as
Nippon Electric Corp. Hitachi Ltd and Fujitsu Ltd. which have the strength to
elicit a "Japanese-0.8. Seniconductor Her." The dominant view within the Japanese
semiconductor industry is that the final agreement between Japan and the United
States on IC tariffs was the trigger for the recent rollback by Silicon Valley.

Under this Japanese-U.S. agreement. the duty. which was double that of the United
States. will be cut to 4.2 percent in April 1982. The U.S. products which have
been kept out of the Japanese market by this tariff barrier will now be quite
capable of competing in the price war. Both the U.S. companies. which have sought
to gain an advantage in the fight for market shares in advance of the April tariff
reductions, and the Japanese companies, which have fought against them, have had to
use price as their weapon. It appears that the time for sifting out the semicon-

ductor producers which are unable to compete in the price war will be coming sooner
than had been expected.

64! RAM Production Plans of Hajor Semiconductor Manufacturers
(thousands of units in the second half of fiscal 1981)

       
 

Present
Cmanx Haas Production Plant Level Plan
Hitachi Musashi plant (Kodaira, Tokyo) 700 increase
Fujitsu Aizu plant (Hakamatsu. Pukushims) 600 increase
NBC Kyushu NBC (Kmamoto. Inna-oto) 300 increase
Toshiba Oita plant (Oita. Oita) 300 level
Mitsubishi Val-auto #2 (Nishigoshi, Kunmto) 300 increase
Oki Hiyazaki Oki (Kiyotake, Hiyazaki) 300 level
Yen IC Memory Cost per Bit
per (HOS Dynamic RAH)
bit 1
0. 1 original
forecast
0.01
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEC's Factory for 2561 RAM

Tokyo NINON KEIZAI SNIHBUN in Japancse 20 Oct 81

[Text] Nippon Electric Corp. Japan's leading semiconductor manufacturer. revealed
on the 19th that it will establish the world's largest plant for mass production
of VLSI's (very large scale integrated circuits) at its Sagamihara works (in
Sagamihara city. Kanagawa Prefecture). This will be a big project involving a
total of 27 billion yen in facilities investment by 1983. In addition to producing
66K RAH's (random access memories). the new plant will have a line for full—scale
production of the even higher performance 256! RAM. for which no semiconductor
manufacturer has yet established mass-production technology. The all-out competi-
tion among Japanese. 0.8. and European semiconductor companies in VLSI's. the
mainstay of the electronics revolution of the 1980's. is about to become even
fiercer; NEC's construction of this advanced technology plant will confirm its
leap to first place among the world's makers of VLSI'a, and will pull Japanese
technology for mass production of VLSI's ahead of that of the United States and
Europe.

The new plant is planned as a three-story building of steel girder construction
with a total floorspace of 19,800 square meters. Construction of the plant
building will begin this month. The construction plan covers 2 years, through
1983. with 15 billion yen in facilities investment in the first phase. and 12
billion yen to be invested in the second phase. The intention is to begin partial
operation of VLSI lines when the first phase of construction is completed in
September 1982. -

NEC is enthusiastic about the plant. saying it is the result of the highest levels
of technology and will use computers and robots for the highest degree of automa-
tion and unmanned operation of production lines. The most distinctive feature of
the new plant is that by the latter half of the 1980's it will have production
lines capable of mass producing 256K RAH's. the VLSI of the next decade.

The lead-off batter among VLSI's has been the 64K RAH. which made its appearance
this year. The circuit line width of this product is 3 microns (1 mm - 1.000
microns). For the 256K RAH. however, a fine circuit pattern with line widths of
1.5 microns is required. NBC will get mass production of 256! RAH's on the right
track by gathering the latest technology of drawing circuits on the production
line with the electron beam emitted by a device resembling an electron microscope.

When these 256K RAH's are used in computers, miniature desktop computers will have

the same capacity for calculation and memory as today's large computers. when
used in robots. they will resemble human action more and more closely. Thus the
electronification of industry will be further accelerated.

The final details of the scope and content of the production plan are being
hurriedly worked out at present. but mass production of the 64K RAM will start
when operation begins in September 1982. and production of the 265! RAM will begin
in 1983 when construction is completed. The silicon wafers (the semiconductor
substrate) which will move along the VLSI lines of the new plant will all be 5
inches (12.7 cm) in diameter. A production volume of 60.000 wafers per month is

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
planned for 1983; if these are all made into 66K W's. it should be quite possible
to produce a million chips per month. making this one of the world's largest VLSl
plants. .

The world market for 64K BAM's is expected to reach $1.8 billion (about 610 billion
yen) by 1985. Observing this expansion of demand for VLSl's. NBC gave the green
light to'construction of this advanced technology plant and entered the competition
for facilities investment to expand the semiconductor industry in Japan and the
United States.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
TI Entry into Japanese Market

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHMUN in Japanese 22 Oct 82

[Text] Japan Texas Instruments (3-6-12 Kita Aoyama. Minatoku. Tokyo; Eideo
Yoshizaki. president) has actively entered the gate array (custom 10) field. It is
coming into the Japanese market with six bipolar gate array products. including

the world's highest level of technology in terms of degree of integration. speed
and power consumption. For the present. only the design will be made here; the
design will be suit by satellite to T1 in Dallas. and production will be carried
out in the United States. Hithin a year, however. the entire process through
production will be handled in Japan. Japan TI is scheduled to get into gate array
products which are not bipolar at a later date; the three other major products are
to be m's [transistor-transistor logical. memories and microprocessors.

Japan TI decided to enter the gate array market because gate arrays. the small-
scale production of which had not been suited to circuit integration. can now be
cheaply and quickly placed on single chips; this has brought a great change to the
structure of production. and gate arrays can now be expected to enjoy the highest
rate of growth and large markets. Of course. 80 percent of this work is circuit
design using computers and depends on the large quantities of software the company

has accumulated in handling gate arrays since the 1960's. Japan‘s gate array
market has been monopolized by Fujitsu Ltd, but recently semiconductor nanufacturers

in the computer field—such as Toshiba Corp. Oki Electric Instury Co and Ritachi
Ltd--have decided one after the other to enter this market. Nippon Electric Corp
and Mitsubishi Electric Corp. which already have some products ready. have decided
to go into foreign sales when the time is right. The entry of T1. which is not
surpassed by any domestic manufacturer in experience with TTL's. is a threat to
the domestic manufacturers. which inevitably raises the prospect of severe compe-
tition before the market has really even opened up.

Tl's gate arrays (TAT series) are produced by the "master slice" method using the
new Schottky trnasistor logic (STL) developed by IBM in 1972. Because the 8T1. has
a simple structure. with an output diode added to a transistor, a high degree of
integration and high speeds are possible, and it also lends itself .to automatic
layout. The speed is close to that of BCL [emitter coupled logic]. and power
consumption is nearly as low as that of cms.

Four of the six products to be introduced are in the TAT series; samples of the
rum with 540 gates and the TATOOB with 1,008 gates were shipped recently. Each

(06

m3 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

has a delay time of 2.5 as per gate, and a power consumption of 600 microwatts.
Two others are now in use in the United States and will soon be announced in Japan:
the advanced STL's TATOlO (1,200 gates) and TATOZO (2.420 gates). Both have delay
times of 1.0 ns and power consumption of 300 milliwatts; they represent the state
of the art in terms of density, speed and power consumption.

Characteristics include: 1) integration of tens to hundreds of H51 [medium scale
integration] TTL's on a single chip (TI is now developing a 4,000-gate product,

and aims for 10,000 gates ultimately); 2) 2-volt operation of gates within the

STL (the I/O interface is 5 volts). which reduces internal power consumption and
facilitates selection of packages with a low cost and a high degree of integration;
and 3) development of a library of 71 macros (to increase to 100) which automatic-
ally give the most appropriate allocation of gates; this reduces the burden on
those using the circuits. and makes the manipulator available to the user.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1981
NTT's 20.000 Gate Array
Tokyo NIKKAN KOCYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 29 Oct 91

[Text] On 28 October, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp announced that it had
succeeded in developing the world's most advanced "logic VLSI." which packs up to
20,000 logic circuits (gates) on a chip about l-inch square and features 32-bit
operation. This super VLSI is an accomplishment of low power consumption, multiple
terminals. and a high degree of integration using CMOS technology with a minimum
line width of 2 microns. microprocessing technology and automatic design technology.
It has half the line width of previously announced VLSI's. and the improved per—
formance of a 50-percent increase in the degree of integration. Consequently,
processors using this logic VLSI as the center of electronic switching or informa-
tion processing systems will be available by 1983. It is seen as one step toward
the realization of NTT's Information Network System (INS).

Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSl) can be classified as memory VLSI's and
logic VLSI's; one memory VLSI developed by NTT is a circuit (DRAM) with a memory
capacity of 256 kilobits. The present development is a logic circuit which can

be used for computation, discrimination, interpretation. or exchange of informa-
tion. The more logic circuits or gates there are, the more complex or higher level
calculations are possible.

This new logic VLSI uses CHOS technology with a minimum line width of 2 microns,
thus achieving a degree of integration which packs up to 20,000 gates onto a chip

the size of a thumbnail. It uses 32-bit processing. and consumes only 0.75 watts
of power. The delay time per gate is 2 ns.

The newly developed logic VLSI will be used in the processors which are the heart
of the NTT Electronic Exchange (DEX) and the NTT Information Processing System
(DIPS). It can be built efficiently and economically because it can be applied to

either DEX or DIPS by just changing the arrangement of a basic circuit (logic
cell) which is common to both. But is has the advantage that existing software
can be used for the programs for both processors.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NTT has been working on the lNS concept which would convert from an analog
telephone system to a digital system, and it has decided to build a model system
in Husashino-Hitaka District (Tokyo) in FY-82. High-speed processors for DEX and
DIPS are indispensable to the INS concept; the development of logic circuits with
the world's highest degree of integration will allowtheuuniaturization and econom—
ical production of processors which will bring the IRS concept one step closer to
reality.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Daiichi Seiko's Fully Automatic Packaging
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 31 Oct 81

[Test] Kyoto-On the 30th. Daiichi Seiko Co (12 Negoro. Homoyamacho. Fushimiku.
Kyoto; Akira Konishi, president; TEL 075(6ll)7155) revealed that it had succeeded
in developing the "GP System," a new semiconductor packaging device which cuts

down resin loss and greatly shortens the molding cycle. This system is said to
completely automate the packaging of semiconductors. a bottleneck in the complete

automation of the semiconductor manufacturing process. The company has filed
patent applications in Japan and 12 other countries and has begun to accept orders.

This system uses, for the first time. granular thermosetting resins and a runner-
less method which eliminates preliminary heat treatment. All processes. from raw
material feed to mold cleaning. are completely automated in a single unit. This
will allow: 1) the shortening of the molding cycle to 70 seconds from the present
200 seconds, 2) a 60-percent reduction in resin losses. and 3) an 80-percent
reduction in operating personnel. It will have a great impact on the semiconductor
industry with its intense price competition. Daiichi Seiko has received many
inquiries, and has decided to build a new factory in Ogori. Fukuoka. to keep up

with orders.

Lead frames with integrated circuits set on them are packaged by protecting them
with thermosetting resins or ceramics. In the resin packaging process: 1) the
lead frame is set in the mold. 2) the resin materials are fed in. 3) heat and
pressure are applied, 4) the product is removed from the mold, and 5) the surface
of the mold is cleaned. In the method which has been in use. these steps are
separated. so frequent human intervention is necessary, equipment is massive, and
mass production is difficult. Daiich Seiko, which is experienced in semiconductor
equipment. molding and resin processing, took up these problems 2 years ago and
began research and development.

The new system it has succeeded in developing uses granular resin instead of
tablets, and injects them directly, without preheating. Then four lead frames
(variable) are potte 1s a unit and shaped in a transfer press using a runnerless
method. (The liquefaction and hardening of the resin is done efficiently in the
mold by means of a temperature control system in the press and the mold.)

And in regard to automation, the introduction and alignment of lead frames. the
measurement and introduction of resin materials. the formation and removal of the

package and the cleaning of the mold are performed one after the other. and such

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
things as positioning are also checked automatically. The equipment is compact.
measuring 2,500 mm deep, 2,300 mm long and 2,500 mm high.

The quality of the product itself will be improved through this series of accomp-
lishments. Because the bottleneck of temperature controls on the viscosity and
hardening of the resin has been eliminated and additives have become unnecessary,
it is possible to use_resins which do not require aftercuring. President Konishi
says this means "there is now a way to use resin packaging instead of ceramics."
and the company has joined the raw material producers and begun research on this
matter.

Daiichi Seiko estimates that a company producing 2.5 million semiconductors per
month with 26-hour operation for 22 days (85 percent capacity utilization) could
cut resin costs by 250,000 yen per month (with resins at 1,200 yen per ks)» and
also improve vorkers' productivity fivefold (three units could be run by one
operator instead of five) and cut power costs by 27.400 yen per month. The price

of the new system is about 40 million yen for the standard model. The area of
the land for the new factory being built in Ogori. Fukuoka, is 27,400 square meters

and that of the building is 5,000 square meters. Operation is scheduled to begin
in December.

COPYRIGHT Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
NEc's Expansion of 65K RAH Production
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japaneses 4 Nov 81

[Text] Nippon Electric Corp, the largest manufacturer of seniconductors, has
expanded and improved its system for producing 66K RAM VLSl's. and is preparing to
triple its present production to the 1 million unit per month level by March 1982.
That is because the European and U.S. LSI users to which NBC has shipped samples
have been sending notification that the NEC product meets their inspection stand-
ards for 64K RAH purchases. Hitachi Ltd and Fujitsu Ltd already plan on monthly
productionlevelsof 700.000 and 1 million units by March; a VLSI battle centering
on these three companies is beginning.

According to NBC, some 130 U.S. and European LSI users have given notice that its
64K RAH meets their quality standards. Vice President Atsuyoshi Ouchi has said

that "seven of the 11 major U.S. and European computer manufacturers are included"
in that number. It appears that NEC has already begun to supply some of the 130
companies. The quality notifications will not all result in orders, but they do
incidate that users are planning to adopt 64K RAH's soon.

On that basic, NEC has directed Kyushu NBC (in Kumamoto). vhich is the focus of
its production of 64K RAM's. to increase production. At the end of October it was
set up for a monthly production of 300.000. but NBC plans to jump to the 1 million
level by expanding output 150,000 per month; 600.00 at the end of December and
1.05 million per month by March 1982. Then production plans will be adjusted in

accordance with market trends.

#9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NBC Nnd not expected this response fron the users until 1982 and had taken the
cautious stance of holding monthly production of 64K RAH's to 300,000. In fact,
the market price of 64K RAM's (on the spot market) in the last year has dropped
from about 20,000 yen to under 2,000 yea; that has stimulated the users' desire to
purchase and has hastened market formation.

The move by NBC was preceded by production increases by Hitachi and Fujitsu.
Hitachi increased its monthly production from 500,000 in September to 700,000 in
October, and will go up to 1 million by March 1982. Fujitsu plans on 700,000 per
month by March. Toshiba Corp, Mitsubishi Electric Corp and Oki Electric Industry

Co each plan to produce 300,000 per month as of March 1982. .

Over 20 Japanese, 0.5. and European companies produce 64K RAH's now. but the
offensives by NBC. Hitachi and Fujitsu will put the Japanese forces in the fore-
front of the VLSI war.

(Commentary) NBC and Hitachi. Japan's leading semiconductor makers. have both
decided to produce a million 64K RAH's per month. This shows that the VLSI era
has begun in earnest, and it has shown the Japanese and others that Japanese
companies are well ahead of the American manufacturers of "Silicon Valley."

The 23 March 1981 issue of Fortune. the influential American magazine. was a
special issue on "Silicon Chips--the Japanese Challenge." The cover illustration
which shows a silicon wafer ring on which a sumo giant is throwing a wrestler
with stars on his tights, sums up developments with the 64K RAM. which has become
the battlefield for the Japanese-0.8. warfare of the 1980's. NBC and Hitachi have
fired up their engines to increase monthly production to 1 million RAM'a each. and
Fujitsu will not be far behind them; this does not cheer up the 0.8. companies.

According to local reports. Intel is having problems with performance and will
suspend production of 64K RAH's at least until December. and shipments of Hostek,
which has been the leading producer in the memory market, have fallen far behind
schedule because of changes in circuit design. The world's largest manufacturer
of semiconductors. Texas Instruments (TI), is making use of the high quality
control technology of Japanese technicians. and has decided to have Japan TI
produce a million chips per month at its Hiho plant in Ibaraki Prefecture; Japan
TI recently said that would be impossible under present circumstances. and seems
to have fallen behind the production plan.

Apprehension regarding the strength of the Japanese is increasing daily in
"Silicon Valley." That can be seen in a recently released report by DataQuest Co,
which specializes in market surveys for the 0.3. electronics industry. The report
says that 1.78 million 66K RAH's were shipped in the second quarter of 1981. and

that the two largest market shares were held by Japanese companies: Hitachi
shipped 700,000, Fujitsu shipped 360.000, and Motorola shipped 350,000.

The "Japanese-0.3. Semiconductor War" began when Japanese manufacturers seized

a 40—percent share of the 0.8. market for 16 K RAH's. the generation before the
64K RAM. It is clear that "Silicon Valley" will be stirred up by the strength of

the Japanese forces as the struggle for the 64K RAH market begins. It should be
noted that it is because of concern about rekindling theJapanese-U.S.semiconductor

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

war that NBC, a leader in the industry, has worked out the policy stated by Vice
President Ouchi “To start production of 64K W's in the United States as quickly
as possible."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiabunsha 1981

NBC. Hitachi 66K, RAH Production

Tokyo NIHOH KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 Nov 81

[Text] Nippon Electric Corp and Hitachi Ltd. the two top manufacturers of
semiconductors, have firmed up plans to begin producing 64K RAH VLSl's, their most
advanced semiconductors, in the United States in mid-1982. The 61.! RAM is a
strategic comedity in the competition among the semiconductor manufacturers of
Japan. the United States and Europe, and the large manufacturers of Japan have
taken the lead by beginning mass production. Accordingly. the Japanese companies
have a large share of the 13.5. market. and it is their judgment that renewed
Japanese-0.8. trade friction in the field of semiconductors would be inevitable

without local production in the United States.

The 66K RAM is used in the memory which is the heart of a computer. and is an LSI
with four times the memory capacity of the 16K RAH which is in wide use at present.

The 1.51 users of the world have been actively adopting the 66K RAH recently, and
the market is expected to expend rapidly in 1982.

In view of such a market trend, NBC and Hitachi both decided to increase 64! RAM
production to 1 million per month by Hatch 1982, double or triple their Septenber
1981 levels of 300,000 and 500,000. Local production in the United States was put
on the schedule at the same time.

NBC's local production in the United States will center on the manufacture of 16K
RAM's by NBC-Electronics USA (San Mateo. California). The plan is to begin
assembly of 16 K RAH's there in April 1982. and examination of the specifics has
begun. This spring use will begin construction of a second Electronics USA plant.

to be completed in 1985. This plant is to carry out the complete VLSI production
cycle, including the preliminary process of building the circuit, but NBC will go

ahead with assembly without waiting for the plant to become operational.

Hitachi, on the other hand, will have Hitachi Seminconductor America (Dallas.
Texas). its 11.8. plant, assemble 66K” RAH's as well as the 16K RAH's it has been
assembling. Hitachi plans to expand this plant in 1982. Under the plan the pro-
duction of 66K RAM's was to begin in the second half of 1982. but it is said that
this has been moved up to the first half of 1982.

Like NBC and Hitachi, Fujitsu Ltd manufactures 610K RAM's and plans to increase
output to 700,000 per month by March 1982. These three companies are the world
leaders in the mass production of VLSI's. Accordingly, Fujitsu is also expected
to move quickly to use its 0.8. plant for local production.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Shortage of 32K BPROH's
Tokyo DENPA SBDBUN in Japanese 6 Nov 81

[Text] The seminconductor market is experiencing a shortage of Erasable Program-

mable Read-Only Memories (2732). and those involved have had to make allowances.
The increased production of video games is seen as the prinry cause of the

shortage. A shortage of the low-power Schottky (LS) TTL's used in microcomputers
peripheral circuits is also becoming evident.

The BPROH shortage is receiving such attention within the industry: a microcompu-
ter manufacturer remarked: "The suppliers were talking about a 2732 shortage
around the end of Septesber and the beginning of October." while a ,components
dealer reported: "There has been a striking shortage of mow: the last 2 or 3
weeks, and allowances have had to be made."

When the consents of those involved are put together, the following combination of
factors can be seen: 1) there was a resurgence of video games such as the space
invader game that was so popular in 1979. and large numbers of game machines were
exported; 2) Japanese semiconductor manufacturers concluded export contracts with
0.5. gaee manufacturers such as Atari. and lacked adequate supplies for the
domestic market; and 3) the price of 32K BPROH's temporarily dropped to about 1,000
yen. and semiconductor manufacturers planned to switch to 610K chips next spring.

Premium prices were paid for 8K EPROH's (2708) during the severe shortage of early
1979. This time. too, there are increasingly numerous examples of 2732 purchases
at somewhat higher prices. And last time there was also a shortage of LS TTL

devices for nicrocomputers; industrial users are apprehensive about a parts
shortage.

The issue is whether this shortage will be temporary or relatively protracted; both
views are found among those involved. Many believe that production of game
machines will peak at the end of the year, but others say that even so the shortage
will continue half a year as it did last time, and that a serious impact on com-
puter production cannot be avoided.

In any case, this shortage is not as severe as the memory shortage during the last
boom. and since it has been expected to a certain extent since September, it
probably will not spread to other fields. This spring a shortage of cans standard
logic Ic's, which resulted from increased production of digital pachinko games.
caused problems in the market. and there are those who think BPROH's will show a
trend similar to that of pachinko games.

From the perspectives of the semiconductor industry. market conditions for
Japanese memories have been noticeably sluggish this year; there has been almost
no growth. There are therefore some who find the BPROH shortage an encouraging
sign of the sort they have not seen lately.

COPYRIGHT: Danpa Shirbunsha 1981

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hitachi's Small Outline Package
Tokyo NIKKAN KDGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 13 Nov 81

[Text] 0n the 12th, Hitachi Ltd (Katsushige Nita. president) announced development

of a 26 pin 16K CMOS static RAH in a miniature plastic package which can be used
for high-density mounting, and said that it is prepared for mass production of 10
items which will go on sale on the 21st. This miniature package is called a
"small outline package" (SOP); compared with the standard 2‘ pin plastic package
for a 16K static RAH (2K word by 8 bit organization), its area is about 40
percent, its thickness (resin portion) is about 50 percent. and the lead pitch.
(distance between pins) has been shortened by half (to 1.27 In).

The static RAH differs from the dynamic RAM in that it does not require complex
external devices such as a refresh circuit. addressmmlticircuitsor other control
circuits, or external timing clocks. It is thus most appropirste for small-scale
equipment such as that used in microcomputers. But the mounting density of the
static RAH has been low, since the number of pins and the size of the package
increase with the memory capacity: a 16 pin DIP 7.62 mm wide for 6K. a 20 pin
DIP 7.62 mm wide for 16K (16K words by 1 bit) and a 24 pin DIP for 16K (2K words
by 8 bits).

It is for that reason that the static RAH was developed in a ainiature package

appropriate to handy sized memory packages such as pocket computers which require
dense mounting. Hitachi's ordinary HOS memories have all been packaged in DIP's

with a lead pitch of 2.54 mm; this SOP is the first to differ. At present it is
used only for the SHAH, but it is expected that its use will expand to other
projects and that it will eventually be registered with Jﬂﬂﬁc [Joint Blectron
Device Engineering Council] or BIA [Electronic Industries Association] and
standardized.

Production of 50,000 per month is expected by the end of 1981. At present the
price is 2,400 yen (in lots of at least 1,000). 20 percent higher than the standard
package; with a battery backup capability it will be 3.000 yen.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
More on SOP
Tokyo DENPA SHIHBUN in Japanese 13 Nov 81

[Text] Hitachi Ltd announced on the 12th that it has developed and will begin to
sell a 16K static RAN in a miniature plastic package capable of high density
mounting. This package has about half the area and thickness of the standard
package, so Hitachi says it is suited to equipment such as pocket computers. NC.
and POS terminals which require high density mounting. The sample price is 2,400
yen (in lots of 1,000). or 3.000 yen with battery backup capability.

The miniature package has a lead pitch which is half the standard (shortened to

1.27 mmo; the resin portion is 50 percent the standard thickness. High density
mounting is possible because the package is not inserted but is soldered into the

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
printed circuit board. and pin allocation is limited to two directions as in the
case of the DIP.

The package will be used for 10 different items with access times of 120 ns. 150
ns and 200 us. It will be interchangeable with Toshiba products.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunsha 1981

Nippon Gakki's VHSIC "1th SIT

Tokyo NIKRAN KOGYO SNIHBUN in Japanese 20 Nov 81

[Text] Nippon Gakki'Co (Genichi Kawakami. president) revealed on the 19th that it
has succeeded in developing and will begin mass production of a high-speed LSI
using an SIT (static induction transistor) as the logic circuit. The SIT is a
semiconductor which has been praised internationally as "the third transistor";
Japanese and U.s. electronics manufacturers have been rushing to put it to practi-
cal use. but Nippon Gakki is the first to succeed. The scientific details are to
be announced in the Electronic Device Study Group of the Electronics and Telecom-
munications Society. which is to meet at the Electrical and Communications
Institute of Tohoku University in Sendai on the 20th. Nippon Gakki wants to
upgrade its products by incorporating this LSI in the next generation of electronic
musical instruments. digital audio equipment. video discs and home computers.

The operation of the SIT differs from that of the more common bipolar and PET
(field effect transistor) types; its major characteristics are high integration and
high speed with a low PD product (product of delay time and power consumption) as a
switching element. The theory was announced by Prof Junichi Nishisawa of Tohoku
University in 1950. and a prototype was completed in 1971. This is an achievement
of Japanese technology and has been noted as the "third transistor." which
surpasses earlier types. Development on the element level was paralleled by
progress in high integration. and there was a great sensation when an IIL (inte-
grated injunction logic) SIT logic circuit was proposed in 1975 and a prototype
completed in 1976. The Science and Technology Agency has undertaken expansion of

the possibilities of the SIT as a creative scientific development project. and
the research of Professor Nishizawa has been continued.

Now Nippon Gakki has gone ahead of the world‘s most influential manufacturers and
become the first to succeed in large-scale integration of the SIT for use in a
household device. while powerful domestic and foreign firms and research institu-
tions such as Mitsubishi Electric Corp. Hitachi Ltd. General Electric (GE). Bell
Laboratories. Stanford University and 13H are still in the research and development
stages. The 0.8. Government has also undertaken SIT development as a major theme

of its big VHSIC (very high speed integrated circuit) project.

This element has about 5.800 gates on a single chip. It includes RAH. ROM. a
counter. an adder. latches. registers. random gates. and about 300 other peripheral
circuit elements.

The process involves design of a pattern with a minimum line width of 3 microns;
it draws the relatively low current of about 60 microamps per gate. for an

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operating power consumption of about 600 milliwatts. There is diffusion dispersion
among elements. The chip size is 5.65 mm by 6.25 am (35.31 square mm), and two
layers of metal wiring are used. The supply voltage is 5 volts, and it can be
interfaced with a TTL. A no pin dual inline package is used.

As for the functions of this LSI. it can be used as a graphic display generator
for home computers; it can generate a vector given only the initial and final
positions; and it can generate memory addresses and data corresponding to picture
elements on the screen.

Picking with a light pen is also possible, and one can enter ROM and select from
16 types of lines. including short dashes or alternating points and dashes. It

is also possible to draw at high speeds using two memories. And it is possible

to connect up with a standard 8 bit CPU. Patent applications have been made on

about 50 points.

Nippon Gakki plans to develop a VLSI of the Schottky type (SSITL) which is about
10 times faster. for a broad range of applications. including the next generation
of electronic musical instruments, digital audio equipment, video discs and home
computers.

Remarks Tohoku University Professor Nishizawa: "This accomplishment is a first.
There is nothing anywhere that operates as fast. I am very happy that it (the
theory) has been proved."

The SIT resembles the PET structurally. but differs in that the positive output

characteristics are those of a triode and the negative feedback phenomenon
(whereby after a certain level the flow deteriorates as current increases, and

only the voltage goes up) is absent. Its speed surpasses that of bipolar trans—
istors by a factor of 10. Other superior characteristics are that high power
applications of 100 watts or more are possible and power consumption is low.
Tohoku University Professor Nishizawa started the concept in 1950. and a prototype
was built in 1970. It is said to be the only semiconductor discovery of which
Japan can brag to the world. But it requires a perfect crystal substrate, and

the manufacturing technology is difficult; it has not previously been much used in
commercial integrated circuit products.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

Hitsubishi—Hestinghouae Joint Venture
Tokyo NIKKAN KOCYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 21 Nov 81
[Text] Informed sources revealed on the 20th the Mitsubishi Electric Corp
(Nihachiro Katayams. president) had reached almost complete agreement with the
large U.S. integrated electric machinery manufacturer Westinghouse Electric Corp
(Robert 8. Kirby. president) to establish a joint venture for the production of
VLSI's in the United States.
The announcement that Chairman of the Board Sadskazu Shindo of Mitsubishi and

Westinghouse President Kirby have reached final agreement is expected soon. This
willbethe first Japanese-U.S. joint venture established to produce semiconductors.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POM 01"?IULAL USE ONLY

The agreement covers four points: 1) A joint venture company for the production
of VLSl's is to be formed by this spring. 2) The two companies will make equal
investments. 3) The plant will be located in either Sunnyvale, Boston. Houston.
Dallas or Atlanta. in consideration of the water quality, the quality of labor and
so on. Plant operation is to begin the spring of 1983. 6) 64K dynamic RAH's will
be produced at first. with 256K DRAH's to follow.

The joint venture concept started with a strong request from Westinghouse. and

negotiations started 18 months ago. A working-level committee has ironed out the
details. and a final decision by company heads is pending now.

The confirmation that Mitsubishi and Hestinghouse will form a joint venture for
semiconductors will be well received by the Hinister of International Trade and
Industry for its effect in easing semiconductor trade friction between Japan and
the United States.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Fujitsu's High-Speed CHOS
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 27 Nov 81

[Text] Fujitsu Ltd (Takamasa Yamamoto, president) has developed and begun selling
new high-speed (4 ns per gate) CHOS gate arrays: the HB60000H series with 2.000
gates and the H361000H series with 3.900 gates. At the same time, Fujitsu has
expanded its family of standard logic cells by about 20 and upgraded the user's
logic design capability and ability to use internal gates.

Fujitsu is the leading manufacturer of gate arrays. Until now its CHDS gate
arrays have consisted of four sizes (770. 1.275, 2.000 and 3.900 gates) all using
the technology of silicon gates with two layers of metal wiring. Because the
speed of these is like that of low-power Schottky TTL's--a 7 ns per gate delay
time-and the power consumption during operation is only in the tens of milliwatts,
much progress had been made in large-scale integration of logic circuits using
standard TTL and CHDS logic. Recently, however, there have been demands for
faster LSI's to improve the performance of devices. Therefore. Fujitsu has
developed high-speed CHOS gate arrays and begun manufacturing the first two
products, which have 2,000 and 3,900 gates.

The high-speed CHDS gate arrays have these characteristics: 1) The switching

speed is 4 ns. a 60-50 percent improvement over earlier CMDS gate arrays (HB60K
and HBélK) and much faster than standard TTL's and LS-TTL‘s. 2) The flip-flop
toggle frequency. which is one criterion indicating speed. is above 20 HR:
(compared with 16 HR: for earlier arrays) under the worst conditions. The increase
in speed has been achieved by shortening the transistor gate length to 2.8 microns
from the old 3.6 microns. and by improving the production process. including mass
production.

The development and design methods, chip composition, package, conditions of use
and so on are the same as for earlier CHOS products. Orders will be accepted
beginning in January; development time is 14 weeks.

56

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fujitsu expanded its standard logic cell family concurrently with development of
this high-speed CHDS gate array. The standard logic cells have logic functions
corresponding to TTL and C805 standard logic; with them the user can design LSl's
and draft schematics. There had been 16 types; now about 20 more--mostly with
the same functions as medium scale integrated circuits (HSI's)-have been added.
These will make logic design easier; they will increase the usability of internal
gates and upgrade the performance of the devices themselves. The additional

cells can be applied to either the new high-speed CHDS gate arrays or earlier CHOS
gate arrays.

COPYRIGHT: Nikan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1981
Toshiba's Expanded U.S. Production
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 30 Nov 81

[Text] Toshiba Corp has decided to greatly increase its production of semiconduc-
tors in plants located in the United States. The scale of production will be
raised from 1.5 million units per month now to 2 million per month in the spring
of 1982. The reasons for this decision are that preparations for local sales have
gone forward in the year and a half since Toshiba went into the United States and
new users are wanted. and that there is a desire to keep the smoldering semicon-
ductor trade friction between Japan and the United States from flaring up again.
Toshiba put its first plant in the United States in April of 1980. Toshiba
purchased an existing semiconductor plant (Halman Integrated Circuits) owned by
Bansei Industries, a major manufacturer of lighters, and established Toshiba
Semiconductors (over $2.66 million capital). Because it was an existing plant.
production of IC's (integrated circuits) could begin immediately, and each month
the plant produces 1 million masked son's. which are cammuﬂy used in peripheral
terminals and television games, and 500,000 16K static RAH's for microcomputers.

The major "car electronics" component has been 4K and 161 RAH chips for Ford.
which is the second largest automobile maker in the United States. Most of the
silicon wafers for these chips are shipped from Japan, but the masked ROH's are
produced entirely in the United States.

Demand for semiconductors in the United States has been sluggish because of the
high interest rates there. but the recent sharp drop in interest rates suggests
demand will recover early in 1982. Toshiba apparently decided to expand its
production facilities to keep up with that recovery. And although little growth
can be anticipated in the number of new cars produced. progressin "car electronics"
is expected as demands for improved performance increase. That factor made it
necessary to increase production of static BAH's.

This production increase will not require construction of new facilities. since
about 5 billion yen has already been invested in construction of a new plant. But
Toshiba plans to introduce advanced equipment for the inspection process in order
to increase production of high-quality IC's.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TI's Expanded Production in Japan
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 1 Dec 81

[Text] One by one the major U.S. semiconductor manufacturers have been increasing
Japanese production and sales of 008 logic semiconductors. which have low power
consumption and a broad range of applications. First Japan TI. a Japanese
corporate entity of America's Texas Industries. the world's largest producer of
semiconductors. became the first newer of the international TI group to produce
cans logics; now Motorola Semiconductors Japan. the Japanese corporate entity of
America's Motorola Corp, will begin importing and selling high-speed cms logics
developed by the parent company in the United States. Both are aiming for ex-
panded sales to Japan‘s electrical. precision and machinery industries. This
penetration of the Japanese market for consumer goods should be noted as an open
declaration of the intentions of U.S. semiconductor manufacturers.

The major semiconductor manufacturers of the United States have fixed their sights

on Japan and decided to increase production and sales of ems logics because:

1) the recession in the United States mans that all items are selling slowly in
their own semiconductor market. and 2) strong growth in the field of consumer
goods is expected in the Japanese market. They can be said to be closing in on the
Japanese manufacturers of IC's of the ms type.

First Japan TI decided to produce (1'08 logics using both its plant in Batogaya.
Saitame (completed in 1968) and its plant in 8111. Dice (completed in 1973).
Samples of 35 items were sent out this year. and plans have been ends to expand
the product line to about 100 items in the first half of 1982.

It has been decided that within the international TI group, the responsibility
for production of Cle logics will be given to Japan TI, which is to provide
supplies to the United States and Europe. It is thought that once production in
Japan is going well. it will be possible to compete with Japanese companies in
the overseas market.

Motorola Semiconductors Japan recently decided to begin sales in Japan of the
very high speed 005 logics ($175116 series) developed jointly by its U.S. parent
and National Semiconductor. and it has begun full-scale imports. Hith the items
it had been handling. Motorola Semiconductors Japan plans on a product line of
about 200 items; comprehensive nsrketing activity will develop soon.

The mos logic is a semiconductor with a broad range of applications. including
television sets. calculators. and various control devices. Having the advantage
of low power consumption, it is experiencing rapid growth in consumer products in
Japan. It is estimated that in 1981 cuos and other ms logics accounted for about
1.0 percent of all 16 production in Japan. This is well ahead of the 20 percent
of bipolar linear IC's and of nos memories.

In the U.S. market. on the other hand. the emphasis is on data, military. and
industrial applications, so high-speed processing takes priority over low power
consumption,‘ and the most nunerous mass-production items are bipolar Ic's rather
than the Hos type. It is for that’reason that Japanese companies like Toshiba and
Hitachi have taken the lead over U.S. companies in CHOS technology.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

American's two leading semiconductor manufacturers have taken the offensive in
CHDS, which has been Japan's big weapon; competition in technological development
and sales is likely to become all the more fierce for Japanese manufacturers which
have taken this attack.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Toshiba's Exports of 60K SRAH
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Dec 81

[Text] Toshiba Corp (Shoichi Saba. president) announced on the let that it has
developed 64K static RAH's (TCSSébP and TCSSéSP) using CHOS and VLSI technology.
and will ship samples in March 1982. These 64K SRAHs are complete VLSI's with
about 400,000 elements integrated on a single chip and rival the 256K dynamic
RAH. This is the first mass-production application of the technology which
Hatsushits Electric Industrial Co announced to the International Fixed Circuit
Association in February 1980.

Random access memories. which can be freely read or written onto. come in dynamic

and static varieties. The static RAM needs three or four times as many elements
as a dynamic RAM with the same memory capacity. but it has the advantages of not

needing a refresh circuit, connecting easily to other LSI's. and consuming less

power through CHOS technology. Accordingly, there is expected to be great demand
for static RAM's for microcomputers and office automation (0A instrumentation.

Toshiba has scorned to follow the IC companies that are rushing to increase
production of 64K dynamic memories. and has put its emphasis on the field of the
static RAM; it is a leading manufacturer which now boasts a 40 percent share of the
world's 4K CHOSRAH's (GRAN) and a 90 percent share for 16K CRAH'e.

The TC5566P is a 64K CRAH with all CHOS circuitry; it is a step up from the 16K
CRAM's (TC5516 and TC5517) now being sold. Its access time is twice as feet
(100 ns) as the 16K CRAH, and its power consumption is a very low. 2 nanoamps on
standby.

The TCS$65 is SRAH which uses NHOS construction for the storage circuits and has
low power consumption (2 microamps on standby); it is a step up from Toshiba's
16K SRAH (THHZOIGP). Its access time is 100 ns.

Using reduction-projection exposure technology and dry etching for a 2-m1cron

line width, and such VLSI technology as two-layer wiring on polycrystalline
silicon. Toshiba has integrated over 600.000 elements on a chip about 6 mm square.
In order to raise the yield and thus reduce the cost. Toshiba has for the first
time adopted "redundancy circuits" to salvage bad elements. In addition. it has
developed its own circuit technology to facilitate interconnection with associated
VLSI's without synchronization, as well as circuit technology to reduce power
consumption.

The characteristics include: 1) an ax word by 8 bit organization which facilitates
interconnection with microcomputers. and also a pin allocation which is compatible

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with that of the standard 64K EPROH. 2) nonvolatile memory which, in the case of
the TCSSGAP. can be maintained 5 to 10 years using commercially available lithium
dry cells, and 3) low power consumption of 2 milliamps in operation. which is
suited to 0A equipment which should be small and have self-contained power sources.
A standard 28 pin dual inline package is used.

The sample price is 60,000 yen for the TC5566P and 50,000 yen for the TCSSGSP. The
level of production will be decided after watching the trend of demand for the 16K

SRAH, but it should be from 30,000 to 60,000 per month in the second half of 1982;
full-scale production will begin at the end of 1983 or in 1984.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo shimbunshe 1981
Oki's Expanded Production of 64K RAH
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 Dec 81

[Text] Production of 16's by Miyazaki Oki Denki Co (200 million yen capital).

the center of Oki Electric Instury Company's semiconductor production, has recently
reached the million per month level. The largest item within this total is the 64!
RAM, the most prominent VLSI. with a monthly production of 200.000. By the end of
this August Oki hadshippedabout 100.000 64! BAH's, including samples, to major
users in Japan and other countries; test results and purchase inquiries have been
coming in from these users. For this reason. Oki has decided to increase its
production of 66K RAH's to 300,000 per month by the beginning of 1982. in order to
respond to growing demand.

To strengthen its semiconductor sector. Oki established the wholly-owned Hiyazaki
Oki Denki to produce 10's; it began operation in April 1981. The plan was to
increase production volume by gradually shifting products from Hachioji. Tokyo.

which had been Oki's big plant, but so far the major effort has been 16! SRAH's
and the masked Ron's which are much used in peripheral terminals; it was only in

November that the 64K RAH came to lead production.

within the semiconductor industry. Nippon Electric Corp and Hitachi Ltd. have
decided to raise production of 66K man's to the million per month level by the end
of March 1982, and companies like Fujitsu Ltd and Mitsubishi Electric Corp have
also rushed to increase production. Because its VLSI plant was delayed, Oki has
without question gotten a late start in the 64! RAM field. but it may be able to
catch up to a great extent by reaching its goal of 300,000 per month at the begin-
ning of 1982. Its effort also speaks of the rapid recent increase in demand for
VLSI's in the domestic and foreign markets.

Oki plans to increase the scale or production at Hiyazaki Oki Denki to 3 million
per month during FY-82. The production plan for 66K RAH's has not been decided
yet, but at that pace they are expected to make up a considerable part of the total
production. Thanks to the new-plant. 1981 sales volume in Oki'a electronic com-
ponent sector, focusing on semiconductors. is expected to increase to 32.6 billion
yen. up 28 percent from the previous year.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9601

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIH!(HHWCJA1.USE¢NVLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

ssusoa nsvswpmrr FOR Rosor's, TV REPORTED -,

Kawasaki Torque Sensor

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 13 Jan 82 p 11

[Text] Kawasaki heavy Industries (president Kanehiro Hasegawa) with the coopera-
tive effort of Kyowa Electric Industry (3-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu-shi, Tokyo-to,
president Hassyasu Kawai, Telephone 0426 (88) 1111) has succeeded in the devel-
lopment of a torque sensor which can detect instantaneously the forces involved
at the various operational shafts of a robot. This unit is plugged into each
shaft so that it does not subtract any strength from the robot capabilities

and functions with the very high precision of 0.01 kilogram-meter and makes
possible automated adjustment for optimum operation for all shafts of the

robot even under high speed operating conditions. This development not only
greatly improves the durability of a robot but has also opened the way to
automated teaching which is expected to become a theme of the future, and it

is expected to contribute greatly to robot reliability.

Great Improvement in Durability

The three elements of speed, positioning precision, and durability carry large
weight where robots are concerned. But because robot operation depends on visual
judgement, the optimum operation suffers should the instsneous speed be too

fast and possibly cause damage to the part concerned or the cycle time may be
fouled should the instantaneous speed to be too slow, and the automatic adjust-
ment for optimum notion to bring out the robot's capabilities to a full 100
percent level has been a formidable problem.

It was considered at this company that though the instantaneous detection of
the dynamic torque operating on each shaft accompanied by the proper processing
of this information would make possible automated adjustment. and work was
initiated 2 years ago on the development of a torque sensor, and this effort
was rewarded at the end of last year by the world's first practical sensor.

The use of a strain gage is appropriate for detection of force, but there is a
need to make the detection sectiOn somewhat weaker in order to improve preci-
sion, and this has been a problem where application to robots is concerned in
which strength is an overriding consideration. This is why the practice has
been to install special detection mechanism on the hands and wrists of a robot
and not on the entire system. On the other hand, such a detection system is

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0FFKJAL.USEGDNLY

only good for detection of small forces such as those involved in assembly
operations. and it is not suited for detection of large dynamic forces such as
those involved in spot welding operations.

The torque sensor developed by this company is a rod-shaped affair along the
lines of a strain gage with a fairly small central section for the purpose of
increasing sensitivity, and its strong point is that it is embedded into the
robot shaft so that it does not lower robot strength. Japanese patents have
been applied for, and patent applications will soon be made in the western
countries with the one in the United States being made through the Unimation
Company.

This sensor is to be installed at various rotational parts of each shaft of a
robot and will automatically control operations of the various shafts operating
in diverse directions to the optimum operating levels, and it has precision

fine enough to detect even the very fine vibrations inherent to the robot
itself. when installed on Unimate 2000, a precision of 0.1 kilogram-meter was
realized while an installation on an Electromotive Puma enabled detection of
0.01 kilogram-meter. when installed on present day robot operating at maximum
speed (k meters/second), the precision did not suffer.

Thisdevelopnent has newly provided the robot with its own self diagnostic
capability and has not only improved durability and wearability but has also
contributed to improved energy conservation. Since it can be installed on
robots presently in operation. it is expected to be used for the time being
for automated adjustment to enable optimum operation of these robots, and
future plans involve development of automated teaching and applications to
various operational phases of force control.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982
Electronic Industry Association's Project
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 25 Jan 82 p 4

[Text] The Japan Electronic Industry Association (president Jinhachiro
Katayama, president of Mitsubishi Electric Corp.) will initiate a survey
research project on sensor (sensitive detector) technology to develop new
applications of computers. In the project engineers in the related fields
will be invited from the different makers belonging to this association to
form a special colmaittee. The comittee will examine both domestic and foreign
research and development results for several years as well as to study the
problem areas of technological development and the trends in needs. At the
same time, the "machine translation system survey committee," "home work
system survey comlttee," and "local network system survey cousittee" which
were started last year will continue their activities.

A sensor is a device which detects a physical or chemical phenomenon and
converts it to numerical data which a computer can handle. This is an indis-
pensible device for broadening the utilization area of computers, and the
development of superior sensor technology is an urgent social need for the
home computer days when the general household will use computers.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In particular, 0A (office automation) and FA (factory automation) are progres-
sing with remarkable tempo. Thus, there is need for early development of
sensors of even finer detection capabilities. The Electronic Industry Associ-
ation has concluded that an industrial level survey research is the best
approach to respond to these needs of the industrial society.

As for the machine translation system project which started last year, it has
dispatched foreign survey groups to study the situation at BC (European joint
study group), the United States, and Canada. According to these surveys, BC
has already succeeded in partial development of the necessary machinery, and
it uses the equipment and the efforts of the roughly 3,000 translation speci-
alists working there to turn out translations of the official documents and
preceedings of the conference by the next day at the very latest which are
circulated to the member countries in their own language.

The Electronic Industry Association plans to utilize the results of these
surveys and is presently searching for a method to develop a Japanese transla-
tion system. For the present, emphasis will be placed on translating Japanese
to English. Should translation of Japanese to English become a reality, then
the English can be readily translated into French, German, and other countries
using the results of the western researchers. Parallel research with develop-
ment of semiconductor elements is planned, and it is hoped that concrete results
will be obtained in about 3 years.

The homework system project is intended to exploit work done at home and here
again the situation in the west is being studied while a system adaptable to
the Japanese industrial society will be developed. The Electronic Industry
Association plans to develp this_these advanced application technologies in
order to respond to the general expectations relative to the technological
advances of the computer as manifested by the 0A which presently is seeing
such great success in Japan.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Sanyo's Color Sensor
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SBIMBUN in Japanese 27 Jan 82 p 13

[Text] Sanyo Electric (president Kaoru Iue) announced on the 26th that it had
succeeded in the application of amorphous (noncrystalline) semiconductors as
light sensors and thereby developed a new sensor area. The sensors developed
to a practical stage include the three types of I) an integrated full color
sensor which can discriminate 12 colors, 2) single color sensor which detects
the primary red, blue, and green colors, and 3) a full spectrum brightness sen-
sor which covers the full visible spectrum and costs just half the price of
single crystal sensors used in the past. It had been considered in the past
that amorphous sensors were inferior in performance compared to single crystal
sensors, but this company put together amorphous thin film (1 micron) integra-
tion technology, PiN continuous separation forming method, and direct lead
frame coupling (ADL structure) to establish a mass production technology to
commercialize a product which can outdo single crystal sensors. The price of

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sensor based on this company's production scale will be 250 yen per
unit for the integrated type full color sensor (to be shipped from March) at a

monthly production rate of 50,000 units, the single color sensor (end of Febru-
ary) will be 150 yen per unit with monthly production of 100,000 units, and the
brightness sensor (15 February) will be 100 yen per unit with monthly production
of 100,000 units. This company is planning not only the sale of individual
units but also is planning to hasten application to facsimile.

The optical sensors in the past have been limited to single crystal silicon
sensors. But, these sensors involve long wavelenghts, and they require infrared
cutoff filters (imported mainly from west Germany) to enable human eye scanning.
This filter is expensive, and any great reduction in cost was difficult be-
cause of complicated production processes of sealing resin and lead wire.

These difficulties were resolved in a single stroke by the amorphous technology.
This new sensor is formed by placing a transparent and electrically conducting
film on a glass base plate, forming amorphous silicon with PiN junctions, and
slicing it into chips by electrode current. Not only is production much simpler
than with single crystals but it has become possible to form integrated red,
blue, and green colors. In addition, a face down bonding method was developed
in which solderable lead frames are first formed upon which the chips are

placed followed by hot pressing (lOO'C). With this approach, sensitivity,

dark current. and gamma value equivalent to those association with single
crystal units have been attained, and the cost has been reduced to about a

The term amorphous indicates an irregular composition structure without ordered
crystal structure, however, it exploits certain properties not seen in single
crystals or polycrystals under a given set of conditions. In addition, the use
of thin film of the order of 1 micron minimizes the amount of raw material
required and the manufacturing process is simple. This company has already
developed a practical amorphoussolarbattery, and its output this fiscal year
will be the highest in Japan (500 kw for the year). This new light sensor
represents its second milestone. It is said that this light sensor should

find very wide applications in the areas of robot intelligence and office
automation (0A).

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

9923
650: 4106/53

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOWY

GREEN CROSS BIOBIGINEBRING ACTIVITIES DESCRIBE)
Tokyo SHUKAN BIRIONin Japanese 11 Dec 81 pp 72-75
[Article by Noritoshi Tsukada]

[Text] "I did everything I could think of. Now, I have finally cooled down enough
to be able to stop and look around." The cal-under in chief of Green Cross Corpor-
ation's research and development, Chairman Ryoich Naito, lately appears to have
finally regained his composure.

Gene Recombination Initial Stage Completed in Past Year

It happened at the (keen Cross board meeting held in November last year. Naito, who
usually fired harsh questions at others, cast off his assertiveness completely and
apologized for his inability on his knees. ‘ihe apology was for seemingly having
endangered the pioneer status in the development of interferon (IFN) derived from
conventioml sources such as leukocytes and cultured lymhoblasts, when it was re-
vealed at that time 'that genetic engineering had progressed rapidly in Europe and
America. With the momenta: of this board meeting", Green Cross has moved swiftly into
bioengineering, including genetic engineering.

In February, Green Cross gave a contract to an American bioengineering research
specialty cowany, CRI (Collaborative Research Incorporated), for research on

yeast dissociants which produce T (game)-interferon (IFN-T) by gene recodination.
In the same month, the corporation also tied up with an American bioengineering
research specialty company, Genecs, for mass production technology (separation and
stabilization of bacillus coli variants) of human serum albumin, a variety of plasma
proteins which are indispensable for the human body.

In August, Green Cross made the decision to send a capital subscription to CR1,

and for the first time in Japan acquired the right to use the basic patent held by
America's Stanford University for gene recodination. In Septenber, it signed a
contract to import B-type hepatitis vaccine manufacture technology by gene recodin-
ation of bacillus coli with a Swiss bioengineering research specialty company,
Biogen. These examples show the series of technology import decisions to which

Green Cross has con-titted itself.
These actions resulted from the concept that the "Japanese technological level is

still low" (Chairman Naito), but they are also the fruit of the labor by 75-year-
old Neito, who regardless of his old age and bloodshot eyes searched through

65

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

overseas literature before and after the New Year and visited Europe and America
more often than he had in the past. 0n the other hand, Green Cross embarked on the
development of 131- with CR1 and IFN-a by itself by means of gene recodination.
In addition, a test facility for the culture renal cell method throwolytic agent,
Urokinase, which had been imported from CR1 before the above actions were taken,
has begun to operate. Indeed, he "did everything he could think of" in the year
since he began taking action.

Green Cross _has expertise in blood-related fields and its specialty is polymer drugs.
"He have continuously been devoted to the study of biotechnology, which hardly drew
any attention in the past" (Chairman Naito). It was because it was Green Cross'
specialty field that the corporation went ahead of others into IFN production from
leukocytes and cultured lymphoblasts.

However, as a result of the unexpectedly rapid development of gene recombination
technology, there was growing apprehension that (keen cross would be left behind
in the mass production technology which would be essential to determine the wide
range of diseases for which IFN is applicable. IPN derived from leukocytes and
cultured lymphoblasts suffers from a raw materials bottleneck. Green Cross started

to tackle gene recombination methods on a full scale, staking its prestage as a
pioneer of IFN.

Raw materials are a serious problem for the corporation in other areas besides IFN.
the major products are all made from raw materials such as proteins and enzymes
which are dependent on natural organic substances, for instance, plasma, at the top
of the line, human urine, saccarine agents, vegetable oils and colloidal agents. ‘
Especially the main products, such as Albumin and Urokinase, which use plasma and
human urine as raw materials, are likely to be subject to difficulty in procurement.
As one of the measures to solve this problem, bioengineering is surfacing. Further-
more, the bioengineering manufacturing processes are very advantageous in cost, so
much so that Green Cross is promoting a serious involvement in bioengineering for
the maintenance of a stable foundation.

Although it is exposed to furious developmental competition, bioengineering is the
most advanced field of science loaded with multiple problems to be resolved. Even
citing the example of IFN development by gene recoubination, it is still at a stage
where "a top runner may or may not appear in sight in a few years" (Chairmn Naito).
However, a lengthy period and astronomical expenses are customarily associated with
the development of a leading new drug. Naito's relaud countenance has much to do
with the confidence that he has completed the first stage of strategic positioning.
he is bold enough to say bluntly: "There is no meaning to my existence unless we
come out as the top contender."

Sales of Artificial Blood and Delay in Clarifying Anticarcinogenicity of IN

IFN is a glycoprotein that works to block the proliferation of viruses which have
infiltrated into a living body. It is said to be widely effective for viral
diseases. It is also reported to inhibit the splitting of normal cells and tumorous
cells. At present, three varieties, (t , p and T , have been discovered based up-
on the difference in antigenicity and molecular weight, and the? type is considered
superior in focal anticarcinogenicity.

66 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Commenting on the acquisition of yeast dissociants that produce IFN-1', the develop-
ment of which is contracted to CR1, the development of full-scale production is
awaited since "the production capacity is still insufficient although all yeast
dissociants are delivered as soon as they are produced" (Chairman Naito). It will
also take another year to be able to produce a satisfactoryOEtype by gene recombin-

ation, despite the promotion of the production of this variety of interferon within
Green Cross.

To fill the gap until then. B type derived from fibroblasts are being purchased
from CR1 and T'type derived from leukocytes are being purchased from American Key.
GLtype made from leukocytes and cultured lymphoblasts within the corporation are

used in clinical tests. However, as for P type, some judge it “not too hopeful"
(Chairman Naito).

Naito explained Green Cross' policy: 'ﬂb avoided the roundabout path of trying

to pursue the big target, a cancer control agent, from the beginning, but aimed at
defining familiar diseases for which the drug is applicable one after another in
order to gain the status of a pioneer." Last May, the corporation applied to man-
ufacture IPN for treatment of virus keratoconjumctivitis, and subsequently it is
expected to apply for permission to include herpetic ulcers of the cornea and
herpes zoster as applicable diseases. Afterward, Green Cross intends to expand the
applicable range further to virus hepatitis and influenza and to challenge "the
inner citadel," anticarcinogenicity. Haas production is the prerequisite for
starting clarification of anticarcinogenicity. The mass production will begin
about the time that yeast dissociants are made available.

Since it requires relatively more time to define applicable diseases in the largely
marketable treatment field, effective new drugs are gradually being lined up to
make a debut in other fields. The first entrant is Fluozol DA. for oxygen trans-
fusion (artificial blood).

In the middle of November, this drug was passed by the investigating committee of

the Central Pharmaceutical Council, and it looks like permission for manufacture will
be granted by next spring, although there still remain examinations by a special
sectional meeting and a regular sectional meeting. The drug is expected to be sold
starting next fall after the price of the drug is listed. this will soon bear

fruits resulting from the time spent on research since 1969 and the investment of
nearly 2 billion yen.

in contrast to blood for transfusion that lasts only 2 weeks, Pluozol DA can be
stored, does not require a specific blood type, and will not cause hepatic side
effects. The market for blood for transfusions is as large as 17 billion yen an—
nuolly, but the blood is chronically in short supply. Since Pluozol DA is usable
for emergency blood transfusions and treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning, it is
possible that it will serve as the replacement for a considerable portion of arti-
ficial blood. It is said that "it provides some good effects not obtainable from
blood transfusions in the treatment of partial heart failure and failure of the flow
of blood to the brain, and in the surgical process" (Naito).

Disadvantages that require further research for improvement are that Fluozol must
be frozen for preservation and that it must be used jointly with an oxygen inhaler.

6T-

F0!’0FFNJAI.USE¢JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As to the new drugs that will appear next, 8 type hepatitis vaccine in the final
clinical stage and a cancer control agent, Spadicomycine, are the leading candidates.
B type hepatitis vaccine produced by the gene recombination method will be sold at
the earliest in 5 years. Therefore, it will be manufactured as a product first by
using an A blood as the raw material. Since at present there is no effective treat-
ment methog for the B type hepatic virus, which causes chronic hepatitis, hepatic
induration and hepatic cancer, this new drug is being watched with gerat expectation.
0n the other hand, Spadicomycine draws attention as an agent that blocks DNA syn-
thesis. It is likely that the technology will be offered to the American Bristol-
Myers company.

Green Cross has enjoyed high growth mainly in blood-related formulations by means
of an outstanding development efficiency such as to "achieve results in 6 out of 10
developmental themes if givenaserious effort" (Ckmirman Naito).

The business results for this December period are expected to show a small gain
after all. The favorable growth of Venoglobulin, an improved drug for serious in-
fection which was put on the market in January; Albumin, a drug to supply proteins;
and Plasmanate will absorb the slump in Urokinase, a drug to dissolve thrombi,

due to a reduction in the price that slashed income by 10 percent and the increase
in research and development expenses.

Just as the previous low growth period of 1980 was saved from becoming a permanent
state by the introduction of Venoglobulin, this time, a strong contender called
Fluozol DA will make its debut. Green Cross has a reputation in its operations for
being quick at seizing an opportunity, as seen in its swift change of direction to
bioengineering and its daring conversion of manufacturing processes. However, it
is certainly an absolute must for Green Cross to come out as the top runner in IFN
by the gene recombination method if it is to be able to restore high profit growth.

interview Hith President Hachiro Ishigaki

[Question] I hear that the business results of this December period renewed the
record for profit increase since the stock was put on the market in 1957.

[Answer] At the time of the interim balance statement, we concluded that the esti-
mate of a small decrease in profit was still correct since the effect of the drug
price cut was ambiguous. However, judging from the trend in October and November,
the business did better than was projected. Sales will come to slightly less than
70 billion yen, and the net profit is sure to exceed 4.5 billion yen. He are hoping
to bring the net profit up to at least 6.6 billion yen (4.53 billion yen in previous
accounting term).

[Question] You mean, even with that profit, the growth in profit is still less than
in the former high growth period?

[Answer] We encountered a turning point due to the expected reduction in income
from Urokinase with the drug price cut and the increase in research expenses in con-
junction with the full-scale development of the most advanced technologies. However,
we regard this as a transitional phase. It is likely that permission for manufac-
ture of artificial blood will be granted by next spring. Also, in 3 years,

68 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Urokinase from cell culture will be brought into the spotlight. With the contri-

butions fro- B type hepatitis vaccine, liposteroid and interferon in addition to the

successful Venoglobulin, we can predict that in 3 years our organization will grow‘
to be one of the big five of the industry.

69— .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'tes)

.tis

plasts)

Lasts)

Supplying of calories

Anticancer effect

Anti B-type hepatitis,
Antistreptococcua
pneumonia, antibacillus
pyocyaneua

Virus keratoconjuctivitis,
herpetic diseases, etc.

Liver transplant rejection
inhibition

Hepatitis

Virus diseases, etc

Virus diseases, etc

Clearing of blood clots
(90% cost reduction)

Swedish Vitrn[phonetic

Singly by Green Cross

American Alta

Singly by Green Cross

Singly by Green Cross

French professor
Haupas [phonetic]

Singly by Green Cross

American CR1

American C81
ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040041-7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

33. 3: H838
83.5

32:5 2. 35
330823- uou downing

FOR OFFICIAL USE GREY

EH ousvoum
:5 3.332.. man—03>!"

one: 3...: H3330
owauu 3.23 H3330

39.5 89.6 .3 33m
2.96 .395 up 33m

guano cacao up annuam

3250 saga

32.00 53.3!
.095 6095 ha 5.36.3

as c.9382
qu caowuqac

532;»: 5323.4
5.3.33.5 330:8.

82 A823 53.:an 33.13 ”50228

cowugwaluuud
.32— 90 «9“.an

newsﬂash» 3906

38323:

3:30.:— uo 933.395
30 .8393. 3.55
one .3233“. 3a.;

30 . 30393 2.5.;

3:30....

33302—3
5333b

3 HON OﬂHh

050...:
0.325... «Eula

c.3334
ﬂaunts—5T .ku
aouauuauawn m

:ououuouaal 5.

309.38
concuuouﬂlaug

show UﬂGQUUUﬂug

mango
92¢ Emma—FEM

ZOE—.4
IanxoUm—M mzuo

can—5.3 duo

71

10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8940

6106/ 29

($0:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007IOZ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040041-7
run UQNLIAL use out!

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

COHPEI‘ITIGI AMONG NUCLEAR MANUFACTURERS INTENSIFIBS
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 21. 22. 23 Oct 81
[21 Oct 81 p 5]

[Interview with Director Hastaka Niahi, Hitachi Limited]

[Text] Japan's nuclear power plant industry with the three companies Mitsubishi

Heavy Industries, Toshiba Corporation, and Hitachi Linited as a nucleus is on the
threshold of a powerful revolution. Mitsubishi has been involved with the pres-

surized light water reactor (m) and Toshiba-Hitachi with the boiling water re-

actor (BUR) ever since the establishment of the Japanese nuclear reactor market.

This has been a sort of established "order." however, it has been disclosed that
Toshiba and Hitachi may also go into PER in cooperation with the West German KHU

Company. Thereby, the long naintained "order" seats to be crumbling. Meanwhile.
power companies which have used either awn or m up to now have started to think
about adapting different reactor types. A new reactor development war has begun

with these three companies divided into two camps. we went to the heads of these
three cowanies which are presently on the verge of engaging in a nuclear reactor
sale dogfight to hear their strategies. '

Question: What is your sin in getting on with the M Company's feasibility study?

Answer: The nunber of nuclear power plants is increasing. and in order to avoid
a situation in which all reactors of a certain type which have had an accident
be stopped, it is only natural that we look at a diverse array of then. There
is increasing awareness on the part of power canpanies to study this problem
more closely. This is why we have decided to survey the users' fe fags on
whether we should introduce the KW reactors into this country. This ..onpany
presently is engaged in construction of BUR alone, but if we can also include
the Pi!!! and be able to provide both types. it will be very advantageous for our
business.

Question: Do you have any specific plans for introducing the Kill reactor?
Answer: The present situation is that a thorough feasibility study should be
conducted. What is to be done then has not yet been decided. This company will

soon send a technology tea to West Germany, and a special group will be created
here to back up that teaa's efforts in research and developnent. We expect the

72

summon“
survey to last about a year. We will decide only after we have conducted
this survey. Even after we decide on the introduction and purchase of the
reactor, time has to be allotted for the acquisition of technology and gov-
, ernment inspections so that the actual introduction will be sometime in the
future.

Question: Let me ask what your basic policy is for promoting nuclear power
generation plants, both domestically and abroad?

Answer: We have en‘ered several bids for secondary systems (turbines, genera-
tors) in international competition and have been successful with some of them.
On the other hand. export, including the primary system (nuclear reactor sec-
tion). requires nuclear fuel supply as well in most cases, which this makes
primary system expert difficult. We feel that we already have the capability
to supply reactors as long as fuel is not included. This company has the
capacity to fill two orders per year, but we are still not at the stage where
we can get enough orders to display our full capability.

At the present time, we can only point to our delivery record with customers
such as Tokyo Electric Power which are BHR customers, but we have also main—
tained our efforts to cater to power companies using PHR such as Kansai Elec-
tric. This policy will remain unchanged. I feel that the ABUR on which joint
development has started will appeal to PHR users.

Recent Events

15 July. Signing of joint agreement by Toshiba. Hitachi, GE (General Electric)
of the United States, and Tokyo Electric on the development of an advanced
type of boiling reactor (ABHR)

1 September. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and HR (Westinghouse) of the United
States sign agreement for the joint development of a new-type pressurized
water reactor (APHR)

5 October. Toshiba. Hitachi, Fuji Electric and the Nest German KWU Company
sign agreement on feasibility studies (industrialization) of KHU's pressur-
ized water reactor (FUR)

Confidence in Fierce Pursuit

It is said that Hitachi was much more aggressive than Toshiba in reaching
this agreement with KHU. Both companies are competing with each other since
they both are BWR makers, but the actual situation is that Toshiba has been
taking a leading role. Following the introduction of Japan's first BUR by
Toshiba from GE, the second order was through Toshiba, and even the third

was by the same route. The first reactor Hitachi handled was the reactor

for the Shimane Power Plant of Chugoku Electric Power, and eventually it also
received an order from Tokyo Electric Power for the Fukushima No 4 power
plant. But with the advent of the newer and larger capacity plants. the com-
pany once more took a back seat to Toshiba. Toshiba also took orders from
Chubu Electric Power.

73

F0l.0l1WCJA1.lEﬂi(ﬂVLY
Nuclear Power Organization of Hitachi Limited

Hitachi Plant (main reactor parts, turbines,
generators)

-- 0mika Plant (measurements and control instruments)
Kokubu Plant (distribution panels, transformers)

Tsuchiura Plant (pumps, fans)
Nuclear Power

Industry Department Babcock-Hirachi*(pressure vessels)
*denotes
Hitachi Plant Construction* separate
(on-site installation work) company

Hitachi Nuclear Fuel*-
(nuclear fuel forming and finishing)

BUR Operation Training Center*
(training of operating personnel)

It has been Hitachi's desire to reverse this turn of events, and this line of
thought may be deduced from what the company said, "It is still up in the air
whether we will introduce the KHU reactor." It also took the stance, "We"
must select the sharpest minds to send to West Germany."

This company's pursuit of Toshiba is also reflected in its activities in ob-
taining orders. The company has two operating plants (for which it undertook
construction of the reactor section) which is considerably less than the six
plants (including two which were joint orders with GE) accounted for by Toshi-
ba, but the two companies are running neck and neck when reactors presently
under construction and on order are considered.

As an expression of the confidence this company has in nuclear power, the
former Nuclear Power Technology Headquarters was elevated to the status of
Nuclear Power Industry Department and began to operate independently in
August of last year. The intraplant system was reinforced in this manner,
while an agreement was reached with the world's foremost engineering company,
the Bechtel Company, to reinforce overall strength.

The company says, "We can construct an entire nuclear plant with in—house and
associated companies' capabilities. Our quality control extends that far,
and we emphasize reliability, which is the most important theme in nuclear
power generation." Once agreement is reached among power companies to use
the KUU reactor, this company will no longer play second fiddle to Toshiba

as in the past. Hitachi, which has the poorest record among the three com-
panies, is now starting a furious pursuit.

74.

IN3I‘OITICJAI.IISEZCHVLY
[22 Oct 81 p 5]
[Interview with Director Yoichi Aoi, Toshiba Incorporated]

[Text] Toshiba Corporation is not only involved in the development of an
advanced boiling water reactor (ABHR), but is also initiating studies on
the introduction of the West German pressurized water nuclear reactor (FUR)
and moving toward the role as an integrated maker.

Question: What are the future prospects for the ABHR on which joint develop-
ment has already started?

Answer: ABHR will further enhance the safety and reliability aspects of the
present boiling water reactors (sun) and is aiming for a "Japanese-type light
water reactor" that will conform with this country's environment. This ef-
fort has already started, and, if things proceed in orderly manner, we should
be ready to enter commercialization just about 1985. This ABHR, unlike nu-
clear reactors of the past which mainly consisted of imported technology, is
to largely incorporated technology which was independently developed by this
company. This alone is motive enough to succeed in this development, and we
have the resolve to see this thing through.

Question: How do you compare this ABHR with PHR on which “nu have just made
an agreement with KHU of West Germany?

Answer: Our company's involvement in these two reactor types is different

in nature. We intend to apply technology accumulated to date to improve the
BUR and come up with a better reactor. ABWR. Preceding the signing of the
recent joint development agreement. this company. Hitachi, and General Elec-
tric of the United States and other leading ERR makers of the world had organ-
ized a "technology renovating team“ and started development of ABHR. In con-
tract to this, the KHU reactor is only now going into the prelimhmrysurvey
stage. The decision on its introduction will be made after the feasibility
studies (commercialization survey).

0n the other hand, the KHU reactor is already in operation, unlike the ABHR
for which there is no working model as yet. Despite this, there is need to
introduce earthquake—resistant design and provisions to conform to Japanese
standards before the reactor can actually be placed in the hands of Japanese
power companies, and considerable time probably will be required for this.
Should everything go according to plan with these two types, I feel that the
ABHR will be on line first. We have been looking at the FUR of KWU for some
time, but only recently have there been expressions on the part of the power
companies to earnestly study its introduction. we felt that the time was
ripe.

Question: With the new addition of ABUR and the KHU reactor to your arse-
nal, how do you think the nuclear reactor sales competition will develop?

Answer: We are studying the KWU's PHR because we feel that it is good that
the makers should study various types of reactors. But we have not made the

75-

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
decision as to importation. Should the introduction of this KWR reactor be-
come a reality. we will be able to respond to user needs for both ERR and
PHR in the area of light water reactors, which are presently the main stream
of nuclear power generation. Thus, we feel that trade talks both at home
and abroad will be conducted more advantageously than at present. I feel
that the primary thing from here on is to put all effort into the export
of nuclear plants, including the reactor. It is unfortunate that nuclear
power construction throughout the world is in a slowdown stage presently.

Events at Toshiba, Hitachi

June 1966. Technology agreement reached with GE (General Electric) of the
United States and BUR introduced.

April 1967. Nippon Nuclear Fuel for nuclear fuel forming and finishing is
founded by joint subscription with GE.

March 1971. EUR Training Center established.

September 1981. Agreement to renegotiate technology agreement contract with
CE.

Nuclear Power Organization of Toshiba Corporation
Tsuruai Plant (intrareactor construction, control
rods, generator)
Nishi Turbine Plant (turbines)

Fuchi Plant (control panel, electrical parts)

Nuclear Power .
Industry Nead- Toshiba Plant Construction* (on-site installation

quarters work)

Isbikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries
(pressure vessel, containment vessel)

Nippon Nuclear Fuel* (fuel forming and finishing)

ERR Operation Training Center’‘
(training of operating personnel

* indicatesseparate company

ABHR, an Effective Heapon

For Toshiba, which is a top maker of ERR, to enter into an agreement with the
West German KHU Company is a chance to leap into position as one of the world's
influential nuclear reactor makers with both Dun and FUN capabilities.

76.

IN)R!0FFI(1AI.IHHE(NNLY
There is a 2:1 preponderance of PUB over BUR in the world nuclear market to-
day, but the situation in Japan is for BUR to outnumber PHR 11 to 10. Al-
though it has opened a considerable gap between itself and Hitachi where BHR
is concerned, all the PHR users rely on Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. so
Hitachi has no way of leading in Japan where nuclear power production is con-
cerned the way things stand now.

In this situation, the development of ABHR project got underway before Mitsu-
bishi's new type reactor (APHR) and moves were made toward PHR by the agree-
ment with KWU. There is a move afoot to use a number of different reactor
types among the power companies, and the ABHR is expected to prove an effec-
tive weapon to use on PHR users of the past.

The further addition of the KHU will certainly strengthen this company's nu-
clear power system. It will be particularly advantageous in the area of
plant export because of the preponderance of countries using PHR. It may be
said that the top position occupied by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is well
within range.

On the other hand, this company has some unpleasant aspects as well. Hitachi
Limited, which was a partner in the signing of the technology agreement with
GE and in the agreement with the West German KHU Company, is fast closing in
from the rear. In another direction, Mitsubishi is expected to make a strong
bid for present BHR users.

This company is proud that it has long engaged in the development of leading
technology in the electrical industry, and it has records to support this
claim. Judged from this. how will the ABHR and the KHU BUR fare? It won't
be too long before we will get the answer.

[24 Oct 81 p 5]
[Interview with Director Kotaro Iida, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. Ltd]

[Text] Toshiba and Hitachi are now attempting to make inroads into the area
of pressurized water reactors (FUR) which heretofore has been the sole domain
of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. To counter this, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
plans to guard its top position through the development of an advanced type
reactor (APHR).

Question: How do you plan to counter the entry of Toshiba and Hitachi into
PHR?

A Answer: The fact that we have from the start introduced technology and de-
veloped experience is the prime reason this company alone is presently hand-
ling PHR. 0n the other hand, there seems to be some resentment by some peo-
ple that any one company have a sole monopoly, and we understand that this .
situation cannot be maintained over a very long period. He anticipated that
this day would come. He, who have for a long time specialized in this type
of reactor, feel that the only way to do business is to offer the user a
better product. Ever since we started developing FUR technology, we have

77-

INJR OIWHCJAl.l£§EZ(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been more interested in making nuclear power production an established sys-
tem for our country than in seeking direct profits, and all our efforts have
been-directed in this direction. The PH'R is now used by many companies, and
we feel that our efforts have finally borne fruit.

Question: Have you any plans to invade the area of boiling water reactors
(BUR) which Toshiba and Hitachi presently are active?

Answer: We don't feel such a move is necessary. We have faith that the PWR
is superior to the BUR both in safety and reliability. This is evident when

one views the world situation and finds that the trend in most countries is
to PHR's.

Question: What are your plans to develop advanced reactors and your future
strategy?

Answer: We are trying to develop the APWR in cooperation with the "eating-
house (WH Corp.) of the United States and are presently in the final survey
stage of how to divide assignments. We will start making final detailed plans
beginning next month, and we are asking PWR users, such as Kwansai Electric
Power to cooperate. This includes capital subscription. We are targeting a
FUR with even greater reliability, safety, and economy than the present models.
where development is concerned, we want to be the nucleus to come up with a
reactor which is suitable to Japan's environment. Where Japan's energy situ-
ation is concerned, we must construct more new nuclear power plants. We feel
that the AM will not only appeal to the present FUR users but also to users
who presently are operating BWR's.

Mitsubishi Activities

April 1959. Mitsubishi Nuclear Power Industry (funded by three Mitsubishi
groups with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as nucleus) and the UH Westinghouse)
Corp. of the United States enter into technological agreement and the PWR is
introduced.

December 1971. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and HIE Ln technological agreement.
Mitsubishi Nuclear Fuels established.

June 1972. Nuclear Power Generation Training Center established.

September 1981 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and NH agree to renegotiate tech-
nological agreement.

Tension in the Face of a Harsh Environment

The company said, "We were resigned to its eventuality." but ever since the
agreement between Toshiba, Hitachi and the West German KW was announced,
there has been no question that there has been tension at Mitsubishi Heavy

Industries. There have been some cements within the company that "We may
have to initiate research on the KW reactor."

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nuclear Power Organization of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
(* Indicates Separate Company)

Mitsubishi Nuclear Power Industry*
(design of nuclear power steam generators)

Kobe Shipyards (nuclear power steam
generator production)

Taksago Seisakuxho (turbines)
Prime Mover

Engine Industry Mitsubishi Electric* (generator, electrical
Headquarters equipment)
Mitsubishi Nuclear Fuel* (fuel assembly
production)

Nuclear Power Development Training Center*
(operational training)

Nuclear Power Service Engineering*
(maneer ing services)

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries has compiled a top record among the nuclear re-
actor makers in Japan, and it single-handedly controls the PHR market. How-
ever, there has been criticism that "the company has enjoyed a monopoly so
long that it sits cross-legged and has delayed developing new technology,"
and that it has actually been somewhat behind Toshiba and Hitachi in new
reactor development. The fact that it is subjected to such criticism itself
is indicative of the great influence the company has on the domestic market.

Toshiba and Hitachi are now attempting to invade the domestic PHR market
which has been Mitsubishi's domain all along. There is an increasing desire
on the part of power companies to switch from a "one company, one type reac-
tor" to a multitype reactor concept, and the power industry which heretofore
had been divided into the P and B camp is losing this identity as the BHR
makers push sales to PUP users.

At the same time, inroads that Mitsubishi may make among the BUR users have
been blunted by the intentions of Tokyo Electric Power which is considered
the "leader" to introduce the KHU reactor rather than Mitsubishi's PHR. The
situation which surrounds Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is beginning to be
severe and completely different from what it has been these last 10 years.

According to informed people in Japan's nuclear power program, it is diffi-
cult to rate PHR's and BHR’s by definite grades. To counter this, Mitsu-
bishi Heavy Industries says, "We have no interest in BUR," which it attri-
butes to the smaller worker exposure and lower production of radioactive
wastes of PWR. With regard to the Toshiba and Hitachi move, it said, "BUR
by itself imposed certain limits, and there was no choice but to go into
PHR as well."

79

FOR‘OFFKJAL ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mitsubishi also stated with regard to AM that "with improvements to the
present reactor, we can provide the user with an adequately satisfactory
reactor, and that it should also be possible to counter the advanced type
boiling water reactor (ABHR). We have to be wary that if we sit still, the
situation might be erroneously interpreted to mean that we have no desire
to improve. This is why we have decided to come up with a much better pro-
duct than in the past" and indicated our desire to attack the BUR market.

Inthe face of expected attacks on its sacred ground by Toshiba and Hitachi
with the double weapons of BHR and FUR, Mitsubishi is in the quandry not only
about defending its territory but also about developing its own counterattack.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai shimbunsha 1981

2267
cso: a106/25

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

SEMICDNDUCTORS EXPORT--Japan'a electronics industry said Wednesday it would
not reduce production of semiconductors or restrict exports to the U.S.

where it has been criticized for penetrating the market. The Japan Electronic
Industries Association said Japan had about 70 percent of the present U.S.
market for the 6bK Ram, the latest computer memory device. But it said Japan
could not maintain this position "as the U.S. industry is certain to become
more competitive." It said Japan's surplus in the trading of integrated
circuits narrowed to 700 million yen (about $3 million) last year compared

to 2.8 billion yen ($12 million) in 1980. An association spokesman said
Japan and the U.S. had also agreed to lower tariffs on integrated circuits
last year. [Text] [0H2709Sl Tokyo ASAHI EVENING HEHS in English 26 Feb 82 p A]

SUPERCOMPUTER PLAH--0fficials of Hitachi, Ltd., have disclosed that their
firm recently embarked on a development project for a supercomputer capable
of handling complicated computations in science and technology areas at a
superspeed. Hitachi plans to complete the first set as early as next year

if all goes well, they said. According to the plan, the machine's speed will
be more than twice that of Cray-l, built by Cray Research 60., a U.S. firm
and now regarded as the world's fastest computer, and more than 20 times that
of the general-purpose computer. At present, MITI is pressing ahead with a
large-scale project for a supercomputer; Hitachi, with several other domestic
firms, is involved in this project, too. In addition, Fujitsu Ltd., is
developing its own supercomputer separately. Hitachi appears to be a step
ahead of them all, however. According to Hitachi, the demand for the nuper-
computer. especially useful in complicated analyses of fluid and molecular
structures, is expected to increase rapidly. Hitachi already received
inquiries from a few potential users. The firm is planning, not only for
domestic sales, but for experts as well. The HITI project, recently started
with the cooperation of six domestic makers. is for the development of a
supercomputer with a speed 1.000 times that of the general-purpose computer.
What Hitachi is trying to do is to develop a more practical type more quickly.
Nevertheless, since the planned Hitachi-type is of higher speed than those
planned by Cray Research and other U.S. makers, it is expected to give further
impetus to competition between Japan and the United States. [Excerpts]
l0H060839 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese b Mar 82 Morning Edition p 7]

C80: 4120/177
Run

81
FT”!(HWWCJAI.USEIDNLN