M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10628
2 JULY 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(F000 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGI'I‘ LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I‘Uﬂ VIIOUOOO-v --- -" - '

vn

JPRS L/1m
2 July 1m

USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(POUO 10/821

CONTENTS

ELECTRIC PWBB

Socialist Obligations tor 1982, 11th Five Year Plan
(BLEKTRIGIBSKIYE STAN'BII, Hay 82)........................ 1

Fuel, Energy (buplexes Needs Described
(A. A. ‘rroitskiy; mmmm May 82)............... 13

Large ES Couple: Design in lyunenskaya Oblast
(V. N. ashotin, et a1.; EPWBE'HKA, May 82)......... 21

mo Brief Book Reviews
(mwmgmnn' “ﬂy ”)0000000000oososoossoosaosooaoaoo 32

ENERGY CONSERVATION
Results of All-mien (qutition ﬁor Energy (buservation

(S. I. Veselov, I. H. Petisova; PRDWSEWA
“Emu“, 3m 82)soasoooossoooooosasssoocooo-oooooo-a-a 3!.

FlEls
Analysis, Planning. Forecasting Cost of Oil Production
(MIAuz, PLANIIDVANIYE I PMOZIROVANIYB SEBBSNIKSTI
”Ya! “Em, 1981)....sooaoooaooooosoo-naooosssosoosaao ‘1
PIPELINES

lhdergmund Tnnk Pipelines
(PODZEINYYB MAGISTRAL'NYYE TRIBG’ROVOW, 1982). . . . . . . . . . . M

- a - [111 - USSR - 37 F001
SOCIALISI' (BLIGATICHS FOR 1982, 11TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Moscow RETRICHBKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 5, my 82 pp 2-?

[Articles Socialist (bliQations of workers. meets. Technicians. Scientists

and Elployses of the 083R Hinistry of Electric Power and Electrification [Hinenergo]
mterprises and Uraniutions on the 1982 Plan for Economic and Social Development
and the 11th Five-Year Plan as a whole Ahead of schedule")

Ext] To implement the historical decisions of the 26th party congress on the
her development of the country's power and electrification on the basis of the
wide develop-ant of socialist competition. Soviet power workers and power builders
are carrying out purposeml work to increase the power potential of the national
econony, accelerate develop-ant of nuclear power. and create greater efficiency in
power and construction production.

hiring the first year of the 11th Five-Year Plan period power workers provided the
national econow with electrical and thernl energy which were within the estab-
lished limits. The electric power output was 123.3 billion kilowatt-hours, 0:
100.1% of the plan. Sons 886.3 nillion gigacalories of heat energy were supplied.
or 100.8% of the plan. A reduction in unit fuel consulption was achieved and saved
about 1 nillion tons of conventional fuel. Sons 100 nillion rubles of profit
above the plan were obtained due to a reduction in the cost of production.

In addition to the annual progress. 100 aillion rubles worth of products were unu-
factured at the plants of this industrial sector. including 1.3 nillion rubles
wa'th of consuler goods.

The installed capacity of all electric power plants reached 27? nilifon kilowatts.
including that of nuclear power plants -- 15 nillion kilowatts. The peaceful ato-
works successfully at the Leningradskaya. Gmmobyl'skaya, Kurskaya. Kol'skaya.
Arnyanskaya and other AB. The rated capacity of the largest power unit in the
world with a fast neutron 600,000 kilowatt reactor at the Beloyarskaya AE was as-
sinilated. A superpower 1150 kilovolt Blibastun-Ural VL [Overhead Line] is being
built.

In 1981. new capacities were released for operation at the Kol'skaya, Kovenskaya
and (H1ernobyl'skaya AB: at the Stavropol'skaya, Syrdar'inskaya and hryyskaya (IRES;
and at the sayno-Bhushenskaya. Niahnekansleaya and azeboksarskaya GB. The first

units produced current at the mestrovskaya and Kurpeayakaya GB, the

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

Azerbaydzhanskaya 633 and the Yuahnaya TEI‘S in Moscow and Leningrad. The follow-
ing were put in operation: the Nadeahdinskiy Mining-Metallurgical Plant; the
second stage of Kam [Kara Motor Vehicle Plant 3 new capacities at the Volga Pipe
Plant; the next in turn unit for producing #50. tons of ammonia at the Togliatti
Plant; four buildings with a total area of 238,000 square meters at the Atoumsh
Plant; and a number of other facilities.

Construction rates of large electric power plants which uso coal from the Etibastus
and Kansko-Achinsk deposits and the natural and by-product gases of Tyumskaya
Oblast are being increased. l‘our 500,000 kilowatt units operate at the
Btibastuaskaya ORB and a thirteenth 210,000 kilowatt power unit was placed in oper-
ation at the Surgutskaya GRB.

Considerable work was done on the socialist development of collectives. To im-
prove housing and cultural and personal li‘Jing conditions of the workers in this
industrial sector. 2,089,000 square meters of housing area were built. The follow-
ing were placed in operation: general educational schools for 8800 students;
childrens' combines with 7900 places; hospitals with 320 beds; trade schools for
1440 students; dining room with seating capacities of 11.900; and stores with
areas of 7500 8Marc meters.

Sone 130,000 new workers were trained in various courses in the brigade methods;
some b50.000 workers and 120,000 engineers and technicians increased their skills
and acQuired related trades.

The leading collectives of the Krasnoyarskaya and Nureksksya GB; the Kostromskaya,
Reftinshaya. Konakovskaya and Lukoml'skays GEE; the Aaenergostroy Trust; the Nos—

cow "Elektroshchit" Plant; the meproenergostroyindustria Production Association
and others have fulfilled their 1981 socialist obligations ahead of schedule.

For selfless labor and for achieving high indicators in socialist competition, the
following collectives of builders and operating workers received congratulations
from Conrado L. I. Brezhnev. General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee and
Chairman of the USSR Presidiul of the Siprele Soviet: the Beftinskaya and
Koatromkaya GRB; the Ust'-Iliaskays CB; the Ust'-Ilimkay LPK [Lumber Industry
Complex]; the Cheboksarskaya 653: the Surgutskaya CHE; the m2; the Rovenskaya

ABS; the Togliatti Nitrogen Plant; the Arpa-Sevan Tunnel; the Kurpsayskaya CB and
others.

At the sale tile, individual collectives and the ministry as a whole have fulfilled
neither the tasks for the first year of the 11th Five-Year Plan nor the socialist
obligations on reducing unit fuel consusption, introducing power capacities. 17.2.11-
ities for social. cultural and personal service purposes. and increasing the
productivity of labor.

in 1981. there was further development in socialist colpetition of collectives on
the principle of working relay races and the experience of 28 Leningrad enterprises
and organisatioms'that are building the Sayano-Shushenskaya GE, competition of work-
ers of leading trades working on personal economic accounts, and for delivering
repaired equipment according to guarantee certificates.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The collective of the Gidroproyekt Institute. whose initiative was approved by the
CPSU Central Committee.came forward with a valuable initiative in socialist compe-
tition. The basis of this initiative is directed toward raising the scientific-
techical standard of planning and reducing the estimted cost of building facili-
ties and saving labor and nterial resources.

By aultiplying the glorious traditions of competition. creating in each labor col-
lective a situation for the creative search for new reserves, workers in this
industrial sector are getting ready to meet the 60th anniversary of the fomtion
of the USSR with honor.

Dozens of thousands of leading workers and production innovators, any collectives
of electric power plants, networks. plants and new constructions in the industry,
following the patriotic example of the comprehensive brigade of the Neryunginskiy
GRB construction Administration. Hero of Socialist Labor and deputy of the USE
Suprene Soviet A. B. Novolodskiy. power builders of Zaporoshskaya AB and power
workers of the Konakovskaya GRB. stood the shock watch under the slogan. "To the
60th Anniversary of the formation of the USSR -- 60 shock weeks.”

Guided by the decree of the November (1981) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee.
the directions of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the CPSU Central
Committee and Chairmn of the m Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. and the decree
of the CPSU Central Committee ”01 the 60th anniversary of the formation of the
USSR." workers, engineers. technicians, scientists and employees of this industrial
sector are assuming the following obligations.

I. For the 11th Five-Year Plan Period

Increase the output of electrical power of the uses Hinenergo to 11428 billion
kilowatt-hours by the end of the five-year plan period.

Increase the annual volune of connercial output to 25.1 billion rubles by 1985
which is “.1 billion rubles more than in 1980, and provide an increase in industrial
activity in a sum greater than 900 million rubles.

Reduce organic ﬁxel consumption by not less than 75 million tone by increasing the
share of electric power output at nuclear and hydroelectric power plants, and by
reducing unit fuel consumption and the amount of electric power used for fuel trans-
port.

Place additional capacities in operation at the Zegorskaya and Kaysm'adorskaya CNS

in order to raise the efficient utilisation and improve the operating mode of nu~
clear electrical power plants. Increase the number of hours utilising the installed
capacity at the A8 to 6500 hours. *

Increase the output-capital ratio in construction by improving the utilisation of
contruction Iachines and devices by 1%.

Increase the equipment servicing coefficient at electric power plants by not less
than 9.6% as compared to 1980 which is equivalent to freeing 3%000 persons.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7W \ll'l'll IAI. \Ihl‘. \ll‘l.l

Provide a 90% increase in construction-installation work and a 90% increase in
coamercial output by increasing the productivity of labor.

Overrulfill the volume of construction-installation work during the five- year plan
period on electric power facilities. and place in operation not less than 61 mil-

lion kilowatts of new power capacities. including power capacities of not less
than 18 million kilowatts at nuclear electrical power plants. Complete the instal-

lation of 1000 megawatt power unit No 5 at the Chernobyl'skaya AB above the plan
by 1985. -

Reach the rated capacity of lb sillion kilowatts at Etibastusekaya CRIS-1 in 1983

and complete. by the end of the five-year plan period. three power units of
500.000 kilowatts each at Btibastussksya cans-2 and two power units of 800 mega-
watts each at the Surgutskaya ORB-2.

Put in operation two power units of 800 megawatts each at the Bereaovskaya Gal-1
in 1984 and 1985.

Put in operation the 1150 kilovolts Btibastus-Kustanay overhead line ahead of
schedul; by one quarter (in the third. quarter instead of the fourth quarter of
of 1983 .

In accordance with the USSR Minenergo construction list. build in 1981-1982 not
less than 600,000 kilometers of 0.3410 kilovolt rural electrical power trans-
mission lines, asking it possible to increase electrical power consumption in
agricultural production and in everyday servicing of the rural population by 1.1;
times. and increase the reliability of the power supply.

Build housing with a total area of not less than 10 million square meters or 2
million square meters lore than the five-year plan goal.

(btain a real national economic effect of 1M0 million rubles from introducing
scientific and project develop-ants in the five-year plan period.

Increase economic effectiveness by introducing into production scientific research

in the area of power in 1985 to not less than it rubles 50 kopecks per ruble invest-
ment.

The work of the Gidroprroyekt Institute imeni 8. Ya. Zhuk on raising the scientific
technical standards of projects and. on that basis. reducing the estimted cost
of facilities and saving labor and nterial resources should be disseminated wide-
ly in the institutes of this industrial sector and will provide the following:

a reduction in power construction costs by 192 million rubles;

a savings of 270,000 tons of metal;

a saving of 380,000 tons of cement:

a reduction in construction labor by 9.2 million Inn-days.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Save 20,000 tons of metal, 50,000 tons of cement and 30,000 cubic asters of lumber
above the plan goal.

Introduce inventions and innovator proposals in the ministry as a whole with an e-
conomic effect above 1 billion rubles.

Solve basically the problen of providing for requirenents of workers in this indus-

trial sector of childrens' preschool establishments and activate not less than
51.1600 places in these establishments.

Over-fulfill plans on producing cultural-personal service and household goods for
the people in the five-year plan period to an amount of 1.3 lillion rubles.

II. For 1982
In the Area of Power

0: the basis of increasing further the reliability and efficiency of power equip-
ment operation. placing in operation new capacities ahead of schedule. implesenting
measures on reducing accident rates. carrying out timely repairs of equipment at
electric power plants and power networks, prodding, within established goals. a
reliable supply of electrical and thermal energies to the national economy and the
people of the country, producing for that purpose 1259 billion kilowatt-hours of
electric power and 885 million gigacalories of thernl enera.

Obtain 25 million rubles of profit above the plan by increasing the efficiency of
power production, by reducing production costs of electrical and therml energy.

Increase the operating level of electric power plants and networks, develop com-
petition between workers of leading trades using personal economic accounting,
continue the introduction of advanced experience of the Kostromskaya, Reftinskaya.
Konakovskaya. Rasdanskaya and Zaporoshskaya GEES and, on tint basis. reducing

unit fuel consumption from 327.1 to 3215.5 gram per kilowatt-hour of electric power
supplied, and save 2.3 million tons of conventional fuel by 30 December 1982.

Increase the utilisation coefficient of the installed capacity of nuclear electric
power stations by 15 as colpared to 1981 by introducing measures to improve oper-
ation and repair servicing of the equip-ant. This will mks it possible to produce
an additional 800 million kilowatt-hours of electrical power. Aesimilate the
rated capacity of power unit No 3 of the Chernobyl'skaya AB and, due to that,
obtain before the end of the year 95 million kilowatt-hours of electrical power
ahead of the normal schedule by 20 days.

increase the equipment servicing coefficient at electrical power plants by 1.65 as
conpared to 1981 by introducing new equiplent; inproving the organisation of labor,
expanding the cones of servicing and combining trades. This corresponds to free-
ing 58150 persons. '

Complete basically by 15 November the annual plan for capital repairs of equipment
to insure a reliable electric and thermal energy supply to the national econony
during the winter of 1982-1983.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ilpleaent the following organisatimal-technical lensures on the basis of intro-

ducing new equip-ant and repair technology, and increasing the voluae of work done
by the industrial-plant sathodn

reduce the idle tins of power unit equip-ant in repairs by an average of 8 hours;

increase the number of excellent evaluations for repaired equipment to 163$ and
release the remaining part of the units with good evaluations.

Transfer not less than 605 of the repair workers to the brigade fore of labor
organisation as colpared to 55‘ according to the plan for the year.

In the Area of capital Construction

hulfill the state plan for contract construction installation work by the 60th
anniversary of the formation of the USSR on the basis of the taxi-u- concentration
of labor, material and financial resources at priority projects, increase the
nobility of construction organisations. inprove the engineering preparation for
construction. raise the standard of production-technological procuremt, and fur—
ther develop socialist competitim on the principle of the working relay race.

Conplete before the end of the year at facilities under construction 11,285,000
kilowatts of new power capacities. including 1.500.000 kilowatts ahead of schedule;
by the 112th anniversary of V. I. Lenin's birthday -- a 200,000 kilowatt hydraulic
unit No 3 at the Kurpsayskaya GB: a 25),000 kilowatt power unit No 2 at Yushnaya
TEI‘s of Lenenergo a aonth ahead of schedule (in November instead of December); a
110.000 kilowatt power unit No i a month ahead of schedule (in August instead of
Septesber) at Smolenskaya TETs-Z; by the Day of the Power worker -- 300.000 kilo-
watt power unit No 2 at the Azerbaydshanskaya (:35: 250.000 kilowatt power unit

No 8 at the Hosenergo TEl‘s: 190.000 kilowatt hydraulic power unit No 1 at the
Shankhorskaya GB; 200.000 kilowatt hydraulic unit No it at the Kurpeayskays (:3.

Put in operating the following boilers ahead of schedule: #20 tone/hour No 6 at
Ust'IliIskaya T‘EI's-3 (in Novenber instead of Dace-bar); 320 tons/hour No 9 at the
Irkutskaya TEI‘s-6 (in October instead of November); #20 tons/hour No 8 at the
Hogilevskaya Tera-3 (by the my of the Power worker).

Put in operation a south ahead of schedule a 100 gigacalorie /hour water-heating
boiler No 3 at Neryungri Yakutskaya Assn.

Put in operation 30.600 kilometers of 35 kilovolt and higher overhead lines and
36,181,000 kilovolt-aspen transforler capacities including the following: a 500
kilovolt overhead Surgut-Belosemaya line a month ahead of schedule (in Hay in-
stead of June): a 220 kilovolt Usinsk-Vosey overhead line a month ahead of schedule
(in Ha instead of June); two lonths ahead of schedule (in July instead of Sep-
tenberg -- 750 kilovolt Chernobyl'skaya A‘B-Vinnitsa overhead line and the 220 kilo-
volt Iailor substation with a 125,000 kilovolt-ampere No 2 transfer-er: by the my
of the Power Worker -- the 1150 kilovolt Ribastus-Kokchetav overhead lines the
500 kilovolt Svobodnyy-ﬂnbarovsk overheu line: the 330 kilovolt ﬂiemobyl'skaya-
Hosyr' overhead line with a 330 kilovolt substation; the 330 kilovolt Ignalinskaya
AES-Paneveshis overhead line with a 330 kilovolt substation (section to Utena);

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the 220 kilovolt Konomol'sk-on-Amur-Gorin-Berssovka-Dzhamku overhead line; the
220 kilovolt Zeyskaya GB-Priaeyskaya—Tutaul-Dipkun-Tynda overhead line; the 500
kilovolt Ochakovskaya substation with a 501,000 kilovolt-ampere transformer.

Place in operation ahead of schedule by the My of the Power worker the following
industrial facilities: capacities for the production of 18,500 tons of steel
pipe at the Volga Pipe Plant: capacities for the production of 20,000 tons of cast
iron and 5000 tons of steel castings per year at KamAz; a line for cross cutting
logs with a capacity of 367,000 cubic meters and transporting 800.000 cubic meters
per year at the Ust'-Ilimsk Industrial Lumber Complex.

Implement not less than 150$ of the annual volume of construction-installation work
by the brigade contract method. increasing this volume by 5‘ as compared to 1981.

Transfer in construction work not less than 73$ of the piecework workers to the
lump sum wage payment system.

Reduce work time losses and unproductive expenditures of construction labor by 10%
as compared to 1981.

Increase further the level of mechanization in construction-installation work to
reduce the amount of mnual labor. Increase the supply of smll scale mechanized
tools and modern types of equipment to construction and installation organisations.
Provide small scale mechanized tools worth 56 million rubles for this purpose. in-
cluding 300,000 rubles above the plan; provide 1550 norm-sets of manual and mech-
anized tools for finishing, roofing and other labor—consuming work which will mks
it possible to free 2500 workers; introduce at construction sites 35 experimental
prototypes of new construction machines, devices, technological lines and mechani-
zation facilities for construction-installation work which will Inks it possible
to save 35.000 nix-hours.

Raise the quality of construction-installation work insuring the placing in opera-
tion, with good and excellent evaluations. 78% of the industrial facilities, 83%

of the electric power transmission lines and substations and 78% of the housing
and social. cultural and personal service facilities.

Save 6000 tons of metal, 13,000 tons of cement and 2500 cubic meters of lumber
above the set norms for material consumption in construction.

Reduce idle time of railroad cars when unloading and thereby freeing 13,500 cars.

In the Area of Production Industrial Products at Commercial Construction Industry
Biterprises

Fulfill the annual plan for the volume of product sales and output of the majority
of the most important types of products in the assigned list ahead of schedule by
the 60th anniversary of the formation of the USSR.

Overrulfill the annual production plan for the output of consumption goods by
200,000 rubles.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Url'lL II“. var. UI‘LI

Obtain an 80% increase in output by an increase in the Productivity of labor.

increase the ratio of workers lising collective (brigade) ferns of the organisation
of wages at construction industry enterprises to 51%.

Increase the output of the highest category s-f quality products by 15 million rubles
as conpared to the plan goal.

Certify for the state enblen of quality 1? types of products including: reinforced
concrete square cross section piles; stands of vibrating nets of high voltage lines;

electrical gantry cranes: 50/10-ton overhead cranes; the V40” vibrating pile
drivers etc.

Provide timely and conplete delivery of auxiliary boiler equipnent. nehines. de-
vices and construction structures.

Increase complete deliveries up to 90%.

In the Area of Scientific Research. Design and Planning-kploratory Work

01 the basis of increasing the efficiency of utilizing the scientific technical
potential. concentrating scientific forces on the solution of especially important
national economic problens in the area of power, accelerating the introduction of
new quipment and raising the quality of planning:

obtain a real economic effect of 250 nillion rubles annually from introducing
scientific and design develop-ants;

achieve an economic effect fron introducing into production scientific investigations
in the area of power of not less than 1+ rubles per 1 ruble of investment into sci-
entific research work as compared to 3.9 rubles in 1981.

fulfill ahead of schedule by the my of the Power Horker the annual plan of intro-
ducing new equipment in all divisions:

provide the issuance of working docunentation for constructim-installation work
for all priority facilities in 1983 by 25 June.

issue not less than “0% of estilate-planning documentation with excellent doculenta-
tion during the year.

Develop widely in the institutes of this industrial sector the experience of the
Gidproyekt Institute iaeni 8. Ya. Zhuk on raising the scientific technical level of
designs and, on that basis, reducing the estimted cost of facilities, saving labor
and mterial resources and prividing the followingnreduce the cost of power con-
struction by 65 million rubles: save 80,000 tons of metal; save 110,000 tons of
cement: reduce labor expenditures in construction by 2.5 nillion nan-days.

Reduce the construction cost of the special design 1150 kilovolt Ribastus-Ural
overhead line by 2.5 million rubles. when developing the working documentation.by

introducing new progressive and efficient solutions.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Develop to a high technical level by using the latest achievements of science and
technology the following: the desigi of the 2.0 million kilowatt Odessa. A'I'El's;
the design of the 750 .kilovolt Zaporoshskaya AB-Zaporoshskaya substation overhead
line with 750 kilovolt overhead line entries; the technical design for the Khudoni
GB with a special design arched dan 200 asters high, saving 5000 tons of aetal as
compared to the approved technical substantiation; the arrangement for developing
and locating the ”nektroenergetika” facilities to the year 2000 (before 25 Sep~
tenber): the design of a 250 neawatt steal-gas installation with an intracycle
igasit‘lcation of fuel for the Novo-Tul'sksya m: (in creative cooperation with the
TsK'l‘I Central Scientific-Research and Planning-Design Turbine Boiler Institute
ileni . I. Polsunov]. vrI [Albanian Thermotechnical Institute ileni r. E.
Dzerahinskiy] and rum [Gas scientific Research Depart-entj), that will lake it
possible to reduce the amount of lurlful discharges into the air and reduce mel

Introduce inventions and innovator proposals having an econoaic effect of not less
than 225 aillion rubles. '

in the Area of Social Develoth of Collectives

To raise further the standard of living of the people. create stable collectives.
improve labor. everyday and rest conditions of workers, engineers, technicians and
employees of the industrial sect-r by achieving the following:

build at enterprises and construction sites kindergartsns for 12,000 places: 520-
bed hospitals: polyclinics to handle 2240 visits; schools for 10,000 students;
trade schools for 3300 students; 26 stores with an area of 13,500 square asters;
72 dining mass with 15.900 seats; 11‘ vegetable-fruit warehouses with capacities
of 10. 500 tons; nine food depots with areas of 15,'$00 square asters: two re-
frigerators with capacities of 3200 tons and three ferlentation-pickling centers
for $0 tons of products:

fulfill ahead of schedule by 30 Deceaber the general plan for goods turnover and
the production of internal output of social feeding to enterprises of the Glavurs
Lﬂain Adainistration of Supplies to Workers . Sell food and industrial goods to
workers by 85 Iiilion more rubles than in 1 1. Increase the level of sales of
goods by self-service to 50$:

train 123,800 new workers during the year in courses for raising skills at educa-
tional combines, raise the skills, teach second skills to “19.500 workers and
98.000 engineers and technicians.

reduce the turnover of cadres as colparsd to 1981: by 3.55 in power workers: 3.05
in capital construction. and 1.7% in the connercial construction industry:

improve conditions and increase working conditions for 107.000 workers by reducing
noise levels. vibration, dust and gas content at working positions.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK Ufl‘lt IAI. U3]: Ul‘l.‘

In Participation in the Solution of the Food Prograa

Participate actively in solving the food supply program outlined by the 26th party
congress and the November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenum for uhich purposes

place in operation 102,900 kilometers of 20-6-0J4 kilovolt rural electric power
transmission lines by 30 December;

fulfill above the plan work on repairs. and giving organisational technical aid
in operating electrical networks and electrical stations belonging to kolkhoses and
sovkhoses in an amount of 350.000 rubles:

repair and give organisational technical aid to kolkhoses and sovkhoses (3 million
rubles worth) in operating electrical installations of grain conveyors. elevators
and field mills used in harvesting the 1982 crop. and animl husbandry farms. com-
plexes and poultry factories to provide wintering of cattle and fowl;

By the start of the harvesting of the crops in 1982. connect to power sources not
less than 4‘00 new grain elevators. grain cleaners. vitamin flour machines and other
agricultural facilities in oblasts, krays and autonomous republics of the RSFSR.

aid in repairing power equipment of agricultural machines, manufacture mechanization
facilities and spare parts in an amount of 500,000 rubles;

fill orders of sovkhoses and kolkhoses for the mechanization of labor-intensive
work in an amount of 2 nillion rubles:

complete the delivery of parts for 7000 silage harvesting combines before 1 Decen-
bet!

by the Day of the Power worker. fulfill the plan for construction- installation work
and agricultural facilities and related industrial sectors in the volune of 76.6
million rubles and assimilate 330.000 rubles above the plan:

produce in auxiliary farms of enterprises and organisations not less than 2900 tons
(live weight) of meat, including 950 tons of swine. 2000 tons of milk, 1:500 tons
of vegetables, 2000 tons of grain and 7600 quintals of live fish.

Put in operation by USSR Constitution my the following:

a commercial-milk farm for 1430 heads in kolkhos imeni Dzershinskiy in Kurskaya
Oblast;

a mixed feed plant for 200 tons of mixed feed per day in the Balakovskiy Rayon of
Saratovskaya Dblast.

Place in operation by the Day of the Power Horker the following:

capacities for the production of 10,000 tons of cast iron at the Nasarovskiy Plant
of Agricultural Machine Building;

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a city milk plant (modernisation) for producing 30 tons of milk per day at
Volshsk:

a mixed feed plant with a capacity of 630 tons of mixed feed per day at Nabereahnyye
Chelny:

the first stage of an aninl husbandry combine at Povoishekiy -- a swine complex
for 108,000 head of swine:

a poultry factory with a capacity of 2.6 million fowl per year at Ivanov;

a poultry factory with a capacity of 1 million fowl per year at the Reftinskeya
Settlement in Sverdlovskaya Oblaat;

a warm water fishery plant at the VerImne-Tagil'skaya cm with a breeding area of

2020 square aeters for the production of 50 million baby carp and 1350 quintals of
commercial fish per day:

a. swine fattening center for 280 swine at Dobrotvorskaya 633.

Place in operation by the 60th anniversary of the formation of the USSR the follow—
lng:

the third stage of a broiler factory for 3 million broilers per year in the subur-
ban communal zone of Kama;

a mixed feed plant for reprocessing 500 tons of grain per day at Bratsk -- in the
first half of the years

a hothouse combine with an area of b hectares at the Karegandinskiy sovkhoa;

a hothouse combine with an area of 6 hectares at the sovkhos imeni 22 party con-
gress in Dahambul'skaya Oblast.

In the Area of Ewironmental Pollution

Brecute construction-installation work on building facilities for environmental
protection to an amount of 120.0 million rubles.

Implement capital repairs and modernization of ash traps at not less than 50 boiler
units of therml electrical power plants.

Carry out work at electrical power plants on building and modernizing water treat- .
lent plants that reduce the run-off of contaminated discharges by 11.6 million
cubic meters of water per year.

Develop norms for the mimum allowable or temporarily approved discharges of harm-
ful substances into the air for thernl electrical power plants located in cities

with intense air pollution, determined by the Goskowidronet [Hydrometeorological
State Committee] schedule.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workers. engineers, technicians, scientists and employees of the USSR hinenereo
enterprises and organisations, in striving to honor with labor gifts the glorious

the outstanding political and state activist, Conrado L. I. Brezhnev, that they
will fight selﬂessly to breath life into the directives of the 26th party con-
gress and the November (1981) GPSU Central Don-ittee Menus and will relentlessly
strengthen the unity and closeness of the Soviet people. and will provide a further

increase in the efficiency and quality of work. and ﬂulfill the plan and obligations
for i982 and of the five-year plan as a whole ahead of schedule.

Hinenergo establish-ants and organisations and approved by the board of the sinis-
try and the presidiun of the Central Oouittee of the Electrical Power Plant and

Electrical muipsent Industry Workers Trade Union on 29 Hatch 1982.

COPYRIGHT: ‘Ehergoisdat . “mektricheskiye stantsii". 1982

2291
(so: 1822/188

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUEL. ENERGY COMPLEXES NBEN DESCRIBED

Hoscou TEPIDUBGEPIIA in Russian No 5, by 82 DP 5‘9

[Articlery A. A. 'I‘roitskiy, USSR Gosplsns ”Fuel and Energy Oonplexes of the
country"

iﬂ'ext] Supplying the country's fuel and energy requirenents in recent years has
beco-e one of the key problem of the further develop-eat of the national economy.

The intensified attention to fuel and more: problem is related to the special
features of the regional disposition of reserves that require huge expmditures
to assinilste then. Moreover, to involve in the fuel-energ balance of the country

fuel-energy complexes on their bsse by coordinating oranicslly exploration, lining.
fuel reprocessing, production of electric power. and the transport of the fuel-
energy resources. The creation of the indicated conplearee. being the lost efficient
for: of econonic utilization of fuel-energy resources, required the solution of
very large depertlentsl probless. related to the sssinilstion of the respective
regions. to the creation of infrsstructures. housing and social conditions on

their territories. The use of reasonable interdepertlsntsl cooperation snd s

The nest ilportsnt, Iodern fuel-energy colplexes are the Psvlodsr-lcibestus.
Kansko-Achinsk and the upedno-Sibirskiy.

struction links. In each conplsn there are single power construction bases which
include the construction industry. construction nterials enterprises. es well as
territorial. procure-out and transport buses. Here is taken into account the re-
gional cooperation of such enterprises with enterprises built for the creation of
fuel-extracting capacities.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \Irrlt. nu. vol: \I.V|.|

In each complex there will also be created a centralised material-equipment base
for operating the electric power enterprises. including repair. transportation and
procure-eat organizations. New organisational managenent structures are envisioned
for operating the electric power plants in the complexes. The electric power
plants of the conplex are to be considered as a single enterprise (association).

Technical solutions, assuned in designing electric power plants. reflect the ad-
vantages of cooperation and standardisation within a group of electric power
plants. These solutions provide the possibility of accelerated flow-line construc-
tion placing in operation. when necessary. up to 2 nillion kilowatts of new capac-
ities per year at each of the complexes.

The construction of these complexes takes it possible to solve problems of creat-
ing nodern housing-personal service conditions on a higher plane for builders
and workers in fuel-energy enterprises on the basis of building new large cities.

The Pavlodar-Etihastus fuel-energy complex is based on the coal in the Etibastus
and Haykyubensk deposits, whose reserves are estimated at 9 billion tons of coal.
It is planned to increase fuel mining at thesedeposits in the ﬁxture to 150-170
million tons per year to supply coal to 35 million kilowatt electric power plants
with an electric power output of up to 220 billion kilowatt-hours per year, as
well as to satisfy the fuel require-eats of other local consumers.

Calculations have shown that these reserves of coal are sufficient to nest elec-
tric power require-ants for the next 15 to 20 years not only of Kasakhstan, but
also of adjoining regions in the Urals, Siberia and the ()6 Consolidated Power
Systes'l of Central Asia. has to the high ash content of an tun coal. reaching
up to 55¢” with selective lining and up to 5% with bulk mining. its trans-
portation is difficult and it is economically nore efficient to transport the
electric power over high and superhigh voltage electric power transmission lines
for distances above 1000 kilometers.

In this connection, it is planned to build four electric power plants with total
capacity of 16 Iillion kilowatts directly at the coal deposits to supply elec-
tric power to Northern Kazakhstan and the transmission of their power to the
European region over 1150 kilovolt A0 overhead lines to the Urals and 1500 kilo-
volt Dc -- to the central regions. Moreover. a Yuzhno-Kasakhstan cm is being
built on the shore of Lake Balkhash to supply electric power to adjoining regions.

The low cost of strip lining coal and progressive technical solutions in building
the 03$ will per-it Production 01' electric power at a production cost of up to
0.4 kopecks per kilowatt-hour.

In the designs of the Bribastus and Yusimo-Kasakhstan GEE developed by the
’"I‘eploelektroproyekt" Institute, progressive technical solutions were applied.
directed toward reducing construction costs and materials consumption. industrial-
ising cm construction and. on that basis. reducing labor expenditures and con-
struction tile. Bight 500,000 kilowatt power units with supercritical steam
parameters are being installed at each ORE. At GEE-1. there are installed type
P-5? boilers of the Podol'sk Machine Building Plant basically sinilar to boilers

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
operating at the Troitskaya and Reftinskaya ORE. The boilers are designed to
burn selectively lined coal with a minus ash content of up to 45-475, and eight
hasner grinders are installed at each boiler.

llet scrubbers and electric filters are used for two-stage ash-trapping.

Unlike GEE-i, the following electric power plants of this ccnplex will be oriented
toward burning high ash content bulk-lined coal with ash content of up to 555.

They will have P-57R boilers. especially adapted for burning high ash content fuel.
Each boiler will be equipped with six Iediun speed grinders. The remaining techni-

and boiler depart-ants of 51 meters each, and a built-in deaerator set of shelves.
i'he min building frame will be rude of high strength and low-alloy steels. The
industrial nethods of flow-line installation will be taken into account in the
design. For this purpose. a non-aligning nethod was developed for installing
colums on foundations, as well as the unitised installation of nultitier shelf
francs and rigid true Joints using high-strength bolts. Hall enclosures and the
roof of the min building will be little of prefabricated light natal panels that
sake it possible to install the walls in 12x12 aster units and the roof -- in
51x12 meter units. All these neaeuree will reduce labor expenditures considera-

bly in constructing the main building and will reduce steel consumption for each
GRI by 5000 tons.

me complicated engineering problem in the CRIS conplex is the organisation of
the reception and reprocessing of large masses of coal (50 to 55 tons per day,
for one GRI), that has relatively low heat of conbustion. A new in principle
fuel feed design was developed for the Bribestus Gas. In coal warehouses. it
will use radial rotary loading stackers, powerful sodomized ham-er crushers, and
crushing-cutting achines in the car-dunpling building. The buildings and fuel
feed route are arranged to reduce the length of the supply lines.

RR tumtables wil be used to deliver coal from open coal pits located nearby with
a capacity of up to 50 sillion tons per year. '

The four GEE conplexes will use circulating systens for technical water supplies
with water reservoirs created on the basis of natural depressions of bitter-salt
lakes with 3311 values of work for constructing water dens and practically with-

out destroying ground suitable for agriculture. ibr GEE-2 and CBS-3, it is
planned to create a con-on water reservoir with deep water intakes which provide

deeper cooling of the water due to its spatial circulation. This will nuke possi-
ble an efficient turbine operation at an average annual water temperature of 15°

The water reservoirs will be replenished fro- the Irtysh-Ksraganda canal. It is
considered that the creation in this reach of large nonfreeaing water surfaces
with a total area of over 60 square kilometers will reflect positively on the li-
croclinate of the region, while the rise in the ground water level will facilitate
the development of a vegetation cover. The ecology of new water reservoirs will
lake it possible to develop fish farming.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UII UI'I'ILIAL LIDL UI‘L‘

plants at a single ash damp created at the Ksrasor salt lake that has a surface
area of 135 square kilometers. To replenish the systems of circulating hydraulic
ash reaoval fro: the ORB. it is planned to use blow-through water from the cooling

water reservoirs. In the future. it is proposed to organise the utilisation of the
ash residue.

Smoke stacks 320 and #20 meters high will be built at the GRE to meet air pollution
requirements. A repair plant is planned for the operating needs of all GEE which.
by subcontracting between industrial enterprises, will do repair work for coal in-
dustry enterprises.

Housing for builders and operating personnel of the complex will be built basically
in Ekibastus.

The technically, economically and ecologically coordinated Btibestus fuel-energy

complex is a new stage in the developaent of domestic electrical power engineering
and power building.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan period. construction work was developed on CHE-1. and
its first .‘wo units were placed in operation. In 1981-1985. 1t 18 planned to 00"
plete the construction of the first cans, develop construction of GEES-2, and in-
stall not less than three power units in it, i.e.. increase the capacity of the
complex to 5.5 aillion kilowatts. Work will also begin on the construction of the
following ORB fo the complex. Construction has developed widely on the Yushno-
Kazakhstan CRIB to insure its coapletion at the start of the 12th Five-Year Plan
period and moreover, TEPe will be built for operation on the 3:1th coal. To
solve the problems posed on building the Eibastus complex, it is necessary. in the
11th Five-Year Plan period, to increase the volume of construction-installation
work by 1.5 times as compared to 1976-1980. Special attention must be given to
the construction of the 1150 kilovolt overhead line to the Urals because a lag in
its construction and assimilation my lead to difficulties in the distribution of

the developing capacities of the Ribastus (IRE with a scarcity of electrical
capacities in the Urals.

To provide coal to the new electric power plants, it is planned to increase the
mining From 66 million tons in 1980 to 8b million tons in 1985.

The Kansko-Achinsk fuel-energy complex [KATE] is being created on the basis of
lignite coal of the Kansko-Achinsk basin. whose balance reserves exceed 110 billion
tons and its geological reserves -- 1500 billion tons.

Favorable lining-geological conditions take it possible to increase the strip
mining of coal in the future to 1 billion tons per year. Unit reduced expenditures
for mining 1 ton of conditional fuel. amounting to 6-? rubles. are the best as
compared to such indicators for all types of solid organic fuel lined in the USSR.

The Kansko-Achinsk coal has low ash content and low sulfur content, but has a high
(up to box) moisture content. at heat of combustion about 3500 kilocalories (about

1u.5 Iegejoule/kilogras. By using this coal, it is possible to build electric
power stations with a total capacity of over 60 sillion kilowatts.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in connection with the special features of the coal. it is planned to utilize it to
produce electric power basically directly at the sine site, transmitting the elec-
tric power to future consusers over overhead lines of various voltages. It is
planned to export coal by rail to adjacent regions of Siberia for sources of heat
supply only.

in the next 10 to 15 years. it is planned to utilise the Kansko-Achinsk coal to
satisfy the requiresents of the Siberian region in electric and heat energy. In
the following period, the possibility is envisaged of transnitting electric power
from this cosplsx to the Urals and the central regions of the Mopesn part of the
USSR over superhigh voltage overhead lines on a scale deternined by the balance of
the capacities and electric power.

At the ease tine. work developed to obtain from raw Kansko-Achinsk coal.

enriched transportable solid and liquid types of fuel. kperisental industrial
installations are being built for this purpose including the electric-technological
EI‘Kh-iOOO installation in Krasnoyarsk which will be put in operation in 1982. The
scale of reprocessing Kansko-Achinsk coal and the area of utilising the products

of their reprocessing will be mde sore precise depending upon the results of the
finishing-off of various technological processes of reprocessing. and the technical-
econonic indicators of these technologies.

In the first stage, in the nearest ten-year period, it is planned to build 2-3

6.1; million kilowatt electric power plants using the raw coal of the western de-
posits of the coal basin (Beresovskiy. Uryupskiy and Itatskiy).

At GRI-i. whose construction is being developed, it is planned to install eight
improved 800.000 kilowatt m turbines. as conpared to similar mhines operating
at the Zaporoshskaya and Uglegarskaya ORB.

Type P-6? ZiO boilers with a productivity of 2650 tons per hour. T-shaped type with
a square combustion chasber and an angular arrangement of burners will be used.

Eight grinding blowers will be installed at each boiler. The win building is a
special design structure 122 asters high. 171 meters across and 700 waters long.

The large dilensions of the building, especially of the height. are related to the
size of the steam boiler to be used. To reduce these disensions and corresponding
voluses of construction-installation work and expenditures of resources. work will be
developed on creating for the next cm a new type of ssaller sine boiler -- the
TsK'i‘I.

The coal will be loved by conveyor belts to the GE from the open pit 11+ kilome-
ters away; continuous action radial rotor machines will be installed at the (:33
and progressive technical solutions developed for the Etibastus ORB will be used.

For the first GREB of the cosplex. it is planned to build circulating system of
water supplies with water reservoirs in small river beds. The water reservoirs
will be created in nrshy botto- lands which will not require the destruction of
useful agricultural land. Hater losses in the reservoirs will be replenished by
the run-off of the snll rivers. However, in the further development of KATE‘K. it
will be necessary to regulate the run-off of the 01qu River or transfer a part
of the Yenisey’s run-off to the basin of this river. It is planned to utilize the
warm discharge water of the G- for intensive fish breeding.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'Ul‘ Ul’l‘l\-|r\h UJI. \I.‘I.I

it is planned to remove ash and slag hydraulically by a circulating arrangement
using for ash dunpe the shallow water in the upper parts of the water reservoirs.
cut off by dams. In the future. it is planned to use worked-out coal open pits to
store ash and slag residues. The dry renoval and storage of ash are also being
developed. In all cases it is planned to utilise the ash and slag fro. the GEES
for construction and agricultural needs.

The estinted rated production costs of the KATE! ORB is 0.35 to 0.1} kopecks per
kilowatt-hour for a unit construction cost of 170 rubles per kilowatt.

As indicated. GRB will be located directly near powerful coal open pits. The

first open pits will have capacities as follows: Beresovskiy -- 55 million tons
per year; Uryupskiy and Itatskiy -- 30 nillion tons per year.

Powerful coal excavators and high productivity conveyor belt systems will. be used

at these open pits. Large iZO-ton self-unloading cars will be used to transport
the coal.

Housing and communal-personal service enterprises for builders and operating cadres
for power. as well as for coal enterprises will be built in Sharypovo. Powerful
bases for construction and the operation of the open pits and the GRE will be
created directly near the enterprises and the city.

The construction of the Berescvskiy open pit field and the KATBC CRIB-1 began in
the 10th Five-Year Plan period. In 1981-1985. it is planned to develop widely the
construction of the complex and place in operation the first two 800,000 kilowatt
units at GRI-i. It is planned to increase coal production in this basin free 35
nillion tons in 1980 to alnost 50 nillion tons in 1985.

It is planned to increase by b.6 tines the volume of capital invest-eats in the
11th Five-Year Plan period to build the complex as compared to the 10th Five-Isa:
Plan period for the electric power sector alone. This will create the necessary
reserves and construction base for the following rapid increase in KATE capacities.

The Vest-Siberian fuel-energy conplex is based on the petroleul and gas reserves
located in Tyunenskaya Oblast. The electric power part of the complex is intended
to supply electric power to gas and petroleum extracting enterprises. gas and
petroleun pipelines and to supply electric power to the Urals.

The electrical power plants of the conplex will be built to operate on natural and
by-product gas directly near its deposits. Electric power capacities. intended to
supply electric power to the Urals. based on prelininary economic calculations. my
be located directly in the regions where the electric power is to be used. How-
ever, taking into account the real resource limitations on building minline gas
pipelines. it was decided it would be expedient to locate all electric power plants
of the conplex directly near the regions where the gas is produced and trans-it

the electric power to the Urals over 500 kilovolt electric power transsiesion lines
in the first stage and later. as the anount of power is increased.over 1150 kilovolt
linen. Locating these electric power plants according to econonic indicators dif-
fers little fron locating then directly in the regions where the electric power

is used in combination with building ninline gas pipelines to transmit gas to the
Urals.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in all. it is planned to increase electric power station capacities in the Hest-
Siberian complex to 18-20 million kilowatts. The basic electric power center will
be the Surgut electric power plant group. The Surgut GR'B-i. whose rated capacity
will be 3.3 million kilowatts. has already reached a capacity of 2.75 million kilo-
watts. The following equipment is being installed there: 13 210.000 kilowatt power
units; two 180.000 kilowatt thermification energy units with T-180 turbines; an
experimental industrial steam-gas 225.000 kilowatt power unit with a T-180 steam
turbine; a 55.000 kilowatt (3450-850 gas turbine; and a high pressure 600 ton per
hour steam generator. Asaimilating such steam-gas units that save 8 to 105 of the
fuel and reduce the voluIe of construction-installation work. will take it possible

later to use installations of this type to build other electric power plants in
Tyumenskaya Cblast using gas fuel. '

Surgut GRB-Z will have a capacity of 16.8 million kilowatts and it will have six
800,000 kilowatt power units. The nohinery hall equipment of this cm will be
similar to the equipment of Berezovskaya ORB-1. hsically. its multiunit boilers
will be similar to the 800.000 kilowatt boilers installed in the Diropean part of
the USSR with the difference that they will not provide for burning fuel oil as a
second fuel.

The capacity of the Surgut ORB and the composition of its equipment are now being
ads more preicse taking into account the ecological conditions of the given re-
gion.

It is also planned to build a high power electric power station near Nishnevartovsk
operating on gas which will produce electric power as well as supply heat to this
new city. .It is planned to install four to six 800.000 kilowatt power units there
and the necessary thermification machines. The capacity of this electric power
plant and composition of its equipment will be determined after the completion
of its design. Here. the expediency of installing at this TB. as well as at the
Surgut CRTs-3. 1.2 million kilowatt units will be considered.

It is planned to build a 2.5 million kilowatt 6338 at Urengoy. It will have steam-
gas power units.

It is planned. in the 11th Five-Year Plan period. to put in operation 795 kilowatt
capacities at Surgut GEE-1. the first two 800.000 kilowatt power units at ORB-2.
begin the construction of GEE-3 and develop widely the construction of the
Nishnevartovskaya and Urengoyshaya GRB and to put in operation their capacities
in the first half of the 12th Pove-Year Plan period. To solve these problems in
combination with building respective overhead lines. construction and operating
bases. as well as housing will require assimilating 1.5 billion rubles of capital
investments in the current five-year plan period. including over 1 billion rubles
for construction-installation work.

The share of putting in operation new capacities at thermal electric power stations
in the country. being built within fuel-energy complexes. increases continually.
while in 1976-1980. only slightly more than 105 of all condenser electric power
plant capacities placed in operation by the USSR Hinenergo [Ministry of Power and
Electrification] were at cans complexes. in 1981-1986 it is planned to increase
this share greatly.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI \Dl‘l‘l‘ nu. one. ‘DI‘IJ

industrial. housing, and cultural-persml services facilities that are of a
general industrial sector. while in the plans for these colplexes capital invest-

ments. equith and material-technical recources necessary to ilplenent the
planned goals are listed separately. Finally. for the interindustrial coordination
of the developsent of the Nest-Siberian complex. a special territorial conission

tion and operation of various organisations and enterprises, which must be solved
expediently on the basis of a single purposeful comprehensive program.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LARGETB WHEN?! HWYA OBI-\ST
Moscow Tmmm in Russian No 5. Hey 82 pp 16-20

llsrticle by engineers V. N. Motin, Yu. A. Gerke and R. H. Vilmskays. Urals
ch of Teploelektroproyektu "Design of a Large TB Complex Operating on the
Natural Gas of Tyunenslosya Oblast"]

[Text] The uneven distribution of fuel reserves and industrial sectors in the
territory of our country detersined the following basic trends of power developnent.

Electric power in the Mopeen pert of the USSR will develop on the basis of nu-
clear mel. while in the eastern parts of the country, local the). energy resources
such as the coal of the Bibastus and Kansko-Achinsk deposits, the natural gas of
Tyulensksya Oblast and the large hydraulic resources of rivers lust be utilised
widely.

The problem will be solved at the sane tile as the transport of hi quality fuel
and electric power to the Ursls and the European part of the uses 1].

Natural gas deposits in the northern regions of the Tyusenshsya Oblast have been
in the process of sssiailstion in the last several decades.

In spite of broad prospects of the develop-ant of the gas producing industry and

the transport of gas to the western parts of the country. its use as a power fuel
is considered to be linited and requires thorough all-around substantiation.

The USSR Hinenergof [Ministry of Power and Electrification] together with the
Hingaspron Ministry of Gas Industry] and the Hinneftegasetroy [Ministry of Gon-
struction o Petroleun and Gas Industry Enterprises is preparing the tectnical-ec-
ononic substantiation for constructing new large north of Tyunmskays Oblast
to trans-it electrical power to the Urals.

These power plants mat be built insddition to those TB which are being built and
those planned to supply electric power to petroleum and gas industries in the ex-

treme north of 'i‘yusenskays Dbl at. i.e.. to take care of donestic needs of the gas
and petroleun-bearing region.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0|"I-'l('IAI. US}. ONLY

Surgutskaya

At present, the Surgutskaya ORB-i is the basic source of electric power supply to
the petroleus and gas fields of Tyunenskaya Oblast. After completing the construc-

tion of the third stage. the plant will also provide central heating to housing
ard industrial enterprises of Surgut.

The power plant is being built on compressed schedules under rigid natural-clilatic
conditions in a sparsely populated region. The first stage of the power plant was
built without a HR using only water transport with the simltaneous creation of a
construction-installation base.

An electric power network necessary to assimilate new petroleun and gas deposits,
as wﬁllas for ties with the Urals OB [Consolidated Power System]. developed in
para a .

The power was transmitted at 220 and 500 kilovolts.

A circulation water supply system was adopted with a water reservoir area of about
10 square kiloseters, built on the basin of the Ghernaya River, a tributary of the
0b' River. A ‘60,000 square meter sprinkling basin on the shallow water section of
the existing water reservoir is planned for the third stage. The 16 power units
of the power plant will have five circulating pulping stations on an open feed
canal. as well as a pulping station for the sprinkling basin.

The franc of the main building was ads of low alloy steel with high strength
bolts used for installation Joints. The walls were mde of prefabricated Ietal

panels with efficient insulation, as well as of keraasit-concrete panels. The
foundations under the fraae of the building and turbogenerators Here precast.

These solutions lads possible a great reduction of labor in transporting and build-
ing Surgut (IRE-1.

Tr ceen K-210-130 single type condensation power units were installed at Surgut
GRB-i. The type of basic equipment began to change with power unit No 14 due to
the necessity of Surgut therlification. According to the approved "Heat Supply
Arrangement" heat to housing and industrial enterprises of the city lust be pro-
vided by GEE-i along with larger boiler plants which will span the peak part of
the schedule.

For this purpose the following were projected for the CRIS: two T-i80/210-130
theraitication turbines, a water preparation installation. a replenishment instal-
lation for a closed arrange-eat of hot water supply, network and replenishment
pumping groups and other equipmt to provide an output of l$9160 sieadoules per hour
of hot water of 70 to 150°C, including 2170 sisadoules per hour -- average winter
load on the therlification turbines.

Thus, in the current year, it will be necessary to assi-ilate two min Lﬂz T-180/210-
130-1 turbine installations in a unit with 'rc-iou boilers at GEE-i.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
By-product and natural gases are the basic and reserve types of fuel for G_-1.
as well as all TB of the considered region.

Taking into account a reliable gas supply, as well as the remoteness and difficult
terrain of the northern regions of Tyunenskaya Ublast. it is advisable to create
cospact, highly efficient steal-gas equipment for the group of power plants.

01‘ the greatest interest in that sense are steal-gas installations with high pres-
sure steal: generators (PGU with VPG). For several years, the "i‘eploelektroproyekt"
has been working with the TsK‘i‘I [Central Scientific Research and Planning Design
Institute ineni I. I. Polsunov] and plants of the Hinenergonsh [Ministry of Power
Machine Building] to create and amnufacture the PCB-250 with ”6-600 TKZ. cr-

bS/BSO Kh‘rz and K-210-130 Lllz power units whose prototypes lust be installed at one
of the electric power plants [2].

After achieving the required operating reliability, the power unit will be highly
efficient -- using 305 grass of conventional fuel per kilowatt—hour and consuaing
less netal as compared to the 210 megawatt steam power unit.

The transportable dinensions of the VPG and the gas turbine Iachine. the possibility
of its being completely Innufactured at the plant and being checked on test stands
will nake it possible to reduce the cost of labor and installation work.

The schemtic diagram of PGU-250 is shown in Fig. 1.

Positive results in assimilating this power unit will sake it possible to establish
a series of such units at the Urengoy GRB. During the period that Surgut GEE-i
was planned, the approach to solving the problems of environnental protection and.
in particular. of air pollution, changed considerably.

Discharge gas from steam boilers burning nonsulfurous gaseous fuel were considered
nontoxic at the start of the seventies. Because of this, the first stage of the
ORB had Ietal snokestacks 60 meters high (one stack per two boilers). Taking into
account discharge of nitrogen oxides. as well as the ORB-1 expansion to 342‘}
megawatts. the building, 1.5 kilometers fro- it of CRIB-2 with a capacity of #800
megawatts, as well as the gas contamination background. created by peak and indus-
trial boiler installations that will operate in the future, it was necessary to
reconsider solutions for snokestacks. It is planned to build two reinforced con~
crete snokestacks 2M seters high, connected to each gas conduit from eight boiler
units.

Urengoy GRB

The basic and reserve fuel for this power plant is natural gas from the Urengoy
deposit which will be fed over two uinline gas pipelines. each designed to take
care of the ﬂill gas requirements. The plan considers the following composition
or basic equip-eat:

Variation I -- Ten Pal-250 with VPG units of type unit No 16 of Surgut 6113-1.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a \a.‘ \l. I It Alla. v.1.. \In‘l-I

 

Fig. 1. Schemtic heat diagram of pan-250430.
I -- superheated steal; II -- water; 111 -- steal tron take-offs; IV -- drainage;

V -- Air: VI -- mel: VII -- products of cosbustiom
1 -- high pressure steal generator: 2 -- furnaces 3 -- by-pass gas conduit;
1* -- convection shaft; 5 -- additional conbustion chanbsr; 6 -- forced circulation

pump: 7 -- separator drum 8 -- cospressor; 9 -- gas turbine: 10 -- electric
generator: 11 -- economiser; 12 -- gas-water high pressure heaters 13 -- gas-water

low pressure heaters 115 -- stea- turbine: 15 -- condenser; 16 -- condenser pulp;
17 -- regenerative low pressure heaters: 18 -- drainage pump; 19 -- high pressure
deaerator; 20 -- feed pump; 21 ~- regenerative high pressure heaters.

Variation II -— Four steam power 210 megawatt units (first stage) and six POD-250
with VPG (second stage) units. This variation is being developed in case there
will be a delay in assisilating experimental unit KID-250 at Surgut ORB-1.

Variation III -- 12 stea- power 210 segawatt units.

Taking into account the severe clilatic conditions, the power plant is projected
with minu- 1ntsrconnection between the auxiliary structures (standby starting.
TEl‘s KhVO [Services], warehouses. TsRH [Central Repair Shops]. engineering.personal

service building) and the min building.

Power output will be at 220 and 500 kilovolts.

Structural materials and equipment will be broudnt in over the Surgut-Urengoy-
Yagel'noye RR line.

24

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
A complex of measures on environnental protection will be inplemented at the ORB
as follows: a closed cycle to purify sewage and run-off waters will be used; a
fish breeding installation will be built; PIX Maxims Prenitted Concentration]
and PDV [Maxi-u- Pernitted Discharge of Karat Substances into the Air] require-
Ionts with respect to NDx-U- co will be let; an experilental hothouse using the heat

of ssokestack gases will be built; an investigation of the effect of the water

reservoir on the nicroclinte will be made. the frequency of forming fogs will be
studied, etc.

It is planned to provide the following autontic systems to control the technologi-
cal processes of power units and TBI a counter-energency automatic system dis-
patcher control facilities; as well as a system for the automatic control of power
unit capacities and the power plant as a whole; and connecting it into the ARCM
[Auto-atic Prequencv and (Active) Power Control] Urale circuit. A nicrorayen
will be built in Tikhoy, the planned city for settling; the operational and con-
struction-installation cadres. The Urengoy ORB is being built and will be
operated under severe clinatic conditions of the extreme north and very conplex
geological conditions: therefOie. along with exploratory-project work. the follow-
ing scientific investigations are being done: of the danger of ground under the
foundations for buildings and structures being frozen; properties of frozen yound
when thawing; vibration stability of the earth under foundations for turbines. etc.

Surgut (PRES-2

The construction of the #800 legawatt GRB-Z began on the industrial site of Sur-
ﬁut GRE-ie

The technical economic indicators of the plant are shown below:

Power. megawatts 10800

Turbines 6xK-800-2‘J0-5
Steal boilers 6x'fG @2016
Electric power output. gigawatt—hours 30.1b08
Electric power for their own needs. S 2.5!;

Staff coefficient, mn/neawatt 0.35?

Unit cost of industrial construction. rubles/kilowatt 183
Production cost of electric power. kopecks per

kilowatt-hour 0.186
Profitability. 5 2b.?
Period of repayment. years “.0
Unit consunption of conventional fuel, grass

per kilowatt-hour 317.“

in connection with the sharp increase in the voluses of construction-installation
work. a considerable expansion of the production and repair base is planned of the
construction-installation organizations by creating regional production-procuring
bases (RPKB) using the experience in designing and building such bases for the
bkibastuz and Kansko-Achinsk fuel-energy complexes.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Url'lt IAL Ubr. UNI]

  

  

   
 

   
 
  
      

 

T . , ' -.
Viz]: ,Ffi'rtf
' n _.%r"fri’?.>?
I E ‘ “'5‘ .. 'n‘I-e -
' I ”I‘Il .
:0 ‘ //’ \§ c
.' . '

 

    
  
  
  
 

‘ t
'* " -— '
32M W'PIIMO-QSMV ”a ‘in ___‘.I- :-
‘QV‘IIAVA‘D’A‘1'RVNV“,‘ no :t u . . . V u
n” :4 '-'-—"
‘9‘". mg-mll“g5
I ‘ > -
a g. ff”;

ins-rm “W-
' , gl-is.
137*.

   

 

     
    

   

b
"1 ........ IIII"'-II:__.

II -"—.' 5‘ 2'd i
- Iﬁﬁirﬁl‘... JP: will é “

 

  
 
 
   
  

 
 

 

   

Pig. 2. Surgut GEES—2 with capacity of 15800 segawatts.
sformer installation:

1 --main building: 2 -- unitized control panel; 3.-- open tran
u -- open distribution 500 kilovolt installation; 5 -- block of auxiliary (BU-500
yes purification buildings;

kilovolt structures; 6 -- gas distribution center; 7 --
station for production-fire pro-

8 -- unitized punping station with the pumping
tection water supply; 9 -- open diversion canal: 10 -- chenical water purification
building; 11 -- consolidated

with a chemical reagent warehouse and purifying
1 plant conpressor and diesel

repair center with a special building: 12 -- genera
lysis installation with a consolidated pumping station to

building; 13 -- electro
transfer fecal. greasy and torrential drainage” 1‘!» -- acetylene generating plant

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 2. Legend continued

with a carbide stateroom; 15 -- oil depart-ant: 16 -- engineering-personal service
building: 1? -- constmction-repair shop; 18 -- diesel engine depot: i9 -- notor
vehicle building; 20 -- fuel oil building with esergency fuel: 21 -- electric
installation products plant; 22 -- heat installation base; 23 -- turbines

2b -- vaporiser; 25 -- condenser: 26 -~ high pressure preparatory 27 -- deaerator;
28 -- stea- boiler; 29 -- blower; 30 -- recirculation exhaust fan; 31 -- regenera-
tive air heater; 32 —- axial exhaust fan: 33 -- slokestack; 34 -- transformer;

35 -- Gill-i; 36 -- construction base; 3? -- UGR; 38 -- BShchUa 39 -- Machinery
hall; ho -- Deaerator departnmt: bi -- Boiler department; 1&2 -- Dthaust fan and
RV? department.

The GRB-Z design approved in 1981 was based on 800 segawatt stean power equipsent.
The design was developed for using the following basic equipment. TGIF-20b. 2650
tons per hour P0 [Production Association] '11:: [Turbine and Boiler Plant] steal
boilers with partial modernisation, taking into account operation on gas fuel only;
type K-800-2b0-5 POT m turbines in a new standardised amngenent that ads it
possible to reduce the length of the unit to 72 Deters (as against 108 Deters at
the Zaporoshskaya and Uglegorskaya cars [3]. The arrange-ant of the boiler roo-

is very compact.

A cross section of the min building is shown in Fig. 2.

The total length of the min building will be $3 asters. The Iain building of
GEES-2 will be located on the shore of the projected water reservoir with the
peanut and facing east; thus. the tenporary ends of ORB-1 and GEE-2 linit
the general installation-assembly sites. A section of the northern side of the
existing flood water spillway of the Gill-1 water reservoir will be used for the
500 kilovolt can [Open Distribution Installation].' The basic and reserve fuels

will be gas iron the Tyunenskaya deposits while fuel oil will be the energency
fuel.

The transfer to purely gas fuel requires new solutions for the boiler equip-ant
because gas. unlike fuel oil for which the TWP-20h boiler is designed. lakes it
possible to increase the intensity of the heat in the fumace. standardise heat
exchanfery the installation of double screens and increase the velocity of the
gases 15

All this will lead to reducing the dinensions and metal consunption of the boiler
and. as a result. to a reduction in construction costs, installation labor, con-
struction tile. an increase in efficiency and an ilprovesent in repair conditions.

Various organizations 90 m. 210 [Podol'sk lhchinery Plant]. Hm £3cientific
Production Association TsKTI. VGPI [All-Union State Planning Insti ute], Teplo-
.elektroproyekt etc.) have created large scientific. desist and emperinental-
industrial reserves for the production of colpact boilers with gas-tight panels.

The positive eight-year experience in operating compact Ye-SOO-ilio 6mm boilers
at Rostovskaya Tats-2 was taken into account. It is planned to develop and create

a cospact 2650 tons per hour steal boiler to operate on gas in 800 1: watt power
units with a reduction in netal consumption indicators and dillensionsefB

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.

Two boiler variations are being considered: a boiler suspended from the building
stmctures: a franeless boiler with a cellular self-supporting structure of gas
conduits ads of all-welded panels and a rotational 'i'sKTI furnace.

Table 1 shows a coaparison between TGIF-2016 and HGPG boilers in accordance with
the ”Po TsX'i‘I version of the Teploelektroproyekt Institute developlente.

 

Table 1
Steel boiler Steal boiler
characteristic TGIF-20“ m
Boiler type Gas-tight with balanced Gonpact. with
draft, P-shaped rotary furnace,
gas-tight pres-
surised
Efficiency coefficient of
boiler. S 93' 99.5
Total weight of boiler netal
(with RVP)
tons 9700 W
kg/kw 12.1 6.2
Metal weight under pressure
tons 16800 2"?“
kg/kw 6.0 3.1
Boilerwidth along front
(at screen axes). asters 20.6 36.0
Boiler nidth (at screen axes),
neters 29.0 22.1;
Elevation of upper point
of boiler. asters 62.3 26.0

A reduction in the dinensions and netal consunption of the boiler is substantiated
by the following solutions:

highly boosted conpact rotary furnace;
conpact arrange-mt of furnace and convective gas conduits;
all-welded double screens and shielded heating surfaces;

new standardised desig: of the steel superheater;

 

*Increase of heat losses of the boiler with discharge gases of about 0.85 is
taken into account: the increase in electric power consunption for their own needs
is about 0.7%

28

non omcm. use ONLY
horizontal. but all-welded panels. farting a self~supported cellular structure,
resting on its own portal:

ribbed low-tenperature heating surfaces.

 

Fig. 3. Gospsrison of min buildings of (IRE-#800 (6x800) for natural gas
(cross sections).

1 -- CRIS with cospsct boilers; 2 -- ORB with TGHP boilers (Surgut ORB-2).

Conparative (ERR-4800 indicators with MiG-2016 and compact ﬁlm-2650 boilers are
shown in Fig. 3 and Table 2 (data by the Tsploelektroproyekt VGPI).

The time of changeover of Surgut GEE-2 to cospact boilers must be lads sore pre-
cise in accordance with the actual schedule of the mufacture of the steal

Such a change seen very advisable fro- the standpoint of finishing-off and

Nizhnevartovskaya CHE

In 1982, the Ural Branch of the Teploelektroproyekt lust develop ”Substantiating
saterials for building the ﬂishnevartovskaya GEE“ with the selection of the

sites for the power plant and settle-ant. If this site is located at a distance
from ﬂiﬂmevartovsk which would econolically Justify the heat supply fro- the (IRS
turbines to the city, then the basic heating. ventilation and hot water needs of
the city would be let by turbine take-offs. with the changing over of large heat-
ing boilers to the peak node and building ninline heating networks fro- the

GRB to the boiler installations. In the future, develop-ant of the city heat
loads my be provided by take-offs of three [-800-230-5 turbines in a set with
groups of 580 to 8160 gigajoules per hour network heaters.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UII OFFICIAL UM ONLY

Table 2
Name GEE-16800 with GEES-10800 with
TGHP-Zolb MPG-2650 'rslﬂ'I
Cell of 800 negawstt unit,
meters 7231‘“ 7211“
without (BShchU)
Unit construct on area 0.015 0.01“
Unit volume, /kilowatts 0.0725 0.0466
Boiler natal consumption, thousands of tons 58.9 29 .9
Prams of rain building metal consumption,
thousands of tons 87.6 33-6
capital investments for min building:
Million rubles “56.6 405.8
rubles/kw 95. 13 84 . 55
Gapital investments saved:
million rubles - 50-8
rubles/kw - ' 10.6

Thus. taking into account the given capacity, it is advisable to equip the GRE
with six 800 neawatt power units and with steam boilers of a new, improved de-
sign tested on the last power unite of Surgut GRB-Z. The arrangement of the
main building must be solved taking into account the sises and arrangements of the
new steam boiler and the simultaneous introduction of solutions of progressive
arrangements (arrangements without deeerators). new equip-ant for the turbine
regeneration system (mixing m. unifilar PVD. new and: etc.).

Thus. a similar 800 megawatt am. using gas can be created on the basis of the
Nishnevartovskaya GEE.

New 635

It is planned to build one more large case in the Tyumensksya Oblsst.

Preliminary project work is being done at present to determine the construction
site and substantiate the optimm power plant capacity.

At this ORB, besides steam turbine power units. there will also be considered the
use of the up 800 megawatt large steam-gas installations with CPU-150 gas tur-
bines in various combinations with high pressure steam generators according to
the TsKTI arrangement, and with utilise: boilers (in accordance with the WI
[All-Union mermotechnical Institute imsni F. E. Dsershinskiy] arrange-ant).

Conclusions

1. The Surgut ORB-1 and the Urengby ORB are based on 210—250 negawatt power
units. High efficiency and conpact Pall-250 with VPG must be assimilated and
operated at these power plants.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2. For Surgut ORB-2. Nimnevartovskaya and new GRB. it is advisable. from the
viewpoint of uim standardisation of solutions (construction. technological.

electric equipmt, power output and operating and repair conditions). to adopt
800 megawatts as a single capacity of the power unit.

3. It is necessary to accelerate in every possible way the work of assisting and
manufacturing a smaller and less Ietsl consuming stess boiler with a productivity
of 2650 tons per hour for burning as.

b. It is necessary to accelerate the develop-eat and introduction of solutions
of the progressive strange-mt and auxiliary equipaent for a new series of 800
megawatt ens-burning power units, as well as to intensify work on the creation
of large steam-gas installations with capacities of up to 800 Iegawatts with high
pressure steam generators and boilers-utilisers.

3mm!!!

1. Troitskiy. A. A. “Basic Directions of Developing the Fuel-ﬁlersy Balance of
Electric Power of the Country.“ Tmm. 1981. no 5. pp 2-4.

2. m'ObOt. Vs Po; GOI'dOhtoyn, As be and Vilmahya. Re Ho “mut1m of noto-
type Steal-Gas 250 Hegawatt Power Unit with VPG for Remote Gas and Petroleu-
Producing Regions.” Tr. Tom. 1978. no 163. pp iii-3?.

3. "Assisilation of 800 segawatt Prototype Power Unit at Zaporoshskaya GRB.“
Tr. TsKTI. 1979. No 166. p 178.

it. ”Boiler and Turbine 500 end 800 Hegswstt Power Unit Installations." sum
by Vs Yes D0r08h¢huk and Ve Be Whin. “COCO“. Kai-31’s. 1979' p ms

5. Golovanov, N. v.; Miter, V. v.; Chsvohsnidse, Ye. L, et. a1. "Assinilstion
and Investigation of Prototype Compact Stea- Generators with s TsKTI Rotary
Emcee. he TBKTI. 1978’ No 15”. pp 3'1“.

C(PYRIGM'I Biergoisdst." Teploenergetika'. 1982

2291
mo: 1822/186

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI'. ONLY

ELMRIC P0133

THO BRIEF DOCK mamas
Moscow WWI!“ in Russian No 5. May 82, p 66

[Advertise-eat: Respected Readers! Baergoislat offers to your attention books
being prepared for publication in 1982]

[Text] Nuclear electrical power plant. No 5. Syaposiua of articles, 23 pages.
illustrations. Translation. 1 ruble 50 kopecks. l0500 copies.

The next in turn issue of the synposiua is devoted basically to generalizing
equipment operating and repairing experience of AB with various types of reactors.
Dtperience in repairing KIPiA [Control and Heasureaent Instrunents and Autontic
Bluipnent] and reconnendations are given on stage by stage repairs of turbines

and tightening their ﬂange Joints. New methods for the activity and consumption
of the heat carrier are cited. A aethod is described for nonitoring the condi-
tion of objects in the external mediun. Several articles are devoted to the
search for defective fuel elenents. As in previous issues of the synposiua, a
special section has articles on designing and building AB.

For AI engineers and technicians. and installation. tune-up and design organisa-
tions.

Yantovskiy, Ye. 1.; Pustalov, Yu. V. 'Steaa Compressor Heat Puaping Installations.“
8.5 pages. illustrations (honour of Electric Potter and Heat). 1&5 kopecks.
10.000 copies.

Heat transformers are considered -- heat pumps capable of low potential heat
(froa envrionlent or discharge waters) to a higher temperature level by means of
machines that i-plementa reverse thermodynanic cycle. The replaceaent of mel
water heating boilers and electric boilers by heat pulping installations mkes it
possible to save fuel, iaprove the condition of the air and regulate the load of
the power system Basic arrange-ants are given of widel used steaa compressor
heat pumps using low boiling point working aedia (Freons , calculations of large
capacity heat pump installations. arrangements for their use in power systole, as
well as results of experimental investigations of these installations with sea
water and discharge cooling water of electric Inchines.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For power engineers uho investigate and design heat exchange installations.

These books can be acquired in all stores that distribute scientific-technical
literature.

C(PYRIGKPI hersoisdat, "Teploenergotika". 1982

2291
050. 1822/186

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY CONSEVATION

RESULTS OF ALL-UNION MITION FOR MY CONSHWA'I‘ION
Moscow PMYSHLBNNAYA ENERGBTIKA in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 2-4

[Article by s. I. Veeelov, chairman of jury of All-Union caapetition, and
I. M. Petisova, executive secretary of jury of All-Union competition]

[Text] The All-Union council of scientific and technical societies, the cen-
tral board of the MO [scientific and technical society] of power engineering
and the electrotechnical industry and the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering
and Electrification have sumrized the results of the 36th All-Union compe-
tition for the best proposal on conservation of electric and thermal energy.
The competition, in which more than 12,000 scientific workers. engineering and
technical personnel and workers or all sectors of the national economy partic-
ipated, contributed to solution of problems of increasing the utilization ef-
ficiency of fuel and energy resources, propaganda and dissemination of leading
experience in the field of energy conservation.

The assistance coeuittees to the All-Union competition at enterprises of
Energonadzor considered 5,323 suggestions with an annual saving of 1.9 billion
kH'hr of electric energy and 5.7 million Goal of themal energy tron introduc-
tion of them. Together with the councils of the mo, the assistance com-it-
tees held 95 republic. kray and oblast competitions for the best proposal on
conservation 0! fuel and electric and thermal energy. From the results of
local competitions. 1,222 suggestions (3,074 authors) were awarded money
prizes, 630 authors were awarded diplomas and 531 authors were awarded honor-
ary certificates of m and vote [All-Union Society of Inventors and Effi-
ciency Buperts]. Information letters were issued on the results of conducting
the local competitions and recommendations were made to put the prize sugges-
tions into production.

Energonadsor [State inspection for industrial power engineering and for power
engineering supervision] enterprises Dneproenergo [State Athinistration of the
Dnepropetrovsk Oblast Power System Management] (it presented 324 suggestions
Krasnoyarskenergo [State Administration of the Krasnoyarsk Oblast Power System
Management] (284 suggestions), Hosenergo [Moscow Regional Administration of
Power Systul Management] (259 suggestions), Kuybyshevenergo [State Mhinis-
tration of Kuybyshev (blast Power System Management] (240 suggestions). Mold-
glavenergo [Moldavian Main ministration of Power System Management] (157
suggestions) . Saratovenergo [State Adsinistration of Saratov oblast Power

34

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

System Management] (153 suggestions), Odessaenergo [State Administration of
Odessa Oblast Power System Hanagauent] (145 suggestions). Karagandaenergo
[State Administration of Karaganda Oblast Power System Management] (118 sug-
gestions). Orenburgenergo [State Achinistration of Orenburg Oblast Power Sys-
tem Management] (115 suggestions) and so on worked actively in conducting the
local competitions.

A total of 1.755 suggestions with a saving of 1.3 billion kit-hr of electric
energy and 4.4 million Goal of thermal energy was presented to the All-Union
Ccmpetition. Power engineers. workers of ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy.
chemistry. petrochemistry and oil refining, the automotive and the light and
textile industry participated actively in the competition (see table).

 

 

 

m, of W
Incoming Electric Thermal
m Hillion Thousand

Sector of 1ndust_rx “usher Percent klﬂ‘hr Percent Gcal Percent
Ferrous metallurgy 220 12.4 136.3 10.2 535.0 12.3
duemistry 182 10.4 90.9 6.8 578.7 13.3
Pctrochemietry and

oil refining 125 7.1 49.9 3.7 383.6 8.8
Nonferrous metallurgy 103 5.9 124.6 9.3 332.0 7.6
Power engineering 99 5.6 289.2 21.8 901.9 20.7
Textile and light 78 4.4 15.9 1.2 112.5 2.5
Automotive 70 4.0 31.8 2.4 59.9 1.4
Timber, pulp-paper

and woodworking 65 3.7 21.3 1.6 173.4 3.9
Construction materials 59 3.4 26.2 2.0 207.4 4.8
Aviation 49 2.8 17.5 1.3 26.2 0.6
Electrotechnical 43 2 . 5 36 .6 2 . 7 24 .4 0 . 5
Petroleum 38 2.2 131.6 9.9 113.1 2.6
Machine tool building 38 2.2 22.0 1.6 3.3 0.1
Coal 33 1.9 16.4 1.2 11.0 0.3
Rail 32 1.8 24.0 1.8 18.0 0.4
Construction 32 1.8 10.8 0.8 45.5 1.0
Electronic and radio

engineering 29 1.6 9.1 0.7 25.0 0.6
Food 29 1.7 1.8 0.1 95.1 2.1
Medical 21 1.2 32.1 2.4 85.8 2.0
Communal housing 19 1.1 20.1 1.5 21.4 0.5
Conmunications

equipuent 15 0.9 1.9 0.1 5.1 0.1
Agriculture 15 0.9 61.4 4.6 20.1 0.5
Meat and milk 14 0.8 1.6 0.1 13.6 0.3
Instrument building 13 0.7 5.5 0.4 20.5 0.5
Microbiology 12 0.7 3.6 0.3 30.1 0.65
Gas 11 0.6 3.9 0.3 10.5 0.2
Shipbuilding 11 0.6 1.5 0.1 16.2 0.4
[Continued on following page]

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

War of Annual Energy Conservation
sin :elstil my Electric Thermal
Million Thousand

Sector of Indust_ry Nulber Percent kw‘hr Percent Goal Percent
Procurement 9 0.5 2.9 0.2 --- --
Fishing econasy 7 0.4 1.2 0.1 6.9 0.16
Local 7 0.4 0.7 0.1 4.1 0.09
River fleet 6 0.3 2.7 0.2 -—- --
Machine building 142 8.1 81.8 6.1 118.6 2.7
Including:

tractor and

agricultural 46 2.6 32.6 2.4 19.1 0.4

heavy and

transport 24 1.4 12.6 0.9 5.9 0.1

d'Lemical and

petroleum 17 1.0 13.7 1.0 9.1 0.2

power engineering 13 0.7 9.4 0.7 10.6 0.2

construction, high-

way and municipal 10 0.6 3.1 0.2 3.6 0.1

light and food 8 0.5 1.1 0.1 13.1 0.3

general machine

building 8 0.5 6.7 0.5 0.9 0.02
Miscellaneous 129 7.4 58.0 4.3 366.8 8.4
Total 1 .755 100 l , 334. 8 100 4 , 365 . 7 100

The assistance comittees at the Energonadzor enterprises Chelyabenergo [State
Adninistration of Chelyabinsk (blast Power System Hanagement] (123 suggestions).
Bashkirenergo [State Administration of Bashkirskaya ASSR Power System Manage-
ment] (92 suggestions). KIIYbYshevsnergo (88 suggestions), Lenenergc [Leningrad
Regional Administration of Power System ﬂanagement] (88 suggestions) . Sverdlov-
energo [State Administration of Sverdlov Cblast Power System Management] (84
suggestions) , Dneprcenergo (73 suggestions) and others presented the largest
nuaber of suggestions to the 36th All-Onion Competition. The jury of the com-
petition awarded prizes for 183 of the best suggestions, due to introduction
of which an annual saving of 282.5 million kﬂ'hr of electric energy and 911,000
Goal of thermal energy was achieved, which comprises 7.9 million rubles.

The jury awarded the first prize of the competition for the suggestion “Modern-
ization of utility boilers for combustion cuter furnaces of the polymetal
combine,“ developed by workers of the P0 (production association] Uralenergo-
tsvetmet jointly with workers of the laeninogrosk Polymetal Combine.

An increase of the operating reliability of the utility boiler was achieved
due to its U-shaped configuration and new design of the screens with collec-
tive blocks that form the top cover and also as a result of changing the spac-
ing of the evaporating screens in the gas lines of the boiler. aerodynamic
optimization of the gas flow by using a new design of the separating wall,

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increasing the value of the intermediate hopper of the boiler and making its
cooling more efficient and using a detachable design of the top cover. Intro-
duction of these measures made it possible to increase the continuous operating
life of the furnace-boiler complex from 10 to 240 days and to save 46,618 Gcal
of thermal energy and 887,000 kR'hr of electric energy annually by utilizing
the heat of exhaust gases. Utility boilers of similar design will find broad
application at other enterprises of the sector.

The first prize of the competition was also awarded to the suggestion "Utiliza-
tion of the heat of distillery fluid of soda production“ of workers of the
Siberian Branch of NPO [scientific production association] Tekhenergokhimprom
and the Sterlitamak P0 Soda, which was directed toward conservation of thermal
energy. the use of secondary energy resources and environmental protection.

According to the existing technology of calcined soda production, the distil-
lery liquid with temperature up to 95°C was dumped into a slurry collector as
production waste. An installation in which the heat of the distillery liquid
can be used both to heat the chemically purified and the circulating network
water in the heating system was developed and introduced for the first time in
the practice of soda production by the mania method. The experimental-in-
dustrial installation for using the heat of distillery liquid of type UITDzh-
500, introduced at the Sterlitamak P0 Soda, made it possible to achieve an an-
nual saving of 52,920 Gcal of thermal energy. The contract design and detail
plan of an industrial installation on the use of the heat of distillery liquid
is now being developed for the Berezniki Soda Plant, the Sterlitamak PO Soda
and the Crimean Soda Plant. The total annual saving of thermal energy should
exceed 300.000 Gcal.

The jury awarded the second prize of the competition for the suggestion "Modern-
ization of evaporative cooling installations of copper refining furnaces” of
workers of the Uralelektromed' [expansion unknown] combine. New furnace com-
ponents--caissons of vertical and horizontal gas lines, a rotary slide valve,
pivot beams, tubular wall caissons for enclosure and protection of openings
between windows, burner nozzles, support beams of the end burner wall and so
on--were used as a result of introducing a number of efficiency suggestions of
the combine workers. Modernisation of the evaporative cooling system made it
possible to increase the stability of the cooled components of the furnace by
a factor of more than 8-10, to bring the degree of utilization of VER [expan-
sion unknown] (with regard to utility boilers) up to 72.2 percent, to increase
the productivity of the copper foundry, to considerably reduce the consumption
of refractories, to considerably increase the efficiency of the evaporative
cooling installations and to save more than 58,000 Gcal of thermal energy
annually.

The suggestion of workers of the Hagnitogorsk Metallurgical Combme ineni v. I.
Lenin “Reconstruction of the intradrun separation device on utility boilers

for two-vat steel smelting furnaces,“ for which the jury of the competition
also awarded second prize, will find application at enterprises of ferrous
metallurgy. The separation device of drums. installed according to the design
on all utility boilers, was not guaranteed the required separation, as a result
of which there were discharges of boiler water into the steam heater.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘iCIAI. USE ONLY

Reconstruction of the separation device made it possible to eliminate complete-
ly the discharge of condensation moisture into the steam heater, to reduce the
idle times of the boiler, to increase generation of steam, to stabilize opera-
tion of the furnace-utility boiler-gas scrubbing-flue system and to reduce the
consunption of water-steam mixture to purge the boilers. Reconstruction of

the indicated device at the Magnitogorsk Metallm'gical Carbine alone guaranteed
a saving of 30,210 Gcal of thermal energy annually.

A number of other interesting works was awarded prizes of the competition.
They will all find broad application at many enterprises of the national econ-
omy, which will permit a significant contribution to solution of problems of
increasing the utilization efficiency of the country's fuel and energy
resources.

organizations of the state Power Engineering Inspection and councils of scien-
tific and technical societies devoted a great deal of attention to problems of
dissemination and introduction of the suggestions awarded prizes at the All-
Union and local competitions. A total of 2,475 suggestions was put into pro-
duction in 1980 upon recommendation and under the verification of inspectors
of Bnergonadzor enterprises, which permitted a saving of an additional $72
million kH-hr of electric energy and one million Gcal of thermal energy in the
national economy.

The ministries of nonferrous metallurgy, the chemical, petrochemical and oil
refining industry. lunber, pulp-paper and woodworking and shipbuilding indus-
tries published intonation on the most valuable suggestions for the corre-
sponding sectors of industry. other ministries sent letters to subordinate
enterprises on the results of the 25th All-Union competition with recommenda-
tions on introduction of the prize suggestions.

At the same time some ministries and scientific and technical societies are
not devoting the proper attention to propagandizing of the tasks and condi-
tions of the All-Union competition and to development of efficiency work on
problems of energy conservation. Few suggestions come into the All-Union
competition from a number of machine building, construction, microbiology.
fishing, local and gas industry enterprises.

The assistance conmittees to the All-Union canpetition of a number of ﬁner-go-
nadzor enterprises and mo councils are not working actively in propagandizing
the conditions of the competition, rendering assistance to the primary organ-
izations of the MD of enterprises in intensification of efficiency work
directed toward conservation of energy resources. The assistance committees
of the Bnergonadzor enterprises Buryatenergo, Gruzglavenergo [Main naninis-
tration of Georgian Power System Management], Kamchatskenergo, Kostromaenergo.
'l'yumen'energo. Chuvashenergo. Yakutskenergo and Usenergonadzor did not present
a single suggestion to the 36th All-Union competition. The assistance constit-
tees to the All-Union competition of Energonadzor enterprises Arkhcnergo,
Amurenergo, Karelenergo, Ryazan'energo and others worked with insufficient
activity. Local competitions for the best suggestion on conservation of
electric and thermal energy were not held in many republics, krays and ob-
lasts. including the Georgian SSR. Kirgiz SSR, Latvian SSR end the Donetskaya,
Khar'kovskaya, Kurskaya, Sverdlovskaya and other oblasts.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Presidium of the All-Union Council of Scientific and Technical Societies,
the Presidium of the Central Board of the “TO of Power Engineering and the
Electrotechnical Industry and the USSR Ministry of Power Digineering and

Electri fication, having considered the results of the 36th All-Union
Competition:

confirmed the decision of the jury on the results of the 36th All-Union
competition for the best suggestion on conservation of electric and thermal

energy:

obligated the central, republic, kray and oblast boards and councils of
scientific and technical societies to consider the results of the 36th All-
Union Competition, to recosuund the best work to economic bodies for use and
to monitor introduction of them into production:

requested the ministries to publish information letters on the prize
suggestions at the 36th All-Union Competition and orders on their introduction
into production and also to obligate the managers of enterprises at which the
prize suggestions were developed and introduced to publish information on the
prize suggestions at the requests of other enterprises and organizations:

commissioned the jury of the competition, the Department of Scientific

and Technical Propaganda and raising the qualifications of specialists of
VSNTO [All-Union Council of the Scientific and Technical Society]. the com-
mittee of VSN‘IO on problems of efficient use of material resources and the
editorial boards of the journal Tamra I mum to organize broad propaganda
of the prize competition work, using the press, radio and houses of technology
of "To for this:

decided to hold the 37th All-Union Competition in 1982 for the best sug-
gestion on conservation of electric and thermal energy and obligated the
boards and councils of NTO, Energonadzor enterprises and regional power en-
gineering boards to organize broad propaganda of the goals and tasks of the
competition, to direct the creative activity of workers toward finding and
use of reserves for conservation of energy resources and to conduct local com-
petitions on conservation of energy resources in oblasts,krays and republics:

confirmed the comittee (jury) of the 37th All-Union Competition for the
best suggestion on conservation of electric and thermal energy:

turned the attention of the chiefs of the Main Administrations and con-
trol energy systems of Buryatenergo, Gruzglavenergo, Kamchatskenergo, Kostro-
macnergo, Tyumen'energo, Chuvashenergo and Yakutskenergo toward the need to
implement measures to improve the work of the assistance committees to the
All-Union Competition in propagandizing the conditions of the competition,
selection of suggestions at enterprises, rendering assistance in formulation
of then and also in organization of local competitions on conservation of
energy resources.

Glavgosenergonadzor and the jury of the All-Union canpetition devote special
attention of the energy services of ministries, agencies and assistance

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE O.\I.\'

committees to the competition to the need for the most rapid introduction 01'
the prize suggestions into production to achieve an additional conservation
of energy.

COPYRIGHT: Enetgoizdat, "Promyehlennaye energetike', 1982

6521
C50: 1822/172

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 622.276.5.338.27

ANALYSIS. PLANNING. FORECASTING 0051' OF OIL PRODUCTION

Moscow W12, PIANIWIYB I PWZIMNIYB 8833810130311 005m}: turn
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 11 Jun 1981) pp 1-3, 111-112

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book 'mlysis. Planning

and Forecasting the Cost of Oil Production”, by Mars Tinir'yanovich Shakirov,

Vladimir Pavlovich Khalyavin, Il'ya Ivanovich Leehchinets and Viktor Yeliseye-
vich Tishchenko, Izdatel'stvo 'Nedra", 1,500 copies, 112 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The characteristics of formation and the lethods of analysis of the economic
indicators of oil production are described. Methods and reserves for reducing
operating losses at the level of the production units of oil-producing asso-
ciations are indicated. Hethodological prerequisites of economic and mathe-
matical modelling and forecasting of the economic indicators of oil production
are outlined and methods end models are proposed that permit one to solve a
wide range of practical problems in analysis of the indicators of oil
production.

The book is intended for economists, planners and other engineering and tech-
nical personnel of oil-producing enterprises and organizations. It will be
useful to students of petroleum higher educational institutions a'd faculties.

Introduction

The economic problem of increasing the economic effectiveness of production
under modern conditions occupies the leading position in develOpeent of so-
cialist industry. The cost of oil production is one of the main indicators

in estimating the effectiveness of the oil-producing industry. Therefore, it
is no accident that a great deal of attention is being devoted to planning and
analysis of the production and economic activity of oil-producing enterprises
in the papers of Soviet authors N. H. Nikolayevskiy, I. I. Ryshenkov, L. M.
Umanskiy, A. N. Buchin, L. P. Grushnovskiy, V. 2. Pattakhov, R. K. Panova and
others.

Economic and mathematical methods of analysis and planning, specifically eco-
nomic statistical modelling, are now used ever more frequently in economic
research. This direction is comparatively new but it is developing rapidly

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K 'IM. USE ONLY

and has already achieved wide recognition of many specialists. Economic re-
search using quantitative methods acquires a new, higher quality and fully
corresponds to the modern requirements of management. The value of mathe-
matical methods and economic statistical modelling is especially high in
solving practicaly problems under operational conditions at ASU [automatic
control system] enterprises. However, it should be recognized that economic
mathematical modelling using computers in the practical activity of lomrlevel
cost-accounting enterprises has not achieved sufficiently wide distribution.
Such problems as economic mathematical analysis of production expenditures,
planning the cost of oil production and other problems of important signifi-
cance in solving practical problems of increasing the efficiency of the oil-
producing industry require their own solution.

This book is devoted to development and application of economic mathematical

methods and models for use in analysis. planning and forecasting of the cost
indicator of oil production.

The methodological procedures and selection of the form of economic mathemati-
cal relationship of the investigated indicator to factors that significantly
affect its level and dynamics are determined to a considerable degree by the
conditions of formation of the cost of oil production. Therefore, special
attention is devoted in the book to formation of production expenditures at
different stages of exploitation of a field. Economic statistical analysis of
the cost of oil production. the estimate of the production and economic activ-
ity of an enterprise. planning and forecasting of the cost of oil production
and economic mathematical models of this indicator for solving practical prob-
lems occupy an important position.

Contents Page
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chapter 1. Method of Economic-Statistical Analysis of Cost of Oil
Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Characteristic features of formation of cost of oil production. . . 4
Methodological prerequisites of economic statistical analysis
of cost of oil production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Chapter 2. Analysis of Cost of Oil Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Tendency and factors of variation of cost of oil production . . . . 21
Economic statistical analysis of cost of oil production . . . . . . 24
Economic statistical analysis of production expenditures by

subsystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Multifactor analysis of cost of oil production with regard to
stage of exploitation of field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

Chapter 3. Forecasting the Cost of Oil Production . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Forecasting the cost of oil production on the basis of time series. 53
Forecasting on the basis of multifactor models . . . . . . . . . . 58
Retrospective analysis of the capabilities of using economic

statistical model for forecasting and planning . . . . . . . . . 63

h2

FtﬂltlFFICLAL USIZCNVLY
Chapter 4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PlanningtheCostofOilProduction. .. . ..... . ..

Planning the cost of oil production under conditions of function-

ing of automated control systn

eeeeseeeeese

Application of economic statistical model to cost of oil produc-
tion in planning the exploitation of fields . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 5 .

Estimating the Effectiveness of Measures to Reduce the
Cost of Oil Production

eeeeeeesesaeeeseee

Intensification of oil samples and improvement of flooding system.
Limiting the increase of flooding of well products . . . . . . . .
Using methods of increasing .the oil yield of beds. . . . . . . . .

Using separate collection of anhydrous and flooded oil and intra-

pipe de-emulsification

eeeeeeeee

Improving the use of stock of oil wells. . .

Conclusions...................

Appendix 1. Host Widespread Forms of Relations .

Appendix 2. Questionnaire for Experts

Appendix 3 .

e-eeeeeeee

eeeee

List of Pectors that Determine Level and Dynasics of

Expenditures of Subsystul of Liquid Extraction . . . . . .

Appendix 4 .

List of Factors that Influence the Level and Dynamics

of Expenditures of Subsystem of Collection, Storage and
Preparationofoil....................

Appendix 5 .

List of Factors that Influence the Level and Dynamics

of Subsystem of Maintaining Bed Pressure . . . . . . . . .

Appendix 6 .

List of Factors that Influence the Level and Dynamics
of Expenditures of Production Control Subsystem

eeeee

Bibliwtapl‘yceseeseeeeeeeeesseseeseseeeeee

CDPYRIGHT :

6521
C50: 1822/174

Isdatel ' stvo "Nedre" . 1981

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

68

66

69

75
75
80

95
101
103
104

104

105

106

106

107

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PIPELINE

'JDC 622 .692 .4.07
UNDERGRQJND TRUNK PIPELINES

Moscow PODZDINYYE MAGISTRAL'NYYE TRUNPROVODY in Russian 1982 (signed to
press 30 Nov 81) pp 1-8, 383-384

[Annotatiom introduction, table of contents and bibliography from the book
"Underground Trunk Pipelines (Design and Construction)“, by Petr Petrovich
Borodavkin, Irdatel'stvo 'Nedra", 6,700 copies, 384 pages)

[Text] Annotation

Problems of the design and construction of underground trunk pipelines for
transport of oil, gas and their refining products are considered. Based on
generalization of douestic and foreign experience of oonstructim and also
from the results of the author's investigations, materials are presented on
guaranteeing high reliability of main pipelines over a long period of their
operation. Special attention is devoted to stabilization of the position of
underground pipelines, pinching of pipes in soils having low supporting capac-
ity (swamps, pernafrost, flooded soils and so on). The book is intended for
engineering and technical personnel involved in the areas of design, ccnstruc-
tion, operation and repair of trunk pipelines. It may be useful to students
of higher educational institutions.

Introduction

In his sumary report to the 26th CPSU Congress, Comrade I... I. Brezhnev said:
”Gas and oil production in Western Siberia and their transportation to the
European USSR oust be done by the most important sections of the Remy pro-
gram of the 11th and even of the 12th Five-Year Plans.“

The Congress posed the probln: “Increase the effic ency and operating reli-
ability of the country's unified gas supply system," the basis of which are
large main gas pipelines.

 

1"Haterialy XXVI 3"yerda 1088“ [Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress]. Polit-

mm, 1981, p 39.
2mm. cit., p 150.

Mo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pipeline transport of oil and gas from a narrowly specialized engineering
system, as it was only 30-40 years ago, has been transformed to a large sec-
tor of the national economy. Tens of billions of rubles are invested annual-
ly in its development. This circumstance requires a scientifically based
approach to distribution and expenditure of such enormous funds and does not
permit one to make even slight aiscalculations both in general and in special
decisions. If scientific investigations are analysed for a specific period,
it is impossible not to note that these investigations and problems of de-
sign, construction and operation of pipelines were not considered in close
relationship to each other. One should not in this regard that some indepen-
dent problems were solved at such a high scientific level that they now have
unsurpassable scientific and practical value. But nevertheless all these in-
vestigations were not combined with each other by the community of the general
goal. which has long been known and is formalised extremely simply: a specif-
ic amount of product (oil, gas. petroleu product, coal and so on) must be
moved by pipeline from point A to point 8. But point A may be located on the
Yamal Peninsula while point B may be located on the western border of the USSR.
There is no need to explain what complex problems must be solved in order for
the product from point A to be delivered to point B and so that it arrives
there continuously over a period of many years.

Problems arise at the second step of selecting the route: how to connect
points A and B, where the route passes, what it intersects, where it cannot
be laid for some reasons not dependent on the designer, how to tie the route
to an existing system of pipelines and one planned for the future and how to
tie the pipe diameter, working pressure of the product, disposition of pumping
stations and pimping mode, design solutions and structural and technological
reliability to each other, taking into account the problem of environmental
protection. It is obvious without any explanation that there is no one ele-
ment of this list which would not depend in sate manner on the position of

the route and which would not itself have a significant effect on its position.
The role of the selected pipeline route is clearly obvious from its relation-
ship to all the elements without exception that guarantee achievement of the
main goal--delivery of the product to the final destination and prolonged
functioning of the pipeline. The following questions immediately arise: with
what expenditures of material resources and within what deadline will the giv-
en goal be achieved, what loss will be inflicted on nature and how will it be
reduced. The simplest answer to these questions is that everything should be
minimal: both expenditures for construction and the loss inflicted on nature
and the time of construction.

A considerable volume of scientific investigations has been conducted during
the past decade on selection of the optimal route. Optimum decisions on re-
duced expenditures, capital investments, design arrangements, branches and
pumping techniques have been found and tens of computer programs have been
compiled.

Thus. let us asstlme that we have a pipeline that is best in all respects or
at least in some indicator. What does "best" or "OptilMII" mean? not us pre-

sent only a brief list of the interconnected (direct and feedback) elements
that comprise the structural and operational structure of a pipeline (Figure

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l) . It is obvious from the figure that the best solution and optimization of
a pipeline can be found when the highest reliability vith ninimun loss in-
flected on nature and mininun expenditures for construction and operation are
achieved simultaneously. This approach to the problem of optimization of pipe-
line transport is still not being quite clearly followed in those investiga-
tions which have been sade up to the present. This is a matter not so much of
the absence of mathematical models as the absence of scientifically substanti-
ated recaamendations on solution of individual problens. Let us analyze this
situation.

Pipeline
Reliability (max) Reduced expenditures Loss to nature
(Iain) (min)
Design Technological Designs
_ Interaction
Nonresolvability Method of Pumping with
Materials Environment
Oil Gas
Durability
Cold. Hot, Technology
warm, cooled, Effect on
hot cold, nature
Strength for p liquid Organization
88 KS Methods of
Natural protection
Strength for q conditions
Diameter
and material
of pipes
Strength to
special loads Uninterrupted
Ming
Protection
against corrosion
Carrying
capacity

Figure 1. Structural and Operational Structure of Pipeline

Reliability has two main brandles: design and production. Design reliability
is guaranteed at a given level when nondestructability and durability are

1.6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
guaranteed (within the limits of calculated or directive operating period).
Nondestructability in turn is determined by the required design strength (for
example, of pipes), calculated for test and operating pressures of the product
being pumped and also to the effect of external force factors (precipitation,
slides, effective flows and so on). Durability with nondestructability already
guaranteed cannot be provided if prolonged effects are taken into account that
reduce the carrying capacity of the structures (corrosion, shifting of pipes
in soils when slip properties appear, effective loads variable in time with
greater or lesser frequency).

We analyzed the investigations in the most careful manner on the strength of
pipelines and concluded that it is not yet possible to talk about complete
scientific substantiation of the methods of designing pipelines for strength.
It is interesting to note that pipelines have an exceptionally high reserve of
carrying capacity, but nevertheless they do sometimes break. This does not
mean that the thickness of the pipe walls should be increased in the future.

It turns out that the thickness can even be decreased by providing a test which
completely determines the latent defects of a metallurgical and structural
nature. One cannot assume that an increase of the thickness of pipe walls to
compensate for structural and metallurgical defects is substantiated. Let us
consider the optimization approach to this problem. This is the schane of re-
lationship of its elements: strength-conservation of metal-tests-period of in-
troduction-time losses (and accordingly of income from later introduction into
operation)-losses from accidents during operation (due to premature introduc-
tion into operation and nondetermination of latent defects)-loss to nature
(sometimes unrecoverable). This is a very important direction of optimisation
that combines the cycle of strength, economic and ecological problems. Inves-
tigation of all the elements of this relationship also ptrmits one to give a
scientifically substantiated answer.

Let us turn to production reliability, bearing in mind only transportation of
oil and gas. The main goal of guaranteeing a given level of production reli-
ability is uninterrupted delivery of a calculated quantity of product to the
final destination. There are more optimization problems here than in the case
of design reliability. Let us begin with determination of the method of pump-
ing. Discussions have been waged over a period of almost 15 years as to how
best to transport gas over long distances: through pipes 1.6, 2 or 2.5 meters
in diameter, without cooling, in a cooled. cold, very cold or in a liquid
state and at pressure of 7.5, 10 or 12 MPa? It is interesting that the prob-
ion of optimization is sometimes very simple to solve: it is sufficient to
note the formula of the area of a circle and the law of variation of gas den-
sity when its temperature and pressure vary. It is natural that the carrying
capacity of a pipeline 2.5 meters in diameter is greater than that of a pipe—
line 1.5 meters in diameter and that more cooled (or even more so of liquid
gas) can be pumped through the same pipe than hot gas. But the accompanying
problems. sometimes much more complicated, arise in this case.

now does one deal with the scientific approach to the problem of selecting the
optimum method of oil and gas transportation, pressure and pipe diameter.

Extensive research work is being conducted in this direction at VNIIGaz [All-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Natural Gas], HINKhiGP imeni I. M.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Uh}. 0M.)

relationship. Available experience in theory shows that even slight changes
of the location of the route lead to variation of the enumerated indicators.
however, we cannot yet talk about the fact that there presently exists a sci-
entifically substantiated methodology that permits one to state that some

version of pimping, some diameter and some material are optimum under one or

example, transportation of liquefied gas). Let us present an example. When
transporting supercooled or liquefied gas, the pipeline diameter and its car-
rying capacity are taken as the optimising parameters. And all the remaining
problems (heat insulation of the pipes, the technology of manufacturing them.
the use of poverful cooling equipment. construction materials, the effect on
nature and so on) are regarded as secondary. Just take heat insulation. An

long time in flooded and freezing soils. However, one can talk about trans-
portation of a cold product on the condition of solving this very problem.

No less complicated problems are related to construction of long oil pipelines,
especially under arctic conditions: the permafrost cannot be "thawed,” cold
frozen oil also cannot be pumped and it is very expensive to construct a pipe-
line on supports. But it must be constructed. This means that the solution
of this problem is one of the most important directions for optimization of

and are found in pure form, they are useless (although not senseless) at a
given period if the existing level of construction does not permit implementa-
tion of them. The direct relationship of the elements of construction to all
the elements of design and production reliability and also to problems of
environmental protection arises here.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The terrain conditions over the entire length of the route are extremely di-
verse and it is frequently impossible to carry out construction by the design
scheme which is the best one with respect to production or design reliability.
This new that one must bear in mind the real capabilities of the construc-
tion subdivisions. It is probable that not every pipeline can be constructed
with the high mobilization of resources and funds which occurred, for example,
in construction of the Vyganpur-Chelyabinsk gas pipeline or the Surgut-Polotsk
oil pipeline. Development of the optimum process flow diagrams of construc-
tion for specific natural conditions and tying them to design and production

achievement of high rates of construction and reduction of deadlines.

It is impossible not to note once again such a problem of pipeline construc-
tion as environmental protection. 'I'nis section of optimization of pipeline
transport is found essentially only at the stage of establishment. Optimiza—
tion should primarily envision the direction of the route, design of the pipe-
line and punping technology that inflict uinimn losses on nature. This can
be achieved by having a clear classification of the effects on nature during
transportation and storage of oil and gas and the methods of predicting chan-
ges in the state of nature during prolonged operation of pipeline transport
facilities. This classification is being worked out at MINING? ineni I. M.
Gubkin, VNIIGaz, VNIIST and at other institutes. Investigations are being
conducted on predicting the effects on nature and a complex of measures is
being worked out to reduce their effect on the natural vegetation complex. the
animal world and reservoirs. The first results already show the capability
and feasibility of cobining problems of environsental protection to develop-
ment of designs, pumping techniques and the technology and organization of
pipeline construction.

It is obvious from the foregoing how canplex and interrelated the problems of
pipeline transport of oil and gas are. It is the oasplex approach that per—
mits one to solve in the best manner those problems which are related to the
need for a continuous guarantee of the country's industrial regions with oil
and gas from fields located in the vast territory of the Arctic and Western
and Eastern Siberia.

Contents Page
Introduction.............................. 3

Chapter 1. Basic Information on Trunk Pipelines . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.1. Designation of trunk pipelines and areas of their

application.........................9
1.2. Composition of structures of trunk pipelines. . . . . . . . . 11
1.3. General characteristic of line part of pipeline . . . . . . . 21
1.4. Basic indicators of pipeline operation. . . . . . . . . . 23
1.5. Designs of underground pipelines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2 .

e e e

NNNNNNN

0......

HOMQUNH
0

Chapter 3.
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.

Chapter 4.
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Longitudinal Shifts of Underground Pipelines . . .
Unstabilired states of pipelines . . . . . . . . . .

Effect of longitudinal shifts on position of pipeline.

Shifts of semi-infinite pipeline . . . . . . . . . .
raking elastic resistance into account . . . . . . .

Shifts with nonuniform distribution of soil properties
Bffect of soil creep on longitudinal shifts of pipeline

e

e
e
e e
e
e

Calculated characteristics of soils. Bxa-ples of cal-

culating longitudinal shifts . . . . . . . . . . . .
Effect of longitudinal movements of pipes on their
insulation.....................

Stability of Underground Pipelines. .
Forms of loss of stability . . . . . .
Stability of straight pipeline . . . .
Stability of curved section. . . . . .

e e s e
e e e s
e e e e
e e a e
a e s e
s e s e
e e e e

Transverse Shifts of Pipelines. . . . . . .
General characteristics of transverse shifts
Vertical shift of straight pipeline. . . . .
shifts of pipeline on curved sections. . . .
stabilization of pipeline . . . . . . . . .

e e e s e
a e a e e
e e e e e
e e e e e

SlideSections . . . . . . . . . .
Characteristics of slides . . . . . . . .
Stress state of pipeline in slide. . . . .
Calculation of pipelines in slide. .
Guaranteeing pipeline efficiency in slide.

e e e e
e e e e e
e e e e
e e e e

e
e
e
e
e

e e

eeee

asses

eeeee
eeeee

Estination of risk related to construction of pipeline

inelide .

Practical reccsunendations to determine standards of risk

Strength of Underground Pipelines . . . . . . .
Pipelinefailures ...............
Statistics of pipeline failures. . . . . . . . .
Methods of calculating pipelines for strength. .
Optimization approach to problem of strength .

see.
eeeee

Estimation of indestructibility of lying part of pipeli

Probability analysis of limiting state of pipeline .
Effect of stress concentrators on state of pipes . .
Effect of stress concentrators and internal pressure
measure of reliability of pipeline section . . . . .
methods of calculating strength of pipeline by given
degreeofreliability ...............
Calculation of strength of pipeline section. . . . .
Strength of “pipe in pipe” pipeline. . . . . . . . .

Testingof'rruckPipelines. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Relationship of calculated and test stress states. .
Testpressure....................

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e
ne

on

sees. .00.

eseseeoe

eeeeeeee

30
3O
32
34
39
41
43

48
S4

66
66
71
74

78
78
80
85

94
94
101
109
111

115
121

125
125
131
134
147
149
152
161

167

168
171
175

181
181
183
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Borodavkin, P. 9., ”Podzannyye tmboprovody" [Underground Pipelines),
Moscow, Neda, 1974.

2. Borodavkin, P. P.. “Manna qtuntov v truboptovodnom atroitel'atve"
[Soil Mechanics in Pipeline Construction], Moscow, Nedta, 1976.

3. Pontryaqin, L. 3., V. G. Boltyanekiy, R. V. Gallkrelidze et a1, “Hate-uti-
cheekaya teoziya optinal'nykh protaeuov" [Kathe-atical Theory of Optima
Processes], Moscow, Nauka, 1969.

4. Popov, I. v., 'Detomtaiya rechnykh mel i qidrotekhnicheekoye
etaroitel‘tltvo'I [Detonation of River Beds and Hydroengineering Construc-
tion], Leningrad. Gidmneteoizdet, l969.

S. thanitsin. A. 11.. "reoriya rucheta konatruktaiy na nadezhnoat" [Theory
of Calculating Structuxee for Reliability], Moscow, Stzoyizdat. 1978.

6. Rosin, L. A” 'Metod kcnechnykh elementov v prinenenii k uprugin siatomu'
[Finite Element Method in Application to ﬂexible Systems], noncow,
Stroyizdat, 1977.

7. rain, 3. H. and V. I. Chernikin, 'Uatoychivoet' podzennykh tmboprovodov'
[Stability of Undergzound Pipelines], Moscow, Nedra, 1968.

CDPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo 'Nedra': 1982

6521
C80 : 1822/175 END

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY