NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10621
29 JUNE 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 24/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 24/32)

Comeurs

INTER -AFRICAN ' AFFAIRS

New Rifts in Minn-Algerian Relations Discussed
(Souhayr Belhassen; JEUNB ”111008, 26 Hay 82)..........

AIDERIA

Briefs
Gas Exports Increased

IRAN

Rajavi Calls Droneyni 'Finished W' hiring Intemeu
(“aa'ud RadaVi Intem", WWI-AME, 29 “Er 82) 0000

ISRAEL

Defense Minister march Views Lebanon Operation
(Ari'el Smron Interview PARIS HATCH, 25 Jun 82)......

SAUDI ARABIA

Defense Minister Views Iran-Iraq Conflict
(Sultan ibn 'Abd all-'iziz Interview; LB ROUVBI.
WATER, 5-11 J‘m 82)OOOOOOOOOOOOOO000.000.00.00...

SYRIA

Akrsm al-Burani.~ Criticizes Current Regine
(Akram al-ﬁurani Interview; AL-HA‘IAN AL-‘ARABI,
$15 Apr 82) ...........J................0.............

Plans To Eliminate Opposition Abroad Cited
(‘1'me AIP'MI’ 7-13 m 82) oooooeepeoeeseoooeeoe
POI 0mm]. USE ONLY

TUNISIA

Industrial Projects Launched in Key Industries
(“m MHCAW 3T WW3, 21 m 82)....000

Iconomic Cooperation um: Gulf States kpanded
(Souhm lehasssn; JED“! AFRIQUB, 2 Jun 82) ..........

1W ARAB RBPUBIJC

Assessment, Implications of Various Political Parties
(Ss'd Zagmul Pu'ad; AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI, 21-27 Hay 82).

”WNW?
NEW RIFTS 1N TUNISIAN-ALCBRIAN RELATIONS DISCUSSED
Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE in French Mo 1116. 26 May 82 p 36
[Article by Souhayr Belhassen: "A New Quarrel?"]

[Text] Tunis--Against whom is the armaments race in which Morocco and Tunisia
are engaging. as well as the strengthening of their military alliance with the
United States. directed? This is the question the Algerian press is asking and
it sufficed for the Tunisian prime minister. Mohamed Msali. to visit Washington
(20-29 April) for the papers to warn of the imperialist threat. The daily news-
paper AL-CHAAB went so far as to speak of an "infernal plot." The Tunisian
government was not long in reacting: the Algerian ambassador was summoned by
the minister of foreign affairs. This incident is the last in a long series.

To speak the truth. the relations between the two countries. encumbered by the
"Gafsa coup“ (January 1980). had improved substantially since the appointment
of Mohamed Msali to the post of prime minister. After siding wholeheartedly
with Morocco in the Sahara affair. Tunisia had assumed an attitude of relative
neutrality. reserving for itself only the possibility of participating "in a
solution on a regional scale."

Bilateral talks confirmed this change. President Chadli Bendjedid paid a visit
to Tunis. followed shortly afterward by his prime minister. Mohamed Ben Ahmed
Abdelghani (February 1980). Then Mohamed Msali traveled to Algeria (September
1981). Similar annual meeting: had been planned and various joint projects were
commissioned, such as the Bank of the Grand Maghreb (January 1982). established
to finance interindustrial projects and to balance trade exchange.

This has not continued to the present. Tunisia gets the lion's share. the ratio
being seven to one. Its needs would include. among other things. steel, rail-
road cars and spring leaves. but it cannot obtain them from Algeria, where the
domestic market absorbs all such production. Tunisian imports are thus leveled
off at about 3 million dinars (about i.) billion CPA francs). At the same time.
800.000 Algerian tourists represent a considerable contribution to the Tunisian
economy. with an average expenditure of kl diners (about 21.000 CFA francs) per
person per half day-as much as a European spends in 48 hours.

The situation began to deteriorate in January 1981. The reason? A statement by
Mohamed Mzali referring to "contacts on the highest level" among the various

1
C
FIHICIHHC1A1.UBE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leaders of the Maghreb concerning the Sahara. Algeria. which has always claimed
not to be directly involved in the conflict. termed this indiscretion “clumsy."
Suddenly. Mr Abdelghani. who was to attend the ceremonies to commemorate the
bombing of Sakiet Sidi Youssef during the Algerian war, canceled his trip.

The impromptu visit paid to Tunisia by Colonel Qadhdhafi (again in the month of
January)'and the rapprochement between Tunisia and Libya following his official
visit in the month of February did not settle matters. The withdrawal of
Tunisia when the moment came for the controversial admission of the SDAR
[Saharan Democratic Arab Republic] into the OAU and the fact that a new com-
nando unit from Libya crossed the Algerian frontier into Tunisia. in the
Kasserine region. on 21 March. revealed the tension. Young Algerians living in
Tunisia had a bone to pick with the forces of law and order. A bus carrying 30-
some Tunisian tourists was halted at the Algerian-Moroccan frontier (JEUNE
AFRIQUB. No 1114).

It was within this context that Mohamed Meali'e trip to Hashington took place.
The fact that the Tunisian minister of interior attended the funeral services
for Mohamed Benyahia. a former minister of foreign affairs for Algeria. in
Algiers on 7 May. is perhaps evidence of the beginning of detente. if indeed Mr
Driss Ouiga did not meet with President Chadli. he did hold talks with Mr
Abdelghani and his Algerian counterpart. Mohamed Had) Yale. In addition. the
new head of the diplomatic service in Algiers made a point of attending the
dinner given for the Tunisian delegation. Mr Ahmed Taleb lbrahimi set forth
pro-Maghreb considerations.

Mr Cuiga. for his part. said that the problem between Algeria and Tunisia lay

in the fact that the declarations of goodwill were not always followed by re-
suits. He also called the reactions of those who see the normalization between
Libya and Tunisia as directed against Algeria "nonsense." And so on. reciprocal-
ly. All of these considerations suggested that Tunisian-Algerian relations were
entering a period of calm.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

5157
CSO: #519/196

2
FOIiOIIWCJAI.lEﬂ!(M‘LY
BRIEFS

Ggs EXPORTS INCREASED-Alaer1en gee euppliee to France have increased. While

the ehere of Algerten gee did not exceed 13.8 percent of French coneunption in
1981. it reeched 19 percent leet lurch. 11m increeee obviouely reflecte the

leteet gee agreement between Algerie end France. [Text] [Perie AL-HIIAN

ALr'ARABI 1n Arebic No 276, 28 Hey-3 Jun 82 p 66] [COPYRIGE'R 1982 AL-WA‘I‘AN
AL-ARABI]

CSO: 6504/357

”BOWMAN“?
RUM]! CALLS WI 'rmrsm MTTB' DURING mm:
Paris APRIQUB-ASIB in French No 262, 29 hr 82 pp 8-10

[Interview with he'ud Rajavi, leader of the People's lbjahedin. by Bouzid
Koura, at Auwers-sur-Oise, France, date not specified]

[Text] [Answer] All right, since I have to talk about ayself.... It was
just after the riots in Qum in 1963 that I suddenly became aware. At the
time, I was a high school student in the city of Mashhad.

[Question] This was a turning point that marked the break boween feudal Iran
and Iran at the threshold of a new stage. The 1960's were also mrked by the

prodigious development of the national liberation movement in the Third World
countries.

[Answer] Yes, and I followed all these issues, not, of course, with the same
acuity as a few years later, but I was already influenced and impressed by
the debates which took place in the national movement, led by lhhdi

Bazargan.* The founders of the Organisation of the Rojahedin were militants
in this movement, which they were constantly challenging and criticizing.
For example, they asked Bazargan: "Is life a battle, or is battle a luxury?"

(This phrase seen to have greatly ispressed Rajawi, who pauses, as if to
stress its importance. Next, he tackles the role of nomeyni, who began to
gain a certain popularity after 5 July 1963 with the action against the Shah.
He will mention this ayatollah frequently. but for the present, it is a

question of grasping the content of this opposition on the part of the re-
ligious leaders at Qlllll.)

[Answer] This opposition came froa reactionary positions. Thus, it was op-
posed to female suffrage and to the distribution of land.

[Question] The Shah's agrarian reform was of no real value....

[Answer] That is not the issue. Khomsyni was opposed to the distribution of
land as a matter of principle, interpreting Islam in his own way.

*Subsequsntly Khomeyni's first prime minister.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M WHOM. USE ONLY

[Question] He was not the only one in the religious hierarchy to develop this
feudal point of view.... ‘

[Answer] No, many shared--and still share (we will return to this)--this re-
actionary idea that the land is sacred.

[Question] Then the opposition grew, and its starting point was Qua.

[Answer] It reached such proportions that the Shah became alarmed and sent
in the police. That was on 5 July 1963, which marked a break in our country's
history.

[Question] A break, or a point of reference?

[Answer] Rather, a point of reference. moneyni was exiled in Turkey, then
in Iraq. The unrest calmed down a bit, and a new transition period began.
The shopkeeper bourgeoisie, newly installed with the help of the United
States, strengthened the Shah's dictatorship.

[Question] Who was still on the scene?

[Answer] No one. The traditional parties had been eliminated; Bazergan and
Father Taleghani arrested. The traditional forms of struggle had completely
failed. Something else had to be found; another path had to be blazed.

[Question] And this is when you appeared....[Interview format interrupted
at this point, as writer provides explanatory background passage that con-
tinues for next seven paragraphs.] Rajavi raises his hand as if to say:
not so fact; that took a long tin.

Indeed, many were the trials to be endured before he was welcomed on his
release from prison by tens of thousands of Tehran ople with arm full of
flowers, crying, like aillions of others, "Kl‘ousyni. Hajahedin! Sher 'ati!”

But [Rajsvi] gained world notoriety the day he landed at zvrem: military
field accompanied by Abolhaeaan BanipSadr, the first president of the Repub-
lic of Iran, reaoved from office by the asstnbly on orders from the strongest
nenbcrs of the Islamic Republic Party (FRI). Up to his disenbarking from the
Boeing 707 piloted by Colonel Hoezi, a militant mashid (of when there are
mny in the any), few people knew this man with the dullrconplexion and the
black hair parted severer on the side. The Journalists who had observed the
imperial regime‘s convulsions, who had ”covered“_the first months of the
Iranian revolution, and who were continuing to follow the development of the
situation quickly understood that of these officials to when France had just
accorded asylu, the real leader was in fact this young nan with the unob-
trusive manner rather than the other, although the latter was better known by
the media.

Until then, lbssud Rajavi‘s reputation had scarcely crossed the borders of
Iran. At the tins of our various meetings, he was always insisting at length
that he was only "one nujehid saong other ubjahedin." And in fact, nothing in

M men. USE ONLY
either his physical appearance, which is voluntarily neutral, or in his
language, his soft and smooth voiceua sign of Iranian courtesy and savoir-
faire--evokas at first glance the image of the leader of a powerful move-
ment, capable today or tomorrow of being a solution to the replacement of
the present government. He has already explained the reasons which prompted
the leadership of his movement to send one of its representatives--him--
abroad. It was necessary at all costs to break the wall of silence that
had been built since June 1981 aromd this country, which no journalist,
could enter unless he gave pledges of fidelity to the official line. The
Iranian people's struggle had to be made known; the Pharisees, the true
mnafiqin, who restored, then destroyed, the February 1979,revolution, had
to be denounced. It was necessary to organize not resistanceo-that was
being organized and led at home, in the fieldubut international solidarity,
and especially to debunk the Khomeyni myth.

The statements and interviews that he has granted to dozens of international
organs of the media, print and broadcsse, are innuereble. But the very
first was for AFRIQUB-ASIB. And he agreed to go still further for us, for
our readers. To get that, we had to overcome his reserve, to force him to
do violence to his natural modesty, since what we asked of him was to

give a historical overview of Iran, to talk of his people and the struggles
he had led and, in fact, to answer the question on which this overview is
focused: who are the mujahidin?

hssud Rajavi will answer at length, giving many historical and anecdotal
details on prominent figures, dead or still living. He will talk about
former political groups, what they contributed as basic elements to expand-
ing the revolutionary process, and about their limits as well. He will
mention his years as a high school student, the debates in the student move-
ment, the rebellions, the long reflections and decisions which were made to
give Iran, its youth and its people, a revolutionary organisation capable of
countless sacrifices so that the voice of the disinhsrited can finally be

raised. This talk took place at his "temporary" residence, he says, in
Auvers-sur-Oise .

We are in a small, secluded room of the house which is closely guarded and
where, in order to enter, one must raise his hands and submit to a thorough
search. No sofas covered with flowered fabric, two easy chairs, a coffee
table and, in one corner, a television set; a file cabinet completes the
furniture in this small study, where Rajavi receives visitors.

0n the wall, five portraits show the world in which he has lived and lives:
Taleghsni, the "spiritual father," mysteriously dead at the very beginning of
the revolution; Phase Khiabani, brother in struggle and hope, whom he has
never stopped mentioning since his death, weapons in hand, against the PR!
forces; Ashraf Rabi'i his wife, a mﬂjahida who was tortured under the Shah
and who also died, weapons in hand, at the side of Khiabani and his wife,
Azar Reza'i;llenif Nejad, the founder of the Organisation of the lbjahedin,

 

*cs. AFRIQUE-ASIE No 243, 14-27 Sep 81.

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also a martyr of the struggle against the Shah, and finally Reza Se'adati,
sun-eerily executed by the present regime last July, despite a wave of inter-
national protest. [end of background passage]

[Answer] "Yes, that took time," Rajavi continues. "‘l‘ao founding members of
our movement, Hanif Nejad and Sa'id Iiohsen. had just finished their engineer-
ing studies. 'lhey belonged to the opposition wing of Bazargan's movement.

For them, the defeat of the June 1966 movement had just revealed a basic
problem: that of the inefficiency of the liberation movement's form of strug-
gle.

[Question] How would you describe this movement? Nationalist? Islamic?

[Answer] The basic difference between Hossadegh's National Front and
Bazargan's movement lies in the fact that the latter had an Islamic ideolog-
ical base and for this reason exercised strong influence although it dis-
played no revolutionary features. The young people who belonged to it did not
find their deep aspirations echoed in it. At that time they used to say:
When you're a student, you're all heart and soul, but once you finish school,
you get untried and that's the end of that."

[Question] So the future mohajedin that you were more or less did everything,
a stint in Bazargan's manna...

[Answer] Yes, because of his ideology, which was both nationalist and
Islamic.

[Question] And Talegheni?
(Rajavi smiles; his eyes toward the "father's" portrait.)

[Answer] He was much better knowa and more progressive than Bazargan. It was
Taleghani who introduced Hanif-Nejad to the exegesis of the Koran, and it was
he who brought out all the progressive content. But as is known, Taleghani
was so modest that later he would say, speaking of Hanif: "I taught ﬁnif

to read the Koran, but it was he alone who understood its essence."

[Question] He was pretty much the antithesis of lanomeyni.

[Answer] ‘l'aleghani was never a traditional mullah, and his life shows this:
he spent the last 40 years of his life more often in prison, in exile, than
at home. I will talk to you later about the pressures exerted on him not
only by the Shah but also by Khomeyni himelf. I would like to talk to you
about Hanif~Nejad, a man of remarkable courage and strictnsss. One day
there was a meeting uniting all the political and religious personalities in
opposition to the Shah. He went there, took the rostrum, and said roughly
this: "when people see yOur preoccupations, your quarrels, and the cars you
drive, the understand that you can do nothing for the people. So close up
shop and don't waste the people's time," He left the rostrum and left the
hall without any form of courtesy.

POINHCIALUSIONLY
[Question] That was a provocation and an act of war.

[Answer] He didn't stop there. He continued his outright attacks by naming
reactionaries who pretended to speak in the name of the peopleufor sample,
Ayatollah Bomjerdi. who at that time (the 1960's) was the highest religious
authority and who had sent a congratulatory message to the Shah after the
1953 coup d'etat.

[Question] We were talking about the break with the Bazargan movement.

[Answer] At that time, the young people were attracted by Bazargan, because
he was the only one with a scientific view concerning Islam. They were re-
ceptive to this ideological opinion, but challenged it from a political and
social point of view. In these two fields, it was ‘l‘aleghani's analyses that
they shared. Moreover, 'l‘aleghani was considered by some of the mullah to be
an infidel, an unbeliever, because his analysis of the Koran was very pro-
greasive.

[Question] Did he publish his analyses? And why did he settle in Tehran?

[Answer] Yes, his texts were available. His choice of Tehran had two mean-
ings. 0n the one hand, he wanted no: to be considered a religious leader

or to have followers and disciples like Khomeyni, but to establish contact
with the intellectuals. Q: the other hand, he did not want to be assimilated
into the traditionalista, whose ,fief is Qun.

[Question] On what were these analyses based?

[Answer] To simplify, it can be said that this hinged on a central idea:
Islam is a religion of struggle; it is a religion fo. the disinherited masses
and against despotism, colonialism, and the exploitation of man by man. 0b-
viously this was not said in such a clear and simplified manner, but we under-
stood him this way.

[Question] So, all the same, he had a certain freedom of expression.

[Answer] Yes, Relative, but real. He held many debates, and the ideas cir-
culated widely. At the time I was in lhshhad. Hy classmates were the future
founders of the People's Pedayin: Almed-Zadeh and Puyan. The meeting P13“
for all revolutionary youth was in an Islamic club led by Ali Shari'ati s
father. We were all opposed to the Shah and spoke with nostalgia of
Hossadegh's era. But here, too, there was a religious content. And that
was an important element. Hanif-Nejad and Sa'id Mohsen were doing their
military service. They had a year and a half to think. And they put this
period to good use by taking stock of the Iranian movement and especially
by studying other countries’ experience. At that time Algeria, whose strug-
gle we had followed and supported, had just won its independence. And its
experience was decisive for us, since the Algerian revolution had this
Islamic content of which I have spoken.

[Question] Hhat did you learn from it?

FOIOFI'IOALUSEONLY
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

[Answer] That struggle is a science, that our previous struggles had had no
connection with the popular masses, that this struggle requires revolution-
ary organization, something that never really existed in Iran. Up until
then, no distinction had been made between intellectual struggle--brewing up
ideas--and professional combat. This was an enormous discovery. It is pos-
sible that now people will laugh at this and find it puerile, but that is
like laughting at single-cell creatures.

[Question] Then this was no longer a debate on the way to reform the system,
but how' and by what means to overthrow it in order to transform it.

[Answer] Exactly. We knew then what the obstacle was: first, the reform-
ist currents themselves. He understood why there were opportunists and what
the organic and social motives of opportunism are. Previously, we had thought
that opportunist: was to be attributed to personal problems.

[Question] All of this debate lasted 2 years, at the end of which an or-
ganization resulted, that of the mojahedin.

[Answer] Yes. 0n 6 September 1965, the decision was made not to found an
organization but to create a central nucleus whose task would be to prepare
the ideological, political, orpnic, and military bases for a revolutionary
movement.

[Question] So there was no official birth certificate of any kind.

[Answer] That is a date of reference; moreover, the name of mujahid was
given to us by the people when our militants were in prison.

[Question] Why this total clandestineness, including in the formulation?

[Answer] We wanted to avoid all formalism and rigid structure with its con-
gresses, emissions, etc. The central nucleus was composed, to begin with,
of three founders: Hanif—Nejad, Sa'id Mohsen, and Ali Asghar Badia-Zadegan.
Later it was to be enlarged and to have a dozen members.

[Question] Including yourself?

[Answer] Yes, I said then that future struggles must be thoroughly consider-
ed snd prepared.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afriqus-As ie.

9380
080: 46 19/82

mmmsonv
DEFENSE MINISTER SHARON VIRUS mos OPERATIG!
M21315 Paris PARIS HATCH in French 25 Jul 82 p (02

[Defense Minister Ari'el Sharon interviewed by Ben Perot—date mad place
not given]

[Text] HATGI: The Operation which began as a raid entitled "Peace for
Galilee" has ended at the gates to Beirut and could be called "Sharon's
war". What do you think of that?

Ari'el Sharon: Is that a coqliment you are paying me? I rather doubt
it.... But it is not true. There is nothing personal in it. No'measure
has been taken at my level alone. All the decisions down to the smallest
detail have been made by the government, which was kept informed of the
developments in the situation on the front as they happened. Prime Minister
Begin did not make do with merely convening the war Cabinet: All the
ministers took part in the debates, hesitations and discussions. And we
hesitated a great deal. I do not remember there being so my government
meetings during our previous wars.... I went from the front to Jerusalem
every day without exception to report to the government and put forward my
most minor suggestions. I also reported to our parliament's defense
comittee which includes the opposition, who did not go easy on me....

MATCH: You will not resent it, will you, if I say it is nonetheless you
who inspired this whole operation?

Ari'el Sharon: Listen, as defense minister it was In duty to submit my
program to the government and to shoulder the responsibility for implementing
the decisions made by the governunt.

HATCH: You were in Beirut Smday evening. Bow were you received and with
whom did you" have talks?

Ari'el Sharon: I visited the Beirut region late Sunday to follow the
operations by our troops who were busy sealing off all access to the capital.
The aim is not to besiege the city. The civilians, who have nothing to do
with the PLO, are free to move crowd. The encirclement of Beirut is aimed
solely at preventing the arrival of Palestinian reinforcements and pre-
venting their leaders, caught in a trap, from fleeing. It is also aimed at

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
run urn-Luau. um; mud

preventing the return of the Syrian troops who, until our arrival, were
stationed in the capital and who enabled the Palestinians to install
themselves there. Now, our main objective is to remove that wound from the
city. On my travels I met with Lebanese soldiers who recognized me, hailed
as and even embraced me Arab-style. They were very surprised to see the
Israeli defense minister in a halftrack. wearing a steel helmet and a big
bullet-proof jacket and holding an automatic machinegun in his hand.

Later, when passing through Ba'ahda. which is to Beirut what Neuilly is to
Paris, I not entirely by chance with a mayor and a group of senior officers
from the Lebanese gendarmerie. Their welcome was very friendly and very
warm.

HATCH: Hhat did you say to them?

Ari'el Sharon: I told them that we had no interest in remaining in Lebanon
and that we did not want to annex l centimeter of their territory. Our
obiective is to destroy the Palestinians' infrastructure in Lebanon since
for many years they have perpetrated violent acts of terrorism in Israel
and other countries. I told them that we had nothing against the Syrians
either. If the Syrians had not intervened to support the Palestinians we
would not have been forced to fight them.

HATCH: So you did not go to Beirut to install a new lebanese government
there?

Ari'el Sharon: What an ideal I have told you and I repeat: I net those
people in Beirut by chance. I did so in cowlete friendship. I told them
of our hope to see Lebanon become a free and independent country again soon.

MATCH: Is President Sarkis free to do what he wants, without any threat
from you?

Ari'el Sharon: We are not interfering in what President Sarkis does or
wants to do. We are not interfering in that country's political future.

HATCd: But surely your tanks standing a few meters from the presidential
palace nonetheless constitute a threat? That is likely to influence
people, to say the least.

Ari'el Sharon: Dear friend. Go there and you will see, as I did myself,
how enthusiastic those people are about our presence. ’lhey told me so
openly. They have no reason to fear us. Our tanks are directed against
the Palestinians, not against the Lebanese. En route I visited several
dozen Lebanese villages and I would like to stress that they remained
intact after our troops passed through. Our tanks were not directed
against them. Each of our officers was equipped with an accurate general
staff map from the start which indicated the places in which the Palestinians
were. They knew precisely where they had to seek then. It was necessary
to lamch fierce battles against the Palestinians or Syrians near Lebanese
villages. But those villages were not hit.... To return to my talks in
Beirut, I told the people I met that I want their country to regain its

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ouu
independence and to be able to live free from the Syrian and Palestinian
occupations which extended from the capital to the south of the country.
I told them that all foreign armies should leave their territory. I say
all armies, in other words the Syrian troops, the Israeli forces and, of
course, the armed Palestinians, their terrorist organizations and their
leaders who must all leave Lebanon.

MATCH: At the start of this operation you set out to clear an area of
1.0 km [in depth]. How do you explain the fact that you are now in Beirut?

Ari'el Sharon: First take a map. Draw a loOkm-line from Hettula. the most
northerly point of Galilee. You will then reach soInwhere north of Sidon,
which is on the coast around 70 km from RA's aloNaqura on the Israeli border.

Second, from the start of our operation, we have repeatedly stated our
intention of smashing the Palestinians' military infrastructure in Lebanon.
In the framework of a political settlement we ask for nothing more than
the demilitarisation of that 60- to IDS-kn zone in order to place Galilee
out of range of the enemy artillery. lbreover, the Palestinian military
infrastructure was 10 times bigger than we had inegined.

HATCH: Here you surprised by their infrastructure. despite the legendary
quality of your intelligence services?

Ari'el Sharon: Yes. We discovered vast quantities of arms, nunitions and
explosives in underground depots.... We found masses of gms. mortars and
even tanks. In the Sidon region alone you can now comt more than 80
Palestinian tanks destroyed by our guns.

HATCB: Has that infrastructure now been destroyed in the south and in
Beirut?

Ari‘el Sharon: It has been only part ly destroyed in Beirut. Everywhere
else it has been or is being destroyed. That takes time.... We are still
mopping up. There are still Palestinian snipers hiding throughout the area.
The mopping-up operation to which I refer extends from the Israeli border
to the Beirut-Damascus road. But believe me when I tell you that when the
time comes for a political settlement we will insist that not one armed
Palestinian can again enter this 40- to 65-1:- area. Just imagine what would
happen after our departure from Lebanon if we had not first destroyed that
military infrastructure beyond the loo-km linit.... They would quickly
infiltrate again. As for the Syrians. whom we did not want to attack,

our tactics are to push them northward so that they move the Palestinian
positions installed in the middle of their lines and which threatened
Galilee away from our border. He warned them in various ways, secretly

and openly. It was in vain. Ihey continued to protect the Palestinian
positions. So we had no choice but to attack them in the south.

HATCH: You are aware that the whole world is shocked by the maker of
civilian casualties caused by the fighting?

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Ari'cl Sharon: Listen. It is up to you to believe me or not. I do not
think there is an army in the whole world which has taken such risks to
cause as few civilian casualties as possible. ... We only opened fire on
buildings from which people were firing on us. And even then, before
launching an attack, we warned the inhabitants by bullhorn and with leaflets.
That is what we did in Tyre, Sidon and Beirut, suggesting that they take
refuge outside their homes to avoid the fighting.... Nonetheless when
operating in a city like Sidon where there were sons 7.000 terrorists--
including 2,000 foreigners who had some to train in PLO cams—it was
inevitable that there would be civilian casualties. Moreover. we paid a
high price for that. Most of our casualties were the result of the caution
with which our troops executed their mission in the major inhabited areas.
we did our best to spare the civilians. but there is a linit to everything
and I know that it is a tragedy. as in all wars.

MATCH: There are children of 12 and 16 among your prisoners.

Ari'el Sharon: I will give you a piece of exclusive information: We
discovered documents proving that Fatah long ago ordered the recruitment of
all Palestinian children from the age of 12. Mlve years, do you hear.
Moreover in another document which I an placing at your disposal it is
clearly stated that it is absolutely forbidden to recruit children under
12....

There Is No Logic” in Arab Terrorism
MATCH: Here lthe children taken prisoner bearing arse?
Ari'el Sharon: Yes indeed. And they are 12 years old.

HATCH: How do you explain the illogical behavior of the Palestinians who,
by violating the cease-fire every day virtually played into your hands,
enabling you to pursue the destruction of their positions?

Ari'el Sharon: If those people reasoned like you and I, there would have
been no reason to carry out this operation. There is no logic in Arab
terrorism, which we have seen in various forms for almost 1,000 years.

That terrorism is the cause of all the misfortunes besetting the Palestinians.
Behind that terrorism lies the desire to physically destroy Israel.

MATCH: Has the PLO been destroyed?

Ari'el Sharon: The PLO has suffered a very serious blow. But not fatal.

At the present time (Monday evening) it still has a major military and
political infrastructure in Beirut. But we have decided not to enter the
capital and not to conquer it. It is up to the Lebanese authorities to
ensure that the Palestinian nomad withdraws from neirut. But those
authorities will not be able to exercise their powers while the Syrian
occupation continues in a large part of Lebanon and while the 20,000 arned
Palestinians and the 60,000 Palestinians organized into nilitia in the
capital remain there. It goes without saying that the withdrawal of the
Israeli troops is also essential for the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MATCR: I presue that you are not talking about the withdrural of all
Palestinians as such fro- Lebanon?

Ari'el Sharon: Not in the least. I an not talking about the Palestinian
civilians. I an only talking about the terrorists. The departure of the
terrorists, the Syrians and the Israelis is a vital precondition for the
reenergenee of a free Lebanon. That is also in the interest of the West

as a whole. We accept as priority and without hesitation the need for our
withdrawal in the franework of the settlenent which I explained to you.

Our villages in Galilee must never again be hostages to the Palestinians

in southern Lebanon. I hope that that settlement will be found very quick .y.

MATCH: So it is the Lebanese Government which must take responsibility
for removing the PLO from Beirut and ensuring the departure of the Syrians
and Israelis from Lebanon?

Ari'el Sharon: Precisely. Otherwise Lebanon will be no more independent
in the future than it was in the recent past. As far as we are concerned,
there will be no problem because we want to leave as quickly as possible.

MATCH: A final question: How did your air force manage to destroy 12
Soviet-made antiaircraft missile bases in 2 hours without losing a single
plane?

Ari'el Sharon: I must content myself with telling you that we learned the
lessons of the Yon Kippur war: We made a very serious examination of the
problem of antiaircraft missiles. He trained for a long tine and our

pilots executed a brilliant operation. I leave the rest to your imagination.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 par Cogedipresse S.A.

CSO: MOO/340

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEFENSE MINISTER VIEWS IRAN-IRAQ oommcr
PH111127 Paris LB NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR in French 5-11 Jun 82 pp 39-100

[Interview with Saudi Defense Minister Sultan ibn 'Abd s1-'Aziz by retired
Gen Georges Buis in Geneva: “we Hill Not Allow Iraq to Be Defeated"-date
not given]

[Text] Georges Buis: Clouds seen :0 have gathered over Franco-Arab rela-
tions after years of smooth relations. Sons people blame that on [French
President] Francois Mitterrsnd's visit to Israel....

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-Aziz: we were certainly not overjoyed by that visit.
But Mr Hitterrsnd ie a free nan at the head of a free country and his
gesture does not come under our jurisdiction. 0n the other hand it is our
right-and even our duty--to judge the inset of that visit: what contri-
bution does it asks to the cause of peace and justice and in our region,
to restoring a balance which ha long been tipped in Israel's favor?
Therefore we were not going to trip up your president on the road to
Jerusalem. But we are busy sweeping away the jusble of propaganda. That
is because we do not want to fall into the trap which Israel has laid for
us by portraying that visit by the French president as the prodigal son's
return to the bosom of his family.

Georges Buis: However, surely President Hitterrand's first trip was to
Saudi Arabia?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz: Out of a desire to be exclusive the Israelis
portrayed that visit to Saudi Arabia by the French president as a mere
comercial traveler's tour. In short. absolution. We were happy to
receive your president in our comtry. as was able to see that we were
not a spontaneous generation of gasoline pw attendants but a line of men
whose history is much older thm that of oil.

By visiting my family birthplace at al-Dir'iyah and by acquainting himself
with Arabia's history. Hr Mitterrand learned that my father. the late King
'Abd al-‘Azi: al-Sa'ud liberated and ramified his fathers' land with a
handful of nen and without using oncet nissiles or aux-30 tanks. Other
tines, other ways, you may eay-but still the sane determination to be
master in our own country, and independent and dignified in our relations
with others.

MOMGMJJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oil and guns aside-I do not deny their importance-“we have another dispute
with France, namly cooperation between our two comtries as part of an
international effort to restore a just and lasting peace in the Near East
and to restore the Palestinians legitimate rights; in other words, in their
own state Hr Hitterrand's friendship for Israel ought to be a source of
hope, not s handicap. It should make it possible to warn Israel against
its obsessive wanderings which are likely to put the region and perhaps

the world to the fire and the sword.

Georges Buis: In that connection, what is the position on the Saudi peace
plan?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aaia: It takes two to make peace. The Arabs for their
part have put forward their proposals in this so-called Saudi peace plat.
As for the Israeli peace plan. it is a series of excuses for annexing other
people's land, for attacks on Lebanon and for official or unauthorized
installations on the Rest Bank. You may argue that the Saudi plan has not
been accepted by all the Arabs, but their criticises relate to the form of
the plan, not to its content. “is Israelis reject the content—peace, and
that is natural. Although a murped people's legitinate rights can be
clearly spelled out in order to be. recognised and accepted, an iapostor
needs chaos, constant danger and pity in order to survive.

Georges Buis: Another major problan at present is the problem of Iran and
Iraq. Their war is now taking a turn which may be decisive. How is Saudi
Arabia's security threatened by the developnnt of that war?

Sultan ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz: Nobody stands to gain from the war between

Iraq and Iran. Indeed its harmful effects are not likely to be limited

to the protagonists alone but to destabilize the whole region. You can

see that we, like the other Islanicand nonaligned comtries, are anxious

to and this war and to see negotiations reopened. I feel that Iraq wants
peace and would agree to a negotiated solution. But it is our Iranian
friends who are reluctant and who are refusing to sit down at the conference
table.

Georges Buis: The Iranians seem close to victory. Saudi Arabia has
already given Iraq considerable aid. But what forts of military aid do
you envisage, should the need arise? Is it indirect aid with Jordanian
and perhaps even Egyptian forces? Is there a purely military plm for
halting the Iranian forces?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aais: At present it would not be wise publicly to
express an opinion on that point. Sons official views may fun the flanes
and delay the advent of peace. But if contrary to our wishes, that war
were to continue, the Arab states-or at the very least the Gulf states—
would be forced to hold a heads of state or defense comcil meeting to adopt
a clear stance on that danger. I hope that that day will never come and
that Iran and Iraq will soon be persuaded that a negotiated solution is
much more fruitful than an armed conflict. War is a last resort when all
peaceful channels have been exhausted.

16
M OFFICIAL use ONLY
Georges Buis: Would this not be an opportmity for Egypt to rejoin the
Arab league?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Azie: We all want that, because Egypt has a proninent
place on the Arab and international scene. That would be a return to the
boson of the family, but it could not take place outside the Arab League
charter's stipulations and the decisions taken by many Arab smite.

Georges Buis: what is the position on' the ".8. plan for a joint military
co-Iittee with Saudi Arabia?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: We rely mainly on ourselves to defend our
country. We are not accustomed to relying on others to protect our heritage
or our territorial integrity. But we can also appreciate the efforts of
influential nations in the service of peace, husan rights and jmtioe.

Georges Buis: Does what is now happening in technological terns in the
Falklands give you a. new view of how to defend the Gulf?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: Strategic conclusions and accurate asseasnente
of a particular piece of military equipnmt used would be premature at this
point in the conflict. Once the area have been laid down and the ins and
outs of that war made clear, we will then be able to gauge, judge and learn
from the gains and losses. There are, nonetheless, some conclusive experi-
ments, like the Exooet missile which the Saudi armed forces have acquired.
And, while adopting no stance on the circumstances in which it was used.

we concluced that we had bought an extraordinary weapon. That is a judgment
made exclusively on the weapon's efficacy.

Georges Buis: Let us remain on the shores of the Gulf. mat might happen
if Iraq is defeated?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: It is difficult to accept Iraq's defeat. If
Iraq is defeated, the whole situation in the region will be upset. We
will not allow Iraq, or Iran, to be defeated.

Georges Buis: If Iraq is in serious difficulty, is Syria not likely to
intervene?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: I do not think that the Syrians will reach the
point of wanting the end of Iraq as a nation and a people, despite all the
current disputes between the two regimes and the two leaderships. No,

I do not think that Syria could go to such extremes—to want Iraq to
surrender and collapse.

Georges Buis: 50, Syria will not deal the final blow?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz: I do not think that the Syrian people or the
Syrian Army would take the responsibility of attacking Iraq or any other
Arab country. And I think that is the case irrespective of who leads
Syria. Nonetheless I am not pointing a finger at the present regime,

I am talking in general terms.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK 0"“..th van UIVLI

Georges Buis: Hhat do you think of Onan's stance on the deploynnt of
- 11.8. forces?

Sultan ibn 'Abd a1-‘Aziz: I do not think that Onan has the right to neddle
in a conflict which does not directly concern it, and I find it difficult
to imagine a developing country. without its own means, entering into
conflict with a big nation for a cause which would not directly affect it.
But, if _it is directly concerned, it will defend itself.

Georges Buis: Do you agree with the fact that the little island of
al-Haairah has hecone a kind of American aircraft carrier?

Sultan ibn 'Abd al-‘Aziz: Our policy is plain and clear: We are opposed
to any foreign presence on Arab land.

Georges Buis: So no military bases in your country?‘
Sultan ibn Abd al-‘Aziz: No to military bases. No to military presence.

Yes to cooperation through an apply. Yes to technicians for a specific
mission. No more.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "la Nouvel Observateur"

CSO: 6400/ 339

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm Ala-DURAN! CRITICIZBS COW REGIME
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 269. 9-15 Apr 82 pp 35-38

Enterview with Akran sl-aurani, co-founder of the Ba'th Party by Valid Abu
Dahar: "This is now to Save Syria"; date and place not specifieﬂ

[jut] Akran sl-Burani: 71 years old. his face lined with the modern his-
tory Syria and the heroic nationalist novaaent of confrontation and libera-
tion from all forms of oppression...ln his eyes is a deep sadness over the
tragic events which took place in his hone town of lie-ah and from which all
of Syria is suffering. But it is the sadness of a strong nan that aeets a
great blow with even greater stoician and determination. As he speaks, the
furrowed lines of his face seen to vanish to reveal a young man brining with
rest, confidence, and faith. It is a face which suggests heartfelt faith.
clarity of mind. and sharp skill at analyzing events and at drawing the
picture of the future. A great Arab warrior with an optimistic eye, confi-
dent of our nation's eventual victory over its enemies.

It was only natural that AL-UATAN AL-‘ABABI should seek an interview with
the nan who has played such a crucial role in the destiny of Syria. He were
finally granted a aeeting with "Abu Jihad" in the garden of his lovely hone.
It was a frank and spontaneous session. yet bold and trusting at the same
tine...1t began with a question about the role of the National Alliance to
Save Syria, and ended with a call of support for saving Syria.

I asked Ahu Jihad: Is the National Alliance to Save Syria a consequence of
the Hanah events, or had the idea already existed previously?

He replied: The call for the constitution of the National Alliance to Save
Syria was issued by a timber of national leaders and conscious individuals
during the June 1967 disaster. Many serious and difficult attenpts to
realize this alliance were undertaken on several occasions. Unfortunately,
the internal and factional conditions of Syria and of the Arab and inter-
national comnity precluded the realization of these attenpts.

we Syrians believe that the only way to rid Syria of Hafiz al-Asad's regine.
which supported by Zionists. Hestern Arabs. and the international connunity.
is to establish the National Alliance anong our people's sons. This alliance

will offer the opportunity to establish a patriotic regime in Syria.

19
FOR omcul. us: ONLY
FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY

A patriotic regime in Syria would place a limit on the massacres occurring
all over the Arab world, in Syria, in Lebanon, and on the eastern borders

of our Arab hoaeland. And, as everyone knows, Syria accomplished the most in
the fifties under the oppressive rule of the National Coalition, a coalition
in which all political factions, from the extreme right to the far left,
including the cot-menists, participated...At the internal level, the Coalition
achieved soae basic social and econonic gains. The Council of Deputies
passed sons inportant legislation regarding the peasants, the workers, and
the econoaic, industrial, and cultural rebirth...The nationalization of
foreign conpanies was carried out, and the bigger ports passed into public...
Even the national budget-which is a nirror that reflects the extent of
general economic growth—increased by an average of 30 to 40 percent each
year. All of this was possible despite the econoaic blockade, despite the
fact that Syria was denied any foreign aid; Syria was one of only three
nations that did not get foreign aid after World War 11.

Even under the shadow of the National Coalition, Syria at that tine nanaged
to confront all of the foreign plots hatched against it and against the
Arab nation. This list includes the mtual Defense Pact, the Baghdad Pact,
the Eisenhower Doctrine, to the Tripartite aggression against Egypt...The
official records on the Baghdad Pact, which were revealed after the 14 July
1958 revolution in Iraq, expose the devilish lengths of the plots aimed at
Syria...Dut in the shadow of the Coalition, Syria was still able to suppress
all plots and emerge victorious.

Indeed, Syria was encircled by sons Arab and Islanic states allied with the
West against it. But thanks to the democratic parlianentary national govern-
ment, Syria emerged victorious fron these battles. At that time, Syria

was a radiating beacon in the Arab world, a shining light of liberation for
the peoples of the Third World. It was even called "heroic Syria." The
world could not imagine that a small country deprived of human and natural
resources could survive in the face of all these powers conspiring against
it, and ultimately energe victorious. What allowed Syria to bring about these
miracles was democracy and the national unity that sprung up in the shadow
of the National Coalition.

It is unnecessary to mention the anount of aid given by Syria to the Algerian
revolution and to Egypt against the Tripartite aggression and the con-
spiracy against the National Union there. Our support reached fruition with
the establisInent of the Egyptian-Syrian union in February 1958.

Question: You were the defense minister at the beginning of the rule of the
National Coalition. You must have keen insights into the Syrian arny's coe-

position. What is your explanation for the nassacres that took place in
Hanah?

Answer: We need to understand the Syrian army's structure from the begin-
ning. In the mandate period France formed what it called the "nixed arny." It
included French officers of different ranks and officers and soldiers from
certain Syrian sects. the soot prosinent fron Latakia Mountains, Jabsl

Druze, al-Sharaksa, and al-‘Asha'ir. France upheld this racist, tribal, and

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sectarian coaposition. It would not give the majority of the young gen of
the country. i.s., of the towns. the opportunity to enter the military
college or the arny, except in a very few cases, and from only certain
fanilies.

when the popular uprising of 1965 occurred to end the mandate. a large nunber
of these officers joined it. Three years later they were to play a super-
visory role in the fighting for Palestine. despite their ssall numbers and
little artillery. The fatality rate of these officers was relatively high

in Palestine in l9é8 because they fought at the head of their unite.

In the nationalist period following the nandate. the sectarian composition of
the armed forces was abolished by a law asking nilitary service obligatory
for ell men. Admission to the military college was nade conditional upon the
applicant's personal nerite and the attain-ant of a secondary school

diploma. In this way the Syrian army became a national arny that all Syrians
could join in to protect their country and to realize the goals of the Arab
nation. And in Syria‘s Golden Age. during the rule of the Progressive
National Front, the Syrian army witnessed its greatest period of strength and
national solidarity...This admirable state of affairs was a contributing
factor to the realisation of the above-nentioned acconplishnents by Syria
during this the.

Indeed, the biggest blow to befall the army's structure occurred after the
movement of 8 March 1963. when steps were taken towards restoring the methods
of the nandate period. A large nunber of officers were dismissed, especially
after the coup of 22 Tebruary 1966...Then Hafiz al-Asad completed the sec-
tarian approach by concentrating the leading positions in the hands of men
from his own clan and sect.

Question: We understand that Hafiz al-Asad opened a gaping wound in the unity
of Syrian society by affirming the sectarian character of the government and
the army. How can this wound be treated?

Answer: "hen the French entered Syria in 1920 after noble popular resistance
at the battle of Kislon, they divided the country into sectarian mini-states,
in the Alawi Mountain and Jabal Druze. They granted each area fiscal and '
administrative independence. and a flag. They tried their best to attribute
to each one of the: a separate cultural character, history, and distorted
heritage...until the people's struggle toppled their attespted artificial
sectarianiam. Complete popular and political unity was achieved after the
1965 revolution when the French were expelled from the country for good.

What France tried and failed to achieve, Anerica and Israel are now sttenpt-
ing--not only in Syria but in the entire region. Zionism and the West under-
stand very well that Israel's strategic superiority over a handful of Arab
states is an artificial, superiority that could be undone and demolished.
Israel's leaders do not try to hide the fact that their policies are based on
carving up the region into paltry sectarian entities...

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

...After the June 1967 defeat, Moshe Dayan and others stated that the Middle
East is not an Arab region but rather a mosaic of several nationalities...he
meant by that a cluster of sectarian and racist entities.

And in fact without slicing the region into sectarian, racist mini-states,
it would not be possible for Israel to maintain its ascendancy in this Arab
region in perpetuity.

Here the savage, sectarian regime in Syria links up with Israel's expansion-
ist designs in the Arab world...the regime has crushed national unity in
Syria and has exposed the destiny of the Arab nation to grave danger.

The Syrian army has lost its military might in the face of this suppression

of national unity by the regime. For military might is a function of internal,
domestic cohesion...Without national unity, military potential is minimal,
regardless of what the army might possess in terms of arms and artillery.

In such cases, the military machine can only be used against the people.

This sectarian regime has fitted nicely into Israel's expansionist designs
in Lebanon, as was made clear in a communique by the Rational Alliance to
Save Syria.

It is indicated in the Red Line agreement over which America took upon itself
to start a mission of negotiations and understandings between Hafiz al-Aaad
and Israel...It is indicated in the despicable and cowardly acts committed

in Lebanon, whereby the army has lost its reputation for patriotism and
fighting spirit. The army has been transformed into a night watchman on the
streets and an instrument of mischief in the hands of smugglers and thieves.
It has been made into an instrument of slaughter of Palestinians and Lebanese.
A band of sectarianists are to be found within the ranks of the Muslims them-
selves in Lebanon.

The collusion of al-Asad's sectarian regime with Israel's expansionist plans
to carve up the region was clear during the rebellion of the agent Barsani
in northern Iraq. Despite the fact that Israel was supplying Barsani with
arms, money and officers to train the rebels during the late Shah's rule,
Hafiz al-Asad was also giving aid to Barzani. And when this agent Barsani
was defeated and died in America, Hafiz al-Asad summoned Barzami's son,
Has'ud, and cajoled him into rekindling the rebellion. It is well known
that Has'ud now spends his time between Syria and Iran.

There are eyewitnesses that claim that Rafi: al-Asad enjoyed good relations
with the shah. when the shah was in the prime of his power, al-Asad used to
get financial aid from him. Even more dangerous is the fact that Khoaeyni's
regime of ayatollahs currently established in Iran is openly in league with
the sectarian regime in Damascus and no longer hides it. This is the same
regime of ayatollahs which still calls up to this minute for the annexation
of Iraq and the Arabian penninsula to Iran, in the name of Islam...Al-Asad
knows that Israel is supplying the Iranian rulers with all kinds of military
aid.

22
F!”l(ﬂﬂﬁ€1Al.lEﬂE(NﬂLY
The Zionist plan for carving up the region was revealed in the famous docu-
ment handed over by the late Jamal 'Abd sl-Naseir to the Indian journalist,
Karinjia, and is the subject of the latter's book, "The Israeli Dagger."
This book exposed the Israeli plan for dividihg the Arab region into sec-
tarian, racist mini-states. hence, the sectarian, racist regime of Hafiz
al-Asad, is a tool to be used by Zionism and imperialism to carry out their
plan.

Question: What in your view is the best way to solve the Lebanese crisis, in
light of the conflict between the Palestinian issue and the Lebanese issue?

Answer: The Lebanese crisis cannot be solved until the Syrian army with-
draws from Lebanon and a patriotic, democratic goverment is established in
Syria. It was the Assd regime that brought Israel to Lebanon in fact...lt
added a new sectarian wedge in Lebanon when the popular leadership of Anal
and founded Ali Bid's organisation in Tripoli. It was also an inhibiting
factor in bringing about conciliation between the different sects (factions)
in Lebanon, including the Palestinians.

Hafiz al-Asad's propaganda that claims that it was necessary for his forces
to save into Lebanon to protect the Palestinians from Israel and prevent
sectarian massacres between the Lebanese only confirmed the truth that his
presence in Lebanon was a contributing factor in the increase of sectarian
slaughter within the ranks of both mslims and Christians. Events showed
that these forces did not fire a single shot to protect the Palestinians
during Israel's attacks on Lebanon, especially during the barbaric shelling
of Palestinian dwellings in Lebanon that obliged the Palestinians to accept a
ceasefire with Israel. '

The facts also suggest that Hafiz al-Asad's presence in Lebanon served, and
continues to serve, as a pretext for Israel's occupation of large parts of
southern Lebanon, especially where large clusters of Palestinians are found,
and aimed at annihilating them.

Question: As one of the long time greats of Syrian patriots, how did news
reach you of the events at Ila-ah. and how true do you think they are?

Answer: I think that the atrocities committed by Bafia al-Aead in the heroic
city of llamah are truly unprecedented in the annals of the nost uncivilized
conquerors in all history, including Genghis Khan and Timurlane. I don't
think there has been anything like it anywhere in the world. An estimated
20,000 people were killed, including old men, wonen, and children. Atroci-
ties, destruction, mutilation, looting and pillage occurred of an order
unlike anything you are likely to read about in books...women's honor was
def iled and word-of-oouth tells us of several women who conitted suicide
in their struggle against the bestial forces of Hafiz al-Asad, protecting
their honor. One young girl exploded herself in the midst of some of these
savage soldiers, killing 20 of them. At least one-third of all the
buildings in the town were destroyed.

2
FOR OFFIClgL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bodies lay strewn on the streets until the town started to fester with dis-
eases. News is still reaching us about bodies being pulled out from under
the ruins...Hhole piles of bodies are being buried in mass graves dug out by
steamshovels. They say that that butcher's forces have even resorted to
burying some of the nartyrs' bodies...just as they burned some of them alive!

The city of Banah used to boast a population of 300,000. Now it hardly has
15,000. The authorities are still barring any journalists from going into
the city. What is really sad is that the Arab and the international news
media, east and west, are keeping quiet about this foulest deed in conten-
porary tines.

Question: During the Bamah events, the official Damascus news nedia targeted
only the mslim Brotherhood. Has it a conflict between the authorities and
the Muslim Brotherhood only, or was it a contest between the authorities and
all of the patriotic opposition forces?

Answer: We nentioned that the city of Hannah once held 300,000 people. It is
incredible to think that the whole town, including its men, women, and
children, consisted of Muslim Brothers...But it was only natural, consider-
ing the encircle-lent and barbaric destruction of the town, that everyone
should have rushed to protect the inviolability of their town and join in the
fighting without fear of death, regardless of the fact that they were out-
matched in arms and amnition...'rhe noble-patriotic resistance displayed by
the people of Bamah accounted for a loss to the butcher of 150 armored cars
and tanks.

If what the sectarian regime's news media says is true. then were Hannah's
Christians who net death in the city and the surrounding countryside, also
members of the Muslim Brotherhood?

More than this...’l'here is an intuitive sense of the lies and falsity of these
claims.

In the period of parliamentary government, Hannah used to elect its own repre-
sentatives to Parliament. The Arab Socialist Ba'ath party would propose a
complete list of candidates and all of them would win seats in free. demo-
cratic elections...‘l‘herefore, since when have the old men, women and chil-
dren of Bansh's 300,000 population, including the Christians there and in the
surrounding countryside, all been part of the Muslim Brotherhood?

Prom another angle, the nuaber of political prisoners in Syria today has
reached the thousands, and run from all sections of society. These include
members of the unions of workers, engineers, doctors, teachers, students
and the Iilitary. So the battle is not only between Hafiz al-Ased's regime
and the Muslin Brotherhood, despite the efforts being made to portray it as
such.

Some have raised questions aboutthe savagery shown to Hannah by Hafiz al-
Asad...what could be the reason for it?

21;
[-0]! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The nunher one reason was to deepen the sectarian differences in Syria to
the point where they became irreconcilable. The tyrant has been working
towards this end throughout his rule. The second reason is to spread fear
and terror aaong the people in order for the tyrant to maintain silence

over his savage crimes. over his support for the regiae of Khomeyni. and the
ayatollshs in Iran, and over crimes coalsitted against the Arab nation and its
rightful future.

Question: In your opinioniwhy didn't any Alawites rise up after the events
of Beulah? '

Answer: It is regrettable that there are no young ban to be heard in the
Lstakia mountain region raising their voices against the barbaric crimes
comitted by Hafiz al-Asad against Syria and the Arab nation. It is

regrettable that they would voice no protest even if it meant their death.

That is why 1 direct ny words to the patriotic conscious and the Arab
sentiaent existing in the minds and hearts of the youth of this honorable
sect. They nust determine what their position towards this rsgine is going
to be. He want them to rally to the banner of the National Alliance to Save
Syria, the only way to save the Syrian people and the Arab nation from

this traitor's rule...lt is the only effective response to Rafi: al-Asad's
attempts to deepen sectarian differences in Syria.

He await the news of our sons in the Latakia mountains to fight at the
side of their brothers in Syria together against this criminal butcher's
regime. ‘ ‘

Question: Do you think that the Syrian regiae is ready to follow in the path
of Camp David, if given the opportunity?

Answer: The full answer to that is contained in the charter of the National
Alliance to Save Syria. -

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

9965
050: “006/031

25
ma omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PLANS TO ELIMINATB OPPOSITION ABROAD CITE
Paris AL—HATAN AL-‘ABABI in Arabic No 273, 7-13 May 82 pp 19-20
(Article: "Syrian Plan to Eliminate the Opposition Abroad"]

[Text] Up until last Tuesday evening, the closing date for this issue of AL-
HATAN ALP‘ARABI, the French authorities had not given out any final information
regarding the results of the investigation. The cause of this silence is two-
fold. The first part concerns the fact that serious information has reached
Paris concerning an official Syrian plan to eliminate the opposition in Western
Europe, and the second part is other information concerning a counter-plan,
which has not yet crystallised. being prepared by the Syrian opposition to con-
vulse the pillars of the regime abroad, and especially in Europe.

ALPWATAN AL—‘ARABI, which is following the investigation and its ramifications,
has uncovered some of its aspects in light of the Syrian plan and the possibil-
ities of a counter-plan.

More than two weeks after the Rue Harheuf explosion, which was aimed at AL—
HATAN AL-‘AIABI, the judicial investigation has not obtained any significant
results, in terms of discovering the perpetrators,_a1though it has specified
the "Syrian role" in the massacre in an undeniable fashion, in terms of making
the decision to punish and intimidate ALPRATAN ALP‘ARABI.

It has become clear today that the Syrian regime's responsibility for the at-
tack is not debatable, since it was aimed at killing two birds with one stone,
as various French political circles have stressed.

1. To inflict the most damage possible on ALPVATAN AL-‘ARABI.

2. To prompt the French authorities to clamp down on AL-HATAR AL-‘ARABI'a free-
dom and perhaps on the emigre Arab press as a whole, on the one hand, and to
send a direct warning to the French Government because of its intervention in
the Lebanese crisis behind Syria's back, on the other. The French criminal
police last week interviewed a number of persons, including ﬂamidah Na'ns',
Lebanese correspondent for AL-SAPIR, who is a supporter of the Syrian regime,
the Egyptian writer Ghali Shukri, and the Syrian journalist, Ghasean al-Amam,
for 3 hours. They were then all released except for one person, whose name has
not been disclosed. '

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Evaporated Lita Salt

The French police have also distributed a composite picture of the driver of
the Opal car that blew up on the street. Police experts determined the fea-
tures of the nan's face in light of informtion from the eye witnesses who saw
the driver of the car up close hours before it exploded. The picture, which
ALPHATAN ALP'AR‘BI is publishing along with this report, shows a face with
Arab features. distinguished by thick black hair, streaked with some gray, and
a thin sustache. '

This photograph was circulated to Interpol and European police organisations,
since the first expectations were that the perpetrator sight have been success-
ful in leaving French territory.

0n the other hand, a team of French police want to the Czech city of Jablonsc
to interview the woman responsible for the car agency where the orange Opel was
rented.

It has become clear that the young woman who rented the car presented the agen-
cy with a false Swiss passport, in the nane of Margit Stadelsan. It is known
that she has bran skin and is about 30 years old, but she has "evaporated"
without a trace. The land or air route that she used to reach Jablonac is also
not known, nor is the hotel where she stayed. although there is the belief that
she carried several passports and travelled under various names.

The young woman's description has been passed to other European police forces
charged with conbating terrorisn, in order to identify her. but the‘results
were negative. This proves that the Syrian regile, and specifically the De-
fense Coepanies' intelligence. prepared the attack with extras care and pre-
cision. They took all the tine they needed to prepare for it, in cooperation
with their informants and spies in Europe.

The Richest Man

The French media, for the third consecutive week, has continued to play up the
massacre and its perpetrators. The newspaper M03 9011! published a factual
report about Rif'at el-Asad and his terrorist activities both at hone and
abroad, as well as concerning his secret wealth. It considers his the richest
man in Syria today. Other magazines have also published pictures of some of
his real estate holdings in France. including a huge villa in the western out-
skirts of Paris. specifically. in the middle class area of (Saint Ne L'Eeu) Pro-
vence, which is about 35 has free: Paris. It also published a picture of the
villa and the opulent gardens surrounding it. A large group of cars was shown
parked outside the house.

The French press aentioned that Rif'at al-Asad registered his property in the
name of a real estate company called "sl-Janan," which is nanaged by his lawyer
brother-in—law, Naji al-Khuri. They added that Rif'at al-Asad recently visited
this villa, and apparently secret neetings were held there to plan the opera-
tions and actions of his intelligence organisation on French soil.

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Liquidation Plan

It is evident that these activities were in the context of an extremely danger-
ous secret plan, which certain French political circles disclosed this week.
The plan calls for pursuing opponents of the Syrian regime and either liquida-
ting the. or‘ kidnapping then back to Damascus. It is based on huge resources
and a vast network of terrorists.

Ala-WATAN AL-‘ARABI is alone in focusing on this plan in all its aspects and
background, backed by facts. figures and sense.

It was decided to put the plan into use in a secret nesting held in Damascus
on 16 February. On that day. the forces of the al-Asad brothers completed the
destruction of most of the districts of limb and were mopping up pockets of
armed resistance in its streets and buildings. As a result of that, the Syr-
ian president st-Ioned his chiefs of intelligence to an urgent and secret neet-
ing. It was attended by 'Ali laydar, responsible for elininating opposition-
ists in western Europe, 'Ali Dubs. responsible for military intelligence,
Mohamed al-Khuli, responsible for general intelligence, as well as Rif‘at al-
Asad.

The plan was prepared and in Rif'at's pocket.

The meeting was aimed at putting the finishing touches on the plan and at dis-
cussing some of its operational details. Its goal was "to hit the opposition
hard, to pursue then everywhere and to create consternation in certain western
capitals that have accepted Syrian oppositionists and have given then freedon
of movenent. in order to make these capitals expel than or inpose restrictions
on their activities, including the media."

This is the first ties in the history of international relations. that a country
has adopted a plan of this kind and has shown such disdain for the simplest
principles that govern relations between nations and peoples, through direct
terrorist intervention in foreign nations.

At the secret meeting, ways of implenentstion were discussed "in light of Pres-
ident Rafi: al-Asad‘a guidance and instructions." Rif'at spelled out the role
of the "soldier" in the pursuit operation. It was decided to make use of the
most capable ale-ants from the 'Alawite sect, after furnishing than with dip-
lomatic passports and the necessary equip-ent.

This equip-ant is another story.
American Expertise

Syrian intelligence sought the assistance of an Anerican arm dealer, notorious
for his past relations with American intelligence, in order to furnish then
with the most effective means of killing and with his practical advice in this

regard .

This dealer‘s name is well known in arms dealers' circles and in the world of
intelligence. lie is George Gregory Korkala. he was sentenced by an Anerican
court to 53 years in prison for violating an official ban on supplying arm to

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Libya. however, Korkala was successful in fleeing American territory, and in

offerring his services. along with his two partners, Hilaon and Terpil (under

10 year prison sentences, charged with collusion with lorhsls) to those organ-
izations and groups who wished them.

However, American intelligence has not forgotten the fugitive "troika" and con-
tinues to pursue Korhala, Wilson and Terpil. The three were successful in stay-
ing out of the clutches of the police and Interpol, until the most dangerous

of then fell into a trap.

That happened on 25 Pebruary in the city of Madrid. Interpol surprised Korkala
at an exhibition of electronic listening devices and equipment. He was arrest-
ed and "ship " at once to New York.

After a series of prolonged interrogations and investigations, Korksla agreed
to "cooperate" with the police and facilitate their job. He revealed everything
with facts end figures.

The confessions were startling. Both the American CIA and FBI had thought

that Korkala and his two partners only worked for the Libyan regime. However,
Korkala revealed for the first time that he also worked for Syrian intelligence.
what were the details that he gave?

His confession was a very serious document concerning the Syrian regime's ter-
rorism. Let us read it and also hear the story of his relationship with Rif'at
al-Asad's intelligence organization.

"In 1977. I and my partner Terpil were invited to visit Damascus secretly.
There, I net with General 'Ali Duh: who told me he was interested in obtaining
the American Ingram machine gun. used by American intelligence. He urged me
to get him a sample of this machinegun for bin to test.

"A few weeks later a Syrian delegation came to New York. led by the foreign
minister, 'Abd al-Halin lhaddam. A captain in Intelligence, laytham Sa'id, was
a member of the delegation. Be contacted me. and we agreed on a date to meet
at my factory, Amstech International, in the city of new Jersey [sic]. ﬂaytham
came; he asked me if I was able to supply him with advanced silencers, magnify-
ing scopes that use rays, and other sophisticated equipment used by American
intelligence.

"Later, there was a series of meetings between us in Damascus and Geneva to dis-
cuss these matters."

Korkala also confessed that the Syrians provided him with a contact in Frank-
furt, Germany, who was purchasing on behalf of the Syrians the following items:
booby—trapped toys, pistols, and explosive ink pens and lighters. The shipment
was to be via Lufthansa.

29
FOR OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poisons for the Opposition

"The Syrian military people then asked ne." Korkale went on to say, "for very
powerful explosives that the American arly uses and for toxic substances that
kill inediately, such as thaliua. strychnine, digitoxin and aconitun. "I
brought this stuff to Paris, and according to the instructions that had been
given to me. I waited in one of the hotels. An emissary cans to me from 'Ali
Dubs, under the assumed uses of Ziyat. All of this was done through a special
"code" that had been agreed upon at the start of our cooperation. Ziyat asked
me to g: to Damascus, specifically to the Hotel Heridian. where I would be con-
tacted.

Accordingly. Syrian Intelligence was supplied with the moat nodern and techni-
cally sophisticated equipment to be used in the liquidation plan in Europe.
This equipment was shipped in diplomatic pouches to Europe. where groups of
kanakazi comandos waited to declare war on the opposition in Paris. London.
Frankfurt, Aachen, Madrid and elsewhere in other Buropean capitals, in execu-
tion of the plan which Hafiz and 81f 'at sl-Asad discussed last lb February.

From al-Muhaysan to Delalasre

Inforned French circles, including the French magazine V.S.D.. which published
details of the plan. put the European war of liquidation in the context of the
Lebanese war and the series of Syrian liquidations which have been going on
in Beirut for several nonths. The officer who carried out the kidnapping of
the forner Jordanian charge d'affairs in Beirut, Kr nisham al-uuhaysan, was
none other than Syrian Captain nuhe-ad Yasin. who also tried to hijack one
of the Arab airplanes at Beirut airport.

Nuhannsd Yesin is the righthand man of Col Kuhn-ad Ghanin, who is in charge

of Syrian intelligence in Lebanon. Be is the one who devised the plan to assas-
sinate French Ambassador Dela-are in Beirut. and delegated its inpleeentation
to al-Nusawi.

Therefore. the Syrian plan to eliminate the opposition in Europe is merely an
extension of the liquidation going on in Lebanon. However, it is more danger-
ous. in the sense that it is being conducted in conplete secrecy and with the
most nodern equipnent that leave no traces: kidnapping (the case of the Syrian
opposition officer, Barid al-Baridi, who was kidnapped from Strasbourg to Dan-
ascus). assassination, strangulation. poisoning, etc. French authorities are
expecting a new wave of these "operations" soon in other European countries,

in which there are Syrian or Arab opposition elenente. for the purpose of "con-
vulsing" both the opposition-and the West. It was revealed in Paris that Rif'at
al-Asad recently visited France (the city of Bordeaux), under the guise of seal:-
ing treauaent. in order to supervise eons of the technical touches to the plan.

However. the unexpected anger against the Syrian regine. which resulted tron
the harbeuf massacre. in addition to the expulsion of the two Syrian diplomats.
Rassan 'Ali and hikha'il Kasuhah, end the imposition of strict security pre-
cautions all over Europe. have shuffled some cards and closed some channels to
Syrian terrorism, which might delay the implementation of some foreign opera-
tions.

30
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The question that arises is: Con the European security authorities nsnegs to
stop the terrorisn coming from Donsscus. end perslyre their intelligence organ-
izations, or will var develop between the two sides, with some European nstions

resorting to direct response end using the sole Isthods. no a senior French
official indicated?

For its part, this question brim up soother one: Hill the Syrian opposition
enter the foreign "stone,” in order to respond to the terrorist. and how?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Ala-“ATM AL-‘MI

7005
080: “06/668

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS LAUNCHED IN KEY INDUSTRIES

Paris means 'rsomcwx In mlrsmms in French No 1906, 21 any 82 pp 1329,
1330

[Article: "Industrial Projects in Tunisia")

[Text] During the Fifth Tunisian Development Plan (1976-1981), the total invest-
ments of manufacturing industries were lower than scheduled: 791 million dinars
instead of 950 million diners (nillion diners: MD; 1 diner - about ll French
francs). As a result, the realization of certain large projects has been af-
fected (iron and steel industry, cement. ammonia. sugar production, etc.).
Nevertheless, private investments have exceeded the Plan estimates by 30 MD

(313 ND against 283 ND).

In 1982. manufacturing industries were to make investments amounting to 245 ND,
representing 17.5 percent of the total investments (compared with 195 ND and
15.9 percent in 1981). Private investments represent a large percentage of the
total, especially in the mechanical and electrical engineering industries.

NOTE: For this study, we have considered only the projects that are now in
progress or the realisation of which is scheduled to start during 1982.

Table l. Investments in Manufacturing Industries (in Millions of Dinars)

Increase in

added value

1980 1981 1982 1982 (1)
Agriculture and food industries 33 55 . 50 0.3
Building materials industries b0.l 69 60 17.6
Mechanical and electrical engineering 21.2 25 bk 11.6
Chemical industries 13.2 34 40 8.1
Textile and shoe-making industries 15 19 27 9.6
Miscellaneous industries 11.8 13 24 16.6
Together ' 136 195 265 9

In 1982, the rate of growth in this sector will be 9 percent, whereas the aver-
age rate of growth adopted in the sixth Plan (l982-1986)-which has just been
the object of a large national consultation-is 11.5 percent. this rate is

32
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE OIL!
I'D“ UFFLULM ODE W11!

based on the recovery of the textile industry, a slight decline in the mechan-
ical and electrical engineering industries as well as in the chemical indus-
tries, and a stabilization of agricultural production.

Agriculture and Food Industries

For technical reasons. the expansion of the Beja sugar refinery-to increase
its capacity from 80,000 to 165,000 tons of beets-was not realized in 1981.

Construction of a new sugar refinery at Ben Bechir is scheduled to start in
1982. This sugar refinery complex, which will have a processing capacity of
4,000 tons of beets per day, and a production capacity of 41,000 tons of sugar
per year, will also include a yeast manufacturing plant producing 7.5 tons of
dry yeast per day. For its realization, Tunisia has signed an agreement with
an Italian-Rest German consortium. The total cost of the project is 47 MD
and production should start in June 1982. The German Bank for Development
and Construction is providing a 45 million mark loan to finance the second
unit of this complex.

In addition, two flour-mills are scheduled to be completed, in Ksirouan and
Gabes; also, 5 HD will be invested to complete the Port of Tunis
dairy station which is managed by STII. [Tunisian Dairy Industry Company]
(200,000 liters of milk per day). and 2 MD to continue the expansion work at
the Sidi Bou Ali dairy station.

In the tobacco industry, 2.6 ND represent the cost of starting the expansion
program of the Tunis plant. The construction of an egg and food packaging
equipment plant in Hateur accounts for a total investment of 1.5 MD. with a
participation from the Koweiti Development Bank.

Building Materials Industries

The total investments for 1982 amount to 60 MD, including 60 MD to finance
cement works projects.

In Enfidha, the Central Tunisian Industrial Cement Company (SICC) will build
a cement factory with a capacity of 3,000 tons of clinker per day, correspond-
ing to an annual production of 1 million tons of cement and 120,000 tons of
artificial lime. This project will cost 71.5 MD, of which 20 ll) will be spent
in 1982. The construction of this factory has been entrusted to the Japanese
company Kawasaki Heavy Industries and production is expected to start late in
1982. The Export-Import Bank of Japan is contemplating a loan of ’05 million
yena to Tunisia.

The Jebel Oust Cement Company and the French company Polysius will build a
sixth cement factory at Jebsl Oust. It will have a production capacity of
1 million tons per year, and will increase Tunisian cement production to 6
million tons. The project will cost 79 MD and will be realized over three
years.

The other projects deal essentially with the realization of the Dir Mcherga
cement factory (15 HD). the hydraulic lime unit (1 HD) and, finally. the white
cement unit (2 MD).

33
FOR OFFICIAL 1183 ML!
Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Industries

It is expected that 46 ll) will be invested in 1982 in the realization of lalge
mechanical engineering projects.

In 1981, Tunisian authorities started negotiations with sutomobi 1e manufactur-
ers, and three manufacturers appear to have agreed with the government
requests.

STIA (Tunisian Automobile Industry Company) and Peugeot have signed an agree-
ment for the assembly of 10,000 model-506 vans, 1,000 model-solo station wagons,
and 2,500 model-305 cars. -Some of these cars will be exported. The agreement
provides for a progressive increase of the industrial integration coefficient
in van production, with a medium term coefficient of 30 percent; it also pro-
vides for the production of spare parts for these cars, and for the purchase .
by Peugeot of industrial products (automobiles and others) made in Tunisia.
The project will cost 12 MD and its implementation is scheduled for the end

of 1982, after the expansion of the STIA workshops.

A second manufacturer-Renault-will realize two units for the assasbly of
4,000 5-10 and 7-HP cars (lo MD), and for the production of brake levers,
remote controls, ignition coils, etc., all of which are to be exported (5.6 ND).

The third manufacturer will realize an unit for the assembly of 10,000 vans.
half of which to be exported (cost: 10 MD).

The Tunisian Economic Development Bank (3081‘) has launched a series of auto-
mobile components projects. It has signed an agreement with the German
mechanical engineering enterprises Kloeckner-Hmboldt-Deutz (KHD) for the
realization of a mechanical engineering complex in Msteur, where light mechan-
ical accessories will be manufactured. This complex will include a unit for
the construction of 6,250 Diesel engines and a unit for the assembly of agri-
cultural machinery (2,200 tractors, 80 combine harvesters, and 700 other
machines). The estimated cost of the project is (05 MD.

A Tunisian company, COTREL [expansion unknown] has been created; it will pro-
duce 6,000 tons of springs for automobile vehicles, mostly for the export
market. A five-year agreement has been signed with Fiat for the sale of
2,000 tons of leaf springs. Technical assistance from the Japanese company

NHK [expansion unknown] has been secured. The project will cost 6.5 MD, of
which 1.5 HD will be invested in 1982.

Other investments in this sector (21.5 141)) will be for modernization and
expansions, and for a series of projects dealing with metallic structures
(5.3 HD), electrical engineering (6 MD), a machine-tool production unit in
Jerissa and a factory to produce radiators for all types of vehicles in
Gafsa (1J0 MD).

In the iron and steel industry, 6.6 ND will be invested in 1982, including
2.2 HD for the overhaul of the El Pouladh blast furnace. The structural steel
shortage reached 100,000 tons in 1982 and will reach 300,000 tons in 1986. A

3h
son omcm. 053 mu
preliminary feasibility study made by Atkins and Partners recomnended a two-
stage development of the plant to adapt it to the production of long products
with a direct reduction prccess. The estimated cost of the operation is 1“ MD.
Table 2._,Investments in Mechanical Engineering (in Millions of Dinars)

Cost of the Realized prior

 

project to 1982 1982
Automobile assembly 27.7 to 9.10
Automobile components -' 31.8 - 5.3
Retailing equipment 1.9 - 1
Tools and machine-tools 2.2 0.6 1
Mechanical engineering complex 38.8 - 1.1
Others - - 6.7
Total 102.1. 10.4 22.5

In addition. 1.3 Mb will be devoted to the expansion of the SOFOMECA [Iron
Works and Engineering Company] foundry so it can produce tubing (1.3 MD);

2.6 MI) will be invested in metal works. and 3.5 MD in the expansion of metallic
packaging.

Chemical Industries

The total investments allocated to this sector for 1982 are estimated at 1.0 MD
(compared with 34 MD in 1981). They include essentially the completion of the
new ICM-3 [Maghreb Chemical Industries] phosphoric acid production unit (10.3
m). This project is part of an effort to increase the phosphate processing
capacity. Its realization would make it possible to optimize the use of exist-
ing equipment in the first two ICU-units by raising their production capacity
to 280,000 tons. and to increase the total ICM capacity to 1.65.000 tons of
phosphoric acid. The total cost of the project is 39 MD and it is expected

to start in June 1982.

The Phosphate and Nitrogen Fertilizer Company will continue the realization
of the SABPA [expansion unknown] project (15.5 MD) and will start work on the
new IC [expansion unknown] projects (lo MD) and on the project for uranium ex-
traction from phosphoric acid (2 MD). The SABPA project will cost a total of
82.5 MD and includes essentially two units for the production of sulfuric acid
from imported sulfur (990,000 tons per year). two units for the production of
diluted phosphoric acid (330,000 tons per year), and one binary fertilizer
unit (330,000 tons per year).

A French 220 million franc loan will be used to increase the capacity of the
local phosphate processing industries and to finance the purchase of equipment
for the M'Dilla (Gafaa) phosphate fertilizer complex. This complex will in-
clude a sulfuric acid production unit (1,500 tons per day using the Heurtey
Industries process), a phosphoric acid production unit (480 tons per day using
the ‘l‘uainian SIAPB [Phosphoric Acid and Fertilizer Manufacturing Company]
process), and two triple superphosphate production units (672 tons per day
using the SIAPB process). Production is scheduled to start in 1986.

35
ms omcm. use our
The realization of a project for the extraction of sulfuric acid and cement
from gypsum and phosphogypsum will start; it will ensure the production of
80,000 tons of sulfuric acid per year and of the same amount of cement. The
plant will be built in Heknassy, will cost 12 MD and will recycle the residual
phosphogypsum from the Gabes and Sfax phosphate processing facilities.

In the other branches of activity, we should note that 3031' and the Italian
group Pirelli have signed an agreement for the realization of a tire factory
in M'Saken (Sousse). The project will have a production capacity of 490,000
units, will cost 35 H!) and mat meet 30 percent of the local demand.

A furfural plant--the first of its type in the Arab world—will be built in
Mahdia. and will produce 10 tons of furfural per day. Purfural is used for
the production of synthetic materials, colors and hydraulic alcohol; it is

essentially produced from spent pomsce, almond shells and other vegetal
products.

The Central Pharmacy has a 9 MD investment progm (Sixth Plan), including 2 MD
in 1982, for the expansion of its production line.

The German company Reifenhauser and SIAPB have signed an agreement for a
plastic bag factory. The factory will be built in Mezrouna and will produce
2 million bags per year starting in 1983 (cost: 5 MD).

Textile Industries

In 1982, 27 011 were allocated to this sector. Three fourths of these invest-
ments will be in various activities of the private sector: clothing and
hosiery (9.5 I‘D), spinning, weaving and finishing (6 MD), tanning and shoe-
making (4.5 MID).

It is expected that 7 MD will be devoted to the modernization and optimization
of the equipment of SOGITBX (General Textile Industries Company) subsidiaries.
The World Bank has agreed to give an 18.6 million dollar loan for this project.
In addition, 3.1. HD will be invested in the expansion and modernization of
SITEX [expansion unknown], and 3.5 HD in the modernization of the equipment

of TISSHOK [expansion unknown] , SOMBX [expansion unknown] and SITER [expan-
sion unknown] .

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

9294
080: 4519/196

36
FOR omcm. us: our!
I‘VE 0"".th M Ul‘hl

TUNISIA

EWNOMIC WOPERATION WITH GULF STATES EXPAND
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1117, 2 Jun 82 pp 53-510
[Article by Souhayr Belhassen: "heading for the Gulf"1

[Excerpts] For the period covering the Sixth Plan [1982 to 1986], Tunis is
counting on a total sum of 1.2. billion diners in Arab trmsfers (500 million
in the form of long-tern loans, ‘00 million in capital market loans and

300 aillion in joint venture loans). These funds will represent 30 percent
of Tunisian foreign capital requirensnts which are valued for the period
1982 to 1986 at 3.10 billion diners. i.e., twice the amount which had been
obtained during the Fifth Plan. Until now. Arab money has primarily been
invested in banking and tourism. Four banks grouping Tunisians and non-
Tunisian Arabs exist in the country. A fifth offshore Kuwaiti bank with

1!. nillion dinars in assets opened recently. In the field of tourism, the
Kwaitia have invested more than 80 nillion diners, not counting the 17
million resulting fron a recent agreement for projects in Sousse and Sfax.
Hhat is new is that today the Arab investors are as equally interested in
non-touristic facilities. Anong such projects, as diverse as they are
nuaerous, are the following: a Gabes-Hedenine railway (20 million diners),
telecommunications and a fishing port in Biterte (14 million), chenical
industries (17 million), expansion of the Trade—Carthage airport. etc.

Mines and agricultural progects thenselves attract petrodollars. The Saudis
have participated in financing the Sidi Saad Dan and in the purification of
the Lac de Tmis. Abu mabi will no doubt contribute to the expansion of
the Bizerte petroleum refinery. The tour made by Mohaned Mali in the Gulf
states in March did not merely result in new financial agreements mounting
to acne 120 million diners; rather, it enhanced his public image in the Arab
world. "Tmisia's new orientation," says one Saudi newapaper, "proves that
it is possible to make a success of all Arab policies which take into account

the interests of each party."
(DP‘IRIGYI‘: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982.

080: 10519 I207

mommuseouu
ASSESSMENT, IMPLICATIONS OF VARIOUS POLITICAL PARTIES
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 275. 21-27 May 82 pp 32-34

[Article by Sa'd Zaghlul Fu‘ad: "Where Did the Missiles in the Mountains of Yemen
Come From? The National Democratic Front Facing the Last Choice"]

[Excerpts] The attempt to depict the relationship between both parts of Yemen
graphically will inevitably show a line rising. falling and even fluctuating.
There are indications, however, albeit unconclusive. that the recent meeting of
the two presidents in 'i‘a'izz has begun moving'that relationship in the direction
of a straight line. What are these indications? Is it possible to determine the
course of the present stage in a historical perspective? The correspondent of
AL-NATAN AL-‘ARABI in San'a' will try to answer these questions.

The Political Front

During the revolution's battles and the battles that were fought to defend the
republic, political movements and beliefs became widespread among the vanguard
revolutionary forces until these were ultimately formed into seven political
parties. Five of these parties are Marxist; one is national; and the other is
religious. These parties do in fact exist today even though officially. political
parties are still prohibited by law. But the government is satisfied with a super-
ficial application of the law and is preventing [the establishment of] public
party centers and newspapers. The government overlooks the actual activities and
the objective presence of these parties and forces perhaps because they are
confined to intellectuals and have not penetrated deeply among the people for
reasons that have to do with the tribal nature of the people and the high rate of
illiteracy among them. The government may also be Overlooking these activities
because it prefers to play it safe; it wants a life of stability, and it wants to
provide security.

Individualism in Yemen is synonymous with tribalism. It may be related to the
geography of Yemen, especially in the mountains where if a tribe were to mutiny
because of an obligation to get even. it would seek refuge behind the rocks and
vegetation and resist in its own way the fiercest of armies. Hence the state
found itself compelled to accept this fact; it did, however, ban the carrying of
weapons in hospitals, in government offices, in schools and in universities.

Foremost among the Yemeni parties is the Arab Socialist Ba'th party which states:

MWWONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Comrephensive Arab unity is the noblest goal of the Arab struggle. It is the
great hope of the masses of our nation. Through unity our independence is streng-
thened and our Arab nation acquires actual control over its natural riches and
resources so it can put them to work for comprehensive development in an
integrated economy that is based on the masses, that operates in their favor and
that meets the basic needs of the toiling and producing classes. This overall
framework of unity has a social content that clarifies independence, bestows the
principal means of production on the people, brings about ultimate deliverance
from backwardness and builds a united Arab socialist society that is based on
democracy and freedom."

The last one among the parties in Yemen is that of the Muslim Brothers. which is
basically a political party operating in a religious framework. "islam is a
religion and a state.... It is worship and leadership.... The Koran is our
constitution, ... and death for the sake of God is our highest hope." However.
the Muslim Brothers do not have a specific political program; nor do they have a
clear economic theory or view. They do not have their own idea of constitutional,
administrative, political and financial institutions upon which a state can be
built. To them the revealed law of Islam is the most important source of positive
law. Hence, they are very active in giving religious counsel and urging good
moral conduct. Recently, on the basis of a religious premise opposing Marxist
atheism they established training camps in the mountains for Marxist rebel‘s, even
though they have not taken part in any battle-so far because the government has
succeeded in paving the way for a solution to the dispute and the achievement of
a national reconciliation. The outcome of that is expected next September along
with the celebrations for the revolution's 20th anniversary.

\

The following five leftist aid Marxist parties fall between al-Ba'th party and
the Muslim Brothers: the Revolutionary Democratic party, the Democratic People's
Alliance, the Revolutionary Resistance, the Labor party and the leftist group of
the al-Ba'th party which recently broke with that party and formed another which
it called al-Tali'ah al-Sha'biyah, [the Popular Vanguard]. “hen national recon-
ciliation is brought about it will be these seven political parties that will
cooperate with the secular and independent elements that are ruling the country
today. All the political and ideological forces and movements will then become
one; [they will work in unison] to overcome backwardness and to build a united
Yemeni society. This will be the society of efficiency and justice that is based
on democracy and self-acting cooperation, as President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih says.
Despite the fact that today political parties are banned by law and confined to
intellectual groups, they represent the political facade of future Yemen whose
purpose is to overcome backwardness and move beyond [the confines of] a tribal
society to become a progressive and a developing society.

Missiles. . . where Did They Come From?

Thus despite their different orientations, the five parties were calling upon
each other to unify their struggle throughout all the stages of tension, anxiety
and dispute. They called for the formation of a national, democratic front that
would include the progressive parties. The function of that front would be to
overthrow any government in the north that would not adopt scientific socialism
and would not achieve unity with the progressive southern portion of Yemen. These
five parties then formed an alliance in the National Democratic Front. Their

39
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
members armed themselves and sought refuge in the mountains of the central re-
gion. especially in the area of (Shar'ab) where they declared their insurrection.
This was how the struggle became an armed struggle. Government forces were able
to flush out the insurgents from most of the ununtainous central region, and the
signs of danger and factors for a major insurrection began spreading into
neighboring areas and perhaps into the entire Gulf area. Besides. foreign
elements would have been dragged into the situation under the pretext of putting
out the fires “to protect oil interests and strategic locations."

The government in San'a' was surprised when SAM missiles shot down two HIGs be-
longing to the Yemeni air force. This incident almost broke relations between
both parts of Yemen. Aden was suspected of giving the insurgents the Soviet
missiles. Thus Saudis and Yemenis issued their joint threatening communique sta-
ring that "Riyadh and San'a' pledge to stand as one against all the clandestine
and public conspiracies that were being contrived to destabilize the area's peace
and security. regardless of their source.... The [two countries] pledge to oppose
anyone who tries to infringe upon the unity of the area's soil and the
independence of the area's countries or impose any kind of hegemony or influence
over the area." It was reported that military forces in a state of alert were
being amassed on what was assumed to be the borders between both parts of Yemen.
The situation was about to explode, and people on all sides held their breath in
anticipation of the impending explosion. however, there were communications
between the two presidents after which they met in Ta'izz between 5 and 7 May.
and [as a result] the fires were put out and serenity was restored. The efforts
of the joint committees that have been working to bring about unity between
San'a' and Aden were stepped up, and it was determined that the Soviet missiles
had come to the insurgents from one of the distant Arab capitals. Aden closed its
borders to the insurgents, or it promised it would, and it promised it would
support the efforts of San'a' to achieve independence in the north part of Yemen.

The Proletarian State

At the same time President 'Ali ‘Abdallah Salih made it possible for the National
Democratic Front to turn over its weapons. and he appealed to its members "to
assume their positions among the masses in the course of the revolution and the
quest for democracy to build a new Yemeni society. a society of progress,
efficiency and justice."‘The National Dialogue Committee in San'a' stepped up its
contacts with its leaders to prepare for the popular elections during which the
people will elect their representatives to the General People‘s Congress which
will be held in the next few months. The proposed National Charter will be
presented to that congress for ratification. That charter will be tantamount to a
national action program during the coming period for all the national forces in
Yemen. including the five parties of the National Front.

One of the uncommon qualities of the ideological struggle in Yemen lies in the
fact that one of the intellectuals of the front described the old Yemeni society
of the Sabaean state as a society of slaves. He was being consistent with the
Harixst materialistic interpretation of history, beginning with the primitive
state of collective ownership, the age of slavery, the age of feudalism, the age
of capitalism and the society of scientific socialism. An independent writer
replied [to that statement and said], "The title or name he gave to the system of
the Sabaean state is inconsequential. This system of slavery produced a civilized

FORloFFKJAl.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

city. and anything that will produce a civilization benefits people and the
state. If the purpose [here is to state that] scientific socialism is the highest
form of cultural evolution because it is based on a collective system and that
the power and accomplishments of scientific socialism under the leadership of the
proletariat, that is the workers, as was the system of the Sabaean state, are
derived from cooperation and the collective participation of the people in
completing- public projects. then the people of Yemen in the Sabaean state did
constitute a class of toilers, that is, a proletariat who were under the aware
leadership of a monarch. By comparing the time difference between the age of
Sabea in the eighth century D.C. and our present age with regard to workers'
wages and living conditions, it becomes evident that the toilets who worked on
the Ma'rib Dam. for example, after the harvest did so to comply with the king‘s
orders. Thousands of them would be rounded up and put to work to build a dam, dig
a canal or build a road, a city or a temple. The state would take care of their
food and their drink. Thus came about a spirit of civilization and cooperation in
building this city. It was done by a cooperative society with the least cost and
with no foreign loans and aid. Those toilers from the proletariat of Sabaea were
satisfied with a few thousand camels, cows and sheep that were slaughtered to
feed them. and they were satisfied with a few thousand sacks of- dates, flour,
shortening and oil. With such modest provisions they were able to build an urban
city that they are still proud of, a city whose memory is everlasting. However,
we the Yemenis of this age have received hundreds of millions in assistance and
in loans after the revolution. but these have had no connenSurate effect in
developing our economy. we are still asking for more, and we are still backward
because we have lost the spirit of civilization which our Sabaean forefathers had.

Two Objectives, Two Targets

In less than I month San'a' hit the target twice in the political arena. The
first time was when it received former Syrian president, Amin al-llafiz, semi-
officially thereby blocking the Syrian regime's attempts to extend its influence
into the moutains of Yemen. The second time San'a' hit the target was when it
pulled the rug from under the National Democratic Front when it staged an
expanded, large and official Labor Day celebration on 1 May. That celebration was
attended by the president. There were processions that included more than 1
million workers who make up the newborn class of workers who were urged by
President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih to form their general federation expeditiously.
Workers had worked last year on forming their associations whose processions
joined the parade grounds on the morning of 1 May in San'a'. There were official
Labor Day celebrations also on a small scale in the remaining provinces and
principal cities. In his speech to the workers assembled on the parade grounds
the president of Yemen wanted to proclaim the country‘s willingness to let by-
gones be bygones with the Democratic Front and to look forward to the future, if
the members of the front were to join the march for revolution and the quest for
democracy and work on building tomorrow's advanced society.

Unity through Dialogue

Some people are saying that in addition to the pacts and agreements that exist
between the two parts of Yemen. such as the Cairo Agreement, the Tripoli Pact and
the Kuwait Agreement, the Ta'izz meeting outlined a new framework for the
relationship between the two Yemens. Both the meeting and the agreements led the

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
presidents of both Yemens to form a council that would work for unity. In addi-
tion. constitutional, economic and cultural unity committees were formed. A con-
stitution of unity will be presented to the people at the next people's congress
which is expected to be held in the next few months.

So for, the two presidents of Yemen have held six summit meetings; these were
held in San'a'. Aden and Ta'izz. If unity is achieved. it will have been achieved
by democratic dialogue and objective principles.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AL-HATAN AL-ARABI

8592
C80: 4406/h9l END

he -
roe omcm use ONLY