Hill OFFICIAL USE ONLV

JPRS L/10103

9 November 1981

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE

(FOUO 8/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English~language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HATERLALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10103
9 November 1981

USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE

(POUO 8/81)

CONTENTS
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Increasing Productivity of Lands in the Non-Chernozen Zone
(T. N. Kulakovskaya; DOKLADY VASKhNIL, Aug 81) ............ 1

Development, Introduction of New Grain Varieties for
Non-Chernozem Zone
(3. S. Kurlovich; SBLBKTSIYA I SEHENOVODSTVO, Aug 81) ..... 7

Estonian SSR's Ministry of Rorticulture Unveiled
(Editorial Report) ........................................ 12

AGRO-ECONOHIC AND ORGANIZATION

Food Program, Organization Structure of Food Complex Reviewed
(Vladimir Potapovich Hozh in, Anatoliy Nikitovich .Lifenchikov
VOPROSYEKONOMIKI.J‘1181)nossasseassesseeeeesecsseeeeesoe 13

Private Plot Accounting, Contract System for Livestock Outlined
(PLANIROVANIYE I UCHET V S‘EL'SKOKHOZYAYSTVM
PREDPRIYA‘I‘IYAKH, Jun 81) 25

TILLING AND CROPPING TECHNOLOGY

Seed Industry Problems, Progress, Prospects Reviewed
(A. S. Nnvolotskiy; SMTSIYA I SMNOVODSTVO, Jun 81) ... 32

-a- [III-USSR-7FOU
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

000 63l.652(lo70.3l)

INCREASING PRODIETIVITY 0F IANDS IN THE NON-CERNOZEH 2%!
Moscow DQ’MDY VASKhNIL in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 3-6

[Article by VASKhNIL Academician 7.“. Kulakovskaya: "Basic Directions for Raising
Productivity of Land in the Non-Chernozem Zone"}

[Text] Among the important factors associated with achieving high land productivity,
special value is attached to raising the level of soil fertility. "The dependence
of a plant upon soil is becoming more clear and more obvious" wrote K.A. Timiryazev,
"At the same time, this factor lies within man's control moreso than the remaining
factors [9].

A large amount of experimental data obtained from all of the soil-climatic zones
confirms this most important statute of the sgrobiological science. But it is of
special importance for the non-chernorem zone, where the conditions and character of
the soil formation processes have led to the formation of low productivity soils

and considerable diversity in the soil cover.

As revealed (see Table l) by the results obtained from 317 experiments carried Out
with grain crops, conducted in Belorussia on soils of varying degrees of fertility,
the latter determines up to 00-50 percent of the total amount of yield from less
tamed soils and this yield proportion increases to 80-85 percent for soils
characterized by a high degree of continuous cultivation, which is created as a
result of the purposeful effect of means of intensification.

The possibility of doubling or even tripling the yields obtained from sod-podaolic
soils. by achieving optimum parameters for their fertility [3, 6, 8], has been
proven by studies carried out by many authors.

The present system of accOunting and control over the status of land areas, based
upon the soil and agrochemical services and the results of studies associated with
special fixed experiments and carried out at training grounds. has shown that under
the conditions of increasing intensification a rather rapid change is observed in
the condition and properties of the soils [2, 7].

At the present time, in republics in the western region and in oblasta of the
non-chernozem zone of the RSPSR, work is being carried out in connection with the

state's all-round program for raising the fertility of soils during the 1981-1990
Period.

:1.
FOR OFPTCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 1

Degree of Continuous Cultivation of Sod-Podsolic Soils, Fertilization and Grain
Crop Yields in Belorussian 58R (1970-1977)

 

   
         

 

Aspens-Isms caelcrss :i( ' 11)
(1) $15 , 3g-
. 3' "
3 3:2
5.0 9.5 9.5 ms o.1s as ".5 25s - - ".2
3.2 9.1 9.5 I.so o.s| 12 no.0 as s ¢.s +2 1 ss.e
5.9 12.3 9.31.60 one m 20.1 :24 $0.: +ss ss.s
5.. 1m :04 Les 0.» 12 ss.s an s.s +4: «.0
s.s 16.0 me n.» 0.9: so 20.. 35.: +1... +9.1 ss.s
Key:
1. Agrochemical properties of soils 7. Control (without fertilizers)
2. Milligrams per 100 grams 8. NPR (200-250 kilograms per hectare)
3. Hanna (1) 9. Difference (quintals per hectare) from
a. Coefficient of continuous increase in continuous cultivation
cultivation 10. Control
5. Number of experiments ll. Yield owing to effective fertility of
6. Yield (quintals per hectare) soils (1)

The implementation of these programs is associated with determining the best

variants for capital investments in measures aimed at raising the fertility of soils
(hydraulic engineering land reclamation, anti-erosion and soil improvement measures,l
volumes of resources employed in the use of chemical processes and so forth).

In this regard, it will be necessary to have a clearer understanding of the system
of expanded reproduction for soil fertility. as a most important part of the
intensification of agricultural production.

A scientific substantiation for the problem of expanded reproduction for soil

fez ility was furnished in the works of K. Marx, vho studied this problem in
connection with differential rent for land. His main thesis held that soil
fertility changes as the productive forces and social relationships become further
developed and that the advantage possessed by land compared to other means of
production lies in the fact that it is constantly being improved, assuming that it
is handled properly, that is. the expanded reproduction of soil fertility takes
pls:e according to modern terminology [S].

The soil fertility achieved under the influence of intensification factors includes
its initial condition as an integral whole; this cemes about owing to the constant
interchange of substances in the soil substrate and the conversion of chemical
elenents participating in the plant nutritiOnal processes from one form into

another. This is clearly traced both in the ratio of organic compounds found in the
soil and those entering from without and in the ratio of the mineral substance in the
soil, especially biogenic elements.

In examining the fertility of soils, not only as a purely natural category but also
as one which is dependent upon the social and economic conditions, the possibility

- 2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Homwlmnun kvﬂwunﬁm aenmnuw
(2) ever-alumnae u :

 

Diagram of Directed Increase in Soil Productivity Under the
Influence of Intensification Factors

Key:
1. A -- System of expanded reproduction 6. Creation of favorable cultivation
for soil fertility conditions (selection of varieties,
2. Directed influence of intensification irrigation, fertilization. measures for
factors on: protecting and preserving crops)
3. Radical improvement of degrees of 7. 5 -- System for raising productivity
condition (by means of land of soils
reclamation, soil improvement 8. Initial level of soil fertility
influences) 9. Achieved (forecast) level of
4. Optimization of egrochemical and fertility under influence of
water-physical properties (lime intensification factors
applications and controlling humus 10. Productivity -- a function of
and nutrient balance soil fertility and crop cultivation
5. Optimization of phyto-sanitary factors.

status and water-physical properties

(thrOugh system of crop rotation plans
and soil cultivations)

exists of furnishing a definite classification for those factors which bring about
the highest agricultural crop yields (rice) for specific soil-climatic zones.

Emphasis should he placed upon the fact that soil productivity is a broad category
and one which includes the fact or soil fertility. as reflected by us in the
diagram. The system (ED of productivity of soil resources is not only dependent
upon but is also a function of the fertility of soils and the bioclimatic potential,
determined by the flow of photosynthetic radiation and the totality of the weather
conditions. It is also dependent upon an additional supply of plant nutrients
available in the soil in the form of various fertilization agents and it is
associated with the genetic potential of the crops under cultivation and their
varieties and with the agrotechnical methods aimed at achieving the potential

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

embodied in the soil and in the cultivated plants and which ensure protection of the
crop against pests and diseases.

The system (A) of direct expended reproduction for soil fertility includes the
properties and condition of the soil medium, which under the influence of the
factors of intensification bring about an improvement in the fertility of the soil.

The scientific-technical concept of soil fertility which we developed is aimed at
revealing the causes of limited yields for cultivated plants, from the standpoint of
soil factors, and disclosing the link between yields and quantitative evaluations

of those soil properties which determine the statue of soil fertility.

Both our own as well as foreign researchers have devoted a greet amount of attention
to the problem of raising the fertility (soil improvement) of soils. Nevertheless,
for many long years the characteristics for soil fertility have been mainly of a
descriptive nature and only during the past 15-20 years have studies along these

lines made it possible to provide quantitative expressions (evaluations) for soil
fertility levels [1, 4].

in conformity with the mentioned statutes, the system of measures for the expanded
reproductiOu of soil fertility can be divided into three large groups that are
closely associated in terms of their mutual effect on the soil medium.

The first group of factors limiting the fertility of soils has to do with the
degrees of the candltion of the soils, with the degrees requiring radical action.

Sod-podzolic soils in a number of areas are characterised by an excessive amount of
water-logging (swampiness), erodibility and obstructions and in the case of many
feed lands -- by heavy undergrowth.

Thus, for example, approximately 25 percent of the territory in the western region
of the nan-chernozem zone is characterized by excessive dampness, more than 15
percent of the agricultural territory is subject to erosion and 10 percent of the
a: ole land contains obstructions. with small fields predominating on the whole

(IO-15 hectares): in some rayons the average size for a field does not exceed 5
hectares.

Studies carried out in Belorussia have shown that 38 percent of the overall reserve
available for raising the fertility of soils (see Table 2) is employed for
controlling these limiting factors.

In the case of sod-podzolic soils. a second and more important group of factors
limiting fertility in that of complexes of internal soil properties, of which the
most important are: humus content, status of soil acidity, nutrient supplies.
complex of water-physical properties of the soild.

The intensity of a change in the properties of soils and in the level of their
continuous cultivation is determined by the creation of a closed cycle of

substances, by an increase in all of the elements required through the use of
chemical agents and particularly organic substances. lime, phosphorus and

FOR OPPIC '
FOR OFFICIAL 033 OIL!

potassium. by a reduction in the unfavorable effects of equipment on the physical
properties of soil and by centrol over the moisture supplies in the soil.

IABIB 2

Reserves for Growth in Soil Fertility on Arable Lands in the
Belorussian SSR (points)

«1—5»... a...

 

 
   

 

 

:: 5
own. I g3 (3 g“ (6)
=2. ‘- g
(l) I 3:? f: x
Banks“ '(1 3% 33 g: H z.: :Z: :1:
rm» as «1 9 5.0 3.0 1.!
rpoaecseaas ?2) el BI lo 0.3 L. 3.!
Msstul u u I: 0.2 1.0 3.0
rams-"- ? n, 2: :3 :2 m :-: 4-:
To -. - sf'ﬁa) - - m cm Isle 3an
Key:
1. Oblsst 10. Anti-erosion and soil improvement
2. Point evaluation measures
3. Actual for 1 January 1976 ll. Brestskays
a. Long-term planning 12. Vitebskaya
5. Reserves for growth 13. Gemel'skaya
6. Total 16. crodnenskaya
7. Including by means of 15. Minskaya
8. Optimization of agrochemical and 16. Mogilevskaya
water-physical properties 17. Total for 338R
9. Hydraulic engineering and 18. Ibid in I

agricultural land reclamation

Only apprOximately 20 percent of the arable soils in Belorussia and Latvia. 30
percent of the soils in Lithuania and Estonia and no more than 8-10 percent of the
sod-podzolic soils in the central zone of the RSPSR can be classified as highly
cultivated soils in terms of these indicators. In connection vith the overall
reserve for growth in soil fertility in Belorussis, this factor accounts for a
decrease of more than 60 percent, with considerable fluctuations for individual
oblasts throughout the republic and especially so for certain rsyons and farms
(see Table 2).

A transformation or change in soil fertility or an increase in the degree of its
continuous cultivation, to the point where no limit is placed upon the requirements
of highly intensive crops and plant varieties, is achieved through the effect
generated by intensification means on the first two groups of factors that limit
plant yields.

The third group of factors aimed at maintaining and realizing the fertility inherent
in a given soil consists of a system of crop rotation plans and soil cultivations

5
I0! OFV'CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which. as is well known, promote improved fertility by improving the phytosanitary
condition of the soil, the entry into the soil of post harvest and root residues

(crop rotation plans) and the conditions for transforming them (cultivation of the
soil).

A brief description of the system of expended reproduction of soil fertility
underscores the need for increasing scientific-research work associated with
evaluating the fertility factors end fully taking then into account when developing
all-round programs for raising the fertility of soils. A clear quantitative
evaluation not only of the yields but also of the yield forming factors will make it
possible to control in a purposeful manner the system for regulating soil fertility.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Barbells, P.D. Author's abstract. Doctoral dissertation. Yelgeva, 1970.

Z. Dospekhov, B.A. "Nauchnyye osnovy intensivnogo sealedeliye v nechernozennoy

zone" [Scientific Principles of Intensive Phruing in the Nonchernozen Zone],
Moscow, "Kolos," 1976.

3. Kulakovskaye 1.3. "Pochvenno-agrokhinicheskiye Osnovy polucheniya vyaokikh

urozhayev" [Soil-Agrochemical Principles for Obtaining High Yields], Minsk,
"Uradzhay." 1978.

-. Kulakovskaya, T.N. "Agrokhimicheskiye svoystve pechv i ikh znacheniye v
ispol'zovanii udobrenly" [Agrochemical Properties of Soils and Their Value in
the Use of Fertilizers], Minsk "Uradzhay." 1965.

S. Marx, K. "Teoriya pribavochnoy stoimosti" [Theory of Surplus Value], Moscow,
I932, Vol. 2, Part 1, page 228.

6. Semenov, B.A., Dragunov, 0.A. Scientific Works of SZNIISKh [Northwestern
lcientific Research Institute of Agriculture], Leningred, 1975, Issue XXXI.

7. Semenov, V.A. "Otsenka zemel' i prognoz urozhaya" [Evaluation of Land and
Crop Forecast]. Lenizdat, 1977.

S. Sudakov, V.D. Author's abstract. Dissertation, Moscow, 1976,
9. Timiryazev, K.\. Selected works, 1948, Vol. 2.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Koloa", "Doklady VASKhNIL", 1981

7026
C50: 1826/008

6
FOR OF?ICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL 088 on:

REGIONAL DBVELOHBNT

UDC 633.1:63l.526.32

DEVELOPMENT, INTRODUCTION 0? NB" GRAIN VARIBTIBS FOR NON-CHIMH ZINE
Moscow SELEKTSIYA I SEENOVODSTVO in Russian No 8, Aug Bl pp 7-10

[Article by 8.5. Kurlovich, Deputy Chairman of the Crop Husbandry Section for the
Breeding and Protection of Plants of the VASKhNIL branch for the Non-Chernosem Zone
of the RSFSR: 'treation and Introduction of New Grain Crop Varieties"]

[Text] The Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR
During the 1981-1985 Period and for the Period Up To 1990 celled for the accelerated
development of breeding end seed production. At the present time, with the
structure of the VASKhNIL Branch for the Non-Chernosem Zone of the RSDSR. the
breeding of grain crops is being carried cut by a breeding center for grain crops of
the Scientific-Research Institute of Agriculture for the Central Regions of the
Non-Chernozem Zone, by complex breeding centers for crop husbandry of the
Northwestern NIISKh [Scientific-Research Institute of Agriculture], the NIISKh for
the Northeast and the Urals NIISKh and also by ten oblast and republic agricultural
experimental stations.

During the Tonth Five-Year Plan the plant breeders carried out work in connection
with creating winter rye varieties which combine high productivity. winter
hardiness. good grain quality and resistance against diseases and lodging. An
expansion took place in studies aimed at breeding barley and spring wheat.
developing methods for high quality agricultural practices and observing the genetic
and physiological-biochemical principles of low growth, winter hardiness and
immunity. Cooperation in the work of plant breeders representing different
scientific institutes was strengthened. Thus individual programs are being carried
out: the breeding of winter rye at the Northwestern NIISKh and the NIISKh for the
Northeast; barley and clever at the Arkhangelsk Agricultural Experimental Station
and at the Northwestern NIISKh. Joint work is being carried eut successfully in the
breeding of barley and spring wheat by the NIISKh for the Central Regions of the
Non-ChernOzem Zone and a number of experimental stations in the central region.
Since 1979 the Northwestern NIISKh, the VNII [All-Union Scientific Research
Institute] for the Protection of Plants and the VNII for Crop Husbandry have
together been selecting immune initial forms and creating provocative backgrounds
for evaluating the resistance of the grain crop breeding material to root rots and
variOus types of rust. In the technological laboratories at all of the breeding
centers. studies are underway on the milling-baking qualities of grain and the
quality of the protein. The plant breeders are working in concert with the
geneticists, cytologists. physiologists, biochemists and plant protection

7
l0! 0F"“IAL US! ONLY
'0! 0!?ICIAL 08! OIL!

specialists. The institutes are converting over to accelerated breeding methods
involving the use of artificial climate units. A breeding complex has been

introduced into operations at the NIISKh for the Central Regions of ﬁne Non-Chernosen
Zone.

At the present time. in oblssts and autonomous republics throughout the zone. there
are regionalized varieties of grain crops having a potential cropping power of

00-50 quintels per hectare and in some instances even more. High productivity and
resistance against lodging are characteristics of the winter rye varieties Voskhod l
and Voskhod 2 (bred at the NIISKh for the Central Regions of the Non-Chernosam

Zone and Yaroslavna and Onege (bred at the Northwestern NIISKh). Voskhod 1 has
already been regionalized in 16 oblasts of the RSFSR, Balorussia and the latvian
SSR. In 1980, the economic effect realized from its introduction into operations
amounted to more than 3.5 million rubles. The Taroslavna variety is distinguished
by winter hardiness, resistance against lodging and large grain. At strain testing
stations in Leningrad Oblast, it surpassed the standard (Cibrid 173) in terms of
grain yield by 5-10 quintals per hectare. In 1978, at the Northwestern NIISKh, this
variety furnished 61.0 quintale of grain per hectare, thus underscoring its high
potential possibilities. In 1980, Yaroslavna was included in a list of promising
varieties and in 1982 it will be regionalieed in Leningrad Oblast. The Onega
variety also produced fine results during state strain testing. It is better than
Yaroslavna in terms of cropping power and it is distinguished by higher winter

hardiness. For 1981, the Onega variety was recognized as promising for Leningrad
Ohlast.

ﬁarya winter wheat, which is regionalized in Ivanovakaya, Moscow, Bryanekaya and
Vladimirskaye Oblasts and recognised as promising for Gor'kovskaye, Smolenskaya and
Kaluzhskaya Oblests must be employed more extensively in the non-cheruosem zone. It
is distinguished by exceptionally high resistance against loose smut.

During the Tenth Five-Year Plan, the regionalised since 1975 Hoskovskaye 35 spring
wheat variety (bred at the NIISKh for the Central Regions of the Non-Charnozem Zone
and the Ryazan' Agricultural Experimental Station) began to be used more extensively.
In :ddition to high cropping power (up t060 quintals per hectare), it possesses

high technological grain qualities. a raised protein content. resistance against
lodging, diseases and pests and it responds well to applications of mineral
fertilizers. The eronmnic effect realized frOm the introduction of this variety

into production already amounts to more than 50 million rubles.

In 1979, the new kodina intensive type variety, with its cropping power of up to
74 quintals per hectare. was turned over for testing. The intensive type variety
Leningradka. created at the Northwestern NIISKh, has been regionalized in 23

ohlasts and autonomOus republics. If the agrotechnicel requirements are observed

and adequate amounts of fertilizer are applied, its yields can reach 50-60 and in
some instances 70 quintals per hectare.

The Scientific Research Institute of Agriculture for the Northeast has had
considerable success in the breeding of barley; the following varieties have been
created here: Luch. Sever l. Viking, Agat, Dar Vyatich. The introduction of the
Luch variety into production operations, with its cropping power of up to 90
quintals per hectare, is providing the country with more than 00 million rubles
worth of additional product. It has been regionalized in 12 oblasts and autonomous
republics of the USSR and it is undergoing international tests in CBHA member
countries. The Sever 1 variety is distinguished by its early ripening capability.
Its use as a predecessor crop for winter rye makes it possible to raise the
concentration of grain crops in crop rotation plans, to increase the gross
production of grain and it also serves to guarantee that grain will be obtained

in Kirovskaya Oblast.

The extensive work being carried out in seed production is making it possible to
supply original material annually to the scientific institutes and seed production
farms in the non-chernozem zone, the Urals and Siberia, while the recmndations
developed for the cultivation technology for these varieties are making it possible
to obtain 60-76 quintals per hectare under production conditions. The
KrasnOufimskiy 95 variety (Ural'sk NIISKh) has been regionalized since 1975. In
1981 the plans called for the Belogorskiy variety (Northwestern NIISKh) to be
regionalized for Leningrad Oblast. This intensive type and highly productive
variety is distinghished by a raised cold hardiness and drought resistance and it
furnishes stable yields from year to year.

In 1979. this institute turned the new mid-season ripening variety Atlant over for
state strain testing and in 1980 -- the early-ripening Iyul'skiy variety, which
ripens 8-10 days earlier than Hoskovskiy 121.

The following varieties of oats are considered to be very promising for extensive
introduction into production operations: Skorospelyy and Kirovskiy (NIISKh for the
Northeast, Ruslan (NIISKh for the Central Regions of the Non-Chernozem Zone) and
Ural and Belozernyy (Ural'sk NIISKh). During the Tenth Fiveerar Plan, the.
Northwestern NIISKh turned over for state strain testing the new oat varieties .
Oktyabrenok and Izumrud. the NIISKh for the Central Regions of the Non-Chernozem
Zone -- Nemchin0vskiy 2 and Drug, the Urak'sk NIISKh -- the Yubileynyy 60 variety
and the NIISKh for the Northeast -- Palenskiy 2, Falenskiy 3 and Palenskiy Koruovoy.

However, the production operations are confronting the plant breeders with new

tasks. Owing to the unstable nature of farming conditions in the non-chernozem
zone. a requirement exists first of all for early ripening varieties which are

suitable for mechanized harvesting. which are stable in the face of unfavorable
weather conditions and which have stable seed productivity.

In recent years the plant breeders have become attracted by the creation of late-
ripenlng varieties which, as a rule. produce high yields on plots but under
production conditions they either do not ripen or they remain unharvested since they
ripen during the period of inclement autumn weather. In this regard, the farms must
be supplied with more early-ripening varieties, especially oats. spring wheat and
buckwheat.

Since crop husbandry in the non-chernozem zone is directed mainly towards feed
production. a considerable increase should take place in the breeding of grain
forage crops (barley, oats) and also pulse crops (peas. vetch. lupine). The problem
of increasing the protein content in grain forage crops and especially improving

its quality is particularly acute. During the next few years a requirement will
exist in all of the plant breeding centers to carry cut work associated with the
creation of varieties which are resistant to adiobatic stresses and, in particular,
to snmnaIOus soil conditions. There is an urgent need in production operations

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for varieties which produce high yields not only on nornul but also on acid soils,
the area of which unfortunately is still not decreasing within the zone. The
breeding of varieties which are responsive to fertilizer applications warrants
special attention. It must be carried out on an all-reund basis and in accordance
with a single plan: variety - fertilization - yield. Similar work must be carried
out aimed at raising the resistance of varieties to herbicides. In the case of
immunity, the chief task of the specialists continues to be that of creating.
jointly with the plant breeders, varieties which are resistant to the more

harmful diseases and pests. This work must be carried out based upon an extensive
search for donors of resistance, studying the structure of strains of pathogens and
determining their virulence and evaluating the imsunological properties of plants
using the methods of induced innunity against diseases and pests.

In order to improve plant breeding in the zone, it will be necessary to concentrate
forces and rescurces on such leading crops as winter rye, grain forage and pulse
crops; carry eut work aimed at achieving further specialization among the plant
breeding institutes: strengthen the logistical base of the institutes and
experimental stations. At the present time, the construction of facilities for
plant breeding centers is being carried out in a very unsatisfactory manner at a
mjority of the institutes. lhny oblast and republic agricultural experimental
stations are still carrying out plant breeding work on an independent basis, in that
they lack the proper logistical base and skilled cadres of personnel. It is
difficult under such conditions to achieve noticeable results and thus it is not
surprising to learn that at some stations not one variety has been created over a
period of 10-15 years or more. The only correct means for raising the efficiency of
“lent breeding work at experimental stations is that of close collaboration between
"re-n at the plant breeding centers and the carrying out of joint scientific studies
th them based upon common programs and methods and creative collaboration.

The return realized from the work performed by plant breeders is dependent to a
decisive degree upon how rapidly the new varieties reach the kolkhoz and sovkhoz
fields and upon how quickly their potential is realized on these fields. Seed
production plays an important role in this regard; it represents a continuation of
the 1rk performed by the plant breeders. However, not all of the new varieties are
In' .; introduced rapidly into production operations and this is the result of
shortcomings in the seed productim Operations. Seed production has still not
become an independent branch. Indeed, many specialized seed productiOn farms are
Only listed as such. when in fact they are only multi-branch rank and file farms.
SerLOus difficulties of an organizational nature are encountered when converting
seed production over to an industrial basis. Such difficulties are associated
mainly with firmly established specialization by a majority of the sovkhozes and
kolkhozes in the zone in the production of animal husbandry products and also with
a low level of cropping power. The problems concerned with increasing the
specialization of many experimental-production farms of scientific institutes in

the production of elite seed are being solved very slowly and. es a result, they
are not being provided with adequate areas for the production of seed for buckwheat,
pulse crops or forage crops.

It bears mentioning that each new variety requires special agrotechnical measures.

If these measures are not observed, the new variety may produce a yield lower than
the old variety. Mny examples eculd be cited showing how farms, in recent years,

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

replaced 2-3 varieties and still did not achieve higher yields; this was the result
of either failure to observe the agricultural practices recoumended by science or
low soil fertility. In this regard, the specific conditions of an oblast, rayon or
farm must be considered when selecting varieties. In some instances, the same fern
must have 2-3 varieties in its plantings representing different requirements with
regard to soil fertility. In order to obtain high yields, a new variety must be
grown in soil that was prepared in a high quality manner, good seed must be
employed and use must be made of complex mechanization and chemical pcocesses, that
is, the cultivation technology recanuended by the scientific institutes must be
adhered to.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos, "Selektsiya i semenovodstvo", 1981

7026
C50: [824/008

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

ESTONIAN SSR'S MINISTRY OF HORTICULTURE UNVEILED

[Editorial Report] Tallin SOTSIALISTLIK POLLUHAJANDUS [SOCIALIST AGRICULTURE]
in Estonian No 18, September 1981, carries an article on pages 674-675 on a 'hew"
Ministry of Horticulture. The article, entitled "A New Hinistry--Production,
Marketing, Processing" identifies the author, Harald Mannik, as the Estonian
SSR's minister of horticulture. The article states that the "Estonian ssn'a
Ministry of Horticulture is a new system which is supposed to integrate the
Cultivation of garden produce in specialized sovkhozes as well as state
purchases, storage, processing and realization with the planning and financing
of horticultural work." Citing the food program enunciated at the 26th CPSU
Congress, the article goes on to state that "this has special significance

for the Estonian SSR because, proceeding from the norms of wholesome nutrition,
we should be consuming considerably [as published] more fruit and vegetables
than hitherto." Hannik cites the need to use industrial technology to raise
the needed quantities of vegetables, fruit and food potatoes. He urges

the introduction of hardier, more disease-resistant plant varieties.

Turning to consumer-related issues, the minister notes that "up to now the
processing of garden produce and its marketing have unfortunately been left
wanting. It is being demanded that we rapidly improve the situation in this
area, and a compact system will create better opportunities for this than
previously existed. Both the food industry as well as industrial agricultural
processing sectors are pledging to take steps to address the selection of
produce available over shop counters."

Hannik goes on to discuss the organization of wholesale and retail trade
vis-a-vis produce. He urges individual horticulturalista and cooperative
members to join together to solve their "extremely complicated problems."

Citing concrete data, Hannik states that "in the previous five-year plan, each
of our sovkhozes sold an average of 2,800 tons of vegetables; in the current
five-year plan, this index will increase to 4,000 tons, and in a few sovkhozes
it will exceed 10,000 tons." He notes that "in the first half of this year
the plan for the sale of early vegetables was fulfilled by 127 percent...

the goal for meat sales was fulfilled by 101 percent."

Finally, Hannik deals with the “building problem." He notes that "two large
warehouses with adjustable climate control systems, each having a 10,000-ton
capacity, are under construction." The creation of a special motor pool to
insure the prompt delivery of produce to the shops is also encouraged.

COPYRIGHT: Kirjastus "Perioodika," ”Sotsialistlik Pollumajandus" 1981

C50: 1824/040 12
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

AGRO-ECONOHIC AﬁD ORGANIZATION

FOOD PROGRAM, ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF FOOD COMPLEX REVIEHED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 20—30

[Article* by Vladimir Potapovich Hozhin. corresponding member of VASKhNIL and
director of the Central Scientific Research Institute of Economics of RSFSR
Gosplan, El'mira Nikolayevna Krylatykh, doctor of economic sciences and professor
at Moscow State University imeni H. V. Lomonosov, and Anatoliy Nikitovich
Lifanchikov, candidate of economic sciences and department head at the Central

Scientific Research Institute of Economics of RSPSR Gosplan: "The Food Program
and the Structure of the USSR Food Complex")

[Text] The Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th

party congress points out that ”the party is advancing a broad program for

further improvement in the well-being of the people in the 11th Five-Year Plan and
the 1980's as a whole.” Paramount importance in this is assigned to reliably
providing the population with a broad assortment of high-quality food products.
The production and consumption of food products has risen steadily in recent five-
year plans. In the last five-year plan, however, the growth rate of production of
agricultural output slowed down and difficulties arose with supplying animal
husbandry products to the population. This was related to unfavorable weather
conditions. To achieve a fundamental solution to the problem of uninterrupted
supply of food products to the population, it has been recognised as necessary

to develop a special food program which should serve as the basis for planning,
financing, and managing the unified agroinduatrial food complex. The program
measures outlined for the current five-year plan are an organic part of the State
Plan of Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985.

A large volume of technical-economic and socioeconomic substantiation and calcula-
tion must be done during development of the food program. Many scientific
institutions and planning agencies are working on the food program, so it is
essential to develop a methodological foundation for their joint work.

The food program is one of the special-purpose comprehensive national economic
programs. The ultimate goal of the special food program is full satisfaction

_—__———————

 

* The article is offered as a formulation of the problem.

'13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of public need for all types of food products in conformity with scientifically
recommended diets. The immediate objective is to insure a stable food supply to
the population in all parts of the country, to create reliable reserves, and to
increase the quality of products. When establishing the goals of the food pro-

gram we should envision lessening dependence on importing food_products which
can be efficiently produced in the country.

Because the goal is stated as satisfying the need for food products, the ques-
tion of how to calculate this need arises. There are a number of methodological
approaches to estimating this figure, including the normative method which in-
volves determining physiological needs for food substances and working out
balanced diets on this basis, as well as the method based on an estimate of
solvent demand for food products. In this case demands can be viewed as a func-
tion of personal monetary income with different elasticities of demand for
particular products depending on the growth rate of income. it seems to us that
both approaches must be used to frame the quantitative indicators of the food
program.

The norms of a balanced diet should be the basis for establishing the strategic
goal and long-term developmental trends in the production of the most important
food products. Estimates of solvent demand may be used to work out guidlines
for development in medium-range planning and to supplement the dietary norms.
The main goal should be broken down into a number of sub-goals and particular

tasks in order to obtain quantitative estimates of needs and to determine the
structure of the food program.

Various foods are needed to maintain normal metabolism, form the tissues of the
organism, and regulate the process of supplying energy to the person. The most
important result of scientific research in recent years has been the theory

of the balanced diet, from which it follows that optimal functioning of the
organism requires not only adequate amounts of energy and protein, but also
observance of definite proportions among many ingredients of the diet. each of
which has a specific role in metabolism. Despite their great diversity, it is
customary in economic calculations to consider five basic food groups, which

are the basis of the diet: proteins, including both proteins of agricultural
(animal and plant) origin and the proteins in the meat of fish and sea animals;
fats, including animal, fish, and vegetable fats; carbohydrates. including
simple sugars (fructose, glucose, and others), disaccharides (saccharoae,
maltose, and lactose), and polysaccharides (starch, cellulose, and others);
vitamins; minerals, other substances, and water. In conformity with this the
overall goal of meeting public needs for food products can be broken down into a
series of detailed sub-goals which includes satisfaction of public needs for the

basic foods: proteins, fats. carbohydrates, vitamins, and mineral and other
substances.

An orientation to satisfying human needs for food substances greatly expands

the possibilities in searching for alternate ways to satisfy a particular need. -
For example. the animal protein requirement can he met with different variations
of consumption of meat, neat products, fish, fish products, and dairy products
on the condition that the diet is balanced in terms of essential amino acids.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIFICIAL "8! ONLY

Problems of maximum receipt of protein or minimum expenditures of public labor
can also be solved with different combinations of consumption of the meat of
cattle, hogs, sheep, and poultry. Furthermore, it is possible to work out al-
ternatives for using different types of raw-materials to produce the same food
products. For example, starch can be obtained from potatoes or from grain.

Each of these alternatives, while solving the problem of meeting a certain need,
has different levels of expenditures and efficiency.

The set of goals involved in providing the population with the most important
dietary elements and food products should, in our opinion, be the basis of
special first-level sub-programs. we suggest the follouing basic sub-programs:
supplying public needs for proteins, fats, sugar and other carbohydratee
containing foods, fruits, berries, and vegetables and rationalizing the structure
of production and consumption of drinks.

The question of the priority of particular sub-prograns is difficult. During the
last five-year plan the growth in per capita consumption of a number of food
products slowed down. and for some it practically stabilized. The dietary level
now attained does not fully provide the population with animal protein, vege-
tables, fruit, and berries. At the sane time, the consumption of grain products,
sugar, and potatoes, which means food products containing large anounts of
carbohydrates, exceeds rational norms. And although the total caloric value of
the actual diet provides for the energy needs of the population, its imbalance

in terms of basic food substances prevents us from considering it fully satis-
factory at the present time.

Carrying out all the sub-programs will demand enormous capital investment and
other types of resources. most of which are in limited supply. Therefore,

we must identify the programs that are most important and concentrate our efforts
on them. In the first stage of working out the food program it seems wise to
give preference to two special-purpose sub-programs: to supply the population
with meat and dairy goods, and to supply fruit and vegetables.

We must also take up the question of the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Significant resources of agricultural raw material, labor, and the like are

taken for the production of alcohol. Despite a number of measures the con-
sumption of alcohol has not dropped in recent years. In the future the struc-
ture of consuaption of alcoholic beverages must be modified in the direction

of a significant increase in the proportion of grape wine, above all champagne
and high-quality dry and semidry wine. This will require further development of
viticulture, an expansion of lands given to vineyards, a rise in their yield, and
an increase in capital investment for the development of viticulture and vine-
making. This is not only a major economic problem, but also a social problem.
within the food program this problem should be reflected in a special sub-program
to rationalize the consunption of alcoholic beverages.

In addition to the special sub-program the structure of the specialvpurpose com—
prehensive food program should also single out what are called "service? sub-

programs. The most important of the common sub-programs should be, in our
opinion, the following: raising soil fertility and iaproving the use of land

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY

resources; full mechanization and electrification; development of the non-
production infrastructure and solving social problems in the countryside; dev
velopmsnt of scientific research (in the fields of agriculture and the sectors
that serve it) and raising its efficiency; developing socialist economic inte-
gration and cooperation in the production of food products; and, foreign trade
.in agricultural raw material and foodstuffs.

Combining special-purpose programs with assignments to supply them with re-
sources makes the food program a special-purpose Omelevoﬁ and comprehensive
program. Within the framework of the food program priority elements should be
identified and distribution of resources must be organized in such a way that it

is possible to carry out the necessary structural changes in the entire food
complex[ J

The food complex, for which the food program is becoming the basis of develop-
ment, is a part of the national agroindustrial complex. In terms of gross
output the food complex accounts for 76—76 percent of the egroindustrial com-
plex. The food complex should also include production, not related to the
agroindustrial complex, which uses the wealth of the world ocean and internal
bodies of water for food and fodder needs. According to rough estimates, the
total volume of gross output of the food complex uas 260-280 billion rubles in
1979, and about 150-170 billion rubles in final output.

Three spheres can be identified within the structures of the food complex that
define its functional structure. The first sphere is the production of means of
:uoduction for all the sectors. It includes tractor and agricultural machine
building, machine building for animal husbandry and feed production, the pro-
duction of equipment for land inprovement work, the production of equipment for
the food industry, trade, and public catering, the production of specialized
motor vehicle transportation, shipbuilding (for the fishing industry), the pro-
duction of agricultural and other accessories, the production of containers.

the sectors of basic chemistry (for production of mineral fertilizer and
chemical plant protection means), construction for all spheres of the food com-
plex, the mixed feed and microbiological industry, and the production of special
equipment and instruments for the sectors of the food complex. The second
sphere is the production of agricultural (crop farming and animal husbandry)
output, fishing and fish culture, salt mining, raising pedigreed stock, nursery
plantations, raising seed material for pond culture, and various other types of
activities. The third sphere comprises the processing of agricultural and

other output of plant and animal origin and production of the final output

of the complex. The sectors of food (with the exception of the perfume»-

cosmetics and tobacco sector), meat and dairy, fish.processing, and flour-
bran industries should be classified with the third sphere.

As the food complex develops there is an increase in the role of infrastruc-
tural elements that affect primary production and its efficiency as they
gradually become independent sectors. Therefore, it is useful to single out
one more structural element in the food complex. This is the production
infrastructure of the complex, or the fourth sphere. It includes systems for
production-technical support and service to agriculture; materialhtechnical

16

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supply to the industrial sectors of the food complex, procurement of agricul-
tursl output and the elevator system; storage of output; transportation and the
road system; specialized retail trade; communications and information-computer

services; and, applied scientific research and design for all spheres of the
food complex.

The product structure of the food cowlex is a set of vertically integrated sec-
tors, the product subcomplexee. Each vertical link connects technologically and
economically interrelated types of activity of the food'complex spheres and
infrastructural elements that are integrated to achieve the final objective of
meeting needs for particular types of food products. Product aubcomplexes must

be singled out vithin the structure of the food complex in order to substantiate
the economic proportions which are defined by technologically interrelated sec-

tors, subsectors, and types of activity in the process of producing and selling
the final output.

Each special sub-program is a tool for managing a set of intersectorial product
complexes, particular sectors, and types of activity. The set of sub-programs,
subcomplexes, and sectors that insure achievement of the established goals may
appear as follows: sub-program to supply protein-rich products to the popula-
tion, including progress for the development of the meat-dairy and fish aub-
complexes; sub—program for development of the subcomplex to produce and process
vegetable oils and animal fats; sub-program to supply the population with carbo-
hydrate-containing foods, including sub-programs for the development of the
grain product subcomplex, the sugar beet subcomplex, and the potato products sub-
complex; sub-program for the development of the fruit-vegetable subcomplex;
subprogramto rationalize the production and consumption of beverages, including
the program to develop the vineyard-winemaking subcomplex, the beer and non-
alcoholic beverage subcomplex, and the tea subcomplex.

But what should be the structure of the product subcomplexes, which in this case
are considered to be objects of planning? In the opinion of some economists,

it is best to include all the sectors of the first, second, and third spheres
and the production infrastructure of the food couples in the product subcomplex.
The most highly debated point is the issue of including the sectors that produce
means of production for the second and third spheres of the food complex in the
product subcomplexea. In our opinion, we should only deal with narrovly spe-
cialized sectors that produce means of production for a definite subcosplex.

For this reason it seems advisable to include the sectors of the second and
third spheres of the food complex in the product suhcomplexes, but from the sec-
tors of the first sphere to take only the narrouly specialised subsectors that
are especially important for the development of the subcompleres. Ior example,
mechanization of harvesting and, accordingly, the problem of designing and
series production of machines to harvest fruit, vegetables, and berries are impor-
tant for the fruit-vegetable subcomplex. Another, equally important program
is development of the production of containers for storing and transporting
fresh produce (glass containers, tin cans, and aluminum containers) as well as
polymer films and materials for preserved and quick-frozen products. The em-
phasis here should he on determining the need for the output of sectors of the
first sphere and their requirements vith respect to its quality, productivity,
and other technical-economic parameters.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The main advantage of switching to comprehensive planning of the development of
the sectors that make up the product subconplexes is that it permits the possi-
bility of balancing the development of the particular sectors belonging to a
aubcomplex, eliminating disproportions. and on this basis shaping an effective
structure and achieving a significant reduction in losses, more rational use of
raw materials, and an increase in production efficiency. The comprehensive ap~
proach makes it possible to identify "bottlenecks" in the functioning of the
entire chain fron production (extraction) of the original output to sale of the
final output. It helps overcome the narrowly departmental approach to the uni-
form process of planning and coordinating different sectors involved in the
production. processing, and delivery to the customer of the actual products,
and this results in optimal distribution of capital investment.

As the meat-dairy subcomplex takes shape and develops still-existing inter-
sectorialdisproportionswill be eliminated. The most pressing problem now is
to balance available feed and the number of stock. A protein imbalance at the
15-17 percent level is the cause of failure to receive animal husbandry output
worth 9-11 billion rubles. This shortfall can be eliminated by increasing the
production of protein-rich feed crops such as peas. alfalfa, clover. soybean,
rape, and the like. The document ”Basic Directions of Economic and Social
Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and the Period Until 1990" poses the
challenge of raising the average annual production of legume crops to 12-13
million tons (the average crop in the 10th Five-Year Plan was 6.8 million tons).

Another way to overcome the protein shortage in feeds is accelerated development
t; the microbialogical industry. It is common knowledge that protein-vitamin
crncentratea obtained from liquid paraffin contain 56 percent protein and using
one ton of them in animal husbandry produces a gain in output of 700~900 rubles
(for an expenditure of 80-90 rubles per ton of liquid paraffin in the micro-
biological industry). Chemicel hydrolysis of wood has even better prospects in
this respect. Output in the microbiological industry is to increase 1.8-1.9
times in the 11th Five-Year Plan. The development of a comprehensive program to
establish a reliable, balanced feed base in the country, an important part of

the overall feed program, must be completed in the near future. as envisioned
in the document "Basic Directions."

One of the main areas of imbalance is in production capacities, their technical
level. and the amount of meat and dairy rav materials arriving for processing.
This is the reason that all the useful components are not extracted from raw
material and that the assortment of output is not expanding rapidly. Milk
serum, for example, is a valuable raw material that is only 10-12 percent used
at present. For technological reasons 8-12 percent of the slaughtered meat
remains on the bones turned over for further processing; this is 20,000-
25,000 tons of a valuable product. Large losses of raw material occur during
intensive periods of large-scale processing because production capacities can-
not keep up with the flow of raw materials. Sometimes excessive concentration
of industrial production and the establishment of very large enterprises in-
creases the radius of delivery for livestock and milk so much that the in-
evitably resulting losses nullify the benefit from concentration. Therefore.
the question of the rational size of meat-dairy industry capacities should be

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

decided together with developnent of plans for specialization and concentration
of animal husbandry, provision of special scans of transportation, and estab-
lishnent of a reliable road network. This entire set of questions applicable
to particular regions should he reflected in the food progrsn. Balance among

all elements of a aubconplex is an inortant condition for raising the efficiency
of neat and nilk production.

At the present time significant disproportions have occurred in the process of
production because of failure to coordinate the econonic interests of the sectors
that belong to the fruit—vegetable subconplex and owing to departmental conflicts.
These disproportions cause significant losses of output and an inadequate level of
production efficiency. Failure to coordinate interests leads to a situation where
many farms try to fulfill the plan with higher-yielding and less labor-intensive
crops, which are nore advantageous to the producers. “therefore. cabbage, table
beets. and carrots, which have linited use in the canning industry, take up some
65 percent of the planted area designated for vegetables in the RSPSR, for crawls.
At the same time, crops which are valuable for processing such as green vetch,
pepper. narrow squash. and eggplant nake up just five percent of the gross harvest
of vegetables (including just 1.3 percent for green vetch) and very snell anounts

of early cucumbers and tomatoes. sweet peppers, bush scallop, spinach. garlic,
lettuce, and various other crops are raised.

The same factors cause the unsatisfactory structure of perennial plantings. Ior
example, in the RSPSR fruits with seeds occupy 77 percent of the area, pitted
fruits are 16 percent. and berry patches are seven percent. Along the seed-type
fruits the proportion of winter-keeping varieties in extreuly low, while our
varieties of apples which are ill-suited for processing predominate. There are
not enough nazzard cherries, apricots, and peers in the structure of pitted fruit

orchards. In nany regions. for ample the North Caucasus, the area planted in .
pitted fruit trees is decreasing.

The level of specialization and concentration of production in orchard Earning
and vegetable and potato raising is still low in many parts of the country.
Industrial nethods of production are being introduced very slowly. The low level
of concentration and specialization in the production of fruit and vegetable out-
put with a concurrent increase in the level of concentration of production in

the canning industry leads to a significant increase in the order of supplier
farm and the radius of delivery of raw materials. For exanple, the Adygey
canning plant in Krasnodarakiy Kray receives raw material from #8 ferns with an
average delivery radius of 160 kilonetere. "hen the shipping length for
tomatoes, for examle, is increased from 25 monsters to 80—100 kiloneters, the
proportion of first-grade tonatoes is cut in half; increasing the shipping
radius by 10 kilometers raises expenditures by two percent.

Existing disproportions in price formation and narrowly sectorial and depart-
mental interests hinder rational use of fruit and berry raw naterials. For
example, while overall consuwtion of fruit is inadequate a growing snount of
fruit and berries is used to produce fruit and berry winerbeeause its production
is more profitable than canning. In the RSPSR in 1979, about 70 percent of the
fruit and berries sent for processing was used to produce wine.

19

P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL US! ONLY

Lack of coordination of departmental Interests leads to certain elements of the
fruit-vegetable subcomplex lagging sharply behind. At the present time, the
labor-intensiveness of producing vegetables on open soil is four times greater
than the labor-intensiveness of producing grain crops, while for potatoes it

is 2.3 times the figure for grain crops. The lshor-intensiveness of raising
grapes, fruit, and berries is even higher. Harvest work accounts for a large
part of the labor expenditures. Hecbanization of harvesting is one of the

key problems of further development of vegetable and potato growing. orchard
farming. and grape growing.

Expenditures to harvest the grapes today reach 20‘35 percent of labor expendi-
tures for raising the grapes. With an average harvest norm (3-3.5 quintals per
person per day). more than 500,000 persons are already employed for a month in
the srape harveSI, and by 1990 the number of persons employed in the manual
grape harvest should exceed 1 million. Therefore, it is essential to switch

to combined methods of harvesting industrial grape varieties. A number of
successful designs have already been developed, including the Kuban'-l combine
which is being tested in the vineyards of the North Caucasus and Crimes. But
lack of departmental coordination makes it impossible today to concentrate the
efforts of the design organizations of the interested ministries on development
and series production of s grape-harvesting combine.

Significant disproportions have developed between agricultural production and
storage capacities for fruit and vegetables. The material-technical base for
scoring fruit and vegetables does not match the current scale of fruit and
v‘getable procurement. The 60 percent increase in capital investment to improve
the storage of agricultural raw material, which is planned for the 11th Five-
Year Plan, will make it possible to significantly reduce losses of output.
Systems management and planning of the subcomplex on the basis of target-program
methods will make it possible to eliminate the existing disproportions between
the volume of production of fruit and vegetables and capacities for processing
and storing it, thus insuring balanced development.

The question of the system of planning indicators is an important one. The over-
all system of indicators of the food program should be worked out with due
regard for the following principles: correspondence between the systen of food
program indicators and the structure of the food complex itself; orientation of
all indicators in the progras to final goals; integrated systems of program lee-
sures and development of the entire food complex as a whole; reflection in the
system of indicators of intersectorisl links and ways to improve them for the
purpose of intensifying the production of the entire food complex; delivery of
program indicators and assignments to specific accountable performers in
directive form; coordination of the system of indicators of the program with the
overall system of national economic plan indicators.

The main target indicator of the program is final Output. The calculation of
final output must be based on balances of the output of agriculture and the food
industry. By itself. however, the indicator of final output does not fully re-
flect the goals of the complex. even though it is very important. It is
necessary to introduce indicators of public need for food goods taking account of
rational consumption norms and predicted trends in solvent demand for food. The

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FM! OFFICMI. "SR ONLY

most significant harvest evaluation indicator of the food program should be
the ratio between the volume of output going for personal consumption and the
volume of public needs. An indicator established in the program that reflects
the degree of attainment of rational norms of per capita consumption can play
the same role. The target indicator should be represented in natural terms

by the consolidated groups of products adopted in the 053! State Plan of
Economic and Social Development.

It is useful to recalculate and give indicators of needs for the basic nutri-
tional elements (proteins, fats. carbohydrates, and vitamins) in reference form
and to introduce indicators of the degree of satisfaction of these needs by the
stages in which the comprehensive food program is being developed. The intro-
duction of this kind of indicator will make it possible to coordinate the
summary section of the program more closely with the indicators of the sub-
programs for satisfaction of requirements for the basic nutritional elements.
In addition to the target indicators the summary section of the program must
represent resource indicators, above all those which can be allocated for the
entire food complex and distributed among its product subcomplexes. sectors.
and subsectors. The distribution of capital investment should be done from
the standpoint of the priority of the problems. Thus, at the present time the
proportion of capital investment in the production infrastructure and for
storage and processing of agricultural output should be increased. which will
permit a significant decrease in losses of output.

Among the generalizing cost indicators that can be used are the indicators of
final and net output (normative) for the entire food complex and per employee
in material production in the food complex. return on capital. rate of repayment
of capital investment, the indicators of relative savings of production re-
sources, and many others. The indicators of the food complex should correspond
to the indicators of the state plan of economic and social development. and the
structural cross-section of the programs should be an organic part of the struc-
ture of the national economic plan.

The sub-programs of the second level, related to creation and development of
the material-technical base of the food complex. should have indicators for
production of program output (agricultural machinery, fertiliser, equipment.
means of transportation, and the like) and development of its capacities
through reconstruction, technical re-equipping, and new construction in the
actual sectors that produce means of production.

For the sub—programs that aim at meeting public needs for food products it is
necessary to introduce the indicators of final and gross output in a group
assortment and the introduction of capacities in agriculture and the processing
sectors and to set a limit on capital investment for the development of each
product subcomplex for it to fulfill its assignments to deliver final program
output. These sub-programs should define the requirements of the product sub-
complexes for material. labor. and financial resources and the sources or ways
to provide these resources. It is very important to achieve a realistic
balance between the total requirement of the product subcomplexes for production
resources and the volumes of production and delivery of these resources in the
sub-programs for development of the material-technical base.

21

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL US! ONLY

In the sub-program for foreign economic links it is essential to represent
Indicators on the volume and structure of export and import of foodstuffs. This
sub-program should include indicators and assignments from longeterm special-
purpose (target) comprehensive programs concluded within the CEHA framework.

Preplanning and planning materials can only he worked out with broad application
of mathematical economic methods and computers. We believe that the best re-

sults can be obtained where systems of mathematical economic models of develop-

ment of the food complex are employed. Different variations of balance models
of production and distribution of the output of the food complex with blocks

for distribution of fixed capital (capacities). capital investment, and labor
can be used as a summary model. Such models are designed to correlate the in-
di(1tors of prniuction volume of the sectors. determine consumption within the
-O';lv3 v'- a an assigned final product, and to identify needs for fixed capital.
-a,lta; 'l estment, labor, and - most important —- output from agriculture and
.ishing. she cost versions of these models, covering the sectors of the food
complex in consolidated form, will permit a full calculation of expenditures for
the production of the basic types of output of the food complex and determination
of total expenditures per unit of final output from the complex.

The development of optimization models will help substantiate the most rational
structure for the food cemplex with maximum production of final output in an
assortment that corresponds to a rational public consumption structure. The
constraints in these models are land and labor resources, production capacities
in the industrial sectors, fixed productive capital, and capital investment.

Another type of model is designated to optimize the development of the most
important product subcomplexes of the food complex. The purpose of these models
is to define balanced development of all the main vertically integrated areas of
production. Unlike the consolidated models of the entire food complex, there
should be a much greater degree of detail in the variables and constraints

here. The most important in them is to choose the best technological procedures
n each element of the technological chain from production of the means of pro-
Juction and raw materials to receiving the final output.

All these models are framed as a whole according to the national economic food
complex and its sectors and product subcomplexes. They are supplemented by an
optimization model of the composite location of production with.the number of
blocks in the largest territorial-production subsystems of the food complex.
Because location is based on zonal specialization and concentration of agricul-
tural production. during development of this model experience with construction
of the model of location of agriculture must be used as much as possible. 8:-
perience from optimization of the location of food industry sectors is also
useful. The general comprehensive model of territorial location of the food
complex should be supplemented by more detailed models of the development and
location of regional food complexes and the most important product aubcomplexes.
Considering the stochastic nature of agricultural production, probablistic and
simulation models should find broader application.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFH‘IAI. “SR ON"

The special-purpose comprehensive program is becoming a realistic management
tool when reliahle systems for controlling its uselmNe heen created. The es-
tablished departmental sectorial structure of control is not adequate to the
target program approach which must be followed in the food program. The docu-
ment "Basic Directions" formulates the challenge as follows: "Establish and
use efficient systems in control programs."

It seems to us that we must have an agency that coordinates the activities of
the many ministries and departments that produce food products. Within such

an agency it would be possible to gradually change the structure of management.
carrying out a transition from the sectorial principle that is now prevalent

to the principle of managing intersectorisl product subcomplexes of the food
complex. Management forms of this type have already been established, for
example by the USSR Ministry of Fruit and Vegetable Industry and the correspond-
ing republic agroindustrial committees such as the RSFSR State Committee
for wine Industry and other agroindustrial formations.

But this transition should not be limited to the sphere of planning and estab-
llshing coordinating management bodies alone. It is equally important to work
out a new kind of relations between partner-sectors. The general principle of
this reorganization is accountability of each element for final results, which
will strengthen plan discipline and contract relations. The time has already
arrived to switch to concrete forms of this. One of the forms is evaluating

the results of work by sectors considering not only the sectorial impact but also
the impact from the use of output of this sector in other sectors of the food
complex. The unreliability of material-technical supply makes it difficult to
employ such evaluations. For example, the sectors that produce agricultural
machinery cannot beaccOuntable for its efficient use in the fields and at live-
stock units because it is produced from low-grade metal. Therefore. we cannot
fundamentally improve the economic mechanism of management of the agro-
industrial complex without making profound changes in the system of inter-
sectorial relations of the national economy as a whole.

Nonetheless, a great deal can be done at the lower levels, in particular with
respect to the relations among enterprises that belong to different sectors of
the food complex. Thus, the decree of the CPS" Central Committee and USSR
Council of Ministers entitled "Improving Planning and Economic Stimulation of .
the Production and Procurement of Agricultural Output" contains a number of
important ways to improve the economic mechanism. Procuring ministries and
enterprises are given responsibility for accepting all the output delivered by
agricultural enterprises. They can now accept above-plan nonstandard output at
prices set by agreement of the party. This will make it possible to reduce
direct or concealed (used for livestock feed) losses of output. It is also
important to switch to receiving all output at the place of production and
hauling it from the farms in vehicles belonging to the procurement agency.-

Along with centralization of receiving, transporting, storing, and processing
agricultural output, we must develop decentralized systems of different sizes

for storing and processing output, which will make it possible to reduce peak
loads in technological chains and to reduce losses. A procedure must be

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established by which output is counted in the procurement plan for the year in
which it is actually aarketed. The general conditions of material—technical
supply for containers, fuel, and other resources that apply to enterprises of

the food industry must also apply to the industrial enterprises of the kollthoses
and sovkhozes.

The role of state and cooperative trade in the entire structure of the economic
mechanism should be strengthened. The operational influence of trade on shaping
the assortment of industrial output, its quality, preparation and packaging,

should be based on a study of public demand in each region by seasons of the
year.

While strengthening the centralized principle in planning. above all in de-
fining the structure of the food complex, we should give the farms greater
opportunities to show initiative. to maneuver. and to employ healthy socialist
entrepreneurship in resolving ongoing management problems. This will make it
possible to receive a significant benefit while carrying out the food program.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ehonomiki". 1981

11.176
CSO: 1827/100

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ACRO-ECONOHICS AND ORSANIZATION

PRIVATE PLOT ACCOUNTING, CONTRACT SYSTEM FOR LIVESTOCK OUTLINED

Moscow PLANIROVANIYE I UCHET V SEL'SKOKHOZYAYSTVENNYKH PREDPRIYATIYAKH in Russian
No. 6. Jun 81 pp 37-40

[Commentaryz "0n the Procedure for Registering Livestock and Poultry Being Raised
By Citizens...."]

[Text] The 8 January 1981 decree of the CC CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers

"0n Additional Measures to Increase the Production of Agricultural Output on the
Private Subsidiary Farms of Citizens" permits sovkhozes and other agricultural
enterprises and recommends to kolkhozes to conclude contracts on a strictly vol-
untary basis with kolkhoz workers, workers. employees, and other citizens living
on their territory and conscientiously participating in public production, and
also with pensioners. for the raising and purchase of livestock and paultry and
for the purchase of surplus milk. The payment for the output purchased in keeping
with the above contracts is performed at prices in accordance with the agreement,
but not higher than the established state procurement prices.

These agreements stipulate the duties of kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricul-
tural enterprises to provide assistance to kolkhoz workers, workers, employees,
and other citizens in supplying them with young livestock and poultry and feed
and in granting them plots of land for haying and for posturing.

it has been established that the livestock. poultry, and milk surpluses which are
bought by kolkhozes, sovkhozes. and other agricultural enterprises through con-
tracts with kolkhoz workers, workers, employees, and other citizens are sold by
these farms to the state and are credited by it to the amount of production and
the fulfillment of the state agricultural output procurements plan, with the pay-
ment of the established mark-ups for quantitativeand qualitative indicators.

In accordance with the 8 January 1981 decree of the cc CPSU and USSR Council of
Ministers. the USSR Central Statistical Administration. USSR Ministry of Agricul-
ture, and USSR Ministry of Procurements, in agreement with the USSR Ministry of
Finance and with Cosbank USSR and through the 30 March 1981 Instructions No. 5-77/
269-1 1813-14 240, have established the following accounting procedure for the
livestock and poultry being raised by citizens on contracts with kolkhozes, sov-
khozes, and other agricultural enterprises. and also a procedure for crediting
livestock, poultry, and milk surpluses purchased on contract to production vol-
ume and to the fulfillment of the state plan for agricultural products procure-

25

FOR 0i1ﬁC]AI.USEtoNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ments by kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural enterprises.

l. The transfer by kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural enterprises of
young livestock and poultry on contract to kolkhoz workers, workers, employees,
and other citizens, and also to pensioners for raising is registered by a deed for
the transfer (sale) and purchase of the livestock and poultry through contracts
with citizens (sel'khozuchet, f. No. 956), in accordance with the appendix. One
copy of the deed, signed by the chief of the livestock section (team leader of the
livestock section), the zootechnician, veterinarian, financially responsible per-
son (delivery), citizen (receipt), and approved by the director of the farm, is
given to the citizen. The number of young livestock and poultry which have been
tramfered (accepted), their actual live mass (column 6), their cost, the state of
their health, and. for cattle. the number of the animal have to be specified in
the deed. After they have accepted young livestock and p0ultry, citizens bear
complete material responsibility for them.

2. Young livestock and poultry which have been transfered to citizens on con-
tracts for raising are registered in the balance of a kolkhoz, sovkhoz, and other
agricultural enterprises in Account No. 09 "Young Livestock and Livestock in
Fattening" (Sub-Account 9 "Young Livestock and Poultry Transfered to Citizens on
Contracts For Raising"). In the sub-account young livestock and poultry are reg-
istered for every person who has accepted them, and also by types and groups of
livestock.

Young livestock and poultry which hne been transfered for raising to citizens on
contracts are reflected in accounting for credit in Account No. 09 (types and
groups of livestock and poultry) and for debit in Account No. 09 (Sub-Account 9).

The number of young livestock and poultry which have been transfered for raising
to citizens and their live mass on the day of the transfer are included in the
total number of the livestock and poultry of a kolkhoz, sovkhoz, and inter-farm
enterprise and are reflected in the statistical reporting in Form No. 24 (24-skh)
2nd in the annual bookkeeping report in Form No. lh-skh.

3. The loss of young livestock and poultry which is being raised by citizens on
contracts and is on the balance of a farm is registered by a deed of loss (slaugh-
ter and disease) of livestock and poultry (sel'khozuchet, E. No. 100) which is
drawn up with the participation of the zootechnician, veterinary worker, and cit-
izen.

In the event of the loss of livestock and poultry through the fault of citizens
the farm is compensated for the damages in the established procedure, on the basis
of the delivered mass of livestock and poultry at state procurement prices, and
the damages are transfered from Account No. 09 to Account No. 86 "Shortages and
Losses From the Spoilage of Assets" at actual costs, and are simultaneously en-
tered in the debit Account No. 84 and the credit Account No. 76 ”Settlements With
Various Debtors and Creditors" and in the sub-account "Settlements in Compensa-
tion of Material Damages" --at state procurement prices.

The number of young livestock and poultry which has been lost through no fault of

26

FORi0FFNJAl.USE(NULY
FOR 0FFK1AI.USE¢DNLY

citizens, their delivery mass at the date of transfer (acceptance) for raising,
and their value are entered in debit Account No. 09 and credit Account No. 19
"Animal Husbandry" (mass and value) by the equal entry method. The hides which
have been obtained in connection with the loss of livestock are evaluated at the
prices of their possible sale and entered in debit Account No. 06 "Output of
Agricultural Production" and credit Account No. 19. The value of the delivered
mass of young livestock and poultry which have perished as a result natural dis-
asters is put in debit Account No. 99 "Profits and Losses" from credit Account No.
09, Sub-Account 9.

In cases of the forced slaughter of livestock the products of the slaughter which
are suitable for food purposes are surrendered to the farm at prices in keeping
with the agreement but no higher than the state procurement prices for live live-
stock with regard to degree of [sttness (minus the delivery mass of the animal
and the established discount for the contents of the digestive tract) and are re-
flected in the debit accounts for material assets and in credit Account No. 76
"Settlements With Various Debtors and Creditors" (Sub-Account 5 “Settlements With
Citizens For Agricultural Products Purchased Through Contracts").

The number of fallen livestock has to be included in the total number of fallen
livestock of all ages (including young livestock and poultry) on the kolkhoz, sov-
khoz. and inter-farm enterprise and reflected in the statistical reporting in Form
No. 26, 24-skh and in the annual report in Form No. lS-skh. '

4. The sale to citizens (at their desire) of up to 20 percent of the additional
livestock and poultry weight raised by them or of slaughter products calculated

by the the appropriate coefficient for the given type of livestock is performed
at prices which have been accepted for settlements in accordance with point 1.5
of the Standard Contract to raise on the private subsidiary farms of citizens
livestock and poultry which belongs to kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural
enterprises. The release of the meat (in terms of live mass) is performed by in-
voices (sel'khozuchet, f. No. 87) after initial payment for it has been made to
the farm's cashier; it is reflected in the accounting as (Other Sales), and is not
included in the amount of the intra-farm expenditure of livestock and poultry.

The release of meat can also be performed as a credit toward monies owed to cit-
izens for livestock and poultry sold to the farm.

5. The sale to citizens of feeds for the contracted raising of young livestock
and poultry is performed as follows: feeds of a farm's owned production-grain

at state procurement prices, other feeds at their planned cost (in accordance with
the 8 January 1981 decree of the CC CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers, points

7, l3), and bought feeds-- at their purchase prices, including delivery costs.

Feeds sold to citizens have to be reflected in the statistical reporting in Form
No. 24-iattening. They are not shown in Form No. 26 (Zh-skh), in section 11.
"Existing and Received Feed For Public Animal Husbandry." These feeds are re-

flected in Form No. 17-50 "Movement of Output" in the annual accounting report
of kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and interfarm interprises.

6. The purchase of livestock and poultry which has been raised by citizens on

27 .
ms omcut'uss outv
FKHR()FFI(1AI.IJSEZCMVLY

contract is registered by a deed for the transfer (sale) and purchase of livestock
and poultry on contract with citizens (sel'khOZohet, f. No. 956). The purchase

of milk surpluses from citizens is registered in the receipt and payments ledger for
milk.

The acceptance of livestock, poultry, and milk is performed by acceptance officers
of the kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural enterprises, as a rule. at
assigned reception points. Livestock and poultry are accepted by live mass and
fattiness, and milk by mass and quality (fat content and others).

Payment for purchased livestock and poultry is made for additional weight which is
determined by the live mass of the raised livestock minus the discount for the con-
tent of the digestive tract and the delivery mass (Column 8 of the deed in f. No.
956).

Livestock and poultry purchased from citizens, that is, additional weight
‘.ve mass minus delivery mass) --Column 7 of the deed in E. No. 956--and milk are

r edited in the kolkhozes. sovkhozes, and inter-farm enterprises on the basis of
acceptance documents and are reflected in the accounting in debit Account No. 09
"Young Livestock and Animals at Fattening" (Sub-Account 9), No. 06 "Output of Agri-
cultural Production" (Sub-Account 5 "Agricultural Products Purchased From Citizens
on Contract") and in credit Account No. 76 "Settlements With Various Debtors and
Creditors" (Sub-Account S).

In :he statistical reporting in Form No. 24, Zé-skh the amount of received addi-
rional weight is reflected in the corresponding lines and columns--by the indi-
taL«:s: livestock raised, additional weight received, and live mass sold. Milk
sur;143es purchased on contract are shown in hand written lines; O7-a in the Form
No. za-skh and ll-a in the Form No. 24 as “in addition. purchased from the pop-
ulation on contract." The quantity of milk purchased from the population on
contract is included in the amount of milk obtained in the kolkhoz, sovkhos, inter-
farm enterprise. However, this quantity of milk is not considered in calculating
the average milk yield per cow on kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and inter-farm enterprises.

the annual accounting reports of kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and inter-farm enter-
pcises livestock and poultry (additional weight) and milk surpluses which have
been purchased from citizens on contract are reflected separately in Form No.
li-skh "Production and Cost of Animal Husbandry Output" and in Form No. 6-skh
"Output Sales" as "in addition."

8. Settlements with citizens for purchased livestock and poultry are performed
within 10 days after their acceptance and for milk-~no less often than once a month.

9. The shipment to procurement points of livestock, poultry, and milk purchased
from citizens on contract is registered by the appropriate commodity-transporta-
tion invoices (sel'khozuchet, f. No. l-skh (live) and No. l-skh (milk).

Procurement organizations accept livestock, poultry, and milk in the established
procedure. An acceptance receipt is written out for the output (f. No. PK-l and
No. PK-J) with the notation "Purchased From Citizens on Contract."

28
FOR OIIICJAI.IEHBCMVLY
FOR‘OFTKJAI.USE(NVLY

in making up a report on procurements of livestock, poultry, and milk in E. No.
3-zag and No. a-zag procurement organizations, when they have acceptance receipts
with the notation "Purchased Prom Citizens on Contract," include this amount in
the indicator "Purchased From Kolkhozes and Sovkhozes" and also underline “Pur-
chased From Citizens By Contract."

0n the basis of the acceptance receipts and the reports of procurement organiza-
tions, statistical agencies credit livestock, poultry. and milk to the fulfillment
of the plan of the corresponding kolkhoz or sovkhoz. Agricultural enterprises are
Compensated by procurement organizations in the established manner for the deliv-
ery costs of output accepted from the population on contract.

10. The sale of livestock, poultry, and milk which has been accepted from cit-
izens is accounted for in Account No. 46 "Sales" in the established procedure
separately from a farm's output of it own production in Sub-Account six "The Sale
of Livestock, Poultry, and Milk Purchased From Citizens on Contract." Agricultur-
al output purchased from citizens without the contract is reflected in a separate
Sub—Account of Account No. 46 as "other sales."

ll. when there is an insufficiency of funds in current (special account) accounts
for settlements with citizens for livestock and poultry raised by them on private
subsidiary farms on contract kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural enter-
prises can obtain short- term credit in the institutions of Gosbank, regardless of
the state of payments on previously issued loans.

indebtedness on this credit is reflected in Section II of the debit balance in
item "Short—Term Bank Loans for Production Expenditures (on Kolkhozesr'or "Gos-
bank Loans for Normed Circulating Capital (on Sovkhozes and Other State agricult-
ural Enterprises)."

12. The value of the delivered live mass of young livestock and poultry which has
been transfered to citizens on contract for raising, and also the raised livestock
and poultry which has been accepted (purchased) from citizens are reflected in the
second section of the assets balance in item "Young Livestock and Animals at Fatten-
ing" with a separate statement of the value of the actual additional weight of the
accepted (purchased) livestock and poultry (live mass minus delivered mass) in the
article "including Livestock and Poultry Accepted (Purchased) From Citizens on Can-
tract.” The value of the milk purchased from citizens is reflected in Section III
of the assets balance in article "Agricultural Products Purchased From Citizens on
Contract." The indebtedness to citizens for livestock, poultry, and milk purchased
from them is registered in the third section of the debit balance in the item "Set-
tlements With Citizens For Agricultural Products Purchased on Contract."

13.ﬂ|:reknse of contruction materials and the performance of work on the construc-
tion and equipping of housing for the maintenance of livestock and poultry for
citizens is performed by agricultural enterprises in accordance with the purchasing
prices of the materials. including delivery costs, but no higher than the state
retail prices, and actual wages on the basis of the corresponding primary docu-
ments.

29
FOR‘0FF"JA[.US£(NVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Services connected with Cultivating the land plot and procuring and deliVery ieedu
and construction materials are paid by citizens in accordance with the planned
cost of the current year.

16. The sale by kolkhozes, sovkhozes and other agricultural enterprises of young
livestock and p0u1try to kolkhoz workers, workers, employees, and other citizens,
and also to pensioners, on a non-contract basis is performed at state procurement
prices and is registered by deed in Form 956, in Column 6 of which the actual mass
of the animals sold to citizens is specified, and is reflected in the bookkeeping
in debit Account No. 46 "Sales" and credit Account No. 09 ( planned costs) and at

the same time in debit Account No. 50 and credit Account No. 46 at state procure-
ment prices.

15. The granting by kolkhozes, sovkhozes, and other agricultural enterprises to
citizens (at their desire) of a monetary advance to purchase tools, materials, and
minor mechanization equipment necessary for the production of agricultural output
on their subsidiary farms is reflected in the debit Account No. 79, Sub-Account 3
"Settlements With Workers and Employees (kolkhoz workers) on Advances Received By
Them on Contract to Raise Livestock and Poultry" and in the credit Account No. 50,
and also in Section III of the assets balance in the item with the same name.

The Cosbank credits which have been obtained for these purposes are accounted for
by kolkhozes and sovkhozes in the balance Account No. 90. Sub-Account "Gosbank
for Loans for the Issuance of Monetary Advances to workers, Employees, and Kolk-
hoz workers on Contract to Raise Livestock and Poultry" and are reflected in Sec-
tion 111 of the debit balance in the item with the same name.

16. The repayment, in agreement with the trade union committee, on the basis of
monies from the economic stimulation fund, of the credit (not more than 50 percent)
extended for the purchase of cows and calves to workers and employees conscient-
iously performing work on sovkhozes and other state agricultural enterprises,
and also to teachers and doctors working and living on the territory of these en-
terprises, and to pensioners who for a long time had worked at these enterprises
i- ueflected in the debit Account No. 19, Sub-Account l and the credit Account

. 50 and 51 "Current "Special Current" Account", and, at the same time, Account

No. 87 is debited for the decrease in load indebtedness by citizens and Account
No. 79, Sub-Account 4 in credited.

Young livestock may be given out free of charge at the farm's expense to young
families (on the condition that members of these families work in the given agric-
ultural enterprise )for the creation and development of a private subsidiary farm.
in accOunting its value is reflected in the credit Account No.9 (in number of head,
live mass. and value) and in the debit Account No. 7 "The Economic Stimulation and

Special Purpose Fund," Sub—Account "Social and Cultural Measures and housing Con-
strucrion Fund."

Help to young families in building work structures is provided for a fee and re-

flected in the accounting in the manner described in point 13 of the present in-
structions.

30
FIHICHHWCJAL USEIDNLY
Iﬂiﬂ 0§1T(1Al.lﬁui(ﬂNLY

18. Settlements with the population for agricultural products and livestock
(without contract) which has been accepted for sale are performed in accordance
with the instructions on the procedure of settlements for agricultural products

and livestock being bought (accepted) by enterprises and organizations from the
population which were approved by the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, USSR Ministry
of Food industry, USSR Ministry of Meat and Dairy Industry, USSR Ministry of Light
industry, and the board of the Central Union on 30 December 1975 No. 269-1/5-22/27-
8-1/33-8/CP-227.

Agricultural enterprises have to provide separate accounting for the receipt and
sale of agricultural products and livestock accepted from the population for con-
signment sale.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Kolos," "Planirovaniye i uchet v sel'skokhozyaystvennykh,"
1981

2959
C50: 1824/13

31|
I1)R Oﬁ1i(]Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TILLINC AND CROPPING TECHNOLOGY

UDC 63l.lb:63l.53l.01

SEED INDUSTRY PROBLEMS, PROGRESS, PROSPECTS REVIEWED
Moscow SELEKTSIYA I SEENOVODS'NO in Russian Mo 6. Jun 81 pp 6-11

[Article by A.s. Navolotskiy. chief of USSR All-Union Production Association for
Varietal Seed Raising: "Sixty Years Later"]

{Text} At the present time. the program for improving seed production and
converting it over to an industrial basis is set forth in the decrees of the CC CPSU
and the USSR Council of Ministers entitled "Measures for Further Improving the
Selection and Production of Seed for Grain and Oil-Bearing Crops and Grasses"
(1976), 'hdditional Measures for Improving the Selection and Production of Seed for
Corn" and "Measures for Increasing the Production and Raising the Quality of Feed
(1978).

in carrying out the mentioned decrees. the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, VASKhNIL
{All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni v.1. Lenin] and local soviet and
agricultural organs have implemented a number of measures aimed at radically
impr0ving the production of seed. Extensive work has been carried out in connection
with seed production specialization and concentration and converting it over to an
industrial basis. The USSR Sortsemprom [All-Union Production Association for
Varietal Seed Raising] system was created for the purpose of directing seed
production work in behalf of grain. oil-bearing crops and grasses. Varietal seed
production associations (sortsemproms) have been created within the USSR Ministry of
AgrLCulture (1977). the ministries of agriculture for the union republics (with

the cxceleOn of the P553) and also in 103 oblaste, ‘araya end autonomOua republics.
Two hundred and sixteen interfarm assOcietions have been organized for the
production of seed.

A network of specialized seed production farms has been approved. Elite and primary
seed production is being carried cut by 288 experimental-production farms of
scientific-research institutes and experimental stations, 119 uchkhozes [training

farms] of agricultural VUZ's and technical schools and by 62 elite seed production
kolkhozes and sovkhozes.

In order to satisfy the requirements of farms not engaged in the production of

seed, 5.778 specialized seed production farms have been organized for the production
of seed for grain and oil-bearing crops. 3.410 -- for perennial grasses. 2.373 --
for corn, 755 -- for soybeans, 1.361 for sunflowers, 89 -- for sorghum and 97b --
for rape.

32
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

During the 1977-1980 period, 1,195 complex stations of varying capabilities and
purposes were placed in operation at kolkhoses, sovkhozes and other state
enterprises and scientific institutes. They were constructed on a large scale in
the BSSR, ESSR. UkSSR, laSSR and the Hariyskaya ASSR and in Vologodshaya,
Chelyabinskaya, Permskaya and a number of other oblasts in the RSPSR. Plants were
built for the processing of corn seed in the HSSR and Krasnodarskiy [ray and for the
processing of sorghum -- in Rostovshaya and Krymskaya Oblasts. At the present time,

there are 159 seed production stations (plants) for grasses, which process more than
100,000 tons of seed during a season.

At the grain receiving enterprises there are seed storehouses having an overall
capacity of 13.3 million tons, 350 seed production departments, 500 ZAV and K28
grain cleaning units, 210 plants for the processing of corn seed and also 3.500
diverse mobile grain cleaning machines. This is making it possible, during single-
shift operations, to prepare more than k million tons of grain crop seed during a
season and to dry out up to 65,000 tons of corn seed on the ears during a 26 hour
period. During the past few years. notwithstanding unfavorable weather conditions,
the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in many union republics, kraya and oblasts have begun
receiving greater Quantities of seed. the quality of the seed has been improved and
the introduction into production operations of new end highly productive varieties
and hybrids for grain and oil-bearing crops and grasses has been accelerated.

Seed production is being concentrated throughout the country in those zones marked
by more favorable soil and climatic conditions and at specialized seed production
farms. In behalf of the 1981 harvest in the KiSSR, 95 percent of the grain and
pulse crop seed was produced at spetssemkhores [spetsialirirovannoye
semenovodcheskoye khozyaystvo; specialized seed prcduction fared. in the ArSSR -- 8l
and in the M833 -- 8l percent.

During the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, increases were recorded in the
production and procurements of seed for first generation corn hybrids and also for
early ripening and medium early ripening hybrids. In 1980. the experimental-
production farms and training-experimental farms of VUZ's and technical schools
fulfilled their tasks for the sale of elite and primary seed for grain crops

(108 percent). for oil-bearing crops (101 percent and seed for the parental forms
of corn hybrids (lOS percent).

However, shortcomings exist in the organization of seed production operations. For
the country as a whole, the plans for laying in seed for pulse crops, buckwheat,
alfalfa and clover were on the average not fulfilled during the 1976-1980 period.
During these years, the spring grain crop seed placed in the insurance funds (57
percent) was considerably less than the figure called for in the plan and winter
grain crop seed -- for the carry-over funds (38 percent). In particular, the
deliveries of seed for these crops to kolkhozes and sovkhozes in a number of
oblssts and autonomous republics in the nonchernosem zone of the R8333, the Urals
and Siberia. the BSSR. the Baltic and Trans-Caucasus republics. the 0:388 and the
TsSSR were very poor. As a result, during the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan
the cauntry's kolkhozes and sovkhozes obtained 25.7 million tons of grain crop

seed from the state's resources. There was a shortage of seed for early ripening
and medium-early ripening corn hybrids for sowing for forage purposes and thus less
productive seed for second generation hybrids, including late ripening hybrids,

33
FOR OF'ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was soun on considerable areas (for silage. green feed and also in secondary
savings) and this lowered noticeably the yields and feed qualities of the fodder.

The capabilities of the plants for processing corn seed are inadequate for the
timely drying out of damp ears, the procurement volumes of which have increased
noticeably in recent years. Thus their drying out is being continued for 70-80
days, the damp ears must be stored for an extended period of time on the kolkhoz
and sovkhoz thrashing floors and on the platforms of corn processing plants and
this lowers sharply the quality of the seed.

In a number of union republics, the tasks for building seed production facilities
are being carried out in an unsatisfactory manner. In the Azerbaijan 883. for
example, the plans called for 26 complex stations for the processing and storage of
seed to be built during the 1977-1982 period and yet not one of these stations has
as yet been placed in operation. 0f 30 stations to be built in the Uzbek 588 during
the 1977-1982 period, only four were built during the pest b years. Seed production
installations are being built extremely slowly in the TuSSR, ArSSR and GSSR, in
Vladimirsksya, Kalininskaya, Tul'skaya, Voronezhakaya. Lipetskaya. Volgogradsltaya,
Omskaya, Tomskaya and Irkutsksya Oblasts and in Altayskiy, Khabarovskiy and
Krasnoyarskiy Krays. The principal cause of the lag -- weak work on the part of the
contractual organizations and insufficient control by the agricultural organs over
the caurse of the construction work.

Owing to the absence of a number of important machines required for the processing
\f seed, the rates for creating the logistical base for seed production are being
rained. In conformity with the decree of the cc CPSU and the USSR Council of
',H15L0r8 entitled "Measures for Further Improving the Selection and Production of
ed inf Grain and Oil-Bearing Crops and Grasses" (1976), seven such machines were
to have been developed during the 1977-1980 period. However, only two were
recommended for production -~ the SPS-S pneumatic grading table and the SHShch-b
magnetic seed cleaning machine. The five remaining machines are still undergoing
state testing. Commencing in 1981, 100 sets of equipment for KTS-O.5 thermal
41vi“fection should be produced annually and yet the plan called for only five.
a a period of many years now, a solution has still not been found for the problem
:oducing a stationary APZ-lO seed disinfecting apparatus and this is requiring
th' ~se, at enterprises under construction, of a mobile disinfection unit that is
unsuitable for use at a permanent station.

Measures aimed at achieving concentration and specialization in the production of
seed for grain and oil-bearing crops and grasses are being carried cut extremely
slowly in a number of republics and oblasts and. as a result, the conversion over to
the system for producing seed and supplying it to kolkhoses, sovkhoses and other
agricultural enterprises, as set forth in the above~mentioned decree of the CC CPSU
and the USSR Council of Ministers, is being delayed. The approved network of
specialized seed production farms for the production of high quality and hybrid seed
for grain and oil-bearing crops and grasses, for satisfying the requirements of
farms not producing such seed, and also the network of seed production farms for the
production and procurements of seed for the state resources are still not operating
in a satisfactory manner. Many local soviet and agricultural organs have for all
practical purposes failed to examine the structure for the production and
procurements of agricultural products on the seed production farms, as a result of

3b
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which seed production occupies a low proportion of their operations. In some
oblasts, up to 60 percent of the high quality seed is procured for the state's
resources from non-seed production farms.

The 26th CPSU Congress assigned great end important tasks to the country's seed
growers. In the Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR During the 1981-1985 Period and For the Period Up To 1990, the plans call for
improvements in the system of seed production for agricultural crops, an acceleration
in its conversion over to an industrial basis, the rapid introductiOn into
production operations of new and highly productive varieties and hybrids and
improvements in the quality of the seed.

During the Eleventh P‘.c-Year Plan, the country's seed growers must satisfy fully
the requirements of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes for high quality varietal grain crop
seed, the annual requirement for which is 30 million tons, including 9.6 million
tons for winter grain crop seed. In addition, there must be insurance seed funds

in the amount of 4.5 million tons and carry-over seed funds for winter crops -- 1.9
million tons.

In order to solve successfully the tasks assigned by the 26th CPSU Congress with
regard to increasing the production and procurements of pulse crops, millet,
buckwheat and rice, the plans call for increases in the volumes of high quality seed
for these crops.

In order to satisfy completely the requirements of the farms for pulse crop seed,
the agricultural organs must ensure that the kolkhozes and sovkhoses lay in 2.87
million tons during 1981 and that this figure is raised to 3.66 million tons in
1985, buckwheat seed -~ 183,500 and 207,800 tons respectively, millet -- 92,100 and
92,100 tons and rice -- 200,000 and 203,400 tons respectively.

In a report delivered before the 26th CPSU Congress, L.I. Brezhnev assigned the
task of expanding the corn sowings for grain. For the successful carrying out of
this task and also to: the purpose of increasing the production of high quality
succulent feed, measures are being undertaken to raise considerably the gross
yields of seed for early ripening and medium early ripening hybrids. Towards this
end, the fulfillment of the program developed by the USSR Ministry of Agriculture,
jointly with the agricultural and planning organs of the union republics, for the
production during the 1981-1985 period of seed from the standpoint of hybrids,
varieties, generations, reproductions and parental forms, has been organized. This
will make it possible, by 1985, to increase the production of seed for early
ripening and medium-early ripening hybrids to 560,000 tons and to raise their sowing
area for grain to 1.1 million hectares and for silage -- to 7 million hectares. In
order to expand the sowing areas for sorghum, it will be necessary to increase the
production of seed for this crop to 27,300 tons by 1985.

During the 26th CPSU Congress, a great amount of attention was given to raising the
cropping power and quality of sunflower seed. In solving this task, great importance
will be attached to improving seed production operations and introducing new
varieties and hybrids into production. The production volumes for varietal and
hybrid seed for this crop must be raised to 284,200 tons during the Eleventh Five-
Year Plan.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The USSR Ministry of Agriculture, jointly with VASKhNIL, the agricultural organs

of republics and oblasts and the scientific institutes, have developed and are
implementing measures for organizing seed production and the introduction of
sunflower hybrids into production operations during the 1980-1985 period. The
production of elite seed for parental forms must reach 1,742 quintals in 1981 and in
1985 -- 2.000 quintals and first generation hybrids -- 4,700 tons and 11,000 tons
respectively. This will make it possible in the near future to grow new and

highly productive early ripening hybrids on all areas deemed suitable for the
cultivation of hybrid sunflowers.

Th- party's central conmuttee has repeatedly underscored the need for increasing
:o;~ean production. During the 26th CPSU Congress, L.I. Brezhnev issued a specific
instruction calling for an expansion in the sowings of this crop in Moldavia, the
southern oblasts of the Ukraine, the north Caucasus, central Asia and the Trans-

Caucasus. The fulfillment of this task requires first of all an increase in the
production of seed for this crop.

At the present time, the requirements of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes for soybean
seed amount to 135,000 tons, including for farms in the European part of the
country -- 15,000 tons. In the interest of satisfying more completely the kolkhos
and sovkhoz requirements for the seed of this crop and expanding still further its
sowing areas. especially in the European part of the country, measures are being
undertaken to increase the production of varietal seed in 1981 to 149,000 tons and
in 1985 -- to 186,500 tons.

" experience of last year has shown that winter rape can be grown successfully in
any unlasts of the Ukraine and in the north Caucasus and spring rape -- in the
)lnsL. of Siberia, the nonchernozem zone of the RSFSR, the 8838 and the UkSSR.

Available seed resources for rape (and wild cabbage) made it possible this year to

plant it for seed and feed purposes on approximately 1.5 million hectares. The

prodrction of seed for these crops must be increased to 25,000 tons by 1905. This
will make it possible to increase their sowing areas to 2.5 million hectares, which
will constitute a worthy contribution towards solving the feed protein problem.

.985, the requirements of the kolkhozes, sovkhoaes and other state farms for
perennial grass seed will increase to 356,000 tons. USSR Sortsemprom end the
agricultural Organs of republics, krays and oblssts are undertaking measures to
increase the production of this seed. Towards this end, the planting of perennial
grass seed plants has been organized, pesticides and fertilizers are being supplied
to the specialized seed production farms, bee pollination of alfalfa and clover is

being organized and improvements are also being carried out in the methods employed
for harvesting the seed plants.

By way of furnishing assistance to those farms which suffer from unfavorable

weather conditions and in order to supply seed to those regions where it is
impossible to organize stable seed production for individual crops, state resources
for varietal seed will be created annually within the USSR Ministry of Procurements
during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan: grain crops (excluding corn) -. 5.7 million
tons (including winter grains -- 0.9 and spring grains -~ 6.8 million tons); corn ~-
l.3 million tons and oil-bearing crops -- 0.2 million tons.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conformity with the program approved by the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, by the
end of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan the sowings of highly productive varieties of
grain and pulse crops (including corn) must constitute approximately 70 percent of
the entire area sown in crops and new varieties -- approximately 30 percent. The
savings of new varieties and hybrids of sunflowers. soybeans, sorghum and other
crops will increase considerably. Thus the plens call for increases in the
production of seed for grain and oil-bearing crops and grasses at specialized seed
production farms and for this work to be carried out in those regions having the
most favorable natural and economic conditions.

During the 1981-1985 period, the country's scientific-research institutes must make
recommendations with regard to singling out such zones in the republics, krays.
oblasts and administrative regions and USSR Sortsemprom and the appropriate soviet
and agriCultural organs must, on this basis, determine the maximum possible
production volumes for varietal and hybrid seed for the crops in these areas and
define more precisely the network of specialized seed production farms to produce
the seed in order to satisfy the kolkhoz and sovkhoz requirements and also the
network of seed production farms for the production and procurements of seed for the
state resources.

The production of seed for corn. sunflowers and other crops having high coefficients
of propagation must be carried out as a rule in scientific-productiou and production
associations. The operational experience of the Gibrid Scientific-Production
Association in the M353 has revealed a high level of effectiveness for this form of
seed production organization.

In addition, during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan it will be necessary to create a

number of scientific-production and production associations for the production of
corn seed and to ensure the production, processing and storage of 210,000 tons of
hybrid seed and 22.000 tons of seed for the parental forms of hybrids.

In connection with the fact that sunflower varieties regionalized in the TsChO
[central Black Earth Region] and Volga region, when use is made of seed raised in
Krasnodarskiy Kray, furnish yields in these regions which are 2-3 quintals higher
than those obtained under local conditions, the RSFSR Cauncil of Ministers and the
RSFSR Ministry of Agriculture. during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan and in a planned
manner, must organize the production of 17,000-18.000 tons of seed for these
varieties for the given regions in Krasnodarskiy Kray. This will make it possible
to increase their gross yield in the republic by 300,000-b00,000 tons.

In order to supply alfalfa seed to farms located in regions where this crop does
not ripen, it will be necessary, in conformity with the decree of the CC CPSU and
the USSR Cauncil of Ministers entitled 'Heasures for Increasing the Production and
Raising the Quality of Feed" (1978). to ensure the delivery by 1985 of 3,100 tons
of seed for this crop (from the UkSSR. 0:858 and KaSSR) into the all-union fund and
also to organize their production in the amount of 5,000 tons in the KiSSR.
Krasnodarskiy and Stavropol'skiy Krays, Rostovskaya, Volgogradskaya and
Saratovskaya Oblasts, the Chuvashskaya ASSR and also the steppe regions of the
Ukraine must become zones for commodity seed production for alfalfa in the
European part of the USSR.

37
FIHICINWCJAI.USIIONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the work of refining, for the benefit of the specialized seed production farms, the
plans for selling agricultural products to the state. This will enable the latter
to achieve a auximum increase in the production of high quality varietal seed for

grain and oil-bearing crops and grasses, for sale to the kollthozes end sovkhozes,
and procurements for the state resources.

During the 26th CPSU Congress, a great amount of attention was given to those
problems concerned with creating the logistical base for industrial seed production.
An this is quite understandable. Indeed, in the absence of such a base it is
impossible to even discuss the production of high quality seed in increasing

volumes or the solving of those tasks assigned by the party and government for
further raising cropping power and increasing the production of farming products.
During the 1981-1985 period. the soviet and agricultural organs of union and
autonomous republics, krays and oblaste must ensure the placing in operation (by
means of construction and modernization at the specialized seed production farms,
seed production brigades and departments of large kolkhozes and sovlthozes) of
complex stations (plants) for the processing and storage of seed having an overall
capacity of 8.5 million tons. In behalf of the overall plan for their construction,
plants and lines must be built during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan for the processing
of seed for lupine, rice, soybeans, sunflowers and perennial grasses. This will
make it possible, by the end of 1985, to raise the overall capability of the

plants for processing seed. taking into account thoae built during the Tenth Five-
Year Plan, to 10.9 million tons.

>n- these year -. 70 plants must be built at the specialized seed production farms.
---r' rental-production farms of scientific-research institutes and at the training
.nrn-z of agricultural VUZ's and technical schools for the processing of seed {or
the parental forms of hybrids and high reproductions of corn varieties; these plants
will have capabilities of 250, 500 or 1,000 tons per season. In addition, 25 plants
must be built for the processing of hybrid and varietal seed for this crop and
these plants will have capabilities of 5,000 or 10,000 tons per season. The
(:1 ---tion of a logistical base for the processing and storage of sorghum seed must be
leted. In addition to the existing plants in Roatovsltaye (city of ZernOgred)
Krymakaya (settlement of Klepinino) Oblasts, they must be built in Stavropol'skiy
K 4} and in Rostovskaya and Saratovskaya Oblasts. The construction of stations
(according to standard plan No. 812-1-6) for the drying and thrashing of the tassels
of this crop sh0u1d also be started. In view of the fact that the principal
eqtipment for these stations -- dryers for materials which are not too free-flowing --
wltl not he produced until 1986. their installation will take place during the

1955-1990 period. In all, 190 such stations must be built during these years (in
the 5:SFSR. the UkSSR, UzSSR and the KaSSR).

During the 1981-1985 period and the period up to 1990, the planning organizations of
the USSR Hi..lstry of Agriculture will continue the development of new and the
modernization and correcting of the existing standard plans for complex stations
(plants) for the processing and storage of seed for grain and oil-bearing crops and
grasses and for seed storehouses and other seed production installatiOns. In the
process. special attention will be given to lowering the estimated cost of
construction and the extensive introduction into planning practice of new and light

weight construction structures, modern and highly productive equipment and
progressive technological solutions.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A great aununt of work must he carried out in connection vith the modernization and
expansion of existing facilities for the processing and storage of seed. This will
make it possible to accelerate the strengthening of the logistical base for seed
production, with a considerable reduction in expenditures.

The cauncils of ministers of the union republics, the USSR Ministry of Agriculture,
Coskomsel'khoztekhnlka and the republic and local agricultural organs must ensure

the allocation of tractors, agricultural machines, mineral fertilisers, chemical
agenst for protecting plants and other logistical resources, primarily to the
scientific institutes carrying out primary seed production and also to the
specialized seed production farms, as called for in the decree of the CC CPSU and the
USSR Council of Ministers entitled "Measures for Further Improving the Selection and
Seed Production for Grain and Oil-Bearing Crops and Grasses" (1976).

The production of high quality seed is a difficult problem of farming. But there is
no deubt concerning the fact that the carrying Out of the program outlined by our
party and Soviet Government for converting seed production over to an industrial
basis will promote its successful solution.

Thus the ideas of Vladimir Il'ich Lenin, reflected in the decree of the Sovnarkom
[Soviet of People's Commissars] on seed production and signed by him at the dawn of
Soviet rule. are being realized.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”kolos", "Selektsiya i semenovodstvo", 1981

7026
C50: :824’007 END

39