FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10362
3 March 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION seavnce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Kords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
AUSTRALIA

Briefs

BURMA

Briefs

PAKI STAN

Briefs

SINGAPORE

Briefs

THAILAND

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 11/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

Melbourne Cannabis Seizure

Rangoon Opiul Seizure

Opiu- Seized
Hore Opium Discovered

Minister on Anti—Drug Efforts

Police Couplicity in Drug Trafficking Diecuaaed

(sum RAT snmm mm, 27 Dec 81)

Ex-Ouatono Official mentions Narcotica Policy

Briefa

(Khan 90:13;st1, 11 Jan 82)

Thai International in Drug Traffic
LATIN AMERICA
BOLIVIA

Briefa
Drug Traffickara in Bolivia

BRAZIL

European Connections of International Drug Ring
(0 asrAno n3 8A0 PAULO. 30 Jan 82) ........................

Latin America, Mia-i Drug Route Broken Up
(0 ssrAno or SAO PAULO, 21 Jan 82) ........................

Police Loae Control of Cocaine Traffic
(POLHA n2 5A0 PAULO, 1 Feb 82) ............................

Police To Monitor Cocaine Refining
(0 cm”. 2*Qb 82) '0.0..0OOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOICOOOOOO

Drug Ring Busted, Arno Seized
(0 61.030, 6 Feb 82) .......................................

'Harihuana' Scle Discovered
Harihuana, Arte, Scale Seized

Sriefa
Trafficker'a Releaae
Incineration of Druga
CHILE
Briefa ‘
Drug Seized in Chile
MEXICO

Harihuana Shipment Seized at Airport, Honen Arreated
(EL BRAVO. 21 Jan 82) .0.0.0.0.0.0.0000...IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Harihuana Traffickera Caught, Ringleadera Sought
(EL DIARIO DE uurvo LAnzDO. 26 Jan 82) ....................

Three Henbera of Heroin Trafficking Ring Captured
(EL HARANA, 22 Jan 82) ....................................

Nenbera of Hichoacan Trafficking Ring Captured
(EL FRONTERIZO, 4 Feb 82) .................................

Briefa
New Heroin Source Reported
Illegal Pill lnporta
Operation 'Condor' Reaulta
January Antidrug Calpaign Reaulta

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERU

Briefs
Drug Traffic Report Controversy

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

EGYPT

Results of The Drugs Seizures Reported
(AL'AW. 16 Dec 81) ssosssossssssssssosooosessococo...so

Hashish Smugglers Apprehended,
by Husayn Thebit, Ahmad Pu'sd
Drug Seizure in Cairo, by Huesyn Ghsnin

IRAN

Briefs
Opium Seized in Khorasen
Opium Seized in Zehedsn
Heroin Seized in Ksshan
Opium Seized in Jiroft
Opium Seized in Tehran
Shiraz Druge Sentence
Border Drug Heul
Quchan Arrests
Mashhad Drug Snoop
Torbet-B Jan Heroin Raul
Hashhsd Drug Seizure
Sistan Vs Beluchestan Narcotics

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

INTER-AFRICAN AFVAIRS

'Prightening' Rise of Addictions in Africa Reported
(m STANDARD, 8 Jan 82) ..

SOUTH AFRICA

Delegste to World Strategy Meeting on Drugs Reports
(Keith Abendroth; m: CITIZEN. 15 Feb 82)

Trial of Alleged Members of International Drug Network Scheduled
(m8 CITIZEN. 19 Feb 82) IIO00.00000000000000IO'OOOOOOOOO.

Briefs
Drug Peddlers Jailed

FOR‘OFEKJAI.USE1DNLY
run vrraunna. var. URL!

"EST EUROPE

SWEDEN

Officials: Danish Tolerance Making Hal-o Into Haahiah Center
(Jena Thmen; nmmcm 110mm, 12 Feb 82) ..............

TURKEY

'MILLIYET' Reports Shift in Narcotics Smuggling Route. Since 1981
(Ethan Akyildiz;mu.m1‘, 9 Jan 82)

UNITED KINGDCH

Police Check Secret Drug. File Leak
(T. A. Sandrock; THE DAILY WOW“. 28 Jan 82) ...........

Bx—Racing Driver Jailed for lleroin Smggling
(Ian Henry; '1'!!! DAILY mzcnm, 27 Jan 82) ................

Briefs
Cannabis Seized
Cocaine Gang Heabera Jailed

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

MELBOURNE CANNABIS SEIZURE--A man will appear in court in Melbourne on 15 February
charged in relation to the seizure of illegal drugs in Melbourne airport on the
night of 13 February. A police reporter in Melbourne says the man, believed to

be from Canberra. has been charged with possessing and conspiring to import

Cannabis with a street value of more than $500,000. [Text] [BK190330 Melbourne
Overseas Service in English 0500 GMT 16 Feb 82]

650: 5300/5668
BRIEFS

RANGOON OPIUH SEIZURE-~Under the direction of Pazundsung Township police Commander
Inspector U Maung Kyi, a police squad led by Subinspector U Thein Shwe at 1000

on 6 February raided "Sinpyudaw" teashop on Anawratha Street, Pazundaung Township
No l ward. and found {our packages of raw opium inside a plastic bag belonging to
Myo Thant, 22, of 27th Street. No 10 ward, South Okkalspa, and another packet of
raw opium from the handbag of Tun "in, 34, of Zani Lane 12, No 9 ward. South Okkal-
apa. The seized opium weighed 2.8 viss [l viss equals 3.6 pounds] and was worth
8,320 kyat. Charges have been filed under sections 6.3, 10.3 and ll/lb.D of the
narcotic drugs law. [Text] [3K190330 Rangoon MYANHA ALIN in Burmese 8 Feb 82

P7]

CSO: 5300/5648
BRIEFS

OPIUM SEIZED—-The ClA police last night raided a bungalow in the Housing Society
area of Quetta and seized 11 maunds of opium worth about Rs 320 million. The

police arrested drug-smuggler Abdulnabi Achakzai in this connection. [Text]
[Karachi JANA in Urdu 12 Feb 82 p 10]

MORE OPIUM DISCOVERED--0n the basis of information provided by Abdulnabi
Achakzai. the drug-smuggler who was arrested last night, CIA police further
recovered 64 kilos of opium worth Rs 20 million from his bungalow in the
Housing Society area in Quetta. It is to be noted that last night the police
seized opium worth Rs 380 million from the possession of the accused. According
to details, the police raided the bungalow and arrested Abdulnabi when he had
loaded it in his jeep. The police took in their possession 11 maunds of
opium. which is said to be worth Rs 380 million in the international market.
CIA inspector Arbab Niaz Mohammad Baluch questioned the accused and recovered
64 more kilos of opium, said to be worth Rs 20 million. A special investiga-
tion team has been set up, which includes Arbab Niaz Mohammad, Sub-inspector
Wali-ul-Rahman. Batkat Hussein, A.S.P. Chaudhari Mohauumd Sadiq and Halik Dost
Mohammad. The police expects to recover more opium. make further arrests

and uncover additional details of the smuggling operation. [Text] [Karachi
JANG in Urdu 13 Feb 82 p 9]

C50: 5300/5649
BRIEFS

MINISTER 0N ANTI-DRUG EFFORTS--Speaking at the Singapore Anti-Narcotics Associa—
tion's VAO nite for volunteer after-care officers on 13 February, Home Affairs
Minister Chua Sian Chin said the government's all-out efforts to combat the drug
menace had paid handsome dividends. He said the most encouraging result was the
dramatic drop in the number of young people arrested for drug abuse. Only seven
percent or 305 of the 4,386 drug abusers arrested last year were under 20 years
old, and out of this number. only A were under 15 years old. While pointing out
that Singapore had succeeded in drastically reducing the number of young people
from joining the ranks of drug abusers, he said it was still far from solving the
drug problem. In this context he pointed to the growing number of addicts who had
repeatedly returned to their old ways even after receiving treatment and rehabili—
tation. Mr Chua attributed Singapore's success to their stiff penalties including
the death sentence, detention of traffickers and pushers and compulsory drug

treatment and rehabilitation. [3K190330 Singapore the SUNDAY TIMES in English
14 Feb 82 pp 1, 6]

CSO: 5300/5648
POLICE COMPLICITY IN DRUG TRAFFICKING DISCUSSED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA WICHAN in Thai 27 Dec 81 pp 10-11
lArticle: “Dishonest Spies: Police Are Narcotics Traffickers”|

[Text] A young man from hong Kong decided to kill himself by jumping off a
skyscraper rather than have to confess to charges of drug trafficking. This
happened during an investigation after he was arrested in Hong Kong. The disgrace-
ful story behind this was skillfully covered up by Thai narcotics control police
who wanted the international community to see that they had seriously followed

the international narcotics movement.

This man fe'l victim to a plan to smuggle narcotics from Thailand -- the Golden
Triangle area is the center for smuggling narcotics to black markets throughout
the world and from Bangkok to Hong Kong. Malaysia and Singapore for further
shipment to world markets in Australia, the Netherlands and the United States.
The plan was to "bait" a major Hong Kong narcotics dealer. Thai police made

a plan that involved sending a shipment of narcotics to Hong Kong by having
Thai narcotics control police disguish themselves as narcotics traffickers

and having them take some heroin and sell it on the Hong Kong black market.

80th Thai and Hong Kong police were aware of this smuggling. But the plan encount-
ered many obstacles since it was not possible to find a major trafficker as
desired. After almost 2 weeks of trying to sell the drugs. the police were

still unable to find a buyer. They then decided to contact a certain Hong Kong

man in order to have him purchase the drugs but he absolutely refused. When

they could wait no longer, they virtually forced a man to buy it and then arrested
him immediately even though this Hong Kong buyer was not a major narcotics
trafficker but had only been implicated in narcotics deals before during inves-
tigations. He was thus a victim of this rather careless plan.

Furthermore, in formulating this plan, some who took part as ”agents“ for the
police had a history of narcotics trafficking. These included Mr Lam Riengchung,
age 56. a man who had been sentenced to 18 years in prison in Thailand, and

Mr Thinkorn Phiromsantikorn, a Thai diamond merchant who had been sentenced

to 9 years in prison.

Both of these men were arrested on 25 October 1974. They were in possession
of 3.3 kilograms of heroin. which was then worth 99,720 baht in Thailand. They
and the evidence were seized in the parking lot of the Dusit Thani Hotel. Mr
Lam Riengchung was released from prison last year after serving only 6 years.

There was dismay about this because there was an agreement between the Penitentiary
Department and the Office of the Narcotics Control Board to the effect that

there would be no reduction in sentence for people convicted on narcotics charges
before at least 10 years had been served. The purpose of this was to prevent

drug traffickers from getting out and engaging in drug trafficking again. Concern-
ing the 18 year sentence, no matter how well he behaved in prison, he should

not have been released this soon. The important thing is that, besides being
released from prison, he has also now been hired to work as an agent for

the narcotics control police.

After looking into the background of Mr Lam Riengchung, the Special Branch
Division, which was then headed by Police Major General Ari Karibut, confirmed
that an analysis of his handwriting showed that Mr Lam Riengchung was the

same person as Mr Lim Liengchun, age 28. whom General Hangkorn Phromyothi,

the then minister of interior. had ordered deported from Thailand in Order

No 116/1951. He was charged with having impersonated a junior lieutenant

in the navy and of having engaged in dishonest activities. Another alias

of his was Mr Li Saelim.

In accord with this deportation order, the Immigration Division issued

Order No 6379/1951 on 27 August 1951. The order stated that he had been
detained and would be deported from Thailand aboard the ship the Hendrigan

on 17 October 1951. Twenty three years later, he was arrested on drug trafficking
charges. This shows that he entered the country illegally before the lifting
of the deportation order of the Ministry of Interior. And when he avoided
punishment in the criminal case. instead of being ordered out of the country
in accord with the original order or being detained like the hundreds of
Chinese and other foreigners waiting deportation because no country would
accept them, Mr Lam Riengchung went unpunished in Thailand. No organization
took any action in accord with the law to have him deported. Even the special
branch police did not send a memorandum to the Immigration Division in order
to have him detained.

During the investigation it was learned that Mr Lam Riengchung was also

involved in communist activities, particularly with the Chinese communist
bandits in the south. It is believed that he collected money to support

the communist movement by selling narcotics. As for Mr Thinkorn Phiromsantikorn,
he posed as a diamond merchant but was actually engaged in selling war weapons
in Chiang Rai Province and in passing forged dollars. During that period.

Mr Lam Riengchung posed as an aircraft engineer. As for the narcotics trafficking
that both men engaged inl they were in contact with those who transported
narcotics from Mae Sai to Bangkok. In particular, they [obtained] heroin

from Lao Su, an international kheroin kingpin, and from Khun 5a, the narcotics
trafficker who has the greatest influence in the Golden Triangle.

When he was deported by ship in 1951. Nr Lam Riengchung, alias Lim Liengchung
or si Saelim. was deported to China. He later travelled to the United States
on a Republic of China (Taiwan) passport. According to his registration
papers, he was born in Samut Prakan, but he was actually born in Singapore
in September 1925. When he was 6 years old, he accompanied his parents,
who were tobacco dealers, and settled in the Sam Pheng area. His father
had home in the Song Hat area even though he was a foreign Chinese. At
the time of his arrest on narcotics charges, he was a bong Kong citizen.

It is not clear when he re-entered Thailand. The investigation found only
that he had changed his name in order to avoid inspection when entering

the country. Thus, he was not only guilty of drug trafficking but was also
guilty of entering the country illegally. But in prosecuting the case, this
charge did not appear in his court files. In addition. when he was freed,
he was not detained for deportation in accord with the original order even
though [his case] had been examined and confirmation had been received from
the Special Branch Division.

It may be that this took place because of some shortcoming in coordinating
the activities between the Ministry of Interior and the Pelice Department.

It is also possible that there was corruption through the financial influence
of narcotics traffickers. The background investigation of Mr Lam Riengchung
and the activities were carried out step by step by the government units.

But the order that was given was just a scrap of paper that no one paid

any attention to or that they pretended not to know anything about because

of the benefits from and influence of the narcotics traffickers.

Another thing is that all the narcotics control units, whether they were
units subordinate to the Police Department. the Customs Department or the
ONCE, worked independently of each other since the units lacked people whom
all could trust in exchanging information. Thus, what was missing was a
”captain“ who could supervise the suppression activities to see to it that
they were carried out in a coordinated way. The intelligence system of the
narcotics traffickers, who were a large group with a widespread network
both within and outside the country, had great financial influence. Each

of the suppression units, especially the high-level units, carried on activities
to suit itself, and foreign units got involved for the benefit of their

own country.

Most of the police agents, or detainees, are ”people in the narcotics trade“

who have double-crossed others with the hope of making money from narcotics
trafficking and from the “rewards” given by the police for providing information
leading to the arrest of others. This is like making double the profits --
getting paid once by the narcotics traffickers and once by the narcotics
control units. Puthermore, they are not prosecuted. Sometimes, high-ranking
police officials are themselves drug traffickers who use their position

in the suppresssion field to facilitate such activities. For example, there

is the case of Police Colonel Niran Hithayawutikun, the former deputy superintend-
ent of police in Chiarg Mai Province and the police superintendent in Mae

Hong Son Province. He was dismissed from government service only for "being
absent from duty for more than 15 days" even though he had been involved

in heavy narcotics trafficking in 'he north for a long time.
Many times, narcocics trafficking has taken place because of plans made

by the police themselves; it is the police who have created the situation.
There is the case in which international police seized narcotics in ﬂat

Yai byliring a Malaysian agent to take millions of baht in cash to purchase
narcotics from sources in Chiang Rai Province. That time the drugs were
sent to Bangkok. If the arrests had been made in Biugkok, Mr Ha Ching Ring,
or Li Ming, would have been arrested for sure. But he was allowed to take
the drugs to Hat Yai and so only the unimportant "carriers“ were arrested.
Even though there was a large quantity of drugs, the major trafficker was
not arrested, which was the goal. Later, a warrant was issued for the arrest
cf “Na Ching Ring.“ Even though there was a large quantity of drugs, the
results of the analysis shoued that not more than 10 percent was heroin,
which was unusual for major drug trafficking cases. This showed that the
international police had been tricked.

Allowing a large quantity of drugs to be seized in ﬂat Yai amounts to creating
a situation so that the government will see that, at present, drug trafficking
has spread to the south and that it is therefore necessary to establish

a "southern drug control center.“ This means that a budget will have to
be set up for this center.

Police Major General Phao Sarasiu, the secretary-general of the ONCE, once
talked about these "secret drug agents." he said that they are ”two bit"
agents rather than agents who want, or intend, to help achieve results in
narcotics suppression. But the things that have happened and the plans for
police to take part in drug trafficking, including having dishonest agents
in drug control circles, may be more harmful than the "two bit" agents.
Sending police out to sell drugs abroad may be damaging to [our] image since
others will think that Thai police are themselves drug traffickers.

1194]
C50: 5300/5632
Ex-CUSTOMS OFFICIAL QUESTIONS NAROOTICS POLICY
Bangkok SIAM RAT in Thai 11 Jan 82 p 10

[Foreign Economic Views column by Khon Dong: "India Is Troubled Because
It Cannot Sell Its Opium"]

[Text] [When people] talk about opium, it is usually assumed that they are
talking about the golden Triangle, which is an area where Thailand, Burma
and Laos border each other. This closeness itself is an important factor
that has led to the spread of drugs throughout the world in the form of
raw opium, morphine and heroin, the peak product extracted from poppy.

But if this matter is delved into more deeply, [it can be seen] that there

are many important countries that grow poppy in order to improve their economies.
Such countries include India, Turkey, Burma and Malaysia and European cOuntries
such as Yugoslavia, Poland and Hungary, which export opium as an important
product.

As for India, during the past several years it has had much trouble. Opium
sales have fallen because much opium has been produced and prices have fallen.
India, which was once the world's largest exporter of opium because of having
large stockpiles of opium, has become worried because it now has 2,600 tons
of opium, which is to be used for scientific and medical purposes.

However, the agreement reached with the United States, which will purchase

at least 80 percent of India's raw opium, which includes the raw opium itself,
the dried poppy stalks and the products extracted from the poppy plants,

will probably relieve India’s worries; The same is true for Turkey.

Even though the cultivation of poppy and the extraction of opium is not

India's largest industry, poppy cultivation still uses 191,500 rai of land

(in 1978, 380,000 rai were cultivated in poppy). And farmers and their families
who do not have substitute crops to plant that will give them a comparable
income are used to tend the [poppy] fileds. when the opium market falls

like this, this may cause large numbers of these people to stop growing

poppy. This is an economic problem and it can certainly cause social turmoil.
Even though cultivation has declined, the opium storehouses are still full
because the opium cannot be sold. Two years ago, the export of opium declined
from 872 tons to 730 tons and production, which decreased to match exports,
fell from 1,647 tons to only 933 tons. The value of the opium exported also
fell drastically. while the value reached approximately 500 million baht

in l980/1981, 2 to 3 years ago it was 1 billion baht. The increase in the
world production of opium has caused opium prices to fall from 1,200 baht
per kilogram in 1978 to 900 baht in 1980. [It is said that] of the amount
produced by India, almost all is exported and only a small amount is left
for domestic use by the pharmaceutical industry and by addicts who must
register with government officials. But this is questionable. when this
writer was still working as a customs officer at Dong Muong Airport many
years ago, I caught Indians flying in from Calcutta carrying S kilograms

of concealed opium which they were taking to Penang. It is very possible

that other routes were also used to smuggle in drugs, including both land
and sea routes.

India used to export opium to approximately 30-35 major buyers in 20 countries
for medical and scientific purposes. Two years ago, only 11 countries ordered
opium from India. The major customers included the United States, the Soviet
Union and Japan. These three buyers maintained definite order levels until

2 years ago. Last year, the United States did not purchase any at all. Or
maybe it was [purchased] from Turkey instead in order to please Nato. Or
maybe this was done in order to punish Indira [Ghandi] who went and gave

so much attention to ”brother” Brezhnev. This too is not known for sure.

But it would be better if the United States purchased [opium] from Thailand.
This would be a way of maintaining close relations between the countries.
This would be better than allowing our friends in the mountains to process

it into heroin and cause troubles in many places as at present.

England used to purchase an average of 225 tons a year from India but has
now stopped its purchases. France has reduced the amount purchased by 78
percent. West Germany has reduced the amount purchased by 94 percent. Italy
has reduced the amount by 97 percent and Norway by 80 percent.

The International Drug Control Office greatly sympathizesiwiUiIndia about
this problem, so much so that it seems like it will exhaust itself. According
to the latest report from this office, India and Turkey produce opium for

export. These old suppliers have a special position in the market and should
be given proper support.

Not satisfied, they have cheered each other. saying that in both of these
countries, poppy has been cultivated for a long time and this has become
an important cultural and economic element. when something happens that
causes a decline in poppy cultivation, the international community should
discuss allowing these two countries to release their excess opium stocks
in order to help them.

As for India, it has made a big fuss about correcting this situation in
two ways.

10
The first is to persuade the buyer countries to purchase [opium] only from
their old suppliers, that is, India and Turkey.

The second is to persuade other producers to reduce the area planted in
POPFY-

Concerning these two ideas of India, the Economic and Social Council of

the United Nations agreed with them at a conference in Vienna a year ago

in March. The United States agreed to purchase 80 percent of the opium neededfrom
India and Turkey. Thus India, in an opium dream, thinks that other countries

will followalong.

When you think about this. it is sad for Thailand. We have spent much money
to suppress drugs and many people have died. Many people have become wealthy.
But it is a waste of time talking about this since these people wil not

be able to keep this money forever. Even if nothing happens to them now,
something will happen to their relatives in the future. They can plant a
little and then disappear. If they want to engage in such trade, why can't
they go and plead with the countries that are the major customers in the
world, jUSt as India has done to the point where the United Nations feels
sorry for it?

Thus, I would like to suggest to the ministers of coaumrce and finance and

to the head of the ONCB. please think about this when you have time. Sometimes
good luck may help improve the poor balance of trade and increase our strength
in coordination with the [natural] gas, which looks bright.

11943
CSO: 5300/5632

11
BRIEFS

THAI INTERNATIONAL IN DRUG TRAFFIC -- Air Marshal Bancha Sukhanusat, the
director of Thai International [Airlines], answered questions before parliament
on the morning of 22 January. He was questioned about the matter of Thai
International officials being involved in smuggling. He was asked whether

it was true that airline officials were involved with narcotics and marihuana.
Concerning this matter, the company has constantly watched things. During

the period he was in the air force, he disguised himself and found [narcotics].
He let the officials make the arrests. However. the arrests, especially

those for narcotics possession, were made abroad. This is because if arrests
are made in Thailand, there are many influential people who will give support
[to the traffickers]. [Text] [Bangkok NATICHON in Thai 23 Jan 82 p 3] 11943

CSO: 5300/5632

12
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS IN BOLIVIA--Cochabamba--Personne1 of the 7th division have cap-
tured 12 drug traffickers and confiscated 2.22 kg of cocaine in the Coloni area,
Chapare Province, Cochabamba Department, according to that division's chief of
staff, Col Gustavo Arrazola. [La Paz EL DIARIO in Spanish 31 Jan p 11 FY]

CSO: 5300/2191

13
EUROPEAN CONNECTIONS OF INTERNATIONAL DRUG RING
Sao Paulo O ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 1") Jan 82 p 13

[Text] Chief Romeu Tuna, of the Sao Paulo OOPS [Department of Political and Social
Order], announced in Hanaus that a new international ring of cocaine traffickers is
operating along the Bogotr-Nanaus—Sao Paulo axis, marking the reappearance of

an old organization in Amazonia with branches in Brazil and Europe. Tums went to
Hanaus for the inauguration of Gen Euclides de Pigueiredo, his personal friend in
the Amazonia Military Command; he is now supposed to go to the Federal Police in
the state to bring information concerning the trafficker A. c. 0. who supposedly

is the leader of the new ring, the same ring from which 38 kilograms of cocaine were
confiscated in Sao Paulo last week.

The 38 kilogram intercepted in Sao Paulo were only a part of a shipment of 100
kilograms loaded in Colombia and headed for Sao Paulo. going through Manaus. Tuna
did not wish to reveal the identity of A. C. 0. but Federal Police sources in
Hanaus admitted that the initials belong to an old trafficker who ran the Amazonia
connection which Tuna mentioned. It was broken up in 1980 by Federal Police
officers.

The Sao Paulo chief noted that the 38 kilogram intercepted in Sao Paulo are
directly linked to the crash of an aircraft in June 1980 in the upper Rio Negro
region; the aircraft carried 600 kilograms of cocaine which were supposed to be
taken to Miami.

Concerning this, there is irritation among the Federal Police in Manaus over the
fact that Chief Romeu Tuma has not yet contacted the agency to get information which
he wants on the trafficker A. C. 0. Sources in that department announced that
"traffic continues in the region and we lack the money and manpower to fight it."

A. C. 0.-whoae operating bases were located in Tabatinga, in Upper Solimoes.
near the border with Coloebia, and also in Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in Bolivia--
supposedly was seen several days ago in Rio de Janeiro, according to information
obtained by the Manaus police department. He disappeared after the confiscation
of the 38 kilograms of cocaine. This is why the same informants think that he is
now in Amazonia and they also believe that Chief Romeu Tuna will stay several days
in Hanaus to obtain all information on the traffickers who live in the state capi-
tal as well as their possible links with A. C. 0.

5058
CSO: 5300/2167

14
LATIN AMERICA, MIAMI DRUG ROUTE BROKEN UP
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 21 Jan 82 p 19

[Text] The narcotics control section of the United States Embassy in Brazil assigned
an agent of this outfit to cooperate with OOPS [Department of Political and Social
Order] in investigations concerning the connections of an international ring of

drug traffickers operating along the Bolivia--Colombia-Hanaus--Sao Paulo-—Hiami

run from which 37.8 kilograms of cocaine. worth an estimated 700 million cruzeiros
was confiscated on Friday at a place called Cotis; this was the biggest haul made
so far by the Brazilian police.

The information came from DOPS Chief Commissioner Roleu Tums who furthermore dis-
closed that, in addition to the drugs, three traffickers were arrested; one of them
was a real estate broker and dog breeder, residing in the hamlet of Cotia; the other
two, whose names have likewise not been released and who are being interrogated on
their activities, may be able to finger the other members of the ring and possibly
point out another drug hiding place in Sao Paulo.

Caught in the Act

The real estate broker was caught in the act around 1100 on Friday after the Sao
Paulo DOPS about 2 months ago had received information to the effect that there
was a secret laboratory for cocaine refining somewhere in the state. According to
police officers. many people were placed under observation during that period of
time until they spotted a red Ford pickup. The vehicle was tailed and police
officers arrived at Cotia.

The DOPS is keeping the names of the three prisoners secret as well as the address
of the refinery in order not to interfere with investigations. Police believe that
the ring was made up of 15 traffickers, including some foreigners, and that the
confiscated cocaine is connected with the crash of an aircraft in Amazonia which
had carried 600 kilograms of drugs.

Police are convinced that approximately 100 kilograms of cocaine had come from
Kansas although they only managed to locate 37.8 kilograms of that amount; it is
believed that the remainder was diverted from the refinery which was immediately
dismantled By the traffickers. According to a police officer, the gang had planned
to build refineries in Sao Paulo, a state which would become the center of drug
traffic, since trade in acetone, alcohol, and ether is being strictly controlled

by the police in Colombia and Bolivia since these are basic products for refining
coca leaves. According to the police, the traffickers have set up airfields along
the route used by the ring.

5058
C80: 5300/2167

15
POLICE LOSE CONTROL OF COCAINE TRAFFIC
Sao Paulo POLEA DE 8A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Feb 82 p 1

[Excerpt] The DBIC (State Criminal Investigation Department), to which the narcotics
investigation division is subordinate, is unable to control cocaine traffic in

Sao Paulo, it vas admitted over the weekend by its director, Delegate Vidal Pilar
Pernandes.

According to him, the persons involved in the production, traffic, and consumption
of cocaine constitute a group with a great purchasing power since each gran of the
drug costs about 6,000 cruzeiros. He added that, in addition to having much money,
the international trafficker ring has a favorable effect on the economy of various
countries in Latin America. Hith three branches, two sectors, and 50 investiga-

tors, the division is struggling against a shortage of equipment and funds, he
complained.

The 0310 director said that the fight against narcotics traffic is the job of the
Federal Police although the states, following the example of Sao Paulo, must operate
in that area through agreements.

He recalled however that a specific department with about 2,000 officers would be
needed to fight traffickers effectively in Sao Paulo.

5058
CSO: 5300/2167

16
POLICE T0 MONITOR COCAINE REFINING
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 2 Feb 82 p 4

[Text] Sao Paulo (0 GLODO)-..The DOPS [Department of Political and Social Order]
yesterday directed that all big firms specializing in the sale of alcohol, ether,
and acetones immediately report to the agencies whenever any customer is interested
in purchasing large quantities of these products. This order, according to the

chief delegate of DOPSE Romeu Toma, is due to the fact that alcohol, ether, and
acetone are used in cocaine refining.

"The best way to prevent the big traffickers from continuing to distill coca
paste in Sao Paulo, as is being done now, is to require that companies specializing
in this area report to us whenever anybody is interested in purchasing abnormal
quantities of these products," said Tums.

Romeu Tuma--who yesterday returned from Hanaus where he had been in contact with
police authorities to obtain information on cocaine traffic from Colombia-~said
that he is certain that the cocaine is brought to Sao Paulo in the form of a paste
for purification because traffickers in this capital find it easier to procure the
necessary components.

Both the Sao Paulo police and the Amazonas police are trying to find Arlindo de
Oliveira Cabral who has been reported to be one of the men mostly responsible for
cocaine traffic in the country. The trafficker's name cane up in police circles
in the middle of January when DOPS in the home of real estate broker Jose Alberto
Lopes Tinoco, in the township of Cotia, in Greater Sso Paulo, confiscated 38 kilo-
grams of cocaine in the form of paste. Upon being caught in the act, the broker
said that the narcotics belonged to Arlindo.

According to delegate Romeu Tums, Arlindo has good relations with official circles
in Hanaus where he lives but, according to information ahtained in the Amazonas
capital, the trafficker is now hiding out in Leticia, in Colombia.

Delegate Tums also said that he asked the judge of the Second District of Cotia,
Antonio Russo, to order the preventive arrest of Arlindo. Real estate broker Jose
Alberto Lopes Tinoco yesterday was to he questioned in court but due to a delay in
the forwarding of the official papers by the office of the prison magistrate, the
interrogation was postponed until 10 February.

Tinoco's attorney, Nelson Zenzanelli. told newsman that his client is innocent,
alleging that he was only used by Arlindo and did not know that he was keeping
cocaine in his home.

5058

CSO: 5300/2167

17
DRUG RING BUSTED, ARMS SEIZED

'Marihuana‘ Sale Discovered

Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 6 Feb 82 p 1

[Excerpt] At a narcotics sale which was broken up at Pico da Pedra Branca. in the
Bangu Mountain Range, police confiscated about 70 kilograms of pressed marihuana,
weapons, two common scales, and a precision scale. After an exchange of shots,

three traffickers (photo) were apprehended at the fair which supplied the traffic
in Grande Rio.

 

18
Harihuana, Arms, Scale Seized

Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 6 Feb 82 p 10

[Excerpt] About 70 kilograms of pressed marihuana-eatimated at 6.3 million
cruzeiros--a .26 cal. repeating rifle (belonging to the Armed Forces), two shot-
guns, two revolvers, two common scales, and one precision scale were confiscated

by police officers from the Metropolitan Police Department. Yesterday afternoon
they broke up a marihuana sales fair in Pico da Pedra Branca, in the Bangu Mountain

Range, which supplied almost all of the small traffickers in Grande Rio.

The fair was run by the trafficker Alberto Guarino, [alias] Pitoca. who is wanted.
In the morning of the day before yesterday. Elias Hachado, an associate of Pitoca,
and his employ Genilson Nogueiro da Costa. were arrested on the premises. Carlos
Vieira de Lima, [alias] Lula, was arrested during the night the day before yester-
day. There was an exchange of fire between police officers and traffickers at

the time of the arrests in the morning of the day before yesterday. "Lula" was
wounded on the occasion and was captured at night while being treated at the
Carlos Chagas Hospital. According to Inspector Peninha, the fair was every day
raking in 450,000 cruzeiros from the sale of 5 kilograms of narihuana.

5058
C80: 5300/2167

19
BRIEFS

TRAFFICKER'S RELEASE-Hanna (0 GLOBO)--Considered one of the key men in the cocaine
traffic connection to the United States, Jose Augusto Basilio, alias "Padeirinho."

is now free following a ruling by the Federal Supreme Court which allowed a patition
of habeas corpus introduced by attorneys Domingos Chalub and Alberto Simoneti.
"Padeirinho" had served a sentence of 4 years and 8 months of imprisonment on the
basis of a verdict handed down by the Federal Appeals Court, leading to his being

remanded to the Central State Penitentiary. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in
Portuguese 21 Jan 82 p 4] 5058

INCINERATION OF DRUGS--Yesterday, 285 kilograms of marihuana, estimated at 2.8
million cruzeiros, were burned in the city incinerator of Ponte Pequena, in Sao
Paulo, in the presence of Francisco Prudente de Aquino, director, professional
operations division, and Josar de Carvalho Ribeiro da Silva, representing the
Ministry of Health on the State Narcotics Supervision Coumussion. According to the
director of the professional operations division, an agency connected with the
State Health Secretariat, the amount burned is great although it does not compare
to the 1,200 kilograms burned in August of last year. This time the confiscated
marihuana was burned faster since the judge issued Order No 20/80, authorizing the
police to take only a sample for evidence during the investigation; the product
was then released to the professional operations division. The drugs burned at
Ponte Pequena remained with the police only for a month. Before the order was
issued by the Judge, the drugs usually were held as long as 6 months. The 280
kilograms of marihuana were intercepted in the capital and in cities in the interior.
About 190 kilograms of that amount were found on just one trafficker who had stored
the quantity in compressed blocks. In spite of the fact that the procedure for
authorizing the burning of drugs is now smoOther. the director of the professional
operations division explained that the burning is done after a good quantity has
been piled up since this causes an interruption in the normal operation of the
city incinerator which burns refuse from the city and must be closed down for about
2 hours so that the asrihuana will be completely consumed. [Excerpt] [Sao Paulo

0 ESTADO DE 8A0 PAULO in Portuguese 6 Feb 82 p 13] 5058

C80: 5300/2167

20
BRIEFS

DRUG SEIZED IN CHILE--A report issued by the narcotics and dangerous drugs control
department states that during 1981 this organization seized a total of 28.7 kg

of cocaine, 255.7 kg of marijuana and 2.762 pills. [Santiago Chile EL HERCURIO
in Spanish 31 Jan 82 p C2 PY]

CSO: 5300/2191

21
MARIHUANA SHIPMENT SBIZED AT AIRPORT, WOMEN ARRESTED
H. Matamoros EL BRAVO in Spanish 21 Jan 82 Sec A p 12

[Text] The marihuana confiscated on Monday night from three young women at the
Matamoros international airport is worth over a million pesos, and they had each
been earning slightly over $1,000 for each trip that they made from the town of
Oaxaca. The drugs seized from them weighed 360 kilograms and, although they claim
that this was the first time that they did this, it has been established that they

belong to a well organized international drug trafficking ring. The contact on
this border is a resident of Brownsville, Texas.

The young women associated with the underworld are Marianne Brizio, aged 22,
Catherine Mary Ahern, aged 23, and Patricia Annette Cop, aged 18. All three are

residents of the town of Key "est, in the state of Florida, where they presumably
intended to take this marihuana shipment.

These ladies are now at the disposal of Alfredo Olivares Osuna, agent of the Federal
Public Ministry, to whom they made their pertinent statements. Today they may
possibly be turned over to the fourth district court, so that the respective

penal action may be initiated against them.

The three women accused of drug trafficking attempted unsuccessfully to disclaim
responsibility, but according to the Federal Public Ministry agent, who is in charge
of this case, they are quite heavily implicated.

Also, during the course of the investigation that has been conducted by the Federal
Judicial Police coamnnder, Mr Benito Estrada Villagomez. as well as the Federal
Public Ministry official. Alfredo Olivares Osuna. the complete identity of the

main contacts of this drug trafficking ring in Oaxaca and Brownsville has been
established.

Hence, everything possible is being done to capture those other drug traffickers, and
there are great expectations of their being arrested at any moment.

Seized from the three young American women were six bags, each containing about 60
kilograms, that is, a total of 360 kilograms of marihuana of the best quality, known
as "lamb's tail", which would be worth nearly 1.25 million peace on the black market.

In the same suitcases, but covering the drugs, were some items of clothing belonging
to the Americans, with which they were attempting to prevent the discovery of the

22
marihuana. Nevertheless, the Federal Judicial Police commander, Benito Estrada
Villagomez, and his agents, managed to catch them.

The individuals under arrest, Marianne Brizio, Catherine Mary Ahern and Patricia

Cop, agree. in their statements given first to the Federal Judicial Police commander
and later to Alfredo Olivares Osuna. agent of the Federal Public Ministry.

They claim that, in Oaxaca, they were lodged at the Mansion de los Angeles Hotel,
where an individual gave them the six bags, as well as $100 apiece for traveling
expenses. Of course he gave them the airplane tickets for the flight to Matamoros.

Reportedly, it was there that they were given the name of the person residing in
Brownsville to whom they were to turn over the bags, and they were promised that,
in Brownsville. they would each be paid the sum of $1,000 for their work in carrying

these bags: and they claimed that they were unaware that the latter contained
drugs.

The three women said that this was the first time that they did this. and they
attempted to claim innocence at all costs.

2909
650: 5330/65

23
HARIHUANA TRAFFICKERS CAUGHT, RINGLEADERS SOUGHT
Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAﬁEDO in Spanish 26 Jan 82 Sec B p 3

[Text] The group of Federal Judicial Police agents detailed to the first zone of
this town dealt a major blow to the drug traffic by arresting six traffickers and

seizing from them over 10 kilograms of marihuana which they had ready to distribute
among the resellers in this locality.

Those arrested on this occasion were Raul Ramos Gutierrez. Joaquin Alvarez Reyes,
Antonio Romero Quinones. Francisco Javier Trevino Abrego, Ricardo Gerda Jasso and
Juan Ibarra Castillo, from whom were confiscated a total of over 10 kilograms of
marihuana and three vehicles in which they were carrying the grass from the interior
section of the country.

According to the Federal Judicial Police reports, the arrest of the aforementioned
persons took place after a series of investigations and interrogations of several
resellers who had been captured previously.

Raul Ramos Gutierrez and Joaquin Alvarez Reyes were the first to fall into the
hands of the Federal Police, and on that occasion 3.5 kilograms of the harmful
grass was seized from them.

The investigations led to the finding and capture of the rest of the trafficking
ring. who were turned over to the Federal Public Ministry agency on duty for
preliminary penal action to be taken against them for committing crimes against
health in most of their degrees.

Also seized from the aforementioned individuals were three vehicles, namely, a
1972 Chevrolet van, a 1972 Chevrolet Impala and a 1973 Ford LTD.

In these vehicles, the traffickers were responsible for transporting the marihuana
for their "contacts" who will be captured at any moment by the Federal Judicial
Police agents.

In the Interior of the republic other groups of federal agents have been mobilized
to arrest the "ringleaders" of the group, who apparently have a large shipment of
drugs that they intended to take illegally into the United States.
25:9 Eon— Z<DH

 

385:0 97.30! O—ZOFZ<

meta-O 83:— AD<¢

.33: .825. 2501:,

 

25
AHREE MEMBERS OF HEROIN TRAFFICKING RING CAPTURED

, alias "Los Chunas". and Juan Artedondo
olice forces, and a large amount of heroin

, and it was learned that the
sidences.

The Quiroz Lopez brothers had previous problems wit

h the law concerning drugs. and
other types of criminal activities.

 

Concepcion Quito: Lopez, Juan Quiroz Lo

Federal Judicial Police forces with heroin. All three have drug trafficking records.
2909

pez and Juan Arredondo Garza were captured by

26
MEMBERS OF HICHOACAN TRAFFICKING RING CAPTURED

Ciudad Juarez EL FRONIERIZO in Spanish 4 Feb 82 Sec B p 2

[Text] Mexico City, 3 February (02H)--During a gun battle, Federal Judicial Police
agents captured a ring of 11 drug traffickers who had been operating in the state
of Hichoacan and in the northern part of the country.

Meanwhile, in the states of Oaxaca and Sonora, the military authorities and those
of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic burned over 2 tons of mari—

huna and 7,000 toxic pills, as well as several kilograms of opium gum worth more
than 80 million pesos.

Gen Raul Hendiolea Cerecero, head of the Federal Judicial Police, remarked that, for
several weeks, there had been information concerning the operations of the drug
trafficking ring which had its centers in the state of Michoacan.

For this reason, several federal agents were detailed to begin the investigation of
the case; whereupon they went to the El Pinal farm in the municipality of Villa
Madero, Hichoacan, where they caught six of the drug traffickers, who drove them
back with gunfire.

After a heavy shoot-out which lasted five minutes the drug traffickers, observing
that they were surrounded by federal agents, surrendered.

On that site, nearly 100 kilograms of marihuana, which they had packed and ready for
sale, were seized from them.

Continuing the investigation, the Federal Judicial Police agents went to another
farm known as Pie de Auga. in the municipality of Turicato, where they captured the
rest of the ring, which did not put up any resistance, and also seized several bags
of marihuana from them.

Those under arrest are: Filemon Bucio, Fidel Lice, Leonides Lice, Felipe Diaz Garcia,

Aquilino Bucio Villa, Martin Gutierrez, Anastacio Villas Ramirez, Eliseo Ortiz, Ageo
Guzman and Pablo Hernandez.

2909
C80: 5330/65

27
BRIEFS

NEW HEROIN SOURCE REPORTED--Tijuana, B.C.N., 31 January (CISA)--During the last
quarter of I981 a new type of heroin called Chinese was discovered in such border
towns as Nogales, Sonora, Piedras Negras, Coahuila, and Mexicali and Tijuana, Baja
California Norte. The director of the Youth Integration Center in this town. Manuel
Molina, reported that the drug, arriving from China, is considered one of the most
dangerous types, since it is synthetic and causes even more harm than pure heroin.
He remarked that a decline in drugs such as heroin and cocaine had been noted during
1981, but that there was an increase in the final quarter. He stressed that the
consumption of volstive solvents of alcohol and of marihuana was the same last year
as in the previous year. In conclusion. he claimed that an investigation had shown
that the drug addiction problem is not Mexico's. but rather that of other countries,
as in the case of the Chinese heroin which is brought into Mexico through the

United States. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 1 Feb 82 Sec A p 8] 2909

ILLEGAL PILL IMPORTS-~Mexico City, 18 January (LEMUS)--Pederal Judicial Police
agents, in close cooperation with German Interpol, discovered contraband in the

form of over 50 million pesos' worth of drugs in the possession of the firm named
Neo-Quimicos Sagitario SA. As a result of the action, the public accountant Ruben
Hernandez Mscedo, representative of the Secretariat of Health and Assistance assigned
to the international airport in this city, was arrested, among others. The Judicial
Police reported that, after an exhuastive investigation, they managed to find 550
kilograms of amphetamines and phenobarbital, substances defined in the current health
code as psychotropic, in the country. The aforementioned Neo-Quimicos Sagitario SA
firm had been importing large amounts of both substances, using for this purpose
formulas which disguised the real contents of the shipments, importing them as

"legal and harmless” substances. [Text] [Nuevo Iaredo EL MANANA in Spanish 19 Jan

82 See A p S] 2909

OPERATION 'CONDOR' RBSULTS--Mexico City, 28 January (ANPB)--Today, Gen Raul Mendiola
Cerecero, chief of the Federal Judicial Police, announced that, through operation
Condor", drugs worth over 10 million pesos had been confiscated and 69 drug traffick-
ers had been arrested. He cited the capture of a dangerous ring of "narcos" in
Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, which at the time had been dealing in amphetamines valued

at more than 5 million pesos. The high-ranking police chief explained that the
aforementioned ring was headed by Genovevo Rivera Camargo and his wife, known as
Mary, and included four Americans and four "pochos“ [Americanized Mexicans], who
were captured and their fatal product seized, in what he described as a major

"blow" to the drug traffic thus far this year. Mendiola Cerecero added that, in

28
Hexicali.two individuals were arrested with a shipment of 223 kilograms of mari-
huana; while in the town of Matamoros, Coahuila, the "mule" Baltazar Rojas Gomez

was arrested; and in Yucatan, Roque Paul Yuit was jailed because he had been
distributing 16 kilograms of marihuana among elementary schoolchildren in the area.
Also, operation "Condor", which is a permanent activity, after a series of investi-
gations. succeeded in arresting Andrade de Dios, in the settlement of Carlos A.
Carrillo. Veracruz, who was leaving his residence carrying two bags containing 44
kilograms of marihuana, which he intended to deliver at a bus terminal. [Text]
[Piedras Negras EL DIARIO DE PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanish 29 Jan 82 pp 1, 2] 2909

JANUARY ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN RESULTs—-During January 1982, Federal Judicial Polite
agents in Zone 11, consisting of the states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon and Coahuila,
succeeded in making 105 arrests. the majority of which were related to drug traffick-
ing. According to reports made available by the coordinator of the Federal Public
Ministry agencies, Carlos Aguilar Garza. last month the federal agents managed to
seize over 1,571 kilograms of marihuana, worth several thousand pesos. They also
seized from drug traffickers 87 grams of heroin and 10 grams of peyote, as well as
1,580 psychotropic pills. At the same time, the federal coordinator reported that
the forces destroyed three poppy plantations located in the Tamaulipas mountain
area, confiscating 32 vehicles used for shipment, and a total of 30 high-powered
weapons. Insofar as smuggling is concerned, it was claimed that the agents in the
zone had discovered 11 cases, wherein all those implicated were tried for that
crime. As for the surveillance on the course of the Rio Bravo, the federal agents
apprehended 33 illegal border crossers, while at the same time making 38 arrests
and nine transfers. In the city of Monterrey, a clandestine laboratory in which
three Americans had been participating was discovered and confiscated. [Text]
[Nuevo Laredo EL DIARIO DE NUEVO LAREDO in Spanish 5 Feb 82 Sec A p 3] 2909

C50: 5330/65

29
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFIC REPORT CONTROVERSY--Lima, 17 Feb (TELAM)--A report made recently by

a weekly magazine has produced varying reactions in the Peruvian political sector
by requesting a thorough investigation into drug trafficking and the involvement
of political parties. The magazine CAREIAS had reported on Carlos Langberg, an
alleged drug trafficker. and his connection with some members of the main opposi-
tion party APRA [American Revolutionary Popular Alliance], such as Jorge Idiaguez,
who for many years acted as secretary to Victor Raul Hays de La Torre, the party's
leader and founder; Cesar Lopez Silva, from the Medical Association, and Eduardo
Jibaja, one of the secretaries of the party. In the face of the report. congress-
men belonging to various parties agreed on the need for making a thorough investi-
gation into the subject. In view of the recent repercussions thereof, the
government party. Popular Action. expelled Deputy Reynaldo Rivera Romero for
being allegedly involved in drug trafficking. Meanwhile. the nevsppaer CORREO
today strongly criticized the evening newspaper LA TERCERA DE LA CRONICA, owned

by the state, for publishing a reprint of the CARETAS article. CDRREO asserts
that the distribution of the reprint is a serious political mistake, for it
damages and undermines the neutrality of the state by deliberately making use of

a political report adverse to the main opposition party. [Text] [PYl82022

Buenos Aires TELAH in Spanish 2109 GMT 17 Feb 82]

C80: 5300/2200

30
RESULTS OF NO DRUGS SBIZURBS REPORTED

Hashish Smugglers Apprehended
Cairo AL-AHRAM in Arabic 16 Dec 81 p 6

[Article by Husayn Thabit and Ahmad Fu'ad]

[Text] In an unprecedented move. the men of the border guard forces have succeeded
in seizing the Turkish drug smuggling boat "No Friends" manned by five Turkish
smugglers. The seizure was made while the smugglers wer attempting to land 12 tons
of drugs on the northwest coast in the vicinity of al-‘Ajami al—Bitash. The value
of the drugs was estimated at 60 million pounds. The boat itself was worth an esti-
mated 500,000 pounds.

The seizure operation got underway based on information held by border guard intelli-
gence director Brig Gen Hahbi Habib revealing that some large-scale smugglers were
planning to bring in huge quantities of drugs and land them on the northwest coast
in the al-Ajami region within a few days.

General Staff Maj Gen 'Ali Faruq al-Sahn. the comander of the border guard forces.
ordered the formulation of the necessary plans to thwart the smuggling operations.
The plan was supervised by Maj Gen Samih al-Tuhami. chief of general staff of the
border guards. The plan aimd at the capture of the smugglers and the craft used.
Several marine ambushes were set up under the leadership of Brig Gen al-Sirr Karar.
coummnder of the northern sector. Brig Gen Taha Muhammad ‘Awad. and Col 'Azmi Badawi.

Two evenings ago. a boat appeared near the al-‘Ajami al-Bitash area. Civilian fishing
boats carrying civilian-clad forces approached the launch. The forces were led

by Col 'Abd-al-Hamid Sanjar. chief of intelligence of the border guards. and Capt
Ahmad Badawi. The fishing boats drew near the smugglers' boat and the border guards
emerged sudeenly with their weapons. The smugglers threw their weapons into the

sea along with their communications equipment and surrendered to the forces. The
boat was then towed to the area of the French port at al-Haks. Inside the hold

of the boat. a quantity of drugs weighing some 10 tons was discovered. The Turkish
crew of the boat was also arrested. The crewmembers included Hikmat Rashid Halts.
born in Iskenderon. who was the mate of the boat; Tahsin Sadiq Aslan, the "mechanic";
Thabit Hilal Tamaskan; Harjan 'Ali Eamdi Julia Ugani; and Shabib 'Adil Balatshi.

Counselor Malnud al-Hanawi. general prosecutor for the narcotics section of the
Alexandria district attorney's office. was transported to the site where the boat
was held. Be supervised the investigation carried out by chief prosecutors Khalid

31
Darraz, Muhammad al-Tarawi, and Yahya al-Fazayiri. It was discovered that the drugs
wer in the form of 277 packages of sacks. inner tubes. and cans containing crude
powder from which hashish is manufactured. It was also revealed that the boat,
which is named Two Friends. is the "Abu Samir" which is powered by a 270-horsepower
engine and is capable of sailing in all types of weather. The craft is valued at
around 500,000 pounds. The accused. all of whom are Turks and possess Lebanese
residency cards. confessed to possession of drugs with intent to land them on the
northwest coast. It was revealed that four of the accused are fluent in Arabic
while the fifth speaks English.

Drug Seizure in Cairo
Cairo AL-AHRAH in Arabic 16 Dec 81 p 6

[Article by Husayn Ghanim]

[Text] In an unprecedented action, Cairo investigations organizations seized huge
quantities of hashish and opium valued at around 3 million pounds in a village in
al-Ha'adi. The drugs had been hidden by drug smugglers in a laundryman's house

on behalf of big dealers in al-Batiniyah. The drugs were to be sold during the
New Year's holidays. In addition, a gang was arrested for burglarizing houpes and
a jewelry store in al-Jamaliyah. The stolen goods were valu+d at 100,000 pounds.

Muhammad Navawi Isma'il. deputy prime minister and minister of interior. was trans-
ported to the Cairo Security Department building to inspect the seized articles.

He praised the tremendous efforts made by investigations personnel to uncover this
robbers den and decided to allocate 7,000 pounds as an immediate reward for the
forces that participated in the capture of the drugs and the two gangs.

Investigations conducted by Cairo investigations organizations uncovered unusual
activity by a number of smugglers and drug dealers in the al-Batiniyah quarter aimed
at importing shipments from abroad. They had resorted to a new method of camouflage.

These investigations confirmed that some known drug dealers were seen coming and
going in the al-Ma‘adi area under unusual circumstances and at late hours of the
night. The investigations. which took place under the supervisionof Cairo security
director Maj Gen Salah AminI criminal investigations director Brig Gen 'Abbas al-
'Asi, and investigations chief Brig Gen 'Abd-al-Hadi Hukhaymar. revealed that the
suspicious activity of the drug dealers was connected with large shipments of drugs

that the smugglers had been able to import from abroad and conceal in suburbs of
Cairo.

A group of investigations personnel was then formed under the leadership of investi-
gations agent Col Sulaynan Hajdi. investigations inspector Col Nabil al-‘Azabi.

Lt Col Sabri Kamil, al-Ha'adi investigations chief Haj Sa'id Zaki. Haj Husayn al-
Qadi. Maj 'Abd-al-‘Aziz 'Uthman. and Maj Yasir Sultan along with a large number

of secret police agents and detectives. This group surrounded the area after it

was learned that the smuggled drugs belonged to well known drug dealer Hustafa Marzuq,
who had extended his activities far beyond al-Batiniyah.

Yesterday at daybreak. the village of al-Sawarikh in al-Ma'adi was encircled and

investigations personnel raided the house of a 32-year-old laundryman named Hassan
Sa'd 'Ali. known as Abu Hannan. The laundryman attempted to flee in a Mazda

32
automobile but was apprehended. Officers seized a large cache consisting of large
numbers of packages of hashish from various sources and many packets of raw opium.
The value of the drugs was estimated at 3 million pounds.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Muhammad Nabaui Isma'il was transported
to the Cairo Security Department building to inspect the seized drug shipment. The
minister said that the efforts made by Cairo investigations personnel deserved the
utmost appreciation.

The deputy prime minister revealed that investigations organizations had arrested

two very dangerous gangs for robbing houses and a jewelry store in al-Jamaliyah

of an estimatele0,000-pounds-vorth of articles. He said that security organiza-

tions had succeeded in arresting three of the thieves--Muhammad Rida Muhammad, Ashraf
Mansur, and Mahmud Mustafa--in the act of breaking and entering residences and stealing
silverware. Investigations inspector Col Muhammad'Abd-al-Nabi, Lt Col 'Ala' Muqallad.
and Maj Mahmud Ibramim had set a trap for the thieves and succeeded in apprehending
them. The thieves gave information about the stolen articles and confessed to committing
12 incidents of burglary. Investigations organizations ver also able to apprehend
another thief named Ibrahim Husayn who had singlehandedly committed 15 incidents

of house burglary. The thief was apprehended in a trap prepared by investigations
inspector Lt Col Sa'id 'Abd-al-Hadi. Lt Col Muhanumd Tal'at 'Abd-al-Mun'im. Lt Col
Muhammad Hazim, Maj 'Abd-al-Hayy Isma'il. Maj Tariq Nasser, and Capt Mustafa Taufiq.
The investigations personnel also succeeded in recovering the stolen goods.

8591
V50: 5300/5009

33
BRIEFS

OPIUM SBIZED IN KHORASAN--After a 48-hour clash with drug traffickers in the noun-
tains of Saleh Abad, which is the border area close to Torbat-e Jam. 60 bags of
opium weighing 450 kg were seized. Also in Saleh Abad 7.5 kg of opium were dis-
covered on one person who was arrested. Five kg of opium were seized from a per-
son in Darreh Gaz. [GF220633 Mashhad Domestic Service in Persian 1430 GMT 21 Feb
82]

OPIUH SEIZED IN ZAHEDAN--The Sistan va Baluchestan antidrug squad has seized 162
kg of hashish and 85 kg of opium from 5 persons. Similarly, the Quchan Islamic
Revolution Guard Corps has seized 23 kg of opium from 1 person. [CF220633 Tehran
ETTELA'AT in Persian 14 Feb 82 p 3]

HEROIN SEIZED IN KASHAN--During the past week 1.028 kg of heroin have been dis-
covered in Kashan. Three persons have been arrested. [GF220633 Tehran KEYHAN
in Persian 2 Feb 82 p 7]

OPIUH SEIZED IN JIROFT--The Jiroft gendarmerie has seized 16 kg of opium from

2 persons. Similarly, the Lorestan gendarmerie has seized 9.2 kg of opium juice
and 2.04 kg of opium from a number of people. [GF220633 Tehran ETTELA'AT in Pet-
sian 3 Feb 82 p 6]

OPIUH SEIZED IN TBHRAN--The antidrug squad has seized 5 kg of opium from 4 persons.
[GF220633 Tehran ETTELA'AT in Persian 0 Feb 82 p 15]

SHIRAZ DRUGS SENTENC£--The Islamic Revolution Court in Shiraz has sentened two
individuals to life imprisonment and ordered the confiscation of their vehicle for
having 25.5 kg of opium in their possession. [CF181663 Shiraz Domestic Service

in Persian 1500 GMT 18 Feb 82]
BORDER DRUG HAUL——In an armed encounter between Iranian gendarmerie officials
and Afghan smugglers at the Iran-Afghanistan border outposts Nos 9 and 10. some
of the Afghan smugglers were injured while others fled, leaving behind 61.5 kg
of opium and 3.6 kg of heroin. [CF261923 Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 8 Feb 82 p 1]

QUCHAN ARRESTS-Four professional drug peddlers have been arrested by Quchsn
Revolution Guards and 33 kg of opium. 6 kg of heroin and a machinegun with 150
cartridges were recovered. [CF261923 Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 8 Feb 82 p 2]

MASHHAD DRUG SNOOP——Thanks to efforts by the Revolution Guards. 30.8 kg of opium
have been seized from smugglers in Mashhad who were later handed over to the
authorities. [CF231865 Tehran ETTELA‘AT in Persian 10 Feb 82 p 8]

TORBAT-E JAM HBROIN HAUL--cendarmerie officials in Torbat-e Jan have seized

5.05 kg of heroin from three Afghan smugglers who were handed over to the
authorities. [GF231865 Tehran KEYBAN in Persian 10 Feb 82 p 8]

NASHHAD DRUG SBIZURB—-Revolution Guards have recovered 28 kg of opium from five
professional drug traffickers who were later referred to the Mashhad Islsnic
Court. [GF231865 Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 10 Feb 82 p 9]

SISTAN VA BALUCHESTAN NARCOTICS-—Five persons have been arrested in different

parts of Sistan Vs Baluchestan Province and 1.03 kg of heroin, 16.5 kg of opium,
and 3.85 kg of hashish recovered. [CF231845 Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 10 Feb 82

P9]

CSO: 5300/5372

35
L'KLUHTENINC '
DELEGATE T0 WORLD STRATEGY MEETING ON DRUGS REPORTS

Johannesburg THE CI IZEN in English 15 Feb 82 p 8

m Mduuwu Mmmm Gamma nuhh m uuncukcaoddlluhlul

WWWWWWWWWWW WWW: WWW. WWWW. WWWWWW WW WWW

.W W W. W .

W WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW WWWWWWWWW WWWWWWWWW WWW

WWWW WWWWWWWW WWWWWWWWW, WWWWWWWWWW WWW: WWWWWW

.W WWWWWWWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWWWW W WWWWW.
WWWWWW WWWWWWWW WWW WWWWWWWW WWWWW WW
.mMWMMmMWMmmM mmmWWWmuw “Wm" mm mm. mmu m wwwmummm

[Article by Keith abendroth;

[Text]

5300/ 5646

C50
nro uorunuouccnw zbwwuu
nauno. u nocun wounonaow
"run 93. 43:: co anon
up nun rumpus-u oocnn o:
33% no on orunwou on
nauwunw u: gonna.

. ago auwmu tau hogan so
awn csnnucnmona crnnr

rpm :00: «chum; cw «to
vauuoo.

cusp. .csa ownouana non
When ball was extended for the three, Hr unbrechte was informed he could
discontinue reporting to the police as had been ordered e condition of ball.

The men were arrested on Septuber 11 after the police raided e Rendburg home and
confiscated about R250 000 worth of dam.

CSO: 5300/5652

39
BRIEFS

DRUG PEDDLEBS JAILBD—Pour men have been convicted in the Durban regional court

of dealing in Handrax. Dharathkumar Ramlall (32), was sentenced to six years
imprisonment. The Magistrate, Mr J J Jscobsz, found that he was the main dealer
and supplier in the transaction. Hemrnj Singh (21), was sentenced to the mini-
mum of five years' imprisonment. Two sixteen-year-old youths were each sentenced
to five years' imprisonment. Hr Jacobs: said that in View of their youth he would
suspend the whole of the sentences for four years. [Text] [Johannesburg

THE CITIZEN in English 11 Feb 82 p 10]

(:30: 5300/5646

60
OFFICIALS: DANISH TOLERANCE MAKING MALMO INTO HASHISH CENTER
Copenhagen BERLINCSKE TIDENDE in Danish 12 Feb 82 p 6
[Article by Jens Thomsen]

[Text] The widespread and virtually unchecked sale of hashish in Christiania
has made Malmo Sweden's hardest-hit city when it comes to drug abuse. The chief
of the Malmo criminal police, KJeld Arne Eliasson, said that in 1979 no fewer
than 1400-2000 addicts of hard drugs such as heroin and amphetamines were
registered in Malmo and Lund and that there is no reason to believe that the
number of drug addicts has declined since then.

For this reason people in Malmo regard the so-called free town of Christiania
as a threat to young Swedes.

"The hashish young Swedes come over and buy in Christiania is the first step
toward hard drugs the victims of which are currently posing problems for the
Swedish social authorities," criminal police chief Eliasson told BERLINGSKE

TIDBNDE.

"Christiania has become a tiresome symbol of liberalism with regard to hashish
and through the years it has given us many problems," added Kjeld Eliasson.

Idea

The head of Malmo's social affairs committee, Margit Palm, who was one of those
signing the letter on Christiania sent to Copenhagen's mayor on social affairs,
Pelle Jarmer, said that today Christiania is such a well-known idea that young
people from all over Sweden go to Copenhagen in order to buy hashish. According
to Margit Palm Malmo is the hardest-hit city in Sweden in this connection due

to its close proximity to Copenhagen.

"The problem of hashish abuse among young people in Malmo has become more pro-
nounced in recent years in spite of the many official Danish assurances that the
hashish trade in Christiania has been limited," said Margit Palm.

"The sale of hashish in Christiania must be brought to a halt," the Swedish
minister of justice, Carl-Axel Petri, said today. That is the message the

61
Danish minister of justice, Ole Espersen, can expect to get when the Nordic
ministers of social affairs and justice meet in Stockholm on 19 February to
discuss the joint Nordic narcotics problems.

Reasonable Level

The Swedish justice minister did not find anything particularly attractive about

the lifestyle characterizing the so-called free town and thought at any rate
that it did not set a good example for the youth of Sweden.

With regard to Justice Minister Ole Espersen's previous statement that hashish
sales in Christiania should be brought down to a "reasonable level" his Swedish
counterpart said:

"If the ‘reasonable level' is zero I agree with Bspersen."

Neither Halmo criminal police chief Kjeld Eliasson nor Justice Minister Petri
expect that drug abuse in Sweden would disappear with the closing of Christi-
ania. But they agreed that it would at least produce a temporary decline in
hashish abuse in Sweden.

Too Liberal

Swedish police and social authorities have often said the Danish View of hashish
is much too liberal.

"It is important to underline that for young people hashish is an introduction

to hard drugs. Hashish abuse is relatively new in the Swedish cultural pattern
compared to alcoholism, for example, and therefore energetic steps should be

taken to stop it. It is also the impression in Sweden that narcotics laws are
generally interpreted more strictly in Sweden and Norway than in Denmark.

"And particularly in regard to hashish cases we feel it would be admirable if
Denmark came closer to legal practices in the other Nordic countries in this
area," said the Swedish justice minister.

6578
C80: 5300/2188
'HILLIYET' REPORTS SHIFT IN NARCOTICS SHUGGLING MINES SINCE 1981
Istanbul HILLIYET in Turkish 9 Jan 82 pp 1, 9
[Report by Erhan Akyildiz]

[Text] As a result of successful operations carried out in and around
Istanbul, teams belonging to the Istanbul Security Directorate Narcotics
Branch seized (do kilos of heroin with a domestic value of 150 million lira

and a foreign market value varying between 1:50 million lira and 1 billion lira.

Again, in the same year, Narcotics Branch teams seized 660 kilos of hashish
with a domestic market value of 70 million lira and a foreign mrket value
of 180 million lira, and lo kilos of raw opium of Iranian origin. 'me price
of a kilo of raw opium is indicated to be approximately 500,000 lira.

According to officials, narcotics seized by Istanbul Narcotics Branch teams
within 1 year make up one-third of the narcotics seized in Turkey overall.
They said that the number of suspects arrested was (.20 and that 75 percent
of the suspects were found guilty and arrested.

As a result of the series of operations and the tight controls, a certain
increase was noted in the quantities of narcotics seized in and around
Istanbul by comparison with the previous year. Whereas 24.5 kilos of heroin
were seized in 1980, 44 kilos were seized in 1981 and the figure of 286.5 kilos
of hashish rose to 1460 kilos.

As Controls Tightened. Prices Skyrocketed
Authorities indicated that, as controls increase, narcotics retail and wholesale
prices skyrocket. They gave the following information concerning retail sales

prices for narcotics in recent months:

"Whereas the domestic price for a kilo of heroin is 3.5 million lira, it is sold
for 10 million in Europe and 25 million in America.

Whereas the domestic market value of 1 kilo of hashish varies between 120,000
and 150.000 lira, it is sold for 300,000—400,000 lira in Europe."

63
while the operations and tight controls which were carried out increased the
amount of narcotics seized two-fold, the narcotics traffic undertaken since
the beginning of 1981 has changed.

According to information obtained from the evaluation of the results of the
operations undertaken, narcotics generally enter our country across our

border with Iran in the east. After transitting Turkey. the narcotics traffic
headed for Europe generally followed three routes up to the beginning of 1981.
The first is the "Iran border-Van-Diyarbakir-Halatya-Ankara-Istanbul-Europe"
route.

The second is the "Iran border-Van-Diyarbakir-Malatya-Ankara-Izmit-Afyon-
Izmir-Europe" route.

The tight controls carried out in 1981 have caused this narcotics traffic to
shift to the south. According to the data from the 1981 operations, narcotics
traffic has begun to follow two new routes.

The first of these is the "Iranian horder-Halatya-Gaziantep-Aleppo-Beirut-
Turkish sector of Cyprus-Northern Italy-Europe" route.

The second is the "Iranian border-Halatya-Gaziantep-Aleppo-Beirut-Turkish
Sector of Cyprus-£ngland-Holland-other Balkan countries" route.

While narcotics branch teams were striking a great blow against smugglers
transporting narcotics across Turkey to Europe and America. Cendarmery units
also undertook a great battle against the growers of illegal Indian hemp
(plant from which hashish is made) photographed in all phases. As a result
of the Gendarmery's operations, approximately 5 hectares of fields planted
with Indian hemp were burned.

Large Operations

Half of the 44 kilos of heroin seized as a result of the successful operations
by the Istanbul narcotics branch teams were seized in four big operations
undertaken during the first 5 months of the year. The biggest of these was
the one which resulted in the seizure of 6 kilos of heroin in a truck in Topkapi
Later. following an operation carried out on the ship Hithatpasa, 5 kilos of
heroin hidden among the ship's hawsers were seized. This operation followed
immediately after the Herter operation which was photographed by our newspaper
in all its stages. In the Herter operation, 4 kilos of heroin which had been
placed in secret compartments of the motor of a Volkswagen automobile were
seized. The other large operation was undertaken on the ship "Akdeniz."

and 4 kilos of heroin were seized.
»ute followed up to 1981
>ute followed in 1981
nRCOTICS TRAFFIC

'5356

65
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040000-4

POLICE CHECK SECRET DRUGS FILE LN

London me DAILY TELEGRAPR in English 28 Jan 82 p 3

[Article by T. A. Sandroclc]

[Text]

A CONFIDENTIAL report about alleged
.. links between the security services and
drugs smuggling, prepared by a former
detective who committed suicide. are being
investigated by Thames Valley police.

‘ The report. prepared in 1914. may form part of
the evidence in a drugs case due to he heard at the

Old Bailey within the next
few weeks.

It concerns. I understand.
a case where a man charged
with dru ollences claimed
he work for M15 and was
asked to inﬁltrate the IRA.

The re rt e ed for-
tner Bet” Sugtr p41"|'ltlllpl,ylt‘alr-
weather. so. who committed
suicide last monthin the garden
0! his home in Kidltnaton.
Own-was sent to the Director
0! Public Prosecutions.

A few years later extracts
from it appeared in a British
ma azine m an article written
by . r Stephan Scott. a reporter

CSO: 5320/19

106

and researcher

Weekend Televi:

producer of th
Credo."

He obtained tl
in 1979 while r1
1974 case. Mi
arrested by ‘l‘.
detectives at the
on Tuesday.

lie was_ one
London pohce st:
hours before hel

Otteredtor

The police in
we ouot' iho wt
3 t. not

of unauthorised
know that mph
oﬂered to map
extracts from it
in foreign nun
At the inques
weather last we
that he had hear
mat months.
to not

which w. worry
Thames Valle
yuterdav that
«merit on the
auto they were

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040008-4
EX-dACING DRIVER JAILED FOR HEBOIN SHUGGLING
London THE DAILY TELEGRAPH in English 27 Jan 82 p 3
[Article by Ian Henry]

[Text] A forner racing driver who turned to drug-snuggling after his business
collapsed was jailed for seven years at the Old Bailey yesterday.

Ian Burgess, 51, was caught at London's Hilton Hotel with note than 2 1b of high-
quality Pakistan heroin valued at more than 850,000 pounds.

The Cbnnon Serjeant of London, Judge Tudor-Price, said drug-peddlers should

normally expect 10-year sentences. "If heroin doesn't succeed in killing users
at street-level. at the very least, it ruins their lives," he said.

Burgess, once ranked fifth in the World Pornula No drivers' league, was stopped

by drug-squad officers following a tip-off. In a briefcase he had 15 packets of
80 per cent pure heroin.

Burgess, of Studdridge Street. Pulhss, admitted possession of heroin with intent
to supply.

At his hone detectives found what they regarded as a drug-snugglers' master-plan
for trafficking without the use of s go-between.

Burgess clained he had agreed to the drugs deal after nesting an Egyptian on a
flight from Karachi to London.

After his arrest, he said: "Yes I an sorry. There is one born every day isn't
there. I have been a fool."

A business colleague, Mr Stephen Cole, told the judge that he thought severe
financial pressure had led Burgess into his troubles.

His construction venture in Iran collapsed in 1979 following the fall of the Shah.
He had since tried to rescue his business by buying a Greek island.

C50: 5320/19

47
BRIEFS

CANNABIS SBIZBD—Cannabis resin worth 750,000 pounds on the black market has been

seized at Avonnouth Docks near Bristol. [Text] [tendon THE DAILY TBLBGRAPH in
English 26 Jan 82 p 3]

COCAINE GANG MEMBERS JAILBDuSix nedaers of a gang which distributed 12 million

pounds worth of South American cocaine in London and the south were given jail
sentences ranging from seven to ten years at Lewes Crown court yesterday. Colin

Brown, 35, smallholder, of Frost Orchard, Yelstead, Kent, was jailed for ten years
and fined 49,000 pounds. Be adnitted conspiring to supply cocaine. Three men
were acquitted. They were: Francis Siperius, 314. secretary, of Haulever Road,
Brixton; David ﬂilsden, 34, engineer, of Huron Road, ‘Iboting Bee, bonudon, and
Kevil Ooyle, 30, of Bodelwyddsn, North Wales. The others convicted, who pleaded
not guilty. were: Albert Hanilton. 40. songwriter and publisher, of Cornwall

Gardens. Kensington; Sidney Alder-an. 65, smallholder, of Warren View Farm,

Yelsted. Kent. and Gerald Karakanna. 33, company director, of Isabella Road,
ﬂackney. They were jailed for eight years. Christopher Shearnan, 30. narket
trader. of Norfolk House Road. Streathan. and Stanley Gibson, 32, farmer, of

Pitt Road, Langley, Kent, were jailed for seven years. {Text} [London THE DAILY
TELEGRAPH in English 26 Jan 82 p 6]

cso: 5320/19 mm

68