FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10664
16 July 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 15/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

I-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

m publications contain infatuation primarily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro. news agency
transaissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language

sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and nterial enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornstion was
processed. mere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sulnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. tines within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(r000 15/32)

CONTENTS

I51 UFBCHNOIDGY

French Researchers Clone Interferon Gene
($Ima m. VIE, 5 (In 82) OOOOIOOIIOIIOOOIOOO0.00....

ELMRWICS

American Share of CII-Honeyvell-Bull Drops to 19.9 Percent
(13 P01”, 17-23 May 82) OOOOOOOOOOOCCO0.0000000000IOO

Consents on Actions, by Martino Leventer
Interview with (III-BB Head, Martins Leventer Interview

ABG-Telefunkm Research, Development Activities
(W “WK, 7 m 82) OOOOOOOOCOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

TRANSPORTATION

FRO Aerospace Industry Reviewed as Remover Show Opens
(Ala 31‘ 603406, 15 Kay 82) oeeoeeoeooeeeeeoeooeeeoeooo

Hannover 5110!: Hill Highlight European Cooperation
(AIR 3T 0mm, 15‘!” 82) OCQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIO00.0...

Harry Major Counuter Projects To Be muted at Remover
(83813 “we; AIR ET C03405, 15 m 82)eeeeeeoeeoeooeee

Orders for ATR 112 Nov Represent 6 Airlines
(AIR & mw, 5 Jm 82) .OOOOOOOCOOOOOOCOOOOO0.00....

Briefs
Airbus Sales, Tests
France, UK Discuss Airbus, Concorde

-3- [III -W!-
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOTECHNOLOGY

FRENCH RESEARCHERS CLONE INTEFFERON GENE

Paris SCIENCE 81' VI! in French 5 Jun 82 p 16

[Text] France is working hard to overcome its lag in genetic engineer-

ing: on the very day that the Curie Institute in Paris opened a
gene cloning laboratory, the Transgene Company and the Roussel-
UCLAF Laboratories announced their successful attempt to clone
the interferon gene. The cloning was accomplished with the new
standard technique of crafting the interferon-producing gene in-
Loan Escherischia Coli bacterium.

The Transgene Company declined to reveal the amount of interferon made (measured
in aolecules), which belongs to the gamma type, one of the three main types thus
idmniﬁed (alpha. beta and gamma). Gamma was chosen because

of its anti-cancer properties (it is produced only by the lympho-
cytcs, either after normal antigen-formation stimulus or after
stimulation with mutagenic agents (capable of causing mutations
in the tissues). We could learn only that the California-based
Gcnentech company had obtained between 8 and 80 molecules from
its experiment with E. Coli generation.

This operation is the third in the history of industrial produc-
tion of interferon: the first to do it was Weissmann, of Swit-
zerland's Biogen company, in 1980; the second was Genentech's
(:ooddcl. It was done under contract involving Transgene, the
Roussel-UCLAF company, INSERM [National Institute of Health and Medical
Research], the National Institute for Agronomic Research (INRA), and the Curie
Institute. It will make it possible to dissipate once and for all the fairly
frivolous public statements made by certain celebrity-rated cancer gurus as to
the alleged ineffectiveness of interferon.

We may assume that such cloning will very shortly become part of
thv programs in the new gene-cloning laboratory at the Curie In-
stitute -- the gift, and a very rare event this is -- of a pri-
vutn donor, the Cino Del Duca Foundation. This laboratory boasts
a high-security Pd-type sealed unit built to higher specifications
than those called for under French and international law in the
realm of genetic risks.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the tea-e attached to the new facility, headed by Prof
Falcoff, took part in the cloning of cal-e interferon. Another
tea. under Prof Prid-an has begun cloning immune-system regula-
tore in rate and non. A third teen, this one led by Prof. Tho-
uee, is starting to clone easy-en found in lylphocyteo.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 “SCIENCE 6 V18“
6182

(:30: 3102/356

2
FOI(HWKJALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS FRANCE

AMERICAN SHARE OP CII-BONBYWBLLPBULL DROPS TO 19.9 PERCENT
Comments on Actions

Paris La POINT in French 17-23 May 82 pp 111-112

[Article by Martina Leventer]

[Text] Now it is just a matter of days: Honeywell and CII-HB
[International Information Company-~80neywell-8ull], the pillar
of the French information industry, are preparing to approve
officially the new agreements linking them for 10 years (see LB
POINT, no 501). These agreements have an even higher cost than
what has been reported. In order to reduce but also maintain
the 0.8. share in the company from 47 percent to 19.9 percent,
not only has the French government agreed to sign immediately a
check for $150 million, but the French company has also pledged
to pay under various forms (guaranteed dividends, use of trade-
mark, licenses), $185 million over a 5-year period.

So this operation is going to cost in all over 2 billion francs.
Of course, no one will ever knzw what it would have cost if
Honeywell had pulled out completely and then reinvested its
money in a commercial system competing on CII-HB's own hunting
grounds. What counts now is the future.

While this solution does give back to CII-HB its freedom of
movement, while still giving it a certain amount of continuity
in its dealings with Honeywell, it is going to demand of the
French firm more dynamism than ever before. If the new agree-
ments are to be a success, CII-HB is going to need top-quality
research projects, flawless strategic decisions, improved in-
dustrial productivity, and increased commercial dynamism.

Jacques Stern has a hard job facing him. He is the 50-year old

new PDG [president and chairman of the board] of CII-HB, and
in all likelihood the future chairman of the Bull Machines

3
FOICNWIJALIBE(RHJ
POI MCI“. USE ONLY

Holding Company. It is true, of course, that this smiling man
with steel-gray hair, who is brill-hing over with energy and ex-
citement about his job, does bring a number of advantages to
his new position.

Jacques Stern does know the information industry: he worked on
the French air defense system before successfully establishing
his own business, the 838A [expansion unknown], which special-
izes in data transmission networks. He also knows the interna-
tional market, particularly the United States, where in 1980 he
set up a subsidiary-~with Honeywell: so he isn't a stranger
coming into the company. It is said that the Americans respect
his competence and his business acumen. Since he has managed
his own company, he has a feeling for money--certainly a neces-
sary attribute if he is to tighten up the ship at CII-BB, which
last year lost 430 million francs.

But all this is no absolute guarantee of success: heading a
medium-sized business such as the 8383 and a large company
employing 20,000 people are not one and the same thing. Also,
the information industry'has now become, more than in the past,
a government matter. Will Jacques Stern really be able to be
master of his ship? And will he be given the resources to do
the job properly? There are at least two serious risks facing
him. First, that the government, in a sort of delusion of
grandeur, may want to do everything itself. And secondly, that
it may not dare give CII-BB the financing it needs, since the
amount at stake is so large.

'we are not Don Quixotes,’ say the people who will have to make
the decisions. "We know that choices will have to be made, and
some options will have to be dropped so we can concentrate on
more promising axes.” The essential criterion: the portion of
the international market that might be won, based on both exis-
ting or future commercial networks.

So some fields such as office automation or some peripherals
(equipment connected with computers), rather than personal
computers, might be favored. Or, for reasons of technology
mastery or strategic purposes, a decision might be made to
finance a scientific computer, but without getting involved in
international sales. There are a great many choices being dis-
cussed with the company, which Pierre Dreyfus should be pre-
senting to the council of ministers before July.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Financing? 'It will be provided, since the president wants it.
We will be able to put the financial package where it is need-
ed,” claims a top official. Apparently they have managed to
convince Jacques Delors and Laurent Pabius that the information
industry is an essential factor in France's economic indepen-
dence, and one which will largely determine whether the balance
of payments will be restored to equilibrium. This argument also
holds true for all of the electronics industry, as Jean-Pierre
Chevenement said last week, while releasing to the press the
report of the Electronics Mission.

Let's see. Just for CII-HB alone, between now and summer 2
billion in capital will have to be invested. After that time,
the financing needed will start to add up: 200 million francs
a year due to Honeywell: capital increases of 200 to 300 mil-
lion francs a year if they want to maintain the rate of growth:
and money for research contracts for products they would like
to add to the present line.

Even if this bill does seem high, we have to realize that,

until the present--contrary to what people tend to think--CII-
HB has never been given the money it needed to get established
on a really solid footing--while at the same time over 2 bil-
lion francs a year was quietly being spent on space. It is
actually a miracle if, under these conditions, France, which has
only 5 percent of the world market, is now in any condition to
have ambitions at all!

It still remains to be seen whether the government, while
properly playing its role as a stockholder, will not try to
interfere with the domain of industry. I‘Instead of wondering
what the government thinks, I would like the people in industry
to tell me what they want to do, and how they expect to make it
a viable Operation in economic terms," says Loik Le Floch, the
staff director for Pierre Dreyfus.

So does everything look rosy for CII-HB? Certainly not. For

it is going to be tested in the international market. And that
is a tough league to play in!

5
son omcm. us: own!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interview with ell-BB Head
Paris LB POINT in French 17-23 May 82 p 112
[Interview with Jacques Stern by Hartine Leventer]

[Text] Question: You are coming into a company which has had
some uncertainties hanging over its future. What are your pri-
orities going to be?

Answer: first of all, I want to say that this company is not
in the mess that some people claim. Of course, it does need to
make some progress: because of circumstances (the influence of
the stockholders, then the length of the negotiations with Honey-
well), there have been some problems in making important deci-
sions, and that happened on more than one level. Also, succes-
sive mergers have left the company with a certain amount of ad-
ministrative clumsiness. So I am going to try to simplify the
organization, to set up faster and more decentralized decision-
making procedures. From this I expect to get a greater degree
of dynamism and productivity.

We are also going to have to increase the quality of the service
we give our customers very quickly--I am going to pay very close
attention to that on a regular basis.

But my most urgent job, the one that will absorb most of my
attention, will be to prepare for the strategic decisions we
haVe to make in terms of products and markets. We can't make

a mistake there, because that could definitely endanger our fu-
ture.

Question: Here you are at the helm of a ship 20 times larger
than the one you were handling. Doesn't that frighten you?

Answer: Well, I do know the job. My goal at CII-BB is the same
as my goal at the seen: to develop our national competence, by
favoring a long-term strategy within an international market
context. And what matters is not the number of employees the
business has, but the quality of the staff with which I will be
working directly. aere I am convinced of the solidity of the
staff, of their desire to cOOperate with me, and of their very
high quality. I may perhaps add to the staff, but I will be
making very few changes. Also, I do plan to augment the
FORIWTKJALlBEOMIY

research staff, to bring in new blood, and also to develop to
the maximum cooperation with french research organizations. But
on the whole, I do feel that we have the human resources to meet
our goals.

Question: But will you also have the financial resources, and
the autonomy to make your own decisions?

Answer: I do hope to have the financing we need. It I have that,
I am convinced that I will also have the autonomy, and that the
government will not interfere in my management and strategy, and
that I will be judged on the results I produce. That is a more
comfortable situation than the situation of this company in the
past: its industrial stockholders not only never gave it the
capital it needed to develop on a healthy basis (our rate of
indebtedness is 10 times higher than that of our 0.8. coupeti-
tors). but they even intervened in strategic decisions, to

block them!

Question: Still, you are going to have to become part of a
national strategy, which could cause same problems of infrin-
ging on the territory of other nationalized companies.

Answer: I am sure that the government expects us to be able to
work together, to coordinate, and cooperate, and that it will
only intervene it we can't manage to get along. This is going
to be quite complicated, you are right there. But this sort of
dialogue between industrial leaders seems a normal thing to me.
I have already begun talking with Alain Gomez, the P06 0:
Thomson.

COPYRIGHT: "Le Point' 1982

7679
C50: 3102/290

7

M0 Ammo. Imo- note e:
roe MICIAL USE aux

W165

ABC-TEEN mm, nzvuorm'r ACTIVITIES
Sundbyberg mom mum in Swedish 7 any 82 pp 52-53
[Articlez "One Billion DH Annually for MD")

[Tent] Research and Developent at ADO-Telefunhen will cost just over

1 billion In this year for the develop-ant of alternative energy swrces,
teleconnunications, speech and text processing, and the develop-ent of con-
ponents' in the fields of industrial and teleconuuications technology. anong
other things. The developnent will be centered at A26 Tele’wnhan in 011:.
This was indicated at technical infatuation sessions held lace last year.

After the war a .all group of employees rasining at a vacuum tube plant in
lode founded the present factory in 01-. Today this division of the conpany
is the second largest aployer in 01-. About 5,000 of the 10,000 aployees
at AEG-Telefunken are active in the production and development of conponents
and electronic equipnent of various types in Inn.

The vacuun tube division now has about 2,000 workers producing and developing
various types of special tubes for teleco-unicetions. including TNT tubes for
satellite equipment.

To further concentrate research and developnent, suiconductor research
previously conducted in leilbronn has been noved to the research center in
01-. For sane tine semiconductor research has been on the back burner, but
now it has intensified again. Thu. in 1981 ABC-Telefunken spent 1 billion 0!:
for all research and developnent.

Recently the question has been asked: "Can we at ABC-Telefunken neet all the
denand for special suiconductor's or circuits, even though we already produce
specialized types of semiconductors?" One solution to the problen was to
establish a center for CAD integrated circuits.

The research institute at Uln is not occupied solely with anniconductor
research and develop-mt, but also is active in areas in which the saiconduc-
tors are used, for exanple teleconnunications and computer technology.

Alternative energy technology and various nethods of energy conservation also
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are studied.
Automotive Electronics and Energy Technology

In the field of automotive electronics, circuits are being developed for
electronic ignition systems and idle stabilisation, as well as various circuits
to indicate fuel consumption and start-stop systems.

In the field of energy, several solar energy projects are at an advanced
stage and new solar cells are being developed for this purpose. Alternative
energy sources also are being examined, for example the use of bionass and
wind energy. Research on these systems also includes the problem of storing
the energy produced and exuining and developing methods of controlling
storage and utilizing the stored energy.

Co-unicat ions Technology

A relatively new systas of speech identification and speech conmunication has
been designed primarily for controlling robots. A totally new system of
speech identification is being developed at the sane time.

If the computer cannot identify the speech of a test individual, a "ghostly"
conversation occurs in which the nachine asks the human to repeat what he has
said or say some additional words or sentences. If the speech is not identi-
fied properly the computer says, "Do not understand--contime or repeat,"
until full identification has occurred.

Suiconductor and CAD Development

Since projects such as those described above require aeaiconductors and special
circuits, in both cases there must be intimate cooperation for the development
of new semiconductors. For this reason, the development of all integrated
circuits has been saved to the research division in Ulm.

In addition to developing circuits for internal use, the company also plans to
cooperate closely with the Heat German electronics industry and produce
integrated circuits to meet the needs of that industry. "est Germany imports
10's for about 8.5 billion DH from the United States and about 6 billion from
Japan. while producing circuits worth only about 1.7 billion DH itself. In
other words. d'mestic production neets only a fraction of domestic needs. For
this reason, German authorities would like to see an increase in the production
of integrated circuits.

The semiconductor division is organized in such a way that the development of
new circuits and CAD activity occur at the ABC-Telefunlten Porschungszentrum in
tile. while the production of standard circuits and further development are
carried out at the Heilbronn factory. A new snicenductor plsnt also is being
Planned in Heilbronn.

The semiconductor technologies most widely used at AEG-Telefunken are PHOS,

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mos, CHOS. 121., and CCD. In certain special circuits a combination of these
techniques is used. Thus, an entirely new series of circuits has been
developed for the electronic equipment used by ‘l'elefonbau und Normalseit

in its electronic telephone exchanges.

There are two main trends in the development of integrated circuits. The first
includes systems design and is characterized by cooperation between those who
develop circuits and various designers of electronic equipment. The other
extremely important aspect from mask production to completed circuit requires
several technological steps. A special developmental laboratory for test
production is available for this portion of the manufacturing process.

Normally, various types of simlation programs are used for proving the
circuits that are developed. The finished layouts are sent to the s-iconductor
plant in Heilbronn for the production of masks and so-celled reticles.

Masks are produced both photolithographically and, to a limited extent,
by electron-beam lithography. The latter method is limited, however, because
of the difficulty involved in producing sufficiently sensitive photoresistors.

In the so-called front-end process liquid-phase epitaxial production is used
in addition to a high-vacuum molecular been process, depending on what
semiconductor type is being produced.

COPYRIGHT: Nordpress AB 1982

9336
(:80: 3102/337

10
5'0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATICII

PRC 53um INDUSTRY “Vim A8 m 8” 0’“
Paris All! 81‘ cosms in French 15 May 82 p 29
:Article: “The 1902 German Aerospace Industry]

{Text} The German aerospace industry. in terms of annual turnover and number
of enployees. ranks third among European aerospace industries, after the trench
and British ones.

Third-Ranking European Industry

The German aerospace industry's total annual turnover in 1901 has not yet been
made public. It is almost certain to be in the vicinity of 10 billion 0H. or
over 25 billion francs. Systems (airframes and missiles) figure predominantly
in this total, accounting for more than two-thirds of it. Engines make up only
around one-tenth of the turnover and equipment around one-fifth.

The German industry's permanent employees totaled around 73,000 persons at the
end of 1980. more than 47,000 of whom were assigned to the design and fabrication
of airframes and missiles. almost 9,000 to the engines sector, and almost 10,000
to the equipment sector.

Predominance of nos

The industry's structure is characterised today by the massive predominance of
530 _Messerschmitt-Boelkov-Blolg_7 whose payroll, following its absorption of VFW
'__United Aeronautical CospanyJ totaled close to 40,000 persons. that is. defin-
itely more than half the total for the industry as a whole, and whose annual
turnover is around 4.6 billion on. IIBB has extremely diversified activities
covering civil and military aircraft. helicopters, tactical missiles, space and
other than aeronautics. This observation is true also of Dornier, which emloys
around 0.000 persons and has an annual turnover of over 1 billion on.

nornier is seemingly deterained to remain independent of H38. which for its part

has omitted itself with equal determination to a policy of international coop-
eration on a non-exclusive basis; but for the two big German firms, cooperation

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with French industry covers a very broad spectrum: Airbus and Transall trans-
port planes. tactical missiles, satellites for NIB, and Alpha Jet and Atlantic
for Dornier.

Both these firms specialising in systess devote very substantial funds of their
own to design and development.

The engine sector is dominated by m [expansion unknown]. which works in close
all-round cooperation with seven foreign engine builders: Pratt a lhitney (2037).
General Electric (cs 6). Rolls-Royce (as 199 and m). am [National Air-
craft Engine Study and Manufacturing Companyjd‘urbaeca (Larsac/H'l'ﬂ 385). and
Allison (250 C 20 B). W's annual turnover exceeds 2 billion DI. This tirm's
study and maintenance activities are also growing.

Germany's aerospace equipment industry is essentially distributed among the
specialised divisions of three large industrial groups: Siemens. A58 'i'elefunken.
531. _Standard Blectrik Lorenz]: Rohde and Schwars is a special case. This sec—
tor has suffered from the fact that the prime contractors, with which the gov-
ernnent deals, are tending to keep some of the work of studies. development and
integration of equipment within their own establishments.

Exports represent considerably less than half the annual turnover of the German
aerospace industry versus foreign sales of weapon systems hardware. This policy.
which has hampered cooperation, is now being modified.

‘No Major Progress: Ibrnado and Airbus

M major programs currently dominate German industrial activity. In the mili-
tary domain, there is the tripartite Tornado program under the. aegis of PARAVIA
_expansion unknown]. which is a manna for German industry (was) because of the
immediate workload it brings to it, but which is at the same tine e burden to
the extent to which this program punches a massive hole into nilitary credits-
thus retarding the launching of new developments--and because the reduction in
manufacturing output rates imposed by the cost of the program (Ger-an production
has been reduced from 60 to 42 planes per year to cut expenses) poses an undeni-
able industrial problen. In the civil domain. German industry participates,
under the aegis of Airbus Industrie and through the Deutsche Airbus group (H88).
in the Airbus program. under which it shares to the extent of around 38 percent
in the A 300 and A no programs. The reticent attitude of German authorities
toward the A 320 program. however. will probably result in a reduction or the
German participation in the latter program to 20 percent.

German industry also occupies a position in the domains of military trainer
aircraft (Alpha Jet, linking Dornier and Dassault-Breguet). tactical missiles
(cooperation between use and AMPAI‘IAIE [National Industrial Aerospace Company
‘9"- under Euronissile). satellites (cooperation between Han and AMPAI'IALB).
and space (Spacelab).

12
“OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Noteworthy are 0138's innovative developments in the field of helicopters and
those of Dornier in that of supply planes. These activities illustrate the
creativity of the Gean aerospace industry.

A Survival Problem

For the German aerospace industry, the tundanental problem is that of its sur-
vival beyond the najor program now in progress: tornado, Airbus A 300. Airbus
A 310, Alpha Jet. Spacelab. etc. This problen is a present one for the design
study depart-ants, the renarkable capabilities of which are already being under-
utilized and are on the verge of being dismantled it they do not very soon
receive sustenance in the torn or new work to be done toward the launching of
additional sajor programs. But as more and lore orders are tilled for Alpha
Jets, 'Dornadoes and Airbuses. the manufacturing sector will inevitably be
affected. m is already planning a staff reduction of MOW-4.500 persons
among its pernanent emloyees over the next 6 years.

The German authorities, invoking their budgetary difficulties. are seting out
more and nore tightiistedly their support of studies and developments. and are
pressuring industry to provide more and more of its own financing. German
industry today, however. absolutely needs to go beyond its current undertaking
under the Airbus A 300 and A 310 programs into launching a new airliner program.
actualizing the PAH-2 conbat helicopter prOgran. and preparing a new fighter
plane successor to the Phantom.

These new prograns. on which the future of the Gernan aerospace industry depends.
are certain to be very much in the spotlight next week when the Hannover Show

opens .

OOPYRIGIIT: A. 8 C. 1982

9399
C80: 3102/299

MOﬂlﬁEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”WA?!"

amen snow WILL 316831681 mm marten
Paris AIR 3'! oceans in trench is lay 02 pp “-45

_Bxcerpt] Although those not exhibiting are nuneroususone of then top-ranking
builders, like Fokker-the lath Ilannover Aeronautics Show nonetheless provides
visitors with an iqressive view of the power of Duropean industry, which is
self sustaining in the donains of transport planes. codaat planes. helicopters.
snall gas turbines, and nissiles. Its real weak point, ‘at least in the civil
aviation sector, is turbojets: Rolls-Royce undeniably still holds a strong posi-
tion in this do-ain with its Its-2n fanily, but cooperation with the engine
builders (herican) renains essential for the others; it at the very least en-
sures dependability of supplies and even places Europe in a good position in
the case of the can 56's as well as in that of the lid-500's if the latter goes
beyond the exploratory stage in which it now finds itself.

ghe standard European codiat plane is of course still the tornado of the 9mm
_expansion unknown] oonsortiua. ‘i'he 100th of these planes was delivered on

31 March, they are in service in the three countries that build their, and the
only shadow darkening the picture is that of the cost overruns and stretching
out of the program both these factors being interlocking. The production rate
is now stabilized at 110 planes a year. which is very close to the originally
planned one. but the ‘nomadic. in view of the fact that its export prospects are
extrenely poor. will cone to an end in 1909.

will European industry have found an ongoing program to take its place by then?
gerhaps an effort could be nade at working out soaething between Dassault and was
_Hesserschnitt-baldow-Blom}-the creativeness of the one and the industrial
capacity of the other (underutilized) could not but gain fro- each other--for
examle, around an experimental twin-jet prototype that could prefigure the
coobat plane of the 1990's. But the govermentsnand the general staffs-«ill
have to conit thenselves... .

Cooperation in the aviation donain is not liaited, however. to the military
donain alone. (in the contrary. it has found a fertile terrain for remarkable
yields in Airbus lndustrie. The presence at lannover. on 17 and la lay. of the
all-new Airbus A410 prototype attests to the vitality of the Ger-an, Belgian.

:ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

British, Spanish, French and Dutch builders associated in the operation. with
501 planes placed anong u airline comanies (327 A-300's and 180 A-3lO's).

175 A-300‘e delivered. a production rate exceeding five planes a month this

year. an A-Jlo testing progran that has gotten off to a remarkable start. and

a number of projects in progress “-320. 1‘59, Tull. etc), all designed to ex—
pand its product line and hence its narket positions. Airbus lndustrie finds
itself virtually alone confronting gigantic Boeing-4 situation that night have
been deesed totally ilprobable only 2 years ago... And with the help of its
governmental backings. the European consortius is certain to be able to with—
stand acre easily than Boeing the inset of the current sing in air transport,
which is producing nothing other than cancellations or orders and postponesents
of deliveries. A sole regret: ‘i‘hat Fokker. not exhibiting at the Show. continues
trying to be the lone horseman in the domain of lso-seaters--wherein the bringing
together in full of all the auropean capacities would not be overly adequate to
overcome the hegesony of the 3-727 and the a-131-and that it has not yet been
possible to cone up with any solution that would ensure the European engine-
building industry a position as najor participant in the launching o: the engine
that is to equip this sane plane...

In the domain of regional transport planes. ABROBPMIALB National Industrial
Aerospace Industry (1%)] and 5331'!th [expansion unknown will of course exhibit

the very attractive accomdations model of. the an 42. a progran the launching

of which has now been decided. m cue-235 (casa expansion unknOVnJ-ﬂurtanio)

is not being exhibited. but is certain to be at a next show. sun [mm Aviaﬁm
Companx7 in association with Fairchild (Conuter 3&0) represents the third

European entity to have decided to coapete in the regional transport sarket. And
not to be forgotten are Pckker's plans with regard to the modernising of the

F-21. In this domain as well, Europe is a latch, and even more, for the United
States.

9399
C80: 3102/30].

15
ton omcm use on“
FOR OFFICIAL [8% ONLY

WWI?!“

mwoacawmrmmmumulmnm
Paris MR 31' cm in french 15 “I! 32 pp 33. 35. 37
:Article by aegis Noyes 'ntensive Space asserved for 'Oouuters'ﬂ

:Text] This is without question the first tine regional transport planes. so-
called 'coaautera.’ will occupy so ouch space at nannover: Bone 12 of these
planes have been entered into the static exhibit. and several stands will feature
presentations on the advanced state of ssjor progress under develcpnent. This

is in no way surprising if one oonsiders the growth that has taken place in this
sector of the aeronautical industry over the past 2 years. It was in 1919 that
a substantial world sarket (estissted by sons at 5.000 units between now and the
year 2000) for planes with seating capacities generally within the range of is
to 50 seats first node its appearance. This denand. half of which was based in
the United States. undoubtedly developed after several years of an Aserican de-
regulation policy. coupled with a constantly rising cost of fuel. The result was
an inediate rush on the part of builders to capture a share of the aarket on an
individual or cooperative basis. and there are nore than sale 15 of then today
heavily omitted to it.

Based on the requirenents of the asrkst. the specialists have drawn a sharp dis-
tinction between planes with a seating capacity of sore than 30 and those with a
leaser capacity. Ilsny existing planes were already of the latter category.
requiring only nodifications or nodernised versions. The so-called 'new‘genera-
ion' ones. on the other band. could benefit frost the recent advances made in the
domains of engines. materials. aerodynasics. equipment and avionics. and it is

in this category that five programs. already launched and some now at a very
advanced stage. stand out either because of the else of the investaents involved
or because of the capacity of the planes involved. These are: the an ‘2. devel-
oped jointly by armaments ﬂational ludustrial Aerospace Cospany] and ABS!-
rm.“ [expansion unknown]; Saab rairchild 340: the aabraer-lzo 'arasilia';
the Dash a by mum» Canada: and the mnﬂemuucu manufacturing 037M.
Of these. only the first three are being represented at liannover (most of the
builders. soreover. not exhibiting at the Show-masong then. sons of the 'big'
ones such as liavilland. Fokker. Shorts and “ﬁlm-are to be found in the “co--
nuters' do-ain).

MWUSBONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he NPR £2

The M1! 42 passed a significant milestone with firm orders from two American
airlines: Ransome Airlines (six planes configured for 46 passengers) and Com-
mand Airways (three planes), announced on 0 and 12 April. i'innair, for its
part, has decided to buy at least five are e2's, and this decision, after
approval by the finish cospany's board of directors, will be announced very
shortly. immune and ARRITAIJA have formed the are" on: Emu: Inter-
est Group] to steer the program and handle its marketing. The ntergovernmental
agreement, signed recently, gives this program an official character. Ilarked
interest has also been shown in a future 'stretched' version, the An xx. caps-
ble of transporting 54 to so passengers. The two versions currently being
offered are the are 42-100, with a takeoff weight of 1L7 tons and capable of
carrying 42 passengers a distance of 1,300 km, and the are 12-200, 15.5 tons at
takeoff and a carrying capacity of 49 passengers over a distance of 1,450 km.
The two prototypes will fly in August and October 19“: in-service dates are
scheduled for the fourth quarter of 1985. ‘rhe principal equipment choices have
been: Pu 100/2 engines, aamilton Standard propellers and Messier-Bispano-Bugatti
landing gear: these are final. Lastly, the study of the cargo, civil and mili-
tary versions is under way: it will broaden even more the market for this plane.

The Saab-Pairchild 340

The SP 340. having been the object of a cooperative program between Saab-Scania
and Pairchild Industries that was announced officially at the end of 1980, is
currently the most advanced toward coqﬂetion among the five certitors: Its
roll-out has been very precisely scheduled for 21 October this year, and is to
be followed by the first deliveries at the start of 198‘. All the plane's char-
acter istics and performance ratings have thus been frozen since lioveﬁer, when
the construction as such actually started. The 81’ 340 is characterized by the
importance that has been given to the economic factor, by way of application of
state-of-the-art techniques: Modern General Electric Cf'I-S (1,675 hp) engines:
Dowty Rotol 3—bladed, conceite propellers: use of cements in the assembly of
components; use of sandwich coapoeites; digital avionics; fuel management sys-
tem. M versions are planned: The 34-seat 'Airliner' (11 rows of 3 seats each
plus 1 row of e seats aft, at 30-inch spacings) and the 12- to lG-seat 'Bxecu-
tive.“ For the first of these versions, maximum rated cruising speed is 50‘!
km/hr and cruising distance (with 3‘ passengers and In Llnstrument Plight
Rules] reserves) is 1,670 km. Orders for the 3? 3CD now total 111 units (firm
orders and options), 15 of which are for the "Executive' version. '

The EMS-120 'Brasilia'

'rhe EMS-120 "Brasilia“ appears clearly to be the 8? 340's direct cowetitor,
these two planes being the only two in the 3-seat-abreast category.ambraer has
scheduled the prototype roll-out for 10 July 1983 and the first deliveries for
1985. According to the most recent information released by the builder, the
characterisation of the plane is now complete and wind tunnel testing more than
so percent complete. The latest "engineering' model, a so-called “Class 3"

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLV

nodel built of wood and netal. is currently in the finishing stage. but the
first conponents of the prototype are already in the nachining stage. The Bra-
silia. it will be recalled. in to be equipped with two Pl! 115 turboprop engines.
each rated at 1.500 hp at take-off. and has a capacity of 30 seats (at 31-inch

spacings). Pirn orders now total 10. to which nuat be added nany intentions to
buy.

The Lesa-Than-30-8eaters

The less-than-30-seater category of cc-uters being exhibited at Ianmver. and
for the first tine in Europe. features the greatest nuwer of new planes. 0n the
parking apron. one can see the Beechcraft C99. the Piper T-1040 and the bistro
m. which have already nade their initial. appearances at the fall 'convention'
of the m :Regional Airlines association:l held in New Orleans in invader.
Planking then are representatives of each of the Dornier narrow (the -100 and
-200 versions). the Pandeirante m 110 Pl/el recently sent to Paris for the
exhibition there. as well as a scale nodal of the cabin (and cockpit) of the Jet-
strean 31 by British Aerospace. The Beechcraft CoInuter €99 is a nodernised ver-
sion of the forner Model 99 'Airliner' built by the cowany between 1960 and
1975. it is equipped with two Pratt and Nhitney of Canada Linited ”oh-36
turboprops derated to 715 hp and can transport 15 passengers at a naxinun speed
of 400 kn/hr over a distance of 1.700 Iua with In reserves. The plane received
its certification in July and is now being nass produced at an average rate of
two unite per nonth. which is to be increased to five units per nonth by the end
of this year. According to the builder. the mater of orders on the books will
absorb production until the end of 1903. Beechcraft is expected also to an-
nounce shortly the start of tests on its Comte: 1900. equipped with two 1.000-
hp ”GA-653 engines and having a capacity of 19 seats. whone characteristics and
perfornance ratings were published in lovenber (see Ala 81' cosms. No 002. p 35).

Already ordered by several European companies. the Piper How will start a
wide-ranging exhibition tour at liannover that will take it throughout western
Europe and into Africa. Together with the 7-1020. these two prograns were an-
nounced at the last Bourget Show and translate Piper's intent to enter the world
counter narket. While the first of these is but a derived version of the Chief-
tain. adapted to the transport of 9 persons. the second. with the sane capacity.
nakes use only of the fuselage and takes over nany coqonenta of the Cheyenne 1.
including its airfoil. engines (2 P'rGA-ll's derated to 500 hp). nose cone and
enpennages. Its cruising speed is «0 kn/hr and its cruising distance is 1.200
kn (under full load) at 3.000 neters. The 'r-ioeo received its Anerican certifi-
cation on s “arch. and its first deliveries are scheduled for April.

The Metro 111. for its part. built by Pairchild Swearingen at a current rate of
around three units per nonth. represents the nost recent cornuter (19-passenger)
version of the Merlin IVC twin-turboprop business plans. For a long tine now. it
has been the only Anerican plane of this capacity on the narket (and will renain
so until the Beach C99 nakes its debut). The Metro 111 is equipped with two
Garrett hinaaearch 1.000-hp TPB 331-110-601 6 turboprop engines. Its maxim

cruising speed is 510 kn/hr and its cruising distance (fully loaded) is
1.150 kn.

18
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dornier cones off well with its two new twin-turboprop ssa11 transports. the
Do 228-100 (15 passengers) and the Do 228-200 (19 passengers). lie briefly re-
call that these two planes are derived fro- the fornsr twin-engined 0o 20 and are
characterized by their so-called M (new-technology) airfoil. which was con-
ceived initially for a higher-category co-uter project baptised the us. (With
a 30-seat capacity, this project is still under study at Dornier.) Developed
rapidly by the German builder since the spring of 1900. the Do 228-100 received
its German certification on 18 Dace-her. while that of the Do 228-200 appears
ininent now. Both planes are equipped with Garrett “us-hp 'I'PE 311-5 engines.
Their saxinus cruising speed is £32 kit/ht and their cruising distances are res-
pectively 1.970 In (-100 version) and 1,150 ks (-200 version).

For the first title. at Bannover. uraer is exhibiting jointly with Aero-Dienst,
its German distributor. a Bandeirante m 11021/41. ‘i‘his ssall Brazilian cos-
euter (10 seats). whose reputation needs no introduction here. is continuing its
brilliant career: Its builder has announced its having broken through the £00-
planes-delivered teeth (65 in 1981 and a total of 75 in the United States). and
states he is sure now of reaching the 500 hark. The no. it is recalled. is
equipped with two 750-hp Pita-34 engines. and in its 91/41 version (take-off
weight 5,900 kg. of which 1,633 kg is payload) its cruising speed is 410 Its/hr
and its cruising distance 1.852 kn.

Also for the first ties. at nannover. British Aerospace is exhibiting a very
beautifu1 scale model of the cabin of the Jetstrean 31. a modernized version of.
the former Jetstrean 111 and configured to carry 10 passengers. The first pro-
duction-line unit, which was rolled out on 25 January. conenced its night
tests on 10 ”arch, thus joining the prototype (whose first flight goes back to
February 1900) in the test program that is to be coupleted in May with sinulta-
neous British and American certifications. First deliveries are scheduled to
take place in July. The Jetstrean 31 is equipped with two Garrett 900-bp

'l'PB 331-10 turboprops. Its cruising speed is (00 Ina/hr and its cruising dis-
tance is 1,200 kn.

COPYING"?! A. G C. 1992

9230
C50: 3102/300

19
POI m1. USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

ORDERS FOR ATR 42 "0V REPRESENT 6 AIRLINES
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 5 Jun 82 p 16

[Article by J.H. : Colonbia's Aerocesar Picks ATR 42. Six
carriers co-uitted to buy 28 of the aircraft]

[Text] Everybody expected that the sixth customer for the Ark 42
twin-turbine aircraft would be either Air Caledonia or Scheduled
Skyways (cf. AIR 6 COSMOS no 908, p16): as things have turned out,
it was the Bogota-based Aerocesar cospany that followed Ransone,
Cos-and Airways, Wright Airlines, Air Littoral, and Finnair in
placing its order -- actually the fifth if you count from the date
of signature: 12 May (Air Littoral signed its firs order on 14
May.

Aerocesar, which serves a nu-ber of domestic routes in Colombia,
mainly operating out of Bogota, Medellin, Baranquilla, Cartagena,
and Valledupar, signed a firs order for two aircraft, with deli-
very prouised for August 1986 and May 1987. The configuration se-
lected calla for 42 seats, with the 2-seat rows separated by a
32-inch aisle.

The 681 Regional Transport Aircraft Conpany (Aeritalia and Aerospa-
tiale), which released the inforsation on 28 May, had also confirsed
a day earlier that the contract with Finnair signed in Paris on 21
May (calling for five Art-42s equipped to carry 46 passengers and
slated for delivery beginning early in 1986) had been approved by
that coapany's board of directors on 20 Hay. Pinnair, which was

the third export client for the Caravelle, thus became the third
buyer of the Franco-Italian turbojet. Finnair's Ark-42s will re-
place its Fokker F-27 Friendships.

Aeritalia and Aerospatiale have thus sold 28 ATR-42s to six car-
riers. That nu-ber will probably be rising very shortly to 38 air-
craft aad 8 carriers when the builders are in a position to an-
nounce fire arrangements for talks with Air Caledonia and Scheduled

Airways.

2O
FORINﬂﬁCLALIﬂﬂEONLY
FOR1DFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

We can also report that the Aerocesar order is interesting for a
number of reasons: first, because this company is the first buyer
based in Latin America. Second, because this client and the geo-
graphical location of the country involve some very demanding
operating conditions. Their choice of the AIR-42 is thus one
more bit of proof of the aircraft's performance and ruggedness.

It is interesting to note, on this count, that the ART—42 is not
underpowered (as the head of one airline company recently asserted),
but is actually higher-powered than its leading competitor, the
F-27. A quick comparison of the specifications (surface, mass,
power) of these two aircraft yields the following answers:

-- F-27 200 and $00: 70 square meters; 20,412 kilos at takeoff;
maximum P/S 291.6 kg/mz; mass/power at takeoff: 4.77 kg/SHP;

-- ART-42: 54.5 m2; 14,715 kg (111-42-200); max r/s: 270 and
285 kg/mz; mass/power: 4.08 and 4.32 kg/SHP.

Nominal performance specifications are heavily weighted in favor
of the Ark-42, thanks to the light weight of its airframe (opera-
tional empty weight 9,295 and 9,335 kg as against 11,578 and
12,243), and to its margin of power: takeoff and landing dis-
tances slightly shorter, ceiling on one engine higher by 1,700
feet (13,400 as against 11,700), cruising speed higher by around
30 km/hr. As for fuel consumption, it will be far more profitable,
since it is less by around 35 percent over a typical 385-km leg.
This difference is of course the result of the gain in its empty and
laden weights, of aerodynamic improvements, and of the high per-
formance of its PW/lOO-z turbo engine.

Orders for the Ark-42

8 April Ransome Airlines; 6 firm orders; first delivery
'November l98$'(.$.)

14 April Command Airways; 3 fins orders + 2 options; first
delivery in 1986 (U.S.)

21 April Pinnair: 5 firm orders; first delivery, early 1986

(Finland)

12 May Wright Airlines: 8 firm orders; first delivery
early 1986 (U.S.)

12 May Aerocesar: 2 firm orders; first delivery in August
1986 (Colombia)

14 May Air Littoral: 2 firm orders; first delivery in
October 1985 (France).

COPYRIGHT: A a c 1982
0182
cso: 3102/356

21
FOR(ﬂFKJALI£ﬂEONLY
mmmmv

TRANSPORTER IN

Alanna sues. mes» men as tests of the A410 go forward. deliveries of the
A-300 are also continuing at a rapid rate. ‘i‘hus, at the beginning of this aonth,
Airbus Industrie had placed 112 planes in service. the latest being an A-300 32-
200 with General electric engines delivered to Iran Air (Which has fin-ordered
six A-300 32's and holds options on three additional planes). Iran Air, as of
the end of 1981. was already using two A-300 32's. As of 3l Decewer 1901. Air-
bus lndustrie had delivered 150 planes m A-300 32's. no A-300 34's). in ser-
vice now in 27 airline coapanies. Deliveries during these first four lonths have
totaled 1‘! planes (2 in January. 9 in February. 2 in March. 4 in April). The
total under of planes now in service should therefore be 175: this total. how-
ever. should be reducedntenorarily-oby three. the first three A-300 84's
delivered to Later. a coqeny that recently disappeared. as we know. The first
A-300 34-200 equipped with Pratt and Ithitney duo-59A engines, built for China
Airlines (see All! 31' comes. Nos 902 end 904). coupleted its first flight on

20 April. It will be delivered in June. And. at Mouse, the 200th Airbus is
now on the final asselbly line, an A-300 BC to be delivered in Septelber to
Bgyptair. 'i‘his airline had firs-ordered eight A-300 Bd-200's with General Blac-
tric engines: it is already using five. two of which are being leased from Bapag
Lloyd Plug. A comlete A-3lo airfoil including the central spar, has been installed
IABG [industrial Plant Enterprise Inc test center at Ottobrunn. near Munich. to
undergo fatigue tests there which are to start in July. These tests will con-
tinue over a period of approsinately 3 years and will sisulate more than

go. 000 flights... . ”1-on _Paris AIR s-r oosms in trench 15 May a: p so]
-‘_com1am a. r c. 1302] 9359

rams. UR Discuss unsus. cums- Transportation Minister Charles Piternan
net in Paris on 6 May with his British colleague Nor-an Lamont. secretary of
state for industry. to discuss in particular the Airbus and Concorde dossiers.
with regard to the Airbus progras. after noting that the A-300 and A-3lo cap-
tured 53 percent of the narket for large airliners last year. the two ainisters
reviewed the progress being nade in preparations for the launching of the A-320
project, “which appears to be" well suited to the future needs of the air trans-
port industry in the aediua-capacity category. This being the case. they
decided to discuss in lore detail with their partners the launching of the
prograa. It is noted that the tern 'launching' appears twice in the official

22
mandamus-zen“
connunique. and observers think Eis terminology translates the positive spirit
that dominated the discussions. As regards the Concorde, the ministers took
cognizance of the reduction in expenses. requested continuation of this effort,
examined the reports prepared by the officials of the two countries, and decided
to submit the dossier to their respective govermente. Ithey will meet again in
July to discuss these subjects further. Text] [Paris m a cosms in French
is May 32 p is] [commas-r: A. r c. 1932 9399

C50: 3102/299 m

23
MWWONLY