FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10641
' July 1982

Translation
PHOSPHATE LASER GLASS

By N. Y. Alokeeyev at al.

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a quas-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item:originste with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
PHOSPHATE LASER GLASS

Moscow LAZERNYYE ROSPATNYYR STERLA in Russia 1980 (signed to press
28 Nov 80) pp 1-352 -

[Book “Phosphate Laser Glass” by Nikolay Yefimovich Alekseyev,
Valentin Pavlovian Gapontsev, Mark Yefrenovich Zhabotinskiy, Valeriy
Borisovich Kravchenko and Yuriy Petrovich Rudnitskiy, edited by

H. Ye. Zhahotinskiy, 'Nauka', 2600 copies, 352 pages]

CONTENTS

Anno tat ion 1
Foreword -__ " 2
Introduction 5
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 0N PHYSICAL PARAHBTERS OP LASER CLASS 10

51.1. Spectral Luninsscence Pareneters Deter-inins the Energy
Characteristics of Glass 10
91.2. Nonlinearity of the Index of Refraction of Class 20
Sl.3. Resistance of Glass to Laser Enission 26
51.4. Thereooptical Distortions in Active Laser Elements 29
51.5. Theraophysical Properties and Thermal Strength of Laser Class 43
61.6. General Description of Laser Glass 69
CHAPTER 2. STRUCTURE OF PEOSPHAIB GLASS 56

CHAPTER 3. NONRADIATING ELECTRON RXCITATION ENERGY TRANSFER IN LASER GLASS 70

$3.1. Classification of Nonradiating Transfer Processes 70
53.2. Ion-Ion Excitation Transfer-Thsoretical Concepts 75
53.3. Ion-Ion Transfer-Experisentsl Results 85
53.6. Ion-Vibrational Excitation Transfer 108
CHAPTER 6. NEODYHIUHPDOPED PHOSPHATE GLASS 126
56.1. General Description of Ready-inn Laser Glass 126
56.2. Spectral Lusinescent Characteristics of Neodymiun
Phosphate Class 128
- a - [I - USSR - L]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
54.3.
56.6.
$4.5.
$4.6.
5%.7.
56.8.

‘a'g'
54.10.

I70. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spectroscopic Hethods of Measuring Sons Luninescence and
Lasing Characteristics of Neodyniue Glass
c:oss Section of Induced Snission of Nd’+ Ions in Glass
Laser Hathods of Deternining the Induced Beission Cross Section
Value of the Effective Cross Section of the Induced Inission
of Nd” in Phosphate cm.

lificstion of Laser Pulses in Phosphate Glsso Doped with
Nd Ions
Lasing Characteristics of ReodyliuI-Doped Phosphate Glass

Free-Running Phosphate Glass Lasers
Use of Phosphate Glass to Obtain Short and Ultrsshort
Pulses

CHAPTER 5. THERHOOPIICAL PROPERTIES OP PHOSPHATE GLASS AND SELECTION OF
NEODYHIUH GLASS FOR LASERS 0P VARIOUS TYPES

‘5.1.
55.2.
55.3.

Thernoopticsl Characteristics of Phosphate Glass
Phosphate Glass for Pulse-Periodic Lasers
Glass for nigh-Energy Laser Systems

CHAPTER 6. SRBIUH-DOPBD LASER GLASS

56.1.

56.2.
‘60:.
56.6.
56.5.

Bibliography

Specific Nature of Srbiun Lasers and Requireuents on the
Active Mediu-

Spsctral Lueinascent Properties of Brbiue Glass
Tube-Pu-ped Srbiun Lasers

Brbiun Laser Sceeittars. Pree Lasing Mode

Possibilities of the BLP Under basins and Alplification
Conditions of K1 [Short Pulses] and SK! [Supershort Pulses]

140
144
151

155

159
16k

170
173

175
175
190
204
208
208
217
230
236
260

255
ANNOTATION

A detailed description is presented of the physical properties of new efficient
laser neterials-phoephate glass activated by rare earth ions. The possibilities
and prospects for their application in various types of lasers are demonstrated.

Information is presented on the structure of phosphate glass, the spectral lumines-

cence, lasing. thereon tical, nonlinear optical characteristics of laser phosphate
glass activated by Nd ions. The processes of energy transport and quenching of

luminescence insphosphate ales:; and sensitization of luminescence in glass co-
activated by Nd and Yb’+. Yb and Er’+ ions were investigated.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR<DFFMJAI.USE(NHLY

POREHORD

Phosphate glass. which is now becoming more and more widespread in the basic
industrially developed countries. first appeared in the Soviet Union. Phos-
phate laser glass has especially great significance in creating poverful and

superpoverful lasers and lasers that operate in the periodically repeating
pulse mode.

At the present time it is possible to talk about the completion of a
defined phase of research and development of phosphate laser glass. recogni-
tion of 1:8 advantages and the beginning of industrial output and applica-
tion in series laser systems. This determines the urgency of the proposed
monograph.

It must be noted that the last exhaustive survey of laser glass was published
about 10 years ago and, just as the preceding ones. contained almost no
information on phosphate laser glass.

The authors of this book are participants in the development and investigation

of many types of phosphate laser glass, including the first, so that a sig-
nificant part of its content is based on their work, and the book itself does

not pretend to encompass the multifaceted problem of laser glass completely.

A discussion is presented of the results of physical and spectral luminescence
studies of phosphate laser glass. the study of the processes of excitation

of rare earth ions, transmission of excitation and relaxation processes in
laser glass. The obtained data indicate both the advantages of phosphate
laser glass over other glass and the potential possibilities inherent in these
types of glass. Physicochemical and lasing characteristics of this glass is
also presented. and phosphate laser glass is cospared with silicate laser
glass.

The book is designed for physicists interested in studying laser materials
and processes occurring in lasers, for technologists involved with improving
laser materials and the active elements made from them, and for laser
designers in need of specific characteristics of active elsnents vithout
which it is impossible to design and build lasers.

ﬁﬂll¢lﬂﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂZ(lVlY
The hook is written in six chapters.

Chapter 1 investigates the requirements on the physical parameters of laser
glass arising from the problem of optimizing the characteristics of lasers
of various types for various purposes. These parameters include, for
example, the spectral luminscence parameters which determine the energy
characteristics of lasers, including their efficiency. The Corresponding
parameters for lasers operating in the free lasing mode differ significantly
from those required for the short and supershort pulse modes.

Special attention is given to the parameters determining the applicability of
glass in powerful and superpowerful lasers, for which the nonlinear character-

istics, optical and thermal stability, and thermooptical distortions become
no less important than the efficiency.

Chapter 2 is devoted to the structure of phosphate glass. The structure of
phosphate glass differs significantly from the structure of silicate glass,

in the final analysis. insuring the advantages of phosphate glass over sili-
cate glass. The physicochemical processes occurring when making phosphate
glass determine its structure. having features characteristic of inorganic
polymers. This, in turn, determines the nearest vicinity of the ion activators
and the structure of subsequent coordination spheres, and at the same time
insures exceptionally good spectral luminescence and lasing characteristics

of phosphate laser glass and also the possibility of controlling its thermo-
optical characteristics.

The modern concepts of the mechanisms and laws of occurrence of the processes
of nonradiating electron excitation energy transfer in laser glass. An
analysis is made of various versions of ion-ion transfer, including the
excitation energy migration process and also the processes of multiphonon
nonradiating relaxation of the excited states of rare earth ions caused by
interaction with the vibrations of admixed hydroxyl groups and structural
elements of the glass itself. The discussion is primarily based on original
results of the authors, the greater part of which are pdalished for the first
time. For exhaustive substantiation of the uniqueness of the properties of
phosphate glass, the authors considered it necessary to expand the class of
analyzed objects by using other activators and glass-like systems, which
lends the obtained results a fundamental nature. The ideas and the results
of this chapter played an important role in the development of laser phos-
phate glass.

Chapter 4 is devoted exclusively to neodymiumrdoped phosphate laser glass and
the possibility of its application in various types of lasers.

The primary content of Chapter 5 is data on the thermooptical properties of
phosphate laser glass, the study of which permitted purposeful synthesis of
compositions with properties optimised as applied to specific problems. In
particular. in this chapter a study is made of the problems arising when

making glass for pulsed-periodic lasers and high-energy laser systems. In

both cases the advantages of phosphate glass over silicate laser glass are
especially clearly manifested.

FOR‘DFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FINICHHHKJA1.USE(HULY

Chapter 6 analyzes the spectral luminescence and lasing characteristics of
erbium-doped phosphate laser glass, and the specific nature of the construc-
tion of lasers based on this glass is investigated. Special attention is
given to neodymium laser pumped erbium lasers, inasmuch as the

combined systems of this type permit the creation of radiation sources in the
range of 1.5 microns which are similar with respect to lasing characteristics
to neodymium lasers, and in certain respects even superior to them in the
short and supershort pulse amplification node.

The limited size of the book takes it impossible to consider the properties
of phosphate laser glass coactivated by neodymium and ytterbiun, which is
prospective for application in powerful amplifiers. Those who are interested
in this subject can refer to the background material [#8, 82. 85, 101].

A bibliography containing 545 references was collected up to the end of 1979.
It includes the most significant publications, but does not pretend to com-
pleteness.

The collective of authors expresses sincere appreciation to all researchers
permitting use of figures from their publications. The corresponding foot-
notes are included in the text or in the captions to the figures.

The authors acknowledge the assistance of coworkers of the IRE [Institute of
Radio Engineering and Electronics], and the IONKh [Institute of General and
Inorganic Chemistry] of the USSR Academy of Sciences. and the "Rubin" PTO
[Production and Technical Association], together with which they studied and
made phosphate laser glass. They also acknowledge coworkers of the PIAN
[Physics Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences] and the GUI [State
Institute of Optics] imeni 8. I. stilov for useful discussion.

The materials of this book were distributed among the authors as follows:

N. Ye. Alekaeyev. 556.1 to 6.3, 6.8 to 4.10; V. P. Gapontaev. Chapters 3 and 6;
M. Ye. Zhabotinskiy, the introduction; V. B. Kravchenko. 551.4 to 1.6,

Chapter 2, §§5.l and 5.2; Yu. P. Rudnitskiy, 551.1 to 1.3, 556.5 to 4.6,

4.7 and 5.3.

M. Ye. Zhabotinskiy

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
INTRODUCTIGI

The 20-year mark of the laser age was reached in 1980. Industrial laser
production is being engaged in on a large scale and has acquired great sig-
nificance in the econonies of the developed countries. Lasers are widely used
in industry. construction. medicine and scientific work. Therefore the lit-
erature on lasers initially devoted primarily to investigation of such
physical problems as the problems of lasing and amplification, including
various operating modes of the laser, such physical characteristics as co—
herence and fluctuations of laser emission, its divergence and spectral com-
position, has gradually cone to include the analysis of problems arising in
the design. development. production and application of lasers.

As is known, the first laser was s ruby laser. It was punped by a pumping
tube. Soon a report came out on the first gas laser using a mixture of helium
and neon pumped by electric discharge. Thus, from the very beginning two
competing and mutually complementary areas were distinguished--the develop-
ment of solid-state and gas lasers. swsequantly. semiconductor lasers and
liquid lasers using organic (dyes) and inorganic liquids were distinguished
as separate areas.

The dewlopment of quantum electronics based on studying the physical pro-
cesses leading to realization of the laser effect hcdaclearly expressed
applied nature. Researchers set the goal of increasing the power of lasers,
their efficiencies. assimilation of a broader and broader range of wavelengths,
including the possibility of continuom wavelength adjustment, the assinila-
tion of variom operating modes from continuous lasing to supershort pulse
lasing, and an increase in frequency stability of laser emission. and so on.

This. in turn, stinulated the search for and the investigation of new active
media suitable for use in lasers. At the present time hundreds of different
gas mixtures are known (including pure gases and natal vapor). which are
capable of lasing at different points of the optical band--from the ultra-
violet region to aubnillineter. A nmber of crystals, liquids and glass of
different composition and an entire series of semiconductor compounds are
known, the nuliaer of which is growing constantly.

However. the mjority of materials for which the laser effect has been
studied have not found practical application, for the set of characteristics
providing for realization of certain specific goals is encountered relatively
rarely.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR OFFICIAL UM ONLY

Thus, the achievement of high pulse energy and maximum high power in the
short and supershort pulse mode requires high density of the active particles
which is characteristic of solid-state active elements. In spite of per-
sistent research and improvement of the methods of growing artificial single
crystals, until recently only two types of active crystals have found appli-
cation in industrially produced lasers. These are rubies and neodymium-doped
yttrium-aluminum garnet. The latter has found especially broad application.
for it successfully combines the mechanical and thermooptical properties of
yttrium-aluainum garnet with the laser characteristics of the neodymium ions

in this crystal. Recently neodymium-doped yttrium aluminate crystals have
been added to this list.

Continuous and pulsed-periodic neodymiumrdoped YAG and yttrium aluminate

lasers are being used successfully. They provide an average power on the
order of tens and even hundreds of watts, and in unique models, when using
special circuits and structures, they provide a power on the order of several
kilowatts. However, the cost of large monocrystalline laser elements increases
much more rapidly than the obtained power, which is explained by the diffi-
culties of growing large optically homogeneous samples.

Neodymiumrdoped glass was one of the first materials in which the laser effect
was obtained. The superior optical characteristics of the glass, the high
technological level of founding and working it, availability and relative
cheapness of the raw material insured rapid progress in the creation of laser
glass and lasers based on them.

The application of lasers in industrial production processes has required
mass output of laser glass, and the problems of laser thermonuclear research
have stimulated the manufacture of large active elements with dimensions
entirely unattainable by the existing methods of growing crystals.

Thus. glass has become the lost important active element for solid-state

lasers. For a long time. only silicate glass was used, the manufacturing
technology of which was developed to the highest degree in the optical industry.
The efforts of physicists and process engineers were ained at improving the
laser characteristics of silicate glass, its physicochemical and optical
parameters, such as optical homogeneity, radiation strength (body and surface),
and also chemical strength, therlooptical and thermomechanical characteristics,
adaptability to manufacture, and so on.

Efforts to create nonsilicate laser glass, for example borate and germanate
glass, did not lead to hopeful results.

The presented book has the goal of investigating phosphate laser glass, which
has recently become one of the most important materials for making the
active elements of solid-state lasers for various purposes.

Phosphate glass was known to specialists as nontechnological, it had a very
narrow range of application and was industrially produced in small quantities.
For this reason, for a number of years there was no effort made to create

phosphate laser glass.

FOR<0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
It was only in 1966 that the collective of researchers working at the Institute
of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, which
included the authors of this book, arrived at the conclusion of the potential
advantages of phosphate laser glass if such could be created. The conclusion
followed from the results obtained by this collective while studying the
luminescence of ions of rare earth elements in polyphosphoric acids and from
known concepts regarding the structure of phosphate glass. A collective of
coworkers of the Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, among whom V. V. Tsapkin and the late 6. V. Ellert

played a leading role, became involved in this research.

As a result of purposeful research, a method of synthesizing phosphate laser
glass based on alkali and alkali earth element metaphosphates was developed.
In the following year neodymiumhdoped phosphate glass laser elements were made
which had satisfactory physicochemical properties and were superior to sili-
cate glass with respect to the primary laser characteristics. Thus, the
width of the lasing spectrum of the new glass was 4 angstroms as opposed to

80 to 120 angstroms for silicate glass, and the efficiency was 1.5 to 2 times
as high under identical excitation conditions. Soon this glass, under the
name of LGS-éo, became the first industrial phosphate laser glass. The dis-
advantage of this glass was relatively low chemical stability.

It must be noted that studies of the possibility of creating phosphate laser
glass were performed independently at the same time by Deutschbein and his
cOworkers in France. They published comprehensive results of spectral
luminescence studies of a number of compositions for neodymium-doped phosphate
glass, and they reported that lasing had been obtained.

The phosphate laser glass of the IRE Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences
developed jointly with the L208 and called LGS-éo M, Les-61 and LGS—bz,
has improved physicochemical characteristics.

The second generation of phosphate laser glass of the IRE Institute of the
USSR Academy of Sciences was intended specially for application in large
industrial and research devices in which rigid requirements arise both with
respect to thermooptical characteristics of the glass and its efficiency.

The athermal characteristics of phosphate laser glass LGS-I were subsequently
reproduced also in the corresponding silicate glass.

A number of compositions of neodymium glass developed by the State Institute

of Optics imeni S. I. Vavilov and the LZOS and manufactured by industry under
the names GLS-Zl, GLS-22, GLS-23, 618-24, LGS-SS and LGS-56 must be included

in the second generation phosphate laser glass.

The next step in the development of phosphate glass was the creation of
"athermal" phosphate glass with reduced temperature dependence of the thermo-
optical characteristics (type LGS-H), with diminished concentration quench-
ing of luminescence and, correspondingly, with high activator concentration
(glass of the LGS-K type developed by the IRE Institute of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, lithium neodymium phosphate glass developed by the Physics
Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences). Recently work on highly concen-
trated glass has been started abroad.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In spite of the progress in improving the characteristics of phosphate laser
glass, one area has lagged behind, in which phosphate laser glass cannot
compete with yttrilm-alimimm garnet. This area involves operation in the
rapidly repeated pulse mode. In this mode the thermomechanical characteris-
tics of the material, especially its thermal conductivity and mechanical
strength, acquire primary significance. YAG crystals have simificant
advantages over glass with respect to both of these characteristics.

The known methods of strengthening glass, for example, quenching, have sig-
nificant disadvantages, song which long buildup to the operating mode and
negative effects on the thermooptical characteristics are the most undesir-
able.

The IR! Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences developed original methods
of strengthening the active elements mde of phosphate laser glass. As a
result, elements operating at a pulse repetition frequency of 10 hertz
develop almost the same average power as no active elements of the same
dimensions, under identical pumping conditions, but at appreciably less cost
and greater availability.

The more advantages of phosphate laser glass must be noted.

One of these advantages is manifested in large devices designed to obtain high
power short and supershort pulses with high emission density. Nonlinear
processes leading to the appearance of internal deterioration as a result of
self-focusing turn out to be limiting factors in this case. Correspondingly,
the limiting energy flux densities in phosphate glass are approximately twice
those in silicate glass.

A second advantage is connected with more efficient energy transfer between
rare earth ions in phosphate glass carpared to silicate glass. The use of
this advantage made it possible to develop high quality erbium laser glass
sensitized by ytterbium ions. The authors of the monograph obtained lasing
in the 1.51. micron range for the first time in this glass in 1969, using
free-running neodymium-doped glass lasers as the excitation source. Later,
the indicated erbium glass was brought up to industrial standards (type LGS—E).
for which, in particular, it was necessary to solve the technologically
conplicsted problem of deep dehydration of it. Systematic studies were also
made of the spectral luminescence characteristics of erbium glass and the
class of problems connected with optimizing the lasing characteristics of
both laser-pumped and tube-pumped erbium lasers. In 1913, one of the authors
presented convincing substantiation of the expediency of using erbium re-
emitters of neodymium lasers as amplifying stages of powerful laser systems
designed for various applications.

Another sensitized phosphate laser glass developed and systemtically studied
in those years at the IRB Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences was
neodymium (aensitizer) and ytterbiun (activator) doped glass which wm pros-
pective for use in the terminal stages of power amplifiers for pulses of
nediua duration. from 10‘6 to 10" seconds.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Recently, Soviet industry has developed and is manufacturing a number of types

of phosphate laser glass, and active elements for various purposes are being
made from it.

The orientation toward silicate glass prevailed for a long time abroad,
and there was no serious concern with the development of phosphate glass.

However. in recent years the situation has changed. Industrial phosphate glass
was produced in Japan. and later in the United States. This glass is used in
large production units and devices for thermonuclear plasma heating in the
United States. Japan and France. The developers of laser systems for other
applications are also becoming reoriented to phosphate glass.

The possibilities of phosphate laser glass have been far from exhausted. Many
laboratories are continuing basic research in order to improve the characteris-
tics of phosphate glass and glass with several glms formers, including
phosphorus. A significant increase in the average pulse energy and power of
lasers using glass of these types, possibilities of obtaining lasing on new
wavelengths, further shortening of the duration of aupershort pulses, the
application of active fibers, and so on should be expected.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW Ull'lLIAI. use ONLY

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 0“ PHYSICAL PARAMETERS 0P LASER GLASS

51.1. Spectral Lmineacence Parameters Determining the Energy Characteristics
of Glass

The phenonenon of forced (induced) enission, which form the basis of the
operation of all lasers is observed on interaction of the emission with a
set of excited atoms or ions in which the population of one of the excited
states with energy 3. is greater than on the lower-lying level with an energy
of Bk. The radiation is amplified on frequencies equal to the transition
frequencies between the indicated states, as a result of emission of light
quanta coherent to the incident radiation by the excited atom. The prob-
ability of forced enission, according to the theory of interaction of radia-
tion with matter is determined by the dipole not-eat (the oscillator force)

of the transition and intensity of radiation. Broadening the energy levels
of the atom as a result of their interaction with the envith decreases
the density of states in the given energy range and correspondingly decreases
the efficiency of the induced processes. The probability of the forced
transition "ind on interaction of an aton with a light beam of intensity 1(v)
is easy to find using the induced emission cross section 0(1)):

18,0!) -‘0 (v) I (v). (1. 1)
Key: 1. ind

0n interaction with not strictly Ionochronatic radiation distributed in the
frequency range conparable to the width of the spectral transition band
AVind' the total probability of the induced trmsition is

.. ._ a a '1 d. (1.1)
53 Su MW 9:. (v) (v) v a

Key: 1. ind "'( 1) (1)

If we consider that at the limits of this band
I(\-) - I - tonal.

then

m. a: l SaMdv = 10..

(1.1s)
where do is the integral radiation cross section.

10

FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
It is possible to show that on normalization of the function I‘(v) describing
the form of the spectral band, by l. we obtain

a(v) -ool‘(~). - (1.1c)

In accordance with the theory of interaction of radiation with matter [1], we
have

wlwlrthJo

(1.2)

where ‘nk is the dipole nouent of the transition, J-th is the radiation
energy flux with frequency v-(B.-Bk)h"1.

Fron expressions (1.1), (1.2), it follows that o olr‘tiz, and the induced
enission cross section on a frequency correspondfng to the maxim luminescence
bend v0 is inversely proportional to the halfwidth [No of the band. that is,

cl. (1. 3)
(1’ “3) ft: AT".

Let us consider how the intensity of the light beam with frequency v varies
on propagation through a laser active nedius. Let the populations 0 the “.31
and k-th levels. that is, the nunber of particles in the indicated states in

1 m3 be N- and :1. respectively. The variation of the intensity in the layer
of nutter dx thi is deternined by the difference in probabilities of enission
and absorption of photons:

at = (aw. - a..~.) I a: £ a...(N. - 3;“ In)! «1:. (1.1.)
5 .
since cﬂﬂﬁ‘ok" here gm, gk are the nultiplicities of level degeneration.

In the case of thermodynamic equilibrium Rn-NkexpGAE/kn‘r). that is,
k 31;", and the value of (gunk-skunk]. defines the absorption coefficient

0n integration of equation (1.6), we obtain the well-known Beer-Bouger
law:

”I (3);].04')‘

where x is the thickness of the layer of naterial through which the light
has passed. If the difference gklﬂn- “[0, then an inverse population
(inversion) is created in the nateri , and the radiation is amplified
(dI>0). The value of

(lan- («IN-)0.» (1.5)

is called the specific gain of the induced emission and is denoted by a .
In doped crystal or glass lasers. inversion is achieved on excitation of the

MOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activator ions using highly intense light sources, for example, pulsed pump-
ing tubes (run), that is. by optical pumping.

The inverse prOportion can be crested in s set of ions for which the follow-
ing conditions are net.

The level, the lifetime of which approaches the radiation lifetime, and the
quantum luminescence yield is close to one, correspondingly, that is. the

interaction of the ion with the surroundings leading to nonradiating loss of
excitation is wash-net exist in the energy spectrum of the ions.

Above the indicated level there must be at least one level (better, several
levels or a band) on excitation to which the ion quickly relaxes to the indi-
cated lower-lying level. Then this level (band) can be used as the excita-
tion (pulping) channel, and the inverse population can be created on the
lower-lying luminescent level called the upper laser level. It is desirable
that between the lower laser level on which the ion is incident as a result
of induced or spontaneous emission and the basic level an energy gap AE>kBT
exists. Obviously, in this case in order to achieve inversion it is necessary
to create a population expﬂﬁl 0:315] times less on the upper laser level than
in the case where the lower laser level is the nain level.

For realization of induced enission it is also necessary that the absorption
from the upper laser level on the lasing frequencies be absent or, in the
extreme case, the cross section of this absorption be such les;- than the
cross section of the used induced transition.

Ions, the spectroscopic characteristics of which are determined by their

a or p-electron states are unsuitable for obtaining the laser effect. Indeed,
the interaction of these ions with a crystal natrix leads to significant
broadening of the spectral bands and rapid nonradiating deactivation of the
excited states. which creates almost insurmountable difficulties in obtaining
sufficient gain for lasers.

Inasmuch as the (of and 3d-e1ectrons are located in the inner regions of the
atoms and interact with the intercrystalline field more weakly than the

s or p-electrons [2], the lumimscent and spectroscopic characteristics of
certain rare earth ions and metal ions of the iron group (primarily neodymium
and chronim ions) satisfy the previously enmerated requirements well. and
the laser effect was first obtained on them.

Let us present a brief description of the characteristic features of rare
earth spectra required for discussion of the interrelation of spectroscopic
and laser properties of glass.

As is known. in the spectra of crystals and glass doped with ions of rare
earth elements, narrow low-intensity absorption and luminescence bands are
observed which correspond to dipole transitions with low oscillator force.
These transitions are the result of the effect of intracrystalline fields on
the ions, for the transitions between states of identical parity in a free
ion according to Laports's law are forbidden. The standard oscillator force
of an optical transition in rare earth ions filo-6 to 10-5, which is
approximately 103 times less than in the transitions permitted in the dipole
approximation.

12

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'I'Iw Interaction of the electron shells of ions with thermal vibrations of

the matrix leads to bonding of the spectral lines called uniform, which
increases with an increase in temperature. At 300K, its value in the crystals
reaches 10 to 1) (11'1-

In glass where the far order is absent, and variations in the structure of
coordination spheres nearest to the activator ion are significant. the energy
SPeCtNm and Pauli-8815111” of transitions in the ensemble of activator
ions can differ sipificantly within the limits of the ensenble. The optical
spectrum of this ion ensemble is broadened nonuniformly. The magnitude of
this broadening in laser glass exceeds the unifora broadening observed at 300K
by 2 to 3 times.

The amount of nonuniform broadening can vary noticeably from level to level
even within the limits of the same multipleth state. which is connected with
some variation in symetry of the electron states and, correspondingly,
interaction with the crystal field.

The existence of electron-phonon interaction also leads to the fact that the
transition of excited ions to low—lying levels can take place not only by
spontaneous emission of photons. but also in nonradiating fashion, with
transfer of the energy to thermal vibrations. The relation between the prob-
abilities of spontaneous emission A and nonradiating transitions "b defines
the quantum yield of the luminescence:

,__L_=1!
q A.I.w° 1.

where To is the radiation lifetime of the excited state in glass, and r1 is
the luninescent lifetime of this excited state.

It must be noted that in cases where the energy gap between the excited and
lower-lying electron levels of the activator (AB) coincides with the energy
of the permitted vibrational transitions in the dielectric matrix,

wv>>A and q20. However. the probability of nonradisting transitions
decreases exponentially with an increase in AB, and the condition waa is
satisfied when the frequency corresponding to the transition between adjacent
activator levels falls in the region of transparency of the dielectric.
Therefore in crystals and in glass luminescence is observed from levels for
which AE>5000 cm'l, and uminescence is induced throng: levels at a distance
of no more .than 2000 cm" from each other and from the metatstable stator;

 

*Here and hereafter the energy is expressed in inverse centimeters. The
origin of the unit of inverse centimeter which has become widespread in
spectroscopy follows from the expression

hv-Ez-B

 

1!
which can be written in the form
1 - 32-31
1 hc

One electron volt (l.602-lO"12 erg) is equivalent to 8066 cm'l.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HOR(Hﬂﬂ(JAL US£1DNLY

The presence in the laser ions of a system of pumping levels and absorption
bands corresponding to then offers the possibility of creating a population
on the metastable level greater than on the lower-lying level by exciting
these ions by intense emission of gas discharge pulse tubes.

The efficiency of optical pumping is determined by the overlap of the
emission spectrum of the pulse pumping tubes with the absorption spectrum of
the laser ion and also the intensity of the absorption bands and Stokes
losses. that is, the fraction of the excitation energy which is transmitted
by thermal vibrations during nonradiating relaxation of the ion to the meta-
stable state.

Let us consider the active eleaent (A!) in the form of a flat parallelepiped
with dimensions :0. y . so. The pumping radiation falls on the AB perpendicu-
lar to the faces, the? is, parallel to the xraxis.‘ The power absorbed by an
elementary volume AV of the active element with the coordinates x, y. z.

n+6x, y+Ay, a+Az at the time t is

2.. (1.. I) .. 3'. (V. (HPNI'I I. M, II J') J] -'r-

.\ \'

-f- up |l.' (V. t. .4" (f -- mlII-‘(m 1. J')‘IV AV. (1.6a)

and for the power which is brought to the metastable level and for the Stokes
losses we have

y... (z, t) = v. jv-Ie. (v, 3) [exp (—1; (v, z, .2) :1 +
‘V - ' .

+ up n: (y. t, z) (z -. 3.)]! k (v. e. 12mm _ (1-6”)

' ""P‘w . _ (1.6c)

In relations (1.6a) to (l.6c) co(v, t) is the power of the emission incident
on a unit of the lateral surface of the element; the value of t (v. t) depends
on the quality of the illuminating system and. obviously, canno exceed the
power emitted by a unit surface of the plasma in the pulsed pumping tube:

the absorption coefficient k(v. t, x) takes into account the decrease in the
initial population of the ground state No on transition of part of the ions N1

 

*The calculations performed on a computer for a flat A8 made of neodymium
glass excited by a system of pumping tubes located along the large faces

of the AB parallel to the y-axis with a plane mirror behind then, gave
results close to (1.6a). The peculiarities of the pumping of a cylindrical
AB in an elliptic and other types of illuainators were investigated in

[3. 6].

16

IIIRIHHHCIA1.USEGMVLY
to the excited states; the factors expl-k(v. t. 2):] and exp[k(v, t. x) (at-x“)!
describe the attenuation of the light flux on its propagation in an active
elenent. Integration is carried out in the frequency range bounded by the
emission frequency of the laser v0 and the frequency of the edge of the fund-
anental band in the absorption spectra: of the dielectric matrix v¢.

Since the noted population is created only on the netastable level. on the
transition frequencies to this level the absorption coefficient is

k... (v, a, a) - k,(v)(1 - "32' ”), (1.7a)

 

and for the retaining frequencies

k. (v. t. z) - 1:. iv) (1 _ W). (1. 7b)
- 0

here k1-0(v)1No in the absence of degeneration of the levels.

Here the population of the metastable level link. x) is defined by the systen
of equations

JN. (l, s)

d! I- GHQ-’51s“. 3) " Na (‘1 1') 1i" (1’ 8‘)

N.(t.1)+N.'(l, 2) h N?
(1.8b)

In lasers using Nd“ ions N.(t, x)<<No(t, x)ZNo. and therefore the solution of
equation (1.8a) has the torn

1 .7 -
”1'“. 1) & (’59.)"| oxp(;’;)l‘ rm”, .4') 0Xp(--- {-ﬂl". (1.9)

The efficiency of using pulping can be characterized by the expression

Junk. y. r, ljdV
' (1.10)

S ‘5“, I)“ ;

Av

integration is carried out with respect to the entire body of the AB, 3 is
the surface area of the AB illuminated by the ILN.

I’-

As calculations and direct measurements performed for AB made of neodymium
glass indicate [3-5]. the value of F can reach approximately 502 of the

energy emitted by the 11.“. In a real illumination systen P4, increases as _
(«Po/J"? (I. is the transverse dimension of the AB) where (#01:) < it)" cu"
(Figure 1.1). The rel tion between the Stokes losses and energy fed to the
netaetable level of Nd is 0.7:1 for brightness teaperature of the us of
about $00!.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.1. Fraction of the radiation energyﬁabsot‘bed by the
glass as a function of the product of the Nd ion concentration
tines the thickness of the flat AB.

The radiation source was xenon discharge with current density

of 1 kiloenp/cnz

l. Phosphate glass
2. ' Silicate glass

The fraction of the energ§+abeorbed by_ the Br“ for laser concentrations
ufu~5'~10‘° on" or Yb for In» '2 was “-8 does not exceed 102 of the
energy enitted the 1m. Therefore sensitization of their luninescence. for
example. by Ed greatly improves the use of 3‘bthe purging and correspondinsly
ilproves the energy parameters of Yb“ or Yb” and! lasers.

The following condition lust be satisfied for lasing: amplification of the
snission in the active material lust conpensate for losses in the laser sys-

tem. This condition is realized when the inverse population on the nets-
stable level is equal to

”no. = WI (1011)

Key: 1. threshold

where II is the losses in the laser systen reduced to a unit length of the
inverse nediun, including absorption in the All. the losses on the mirrors and
to diffraction. If the lower laser level is the nsin level (a three-level
induced enission system), it is necessary to create a population equal to

N..- %-N. -l Nois-

on the upper laser level. If an energy gap AB, exists between the lower
loser level and the nain level, condition (1.11) is satisfied for

N.=- N.oxp[-:; .—‘ | New

Key: 1. threshold

16

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When AE£>>RBT and “azuthreshold’ the four-level induced emission system is

realized. Here the characteristic setup time for the thermal equilibrium
between the main and lower laser level ‘t defines the minimum laser pulse
duration, the generation of which occurs by the four-level system. During
induced emission or amplification of the pulses with duration t ulse‘Ti on
the lower laser level. an additional nonequilibrium population is created,
which decreases the inversion. and in these cases degeneration of the four-
level amplification system to a three-level system is indicated. When
tpulse‘<71' the laser pulse can "discharge" only a defined fraction of the
population of the metastable level, that is. the maximum energy lost to
induced emission decreases noticeably.

For exact consideration of the degeneration effects, in addition to the value
of ti, it is also necessary to know the structure of the lower laser level.
Since thermal equilibrium between the Stark components of the multipleth level
is established much faster than between the different states. an additional
population created by induced transitions in one component or a group of
camponents of the lower laser level, is redistributed according to Boltzmann's
law between all the Stark components of this laser level. and the negative
influence of degeneration decreases.

The induced emission cross section of the laser transition for an ensemble of
activator ions with uniform broadening is defined by the formula

OH) =- my‘v),

where 7(v) is a function describing the form of the line (gaussian or
Lorentisn). do is the integral emission cross section which is related to the
probability of spontaneous emission A as follows:

4" LI.
51‘"- g.

(1.12a)

a."

Here g1 and g2 are the multiplicities of degeneration of the levels.

In the case of a nonuniformly broadened spectrum o(v) is equal to the integral
of cross sections of induced emission of all particles on a frequency v:

° “0 "' S 5 PM. V’) a. (A) v (v. v’) dv’dA. (1.125)

AVO

where o(A. v') is the fraction of the particles for which the probability of
spontaneous emission is equal to A, and the maximum of the uniform line is
located on a frequency of v'; oo(A)y(v, v') is the emission cross section of
these particles on the frequency v.

Let us express the lasing threshold and energy efficiency of the laser in
terms of the spectral luminescence parameters of the glass. Let us consider
a four-level induced emission system and a square pumping pulse for which
50(v, t)-: (v) for 0<tst ing' and for simplicity we shall consider that

it is possgble to neglecgugge variation of the pumping intensity with respect
to the AB cross section.

17

FOI4OPFKJAL.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tron expreaaiona (1.9) to (1.12) it followa that

- 5-; 5 My) 33 $411332"? - °§P(-..‘-'.=‘-")).X

x96. ON“. (1.13)

where (hv )‘10: ia the total nuber of particlea excited by pumping par (:13 of
AB par un t ti‘e. q in the quantul yield of the lulineacence which ia aaaunad
to be identical for the entire mule of excited particlea.

'l'he pulping energy for which the _laaing_ threahold ia reached in
’33- W" “‘63": (1. 11.)
Key: 1. threahold

where EEe./c ia the relative namitude of the Stokea loaaea averaged with
respect to t e activator abaorption apectrun. V ia the voluae of the AZ.
tthreahold ia the tine the laaing threahold ia reached (as a rule.
tthreehold“'z)' vain; expreaaion (1.13). we obtain

‘ M. (9%)“ "V ' (1. 14.)
r”, -_ .. .
( ””4. 00.1.4) ﬁv, «way

u..." : ‘

 

av
Key: 1. threahold

It in poaaible to expreaa the integral in the denominator in tar-a of the
experimentally defined lunineacence para-atera of the slaaa: the quantu-
yield of the luaineacence q. characteriatic attenuation tine of the luinea-
cence ”(t d) excited by a light pulae of duration t . and
['00) in t ergﬁtude of the function normali'aad by one deggigﬁglidthe ahepe
of the luaineacance band on a frequency of v0:

‘ C . . ' . - 'r
H 934. Wu. (mum MM — 5.73211). (1. 16b)
IV. _ , , 1:; a)

Key: 1. threahold

In a laaer the lasing frequency v uaually coincidea with the frequency of
the maxim- luineacence band, «3 in thia caae

"" ‘ ). (1.15a)

7min cone: '

Key: 1. threahold

In the caae of ateady-atate owing the paying power for which laains occura
ia

18

MWLUSEONLY
-3 “IN _‘ Av.
ca; .79") 89)?- waMr ,T,~ (1.15b)

Key: 1. threshold

The intensity of the induced emission I passing through a- unit surface of the
working cross section of the active element so under steady-state lasing con-

ditions 1’ related to the pulping emission power absorbed by the A! as
follows:
(1))...“

NS. - m.(1 —

 

”(2 l'un (1. 163)

Key: 1. threshold; 2. ind

where w 1nd'k01 is the probability of induced emission; k is a coefficient
indicating how many tines the photon field inside the resonator is larger
than outside it: "id/'2 is the probability of 1minescent processes.

Using formulas (1.11) and (1.151)) and integrating with respect to tine, we
obtain the expression for the radiation energy of a laser:

(2)
-.-. mnb -- Jim 4- (Mm-1)]; (1.16b)
2’(1) (3) “(3)

Key: 1. ind; 2. threshold; 3. paying

for glass lasers the value of km. is approximately equal to one, I is the
active elenent length. Here the energy expenditures on maintaining the
threshold population and on the ltninescence processes which naturally are
not curtailed during lasing are proportional to the value of

“n 4 (In1)")°°¢°““‘mv. (1.16c)
Key: 1. threshold
the efficiency of the laser (2)
1
.- :9 '9 F41 — $9“ + (mp-9]; (1. 16d)

Key: 1. ind: 2‘. threshold

for rind» h e the efficiency ZFE. During pulping by the emia ion
of xenon ILN wit h all" arge current density on the order of 1 kilom/cn .
the value of PE for phosphate glass <12! of r . As we shall see, the
lasing threshold and efficiency of the laser dgpgdnﬁo a significant degree
on the spectral luninescence permeters of the glass: the intensity of the
absorption bands and their overlap with the pumping emission spectrun. the
lmnescence quantum yield, the magnitude of nonuniforn broadening of the
lininescence band and also the magnitude of the Stark splitting of the upper
and lower laser levels.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run cerium. UM URL!

The width of the induced emission spectrum, as nuerous experimental and
theoretical papers [6. 7] have demonstrated. is determined by the ratio of the
uniform and nonuniform broadening, the shape of the luminescence band, and.

in cases where the probability of the excitation transfer processes between
the active ions is comparable to the probability of induced emission, by the
energy migration rate. For illustration let 1. compare some of the spectro-
scopic parameters of neodymium-doped borate, silicate. phosphate and
gersanate glass. using the data presented in [/07].

The quantum yield for silicate, germanate and phosphate glass with a neodymiun
ion concentration of 210'20 cm" is 0.5 to 0.8, and for borate glass the
quantum yield is no sure than 0.1 to 0.2. The fraction of the pulping energy
absorbed by the A! from the phosphate glass is 20 to 501 more than for the
majority of silicate glasses. The laser silicate glass 80-2 which absorbs
pumping radiation just as well as phosphate based glass constitutes an excep-
tion. With respect to magnitude of overlap of the absorption spectra of the
"(13" ions with the nu spectrum, the garnanate and borate glasses, in our
opinion. are similar to silicate glass. In phosphate glass the minimum width
of the laser transition luminescence band is observed equal to 150 to 220 can-1;
in other types of glass. this value is 1.5 to 2 tines higher.

It must be noted that fluophosphate glass has spectroscopic characteristics
similar to phosphate glass. This is investigated in more detail in 51.6.

A comparison of the spectroscopic parameters of neodymium-doped glass of
various types penits a unique conclusion to be dram—phosphate glass has
optinal spectral luminescence parameters for laser application: namely.

quite intense bands in the absorption spectra- larger than in other types of
glass, induced eni sion cross sections. minimum width of the luinescence band
of the transition 3/p‘111/2. the quantum yield of luainescence in them is
0.7 to 0.8. Phosphate glass coactivated by Yb3+ and Br” or Nd“ and Yb“
ions also has good properties.

51.2. Nonlinearity of the Index of Refraction of Glass

As is known, the relation between the index of refraction of a transparent
dielectric and its nicroparanetera is defined by the wrest-Lorentz formula

(ﬂ, - 1)(B: {- 2"] .-.s gdpﬂl‘qa, (lo 17)

where A is Avogadro's nuber, M is the nolar ms. 9 is the density, a is
the polsriaability of molecules which on optical frequencies is basically
caused by polarization of the electron shells of the ions.

Under the effect of intense light fields (energy flux density >106 watts/m2).
the electrostriction compression of the material and increase in polarizability
lead to an increase in n by an amount proportional to the square of the
intensity mlitude of the light field:

'n-n.+ ngld'l’. (1.18)

20

MWWONLY
The term which is linear with respect to F in isotropic glass. just as in
centrosynnetric crystals, is equal to zero.

The coefficient of nonlinearity of the index of refraction n2 is a character-
istic of the material. and for glass 1: has values of (3 to 0.5).10'13 cmzlvoltz.

As the calculations show [8, 9], with a light pulse duration less than

10‘9 second, the primary contribution to n2 (up to 802) is made by the electron
polarizability caused by light induced dipole moments (these dipole moments
determine the intensity of the Raman scattering lines in the material). The
characteristic time for establishment of equilibrium between the nonlinear
electron polarizability and electromagnetic field is on the order of 10‘16 sec.
Other nonlinear mechanisms include the following: the electrostriction
mechanism and also orientation (Kerr) and nuclear polarizabilities—have
characteristic setup times on the order of 10'12 sec, and their joint contribu-
tion does not exceed 201 of the observed values of n2 of glass.

The nonlinearity of the index of refraction leads to the fact that on propa-
gation of a laser beam with gaussian or any other convex intensity distribu-
tion with respect to the bes- cross secti n in the glass, a positive non-
linear lens is "induced." Its focal length is determined by the magnitude of
n2 and the power of the radiation; if the focusing effect of the nonlinear
lens exceeds the divergence of the light beam, self-focusing of it is ob-
served. The power for which the nonlinear lens compensates the divergence of
the emission is called the critical or threshold power of self-focusing. For
radiation powers significantly exceeding the critical power, small scale dis-
tortions develop in the laser beam which not only have a negative effect on
the quality of the wave front. but with sufficient length of path of the
light in the glass. lead to breakdown of the beam into individual filaments
with very high power density and optical breakdown of the glass. The self-
focusing theory and experiment performed to study it are investigated in

considerable detail in the survey books [10. 11]. we shall only consider the
basic laws here.

If a quasicylindrical light beam with cross section diameter D and light
field intensity 5‘ is propagated in a nonlinear optical medium. then the
index of refraction of the medium inside the bean will be -- "-‘IIM‘mJ’.
where no is the index of refraction of the medium outside the bean. Here,
the rays incident on the surface from the inside, bounding the beam, sake the
transition from a medium which is optically more dense to a medium opti-
cally less dense, and with sufficiently large angles of incidence undergo
total internal reflection. The critical angle of incidence for which the
reflected ray is propagated parallel to the interface is defined by Snell's
law n sindcr-nosinU/Z). Since the angle of divergence of the beam 8 is
related to the angle of incidence o by the eXpression 0-1/2-0, then

0 -arcoos ' (M m
Key: 1. cr
21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A light been with divergence we“ will renein diverging; for °<9cr it will
be focused. Por diffrection divergence (id-1.22 MD the critical intensity
of the light field Bcr and the critical power of the bean tcr for which
oer-e d are defined by the expreeeiona

0' LI" ii mm?» 1.20

aim-~19 «7»,— . ‘ ’
. - I .-

:%-'_‘"_'Ja).“_’uz_'_"t' (1.20a)

Key: 1. or

where [Hg-nzlc-Zlvoltzlbmloynoc, J a the energy flux density (in units
of watte/ o

Obviouely. in the case of a wave with divergence o-HBd. the radiation power
must be H2 times greater than cu. in order to obtain ael‘f-focueing.

The dietance at which the light flux with plane phase front ia self-focused.
being propagated in a nonlinear nediul, is equal to

_p ("n.' ' ail/«3. (1.21)
”’Eb- 7“ W" M

Key: 1. nonlinear

For divergence of the mission 6 end power in the bean exceeding the self-
focusing threehold. the light been is focused at: distance R“:

7..- = ge- Emir. n. = 2,. (mm
- )

Key: 1. sf; 2. nonlinear

Using Snell's law, in the limiting caee it is easy to show that for gaueeian
distribution in the bean

‘ a
,. ~53 I
a; T -’ ﬂm‘ (1.22.)

Key: 1. eff; 2. nonlinear

where D ff ie the effective bean diameter, J ia the anxiou- flux density
in the Seen. In laser been of high (eupercmical) power Rafzknonlinear’

Applying the above-patented fornulaa. it ie neceeaary to consider that they
are valid only for nonlinear media in which awlification or attenuation of

2-2

POIOI’I'ICMLUSEONLY
the emission does not occur. In the presence of absorption k the minimum
power for which self-focusing is still possible is determined from the equa-
tion Rnonli ar-k‘l. The physical meaning of this equation is obvious: the
nonlinear e acts become insignificant at distances exceeding the length of
frvn path of the photon in the medium. In an active medium with npevific
gnln “8 the self-focusing develops faster than in a nonamplifying medium.
If the condition Rnonlinear°g>’1‘1° satisfied. then Rsf'2“(Rnonlinear“g)/“g'

instabilities develop in the light beam which, with sufficient length of the
nonlinear medium, lead to breakdown of the beam into a number of individual
small—scale beams and, consequently, significantly distort the wave front of
the emission. The instability of the laser beam increases sigiificantly when
small-scale distortions occur in the distribution of the emission intensity.
These distortions are the result of interference of the main high-power laser
beam with low intensity emission propagated at small angles ¢ to the basic.
The variations in the intensity lead to spatial modulation of the index of
refraction of the medium, which. in turn. increases the fraction of the
energy in the scattered emission and induced optical inhomogeneity. In
reference [13] it is demonstrated that the distortions in the intensity dis-
tribution with~§ran7verse dimension ark/(on) incregse at a distance L. as
exp{xL(YJ-K2/4k )‘1 2}, where x-Zr/a and E-Znn/A, J is the average value of
the radiation flux density in a laser beam.

The distortions with characteristic dimension determined by the equality
tin-21:2” are the most unstable. Their amp_li_tude Jmax increases as

I.
Jun: (L) = In" (U) "51’ {FY f7 (1) d1}.
0 .

and the self-focusing length is
O .
. 33-2- :3”??- (1.23)
k

‘ (1)
Key: 1. sf '

In reference [14] a study is made of the development of small-scale distor—

tions in the laser bequopggated in an amplifying nonlinear medium. Here
it was considered that J(L)-Joexp(oN1ndL).

According to the calculations using the abovepresented formulas for a
medium haMGwJ, the inhomogeneities (distortions) with

rm=0.8k YJinpc/“o are most unstable. the magnitude of which increases by
the law 11)

VJG

J..." (L) 2: In... (0) exp {0,735}; 7-; (“N"). . (1. 24)
O

l
1.
Key: 1. inp

where 31M is the average energy flux density of laser emission at the input
of the amplifying medium. (wind) is the specific gain of the medium.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently, for fixed enission power at the exit of the laser systan, the
buildup increment of the instabilities is inversely proportional to the
specific gain of the inverse nediu,- and the energy flux density which can
be obtained at the output of the laser system for given distortions of the
wave front is proportional..to..the square of the specific gain. With a gain
G<6.S, as the gain increases, the value of Km varies from

i/ijian/“O to 0.8i/y3ian/no [110]. Let us again note that the above-

presented foraulas are valid under the condition IJ‘dx/J «l. where 'J‘dt
is the total energy flux density of the emission responsigle for small—scale
self-focusing. For IJKdr/Jo'l the self-focusing theory is significantly
complicated and becomes less obvious than the linear theory of development of
small-scale instabilities.

 

 

Let us present the characteristic self-focusing parameters calculated for
phoaphate glass of the Les-M type: n 11.0'10‘ 3 cnzlvoltz, v-2.76o10'16 cmZ/
watt. the critical power in the bias 2.5~107 watts. In glass with
absorption coefficient k-10'3 cn' . self-focusing of a laser been 2 5n in
diameter is observed with the flux density greater than 5103 watts/en .

In the same gla_s_s small-scale focusing begins to develop at J>2~lo8 watts/m2.
With a density JZ3- 109 watts/m2, the radiation components with a divergence
of 1.S~10"3 rad are the most amplifying. They cause transverse nodulation in
the intensity distribution of the er bean with a wavelength of 0.7 ml.

The gain of the distortions is 6-10" oil and the self-focusing length is
about 50 cm. If a flux density of ~3‘109 watts/cu:2 is obtained at the
output of an amplifier about 50 ca long with 8-7.5, then self-focusing
does not develop, and 5 times less energy goes into the snail-scale distortions
than in the nonanplifying glass.

According to the data presented in [12. 16], it is possible to neglect the
influence of self—focusing (stall and large-scale) if the condition

I.
. %757(-ndl<3. (1.25)
s

is satisfied, where J (9.) is the average flux density (watts/m2) in the cross
section lagging a distance ’. behind the input cross section of the nonlinear
median (glass), 1. is the total length of the nonlinear medium The physical
meaning of this condition is clear: as a result of nonlinearity of the
index of refraction, the emission phase advance must not exceed 1/2. and the
variation of the divergence angle lust be less than the diffraction angle.

The value of II: for glass was determined by the interference method with a

laser pulse duration on the order of 10'"10 second. The increase in the index
of refraction in the investigated glass with an increase in emission intensity
leads to shift of the interference bands proportional to n2.

In performing these neasurenents, it is important to insure space and tine
coincidence of the integrating beans on the recording instrument and also
sufficient tine resolution when recording the interferograns [15. 16].
Slncate

LGS-267-2(GLS-7) 1.5696

GLS-l 1.536

I'D-2 1. 567
Phosphate

LGs-I 1.500

LGS—H 1.532

ROSS-1161 1.530

08-6 1.532
Fluophoaphate

Les-P 1.490

. 4v
1,.»

.I_I.

"nu u; .90 M "I

Figure 1.2. :12 aa a function of “D and up for silicate and

52
58
56

57
65
66
64
66
68

  

1.520.2
1.61!0.1&
1.52:0.3

10210.2
1.020.15

1.0m. 1
0.95

1.70
1.40
1.70

1.70
1.35
1.15
1.18
1.15
1.05

0.70

phosphate glass (1), fluoailicate and fluophoephate glass (2)
and fluoberyllate glaaa (3). The nulbera 3n the dotted curves

indicate values of n2 in units of 10'13 cu

The value of n can also be calculated. defining the focal length of the
created on propagation of the light beam with known power and

nonlinear lens2

[volt2.

gausaian distribution of the intensity [171.

25

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY

Using the Lorenz-Lorentz formla. the authors of reference [18] derived a

formula in which n2 is expressed in term of the optical constants of glass

“D and the Abbe nunber (or dispersion coefficient) vD-(nD-l)“ ac) (up. "I"
are the indens of refraction of glass on wavelengths of 58%.

6 .l and @36.3 nm, respectively) as follows:

. _ “a It“ '
u; . “N o ‘)( n+3! ‘ 10"‘cu’lb1:

.,,l1.517 + [(ug,+2j (an +59 wont—D}

;

(1. 26)

The values of n2 calculated by this formula agree well with the experimegtally
neasured values (with an error to-lo to 152), including when n2<2.5-10'1 cmz/
voltz. Por materials with n2>2.$'lo"13 cnzlvoltz. the calculated values are
systematically less than the experimental values.

The values of n neasured estperinsntally and calculated by formula (1.26) are
presented in Table 1.1 for Soviet and foreign laser glass.

The dotted lines in Figure 1.2 show the possible values of n2 for different
glass [14-17]. The index of refraction n and dispersion coefficient “D

are plotted on the coordinate axes. In pRosphate glass the values of oz are
much less than in silicate glass. Fluophosphate and fluoberyllate glass has
Iininum values. however, these types of glass are inferior to phosphate glass
with respect to technological characteristgcs and magnitudes of the cross
sections of the induced emission of the Nd ion.

91.3. Resistance of Glass to Laser Emission

The first papers in which breakdowncf transparent dielectrics by laser emission
was noted were published in 1966 to 1965. Since that time basic research

has been done both with respect to the physical principles of optical break-
down and the nethods of increasing the resistance of dielectrics (including
glass) to laser aission: the results of this research are generalized in the
surveys [19-21].

The problem of optical breakdown in naterials used in optics are the subject
of conferences held annually by the Rational Bureau of Standards of the
United States beginning in 1969 [22].

It must be noted that the physical picture of optical breakdown in laser
glass does not differ from that observed in other types of glass. 0n the
surface of the glass the damage appears at lower energy and flux densities
than in the body of the glass. In the case of damage to glass and light
breakdown, the threshold power on the entrance surface of the aalple is
always lower than on the exit surface, which is explained by the difference
in electric field intensities of the emission at the entrance and exit of
the dielectric.

Deterioration of the exit surface begins with the formation of snall spells-
tions, which, as the radiation intensity grows, increase in size. forming a

network of transverse cracks. The deterioration of the entrance surface
occurs in the majority of cases for flux densities of 'J>>Jp where Jp is the

26

M omen. USE ONLY
energy flux density for which sparks begin to be observed. The damage is
manifested in the form of individual burns which with high radiation intensity
fora continuous ring projections, and on exceeding (-3-5) Jp, traces of
continuous fusion and chips occur in the glass.

In references [23, 26] it was demonstrated for the first time that a reduction
in optical surface density of a dielectric by comparison with the body

density is caused by the presence of absorbing admixtures. Such admixtures
include the remains of abrasives, hydration of salt entering into the composi-
tion of the glass by atmospheric moisture, and so on. The concentration of the
absorbing admixtures in the surface layer up to 2-10" cm thick is estimated
at 108 cr3, and the absorption cross section is 10'9 to 10'11 cm . Absorbing
the radiation energy. the admixtures are heated to high temperatures, and the
adjacent volume of the glass is heated as a result of thermal conductivity.

with high radiation intensity, part of the material evaporates. and further
heating of it to the state of a low temerature plasma and the formation of
holes on the surface of the glass take place. On cooling of the heated region.
stresses and cracks appear in the glass.

It must be noted that multiple reflections in the crack layer of the glass

increasing the local intensity of the emission also lead to significant lower-
ing of the breakdown threshold.

It is obvious that the admixtures and defects in the glass surface have
distribution with respect to size and absorbing capacity. Therefore the
threshold of optical breakdown which depends on the parameters of the irradi-
ated admixture also has high dispersion. With an increase in the transverse
cross section of the laser beam incident on the surface of the glass, the
probability that an admixture capable of initiating optical breakdown for
given flux density will be irradiated increases, and the glass breakdown
threshold is lowered. On variation of the laser beam cross section from

3 to 11) nan , a monotonic decrease (up to tenfold) in the radiation flux
causing damage to the surface of the glass K-8 from the first shot with a
probability of about 502 was observed. It is also obvious that the body of
the glass adjacent to the admixture and heated as a result of thermal conduc-
tivity, increases with an increase in pulse duration tpu even in the case
where the thermal conductivity of the glass and the absorbing capacity of the
admixture do not change on heating. The radiation energy causing damage to
the glass must increase as the square root of the pulse duration.

The values of the flint density for which damage to the surface of the K-8 glass
and GLs-l laser glass begins for different laser pulse durations tpulse are
presented in Table 1.2 [26]. The experimental results presented in it were
obtained for light beam cross sections of about 1 cmz. The relation between
Jp and tpulse is described quite well by the expression

1.3.)". (en's We

According to the data presented in [21, 22], the failure threshold also

decreases monotonically with an increase in the pulse duration, but it does
not always follow such a simple function.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nt-erous experiments indicate that the application of any of the methods of
obtaining a surface of increased purity leads to an increase in the optical
breakdown threshold [21, 22]. The application of pickling of the glass sur-
face during the polishing process is especially efficient. The failure
threshold rises with the process of Iachining the surface by more than an
order-to 300-350 joules/cl:2 for ‘3 (50°10-9 second. Unfortunately, the
pickling effect turns out to be 331:. with tine the light strength of
the surface spontaneously drops to the mus-1 values. The reason for this

probably is looseness of the surface during hydration and contuination by
the dust particles in the air.

Table 1 . 2

 

,l I II "so!
, J mm. mm)

 

l. t , second

2. Pgﬂflge flux density, watts/a2
3. class R—8

10. class 618-1

The body failure of the glass can be broken down into two types: the differ-
ent types of internal chipping (cracks) and long hairline dalsge. The
chipping. as a rule, is obtained in glass during lasing and aqlification of
the laser pulses with high energy density (10 joules/cl2 and higher), which
is usually achieved with a pulse duration of 10‘”2 to 10'8 second. The hair-
line dansge l to 5 microns in diameter and 10 cm long (and sure) appears in
the glass under the effect of light pulses with energy flux densities exceed-
ing 108 watts/a2. The radiation energy density can be low (0.1 joule/cnz).

The thresholds of the hairline damage practically coincide with the thresholds
of small-scale self-focusing which sharply increases the local intensity of
radiation. Quite silple data about this type of damage is presented in [21, 22].

The came of the low threshold of body breakdown of glass is the presence

in the body of the glass of large (10‘3 to 10'2 on) defects of process origin.
Their concentration is less than 10 defects per liter of glass. The process
causes of the forsation of these inclusions in laser glass is rupture of the
founding vessel (inclining platinu) by the glass nslt. contamination of the
initial glus charge with adlixtures. licrocrystallization and nicroliquation
processes. The rupture thresholds of glass on netal platinm inclusions
under the effect of s quasicontinuom p se of duration on the order of

10‘3 set very fron 100 to 500 joules/cl depending on the type of glass. The
chips on the ceramic inclusions appear at somewhat higher densities (200 to
800 joules/uz). The odal stris cause rupture of the glass for energy
densities exceeding 10 joules/cu .

28

POIOW'IGAIJJSEONLY
In the case of the above-enumerated defects, the failure thresholds with laser
pulse duration of 10"7 to 10"8 see are an order lower than indicated.

Heating by laser emission of the inclusions of smaller dimensions (0.1 to 1
micron) leads to the appearance of stresses in the adjacent microvoluaes of
glass and quite strong scattering of light. On repeated irradiation, the
regions scattering the light spread, the magnitude of the thermoelastic
stresses in them reaches the ultimate strength of the glass, and cracks appear.
The failure threshold for t ulse‘10-3 sec in this case is greater than

103 joules/m2. In defect-gree regions of glass, the flux density threshold
leading to rupture coincides with the threshold for the case of devegopment of
an electron avalanche and is about 61010 watts/cm2 for ‘pulse:5'1°- sec.

The theory of thermal failure of glass for the case where the parameters of

the medium and the absorption coefficient of the inclusions do not depend on

the temperature, developed in [2b]. agrees well with the experth for sizes

of the inclusions of 0.1 micron or more. The nonlinear theory of thermal

failure. considering the dependence of the absorption and thermal conductivity °°'
efficients on tesperature- and considering failure as thermal explosion of the
inclusions, predicted a decrease in the "dangerous" size of the inclusions by
almost an order, and it also explained the threshold nature of the light break-
down of glass and the existence of threshold glow [27].

Unfortmately, the literature has no data on the thresholds of optical break-
down of phosphate laser glass. However, the operating experience of AE made
from phosphate glass in lasers for various purposes indicates that with
respect to radiation resistance, they do not differ from silicate glass.

51.1.. Thermooptical Distortions in Active Laser Elements

During luing, the laser active elenent (AB) heats up. The primary causes of
heating are absorption of the pumping emission by the glass matrix (funda-
mental and admixture), Stokes losses on transition from high excited levels to
the mtsstable level of the activator, nonradiating losses as a result of
difference in quantun yield of the luminescence from the metastable level from
one. nonradiating transitions frm the lower operating levels (for the four-
level lasing system) to the main level of the activator. Usually during opera-
tion of the laser, efforts are made to achieve uniform absorption of the II.“
emission in the body of the AB; here the heat release with respect to the
volume will also be uniform. However. the temperature with respect to cross
section of the AB varies as a result of finite (and very small) thermal con-
ductivity of glass and differences in the cooling conditions between the edges
and the center of the AB. Other possible causes of temperature variation

are inhomogeneities of the emission of the pumping tubes and absorption of

the emission with respect to the body of the AB (deviation from uniformity of
pulping), thermal heating of the surface of the element from the pumping tube,
and so on. These causes are related to peculiarities in the structural design
of the illuminator and can be eliminated on isprovement of it; therefore we
shall not consider them here.

29

MOWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The optical properties of the active elensnt during heating vary. but the
front of the lightwave passing through it, as a rule. is distorted. These
distortions are called thernooptical. For laser eleaents this effect was
noted for the first tine obviously in reference [28]. In this icon we shall
present general formulas which describe the thermoptical distortions, brief
information about the therlaooptical characteristics of phosphate and (for
couparison) silicate laser glass, and we shall demonstrate the influence of
the thermoptical distortions on the energy and divergence of the glass laser
emission. The dependence of the variation of the theraooptical properties of
phosphate glass and its composition will be investigated in more detail in
55.1 and then in 555.2 and 5.3 the general argu'aents of the given section will
be more specifically defined for two important cases of practical application
of phosphate glass, in pulse periodic lasers and powerful laser system.

Thermoptical distortions are related to two basic causes. First, the index
of refraction of the glass n varies with tenperature and, consequently, the
length of the optical path in the element varies. This case is realised in
a uniforaly heated AB in the for: of a rectangular plate with unattached ends.

In the presence of a temperature gradient with respect to cross section of the
active element, the length of the optical path at different points of the

cross section is different. A platy A8 with linear teaperature gradient along
one of the coordinate directions of the cross section is an emple. In both
of the indicated cases, mechanical stresses do not arise in the active element.
The optical properties of such elements are investigated in [29-32], and they
are characterized by the therlooptical constant w-dn/dMT(n-l). where (:1- is
the coefficient of linear thermal expansion, '1' is the tenperature. For an
element of length L. the difference of the optical paths Ap for points of the
cross section in which the temperatures differ by AT, is defined by the

siaple relation [29-33]

AP'LWM' (1.27)
This formula serves for determination of the value of it either with uniform
heating of the optical element and sinultaneous recording of the variation of
Ap [3‘] or with creation in the platy A! of a linear temperature gradient

along one coordinate and comparison of the optical paths for beams traveling
through the sections of the cross section with different temperature [32].

The second came of thermopticsl distortions is the photoelastic effect.

We shall consider two types of the most widespread AB here—the above-sen-
tioned rectangular plate I. in length and 2h thick. and a cylinder of radius R
and length I. (here two versions are possible--a long cylinder with L>>R

which we shall consider in the greatest detail. and a disc with R21” On heat-
ing. mechanical stresses arise in the cylindrical AB and in the plate AB

with fastened ends or nonlinear temperature distribution with respect to
cross section. The orientation of the two principal axes In and n; of the

stress tensor in the cross section of the cylinder and the plate is illustrated
in Figure 1.3 [35]. The stress with respect to the third axis 733"!" is

directed along the elongation I. of the plate or the cylinder (perpendicular
to the plane of the drawing). for a cylindrical AB, the two main conponents

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the stress tensor in the circular cross section are directed along the
radius of the AB ("1'“rr) and perpendicular to the radius (nz-n“). For the
plate A! the stresses nl-n and nz'n in the cross section perpendicular

to the elongation. are parﬁlel to thxyfaces of the plate except the regions
near the boundsries of the AB noted in Figure 1.3 by the crosshetched area
where the boundary effects are felt (jut as on- the fastened ends of the long
plates; see, for exnple [35, 36]). These regions are not considered further.

 

Figure 1.3. Orientation of the principal axes n and n of
the stess tensor in the cross section of a cylindrical Ea)
and plate (b) A! [35]. The areas in which boundary effects
are observed are crosshatched.

Let us first analyse the thernooptical distortions in a cylindrical AB.
Usually it is seemed that the temperature distribution in such an element
is radially synetric and does not vary with respect to length of the AB.
‘lhe directions of the principal axes of the stress tensor in such a case
corresponds to Figure 1.3. and the components of the stress tensor reduced
to the principal axes are [31, 37, 38];

'- u'? .‘i, .’ "
M'MH‘T} ..
-- s i i, (1.28)
M-X—.(7-‘+-y—r,(r)_).
ﬂu=ﬁy+n~.

Here or is the coefficient of themllexpagsion (51R), B is the modulus of
elasticity. u is the Poisson coefficient, TR and ‘1' are the average :eepers-
ture with respect to the entire cross section of the AB and with respect to
the cross section of radius r. respectively:

1:
?n - %!T(r)rdr.
7'! “ﬁg-5mm.

In the presence of stresses. the indexes of refraction for beans with linear
polarization in the direction of the radius of the elelent and perpendicular
to it will differ as a result of the photoelastic effect, which for a body

31

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

isotropic in the free state is characterized by the photoelastic constants
c1 and Oz describing the variation of the index of refractions of light with
oscillations parallel and perpendicular to the direction of the stresses
[37, 39]. (In some experiments the values of B . and-3' having signs
opppsite to the signs of c1 and C2 are used instead of the values of Cl and
C2.

Knowing the magnitudes of the stresses in the AB, it is possible to calculate
the variations in length of the optical path. The calculation for the steady-
state case-laadng in the continuous mode or in the steady-state mode with
periodic pulse repetition with off-duty factor exceeding the thermal relaxation
time in the AE—-is the simplest. If the directions of the principal axes of
the stress tensor r and 6 (the radial and tangential polarization) lie in the
polarization plane of the light wave. the variation in length of the optical
path Ap at a distance r from the axis of the cylindrical AB is given by the
following expressions [31. 37. 38]:

MW) - L 6543*1c4n.) .—
. _.g(:f_3m(cl"lcs)-i';+ ”(n-1H:
+11???» ‘0‘ + 300170} (1.29)
an. (r) - Lug; - %(0. +09] rm +' . (1.29)
+m‘-’_5,;;(cr—c.m+[aru-n +.
'73 ' _ -'- 1
4-Way -| seal“).

 

Here the notation is analogous to that used previously. In these formulas

the temperature dependence of the physical characteristics of the glass
(except n) is not considered, and dn/dT is assumed constant. This is admissi-
ble only for small average pumping powers per unit volume of AB and for
lightly varying operating temperature of the laser. Below, we shall demon-
strate how important it is in a number of cases to consider the temperature
variations of the properties of the glass. The above-presented formulas per-
tain to the steady-state case. In the single and rare pulse mode. the temperb
ature of the AB depends on the time. This case and also the operating mode
of the laser transitional to steady-state are discussed in detail in a number
of papers [31, 38, 60-43].

For plate A! usually the case most frequently realised in laser systems is
considered where the temperature varies only along the thickness of the plate
(the coordinate x in Figure 1.3, b). Then under the assumption that surface
forces are absent, the regime of the two-dimensional stressed state is
realised for the A3 with the following values of the principal components of
the stress tensor [29, 31]:

B a
n“-nvs':I.—”[';7.IT(1)¢I;_T(I)]; (1.30)
The corresponding expressions for the differences in optical paths in the
plate AB have the form [29, 31]

Ap,(z) — L ‘3;— _p26,]1'(z).

. d" . «,3 . . (1.31)
Ap, (x) - 1. [37 4. m (c; + co] r (x).

In [38, 42] it was demonstrated that when determining the absolute magnitude
of the variation of the index of refraction of glass it is necessary also to
consider the contribution from the excited activator ions which will be con-
sidered below. However, in the majority of cases the radial dependence of

n for small temperature gradients in the cylindrical AB is described well by
the formulas analogous to (1.29).

These formulas are sinplifigd significantly if we use the so-called thermo-
optical characteristics P, U and 0 which are combinations of other physica-
chemical parameters of the glass and, what is very significant, can be
determined independently [33, 56. 45]:

Wa§+um—u

P dn “1-3

=ﬁ-w—.,.,(€. 4-30.). (1'32)

«,3
The value of H already mentioned earlier characterizes the variation of the
optical path in the AB free of stresses, P characterizes the magnitude of the
optical inhomogeneity averaged for two polarizations in the A3 with mechani-
cal stresses, Q characterizes the magnitude of the Optical anisotropy induced
by the stresses (birefringence). Now expressions (1.29), (1.31) can be re-
written in the form [31]

Ap,_,(r)= L|(P:EQ)1'(r)=F QT'i-(W-Pn'nl- (1,33)

Here the top signs pertain to the radial stress (r-polarization), and the lower
signs, to the tangential stress (6-polarizstion. For plate AB [31], we have

a
—’ _ . .L. . .
Ap.,,(z) L[(W P-i 0) afﬁrms; I (P10) Tog]. (1.34)

The upper sign here pertains to light polarized along the x-axis, and the
lower sign, along the y-axis. values of H, P and Q and their temperature
derivatives for a number of silicate and phosphate laser glasses are presented
in Table 1.3. More detailed data can be found in [47, 48]. The thermo-
optical characteristics-vary linearly with the temperature in the first approx-
ination [34, 48, 49]. W and P increase with an increase in temperature,

their temperature coefficients are similar, and for laser glass they amount

to (0.09 to 0.25).1o-7 r2 [34. 1.9]. The value of dQ/dT is appreciably
smaller: (-0.01 to 0.03)'10‘7 K'z, and the temperaturevariation of Q can be
neglected. In formulas for thermooptical distortions it is necessary to use

values of P and a corresponding to the temperature of the medium surrounding
the laser AB.

33

IN)! OFFTCIAI.IISIZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

£335 -9 :3 :3 ”13 °.‘.‘

5 , 0.01
we- 6- 51a 1.5 — T
“8"” :- -: 2'; 3-0:. - -
Egg-Ft“ 9 :1 £5 '— -—- :
Kass-$1? :1: "g : ._ _
Lass-v1 ad -1 1.5 1' I 5.

 

*I.ead phosphate glean with anall valuea of Q [49]; the characteristic w for
this type of glaae ie Ieaeured for 70": at l -0.6lolo nicron. For the nejority
of other typea of glean the characteriatice are preeented for 0°C and
x-1.06 licrona.

M)«-0.63 nicron.

For practice, it ie not the aheolute value of the difference in optical
patha for a defined croee eection of AB that in important. but the variation
of Ap with reepect to trace aection, which dependa on the fore or the AB and
the te-perature distribution. The ceee of heat releaee which is uniform
with reapect to volume and constant in tine ia conaidered neat frequently.
Under theae eteady-etate conditiona the taperature distributions in the A2
are parabolic [31, 35, 50] and. for cylindrical and plate AB they have the

torn r,
T =T -AT 1—. ).
(r) H (31 .7" (1.35)
Key: 1. cyl
' I 'I - H (1.36)
Key: 1. rect T(z)-T.+4Tu(i—{r).

. (1)
Here r and x are current coordinatee for the cylindrical and rectangular

plate AB, reapectively, 61' end A'l'r ct are the teqereture gradients between
the center end the eurfacecgavinga gen erature 1'0) of the cylindrical end
rectangular Al. For enall AT, where it in poaeible- to neglect the temperature
dependence of the thermoptical characteriatica, the differences in the
optical patha between the center of the AB and acne point of the crane sec-
tion for the cylindrical and rectangular A! are equal to the following,
reapectively [31. 33. 50]:

”W082“?
AP“. (0) " AP“ (7) '3 L (P d: '3') AT“:

to
(1)? (1.37)
Key: 1. cyl
Ap...(0)-Ap...(z) ¥=L(P£Q)AT.-;‘;. (1.3s)
‘ ' (1)

Key: 1. rect

here let us detersine the differences of the optical paths for beans with
orthogonal polarizations coinciding with respect to directions with the prin-
cipal axes of the stress tensor in the transverse cross section of the All:

. AMr) — MW." Lard % (1. 39)
Key: 1. cyl
' !
Ap.(x) - Ap.(z) - 21,616 {r (1.40)

Key: 1. rect

The phase shift between these beans can be obtained by multiplying the right-
hand sides of the last two for-alas by ZI/l, where l is the wavelength of the
light. The quadratic dependence of the phase shift on the coordinate indi-
cates that the cylindrical A! is equivalent to a spherical lens. and the
plate AB is equivalent to a cylindrical'lens. here, for the plate AB the
light linearly polarized with respect to x or y axis retains linear polariza-
tion on passage through the AB.

The energy characteristics and divergence of the laser enission depend on the
themaptical distortions. In a resonator with flat mirrors and as. with
respect to the cross section of which the difference of the optical path
changes, the angular divergence 6 is proportional to the square root of the
difference of the optical paths in the AR [51, 52]. This difference'is con-
sidered equal to the sun of the moduli of the minu- and minimum (having
ordinarily another sign and the maxim) distortions of the light wave front
passing through the AB. He shall discuss this problem in more detail in 55.2
devoted to pulse-periodic lasers. In accordance with the fornulss (1.37) and
(1.38) for difference of the optical paths. the divergence increases with an
increase in the average pulping power deter-lining the teqaerature gradient

in the AB and with an increase in the values of (no/2) or (MO). The closer
to zero these values, the smaller the divergence and for the same lasing
energy, the higher the radiation brightness. In Pigure 1,1. the angular
divergence is presented for the emission of a periodic laser with cylindrical
cooled AB 7 m in dineter and 120 Ill long as a function of the temperature
gradient in the AB. The values of P and Q for the majority of these types of
glass are presented in Table 1.3.

35

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For small pulping powers where the temperature gradients and the thermo-
optical distortions are small. the lasing energy increases with an increase
in the pumping power (Figure 1.5). Then as the optical strength of the
thermal lens increases, the luing energy begins to decrease. For GLS-l
glass, the focal length of the induced positive lens decreases with an in-
crease in pumping power (Figure 1.6). Figure 1.7 shows the variation in
lasing energy in each pulse with an increue in pumping power for glass with
different values of (PtQ/Z). Here the lasing energy drop takes place faster
the larger the dispersing effect of the thermal lens, that is, the smaller
the value of (P-Q/Z) in the negative region. Since the thermooptical char-
acteristics vary with teaperature, in reference [42] the concept of the
optimal teqerature T0 was introduced, for which the values of (P-Q) or (P-Q/Z)
are equal to zero for rectangular and cylindrical AB. respectively, for
neodymitn containing glass on a wavelength of 1.06 microns. Prom Figure 1.7,
where the data are presented for room tenperature, it is obvious that for
(P-Q/2)-0 the energy parameters of the laser are the best.

The measurement of the values of P and Q entering into the formulas (1.37),
(1.38) is quite labor intensive, and therefore in a ntmber of papers efforts
are made to relate the values of the focal lengths of the thermal lenses and
the-generating characteristics of the lasers to the more easily measured value
of 1'. Thus. in [57] it was found that the focal length of the thermal lens~
in the AB increases with a decrease in absolute magnitude of H. Values of w,
the angles of divergence 0 in the single pulse mode and in the periodic mode
and the relative efficiency of the laser (with respect to the efficiency of
613-1 glass) are presented in Table 1.6 for a nuber of types of laser glass
[56]. In the periodic mode the measurements were taken on cylindrical AB

20 ml in diameter and 260 III long which together with the IPP-SOOO tube were
placed in a block of LII-318 glass silvered on the outside. The cooling of
the rod and the tube we realized by running water. The pulse frequency was
equal to 0.1 hertz, the average puping power was 600 watts. In the single
pulse mode the pumping was carried out in an illtninator with four tubes
IFP-SOOO. the pumping energy was 18 kilojoules, the pulse duration was 1 milli-
second. As we shall see, in order to increase the radiation brightness as a
result of decreasing divergence while retaining the efficiency. the value of
I“! lust not exceed 10'10‘ [(-1 [56]. The correlation of the values of H and
the thermooptical distortions characterized by (HQ/2) (see (1.37)). is
related to the linear relation between i? and P for a series of glass types
found in reference [55] when investigating a large nmber of types of glass
of different composition. The situation changes for the "athermal" glasses
with small values of P [48]. As an exanple, in Figure 1.8 the variation of
the focal power of the thermal lens in cylindrical AB 7 mm in diameter by 130 II
with an increase in temperature gradient is illustrated for two types of glass
[56]. For large values of the thermoptical characteristics it and P, when
the contribution of the value of Q is small (the values of Q-for the majority
of ordinary types of laser glass do not exceed 1°10"6 r1). H can be used
with admissible error for estimating the magnitude of the thermooptical dis-
tortions. Por "athermal" types of glass with PZQ, me of i? in place of

P and Q can lead to improper conclusions regarding the magnitude and nature
of variation of the induced optical inhomogeneity (the glass 615-22;
previously Kass-1621). However. even in this case by the value of w it is

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080015-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible to judge the; the given glsss lust belong to th
glass. The value of W depends on the dispersion of the :

 

(a) 11m- _
"’" 9r (1)
M
:J
M
:0 - m
/
L___L___.I—nb—J I
‘7 m' ' w an"? w
Figure 1.10. Angular divergence of Figure 1.5. Ls
the emission of a periodic laser "8 es s funct
with cylindrical A! made of e m for s cyl
GLS-l glass (1). (18-2 glass (2), elenent 6 II in
ROSS-3 glass (3) and GLs-22 nsde of 615-1 3
glass (’0) [52]. Key:
The dots are the eacperinentsl 1. V8, I1
data. and the curves are the - 2. cpl-IP’
calculated dsts.
Key:
n. 6, minutes
ta
{a
0
a
~¢ ..
.' ..' " C..-"ll (a) I

Figure 1.6. Pocsl length I of the induced positi

function of pulping power for s cylindricsl AB 6
by 130 m made of 61.8 -1 glsss [50].

l -- o-polsrizstion, 2 - rbpolsrizstion
Key: s. :PWP’ kilowatts

37

MOWIJSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600080016-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1/

__ ..__.__
I
I
. / .

3k\\
‘ Q .l
\\r me;

\‘~- -
‘——°—.‘

1: J,- “

_.——---- --;.-..:-.-:<.>

 

Figure 1.7. Variation of the lasing power with an increase in
average pulping power [56].

G1ass mes-1621 (1). moss-9199 (1')..xcss-v-16 (2), [(1193291 (2')
and mes-mo (3). o-qm-o (1), 0.5-10-7 (1'), 4-10" (2),
-s-1o-7 (2') and -12-1o-7 r1 (3): (mom-4.104 (1). 1.5-10-7
(1'), -2.5x10'7 (2), -3-10-7 (2'), and 4040-? x-l (3).

The solid line 1. the calculated values for monk-1.40-7 r1.
The ratios of V for the investigated pming powers to ”8

in the single p e node are plotted on the raxis.

 

Key: .
a. ‘pm' watts
Table 1.6
lld3F con- ”, 10" 0 in the Relative e in the
Types of glass centration, r1, periodic effi- single
2 by weight A-l.06 node, ciency pulse node,
nicrons minutes ninutes
1128-36-2 2 55 18 1.1 5.6
613-1 2 38 16 1.0 5.2
KGSS-3 2 l7 9 0.8 3.7
Silicate 3 11 10 1.0 3. 1
Silicate 3 8 8 0 . 9 2. 8
Silicate 2 6 6 0.8 2.3
Borophosphate Les-61 3.5 lo 8 1.2 -
Silicate 2 2.5 7 - -
Silicate 138-46 2 -1 7.5 0.7 1.5
Phosphate LBS-60 3.5 -16 15.5 1.1 5.6

[39, 109]. Table 1.5 shows the lost probable values of w on wavelengths of
6M. and 508 u for silicate and phosphate glass corresponding to the zero
values of the thermoptical characteristics of P for a wavelength of 1.06
microns at a tewerature of ZIP(2.- depending on the differences in the indexes
of refraction for two spectral lines of hydrogen 1, and 1c (wavelengths of

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
”I'M-l5?! (b)

   

a: w u
.‘r' W/JM I, In"

. 4: Am"

0

Figure 1.8. Relation of the focal power of a thermal lens

to the glass parameter [56].

The experimental values of the focal power of the theml lens
corresponding to redial III: (1) and tangential llf. (2)
polarization power respectiwa

 

 

GLS-Z
[USS-1621
Table l. 5
moo "13.5' 19
1500 45 23
1900 17 so
Table 1.6

 

 

Cvlindrical A3 P_l_a_te A! - - -
row-1: 7:29“: 1'”. c. for'c

    

—152 -125
615-2 —1 1.1 —73 —61
#3:“;3 “a :%
6&2}? _ o _'.”J 43

MWWONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

686.1 and 656.3 nm) [46]. The values of w in Table 1.5 are somewhat higher
than those found in [56] when looung for laser glass insuring high radiaticm
brightness. “ensuring H. it is thus possible to select the compositions of
the "athermal" glasses with small P and then more precisely determine the
thermooptical characteristics for cospositions close to optimal.

For large average paging power the temperature gradient in the AB can reach
100K or more [57. 59]. In this case it is necessary to consider the telnet-a-
ture dependence of the thermooptical characteristics, primarily P, for

dQ/d'l'ZO [49]. Then the expression for the difference of the optical paths
between the center of the AB and the points with the coordinates 5 equal to r/R

or :lh, respectively, for a cylinder and a plate, acquires the following form
52 :

Aim... (9 - w 1mm...) (1. Ar) 9 + n. (M) 91.

. (1.41)

where m- “9573 9-5;”‘2g:
5mm“ .— p. $on + e (r + 2m). (“‘2’
n4“, (1', AT.) - P. :0. + 0(7' + 241's). (1.1.3)

Here '1‘ is the temperature of the lateral surface of the AB reckoned from the
standard for which the values of P0 and 00 are introduced (for example, 0°C).
Thus, in order to decrease the thernoopticel distortions, glass is needed
with small values not only of P0 and Q . but also 0. Considering formulas
(1.42), (1.63), the values of the "opt2mal" temperature minimizing the values
of n20. M x ), in accordance with [lob] are defined by the following
express one gr cylindrical and plate AB:

To“. ;- 1' (Pg-i 00,2)lol (10 ‘4)

Tu..- — (p0:t (”’0‘ (1.105)

The optimal operating temperatures of lasers with cylindrical and plate AB
calculated by these formulas are presented in Table 1.6 [52]. abs-22 is
phosphate glass, and the remainder of the glass is silicate glass. Figure 1.9
shows the teqerature dependence of the angular divergence and lasing energy
of the periodic laser with cooled cylindrical AB 10 I in diameter by 120 -
nade of (38-2 and (15-22 glasss with a tequerature gradient or between the
axis and the surface equal to 20'C. As we shall see. the minim divergence
of the emission is reached in the temperature range between the values of

To, and 10¢ (for rectangular AB, between Taxeand ‘1' , respectively). The
optimal temperature previomly determined in refer-ghee [69] for lasers with
small tewerature gradient anally decreases in this interval. but the
valuaof To considering the temperature dependence of the thermoptical prop-
erties are physically more substantiated. For T<T° the radiation pulse energy
(Figure 1.9, b) decreases, which can be explained f52] by an increase in
losses in the resonator as a result of deflections of the beam by the
peripheral zones of the A! permits access and exit of them from the resonator.

60

non omcul. use ONLY
The formulas (1.104) and (1.65) are inexact. for they consider vanishing only
of the value of n (r 6’ x y (see (1J2). (1.103)). Here additional diatorb
tiona determined y ng'ana depending on the coordinates, a and AT are
retained. In 55.2 when analyzing the thermooptical distortions in the A!

of pulse-periodic lasers, it will he demonstrated that with an increase in n].
at least for one polarisation the therlal lens in the A3 with- the teaperature
gradient can be cmletely ‘elininated only for glass with 8-0. In real opti-
cal glaas, however. 820.06'10'7 r2, and for ordinary laser glass
020.1010" ['2 (Table 1.3). In [58-60] it use demnstrated that during
operation of the laser in a wide temperature range the angular divergence and
the emission energy vary sharply as a function of the temerature behavior of

H and P. and this dependence turns out to be the weakest for phosphate glass
type LGS-H with 0:0.09-10-7 r2 [59. 60].

(A) ”.0— all

      

Figure 1.9. Teuperature dependence 0f . angular divergence

6 (a) and lasing energy 78 (b) for 03-22 glass (1) and

618-2 glass (2) [$2].

The ratios of the values of ”f are plotted on the y-axis
8

in Figure 1.9, b for the invest ated temperatures and at
roon tenpersture.
Key:
A. 9. minutes

0n introduction of polarizing elements into the laser cavity. the birefringence
effects in the AB becone significant. They can have a sharp negative influence
on the output characteristics of such lasers [61, 62]. Only one characteristic
—the value of Q--enters into the expressions (1.39), (1.40) for the difference
in optical paths of the beans of mutually orthogonal polarizations. One of
the possible methods of improving the characteristics of lasers with polarizing
elenents is creation of glass with very small values of Q. The requirement of
thermoptical distortions lust be ntisfied also in this case. and, conse-
quently, the glass must simultaneously have sull values P. Such glass can be
created only on a phosphate base [106] (Table 1.3). The variation of Q for
phosphate glass will be considered in detail in 55.1.

Up to now we have talked about long active elements in the shape of a
cylinder or rectangular plate. In the case of discs, the therﬁooptical dis-

tortions are characterised not by the previously indicated values of P and Q,
but by the parameters w. R and Q1 [63], where

«r . r.- _ ,
Q n. (Ir ('1 ~1)” — arL‘ +1, 0' r: at“ Q72}.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The variation in length of optical path of. two. polarizations of light is
An... (r) - 1407+ 52 a: o.) r (r) — 9:53.: of».
Key: 1. ave '

where '1'“. is the average temperature of the entire disc, 7, is the average
temperature of the section of the disc with the radius r. The variation of
the thermoptical paraneters with teqerature is not considered here, although
in disc lasers operating in the periodic pulse mode. the temperature gradient
between the center and the edge of the disc can reach 60‘C [610]. It is_
possible that the absence of considering the temperature dependence of v. R
and 01 led in reference [63] to significant divergence of the experimental
and calculated values of the arms of 11+}? . For the glass investigated in
[63], R is a positive value. and therefore in order to obtain the minimum
thermooptical distortions. when the sum 3+}? must be close to zero. the value
of W must be negative. Actually, the mining: distortions are observed in
discs made of glass.with negative values of w [63, 65]. The glass based on
phosphate can have R to -60o10'7 r1 [36]; therefore these types of glass are
well suited to use for disc lasers. However. themooptical distortions in
the disc active elements and the laws of variation of the values of R and 01
with the comosition of the glass have now been investigated insufficiently
well.

The thermal lens deter-ined by variations of the index of refraction which
are caused by the tmerature gradients in the A! was discussed above. The
variation of this theml lens in tine is determined by thermophysical and
geometric parameters of the active element; the time constant of the thernal
lens for the single pulse mde is seconds and sore. The other cause of var-
iation of the index of refraction in glass is variation of the polarizability
of the activator ions for transition of them to the excited state which takes
place with time constant corresponding to the lifetime of the activator
luminescence and the component part M3" 0.1 to l nillisecond. The different
variation rate of the index of refraction offers the possibility of separating
these two effects in the AB [66]. The measurements performed in [66] indicate
that for “(13" ions in the glass. the variation of the polarizability “1.06
on the lasing wavelength for different glass is on the average
(0.8:0.l)-10‘25 cm3. The corresponding variation of the index of refraction
with respect to cross section of the A! for neodymium-doped glass is

71"]. “7‘""AN'm

Key: 1. refr; 2. inv

where AN1 v is the variation of the inverse population with respect to cross
section 0 the AB. Its value is not measured directly. If we assume [66]
that it is about 251 of the threshold inverse population (1.5 to 2)-1018 cs'3,
the value of “ref: will be about (2 to 3)~lO‘7. For glass with CP:Q)>>0,
this additional variation of n altost has no influence on the focal power of
the total induced optical lens. for the tmerature gradient arising in the
AB as a result of one puping pulse is approximately (0.5 to 20) K [31. 62],

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and An is (20 to 100 )olO‘7 or more. respectively. For (P2020, the value of
An“;If for one of the polarizations will become comparable to the variation
of n as a result of thermal effects during the operation of the laser in the
single pulse mode (small AT), and it will be negligibly small by comparison

with the therml variation of n when operating in the periodic mode
(large at).

51.5. Thermophyaical Properties and Thermal Strength of Laser Glass

In this section we shall consider the thermal node of the Al, the thermal
strength of the A3 and mthods of increasing it and also certain methods of
decreasing the temperature gradients in the A! during operation of the laser.
As a result of poor thermal conductivity of glass. the tmereture gradients
in the as made of glass are appreciably greater than in crystals. For descrip-
tion of the thermal conditions of the an it is sufficient to consider the case
of uniform heat release with respect to volule in the approximation of a contin-
uously operating internal heat source. This approximation is the most justi-
fiable for the steady-state with continuous operation of the laser or with
pulse periodic mode with pulping pulse repetition period appreciably less

than the thermal relaxation time of the A3 (for example. the repetition fre-
quency is much greater than 0.1 hertz for a cylindrical A8 made of glass with
radius of 0.14 cm [31]). In this approximation the temperature field 1'(r, t)
for the cylindrical A3 with radius R at a distance r from the AB axis at the
time t is defined as follows [31, 5‘7]:

T(r.i)— T.-1€[1+%_%_.
4.2! fidele(gﬁh)‘lp(— pz';T‘3)]' (1.“)

Here To is the surface temperature, q is the power of the heat release per
unit volume. 1 is the coefficient of thermal conductivity, a is the tempera-
ture of thorns diffusivity. A and "n are the coefficients which depend on
the hint nuber Bi-EIR/ 1h (d is t e heat exchange coefficient) characterizing
the heat exchange conditions. Io is the Bessel function. The temperature
gradient between the center and the edge of the AB is relatively small for
the single pulse mode, it increases in the periodic ads with an increase in
the pulse repetition frequency and it reaches a mead.“ value of AT“ in the
steady-state mode [31]; it is

. , ,
ar .-r(0.:).-1'.(R.¢)- ". (1.1.7)
. ' ("1) . I .I in

Key: 1. at

In other words, 61‘ depends on the radius of the AB and on the thermal conduc-
tivity of the material. The transient heating processes were investigated in
a mater of papers, for example [38, 60-42. 67, 68]. In these cases the
temperature gradient is less than AT", end therefore in order to discover

the limiting possibilities of the AB made of glass. it is sufficient to
consider only the steady-state mode. For plate AB the temperature gradient

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between the center and the side surface in the direction of the x-axis
(Figure 1.3, b) is deter-ined analogously:
.1
M..-' .
<15 57*
Key: 1. at

Then we shall consider only the cylindrical AB. For the calculations it is
convenient to characterise the heating state of the A]! by the relative
temperature 9 [31] defined as
9 - 2.2—1.1».
AT.._ (1‘)
Key: 1. pulse

where T“ is the temperature at the given point of the cross section under
steady-state conditions. To is the surface teqerature, “pulse is the
increase in the temperature of the A3 in one puping pulse.

in “lee-Olen. where Q is the energy absorbed by a unit volume of the A! in
ong pumping pulse, c and o are the specific heat capacity of the glsss and
its density. respectively. The results of calculating the relative tempera-
ture on the axis of the A! made of silicate glass under steady-state conditions
as a function of the pulse repetition frequency and radius of the cylindrical
A3 are presented in Table 1.7. The Diet ntders correspond to liquid cooling
of the AB. As follows fro. the table. the heating is approximately propor—
tional to the pimping pulse repetition frequency.

The magnitude of the relative temperature 6 under steady-state conditions

for e ruby rod with 8-0.2 on for 81-10 is 1.1 for S hertz and 9.10 for 100 hertz,
that is. as a result of high thernal conductivity the ruby elenent is heated

10 to 20 times less than the glass element (for the one value of rival“).
Since the temperature gradient in the cylindrical rod increases proportionately
to the square of the radius, for glass lasers with high average lasing power

it is expedient to select thin active elements of long length (or in the case
of discs, large cross sectional area). An important characteristic is the
thernal conductivity of the glass which nut be selected as large as possible.
The value of ‘h for glass is usually 0.6 to 1.10 watts/(ark) (moon-0.0032
cal/(cm-sec-K) [31, b7. 48]). The variation of the values of "h for phosphate
glass of different composition will be analyzed in 55.2.

The temperature gradients lead to the occurrence in the A3 of mechanical
stresses. The corresponding expressions are presented in 51.6 (formulas (1.28)).
For a limiting value of the temperature gradient. the stresses exceed the
strength of the glass, which usually is 3 to 10 [cg/1.2 [31, 39. 69], and then
failure of the AB takes place. For cylindrical AB 10 - in diameter and

130 u long nade of silicate glass with the upper defective layer removed by
pickling. the marina temperature gradient is 70 to 90 K [67, 69]; for phos-
phate glass 25 to 1.0 K [107, 69, 70] (for more detail see 55.2).

64

F0! OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
Table l. 7

Values of 0 £0
7 1190.! ta . 3-0.: on

hertr 3.-” In.» I shuosl

        

1'

     
  
 

    

R-O.‘ cu

31-100 I III-100 .

    

 

As is obvious free Table 1.7 and expressions (1.66). (1.67). the tenperature
gradient in the AB increases with an increase in the pulping pulse energy
and repetition frequency. The liniting frequency for cylindrical A! (above
which failure of it occurs) mder steady-state conditions is deter-ined fro-
the expression [31] p..- '

I: 7<nm"" "' .. -. (1.53)
. lug—13842 2)

 

I

Key: 1. pre; 2. pulse

where to is the stress leading to failure of the seterisl. a is the

coeffi ent of thaml diffusivity (a-lh/cp). For AT .-l K and standard
values of the p raneters for silicate less “-600 Ere-2, 0147-10040“7 r1,
2-6.5-105 hg/ . u-o.2a. «no-3 a2 see an 3-0.2 as. we have 1<37 hertz.
Using elseents node of silicate laser glass with stall transverse cross sec-
_ tion. it is possible to obtain a pulse repetition frequency of 100 or nore
hertz [71, 72] and also lasing in the continuous node [72, 73]. however. as
a result of large .tensrature gradients and the thereal lens effect. such
lasers have poor energy characteristics and their efficiency is 0.02 to 0.11.

The thermal strength of phosphate glass is muslly 2 to 3 tines lower than
silicate glass [67, 69, 70]. In [73]. a study was lads of the liniting
resistance to puqing power of A3 2.5 II in disaster nade of phosphate.
fluoberyllate and silicate glass. The lasing threshold in a single pulse for
rods lads of phosphate, fluoberyllate and silicate glass was 1.5, 2.6 and 6
joules respectively. The paying power for which failure of the AB occurred
was 650, 800-1000 and 3000 watts. Phosphate glass turned out to be insuffi-
ciently strong. and lasing in the continuous node could be realised only on
silicate glass. In the quasioontinuom node on phosphate glass with the
conposition ZnLil,(P03)6. lasing was obtained on pulping by the emission of
a xenon tube operating on alternating current with a frequency of 50 hertz
[74] (Chapter ’0).

It is lmown that the mechanical and thermal strength of glass can be increased
by special treatnent [39, 75]. In order to harden silicate laeer glass,

special Iechanical treat-ant of the surface of the A! with selection of the
optinel height of the unevennesses on the surface [76]. fire polishing [76],
pickling of the defective surface layer [67, 69, 77], ion exchange [71, 79],

65

”WWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and quenching [70, so] were used. The last three methods are especially
effective. Thus. the ion exchange method increase the strength of the
silicate laser glass 80-2 by five times [78. 79], the quenching method
increases the maximal temperature gradient which the AB withstands without
failure by more than threefold [70]. The process of strengthening phosphate
glass has been studied appreciably less. and only in the nest recent years
has it been possible significantly to increase the thermal resistance of AB
made of phosphate glass [58, 59, 70. 81]. This is very inortsnt. for it
permits efficient use of "athensal" phosphate glass with small magnitudes of
the thermooptical characteristics P and Q in order to increase the average
lasing power of lasers with snall angle of divergence of the emission 65.2)

As is obviom from the preceding discussion. decreasing the radius of a
cylindrical Al: or the plate thickness leads to a decrease in terperature
gradient in the AB. Therefore it is possible to use fibers of films made of
glass where cooling can be rude most effective, and the temperature gradient.
snall. However. decreasing the transverse dinensions of the A8 unavoidably
leads to an increase in the radiation divergence. A survey of earlier papers
with respect to glass fiber can be fomd in [82-85]. In recent years. in
addition to the study of the lasing and Amplification effects in fibers made
of ordinary glass (see, for enmple [86. 87]). a study was also made of fibers
made of especially pure quarts with M203 [88, 89]. on which it was possible
to realize lasing during pulping using a saniconductor injection laser [90].
Lasing and anplification of light were also obtained in film ends of sili-
cate glass using the diffusion light guides created in the silicate glass
[9l~93]. Efforts to nuke phosphate glass film with the composition “95°11.
[94] by radio frequency spraying of the crystals of the same comition
with decreased concentration quenching of lusinescence of the ltd3+ ions did
not give good results: the lifetine of the Nd” luinescsnce in the films
was approminstely 8 microseconds. which is appreciably less than in the
initial crystals (55 to 120 microseconds). The laser effect on films nade of
phosphate glass has still not been obtained.

Let us consider another factor. which determines the temperature conditions
of the AB—the power of the heat release q. This heat release power is
connected with the absorption of pulping light in the A! and with nonradiating
losses munereted in 51.6. The puping light is absorbed by the glass matrix
as a result of the presence of inactive admixtures: there is also natural
absorption in the short wave..as a rule. ultraviolet part of the spectra:

and absorption by the activator ions. The absorption by the matrix takes
place only on heating the AB, and it is desirable to reduce it to a minimum
by using pure reagents and filtering the shortest wave part of the pumping
ttbe emission. However. with such filtration part of the useful absorption
is also lost simultaneously (in the activator absorption bands). Let u con-
sider this briefly in the example of glass doped with M3" ions (the spectro-
scopic properties of Nd3+ are discussed in more detail in Chapter ’0). The
absorption spectrum of M3" consists of narrow bands which can be broken

down into three groups in the range of 350 to 530. 580 and 680 to 880 nm [5].
Figure 1.10 shows the absorption spectra for ans-4 silicate glass and Les-ho
phosphate glass together with the transnission curves of filters made of
three types of glass—K-ZOB, 08-12, 15-14 [5]. In contrast to phosphate

46 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
glass, silicate glass usually does not have absorption bands at 350 nm. and
therefore a filter made of K-208 glass has no influence on the activator
absorption or the lasing characteristics of the glass. The use of the other
two filters significantly decreases the lasing energy, especially for phos-
phate glass (Figure 1.11). Efforts were made to decrease the reduction in
lasing efficiency during filtration, for example, by the application of
luminescing liquid filters, the material of which absorbs the shortwave
emission and emits the longer wave emission (see, for example [96]); however,
such filters have ordinarily low light strength.

The role of Stokes losses in the heating of the A3 for individual groups of
absorption bands of N113+ is illustrated in Figure 1.12, b [5]. It varies
with variation of the absorptivity of the neodymium glass, which for cylindri-
cal AE depends on its diameter d and on the activator concentration ”ha (as
the square root of the product of these values). The energy absorbed in the
680 to 880 nm bands makes 20% contribution to the heat release and about 402
contribution to the maximum admissible lasing power (Figure 1.12, a); the
latter was calculated in [5] by the total tube pumping energy absorbed by the
activator5+under the assulption that the quantum yield of the luminescence

of the Nd is equal to one, and the energy losses to heat are connected only
with the Stokes shift between the given excitation band and the Nd3+ lasing
band by 1.06 microns. The total pumping energy absorption for the cylindrical
AB 10 In in diameter by 130 mm is 6 to 121 of the electric pumping power [47,
S. 97. 98]; approximately half of the absorbed energy can be converted to
lasing power with these dimensions of the A8 [5]. The actually attainable
efficiency of the glass lasers with small A! usually is less inasmuch as the
lasing power decreases not only as a result of Stokes losses. Figure 1.12
shows that on variation of the absorptivity of the AB, the contribution of

the blue green and yellow absorption bands to the lasing power and heat varies
sharply. For Hudd-l to 452 the maximum admissible lasing power is given by
the yellow band and only about 202 by the blue green bands; for N "dd-15, the
role is reversed. Here the contribution of the short wave bands to the heat
release for large values of p "dd reaches 651. The thermal conditions of the
an very correspondingly for identical filtration conditions. In spite of
improvement of the thermal conditions of the AB on filtration of the short
wave part of the pulping emission, in this case, the decrease in lasing
efficiency that occurs makes consideration of the thermophysical and strength
characteristics of the glass permitting a decrease in the requirements on the
pumping filters highly significant.

The use of narrow-band pumping sources of the type of seniconductor light
diodes and heterolasers, dye lasers, Raman lasers, and so on operating in the
range of $00 to 900 nm and matched with the absorption bands of the activator
is a radical method of decreasing the heat release as a result of Stokes
losses and absorption of the energy by the glass matrix. With these pumping
sources, in particular, continuous lasing was obtained on the A! made of
neodymium-doped phosphate glass [99]. However, the power and efficiency of
the existing narrow~band pumping sources still are insufficient, and they are
used predominantly in experimental devices. For powerful systems, "double"
conversion of the energy, for example. tube pumping of the "('13+ lasers and

47

F08‘0FFKJA1.USE¢DNLY
Key

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.10. Curves for the opticel density D of 61.84 glue (1)
and Les-60 glue (2) 5 III thick and the trmliseion curves t

of filters node of 1-208 glass (3) 3 m thick, 08-12 glue (6)
end Its-14 gnu (s) 1 m thick [95]

.m

    

.. m -' 0?” 'I~“(”‘7A; 2N ‘bl ”I.“ (A)

Figure 1.11. Losing pover es s function of the pupins power for
ans-6 glass (s) end 108-40 glue 0) without filtration (1) and
using filters node of {-208 glue (2), 09-12 glass (3) and

16-16 glass (5) [95]. The recioe of. the lasing power for the
investigatedenergy to the lasing power nesr the threshold are
plotted on the y-sxis.

j oules

subsequent use of these lasers to pup the A! node of Yb” end Br“ doped
glass can turn out to be effective. This significantly improves the thermal

conditions of the output stege of the laser system Such a converter is
described in Chapter 6. ~-

68

MWMWLY
3-: ”I 2 .1
' Iva-£7 b)‘ WW

Figure 1.12. Variation of the contribution of the energy
in the 0.63 to 0.53 band (1), 0.58 band (2), .68-0.88 nicron
band (3) to the maxim- lasing power (a) and heat 0:) as a
function of the activator cogsentration and disueter d of the
active element [95]. I'M-10 cn'3, the diameter d in cu.

51.6. General Description of Laser Glass

Now. after discmsing the intonation about the lost significant characteris-
tics of laser glass, we can conpare glass-like laser materials with other
types of naterials for lasers. The laser effect is now obtained in solid,
liquid and gaseous media. The Interials of solid-state lasers are divided
into two basic types—seniconductor crystals and films and Interials with
predominantly ion structure containing rare earth elenents or certain 3d-ions
(Cr. Co. Ni) or having color centers as the activators. Each type of laser
has its own area of application. mterials with ion structure can be
crystalline (including in the for. of thin nonocrystallinc film or fibers)
and vitreous. Laser crystals are investigated in the nonograph [100]. Three
crystal materials basically now have prac ical significance: ruby A1203:Cr3+,
yttrit- elulintll garnet (YAG) ryusolzmd and yttriun aluninate

YA103:Nd3"'.

The vitreous laser naterlals prinarily belong to the classes of inorganic
oxides or fluorides of glass. Glass as a laser asterial has a amber of
advantages by cowarison with crystals [68, 83, 8‘]: namely.

1) The possibility of obtaining it in large values with comparatively low
cost.

2) Sinplicity of manufacturing products of alnost any shape and size.

3) High optical homogeneity and small losses (-0.001 cn'l) to inactive
absorption on the lasing wavelength.

4) The possibility of variation of the physicochenical, spectral luminescence
and lasing characteristics within significant linits for glass technology

and for the developnent design of lasers and selection of the optimal conbina-
tion of these characteristics.

109

MWLIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5) The possibility of selecting thermooptical parameters which insure
uininun distortion of the light wave front (£1.10) and selection of nonlinear

optical properties insuring that maxim- lasing power will be obtained for
short duration pulses (51.2).

6) Broader absorption bands of the activators, inproving the matching with
the pulping sources; the possibility of eliminating polarizaticn effects
(variation of the optical transparency of the active mediu- under prolonged
exposure to pulping light) as a result of the corresponding additives.

The deficiencies of glass by conparison with crystals reduce to the following.
1) Horse thermal conductivity (by more than an order less than in crystals):

2) Horse mechanical properties—less hardness. lower modulus of elasticity
and strength. This is illustrated by the data in Figure 1.8, in which sone
physical properties of ruby. YAG and glass are compared [31, 84].

3) Greater luminescence band width, snaller induced radiation cross section
of rare earth activators; consequently, smaller gains and higher lasing
thresholds. For Nd“ ion and YAG, the max-nun cross section of the induced
emission for the main laser transition is 810'” a2 [100]. in glass
(l-b.7)-10’20 m2 [47, 108, 101-105]. however, this factor turns out to be
useful during the operation of active elements in the anplification and
Q-switching nodes, especially in powerful system, for it offers the possi-
bility of obtaining high radiation energy fron one element.

 

Table 1.8
Properties Rub: YAG Glass

Thermal conductivity watts/(Ir!) 23 lb 0.3-1.3
Hicrohardnaas, Its/“2 2100-2000 1320-1300 300-600
Hodulm of elasticity 107 gg/anz 4.3-4.6 0.29:. 0.05-0.09
Bending strength, 10 kg/cn 3-6 1.75-2.1 0.3-0.8
dn/dT, 10-6 r1 1.0-1.0

(for no) 9.86 -10- (+10)

Lasing is obtained in glass for an entire series of rare earth ions. In
Table 1.9 sons of the laser parameters of glass via! different activators
are presented. The studies were performed in different laser systems and on
elements differing with respect to size. optical quality, inactive absorption
and other parameters, and therefore the results can be conpared only with
great caution. The me of aensitizers perlits significant inrovelaent of
the characteristics of the glass with certain activators. for exalple, with
Br, Tn, no. however, on the wh le, the lasing thresholds for glass doped
with Yb“, H03”, 003*, 103+, '0- ions, are very high, and the lasing
efficiency is low. Therefore only Nd” doped glass and, to a lesser degree.
Yb” and Br“ doped glass have acquired practical significance at the
present time.

50

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
, an: ”www- ....... ' g
mm m»- m -
(1) 25'3".” <53" " ”I: .. """"‘ «1 .0)
Guam-MID Nd” '3oo_ cpm-ulm 1.03. 0.1 (m s_ 0.9 [as]
. . (mm)
s ' a ‘ s. s s : 2.5 55 4 [73]
0'!"ch mum
l' (1;; ' ' o 1.05 . s o > '2.9. [73]
Gut-dame (11,) s . a _ ,3 - 1.06 s s . 1.5 [73]
to (15) Th” . ' _ ”6"". 0.5‘2 6.5 70 ' mo ‘ [33]
Cnnnmnos (16) Ho" 77 'Iév'l. 2.0‘6 ”00 I83]
. Er” o ”ta/2""wz 1.35 s 2L 1100 I33]
'- 1'11” " . ”En-”m 1.015 s 2‘ ~ mo [83]
. ' Pr" 0 scram 1.047 6.1 53 '150 - [as]
. . Ca” 13 0P,,,—.-sm 0.315 s 24 4300 [as]
I .
. w“ 71’ m n’ll 1.85 x 21' ' 55 nos:
. \ ' u . '
Key:
1. Types of glass 11. Silicate
2. Activator ion 12. (fiber in sheathing)
3. Operating teaperature. K 13. Pluobaryllate
4. Transition llo. Phosphate
S. lasing anelength. m 15. Borate
6. Size of cylindrical element. 1- 16. Silicate
7. nineter
8. Length

9. Lesing threshold, joules
10. Data source

Let us consider the basic groups 'of Edy-doped laser glass in sonewhat more
detail. Ordinary inorganic glass includes compounds of nodifier eleueats
(oxides and halides of the Iajority of metals) and glass forming elements
($102, 3203, P205, 6e02, Bel? . ‘l'e02, in some cases A120 . and so on). The
spectroscopic and lasing stuﬁies were performed for silicate. phosphate,
borate, gemnate, fluophosphate and fluoberyllate glass. The spectroscopic
properties of Nd” have also been studied for tallurite, sulfate, chloride,
fluozirconate, nitrate and acetate glass. The lasing data for such glass
are almost unavailable. and we shall not consider these systaas in more
detail. Let us only indicate the possibility of obtaining quite high induced
radiation cross sections a for lld3+ tellurita glass-mapproxintely
9-10-20 on2 for the transition ‘13,? 111/2. by the spectroscopic estimates
nude in [106]. At th sane tine, other authors give significantly smaller
values of a: 4.7010“ 0 a2 in [107]. where continuous lasing is obtained

'51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on tellurite glass with Nd” for longitudinal pI-ping by an argon laser,

and 2.3.10’20 cmz in [102]. Recently synthesized glass based on sulfides
and oxysulfides of rare earth elements and gallium can turn out to be highly
prospective [108, 109]. In these types of glass, the intensity of the
absorption and luminescence hands of Nd3+ is appreciably higher than in an
ordinary oxide or fluorine containing glass as a result of an increase in
the degree of covalence of the bond between the activator and the atom
surrounding it. The studies of such glass are only beginning.

Laser glass is characterized by several tens of parameters describing the
physicochemical, thermooptical, spectroluminescent and lasing properties.
Comparing laser glass with respect to all parameters is a problem which goes
far beyond the framework of the given paper. We shall try to give an analysis
in general form of some of the most signifith properties for use in laser
systems for the most important groups of laser glass. Basically the character-
istics -. already investigated in 551.1 to 1.5 and also the mechanical and
chemical strengths. the adaptability for manufacture and cost of production
of the glass will be cowsred. Then, in Chapters 3 to 6. when analyzing the
individual properties of phosphate glass, a more detailed cowarison of it
will be made with other classes of laser glass, and the advantages of phos-
phate glass for use in different laser systems will be demonstrated.

Th§+sulmnary picture of the properties of various classes of laser glass with
Nd ions is presented in Table 1.10. The ranges of variation of the physica-
chemicsl properties are presented approximately with the use of references
[07, 1.8, 101, 103, 110-116], spectroluminescent and lasing prOperties, using
the results of [67, 48, 73, 101-103, 112-118]. The omissions in the table
indicate the absence of systematic studies.

The most widespread now are silicate laser glasses [1:7, 68, 119]. About

1:0 types of silicate laser glass have been developed in the USSR and abroad.
They are the cheapest and are the most adaptable for manufacture, they have
good mechanical and chemical strength, they offer the possibility of obtain-
ing large castings of high optical quality. The magnitude of the cross
section of the induced emission of “(13* ions does not exceed approximately
3-10"20 (:12; the coefficient of nonlinearisy o; the ndex of refraction n2

is comparatively large (more than 1.4~10' cm lvolt , which limits the
possibility of using the glass in powerful systems with small pulse durations
(fractions of a nanosecond). Detailed information about the properties of
industrial silicate laser glass are presented in [67]. A deficiency of
silicate g1ass,is the relatively hig values of the thermooptical characteris-
tics w and p «21010-7 r1, rgs.1o' r1 for a wavelength of 1.06 microns,
51.4), which does not permit selection of the compositions combining good
thermooptical and lasing properties.

Germanate glass almost has no advantages over silicate glass. but it is
significantly more expensive. which makes industrial use of it inapedient.

Borate glass has comparatively large induced emission cross sections of M3"
(to 3.8-10’20 cm2) and satisfactory thcmooptical characteristics, but low

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«Ta «To Ta 73 .o

8787 oﬂun ab. 73 .m
omuuoouu oo~uo~ Hum “no” .a
”33
unauauowuwso Hauwuaooauugh
n.e.o.u o.n-o.o «nu canon .o aoﬁuooo
«mono nououuuu vaoauan
Solos 80.723 avg—000.95.“!
.0 nomad condonondasa
2.2 8.8 E .awzuﬁuxnmz 38
mo vans ounoaoonaisu
0:» mo suvwsauuu
33.32 82 .a A”: 3L5. v
onus command: H
.33. on» «0 Iguana:
Tn Sun an 33 u 2.168 3983
Solon.” 0858 as}: Soon—3205a:
mans nanm Aunaquouuua nuon

24 53326.80 Hg..."
93.8 8.798 Tunﬁa a... 83898
.n 2.5 mo uawuuuuooo
n.~noo.o o.~noe.a «uno>\ulo
«.73 .N: 533C:
no nova.“ 05 we .3.“
luau—13.5: mo acouuuuuoou
«.734 «.734 a: 83253 no .8qu

«33.3 cum

 

53

Fill€IﬂﬂClAl.lEﬂi(NiLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quantum yield and short lusinescence lifetime of M3" (no sore than 150
microseconds) cosplicate its use for the existing pulping system.

efficiency. The thermoptical characteristics of phosphate glass vary within
broad limits, which offers-the possibility of selecting compositions with

amplifying supershort pulses [16, 120-122]. Phosphate glass is sufficiently
adaptable for manufacture, and it can be obtained in large volumes with

high ontical quality. The deficiencies include increased cost by comparison
with ate glass, lower mechanical and chemical strength than for silicate

av-z and 0-88 [122]. Blenents made of glass of the last two types begin to

are known. The spectral luminescence properties are known for many of these
types of glass. and the lasing properties are known for acne. Thus, the
term "phosphate glass" can actually refer to a very broad class of composi-

In esseice. the same class includes fluophosphate glass contairing signifi-
cant alnounts of metal fluorides. This glass is similar to phosphate glass

with respect to physicochcmicsl properties [113-115], it has somewhat smaller
cross section of induced emission M34; but even smaller coefficient of nonlinear-
ity of index of refraction n . which makes it prospective for use in power-

ful laser system with heate plasma [16, 113]. Increased aggressiveness

and volatility of fluorine-containing nelts comlicate obtaining large
optically homogeneous billets and require additional development of the
process of founding such glass.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The study of fluoheryllate glass was started comaratively recently [115, 121..
125]. As was discovered recently, Berg and fluoberyllate glass have the
least coefficients of nonlinearity of the index of refraction n2 for
inorganic materials [112]. In fluoberyllate glass the syrnetry of the
surroundings of the activator is the highest, and in such glass the ionicity
of the bond between the activator and the ligands is the highest [125]; the
luinescence band width of M3" and the nagnitude of the induced emission cross
sections of neodymium for fluoberyllate- glass are close to these characteris-
tics for phosphate glass [73, 112, 115]. Fluoberyllate glass has lower
mechanical and chemical stability than phosphate glass. It is very difficult
to obtain optically homogeneous castings from fluoberyllate glass. The
thernooptical properties of fluophoaphate and fluoberyllate glass have still
been studied insufficiently.

The complex of physical properties required for laser glass depends on the
specific purpose and required parameters of the laser system. Thus, the
requirements imposed on the thermoptical characteristics of glass are differ-
ent when using active eleaents in the form of cylinders, discs or plates (51.4),
the requirements on the active elements of lasers operating in the single
pulse node and in the periodic frequency mode are different, and so on. It

is necessary to select the glass for powerful systems where the expenditures
on materials are large, especially carefully. An example of such a choice of
glass used in system for studies of laser thermonuclear fusion is presented
in reference [126], where the expenditures on creating the active elements
from glass are capared with system with high power or high lasing energy.
Here phosphate glass can turn out to he a highly prospective material “5.3).
The requirements on glass for systems of another important type—pulse
periodic lasers-are analyzed in 55.2.

55

“MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2. STRUCTURE 0? mm GLASS

Phosphate glass, just as the majority of other types of inorganic glass [110,
127-129] contains two types of coordination groupings of atoms-compact poly-
hedra of glass former ions (in the given case, P02" tetrahedra) with powerful
covalent bonds between the anions and the central ion and larger polyhedrs
of modifier ions, where the bonds have a more ionic nature. The preperties
of glass are determined to a significant degree by the structure of the anion
motif, the method of costining the polyhedrs of the glass former (isolated
groups of polyhedrs, rings. chains. strips, layer , franes) and the type of
modifier ion. In ordinary silicate glass the SiO tetrahedra, joined by

the apexes through bridge (that is, bound to two glass former ions) oxygen
atom. form a cmaratiwly strong three-diasnsional silicate frame. in the
cavities of which the modifiers are located [110]. This frame can be char-
acterized by the degree of binding m determined by the average nusber of bridge
Oxygen atoms per ion of glass former. The degree of binding is equal to la in
pure 8102. and it decreaes as the molar concentration of the modifier in-
creases. to 0 for transition to "inverted" glass, in which the molar content
of the sndifier is higher than in 8102 [130]. Another meful characteristic
of the anion motif (especially for phosphates) is the density of the trans-
verse bonds [131. 132], which is defined as (Ia-2). In essence, it is equal
to the average water of additional bonds per glass former ion by comparison
with the nmer of bonds in an infinite polymer chain of polyhedrs of glass
formers joined by the apexea, in which there are two bridge oxygen atoms

for every glass former ion.

The same situation exists with the binding of the anion mtif in crystals.
Phosphates containing more than 50 mole 1 metal oxide are constructed from
island (isolated) phosphate groups and polyhedrs of the cations connecting
these groups located between them. "1th a univalent and bivalent metal oxide
content of 50 mole X. that is, in "netaphosphates" with the formula Hero
or He(PO3) . every tetrahedron of PO?‘ is connected to two other tetrah a
through co‘nn (bridge) oxygen atoms; here rings or infinite chains of
tetrahedra are formed. The density of the transverse bonds is equal to 0,
that is, they are absent. In the region of crystals with predominance of
P205, "ultraphosphated' appear, where part of the POZ‘ tetrahedra ("ultra-
tetrahedra") are already connected to three other tetrahedra. the binding
of the anion motif increases. In one of the versions of P20 (O-form).
every tetrahedron is bound to three others, forming a frame 133, 134],

S6

MWWWLY
and this nsans that the binding of the phosphate motif is correspondingly
equal to three, and the density of the transverse bonds is equal to one.

Thus. phosphates and phosphate glass have less binding of the anion motif than
silicate glass. Usually the higher the binding of the anion notif, the
higher the mechanical properties of the glass (with identical nodifier cation).
Correspondingly. phosphate glass has. lower nicrohardness, lower nodulm of
elasticity, higher coefficient of thermal expansion and lower softening

points than silicate glass with the same cation.

In order more clearly to represent the basic types of phosphate groupings
which can exist in phosphate glass. let us briefly consider the structure of
phosphate crystals in the example of th He Plez+0-P205 system, the diagrsn
of which is shown schenstically in Figure .l [135]. Hate Me" and He” are
univalent and bivalent metal, respectively. with an increase in the P205
content in crystal phosphates, the anion groupings are conplicated in the
following sequency: orthophosphstes with isolated tetrahedrs P03» pyro-
phosphates with double tetrshedrs ”2071“” art chain polyphosp tes with
the formula of the anion mtif [Pn03n+1](n+2 '+ the ring . phosphates with
the formula of the anion [P03]: + metaphosphates with infinite c sins of
[1,031.3 strip and layered ultraphosphates with the anions [P5011] ',
[9601712-. [psom] [135-142]+ms. 9205 (0-forn).

Q’ﬁ‘a

 

    

up :u ...I "m‘b 3/ 30 “ca/(SI
Figure 2.1. Ternary diagram of the systel nego-ueﬂo-ons
[135]. The basic types of cowounds are indicated.
Key:
l--ultraphosphates; 2-—metaphosphstes; SP-tetrapolyphosphates;

4~ tripolyphosphates; Sndiphosphates; 6-orthophosphates; 7-bssic phos-
phates

Certain types of phosphate groupings are depicted in Figures 2.2 to 2.5. It
must be noted that for each type of phosphate groupsgg, several versions of
the mutual spatial orientation of the tetrshadrs P0 csn exist; various
methods of codaining the tetrahedra are also possibie [133, 136, 162, 163].

57

MOMMUSEONLY
MOFHCIALUSEONLY

As an eta-ple. Figure 2.3 shows several different types at infinite phosphate
chains with the generel fornula [P0 '3 Figure 2.6 shove two types of
ultraphosphete strips with e galore} got-uh [1’50“]3' encountered in ultra-
phosphetes of the type of ”501‘. where He is a rare earth element or Bi;
Figure 2.5 shove nyers of eight tuber and 1’. neuter rinse constructed fro-
Ietetetrehedre PO‘ connected with two other tetrahedrs and ultratetrehedre
connected with three tetrahedre.

., bf --c2 ‘0 .3
Figure 2.2. Sane island’zhosphat'e groupings. a) ‘l'etr edron 902';

h) pyrophosphete ion P20 ; c) tripolyphosphate ion F30 ; d) cyclic
triphosphete ion P3031 e) cyclic tetraphosphete ion no 2

    

Rm" we, 'mwu, cum): nun-1,1:
CM'O, MN, _ Nagqnlﬁ, l'hu‘l): Aglaﬁ,

g.

”KW,"
mum),

 

;
. '.
I

 

. (many). mm”):
Figure 2.3. Vsriom polyphosphese chains [152]. The relative
orientation of the tetrahedra PO‘ along the axes of the chains is
denonstreted.

58

”MUSIONLY
Figure 2.6. Phosphate notifs in certain strip ultr phosphates.
a) Possible nethods of joining 8 er rings of P0 tetrahedra
in ultrsphosphates (Pc—niddle P0 group connected to two
others, P --ultraphosphate group 2" connected to three others);

b) ultrap osphate strips of 8 aster rings in 30501,. lattices
and c) rholtic version of "”5014 [139].

    

 

o) ' l’ -. h? c) .

Figure 2.5. Phosphate grids in lattices of certain ultraphosphates
[163].

3) W40 1; b) Sr P20 ; c) P6017. The blads circles are ultraphosphate
tetrah re. t e te cir ea are the ﬁddle (sets) phosphate

tetrahedra. Only the P atone are indicated, the oxygen atom
are onitted.

59

NIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the isolated P02- tetrahedra, all four P-O bonds are approximately
equivalent and mually are 0.15620.001 m long [133, 136, 152]. The multi-
plicity of the P-O bond is greater than one. There are no final data on the
electron structure of a phosphate tetrahedron [1102], although it is seemed
that in addition to the ordinary o-bonds of P-O, a r-bond is formed in the
tetrahedron as a result of overlap of the d-orbitals of phosphorus and the
p-orbitals of oxygen I133, 134, 1‘2]. In the phosphates containing motifs
from bound tetrahedra, the M bonds become nonsquivalent. The spacings of
the P-o (-2) with bridge atoms 0 (2 oxygen atom in the meta and three in
the ultratetrahedron) are 0.154 to 0.167 nm for different oolyphosphates
and ultraphosphates and usually are greater than the P-O spacing (the terminal
oxygen) in the same tetrahedra (0.166 to 0. 152 m) [133, 136, 1&2, 1431.
Consequently, the proportion of the n-bond is higher for the phosphorus bond
:ith the terminal O-atoms entering into the coordination sphere of the modi-
ier cation.

As we have seen (Figure 2.1). in anhydrous systems, as the P205 concentrs ion
increases, the process of joining, polycondensstiom, of the tetrahedra P04
takes place with the formation first of island and then chain. strip and
layered phosphate motifs. The cation polyhedra bind the phosphate groups,
forming characteristic structures—usually fralses, layers or chains-~in the
crystals with high netal oxide content, predominantly isolated groups or
simply isolated polyhedra in the ultrsphosphates. The analogous picture of
complication of the phosphate motifs also occurs in the melts of polyphosphoric
acids containing voter: with an increase in temperature. the phosphates
crystallize successively with all the more complex phosphate radicals [144].
The process of polycondensation of the phosphate tetrahedra takes place with
an increase in binding of the anion motif _ (just as for certain
other groups of oxygen compounds, for example, borates [145]), under the
effect of several factors-variation of the concentration of the metal oxide
in the system, the teqersture, acidity of the medium, pressure and so on.

The type of phosphate groupings fouled depends on the metal cation. For
example, anion groups are distinguished for ultrsphosphates of bivalent and
trivalent metals [138, 140, 162, 163]. In the ago-P 05 system at 170°.C, the
min part of the P atoms is in the form of the pyrop osphate ion P203”, and

on addition of the trivalent metal oxide to the solid phase, bismuth ortho-
phosphate Biro“, ytterbium polyphosphate “10207, gallium tripolyphosphste
GaH2P3010 and the metaphosphate of lanthsm- “(P093 are isolated [1414].

This can be explained from the point of view of the theory of random arrange-
ment of phosphate melts proposed by Van Vezer [1‘61 in which dynamic
equilibrium exists between the free P02- groups and the groups bound to

l, 2 and 3 other tetrahedra. Introduction of the metal oxide leads to a

shift of the equilibrium in the direction of formation of the most soltble
compound. The metal cations, in accordance with the viewn of Belov [167, 168],
can play the role of a matrix or a nucleating center, around which the formation

of the most energetically advantageous anion structtn'e takes place.
As is obvious, phosphate glass is obtained by cooling melts; therefore an

entire set of phosphate groupings with predominance of any defined form must
exist in then. The structure of phosphate glass, as is shown in a number of

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
experiments by the methods of x-ray diffraction, spectroscopy and
chronatography [129-155] is theoretically analogous to the structure of
crystalline phosphates, and it is distinguished by a lower degree of ordering.
In alkali glass with high metal oxide concentra ion, linear polyphosphate
groups predminats. The average mater n of Po‘ tetrahedra‘ in such groups
gep-ds on the ratio R of the mole fractions of the natal oxide and P205: _
n-2/(R—l). Then the umber of groupings per 100 atone of phosphorus T-100/n.
With a ratio of HezO:P20 '1, we have mm, which corresponds to 100% content

of infinite nonophosphata chains. In reality, along with the linear phos-
phate groupings, there is always some rider of cyclic groupings in the glass.
Figure 2.6 shows the variation in content of various anion groupings in
alkaline glass with variation of the molar concentration of the alkali oxide
[153]. With an increase in the P 05 content, the proportion of more condensed
groups increases, and anion group gs appear in the ultraphosphate region,

in which part of the P0? tetrahedrs are bound to three other tetrahedra
(branch points), and not to two, as in the alkali groupings. Correspondingly,
the binding of the anion notif increases, the vitrification point and Young's
modulus increase for the glass [131, 132]. _ :—'"""

  

Figure 2.6. Proportion of phosphorus atoms (in 2) entering into
the comosition of various phosphate polyions in alkali potassium
phosphate glass as a function of the average length n of the
phosphate chains [153].
The tubers on the curves are the number of ph 359nm atom n
in the linear polyion with the composition Pnognﬂ '3
c is the proportion of phosphorus atone entering
into the cyclic phosphate groupings; HP is the proportion of
P atoms in linear phosphates with n>9.
Key:
1. Proportion of P atone,_X
2. Average chain length. n

Glass with island anion groupings is easily crystallized. In phosphate
systems stable glass is formed in the metaphosphate and ultraphosphate regions,

where the binding of the anion notif is high. The bond strength between the
phosphate groupings depends on the type of modifier cation. Cations with

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high field stren th, that is, with large charge and small anion radius
(1132+, A1343 Nb , and so on) form strong bonds with oxygen, the strength
of which differs little from the P-O bond strength. The introduction of
these cations into the glass decreases the coefficient of thermal expansion,
increases the thermal stability and chemical stability of the glass, its
microhardness, and the teapersture of the beginning of deformation. It is
provisionally possible to consider that such cations together with the poly-
hedra of the glass former form a "mixed motif," which was investigated, for
example, for titanium-containing and zirconium-containing silicate glass
[156, 157]. The conditionality consists in selecting the boundary between
the extreme cases: the structural motif formed only by polyhedra of the
glass farmer (8102. Geo , 820 . 9205, and so on) and the "standard glass"
containing an anion motif (wigh powerful cation-oxygen bonds) and large low-
charge ions (for example, alkali metals), having weak binding to oxyg .
Even the transition from single-charge cations to larger bivalent Ba 4‘ causes
a sharp change in properties of the metaphosphates, for example, a significant
decrease in the electrical conductivity of the melts [158]. The difference
between strengthening of the phosphate motif itself as a result of increas-
ing its binding and strengthening of the mixed phosphate cation motif on
introduction of "strong" cation modifiers decreases with an increase in field
strength of the cation. Therefore, for example. it is possible to talk about
alkali niobium phosphate glass [159, 160], considering that the bond strength
of He+-0 is much less than the P-9 bond strength or the Nb-O bond strength,
which means P and Nb can play an analogous role structurally.

Of course, the most similar in this respect are the P atoms and the glass
former ions which can under defined conditions A‘f‘orm nixed tetrahedral motifs
with the phosphate tetrahedra, for example, Si , 83", A85", sometimes A11”
[161-178]. For laser phosphate glass, 33* is especially important, for it
is demonstrated that the introduction of 3P0“ into phosphate glass signifi-
cantly inroves its mechanical and chemical stability [166, 167]. Bor n
orghophosphate has a frame structure with alternation of tetrahedra 80 and
P0,. . The addition of 3P0], to metaphosphate glass leads to the appearance
of additional bonds between the polyphosphate chains, an increase in binding
of the anion motif and, consequently, to an increase in its overall strength
for the same cation modifiers. In order to keep the interaction of the
activator with the glass matrix small (see Chapter 3) it is essential that
up to a defined 8203 concentration in the glass with 8P0; additive, the boron
atoms in the phosphate glass have predominantly tetrahedral coordination.
However, at the present time there are no exact date on the relation between
the boron atoms in the tetrahedral coordination and in the other possible,
trigonal coordination. As an example, let us present data on the fraction
of the boron atoms m, in tetrahedral coordination determined recently for
several glass compositions in the K20-3203-P205 system by two- independent
methods—by the Raman scattering spectra of glass [168] and by the nuclear
magnetic resonance spectra of B 1 [170] (Table 2.1). As we shall see, the
results do not agree. Comparison of the available data from infrared
spectroscopy, electron microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
the results of studying the electron paramagnetic resonance of boron phos-
phate glass with admixtures of paramagnetic ions and irradiated glass, the

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
studies of the processes of extinguishing luminescence of RZI‘which depend
on the frequencies of the highest-energy oscillations of the matrix and,
consequently, on the coordination of the boron atom (see Chapter 3), pro-
vides a basis for considering that high values of n4 obtained by the method
of nuclear nagnetic resonance are more reasonable. In the region with large
3203 content with respect to the 1’20s content obviously the trigonal
coordination of the boron atone predominates; usually in boron phosphate
glass of this type, liquation is observed [166, 165, 173, 176]. In such
glass, the interaction of the rare earth activators is intensified both
between each other-as a result of liquation and an increase in the local
activator concentration—and with the glass matrix as a result of high energy
of the vibrations of the 3-0 bond for boron atoms in trigonal coordination.

Table 2.1.

 

The addition of small amounts of 510 to phosphate glass usually leads to
cross linking of the phosphate group ngs, an increase in the binding of the
anion: frame, a decrease in the crystallization capacity of the glass [171,
172,177]. Large anounts of $102, on the other hand, have a depolymeriaing
effect on the phosphate grouping, in a matter of cases having a negative
effect on the cheaical strength of the glass and increasing its inclination
to crystallization [175, 175]. Sometimes the negative influence of large
amounts of $10 on the chemical stability of the glass can be conpensated by
the addition of A12 03, which obviously leads to the formation of stable A1P07
groups with alminu3 stone in tetrahedral coordination in the glass [176].

In the properties of laser glass. variations not only in the cation. but
also in the anion composition of the glass are felt strongly. The most
important is replacement of the oxygen ions by Oil-groups and halide ions,
primarily fluorine. If we do not take special measures with respect to care-
ful dehydration of phosphate glass, it will always contain a significant
amount of residual water (fractions of a percentage by weight and even
percentages [179], which corresponds to nveral nole percentages [179-1841).
This has a strong influence both on the optical transparency of the glass in
the regions corresponding to the absorption frequencies of the OH-groups and
the luainescence properties of rare earth activators [181-183, 185]

(Chapter 3). In phosphate groupings the Oil-groups are terminal, and increas-
ing their concentration decreases the degree of binding of the phosphate
motif [131]. On the contrary, the process of renoval of the water leads to
codaination of the phosphate groupings, an increase in the average degree of
polymerization and the degree of binding of the phosphate motif [131,180].
Of course, the degree of polymerization (that is, the nulber of P04 tetra-
hedra in the phosphate grouping) with identical initial composition of the

 

* RZI - rare earth ions
63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

glass. in addition to the water content, can also be influenced by other
factors: the possibility of volatilization of part of- the P205, variation
in the ratio between the ring and the chain groupings. and so on [186].
The dehydration is felt nost strongly in the properties of ultraphosphate
glass, where it causes an increase in the transfornation temperature and

Young's modulus of the glass [131, 132].

Inasnuch as the presence of Oil-groups has a significant negative effect on

the luminescence, and in certain cases. the lasing characteristics of the
glass with rare earth activators, various methods are used for dehydration

at least glass [117. 181-183, 185, 187]: bubbling of the glass melt with

dry gas, founding in a protective atmsphere, deuteration of the melt,
evacuation. the addition of halides. In particular, the addition of fluorides,
leading to replacement of the terninal Oil-groups by P ions essentially having
no influence on the luminescence properties of the activator, permits us to
obtain almost anhydrous glass [183]. The amount of fluorides which can be
introduced into the phosphate glass is very high: phosphate glass can con-
sist of about 80 percent fluorides [116, 188. 189]. Up to defined concen-
trations of fluorides in the fluophosphate glass, polymer phosphate groupings
are retained [116, 190], then the pyrophosphate and ring phosphate groups
begin to increase. The P03? anion intermediate between the purely fluoride
and purely phosphate components of the structure plays an iaportant role in
phosphate glass [116]. The presence in the coordination sphere of an activator
of fluorine and oxygen atone causes uultitype nature of the centers distin-
guished with respect to resolution of the transitions, 1minescence lifetimes.
and so on. With respect to width of the luainescence bands and cross sections
of the induced emission of the activators, the fluophosphate glass is similar
to phosphate glass [115. 191, 192], but the protesses of excitation energy
transport in it differs significantly [193] (Chapter 3). which is connected
to a significant degree to variation in the glass structure.

The activator ions in the phosphate glass are located in the vicinity of the
oxygen ions. Rare earth ions with completed (of-shell are distinguished with
respect to coordination capacity in oxygen compounds both from large cations
with snall field strength. high degree of ionicity of the bond and coordina-
tion numbers and cation-oxygen distances varying within significant linits,

and from 3d-ions with powerful covalent bonds and comparatively rigid coordina-
tion polyhedra. Ions of this type, for example, Cuz". V“, form a characteris-
tic environment in the glass which is different for different glass formers,
but depends cowaratively little on the type of cation nodifier (if it does
not cause changes in the structure of the glass). [196]. The complex fol-rung

capacity of rare earth ions (RZD in compounds with oxygen is less than for
3d-ions, and the set of coordination polyhedra and the interval of variation

of the interatonic spacings and valence angles in then is correspondingly

larger [195-200]. There is also a difference in the coordination properties
of different RZI [197-200] and variation in the surroundings of the activator
as a result of loss of order in the glass. ‘E’or glass usually a study is ads
of the average'statistical shape of the nearest coordination in the vicinity
of the activator which can be found with a defined degree of reliability

either by comparing the luminescence and absorption spectra of the activator

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the glass and in the crystal with known coordination of the activator or
by comparing the spectra calculated by the methods of crystal field theory

with the experimental data. Several such studies are known for phosphate
glass.

In [201]. on the basis of a comparison of the calcglated and eacperimentally
obtained absorption and luminescence spectra of Yb , the conclusion is drawn
that in the investigated phosphate, silicate and germanate glass, this ion
is in six coordination with 5? D3 symmetry. In [202] it was demonstrated
that the structure of the Nd tsrms in alkaline niobium phosphate glass is
close to the structure of the Nd term in 1-00,. [203], where the La ions
have nine nearest 0 atoms and surroundings with C1 symmetry, and the prop-
osition is stated that in glass Nd3+ ions have analogous surroundings. In
references [204] and [205], on the basis of analysis of the splitting of the
energy levels of the To”, Br“ and Edi” ions, the conclusion is drawn that

surroundings 0f the M ions have Cl, CZ or C symetry. It is therefore
possible to consider that the coordination nuISer of the RZI varies in phos-
phate glass from 6 to 9, and the nearest surroundings have quite low symetry.
Of course, as a result of disorder of the glass structure, a set of coordina-
tion polyhedra is realized in it for the activator, which, along with the

absence of for order, leads to broadening of the luminescence and absorption
bands of the R21 [83].

The oxygen atoms entering into the first coordination sphere of the activator
are usually related also to the glass former atoms (phosphorus in purely
phosphate glass) and the cation modifiers. In phosphate glass with onion
motif, predominantly from the chains of P02— tetrahedera, there are no sig-
nificant steric obstacles to the formation of the nearest vicinity of the
activator ions located between the chains. in contrast to the silicate glass
with rigid silicate frame. In such a case the fluctuations of the local
electric fields acting on the R21 depend primarily on the field strength of

the cation modifiers located in the second coordination sphere of the activator,
increasing with an increase in charge and a decrease in the radius of the

modifier. Here usually the width of the absorption and luminescence bands
of the activator also increases.

With variation of the anion motif. for example, on introduction of 3203,
BPOA, Nb205. A1 0 , on making (he transition to ultraphosphate glass with a
higher degree 0; ginding of the anion motif, first of all steric obstacles

to free fonmtion of the surroundings of the activator can arise as a result
of an increase in rigidity of the anion motif and, secondly, the mater of
possible combinations of atoms in the second coordination sphere of the

activator increases. The oxygen ions of the first coordination sphere of the

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activator can now be bound not only to the phosphorus and modifier atoms, but
also to other atoms forming the anion motif-B, Nb, Al. Therefore introduc-
tion of the additives 8203, 3904, szo5. A1203 to phosphate glass leads to

an increase in variations of the surroundings of the rare earth ions and to

broadening of the energy spectra of these surroundings [83, 117, 159, 162.
167, 208 .

The interaction of the activators in the glass depends on the spacing between
the active ions. with usual laser concentration of Nd3+ ions on the order
of 2.1020 c-r3 the average distance between the activator ions is about 2.1 In
However, the actual spaces can differ sharply from the average. As a result

of the processes of chemical differentiation, the glass is inhomogeneous,

polyhedra [83, 110, 209]. The size of the region depends on the glass composi-
tion and the conditions of its heat treatment, and it increases in the lique-
fying glass. The activator. which usually plays the role of a modifier, has

a tendency to accumulate in the ionogenic regions where its local concentra-
tion can greatly exceed the average'and where segregation of the activator
takes place [210]. This leads to the formation of pairs of groups of close

216]). Increasing the local activator concentration can be connected with
microstratification of the glass [2151. However, this obviously is not manda-
tory [209, 216, 217]. Such processes are most strongly espressed in quartz
glass [211, 218], in silicate glass inclined toward liqustion with relatively
low modifier content and in glass with two or more glass former ions (boron
silicate, boron phosphate, and so on) with defined concentration ratios of
such ions (see, for example, the survey [209]). As a result, intensification
of the interaction of the active ions takes p1ace~~ quénchins of the

The processes of segregation of phosphate glass depend on the composition and
structure of the glass, and for ordinary activator concentrations (2-6).102°
cm‘3 for Nd3+ dions, they can he expressed either very weakly (which,
according to [222], occurs for GLS-22 glass) or, on the contrary, strongly
(as for alkaline boron phosphate glass [117]). To purely phosphate glass,
the average distance between the Nd3+ ions for which the luminescence life-
time in the 1.06 micron region becomes half that in glass with low Nd3+ con‘
centration. is less than for other types of glass-silicate, gernsnate,
borate [223]. This can also indicate comparatively uniform distribution of
the activator in such glass.

glass with predominantly trivalent cation modifiers with high P205 concentra-
tion (more than 60 mole 2), in which the concentration quenching uof the
luminescence of the activator is most sharply expressed [206 207, 224-229].

The study of such glass began after detection of intense Nd8 luminescence
in a series of neodymium—containing crystals with Nd3+ concentration of
(3 to 6)'1021 cn'3. exceeding by more than 20 times the Nd3+ concentration

66

FOIIOFFNJAL.USE(MVLY
in ordinary YAG crystals Y3Al O 2:119" . Here we are talking about phosphate
crystals Nd? 014 [206, 230, 231], He+Nd(PO3)4 [23, 232] (where He+-Li+,
Na'h K", Rb" , NdA13(BO3)(, and certain other materials [23), 232, 233].

The most significant structural peculiarity of such crystals obviously is

the location of the active ions in the cm cation motif. The form of the
altnimn grouping in this case can be different. For example, the concentra-
tion quenching of the Eda" luinescence is low in RbNd(P 012) crystals
with ring tetraphosphate ion [9501214- [234.], in HeNd(P03)4 Li, Na, K)
with infinite netaphosphate chains (PO )3 and in the ultraphosphate “@5014
with P50143- strips [230, 232]. In all these structures with different anion
motifs, the activator polyhedra are isolated, that is, there are no Nd-O—Nd
bonds in the structure, and the I'd-Nd spacing exceeds 0.5 nm. Even a snall
(to 0.481 nm) decrease in the shortest lid-Nd distance leads to -K3Nd(ma)2
[235], where the M3" polyhedra also have no collaon peaks, to an increase in
the concentration quenching of Nd’ luminescence. although not to
such a degree as in phosphate crystals, in which two neodymium atoms are
bound directly through a canon oxygen (for example, in (La, Nd)P04) [203].
These crystal chenical characteristics are insufficient for the decreased
concentration quenching of Nd luminescence; the structure of the energy
levels of the neodyniun ion, the phonon spectrum of the matrix, and so on

are also simificant [231, 236]. However, for oxygen compounds this obviously
is necessary. Such conditions can be satisfied in two cases: either in the
cation motif of the lattice the activator ions and other cations alternate

in ordered fashion or in the cospound containing only the activator as a
cation, the anion motif creates steric obstacles for direct cation-cation
contacts. The first case is realized in the phosphates He+Nd(PO3)4. in
“130303“, in “as“dmb)? K5Nd0b04)3 [237]. and so on. In known structures
of this type the activator cations make up no more than half of the total
nuiaer of cations. The anion groupings can be discrete, just as in
RbNleaou] (rings of 6 tetrahedra) or chain, as in He+Nd(PO3)6 (NJ-1.1+, Na“,
K"). The representatives of structures of the second type are ultraphosphates
of rare earth ions of the MePSOM type, ultraphosphates Mel’aOn (He-Mn. Ca).
Analysis of the spatial relations of the cation polyhedra and anion motif in
these structures led to [136-138, 142, 1103]. It is interesting that the
ultraphosphate notif does not necessarily insure absence of contacts of the
cation polyhedra: in the ultraphosphate CdzP5017, the Cd cations are arranged

in pairs [1103]; in the Sr2P6017, the Sr polyhedra are hound into infinite
chains [160, 143].

Thus, two groups of phosphates are now known in which the polyhedra' of the
rare earth cations are arranged in isolated fashion, and the spacings between
the cations are quite large: these are compounds of alkali and rare earth
cations and ultraphosphates of rare earth ions. The “N11811:? of the energy
structures of the levels and lifetines of luminescence in both types of de-
hydrated crystalline and vitreous phosphates with high Nd“ concentration
indicates closeness of their structure. Concentration quenching of the
luminescence in such glass is rather weakly expressed Let us note that
the conclmion of reference [206] that glass belonging to the ultraphosphate
re ion of compositions has anoulously weak concentration quenching of the
Nd luainescence independently of the chemical composition of the modifying
oxides, appears to be inaccurate. First, as follows free the above-presented

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE¢DNLY

of metaphosphste glasses of the type ammo,” and Hezﬁidﬂ’o )5 containing
Nd” ions and ions of alkali and alkali earth metals [224, 229 . Secondly,

the cation motif of crystalline ultrsphoaphates can be constructed differently,
as has already been noted above, and. consequently, the structure and proper-
ties of the different ultraphosphate glasses can differ. The structural

As has already been pointed out above, the lid-Nd spacing, which exceeds about
0.5 an, is of the necessary conditions of low concentration quench-
ing of the Nd luminescence, which is connected with strong dependence of

the interaction of the active ions on the distances between then (Chapter 3).
The total probability of the loss of excitation of the activator characterizing
the degree of extinguishing of its luminescence W is proportional to £(1/R6).
where the interacting activator ions located at a 3 stance ‘R are considered
together [231]. Let us consider how this lattice sun varies for different
distribution of the distances between the active ions for Nd3+ concentration
of 2.71021 «3'3 used in references [225-228, 238]. The average volume cal-
culated for the Nd3+ ion is 370-10‘3 n33. For the nest tightly packed
arrangement of the spheres, they take up 76.051 of the total value [168];
consequently, if we consider such packing, then the volume of the sphere
corresponding to one M3" ion is 275-10” m3, and its radius is about 0.4 Inn.
The spacing between the centers of the spheres 0.8 ms is the average distance
between the "(13" ions. For the tightest packing of the spheres. each sphere
is surrounded by 12 adjacent ones, the lattice sun with respect to which is

46 nm'6. Now let the spacings differ fron the average and let two activator
ions approach the central ion to 0.6 not each, which corresponds approximately
to the Nd-Nd in the chain of polyhedra connected along the edges. Then the
lattice sun increases to 530 mn‘G, that is, by more than tenfold by compari-
son with the ordered distribution. If the two closest ions are renoved by

a distance of not 0.6, but 0.5 n, then the lattice sum decreases to 170 nn‘é,
that is,.by 3 tines. Thus, it is not the average distances, but the nearest
activator-activator distances that are significant.

The study of the cancentration quenching of Nd3+ luminescence in
phosphate glass indicates [206, 229, 232, 233, 238], that its probability is
only insignificantly—by 1.5 to 2 tines-«greater in glass than in crystals”.
of analogous conposition with low concentration. quenching of the Nd
lminescence for concentration to (3.6 to 10.102"- cn'3. This pertains both
to ultraphosphate glass of the type (NdLs)P5014, Li-Nd-PS, and so on, and
to metaphosphste glass typo MeNd(PO3)(. (He-Li, Na, K, Rb). Hence, two
ingottant conclusions about the structure of the glass follow. First, the
Nd ions are comparatively uniformly (just as in crystals of this type)
distributed with respect to the body of the glass, not forming associates
with small Nd-Nd distances (less than about 0.5 an). Secondly, the ordered
alternation of the alkali cations and Nd3+ ions characteristic of crystals
of double netaphosphates HeNd(P03)l. is also retained in glass. preventing

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the formation of Nd” polyhedra bound along the edges or at the apexes. The
last conclusion indicates the active role of the cation in the construction
of the phosphate glass structure as was noted above also for crystals.

The crystal chemical investigation of the structure of the glass and the
structure of the active centers permits explanation of the laws of variation
of the spectral luminescence and physicochaaical properties of glass and pro-
vides a basis for structurally substantiated selection of the conpositions
of phosphate glass with the lost expedient co-bination of properties for

the specific applications.

69

MONGALUSEONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3. MINING ELECTRON BXCITATION MERCY TRANSFER IN LASER GLASS

53.1. Classification of Nonradisting Transfer Processes

In the physics of laser glass, just as other types of luminophors. an excep-
tional role is played by nonradiating electron excitation energy transfer
(BPV), which can be defined as the physical process in which primarily the
excited particle-«the energy donor D*—es a result of weak interaction with
another particle-the energy acceptor A-nskes the transition to the electron
or electron vibrational state with lower energy, with simultaneous transition
of the particle A to the state with higher ener . Photon emission does not
occur in this case, that is, the process is nonra iating. For significant con-
centrations of rare earth ions (22!) it is necessary also to consider the
possibility of the appearance of radiating transfer caused by reabsorption -
by the acceptor of the enission energy of the excited donor. However, the _
influence of this factor on the spectral ltninescance and lasing characteris-
tics of the glass is limited.

In glass which is prospective as an active mediu- for lasers, as a rule. the
energy donors are trivalent R21 excited to one of the hid: electron states.
Sonetiues a stud; is also nde of m from certain transition netal ions.
for 013-918. Cr , an”, no“, or nolecular groups, for example, 00? excited
to the Ietastable electron vibrational state. The circle of energy acceptors
is much wider. For any donor the acceptors can be any inpurity ions or ions
belonging to the glass lattice capable of absorbing transitions, isoenergetic
or resonance, with the investigatgg rad sting trans tion 0*. As an crawls.
let us indicate the ions Sn , Dy , Pr , Yb“. Cu , v“, Fe”, and so on
for D*-ions M3" or the ions 1M3", 81:3“, Pr3+, and so on for the D*-ions
31-3". The requirement of isoenergetic nature is not strict. Cues are
known where BPV takes place quite effectively with an energy difference in
radgeting and absorbing transitions to 6000 cf}- (the pairs Thu-“)3".
-Yb . and so on [209]). The energy acceptors mat also include molecu-
lar groups. overtones of high frequency vibrations which sometimes are
manifested in the infrared absorption spectra with sufficient intensity for
effective m to energies of 5000 to 10000 of)». As examplss we have the
hydroxyl groups 01!” or glass-forming anions (8101)“. (1’04) . and so on.

Thus, beginning with the nature of the transitions participating in the m
act. it is possible to talk about two types of BPV with participation of
321. namely. the ion-ion (l) and ion-vibrational (2). Each of these types
has. in turn, several variations.

roe omcuu. use on“
Let us enumerate the variations of the ion-ion BVP:

1a) BPV with conplete excitation energy degradation in A to thermal lattice
vibrations as a result of nonradiating relaxation of the excigatzon be en
the levels to th ground state (Figure 3.1, a (exanples: Nd ( P3/2-> 19/2;
A111/2)‘P82‘.l; Br§‘(‘113/2+1‘115/2)-Nd3*(519/2+ 115/2). 81d 80 on (see

Figure 3. 3 below) .

lb) BPV with nonradiating relaxation in A to the netastable state vith subse-
quent emission of a uantul of energy hm <huD (Figure 3.1 b ( les:

lo - . 3
“Tara/g» 19,2) Yb (2r7/2+2r5,2), nﬁ(zrs,zalp7,2)-rr5+(zrls,z 111/2).
an so on .

1c) Cross relaxation of the excitation energy through one or two internediate
levels in the D*-A pair frz: the identified particles (Figure 3.1, c)

(classical axe-pie: Nd3+( 3,2-r‘115/2; “113/2)-Nd3+(lo19,2->4113/2; 4115 ,2».

1d) Multiple m with respect to like particles without significant non-
radiating relaxation of the excitation energy for a unit act of BW usually
called the process of excitation energy migration with espect to the
donor stbsysten (Figure 3.1, d) (examples: Nd3"'("P3/2+ 19 l2)-Nd3*
(“lg/2+“P3/2)-...-Nd3+ and so on).

1e) BPV to the accepts which is» in the excited stgebuﬂ) zl’igure 3.1. e)
(exgples: Nd3+( P3/2+ 19/2)-Nd (6173,2+2P3,2); Nd ( r3/2- 19/2)-
-002 (3nou-Jzoul) [246] and so on).

If) Cooperative BPV or simultaneous excitation energy transfer from two
or more donors to one unexcited acceptor with sulnation of the ener quanta

[216. 21.5] (Figure 3.1. r) (example: 7b3*(2r5,2»2r7,2)+n3+(2r5,2+ rm)-
-'rb3*( 713313,.» .

The veraiom of ion vibrational BPV (Figure 3.2) are as follows:

2a) BPV to overtones of the vibrations of the iwurity molecular groups.

For oxide glass acceptors of this type can be oxyhydryl groupings (0n )'
dissolved in the majority of then, of which the hydroxyl groups (010' ave

the greatest significance. In the general case, the (OD)'. CH. and other groups
can be analogous quenchers.

2b) Intracenter BPV to vibrations of glass forming molecular groups enter
into the first coordination sphere of the D*.

These groups include the anions (81001", (904)3', (803)3', memo)", and
so on.

71

MWUSEONLY
a)

Figure 3.1. Versions of ion-ion nonradiating electron excitation
energ transfer. Solid liner-radiating transitions;
dotted liner-m DLA; wavy linea—nonrediating transitions.

Type Zbis them specific wdatimofthal’ﬁlpherm, for, incortrast totheothers. it
is present in all types of glass for any activator concentrations. All

other versions of BPV are of an intercenter nature, and they can theoretically
be eliminated by decreasing the acceptor concentration.

Let us also ewhasise that all versions of ion-ion BPV are at least three-
particle processes (D*—A-lattice phonon). inaseuch as they are continuously
related to the ion-phonon interactions: direct (single phonon). nultiphonon,
Orhach [262. 243], and so on. These interactions pernit dispersion of the
excess energy during the an act or, vice verse, they cover the energy shortage
in the case of sntiStokes m 0109410“). The ion-vibrational BPV can also he
two-particle (DNIIolecular group).

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11' A

 

 

Figure 3.2. Diapa- of the ion-vibrational nonradiating
electron excitation energy transfer; s— mater of the
vibrational node

Key:
3- “at:

The influence of m on the spectral luinescence and lasing characteristics
of laser glass is dual. On the one hand, the m. primarily versions 1a, lb,
1c, 2a, 2b, has negative influence on these characteristics, for it leads to
nonradiating energy degradation of the netastable states of the donors and,
therefore, to_a reduction in quantun yield q, average duration of the
lmineacence r , a reduction in lasing efficiency and an increase in the
lasing thresho . Here an type lc can be the came of concentration quench-
ing of the Dit luminescence even in the absence of foreign quenching adaixtures.
The excitation nigration process with respect to the 0* ions does not directly
cause quenching of their luinescence. but promtes it indirectly, leading to
spatial convergence of excited donors with the quenching centers.

The BPV type 2b serves as a cause of negligibly small quantum yield of
luminescence of the R21 froa the majority of upper excited states, which
sharply limits the mater of potentially possible laser transitions. As for
M type 1e and 1f, they have a nonlinear nature, that is, they depend on
the excitation level. At high excitation levels characteristic of laser
operating modes, their contribution to the quenching of ltninscence of the
metastable states of the activators in acne cases also must be considered.

0n the other hand, BPV is very useful, for example, when it is acconpsnied
by the effects of sensitizing the luineacance of R21 not having natural'
intense absorption bands on type lb), and therefore it permits expansion

of a nder of ions prospective 52' the cseation of lasing media. Thus.
obtaining effective lasing on Br and Yb ions turned out to be possible

in ractice only as a result of sensitizing their luninescenoe by Yb“ and

Nd ions respectively. The process of migration of the excitation under

the conditions of strong nonuniform broadening characteristic of luninescence

73

MOMMISEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and absorption bands of RZI in glass insures effective energy exchange between
the activators, restoring their equilibrium distribution: disturbed during the
lasing process, and thus it has a positive influence on the efficiency, lasing
spectrum and other characteristics of the laser. The process of nonradiating
deactivation of high excited states as a result of BPV type 2b turns out to be
useful if we consider the efficiency of the accumulation of excitation energy
absorbed in various activator bands in the metastable state. In some cases,
for example, for a laser-pumped erbium laser (Chapter 6), the energy relaxa-
tion rate between the excited states can have decisive influence on the
operating efficiency of the laser. The processes type la and 1f are used for
visual display of the infrared radiation [245].

Thus, the manifestations of BPV in laser glass are extraordinarily varied both
with respect to nature and with respect to effect on the spectral luminescence
and lasing characteristics of the glass. Selecting the glass composition and
concentration of the activators and sensitizers, carefully purifying it of
harmful admixtures and introducing useful ones, it is possible to suppress or
amplify the efficiency of certain versions of the m and as a result, signif-
icantly to improve the lasing characteristics of the glass or create new
types of glass lasers. Examples of the progress made in this approach are
erbium lasers with laser pumping [101, 247], minilasers and microlasers based
on concentrated neodymium glass [207, 225, 228, 229] and ytterbium lasers.
However, for this purpose it is necessary carefully to study both the general
laws and mechanisms of various versions of BPV and the dependence of their
efficiency on the structure and composition of the glass and also the specific
nature and quantitative characteristics oﬂm in various pairs especially
important for applications. The indicated problem was stated in general form
at the dam of the "laser age," at the beginning of the 1960's. A mater of
experimental and theoretical studies have been performed in the past, but ”e are
still a long way from a really cowlete solution of it. The primary cause
of this situation is complexity of the objects of investigation: as a rule,
in real systems, several versions of BPV appear in parallel, frequently com-
peting with each other. In addition, in the framework of each of them usually
several pairs of resonance and nonresonance transitions compete with the
participation of various Stark components of the initial and final state of D
and A.

Let us demonstrate this in the relatively simple example of neodymiumrdoped
glass. The luminescence from the intermediate excited states of the ions
M3", 41 1, . 4113/2, 61 ,2 (Figure 3.3), jmt a. from the high excited
states, s gully quencheds as a result of type 2b BPV. Luminescence from
the metastable stat ‘F3£$ is guanched by uncontrolled admixtures from
the series re2+. Cu +, v , Dy , Pr“ 31:13", er“, m1”, “3* Ni, Co and
so on [268] (the transitions in the Nd5+ ion to the “19/2 and lel/Z levels
compete) and also on vibrations of the 0H'-groups (transitions to the

4113/2 and l’1'15/21ev131s compete), and in some cases on the matrix vibrations.
In addition, already for moderate concentrations of “(13+ ions, approximately
1 to 2 Z by weight, the cross relaxation process begins to be manifested
(type 1c), where transitions compete with the participation of the 4113/2
and ‘115/2 levels. The process of excitation energy migration with respect
to the system of Nd3+ ions deepens the effect of all of the impurity quench-
ers. Finally, with high populations of the state 4F3/2 (greater than 1019
cm'3), nonlinear quenching as a result of BPV type Is is also possible

74

FIHRIJFFICIAI.USIICﬂVLY
[269]. The picture of the microscopic effects connected with BPV is still
more complicated by the irregularity of the distribution of the donors and

acceptors in the glass.

The noted factors couplicate interpretation of the experimental data in the
case of single center crystals. In glass, new complications are added to them:

1) Powerful nonuniform broadening of the spectral bands (NUP) of 0* and A
which lowers the probability of enct resonance of the transitions even for
like interactions of the centers: in addition, spectral dependence of the
probabilities of the radiating transitions [250] and, as recently demonstrated.
the force of ion-phonon interaction arise [251].

2) In glass lattices consisting of like structural elements, the vibrational
spectrum is richer. including, in particular. the shorter wave modes, than

in the majority of ion crystals. which promotes increased probability of
nonradiating transitions, and as will be daonstrated below, greater effective-
ness of the nonresonating SW.

3) A tendency toward segregation or selective entry of the activator causing
its nonuniform distribution, which is observed in a nutter of types of multi-

coqaonent technical glass (Chapter 2).

New highly informative experimental methods have appeared only recently which
permit quantitative study of various versions of BPV in glass on the level of
the elementary act of interaction. These methods are primarily related to
the development of procedures and equipment for selective laser excitation
[252, 253] and highly sensitiVe systems for counting phonons with high time
resolution [254].

In this chapter, on the basis of the latest experimental data an effort is
made to discuss modern concepts of mechanisms and basic laws of the BPV pro-
cesses in laser glass from united points of view. especially affecting. the
location and specific nature of phosphate system in the general series.

§3.2. Ion-Ion Excitation Transfer-Theoretical Concepts

The modern state of the art with respect to theoretical concepts of BPV in
condmsed media has been discussed in the monographs [239, 240], surveys
[243, 264] and other works. . During this analysis it is necessary clearly
to delimit the theory of the elementary m acts and the theory of the inter-
relation of the latter to the macrocharscteristics of transfer in the set of
excited and unexcited donors and acceptors. The former is devoted to analysis
of the mechanism of elementary acts considering the effect on them of the
solvent matrix. The latter presupposes various relations relating the
macroscopic characteristics of the BPV (the kinetics of the luminescence of
the donors and acceptors, the quantum yield of the donor luninescence, the
effective relations of the lininescence. and so on) to the parameters of the
elementary acts as a function of the nature and dynamics of the mutual
arrangement of the particles 0* and A and the distribution of the transition

energies.

75

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
I708 OMOAL USE ONLY

3.1050!"
w — —
i — : — g
55 L _ - : _ — —
; _ '1:- ‘ i I :
’2 "E - .1...- _ _
2: a E E 5 : 5 a 2:.
T“ E E " - -
It '1. — E -'I. u- ; -
T- _ lb 0,
"I " = I
.252: = _. Lag»; ..
w 0 — = ' —il
1'. —1 : _.._
h £2 Y—s :
v I m | l ‘
fit: I ”LL :5
I .. , '_ _% —
I? :“w W : "— _’ "I
I I 1'?" ":0“ m i.
I“ I —n l
I _', “-n—s “g
‘ . ’r. n v. ,, um. I
=’ '6' :- 1 w :
_x_ln-‘-av— —'r. = _" r : °'
0 - .LF -5 :0 | ' : I
z”!— *La— :: '_' I I I :
‘W- —x ' i
—--— — ='—’-’- ’ . ,
(’nzyzxq’i‘an’IKw/olmﬁo’n
on" Pr" WNW-"z." WNW," "0"6'" mm"

Figure 3.3. Diagram of the energy statesmf rare earth ions in
glass [95]. Vertical solid liner-transitions investigated by
the authors in the case of quenching on matrix vibrations;
dotted lines—on OH-group vibrations

BPV Blelentsry Act. As is ham. the ‘f-electrons of rare earth ions are
shielded to the mum- and are localised by cowarieon with the optical
electrons of all other known luinescent ions. As a result, overlap of their
wave functions with the wave functions of even the nearest neighbors is

very enall, and the rare earth ions are weakly bound through the crystal
field of the ligands to the surroundings: in other words, both for interion
and for ion oscillatory interactions with the participation of rare earth

ions. the case of very weak bonding is realized. The spectroscopic attributes
of the weak ion-ion bond are absence of any significant (by comparison with

76

roe OFFICIAL WE ONLY
A031“; 1..) splitting of the spectral lines with an increase in the R21 concen-
tration, and the ion-phonon, low intensity (especially in glass) of the
electron-vibrational satellites of the electron transitions. For exasple.

for Nd” ions in glass, they are almost undetectable, and for Yb3+ ions,

they are observed in the absorption and lminescence spectra with an intensity,
approximately 100 times less than the intensity of the phononless lines.

What has been stated above must be constantly taken into account when analys-
ing the applicability of the general principles of the theory of the elementary
act of BPV to the case of 321 in glass. At the limit of weak bonding, the
probability of this act in the D*-A pair usually is recorded within the frame-
work of the nonsteady theory of perturbations in the form [239]

Wm-lemrom. (3-1)

where <8 > is the matrix element of the Baniltonian of interaction causing
nonradianin ng transition. and 9(3) is the density of the finial stat5 of the
0* + A + lattice system. The form of <BDA> depends on the mechanism
of electron interaction in the D*—A pair and also on the propositions with
respect to the nature of the ion-phonon interactiomactive in the BPV act.

The electron interaction in the general case can be caused by electrical multi-
polar, nagnetic dipole or exchange interactions. However, for R2! in dielec-
tric matrices, the contribution of the magnetic dipole transitions to the
optical BPV is negligibly small [262, 2614], even when the electric dipole
transitions are forbidden by the rules of syuetry. Stron localization of
4-f-electrons and significant minimal distances in the D-A' pair by comparison
with the dimensions of the interacting oscillators prevent effective manifes-
tation of the exchange _ interactions. inmmuch as for
the latter the value of I<EDA> >I2 decreases with distance exponentially with
the index of the order of the dimensions of the electron shells D and A. In
any case, in spite of the many efforts up to the present time convincing
experimental proof of noticeable contribution of the exchange interactions
to the BPV between the R21 was not obtained. Thus, preference should be
given to the electrostatic coulomb multipolar interaction of quantum oscilla-
tors corresponding to the interacting transitions. This type of interaction
in the adiabatic approximation is characterized by the inverse exponential

dependence of the square of the matrix element on the distance RDA between
D and A [257]:

KEMP-”ii, (3.2)

where m is the multipole parameter equal respectively to 6, 8, 10 for the di-
pole-dipole. dipole-quadrupole and quadrupole-quadrupole transitions.

1The dimensions of the RZI-oscillstors are less than the dimensions of the
ions and the dimension of the lo-f-shell of the ion, where the transition is
realized, that is, less than 0.5 to 0.6 angstrou. At the same time, the

least distance fron these ions to the nearest coordinating atoms of the matrix
is more than 2 angstroms and, consequently. more than 3.5 angstroms to the
adjacent RZI-center.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proper consideration of the nature of the ion-phonon interactions presents

s more difficult problem. The first quantitative theory of the elaaentary
act of ”V vs the theory of resonance Poerster transfer [256] later general-
ized by Dexter [257]. In this theory the participation of the matrix is
considered phenomenologically through the overhp‘integral of the radiation
spectrum 0" and the absorption spectrum A. Rare adiabatic approximation and
the proposition of Independence of the vibrational wave functions of 0* and A

are used. The theoretical result is presented below in experimentally
neasured values for dipole-dipole Mr

I ’ ‘ ~ U ~ ~ 1.
w n . " .
AA ‘m"": .1131.“ 5 ”a (V) *5 (V) V dV1 (3 3)

where ”(0) is the fern factor of the luminescence band or the quantum spec-
trum of the emission 0* norulixed with respect to area; “(0) is the linear
absorption coefficient of the acceptor on the scale of wave nuﬁers (cn’l):
to” is the radiation lifetine of the excited state 0* (sec): ”A is the con-
centration A (ca-3); n is the index of refraction of the matrix; x2 is the
"orientation" factor taking into account the averaging of ﬂing with respect
to orientations of the dipole moment.

processes of ion-ion BPV.
a) single-phonon nonresonance; b) Ralan resonance; c) two-phonon
nonresonance; d) Orbach resonance; e) nultiphonon nonresonance.

The simplicity of practical determination of the values entering into (3.3)
and good agreenent in a nunber of cases with the experiment gave rise to wide
popularity of the Poerster theory. It was subjected several tines to theoret-
cial checking in order more precisely to define the limits of applicability
(see [239. 260]). In this respect, another phenonenological approach turned
out to be fruitful—the method of the density matrix which, in particular.
per-its sore precise deterainatim of the weak bond condition [260]. Further
progress is connected with the developIIent of the quantm nicroscopic theory,
in which ion-ion interaction in different approximations is con- ‘

sidered directly. Figure 3.6 shows the basic diagram of the ion-ion BPV

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(two-level approximation) with the participation of different ion—phonon
interactions. Table 3.1 gives a brief aux-er} of the results obtained in

the framework of microtheory. For the two-phonon processes of type b and d
its conclusions coincide with accuracy to the correction factor with the
results of the phenomenological approach. This is not unexpected inasmuch
as the indicated processes, as is known from [240]: deternine the mechanisms
of uniform broadening of the spectral bands. With respect to all data, they
make a decisive contribution to the total efficiency of the 31"? in the
resonance region E<A°single where t-IBD-EAI. The singlephonon process

Table 3. 1

 

8D is the Debye temperature of the given matrix; A31 is the energy difference

between the operand and the metastable states; a is a parameter.

Key:
l. “where according to Figure 3.6
2. Function ma)

3. Function wnA(r)
lo. Data source

type a is ineffective here on the basis of low density of the phonon states
of the matrix which for E<<v , where 9D is the De ye frequency (on the scale
of the wave nunbers); is usually proportional to E [242]. The above~
mentioned correction factor depends on R and can be appreciably less than
one for small “DA on the order of severagAlattice constants [273, 276].
Inasmuch as for an effective interaction radius of the R21 R0 determined
from the condition "DA'(‘£D)-1' where 1'”, is the average duration of

0* luminescence in the absence of A, these parameters are characteristic.

1The npv diagrams with the participation of virtual phonons [240, 260, 259]
and excitors [21.0] of the matrix have still not been taken into account, for
it is seemed that the investigated transitions are located far from the
fundamental bands in the infrared and ultraviolet absorption spectra of the
glass.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this factor must be considered. However, its numerical estimates for R2!

in glass are unknout Hhen analysing the resonance BPV it is also necessary to
consider the type b process, the probability of which does not have a simple
relation to the band widths.

The single-phonon BPV process becomes weighty in the region Avainglgagon.
Depending on thewpropositions regarding the mechanism of ion-phonon inter-
action by the magnitude of the parameter qv-chva/vaomd (Vsomd is the
speed of sound in the medium) characterizing the relation between RDA and
the wavelength of the active phonon in the BPV act, various relations W (l)
are obtained for it. However, it must be emphasized that in all cases ey
turn out to be increasing, having an exponential form with the exponent
s-l—3. In references [271, 272], in the expression for “DA for qv>>l, an
additional dependence on R appears in the form of the factor proportional to

REX. Let us also note that one of the investigated mechanisms of single

phonon nonresonance BPV corresponds in Foerster theory to overlap of the
phononless bands and single-phonon wings in the 0* and A spectra. However.
in [240, 266, 271] it is demonstrated that this concept is valid only in the
region qv>>1, that is, for t>100 cm'l, if RDA-10 angstroms,

vsomdzsqtﬁ m-sec‘l. Nevertheless, for £21 in glass, the region E5100 cm“1
is of greatest interest, inasmuch as .the values of AOH-S-IOO cll’1
and A081“ e from 1040—10-3 cm'1 at low temperatures to 5-20 cm'1 a: 300 x
are charac eristic for them.

In the multiphonon region 09sz , where O is the boundary frequency of
the spectrum of basic vibrations o the tantra): the function WM“) again
becomes decreasing close to the exponential curve. Thus, the microtheory of
BPV has made it possible more precisely to define the limits of applicability
of the Foerster theory and has proposed several mechanisms, for the
phenomenological approach obviously not considered. Unfortunately, on the
basis of indeterminacy of the approximations made in different models and
also as a result of the presence of parameters not subject to direct exper-
imental determination, the microtheory of BPV does not permit calculation of
absolute and relativc efficiencies of the interactions caused by these
mechanisms, which complicates the selection between the transfer models in
specific experimental situations. Nevertheless, the conclusions of the
theory of the nature of the functional dependencies HbA(E), "DA(RDA) and
"DA(T) put the "keys" in the hands of the experimenter for checking its
principles and discovering the predominating mechanisms of the ion-ion trans-
fer between RZI.

Interrelation of the Macrocharscteristics of BPV with the Parameters of the
Elementary Acts. With respect to nature of occurrence of the energy transfer
processes in the Dﬁ+A system, usually two situations are distinguished:

static and dynamic. The sign of the static nature of the BPV is absence of
spatial wandering of the excitation with respect to the donor subsystem.

which is typical of small donor concentrations. The procedure of averaging
the probabilities of elementary acts with respect to configurations of the

set of statistically uniformly distributed particles of the donor with respect
to the acceptor was first proposed by Foerster [256]. Later. it was developed

FOR OFFICIAL Uta- JNLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

in references [276479] and a nulber of other studies. In the case of multiple

approxination of the donor-acceptor interaction the luinescence damping
kinetics 0* are described by the expression

Nn<:)= Y(:>exp{- %xir(4-%)cgz.v-} (3.4)

and, in particular, for dipole-dipole interaction by the relation
”11(1) -Y(I)OxPl-?V?l. (3.4a)

where ND“) is the population of the radiating state D*; the function Y(t)
expresses the luinescence daming law 13* in the absence of A (in the general
case, nonexponential); I‘(x) is the gal-s function; Cm is the nicroparaneter
of the interaction D*-A related to "M by the expression HDA(R)-CDARB:;

Y is the parameter determined from the expression

., -“Tmcmm. (3.5)

The formulas (3.10), (3.6a; are valid for the following restrictions:

1) the inverse transfer A91) is absent; 2) Air-«Io: 3) #JA‘...< i, where Man
is the total nuiaer of planes which could be occupied by acceptors per unit
volume. The last restriction provides that the averaging be carried out with-
in the limits of the statistically uniforn distribution of D* with respect to A
without considering afinite masher of places which can be occupied by the
acceptor» in the nearest coordination spheres near 0*; this is admissible
only for snall A concentrations. The case NA/Nux-vl was investigated in

[276. 279]. It was duonstreted that here the luainescence decay kinetics
approach exponential with characteristic tine deternined by the total sun of
the probabilities of the interaction with respect to all nodes of the acceptor
sublattice. The exponential kinetics are nanifeated first of all in the
initial phase of the process of luainescence decay. In [280], consideration
is given to the influence of the minim: distance of approach of the donor
and the acceptor Rnin' It is demonstrated that in the initial stage of decay
(for t<<R;m/C ) there is a relatively short exponential section which can
be noted or [FR-Atllnx or for very small interactions. that is. for

6
CDA‘ tn’knin '

The fomulas (3.6). (3.1a) are derived for the case of excitation by a
6-pulse. The damping law for any other type of excitation can be written
in the forn of a convolution in tine:-

‘
N'n (a) Show: - Mt (3.6)
C

where Mt) is the shape of the optical excitation pulse. For exanple. after
switching off the steady-state excitation. the luminescence damping kinetics
are significantly closer to exponential than (3.4) [275]. The decay law

with an exchange nature of the interactions in the pairs D*—A also differs
sharply fraa that described by formula (3.6) [278]. Nevertheless, in spite
of the indicated restrictions. the law (3.1.) is quite tmiversal and applicable

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

according to [286]. also to the media with nonuniform broadening if instead
of "DA we use the probability "DA averaged with respect to the transition
energies.

With increased concentrations of D, the process of quenching by the acceptor
is stimulated by migration of the excitations with respect to the donor sub-
system and when finding the function ND“) it is necessary to consider the
dynamics of the spatial distribution of D* with respect to A. This situation
is sore complicated for interpretation and it is described within the frame-
work of various models of quenching [276. 278-288]. Qualitatively, the energy
migration with respect to D leads in all models to an increase in the rate

of the lu-inescence decay process and its exponentialization in the final
phase. The parameter of the exponential curve w defining the rate of migra-
tions controlled quenching of luminescence of 0* depends not only on NA and cDA'
but also on the concentration of the donors NA and probability of the 919‘
mentary act of donor-donor interactions “DD'CDD . However. the form of this
function is essentially different in different t eoretical models. Analysis
of the conditions of applicability of one model or another, their approxima-
tions and limitations can be found in references [281, 2810]. The results of
such an analysis reduce to the following.

First. it is necessary to distinguish the migration controlled phase of
quenching from the kinetics phase.1 The condition oinrgalizing migratiog
" )

controlled quenching has the form “DA“E' where c-HBA (1A)'1/ (“Bind-(1A)

defines the rate of irreversible energy runoff to the acceptor subsystem;
"a“ is_the1probability of the elementary act of BPV at a minimum distance

n3 (1' )' is the average energy relaxation rate in the acceptors. Thus.
t e bott eneck in the given case is the migration rates of the energy with
respect to the donor subsystem. In the kinetic stage of quenching (HDD>>€)
the limiting factor is the excitation energy discharged through the acceptors.
Her the_luminescence quenching rate can be limited by the tr port D*-A
( m“<<(rA)‘1) or the excitation relaxation in the acceptors DA“>>(1A)'1).

Secondly. in the migration controlled phase the quenching kinetics are
described within the framework of the diffusion or jump limits. The former

is applicable for a ratio of Cm>>CDD. The solution of the diffusion equations
is found in different approximations in references [274. 279. 280. 283, 284.
287-289, 291, 292]. The asymptotica obtained by different authors do not
agree with each other. For resonance dipole-dipole interactions in the

pairs D*-D and D*-A for uniformly broadened transition bands, the process can
be approximated by the following analytical function [281, 293]:

A’ﬂ (I): (‘\p (-- 1—i_ 1,] '1'" Wt), (3. 7)

 

1The latter is sometimes called "superaigration" [281].

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W‘ - .1.-1"uf‘n ((5)110” “(‘EUU‘.
(3.8)

different authors use different values of the coefficient A, and the value
of x varies from 5/6 to 3/4.

For c >C the application of a jump limit is more substantiated. In this
case 93.. 99mm of references [273. 271., 279, 282-286, 289, 291, 292] are
much closer to each other:

W a Mornchicﬁi (3.9)

However. the values of the coefficient 3 do not coincide here, varying as a
function of the simplifying assmptions made within the limits of 16 to 27.
Uniformity of expressions (3.8) to (3.9) was also confirmed by numerical
simulation [287], but here the coefficient 3 turned out to be smaller:

8 was equal to approximately 16 for ordered arrangement of D and 3.5 for
random arrangement. Finally, the calculations performed in [289] demon-
strated that the function (3.9) is maintained with an error to 102 in the

region C0030. SCDA'

Thirdly. the kinetic stage of ”quenching is realized in a broad range of

r r -n.s c 'J
concentrations ND)"; . where D 1%) (6%) (Rm-0". except in

the junp model.

Here - " " ‘
W - é‘ﬂ'ﬂ’acu main)"
(3. 10)

and does not depend on [In and CD!) [284. 285]. At the diffusion limit the
kinetic phase is attainable only in the region "DIN-“+1.
The above discussed results are obtained under the assumption of resonance
dipole-dipole nature of the interaction of the donors with uniformly broadened
bands. The equation for ND(t) considering nonuniform broadening was obtained
at the julp limit in reference [290]. Its approximate solution when replac-
ing real probability distribution of the elementary acts of energy migration
in the donor subsystem by 6-distribution with some average probability

w,“ -Bgzﬁﬁ; has the form [516]

W- I Wnumt’wﬁk. (3.11)
. ‘4' EinA (In/WM,

where g' (R) is the distribution density of the acceptor around 0*. Formula
(3.11) is quite canon, for it is valid both in the case of multipole and
for exchange nature of 0-D and D-A interactions. and it describes the
migration contrglled and kinetic stages of luminescence quenching. In the
liaiting cases “DD“: and "D >>€ with dipole-dipole nature of the inter-
actions ita asymptotics coincgde with (3.9) and (3.10). respectively.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, at the present time theory presupposes quite simple relations between
the relation of the integral kinetics of luminescence decay D* and the micro--
parameters of the elementary act of 1H) and D—A-interactions.and certain
stipulations used also in the case of activated glass. They provide the
basis for the method of precision investigation of the integral kinetics of
luminescence or the method of microparameters most corprehensively developed
in [281, 283, 293]. This method permits certain definition of the ﬂare-
parameters averaged with respect to energies of the D-A interactims C‘DA and
m and in the case of realization of the kinetic phase of quenching,
estimation_of the distance 3min. At the same time. the estimates of the
parameter ODD are less exact and possible only in the presence of preliminary
intonation about the multipole nature of the interactions 0-1). In real
experimtal situations, the choice between models of migration controlled
quenching of luminescence is also complicated.

More conplete information about the microparameters and mechanisms of donor-
donor interactions is permitted to be obtained by the methods of investigating
spectral migration in the donor subsystem. This migration is specifically
characteristic of media with NUP, and it is manifested for the corresponding
setup of the experiment. for exalple. for low temperatures or selected excita—
tion, in the time evolution of the spectral composition of lulinescence.
Efforts at theoretical description of the spectral migration were undertaken
in references [252. 266, 290, 296-301]. The most successful of them obviously
is reference [290]. in which it was possible to obtain; in particular, rela-
tions generalizing formula (3.4) to the case of the lusineacence quenching
law of spectrally isolated centers in various sections of the resonance NU?
curve:

Nu (h‘. t) — g (E) Y (E. c) o!p[-’- 1g: '1‘(1 —%) ”gal-p (3)} (3. 12a)

where ' ’ .. ~ ..
m!) = I [can (ew'wuz - .) «is.
O

(3.12b)

For known ND“. t) and Y(E, t) expressions (3.12) permit determination of the
parameter In and the functional dependence ODD“) which sheds light on the
mechanism of the interactions 0-1), which was used as the basis for the method
of selective observation of the kinetics of the quenching of luminescence
on the shortwave branches of the resonance lines (sm) [254]. Additional
information about the mechanisms of interactions and relative contribution of
transition; between different Stark components can be given by the temperature
functions cmCr) and Wt) [290].

Thus, the results of investigating the integral and selective kinetics of the
duping of the 0* luminescence carry sufficient information to determine the
nicroparametera and mechanisms of donorbdonor and donor-acceptor interactions
and their interrelation to the structure of laser glass. Let us esphasize
that the study of the concentration and temperature dependence of other
characteristics of M. for enamle, the quantum yield q or the average

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
duration of the luminescence ? D does not have analogous informativeness, and
it is necessary to take a critical position with respect to the conclusions
drawn on the basis of it regarding the mechanisms of pair interactions.

53. 3. Ion-Ion Transfer-Experimental Results

Analysis of the Published Data. At the present time a ntmber of experimental
papers have been cencluded, in which certain characteristics of the BPV pro-
cesses are presented for different pairs of rare earth ions in glass. The
known reviews of these papers became obsolete long ago [82-85, 302]. An

effort is made below to classify the published data and to some degree analyze
their quality and reliability.

The greater part of the experimental papers are devoted to studies of such
macroscopic characteristics of the BPV as dependence of the density of
luminescence, quantum yield and some "effective duration of luminescence" of
the donors on the concentration of the acceptors and in a number of cases on
the composition of the glass and temperature. The data presented in Table 3.2,
not pretending to- completeness, permit an idea to be formed of the volume and
the accents in the performed research. As we shall see, primary attention is
given to silicate systems and then phosphate system, and gong the investi-
ga5$d pairs, the pairs important for laser applications Nd -Nd3+, Ndy-Ybal‘,
Yb -Br3'*' andcertain others predominate. The series of indicated papers is
characterized by an arbitrary choice of compositions of glass, imperfection
of procedures and experimental equipment and absence of clarity in defining
the concept of "effective luninescence duration." In many cases when analyzing
the quenching processes, consideration is not given to possible competition
on the part of the accompanying impurities which are not taken into account,
for example, the Oil-groups. The conclusions of these papers regarding the
mechanisms of pair interactions, as has already been noted above, must be
approached with caution. Nevertheless, the research has made it possible to
obtain primary information about the efficiency and specific nature of the
BPV processes in one pair or another, and it has created defined prerequisites
for deeper research.

In another group of papers laser methods of studying transport processes are
developed. This group must include the cycles of works in which investiga-
tions are made of the dynamics of the reproduction of the equilibrium curve

of the luminescence band of rare earth ions after clearing of the latter

by passage of a single band laser pulse through the sample [366, 348, 380-382].
the dynamics of development of the generation spectra [202. 386], lasing
kinetics I202, 335, 353] and other processes. The limited . nature of the
laser methods consists in the fact that for implementation of them it is
necessary to have a powerful pulse source of coherent radiation with lasing
frequencv coinciding with the frequency of the luminescence band of the inVesti-
gated transitim of the rare earth ions; in some cases the lasing mode must be
implemented in the investigated sample itself. Therefore at the present time
the circle of BW processes investigated by such methods is limited to
migration of the excitation energy with respect to the M3" ions in silicate
and phosphate glass. In addition, the obtained results reduce only to
estimating the phenomenological characteristics of energy migration defined

in one way or another, the unique relation of which to the parameters of the
elementary acts cannot be traced.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recent years various versions of the chronospectroscopic or spectroscopic
method with time selection for investigation of resonance luminescence of

rare earth ions in glass combined with the methods of selective excitation of
individual types of luminescing centers have developed quickly [389, 394].
Selective excitation of rare earth ions in glass was used for the first time
in reference [615] to investigate Bu ions, and the presence of spectral
migration was discovered, which insures establishment of equilibrium in the
set of luminescence centers. The method of selective excitation supplemented
by the chronospectroscopic method of recording was later used many times to
study the parameters of the spectral and spatial migration of energy with
reggect to the ions Nd3* [370, 379, 383, 387, 388], Yb3+ [301, 351, 377],

Eu [251-253, 349, 371, 375, 377, 379, 389, 390] in phosphate, silicate,
borosilicate, fluoberyllate and germanate glass. In the majority of indicated
papers, only qualitative estimates were obtained for the phenomenological
migration parameters. In some cases conclusions were drawn regarding the
mechanism of elementary acts of the interactions. However, the procedures for
processing the results of such studies have still been insufficiently developed,
and they do not permit reliable identification of the mechanism of inter-
action or the obtaining of quantitative data on the microparameters of

mi ration. In this sense, the situation with investigation of migration in
Eu -doped glass is characteristic. In reference [252], the mechanism of the
elementary act is defined as . dipole-dipole nonresonance single-phonon,

in [253], as .quadrupolar-quadrupolar resonance, in [375], as dipole-
dipole two-phonon nonresonance, and, finally, in [390], as dipole—dipole
resonance.

More reliable and complete results can be obtained on combination of the
chronospectroscopic method of recording. selective excitation and low tempera-
tures (ksT<<Av“) where the processes of phonon abscrption are "frozen" and

BPV within the limits of the N0? curve proceeds only in the direction of

lower energies. Obviously, this fact was first indicated in [372], where for
b.2 K in silicate glass, a long wave shift of the luminescence band of the
Yb3+ ions is noted (the transition 2F5/2(l)+2P /2(l)) on excitation of them
by quasimonochromatic emission with frequency 10330 cm’1 to the short wave
edge of the resonance absorption band, and a valid interpretation of it is
given qualitativ l . Laier. long wave concentration shift of the lumines-
cence band of Yb ions, and then Nd3+ was investigated in detail during wide-
band excitation in silicate, phosphate and fluophosphate glass in the cycle

of papers [296, 356, 357, 369, 373, 38k, 392]. The authors of these papers,
confirming the conclusion of [372] regarding the single phonon nonresonance
mechanism of BPV between the Yb3+ ions in glass of kBT<<A§ , tried many times
to calculate the relation from the experimental data for ta
value introduced in a defined way which characterizes the effective spectral
migration rate of the excitation as a function of the difference in energies
of the interacting transition t. However, such efforts do give any unique
result. Only recently when using selective excitation of Yb ions, were
qualitatively valid data obtained [301]. In Figure 3.5, for phosphate glass
with "Yb'7'1020 cmF3, the form of the resonance luminescence band of Yb

ions is presented for narrow band excitation by krypton tube emission

with 93-10256 cm’1 (1) and absorption (2) corresponding to the transition

86

IKIICMWNCJAl.lEﬂE(N9LY
Table 3.2

 
    
    
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
 
   
         
   
   
   
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
   

I l llmnuu llllul
I1 ch). 83(c.¢). 84(1)). 85(6). No.
650.223 223(6. 0). 225 (1?). m (0.229
0)). 2308309).” («2.3“ c. 1»).
(c).306 (at Q..6 r. e). (I).
308(6). 309(0). 310(c.r). 311(c).
‘ ‘ $8 (0). 670 (0)] -
Fm" lul: Nd” ‘fsn-O’G", u I749 (6)] .
4 -0 0 o 82 101 . 35¢ a." 318
F” 1'“ m ‘np' 1”” ‘ ' ($9320 (6)(1(c 0 (c). A"?
3&7 (#19). 35H 0). 36016). (Q
no:+ awe-2;, u {246 «.6 6h». 35w. 0. 61¢)! .
a» "Main”. 16 ms (can. m «#1». as: «non ,
PR. .Bf"'c. ’6 lw (C. ”I
30” “512"”!!! i. 701’ m (1.)
Dy” OHM-arm; '1qu 1- Tot in
w was. 15 Tania
Ho” . "0'1. 16 Tor mo'
Tb” - "0"”m - . 1. Tan
' a." wrap. ' 1-) Term
00" ‘
Y)” 'P *‘F 9] ->‘l 16 48 85 . . 101 . 31H .
. m m an m: I 32$? 5) 332% 938“” (ﬂ). ”(3'
360“. :usuc. )mm. (c)!
.‘I (1.1”.512 15 [33 (r) I
"rat. to [311(c). :13'.'(c). 366 MM
’II.-o‘ll. 16 [an (ale ) I
'Hrt’ﬁ; 'Fc“‘ac U [343(7)]
ﬂuidity: :- [an (6)]
WWW

[rm (co. r)!

 
 
   

9’ 1112*” ma Izm «m. m (6. on
‘lu-‘l: 16 m: (c). 345 (Mp). 355 (c, 4.)}
”9/2"" 15:2 1. I330 m. m (r. a»!
"13.2”"012 11} I333 (0- 01’. W0. ’)1

[241 (c. i». r. 6c)!
I240 (0. c). 359 (t). c)!

  

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Table 3.2, continued]

 

 

m n... . ‘ ""'
w. sD‘..1p.l n.» L It,” .apm 16 l3“ 0:. O. r. ﬁle)!
. . NI!“ : "on-”Gm '16 [353 (9)!
Wrap. W '5 ‘41,; 3 . l! I352 (”I
- Tb” "5-4!” 1: , Is Tonn' (a) -
’ 1h” . 'Erf'l. 16 Tor as.
by” ”WEN: . is Tor us
Nd" Sing-J 115/: Is To! so
51:" will". Pm: m is T." me
Tn” IBM”. - .‘l:;’:"v ,I: ’n 16. [3‘3 (.0 6): m (.0 6)]
Gd" ”4.9", I3“ (6. 5). 32! (en
—m_n w
Cc” — l315 (ale). 816 (sle). 319 (e). 321(e)|
._ . [316 (do)!
._ - 11.» ms (6)! -
_._ m 1801 (6))
cl... _ "av l32‘l (c). 320 (c)!
_ Yb” mo (0). 333 (c). 381 (e. 4»)
”no. _ Nd”. ' — i6 [295 (c). 325(6). 327 (c). 337 (6)1
_ El" 2 — 46 I337 (¢)|
_ Bo" _ — 16 I337 (c)!

     
    

The letter in parentheses indic'stss which glue i
paper:

[330 (o)l

[246 3“.“ 616.0. 315 (c) :m (c). 325 (c).

356k). 359 (¢. c W6). 305 «)1

IN? Q c 6/ ). 372 (010) 3“ (§).

359 (0- 0- ¢)l

lm (t)!

s investigated in the given

ch-eilieste. hphosphsts, buborste, b/e-boroscilicate. b/O—boro-

phosphsts. fr-gs'rnsnsts, s/Hflmhosphste, Olbunuoberyuste. O‘rnfluoride.

a/cusluosilieste, k--qusrt 2.

Key

”OFFICIALUSEONLY

lurrsnsition; z—Type of m; 3-Dsts source; lo—the sane
2P5, (1)22?" 2(1). and in Figure 3. 6, the spectral dependence of the lacro-
acopic characteristic of- the energy nigration process ‘1: using the expression

. This relation confirms on th phenomenological

w.(e - v. - v)~ ~l.(v)/g(v)

AIM/f?)

“(7
e

   
 

I’M/l:

mo M!” m W W in."

Figure 3.5. Porn of the resonance band corresponding to the
transition ’N,(l)§-.'e.'Pm ('1') of Yb“ ions in phosphate glass
3011.

-1u:inescence vith selective excitation. 2—-absorption.

I15 - 1-10“ “'3'

level the theoretically important results previously established [256] using
the sun. nethod: a sharp increase in probability of the elenentary BPV act
within the limits of the “UP with an increase in t vhich is valid at least
for [fruit-E and refutes the widespread opposite opinion based on preference
given to a resonance nechanisls of WV. Let us note that the function
w¢ (E) does not have a siwle relation to the probability of the elenentary
act so that it is at least difficult to use it to deternine the micro-
paraneters of the D—D interaction and the functional form of the relation

cDD(E)e

 

Figure 3.6. Spectral dependence of the Brobagility of transmission
"(a for phosphate glass vith M'7‘102 " [301]

Key:
1. v” arbitrary units

 

l‘l'he results obtained using the sun nethod are discussed in more detail on
PP 103-105.

l-‘OIOFI-‘IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Table 3.3 data are presented from experiments in which the method of
investigating the integral kinetics of luminescence was used successively.
There are very few of these papers, and in the majority they are devoted to
determining the microparameters of BPV in neodymium-doped glass. Their
authors unanimously come to the conclusion of dipole—dipole nature of the
interactions in the investigated papers, but for the interactions D-D, this
conclusion is not confirmed by convincing experimental proofs. The conclu—
sion that the migration quenching of luainescence in neodymium-doped glass
must be considered within the framework of the jump model appears to be
geliable. Quantitative estimates-are made of the microparameters CD9 and

CDA for a number of pairs. however, in some case; they are questionable

(see the remarks to Table 3.3) and for 6.2 K for CDD using fqgmula (3:9). they
are in general not incorrect. The temperature depend ce 35 CDA and CDD’

in particular, the relations obtained for the pair Bu ~Cr in [3501

giving information about the BPV mechanisms, are of intergst. In_[205] an

of ort was made to trace the dependence of the parameta's ebb and C for
Nd ions on the type of glass former, but it was not possible to attain
complete, sufficiently reliable data. In [238] an effort was made to
explain the reduced concentration quenching in Li-La-hd-phgsphate glass:
namely. the combination of a small value of th§+parameter A characterizing
the process of cross relaxation of the ions Nd (about 3-1 41 cmG-sec‘l).
and the relatively large value of Ruin (about 4.7 angstroms). However. the
causes of significant developments in the degree of concentration quenching
in the series of phosphate systems. in our opinion, remain still unclear and
require additional study.

In the papers mentioned in Table 3.3, it was proposed in acgprdance with the
theoretical concepts discussed in 53.2, that the functions w-f(ND) and

H-f(NA) in the migration controlled phase of quenching are linear. Experi-
mental teating of this proposition (with the exception of the case of con-
centration quenching in neodymium glass which is complicated for interpreta—
tion [238]) was not carried out. Moreover, in references [340, 341, 395], in
which the BPV was investi ated in 12 pairs of rare earth ions (Rd3+be3*,
Yb3+-Br3*. Nd3+-Sm . Dy -Dy3+: Dy3+—Bu3+, Sm3+-Eu3+. and so on) in phosphate
glass it is'pointed out that in the latter, in contrast to the silicate glass,
the functions H-f(ND) are nonlinear, and H increases appreciably faster than
the concentration ND. It is demonstrated there that the experimental values
of the excitation energy diffusion coefficients with respect to the investi-
gated donors in phosphate glass exceed by an order or more the ones calculated
for dipole-dipole interactionﬁusing the overlap integrals of the spectra with
respect to the formula (3.3), at the same time as the indicated values are
close in silicate and germanate glass.

0n the basis of these results, the conclusion is drawn of exchange nature

at least the donor-donor interaction phosphate glass. however, the set

of results obtained recently on a large number of objects using the precision
methods of investigating BPV, in particular, the SNKL method, does not confirm
this conclusion (see below). In addition. it is necessary to recognize the use
of the diffusion model for description of the migration controlled stage of
quenching in the majority of investigated pairs as unconvincing, inasmuch as

the efficiency of the 0-D interactions. as was indicated in these papers, exceeds
the efficiency of the D-A interactions (see 5 3.2). At_the same time. the indi-
cations of nonlinearity of the concentration functions H - f(4(n) require fixed
attention.

90

FIHICNHHCJAL USIZCH‘LY
”MP-qua: an

um-urm u

.r3l’...l.ll

 

 

        
 

'I.-o'l. 16

   

Nd”

Wan-9‘1””: “I: Nd” .‘I ”19‘! 18/1; “I! ll

 

 

"III-“rill 1P

 

91

FOR OFHGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

source

     

Data-

   
 

IJnl'Uﬁ, 77 -- Ilsa-Mu”: .. ‘
.. mu 1km: TI”, _
_ ’ |:I.n|
If. ”.‘L’ .

',:;(;u01.',-I u

—_.._..

 

,'.\|
:l I

92
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Table 3.3]. Notes. (1) The dispersion 10 with respect to the NUP curve
is not taken into account; (2) the competitioR on the part of quenching on
the Oil-groups is not considered; (3) the use of the diffusion model is
questionable; (lo) the quenching on the mat-51: vibrations is not considered;
(5) the use of formula (3.9) to determine CD at 6.2K is invalid.

The following abbreviations_are used: Eli-ﬂung) model of migration
quenching; DIP-diffusion model; F--effsctive macroscopic energy migration
rate with respect to donors; y(T)-depsndence of the macroparameter of BPV v
(3.5) on temperature; D(T)—diffusion coefficient as a function of tempera-
ture.

0n the whole it can be stated that there are insufficient data presented in
the above investigated papers to put together a clear representation of the
mechanisms and relations of the BPV process parameters in glass or their
dependence on the type of glass former, modifier or glass structure.

The original experimental data are presented below (the greater part of them
are published for the first timel) fill the indicated gaps to some degree.
The described results are obtained by analyzing the luminescence decay
kinetics. including with spectral selection with respect to the excitation
channel and with respect to the recording channel, in a wide temperature
range on a large nuﬂaer of samples with specially selected relations of the.
activator concentrations. Here use was made of the precision experimental
setup (Figure 3.7) providing for recording the luminescence decay kinetics
in the multichannel photon counting mode in the dynamic range to 80 decibels
with sensitivity to 10 photons peat excitation pulse, spectral resolution to
0.5 angstrom and time resolution to 10 microseconds, with automated process-
ing of the experimental results. The recording of the luminescence decay
kinetics in the infrared range was insured in an analogou mode in the

105 decibel range using the cooled germanium photoresistance, signal from
which after preamplification was normalized with respect to intensity and
averaged in the two-channel gate integrator with time resolution to 100 nano-
seconds, and then input through a matching device to the minicomputer memory.
The latter was used to approximate the curves obtained by calculation with
output of the results on the display screen for visual comarison.

Donor-Acceptor Interaction of Rare Earth Ions. Measurements of the D—A
interaction parameters were performed on samples with very small donor concen-
tration (on the order of 1‘1019 cm‘3) which excluded migration of excitation
energy with respegt to them. The acceptor concentration varied within broad
limits, from 1-10 0 to 2-1021 cm'3. The program for processing the experi-
mental results on a computer considered the presence of dispersion of the
radiative probability with respect to the set of donor centers manifested in
the nonexponential nature of the curves for the radiation luminescence decay
[250]. In Figure 3.8a, in the example of the Yb3+-Br3+ pairs in phosphate

 

18m studies were performed jointly with Yu. Ye. Sverchkov and S. H. Hatytsin
on samles fixed by A. A. Izyneyev, A. K. Gromov. V. B. Kravchenko,
v. M. Kozyukov, and U. Ya. Sednalis.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3.7. Functional diagram~of~a modern experimental setup
for kinetic studies of m processeﬁn

l—nitrogen laser 0-0.337 micron, ‘t “1. -10 nanoseconds.

pr. “t-o to 500 hertz): 2—uc laseg: §d3+ 0-1.066, 0.532,
0.3% micron; 1 “1. ~15 nanoseconds; P 0’ “-0-100 hertz);
3-the tunable Eye laser 0-0.1. to 0.7; micron) or L1?

crystal laser: F" (0.85 to 1.1 nicrona): lo-aample; S--heliua
cryostat (2-300 K ; 6-double- monochrolator (dispersion

S angstrou/n): 7-cooled photonultiplier; 8-photomultiplier
cooling system 9—preamplifier: lO-nodula for sampling single
photon events; ll—Iultichannel statistical pulse analyzer
(1024 memory channels; scanning rate with respect to channels
10 microseconds/channel); 12--Iinicoq;uter; l3-atorage element
based on flexible magnetic discs; lip-terminal; lS—digital
plotter; l6—avalanche photodiode: l7-delayed pulse generator
in the 'Ynd‘ronization channel

glass with the caposition Ba La(PO )1 , into which the activators were
introduced by replacement of a, standard experimental lmnineacence decay
curves of D* are presented which were mounted with high precision in the
dynamic range of intensities occupying more than three orders. 0n approxi-
mation of these curves by the expression (3.6) with variation of the intro-
duced values of the parameters m and the best matching in the entire
investigated time interval was achi for m-6i0.l. that is, the process of
static quenching was described well within the framework of the concept of
the dipole-dipole interaction. An increase in concentration of A we not
acoonpaniad by significant changes in the nature of the functional dependence
Np(t) or the value of the parameter , but in the initial section (M) a
trend was traced to an eﬁonengialiaat on of the decay. In glass with high
A concentration (to 2.10 cn' . this trend was expressed quite clearly,
indicating upper bounding of the luminescence quenching rate as a result of
ninimt- distance between rare earth ions (see 53. 2) and. on the other
hand, absence of a noticeable contribution 0 other, shorter acting types of

interactions even in the closest pairs.

910

MWUSIONLY
The pair “ah-Er“ is. characterized by almost conplete overlap of the
1mnegc¢nce spsctrul 0f 0* and absorption spectrum °fA(Pigure 3.9.),
Analogous studies of couples with differ t acceptor on centration were per-
formed for standard nonreaonance pairs-Yb 453* and Yb -Ilo3+ and also for
the pair of ions Edy-Yb“, the spectra of which partially overlap in
their wings (figure 3.9b). For exawle, in Figure 3.8b, the experimental
curve is shown for the luainescence- decay of Yb“ in glass with high 303+ ion
concentration (about 2.1'1021 cm"). A calculated relation is prgsented
there which was obtained ming fonula (3.1:) for (hm-1.310“ cm -sec'1
neasured on samples with low 303+ concentration. As is obvious, the experi-
mental curve differs froa the calculated curve by the initial, more gently
sloping and exponential section -in the dynamic range of intensities of more
than one order. Using the relation of [238]

1Q. _ (ﬁgﬁﬂri (3.13)

it is possible to estimate Run=5.0 angstroms by the luminescence decay rate
in this section we. This value is close to the known data for crystal phos-
phates. for example, NdPsP ( 3-5.19 angstroas) or LiNdPao 2 ( -5.64
angstroms) [238], and it 1&3“. es the isolated location of the R2 2rare
earth ions] in phosphate glee-1"“.

    

m 1.3.; M MU",

Figure 3.9. Position and shape of the luminescence and
absorption bands of rare earth ions connected with excitation
energy transfer in the pairs “9-39", Yb3"'-Pr3+, Ybﬂ-ﬂo“,
“kw-3+ (a) and reﬁt-ma3+ (b); «2-300 1:.

For 81’3" and 303'", the scale on the y-axis has been doubled,
and for Pr3+. 1: has been multiplied by five.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the Ndﬂ-Yby‘ pair studies were also made of the laws of burning of
luminescence of the acceptor, and their. correspondence on the whole to the
nature of the duping curves was discovered.

Thus, the obtained results indicate that the Poerster theory is applicable for
measuring the averaged Jerameters of the elementary acts of donorbacceptor
interactions of m and in glass in a wide range of acceptor concentrations.
The measurements for hi A concentrations permit additional estimation of

Ruin'

Experimental values are presented in'T_a_ble 3.4 for the parameters of the pair
interactions m. 65A and no, where “o"cﬁa"un)l 6 is the critical Foerster
radius for a large number of pairs of rare earth ions in phosphate glass_wiih
the composition Ba3A1La(P03)1 . The calculated values of the parameter 03: °
obtained from the integrals of overlap of the spectra under the assumption

of dipole-dipole resonance nature of the BPV using (3.3) are given for a number
of airs in the same table.1 For nonresonance pairs the upper bounds of

C“ c are presented considering the resonance overlap of the electron spectra
or 11* and A with the electron vibrational satellites of the partners. the
intensities of which could not always be determined because of their smallness.
As was obvious from Table 3.10, in all cases, dipole-dipole interactions (m-6)
predominate. and, therefore. the conclusions of the authors of certain papers
regarding effective manifestation in the BPV between the rare earth ions in
glass of other types of interactionr—dipole-quadrupole [352. 363] exchspge
[360], and so on-are not confirmed. For resonance pairs (Yb3*33r5*. Yb -Pr3*,
and so on). quite good correspondence of the values of cg and 03:“ is
observed, and for nonresonance pairs, the experimental values are systematically
an order (or more) larger than the calculated values. The divergences

increase sharply with an increase in energy deficit during the transfer act
Elm, where ﬁn“ is the minimum snargy difference of the transitions between
the Stark components of the interacting multipleths 0* and A. It is remarkable
that the experimental values of cg“ and, the more so, R0 for variation of £11
in broad limits (sometimes to 100 cm'l) differ relatively little for trans tions
with close integral cross sections. This is easily traced in the example of
quenching of the luminescence by Yb“ ions from the series Br“. "3*, 303+,
“3+ (m Figure 3.9 and Table 3.0). The differences in values of ch for
these pairs do not exceed one order. and the values of Ito differ by one and

a half times and correlate with the differences in the transverse cross sec-
tions of the absorption bands of the acceptors. Only for E n>iooo to 1200 car:l
($32000 em‘l, where Em is the energy mismatch between t e most intense
couponents of the transitions 0* and A) a sharp decrease in the value of cm

is observed of which it is eas to e convinced in the exsaple of the pairs
Buy-Yb“ a.“ 21300 curl). n: Bu (aunzaooo cm'l), ub3+~rb3+

(Eun23500 care), and so on. Attention is attracted by the fact that the
admiuible ineteraction energy deficit corresponds to the muimum frequencies
of the vibrational spectrum of phosphate glass (0";1200 cm’l). Thus. the

——

 

1"l'he values of E?“
n t

for NUP are

obtained in this way are somewhat high. for the corrections
aken into account.

96

MI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.4

 
   
        
           
                
  

Transition

 

sign-.51,” w "1/:""|/3

 

. ‘ Ho" up». 3.0
- ’m“ ’mzzm 3"” ”m“"m:m:m: u - “-2
‘FuI-o‘l “I! NC" ”Sm-“VIII; 5.1
'F 3/2"" an 3“” "3*”. . 1.3

Tm" my». _ 3.1

     
   
     
  

  
     
           
   
    
 
   
    
       
 
     
      

 
 
  

 
  

”§m""sm 6 12 12.0

"IN”. 6 <0.5 s 1

.ZSIG. o <o.1 1.5

a 6 5 10.2

'11 512"?" mg. m: 0 £ 10.0

' '15-”. a <o.om <3 2

. 'Pv’F. o <o.om <a.2
"5,3°)"'F1n(1) .1” 3".1'5,’ O 0 3,2

5"” "11' *‘l 15.: Nd" '1 012*" m:
HG” "HI, '

_ m» Virus.

50" 75-49.

m” "Ivar.
'nuz""m

5“" murmuz; :n 3"” "a: I'JDO

9!" 1’ 1m
“ 'z’m sun/2:012

   

   

En" 'ro—uo. In

 

97

FOR OIFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presented results indicate the significant contribution of the single phonon
nonresonance mechanism to the total efficiency of the donor-acceptor trans-
fer. Consequently, the degree of overlap of the emission spectra D and
absorption spectra A or their resonance is not a decisive factor detersining
the efficiency of the HPV process. The requirenent that the difference in

energies of interacting trensnissions not exceed the value of van): for the
given nstrix is such nore inportsnt.

Table 3.5.

      
   

BA—Al-le—nets hos

N“uhlﬂtlghog .32“
K-laenefsp oe ate
Ph—lag-u trap
u-Ns-X-Bessi

   

The drawn conclusion ie_confiraed also by the results of studying the depen-
dence of the values of Cm on the type of glass forner. In Table 3.5 the
parameters of the elenentary acts of the interactions are presented for two

pairs of interest for laser spglicagons: Ndy-Ybﬂ and Yb3+-Br3"- and
standard nonresonance pairs Yb -'ln , Thy-833+ in glass of dif erent

celposition. It turns out that the value of for the pair Yb -Er3+

depends weekly on the type of glass former. 0n y the following types of glass
are distinguished with respect to NW efficiency: lead phosphate glass with

an excess of phosphorus (in the direction of higher efficiency) and alkaline
silicate glass (in the direction of lower efficiency). Replecenent of phos-
phorus oxides by other glass for-ears (0.02 or 8102) leads to some decrease
in the values of cm (figure 3.10). However. the noted differences are
snell. The dependence of on the type of nodifier is still less signifi-

cant (Time 3.11). The i uence of the netrir on the transfer in the
Nd3“‘-Yb3+ pair and especially the Thy-Th9 pair turns out to be Inn-e signif-
icant. In the latter case borste glass is distinguished. for which the
value of Ce is higher. As is known [412], for borate glass the greatest
extent of erlpectrun of basic netrix vibrations is characteristic
(omxzmso cn'l). which pronotea involve-eat of a greater nuﬂ>er of
transitions between c onents of the Iultipleths 2P5 2 and 2P7/ of the
donors (“>3") and 3H6. 5 of the acceptors (1‘6”), including t e soot

98

FORWLUSEONLY
intense. in the BPV process. In other glass, the latter do not participate
in the transfer, for 2w“, for them. Obviously this explains the higher
efficiency of transfer in the borate matrix in the pair Yb3+-Tm3*. The
analogous situation is realised also in the case of the pair Yb3*-ao3+. 0n
the contrary, for the mm between the ions bid3+ and-Yb“, for which

E {900 cm'l. and_the edges of the spectra even overlap (Figure 3.9b).

tR: dependence of on’ the type of glass forner is significatly weaker,
and borate glass is not distinguished.

     

" I 2 .1 .2-

Figure 3.10. Variation. of the 3probability of the elementary
act of 81W in the pair Thy—Er for molar replacement of

P205 by the oxides $102 (a) (L 9.02 (b) in the systena
n,‘p,'~i>bo.(s :3): 9.0”; f '
where R is rare earth elements.

It is remarkable that even with almost cgaplete overlap of the spectra. in
spite of the closeness of the values of c°nA and 6““ entering into the
error. the contribution of the nonresonance tranaf“ channel turned out to be
highly significant. This is indicated both by the fact that the experi-
nentally measured values exceed the calculated values (in spite of the high
estimation of the latter) and the coupler nature of the tenperature funcgons
c; (T for resonance pairs illustrated in the example of 31"] between Yb

an Br (Figure 3.12). The observed temerature growth by more than tenfold
in the range of 6.2 to 300 K with two sharp inflections at 12 and 80 K is difficult
to explain within the freaework of resonance BPV. Indeed. for the first tins,
the values of cﬁlc for 4.2 and 300 K diff“ by no more than

1.5 tines. The mission spectrum of Yb“ is overlapped with the components

of the absorption spectrum Br“ uniformly broadened as e res t of the relaxa-
tion processes even for 10.2 K; thus. the calculated value of C“ c (4.2 K) can-
not greatly exceed the true value. Secondly, the influence of the temperature
broadening of the lines mat be manifested in the region of high tenperatues,
when the values of ”sin 1e and Min approach. and. consequently, it cannot

be accowanied by sharp reeks in the functions c3 (T) at low temperatures.
Nevertheless. the nonresonance processes of BPV wﬁh phonon absorption possible
in the given pair can have energies of activation corresponding to low temp-
eratures. In particular, the break at 80 K can be fully explained by thermal
activation of the nonresonance transfer with sbsorption of a phonon with an
energy of about 50 cm‘1 required for compensatibn of the energy deficit
between the most intense transitions corresponding to the ‘.uninescence bend
peaks of the Yb” ions (about 10265 cm'l) and the absorption band of the

Er“ ions (about 10315 crl).

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLY

  

u mungcazasrca'unu)

Figure 3.11. Hemitude of the cropereleter of the donor-ecceptor
interaction for the pair Ybﬂ-Br an e function e the type of
Iodified (w or in“) in the phoephete mm. a: 03 with
RG’O3) and $3003); with 3003) 3. where R ere rare earth
elenen .
Key:
1. ﬁndifier
2. CD“. 10"0 an-eec'l

~h3

ﬂov‘ «:4

3}

(') narrator I 1 t
5x

Figure 3.12. Teqereture dependence of the nicroperenetere of

donor-eccep or interectione in the peir YbM-Br-W' (1)

end “St-Yb (z) in gun vi the cmoeition Manama)”
Rey: _

e. cf“. 1040 ens-eec'l

For the other peir. Edy-Yb“, the tewereture dependence of '1 (1') in
elnoet eheent (Piguu 3.12). ineenuch en in the given cue the renefer
proceee ie nccmpenied by generetion of phenom. end it does not require
theml ectivetion. An enelogoue picture wee obeeged when inventigeting
ouch reletione for the peire Thy-Tn“ end ﬂay-Ho .

Now let ue coneidcr the procen of croee relention of the electron excite-
tion energy of the lid“ ione fro: the epplied point of view (M type lc,
Pigure 3.1) teeponeihle for concentretion quenching of the lunineecence of

neody'niuI-doped glue. Thin proceee in difficult to abject to interpretetion.

100

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
inasmuch as it is caused by cmetition of three relaxation channels:

1) quasiresonsnca caused by weak overlzp of the luineicence and absorption
bands corresponding to the tranzitionz P3/2‘rl‘l 5 2 (16 115 sec'l, where To
is the radiating lifetine) and 19/24 115/2 (U:;°{0'22 a2) 2) nonresonance

connected with the transitions ‘FSIZJIHIZ (r01‘280 seed) and l"lg/{”61”,2

(tun: 70° “(.900 “-1. M11600 ca'l); 3) nonresonance connected with the
’° 1. ~ . 2 2 z -1
transitions P3/2J‘115/2 and 19/2+ 113,2 (as-2 10' 1 on , tum 750 CI! ,

tw21200 ca'l). Por channel 1 estination of 33:1“: in phosphate glass with

the composition Ba3A1La(PO3) 2 gives (Si-040;"2 m6-sec'1. which is almost
an order less than the exparinental value of ch-solo-M (36-88(3'1 (see
Table 3.1.). In addition. this process presupposes a sharp decrease in C?“
for low teaperaturea on the basis of disappearance of the overlap of the
spectra and satisfaction of the condition 294‘. and the experinent demon-
strated that %A depends little on the temerature (see also [238]). On the
other hand, the values of n for nonrasonance channels 2 and 3 do not
exceed “as: and. consequent y. their efficiency must be quite high. but the
temperature dependence is insignificant. Preference must be given to
channel 2. for it is connected with more intense transition in the donor.
Actually. the calculated values of CDA for channel 2 give a value of about
5'10".2 cn5-sec’1, and for channel 3. about lolO‘“ m5-sec‘1. The closeness
of the value of tax to the high-frequency boundary of the phonon spectrus

of the matrices forces expectation of significant dependence of 03A for
channel 2 on the type of glass former. The study of the processes of concen-
tration quenching of luminescence of lid“ in borate glass confirmed this prop-
osition, demnstrating that C =(l.3:0.lo)’10"‘° m6-sec'1. The lower
accuracy of the measurements a connected with strong cospetition on the

part of the quenching process on the matrix vibrations (see below).

Donor-Donor Interactions of Rare Earth Iona. The first problem in stating
the experimental studies of donor-donor interactions was checking the applica—
bility of the basic principles of the theory of integral kinetics of
luminescence decay of a set of inpurity centers in the migration-controlled
and kinetic phases of quenching to actual vitreous system. Therefore for a
number of pairs of rare—earth ions in different matrices, a careful study

was made of the concentration functions FNMA) and H-f(N ). Figural”
shows a typical function FM“) in the example of the pa r Yb3+~Br in
phosphate glass with the composition Ba;MLa(P03)1 . It is linear in a wide
range of Br concentrations (in the ae ected coor inate grid this corresponds
to [cs-degree slope of the experinental curve). The relations of this type
had analogous forts in ail of the investigated cases. for example, for the
pairs Thy-Tait. tidy-Yb . and so on. Another picture was found for the
dependence of H on the donor concentrations”, In Figure 3.1!: curves l-lo
correspond to the laws in the pair Ybﬂ-Er in phosphate. borate. silicate
and fluophosphate glass. The first two of then are explicitly nonlinear.

For example. in phosphate glass at low concentrations of Yb3+(3-12)-102° cm‘3).
the curve is closer to quadratic, and for high (ND>1‘3'1021 cn’a) the

growth of H is slowed sharply. which obviously is connected with the transition

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the kinetic phaee of quenching. l’or eilicate and fluophoaphate glaea the
eaaeured reletiona turned out to be cloae to linear within the linite of
accuracy of the experiment.

M)

      

m0 m5 m-V III”

e", .‘L’N ' '

'_Pigure 3.13. Probability of nigration-controlled quenching of

H a Sanction of the acceptor concentration for the pair
Yb -Br an glaae with the conpoaition 303A1La0’03)123
mums-10 1 ar3

Key: _
1. w. aec"1

In order to eatablieh the generality f the obaerved lava in phoaphate glaae.
a study vaa alao nade of the paira Yb 41‘.“ and Edy-“>2". In the firat
caee (Figure 3.14, curve 5) the concentration growth of H alao turned out

to he non-ogstonic. ‘l'ha traneition to the kinetic atege‘wae obeerved even
for (In: '10 d3: in the eecond caee (Figure 3.11., curve 6). the function
"(119) within the lid“ of accuracy of the experinent (low ea a reault of

cognition on the part of the croee relaxation proceaa in the eubeyaten of
Nd ione) can be conaidered linear.

Thua, the concluaion of referencee [340; 241.. 395] regarding deviationa fro-
linearity in the concentration fuctiona HUD) in phosphate glaea uaa con-
fined. The analogoua effect vae detected for borete ayetera. It vee denou-
etrated that the nature“ the functione Hub) is different in the given
natrix for different paire of rare earth ione, which obvigualy ie connected
with differencea in the ratioa of the paranete'ra cm, and cm. The caueee

of the obeerved effect are atill unclear and do not find explanation within the
frenevork of the ebove-diecueeed theoretical concepte of the kinetics of
nigration—controlled quenching. Therefore the nu of the nethod of integral
hinetice of lu-ineacence for eetinating the veluee of the paranetera of cm,
at leaat in ghoephate and borate glaee ia queetionable and in practice ia

102

MMLMONLY
possible only for pairs for which the linearity of the functions VOID) has

been established in a defined concentration range of D. Here all of the above
stipulations remain valid.

[0‘

10’

        

10"”, U‘ “in: 0" "'

gigure 3.16. Probability of migration-controlled quenching
H as a unction of the donor concentration for the pair
Yba-Er in phosphate (1). borate (2). fluophosphate (3).
silicat (lo) glass, for the pairs thy-1‘3? (5) and
tidy-Yb (6) in phosphate glass (HA-3.5.1019 cn'3) and
also the calculated linear function (7)

Key: _

a. H. see"1

The experimental results discussed hereafter were obtained using the new
nethcd of investigating donor-donor interactions of rare earth ions already
mentioned above in tendon nadia, and the nethod of selective observation of
ltninescence kinetics in the short-sieve wings of the resonance lines at low
tmeratures [25b]. The essence of this nethod consists in the following.
At low teweranures (kn‘kqﬁ ), the donor centers in the nedia with FOP,

as a result of freezing of t a transitions Iran the upper Stark components
of the netaatable state to the sharp decrease in uniforn broadening of the
resonance coqonants (“sin 169303) and a decrease in the efficiency of
the m with phonon absorpt on are becoming spectrally nonequivelent. As

a result. the possibility appears for direct experinental observations of

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

the effect of 3?? from centers with greater energy resonance transition to
centers with smaller energy by investigating the kinetics of the decay of
spectrally isolated luminescence centers after photoexcitation by a

d-pulse. Actually, the experiments for 4.2 K demonstrated that for donor
centers on the short-wave edge of the resonance lines, concentration-dependant
decrease in duration and variation of the luminescence decay kinetics from
almost exponential at small ND to sharply-exponential close to Pberster for
high ND,is observed. The effect increased sharply on shift of the spectral
slot to the edge of the resonance NU? (Figure 3.15). On the contrary, on
wavelengths close to maximum NU? and also increased temperatures it is almost
absent. The nature of the dependence of the luminescence decay kinetics of
the observation wavelength indicates growth of the probability of BPV with an
increase in the energy deficit 2 between the transitions in the interacting
centers, and it permits the conclusion to be drawn that the transfer mechanism
is a single-phonon, nonresonance process, and the process of spectral migration
is nonstationary, bounded by one or several jumps to the centers with maximum
transition energies at which excitation is localized. Careful studies of the
kinetics of luminescence decay curves as a function of 1 permit us to obtain
detailed quantitative information about the parameters of the elementary acts
of D-D interactions and their dependence on the energy shortage in the inter-
action t. The experimental procedure is discussed in detail in [254].
Measurements performed for a large number of types ofaglass based on phos-
phate, borate and silicate doped by Yb3+,N 3+and Eu ions in different
concentrations demonstrated reliably that the donor-donor interactions are of
a dipole-dipole nature (n-6+0. l), and the functional dependence CDD (t) in

the energy range of t<100 to 150 cn' '1 is approximated well by the exponential
curve (Figure 3.16). The latter result was unexpected, and, in our opinion,
does not find acceptable explanation within the framework of the known theories
of the elementary act of single-phonon, nonresonance BPV (see above).

Let us also note that for different R2! in one matrix, the functional form of
the functions CDD (t) it is almost identical, whereas on replacement of the
matrix, the exponent of the same activator changes significantly. This result
indicates that the form of the curves CDD (t) is determined by the peculiari-
ties of the spectral distribution of the Ddensity of the phonon states in
different matrices and depends weekly on the specifics of the electron transi-
tions.

Another experimental result consists in the fact that the absolute value of
CDD for any value of E almost does not depend on the activator concentration
for varﬁgtion of the latter within very broad limits, for example, for the
ions Nd fro- 3.m ”to 4.1021 a'3. This fact indirectly confirms the
correctness of the drawn conclusions regarding the dipole-dipole nature of
the donor-donor interactions.

With an increase in temperature of the sample, the nonresonance BPV with
respect to the NU? curve becomes two way, and the process of spatial migra-
tion is activated, acquiring a quasistationary nature for kDT>AOR. It is
obvious that the greatest contribution is made to it by the excitation

jumps connected with phonons with an energy on the order of the halfwidth of
the NUP. Consequently, the value of 693(693) can serve as a characteristic
of the efficiency of the process of nonresonance spatial nigration of

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M .. I10

.9 .70 ,
' 5, 01'

Figure 3.16. Hiaoparanstar of the eleaentary act of 11-1)
interaction own) as a function of the energy of the enitted
phonon E.
l-Nd3"' in glass with the mition manutpo )12.
Z—Eu“ in the sale glass. 3—Yb3" in the eerie g s,
lo--Yb3"' in lla-Hg-phoephate glass. 5453* in borate glass.
6-411)” in alkali silicate glass. The values of CD!) for the
an“ ions n. multiplied by 10.

Key:

s. 630(3). cats-net?1

excitetions_at high telperatures. According to [290], for kn'pmt’n it is
related to cm, by the expression

8'” ~ cu (A3.) «m5... (3. 1:.)

In Table 3.6 conparative data are oresented with respec§+to the efficiency of
nonresonance migration of excitation with respect to Yb ions in different
matrices. As we shall see. phosphate glass has increased efficienchcmared
to other systeas. It is_also of interest to were the values of C with
the estimated values of (31, obtained using the formula (3.9) tron anw
analysis of the integral luminescence decay kinetics of the rare earth ions
in the presence of an acceptor in the linear region of the concentration
functions VOID) and also with the calculated values of eagle for-ed fro.

the overlap integrals of the absorption and luainescence spectra of the rare

earth ions. In Table 3.7 data are also presented for the ions Rd“

105

MWUSEONLY
m2 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(quencher Yh3+). Yh3+ (OB-groups). zr3+ (ud3+) in phosphate 31... with the
conpoeition BaaAlLa(P03)12o When eatinati as cm, 3-20 according to [284] m

Table 3.6

 

 

 

 

 

"nlA‘ ,_,,Yb‘(Po,). on ' 15 T
3.5 3.5
Kass-as (silicate) | 4; | I | ohs

.3 my: indicate} I m —|—1 | u,7

§"-"“-“a0a*-Klaaa
LGS-K phoa ate

    

 

 

13 uuo 3.3. -
W— I2.5|1mu|o.7
£0-2.(.111c.c¢) 3.0 | Mao { 0.9
m-u-Bprglaee no | 850 | 3.0
1554 (phoaphate) I 10 I 1250 I 2.9

5:0 (1)0 I) in the calculated value of the integral paraneter of donor-donor

interactione at 300 K using exgﬁea eaaion (3.16); ?g (6.2 K) is the effective
lumineecame tine of the ion 31: for low concentrations and a tenperature
of 6.2 x; cm (60 cu“ 1) is the velue of the apectral para-net of the donor-

donor interactiona for t-Go of ‘1.

used. A cowarieon of the presented data'igdicatea that the value of 311).!)

ie cowereble or even exceeds the value of 1¢=C° This fact permits

the concluaion to be drawn of eignificant con ribuﬂon of nonreaonance
single-phonon processes to the total efficiency of excitation energy nigretion
at too. teqeraturee. The atudiea of the te-perature functiana "(1') confined

106

F0! omcw. USE ONLY
this conclusion. for mle. in Figure 3.17, the relation was presented for
phosphate glass coactivated by the ions Yb” (l.3'1021 en'3) and “3+
(1.3-1020 cm"3). For this pair, as was demonstrated above, weak temperature
dependence of the parameter cm is- demonstrated, which permits the observed
temperature behavior to be completely attributed to the process of activation
of spatial migration of excitations with respect to the Yb“ ions. Here the
energy of activation (:60 cn‘l) turns out- to be the corresponding value of
Mn for the W3 ions in the given matrix.

Table 3. 7

 

Conclusions. The above discussed experimental data permit the following
conclusions to be drawn.

1. The dipoledipole interactions of rare earth ions are responsible for the
BPV between rare earth ions in vitreous matrices and, as a rule, there is no

necessity for calling on interactions of other types for interpretation of
the experimental results.

2. The nonresonance single-phonon processes of transport make a highly sig-
nificant contribution to the total efficiency of the m, and both in the
case of 0-D and in the case of D-A interactions with respect to efficiency
they turn out to be close to quaairesonance.

3. The mechanisms of single-phonon nonresonance processes of the BPV remain
unexplained. In particular. the experimental data require careful theoreti-
cal analysia with respect to the exponential nature of the functional rela-
tions ODD“) in the range of phonon energies of Ed)” and also deviations
from linearity in the concentration functions VOID) in a mater of types of
glass.

5. The type of matrix which includes 321 has significant inﬂuence on the
transfer efficiency. primarily as a result of differences in intensity,

extent and structure of the spectrum of the vibrational mode in the vicinity
of the interacting rare earth centers.

5. Phosphate glass differs from other vitreous systems by increased BPV

efficiency between the 821, which makes them especially prospective for the
develovaent of laser materials.

107

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"e

C-Q

1
”VI

All?

(1)

I

  

46'
II"

 

rnmwwmmw

Figure 3.17. The experimentally found tenperature dependence
of the probability of nigration-controlled quenching H in
phosphate glass doped with Yb“ and Te“ ions
Key: _
l. w, 103 sec':l

6. For pairs sf ingrest from the point of view of laser applications:
namely, for Nd - , Yb3+-Er3", Br3+_ﬂld3'_’, YbN-Boa', Yb3"-‘hl3+.

tidy-Nd” and my others. expression szc is satisfied, which indicates
the discontinuous nature of the quenching pPéceas in the migration-controlled
and kinetic stages.

53.10. Ion-Vibrational Excitation 'rrmsfer

General State of the Art with Respect to the Problem. As has already been
noted in 53.1, ion-vibrational BPV is a version of nonradiating energy trans-
fer, and it is the process of replace-ant of a quantum of electron excitation
energy by energy-equivalent number of phonons. local. quasilocal or
crystalline excited in the first or nore distant coordination spheres of the
electron center (Figure 3.2). This process stinulates the effect of non-
radiating relaxation of electron excitation leading to quenching of luaines-
cence from the najority of excited states of electron centers in condensed
media. In the general case. the degradation of the excited electron states
of atom and mlecules can also have a chemical nature (electron transfer,
isonerisation. and so on). However, for trivalent rare earth ions in ion
crystals and glass it he been established with reliability that in a wide
tewerature range. as a rule. the physical nechenisn of degradation is
realized which is not accowanied by chemical reactions. The probability of
nonradiating relaxation depends strongly on the radar of vibrational quanta
or phonons participating in the eleaentary act of m. For single-phonon
processes which predominate in the region of energy of gaps arrow. where
the wave meter 0-“ corresponds to the naximn frequency of the extinguish-
ing vibrations , very hid: relaxation rates are characteristic. in spite
of the weakest b ding of the ‘f-electrone of the rare earth ions to the
surroundings coepared to the binding in other known compounds. Por example,
judging fron the unifors broadsnings of the R21 lines- and the EPR data [239],
the excitation relaxation rates of the R21 on the lattic nigrations reach
values on the order of 101° to 1011 sec'l. With an increase in AB and,
consequently, the number of generated phonons s. the probability of the
relaxation process which is in the given case called nultiphonon (MFR)
decreases rapidly. At the sane tine, in sane cases. in particular, in glass.

108
M 0M“. USE ONLY
MFR can compete noticeably with other channels of radiative and nonradiating
relaxation to A218000 to 10000 cm'l, and in proton solutions, even to 13000

to 15000 cn-1 1239].

Another specific feature of nonradisting BPV is the exceptionally strong depen-
dence of the probabilities of NPR for AE-const on the solvent matrix. As

will be demonstrated below. even in a number of oxide glasses. they can differ
by 10‘ to 105 times. and on comparing the various types of glass with certain

ion crystals. the probability difference can reach 10 orders of magnitude or
more.

The indicated facts force mixed attention to be paid to the study of the
mechanisms of MFR in glass and the interrelations of their probabilities to
the specific nature of electron transitions, the peculiarities of the vibra-
tional spectra of the matrices and the values of AB. Clarity in these prob-
lems will permit facilitation of the solution of the basic applied problem.
directional synthesis of glass with previously given properties for the same
laser applications. Until recently. even qualitative understanding of the
law. of MFR in glass was missing. This is indicated by the significant dis-
parity in the interpretation of the experimental data by quantum yields of
luminescence of rare earth ions from metastable states in glass. in particular,
the dependence of the quantum yields on the glass composition and the tech-
nological factors connected with their manufacture.

Recently, in a number of experimental and theoretical studies of NPR in ion
crystals [401] and glass [367, 404-412], basic qualitative laws of the MFR
process were discovered. However, the problems of the physical mechanisms
and the possibility of free experinental quantitative calculation of the
probabilities of “PR for specific transitions of the rare earth ions in still
univestigated matrices remain open. The original experimental data presented
below, in our opinion. fill this gap. however. the theoretical concepts of
the HWR and the experimental results published in the literature will be
discussed briefly first.

On the theoretical level, the processes of MFR at the limit of weak binding
usually are considered in the harmonic approximation of the dynamic
Hamiltonian of the crystal field in the vicinity of the rare earth ions. For
description of the perturbations generating nonradiating transitions, the
nonadiabatic operator is used. The lechanism of electron-phonon interaction
is not specified in this case. In various asymptotic; of perturbation theory
eXpressions were obtained for the probability of MFR H3 of order s (see, for
example, the surveys [243, 258. 396. 401]). However. their use when calculat-
ing the quantitative laws of the processes of NPR for specific matrices and
transitions is complicated in practice as a result of the absence of informa-
tion about the frequencies of the vibrational modes in the vicinity of the
rare earth ions, their polarisation, mobility and strength of the vibron bond
with the electron transition. Therefore a consistent analysis of the experi-
mental resul;a is possible only within the framework of the simplified
phenomenological models. The ao-called single frequency model of MFR has
become widespread (first publication [397], for a detailed analysis see
[401]). which presupposes that for s23. the primary contribution to the“b is
made by the interaction with vibrations having frequencies which are close

109

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HHLY
FOR 0'.' HO“. USE ONLY

at the high frequency boundary of the vibrational spectrum of the glass and
strongly bound to the RZI-center. The binding strength canbe judged by the
electron vibrational spectra of the rare earth ions. For exchange of electron
energy in this case a minimum mater of phonons are required, and the order
of the process is a predominant factor in the act of MFR. The specific prop-
erties of symetry of the electron wave functions and vibrational nodes and
also dispersion of the force of electron-phonon binding with respect to modes
are considered to be average as a result of the high order of the process.

and they are not taken into account.- The probability ? basically depends

on the Isgnitude of the normalised energy gap Minn/“err and at low tempera-
tures it can be described by the expression

Wading. Koxpl--|lnulA.£‘.“../{r.»]l (3.15)

where he” corresponds to the frequency of themost active vibrations in the
act of m. K, K-paraneters charscterizing_the strength of the electron-
phonon bond for the given matrix, where x-Hgﬁo"1<<1, ARM“ is the energy

gap between the lower Stark component of the upper multipleth and the upper
component of the lower multipleth. The tenperature dependence of we in a
single-frequency model is basically determined by the thermal population of

the vibrational mdes, and it has the form
' H l

(1)
o a “P (lo (I: 1') o (3.16)
w m..w.[,,,( WSW],

Key: 1. eff

where the critical value‘even in the given case is considered to be the

order of the process. The dependence on the exact value of ”eff is auch
weaker. Consideration of the thermal population of the Star; components of
the two multipleths gives only insignificant corrections to "3, so that

the teqerature dependence of the region hueff>>k3T must be absent in practice.
Exceptions are dictated only by the selection rules, on the basis of which

for transitions between multi leths with J-l and J-O (for example, the
transitions 501+5D0 of the Eu ions), the ion-vibrational BPV is forbidden.

Numerous experimental studies of the MFR processes in crystals activated by
rare earth ions [601] confirm that the single frequency model qualitatively
reliably describes the basic laws of the m. Recently it was modified con-
sidering the specific nature of the glass [1012]. In Figure 3.18 the prob-
abilities H‘ measured in this merinent are presented for several transitions
in different types of glass, and the experimental relations approximating
then Warm ) are given. According to the conclusions drum. the single-
frequency moael of NPR in oxide glass adequately describes the experimental
data and permits quantitative prediction of ‘7' for new transitions. The
greatest contribution to F is made by vibrations with oefm. The
probability that m for defined transitions in a series of oxide glasses
(from tellurite to borate) differ, ’ according to [412], by 103
times. which is explained'b the difference in values of 9 (Table 3.8).
On the whole, the values of for equal “min in glass are'ﬁigher than in
crystals, which is explained by the great extent of the phonon rspectrua

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
woe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the glass. Previomly. the resolving effect of this factor in the glass
was noted in references [404-611]. In [1012] the conclusion was drawn of
approximately eque‘. strength of the electron-phonon binding in a nmber of
oxide glasses. havever. the latter conclusion does not correspond to the
pregented experimental data inasmuch as close slope angles of the curves
inlﬂ'uﬂunﬂ to: different “eff antonetically indicate significant variations
in the parameters K and K for these types of glass. Let us also note that
usually the values of r in glass (about 0.012 to 0.007) are snaller than in
crystals, that is. the electron-phonon binding in glass is obviously weaker.

O

 

Figure 3.18. Dependence of the probability of multiphonon

relaxation ? on the magnitude of the energy gap and“ in

different glass.

l--tellurite, 2—germenate. 3—silicate. (be-phosphate,

S—borate glass [6121. Analogous relations for borate (6)

and phosphate (7) glass according to the authors' data.
Key:

a. W, sec'1

Other noncorrespondences are discovered on comparison of the values of W
predicted in [612] for the energy rsnge of mun-5000 to 7000 cm‘1 with

those measured by m in system of similar couposition. For example. in
borate lass the values we waging: for the transitions5517+51 for the

ions no (Anunzaaoo curl), - 6 in the in“ ions we“11 :1. oo curl)

and ‘112/2-41 / for the ions- :34- (A! 1n215100 curl) exceeaed those predicted
in [612] by 10:: ; and 17 times, respectively, in spite of the fact that

our glass was carefully dehydrated, and in {512] this factor is not taken
into account. The indicated noncorreepondence clearly illustrates the basic
deficiency of single-frequency model—iwossibility, with respect to minimum

111

POIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mater of preliminary spectroscopic‘dgta obtained on one to two samples, of

predicting the quantitative value of H“ for any transition in a new matrix.

0n the contrary. it requires technically complex measurements of H“ directly
on a large nusber of specially made samples. Of course, the averaging con-

sidering additional points permits a decrease in the average deviations

(straight lines 6 and 7 in Figure 3.18). but here the problem of preexperi-
lental calculation of w- itself becomes meaningless.

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
 

Table 3.8
(1) Wares. ° u” l 95" I an“ Or” To” In“
, 3; Moment: m 5 :5 u 32 5: l 4
“comment-oases
«nose :I I. 0 h I‘- II I

(5) Amman ustos.s. e. a. um

(5) Ig-umunmye,X 0.10 0.20 0.35 0.4: «w. 0.5: um .
V,.,,".rn" - ~ISUU' @125! e:1l:‘m.azm 2700 :8!”

  

 

Key:
1. Glass former
2. Atomic number
3. Coordination nlssber
6. Atomic nees. atomic units of mass
5. Ion radius. angstrma

Another highly significant deficiency of the single-frequency model, is that
it is too formalized. and it sheds little light on the physical mechanisms of
NPR. Actually. the mechanism of interaction in it is not specifically stated,
it does not specifically take into account the degree of spatial localisation
of the damping vibrations, the concentration of the vibrational groups and
their spatial distribution with respect to the electron center. In addition.
the single-frequency model does not "operate" in the region s>3 or in the
region greater than Anna in the presence in the matrix of vibrational groups
differing significantly with respect to frequencies and spatial distribution

[501]. The latter situation is characteristic, nevertheless, for glass where
along with the vibrations of the chemical bonds of glass forming elements in

the nearest vicinity of rare earth ions. frequently there are oscillators of
admixture origin. primarily Oil-groups. the frequencies of the basic stretch-
ing vibrations of which (33000 curl) are appreciably higher than the vibra-
tional frequencies of the glass forming elements. As a result of lower order
of the MFR process the Oﬂvoacillators in the region of large A15.“

(>6000 to 5000 cm’i). in spite of relatively low concentration of than in the
glass, can compete with the lattice vibrations and Wendie“ 0‘ the

rare earth ion 1m1nescence-. . 0 quenching effect of the Oil-group in the
glass was first detected for Nd and Br” ions in the phosphate system of
[181. 182, 193]. Later it was confirmed and studied on the phenomenological
level for other transitions in phosphate, fluophosphate. silicate.

borate and tellurite glass [101. 117. 183, 185, 187, 191, 229. 305, 365, 361,
1003, 401.. 613]. However. the mechanisms of electron-phonon interactions in
the indicated papers were not specified; only the proposition was stated of

112

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
strong binding in the pair made up of rare earth ions and 0" based on the
erroneous in:.rpretstion of the linear nature of the dependence of the
quenching probability on the concentration of OH-groups [101, 183]. In the
indicated papers quenching was not taken into acc0unt even within the
framework of formalism of multiphonon relaxation, although the nature of the
spatial distribution of the vibrational groups and the difference in
oscillator frequencies do not change the essence of the problem. Let us
note that in all known papers on MFR in glass, except our paper [404], the
possibility of competition on the part of the OH-groups is not considered
in general. Nevertheless, for example, it significantly distorts the slope

of the graph of ln R9 as a function of Anni“ in [412] at least for tellurite
and phosphate glass.

The presented arguments permit, in contradiction to [1.12], the conclusion to
be drawn of insufficiency and nonphysicalness of the single-frequency model

of MFR as a working theory for calculation and analysis of the MFR processes

at least in glass. Another phenomenological model of MFR which uses the
concept of induction resonance nature of the interaction of electron and
vibrational oscillators appears to be more prospective. For a number of years
the indicated model has been successfully developed in the papers by Yermolayev
and Sveshnikova [239, 399, 400] as applied to the quenching of the luminesCGNt
of rare earth ions and transition metals in protonated and deuterated liquid
solutions and also in hydrated crystals. For analysis of the MFR processes

in ion crystals and glass, up to now it obviOusly has not been used (with the
exception of [404]).

In the inductive-resonance model, a specific mechanism is proposed for ion-
vibrational BPVvueak resonance dipole-dipole interaction of the electron
oscillator with dynamic oscillators corresponding to overtones of local or
quasilocal aggressions of chemical bindings in its vicinity. The dipole
transition in the latter between the vibrational states with As>l is
partially permittelas a result of anharmonism of the vibrations. Thus, the
elementary act of BPV in the given case is of a local nature, that is, a
quantum of electron energy is replaced by vibrational quanta of a specific
molecular group and not by quanta of collective vibrations of the surroundings
as a whole. As was pointed out above, in the single-frequency model the

nature and degree of localization of active vibrations in the HER are not
specified.

With this approach for calculation of the probability "Ev of interaction of
an electron oscillator with the i-th vibration, it is possible to use the
formulalanalogous to (3.3):

"’4" 2.3-10"xm." on)" I a- (3) e (3) n" (SW-um ‘3'")
(1)
Key: 1. av

 

1The factor n"(0) was introduced in (3.17) under the sign of the integral,

for in the investigated region it is impossible to neglect the dispersion of
the index of refraction.

113

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 81 is the distance from the R21 to the center of the i-th oscillator.
spa?) is the absorption cross section of the quenching vibrational groups,

8(9) is the form factor of the luminescence band corresponding to the
electron transition (I g (o) dv-l) .

The probability of the MFR act for the j-th electron center is defined as the
result of suction of H1 with respect to all the quenching oscillators
in the vicinity of the REY:

I
W; "" 1"" W2?) (3. 18)

Key: 1. ev

and the averaging procedure with respect to these centers in order to determine
the effective macroscopic probability of HU-<H‘> depends on the nature of the
spatial distribution of the vibrational oscillltors with respect to the
RZI-center. with regular arrangement of them in the nearest coordination

sphere 759313;. For statistically uniform distribution of the imurity

vibrational oscillators in the matrix, the kinetics of the MFR process become
not exponential. but close to Poerster, and for its description it is possible
to use formula (3.6a). In this case it b_e_comes possible to determine the
average parameters of the elementary act Rev or Gav-H. 6 directly experi-
mentally by the kinetics of the decay of the excited ectron state,‘

The first version is realized during quenching on the vibrations of the .
structural elements of the matrix, the second on the vibrations of the
impurity oscillators, for example. the Oil-groups.

Direct application of the formlas (3.17), (3.18) for interpretation of the
experimental data with respect to NPR in the case of regular arrangement of
the vibrational oscillators usually is comlicated by the absence of reliable
data on the coordination nubera of the first, and especially the second
coordination spheres of the 821. In addition, the vibrations thenelves fre-
quently are not completely localised. Therefore it is possible with good
approximation to replace the «nation in (3.18) by integration with respect
to value and then we obtain [239]

 

W; ' senate,“ S i ('v') 1:. (3 "" (3);“63. (3.19)

where 154(9) is the linear absorption coefficient of the matrix in the multi-
phonon region. Ru is the radius of the sphere around the R21 not containing
high-frequency oscillators.

Thus. the inductive resonance model of m permits determination of the prob-
ability of MFR in terms of the experimentally measured spectroscopic char-
acteristics of the_electron transition (TOD. 60)) and the matrix 0940)).
Here the function UNA!) is defined by the dependence of on 9. in which
automatic consideration is given to the contribution of al of the types of
the vibrations active in the infrared spectra (which means in the MFR)
determined by their anharmonism. both mechanical and electroopticel.
connected with nonlinear dependence of the dipole moment on the vibrational
coordinates. As is known from the theory of infrared spectra of amorphous

1110

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
bodies (see, for example, [602]), in the multiphonon region basically these
spectra are determined by the overtones and the component vibrations (among
the highest frequencies of the given matrix), which also explains the appli-
cability of the single-frequency approximation. Moreover, the spectrum
kuﬂ) in the multiphonon region in many cases can be calculated beginning
with the structure of the matrices both for the crystals and for amorphous
bodies [#02]. The calculations show that for s>>l where in the given case
a has the meaning of the overtone umber, the spectral function 131(9)
approaches the asxwtotic (”Suﬁ-W), where b-const. Substituting it in
(3.19), we obtain "Suﬁ-ad! . Thus, within the framework of the inductive
resonance model of m. the exponential dependence of W3 on Al! is easily
explained by the analogous function kn(°)o At the same time. this model
explains numerous deviations from the exponential function. especially in
the Legion of small a. Rate the spectral function 151(9) is less monotonic
and "9 must follow its peculiarities. The inductive resonance model does
not exclude consideration of the individual charactegistics of the electron
transition, explaining the differences in values of W for AE-const by the
differences in the radiating probabilities of the transitions.

It must be emphasized that the effective value of the energy of the gap

AB ff which must be used in the framework of the applied model far from always
co ncides with ARI“. According to (3.17) 486 corresponds to the maximum

of the expression okn"gv"‘. Therefore ABeffo-ti n in the region of large
steepness 151(9). and where dku(°)/d9-'0, the value of Met-yum“, and it
corresponds to the center of gravity g(0). Considering that the Stark splitting
of the electron states of the rare earth ions reaches 1000 to 800 cm'l,
neglecting the indicated correction can significantly distort the results.

The teaperature function W'Cl') within the framework of the inductive—resonance
nodel corresponds to the temperature function 1916)). In the region
“Rpm-ax. the latter is described by an expression similar to (3.16). In the
low teaperature range anomalies are possible which are connected with trans-
formation of the spectra g(0) and variation of the radiative probabilities
for thermal conbimtion of populations of the upper Stark components. Within
the framework of the given model, the term "electron-phonon bond strength"
acquires specific physical meaning, and for other equal factors, it is deter-
mined by the distances from the R21 to the center of gravity of the vibra-
tional oscillators (4'6). the nature of the distribution in the matrix and
the degree of anhamonism of the vibrations. It is natural that in the
matrices with less dense packing or for the Oil-group, the bond strength is
less, that is, for the same kg“), lower probabilities of m are observed.
Finally, the inductive-resonance model presupposes the possibility of dis-
persion of the probabilities MFR even for regular arrangement of the vibra-
tional acceptors the sources of which can be: 1) variation of the frequencies
and degrees of anharmonism of the high-frequency vibrations as a result of
local lattice deformation: 2) dispersion of the distances from the rare earth
ions in the high-frequency groups; 3) dispersion of the radiating probabili-
ties of the electron transitions; 6) dispersion with respect to the R21-
centers of the transition energies and, consequently AEeff. The degree of
the contribution of any of them a priori is not clear and requires experi-
mental determination in each specific case. Let us only note that the

first three factors in the single-frequency model are not taken into account,

115

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

so that the expe:imental isolation of their contribution will serve as one of
the proofs in favor of the applicability of the inductive-resonance model.
The vulnerable part of this model is the possible strong deformations of the
given coaponents in the vicinity of the an. wherea M10") is determined
integrally for the matrix as a whole. The degree of the influence of this
factor requires experimental study.

Thu, the inductive-resonance model opens up new possibilities in the studies
of the mechanisms of parameters of the m. and it has explicit advantages
over the single-frequency model under the condition of obtaining weighty
proofs of its applicability to vitreous matrices, theoretically permitting
solution of the above-formulated basic problems. In [239], quite convincing.
although indirect proofs of its suitability in the case of liquid solutions
and hydrated crystals are presented. Beginning with the general principles.
it can be stated that the situation in amorphous glass (in contrast to crys-
tals with sipificantly different dynamic vibrational movements) does not
differ in theoretical respects from the situation in liquid solutions. with
the exception. perhaps, of significantly smaller frequencies of the high-
frequency vibrations of the glass forming elements by comparison with
uniquely high frequencies of hydrogen bonds. According to modern theoretical
models of oxide glass 1111], the high-frequency part of their vibrational
spect is geranined by the vibrations of the bonds of the glass-forming
ions Si 4" , P5+, Ce“ or Te“ with oxygen. The frequencies of the vibra-
tions connected with the modifier ions are 2 to 3 times less. The high-
frequency vibrations are weakly bound to the lattice as a whole and are
sufficiently well approximated by independent local oscillators. The nutter
of oscillators in the first coordination sphere of the rare earth ions is
equal to the product of the amber of nearest glass-forming polyhedra (6 to 8
for oxide glass) times the amber of high-frequency modes in each of th..
The indicated oxygen bonds are sufficiently elastic, and their frequencies
are close to the frequencies of the free elastic bonds of the oxygen and the
glass former. Therefore the inhomogeneity of the crystal field in the vicin-
ity of the rare earth ions is primarily obviously connected not with deforma-
tion of the polyhedron, but with variation of their mutual orientation. For
this reason, it is not necessary to expect strong distortion of the phonon
spectrum in the vicinity of the introduction of the rare earth ions by com-
parison with the lattice spectrum as a whole. However. in order to obtain
reliable information, it is necessary to study the electron vibrational
excitation spectra of rare earth ions in glass during selective excitation.
Let us also note that in multiphase glass or systems with several glass-
formers the rare earth ions can be introduced in different sublattices with
essentially different vibrational structure. This fact must be considered
when analyzing the processes of m in such systems.

The discussed arguments regarding the vibrational structure of glass favor
the application of the inductive resonance model to the glass-forming matrices.

116

FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
A description is presented below of the set of experimental data obtained by
us1 permitting reliable confirmation of its advantage and effectiveness for

studying the processes of MFR for rare earth ions in glass.

rare earth ions by Oﬂ-groupathere were no data on the precision kinetic
Ieasurements. Moreover. the linear nature of the concentration functions
131-f(mon) noted in [101, 183. 185, 193] was not in favor of the multipole
nature of the interaction. He measured the luminescence decay kinetics on

10 transitions in different RZI (Table 3.9) in phosphate glass with the composi-
tion Ba3AlLa(P0 ) . The selective transitions correspond to energy gaps in
the range of soaolfo 10000 cn'l, where the quenching of the luminescence by
the lattice is already quite weak, and it is possible to isolate the contribu-
tion of the quenching by the OH-groups which is more effective on the basis

of the lower order of the NPR process. The concentration cf the OH-groups

in the investigated samples varied as a function of the technological pro-
cedures o founding and greparing the charge by almost 3 orders of magnitude.
for 1.101 to 6'10 0 cm' . It was determined by the absorption level in the
range of 3000 cm'1 with respect to the standard sample calibrated with an

ﬂbﬂeo to sharply nonexponential for N >1020 cn'3. The standard experimental
decay curves are presented in Figure 3519 in the form of a photograph from
the screen of a multichannel analyzer. The result of the theoretical
approximation of the luminescence decay kinetics is illustrated by expression

 

1The experinents were performed by the author jointly with Yu. Ye. Sverchkov

and H. R. Syrtlanov. The samples weref1xed by A. A. Izyneyev, A. K. Gronov
and V. B. Kravchenko.

117

FOR10FFKJAI.USE4ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.9

     
     
     
   
     
   
      

6:0.1] totes] ‘

610.3 251-3

11,: . 1.1 03 01:0.1 4.71:0-5

BR" 8.2 100 6:0,! 1.21.0.3 1.6
Pr” 0.25 2000 630.2 18:22 —
Sm” 3,1 19 630.2 0.1 £0.05 -—
Dy" 1.0 so 63:0.2 0,110.05 —
Y I)” 1.15 810 620.2 0.055103 0.035

 

at the Jiven temperature there is a constant set of values of the parsneters
n and 0‘" which does not depend on Non (Table 3.9). pernitting description of
the experimtal luinescence decay curves by the expression (3.0. Here
the paraneter :- was in all cases close to six. This result per-its the con-
clusion to be drawn that the investigated m process is caued by the dipole-
dipole interaction of local inpurity centers [4151.1 The applicability of
the inductive-resonance_nodel of m is traced further if we calculate the
value of the parsneter chc. using fornula (3.17). As is obvious free
Table 3.9. quantitative correspondence of these values with the aperiaentally
neasured values is detected. Figure 3.20 shows the standard function “011(9)
for the investigated glass (curve 2). The absorption spectrg of the natrix
itself (curve 1) and the experimtal values of the product Caulkinv” are
illustrated there for couparison. It is clearly obvious that the spectral
dependence of this value strictly follows the function hon“). Nevertheless,
if we siaply construct the graph of Cme), quite strong deviations from the
curve 305“) are observed. which are connected with differences in the
radiative probabilities of the transitions. Their difference is nsnifested
especially clearly when coup ring the tregitions with close values of Allen.
for example, for the pair 5- -Pr3" or Nd -‘l‘l3"- .

The obtained results are of a fundsnentel nature, more precisely defining the
nechanisn of m in anorphous nadia and indicating the applicability of the
dipole-dipole resonance model to the description of the ion-vibrational BPV

 

1'llecently reference [238] also appeared. in which close values of the
paraneter cw were obtained for the M3" ions in Li-La-Nd-phosphate glass.

118

MWLUSEONLY
Figure 3.20. Spectral relations for the linear coefficients
of absorption of the nstrix (1) and Oil-group (2) in glass
with the conposition Ba3AlLa(P03)12 _e_nd normalized experi-
mental values of the nicrOparameter c v for different
transitions of rare earth ions (asterisks).

Key: 1
a. Azeff 0 cm"
b. curls": 2.3-10-26 «2

and its corollary-mltiphonon relaxation of excited states of the R21 in
glass. 0n the other hand, the possibility of calculating the probabilities

of quenching luinescence of rare earth ions by Oil-groups with respect to the
absorption spectra and the known radiating probabilities without performing
complex experiments and also the solution of the inverse problem-calculation
of the radiating probabilities of the transitions with respect to the measured
values of C and horfacilitate the developnent of new comositions of laser
glass and daemination of the required degree of their dehydration. and

they also permit direct Ieasurement of the radiating probabilities of the
transitions between the high excited states. which is difficult or iwossible
in general by other methods.

Finally, let us note that the process of quenching of the luminescence of R21
by Oil-groups is subordinate to all the laws of the theory of BPV discussed
in 53.2 as applied to ion-ion interactions. In particular. a comparison of
the data presented in Table 3.7 and 3.9 permits the conclusion that at least
for the Nd“. Yb3+ and Br” ions. the nigrstion controlled phase of quenching
by Oil-group must be considered within the framework of the jump nodal.

The studies of the functions i-HNOH) indicates that. in accordance with
(3.9). they are linear in a wide range of concentrations of N . As exaaples,
in Figures 3.21s, the relations are presented l/‘r-Wlﬁl-fw for ultra-
phosphate glass of the casposition La1.de,‘P50 [229], and % Figure 3.21b,
for erbiun glass with the composition BaghlLad33) 12.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

’ .3 I

l';|‘. 0".qu

. C)

Figure 3.21. The probabilities l/1(a.b) and l/‘re-l/tz (c)
of quenching of the lulinescence of rare earth ions in
phosphate glass as a function of the Oil-group concentration.
a) Glass with the couposition Lahfid‘l’sou, experiment;
x-l (l), 0.28 (2), 0.12 (3); b) glass with the cowosition
33%;)? with 3:3“, med-eat; liar-3.5:d020 c-‘3 (1).
1.310 on" (2); c) glass with the composition Ba3AlLa(P03)12
with Kr“; Nat-1.5401 cn'3; solid line-calculation.
Key: __
A. 1/1, 103 sec"’1
8. l/‘re-llrz, sec'1
The linear behavior o_f_ these relations pernits easy estimation of the sexism
admissible values of I! and q in the dehyrated glass without realizing the
technologically difficult operation of removal of the Oil-groups from the
glass. This is especially convenient for erbium and highly concentrated
neodymium-doped glass, where the degree of dehydration must be very high.
For eats-pie, {gr aeodyaiun-doped glass when x-l. it is required that
Non<l° 10 9 cu' ( <1.5 crl) at he sane tine as for Ioderate concentra-
tions of Nd“ ions 20-0402 cm“ or x-0.05 to 0.1) usually used in laser
eleoents. the adlliasible Oil-group content is several tiles higher
(”0326-34019 ci’a), which is easily achieved by ordinary technological
procedures. In erbius-doped glass the situation is highly critical even for
173,40. in spite of the aaaller value 3f the parameter Cev for N03 lust be
smaller than or equal to 0.5.1019 ca’ . which is explained by the snsll
radiating probability of the laser transnission of the Er“ ions. It is
obvious that glass with increased erbiu- concentration nust be dehydrated to
an even higher degree.

120

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
Values of l/te-l/rg obtained experimentally and calculated by formula (3.1m)
are presented in Figure 3.21, c, where 7e is the time in which the intensity
of the luminescence decreases by e times with respect to the maximal: as a
function of the conggntration of Oil-groups in BasAlLa(P03)12-glass with low
concentration of Br ions. These relations coincide in practice, confirm-
ing the conclusion of dipole-dipole nature of the interaction of the rare
earth ions and 01!. It is obvious that for NOH£(l-l.5).102° cm‘3 the func-
tion ll'r -l/1 -f(N ) is easily taken as linear, just as the authors of
[101, 18 , 183, 19 did. -

Experimental Studies of the MFR Processes on Matrix Vibrations. The basic
evidence of the applicability of the inductive—resonance model in the given
case is the presence of a correlation between the probabilities of multi-
phonon relaxation and the intensity of infrared absorption in the overtone
region established by us on a large nulber of transitions of rare earth ions
in several oxygen-containing glasses. This fact is indicated for the first
time in the report [[0010]. In Figure 3.3 on the diagram of the energy states
of rare earth ions, the solid vertical arrows indicate the investigated
transitions. Figure 3.22 shows the relation km“) in a wide spectral range
for metaphosphate, borate, silicate, germanate, tellurite and fluophosphate
glasses determined by couputer processing of the data on the spectral
transmission of samples from 10 microns to 15 cm thick in the corresponding
regions of the spectrum obtained using the UR-ZO and SF-8 spectrophotometers.
All of the investigated types of glass were carefully dehydrated using the
corresponding technological procedures, which permitted reliable isolation
of the natural absorptim of the glass and forming elements of the glass.

For example, in phosphate glass the Oil-group absorption coefficient on a
frequency of the basic stretching vibrations (=3000 cn'l) did not exceed

0,1 cm'l. Analysis of the presented relations confirms that the linear
absorption coefficient and its spectral behavior actually depend on the extent
of the basic lattice vibration spectrum of the glass and “max (compare with
the data in Table 3.8). A clearstructure which is best mressed in phosphate
glass is exhibited in all cases in the region of s-2-3. The average slope
of the curve knﬂ) permits determination of the coefficients It which. in the
given case, characterize the degree of anharmony of the vibrations of the
different matrices. In Figure 3. 22 the experimental values of the probabilities
of MFR are noted for different transitions. The explicit correlation between
the functions RMW) and ”(0) is observed. At the same time, some of the '
points noticeably' are removed from the general pattern which obviously is
connected primarily with differences in the radiating probabilities of the
transitions. gigure 3.23 shows the normalized values with the probabilities
of NPR Tsinglewsw' for transitions where it was possible to measure or cal-
culate 1' 118 e from the absorption spectra in phosphate (2) and borate (1)
glass. The deviations turn out to be appreciably less in the given case.

Significant nonexponentialness of the luminescence decay curves must be noted
in almost all of the investigated cases. Pi re 3.24 shows th photographs
of the luminescence decay curves for the Er ions (the “s - 9/ .
transition) in phosphate and fluophosphate glass. These pﬁéfograpﬁs reflect
the standard case. The more complicated curve corresponds to fluophosphate
glass which obviously has two sublattices with frames based on phosphate
fluorides. The probabilities of multiphonon relaxation of the rare earth
ions introduced into each of them differ sharply from each other, and the
decay curve is sharply nonexponential. This curve can be represented in the

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
            

:y

’(’D,.'

'3
‘5’?)

rev-y .

I'lm"(‘u,.)

”’1‘:
-79

‘zr’.("ll:‘)
-‘fm"(‘F_)

.- ER'CIWQ

-pramn-)

-
=

- —Ho"(’l,)

Wml/ AIM“ ,5" I (a)

Figure 3.22. Correlation of experimental values of the
probabilities of m U“ (the symbols) with natural absorption

kuW) (lines) of the matrices in the overtone region.
l—tellurite glass, 2—gernanate, 3-silicate, lo—fluophosphate,

5--phosphate. 6—borate. The sylbols in the circles with
arrows indicate the probability of MFR lying below the x-axis.

Key:
a. Alien. 9, _-1 _1
I k“, CI

b. F, 107 sec
form of two quasiexponentiel components and, therefore, it is possible to
define the probabilities of Inland the percentage content of the rare earth
ions in the two phases. The indicated fact opens up an interesting possi-
bility for quantitative monitoring of the activator distribution in the
multiphase vitreous system. So far as we know, there are no other nethods of
quantitative solution of the indicated problem at this time.

Analysis of the data presented in Figure- 3.22, 3. 23 also indicates that

the probability of NPR in glass as a function of composition varies in the
region of ABeff-SOOO to 7000 can-1 by 6 to 5 orders. which is appreciably
greater than was assumed earlier. Therefore the choice of composition for
laser glass has exceptionally great significance. The possibility of quanti-
tative prediction of the probabilities of m following from the obtained
results greatly facilitates the solution of the indicated problem. Another
consequence of these results is that the processes of relaxation of the
excited states. skipping the nearest excited states. are almost completely
excluded. Therefore the m process is a nultistsge, stepped process which

aust pass through all of the lower-lying electron states.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
" Ute-Wan“-

 

.W mu: m m m ' aw

Figure 3.23. Correlation of the absorption coefficient (solid
lines) of the glass matrix 134(9) in the overtone region with
morinentel when of the probebilitiee m IF (the eyﬁole)
from different excited etetee of the rare earth ione normalized
by; unit radiating probability of an electron transition and
9' .
Key:
1. 9. ABeff. “-1

123

MOI'FIGALUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1., [RUMOR-DOPE!) mosmm. GLASS
54.1. General Description of leodyaiu Laser Glass

Neodynitn belongs to the group of lanthanoida. the is, elenents with

completing (sf-shell. whereas the shells of n-S (5s . 5p6) and n-6 (692) are
completely filled. In oxide glass. the neodymium ion is surrounded by oggen
io . ”53 rule entering into the polyhedra of the glass forner (the P0,.
30 , 30‘ . 810 groups, and so on). The possible coordination polyhedra
of Nd“ and the synetry of the environment are investigated in Chapter 2.

The excitation and luinescenca of lanthsnoid ions are realized as a result of
internal electron transitions ﬁfe/of and (of-*Sd. For the triple charged ions,
the lof+5d transitions correspond to the ultraviolet region of the spectrum.
and the absorption ‘and luninescemebands in the visible and infrared region
are connected with the 4Mf transitions. The optical electron is vell
shielded from the influence of the crystal fields of the atria by the outer
electrons, and therefore the general view of the spectra: for different
natrices varies little. The influence of the matrix is felt only on varia-
tion of the relative intensity of the individual bands. their halfvidth and
the aunt of splitting of the components.

Neodyaiua-doped glass has becone widespread as a result of its good laser
characteristics. Active absorption of such glass is higher than glass doped
with other rare earth elements. The neodymiurdoped glass is colored a
characteristic lilac color and has intense absorption bands in the regions

of 0.58. 0.76. 0.&) and 0.90 micron (Figure 1.10). On excitation by emission
from any of these wavelengths. intense infrared luminescence is observed
with peaks of wavelengths of 0.9. 1.06. 1.35 and 1.8 microns. All of the
luminescence bands correspond to the transition from the sane metastable
level ‘F3 to the lover-lying levels (Figure 10.1). The luinescence of “(13*
from the higher levels (413/2. ‘1' ,2) is weak. and it usually can be
observed only at low tawerature see, for estanple, [517]).

basing is theoretically possible on all luminescent transitions f m the

levels 1‘13 2 to ‘19 , 6I , ‘1 3 . l‘1: . but the transition P 2+‘I
(1.06 aim/Ins) has {ﬁe nag/greeticﬁi signiﬁcance. This is explaingtll by 11/2

the high induced emission cross section and four-level lasing diagram

The level 1‘In "is raised" approximately 2000 cm"1 above the ground state,
and therefore 3 room tuperature it renains almost empty. In addition. from

124

FOR m1. USE ONLY
this Z~vel there is rapid nonradiating relaxation of the excitation in the
ground states [‘19, , which insures high lasing efficiency. Accozding to the
data of reference {618}. the lifetime of neodymilm in the state 111/2 does
not exceed 2 nanoseconds. Therefore neodymiu—doped glass is a good
material for generators and amplifiers of long light pulses.

 

Figure 6.1. Diagram of Nd“ levels in glass
Key:
1. micron

The luminescalce bands of neodymium in glass are significantly wider than in
the majority of crystal matrices. The broadening is of a nonuniform nature
and depends weekly on the temperature. This arises from the irregular
structure of the amorphous vit sous base. which leads to variation of the
nearest surroundings of the Nd ions and. wrrespondingly. to variation of
the crystal field acting on them. The variations of strength of the crystal
field and its symaetry cause variation of the amount of splitting of the
terms. According to [1019]. the amount of splitting of the I J terms is
determined by the field strength with cubic sylmetry, and the terms ”3/2,
by the strengths of the fields of lower synatry.

when investigating alkali silicate glass [1020] it was found that increasing
the alkali content leads to growth of the nearest vicinity of the neodymium
iamand decreases the splitting of the ‘1’3/2 level. Thus. with a content of

30 molecular z alkali oxide in the glass, this splitting is 135 can-1 for

Nazo and 115 ce'l for x20. whereas for 5 molecular 1 he 0. it reaches 160 en-l.
Splitting of the gromd state of the neodymiua ion of e given glass almost
does not depend on the composition and is about 500 cm'l.

More cowlea relations can be observed in the process of rearrangement
of the glass str ture. For example. in sodilm aluainum silicate glass the
splitting of the 3/2 varies from 150 to 220 cm‘1 [521]. In contrast to
the preceding case. the dependence of the composition is not smooth. with
A1203 content of 13 to 15 molecular X. the splitting is maximal, which is
connected with variation of the coordination above the alumina. In these
types of glass. analogous relations are also observed for the magnitude of
the nonuniform broadening of the luminescence band of the resonance transitions
4P3/2-t519/2. In sodium and potassium silicate glass. nonuniform broadening
decreases as the alkali oxide content increases from 95 cm'1 to 83 cm’1 in
soditaa glass and to 78 cm“1 in potassium glass. In sodium aluminum silicate
glass the nonuniform broadening varies from 90 cm'1 to 130 cm'1; for A1203
content of 13 to 15 molecular 2. maximum broadening is also observed.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

The magnitude of the~aplitting of the ‘P3” level in phosphate glass usually
is 100 to 160 aa'l. Introduction of additives, for example, HgO or 3203,
leads to an increase in splitting.

During lasing, nonuniforn broadening is accompanied by broadening of the
lasing spectra [422]. Photometrizing the spectrogram of the lasing spec-
trum at low tenperatures and with a high excess of pumping energy over the
threshold, it is possible to determine the form and magnitude of the nonuni-
form broadening. In reference [85]. the magraitude of the nonuniform broaden-
ing of 6.5 nu was found for silicate glass, and it was established that the
band curve corresponding to nonuniform broadening is somewhat asyunetric.

The remaining broadening 2f the luminescence band (usually the with of the
luminescence band of the P3, *‘111‘2 transition in silicate glass at room

us

temperature is 22.0 to 30 nm is c ed by Stark splitting and uniform
broadening of the levels.

The Star]: structure of the basic operating levels of M3" in niobium phosphate
glass was investigated in considerable detail in reference [202] (Figure 6.2).

The nagnitude of the splitting of the ground state 19/2 in it will be about
400 cn'l, which is somewhat less than in silicate glass, and more uniform

distribution of the Stark halflevels indicates low synetry of the surround-
ings. ﬂonuniforn broadening of the luminescence bands for the transitions
between the Stark halflevels of the 419/2 and 1‘? / levels does not retain
unchanged. but fluctuates within the limits of 43 go 200 cu‘1 (Table 4.1).

Figure 6.2. Stark structure of the basic operating levels
or Nd3+ in niobium phosphate glass

126

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
522:8: 555%: as

    

 
  

e.
.-
9|

.oeooco gooog
§§§§§§ asses

35328

 

Key:
1. Transition .
2. Transition band frequency, of
3. Band helfvidth, cm”

1

The luminescent: lifetine of neodymium in glass varies within broad limits

(from 50 to 1000 microseconds [SJ-85]). Pith low activator concentration it

is determined by the cemosition of the glass and the presence of quench-

ing ad-ixturee. In the borate base the luminesceme lifetime of the neodymium
has the least value (about 50 nicroseccnds). and in the alkali earth silicate
glass. the highest (to 1000 Mcroseconds). The Oil-groups [623], ions of
transition and certain rare earth elenents, which are acceptors of the neodymiu-
excitation energy, can serve as quenching admixtures. This is discussed in

more detail in Chapters 2 and 3.

Increasing the neodyniul concentration above 1 to 22 by weight also leads to
a reduction in the luineecenm lifetine. This quenching is called concentra-
tion quenching and is explained by the cross relaxation interaction of close

neodynim ions [624] (Chapter 3).

Other parameters characterizing the neodymium ion in glass are the quantu-
yield 1ulinescence [118. 1025]. the branching coefficient [102. 118, 521, 1.26]
and transverse cross section of the lasing transition [103, 106, 117. 118,
427, 429]. The quantum yield deternines the efficiency of the conversion of
the pming light to 1mineecant emission, the branching coefficient gives
an idea of the relative quantum yield in individual luminescence bands, and
the magnitude of the induced emission cross section determines the choice of

one glass or another for application in specific lasers and amplifiers.
127

”MUSIONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

At the present tine lasing on neodymium is realized in s nuﬂ>er of types of
glass. but only silicate and phosphate bases have found broad practical appli-
cation. This is explained by good luinescent and lasing characteristics

or neodyniu in such glass and also the possibility of achieving the required
physicochenicsl parameters by variation of the composition of glass within broad
limits.

56.2. Spectral Lusinescent Characteristics of Neodynim Phosphate Glass

The spectral luminescent characteristics of neodyniun in glass are
characterised by a set of paraneters: the absorption and luminescence spectra,
the nsgnitude of the Stark splitting of the levels, the magnitudes of the
uniform and nonuniform broadening of the absorption and luminescence bands._
probability of radiating and nonradisting transitions, the decay time of the
excited state. the quantum yield of lu-inescence and also a nutter of other
paraleters. It is possible to find broad data and a list of papers on these
questions, for exauple, in the survey [47]. In this section a study will be
nade prisarily of the characteristics which, in our opinion, have direct
influence on laser paraneters. These are the width and the position of the
luminescence band peak of the operating transition, the radiating lifetime,
the resolution of the optical transitions. and the influence of the quenching
adaixtures.

Table 6.2.

 

Comosition aligns: ouposition Mum

      
         

( 2w 203 (90 m, 20.0
(mhoxf m. (mﬁﬂuc " 20.0
10.1 (roams, ' 13.2
10.0 (mums. 15.3

 

 

( s
(990.660.

The prospectiveness of needy-inn phosphate glass of a material for lasers was
demonstrated for the first tine in [123, 1030]. In reference [630]. a study
was made of the luminescent characteristics of neodymium in the systems
P205+IIHe 0, where lie-Li, Na, K, Rb. and Paos-HIHeO, where lie-Be, Mg, Ca. Sr.
Ba, Zn, . Pb. The magnitude of R vsrie with respect to the entire region
of glass for-nation In addition, studies were made of the characteristics

of the nixed system R(P205+He20)+0205+ns0). where R assuIes values of

0, S. l. 2, 3, 6, 5.

For these investigations. prinrily the high intensity of longwsve bands in
the neodymium absorption spectra by cospsrison with silicate glass wzs noted.
In addition, the maximal of the lusinescence band of the transition P3, -t
+4111]: turned out to be shifted noticeably in the shortwave region of t e
spectra. Thus. in the system 9205+RCd0, the wavelength at the peak of this
band was from 1051.5 to 10100.0 n with variation of R from 0.6 to 1.2.

It was also noted that the given luminescence band in a mater of phosphate
compositions is appreciably narrower than in any other glass base. Table 6.2
gives values of the halfwidth of this band for a nudaer of types of glass

128

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the mixed system. As we shall see, increasing the alkali oxide content
leads to noticeable decrease in the halfwidth. Introduction of A1203 into
the glass composition is accompanied by broadening of the luminescence band.

The temerature and duration of founding have noticeable influence on the
luminescent lifetime of neodymim in glass. On the average, it is 250 to

300 microseconds, and increasing the neodymiu- content leads to strong con-
centration quenching.

During lasing tests of this glass, very low threshold pulping energies were
noted. which made it possible to obtain quasicontinuous lasing.

In reference [123] it was found that in phosphate glass the electron excita-
tion transfer process between the rare earth ions proceeds sore rapidly than
in silicate glass. The actual lasing characteristics of phosphate glass were
described there for the first time. It was discovered that phosphate glass
differs from silicate glass by the narrower lasing spectrum. and the signif-
icantly larger gain of laser emission. All of this has served as an impetus
to the expansion of operations in the given region.

A detailed study was made of two glass-toning systems: namely, HePO3-8P04-
M30. where lie-Li, Na, K. and ne(P03)2-A1(PO ) , where lie-Mg. Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn,
Cd. Pb [167. 630]. These two system with digferent additives make up the

base for the majority of industrial phosphate glass. both optical and
laser glass.

In the noted papers it was demonstrated that luminescent and laser character-
istics of neodymium in phosphate glass are determined to a significant degree
by the structure of the latter. The structure of the glass is investigated
in Chapter 2. The basis for the structure of the majority of pure phosphate
glasses is the long polymer chains made of 902' tetrahedra connected with
respect to the peaks. Hith an increase in the ”0;, content in the glass, it
is necessary to expect an increase in binding of the anion motif and partial
I“31’1‘3‘330311t of the P04 groups in the coordination sphere of Nd“ by 304 or
80 . This increases the nuiaer of versions of the nearest vicinity of Nd3+
and leads to an increase in halfwidth of the nonuniformly broadened
luminescence band. The nonuniform nature of the broadening is confirmed by
studies of the luminescence spectra at helium temperatures. As has been
denonst ated, si ificant variation in the magnitude of the Stark sp'.itting
of the P3” and 111/2 levels is not observed for these conpositions.

Rearrangement of the glass structure found its reflection in the variation in
halfwidth and position of the peak of the luminescence bend of the transitions
“P3, “Ill/2° The dependence of the halfwidth of the luminescence band on
the 3m. content for lithium. sodiun and potassitn glass is presented in
Figure 6.3. As follows from the performed measurements, very smll halfwidth
of the band is observed in glass based on sodium metaphosphate (14.4 nm);

for lithium metaphosphate the halfwidth is somewhat greater (16.2 no).
Increasing the ”01. content to 45 nolecular 1 leads to broadening of the

band to approximately 18 me; the least halfwidth is observed for potassium
glass.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

0 n a: a w as
(2) mum“

Figure 4. 3. Balfvidth of the luinescence band of Rd“

in glass ofthe hero -BP04 systee as a function of the
”04 content; lie-14.3%. K.
Key:

1. M . ne
2. [350‘]. nolecular 2

Increasing the broad orthophosphate content in the glass leads not only to
variation of the nearest vicinity of the M3". but also to rearrangement of
the glass structure. The presence of the 3P0]. groups corresponds to cross
linking of the netsphosphata chain. By the Ranen scattering spectra. it is
well visible (Figure 6.6) how the transition takes place fro. the linear anion
structtn'e characteristic of sodiun netaphosphate to the structure with high
binding of the anion notif and glass with large boron orthophosphate content.
In the lulinescance spectra this is reflected in the shortwave shift of the
luminescence band peak of the transition ‘1'3/2‘6111/2 in Nd3+ (Figure 4.5).

'Another picture is observed on introduction of nsgnesiue oxide. As its con-
centration in the glass increases. the content of pyrogroqas and orthogroups
Inst increase. llere the average length of the polyphosphate chains is quickly
reduced. and the min: of terminal groups P0? increases. In the Ramon
scattering spectra of glass the bands characteristic of netsphosphstes dis-
appear. and new bands appear corresponding to the orthogroups and pyrogroups.

island leads to a shift of the luainascsnce band peak of Nd3+ to the lonmave
region of the spectrun for aodiun glass to 1056.5 nn (Figure 5.6). Strong
deviation of the shift fron linear is observed for potassius glass, which

can be connected with partial transition of nsgnesiu to quaternary coordina-
tion and the formation of Hgo‘ groups. However. judging by the relations pre-
sented in reference [167] on the properties of glass as a function of its
cowosition, the meter of these groups must not be large.

As the "30 content in the glass increases. the halfvidth of the luminescence
band of lid“ increases significantly (Figure 6. 7). The probable cause is an
increase in the strength of the disturbing fields caused by an increase in
the second coordination sphere of Nd“ ion of the meter of high charge ions
Hg” with small radius. however. in potassium glass e presence of Ego is

felt weakly. Obviously. in this case primarily the ions are located in
the second coordination sphere of neodymiu.

MWUSEONLY
Figure (0.6. Spectre of Ruse scattering of glue of the
3003-31!“ system for different retioe of the components

hum-m

   

I, ﬂl ‘1” W?
" ” 71)"?aoofm? (1)1rvgu1...n.x

-

Figure 6.5. Position of the peek of Figure 6.6. Position of the Inn
the luminescence bend of M3" in glass of the Its-ineecence bend of Rd in
of the HePOyBPO‘ system es e function glue of the HePOyHgO system as

of the ”04 content; tie-Li. Rs, K e function of the “go content;
Key: lie-Li. Us, K.
1. [IPO‘], molecule: 2 Key:

1. [580]. molecule: 2

131

MWLISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In glass of the ternary ayatea MsPOTﬂoa-Hgo the indicated trends are retained.
Consequently. on the basis of this system. it is possible to synthesize laser
glass for lasing of different wavelengths and with different halfwidth of the
luminescence band of the transitions F3/2+’°I 1, . In this way it is possible
to vary the lasing wavelength within the linifs from 1052.0 to 1056.3 on and,
as will be denonatrated hereafter, the width of the lasing spectrum and nagni-

tude of the cross section of the induced mission. and at the same tine. the
gain of the coherent siml.

In reference [167], a study was made of the glass of the MeP03-8203 system.
and it was demonstrated that the introduction of boron anhydride leads to
broadening of the luminescence bands of Nd and their shift to the longwave

region of the spectra for alkali netsphosphates of Li. Na and K (Figure 6.8.
4.9).

The spectral luminescent characteristics of glass based on netsphosphates of
the elenents Mg. Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn, Cd and Pb were studied for cospositions of
(loo-zonea’o )zoxam’oa) [431]. where x seamed values of 0, 12.5, 25,

50 and 75 no ecular Z. gor all pure netaphosphates of the basic subgroup
(Mg. Ca, Sr, Be) the peak of the absorption bands of the transitions

“F3 [24.1 In is found for the ease wavelength of 1054 ms with small devia-
tions. ior Zn, Cd and Pb the peak is shifted to the shortwave region of the
spectrua. especially for zinc glass. The halfwidth of the luminescence band
of Nd3+ decreases monotonically in the series Hg-Ba from 22.6 to 18.0 nn.
Here a linear correlation is observed between the radius of the cation Me2+
and the halfwidth of the luminescence band (Figure 4.10). This agrees well
with the propostion of variation of the force of the disturbing crystalline
field created by the nodifier ions. The increase in aluminum phosphate con-
tent in the g1 s in all cases is accowanied by a shift of the lulinescencs
band peak of Rd to the shortwave region of the spectra (Figure 4.11) and
an increase in its halfwidth (Figure 6.12). The Ca and Hg netaphosphates
constitute an exception: in the latter the halfwidth even decreases somewhat.
The greatest shift in the peak is observed in zinc glass; For 50 molecular :
A1(P03)3 the lasing wavelength in it must be 1051.1 nm. Measuring the
Einstein coefficients A03. A1 2. A1 35 for luminescent transitions and
Jadda coefficients 9:, ‘2‘, 06 (2 .3) delonstrated that the resolution of the
transitions increases in the series Be-Ba, and the ratiosof the areas of the

luminescence bands (the branching coefficients) remain almost constant
(Table (Os 3)s ‘

 

0 M 20

. 40 50
"90], no”. 7. (2)

Figure 4.7. halfwidth of the luminescence band of Rd“ in
glass of the FlePO3-Mg0 systen as a function of the "go content;
Fla-Li, Na, K

Key: Inn“ on: 2--[Hgo], nolecular Z

132
F0! OFFIOAL USE ONLY
The luinescent lifetime of neodymium in the investigated glasses based on
alkali and alkali earth metaphosphate experiences siyzificant fluctuation
(within the limits from 200 to 350 Iicroseconda). However. these fluctuations
can be connected with the difference in residual water content as a result

of inconstant synthesis conditions.

 

o n! :71 .10 w .70
[3:0,].mv'7- (2)

 

Figure 10.8. Balfwidth 3f the Figure 6.9. Position of the peak of
luminescence band of lid in glass the lminescence band of M3" in
of the morn-203 system as a glass of the Remy-3203 system as
function of 3203 content; a function of the 8203 content;
lie-Li. Na, K. He-Li. Na. K
Key: Key: '

1. AA . m 1s m. m

2. mo ecular X 2. molecular Z

The development in the USSR of experimental and industrial phosphate glass
Les-40. LGS-lol, Les-62. LGS-I. LOB-H and [888-1621 was a natural consequence
of the performed research.

The results of studying the spectral ltmineecence characteristics of alkali
alunophosphste glass are presented in [162]. A study we made of the glass
of the He O-Al 03-1’505 system. The phosphorus pentoude concentration varied
within chi 1 z. from 33 to 66 molecular x, and the ratio of HezO/PZOS was
selected equal to 1:1, 1:2 and 1:3. The absorption spectra of neodymium in
such glass have the usual fore, the most intense bands correspond to wave-
lengths of S90 and 79’: nan. Significant variations of the spectra with temp-
erature are not observed. The beat resolution of the spectra occurs in
potassiu¥ glass; the resolution becomes worse as the radius of the cation
(Raﬁ Li ) decreases. The sane thing also occurs with an increase in the
P205 content. A decrease in the ratio HezO/A1203 gives the inverse effect.

The indicated variations are connected with the arrangement of the structure
of the glass. the base of which is made up of the tetrahedra P01. and A104.
With a decrease in the ratio HeZO/Alzo <l in the glass, A105 octahedra
appear. The luninescence lifetime of “33* in the investigated glass contain-
ing 21 by weight M203 varies iron 350 to 500 microseconds. increasing as
the Hezo content increases and the P 05 content decreases. The residual
water content has not been controlle .

133

MOIFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

Mi 0.! 0,15
PW", 1m (2)

Figure 10.10. Halfwidth of the lunincscence band as a- function
of the cation radius
Key:
1. All. In

   

0 " .w m 40 (I
[“(905’slrmx (2) 3’ wilt(%gjl.£7(2)

Figure lull. Postion of the“ Figure 6.12. lalfvidth of the
luminescence band peak of Nd lainescence band of Rd” in glass
in He(P03)2-A1(PO )3 glass as of the He(PO3)2-A1(PO3) systen
a function of A1(303)3 content. as a function of £0053 content.
Key: Key:

1. lug. nn 1. Al , nn

2. molecular Z 2. no ecular X

In order to inprove the physioocheaical characteristics of slain phosphate
it is possible to introduce vanadiun [433, 455] or niobiun [159, #33] into
their composition. 0n addition of vanadiun pentoxide, part of the vanadiun
mually is reduced to tetravalent state. which leads to coloring of the glass
a dark red color [416]. In order to avoid dyes when preparing the charge,
yttriun orthovanadate (“704) or neodymium orthovanadate (NdVOa) is used.

The introduction of even a relatively ensll quantity of m“ (0 to 0.21 by
weight) causes a sharp shift of the edge of the ultraviolet absorption of
the glass to the longvave region of the spectrun (to 350 nn). The lumines—
cence lifetime of the neodyniun and the quantum yield of the luminescence
first (to a concentration of no“ of 0.352 by weight) increase, and with a
further increase in the W0]. content, quickly decrease. The saxinun of the
luninescence band of neodynim corresponding to the transitions ‘1’3/2-1‘111/2

136

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is shifted in the direction of longer wavelengths. which can be related to
the rearrangement of she glass structure. Obviously, with a snall content,
vanadium forms the V0,. tetrahedra which can be built into the polyphosphate
chains without disturbing the overall structure of the glass, and a further
increase in the V content leads to the fact that it begins to play the role

of an ordinary ion modifier causing depolymerization of the vanadium phos-
phate anion motif.

Table 4.3

         
    

   

 

   

 

d
a "a 32 “a
a a J: 3 a
.I I 00... I°
: a 3-5; - .
a d 3 8| 9‘
15° 5.92. 2.93 2.87 340 m m guano 1.28
M: 5.11 2.68 4.13 ms son zoo “8:12 2.05
Ga 4.23 3.50 4,25 812 one no ‘2:46:12 2.40
Sr a.“ 3.64 5.06 053 i136 no £0:48:_12 2.04
IL: am 4.58 5.38 1214 13m 320 13:41; :_11 3.00
4.x: 3.x. £51 832 mu 2w 40:48:12 3.0
-I 4:3 3.42 ms 932 not 210 40:48:12 3.0
.. luau 3,3'. 4,82 1211 15m ass 40:48:12 3,8

The glass composition in molecular Z: 50 HeO-SOPZO 4.7116203;
erg—value of the transverse cross section determine; spectroscopically.

Analogous processes also take place in aluninun phosphate glass containing
Nb [434]. which indicates identical behavior of vansdiun and niobium in them.
Consequently, it is possible to consider that the introduction of small
amounts of these elements is felt favorably in the spectral 1minscence and,
apparently, the lasing characteristics of aluminum phosphate glass.

The ao-called fluophosphate glass is a version of phosphate glass. Fluo-
phoaphate glass, along with phosphate. can maintain up to 80 molecular Z
alkali earth element and alumina fluorides. The spectral luainescence
characteristics of neodymiua in such a base were investigated in detail by
the authors of references [115, 191, 345]. With respect to their structure,
the fluophosphate glass is very sinilar to phosphate. For the systems
investigated in reference [3105], Ba(PO3)2- (0.5)A1P3'(0.6)Cal’2 and
“0092'!!ng the existence of lsgnesium fluoride and calcium fluoaluminate
groups present in the products of crystallization of the glass along with
the phosphate groupings and the fluophosphate groupings P03? is permissible.
All of these groupings can serve as ligands in the complex molecules con-
taining Nd .

As the fluoride content increases. a significant shift of the peak of the
luminescence band of the transition ‘Fal “I 1/2 of Nd“ to the shortwave
region of the spectrum is noted (Figure £13}. For 80 molecular X fluorides.
the wavelength of the peak is 1051.0 an. The authors of {115] relate such
shifts to the localization of neodymiul in the fluoride component of the
glass. However, beginning with the results obtained when investigating
phosphate glass, the primary cause of this should be considered to be
rearrangement of the structure of the glass. The halfwidth of the lumines-
cence band of neodymium in aluminum fluophosnhate glass [115] is 18 to 19 nm.

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It must be noted that fluoridation is in itself a good method of dehydration
of glass; therefore the fluophosphate glass contains an extraordinarily snail
amount of residual water and has high quantum yield of luminescence.

Table 4.4 gives the luminescence characteristics of some fluophosphate glasses:
namely, the quanta: yield of the luminescence q, the lminescent lifetime

1;. the total probability of luminescent transitions and the absorption of
water contained in the glass on a wavelength of 3100 nm.

{as
W
a a! ‘0 W ‘V
F #1
11'1“}- (2)

Figure 4.13. Position of the peak of the luineacence band
of Nd“ in barium magnesium phosphate glass as a function of
the HgFZ content

Key:
1. , on
2. xcular 2

Introduction of a snall amomt of silicon oxide into the composition of
phosphate glass can be acculpanied by an increase in the chemical stability
and suppression of the inclination toward crystallization, which is extremely
important for production. Some of the luminescence characteristics of a
number of silicophospbate glasses bued an alkali and alkali earth elements
were studied in reference [636]. The presence of 15 to 20 molecular X 8102
in the composition of phosphate glass is felt little in the luinescence band
width of neodynitm with a high 8102 content, just as in the case of the
H30 and 3P0]. additives. broadening of the bands takes place.

An important luminescence paramter of the laser material is the quantua
yield of luminescence. For ud3+ ions in glass it is determined primarily by
the concentration quenching of the lininescence and the scattering of the
excitation energy of high-frequency vibrations of the molecular groupings.
especially the Oli-groupa. The quenching of the luminescence of M3" in glass
by water was first indicated in reference [181]. The general mechanisms of
quenching were investigated in Chapter 3. In [117] it was established that
the luminescent lifetime of Nd3+ measured in the initial Section of the
luminescence quenching curve depends on the water content in the glass,

and the lifetime aeasured on its "tail," alaost does not depend on it and

is determined by the neodymium ions with the least luminescence intensity.
This process is analyzed in detail in 53.3.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the present time it has been demonstrated that in condensed media, in the
vibrational spectra of which there are no high-frequency components, the
quantum yield of 1minescence of needy-inn with low concentration of it can
approach one [612]. The highest frequency vibrations in the spectrum of
phosphate glass lie in the region of 1000 to 1500 cm'l. and therefore in them
quite high quantum yield must also be observed. According to the data of
references [118, 425], with careful dehydration'it approaches 0.8.

Concentration quenching of the luinescence of neodymium as a function of the
glass conposition usually begins to be felt for Nd203 content of 1 to 31 by
weight [117]. The quenching of lazinescence is characteristic of all multi-
conponent systems, but homogeneous types of glass not subject to microstrati-
fication are the least subject to it (Chapter 2). A significant difference
of the concentration quenching from water quenching is the ssibility of the
occurrence (with a quite large neodyniun content) of the Nd ion associates
almost completely losing the possibility of luminescence as a result of strong
exchange interaction.

Table 6. lo .

No Composition,

 

 

: . molecular 2 c
1 nun-0,), 0,70
2 waa(l’0,),v50.\lgI-‘, ' om
3 .u-m.(n'o,),.1ongr. 0.95 no 2.32 0.143
a suusawo,).-2o.\w,-mr, one 310; 2.5: 0,125
5 nomwogrmalnszonr, 0.95 530 1.19 0.015

Ndzo3 concentration in the glass was 11 by weight.

If in ordinary laser glasses the neodymium ion concentration fluctuates within
the limits of (l-lo)-10 cr3 (1 to A X by weight M203), then, for example.
in glass with the composition 1105015 (neodymit- pentaphosphate) it can reach
3.6.10 1 cnI'3. It is not possible to obtain homogeneous glass even for the
ordinary multicomponent glass with this neodymium content as a result of the
inclination of such glass to crystallization and stratification during the
founding process. On the basis of mixed alkali and alkali earth metaphosphates
and neodymit- metaphosphate it is possible to obtain highly homogeneous glass
containing up to 30; by weight or more Ndzoa. A number of luminescent
characteristics of such types of glass are presented in Tables 6.5, 6.6 [229,
4362. As can be judged by the ratio of the radiating To and maximum 1’
luminescence lifetime obtained by approximation of the dependence of tﬁgx
lifetine on water content in the glass to its zero content, the quantu-

yield of neodymium 1mincscence in such glass for “(13* concmtrations to
14.1021 cm‘3 can reach 0.15 to 0.2. This makes then an entirely suitable
material, for ample, for microlasers—devices where small volunes of work-
ing material are required. The maximm of the 1minescence band of the

137

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

“F / 9‘11]. 2 transition for all nixed netaphosphates is located at 1053 on.
which is s t less than for the ordinary alkali and alkali earth nets-
phosphates (1056 an). The heli‘uidth of the luminescence bands is high and
depends weakly on the type of cation; both for sodiul and for barim glass

it is 21 n. Attention is attracted by the broadening of the 1minescence
bend in the glass with the composition HePO3(He(PO3)2)-xﬂd(Po3)3 as the
neodyniun content increases. Whereas for a neodymim content in bariul
netsphosphate in the uncut of several percentages the halfwidth was 18.0 m,
in glass with the composition Ba(P03) ~Rd(P03) it reached 21.0 on and
increased to 22.8 on in Ba(P03)2-2Ild(303)3. 11?;- sane thing occurs also in
alkali netaphosphatea, for with a small needyniun content in sodim nata-
phosphate or potasaiu metaphoephate the halfvidth is 14.0 nn. This dependence
of the halfvidth on the concentration can indicate significant electrostatic
interaction between the neodyniln ions in each netrices, which nevertheless
does not lead to strong quenching of the lld luminescence. It is also
possible to state that a decrease in the cation radius, for crawls.

Table 6. 5

    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

worming.
NePOyNdﬂ’Od,
KPO,-NJ(PO,),
moms-name».
m(po,).-Nd(ro.).
rum-mm».
nau’o‘wmwo.»
nn(Po,),-2ud(Po.).-2u(m.),
Maorﬂ’ﬂo

Nd(l’0,),

 
 
     

Conposition

I.u-o..Na(Po.), 350
mpg-mum.» 350
Kpo..Nd(Po.). _
MPOﬁ-NMPOJ, . —
11a(Po,),-Nd(Po.), .320
Pb(po.)..Nd(Po.). —
Ba(PO,).-2Nd(l’0,), 420
Ba(P0,),;2Nd(P0.),-2[a(l’0.), —
redo-59,0. 325
mum». -—

M

GE’ISISIaSS
replacement of Ba by Sr leads to a noticeable increase in the probability or
nonradiating relaration, which can be explained by a decrease in the spacing
between adjacent neodymium ions.

 

 

Table 4.6
:3:
Composition, _ F:
molecular X" _‘ .g‘ c
; uwpyzmmrmp. .', 2.0.
' 14mm..2.ma.o.-u.sv.o.= . 2.00
authorisations?“ 2.12
«supremeorusme. 2.34
22.o¥,o..'2.4§a.o..1sv.o! 1.79
u.sv,o..2.ma,o.-n.av.o.' 2.00 .
22.01;.q.:2;m.o.-159.o. m
“supreme-aunt). 2:23
s:./zu.o.42.sna.o..1sp,o. m
summation-usurp 3.51‘

 

In contrast to the mixed metaphosphatss, the wavelength of the maximum
luminescence band for neodymium pentaphosphate is 1051 an. and the halfvidth
of the band is 23.4 nm. In recent times. lumineuence of neodymium has also
been detected in the form of the pure metaphosphste. The luminescence life-
time for glass not subject to careful dehydration was 12 microseconds.

In addition to the quantum yield of the 1minescence, the neodymium ion in
glass is characterized by the intensity of the luminescence bands arising
n transition from the levels 4P3” to the lower-lying levels 4115/2
[13/2, “Ill/2' 1519/2. The intensity of the luminscence band is ’

determined by the Einstein coefficients for these transitions. These and other
data for industrial phosphate glass are presented in Table 4.7 [107]. Table 6.8
gives comparative characteristics- of the glass on a different base [103].

In our glue except the glass indicated in the last calm of Table 4.8,

Nd was introduced in the form of an oxide, and in the glass in the last

calm. in the form of the fluoride.

139

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWUSEONLY

Table lo. 7

  

‘("-/.~""J)

  
    

         
  

 
 
     

    
  

          

              
   

 
  

    
  

     
  

      

.- 21 a.“ 1.30 19
~ 1.00 2.0‘ 10
m 3.0 ~ 49
bibs-40 3'? :45 $53 ‘ '9
. . 14
1.687“ 3.2 3.00 no 18
1% '20 m % I?
*msa 2:0 {200' 310 ~:-10'
118-50 2.0 ‘1.” 300 w
its-0M 1.11 ms 300 ‘ w
j-ws-u-z 1.02 no no . :9
. u. 3.0 3.11 no 10
4.0 1.52 .. . “5 .33
3'3 3'53 % ‘ {8'3
'83” a.“ 305 1812

 

5/0. 3. Spectroscopic Methods of Measuring Sons luminescence and Lesing
Characteristics of Needy-il- Glass

One of the widespread nethods of deter-ining the spectral luinescence
characteristics of hid” in glass is based on the results of references [437,
438]. The authors of these papers have denonstreted that the strength of
the transition lines between levels of the trivalent rare earth ions can be
described by the following expression:

96-9. («J-29:9". L'. J') -. Z .miQJ-IWIJ') I', (4.1)

W...

where s. L. J are the main quest!- nubers of the initial level. 8'. L', J'
are the Iain quentt- ndere of the final level, I<Jl I-ubIIJ'>I are the netrix
elenents of the unit tensor operator which do not depend on the conposition
of the base. 0,, is the Jedde coefficient taking into account the influence
of the base.

According to [6“]. it is possible to express the following values in terns
of P:

The integral hand intensity

[*(M‘ﬁ-fwﬁl‘i'V-“lm “'2’
140

”MUSEONLY
where n is the index of refraction in the base. I! is the voluetric concen-
tration of the neodynit- ions. s is the electron charge. 1 is the average
wavelength of the transition. c is the speed of light. h is the Planck
constant, k0) is the absorption coefficient on a wavelength of A;

The probability of spontaneous transition_

 

I I m“; (N’+2):- ,
A(S.p.l»3'.§.J)-W" 9.. 19" (ms)
The oscillator strength
.9 on. 1 ~ ~

where n is the electron mass. 1' is the concentration of the neodynit- ions.

Knowing the probabilities of spontaneous transitions fron thi netaetable
M3“ level. it is possible to find the. branching coefficient

. ' 'A(‘r‘-.v
ﬁcpm-t'll) = W. “'5)

The usual lifetine

.'~ g _ 1
”it" 3- 4(‘1' *‘MT‘.
~ :3 l; w_. -' '. " (6.6)
Quanti- luainescence yield ,_
w. _- g" .
"'«f. "'7' ' (6.6a)

where 11' is the ltnineecence lifetiu of neodymiu. and the value of the

cross section of the induced enission at the maxim of the working
transition band

_ : 44, 9! (M7)
.-'-ﬁrnq (13 9-11).» .

Key: 1. eff

where Alert is the effective halfvidth of the luinescance bend. The natrix
elaents used for these calculations were calculated in references [437, 639.
1060], and the neasurenents reduce to deter-ining the parameters 9b with
respect to the absorption spectra. For sample. in [1439]. 21 absorption
bands of neodynim were used for this purpose; in [101.], 9 bands were used.
The investigation of the influence of the nder of bands taken into account
on the accm'acy of determining the parameters was performed in reference
[102]. and it wu denonstrsted that variation 0 their umber fron 6 to 10
does not lead to a significant change in the value of 0b.

 

1These branching coefficients differ from the ones presented in Table 6.6
by a constant factor.

161

mmmmv
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.8

Class cowosi- ' - -
mfb ”Tits...

tion. I _by
(mum -

  

Axeff is the hslfvidth of the 1minescence band nom1ised to the gaussian
curve [103].

The operation of deternining the cross section of the induced emission was
simplified sonewhat by the author of [461]. For this purpose use is made
02 the act that the ratios of the area of the absorption band on 1-750 n-
( 19/? 1'7/2; 419,2+‘s3,2) to the areas of the radiation bands on 1-1060 on

(“F +41 ) and 1-1335 nn (‘3 +‘I ) depend weekly on the cospcsition
3/2 11/2 3/2 3/2

of the glass. Insurgents by the proposed ssthod reduce to detsnining the
absorption band strength P750 and the calculation by the formulas

‘ (‘1) (5. 80)
0'.” I: 2,70'10-.CI' yer/Algooqsss): (‘ 8b)

' 0m. '- i,865-iO"cu ~9m/Alzﬁuao-
Key: 1. eff

Testing demonstrated good coincidence with the data obtained by other netth
for various types of glass.

The band strength P750 is defined by the expression
' ‘ 'Za’as'ﬁﬁr (M9)
,5".(”“'.'. W+i)'

where k0) is the absorption coefficient (cl-'1). IV is the vo metric concen-
tration of ad“. J u the quantu- nuber of the lower level 19/ .
€'(n2+2)2/9n is the correction factor of the local field in the dielectric.

162

mommouw
In a mater of papers, the lasing transition cross section is calculated in
terms of the measured Binstein coefficients. Por example, in [627] for
determination of the probability of the transition. the formula

-_~—--
, .‘__-_~

M‘PHH‘ _ 4,+.24,' ' (4.10)
{0? I'M)f-—T:'_.-_ I“, “flame;

is used where A1 is the probability of spontan s transition between the
lover Stark coqonents of the ground state of 9/ and the excited state
“F3”, ”1 is the frequency of this transition, 2 is the total probability

of all spontaneous transitions on the lower component of the excited state
to the upper halflevels 2. 3. 6. S of the ground state. N1 is the population
of the lower Stark component of the state 19/2.

The value of A1 is found from the res ance absorption spectru- and the
helium temerature, and the ratio (Arr A1)/A1. from the luinescence

spectrum of the same transition also aé-ﬁeliun temperature. Hereafter the
value of °t will be defined by the expression

a" 4 10
ol-WrmiA(Fs/n" I‘m} ( . ‘)

zhere B is the ratio of the luluneacence energies of the transitions
l’2:/2*"19/2 “‘1 ”3/24111/2'

In reference [118], a somewhat different formula is used, namely:

WT. ﬁfe-1'... .,.. I 3“.
{"146 4(Fm» l,m)9«-:-n— '. ;' “.101”
'I 3;?- . .Q- .. " . e 5..

Since the total probability of all radiation transitions from the metastable
state is connected with the radiation lifetime of r (6.6). measurement of
the luninescence lifetime and quantu- yield of the aminescence permits
determination of the value of tong/q.

Normalizing the total luminescence spactrun of neodymium. it is possible to
find the ratio of the mnber of quanta emitted during lasing transition to
the total n er of emitted quanta as the ratio of the area of the transition
band“ -* ll 2 to that. an ofI the areas of all the luminescence bands and,
conseque‘gly, % find A(” 1'3”“ 2). After substitution of the obtained
result in formula (6.10b)vefind‘l‘

For determination of the quantum yield of the luminescence of neodymium
glass frequently a traditional uthod is used utilising the selective

excitation source and integrating sphere [625].

163

FOIOFIIGALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«.4. Cross Section of Induced hission of m3" Ions in Glass

The deternination of the induced elission cross section of Nd“ or other ions
in glass has its peculiarities caused by nonuniforn broadening of the levels
in the energy spectru- of the laser ions. Nonuniforn broadening is nanifested
not only in erosion of the electron states in acne energy interval, but also
the difference in resolution of the transitions between these states. It is
age necessary to pay attention to the fact that the upper laser level of

N

has two Starkcosponents, and the lower, 6, and out of the 12 transitions,
those for which the induced emission cross section on the lasing frequency

is nonzero can participate in the induced emission. All of the indicated
facts can be considered by defining s(v) as follows
, . . . . .

‘ '.'- I ‘L°(4)1(v._v'wu.v'. va'.

, a(v, f)‘-J————————

-. s ' (‘0 11)
L I” (w. A. MAN -
' 0

where 0(A) is the integral cross section of the induced emission of a
luninescence center with the probability of spontaneous emission A:
y(v. v') is the form of the unifornly broadened line with peak at v'
normalized by 1; MA, v', t) is the inverse population of the “013+ ions on
the level ‘1’3/2 with resonance frequency v' and probability of spontaneous
enission A at the tine t. Integration with respect to v' is carried out in
the spectral range of AY‘bounded by the comlete width of the luinescence
band of the transitions 1' 4021‘? and with respect to A, from 0 to a.

Let I! introduce the distrf‘rzxti unction 91(A. v) normalized at each point
in tin such that

1V(A.V. i) .-_N.(‘) 9'. (A: v), 1. a, 559‘“. ﬁdddv _1. (4.12)

llere N1(t) is the total nuber of excited particles par cubic centineter.
For the induced emission cross section o(v. t). we obtain

a (v. z) j jam) 1: (v, v’) p. (A, v’) dAdv', (4- 13)

that is. at each point in tine t 0(v, t) is defined by the shape of the
luninescence band given by the two-dimensional distribution function at“. v).
The kinetic equation describing the variation in particle density distribu-
tion NA, v, t) in the case of the four-level system has the following form
2n neglecting the variation 0f the under of particles in the ground state

I [456] .

9/2 -. W -—- (Iw)"s.p.(A. v) - NM. v. z) A -

. _ a. (.4) N (A, v. s) j 7 (v, v’) 1 (v'. t) w +

‘ ‘ (6.10
+ w.[p.(A. v) I N (A. v. t)dAdv.-— N(A, v. 0].
where (hv)'1e. is the pulping rate, I(v. t) is the emission intensity

on a frequency of v. D (Aw) is the distribution function detening the popu-
lation of the netastsb e state by pimping, w” is the probability of energy

exchange between ions. Using ($.16), let us denonstrate that even in the
absence of induced enission and energy transfer, the cross section defined

166

MWUSEONLY
by families (6.11) and (6.13) will vary as a function of the excitation
conditions of the particle ensemble.

If the ion dispersion with respect to frequencies inside the nonunifornly
broadened line does not correlate with the dispersion with respect to A1,
it is possible to represent the distribution function in the absence of
induced eldssion in the foul of the product of the distribution functim
with respect to A and the frequency v:

vsaijvﬁawai». («15)
“re . « ~ _ - -,r-- -- V..-
J'Q'(_4)d__4‘-31 and [NM -‘1. (6.16)

The solution of (6.16) in the absence of induced mission and in the case of
rectangular shape of the excitetion pulse lasting t1 is represented in the
for-

".‘TIQFE;"—'”. '4 . 1
.N(A.v.t)-eTp.(A.v)(i,-O Noriega. (4.17.)
145.431:)'[-.-.,'9§;.i_i-Tj..‘,f ' “rm ._ .
;. T‘f'ﬁ'f 939.35) cf“‘"" (f :- V") ’°"~ ‘> {r (4. 17b)

For a short excitation pulse (At1<<l) fron (6.11). (4.12). (4.15). (10.17),
considering that ouch, where o is a content coefficient, we obtain

I.“ $557-$753: (4.18)
m- [ﬂipvﬁbmm 14491544 'A 1. the sverese mm of A.
For the steedy excitation node «ti--
do. e);.'.i¢)’_'(T-T)-a; (6.19)
Inasnuch es i)(ﬁ-l, Eon" "" -_

' mm“, .,; ~ .

 

1In the presence of a correlation it is easy to obtain the sane results using a
uniform distribution function.

165

”MUSEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analogously. if the ensenble of M3" ions is excited by the short pulse
(AtI<<l). and luminescence decay of excitation then occurs,

' a 9,:' -ap ""“""“ _ (4.20)
3- (. ’ - (filmy-4"“ '. -'

where t'-t-t1. Obviously if 9(A)-6(A-Ao)1 (the case of absence of dispersion
with respect to A). then 06». t')-uA01'(v)-o(a)r(v). It is easy to demnstrate
that for the distribution function with respect to A differing from the
6-function. o(v, t') decreases nonotonically with an increase in t'.

Using equation (5.16). it is also possible to show that for a probability of
energy exchange between the ions wm>>A, the induced emission cross section
does not depend on the excitation conditions and does not vary on damping of
the excitation of the ensenble of particles as a- result of the luinescence
processes.

Thus. the induced emission cross section in the active nediuu with nonunifom
broadening depends to a significant degree on the pulping conditions and
evolution of the ensetble of excited particles at neasurenent tine. Let us
consider the procedures for determining the induced emission cross section of
Nd” which have becone quite widespread; one of then is based on using the
spectroscopic methods to determine the value of the integral cross section of
the laser transmission enission averaged with respect to the set of Nd3+
ions and the shape of the luainescence band. The induced snission cross
section is naturally calculated by the formulas similar to fornula (10.13).

Secondly. the laser procedure is used to deternine the relative variation in
the inverse population under the effect of tht laser pulse with known energy
density. and for calculation of o(v) expression (4.16) is use}. '

It nust be noted that a value close to 0(vm, 0°) is deternined by the
spectroscopic nethods (vw is the frequency of the mim- intensity of

the luadnescence band). whereas-in the laser procedures, an effective cross
section def (B) is neasured (B is the energy density in the radiation pulse).
It will be monstrated below that for a narrow-band signal having small
energy density and coinciding with respect to frequency with the peak
luminescencebsnd intensity. Geffa)’ =0(v , t). Consequently, in accordance
with fornula (4.19) 63 f(0)zo(vm,E:9. Th2: fact is one of the causes lead-
ing to higher values of the cross section determined by the laser methods.
Another cause consists in the difference in the integration intervals with
respect to the spectrum: in the spectroscopic procedure th: inte ration is
carried out with respect to all transitions between levels F3/I’2111/2;

in the laser procedure only two transiti are actually considered-

between the Stark couponents of the state P3/2 and the lower cowonents of
the level ‘111/2'

 

1Here and hereafter 6 is the Dirac delta function.

146

FOIOI'FICIALISEONLY
Under the effect of coherent elission. the distribution function 0(A, v) and
the fora of the luninescence band of the laser transition can be significantly
defer-ed, which leads to dependence of o(v, t) on the energy density of the
emission. interacting with the inverse nadim. Actually. with application

of the laser pulse of duration t1<<t (1' is the lifetime of the state “Pa/2).
for which it is possible to neglect all processes. except the induced

processes. the density of the inverse population “A, v, t) is defined by
the solution of the equation (6.16):

Nil-v, t) = . ‘ .-
— N (A. v. ampl—u (A) Um. v’) I (v’. l'ifh'dl' . ($2) (4-21)
. 52;.“ _..

I

 

—,_—.__. .._.n .,

Introducing the particle distribution function 9(A, _v) at the tine of arrival

of the laser pulse and denoting by ”1(0) the inverse population at the tile
(that is MA. v,0)-N1(0)D(A. v)). we convert equation (18.13) to the for:

-.....~. .......
K \

a“. 1) “1'1.“019. ")”-(°)P(A. V') X' '
. I .. _ -
. '~ . . . ‘ . I

s ‘ ,

~ N ' A. "
4M “9‘” "" (1.42)

I -l
map {- o (A) .1"! “wt. v')! (v'. 1‘) dv’dl'} dddv'] .-
. .

As we shall see, the nsmitude of the induced emission cross section decreases
in the process of forced mission.

For description of the propagation of the ellission in the four-level nediun

with nonmiforn broadening. a systu: of equations for emission intensity and
for population is used:

a! (v. I. n 1 :Il(v.1, n __ I
a: " 7 01 '
.. {(v, 1.x)j S a(A)1'(v, v')N(A, v'. l)dAdv’—Bl(v,t..r). (4.23)
s a! . .
«15/ M. V." _ .

 

a: _
_ 4(4)” (,4, v, 1) j W. «my, 8)dv’+¢-(h v) 'MA. v) —
LY

‘ " 4.26
..\'(A, y. M +10. [MA v) S, SNM. v. tidAdV-NM' "- 0} ( )
A 0

where I(v, t. x) is the emission intensity on a frequency v at the tile t
in the cross section at, B is the loss coefficient.

167

momentum“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efforts to determine 90(A, v), which is needed for solution of equation
(4.24) did not yield positive results, and therefore it is convenient to
introduce the effective induced mission cross section ”eff which describes
the result of snplificetion of the spectrslly nonuniform inverse nedim.

If the rates of the induced processes are large. then by using equation (4.14)
it is possible to determine as“ as follows:

M'— ' - 4.25
”Inﬁw). ( ')

ESE-.L‘in‘v ms. ..

Key: 1. eff '
vhere E? Mfrs-11‘“) dvdt. N1103- is the initial inverse population of the
I - ' .' . - ’.

level “Fa/2 of Nd”, “1(a) is the inyerse population after trsnsnission of
the laser pulse with energy density 3 and duration t1:

 

. :2?’ _ ' . “._._.—
N. (Z‘) - M0375 MA. V)x .
' lrgﬁ‘lyﬂ ‘- 2 es . ' '
>533 1. ﬁ'ng)“; 51(V' ‘9? (V, y') dv'dt’] WV.
Consequently.
' 2'75” '""'-'
"M-i°oo(l)-‘~ln[ 0(A.V)>< , ~
<1) (1>._._-_ _ ”5f 5 j,
. .' '11:?“ ’I so . ,. -1‘
X of], ["3 0&4.) j I I (“’1 07(YI V') dV’d‘I} dMV]' '.«I
m, ,. - . , , . - -
Key: 1. eff '
It is possible to show thetwmr, _ __ __ A_
.H‘i',-.'.‘,’_ ~. ' . . ‘ 13:. ..
“WHY-0W4)- o(v ,1 to dl.
- (1)523 o .' ... f. ,. s ) )
Key: 1. eff
Under the condition '(Mr'orfmg <1 - we obtsin
1) ‘a
Key: 1. eff
' ‘ " 4.25b
emu». E) u a)" 9' 9M, v)a(A)1(V, mama, ( )
Key: 1. eff

148

MWWEONLY
where v0 is the laser signal frequency. Thus, 0°30). i) for low energy
density of the enission coincides with the induced emission cross section

for the luminescence bend not Idisturbed by the induced processes. The
function °eff("' B), being a characteristic of the laser saterial. at the

sane tile permits proper calculation of the snplificetion of the mission in
the active nediul. Let us again consider the couplete- systen of equations
describing the propagation of the laser pulse in the four-level inverse nediun;
neglecting the l\-inescence processes and pulping, we have

.u (v. c. '-

3) l Dllv. 3,1) ,
.2, +7'—a.—-'-‘

._... ---.- __ _.

a I (v, t, 3)} j a(1|)7(v, v;) N (:1. v', 1) «hhlv'—|$l(v, I. 1). (4-25)
. a} ..

W - 40M) NH. v. t) he. v') I (v'. ndv'.
' at
Substituting the solution of the second equation in the first equation of
system (4.26). using the definition of aeffw, B) and integrating the result
with respect to tins and frequency we obtain

..r~ . -' "~" ~ ~ (4.27)
—' -- Mum n -m. l- (hvrfb‘om (3)1! -— BB.

('1

- Key: 1. eff

Equation (6.27) differs fru the equations describing the anplification'of the
light pulse in the medium with uniforn broadening [3] by replace-eat of
0(v) by °eff(")-

The effective cross section Ueff (v, E) can be expressed in terns of the ratio
of the intensities of the nomlized luminescence bands on the frequency of

the laser pulse v0 before and after transmission of this pulse. The intensity
ratio is . '

' in“. v.) dl ‘
f. .. 7):, (13.28)
{1'1 (4- Vs) ‘I‘.

where 0(A, V0) is the distribution function of the inverse population at the
time of arrival of the laser pulse, 9t“, uo) is the seas function after

passage of the pulse. Let us write solution of equation (6.26) in the
following form

@309 m (A. v.) 5 191(0) {(4. m ;— «EA/(m.

llcre N (E) is the inverse population after passage of the laser pulse,
a(A) . Then

149

FOROFIICIALUSEONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

' J‘M‘U'” 7%?“ 7 ' ' I (4.29)
For Geffé) we 05““

.a...'!__IL- _. ‘,
0' e

L. I i '1. - .
o (73 i S m. w) I or; new:

.. n'
_- a

 

“(if- . 45M“ .

<1) . ' Tuna)..- . M»
C ' '
= av.) -’-'g in 7,

Key: 1. eff
where A is a value of the variable in the integration interval in (5.29).

The physical meaning of 6(vo) becoles clear if we consider the behavior of
Cleff for snall energies in the laser pulse. In this case °eff(3)'°("0)'
that is, it coincides with the cross section of the induced enission of
the undisturbed luminescence hand of the laser transition; therefore

3(vo)-o (v0) .

Let us note that the value of o‘fﬂv. 3) depends on the excitation conditions
and delay tins of the laser pulse with respect to the beginning of the pulping
pulse in the seas way as o(vz t) defined by formula (6.20). Figure 10.16

shows the values of o ff(v, 3) for a mder of types of glass obtained for
various tine delays of the measuring pulse (energy density i on the order of

l joule/cnz) with respect to the short (about 100 nicroseconds) punping pulsel'.
In silicate glass ion dispersion with respect to radiating probabilities of A
is clearly manifested. The picture of oefp‘oeﬁu) observed in phosphate glass
is explained either by the absence of the dispersion with respect to A or

by rapid (w.>>A) nigration of excitation. which was noted in the studies of
energy transfer.

 

1The experimental procedure for detenining 0(3) will be discussed in
$5. 3.

150

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
4' . _ . ”1(2)

  

I'M-71 3)

75; ‘ , mu (4)

 

(1)

mound
‘2 ﬁ

 

.4—
:w w no t. m (5)

Figure 6.16. The values of a. I obtained for different types

of glass on variation of the interval between the end

of the puming pulse and the tins of Insuring the cross section.
The ratioso leasured 100 microseconds after puping to

a.“ nessured $500 to 700 microseconds after pulping are plotted
on the y-exis.

l. 0. relative units
2. Les-I

30 low-7

1.. Les-6

S. t. microseconds
6. 615-1

54.5. Loser Hethods of Deternining the Induced Emission Cross Section

Effective cross section of induced mission can be calculated, neasuring the
energy parameters of the laser with sufficient accuracy (lasing threshold,
energy of the induced elission for given amounts of punping energy above the
threshold), the resonator of which has known losses [628].

Geff(vo ) can also be found, defining the variation of the population of the
“Pg/2 state of Nd“ for generaiion or amplification of the light pulses of
duration 10‘7 to 10’8 seconds. The variation of the inverse population can
be found by neeeuring the ltninescence intenzity fzon the netastsble level.
for example, as a result of the transitions 3/2-19 Let :3 consider
the two procedures for detemining 0(vo) in more deteﬁ.

Knowing the inverse population corresponding to the lasing threshold of the
laser, the resonator of which has knovn losses, o.ff(vo) can be calculated
by the fornuls .

(Vo)=p—- .
73-4512) . (4.31)
Key: 1. eff; 2. i, thrash

 

1For this pulse duration it is possible to neglect the variation of the
inverse population as a result of lt-inescent processes and pt-ping.

151

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' " '.' E " j 1‘";
where Ill-£11311???“ are the losses on the nirrors and to absorption in

the active elements, i is the length of the active elenent, R1 and Ri are the
reflection coefficients of the nirrors,N thresh is the threshold nverse
population. It can be found, neuuring the energy obtained by the laser for
different excesses of the puning energy over the threshold energy. The
following sinple relation is used here -..

M(:)s§r.:{'_'9) h 1(a) . (4.32)
e; (9-. JEW-

Key: 1. thrash; 2. pup; 3. eff

Here cp is the puqaing power, 8 is the area of the end of the active elenent.
(Ftp 475») is the total m‘er of particles excited to the netastable level

by pumping per unit tine (inverse pepulation), ‘thr -hv(€P)‘1N1 hle
is the pming power spent on maintaining the thresﬁgh population '33..“
active element during lasing of the laser, k1 is the photon density inside the

resonator, k-—rn! is the probability of the luminescence processes.

Perfor-ing the sdastitution in (lo. 32), aeff'hvmllzpethresh and perforlling
the corresponding algebraic transfornations, ye have

Maw-es 3')- m.)- «eh-w.
Key: 1. pup; 2. thrash

where o-l/(Idll) .

Integrating the last expression with respect to tine, we obtain the equation
relating the emission energy, lasing threshold and pumping energy:

.,...- --. -.--‘

)—.(d[¢_.,ﬁ&+¢)] (4.33.)

Key: 1. i; 2. pulp; 3. threshold

Since the intensity of the e-ission ILN I(t) is proportional to :1, t).
using a photomultiplier and oscillograph to record the kinetics ofth pulp,
emission and the lasing kinetics. it is possible graphically to define the
integral

"‘ - (4.331»)
Key: 1. pulp "

where t and t2 are the titles of beginning and end of lasing, r is the
proportionality factor. Inasnuch as “‘2)'“:hm h' then wthre sh-Ntz) (tz't1)-

If we perforn neasurenents of In for different pumping energies it is possible
to define, using the equation

1.52

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
.-——— ‘

— . I}. -' ‘ - . -
‘ F’.=(Xf‘§*’)jl(t)dt 1—1?“ -"’(1+a) ,
" ‘ flu)“
‘1

(4. 33¢)

the coefficient (K'IEF). to calibrate h’ h sh in joules, and s hresh in watts
(or in nulber of photons per second) and than by formula (6.31; to

calculate N1 and ce 1:. The necessary measurments of the ratio

"thresh/Vpum can a o be insured by varying the reflection coefficient of
the output mgrror and keeping the puping energy constant.

The theoretical disadvantage of the investigated procedure is variation of
the spectral composition of the run emission and the induced radiation cross
section as a result of broadening of the spectrum of the laser emission with
an increase in pumping energy.

The procedure for determining the effective emission crass section using a
recording of variations of the inverse population and intensity of the M3“
ion luminescence for generation or amplification of light pulses was developed
in references [117. 1.102, “3]. The layout of’ the experiment for determination
of oeff is quite siuple. An inverse population is created in a sample of
"(Ix-doped glass. When the maxim inversion is reached, a sounding laser

pulse is fed to the sample. The luminescence of the “(13" 100' 83‘ its “’1'"
tion are observed in small volumes of glass located at the entrance or exit

end of the sample with respect to the sounding pulse on a wavelenng of

880 to 920 run. The energy in the laser pulse is measured simutaneously. The
value of oeff is determined by the formula (6.25s). Obviously in order to
insure the required accuracy of the measurement a“ , which depends only on
the error. in determining AN and the pulse energy, it is necessary that
AN1>2Noexp{-AB/k3T}(6N1)'1 {6111 is the error in determining the variation of
the inversion). the intensity of the sounding beam must be uniformly dis-
tributed with respect to cross section, and the beam itself must comletely
fill the cross section of the sample.

In reference [“3], °eff was neasured as follows. The excitation of the
active element (10 u in diameter and 130 II long) was carried out either by
a [PP-1200 type pulping tube in a single tube illuinator or by the emission
of a ruby laser operating in the monopulse mode or in the free-running node
(Figure 6.15). On excitation of the 1m sample, the luminescence at 1-880 n-
was observed at a small angle to the direction of propagation of the sounding
pulse from the direction of the exit end. The primary contribution to the
observed luminescence, as the measurements dalonstrated, is made by the part
of the active element 1.5 cm long. In order to avoid spurious exposure to the
ILN emission, when the maximum inversion is reached, the capacitor bank is
shunted by a discharger, and the laser sounding pulse arrives at the sample
100 microseconds after cutoff of the current in the tube. The sounding pulse
50 nanoseconds long with respect to the base with a spectral width of less
than 20 m was generated by a laser and the laser amplifier. A uniform beam
with respect to intensity, 10 m in diameter was formed by a telescopic
system with diaphragm. The emission energy was measured by an IKT-lh or
IMO-2 calorimeter and if necessary it could be varied by using neutral light
filters. 153

MWWEONLY
. , ‘ l n .

1:

   

Figure 6.15. Diagran of the setup for measuring a .
Inneodyuiln glue naeter oscillator. 2-1eser amplifier.
3—light filters, 4, S—telescopic eyeten with diaphragm.
6—inveetigsted sample. 7-die1ectric mirror with transniesion
coefficient for 1-1060 on equal to 801 and reflection
coefficient for 1-693 n- equal to 1001, G—nby laser.
9—mnochronetor, lo—photoreceiver; ll—light filter.
12-photocalorilseter.
Key:

‘0 12.7

1:. 81-37

c. FED-62 photonultiplier

0n excitation of the selple hy the emission of the ruby laser luminescence is-
observed from the layer less then 1 m thick from the entrance and perpen-
dicular to the direction of propagation of the laser mission. The direction
of propagation of the ruby laser elission was combined with the direction of
propagation of the sounding pulse using e' syst- of prisee and dielectric
lirrors trauperent for 1-1060 3. The die-eter of the neodymium laser heal
was always equal to or sonewhst greater than the dis-eter of the hem- of
mission with 1-693 net.

The emission with 1-880 III wee recorded by neene of en NDR-z nonochronator,
the FED-62 photomltiplier with cathode repeater and storing 81-37 oscillo-
greph. The tin resolution of the eyete-wee 0.2 microsecond. The results of
neasuring a.“ agreed for the two nethods of exciting the sanple.

The authors of reference [117] determined a.“ by neasuring the inverse popu-
lation and the gain in the glass. The inverse population N1 on the note-
etahle level of Nd” was found by varying the intensity of the luuneecence

on mlification of the nonopulee and the increase in energy of this pulse.
Since the intensity of the 1mineecence I is slways proportional to the

level population, then
‘ .ar'i (6.36)
N I- ,
(i') W}. .

Key: 1. 1

156

M OWL IS! ONLY
where N! is the increase in pulse energy, . AI is the luinescence intensity
before passage of the pulse and variation 0 it, v0 is the frequency of
induced emission, V is the volt-e of the eagle. The effective cross section
of the induced emission was calculated by the formula

-.,. .-.. .

5‘,- h-ngﬁ . (4.3m
Key: 1. eff _. ,-3' . - 2.1.“

where l is: the amplification length. K0 is the gain,of the weak signal
related to the experimentally neasnred gain K- +Af
Esp "

by the expression

‘-‘.--T—r.._.._.——. ‘ — ....

I . - '
{Kr-‘1! i' ((—1 ',__"° ', ' (5.3%)
"1"] [~ +( ”ft-’6’} .

The last expression was obtained by expansion of the mlete solution of the
equation of pulse amplification (6.27) for (hv)'1aeffi<l.

The variation of the value of I with respect to length of the active element
as a result of saplification of the sounding pulse leads to errors in
determining the inverse population and mission cross section. Analysis shows
that for K0515 the error in the value of N1 does not exceed 51 for any energy
of the sounding pulse. The required nagnitude of 30 for the given puping
conditions is achieved by selecting the length of the excited part of the
active eleaant.

The authors of the indicated paper characterize the energy efficiency of the
laser naterial by untim- energy Flo, which can be converted to induced
emission by a unit volune of active material under given pumping conditions:

,.——. —--

I _ .lN cldt.
rt;- hf‘.fo(i)()'

(lo. 35)

\

Key:l.i

For the ensemble of particles which is uniform with respect to the lusinescence
output, this value is proportional to the total nui>er of ions excited during
the pming pulse. In the presence of ions with short '2 (for examle, close
pairs or groups of ions), their contribution to V0 is negligibly small.
Therefore among the glass with identical spectral characteristics the sample
with noticeable proportions of ions with small 1,, will be distinguished by
smaller values of V0.

“.6. Value of the Effective Cross Section of the Induced Emission of Rd“
in Phosphate Glass

Systematic measurements of o (i) for phosphate glass were performed by the
authors of references [117. gig]. In [663] results are presented froa
measuring 0.3m) for glass of the type LES-loo. Lcs-I, Les-M. (ms-22, and
also for a meter of types of glass based on the netaphosphates of the

155

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

second group on variation of the energy density in the laser pulse from

1 to 10 joules/a2. For coIparison a study was-node of silicate glass type
613-6 and 618-1. Figure 40.16 shows the relations- for N1(0)/N¢(B) as a fmcv
tion of E for different glass for durations of the sounding pulse equal to
50 nanoseconds and 6 nicroaeoonds. In all cases the behavior of the ratio

”.6". It“: :

agaiﬁfw ' (1)

PIC-I‘M!) (3)

    

Figure 6.16. N1(0)/N1(8) as a Figure lo. 17. Geff(z) for different
function of energy density in types glass.

the .plified laser pulse for Key: _

different types of glass. 1. gems). 10-20 «.2
DI-1sser pulse lasting 6 nicro- 2. B. flannel/ca2
seconds. HI—laser pulse of SO 3. 61.8-2‘ (DI)
nanosecond duration 6. 618-22

Key: 5. 613-26 (H1)

1. z. joules/a3 6. ens-1 (m. m)

2. ems-24 (n1) 7. 613-6 (HI, DI)

3. 613-22, 61.8-2‘ (HI)

I. GLS-l on. 01)

Se ”-6 (HI. DI)

81(0)"!16) is described by linear functions. Increasing the pulse duration
while retaining its energy does not lead to noticeable variations of this
ratio in silicate glass, but in phosphate glass the values of 81(0)/N1(B)
for t1-6 microseconds are significantly larger than for tt-SO nanoseconds.
In Figure 4.17 relations out“) are presented which were calculated by
foraula (6.25s) using experinental data presented in Figure 4.16. All of
the curves amts) for t1-50 nanoseconds are approximated well by formulas

of the type _ ._ ._... . .
an)... (2‘) .. “i u. u + (5 Mr: lawn. (a. 36)

Key: 1. eff

156

MWMONLY
where 0(0) is the induced emission cross section determined by the slope of
the functions “gm/111(3) for B approaching zero.

Table 6.9 gives the values of 0(0) and also values of a.ff(8) for 821.5 joules/
ca:2 for a mater of types of phosphate and silicate glass. The observed
relations of o “(3) can be caused by the following factors: deformation of
the shape of the luainescence band of the laser transition of M3" ions.

degeneration of the four-level qlification systen to three-level, the
sinultaneous effect of both effects.

Table 6.9

020;, 0 f 1!;
312s of glass ' 10-20 cnz 13-50 m2
Silicate
GLS-l 2.5 2.3
613-6 1.5 1.6
Phosphate
Les-60 5.5 6.5
LGS—I 3.5 3.1
1138-)! 6.6 3.9
ans-22 6.2 3.6

In reference [618] it was demonstrated that the nagnitude of the “In/2 level
relaxation tine. both in silicate and in phosphate glass. is less than

2.10‘9 second. According to the data of reference [612], the rate of non-
radiating excitation energy dissipation in phosphate glass is higher by
several tines than in silicate glass. Therefore vith a sounding pulse dura-
tion of about 50 nanoseconds, it is possible to neglect the degeneration of
the fourlevel uplification system to three-level.

._.- .vrr

    

W (A)
. c)
Figure 6.18. Luainescence spectra of 615-1 glass (a). 615-22
(h) and 1138-60 (c) before (1) and after (2) passage of the
laser pulse
Key: A. l. on

157

MWLIISEONLY
In order to determine the digree of correlation between the deformation of
the lminescence band of Nd and the function obtained Get-fa), the
luminescence band curves were recorded after passage of the laser pulse.

The spectrum was recorded with a time delay with respect to the laser sounding
pulse from 3 to 100 microseconds. The scanning time in the entire spectrun
was 10 microseconds. The spectral resolution of the-spectrophotometer was

$10 em‘l. Figure A. 18 shows the luminescence band curves for silicate glass
618-1 and phosphate glass Les-40 and (ms-22 before and after passage of the
laser pulse obtained at room temperature and with a delay time at the
beginning of recording of the spectrum approxinately equal to 3 microseconds.
In silicate glass the deformation of the curve is significant. In Lcs-l
phosphate glass the deformation of the curve is noticeably less, and in

Les-60 glass the curve is close to equilibrium. Observation of the kinetics
of restoration of the equilibrium curve of the luninescence band gives low
false correlation rates: for silicate glass these rates are equal to

(0.5 to 1)X10‘ sec-1; for phosphate glass ans-22 and 1138-1. on the order of
105-106 sec'l, and for His-60, obviousl greater than 106 sec‘l. The defama-
tion of the luainescence band of ‘1’3/2 I /2 was not observed in either type
of glass, which is explained by absence 0? correlation between the nonuniform
broadenings of the Stark components of the 19/2 and 5111/2 levels.

In silicate glass, the defamation of the curve for the luminescence band of
the 4P3 2%! 2 transition. according to the calculations by formula (6.30)
correle‘es wig variation of oef (3). Consequently, in these types of glass
nonuniform broadming makes the ﬁnale contribution to the observed functions
a tin). In phosphate glass the deformation of the luainescence band is
significantly less than that which is required to match the defamation with
the decrease in caffﬂz) with an increase in energy in the laser pulse. This
effect and the increase in Geff(3) which is observed in phosphate on varia-
tion of the pulse duration from $0 nanoseconds to 6-10 microseconds can he
explained by rapid transfer of excitation between the Nd3+ ions or the quite
large (about 50 nanoseconds) lifetime of the levels ’61 1 2. The latter prop-
osition contradicts not only the previously presented datakbut also our
experiments. The variations of the dependence of Ni(0)/N1(B)on the pulse
duration cannot be matched with each other by varying only the value of 11.
On the contrary, introduction of the term describing the excitation migration
into the equation (6.24) (“1405-106 sec‘l) for r£<<11-50 nanoseconds, gives
the required increase in the effective cross section and explains
noncorrespondence between the relative deformation of the luinescence band
of the laser transition and the measured values of °eff(z)‘ This effect is
connected with noticeable relaxation of the deformed curve to the equilibrium
curve during the relaxation time inasmuch as the minimum delay time of the
beginning of recording with respect to the sounding pulse was about 3 micro-
seconds, end the recording of the entire spectrum took place in 10 micro-
seconds.

The discussed experimental data indicate that in phosphate glass the effective
induced emission cross section depends on the probability of this mission:
on satisfaction of the conditions

. (“MK-(o) 3);“ ~ 10' c"

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we have

o<B=5MLHMWamm,
3&5. 1'

Key: 1. eff

(levy-1,“);

and for ‘1 .( m.

we obtain

an). o (0).
Key: 1. eff

In intermediate cases with a magnitude of this ratio on the order of w",
the exact value of o (2) not be determined beginning with the cowplete

solution of equation his lb). As an approxination- it is possible to take the
values obtained for t126 nicroseconde.

54.7. Amplification of Laser 1mm in Phosphate Glass Doped with M3" Ions

The equations describing the gain of the laser pulse on propagation in a
linearized inverse nediun have the form

31+ :3-1-‘01‘23; m.‘ (mm
1%" .. — oNaI— N.— (a. 3m
(1) *Yu

Key:i

Let u aasue that the pulse duration is much greater than the equilibriu-
setup tine between the excited laaer ions and the medium, but such less than
the characteristic pumping time. In the case of interest in practice where
t1<<1v the variation of the inverse population after transmission of the
pulse is deter-lined by the emission energy passing through the given cross
section of the active eleaent:

- “'Hif- r’..—__ . — ‘_—--.—_.

i (3”:- whoop—o; 10' z)d¢’] (4.38)

a

The system of equations (lo. 37) has quite siqle analytical solution only
under the condition of 8-0. that is, in the absence of inactive absorption
[638]; then

    

I (I. t) - I g 'l. (‘.— 8") ‘ -. (a. 398)

(-xe '
-o I 1.00“}

   

159

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2(a) =- M“? :38; -19(0) 419?] ”1“ +
e ' ' . ' 0.,

+ an [t '+' o'xp [Mn-93(0), (one (— was); 1)]
‘ . J z .- u ‘ ‘. 7-, °ﬁ a_ (b.39b)

,‘c‘. {I} -:-I' '.

The latter equation is easily converted to the form convenient for the calcu-

lations: ., 1

K. (3) - (“P «Mt-362 (z)ll— i)‘(sxp [(hv)-‘oE(0)| _ “-1.. .E (6 3%)

where “0(3) ' “P (a! N9“) is the weak signal gain.

The inverse medium is called idealized. for a nud>er of factors are not con-
sidered in the gain equations. The factors not considered include the
presence of Start structure of the levels of the ions interacting with the
emission, nonuniform nature of broadening of these levels in glass. It is
also proposed that the lower luer level is not populated in the induced
emission process. that is, the tin of its destruction 11-0. although it is
known that in 1...: crystals and glass t,-10-8 to 10-10 sec, and 1: depends
on the magnitude of the energy gap between the ground state and the lower
laser level of the phonon spectra of the crystal or glass.

Let us consider what changes in equations ($.37) consideration of the indi-
cated factors leads to. Obviously, equation (4.3%) is converted to a system
of equations for populations of the Stark components which consider the setup
time of the Boltzmann equilibrium between the components of the ease level

and the equilibrium setup time between the lower laser and ground levels.
Inasmuch as the setup time of thermal equilibrius between the Stark comments
of the level on the rare earth ions is < 10‘12 second, it is possible to
consider that for generation or amplification of pulses lasting are than
10-12 see the Boltzmann distribution of the populations of the Stark components
is not disturbed. In this cue, the presence of the Stark structure of the
upper laser level can be considered by introducing the averaged induced
uission cross section with respect to transitions (for example, similarly to
how average was done in 56.6). Let us note that the same magnitude of cross
section is obtained from the previously ascribed experiments in determining
the induced emission cross section of Nd .

Vhereas some of the Stark components of laser levels do not participate
directly in the induced emission (0(v )-0 for all transitions between these
components) they play the role of the "reservoir" influencing the population
of the cognate participating in the induced transitions.

The discussed arguents make it possible to reduce the system of equations
for populations of the laser level components to the system of equations for
integral population of these levels:

160

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
4N '

:77". ' -’ 0“”. *' 1N1). '

”1-”: (6.40)
r, '

 

'lN
1;" "IN- - 1N.) +
-- (4.41)

where x is the ratio of the populations of the couponents participating in
forced transitions to the total population of the lower laser level,
ug-uoxexppazf/kn'n is the equilibrium population of this level. Here 1m;
seemed that ll.<<ﬁ and significant variation of the population of the
ground state on excitagion does not take place.

Let m consider two liniting cases: nplification of the short laser pulse
t1<<T and amplification of the pulse of duration t1>>rr In the first
case hermal destruction of the lower laser level in the tile (:1 can be
neglected. Then

- W_'?'?3"."‘."*_'"'“3‘1 + mm- (0" (a. 42.)
where “1(0) is the initial inverse population of the netastsblev level.

For neodymiun-doped phosphate glass x30. ‘5; for neodymium silicate glass
x-0.6 if we consider in accordance with [202], that the induced enission is
participated in only by two Stark components of the 4111/2 state. Pron
fornula (6.42s) it follows that in phosphate glass on anplification of a
short laser pulse, lore than 702 of the excited Nd3+ ions can be involved in
the induced emission. and more than 602 in the silicate glass. With a
classical three-level gain (where the laser levels are seemed to be singlet
levels) this value is $02.

For t1»?2 we obtain the usual solution for the four-level laser system:

.jt“,m7.r J". """ U" .‘ I’

32"" 1",” '(0) exp i-.- (1‘10“ 32% (6.42b)
In the intermediate cases tio'r . it is necessary to solve the complete system
(5.40). (“.41). According to t e measure-ants performed in reference [618],
Tl<2'10'9 sec. and therefore the effects of degeneration of the four-level
system must be noticeable for tf-lO'9 sec and radiation energy densities
E>hv/0(x+1). The indicated energy densities for t1-10'9 to 10.10 set are
achieved in the output amplifying stages of the laser units designed to
obtain a thermonuclear plasma. The measurenents of 1,, for glass produced by
USSR industry were taken by various methods [618, “10. “5]. In [444] the
relaxation tine of the ‘11 /2 level of Nd“ in phosphate glass DOS-40 was
determined by comparison of the "clearing" of the inverse population during
generation of pulses of duration 3-10'8 sec with different energy with varia-
tion of N1 calculated for the four-level systen under the assulption of
uniform broadening of the spectral band. The difference between the "clear-
ing." defined experinentally and calculated was considered the consequence
of the appearance of noticeable population of the lower laser level. The
value of 1' was estimated by the difference between the experimentally found
variation of N1 and that expected for the four-level systen. Porv Les-loo
glass, 1’1-3- 10‘8 sec.

161

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The more direct method of measuring the relaxation tins of this level in the
glass is head on determination of the variation of the gain of the weak
signal after passage of a powerful laser pulse of duration 5°10"1:l sec
through the nplifier with spectral width of 0.1 nm [445]. The authors
considered that variation of the gain is caused only by relaxation of the
“In/2 level, although the pulse gain must be accmanied not only by
redistrib’ution of the population with respect to Stark cowonents of the
states 3P and I’ll ,2. but also the deformation of the curve of the non-
unifornly roadened inninscence band of the laser transition. According to
their neasurelenta r, for ens-1 and Lcs-ao glass is (1Q:5)-1o-9 and
(30:3).10’9 sec. respectively.

In [418], the value of r! was determined by the following procedure. The
thermally equilibrium population of the lower laser level is about 10“ of

the population of the ground state neodymium In standard laser glass at
r-aoo K this populatizn corresponds to the absorption coefficient of 1-1060 nm
on the order of 5'10" cm'l. In spite of such weak absorption, on irradiation
by a laser pulse with a wavelength X-1060 nm the population of the metastable
level increases. reaching in the limiting case, for large energy densities of
the pulse. the population of the Stark cosponents of the “In, level partiv
zpating in the absorption. It is obvious that the maxi-um popu ation of the
F3/2 level components will be equal to the thernal equilibrium population

of the two lower components of the “In, level for t1>>1 . however, for
pulse duration of t1<rl the populations of the 41%,; level and
corresponding components of the' I1 2 level will be less than the thermally
equilibriu population. If it is c sidered that the Boltzmann equilibrium
between the Stark components is set up instantaneously and t if”, then depend-
ing on he specific layout of the laser levels the limiting population of the
states 3/2 will be 1.5 to 1.7 times less than that observed for t1>>rr

The increase in the "P3/2 level population can be monitored by lunineacence,
for example, on x-seo nm.

Here the relations for the papulation (and luninescence intensity) of the
“F3” level as a function of the energy of the exciting pulse for the indi-
cated relations between t1 and ‘1. also differ noticeably, and the nonuniform
nature of broadening of the spectrum of the Nd” ions has no significant
influence on the observed relations. Consequently, by varying the duration
and the energy of the laser pulse and comparing the observed increase in
population'of the “F3 2 level with that calculated for different ratios f

t1 and r1, it is possible uniquely to define the relaxation time of the 111/2
level. As the experiment shows, in glass of the type CLS-l, Les-2674,
Les-40, Les-1 and ans-22, the dependence of the “93/2 level population on

the energy of the laser pulse of duration 3-10'3.sec does not differ from

the four—level at the energy density for which 0915 joules. According to
the calculations. in this case 1'” can be less than 2.10"9 sec. In reference
[446]. a direct measurement was also made of the restoration of the gain

of the laser amplifier using ED-Z silicate glass after passage of the pulse
of 1.6 nanoaecond duration. The energy density in the laser beam at the
entrance of the awlifier was 2 joules/m2, the gain of the weak signal was 7.
On interpretation of the experimental ts, the systen of kinetic equations
describing the behavior of the ‘P3/2, Ill/2 and 19/2 level populations of

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
neodymium and the laser pulse gain were used. The absorption fron the

4P ,2 level was also considered. The best agreenent between experiment and
caiculation was obtained under the following conditions: absorption from the
metastable level absent. degeneration of the levels participating in the
induced transitions absent, “41.2510.” nanosecond.

As was demnstrated 1336.1, the influence of nonuniforn broadening in the
energy spectrum of Nd ions on the gain of a laser pulse can be considered
by introducing Geff(B). The formula based on the experimental data is used:

emu?) e gm [1 + «(0) Echo-11. (4.43)

Key: 1. eff (1)

For t1>>rr the equation describing the gain of a laser pulse in neodymium
glass has the form

 

‘7’” 4 mm It - “a (- (mo-1 «(5‘) 3(1)): — 02.32) - '

“ (1) a ‘ ‘ (4.1.4)
. . _ 4(0) (:HM‘ _
Key: 1. 1 1:3") i_+a(0)’,(a)(hv)'l FEM

In accordance with the solution of this equation the gain is defined by the
expression

‘ ' In It, In —(In)-'o(0)E(omx
an’= 10K.—(1—T)ln “Kg—a")- 0(0) (0)“. (5.1.5)

where ‘0 is the gain of the weak signal, 3(0) is the energy density in the
laser pulse at the entrance of the anplifier, 1. is the alplifier length.

It is easy to see that equation (6.64) coincides with the equation for the
gain for a.laser nediu with uniforg spectral broadening for (hv)'loE(0) <<1
or (hv)'loB(0)>l. The relations lamp) for certain values of Ko(e, 10, 25)
for 8-0 are presented in Figure 6.19. Here relations are presmted

E M " —--I - _
.lx(§)=mlnli+xo(“91(.h”) who» ”1' ‘ (4.1.5)

where o is not a function of the energy flux density. The noted differences
in the gains are manifested for quite large K; therefore in multistage laser
systems based on glass consideration of the influence of the nonuniform
broadening is necessary.

163

I‘OIOI'l-‘ICIALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 10.19. Gains of a laser amplifier considering (solid
lines) and without considering (dotted lines) nonuniforn

broadening for values of the gain of the veal: signal equal
to e, 10, 25 and o(0)-S.SXl0‘ 0 cnz.

Key: -
1. 81M, joules/cu2

56.8. Lasing Characteristics of Neodymiua-Doped Phosphate Glass

A distinguishing feature of phosphate glass doped with neodynit- is signifi-
cantly more narrow lasing spectra than in silicate glass. This fact was

given attention in references [123, 356]. The results of investigating the
dependence of the lasing spectrun width in a confocal resonator on the ratio
of the pulping energy to the threshold energy for phosphate, borophosphate

and silicate glass are presented in Figure 4.20. The LBS-60 glass (phosphate
alkali glass of netaphosphate composition) has the mat narrow lasing spectrum
of all known types of glass-with a tenfold excess of the pulping energy over
the threshold, the lasing spectru- width does not exceed 0.2 us. The lasing

spectra: of the horophosphate glass LGs-lol (0.4 an) is somewhat broader.

For silicate glass yes-28. its width reaches 7 n- under the same conditions:
this value is typical of silicate glass. In a flat cavity the width of the
lasing spectra is appreciably greater than in the confocal cavity (Fig 4.21).

Another characteristic feature of phosphate glass is the high gain [123].

The gain as a function of energy density of the entrance of the amplifier for
phosphate glass Les-1.0. 113-61. Lcs-I-3 and silicate glass Ins-28 is pre-
sented in Figure 6.22. With a weak signal the gain is 16 for Les-40 glass,

it is 12 for 1.6-1-3 glass and 2.5 for Les-28 or the gain is equal to ,

0. 28 (Les-(.0). 0.19 (Lcs-I-3) and 0.07 cur-1 (ms-28), respectively (rods

10 III in dianeter by 11!) In; puping 80 joules/m3).

1610

MOMMONLY
l/c-u (’0)

 

as
a:
2 m
4 6‘ 50410,, (2)

Figure 0.20. Hidth of the lasing spectrum as s function of
pumping energy in a confocal resonator

Key:

2‘ wivthreshold

3.
’0. 153-101
5 . 1:68-40

The causes of narrov-bend lasing in phosphate glass at the present tine are
considered to be a magnitude of nonuniform broadening less than for silicate
glass and uncorrelated Stark splitting of the working levels [“7]. Investi-
gation of the tine development of the luing spectrum shows that-in silicate
glass the splitting of the lasing spectra occurs by a wiping energy exceeding
by one and a half tines the threshold. and in phosphate glass 1:68-60.

splitting does not occur even for thirty-fold excess over the threshold.

 

. r ' p ,'
' ‘«w./w.,.(2)
Figure 10.21. Lssing spectra width as a function of puping
energy in a flat cavity.

Key:
1. Alba, 3. 188-28
2' ”P"? e”threshold 2' 11:86:23
165

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Direct neasuraaents of the inverse population of the working level (“l-'3”

and the induced enission cross section nade it possible to explain the

large gain [117]. It was discovered that although phosphate glass has lower
luinescence lifetime than silicate glass, the phosphate glass is not inferior
with respect to magnitude of inverse population and essentially is superior
with respect to induced e-ission cross section. The energy stored in the
inverse population of the Nd?" ions usually is 0.7 to 1.51 of the energy fed
to the pulping tdue. At the sane tine. such glass is noticeably superior to
silicate glass with respect to total excitation energy, that is, the total
number of M3" ions excited to the ‘F3/ state during the pumping pulse. The
conbination of all of these properties determines the low lasing threshold
and high efficiency of phosphate glass in the free running node [167, 1031].
Table (0.10 gives values of the induced mission cross section for laser phos-
phate glass produced in the Soviet Union and abroad.

By varying the glass composition it is possible to change the induced emission
cross section and lasing wavelength, just as the position of the naximnn
luminescence band and its halfwidth. This is indicated by the results of
references [167, (031], where a study was nude of the dependence of the lasing
spectrum width and nagnitude of the cross section on the conposition of the
glass. Proh the data presented in Figure 6.23 it follows that increasing the
3P0“ content in netaphosphate alkali glass leads not only to broadening of the
lasing spectra. but also to a decrease in the induced emission cross section.

  

I

Ear/av“ (1)

Figure 4.22. Gain as a function of energy density at the
entrance of the amplifier

Key: .
l. E. joules/cm2
2 . LES-60
3. tGS-I-B
lo . 1508-61
5 . LBS-28

In glass based on phosphates of the elements of the second group, the magnitude
of the cross section can be regulated by cation substitution 5431]; whereas

for namesiun netsphosphate the cross section is 1.8-10‘20 ca . on transition
to bariun. a snooth increase to 3°10"20 cm2 is noted. The lasing spectrun
width Al 3 for such substitution of cations is constricted from 2 on for

Mg to 0.}.“m for Be (the data for all the alkali earth metaphosphates are

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
presented in Table 4.3 [A32], Table 6.11 [1030], and Figure 4.24). Whereas
the constriction of the lasing spectrum can be explained by a decrease in
nonuniform broadening of the rig-Ba series. this is explicitly inadequate
for the explanation of the growth of the induced emission cross section;
obviously, on replath of the cation. an increase in resolution of the
lasing transition takes place.

 

Table 4.10

DE of glass 0,10.20 cal ' 122° of glass (II 10'20 (:32
015-21 3.9 LBS-56 2.9
HIS-22 3.9 1138-62 2.8
(ms-23 3.9 HES-I 3.0
GLS-l3 3.9 HES-ll (0.0
LGS-IOO 4.3 LEG-5 3.9
138-101 2.6 W6 3.7
LBS-5’0 4.3 LEG-7 3.8
m'ss 3.3

Data of [107] and measurements by the authors.

Table 6. 1L

 

Nunaxinun inverse popula on; [Io—excitation energy (energy per unit value
of the total nuiaer of Rd 10» excited during the pulping pulse):
oninduced emission cross section

The nature of narrow-band lasing of phosphate glass has been investigated
inadequately at the present tine. One of the primary factors influencing the
spectral width of the emission of a free-ruining laser is narrowness of the
luminescence band of the laser transition (the gain curves). The broadening
of the luninescence band of this transition with variation in the composition
of the glass has a negative effect on the selective properties of the gain
curve, and it leads to noticeable broadening of the induced emission spectrum
[432]. Another factor is conparability of the excitation migration rate with
respect to Nd3+ ions for concentrations of 2-1020 cs‘3 with the destruction
rate of the working level under the effect of induced euission. In niobiu-

phosphate glass. a noticeable broadening of the lasing spectrtnn was noted
for a reduction in the Nd3+ concentration to 5.1019 «1'3.

167

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

.4! ._ a a
. - ”hm
Figure 6.23. Induced emission cross Figure 6.2!» Width of the lasing
section in glass of the systen spectrun as a function of halfwidth
(90-x) NaPnyBPok-lo "go as a of the luinescence band in glass
function of colpoaition of the He(P03)2-A1(P03)3 systen
Key: Key:
1. x by weight 1. A1153, nn
2. ml

Higher values for the induced mission cross sections were obtained in
reference [395]. Table 6.12 has the results for zero energy density of the
sounding pulse and density of 1.5 joules/enz.

Judging by the results of measuring the magnitudes of the induced emission
cross sections, silicophosphate glass is en extrenely prospective naterial
for lasers.

The nagnitude of the induced emission cross sections, according to our

measurements using the spectroscopic [“1] end laser [117] procedure is
(2.6-0.10'20 a2.

Attention is attracted by high resolution of the laser transition (0-0-6)-
'10‘20 cnz, although the halfvidth of the luminescence band in this glass

is also significant (20 to 23 um). Broad luminescence bands and, conse-
quently. absorption bands nust pro-ate more conplete use of the light of the
pumping source. and a high ugnitude of the induced mission cross section
sust reduce the threshold puping energy.

On a order of laser nodels 10 In in diaseter by 130 - obtained front a small
volume of glass of low optical quality, an efficiency exceeding 22 in the
free running node was easily achieved.

Data on the induced e-ission cross sections obtained by the spectroscopic
nethod for a number of mixed Istaphosphates of alkali and alkali earth ele-
lento and neodynitn are presented in Table 6.13. For alkali netsphosphates
the cross section is on the average 3.0.10"20 cnz, and it depends weakly on
the type of cation. For alkali earth netaphosphates, its nagnitude is sane-
whst lover. Data are presented in Table 6.6 [1036] for glass containing
almimn, indium, yttriun and lanthanum

168

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
The neasuremt of the cross section by the lasing procedure for neodynitn
pentaphoaphate (“4203'51’205) gave a value of 2.2-10'20 m2.

' .42). mu.»

,2,-

 

Table 6. 13

'- Cowosition I .-.u"°e-’ _
' 1.: .mp0 ’
.. ﬂ." .

«We '

Lasing on glass with high neodyniu concentration can be obtained for snail
sizes of the active elelent. Thus. for plates nade of potassium neodynitn
glass Les-K, 500 nicrons thick with longitudinal pulping by the second
harnenic of a YAG laser, the threshold pulping energy was 700 nicrojoules
[229]. basing was realized also on lithium neodymium glass [225].

 
 

9'99.” “5"
each oak o

 

In order to obtain a lasing' effect with tube puping. we used an eleuent

10 In in dineter by 130 II node of pentaphospbate glass with the composition
dezo3(l-X)L8203-SP205 containing 82 by weight M203. For a pumping energy of
800 joules. an efficiency of 22 was achieved.

The neasurenent of the inverse population and excitation energy for glass
of this composition denonstrated that at least up to 81 by weight M20

the excitation energy increases as the square root of the neodyniu c cen-
tration. For ordinary multiconponent glass the excitation energy growth
stops with significantly less activator content [117].

As has already been stated, the concentration quenching of the neodymiu- in
the glass is accompanied by a strong drop in luainescent lifetime and quantum
yield of luminescence as the neodymium concentration increases. The data
presented in reference [117] for the neasuraaents for borophosphate glass
14341 and Les-(.2 demnstrated that beginning with some concentration Nd“,

a decrease in the excitation energy is noted. It we found that for nicro-
nonmiforn glass the critical concentration is less than for uniform. The

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A“‘\

 

Figure 6.25. Lifetine 1'. inversion density N, excitation energy
density ”0 and proportion of nonluninescing ions 1) as Emotions
of the M203 content.
Dotted line—LGS-loZ glass, solid lines~I.cS-41
Key:
1. r, nicroseoond
2. N. percent by weight
3. W0, joules/m3
lo. II. percent by weight

same effect occurs in silicate glass. The authors of [117] relates to the
fornation of close groupings of neodynim- ions with zero quantum yield of
luminescence (pairs. triplets, and so on). the amber of which increases
quickly with exceeding of a critical concentration (Figure 10.25). Fran the
obtained data it follow that the amber of such associates can reach (.01
of the total anount of neodyninn. however, in reference [366] it is proved
that in KISS-1621 glass at least-to aneodyniun concentration of 2.1 nolecu-
lar Z. preportionality is retained between the quantun yield of the
luinescence and the lunimscence lifetime.

Study of the influence of water delonstrated that its presence does not lead
to decrease in excitation energy, that is, each neodyniun ion retains the
capacity to lumesce. but the 1minescence density decreases as a result of
shortening of the lifetime [117]. An analogous result was obtained by the
authors of reference [648].

56.9. Free-Running Phosphate Glass Lasers

Good lasing characteristics of phosphate glass were noted in reference
[1.30]. As a result of the low lasing thresholds: of phosphate glass. a
quasicontinuous lasing node was obtained [76]. For this purpose, elements

3 In in disaster by 50 I: were used. the pulping tube was fed by a rectified
ac current without additional filtration. For a single halfperiod rectifica-
tion, the threshold puning power was 720 watts; for halfperiod, 1100 watts.
Another attewt to realize continwus lasing was made in [73]. However,
continuom lasing was obtained only on silicate glass, phosphate and fluo-
beryllate glass were destroyed as a result of thermal stresses before

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
attaining the lasing threshold. The experimental conditions were investigated
above. It was found that emission in the free lasing node was concentrated
near the axis of the active elenent, and the enitted power (0.5 watts) was
approximately 10 tines less than the calculated power. At the present time

continuous lasing is certainly obtained only on the so-called "selfocuses"
node of silicate glass [72].

When using phosphate glass in pulsed lasers, the possibility of creating an
extraordinarily narrow lasing spectrun without significant reduction in the
laser efficiency is attractive. The simplest diagram-of this laser is pre-
sented in Figure 10.26. The laser consists of a generator and amplifier,
both of then are made of 138-100 phosphate glass. In the generator the active
element is placed in a saniconcentric resonator. The output mirror is made
in the fora of a plane parallel plate, on which a dielectric coating is
applied. This plate simultaneously plays the role of a frequency selector
with reflection coefficient of 152. In order to increase the output energy,
a single power asplifier is used. By using this device, a smooth lasing
pulse is obtained with spectral width of the Ilission band of 0.05 cla'l.

Figure 10.26. Diagra- of an anplifier-laser with narrow emission
spectrum.

l--active elenent, 2—spherical mirror, 3—p1ane parallel plate

The use of the resonator pernitting realization of the traveling wave node
makes it possible to achieve further narrowing of the lasing spectrum [1049].
In the systen presented in Figure 6.27, a four-mirror ring cavity is used.
In order to obtain the traveling wave node, an additional return airror is
used. Three of the four mirrors placed at the corners of the rectangle are
blind mirrors, with beveled rear surface, the fourth is senitransparent. It
is used to output enission from the laser, and the return mirror is blind.
Between the seaitransparent and return mirrors there is a selector in the
form of a Fabry-Perot etalon. The other etalon- is placed directly in the
resonator and is used for emission frequency tuning. For this purpose its
surface is set an angle of 10-4 rad to each other. The laser uses two
active elements, one node of phosphate glass and the other of 613-1 glass.
Both elements are excited simultaneously.

In the absence of the return mirror the time expansion of the lasing is a
random series of peaks with spectral width on the order of 1 cn'l. 0n
includin the return nirror, the width of the pulse spectrum decreases to
0.08 ca“ . Placement of the selector between the return and senitransparent
mirrors brings order into the series of peaks in time and is accoapanied by
excitation of only one or two axial nodes. When the pumping energy exceeds
the threshold by 4 to 6! and with small inclination of the selector, a
single frequency lasing node is achieved with spectral width of 0.005 and;
regular enission pulsations are.obser‘ved here. The duration of individual

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI omcw. USE ONLY

peaks is 2 microseconds, the tile intervals between the. are 12 micro-
seconds.

 

Figure 6.27. Diagram of a traveling wave laser with narrow
emission spectrun:

1-active element. 2-ref1ector. 3—smitransparent nirror,
lo,$-Fabry-Perot etalons.

Frequency tuning is realized by shifting the nisaligned selector in a 1054-1070
n- range. It was noted that during tuning to the long wave region the width
of the lasing spectrun increases somewhat.

As was stated above, efforts to obtain continuous lasing on phosphate glass
were not crowned with success. Nevertheless, good results were obtained
when wing this glass in the frequency lasing node [58]. On active elaents
8 In in dinner by 100 - nade of 115-1 and nos-H glass. lasing was realized
with pulse repetition of 10 hertz for an average enisaion power to 10 watts.
For pming the ISP-GOO pulse tube wu used which together with the active
elenent was placed in a single nodule quartz illI-inator. Cooling was
realized by a liquid simultaneously serving as a filter for the ultraviolet
puwing aission. ‘rhe pulping power was 700 watts. In the nos-h glass with
attenuated dependence of the therlooptical constants on temperature. lasing
was observed in the telperature range from -60 to +80°C, the variation of the
lasing energy in the pulse on variation of temperature did not exceed 502.

Figure 10.28. Simlest laser with-dispersion resonator.
1--f1at mirror. 2—active element, 3—prisn, b—rotating mirror.

Introduction of dispersion elenents in the laser cavity (Figure $.28) offers
the possibility of obtaining snooth frequency tuning within the limits of the
neodymium luminescence band [15102, 650, 510]. Use of the Fabry-Perot etalon

for frequency tuning made it possible in reference [‘53] to realize stable
lasing in Les-40 phosphate glass on a wavelength of 1.3 nicron or simultan-
eously lasing on 1.06 and 1.3 micron. The possible tuning range inside the

172

FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
luminescence band was detemined by the dispersion characteristic of the
etalon and it was 10.5 III. Losing was not obtained on silicate glass under
the same condition. Moreover, the introduction of silicate and phosphate
glass simultaneously into the cavity leads to discontinuation of lasing at
1.3 microns. which indicates the appearance of large inactive losses in the
silicate glass under the effect of pumping.

In conclusion. it can be stated that the use of phosphate glass in free-
running lasers is extremely efficient. As a result of low lasing thresholds
phosphate glass greatly increases the laser efficiency. References [167,
431] contain reports on obtaining an efficiency of Is to 51 in elements

20 m in diameter by 260 an made of Les-I, Les-H glass. This is almost
twice that, for example, for GLS-l silicate glass. In reference [47), an
efficiency to 61 was achieved for elements 1.5 an in diameter by 600 am.

55.10. Use of Phosphate Glass to Obtain Short and Ultrashort Pulses

The narrowness of the lasing spectrun characteristic of phosphate glass can

in some cased be useful to iaprove the characteristics of lasers operating in
the self-synchronization modes.

Although silicate glass, as a result of the broad emission spectrum (50 to
100 cm‘l) theoretically permit us to obtain 10-13 second pulses with mode
synchronization. the artireflectim dyes used for realization of these condi-
tions have insufficiently short absorption recovery time (10'11 sec), which
leads to irregularity of the peak structure and difficulties in achieving
reproducible conditions. In order to improve the reproducibility. it is
necessary artificially to constrict the emission band of the laser using
dispersion elements placed in the cavity. The application of phosphate
glass with a narrow lasing spectrum must provide for simplification of the
volume of this laser and provide stable, well-reproducible lasing conditions.

In reference [653]. alkali niobium phosphate glass Les-$10 with an emission
spectrum width in the free running mode of no more than 6 curl was used for
this purpose. A rod nade of this glass 10 In in diameter by 130 in with ends
beveled at the Brewster angle was placed in a plane parallel resonator 90 cm
long. The resonator consisted of a blind mirror in direct contact with the
transmitting filter 2 In thick and a mirror with 50% transmission (Figure 5.29).
The mirror backings and the filter opening had wedge shape. An iris 2.5 III
in dimeter was used to limit the angle modes of the resonator. The initial
transmission of the transmitting filter was 652. when the pumping energy
exceeded the threshold by 5 to 101, the lasing occurred in the form of a
regular train of pulses 20 nanoseconds in duration with contrast of 2.5.

The width of the pulse spectrum was 1.3 to 1.7 cm'l. The total ener of the

pulse train was 6 to 9 nillijoules with a peak power of 109 watts/cm . These
conditions are highly reproducible for 30 to 40-fold pulping repetition. In
addition to regularity of the pulping structure, the lasing wavelength is
reproduced well, the average deviation from pulse to pulse does not exceed
0.5 cm‘l. Analogous results are also obtained for another phosphate glass—
LcS-loo [653]. " '

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWONLY a

a i .' ‘
Figure 6.29. Diagram of a laser with passive node synchronisation.

1- cell filter combined with a mirror with 100! reflection.
Z—active element, 3—iris. Mirror with 502 reflection.

As a result of the low thresholds and high efficiency, phosphate glass can be
used in a nuliur of devices to replace such expensive materials as yttrim
aluminum garnet (“6). Thus, when using a rotating prisn based on elements
8 m in disaster by 100 - as the nodulator, the periodic giant pulse lasing

node with a frequency of 10 hertz and energy per pulse of 0.5 joules was
obtained’ [58].

The elements were nade of 158-1 glass and they were subjected to special
processing in order to improve their strength. The experinental conditions
were analogous to those described above for the free lasing node. The pulping
clergy per pulse was 50 joules. The efficiency of this laser in the giant pulse
node exceeded 11. The presence of 188-1 glass by W“ with attenuated
dependence of the themoptical characteristics on tenperature nade it possible
to obtain stable lasing in the range fro. -60 to +80‘C with an enission
divergence of 20' with respect to the 0.9 level and energy variation per pulse
of no more than 502 in the entire tenperature range. The paraneters of such

a laser as a function of thernooptical characteristics of the glass are
investigated in mre detail in 55.2.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER 5. WWICAL PROPERTIES OF PHOSPHATE GLASS AND SEMI“ 0?
NW GLASS FOR LASERS 0P VARIWS TYPES

55.1. Thermooptical Characteristics of Phosphate Glass

For the creation of phosphate glass with given thermooptical properties. it is
necessary to know the thermooptical characteristics a, P and Q as a function
of the glass coqosition. The value of V which can be calculated by formula
(1.32) [656] is the sigzlest to neasure. but the interferometric methods of
direct meurenent of u with uniform heating of the glass element [36, 655.
657. 658] or when determining the difference in path between two points of the
cross section of a rectangular alnent having different temperature [32] are
more convenient and exact. In the latter case, it is necessary to use a rect-
angular (desirably. plate) element with unattached ends. in which a linear
tesperaturs gradimt does not create stresses [31. 32]. In the method dis-
cussed in [655. 657. 658]. the temperature of the elenent is recorded. then it
is varied by a defined amount. and the difference in optical path occurring in
this case is measured. This gives an average value of w for the tenporature
interval of the measurements. H increases linearly with temperature. The
teqerature coefficient war 1. (0.05-0.30 - 10" r1 [33. 34. 69. 459).

For a value of deT equal to 0.2 ' 10" 1' and a temperature gradient for
two measurements at 50 K used. for example, in [657]. the obtained average
value of I! will differ froe the values for the ends of the interval by :5 -
10"7 K". When using values of it presented by different authors. it is neces-
sary to consider the variation of H with teqerature. In [36. 660]. a eethod
is proposed for continuous recording of the teeperature dependence of the dif-
ference in optical path Ap('r) with slow uniforn heating of the smle. which
pernits construction of the curves w(1') for a broad temperature interval and
improvement of the accuracy of deternination of i.

As was demonstrated in [661]. and then in [36. 656. 660], the values of it and
“Id? for phosphate glass. as a rule. decrease with a decrease in the field
strength of the cation modifier. In Figure 5.1 the values of ‘7 are presented
for netephosphates of bivalent and trivalent metals [656] as a function of the
ion radius r of the cation. Figure 5.2 shows the tenperature dependence of 9
for glass with the composition (in molecular percent) of 90 Me(P03)2-10A1(P03)3
[36]. The behavior of the curves Mr) differs for the catiolsﬂg. Ca. Sr. he
with electron shells of the same type as for inert gases. and for ions of the
Zn-Cd group with l8-electron shell. nu. was noted for the first time in

[661]. and then it was found for the dependence of other thermooptical

175
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

properties on the atoaic characteristics of bivalent cations [456. #63. 464].
In fable 5.! for glass with the composition of 90 He(P03)z:10 A1003)” values
of U obtained by two nethods were cowared. The value of H; was measured di-
rectly during continuous recording of the temperature dependence of the length
of optical path of Ap(1') [34]. He calculated "2 by the values obtained in
[656] for pure netsphosphates of bivalent natals and aluninun by neasuring the
coefficient of thermal expansion n and dn/d‘l' and subsequent calculation of H
by formls (1.32). “mess values of h are presented in Table 5.2 [1056). The
values of B-the optical stress coefficient investigated below—are indicated
there. then perforning the calculation it was scanned that the contribution
to H depends linearly on the netsphosphate concentration. All of the values
are presented for 70’ c considering the values of “MT. In [34] H was seas-
ured on a wavelength of 632 m; in [656] it was measured on 508 on. With an
increase in wavelength the thereooptical constant H decreases [33. 96]. De-
pending on the dispersion of the index of refraction the values of H on A -
508 a. rust be (6-12) - 10" 3:" larger than for x - 632 ms (nu. 1.5).

5:-

17,5 (,0 1,5 I,’

Figure 5.1. Thereooptical constant 7' of vitreous netaphosphates of bivalent

and trivalent netals as a function of the ion radius of the cat-
ion [656].

 

Figure 5.2. Tenperature dependence of the thernooptical constant a for glass

with the composition (nolecular percent) 90 He(P03)2-10 A1003);
[31o].

Coaparison of [71 and €12 (Table 5.1) denonstrates that both gethods give re-
sults that agree satisfactorily considering the dispersion H and the total

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
neasureuent and calculation error (on the order of 5 - 10‘7 K'i); considering
the dispersion of H. the values of H; are son-what larger than ”2. except glass
gith Zn and Cd. At the sane tine. the values of the teapersture derivative of
U differ by 1.5 to 2 times. The values of dﬁ/dT defined by different inter-
feronetric nethods [36. 459]. are larger than the values obtained by calcula-
tion using fornula (1.32) [49. 556]. Therefore a quantitative cosparison of
dH/d'l' is now possible only for the identical method of neasurenent. The
course of the relation for dild'l‘ as a function of the para-stern of the nodi-
fier cations is identical for different neasurenent methods. and. nsnely.
dﬁ/dT decreases with a decrease in the cation field strength. Alkali phos-
phate glass has the least values of these derivatives: for phosphate glass

dﬁ/dT can be almost half that for barium glass having minimum value of dW/dT

the HePOs-BPm-Hgo (He - Na. K) are presented which were studied in [36, 167.
461. 662]. The addition~of 8203. 3P0. and M30 to the alkaline netsphosphates

increases the values of H and deT (Table 5.3). Potassiun glass has appreci-
ably snaller values of ‘3 than sodiun glass.

Table 5. l

 

Table 5. 2

 

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.3

Glaee Co no

 

Now let us coneider the contribution to ‘3 fro- two tern of forenla (1.32).

In Table 5.2 theae valuee ere preaented for netaphoaphatee of bivalent end
trivalent netele [656]. in Table 5.3 for glaee based on alkaline netephoephatee.
The contribution of e1-(n - 1) ie elwaye poeitive. it in (25-100) . 10" K".
and for like ione. it increaeea nonotonically with an increase in the atomic
nder of the cation. Thie ie connected both with en increaee in the coeffi-
cient of thermal expansion and with en increeee in the indu of refraction.
Thue, the eign and the value of ii are deter-ined primarily by the tenperett re
dependence of n. which varies within eignificant linite (the value of dn/dT
varies epproxinately from -150 . 10‘7 to +100 . 10" It"). It depende on the
ratio of the temperature coefficiente of therml maneion and polarieability.
Thie ie easy to denonetrate [667]. ueing the known Lorenz-Lorentz formle:

a__,

13-12:

v- R. (5.1)

 

where V ie the apecific value. I ie the epecific refraction of the nediue.
The poleriaability factor o1; - min/(lord). where 24 ie the molar we of the
material. a ie Avogedro'e number. Tron (5.1) after tranafornetione we obtain

uln (n’— i)(n’+2) ~ ~ (5.2)
ﬁ. = -—-‘—'—M (‘P — Y).
- 1 4y ~ 1 do I .11:
Here — ie the coefficient of volumetric expeneion - — J-1——- ie
y Var ' q a" .11' I: .IT

the total thermal coefficient of polerizebility (that ie. considering all
variatione of the polarizability with teupereture).

Let us conaider three poeeible ceeea of the reletione between 3 and §.

178
FOR OFFICIAL L. . ONLY
l. y is always larger than 0. The index of refraction decreases monotoni-
cally with tenperature. A! an illustration, in Figure 5.3 we have the tem-
perature dependence of n. y. 6 for vitreous 3203 [(067]. in which the bonds are
significantly less strong than. for example. in 8102. This behavior is char-
ecteristic for "loose" structures with relatively weak bonds. and it can be
expected for borate and phosphate glass containing large low-charge nodifier
cations.

2. §and3 are similar with respect to magnitude. This category includes the
majority of silicate optical glasses with rigid silicate frame. For a wide
tenperature range the curves of the thernal dependence of y and ¢ intersect at
three points where the function n(T) has peaks or ninina. At low tenperatures
the indent of refraction decreases slowly with temperature. Then at higher
temperatures. n increases. reaching a naxinum near the roasting temperature.
In the region of transfomtion 7 becomes larger than 0. and n decreases to
the following nininun and then it again increases. As an illustration we have
the behavior of n(T) for borosilicate crown glass (Figure 5.6).

II

("0'

I,~'.‘

     
  

«wan an M

JIM
Temp. °c ' ‘1 Tenp. °C

   

«1

Figure 5.3. Telperature dependence of the index of refraction (a). the coef-
ficient of volumetric expansion 7 and the total polerizability
factor. (b) for vitreous 330, [467].

   

3“”
Q we
was
to} 7
mam
2w
’0” i
0
a' an m we as: ma.
Jemp. °C a; Temp. C

Figure 5.6. Temperature dependence of the index of refraction (a). the coef-
ficient of volunetric expansion 1 and the total polarizability
factor 3 (b) for borosilicate glass [467].

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. y is always smaller than 3. This is characteristic only for quartz glass
with very samll m7. Here the defining factor is the thermal variation of po-
larizability. and n increases nonotonically with teaperature to the region of
transformation (about l.300° c for quartz glass).

These relations are useful to consider when analyzing the general picture of
the dependence of the index of refraction on temperature. For example. it can
be expected that the values of dn/dT will increase for the transition from
loose (with large volume calculated for one anion) phosphate glass containing
large cations and having predominantly chain structure. to denser phosphate
glass. the composition of which includes cations with large field strength
Gig“. Al”. and so on) and also ultraphosphate. borophosphate and silicophos-
phate glass having large binding of the anion motif and structure close to
frane. Among the silicate glass the least values of dn/dT must also have
glass with large content of the large cations (K. Cs. Ba. Sr).

Above. we did not investigate the physical mechanisms of variation of polar-
izability which. along with variation of density are responsible for the tem-
perature dependence of the index of refraction. These mechanisms were ana-
lysed in [465. 466]. and then in [663. 468]. The Drude formula for molecular
refraction or polarizability analogous to the Lorenz-Lorentz formla was used:

I“ _ I =- 4nﬁn",

where fl is the number of oscillators per unit volune. It was demonstrated
that it is possible to isolate three contributions to dn/dT which we shall de-
note by 9’, Q, a; they are related, respectively. to the variation in the num-
ber of oscillators per unit volume as a result of the theraal variation of the
density (9). with variation of the polarisability as a result of variation of
the density (Q) and with variation of the polarizability as a result of vari-
ation of the temperature (a):

3

, ~u —-|
l'”Fﬁ'
Q aﬁﬁw. +2c.)— 9, (5-3)

It

‘9?=:—r—(9+Q).

when using the Lorenz-Lorentz formula. the value of 9 can be sultiplied by
(n2 + 2)/3 [463]; the value of Q also varies correspondingly; 3 does not de-
pend on the initial expression for refraction.

The value of Q pernits estimation of the contribution of the photoelasticity
to the temperature variation of n. Unfortunately, for such an analysis it is
necessary to know the photoelastic constants of glass c. and C: which are
neasured only for optical glass of couple: composition [669] and for metaphos-
phates of bivalent metals [664. (077].

Using the parameters 9’, Q. 9. it is possible to estimate the temperature vari-
ation of the polarizability factor of the glass "(1') [386. 388. 389. 391]:

180
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Here no is the initial polarizability. $9 = i(?—;).- - g is the thermal co-

efficient of.polarizsbility for constant density p (differing from the total
coefficient 6 in (5.2)). 2-—Q/§ is the deformation-polarization coeffi-
cient determining the variation in the polarizability with variation of the
volune.

Table 5.4 gives the values of 9. Q, a, 2’, 2'7} and 6 according to Lorenz-
Lorentz for metaphosphates of bivalent netals [4643; the values according to
Drude are given in parentheses. Although the values of the coefficients cal-
culated from the various expressions for the refractions can differ signifi-
cantly. the general behavior of their variation on transition from one compo-
sition to another is retained. 9 and (9+Q) (the photoelastic effect) de-
crease in the series rig-Ba and Zn-Cd-Pb. The values of 9.6! and 9! are com-
parable to each other, which distinguishes the glass from crystal in which the
predominant contribution to the variation of the polarizability with tempera-
ture is made by the photoelastic effect (9'.'Q>92, 97>...) [46a]. mm
metaphosphate. which is similar with respect to the value of 1 to crystalline
Mr [663. 666] is an exception. Figure 5.5 shows the dependence of the vari-
ation 9. Q and .9 in netaphosphates of bivalent cations on the variation of
the coefficient of linear thermal expansion and the free cation refraction.

9 depends linearly on the coefficient of thermal expansion, Q and 9 depend
on the refraction. The proportionality coefficients for 9 and a differ in
the series Hg-Ba and Zn-Pb as a result of difference in degree of covalence of
the Heat-0 bond. “As a result of different sign of the slope angles of the
functions Q and a on the refraction, the sun (0+!) in the vitreous Me(P03)
varies little, and the dependence of dn/dT on the composition is determined in
the given case by variation of the nunher of oscillators per unit volume. that
is. the value of 9 [1066]. As our neasurenents demonstrate. the analogous
situation occurs for glass 0.9 Me(P03)2-0.l A1003); and for glass based on
alkaline netsphosphates. Thus. we obtain confirmation of the previously dis-
cussed arguments of the ratio of the values of y and 3 for friable phosphate
glass.

As is obvious from Tables 5.1-5.6 and Figures 5.l. 5.2. values of 9 close to
zero can be obtained on the basis of the compounds of Sr. Ba. Pb and ciao al-
kaline metals, which is understandable in the light of the previously dis-

cussed concepts. Therefore the influence of the oxides of these elements on
the thermooptical characteristics of glass was studied recently in the great-
est detail [670-476]. It was discovered that the contribution of the oxide

additives to the value of a depends on its value for the initial glass. The
addition of 3:0 to glass with positive values of ‘3 leads to a decrease in
them; with negative values, to an increase in then. Pbo has a similar influ-

ence [1070. 1071]. In all of the investigated phosphate glasses. Bao lowers W
[472]. Glass based on the alkaline netal oxides has the least value of w.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

usually to -50 1 10'7 K" [311]. although phosphate glass with a large content
of 11020 and C1120 can also have such smaller values [1173]. The deter-ination

of the contributions of individual conponents to 11 made it possible to create
a table for calculating its values in glass. predominantly based on phosphates

of bivalent metals. inaanuch as for such glass data were obtained for differ-
ent additives [678].

Table 5.11 .
lager». | c.0150. I two-11.0. | Boo-7.0. l 21100.0. I coo-m Ina-9.0.

 
     

9. 10" 11-) 4301—02) 4021—131) 4501—100) 41101—101) —151(—101)—zo1(—1az) —300(—230)

           

     

    
  

       
      
 

   

       
       
    

 

 

 

 
 

 

Q. 10-, 11" 73136). 135161) 130150) 2011101) 1.0120) 120151) 233112)
10.10-111-1 so :2 s1 -0 1:10 ' 100 58
g . . 0.0010311) 00210.44) 0.530330) 0.66(0.51) 04110.20) 0.111(011) 0.5111031)
31-- 1o-* 11-1 1171201) 181114) 021122) : 431—20) zooms) 1151221) 02110:)
2?. 10-1 11-1 125151) 131(131) 1001101) 21111212) 10511.11) 101(111) 2121120)
1». 10-1 11-1 511 1:1 —11 —71 as 02 —37
o. 10" 11-1 5.5 5.1 10 11.1 —0.1
W. 10-1 11-| m 31 01 u —1
MW 0.9 0.4 5.0

     

”0 1,.” K

.m e
"’_ ’9 a, . 6, Aou‘lmol

Figure 5.5. Dependence of the terns I. Q. '8. defining the variation of n with
tenperature on the coefficient of linear thermal expansion or (a)
and on the refraction of the free cation R (b) in netsphosphates
of bivalent netala [11611]. Calculation by the Lorenz-Lorentz for-
Iula. The circles—a. the crosses- a.

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The calculation of an additive property ac of the glass containing an cowo-
nents is made by the Dukina additiveness formla [679):

*2: 1(2)»-

I
where b. a; 3‘3/(29). Here 9. is the partial value of the calculated parameter
0 1 0

for components in glass; the coefficients So called the structural lass serve
for transition from the uses fractions so to the voluaetric fractions bo. In
Table 5.5 the partial values of the index of refraction no the average dis-
persion (np - nczo. the coefficient of theml expansion a, . the thermoptical
characteristics "0. Q0 and the optical stress coefficient so are presented for
28 oxides. The structural nasses of so of the oxides were determined by the
experimental values of the index of refraction. The table offers the possi-
bility of calculating the magnitudes of the coefficient of thermal expansion
or and H with the arithaetic mean error 2.5 ~ 10" R" and 3 ° 10” K“. re-
spectively. and nean square error of 5 o 10" K“ for both values with a con-
fidence interval of 0.85.

Table 5.5

    
  

Oxide Con-

     
  
     

o—1 (30)
0—28 (60)
0-21 (57)
0—5
0-20

0-; '.- m 3t:
Bob a £39)
(Ii-,5”: ems c
w“ s
10 0—10(28)

i 0—10 (‘2)
—23 0—” (Si)
.25 0—20 '

snﬁﬁﬁrss so

CaO
SrO

BIO
'/.n0

§§§

Key: a. (in glass without M) c. (in glass with sac and mm)
b. (in glass vith PbO) d. (in glass with [(20 and in meta-
phosphate)

183
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

Table 5. 5 (continued)

000 210 2.10 2000 as 111 1 as 0—20 (11)
P110 :10 2.23 1000 21s —30 —1 —10 0—10 (00)'
$90. 11 1.00 1500 .00 as 1 00 0-10

_ v.0, - m 1.00 1000 —'100 100 1 '10 0—1200)
up, 111‘ ' a ' '
no. 112 ' 1.00 1005 —10 100 . 1 10 04(5)
110.0. 110 ' '
0,0, 1:1 1.50 1.10 ~10 110 f 12 0—12
111.0. 102 1.05 100 -105 100 s 25 0—11 (10)
c..0, 100 1.15 1.100 40 315 0 so 0-10 (31)
n.0, 111 1.10 1000 -55 210 1 10 0—10 (10)
510, 00 ‘ 1.111 005 -10 1o 1 10 0—3
600, 101 no 1000 —100 530 1 30 0—10
1111.0. 121 2.05 0100 —105 310 0 10 0—10
511.0. 151 2,20 5500 100 11110 1 15 0—10
01,0, 211 2.12 . 0000 100 no 1 as 0—2052)

* The autumn in parentheaea indicate the uni” oxide concentration in the
binary system.

 

6
p. e-I/ 1301

Figure 5.6. Photoelaetic conetanta C; end C2 no a function of the refraction
of a free cation for vitreoue netaphoepheteo He(P0;)z [11611].

As a rule. the thermoptical characteriatic P varies aa a function of the
glean coupoaition in the cane vay a II. However. in connection with the great
couplexity of ita determination. the number of papera in which the dependence

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of P on the glass cospoaition is analysed. is very limited. P is calculated
by mechanical and photoelastic characteristics of glass and values of dn/dT
with respect to the formula (1.32). The photoelastic constants C: and C2 in
binary glass are measured only for metaphosphates of bivalent metals [400.
664. 477]. In the series Hg-Ca-Sr-Ba. the value of C; increases, and C2 de-
creases (Figure 5.6). The optical stress coefficient 3 - c, - C: also de-
creases. A decrease in B is noted in the series of metaphosphates of Zn-cd-Pb.
however. 01 and Oz vary nonmonotonically here. This nature of variation of
the photoelsstic properties and small number of measurements on glass of sim-
ple composition make calculation of P difficult. The method of its indepen-
dent determination proposed in [65] is highly complicated and requires samples
with high optical quality. Now the values of P are measured by the method
only for laser glass of comlex composition gTable 1.3). In [55] it was dem-
onstrated that P is connected linearly with w:

l’ - (-013 + 4.44%) - 104 Ii".

This relation was found for intervals of the values of the coefficient of
linear thermal expansion of glass (35-112) - 10‘7 K". photoelastic constants
:(0.9-6) . 10-7 cmzlkg. Young's modulus 4.100-s.2oo kg/—’ and values of p and
H (2-150) ~ 10" K". The authors of [55] consider that in this case the
value of P can be obtained with the mean square error not exceeding 6.5 -

10" K". Figure 5.7 shows the relation of P and H for glass {55].

If this expression is valid. the laws of variation of P and i with glass com-
position in the phosphate systems are analogous, that is. P must decrease to
large negative values for glass with large concentrations of large low-charge
cations Na. K. Rb, Cs. Ba. Pb and. just as a. increase as the field strength
of the cation modifier increases. This actually occurs. as the published data

 

ﬂ! ~ m
vufh"

Figure 5.7. Relation of thermooptical constants P and a for glass [55]. The
circles are the experimental values. the dots are values found by
the experimental values of optical. elastic. thermal and photo-
elastic parameters.

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for phosphate glass [65. 66. 69. 51. 52. 663] and our -=lculations of P with
respect to photoelastic. optical and mechanical characteristics for glass of
the type 0.9 He(P03)2-0.1 A1(P03)a and for glass based an alkaline metal
metaphosphates (see. for example. Table 5.3) show. Bere the statistical rela-
tion between the calculated values of P and the values of H determined experi-
mentally. indicated in [55]. is not always sustained. which can be seen from
the data presented in Tables 5.3 and 5.6. but both characteristics vary sym-
batically. In calculating P. the greatest error is connected with measure-
ments of the photoelastic constants C; and 02. where for ordinary methods the
total error reaches 15 to 20 percent. However. there are.entirely sufficient
data available on the correlation of the values of P and H so that when devel-
oping phosphate glass with given thermooptical parameters initially the easily
measured and calculated value of w is used. and then a more precise definition
is made of the composition after the more tedious measurements of P.

The value of Q characterizes the anisotropy occurring under the effect of
mechanical stresses in the active elements. From formula (1.32) it is obvious
that Q depends on the mechanical properties of the glass or. B and u and on
the optical stress coefficient 3 - C; - Cz. The laws of variation of B with
phosphate glass composition were studied in a number of papers [66. 656. 663.
666. 669-677]. As is obvious from Figure 5.6 and Table 5.2. the Ba and Pb
metaphosphates have the least values of B. and Zn and Y. the greatest. In the
first approximation Q and B are related by the linear expression [55]: Q -
3.75 B. A more detailed investigation demonstrated that for additives of cer-
tain oxides to glass of defined composition the contribution from uT and B to
the value of Q can predominate over the contribution to B. and the proportion-
ality between B and Q in the general case is not satisfied (Figure 5.8). For
example. additives of Nazo and K20 to the phosphate glasses lower 8. but they
increase Q as a result of a sharp increase in the coefficient of thermal ex-
pansion of glass. In [680]. the solar contributions to Q are defined. that
is. AQ/Am. where m is molecular percent of oxide. and the table is compiled
which offers the possibility of calculating the values of Q and B for phos-
phate glass. Just as in the case of w. the calculation was made by the
Demkina additiveness formula. the structural masses for calculating all of the
thermooptical parameters coincide. The partial values of 0° and 39 are pre-
sented in Table 5.5. They are minimal for heavy cations Cs. Tl, Ba. Pb where
the values of Q0 are negative. The values of Bo and Qo can have different
signs (Li. Rb. Ca. Sr. Table 5.5). The mean square deviation of the given
calculations of Qo from the experiment is 20.3 - 10" K". and B 2 0.1 - 10"7
cmzlkg. which almost corresponds to reproducibility of these parameters of the
glass in different foundings of glass of the same composition. Let us again
point out that the data in Table 5.5 are basically suitable for calculating
the properties of glass based on metaphosphates of bivalent metals. For sys-
tems consisting. for exa-ple. predominantly of alkaline phosphates with addi-
tives of 3P0. or 3:0; [101. 167. 662]. the values of the calculation coeffi-
cients will differ significantly from those presented in Table 5.5. For exam-
ple. the partial values of ﬁg determined by us for alkaline phosphate glass
for K20 amount to ~620 - 10’ 3“. for Nazo. 190 o 10" K". that is. less
than in Table 5.5. However. the majority of industrial Optical glasses on a
phosphate base contain high concentrations of bivalent oxides. and in this
case. using the data in Table 5.5. it is possible to create laser phosphate

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'5 -5 u "
MI

4—" -W"c-‘/ kg-uol-Z
Figure 5.8. Relation betven contributions to the values of n and Q per mole
percent of added oxide for phosphate glass [680]. The eleeent

sylbol corresponds to the oxide.

glass with values of Q close to zero. The primary couponent of such gleee ie
no [66. 680]. Sons characteristics of such glass were presented in Table 1.3.
Birefringence in elements node of such glass with smll Q is 3 to lo tines less
than in analogous elellente mde of industrial phosphate glass 61.8-22.

 

Figure 5.9. Relation between partial values of ﬁg end on for oxides in phos-
phate glass [680]. The symbol of tee element corresponds to the

oxide.

For a small value of the thernoopticel distortions in the active ole-eats made
of glass. closeness to zero of not only Q. but also P is needed. Glass uith

187
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

small a. as a rule. has small values of P. In Figure 5.9 partial values of

the thermooptical constants Ho and Qo are compared [680]. This diagram. to-
gether with Table 5.5. offers the possibility of purposeful selection of the
base of phosphate laser glass. Of course. when selecting. it is necessary to
consider a number of other characteristics of the glass: spectral luminescence
and lasing parameters. the technological properties. thermal conductivity.
chemical and mechanical strength. and so on. but the condition of smallness of
the thermooptical distortions is one of the most important. The primary compo-
nents of phosphate glass with small thermoopticsl characteristics are the
barium. lead. strontium. lithium. sodium. potassium. rubidium and cesium ox-
ides. The phosphate glass with a high content of these oxides has high in-
duced emission cross sections and small width of the luminescence and lasing
bands of Nd’+ (Chapter 6). which makes it possible to create neodymium-doped
laser glass with optimal combination of these properties for an entire series
of laser systems [67. 68. 58. S9. 101. 395].

The relations studied at the present time for the thermooptical properties of
phosphate glass as a function of glass composition are of a purely phenomeno-
logical nature. Unfortunately. even for simple binary crystals, the calcula-
tions. for example. of the photoelastic parameters determining the thermoopti-
cal characteristics of P and Q can be made only highly approximately (681.
682]. Efforts to explain the optical properties of crystal phosphates within
the framework of the zone model in the approximation of a single-frequency
oscillator [683] are known. which offers the possibility of prediction. for
example. of the dispersion dependence of the photoelastic characteristics
[681. 686]; work has been started in this area for certain types of glass
(see. for example. [686. 687]). The thermooptical characteristics of phos-
phate glass within the framework of the model of a single-frequency oscillator
have been investigated primarily by Kopylov [686]. Let us briefly remember
the basic concepts of the model used. The dispersion equation of Zelmeer is
most frequently the initial equation

II‘lm] - I DUN/(min 40’).

Here n is the index of refraction. s is the oscillator strength. 8 is the
number of oscillators per unit volume. u is the angular frequency. The dis-
persion of the optical properties of the material in the visible part of the
spectrum depends on the position and strength of the most high-energy vibra-
tions of the atoms in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. In the Zelmeer
model. the actual set of these vibrations is replaced by one "effective"
equivalent oscillator with strength a and frequency we. Hemple and Di Domenico
have successfully used the zone model [681. 683. 685. 686] and a modified

Zelmeer equation
um») - 1 l-‘llz"—(nm)',

to describe a series of optical properties of solid states. where P is the
strength of the interzone transitions. Bo is their energy. h - h/Zn. h is the
Planck constant.

188
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The high-energy transitions which basically determine £9 and F are related to
the oxygen atom concentrations in oxygen-containing compounds. In this case
the number of oscillators is identical with the number of oxygen atoms per
unit volume. In [481. 483-486] it was demonstrated that it is expedient to
use another value--the dispersion energy 3d - F/Eo--which for nonmagnetic non-
netsls determines the dispersion of the electron part of the dielectric con-
stant of the material. It turned out that for the majority of crystals and
glass [481. 483-486], Ed is related simply to the structural characteristics
of the material. namely to the coordination number he of the cation having the
greatest bond strength with the anion, the anion valence Z, and the number he
of valence electrons on the anion: Ed I suczase. Here 8 is a constant which
depends on the type of bond in the material and is equal to (0.26 t 0.04) eV
for ionic materials (halides and oxygen-containing compounds) and (0.39 +
0.04) eV for covalent materials. Measuring the dispersion of the index of re-
fraction. it is possible to find P and Bo and then calculate Ed and B. For
phosphate glass based on univalent and bivalent cations the value of 8 turned
out to be (0.27 i 0.02) eV, which corresponds predominantly to the ionic bond
in the Hemple-Di Domenico model.

The thermooptical and opticoelastic parameters of materials can be obtained
[481. 484]. differentiating the Zelmeer equation with respect to temperature
and pressure. He shall present the corresponding formulas in the form used in
[484]:

"(I)” ”-111 11".“ 1—39)
03(A)— n' he ’ '

\-

 

p

(5.4)

 

I’I‘
n(A);7 , ( 1:)1
———ﬁ=—?1+Wi— .
(n' (M - 1) . [‘4 ?

Here D, is the potential of the deformation optical anisotropy characterizing
the variation of the energy of the interzgnsl transitions for the uniaxial
stress n. D; - Aﬁgln; the value of z . AE°IAT characterizes the variation of
the energy of the interzonal transitions with temperature. 3 is the optical
stress coefficient. The values of k“ and kT indicate variation of the oscil-
AF MT AH u:
later strength on variation of its energy: k“'roo(-p:°) [(Tﬂ . The values
of D3. 2. k". kT are presented in Table 5.6 for glass with the composition
0.9 He(P03)2-0.l A1(P03)3 [484]. Values of B and dn/dT are presented there.
1he temperature is indicated for which k7. dn/dT and s were calculated. For
these types of glass D, < 0. AF > 0. that is, the oscillator strength in-
creases. and its frequency decreases under the effect of uniaxial stress. The
values of Da and AP vary monotonically with B. which is connected with almost
identical parameter k" varying from -0.89 to -0.96 for these types of glass.
For glass based on the metaphosphates of alkaline metals (Table 5.3), the val-
ues of k" are small, that is. the oscillator strength varies little, and its
energy varies approximately identically for all of the investigated alkaline
glass. As a result. the values of B vary little--approximately from 1.5 -
10” to 2 - 10'7 cmzlkg.

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6

D o
0
Basic 10"eV-c~3-
Cation .kg‘“

 

 

 

Glass No

  
 
 

gauge“:—
.-
1‘

Basic
Glass No Cation

Mg
Ca
Sr

lie
Zn
Cal
l'h

QOU¥3I6—

The sign of the parameter 2 for the majority of types of glass (except glass
with Zn) does not coincide with the sign of the derivative dn/dr; their values
vary syabetically. There the proportionality isviolatedas a result of the
variable value of kt which varies by sore than twofold in the netsphosphate
glass series. When a > 0. the temperature increase leads to an increase in
energy of the equivalent oscillator 39. n decreases with temperature; for

z < 0 the picture is the reverse.

Although the model of the single-frequency oscillator is also phenomenological.
the parameters in it have an obvious physical meaning. and the formulas ob-
tained with its help describe not only the variation of the optical properties
with temperature and pressure well. but also the dispersion of these proper—
ties (formulas (5.6)). This approach supplements the one used earlier in the
Ramachandran model [665, 466], and it also permits standardization of the de-
scription of thernooptical properties of crystals and glass.

55.2. Phosphate Glass for Pulse-Periodic Lasers

Pulse-periodic lasers based on glass, primarily activated by Nd" ions. are
finding broad application in various areas of technology. The parameters of
these lasers vary within broad limits: the lasing energy varies froa hun-
dredths of a joule to tens of joules. the periodicity of the effect varies
fron fractions of a hertz to approximately 100 hertz. the emission power in
the Q-switching mode varies froa hundreds of kilowatts to hundreds of nega-
watts. The survey information about industrial periodic glass lasers can be
found in [68. 119. 688]. and information about the laser glass for them, in
[47. 48. 119. 489, 490]. As a result of the wide range of variation of the
spectral-luminescent and thermooptical properties of phosphate glass. they
offer the possibility of detailed investigation of various lasing modes and

190
FOI*OFFKJA1.USBIMVLY
establishment of the physical principles of the optimal selection of the glass
for application in various pulse-periodic laser systems.

In the given section, using the general concepts discussed in 551.1, 1.4 and
LS. let us specify the reguirements for the active elements of pulse-periodic
lasers using glass with Nd 4'. Inasmuch usually an effort is made to increase
the average power of such lasers with given size of the active elements, the
lasers operate in the mode with large heat release and. correspondingly. with
high temperature gradient in the active element. which leads to powerful ther-
moopticsl distortions. We shall discuss these distortions in more detail on
the basis of the results presented in 51.4. Let us consider the dependence of
the energy characteristics of the lasers on the properties of the material of
the active elements, and let us compare the parameters of the pulse-periodic
lasers based on phosphate and silicate glass. Here we shall not consider the
technical peculiarities of the structural design of such lasers. for we are
interested primarily in the requirements on the material.

In 51.5 it was demonstrated that in order to improve the thermal conditions in
pulse-periodic lasers it is expedient to use long and thin active elements
made of glass having high thermal conductivity Ah. Increasing the length of
the active elements also leads to an increase in the gain and a decrease in
the threshold pumping energy [691, 492]. The thermal conductivity of laser
glass is approximately 0.6-2 watts/(meter-K) [47, 48. 090. 493. 494]. Among
the silicate glass, lithiumcslciumsilicate ED-Z glass has the greatest thermal
conductivity (about 1.2 watts/(meter—K)). The data on the thermal conductiv-
ity of phosphate glass are limited. Glass similar in composition to aluminum
metaphosphate (Figure 5.10) has the largest values of Ah (about 1.2 watts/(me-
ter-K)). and potassium glass [111. 596. 695] has the least values (=0.3
watts/(meter-K)). Figure 5.11 shows the thermal conductivity of vitreous
netaphosphates as a function of the ion potential Ze/R of the cation modifier
[495]. The thermal conductivity increases with an increase in the ion poten-
tial of the cation. However, as was demonstrated in the preceding item, the
values of the thermooptical characteristics of P and W increase simultane-
ously. and the luminescence and lasing bands are broadened. The induced emis-
sion cross section of Nd3+ decreases (Chapter 4), and consequently the thresh-
old pumping energy increases. Therefore when selecting the glass composition
for active elements it is necessary to consider immediately the set of proper-
ties of the glass and the solution depsnds on the requirements on the output
parameters. overall dimensions and pumping energy of the laser. In particu-
lar, the requirement of low energy threshold of lasing and high efficiency of
the laser is usually the most important. For small threshold energy of pump-
ing rthresholdv the efficiency increases with the same values of the pumping
energy IVpump in the pulse as a result of growth of the ratio

rpump/ rthreshold'

The value of "threghold decreases with an increase in the induced emission
cross section and with an increase in the lid3+ ion concentration; the laser
cificiency also increases simultaneously. In Figure 5.12. we have the values

of Vthreshold (normalized for rchfeghold at Iago, - 2 percent by weight)
and the output energy 1'13“ (normalized for 713“ at ”34.1.03 - 6 percent by
weight) as a functiot. of the M203 concentration in silicate glass [1096] for

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE GNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cylindrical active clenents 5 - in dimeter by 80 1-. The analogous picture
occurs also for phosphate glass. With a diameter of the active elensnts of

6 to 8 u. the optimal concentration of the Nd” ions is (3-6) . 10" ca";
for a disaster of 3 to S m it is (5-8) ~ 102° cm”. In [1:97]. for example.
lasing on a frequency to 100 hertz was obtained using Li-IId-Le-phosphate glass
with a concentration of Nd“ 5.8 - 10" on". Here a lasing power of 6.5
watts was obtained on an active elensnt 5 III in diameter by 50 III with a pump-
ing power of l kilowatt and pulse repetition frequency of X0 hertz. In this
case the energy efficiency is low inasmuch as the dimensions of the active
element. the illuminator and pumping tube do not match. For a laser with ac-
tive element made of silicate glass 8 n in disaster by 80 I- at a concentra-
tion of N20; of 6 percent by weight. an average free running power of 7 to 8
watts is obtained at a frequency of 7 hertz. a pulping power of 620 watts and
efficiency of 1.8 percent and 7.5 watts at a frequency of 37 hertz and effi-
cisncy of 2.5 percent [492]. However. silicate glass providing such charac-

teristics is not "athsrnal." and the divergence of the eaission reaches ao-so'.

 

0 a: m m‘
x. nole fraction

Figure 5.10. Thermal conductivity Ah so a function of x for phosphate glass
with the composition M x (l - x)PzOs (where x is the mole
fraction of the metal oxide) [695]. Me: l--A1. 2—143. 3—Ca.
(0-3.. 5"!!19 64s

A». Ill/(~10 -;

h
u.

 

no 2 4. : ate/n

Figure 5.11. Thermal conductivity A}. of vitreous metephosphetes as a function
of the ion potential of the cation Ze/R [495].

The presence of a positive theml lens in the active element of pulse-
periodic lasers with noderate pumping powers improves the energy

192
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
characteristics of the laser. In a resonator of length l with lens introduced
inside it with a focal length f , the diffraction losses are proportional to

(I - l/2f) [692]. For small pulping powers f is large and the losses are sig-
nificant. With a decrease in f with an increase in pumping power for glass
with P > Q. the diffraction losses decrease. rthreghold decreases. and the
efficiency increases. For example. for the above-mentioned active elements

8 mm in diameter by 80 man made of silicate glass with M203 content of 6 per-
cent by weight ran-“1.014 decreases from 25 joules per pulse for the single
pulse mode to 9-10 joules approximtely every 8 seconds after the beginning of
operation in the pulse-periodic node with a frequency of 10 hertz (the thermal
relaxation time of the active element in this case is less than 15 seconds).
Therefore if the requirements on the radiation divergence are not very signifi-
cant. it is preferable to use such glass.

I 3
II I
2‘
a .
3:
ll,‘
__I——L
I) 4'.” 4 i'
st'up, . “'9' t

Figure 5.12. Threshold lasing energy (1) and lasing output power (2) as a
function of the M203 concentration in silicate glass for an ac-
tive element 5 II in diameter by 80 III [696] .

Laser phosphate glass with large values of o and optimal Ndzog concentration
permit us to obtain low thresholds and high lasing efficiency. In Figures
5.13. 5.11.. relations are presented for the lasing energy for single and re-
peated pulses in the free lasing node and for Q-switching by a rotating prism
06.000 rpm) [81]. (The size of the active elements is 6.3 an in diameter by
76 m. the glass is Q-88* (strengthened version). 4.3 percent by weight Nd203.
resonator length 20 cm for free lasing and 30 cm for giant pulse mode. silvered
illuminator. water cooling.)

In the free running node with single pulses and stall repetition frequency
(small average pumping power) the output energy of lasing. as shown by Figure
5.13. a and b. depends linearly on the pumping energy. The efficiency calcu-
lated by the slope of the curve is 4.5 percent for single pulses, 3 percent
for a frequency of l hertz; the energy efficiency is equal to 3.5 and 2 per-
cent. respectively. The lasing threshold for the periodic node in the given
case is almost half that for the single pulses. With Q-switching in the sin-
gle pulse mode. the efficiency is 1.63 percent (nirror with 65-percent reflec-
tion. pumping energy 15.8 joules. emission energy 0.22 joules. Figure 5.1342).
0438* glass is not "athernal." the magnitude of H which we calculated accord-
ing to the data of [493] is approximately 50 - 10" K" for it. Therefore
with an increase in the average pumping power. the divergence of the emission

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-l ONLY

0 increases. the output power decreases (vhen the diffraction losses become
less than the losses to inactive absorption. and the effects of birefringence
hecone important [50. 698]). for the Q-switching node. the lasing pulse dura-
tion t1... increases. The lasing energy drop per pulse is also observed for
the above-nentioned active elenents made of "athernsl" Li-Nd-La-phosphats
glass. where the average punping power exceeds 0.3 kilowatt for the active
elenents and illuninators used in [697. 699] (Figure 5.15).

was
2:9” "‘0,"
_. '2 ar :5 .
a

 

Figure 5.13. Losing energy as a function of the punping energy for an active
element 6.3 III in disaster by 76 III nade of 048* glass [Bl].
a) Single pulse node; h) frequency 1 hertz. free lasing node;
c) single pulse node. Q-svitching. reflection coefficient of the
output nlrror 75 percent (1) and 65 percent (2).

2 l 0 unﬁt

Figure 5.14. Lssing energy as a function of the pulse repetition frequency
for an active elsnent 6.3 n in disaster by 76 - nsde of (3-88"
glass at s punping power of 11 joules per pulse in the free les-
ing node (I) and in the Q-switching node (2) [81].

The vslues of t1“, and e for active elensnte nsde of Q-88* glass with a pup-
ing power of 11 joules per pulse and an increase in the pulse repetition fre-
quency are as follows. respectively [811:25 nanoseconds and 8' (single
pulses). 30 nanoseconds and 11' (l hertz). 65 'unoseconde and 15' (5 hertz).
55 nanoseconds end 18' (10 hertz). 70 nanoseconds end 21' (15 hertz). The

194
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lasing energy per pulse at v - 15 hertz is about 0.07 joule (Figure 5.11.).
Thus. with an increase in the average pumping power as a result of growth of
the pulse repetition frequency the lasing power in thegiantpulse mode in-
creases froa 0.07 to 1.05 watts. the divergence increases by twofold. and the
pulse duration by almost 2.5 tines. The radiation energy flux density in each
pulse decreases correspondingly by several times. The maximm efficiency for
a laser with active element of the indicated size made of Q-88* glass with Q-
awitching is achieved for a frequency of 5 hertz, and it amounts to about 0.9
percent. The lasing energy in one pulse in the free lasing node also passes
through a peak at 5 hertz. the efficiency reaches 2.2 percent. the output
power is 1.2 watts. For 15 hertz the free running power is about 2.9 watts at
an efficiency of about 1.6 percent. Let us note that it is not the absolute
values of the efficiency that depend on the optical quality and the machining
of the active elements. the values of the inactive power in the glass and in
the resonator or the pulping conditions and other factors that are signifi-
cant. but the variation of the efficiency, energy and divergence of the anis-
sion with an increase in the average pumping power and lasing power (51.5).

  

0 ' _L ._L_

a: 10' Map, kw

Figure 5.15. Output laser power (per pulse of emission) as a function of the
average pumping power ep [697]. Normalization by the lasing
power to in the single pu se mode.

When using "athermal" phosphate glass with low values of P 1 11/2 (for a cylin-
drical active element) in pulse-periodic lasers. the divergence of the emission
decreases. and an increase in the average lasing power. especially in the
giant pulsemode becomes possible. For "athermal" glass. some data were pre-
sented in 51.6, and shown in Figures 1.3-1.8. Let us consider in more detail
the optical strength of the thermal lenses and lasing parameters for such
glass under the conditions of a large temperature gradient between the axis of
the active element and its edge [60]. Here the initial expression is expres-
sion (1.101). The thermal lens formed for large tenperature gradients 0.1“ is
nonidaal. in contrast to the lenses with small gradients ((1.37). (1.38)).
Actually, from expression (1.41) and the formula for the focal power

!-- W (5.5)

I '17“

where Ap is the difference in optical paths between the axis and the edge of
the lens, it follows that the thersal lens in an active element with focal
power of 1/f can be represented as the sun of two lenses with focal powers of
III; and l/fz. where

195
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

— 5: '1 1‘ P ﬂ' 1' 5.6
I} -A _i” ( .;h :5 | (I )' ( )
1' . .. I. . .

,- --.:(AII‘F:0(J-— {1. (507)

The lens defined by expression (5.6) is a spherical lens. its sign and focal
power depend on the thermooptical characteristics of the glass. the tempera-
ture gradient in the active element and emission polarization. and they do not
vary with respect to cross section of the active elements. The lens defined
by (5.7) is aspherical. always positive. its power does not depend on polar-
ization and varies with variation of 5; therefore the conensetion of the dis-
tortions (closeness to zero of the focal power of the total thermal lens) is
possible only for negative spherical lenses (5.6) and only in a sufficiently
narrow ring tone with respect to the cross section of the active element. The
temperatures ‘1'1 and '1': for which the focal power of the total thermal lens

vanishes at the edge and on the axis of the active elements. are equal respec-
tively [60] to

Tm." "' " AT " (For :I: 0.!2n'0.

Tm.“ ‘- ‘- 2A7 “ (P. :i: 00/30/0. (5'8)
The resonator with negative lens introduced into it is unstable. and therefore
it is expedient that the total thermal lens be positive with respect to the
entire cross section of the active element. at least for r-polariastion. Then
T: defines the minimum temperature. for which the given glass can operate ef-
ficiently for the given value of AT determined by the pumping power. As fol-
lowe from formula (5.8). '1‘: is in the room temperature range only for (Po 2
00/2) < 0. Expression (5.8) differs from the one used earlier in [52] (for-
mula (1.44)) by considering the temperature gradient in the active element.
which turns out to be highly significant for high average lasing power. when
it can exceed 80 to 100 K [57-59].

As is obvious from formulas (5.5). (5.6). the focal power of a thermal lens in
the active element depends on the taperature. Figure 5.16 shows the tempera-
ture dependence of the focal power of the thersel lens formed near the axis of
a cylindrical active element for "athermal" phosphate glass 01.8-22. LGS-I and
LGS-M (r- and o-polarieations) [60]; in Figure 5.17 we see the average free-
running output power as a function of the pulse repetition frequency for a
pumping energy per pulse of 100 joules.

The temperature gradients between the edge and the axis of the active elements
are about 40 and 80 K for 108-! and 1.6841 glass with a pumping power of 250
and 500 watts. respectively. The measurement conditions were discussed in
554.9 and 4.10. the surface temperature of the active elements was varied by
means of the cooling liquid. With an increase in the pumping power 71“;
increases linearly. In the free lasing mode the lasing power reached 10 watts
with a puning power of 700 watts. During Q-svitching of the resonator using
an opticomechenicel shutter (rotation rate 21.500 to 43,000 rpm). the lasing
energy on the active elements made of Les-I glass obtained under optimal con-
ditions was 0.6 jouls with a pumping power of 40 joules and pulse repetition
frequency of 10 hertz. The magnitude of the angular divergence with respect

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the 0.0 level of total power ie 22' [$9]. The "ethereal" gleea thua an-
aurea higher radiation brightneea than glaae with large thernoopticel con-
etante.

 

Figure 5.16. ‘renperature dependence of the focal power of thernal laneee for
a temperature gradient of 30' c in active elanenta 8 u in di-
aneter and 200 a long on a wavelength of the eounding pulae of
0.63 aicron. a) r-polariaation; b) Molariaation. (r/R) - 0.5
(dotted linea). (r/R) - 0.82 (aolid linea’). ‘l'he gleea Les-I
(I). (18-22 (2). L084! (3) [60].

The variation of the laaing energy with taeperature dependa on the tenperature
behavior of the focal power of the them]. lane that ia forned. Since P de-
creaeea with tenperature. the thernal lane with low focal power for "ethereal"
gleea at too. teqerature can bacona negative at low tanpereturea. eapecially
for hpolariaation (Pigure 5.16). here the nagnitude of the temperature da-
rivative of O - dP/d‘r ia eignificent: the anallar it ia. the more alowly the
focal power of the tharnal lane variea. For LGS-M gleea (0 - 0.09 ~ 10" K")
the laeieg power at negative teneraturea decreaeee (by conparieon with the
lacing power at rooa tenperature) appreciably nora alowly than for 61.3-22
gleea (0 - 0.14 . 10" K") (Figure 5.18). Thie agraea with the tenperature
behavior of the focal power of channel leneea in active elenante (Figure 5.16).
For negative lenaee part of the heane leave the active elenent. the Q-factor
of the raconetor beconee worae. the reaonator beconee unstable. the lasing ef-
ficiency decreaaee. and with high power of the negative lane the leeing atopa.
Accordingly. "ether-e1" gleea. ea haa already been noted in 51.6. cannot oper-
ate efficiently in the pulee-periodic node at t-peraturea appreciably below
optinal [52]. for which the conbinatione of tharnooptical cheracteriatice de-
fining the optical difference in path for the Holeriaation vanieh.

The above-preaanted armnanta pertain to a fixed taaperature gradient in the
active ale-ante. However. the focal power of the negative lena aa a function
of the tanpereture gradient in the active alenant ia not nonotonic under cer-
tain conditiona. Thie ia eaaily eatabliehed fron fornula (1.1.1) for a cylin-
drical active ale-ant. Differentiating it with raapact to AT and equating the
obtained derivative to rare. let ue define the value of the tenperature gradi-
ent are: for two polariutione of light:

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, I' .z 0.12 + or
A7¢r ’d — W, (5.9)

on exceeding of which instead of a further increase in focal power of the nega-
tive lens with an increase in or. it begins to decrease, and then the lens be-
comes positive. Thus. the value of are, corresponds to the minimum as a func-
tion of the focal power induced in the active elensnt of the theraal lens as a
function of the tapersture gradient. 11ers expression (5.9) is leaningful

only when the nueeretor is negative (or equal to zero), for the values of 6

and AT“ are positive. and £ ‘ 1 (91.4).

3
:6
3
h
2
L__—.J
l I d I I
v. ll!

Figure 5.17. Average output power of free lasing as a function of pulse repa-
tition frequency for e pusping power per pulse of 100 joules for
LOB-I glue with active element 8 - in disaster by 100 u [59].

 

'M'M'U 0 0”.”
KT

Figure 5.18. Leaing power as a function of the coolant temperature [60].
Pulse repetition frequency 10 hertz. active eleesnt 8 I in
disaster by 100 In; Les-n glass (1). ans-22 glass (22). The
ratio run/11..., roo- is plotted on the y-axie.

For the given glass the teeperature gradient in the active elements is propor-
tional to the pulping energy power. For maple. for cylindrical active ele-
aents 8 II in disaster by 10 - made of mad-3 glass in a highly efficient
illuniutor the tawereture gradient increases by 16' c with an increase in
pulping pover by 100 watts [58. 59]. The focal power of the theresl lane

changes correspondingly.

198
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us consider an exalple of phosphate glass Lcs-I and LGs-H. the thermopti-
cal paraneters of which were presented in Table 1.3. Table 5.7 shows the val-
ues of the combinations of thermooptical characteristics entering into formula
(5.9) and the values of Are, for the tenperatures of the side surface of the
active element of 20 and ~60° c. and Figure 5.19 shows the dependence on AT
of the focal power of the total thermal lens in the active elements ends of
this glass for two polarizations and two values of t; at '1' - 0' c. As we

shall see. the smaller the initial values of the suns (Po 2 (10/2 + 61'). the
greater the teeperature gradient in the active eleaent needed for variation of
the course of the dependence of the focal power of the thermal lens on A1.
Here the active elenent operates stably under two conditions-«at AT I 0 (rare
pulse conditions) and at AT exceeding Al'o corresponding to the intersection
point with the x-exis of the curve l/f(A'l‘). for r-polarization and € - 0
(curve 1 in Figure 5.19). In the region between at - 0 and AT - Ah. where
the negative lens under steady-state conditions occupies the entire cross sec-
tion of the active element. the lasing power decreases. and the divergence in-
creases [56]. In real active elements under transition conditions and on de-
viations fron parabolic dependence of the temperature on the radius of the ac-
tive element (the data in Table 5.7 and in Figure 5.19 are calculated under
the assunption of parabolic dependence). the pattern of the variation of the
themoptical distortions with temperature gradient differs somewhat fron
idealized. but the general diagran of the variations is maintained. These
arguments must be considered when selecting glass for pulse-periodic lasers
with high average power. where phosphate glass turns out to be optimal. Under
such conditions the active elements made of glass with e value of (Po 4-

Qo/Z + 01') which for the given tsnperature gradient ensures a snell positive
lens for r-polarieation near the axis of the active eleasnte. give the least

angular divergence of the emission. and in the Q-switching node. the op-
ticonechanical shutters ensure the shortest duration and MB“ stability of the
lasing pulse.

Table 5. 7
I I {$5-1 HES-ﬂ

r-ao'c [there 1 .20 c lr- -oo ‘c

 

       
 
    

("VFW/2+0“. 90" K"
("r-(UH-OT) '0', “4

Note: Negative values of “or indicate that the thermal lens is always posi-
tive.

An important factor liaiting the output power of such lasers is the limiting
temperature gradient sustained by the active element without rupture.

199
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore the nethods of improving the thereel strength investigated in 51.5
and used recently for "ethereal” laser phosphate glass [58. 59. 70] have in-
portant practical significance. For certain types of technological lasers.
the choice of phosphate glass with ansll values of the coefficient of therlal
expansion (less than 100 ~ 10" I") and increased thernal conductivity makes
it possible to increase the aerial- tsnperature gradient in the active elenent
[697. 1099] and it ensures an increase in the output lasing power (with einul-
teneous increase in radiation divergence).

   

4)

Figure 5.19. Vocal power of a thermal lens as a function of the temperature
gradient at between the edge and the axis of the active element
nade of 1468-1 glass (a) and 1.634! glass (b) for 'r - 0‘ c.
l. 3--r-polerieation; 2. 6-O-polar1utlon; I. 2-£ - 0; 3. 10-
6 - 1.

Tables 5.8 and 5.9 show the paraneters of pulse-periodic lasers using silicate
and phosphate glass. The table data are not exhaustive and serve only to in-
dicate the possibilities of active elenents made of glass and approximate con-
perison of glass of various types. for the laser paranetere depend on an en-
tire series of factors. At the sane tine. free the tables it is obvious that
phosphate glass ensures higher lasing power and efficiency and less angular
divergence of the enission for active elements of sinilar size. According to
the estimates of [500]. the use of active elements eade of phosphate glass in pro-
dUCtion lasers peruitmachievensnt of lasing efficiency which is 1.5 tines
greater than for silicate glass. 1.5 tines less radiation divergence and twice
the pulse repetition frequency. In reality. for "ethereal" phosphate glass
the gain in .10!” and divergence is even note. here the lasing efficiency
for "athernl" glass (type Les-1. LGS-Ii. abs-22, and so on) renaina high for

high average punping power.

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5.8

    
  
 

 

   
 

 
      
 
 
   
  
  

' . .- Woo-ea -
Nag-us ”a . E25 1(8 urroas- llcvoeuu
1m clot-as $13.13. 3%; z Ito-63'). uuuus

 

"s—B-ub adhwm warm

 

     
     

‘ 0.“)! 0.025
I-ywuwu I (15) (17) m’ _
25 1N 0.15 0.15 ISO
' ' n .5; *°° 3-3, 3-2 ‘1‘”, :3
. . - men. 19 . . so . .
(12)(n1u:anue Hosanna» a (11) “$1: 28
will ( 6) , 1 490 1,0 0.2 — I502
lib-25 0 1111311119.. lg 62(3) 2.: (1):; :3 “1‘9
(12) (Junta-toe MM: 15) 1) 3 ‘00 2:5 2'5 _
s e N 125 0.5 0.‘
s "enemy‘s- : 10 100 0.1 0.1 “92)
(16) '
: s s 3 125 1.0 0.8
mc (13) ' ' “1, a 1'3 3'25 12 I51
C RI ' m .
ﬁnc- £2 (1 )mim “5 : a 990 6.3 0.65 — lacs
JII‘O?‘ e s 2 “0 1.0 1.1 -— -
APO-2‘ Iloeounnvuo- is 2 “(1 1.0 0.7 — l I504)

nul (16)

\

*) The divergences are presented in the vertical end horizontal planes for
a plate elenent.

Key: (1) Type of glass
(2) Losing node
(3) Type of active eleesnt
(6) Size of active eleeent. an
(5) Pulse repetition frequency. hertz
(6) Pumping energy per pulse. joules
(7) lasing energy. joules
(8) Efficiency. 2
(9) Angular divergence*, minutes
(10) References
(11) Plate
(12) Silicate
(l3) XGSS-7
(1‘0) 138-. s a
(15) Free
(16) Giant pulse
(17) Cylindrical
(18) Vertical 7. horizontal 28

201
ROI OFFICIAI.IENI(HVLY
ma WHCIAI. USE. ONLY

Table 5.9

 
 
  

     
     
      
     

 

 

 

Vat-ma morn-1 nu g .13 ”a...“
In no Penn Peale: A8. MW "”‘NW‘ :- " I [men-al- "rum-nu
1::an "mun :7? ”F ':,’3:'_:. 5%; : mm 0). llml
fa 1M 0 " = z (102

   

       
 

      
 

    

  

   
   
   
  

(11)l‘ 11022 Mouomm yuc- H. mm". (X2006 2 I506]
uni (14) - .
I‘ﬂC-Z‘.’ e 6 >126)! “5 5 . 0.15
l‘JICv": Cloﬁombidzls) g 10X I” 5 150 i .5 1.0 -- I76]
mm : l7 mum to 7 v 1.0 M —
(12) I - ( ) L Yams]
.‘II‘OII Manommyuc-
nnl (16)
er" Clﬂﬂ?Tg . I
. e ' ' 0,18
0 a ' ? 13:]
0-88' Mono-nun) euc- 0.09
8H5 (16)
0-89 (13). I 06.8)(76 15 II 0.065 0.6 :I
1.: Nd-VO Cuoﬁmurfs 95x50 10 am 0.53 0,65 - [497]
”Nd-3'0 D ) ' 25X” 1 32 0.65 l.’:(l - } ‘
Lisa-ya» Mommunym- zsxso 1 a: 0.15 0.41 — "’9'
uni (14)

 

*) The proportion of the lasing energy in the given solid angle is indicated
in perenthaaea

Key: (1) Type of glue
(2) Laaing node
(3) Type of active ele-ent
(6) Size of active element. In
(5) Pulse repetition frequency. hertz
(6) Punping energy per pulse. joules
(7) Laeing energy. joulee
(8) Efficiency. 1
(9) Angular divergence*. minutes
(10) References
(11) alas-ate
(12) 138-1
(13) Li-Nd-UF
(16) Giant pulae
(15) Free
(16) Plate
(17) Cylindrical

202
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The possibility of obtaining short pulses investigated in chapter 4 (pulses on
the order of 10"° to 10"‘ seconds in duration) in phosphate glass can also
be realized in the pulse-periodic mode. In [506]. high power up to 0.5 giga-
watt with a pulse duration of about 5 to 100 picoseconds and a pulse repeti-
tion frequency to 12 hertz was obtained on ”athermal" phosphate glass LEG-7.

The most rigid requirements are imposed on active elements during operation of
the laser in the continuous mode. As a result of large temperature gradients
in this case it is necessary to make maximum improvement of the cooling condi-
tions. which is achieved with small transverse cross section of the active
elements. For effective absorption of light in the case of transverse pump-
ing. high activator concentration is necessary. In this version the thresh-
old pumping power Cthreshold using the narrow-band radiation source with con-
tinuous mode is equal to [229]

l’ hr (rs ' '.|l).l'.-'
th 79 2!_,7..\'uk“ ' (5.10)

where to and rp are the nonresonance and resonance losses in the resonator,
respectively. for a double pass. h is the Planck constant. c is the speed of
light. A ump is the pumping wavelength. 11 is the luminescence lifetime of

Nd . N {a the relative population of the upper half-level bP312. kPUlP is

the absorption coefficient in the pumping band. L is the length of the active
element. The resonance losses rp - Zlouerz. where Jr is the activator con-
centration. 81 is the Boltzmann factor for the lower laser level. 2 is the
distribution function. For glass with a concentration of Nd3+ on the order of
102| cm" the resonance losses are significant. and they amount to several
thousand cm" [68. 229. 232].

The product 110 which enters into formula (5.10) and must be maximal de-
pends to the hi est degree on the composition. Since for small active ele-
ments k? must be large. glass is required which has long luminescence life-
times 0 ":33+ with concentrations to (2-6) . 1021 cm" and large induced emis-
sion cross section and. correspondingly. high quantum yield of luminescence.
The magnitude of the quantum yield which depends weakly on the glass matrix in
the dehydrated phosphate glass for a concentration of Nd3+ (6-6) ' 102° cm"3
(only if there is no inclination of the glass toward microstratification char—
scteristic. for example. of zinc phosphate or boron phosphate glass) varies
sharply with the glass composition at high Nd203 contents. It was demonstrated
in Chapters 2-4 that the least luminescence quenching is observed in ultra-
phosphate and metaphosphate glass with approximately identical content of the
oxides of univalent and trivalent metals under the condition of careful dehy-
dration of the glass. Stronger quenching occurs in glass containing bivalent
cations. When selecting the base of the glass for continuous microlasers. it
is necessary to consider also the technological, thermooptical and physico-
chemical properties of glass. Absorption coefficients on a wavelength of 0.8
micron for phosphate glass reach approximately 70 cm"1 with Nd" concentration
of (3.8-4) ° 10 1 cm’ . and the maximum luminescence lifetime for such activa-
tor concentrations in the case of complete dehydration of the glass is 60 to
60 microseconds. Calculation shows [229] that for pumping by the emission of

semiconductor light diodes the active elements of optimal size made of

203
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phosphate glass with specially selected activator concentration and small in-
active absorption can have lasing thresholds in the continuous node which are
comparable to lasing thresholds for YAG: lId3+ crystals. The lasing on phos-
phate glass in the continuous mode is realized only for longitudinal pumping
of the active elements by the emission of an argon laser [229].

55.3. Glass for nigh-Energy Laser Systems

when studying the propagation laws of coherent radiation in the atmosphere.
for experiments on the interaction of emission with the material and obtaining
a thermonuclear plasma. lasers with an energy of more than 1.03 joules per
pulse are required. Naturally, the divergence of the emission must be quite
small. and the energy density in the laser beam the maximum possible. Since
the 11.8 radiation energy flux density in the range of 0.3 micron to 1.000 nm
is about 0.2 megavolt/cnz. and in the best case 10 percent of the pumping en-
ergy or under giant pulse conditions 1 percent. is converted to induced emission
under free lasing conditions. in order to obtain the indicated energy multi-
tube. multistage laser system are used with large total ILN surface and ac-
tive elements. respectively. In these lasers the total number of IL“ exceeds
102 to 10’. and the total length of the active elements reaches several ne-
ters.

Let us consider the basic requirements imposed on the physical parameters of
laser glass used in active elements of large laser system.

For lasers operating in the free lasing node. in accordance with what has been
discussed above it is necessary to select glass which for the given magnitude
of the absorption coefficient has minimal luainescence band width of the
transition “Fa/z 't "In/z and large quantum yield, that is. glass with maximal
product on. As was demonstrated in 51.1. this glass will have minim- energy
losses connected with luminescence processes and maintenance of threshold pop-
ulation. /

Since the surface strength and nonlinear properties of the glass limit the op-
erating energy density of the induced emission to values that are smaller than
or equal to hu/o. application of glass with high induced emission cross sec-
tion in giant-pulse lasers promotes more efficient use of the energy stored in
the inverse population of Nd”. especially in the preamplification stages.

The increase in laser emission divergence (above the diffraction divergence)
is determined by the following factors: distortions of the wave front of the
emission on nonunifornitiee in the glass. deviation of the form of the working
surfaces of the active elements from given. thermooptical and nonlinear ef-
fects.

Modern technology ensures high quality of active elements during series produc-
tion of them. The distortion of the emission wave front on passage through an
active element 100 cm long does not exceed 0.51 (A - 1.060 nn). Therefore
thermooptical and nonlinear distortions are becoming the basic factors in-

creasing the enission divergence.

204
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The magnitude of the thermooptical distortions and the active elements (51.1.)
is determined by the expression

AMI, y, x) — cum. 1;) — m

where s - P 3 Q for a plate active element and 6 - P t _0_/2 for a cylindrical
active element. L is the length of the active element. '1' is the average tem-
perature. T(x. y) is the local temperature in the active element. Let us ee-
timate what value of 0 the glass must have which is used in a laser with total
length of the active elenent equal to 1 meter so that Ap S 0.5 - 10"“ cm. that
is. so that the thermooptical distortions will not exceed the distortions of
the wave front caused by nonidealnsss of the glass. In giant-pulse lasers the
energy (per unit volume) stored in the inverse population. as a m.e, does not
exceed 1 joule/cm’. and at the time of achievement of the indicatet' population
it goes for heating the glass as a function of the shape and duration of a
pumping pulse of 1.5 to 2 joules/clog. Consequently. the maximum value of
(T(x, y; - '1‘) does not exceed 1° C. and the value of 0 must be less than

5 ° 10‘ K“. In powerful lasers operating under free lasing conditions. the
active element is heated by no more than 5° c. Therefore the magnitude of 0
must not exceed 10" K". If the lasers operate in the repeated pulse mode
with repetition period less than the time of complete cooling of the active
elements. the established temperature gradient is tens of degrees. and more
rigid requirements are imposed on the thernooptical_cheracteristics of the
glass: in addition to the condition 0 = 0 for '1‘ - T. it is necessary that
ao/a'r = O. for the latter value determines the temperature range inside which
the conditions of smallness of the thermooptical distortions are satisfied.

In the case where the laser emits a series of pulses (after which_totel cool-
ing of the active elements takes place). the value of (The. y) - '1') increases
continuously during the course of the working cycle. and the average tempera-
ture increases by AT > (SO/31‘)“. it is possible to minimize the thermooptical
distortions as follows.

For active elements. glass with O - -(ao/ac)A'r is selected; the heating of the
active element during lasing leads to a gradual decrease in the absolute mag-
nitude of O. and at the end of the series, where the temperature gradients are
maximal. 0 = 0 and correspondingly Ap(x. y) a 0.

As the measurements show, the thermooptical distortions in the active elements
in the form of a plane parallelepiped with a cross section of 40 x 240 Ill]! made
both from phosphate and silicate glass with neodymium concentration (1.4-2.0) °
10"” cm”. and the greater part of the cross section are close to cylindrical.
They are about 0.21 in an active element 720 III long with pumping of 250
kjoules. In giant-pulse lasers which use these active elements. the thermoop-
tlcal distortions can be compensated by a cylindrical lens. the curvature of
which is connected at the time of lasing to the curvature of the wave front of
the emission. In lasers operating in the free lasing mode. the thermoptical
distortions are equivalent to a lens with variable focal length; therefore in
order to compensate for the distortions. an optical system coupled to the
thermooptical lens is required. the focal length of which varies proportionally
to the pumping energy absorbed by the active eleuent. It must be noted that
the thermooptical distortions at the edges of a plate active element (in an

205
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

area naking up 20 to 30 percent of the area of the output end) have couple:
forn. and therefore they cannot be conpensated by cylindrical or spherical op-
tical systee. In active elements of cylindrical fore excited by the eeission
of illuninators with lo to 6 tubes, nonunifornity is observed in the inverse
population distribution and heat release both in the radial and in the azi-
muthal directions. however. the indicated nonunifornities can be decreased to
20 percent of the values at the center even in an active elenent with s diame-
ter of about 100 In by selection of the configuration of the reflectors and

decreasing the lid” concentration in the glass, and the thermal lens can he
ends almost spherical.

In lasers with disk active elements. the basic thermoptical distortions are

caused by heating of the air between the individual active elelsents (dn/d‘r of
the air is on the order of 10" K“). by the ultraviolet part of the pulping

_ emission. In order to attenuate the pooping in the ultraviolet region. pyrem
glass filters are used. The voluetric thermooptical distortions in disk ac-
tive elements are small, for with unifore pulping with respect to aperture of
the active element, the variation in the optical path in the glass as a result

tire cross section of the laser been even for poor thernooptical parameters of
the glass. According to the experimental data. the total (surface and volu-
metric) themoptical distortions in the laser containing six disk eleeents
with light aperture of 10 cm and total glass thickness of 18 on, amount to ap-
proximately 0.5l for pumping of 70 kjoules [369].

The distortions of the wave front of the emission caused by nonlinearity of
the index of refraction significantly increase the divergence of the emission
and decrease the flux density which can be obtained. focusing the laser beam,
if nonlinear variation of the phase on propagation of the eeission in the la-
ser systse is nuch greater than I. Here the maxim- rsdiation flux density
which can be obtained for a given quality of the vave front. as was noted
above. is proportional to (ohﬂ’ly. (The induced emission cross section 0 and
the nonlinearity coefficient 1 are constants of the glass.) Obviously. the
nonlinear phenoeena are manifested coepletely for pulse durations such
that the condition

L
2-23571(l)dl>n
I

is satisfied for flux densities less than the threshold of optical breakdown

of the glass surface.* For phosphate glass. the duration of these pulses is
less than (0.5-1) ' 10" seconds.

The authors of [507] propose selection of the glass for laser systems in the
picosecond range by the cost of l joule of focused energy 25. using for this
for-ula

* According to the data presented in [507]. the surface breakdown thresh-

old of the glass for different types of glass is 50 to 120 gigamratts/cllz with
a laser pulse duration of about 2 o 10'1 seconds.

206
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u . eI'
z, 31"?» (M107.
where C is the cost of the glass. 5 is the area of the output end. For lasers
with a pulse duration of 10’9 to 104° seconds. the optimal phosphate and
fluophosphate glass with n: - (1-0.5 - 10-" cmzlvoltaz and o>3.s - 10-“
cm2. and with a laser pulse duration of SlO“° seconds. the fluoberyllate
glasses with n; < 0.5 o 10"" cll’lvolts2 are the best.

In lasers in the nanosecond range. nonlinear effects are not so significant.

and the cost of the focused energy is determined by the ratio of the product
of the energy.density for which breakdown of the surface of the glass

takes place. SP for the energy stored in the inverse population. to the magni-

tude cf the saturating signal. 3. - hv/o multiplied by the thermoptical con-
stant of the glass:

, T: A' v
ZN" '— (1%!

l

s

where V is the volume of the active element in the laser system.

The types of phosphate laser glass produced in the USSR are distinguished by
good optical properties sand the LGS-n type glass also has a small value of
d(P : Q)/d'r = 0.09 - 10- 1:“). they have high values of the induced emission
cross section of neodymium. and therefore they are used successfully in lasers
in the nanosecond and millisecond range. For lasers that emit pulses shorter
than 10‘9 seconds. glass of the Kass-1161 and LGS-ﬂ types. for which n: =
10'13 cmzlvoltez are the most suitable.

207
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

microns (figure 3.3). The effort: [204. 508] to obtain lesin
from highsr‘excitedbstetee of Br

nicron) or Pslz ~> I13 13 (11“. a; 1.1 microns), in contrast to crystals. did

not yield positive results inenuch
glass is sharply quenched ' by the
laxation of excitation (93.4).

troducing erbiun ions into the active

of the three-level

ions. the Yb” ions turn out to be effective eensitisers.
Yb” ions have s unique. but powerful (especially for high Yb” concentration)

02 microns with "effective" vi th on

At the cane tine. the Yb ions
can be in turn sensitized by Nd”, Cr”. Ce”, He“ ions. and so on [68. 82).
which theoretically pernite the use coeffici

ent of the eniesion of the pumping
tubes to be increesed still more. Under such conditions. the energy charsc-

teristice of erbium losers (31.) are deter-ined to a decisive degree by the
BPV efficiency in the “”53”

sible concentration of the Br

I". and basically gives the choice 3f the ch
The nexiem concentration of the Yb

.4"; can be increased
red level of adapte-

. 3h quantum yield of the eacitstion
energy trensnission in the pair Yb” — Br

.. ‘(q 't 1) can be insured (depend
m the used estrix) for Wu>(1.5—5)'IO"cu" cl“(53.3). Consequently. con- 1“
siderins the losses in the laser csvity. in orde

to reach the losing thresh-
>ld it is necessary to excite at least (1-3) '10 9 en‘3 8r” ions. These

208
Figure 6.1. Standard absorption spectrum
of Erbium-doped phosphate laser glass.
. / '

(1» 05 I ‘ ‘ 2,5,”

   

Key: (1) Transmission. 2

(2) Hicrons 40
(3) Absorption edge of the m
03 band
0'
m 2)

 

$0 337 a” an ﬂ“? mm MM 4&7 “View

excitation levels are already quite high. For comparison let us point out that
in neodymium glass lasers with blind resonator mirrors the lasing threshold can
be reached with a population of the metastable state of the Nd” ions on the
order of (1-2).101 cm". and under optimal operating conditions. the latter
doefanot usually exceed l'lO18 cm" under free lasing conditions and (2.5-5) '
'10 cm" under the amplification conditions of short pulses (Chapter Io). In
erbium glass. even the best with respect to an efficiency. the minimum Er”

ion concentration must in.pr1ctice_.be greater than the above indicated values.
within the limits of W..)...>(2,5—5) - 10“ em". The fact that is at high
excitation levels, as the Br" ions scctasulate in the metastable state under

the effect of a pumping pulse. the BPV process efficiency decreases signifi-
cantly. Frequently this is connected with impoverisInent of the population of
the ground state. Another effect appears to be more important. This effect
consists in primary knockout of the acceptor centers from the quenching process
with min:- probability of donor-acceptor interactions. According to what

has been discussed in Chapter 3. for the above-indicated ratios of the Yb”

and Br” ion concentrations in erbius laser glass. the kinetic phase of the BPV
process is realised. that is. excitation energy migration with respect to the
donor subsystem is so intense that the limiting factor of the quenching process
is the excitation runoff rate to the acceptor subsystem. At low pumping levels
the runoff takes place primarily through the acceptor centers, the donor vicinity
of which approaches them to the maximm (to the minimum admissible distance 3min
(93.2)). At high pumping levels. under conditions where the migration process
is absent in the acceptor subsystem (JP. is small) and t << 'r . where
CPUIIP is the pumping pulse duration. such centers, beingmpercitgderto the

first stage. are knocked out according to the pumping pulse effect from the
39V process. and the effective rate of the BPV process can drop significantly
faster than would be expected beginning with the dynamics of the decrease in
population of the ground state of the Br” ions. It is also possible to men-
tion other important principles of the accelerated decrease in In! during intense
pumpings. In order to coqeneete for the indicated effects. it is also neces-
sary to increase (4'..).,.,'

Thus. if we ' also consider the relatively low use coefficient of the emission
of the pumping tubes (in spite of the presence of sensitisera). the lasing
thresholds of erbium lasers with the traditional system of their execution
using pulse tubes turn out to be very high. and under the conditions of limited
reserve with respect to strength of the latter they are in practice reachable
FOR OH’ICIAI. USE." ONLY

only for cylindrical small-diameter active elements (d < 10 to 15 mm). The
diameter restrictions are also imposed by the large values of the Yb’+ concen-
tration. inasmuch as the active elamentawithdn> 7 to 8 mm usually are pumped
very nonuniformly. Thus. the possibilities of the tube version of the erbium
laser (ELL) are highly limited. Introduction of sensitizers into the glass
does not change the situation for the most effective of them. Nd’+. cannot be
used in sufficient amount as a result of the appearance of quenchin of the
luminescence of Br” with respect to the Er” (In/.->‘lu/,)-Nd“ (' 05"" “1.)
(53.3). and the others have low effectiveness. As a result. the energy charac-
teristics of ELL are greatly inferior to the characteristics of neodymium glass
lasers: the emission energy is less than one Joule. the efficiency is < 0.2

to 0.6 percent [48, 85. 450]. At the same time. they find defined application
as a result of absence of other. more efficient lasers for the 1.5 micron band.
and also as a result of safety of their emission for the vision [68. 509]. the
presence of window: of transparency of the atmosphere [510. $11] and good radia-
tion receivers [$12].

Cardinal improvement of the energy characteristics of erbium lasers has been
achieved by transition to excitation by the emission of neodymium glass lasers
operating in the free running mode [267]. The pumping radiation in this case
is absorbed by Yb’+ ions during the electron transition between the upper Stark
component of the base level 3P7]a and the lower component of the metastable

level 2P5], (Figure 3.3). The initial level of the absorption transition at

room temperature is weakly populated (about 1.5 to 2) ' 10"2 IVE. ). but as a
result of the large values of AH» it is possible to insure an absorption co-
efficient on the pumping frequency of kpump approximately equal to (5 to 8) '

' 10-2 cm-l. for which the threshold den ities of the stimulating emission,
although quite high (30 to 100 joules/cm ), are entirely attainable by neodymium
glass lasers and. the main thing. they do not exceed the light strength of the
glass (see i 1.3). At the same time. small absorption level permits uniform
excitation of large volumes of the active medium. The theoretically possible
energy coefficient of conversion 1.06 e 1.54 microns is defined by the ratio

of the quantum energies of excitation and pumping. and it is "max k 0.69.
Although in a real experiment such values are hardly attainable. the applica-
tion of the laser excitation system permits creation of erbium lasers with high
energy characteristics as a result of high efficiency of the neodymium lasers
in the free-running mode (to 5-6 percent) and elimination of restrictions on
the thickness of the active elements. As will be demonstrated below (56.5).
the advantages of erbium laser reemitters (BL?) of neodymium lasers are espe-
cially perceptable when constructing powerful systems for the amplification

of short and supershort pulses (K1 and SKI). Indeed. high quantum yield (no
less than 0.9). long excitation lifetimes in the metastable state (on the order
of 1'10" sec) and moderate ¥81u°' of the transverse cross section of the induced
emission not exceeding 1'10’ cma make the set of excited Br’+ ions almost the
ideal medium for these operating conditions. and the application of the laser
method of exciting the active medium to a high degree eliminates a number of
the harmful effects accompanying tube pumping (for example. heating of the
active elements or transverse nonuniformity of the distribution of the excited
particles). and it permits achievement of record values of the specific stored
energy in the amplification channel (to 5 to lo joules/cm’).

210
FOIIOFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
Let us consider in more detail the requirements imposed on erbium glass as an
active medium in order to neximize the energy characteristics of erbium lasers.
Let us perform a theoretical analysis of the processes of accumulating Er3+
ions in the metastable state and lasing of stimlsted emission in the exanple
of the model of the BL? excited by a monochromatic square pulse of emission of a

neodymium laser (Ipump (v,t) - 106(v :lvpmn. 0 < t < spa-P. where vi”mp and

{puss are the emission frequency (sec ) and intensity of the photon been

(cm’ - sec-1) in the pumping laser pulse). The strict kinetic model of BL? is
quite complicated. Figure 6.2 shows a simplified equivalent diagram of the
levels and transitions between then determining the dynamics of the accumletion
of the excitation energy in the metastable state and the lasing process. when
compiling it. along with the excitation processes. consideration was iven to
EPV and lasing and also the presence of induced absorption of the Br ions in
the setastsble state on pumping and lasing frequencies (Vlase) for which the

wings of the absorption bands oorrgsnopding _to the transitions q”/."‘P0/,
(vo~8900 on") and Vim-”101. (we! 6100 cu") are responsible. In the
diagram in Figure 6.2 consideration is also given to the fact that in order to
obtain lasing in the Br’ ion system in glass. according to the analysis of the
structure of their luminescence spectra (see below 56.2) the most favorable are
the transitions from the Val. level for one of three low Stark components of
the level ‘lul. separated energywise by so to 50 ca'1 (AB << 1‘). The transi-
tions to the components 3-8 of the 5115/ level lagging behind the lower com-
ponent by 200 to 500 cm" (A! > ItB‘l') 2have significantly smaller transverse
cross sections (by S to 20 times) and, in addition. they overlap more sharply
with respect to energy with the induced absorption band. Therefore the condi-
tions for obtaining effective lasing on them. unfortunately. are unfavorable.
It is also considered that according to the data discussed in 93.4. the proba-
bility of direct nonradiating transitions from the upper excited states of the
Br" ions (states 3-5) to the ground state is negligibly snall by comparison

with the probabilities of staged relaxation with the participation of all of
the intermediate levels.

Using the notation introduced in Figure 6.2. the system of kinetic equations
describing the variation of the populations N of the levels of the Yb” and
Er” ions during excitation accumulation on the metastable level 113/2 (2 A)

and generation of stimulated enission. can be written in the following form:

 

 

~31! "" “age (”all " Nan) "' N “11:11 '- wﬂstn.
li’u --' 0&1): (Nu — NM) '|' "s-A'Nu — ”RAN”: + “’anu.
-.\'.-.\ -’-‘ “’asNM — ("s-Al + wsl) Nu " “(Jr (”as - Nu) —
_ azalr (Nu — NM) ‘- an]. (Nu —‘ NM).
31m wMNm - “’uNu + u’uNu. (6.1)
gm -‘- u'uNtA 'l' 0“], (NM — Nud— Wan/4A.
IV“ -'-‘ “alsuvu — Nu) — wuNu.

- as
N,“ a. N." oxp(- 73-5) - cons! $2 In.

I
2 Nu =A°Ir

can - 1‘s
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

53:? 6.2. Equivalent diegrsn of the energy levels of the system of ions
2r” end transitions between then describing the operation of the m.

and I“ care the intensities of the pulping and lasing emission
Ep'sec'lu ). ac: and a

pulp lsse
b_t§p tion on the pulping frequency and induced emission on the lasing frequency
).

a“ are the transverse absorption cross sections between the levels I

and J of the acceptor (cn 2). v is the rite of nonredisting relaxation of

excitation between ’11.. levels 1114 5 (see is the effective m
rate in the pair Yb 2r“(sec' '11!) is the 1minescent lifetine of Yb”

on the mm. 21?5 /2 (an). M 1. the rsdisting 11mm of the 3:” ions on
the netssteble level "113 I2 (2 A).

ere the effective transverse cross sections of

Key: (1) pm
(2) less

The strict solution of the systen (6.1) lust be found jointly with the solutions
of the equations for the enission density in the laser resonator (see. for
example. [3]). Considering the complex fern of the functionw man)’ it is

difficult to obtain it1 liotmver1 for the stationary pumping node (t ,
tthreshold >> "DA ' "323 '31-'16. when tthreshol d is the tine 1mm

fro. the beginning of pulping until the threshold inverse population is reached

 

“threshold ' (Nu - "1A)threshold) under acceptable conditions
W... w... Wu’oulh out. (6.2)
(1)

Key: (1) lase

it is possible to replace systen (6.1) by the equation for inverse population

¥-’(%JO+':A')AN+ I” (6.3)
(1) ’ he‘s! ng _' -I t '
+(‘s’s+':)l+'lu an?!)
Key: (1) lose (2)
(2) pm 212

MWMUSEONLY
-_1-l _
Hm v21. Equation (6.3) is nonlinear. for "DA f(AN). If the

tom of the function f is known. its solution can be found by nuerical methods.

At the sens tine it is obvious that for nininisetion of “thrash 01 d it is neces-
sary to insure satisfaction of the condition

where ‘u

mm 3’ ‘1]: 'l "als- (6J0)
. . (1)

Key: (1) PM
In this case the solution of (6. 3) presents no difficulties. In the initial

phase of operation of the laser when the induced enission is absent 11“ e .0)
end the process of charge accumulation takes place on the level 2A.
-- -- 6.5
AN (8) - (A- ra) ._ u'maa. ( )
where A I: 28') ’N 'n‘aa-
(6.6)
Key: (1) Pulp
hence. it is easy to deter-ins the tine ‘threehold:
1n09=11510{)_ T‘tl‘T-A‘T‘E" (6‘7)
Key: (1) threshold (1)
and the threshold punping energy density of the active nediun of values V:
r.” :- hwy]. [Ost + ps'l‘
- (1) (2) +0..- 0 2,st + Mg?» ‘rw. (M)
Key: (1) punp threshold
(2) pulp
(3) threshold
which must approach the nininm value
(rami'u' #0 JUN-V My, + ANN») x '
(1) (3 6.
x [”123 p..a+ozso (AN gal-1w]- ( 9)

Key: (1) pup threshold
(2) pm
(3) threshold
on satisfaction of the condition tthreshold << 11A as a result of an increase
in Io. In these fomlas BPUIIP is the coefficient of inactive losses in the
glass on the punpins frequency (cn 1). and AN

is defined by the expression

threshold' as 1° “3" ‘° denonstrate,

213
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I")! OPINCJAI.USIZ(NNLY

m+moso n, '
AN. .I
(B12) “e “um (6.10)

Key: (1) threshold (2) lass (3) i

“here 8183‘ and 81- (IIZIR ”)1n (s)'1 are the coefficients of inactive

losses on the 1&01118 frequenm :u'. 6the losses to emission in the laser cavity
(cn' 1), respectively. R is the reflection coefficient of the output nirror of
the resonator. llas is the length of the active element dith respect to the
lasing channel. considering the knovn equations for the radiation

density in the laser cavity [3]. siaple but awkward calculations permit us to

obtain the following useful expressions for the output power to ut and the
efficiency (n) of BLP under quesisteady lasing conditions:

. . .-.’.q-. . _

ewt~herqfu(k.) I. (‘— 0.5;”))(
(1) (2) {"3 5+3 +55“:
XTFO o.s(¢r.,+arn'~( (6.11)
'IlA'IA “duo’s

"z g, V, (mam: — o. '5"! I/a,)
M'I("I)m+ +0 eo(”lr+° up):

a. om + AN _,) +]

x 1-
5~ + Br + 65“»,1 9m (*dm’o

(6.12)

Key: (1) out (3) eff (5) threshold
(2) lass (lo) 1 (6) pump

Vlase
Here qggu- --——E-AT—1—- is the quantum efficiency of energy transfer in the
ll)
pair Yb’ ’+ ~8r”D for the steady-state level of inversion
wiiwwm'obtrt‘sr ANgfaconu, (6.13)
(kl)W‘°I£Nm-Nu)- MM"-
(2) (3) ‘ 'Jo+'il+§n ”v
Key: (1) threshold (3) mp
(2) eff

The last expression takes into account the possibility of violation of condition
(6. lo) leading to a decrease in the effective value of the absorption coefficient
on the pumping frequency. The value of the prohsbilityv1 vl‘“ obviously is less
than the values measured for low excitation levels. «1.89:. it is significant
here that it approaches a steady-state valuedeternined “by the residual population

of the basic level of l A. for with the ogcurrence of lasing, the effective
radiating deactivation of the excited Br’ ions pernits the acceptor centers.
the efficiency of the interaction of which with the donor surroundings is maxi-
nal. nultiple participation in the m process even in the absence of migration
of excitation energy with respect to them.

216
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Analysis of expressions (6.8). (6.10). (6.11) per-its discovery of the following
conditions. on satisfaction of which the efficiency of the 21.? must be close to

the maxi-us value of IF“ - “lass/“pm
“um. '—
1) a 5’1. (5) . ,
2’ (kum>“u . "Him; (.rlir ‘I'Muup’;
(2):!) 5.59, .; ",1..an ,,; (’0)

ll) “u < 20:; (1) (6 '1‘.)
5) “(Wind '3

, 6) I. ) A.” 'I‘ 51".“? .4",- ‘l' AN“!

24in 'n (has... MiA'IA G's)“

Key: (1) less (’0) threshold
(2) I! - pulp (5) 1
(3) eff

Condition 1) defines the nininun Br“ ion concentration in glass and. consequently.
the threshold pulping energy end 1 . In order to decrease then. it is necessary
to find astrices with the largest aaiblt values of w . Accord to the re-
sults of Chapter 3. the greatest efficiencies of transﬁr in the Yb +41"" pair
are realized in phosphate end horate glass. Considering that wk“ 3 "DA (for

A
Nu - (0.4 to 0.5) an). we find that in this glass usually #2, > 0.9 for

A's.) (3-4) '10"¢|I‘-’-l For coaparison let us point out that in silicate glass it
is required that at least Ji'..>(_8_-10)~10"cn4.

The presence of induced absorption on the puaping frequency complicates the
satisfaction of condit 2) For the actual values of 3 S'lg'zcl'l.
. 19 ca"

«- - . -3 - ‘ '- -
89m .. (1 2) 10 CI and 0.5 gg+zANthreshold) 2 , the value

of a must be less than (1-2)°10 cn . Otherwise. this absorption will greatly
decrzzse the efficiency of 311’. Experimtal neasurslasnts of the level of induced
absorption [613] denonatrated that condition 2) is critical. Phosphate glass in
which a is less than in silicate glass. has an advantage. In general. it is
necessa to select matrices with large 0pm end shift vM as far as possible

to the high-frequency region. Phosphate glass is also fro. this point of view
preferable, for it has larger values of 0 compared to silicate glass. and

as a result of lsrger w under identical conditions (I: + k is

DA pm’cff Pull?
insured for higher 10.

Condition 3) reduces to the require-ent of insuring the ninimn level of inac-
tive losses on the lasing frequency. The smell cross section on“ Units the

possibilities of satisfying the condition 3) as a result of an increase in B
by decreasing R. In addition. the presence of induced absorption in the lasing
region is equivalent to an additional decrease in the effective value of the
induced emission cross section to a value of MI see-alase - 0.502“). Thus.

the requirements on the purity and optical unifornity of erbiun glass are much

215
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

metals. but especially the hydroxyl groups dissolved in the glass. The absorp-
tion coefficient of the hydroxyl groups in the range of 1.56 microns increases
compared to the region of 1.06 microns by 70 to £00 times (see Figure 3.21)5

and 1: becomes highly significant (about 1.5-10' curl fox 4' - 1.101 cm”

in phosphate glass). Consequently. erbium glass which is suggable for applica-
tion in lasers must be carefully dehydrated. The requirement on the dehydration
level ensuring minimization of 81“e approximately corresponds to the require-
ment Wm< (5—7)- 10" if following from the condition qer ~> l. The influence
of the induced absorption would be insignificant for o,.<1.1o-a “a. This
requirement is much more rigid than condition 6). Towhatdegree it is satisfied
has not been successfully established at the present time. The maximum of the
corresponding absorption band (the transition 1'I + “I ) lies, as has _1
already been pointed out above, near 6100 cm'l, égigh is gpgroximstely 600 on
less than 013 . The intensity of this band. judging by thz results of reference
[361] is cougﬁsurate with the intensity of the transition I 5 -' “ll .
Therefore. in spite of significant shift of 61 with respecf ‘3 the mall-um.
the value of 024 can significantly exceed the e-indicated limit. Some
estimates of 024 will be presented in $6.3.

Condition 5) imposes an upper bound on the pumping emission intensity as a result
of the finite value of "[15:88' Condition 6) is equivalent to the requirement

that the intensity of the pumping mission significantly exceed the threshold.
inasmuch as usually tpump < TlA' It imposes a lower bound on the optimal values

of l . Let us estimate to what degree conditions_ 5) _a_nd 6) are satisfied in
different matrices. For silicate glass when 43-8-10" cars 080811

lass; .. . 3 -1 3 . -21 2 - - 24 -2-
"DA 1 (2.5 lo) 10 sec . up“.p , l 10 cm . Then lo << (2.5 b) 10 en

sec' . which for pumping duration of tpump - 540'8 seconds corresponds to a

pumping radiation energy density of 2500 to (.000 joules/cm’. 0n the other hand.
condition 6) gives I >> 2.2'10 3cm"£-sec‘1 (210 joules/cm”). Thus. it is dif-
ficult to satisfy bogh of the conditions 5) and 6) in the case of silicate lass
imediately. For phosphate glass when I..~3,5.10'° “-8, wbgse ‘3 0.6Sv10 sec'l.
OPWP - 2'10“21 cm and Rpm :2 6'10“"9 cm“. condition 5) has the form

19(33-10" cm"-sec'1£310050ules/cm’). and condition 6) is the form of
10’33'10” cr’- sec' (77 joules’cn’). These conditions are less rigid than for
silicate glass. but they are also quite stressed. Their satisfaction is com-
plicated with a decrease in ‘3 . It is also necessary to note that the
pumping energy densities requ 33 for realization of high efficiencies are
very high even for the laser method of excitation. For silicate glass, they
exceed the radiation breakdown threshold of the glass with respect to platinum

inclusions (700 to 1000 joules/cm’).

Thus, the performed analysis demonstrated that under optimal conditions the
energy efficiency of the EL? can approach the theoretical limits. Here the
integral brightness of the emission of such BL? can exceed by one and a half
to two orders the brightness of neodynium lasers [247. 613. 535]. However.
the achievement of high energy characteristics of the ELP in the free running
mode is possible only under very rigid conditions requiring optimization of
the chemical composition of the glass and concentrations of the activators,

216
F0! OFHOAL USE ONLY
high radiating strength of the glass. high energy densities of the pumping
emission and maximum shift of the emission wavelength of the pumping laser

to the shortwave side (to 1.050 to 1.054 microns). The best matrices for

the working material of the BLP are phosphate materials having decisive advan-
tages over silicate. Only borate glass could compete with them with respect
to BPV efficiency. but in borate glass the quantum yield of the Er3+ ion
luminescence. unfortunately. is extremely low (< 0.07) as a result of the high
efficiency of the MFR processes (93.4). In the phosphate glass series prefer-
ence must be given to the compositions permitting introduction of the largest
possible concentrations of Yb3+ ions having both high opump olase and maximum

transfer efficiency in the Yb’+-Er’+ pair without having negative effects on
the technological characteristics. According to the results of 53.3. they
should be found among the systems permitting maximum approach of the rare earth
ions, that is. having minimum Rain'

5 6.2. Spectral Luminescent Properties of Erbium Glass

Figure 6.1 shows the standard absorption spectrln of erbium phosphate laser
glass. It consists of a small number of relatively weak and narrow bands in
the visible and near intrared regions of the spectrum. The most intense are
the bands with peaks about 522 and 378 nm (the oscillator strengths are
5.7-10‘6 and 12'10'6, respectively). The remaining groups of the bands are at
least an order weaker. A detailed analysis of the absorption spectra. detailed
data on the powers of the oscillators of the transitions and positions of the
band peaks and also the parameters calculated by them (in some cases) for the
crystal field. can he found in the following papers: for silicate glass [361.
364. 516-518]. phosphate glass [191. 193. 204, 361. 405. 411. 508. 516. 517].
borophosphate glass [193. 361. 517]. fluophosphate glass [191. 345. 517].
borate glass [405. 411. 508. 517]. germanate glass [405. 411. 508. 517].
tellurite glass [361. 403. 411] and fluoberyllate [361. 517. 521. 522]. A
comparison of the data presented in them permits the conclusion to be drawn
that the chemical composition of glass has less influence on the form and the
position of the bands than was observed for the Nd3+ ions. For example. in
metaphosphate glass with different modifiers (elements of the first and second
groups) and also in borophosphate glass the form and the position of the
absorption bands of Er’+ do not change in practice [193]. Only on comparison
of them with other types of glass are differences noticeable. It is possible
to be convinced of this in the example of the resonance absorption band corres-
ponding to the laser transition (Figure 6.3). The resolution of the transitions
varies more significantly. with some exceptions. it increases in the series

at fluoberyllate-alkali and alkali earth ailicate-aluminocalciumsilicste-
fluophosphate-borophosphate-phosphate-germanate-borate-tellurite glass (7-8
times for "supersensitive" transitions ‘1'.“ 12‘1"“; "In/,3 'GHI. with _

AJ - 2 and 2 to 3 times for the remaining transitions. including for thhit‘luh .
which. according to [518]. correlates with the decrease in symmetry of the
local crystalline field in the vicinity of the rare earth ions in this series
of glasses. The resolution of the transitions varies noticeably also as a
function of the type of modifier. For example. in tinary alkali earth phosphate
glass (50.5 Mac, 49.5 9205 molecular percent) the integral absorption cross
station of the transition ‘luh-v‘luh increases by 1.35 times in the Mg-Cd
svrics (to 4.2-108cm3°sec'1). then it decreases somewhat for Ba [519].

217
FOI’OFTHCJAI.USEZOhﬂJ(
FORIHHWCJAleEIONLY

In the luminescence spectra of the majority of compositions. a unique intense
band is observed with peak at 1536 um corresponding to the resonance transi-
tion ‘Iuh-e‘luh (Figure 6.3). Only in fluoberyllate and especially in the .
tellurite glasses do the hands correspondine to the transition ﬁsq.-O‘lu/.
(sso nu), ‘lnnlp‘lu,’ (about 990 nn) and 'P-h-"Iuh‘ (about 320 nm)- [345.
361, 521. 522] have noticeable intensity. which is caused by lower probability
of nonradiating degredation of the high excited states of the ions in these
types of glass (Chapter 3).

In contrast to the corre pending absorption band. the form of the resonance
luminescence band of Er’ ions depends strongly on the glass composition (Figure
6.3). Its halfwidth in phosphate glass is greater than in silicate glass

Av S 135 and 115 cn’k respectively). and depends insignificantly on the type

of modifier. In fluophosphate and especially in borate glass, the value of

A51 increases sharply (in the latter. to 400 cm'l). which is connected first

of all with growth of th: relative intensity of the transitions from the upper
Stark components of the 113/2 level forming the high frequency wing of the

luminescence bend at 300K. Simultaneously. in the series of silicate-phos-
phate fluophosphate-borate glass. the transverse cross section of the induced

._,_.—— .__-
_. .

Figure 6.3. Luminescence (l) and
absorption (2) bands of Er’+ ions
corresponging to the transition

(8). Ba-Al-phosphate (b).
fluophosphste (c) and Na-borate
(d) glass. 300 K.

here and in Figure 6.6 the absorption
cross sections are multiplied by
-1.

 

218
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
emission decreases at the luminescence band peak a . Let us note that this
series is almost inverse to the one presented abovyeﬁere we were talking about
the integral cross sections of the absorption bands of Er” ions. This apparent
contradiction is explained by differences in width and shape of the luminescence
bands. In Table 6.1 complete information about a and the positions of the
maximum resonance luminescence band taken from “$238.; sources are collected.
The differences in the presented values of 0 do not exceed 50 percent. This
is much less than the observed differences fogsSeodymium glass where they reach
three times (and even more) (Figure 10). Among Bhosphate glass. according to
[519] the value of <11“e increases from 6.3-10' to 13°10‘21“:2 in the series

of modifiers Mg-Ca-Sr. then decreases to 5'- 7.5‘10'21 cm2 for Cd and Ba. How-
ever, the indicated differences are not too significant. Thus, it can be con-
cluded that the possibility of a significant increase in alase by finding the

optimal compositions for erbium glass obviously is excluded.

Measurements of the absorption and luminesceme spectra for low temperatures
permit us to obtain information about the position of the Stark components of
the levels 1'I 2 and l’I 5/ and also the magnitude of the nonuniform broadening
of the bands iglresponding go the transitions between these components. In
Figure 6.10. the spectra of this type that we obtained are demonstrated for a
temperature of 6.2 K for Na-K-La-Ba-silicate and Na-Hg-phosphate glass and also
approximum expansion of these spectra into individual components. It is obvious
that the degeneration of the indicated levels in glass is completely removed,
and each of the terms is expanded in 2.! + l halflevels. The opposite conclusion
drawn previously in [517] is explained obviously by low accuracy of the record-
ing. In Table 6.2 the positions of the Stark components on the energy scale and
estimated values of nonuniform broadening of the absorption or luminescence
bands connected with them are presented. The obtained values of A?) for
phosphate glass turned out to be larger than for silicate glass, anamously

to the results found by us for the Yb” ions, and opposite to the situation in
neodymium glass. 0n the whole. the magnitude of the nonuniform broadening of
the Er3+ ion bands is appreciably less than for the Nb’ ions.

Few experimental studies have been made of the induced absorption spectra of
Br" ions in glass. A strong band in the 20,880 cm" region was detgcted in
reference [525]. This band was attributed to the transition to the K15 /2

26 levels, and weak bands were detected in the regions of 19.250 '

7 2
car{ (+ 469/2) and 15,400 cm-1 (the transition is not established) in multi-

component silicate glass. More complete and exact data were obtained in
[361. 526] for Li-Hg-Al-silicate and Na-Al-phosphate glass where the induced
absorption bands corresponding to the transitions on the 419/2 level (about

6100 curl), “53 2 (approximately 11,750 un'l), 2311/2 (12.1.50 cm'l), "rm
(13,950 cm_1), Esp (15,550 cm‘l), "1’3!2 (15,950 curl). 2c9/2 (18.050 curl).
a .— 4 - 2 2 -

611/2 (19,850 cm ). 69/2 (20,850 on ) and 07/2,- K15,2 (21,550 cm 1 bands

(Figure 6.5). Here the band with maximum at 6100 cm turned out to be one of
the most intense. Let us note that the authors of [361, 526] diverge with the
generally accepted classification of Er3+ ion levels (see. for example. [95,

219
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘M UI‘IILIAD 03!. “Wk,

Table 6.1

Glass teapositi‘on —2s : ... -, Data

ealecular t l. a '9' a Source.
10.5 so. 3.: Nap.

2.0 3.0. 23 n.0,. 0.50 mo [312]
8.0 :90. 2.04 3:.0. . '

51 310,, a .‘ “.0. .
1.8 My 13.8 ”(0.. 0,77 [um-51" ,
I 3&0. .

59,5 “0.. “.5 SID. -
I BI‘O. ‘ 0.”

[ml

49.5 9.0., «no. . I
1 mp. ' [5m
‘9': P300! ‘935 “80.

. 1 mo. . 0.03 0510 [m]
50.3 9.0.. as no. ‘ '
12.5 n.0,. 5.2 n.0,. [as] _-
' 3h": ' . ' .
u 3.0.. «,3 mp, o.so mo 15m . ,:
1.25 mo. ' . 0.42 6510 _~
58.9 9.0.. 24.1 no, ~ ' . - ‘
u,2AI.0.. 5.2 n.0,. [as] ‘. "
0.1a n.0,
so v.0" 37 9.0. . I

12.5 n.0,. 0.: mo. 0.70 mo um. am

" [he eeuureeents were erfore

     

100. 338] and so on), according to which the induced absorption bands with peaks
in the vicinit of 18,050 cn’ '1 and 20, 850 cm '1 met correspond to transitions

to the levels 119/2 and 269/2. respectively. The band corresponding to the
transition “113/2 * ‘17 179,2 (near 8800 en 1) was not detected in these experiments.
0n the century. in [527]. the presence of induced absorption in the 9600 to
9250 cu region in erbium glass was noted, which was later related by the
authors to the indicated transition [413] (F'igure 6.6). However. as a result
of experimental difficulties. they were unable to reproduce the absorption band
curve conpletely. and the presented data are limited to a segment of its short-
wave wing. Fro- Pigure 6. 6 it is obvious that on the pumping frequency of the
BL? (1.055 nicons) phosphate glass with a concentration of ﬁg, - 3 10" on"

with specific absorbed energy of abogt S ioules/m’ has an induced absorption
level approximately equal to 7.5‘10" cm- . which is 1.3 tines less than in

220
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 6.4. Luminescence (l) and absorption (2) bands of Br3+ ions in
Na-Hg-phosphate (a) and Na-K-Be-La-silicate (b) glass at 6.2K and the
approximate position of the Stark components (dotted lines).

Data on the cross section are increased by five-fold in figure b in the
6000-6200 cm' range. '

silicate glass. Hence. it is possible to obtain a value of a 3’3‘10-22cm’.

which must be considered as the lower limit, for the populatigb of the metastable
level is explicitly below the value estimated by the absorbed energy.

As was already noted in 5 6.1. an important characteristic of erbium glass is

the absorption coefficient “pump in the region of emission of pumped neodymium

lasers (1.055 to 1.06 microns). The form of the absorption band of Yb’+ ions
in phosphate glass with high concentration of them is illustrated in Figure 6.1.

221
FIHI(HHHI1A1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
     
 

 
 
  

 

Table 6.
Coupone’ntt
2
8
4
5
6
1
' 8
q“,
Coaienoﬁﬂ' '
Figure 6.5. Induced absorption spectra of the 819+ ions free the “113/2
level according to (361]. For trmition to the l'19/2 level. the scale

along the y-axia in ﬁnished by twofold; for the trmeitiomto “69/2 by

tenfold.

Figure 6.6. Spectm 2f the induced absorption ’hx:
I

of 3:” ions fro. the I I level in phoephate 1?.
(l) and eilicate (2) 31.33 in the region of 1.05 3
to 1.15 licrone; the ebeorped epecific pulping ‘
energy is 5 joulea/cu’; mg '43)? town-"am: p

 

Key: (1) microns

222
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
From this figure it is obvious that the pumping wavelength A comes at th:
edge of the long wave wing of the absorption band. The sectiggpof this wing
of interest to us for s s ries of types of glass with identical concentration
of Yb’+ ions (1.5-1021cm' ) is presented in Figure 6.7 on an enlarged scale.
As we shall see. the glass composition essentially determines not only the
coefficient kpump' but also another important characteristic-the slope of the

spectral curve dkpump/dx in the vicinity of xpump (! 6.4). In Table 6.3 we

h d t k A - 1.055
ave comparative ata with respec to the magnitude of pump on pump

microns normalized to the concentration Iva-1.540” cu". in glass of dif-
ferent composition. Their analysis permits the conclusion to be drawn that

the largest values of kpump are characteristic of borate glass, which is con-

nected both with the large oscillator strength of the transition 2P7/8* ZFSIZ

9n the wholezand with the higher relative intensity of the transition
F7/8 (b) + P5/2 (l) in these matrices. Unfortunately. the indicated glass

is unsuitable as laser glass matrices with respect to other parameters. From
Table 6.3 it is also obvious that the values of k in phosphate glass exceed
by one and a half times the values characteristicpgfpailicate glass. Among

the phosphate systems the variations of k are insignificant. Germanium
phosphate glass attracts attention by incfgaged values of k . In Figure 6.8
the relation is presented for k as a function of the teggggature of the
sample. indicating that one wsypﬂspincrease kpump is to increase the tempera-
ture within reasonable limits (by 50 to 7o‘c above room temperature).

          

I

m w m w m

1,:Z?(1)

Figure 6.7. Spectral relations for the absorption coefficient kpump of Yb’+

ions in the region of 1.0b to 1.09 microns in different glass. l-Ba-Al-
phosphate, 2--Na-K-La-Ba-ailicate. 3-germanium phosphate.

Key: (1) microns

223
FIHI(HHNC1AI.lEﬂE(NVLY
ﬂOI‘OFFﬂJAl.US£(NHLV

 

Table 6.3
Class kpu.p(1.055 microns). "DA'
10"“?1 lo’uc'l

Ba-Al-netaphosphate 6.0 11.0
Sr-Al-metaphosphate 5.9 10.8
Cd-Al-metaphosphate 5.9 10.7
Na-Hb-nataphosphate 5.0 10.5
Ba-La-netaphosphate 5.8 10.5
Ba-Pb-La-mataphosphate 5.0 12.6
K-Ba-Al-netaphosphate 5.9 10.7
Pb-La-ultraphosphats 6.8 10.8
Na-Hg—horophosphate 5.3 9.6
La-germaniunphosphate 5.3 12
Pb-La-gernaniumphoaphate 7.8 13
Pluophosphate 5.3 1.9
Ph-La-silicophosphate 5.0 8.2
Les-n 6.0 10.9
Na-K-la-La-silicate 6.0 2.0
Ca-Li-Al-silicate (ED-2) 5.1 3.0
Ba-La-horate 9.8 18
Na-K-Ba-Al—germanate 4.5 2.9

Figure 6.8. Absorption coefficient

k - .
pump on xpunp 1 055 sicrons as a

function of the sanple tenperature.
Ba-Al-phosphate glass; 4'“. g. (.31. .4.

 

0 .1) «(I y a; "7,7;

The most important characteristics of exhium glass are. of course. the duration
Tl Br and quantum yield QB: of the Er’ ion luminescence. In earlier works

[516. 517. 519]. large scattering of the measured values of 11 Br was noted in

glass of different conposition-from hundreds of microseconds to 15 milliseconds
-which the authors explain by strong dependence on the structure of the vitreous
matrices. however. in [193] we demonstrated that the quenching of the lumines-
cence of Br’+ ions takes place primarily on vibrations of the OH-groups (see

also i 3.6). Table 6.6 presents the data aaasured in this paper and also that

of available in the literature on 11 r (in cases where low Oh-group content is
unquestioned). Values of qBr which we estimated with respect to r rl1

are also presented there (I I was determined using the known exp%.§.108 FSIating
T to the integral absorpt n £0etfici::£ of the resonance hand presented. for

e 1e. in [100]) and the values of q c calculated or neasured directly by
other authors. When analysing these dgia it must be considered that the decay
tines of the luminescence of Br’+ ions measured under ordinary conditions

220
FOI‘OFFHJA1.USB(HVLY
can significantly exceed the true values of the luminescence lifetimes of 11 Er'
The result of the measurements essentially depends on the configuration and
the dimensions of the sample [193]. This fact is connected with reabsorption

of the luminescence in the sample on the basis of resonance of the transition
“113/2 : (.115,2 combined with high quantum yield of the luminescence. The
influence of these factors is illustrated by Figure 6.9 where concentration
relations are presented for the true values of T 3, measured on powdered samples
with a layer thickness of 500 microns and "ordinirv" values obtained on samples
10x10x10 mm’. As we shall see, for in.i- l-10”cu" in glass with high quantum
yield. the measurement results can differ by 1.3 to 1.5 times in phosphate glass.
and in fluophosphats glass. even by 1.7 times. In the published data of Table
6.4 this fact. as a rule, was not taken into account, and therefore the series
of percentage values with respect to t is explicitly high. The same thing
must be said of values of q r' wheres; Eh germanate. fluoberyllate. fluophos-
phate and silicate glass the closeness of q to one is unquestioned. in phos-

phate glass nevertheless qEr < 1. This is indicated by our data on qEr and

 

 

 

Table 6.6
Class M... "n" 1 11 Br' 10-3 sec th qglc Data Source
Na-K-Ba-Yb-silicate 2.3 16 *) - - [312]
Silicate **) 6.7 13 - 1.0 [413]
K-Ba-silicate 4.5 13 0.97 [361]
Zn-Al-Yb-phosphate - 9.0 *) - 1.0 *) [528]
Phosphate **) 3.0 8.4 - 1.0 *) [413]
Fluophosphate **) 10 12 *) - 1.0 [517]
Pluophosphate **) 6.8 8.0 - 1.0 [513]
Pb-germanate 10 5.5 - 1.0 [361]
Ca-Mg-Sr-Pb-Al-fluo-
beryllate 15 12.0 *) - 0.96 [361]
Ba-Al-Yb-Phosphate 1-20 7.8 0.86 Data of the
authors
LGS-B 0.35 7.7 0.88 The same
Na-Hg-phosphate 0.25 8.2 0.83 - " "
Ba-La-borate 0.15 0.59 0.07 - " "
Li—Ca-Al-silicate (ED-2) 0.33 12 1.0 - " "
Na-K-Ba-Al-germanate 0.28 6.5 1.0 - " "

*) The values are obviously high as a result of the influence of reabsorption.
**) The glass composition is not indicated.

also the calculation of the probability of MFR for Br’+ ions according to the
results discussed in S 3.4. For phosphate glass the estimates give H 3 10-25
sec-1 which corresponds to q! - 0.8 to 0.92. An indirect experimental con-
firmation of the difference of q from 1 is also provided by the relations
presented in Figure 6.9. They iﬁdicate that in phosphate glass the difference
of the "ordinary" and true values of 11 Br is less than in fluophosphate glass.

225
ﬁOR¢MﬂﬂC1AI.USE!0NLY
NI (WHCIAI. 08!. UNI-Y

    

4:010“ 51-5:qu

Figure 6.9. Concentration relations for the true values of t1 (1. 2). and
neesured on samples with dimensions 10:10x10 III’ (1'. 2'. 3) £55 Be-Al-phos-

hate (1 1' 3) and fluo hos hate (2 2') less at .r (3-10" -I'
ﬁnd [ML‘S'2’.‘MCI" (0. p p O 8 03 CI (1.1.3.?)

Key: (1) 1 . 10"3 sec

13:

The obvious reason for this is the sasller quantu- yield. In phosphate glass
with still lower “Br (3: 0.6 for Ink-.0) . concentration growth of 1’1 Ir is

not observed in general as a resul of introducing Oil-groups for smell A's: ;
but for high concentrations of Br the value of 1 begins to fall (curve 3).
which is determined by the effect of excitation ndrﬁion with respect to the
Br” ions. The absence of the contribution of the latter to curves 1 and 1'
confine the intracenter nature of quenching.

Thus. the noet probable value of q in phosphate glass is about 0.9. Direct
measure-eats that we performed by “sparing areas under the luminescence decay
curves of the eanplee asde of fluophosphats and phosphate glass with

«M. :- 9.6 - I0” cuz’ placed in the torn of plates 500 nicrone thick under iden-
tical experiaental conditions and excited by a short (t - 35 nanoseconds)
pulse of radiation of s neodyniun laser (second haraoniEFBeraitted direct
detenination of our - 0.88:0.2.

..___-.

.l 5
[— -— -—'-.
I, '0";-

(1)

   

Figure 6.10. Standard for. of’the
luainescence decay curve of Br ions
in phosphate glass with the cosposition
be,AI(PO,) taken in a large range of
intensitiez.

Js'tol s ‘.Q “cg;
#0" < 3' 'O’MI‘C; ‘u‘ u.

M?"

Key: (1) seconds

226
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The data presented in Figure 6.9 also indicate that the concentration quenching
of the luminescence of the Er3+ ions noted in a number of papers [339, 361. 516.
517. 519] in carefully dehydrated glass founded from a pure charge is absent.

It is also necessary to note that in phosphate erbium glass. the dispersion of
the radiating probabilities of the transition “113/2 * 4115/2 is weakly mani-
fested, which is indicated by the exponential nature of the luminescence decay
curve (Figure 6.10).

Thus. in the majority of vitreous materials in a wide range of concentrations
the quantum yield of the luminescence of Er’+ ions can be close to one, and
11 Er' to the radiation value. Only borate glass where quenching is highly

significant on the matrix vibrationaoconstitutes an exception.

Values of the excitation lifetimes on higher excited states of Er3+ ions are
also of theoretical interest for calculating the energy characteristics of
erbium lasers. Insufficient deactivation rate of the 111/2 level can limit

the efficiency of the sensitization channel Yb3+ * Br’+ for high intensities
of the pumping emission (5 6.1). and also lead to the appearance of additional
induced aBsorption of the pumping emission as a result of the transition
4111/2 + “ll/2’ The efficiency of the multistage and cooperative processes

of [245] and. consequently. the possible number of induced color centers of
the glass which can significantly improve the level of inactive absorption

on frequencies of vpump and vlase depend on the excitation lifetime on levels
of “I , a? . “S . and so on. Data on the excitation lifetimes on levels
4 9/2 69/2 3/2

of 111,2. 83,2. and F9/2 are presented in Figure 3.23. It is obvious from

this figure that the excitation relaxation rates from these states are quite

high. Borate and phosphate glass has predOminance with respect go this parameter.
In this glass. the values are equal to approximately 4-10 . l;l0 and 3.5‘ 06 '
sec'k respectively. For the 419/2 level, the estimates give H9 > 108 sec' .

Thus. the quantum yield of the luminescence from these states in all types of
glass is negligibly small which. along with the nature of the dependence of

the probability of MFR on the energy gap between levels AB investigated in

9 3.4. permits consideration of the results of the measurements of the quantum
yield of the excitation relaxations from these states to the metastable state
obtained in [517] to be considered incorrect inasmuch as [517] states that. as
a rule, it is significantly less than 1. Inasmuch as the probability of MFR
decreases sharply with an increase in AS, the excitation must unavoidably relax
successively thrugh all intermediate states, including the metastable state.

The processes of nonradiating excitation energy transfer in the pairs Yb’+-Er’+.
Nd3+-Yb’+. and Br’+-Nd’+ and dependence of their efficiency on the glass com-
position were investigated in detail earlier (9 3.3). Therefore we shall limit
ourselves below to the presentation of some of the useful relations and tabies.
Figure 6.11 shows the standard relations for the parameters Tl Y . (11 Yb)-

and q A as a function of the concentration of the Er’+ ions in phosphate glass
measuPed for low excitation and concentration levels of the Yb’ ions typical

of laser glass. The concept of comparative efficiency of the BPV in various
matrices with the same concentration JP'. and JPp-:L5-10" cﬁ-l can be obtained

227
FOI‘OFIHCIAL USElDNLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from Table 6.3 (the authors' data). As follows fron this table. the largest
values of w for given concentrations are observed in borate and then in
phosphate ggﬁss. In the latter. the quafsun efficiency of the BPV is more
than 0.9 already at JYl,- (2 to 2.5)‘10 cn‘3. Within the linits of phosphate

glass. the values of differ by no more than 1.3 times. with respect to

w
efficiency these are eggs close to germanium phosphate glass which is attrac-

tive also because of its increased values of kpunp'

Figure 6.11. Standard relations for the L: 1“-
duration of lusineacance of Yb’+ ions
(11 Yb)‘ the inverse duration (l/t1 Yb)

and quantum efficiency of BPV (an) as

    
  

.3 I.”
a function of the Br’+ ion concentration L My
in phosphate glass; 300 K; g4'
3'“ - 1,5 - loll “-3, " as M

Key: (1) r . m"... :1) u
1 Yb 1 L

(2)(11 Yb)-1’ loasec-

a: at u: 40 w
'1.- . U’L‘u ‘1

As was noted in I 6.1. in order to select the activator concentrations. it is
extrenely necessary to+have inforsation about the dependence of the efficiency

of BPV in the pair Yb’ -Br’+ on the ex itation level. Figure 6.12 shows the
functional r lations that we obtained* for the probability w noraalizad by

o value of up characteristic of the lower excitation levels 99 a function of

the relative 9o ulation of the setaatable levels ('I for different concen-
trations of Er ions. The measure-ants were perfoga‘z by excitation of optically

] ' . \ .

   

I

Figure 6.12. Relative rate of BPV
in the pair Yb’+-sr’+ as a function a
of the relative populst on of the '
metastable state of Br ions.

at “
in!
a
a

Bs-Al-phosphate glass: 4‘

The dotted line it the calculated “2

linear function. a

 

*) The nsasurenents were performed jointly with 8.". Hatytain.

228
FOI(NHHC1AI.USE(NVLY
thin samples by radiation pulses close to rectangular of a neodymium—doped
phosphate glass laser (t - 1.9 milliseconds. X - 1.055 microns) in-
suring an energy densitypggpthe surface of the samBTgpto 500 joules/cm”. The
sample was secondarily excited l millisecond after the end of the pumping

pulse by the pulse of another neodymium laser with duration of about 40 nano-
seconds. The luminescence decay of the Yb’ ions after the secondary excitation
was recorded through a monochromator by a photomultiplier and it was recorded
on the screen of a storing oscillograph with wideband logarithmic preamplifier
insuring high quality logarithmization of two orders of signal intensity. The
population of the metastable level was measured by monitoring the variation

of the absorption coefficient of Er’ ions based on the state in the band with
maximum at 0.52 microns. As is obvious from Figure 6.12. for small concen-
trations Jru . an accelerated decrease in the value of wDA is observed with
an increase in the excitation level. widuan increase in Jr" the function
approaches linear because of a decrease in population of the ground state. This
is promoted by the appearance of effective migration of the egcitation energy 6
in the subsystem of Er3+ ions. According to the estimate of s 30-10-40 cm
sec'l made in 5 3.3. it is easy to calculate the average time n which an exci-
tation jump takes place between the Er’+ ions. Peri?» e 1~IO"cu". it is
approximately 1.8 milliseconds. which is less than t .

 

   
  
   
       

pump
Table 6.5
Sensitizer Transmission System Data Source
I ____.

Nd" Nd" «VIP—Br” I318
Cf” ctr—E.” 313!
No“ Is" — BI": 3w

2 . \ Mo"-;Yb"-&R’ ”23
00 ° ~ nag—ax"; -

' UO§‘-—Nd"-—Y|P’-Bl" 3:93;} I
"n" ' WW—Er"

The possible systems for the use of other sensitizera to increase the efficiency
of erbium lasers proposed in various papers are presented in Table 6.5. The
most prospective is the Nd’+-Yb’+-Er’ system. However. complete use of it is
interfered with. as has already been noted, by the inverse quenching of the
luminescence of the Br’+ ions by the Nd’+ ions. In this pair the BPV was inves-
tigated in references [338. 339. 361. 517]. Quantitative estimates of the
parameters of the elementary act of transfer are presented in 5 3.3, where it

is shown that the transfer in this pair just as in others. is dipole-diplole.
and for phosphate glass CD I 1‘10“ 0cm -sec'1. Figure 6.13 shows the standard
relation for phosphate glaés of the magnitude of the characteristic time inter-
val r°r for the static transfer during which the luminescence intensity decreas-
cs by e times with respect to the maximum as a function of the Nd’+ ion concen-
tration. In practice this intensity coincides with the calculated value. From
the figure it is obvious that for the Nd’+ concentration in the glass of more
than 5-1019 cm‘3. the duration and quantum yield of the luminescence of the

Br3+ ions decrease. Other potential sensitisers of the Br’+ -ons are much

less efficient. The quantum yield of the luminescence of Cr’+ ions in glass

is very small [361]. The quantum efficiency of the m for Mo. 003+ and an“

229
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(HVLY
DUI WPMAL WI. UNI-I

ions exceedrOJ to 0.9 only for concentrations If. larger than (2-3)°1020

cm" 1361]. The introduction of some of then (for example. 003 ) into the
glasn is accompanied by an increase in the level of inactive absorption in the
1.5 micron range (as a result of the presence of other uranium forms) [246. 359].

      

I 2 .9 w... on"

6.13. The effective energy transfer time of the excitation in the pair Br’+-
Nd’+ as a function of the Nd3+ ion concentration in the glass with composition
383A1(P°3)93 e1",- 8'- 10' em".

Key: (1) seconds

In conclusion. let us note that the studies that we made of the photochemical
resistance of phosphate glass to eolarisation demonstrated that the laser emis-
sion with a wavelength of 1.055 microns at energy densities to 500 joules/cma
and a number of pulses to 10’ does not lead to noticeable additional color of
the glass. Concentration emission by the light of powerful pulsed xenon tubes
is more dangerous. Therefore. the erbium elements operating in the ELL require
filtration of the shortwave part of the pumping emission (see also [511]).

Thus. the performed analysis of the spectral luinesceme characteristics of
erbium glass confirms that phosphate glass has an optimal set of properties
required for the creation of effective active naterisl for ELL and BLT. These
are similar only to germanium phosphate matrices. but the latter obviously are
less adaptable to manufacture and contain an expensive component. At the
present time the production of two high quality erbium laser glasses has been
mastered b Soviet indust . ,Let us resent the ters of o of then.
me DOS-Bf 4'..-'1.5-10"c3’. «5‘» #33:, 6; 9-10" 01!:ng "‘7'“? “1'3 -1
> 7.6-19'3 sec ‘ 0.9. 8 (1.5.10'3 an". 3PM < 2.01.10 on .

s 6'10” cm'l. 1‘“

:1 Br ' qer

I 6.3. Tube-Pumped Erbium Lasers

As has already been noted above (I 6.1). the energy possibilities of ELL are
highly limited. The basic efforts have been applied to improving them after
the appearance of the first reports on obtaining the lasing effect in Na-K-
Ba-silicate [516. 529], Li-Hg-Al-silicate [530] and fluophosphste [531] glass.
Generalizing the conclusions of theoretical analysis of the energy characteris-
tics of BL? to the case of ELL. it is possible to state that conditions 2)

and S) (6.16) in this case lose significance on the basis of the wideband
nature of the pumping. 0n the contrary, condition 6) acquires decisive weight.
In the given case this condition can be written in the form

230
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
in. (v) k. (v) dv >’%‘:_”t_|1reﬂfh:1}d [I (z, 4:. = com.
' (1) (1) “‘ bump v (1)
0< t < 1.5
(1)
Key: (1) pump
(2) F - lase

It is far from always possible to satisfy this relation fully on the basis of
limited electric strength of the pumping tubes. especially for large-cross
section active elements. From this condition we have two areas of improving
the energy characteristics of ELL: selection of the compositions of the glass
insuring minimum values of J?» as a result of high efficiency of the BPV in
the pair Yb""'—Br3+ and finding means of improving the use coefficient of the
emission of the pumping tubes.

Within the framework of the first area. a significant gain has been obtained
from the transition to phosphate matrices realized for the first time in [528].
In such glass in,- (2.5-3)'1019 cm' is admissible. As an example let us
present the characteristics of the ELL with active elementzf.5 in diameter
by 80 T3 manufactured by us from LGs-B glass (#u- 1.5'10 cm'3, 4°»-

- 3°10 cm ) placed in amonomodularcylindrical quartz reflector and cooled
by running heavy water (0,0). The pumping tube of the IPP-800 type for the
best matching with the Yb’+ ion absorption band operated under "soft" condi-
tions. with current density of 1000 to 2000 amps/cm”. which was achieved as a
result of using a long pumping pulse (i 4 milliseconds). The transmission
coefficient of the output mirror was equal to 0.3. the resonator base was 300
mm. The lasing threshold in such a laser was reached for a pumping energy of
z 350 joules, and for pumping energy of 1200 joules. 1.8 Joules was emitted
with a pulse duration of about 3.1 milliseconds. The lasing kinetics had
ordinary peak structure with peak duration of l to 3 microseconds. In the
case of Q-switching of the resonator by a rotating prism. with the exit mirror
with R - 0.5 and pumping energy of 800 joules, a pulse was emitted with a
duration of 30 nanoseconds and an energy of 0.5 joule.

A further decrease in 4r; woulg be possible by increasinngy. to the maximum
admissible values of about 4-10 1 cm'3. However. the gain obtained in this
case is approximately 1.5 times (5 3.3). which is not so significant as to
justify the difficulties connected with the negative effects on the radial
uniformity of the pumping and the technological properties of the glass.

In addition. in the Q-switching mode a further increaseiﬁﬂu is generally in-
expedient. The second area appears to be more prospective. At the present
time several versions of increasing the efficiency of the use of pumping
emission in ELL is proposed. The most radical of them is. as has already
been noted above. introduction into the erbium glass of additional Nd3+ ions.
A theoretical analysis in order to optimize the activator concentrations in
the Nd’+-Yb’+-Br’+ is performed in reference [339]. Its authors have drawn
the conclusion that it is expediant t3 introduce the Nd3+ ions into the

glass in concentrations to 4'102 cm' . compensating the decrease in T B
accompanying this (5 6.2) as a result of a decrease in the pumping pulse r
duration tpump' As applied to the conditions of free lasing. it would be

231
FOR‘OFFMJA1.USE(NNLY
FI”!(HWW(JAL.USE|DNLY

possible to agree with this if the introduction of the Nb3+ ionsuere not ac-
companied by the introduction of additional inactive losses into the laser
resonator on the lasing frequency which was not considered in [339]. According
to our measurements, depending on the lass composition. these losses are (1.5
to 2.2»10'l curl for inn-14020 cm“ , which is highly significant. espec-
cislly if we remember the small values of the cross section 0 (see also
condition 3) in (6.14)). In the Q-switching mode the level ofaeﬁe inactive
losses, as is known, has less influence on the lasing threshold and the effi-
ciency. but the reduction of r E worsens the conditions of accumulation of
the Br3+ ions in the metastable State. and therefore is extremely undesirable.
For these reasons, in both_gpgrating modes of the ELL. obviously it is inexpedi-
ent to use Jfﬁ.>45-7)-10" ca‘! . The analogous conclusion is drawn in [361].
In [528], the optimal copgentration of the Nd3+ ions is considered to be still
less, approximately 2'10 cm‘3. Their introduction into the glass even in such
small quantity gave a gain in the lasing threshold by threefold. In this

paper a study is made of the ELL with active element with dimensions of 61mm

in diameter by 76 mm made of Zn-Al-phosphate glass doped with Yb303 (15 percent
by weight). Ndzo, (0.2 percent by weight) and Ergo, (0.5 percent by weight).
With a pulse duration of the xenon pumping tube (4 mm in diameter) of about

6 milliseconds the lasing threshold was reached for a pumping energy of 9S
joules. and at 350 joules in the free lasing node. 0.86 joule was emitted

(n - 0.25 percent). For Q-switching by a rotating prism and with pumping
energy of 150 joules. a short pulse was obtained with duration of 25 nanoseconds
and energy of 0.2 joule (n - 0.12 percent). Similar data were obtained later
in other papers [85, 528. 533. 536].

Another way to improve the efficiency of using the pumping emission consists
in placing reemitting shells around the active element. The active element
itself in this case is made of glass activated only by Yb’+ and Er3+ ions.

As the shell naterial most frequently Nd9+ and Yb doped glass is used. A
significant part of the emission of the latter falls inside the active element
and is absorbed again by the Yb’+ ions. In [85] approximately double gain in
radiation efficiency with respect to the active elements without the shell was
achieved in this way. Inasmuch as the wall thickness of the shell must be as
small as possible, highly concentrated neodymium glass with small additions of
ytterbimnareespecially suitable for making the shells. Our estimates [5341
demonstrated that such a shell 0.5 mm thick made of glass with the composition
KNdo.9Ybo.1P4°12 increases the pumping use coefficient by 2 to 3 times. It

is possible to obtain a still greater effect by applying an interference

coating to the surface of the active element with reemitting shell reflecting
the emission in the range of 0.95 to 1.1 microns and thus not emitting it from
the active element. In reference [532] it is proposed that M03+ ions absorbing
in the region of 0.36 to 0.55 microns and emitting in the region of 1.02 microns
be used as the activator for the shell glass. However, nothing has been re-
ported on the efficiency of this version. A study was also made of the possi-
bility of making active element: by fusing a bundle of fiber consisting of
glass activated by Yb3+ and Er’ ions and shells made of Nd’ -Yb’+-glass

[528]. A deficiency of such an element is increased radiation divergence (up

to two angular degrees).

232
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USB(NVLY
A prospective way to improve the output energy of an erbium laser is use of
tubular elements. including with reemitting core. for example. made of Nd”-
Yd’+—glass [5310]. Here it is possible to increase the transverse cross
section of the active element without an increase in nonuniformity of pumping
and therefore to match it with the large diameter pumping tube and, conse-
quently. with high maximum emission energy. By using such elements with out-
side diameter of 110 an. inside diameter of 8 In and 120 m long and optimizing
the pulse duration and brightness temperature of the pumping source we were
able to improve the radiation energy of the ELL to lo joules in a pulse lasting
3.5 milliseconds and 1.5 joule for t1 - 40 nanoseconds.

An interesting possibility of improving the efficiency of ELL is connected

with the application of interference dielectric coatings to the surface of

the pumping tube emitting radiation only in the range of 0.89 to 1.05 microns.
According to [543], in this way an increase in efficiency of the neodymium
lasers by 1.5 to 1.7 times is achieved under certain pumping conditions as a
result of partial transformation of the previously unused part of the pumping
radiation to radiation in the spectral region of absorption by Nd’ ions.

'80:- SLL absorbing in a narrow band, the effect of this transformation must

be still more significant. This is indicated. in particular. by the smaller
than expected lasing thresholds of erbium glass. “For example, for ELL described
at the beginning of the section. when Aha-340M231" the threshold absorbed
specific pumping energy reduced to s - 10.000 cm'1 must be more than 3 joules/cm’.
Such values are observed in ELP (see below. 5 6.4). where they can be measured
exactly. Consequently. for electric threshold pulping energy of 350 joules
input to the pulse tube and for a volume of the active element of about 2.7

cm’. an efficiency with respect to stored energy of more than 2.5 percent is
realized. For ELL this is a very high value. and it indicates the partial
transformation of the initially unused emission of the pumping tube. but then
reabsorbed by the discharge plasma. to the emission falling in the absorption
band of the Yb” ions. 0n application of interference coatings. this effect
can be intensified significantly. An analogous result can be expected from the
application of cavity pumping tubes. In the case of neodymium lasers they turn
out to be less efficient than rod lasers on the basis of lower brightness
temperature of the plasma and greater reabsorption of the pumping emission by
the discharge plasma. For ELL. these deficiencies are surpassed by the advan—
tages. In addition. the cavity tubes permit greater energy densities of pumping.

Along with the energy characteristics. the spectral characteristics of ELL
emission are of great interest. In the first reports it was pointed out that
the ELL based on silicate glass emit on a wavelength of 1.543 microns [312].
and on phosphate glass. on X1 . 1.536 microns [528]. The reason for this

is the differences in the forgsgf the luminescence band of the Er” ions in
this glass (5 6.2). In silicate glass the relative intensity of the transition
to the second Stark component (AB $ 26 curl) of the I 2 level is appreciably
higher than in phosphate glass. Later. it was amnetliéea that the lasing
wavelength of the ELL in both cases depends on the reflection coefficient of
the output mirror. the tuning accuracy of the resonator and the temperature

of the laser element [510. 511. 533]. With high Q-factor of the resonator.
lasing occurs on A - 1.563 microns. with law Q—factor. on A - 1.536
microns. In some case a”for example. blind mirrors) it is possibl 823 observe
lasing even in the range of 1.61 and 1.57 microns [361] with respect to the
quasifour'level system (A3 a- 330 cm. ). although the efficiency of this lasing

233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK WHLIAL USP. ONLY

is naturally low as a result of the small cross sections of the induced emis-
sion of Br ions in this region and the presence of induced absorption (the
transition l'113/2 + I ). The width of the lasing spectrum is approximately
17 cm'1 for Alase - l.g‘§ microns and about 6 cm'1 for Alase - 1.536 microns.

0n the whole, it must be noted that the energy and spectral characteristics

of ELL have been investigated explicitly insufficiently. A more careful study
will obviously help to reveal significant reserves for improvement of them.
The application of ELL is primarily expedient where it is necessary to have
emission in the spectral range of 1.5 microns or where the shorter wave emis-
sion presents a real danger for the eyes [537. 509]. The report was made on
the development on the basis of ELL of a number of range finders and locators
[85, 546, 510]. In [545] a description is presented of ELL developed for meas-
uring the height of the lower bound of the cloud cover. It emitted pulses
with 35 nanosecond duration and a power of l megawatt with a divergence of 10
milliradians. The reflected signal was received by an avalanche germanium
photodiode. The range of the instrument was more than 10 km. Among the pros-
pective areas of app1ication it is also necessary to note scientific research,
for example, spectroscopy [538] and also medicine. In [539] a report is pre-
sented on the successful experiments in treating diseases of the cornea of the
eye using ELL.

6 6.4. Erbium Laser Reemitters. Free Lasing Node

Along with the search for new. more efficient compositions of erbium glass and
optimization of the concentrations of the activators. the creation of the
efficient BL? is connected with the solution of the nontrivial problem of opti-
cal coupling of the pumping laser to the erbium active elements. Let us con-
sider some significant aspects of this problem. One of them consists in the
necessity for simultaneous satisfaction of two, usually mutually exclusive re-
quirements: 1) the pumping emission must be completely absorbed in the erbium
active element; 2) the latter must be uniformly excited with respect to the
entire operating volume. In order to satisfy the first of them, the active
element must correspond to an optically thin element, and to satisfy the second.
an optically dense layer with respect to the pumping radiation. However. these
requirements can be combined if the active element is placed inside the
resonator of a neodymium pumping laser. In this case the erbium active element
plays the role of the useful load of this resonator, replacing the output mirror
and. consequently. the losses introduced by it must be optimized in order to
insure maximum efficiency of the neodymium pumping laser during operation on
such a load. It is obvious that for this purpose the following relation
must be observed: , .
u. I. (1)

”ﬁ- >hm+h-. 6J5

(1) T (If ( )

Key: (1) pump

where Bud and Bpump are the coefficients of inactive losses on the pumping fre-

quency. respectively, in the neodymium and erbium active elements. L and Lpump

are the lengths of the neodymium and erbium active elements along the pumping
path and Kpump is the coefficient of useful losses in the resonator of the

234
FOR‘OFFICIAI.LE“B(HVLY
neodymium laser introguced by erbium active elementsz FoI the available values
cm‘ .

of 3 . 8 ‘ 1'10' cm‘l, we obtain k' < 1'10' Hence. it is pos-
pump Nd pump

sible to determine the minimum length of the erbium active element. For example,

for a standard length of the neodymium active element, L - 600 mm and k - 0.05

cm’l. the length of the erbium active element must be no less than 120 3§?p Here
65 percent of the pumping energy is absorbed in it in one pass or the density of
the excited particles at the output of the active element for its location out-
side the resonator is two times less than at the entrance. In the case of intra-
rcsonator location. these values differ by no more than 20 percent. It is pos-
sible to obtain still greater uniformity 8:5 percent) on placing two neodymium

elements in the resonator symmetric with respect to the erbium active elements
(see below. 6.17).

A second aspect of the problem of coupling is connected with conditions 5) and
6) from (6.14) for the satisfaction of which in the free lasing mode. as was
pointed out above, pumping emission energy densities in the erbium active ele—
ment are required on the order of 500 to 700 joules/cm“. These values are
appreciably higher than those ordinarily realized in neodymium laser cavities
(80 to 300 joules/cm’). Consequently, the pumping emission beam inside the
erbium active element must also be pinched. This is done most simply by using
a lense telescope, but the introduction of the latter into the cavity is con-
nected with the appearance of significant additional losses. The analysis

that we made of various versions of increasing the pumping density demonstrated
that the optimal version is to make erbium active elements in the form of spe-
cial prisms. the geometric shapes of which in different versions are illustrated
in Figure 6.14 [247. 515]. In elements of this type the pumping emission

 

Figure 6.14. Various versions of the geometry of active elements of ELF for
lrcc lasing mode insuring optical coupling of the active element to the radia-
tion beam of the pumping source and beam concentration.

Key: (1) lase (2) pump

235
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘IIILIAL use ONLY

density is twice the radiation density at the entrance as a result of several
total internal reflections of the pumping beam from the side faces on which

it is incident at an angle of 65'. An important problem of spatial separation
of the lasing and pumping beams is solved simultaneously. and autocompensation
of the nonuniformity of the pumping radiation density with respect to cross
section of the beam at the entrance of the erbium active element and uniform
energy pickup of the stored energy from the entire excited volume are also
insured. Prisms of the type of a and b also satisfy the function of one of
the mirrors of the pumping laser. The selection of the indicated versions is
dictated by the required output energy of the BLP. the volume of the active
medium and the possibilities of neodymium pumping lasers. The set of working
faces. which complicates cooling of the active elements. high requirements on
accuracy of their optical processirg and the necessity for using neodymium active
elements of rectangular cross section for pumping constitute the deficiencies
of the indicated shapes.

Finally. a third aspect of the coapling problem is connected with the selective
nature of loading introduced by erbium active elements into the neodymium laser
resonator. For the last laser the threshold condition is defined by the rela-

tion "
mm_mm+ml

_ II .1.
(2) W - “M. (6.16)
Key: (1) pump
(2) lase
where class (A) is the gain of the active medium of the neodymium pumping laser
on a wavelength of A . For k >> 8 and k 1 IL >> 8“ we obtain
9“"? P“‘P pump pump pump 4
a (1)-I.“ A.
(2.) ( n)( ) (5.17)

Key: (1) PUIP
(2) lase

I on
Figure 6.15 shows the relations al“e (A). kpump (A) and kpunp (A) for active

elements of the pumping laser and EL? made of phosphate glass. Inasmuch

as the steepness of the function k' (A) is greater than the steepness of the
long-wave wing of the amplificatioguggrve. the condition for the beginning of
lasingrn'a neodymium laser is satisfied primarily in the region of 1.07 to 1.08
microns. Thus. a shift of the pumping laser emission wave to this region must
be observed. which is extremely undesirable. for it would lead to a sharp de-
crease in energy absorbed in the BL? element and to a decrease in the efficiency
of the neodymium laser itself. Experimental studies of the emission spectrum
of the pumping laser confirmed that the lasing frequency shift actually occurs.
If under a load on the flat dielectric mirror with R - 0.5. the lasing spectrum
width did not exceed 10 A. and the center was located at 10,565 A. then in the
given cgse the lasing spectrum was broadened by axproximately 200 X (10,540 to
10.750 A). Lasing began in the region of 10.750 . and then gradually shifted
to the maximum of the luminescence band. This shift can be explained if we
consider that as the ER’+ ions are accumulated in the metastable state. the

2%
INDR¢0IWNCLAI.thIZ(NNLY
level of the induced absorption in the pumping region also increases. and its
dependence on the wavelength is inverse to the dependence of .009 on A (Figure
6.6). Analogous broadening of the lasing spectrun was observe by the authors
of [535). In order to improve the operating efficiency of the BLP it is neces—
sary to take additional neasures to stabilize A1”. at the nexinun of the anpli-
fication curve. This can be achieved if we introduce an element with inverse
dispersion k"(X) into the resonator (Fibure 6.15. b, c). llere full compensation

of hém is not required. and it is sufficient to satisfy the condition

dit:‘-'1|-'-."’_7.)l Jn,:i.‘-
__._.__ <—,:—. (6.18)

Key: (1) 9m
(2) lass

4

(A).a,ms"av"'

l
e

t

q

  
   

37.

“FM”

‘3'!
B

4005.10. at .w 51‘-
c) 5""! 0)”

Figure 6.15. Spectral relations in the region of 1.05 to 1.08 nicrons of the

gains alas“); I" (A). kng) are the losses in the resonator of the

punping laser introduced by absorption of the Yb3+ ions in the active element
of the BL? and additional eluents conpensating the dispersion. respectively.
a) Conpensating element absent; (b) conpensstion using the glass plate acti-
vated by 5.30,. 5 percent by weight (kgm - our“); c) conpensation using

n n a
selective dielectic nirror (Rpm (swan-m). . The segnents of s straight
line at the top indicate the width of the lasing spectrum without conpensation
(l) and with conpensation (2).

Key: (1) a I pulp (3) microns
(2) I‘ - lase (lo) threshold

237
POI OFFICIAL 158 ONLY
I'Uli OFFICIAL OBI. ONLY

 

Figure 6.16. Diagram of an erbium converter with intraresonator symmetric
excitation of the erbium element [267]. l--erbium active element; 2.2'--
neodymium active element; 31 32-meodymium resonator mirrors; 33. 3,.—
erbium resonator mirrors. ’

Key: (1) AP - 1.055 microns

“.9
(2) Alase - 1.536 microns

Figure 6.16 shows one of the optical systems of BL? with intraresonator loca-
tion of the erbium active element [101. 267] which we investigated. The latter
was made of phosphate glass type LGS-E containing JP..-l 5'1021 cm" and

:rrrM 2J3~10“ cu" (k - 6-10'2cm' . - < 2'10‘3cm' . I - 9.0-10’3
sec). in the form of Ruggism with side fagggpbeveled at angle; 5! 65’:5". The
pumping radiation was introduced into it normally to one of the beveled faces
and. undergoing several total internal reflections. it exited through the op-
posite face. The length of the erbium active element with respect to the pumping
channel was 12.8 cm. The pumped volume was s 8.2 cm’. The resonator of the
pumping laser consisted of a prism and dielectric mirror 3 and also two
active elements made of phosphate ne dymium glass Lcs-I made 1% the form of
rectangular plates 2 and 2' with dimensions of 101328280 mm’ and ends beveled

at the Brewster angle arranged symmetrically with respect to the erbium active
element. The base of the pumping resonator was 150 cm. The BL! resonator with
base a 20 cm was made up of flat dielectri mirrors 33 (R I l) and 34 (R - 0.6).
The pumping pulse duration tpump . 1.6'10' second.

Two methods of compensation of k' (A) were used. In the first method. a
plane parallel plate of Sm30, puﬂﬂtﬂ glass (5 percent by weight)was placed in
the resonator at the Brewster angle to its axis. By selecting its thickness.
it was possible to stabilize Apump- but the laser efficiency was reduced by 10
to 15 percent as a result of introducing additional losses into the resonator
at the lasing frequency (Figure 6.15, b). The second method gave better re-
sults. A dielectric mirror with reflection band selected so that R (1.56
microns) - 0.95. and R (1.070 microns) - 0.65 (Figure 6.15. c) was made. In
this case no noticeable decrease in pumping laser efficiency was observed. In
both bases the lasing spectrum remained twice as wide as with a flat mirror.
and it occupied an interval of 1.056 to 1.056 microns.

Measurements of the energy characteristics of this BLP demonstrated that the
threshold absorbed specific pumping energy is 5.3 joules/cm’. the lasing energy
is about 60 joules with triple excess over threshold. The standard dependence

238
FOI‘OFFKJALIKHEONLY
) on the specific pumping energy absorbed in the
erbium active element (7 a s) is presented in Figure 6.17. From this rela-
tion it is possible to dete ine the differential efficiency of the ELF, reaching
30 percent. With somewhat altered resonator layout and greater pumping dura-
tion and excess over the threshold, the lasing energy of about 80 joules in a
pulse with a duration of 3.5 milliseconds was achieved later wit differential

of f iciency of about 39 percent and radiation divergence of 3'10- rad [515].

The lasing spectra consisted of three lines: 1.536 microns with

AC) - 7 cm'l, 1.543 microns with A?) - 7.5 cm’1 and 1.538 microns with
lase 1 lase
Mlase - 6 cm' . With a pumping density of a 700 to 800 joules/cm“. local

deterioration of the glass of the erbium active elements with respect to platinum
inclusions was observed.

of the lasing energy (1’ lase

Attention is attracted by the small divergence of the lasing emission achieved
without the application of any special measures with a short resonator base

and small cross section of the lasing beam of the 31.? (about 1.4 cmz). This

is promoted by high uniformity of excitation and low specific heat release, which
are distinguishing features of ELP.

In references [413. 535]. a study was made of the extraresonator system of the
EL? (Figure 6.18). A phosphate glass laser with active elements 45 mm in
diameter by 620 m (X I 1.543 microns) was used as the neodymium pumping
laser. In order to iﬁggase the pumping density. a telescopic system 2 with
multiplicity of about 4 was used. The pumping was done through the end of the
ELP element (3) at an angle of approximately 20' to the axis of the EL? resona—
tor. The latter was formed by the prism 4 and the flat mirror 5 with R - 0.2
to 0.8. The length of the resonator of t e erbium laser was about 150 cm. The
pumping pulse duration was (2 to 2.5)‘10' seconds. The erbium active element
was made of phosphate glass with the follow ng parameters: ”vs—”2.2‘ H)"
cm'3. 19-3.40" w-a' Rpm - 0.054 cm‘ , 11 a: - 7.5-10'3. an“ - 0.006

cm'l. Under such conditions with absorbed specific pumping density equal to

31 joule/cm’. a conversion efficiency was achieved which is equal to 35 percent,
and the differential efficiency was 43 percent with a specific energy pickup

of about 11 joules/ems. total emission energy of 27 joules (through a 5 an
iris) and divergence of 2.6'. The use of higher pumping densities led to the

Figure 6.17. Standard dependence of the lasing
energy ’13“ of 31.? in the free lasing mode on

the specific pumping energy absorbed in the active i
elements. r abs in the diagram with intraresonator 5::

location of the erbium active element. (1)-

 

Kcy: (1) Vlase' joules

3 III " :'
(ZN'abs' joules/cm “"03”", (2)

(3) Efficiency with respect to slope 3 30 percent

239
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m use we a ss-eo... uue- U-sue

2 I
'l

6%: W"
\ 7:“ *“”~(1)

Figure 6.18. Diagram of an erbium BLP with active element outside the
resonator [413].

l-Neodymium laser; 2-telecope; 3-erbium active element: b-rectangu1sr
reflector prism; 5-output mirror.

Key: (1) microns

appearance of local damage to the investigated glass. The integral brightness
of the emission of the BL? is almost an order greater than the brightness of
the emission of the pumping neodymium laser. The emission spectrum consists _1
of two spectral components with peaks at 1.536 and 1.565 microns. 8 and 16 cm
wide. respectively.

Thus. the performed experiments demonstrated that the ELP permit not only crea-

tion of laser sources in the region of 1.5 microns with good energy characteristics.
but even an increase in the limiting values of the specific energy pickup from

the active element (to 10 to 20 joules/cm’) and integral brightness of the
radiation to levels that are record levels for lasers in general. which opens

up the prospects for their use in powerful laser systems. At the same time.

a number of factors were discovered which prevent the achievement of maximum
operating efficiency of the BL? in the free lasing mode. Above all. these in-
clude the following factors:

1) Extremely high required pumping emission densities (to 1000 joules/cm“)
commensurate with the radiating strength of the glass and complicating the
problem of optical coupling of the EL? and the pumping lasers; 2) the necessity
for operation with minimum possible concentrations of Br3+ ions. which does

not permit insurance of ”cuff cient efficiency of the excitation energy trans-
mission in the pair Yb ”-Br’ . especially for high excitation levels; 3) rela-
tively small cross section of the laser transition ‘113/2++41115/2 which sig-

nificantly increases the requirements on the level of inactive losses and the
optical quality of the glass; 4) the presence of induced absorption on the
lasing frequency.

The indicated difficulties are softened to a significant degree on using EL? in
the lasing mode and on amplification of short (K1) and supershort (SKI) pulses.

S 6.5. Possibilities of the EL? Under Lasing and Amplification Conditions of
K1 [Short Pulses] and SKI [Supershort Pulses]

In 5 6.1 it was already noted that erbium glass is an almost ideal medium for
amplification of K1 and SKI. This fact was first indicated in [513]. The
advantages of the erbium medium consist primarily in high quantum yield and

240
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
large values of 1'1 Br permitting easy realisation of the pumping mode

<< .
tpull]: 11 Br

tion of the energy in the metastable state of all 2. As is known. (see.
for example. 5 5.3). neodymium glass corresponds 2‘ the requirements on the
active medium for amplification of the K1 and SKI to a much lesser degree.
which causes a sharp decrease in their efficiency on transition to this
operating mode.

Low values of “B r are also favorably felt in the accumula-

Other advantages of BL? follow from the laser method of its excitation.
Already for reasonable pumpig radiation density of 1000 joules/cm: it is pos-
sible to excite up to 1.0.10 Br” ions in one cm’, which corresponds to a
specific stored energy of 'stor ed s: 13 joules/cm’. exceeding by more than

an order the value of f r in power amplifiers with large aperture based
on neodymium glass and. tﬂsomgge so in gases. The optimal . operating concen-
trations of Er ions in the given case are (6--10)‘1019 cm'3. which insures
high excitation transmission efficiency in the Yb”-Er’+ pair (to irwersiv:ms_1
of M01330,” For the indicated inversions. the gains up to 0.3 to 0.6 cm
become realistic. which permits a sharp decrease in the total length of the
active elements in the amplifying channel and manufacture of elements of
individual stages in the form of plates with l - 2-3 cm. insuring. never-
theless. a gain K0 in each of them for the “$819.1 of 3 to 6 times in one
pass. In neodymium large cross section active elements. a value of 1 of

at least 20 to 1.0 cm is required to achieve such a gain. It is also m [560]
that breakdown of the active elements into thin spatially separated discs
(plates) significantly increasing the aelffocusing thresholds and. consequently.
the beam strength of the glass. In addition. the distortions of the wave front
of the emitted radiation occurring as a result of thermal deformations decrease.
Amplifiers based on 31.? in this respect have unquestioned advantages over neo-
dymium glass amplifiers for they permit easy solution of this problem without
an extraordinary increase in the number of discs and the length of the amplify-
ing channel as a whole. An important circumstance also is the smaller value

of the index of refraction in the region of 1.5 microns and. obviously. its
nonlinear component. In addition. it is highly significant that erbium active
elements have almost unlimited “field of view." which permits use without any
difficulties of diverging beams with any angle of aperture. full realization

of the possibilities of multipaes and telescopic amplifiers [561. 5&2] and also
pickup of the maximum proportion of the excitation energy stored in the
active element (which is especially urgent in the case of SKI) by passing
several beams in series through it or one been several times at different angles
to the plume of the active element. Let us also note the simplicity of the
effective suppression of superluminescence in the active elements. For this
purpose it is sufficient to leave the peripheral parts of the active elements
unexcited.

2101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR WPILIAL use. UNI-I

 

Figure 6.19. Experimental dependence of the gain an“ on the specific absorbed

pulping energy If.“ normalized by _rebsorbed threshold' in ws-s glass.
In.” sun- can"; 5. lax w" a}.
lane". a). ssxu-esf' (a).

Key: (1) an”. CI-l

‘2) 1» she/Ives. threshold

In 9 6.0. other advantages of the 31.? have already been notednlov specific heat
release and high unifonity of excitation. which persits signification of the
problen of achieving diffraction divergence of the radiation and also an in-
crease in the repetition frequency of the amplified pulses. It is also important
that in a neodymium puping laser the tubes can operate under lighter condi-
tions than in Wily-ill! asplifiers. consequently. with high reliability. The
theoretical analysis made by us [515] shows that in the amplification node of
short pulses at t > 10 nanoseconds. values of n s 0.15-0.2 are entirely attain-
able; thus. the efficiency of the needy-inn laser of about 3 percent can be
counted on for a total efficiency of up to 0.6 to 0.6 percent.

__

(I...)
to
i
Q I
Figure 6.20. Experimental dependence of g:
the specific absorbed puuping energy 8, ‘
vabs threshold corresponding to the
threshold of achievement of inversion as "
a function of the Br” ion concentration a ‘ I I ,0 ,2
in LOB-8 glass; «tn-1.5x 19" at". ‘ .rzno'cv"

by: (1) webs threeh' joules/cn’

2&2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 6.19 shows the experimental dependence of the gain of an erbium active
element made of LBS-E phosphate glass with different erbium ion concentrations
as a function of the relative magnitude of the absorbed specific pumping energy.
The measurements were performed by sounding the active layer 5 cm thick uni-
formly excited by an external converging beam of neodymium laser emission
(tpump - 0.8 milliseconds). by a short pulse from the external ELL with Q.

switching (the delay with respect to the beginning of pumping is about 1.0
millisecond). As we see, for small -ﬂ%. the investigated relation is non-

linear in a large range of values of ’r'aba/‘raba thresh' 0n the other hand.

for JP” - 8. 6 1019cn 3 it is linear to v ues of - 0.26 to 0.3 $33.

which corresponds to a level population of Ili/Z of Bﬁroximately 7 10 3.

The obtained maximum value of 01w - 0. #6 cm is not limiting. For large
4?}, and 1f» .it can reach up? M1

The threshold specific absorbed pumping energy as a function of the erbium ion
concentration in the glass is illustrated in Figure 6.20. From this relation
it follows that for small 4th, the value 1( abs thresh is somewhat higher than

expected for qﬁzse 1. These data agree with the results presented in Figure

6.12, and they independently confirm the contribution of the accelerated de-
crease in probability of BPV in the pair Yb’+-Br3+ as the Br3+ ions are accumu-
lated in the metastable state with low concentration of them in the glass.

The lasing characteristics of the EL? in the Q-switching mode will be illus-
trated in the example of the system used earlier to obtain free lasing (Figure
6.16). When using a rotating prise. output mirror with R I 0.5 and specific

pumping energy of about 9.5 joules/cm’ . this EL? emitted 5.1 joules per pulse
with 30 nanosecond duration.

4
Figure 6.21. One version of the optical d*f

system of the power amplification stage
for KI and SKI based on BLP. J

l--erbium active element. 2-90° prism
of erbium glass. 3--neodymiun active
element. 6-selective dielectric mirrors.

 

Figure 6.21 shows one of the possible versions of the optical system of the
output stage of a power amplifier based on ELP. The erbium active element is
made in the form of a plate 16.1 mm thick and 60 nanlong. on the two lateral
faces of which 90 degree prisms made of glass of the same composition activated
only by erbium ions in a concentration of 2°1020 cm‘3 are seated on a deep opti-
cal contact. Bmission from two symmetrically arranged plates 20 mm thick made
of neodymium glass which are placed in a common resonator with the erbium

263
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. 08b ONLY

active element is introduced through the indicated prisms into the active
element. The manufacture of these prisms fro. glass with Br’+ permits
efficient suppression of spurious lasing on the internal nodes. It is obvious
that the amplified been of radiation can be transmitted at any angle of
incidence with respect to the working planes of the active elements. The
degree of nonunifornity of distribution of the inverse population in it does
not exceed 5 percent. The total stored energy depends on the width H of the
excited part of the active element and the erbium ion concentration. For
example, for H - 60 mm and 4f}; - 8.6°1019 cn‘3. it can reach 500 joules. The
amplifying characteristics of the active element are analogous to those pre-
sented in Figure 6.18. that is. the gain per pass on incidence of the been

at the Brewster angle will be about two.

264
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10'

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Bete, C., KVANTOVAYA mm [Quantum Mechanics], Moscow, Mir, 1975.

Sviridov, D. T.; Sviridova, R. K.; Smirnov, Yu. F., OPTICIIBSKIYE SPEKTRY
IONOV 9mm METALLOV V KRISTALLAKR [Optical Spectra of
Transition Metal Ions in Crystals], Moscow, Nauka, 1976.

Mikaelyan, A. L.: Ter-Mikaelyan, H. L.; Turkov, Yu. 8., OPTICHBSKIYB
GENERATOR? NA WKRDOM T313 [Solid-State Lasers], Moscow, Sov. radio, 1967.

Belostotskiy, B. R.; Lyubavskiy, Yu. V.; Ovchinnikov, V. M., OSNOVY
LAZERNOY WK! [Fundamentals of Laser Engineering], Moscow, Sov. radio,
1972.

Buzhinskiy, I. M.: Manonov, s. K.; Mikhaylova, L. 1., ZHPS [Journal of
Applied Spectrometry], Vol 15, 1971, p 229.

WRONDNOYB USHIRE‘NIYE SPEKTRAL'W LINIY AK‘HVNYKH SRBD OKG

[Nonmiforn Broadening of Spectral Linea of the Active Media Lasers],
Kiev, 1? AN USSR, 1969.

Godenko, L. P.; MaahkeviCh, V. 8., VVEDENIYE V KVAN‘I‘OVUYU ELEKTRONIKU
SPEKTRAL'NO mommmxn SRBD [Introduction to Quantu- Blectronics of
Spectrally Inhmgenaom Media], Kiev, Naukova duﬂu, 1977.

Wang, C. C., PHYS. REV., V01 32, 1970, p 20105.

Hellvarch, 8.; Cherlov, J.; Yang Tim-Tsai, PHYS. RBV., Vol 311, 1975,
p 966.

Akh-anov, S. A.; Sukhorukov, A. P.; mokhlov, R. V., um [Progress in
the Physical Sciences], Vol 93, 1967, p 19.

Shea, Y. R., PROGR. QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, London, Pergamn Press, V01 6,
1975.

Bliss, E. 8.; Hunt, J. ‘1‘.; Renard, P. A., et al., 1828 J. QUANTUM
ELECTRONICS, Vol 08-12, 1976, p 402.

Bespslov, V. 1.; Talsnov, V. 1., PIS'MA ZHE‘I'F [Letters to the Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Physics], Vol 3. 1966, p 1.71.

LAWRENCELIVERmRE LAB” REP. 00111. 75628, Liverlnore, 1974.

Bliss, B. 8.; Speck, D. R.; Simona, H. w., APPL. PHYS. 1.811., Vol 25,
1971., p 728.

Milan, 0.; Heber, M. J., 1m J. QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, V01 (23-12, 1976,
p 512.

245
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LAWRENCE LIVE“!!! LAB" SMANNUAL m. UCRL 50021-73-1, Livernore,
1973.

Boiling, N. L.; class, A. J.; Ovyoung. A., LAURENCE LIVMRB LAB.,
REP. UCRL 75628 50?”... Liver-ore, 1974.

Heiaa, J. A. 0PT. SPECTRA, Vol 11, 1977, p 39.

Blonb‘gergen, N., KVAN'IOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA [Quantum Electronics], Vol 1, 1974,
p 7 .

Khodakov, G. 8.; ‘l‘aeanek, L. 8., urn-m. PROM. [Optical Mechanics
Industry], No 9, 1976, p 55.

class, A. J.; Guenther, A. 11., APPL. 0PT., Vol 12, 1973, p 637;
Vol 13, 1971., p 76; Vol 1‘. 1975, p 698; Vol 15, 1976, p 1510.

Danile ko, Yu. IL; Hanenkov, A. A.; Prokhorov, A. “.3 Hal'kov, V. Ya.,
211ng Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics], Vol 58, 1970, p 31.

Hopper, R. 11.; Uhlnan, D. 8., J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 41, 1970, p 10023.
Beaarab, A. V., KVANTOVAYA ELMONIKA, V01 6, 1977, p 328.

Buzhinakiy, I. 11.; Pozdnyakov, A. m. rvmmvan mun, Vol 2,
1975, p 1550.

Aleshin, I. V.; Ina, A. Ya.; Hilyukov. Y. 59., on.-m. PRO?!” No 7,
1975, p 32.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Flak, A. A., OPT. I 8PM. [Optics and Spectroscopy],
V01 16, 1966, p 1065.

Dianov, Ye. H.; Prokhorov, A. 14., DAN 8881! [Reports of the USSR Acade'y
of Sciences], Vol 192, 1970, p 531.

Slyusarev, G. 6., 0PT. I SPERTR., Vol 6, 1959, p 211.

Beloatotakiy, B. R.; Rubanov, A. 5., TEPIDVOY REM TVERDO‘I'EL'NYKB
OPTICHBSKIKH WARWICK GBNBRA‘I’OROV [Theml Conditions of Solid-State
Lasers], Moscow. Energiya, 1973.

Buzhinakiy, I. 11.; Dianov, Ye. 14.; Hanonov, S. K., et a1.. DAN SSSR,
Vol 190, 1970, p 558.

Denkina, L. 1.: Shchavelev, 0. 8.; Babkina, V. A., mm 001 [Works of
the State Institute of Optics], Leningrad, Vol 39, No 170, 1972. p 105.

Oronov, A. K.; Izyneyev, A. A., Kopylov, Yu. L.; Kravchenko. V. 3.,
P12. I mm. STERLA [Physics and Chemistry of Glass], Vol 2, 1976,
p 664.

246
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
37.
38.

39.

40.
’01.
42.
103.
1.6.

(.5.

106.

67.

108.

Vitrishchak, I. 8.; Sam, L. N.; Tarssov, A. A., 2111'? [Journal of
Technical Physics], Vol 44, 1976, p 1055.

Pavlov, V. 1.; Perganent, A. Kh.; Ponomarev, A. V.; Chernyak, V. 11.,
ISSLEDOVANIYE TEImOUPRUGIKH DEFORNATSIY TORTSEVYKH POVERKHNOSTEY
AKTIVNYKH ELEMENTOV LAZBRNYIG! SISTEM [Study of Themelastic Deformations
of End Surfaces of Active Elements with Laser Systems], preprint of the
Applied Mathematics Institute, No 8, 1978.

Quelle, F. 14., APPL. OPTICS, Vol 5, 1966, p 633.

Riedel, E. P.; Baldwin, G. 1)., J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 38, 1967, p 2720.
Berezina, Ye. Ye.; Delkina, L. 1.; Kisin, V. 1.; Orlova, L. A.,

PIZIKO-KRIMICHESKIYE OSNOVY PROIZVODSTVA OPTICEESKDGO STEKLA [Physica-

chemical Principles of the Production of Optical Glass], Leningrad,
Khimiya, 1976, p 161.

Zheltov, G. 1.; Rubanov, A. S.; Chaley, A. V., ZHPS, Vol 11., 1971, p 226.
Zheltov, C. 1.; Rubanov, A. 5., ZEPS, Vol 22, 1975, p l018.

Baldwin, G. D.; Riedel, E. 9., J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 38, 1967, p 2726.
Epstein, 8., J. APPL. PHYS., V01 38, 1967, p 2715.

Anan'yev, Yu. A.; Grishnanova, N. 1., ZHPS, Vol 12, 1970, p 668.

mm. A. A.; Hit'kin, v. 11.; Sons, 1.. N., et 31., om-m. now,
No 9, 1971. p 42.

Shchnvelev, 0. 3.; Babkina, V. A.; Yelina, N. N., et 31., 0PT.-MElGl.
PROM., No 7, 1976, p 32.

AvakyantsL. 1.; Buzhinskiy, 1. 11.; Koryagina, Ye. 1.; Surkovs, V. F.,
KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, V01 5, 1978, p 725.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Anikiyev, Yu. 6.; Capontsev, V. P., et a1.,
ITOGI RANK! 1 TEKHNIKI: SER. RADIOTHHNIKA [Results of Science and
Engineering: Radio Engineering Series], Moscow, VINITI, V01 18, 1978.

Shchavelev, 0. 8.; Hit'kin, V. 11.; Babkina, V. A., et 81., 0PT.-NRICH.
PROM., No 1, 1975, p 2!).

Pink, A. A.; Sons, L. N.; Stepanov, A. 1.; Sudakov, A. 3., 0PT. 1 SPEKTR.,
Vol 30, 1971, p 1081.

Mit'kin, V. PL; Shchavelev, O. 8.; Bunkina, N. 11., ms, V01 23, 1975,
p 218.

247
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
52.

53.

54.

55.

S6.

S7.

58.

59.

6°.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vakhllyanin, K. P.; 11311, A. A.; Mit'kin, V. 11.. et 31., KVAN'I‘OVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, V01 3, 1976, p 196.

Bubnov, 11. 11.; Buzhinskiy. I. 11.; Dianav, Ye. 11., et 31., DAN sssn,
Vol 205, 1972, p 556.

Bubnov, 11. 11.; Bushinskiy, I. 11.; Diem, Ye. 11., et a1., KVAM’OVAYA
MIRA, Moscow, Sov. radio, No lo, 1973, p 113.

Shchavelev, 0. 3.; Hit'kin, V. 11.; Babkina, V. A.; Bunkina, II. 11.,
OPT.-1IEIGI. PKG!" No 7, 1974, p 73.

Hit'kin, V. 11.; Shchavelev, 0. 8., ms, V01 26, 1977, p 667.

Veyko, V. P.; Suslov, G. P., F12. I KIIDI. omno'm HATERIAW [Physics
and Chemistry of the Working of Materials], 110 6, 1968, p 27.

Alekeeyev, N. Ye.; Gmilov, G. 8.; Gruzdev, V. V.. et 31., TBZISY DOKL.
I VSBSOYUZN. KONF. P0 OPTIKE LAZEROV [Smaries of Reports of the
First All Union Conference on Laser Optics], Leningrad, 601, 1977, p 36.

Alekeeyev, 11. Ye.; Gruzdev. V. V.; Izyneyev, A. A., et a1., KVAMOVAYA
lam-mom“. V01 5, 1978, p 2356.

Alekseyev, II. Ye.; Gromv, A. L; Izyneyev, A. A., et 81., KVAN'IOVAYA
WI“, V01 6, 1979, p 160.

Dishington, R. 11.; Hook, w. R.; mlberg, R. P.. PROC. 1332, V01 55, 1967,

' p 2038.

Yevdokinova, V. 6.; Halt, A. A.; Sons, L. 11.; Shaforostov, A. 1.,
KVANTOVAYA mourn, Vol 2, 1975. p 1915.

Hit'kin, V. 11.; Shchavelev, 0. 8., 0PT.-11EKII. ”1011., No 9, 1973. p 26.

Buchenkav, V. A.; 1131;, A. A.; 11a11mln, B. 6.. et 81., KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 2, 1975, p 2037.

Reitmyer, F.; Schroeder, 11., APP‘L. 0PT., Vol 16, 1975, p 716.

Bubnov, 11. 11.; Grudinin, A. 3.; Manov, Ye. 11.; Prokhorov, A. 11..
KVANTOVAYA HERMIKA, V01 5, 1978, p 1:66.

Buchenkov, V. A.; Koleenikov, B. N.; Hit'kin, V. 11., et 81., KVAN'I'OVAYA
ELEKTMNIKA, V01 2, 1975, p 728.

Ivanov. Yu. P.; Koleenikov, B. 11.; Kuznetsov, V. 11.; Perlov. D. 1.,
2193, Vol 16, 1972.4; 797.

Buzhinskiy, I. 11.; Malonov, S. K.,'OPTIKO-ELBKTMNNYYB PRIBORY [Optico-
electronic Devices], Moscow, Hashinostroyeniye, No 7, 1974, p 181.

258
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76 .

77.
78.
79.
so.
81.
82.

83.

87.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

link, A. A.; Hit'ldn, V. 11.; Polukhin, V. 11., et 111., KVANTOVAYA
WNW, V01 2, 1975, p 350.

Segre, J. P., SPACE AGE NEWS, V01 12, No 11, 1969, p 21.

Ushids, 1.; Yoshikeve, 8.; Washio, 1., et 81.. JAPAN J. APPL. PHYS.,
Vol 12, 1973, p 126.

Galaktionova, N. 11.; Garkevi, G. A.; Zubkove, V. s., et 31., 0PT. I
swam, Vol 37, 1971., p 162.

Deutschbein, 0. L; Peutrat, c. 0., I!!! J. QUANTUM ELECTRORICS,
Vol QE-lo, 1968, p 48.

Bartenev, G. 11., FROM I WROCHNYYE NEORGANICEBSKIYB STERLA
[Strong and Superstrong Inorganic Glass], lbscov, Stroyizdet, 1975.

Malt, A. A.; Hikhaylov, Yu. 11.; Stepanov, A. 1.; Yascrebava, L. 8.,
0PT.-m. PMs, “0 10. 1969, p 73.

Upton, L. 0., US Patent 3982917, 1976.

LASER FOCUS, Vol 5, No 7, 1969, p 20.

Spanoudie, 1... US Patent $87799, 1972.

Ksntorski, J. 11., US Patent 3700623, 1972.

Meyers, J. 0., 0PT. SPECTRA, Vol 11, 1977, p 34.

Snitzer, 3., APPL. 0PT., V01 5, 1966, p 1487.

Karapetyan, G. 0.; Reyshekhrit, A. 1... 12V. AN SSSR: 831:. NEORGAN.
HATER. [News of the USSR Acadely of Sciences: Inorganic Materials
Series], Vol 3, 1967, p 217.

Galanc, Ye. I.; Karapetyen, G. 0.; Lunter, s. 6.; Reyshakhric, A. I...
emu-m. mom. No 11, 1969, p (.8.

Snitzer, 3.; Young, (2. 6., LASERS-wk SERIES 01’ ADVANCES, New York,
Dekker, V01 2, 1968, p 191.

Gaprindashvili, Eh. I.; (News, Sh. Sh.; mnladze. V. V., et 81.,
ZHPS, V01 13, 1970, p 715.

Caprindashuili, Kh. I.; Wotan, Sh. Sh.; Hmledze, V. V., et a1.,
ZHPS, Vol 17, 1972, p 715.

249
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f3 .8

91.

92.
93.
910.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101 .

102 .

103.

104 O

105.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stone, J.; Burrus, C. A., APPL. PHYS. 1.211., V01 23, 1973, p 388.

Gorovaya, B. 8.; Daskaya, B. L.; Izotov, A. IL, at 81.. KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA, V01 6, 1977, p 922.

Stone, 3.; harms, C. A., APPL. 0PT., V01 13, 1970, p 1256.

Yaiigm 8.; Rune, 5.; Saki-0:0, Y., Am. PHYS. 1.811., Vol 21, 1972,
p 0 .

San-rated, 11.; have, T., m. ms. 1.311., Vol 24, 1976, p 603.
Chen, 3. 0., Tang, C. I... APPL. PHYS. 1.2113, Vol 28, 1976, p 435.

Quinn, D. 3.; Berak, J. 11.; Cullen, D. 8., J. APPL. PEYS., Vol (.6, 1975,
p 3866.

Diete, c. 8.; Ctoeawhite, B. N., APPL. OPTICS, Vol 2, 1963, p 675.

Hatyushin, c.'A.; Byalko, N. 6.; Tolkachev, B. V., ZHPS, V01 18, 1973,
p 1102.

Buzhinakiy, 1. PL; Manonov, 8. K.; Mkhaylova, 1.. 1., zaps, 1969, Vol 10,
p 588.

Balagurov, A. Ya.; Kronskiy, G. 1.; Chivilov, V. 1... ms. V01 15, 1971,
p 827.

Mshida, 3.; "cubic, K.; Yoshikava, 8.; Kato, Y., APPL. PHYS. 1.311.,
Vol 34, 1978, p 273.

Kninskiy, A. A., LAZERNYYE KRISTALLY [Laser Crystals], Moscow, Nauka,
1975.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Capontaev, V. P.; Izyueyev, A. A., et 31.,
ISSLKDOVANIYA V OBLASTI RADIOTMIKI 1 menu [Research in the
Field of Radio Engineering and Electronics], 19510-19710, Hoscow, IRE AN
SSSR, Part 2, p (401.

Brachkovskaya, N. 8.; Grubin. A. A.; Lancer, s. 8., er: 31., KVANWVAYA
EWIKA, Vol 3, 1976, p 998.

Jacobs, n. A.; Heber. n. 3.. man J. cum-m anemones. Vol 02-12.
1976, p 102.

Sarldes, P. 8.; Sandoe, J. 11.; Parke, 8., J. “118., Vol D10, 1971,
p 1642.

Candy, :1. m; cmher, a. 3.; weuer, J. a. J. mm. mm, Vol 38,
1967, p 3030.

250
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
106 .

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

116.

115.

116.

117.

118.

'19.

120.

121.

l22.

Singh, 8.; Van Uitert, L. 6.; Grodkiewicz, W. 3., OPTICS 0014mm,
Vol 17, 1976, p 315.

Michel, J. C.; Morin, 1).; Aurel, 17., REV. PHYS. APPL., Vol 13, 1978,
p 852.

Reisfeld, 3.; Barnstein, A., CHEM. PHYS. 1.311., Vol 67, 1977, p 194.

Cuittard, M.: Loireau-Loasc'h, A. M.; Purdo, M. P., et 31., HATER.
RES. 3ULL., V01 13, 1978, p 317.

Appen, A. A., KMIMIYA STEKLA [Chemistry of class], Leningrad, niniya,
19710.

Mazurin, 0. V.; Strel'tsins, M. V.; Shvnyko-Shvaykovsksya, T. P.,
SVOYTSTVA STEROL I STEKLOOBRAZUYUSHCHIKH RASPLAVOV [Properties of Glass
and class For-111g Melts], Leningrad, Nauka, Vol 1973, Vol 2, 1975,

Vol 3, 1977, Part 1, Vol 3, 1978, Part 2.

Weber, M. J.; Cline, C. P.; Ssroyan, R. A., et 81., TOPICAL MEETING
ON INERTIAL CONFINEMENT FUSION, San Diego, 1978, To 313.

Stokouski, s. 3.; Weber, M. J.; Saroyan, R. A., et a1., TOPICAL MEETING
ON INBRTIAL CONFINEMENT FUSION, San Diego, 1978, Tu 312.

Khalihzv, V. D., SVOYSTVA I mm mm OPTICHBSKIKR STEKOL
[Properties and Development of New Optical Glass], Leningrad,
Mashinostroyeniye, 1977, p 62.

Golubtsov, V. A.; Yegorovs, V. 1’.; Zubkovs, V. 8., et 31., SPEKTROSKDPIYA
KRISTALLOV [Spectroscopy of Crystals], Leningrad, Nsukn, 1973, p 234.

ShChsvelev, 0. 8., 01712-113101. PROH., No 12, 1967, p 35.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Izyneyev, A. A.; Kravchenko, V. 3.; Rudnitskiy, Yu.P.,
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 1, 1974, p 2002.

Disnov, Ye. M.; Karasik, A. Ya.: Kut'yenkov, A. A., et 81.,
KVANTOVAYA nmmm, V01 3, 1976, p 168.

Ryabov, S. 6.; Toropkin, G. N.; Usol'tsev, I. F., PRINOTY KVANTOVOY
BLEKTRONIKI [Instruents of Quantum Electronics], Moscow, Sov. radio,
1976.

Burdonsky, J. N.; Zhuzhukalo, E. V.; Kovalsky, N. 6., et a1.,
APPL. 0PT., Vol 15, 1976, p 1650.

Auric, 3.; Charles, C.; Dalmyrac, c., TOPICAL MEETING ON INBRTIAL
CONPINEMENT FUSION, San Diego, 1978, Tu 36.

Lewis, 0.; Jacobs, 8.; Lund, I... TOPICAL MEETING ON INERTIAL CONFINEHENT
FUSION, San Diego, 1973, Tu 85.

251
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12 3.

124.

125.

126 .

127.

128.

129.
130.
131.
132.

133.

I“.

135.
136.

137.

138.

139.

160 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Buzhinskiy, I. 14.; Capontsev, V. P., et s1.,
IZV. AN sssn: SER. mom. HATER” Vol 5, 1969, p 1062.

Petrovskiy, G. ‘l'., AVTORKFERAT DOK'l'. DISS. [Author's Review of
Doctor's Dissertation], Leningrad, 001, 1968.

Petrovskiy, c. ‘1'., STEKIDOBRAZNOYE SOSTOYANIYE [Vitreous State],
Leningrad, Nsuks, 1971, p 76.

Hagen, H. F.; Trenholne, J. 3., mum mm on mum. connmmn'
rusron, San Diego, 1978, ru 36.

Durham, 0. 11., STROYENIYE I momma SVOYSTVA NWRCANICHBSKIKH
STEKOL [Structure and Hechsnical Properties of Inorganic class],
Moscow, Stroyizdst, 1966.

bet-kins, l... 1.: Yevstrop'yev, K. 8.; Petrovskiy, C. ‘1'.; Ynkhkind, A. K.,
FIZIKO-KHIHICIIBSKIYE OSNOVY PROIZVODSTVA OPTICHBSKOGO STEELA [Physica-
chenicsl Principles of the Production of Optical Glass], Leningrad.
Khiniyn, p 33.

Porai-Koshits, B. A., J. BUR-CRYST. SOLIDS, V01 25, 1977, p 86.
Stevels, J. 11.; Trapp, H. J. I... CLASTECIIN. BBL, 1959, B 32 K, p 31.
Ray, N. 11., J. POLYBR SCI: POLMR C891. 31), V01 11, 1973, p 2169.
Ray, N. 11., J. NON-CRYST. SOLIDS, V01 15, 1974, p 623.

Corbridge, D. B. C., T113 STRUCTURAL CHEMISTRY 01’ PBOSPHORUS, Ansterd'sn,
Bleevier, 1976.

Corbridge, D. E. C., BULL. SOC. MC. MINER. CRIST., Vol 95, 1971,
p 271.

Durif, A., BULL. SOC. FRANC. MINER. (311157., V01 95, 1971, p 316.
Hong, H. Y.-P., ACTA CRYATALLOGR., V01 3!), 1976, p 668.

Bondsr', I. A.; Hezentsevs. 1.. P.; Dounskiy, A. 1.; Piryugko, N. 11.,
ZHNKII [Journal of Inorganic Chemistry], Vol 20, 1975, p 2618.

Hinacheva, L. 101.; Poroy-Koshits, H. A.; Antsyshkins, A. 8., et 81.,
KOORDINATSION'NAYA KBIHIYA [Coordination Chemistry], Vol 1, 1975, p 421.

Porsy-Koshits, M. A.; Anlsnov, 1.. A.; Korytnyy, Ye. P., ITOGI NADKI
I TEKHNIKI: SER. HISTALLOKHIHIYA [Results of Science and Engineering:
Crystal Chemistry Series], Moscow, VINI‘I'I, Vol 11, 1976, p 5.

Antsyshkins, A. 8.; Porsy-Koshits, H. A.; Hinacheva, L. 101., et sl.,
KOORDINA‘I’SIONNAYA KBIHIYA, Vol lo, 1978, p 61.8.

252
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1101.

1102.

163.

1101;.

1105.

1106 .

147.

1108.

1109 .

1500

151.

152.

154.

155.

156.

Linde, S. A.; Gorbunova, Yu. Ye.; Lavrov, A. V., et a1., TEZISY 0010..
I VSBSOYUZN. SOVESHCN. P0 NEORCANICNBSKOY KRISTALLOKHIHI [Sumaries of
Reports of the First All Union Conference on Inorganic Crystal
Chemistry]. Moscow, Nauka, 1977. p 66.

Palkina, K. K., 12V. AN SSSR: SEN. NBORGAN. HATER. [News of the
USSR Acade-y of Sciences: Inorganic Materials Series], Vol 14, 1978,
p 789.

Antsyshkina, A. S.; Poray-Koahits, H. A.; lunacheva, 1.. £11.;
Ivanova, V. C., KOORDINA'ISIONNAYA KHIHIYA, Vol 5, 1979, p 268.

Chudinova, N. N., 12V. AN SSSR: 883. MCAN. mm., Vol 15, 1979,
p 931.

Kravchenko, V. 3., ZR. STRUKT. mm. [Journal of Structural Chemistry],
Vol 6, 1965, p 88.

Van Vezer, POSPOR I rsoo SOYEDINBNIYA [PEOSYBORUS AND ITS moms],
Moscow, Hir, 1969.

Belov, N. V., KRISTALLOKHIHIYA SILIKATOV 8 [mm KATIONAHI
[Crystal Chenistry of Silicates with Large Cations], Moscow, Izd.
AN SSSR, 1961.

Belov, N. V., OCHBRKI P0 STRUKTURROY HINBRALOGII [Outlines of Structural
Mineralogy], Moscow, Nedra, 1976.

Brady, 0. H., J. CHEM. PHYS., Vol 28, 1958, p 68.

Jost, K. 11.; Wolf, 11.; Horula, 3.; Thilo, 3., NRISTALL. U. TBCHNIK,
Vol lo, 1969, p 325. '

Soklakov, A. 1.; Portnova, N. I... KRISTAIJDGRAFIYA [Crystallography],
Vol 14, 1969, p 141.

Soklakov, A. 1.; Portnova, N. I"; Nednayeva, V. V., STBKLOOBRAZNOYB
SOSTOYANIYE. TRUDY V VSBSOYUZN. SOVBSHCH. [Vitreous State. Works of
the Fifth All Union Conference], Moscow-Leningrad, Nauka, 1971, p 11010.

uescuan, A. a. n., mourns ASPECTS or vrrnaous STATE, London, Buttervorths,
Vol 1, 1960, p 63.

Pechkovskiy, V. V.; Cherches, G. Kh.; Kuz'menkov, H. 11., USP. KHIH.
Progress in Chemistry], Vol 46, 1975, p 172.

Poletayev, E. V. IZV. AN M2. SSR: SER. 1mm. [News of the Kazakh SSR
Acadely of Sciences, Chenistry Series], Vol 18, No S, 1968, p 1.

Varshal, B. 0.; Ilyukhin, V. V.; Belov, N. V., PIZ. I ERIN. STEKIA
[Physics and Chanistry of Class], Vol 1, 1975, p 117.

253
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

1610 .

165.

166 .

167.

168.
169.

170.

171.

I72.

173.

17/0.

POI! OFHGAL USE ONLY

Voronkov, A. A.; Ilyukhin. V. V.; Belov, R. V.. KRIS‘IALLOGRAPIYA,
Vol 20, 1975, p 556.

Zuca, 8.; Sokolova, I. 1).; Gageecu, 1).; Olteenu, 11., REV. ROHAINB CHIN.,
Vol 17, 1972, p 1697.

Atanov, I. 0.; Buminekiy, I. 11., KORYAGINA. Ye. 1., et 131., IZV. AN
SSSR: SBR. NEORGAN. HATER., V01 10, 1971., p 909.

Gelnktionov, A. 0.: Shtin, A. P.; Holymhin, V. 1... TBZISY m.

IV VSBSOYUZN. SIMP. P0 OPTICBBSKIH I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYS'I'VAH 873301.
[Sm-aria of Reports of the Fourth A11 Union Smosiul on Optical and
Spectral Properties of Glue], Riga, 1977, p 85.

Beekenkulp, P., PHILIPS RES. REP. SUPPL, No lo, 1966, p 1.

Galaktionov, A. 1).; Rhodes, H. Ya.; shtin, A. P., et 31., ms, Vol 21,
1974, p 1.60.

Shtin, A. P.; Potiyev, A. A.; Canktionov, A. 13.; Rhodes. 11. Y...
FIZ. I KRIH. S'I'EKIA, Vol 2, 1976, p 80.

Ushekov, D. P.; Baskovn, N. P.; Iarlekov, Yu. P., FIZ . I 101111. SW,
Vol 1, 1975, p 151.

Ushakov, D. 1’.; Bukova, N. F., PIZ. I mm. STEKLA, Vol 2, 1976, p 41.

Takahaohi, K., ADVANCESJN GLASS 13mm: TECHN. PAPER 0? m VI
INTERN. CONGRESS ON CLASS, 113., Plenum Press, 1962, Pt 2, p 366.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Izyneyev, A. A.; Kopylov, Yu. I... e: 81., ms,
Vol 26, 1977, p 116.

Ray, N. 11., PHYS. cm. GLASSES, V01 16, 1975, p 75.
Nakallura, ‘1'.; Ohashi, 311., BULL. CHEM. SOC. JAPAN, V01 100, 1967, p 110.
Yun, Y. 11.; Bray, P. J., J. NON-CRYSI. SOLIDS, Vol I), 1978, p 105.

Sednlie, U. ‘13.; Bol'ehiy, Ya. Ya.; Byduk, Ya. Ya., FIZ. I mm. STBICLA,
Vol 1, 1975, p 569.

Finn, C. V. 17.; Fray, D. J.; King, '1'. 3.; Ward, J. 8., PHYS. CHEM.
GLASSES, Vol 17, 1976, p 70.

Kutukova. Ye. 8.; Syritskaya, 2. 11.; Vaysfel'd, N. 11., P12. I am.
sm. Vol 1, 1975. p 215.

Vitina, I. A.; Sedllalie, U. Ya.: Igaune, S. A., PIZIKA I HIMYA
STEKIDOBRAZUYUSRCBIKII 8181'!!! [Physics and Chemistry of Vitreous Systems),
Riga, 1‘0 5, 1977, p 19.

256
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

I87.

l88.

"19.

I90.

Vayvad, Ya. A.: Lagdzlns, S. Ye.; Sedulis, U. Ya., FIZIKA I
KHIMIYA STEIQDOBRAZUYUSUCHIKH SISTEH, Riga, No S, 1977, p 29.

Kutukova, Ye. 8., AVTOREPBRAT RAND. DIS. [Author's Review of
Candidate's Dissertation]. Moscow, HRHTI in. D. 1. Hendeleyev, 1970.

Sednalis, U. Ya.; Bol'shiy, Ya. Ya.; Sedsale, c. P., et al.,

UCH. 221’. LA‘I'V. GU [Scientific Notes of the Latvian State University],
Vol 231, 1975, p 160.

Vitina, I. A., AVTORBPERAT RAND. DISS [Author's Review of Candidate's
Dissertation], Riga, 1976.

Naruse, A.; Abe, 1.; Inoue, H., J. CERAM. SOC., Japan, Vol 76, 1968,
p 25.

Voskresenskaya, N. K.; Sokolova, I. D., USP. mum, Vol 38, 1969,

Izyneyev, A. A.; Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Kravchenko, V. 3.; Paramova, N. A.,
TBZISY DOKL. III VSESOYUZN. SOVESHCH. P0 FOSFATAH [Smaries of Reports

of the Third All Union Conference on Phosphates], Riga, Binatne, 1971,
p 214.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Capontsev, V. P.; Grow, A. K., et a1., NOWYE
LBGKOPIAVKIYB GLAZURI, m1 1 POSPOROSODERZHASHOBIYB STERLA

[New Low Melting Glasers, Enamels and Phosphorus-Containing Glass].
Riga, Zinatne, 1973, p 156.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; CapontseV. V. P.; Gmmov, A. K., et a1., 12V. AN
sssn: sen. mom. mum, Vol 11, 1975. p 323.

Plyshevskiy, S. V.; Haketun, V. 11.; Kuz'nenkov, M. 1., F12. I 1011“.
STKKLA, Vol 1, 1975, p 279.

Bondarenko, Ye. c.; Galant, Ye. 1.; Lunter, S. 6., et a1., on.-nmm.
PROM" No 6, 1975, p (.2.

thevskiy, M. 3.; Kuz'nenkov, H. 1.; Pechkovskiy V. V.; PlysheVskiy,
S. V., ZHPS, Vol 17, 1972, p 1032.

Cnlant, Ye. I.; Lunter, 8. 6.; Hironov, A. .11.; Fedorov, Yu. K.,
PIZ. I KHIH. STEKIA, Vol 2, 1976, p 351.

Khnlilev, V. D.; Petrovskaya, H. L.; Nikolina, G. 9., F12. 1 101111.
STEKLA, Vol 1, 1975, p 508.

Petrovskiy, G. 'l'.; Urusovskaya, 1.. IL; Yudin, D. 11., 12V. AN SSSR:
SER. NBORGAN. HATER., Vol 9, 1973, p 1615.

Smirnova, Ye. V.; Urusovskaya, 1.. IL, TEZISY DOKL. IV VSESOYUZN. SIMP.
P0 OPTICHBSKIH I SPBKTRAL'NYH SVOYSTVAH STEKOL [Smries of Reports
of the Fourth All Union Syuposium on Optical and Spectral Properties of
Class]. Riga, 1977, p 88.

255
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
191.

192.

193.

196.

195 .

196 .

197.

198.

199 O

200.

201.

202.

203.

206.

205.

FOR omcm. USE ONLY

Kolobkov, v. P.; Kholilev, v. 1).; Vssylysk, Ya. 1)., et sl.,
1137.132 DOKL. IV vsnsovuzn. 8m. P0 orncnesxm 1 snxmvm
svovs'rvm 5mm, Rigs, 1977. p ns.

Vskhrsncyev, V. I.; Rssben, E. I..; Pedorushkov, B. G., et 31.,
T3218? non. III VSESOYDZN. 8111?. P0 OPTICHBSKIM I SPEKTRAL'NYH

SVOYS‘NAH mat. [Salaries of Reports of the Third All Union Symosim
on Optical and Spectral Properties of Glass], Leningrad, GOI, 1976, p 86.

Capontsev, V. P.; Grow, A. K.; Irynsysv, A. A., et s1..
SPBKTROSKOPIYA KRISTAILOV [Spectroscopy of Crystals], Moscow, Hanks,
1975, p 337; IV VSBSOYUZN. SIHP. Po smsxovn KRISTALLOV,
AK‘I‘IVIROVANNYIGI IONAHI mzm'm I mammal METALWV [Fourth
A11 Union Synposiu on the Spectroscopy of Crystals Activated by Rare

Earth and Transition Metal Ions], Sverdlovsk, 1973, p 86.
Bogonolovs, L. D., FIZ. 1 mm. m, Vol 2, 1976, p 6.
Bandurkin, G. A.; Dzhurinskiy, B. P., DAN SSSR, Vol 168, 1966, p 1315.

Bokiy, G. 3.; Kravchenko, V. 3., “MCKESKIYB SVOYSTVA SOY'EDINBNIY
REDKOZML'W WV [Chemical Properties of Coqounds of Rare
Earth Elements], Moscov, Hanks, 1973, p 7.

Aslsnov. L. A., AVTORZFBRAT DOKT. 0188. [Author's Reviev of Doctor's
Dissertation], Moscow, 10mm AR 8853, 1973.

Bondurkin, G. A.; Dzhurinskiy, B. P.; ‘rsnsnsyev, I. V., DAN 8888,
Vol 189, 1969, p 96.

Bandut‘kin, G. A.: AVTORB‘PERAT RAND. 0188. [Author's Review of
Candidate's Dissertation], Moscow, 10m AN SSSR, 1967.

DZhurinskiy, B. F., AVTOREFBRAT non. 0188., Hoscw, IONIC! AN SSSR, 1972.

Robinson, Ch. C.; Pournier, J. T., J. PHYS. (mm. SOLIDS, Vol 31, 1970,
p 8950

Krssilov, Yu. 1.; Solokhs, A. P.; rsapkin, V. V.; Bl1ert, G. V.,
KVAN'DOVAYA KLEK‘I'RONIKA, Vol‘ 1, 1976, p 370.

2verev, c. 14.; Onishchenko, A. 14.; Sensuov, A. A.; Snimov, A. I.,
m [Solid-State Physics], Vol 13, 1971, p 2161.

Reisfeld, R.; Bckstein, 7., J. SOLID STATE 011311., Vol 5, 1972, p 176.

Briskina, Ch. 11.; Zhsbotinskiy, N. Ye.; Artsnonovs, M. V., et s1.,
ms. Vol 22, 1975, p 61.

256
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

216.

215.
216.
217.

2I8.

219.

220.

221.

Haber, H. P.; Damon, T. 0.; Dsniclneyer, H. 6.; Tofield, B. C.,
APPL. PHYS. LETT., Vol 22, 1973, p 534.

Alekseyev. N. Ye.; Gspontsev, V. P.; Gromv, A. K., et 81., TBZISY
DOKL. V VSESOYUZN. SIHP. P0 SPEKTROSKOPII KRISTALLOV, AKTIVIROVANNYKB
REDKIHI ZBHLYAHI I ELEMENTAHI GRUPPY ZHBLBZA [Sunnnries of Reports of
the Fifth A11 Union Synposium on the Spectroscopy of Crystals
Activated by Rare Earths and Elements of the Iron Group], Kszan',
1976, p 11.

Bokiy, G. 3.; Kravchenko, V. 3., SPBKTROSKOPIYA KRISTALLOV. Leningrad,
Nauka, 1973, p 7.

Dnitryuk, A. V.; Ksrapetysn, G. 0.; Hsksinov, G. V., 2108, Vol 22,
1975, p 153.

Galant, Ye. 1.; Ksrapetyan, G. 0., STEKLOOBRAZNOYE SOSTOYANIYE
[Vitreous State], Leningrad, Hanks, 1971, p 186.

Stepanov, S. A., PIZ. I KRIH. STEKLA, Vol 2, 1976, p 228.

Zhilin. A. A.; Nenilov, S. V., FIZ. I KBIH. STEKLA, V01 2, 1976,
p 58.

Zhilin, A. A.; Nemilov, s. V., TBZISY DOKL. IV VSESOYUZN. SIHP. P0
OPTICHBSKIH I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYS‘NAH SMOL [Summaries of Reports of

the Fourth A11 Union Symposiul on Optical and Spectral Properties of
Glass], Riga, 1977, p 76.

Zarubins, '1'. V.; Hokeyevs, G. A.; Stepsnov, s. A., TEZISY non.

IV VSBSOYUZN. SIHP. P0 OPTICEESKIH I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYSTVAH STBKOL,
R18" 1977! P 60'

Tolstoy, H. N., AMTOREPBRAT DOKT. DIS., Leningrad, GOI, 1977.
Dnitryuk, A. V., AVIORBFERAT RAND. DISS., Moscow, IKHP AN SSR, 1978.
Hilyukov, Ye. H., 0PT.-HEKH.PROH., No 3, 1976, p 66.

Arbuzov, V. 1.; Galsnt, Ye. 1.; Golubovaksys, H. P., et s1., PIZ. I
KHIH. STEKLA, Vol 3, 1977. p 262.

Dnitryuk, A. V.; Ksrspetysn, C. 0.; Nikitin, S. V., ZHPS, Vol 18, 1973,
p 869.

Antipenko, B. H.; Dmitryuk, A. V.; Zubkova, V. S., TEZISY DOKL. III
VSESOYUZN. SIHP. P0 OPTICHESKIM I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYSTVAH STEKOL
[Sunsuries of Reports of the Third A11 Union Symposium on Optical and
Spectral Properties of Glass], Leningrad, 001, 1974. n 116.

Obrsztsov, G. 1.; Reyshskhrit, A. L.; Tolstoy, M. N.. 0PT. I SPBKTR,
Vol 34, 1973, p 803.

257
FOR(HNH(1AI.USE(HVLY
222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227 .

228.

229 .

2”.
231.

232.

233.

234.
235.
236.

237.

238.

won omen. USE ONLY

Aacycv, 1.. Yo..; Brachlwvakaya, N. 3.; Grubin. A. A., TBZISY m.
IV W. 8111?. P0 OPTICIBSKIH I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYSTVAH STEKOL,
Riga. 1977, p 103.

Kaliym, T., J. CM. SOC. JAPAN, V01 82, 1976, p 637.

Krnvcbenko, V. 8., TEZISY m. I VSESOYUZN. SOVBSBCH. P0 NEORGAN.
MSWI [Topics of Rnportn of the First All Union Conference
on Inorganic Crystal Chmctry], Moscow, Rania. 1977, p 26.

Voron'ko. To. [.3 banker, B. 1.: Zlcnko. A. A., ct 31., DAR 5388, Vol
227. 1976, p 75.

Batygov, s. 101.; Voron"ko, Tn. L; banker, B. 1., ct n1. KVANTOVAYA
um, V01 3, 1976, p 2263.

Banker, a. 1.; n1'p1o, A. v.; Mai-ova, c. v., at .11.. rum-cum
nan-mm. Vol 6. 1977, p 688.

beaker. B. 1.; Maui-ova. G. V.; Ooiko, V. V.. et 81., DAN SSSR,
Vol 239, 1978, p 573.

Alcheyev, 11. Ted Capontnev. V. P.; Grooov, A. K., at 31., RADIO-
TMIKA I 3mm. Vol 23, 1978; p 1896.

am. 3. Yo-Pc. Chitin. 8. R0. mm. R38. BULL, V01 11, 1976. P 461.

Bondnr'. I. A.; banker, B. 1.; Donnnskiy. A. I., et a)... WANTOVAYA
mum, Vol 6, 1977, p 112.

Chitin, S. 11.; Bang, 3. Y.-P.; Pierce, J. 9., USE! FOCUS, V01 12, No 5,
1975, p 6b.

Knninski. A. A.; Sarkisov. S. 3.; Tran Ngoc. ct n1., PHYS. STAT.
SOLIDI (8), Vol 50. 1978. p 7105.

Koizmi, 8.; NIknno, J.. ACTA CRYSTAIJM” Vol 333, 1977, p 2680.
Hons, no Yc-Po; chi“. 80 no. “Am. RES. ml“. V01 11’ 1976. P [.21.

banker, B. 1.; Osiko, V. V.; Prokhorov, A. 11.: Shcherbnkov, I. A.,
WANTOVAYA 31mm, Vol 5. 1978. p 867.

Knninnki. A. A.; Snrkilov, S. 3.; Doha, 3., ct n1., PHYS. STAT. SOLIDI
(3), Vol 63, 1977, p 71.

Avancsov. A. 6.; aniyev, T. T.; Voron'ko. Yu. L. at 31.. ZHBTF,
v.1 77, 1979, p 1771.

258
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
239.

2‘0.

241.

2112.

243.

2“.

2105.

266.

2107.

248.

269.

2500

251.

252.

253.

2510.

Yernolayev, V. L.; Bodunov, Ye. 1L; Sveshnikova, Ye. 3.;

Shakhverdov, '1'. A.. BEZYZLUCHATBL'NYY PMOS ENERGII umouuoco
VOZBUZHDBRIYA [Nonradiating Transport of Electron Exéitation Energy],
edited by H. D. Galanin, Leningrad, Nauka, 1977.

Agranovich, V. 14.; Galanin, H. 0., PBRENOS ENERGI'I ELMONNOGO
VOZBUZHDDIIYA V KONDENSIROVM SRBDARH [Electron Excitation Energy
Transport in Condensed Nadia], Hoscow, Nauka, 1978.

Koniym, 17., J. MN-CRYST. SOLIDS, V01 18, 1975, p 107.

Orblch, R., OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF IONS IN CRYSTALS, ed. Groscuhite and
Hooa, Intersci. Pub1., 1967, p “5.

Orbach, R., OPTICAL Pmms 0P IONS IN SOLIDS, ed. 3. Dinartolo,
N.Y., London, Plenum Press, 1975, p 355.

Watts, R. K., OPTICAL PNPERTIBS 0P IONS IN SOLIDS, ed. 3. DiBartolo,
N.V., London, Plenum Press, 1975, p 307.

Ovayankin, V. V.; Peofilov, P. P., NELIWMA OPIIKA [Nonlinear Optics],
Novosibirsk, 1968, p 293.

Galant, E. 1.; Gapontsev, V. P.; Zhabotineky, H. 8., et 111.,
PROCEEDINGS mom-70. De Venter, 1970, pp 13-22.

Gapontsev, V. P.; Zhabotinskiy, H. 3.; Izyneyev, A. A., et 111.,
PIS'HA 2881?, Vol 18, 1973, p 1128.

Arbuzov. V. 1.; Galant, Ye. 1.; Lunter, S. 0., et a1., PIZ. I III".
STEILA, V01 4, 1978, p 439.

Aristov, A. V.; Kolobkov, V. P.; Kudryuhov, P. 1.; Shevandin, V. 8..
OPT. I SPEECH!” Vol 39, 1975, p 281.

Kansro, A. R.; Karina, Ya. 8.; Przhevuakiy, A. K., et a1., PIS'HA
231?. Vol 2, 1976, p 652.

Avouris, ph.; Cupion, A.; Bl-Sayed. H. A., J. CHEM. PHYS., Vol 67,
1977, p 3397.

Hotegi, n.; Shionoya, Sh., J. Lunrunsczncn, V01 8. 1973, p 1.

Alinov, A. K.; Basiyev, ‘1'. 1.; Voron'ko, Yu. K., et al, 2112117, V01 72,
1977, p 1313.

Alekeeyev, N. Ye.; Gapontsev, V. P.; Zhabotinakiy, H. Ye.; Sverchkov,
Yu.Ye.‘; PIS'HA 2321?, Vol 27, 1978, p 118.

259
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
255.

256.

257.
258.
259.

260.
261.
262.
263.
264.
265.

266 .

267.

268.
269.
270.

271.
272.

273.

276.

275.

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

Voron'ko, Yu. L; Mow, ‘1'. 6.; Oeiko, V. V., et 01., 2mm, Vol 71.
1976, p 478.

tamer, 11... z. mama, V01 an, 1949, p 321, m. ms., V01 2,
1968, p 55.

Dextet, D., J. cm. PINS” V01 21, 1953. p 836.
Myekeve, 1.; Dexter, D. I... PHYS. RSV., V01 31, 1970. p 2961.

Negibnrov, V. 3.; Nugiberove, I. A., 0PT. I swarm, V01 20, 1966,
p 15.

Negiberov, V. R., 711‘, Vol 8, 1966, p 684.

Neglberove, I. A., symmrnA KRIS‘IALIDV, Moscow, “nuke, 1970, p 96.
Negiberove, I. A.; Shegede, A. 11., on. I .srm” V01 30. 1971, p 174.
Birgeneau, R. J., J. CHEM. 9318., V01 50, 1969, p 4282.

Kohli, 11.: Huang Lin, N. I... PHYS. REV” V01 89, 1975, p 1008.

Holstein, “1.; Lyo, s. L; Orbech, R., PHYS. REV. LB‘I'L, V01 36, 1976,
p 891.

Halyehev, V. A.; Shekhtlnn, V. I... XXVIII GERTSEIDVSKIYE “VIENNA:
T3011. P12. I A8110“. [28th Bercene Lectures: Theory of Physics and
Antonelly]. Leningrad, Leningrad State University, 1975, p 27.

Shekhunen, v. L.; Sbtrokobtod, o. Yen mu cmrszuovsxnz cmnA:
non. 712. I ASTRON.. Leningrad, cm, 1975, p 32.

De Leah, no 60; Grant. “0 J0 Ce, ms. We. v01 31. 1970, P 17540
Mather. J. 3., ms. STAT. SOLID! (b), V01 77, 1976, p 359.

Main, I. 81).; Trifonov, Ye. D.; Tronhin, A. 8., XXVII GERTSENOVSKIYE
mm TBOR. VI 2. I ASTRON [27th Hercene Lectures: Theory of
Phyeice and Antone-y]. Leningrad, L00, 1976, p 50.

Kozhuehner, H. A., m, V01 13, 1971, p 2601.

Bodunov, Ye. 11.; Shekhtlnn, V. I... m. V01 12, 1970, p 2609.

Golubov, s. I.; Konobeyev, Yu. V., ms. STAT. SOLIDI (1)). Vol 56. 1973,
p 69; V01 70, 1975, p 373; Vol 71, p 777.

Golubov, 8. I.; Konobeyev, Yu. V., m, V01 13, 1971, p 3185.

Gelanin, H. D., 2331?. V01 21, 1951, p 126; Vol 28, 1955, p 685.

260
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
276.

277.

278.
279.
280.

281.
282 .

283.

284.

285.

286.
287.
288.

289.

290.

291.

292.
293.

2910.

295 .

Rozman, I. 11., OPT. I SPEKTR., V01 «'0, 1959, p 536; IZV. AN SSSR:
SBR. F12 [News of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Physics Series],
V01 37, 1973, p 502.

Sveshnikov, B. ‘10.; Shirokov, V. 1., OPT. I SPEIﬂ'Rn V01 12, 1962,
p 606.

Inokuti, 11.; Biraym, P., J. cm. PHYS., V01 103, 1965, p 1978.
Sakun, V. P., m, V01 1’0, 1972, p 2199; Vol 15, 1973, p 2277.

Rokenglaz, H. 1.; Roma, 1. 11., OPT. I SPEKTR” V01 36, 1974, p 100,
106.

Shcherbakov, .T. A.. AVTORZPERAT DOK'I'. DISS., Moncaw, PIA“ SSSR, 1978.
Burahceyn, A. 1.; Pace.“ A. Yu., m, V01 16, 1974, p 2318.

Arcanonove, H. V.; Briskina, Ch. 11.; Burehteyn, A. I., et 01.,
211817, V01 62, 1972, p 863.

Burshteyn, A. 1., my. v61 62. 1972. p 1695.

Zusnen, 1.. 1)., on. 1 391mm. V01 36, 1971., p 1.97; znmw. v.1 73,
1977, p 662.

Burohteyn, A. 1.. AWYA [Aucoutry]. No 5, 1978, p 65; n6 6, p 72.
Shekhtnen, v. I... on. 1 spam!” v61 33, 1972, p 381..
Yokota, 11.; Taninoto, 0., J. PHYS. SOC. JAPAN, V01 22, 1967, p 779.

Doktorov, A. 8.; Kipriyanov, A. A.; Burshtcyn, A. 1., 2mm, V01 76,
1978, p 1020.

Gapontsev, V. P.: Sverchkov, Yu. Ye., Preptint No 6, Moscow, 1R3
AN SSSR, 1979.

Vusneieter, 3. 2.. ms. STAT. scum (1)), Vol 76, 1976, p 161;
V01 90, 1978, p 711.

Mikheluhvili, H. 8., 12V. AN SSSR: SER. P12, V01 39, 1975, p 1859.

Basiyev, '1'. 'l'.; Voron'ko, Yu. V.; Hanedov, ‘1'. 6., et 01.,
SPRTROSKOPIYA KRISTALIDV, Moscow, mm, 1975, p 155.

Grubin, A. A.: Przhemkiy, A. K.; Tr-3000v, Ye. 1).; Troshin, A. 8.,
m, V01 18, 1976, p 734.

Holstein, 1.; Lyo, S. K.; Orbnch, R., PHYS. REL, Vol 815, 1977, p #693.

261
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
296.
297.

298.

299 .

301.
302.

303.
304.
.5.
306.
117.
308.
309.

310 .

311.
312.

313.

314 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Huber, D. 1...; Hamilton, 1). 5.; Barnett, 8., PHYS. REV., V01 1316,
1977, p 4642.

Chin, W. Y.; Huber, D. L.; Barnett, 3., PHYS. REV., Vol 817, 1978,
p 5025.

Hubar. D. 1...; Chins, W. Y., PHYS. REV., Vol 818, 1978, p 5320.

Bemacmu, J.; Alexander, 8.; Orbach, R., PHYS. REV. 1.811., V01 41,
1978, p 185.

Alexander, 3.; Bernuconi, J.; Orbsch, R., PHYS. 11317., V01 817, 1978,
p 4311.

Sevyasc'yanov, Ye. A.; Przhevuskiy, A. 1., m, V01 21, 1978, p 796.
Tolstoy, H. N., SPEKTROSKOPIYA KRISTALLOV, Moscow, Nauka, 1970, p 1210.

Peterson, G. 8.; Bridenbaugh, P.--ﬂ., APPL. PHYS. 1.81.12, V01 4, 19610.
p 201; JOSA, V01 54, 1964, p 644.

Karapetyan, G. 0.; Tolstoy, M. 11.; Feofilov, P. P.; Shapovalov, V. 8.,
ZHPS, No 7, 1967, p 174.

Basiyev, '1'. T.; Hanedov, 1'. G.; Shcherbakov, I. A., KVANTOVAYA
mm, V01 2, 1975, p 1269.

Housman, 3.; Shionoya, 8., PHYS. REV. 1.311.. V01 25, 1970, p 1710.

Galant, Ye. 1.; Gorovaya, B. 8.; Deukaya, E. Kh., et 01., P12. I 1mm.
3mm, V01 2. 1976, p 438.

01.nov, Y0. 11.; Katenkov, A. A.; Mnenkov. A. A., et 01., m. V01 69,
1975. p 540.

Arbuzov, V. 1.; Brachkovskaya. N. 8.; Zluyreva, N.A., et 81.,
KVANTOVAYA HLBKTRONIKA, V01 3, 1976, p 2005.

Hiraym, 0.; Cup, I“. 8.; Helmd, N. T., J. NON-CRYST. SOLIDS,
1971, p 342.

Chryaochoos, J. J. CHEM. PHYS.. V01 61, 1974, p 4596.
Snitzer, 2.; Woodcock, R., APPL. PHYS. LB‘I‘T., V01 6, 1965, p 45.

Reisfeld, 3.. 'smcrunn m mums, ed. J. n. Dunity, at 31., Berlin,
Springer, V01 13, 1973, p 53.

Reiofeld, R.; Greenberg, 3.; Velapoldi. R. A.; Barnett, 8., J. CHEM.
PHYs., V01 56, 1971, p 1698.

262
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
315.

316 .

317.

318.

319 .

320.

321.

322.
323.

324.

325.

326.
327.
328.

329 .

31).

331.

332.

333.

331..

Candy, u. 13.; Ginther, a. 3.; Heller, J. P., m. ms. 1.811.,
V01 .4, 1964, p 188; Vol-6, 1965, p 66.

Candy, 3. 8.; Ginther, R. J.; Waller, J. P., APPL. PHYS. 1.311.,
V01 5, 1966, p 220; PHYS. 1.311., V01 11, 1966, p 213.

Candy, 1!. 11.; Ginthcr, R. J.; Heller, J. P., APP]... PHYS. 1.811.,
V01 6, 1965, p 237; J. APPL. PEYS., V01 38, 1967, p ”30.

Pearson, A. ‘D.; Porto, s. P. ”8., APPL. PHYS. 1.311., V01 lo, 1966, p 202.

Jacobs, R. P.; Layne, C. 8.; Weber, H. J.; Rnpp, Ch. P., J. APPL. PHYS.,
V01 (07, 1976, p 2020.

Peterson, 0. P.; Pearson, A. 1).; Bridenbaugh, P. H., J. APPL. PHYS.,
V01 36. 1965, p 1962.

Pearson, A. 1).; Northwer, w. R., J. APPL. PEY8.. V01 38, 1967, p 2686.
De Sharer, 1.. 6.; Cabezu, A. V., PROC. 1‘, V01 52, 1964, p 1355.
Kitnnurn, A., J. PHYS. SOC. JAPAN, V01 20, 1965, p 1283.

Mela-ed, N. 1.; Bunyan, 0.; French, 0., APPL. PHYS. 1.211., V01 6, 1965,
p 63.

Manned, N. 1.; Birayana, C.; Davis, 3. K., APPL. PHYS. 1.811., V01 7,
1965, p 170.

Snitzer, 3.; Woodcock, R., JOSA, V01 55, 1965, p 5810.
Naknznun, 3.; Shionoyn, 811., APPL. PHYS. LETT., V01 6, 1965, p 117.
Shionoya, $11.; Nakaznwa, 8., APPL. PHYS. 1.211., V01 6, 1965, p 118.

Karnpetyan, G. 0.; Lunter, S. 0.; Koala, V. P., 0PT. I 8PM”
V01 19, 1965, p 951.

bulge, 6., 1333 J. QUANTUM ELECTRONICS (DIGEST 0F TBCHN. PAPERS),
Vol QB-Z, 1966, pp nan-11:.

Kovnlev, V. P.; Knrapotynn, G. 0., 0PT. 1 SPEKTR., V01 18, 1965. p 182.

Veynborg, T. 1.; Zhuyreva, I. A.; Kolobkov, V. P.; Kudryuhov, P. 1.,
0PT. I SPBKTR., V01 24, 1968, p 661.

Hokeycva, G. A.; Kolobkov, V. P.; Knrapetyan, G. 0., ZHPS, V01 9,
1968, p 326.

Kudrashov, P. 1.; Kolobkov, V. P.; Veynberg, T. 1., ms, No 8, 1968,
p 269.

263
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
335.

336.

337.
338.
339 .

341.
“2.

31:3.
346.
365.

“7'
“8.
349.

350.
351.

352.
353.

NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

anonteev, V. P.; Rndnttaldy, Yn. P.; Surchkov, Ye. 1.,
NEODNOWE USHIRENIYB SPBKTRAL'W LINIY mm SEED OKG
[Nonnuforl Broadening of the Spectral Lines of the Active ﬁedia of
more], Kiev, 1969. p 180.

Tolstoy, H. 11.; Peofilov, P. P.; Shapovalov, V. 8., IZV. AN SSSR: 838.
P12" Vol 31, 1967, p 2066.

Parke. 8.; Cole, 3., P318. cum. GLASSES, V01 12, 1971, p 125.
Ansel, F., M. W” V01 26, 1969, p 363.
Eduardo, J. 6.; Sundae. J. 8., J. PHYS., Vol D7, 1971., p 1078.

Krayevakiy, S. L.; Rndnitokiy, Yn. P.; Sverchkov, Ye. I., OPT. I
sm., V01 36, 1976, p 1136.

Zheborinnkiy, M. Ye.; Izyneyev, A. A; Kraxevskiy, S. I... et 31.,
0PT. I SPEKTR., Vol 32. 1972, p 758.

Yesorova, V. 9.; ankova, V. 3.; Karapetyan, G. 0., et 81..
SPEKTROSKOPIYA KRISTALWV, Moscow, Ranks, 1970, p 219.

Ansel, 8.; Dentachbein, 0. 1., Z. NATURPORSCB, V01 2103, 1969, p 1562.
Retofeld, R.; Bckstein, V., J. "ml-MST. SOLIDS, Vol 11, 1973, p 261.

Kolobkav, V. P.; Khalil", V. 0.; Vasylynk. Ye. P., et 31., 1’12. I
m. 5m. Vol 3, 1977, p 249.

301m, V. 3.; Brianne, Ch. 11.; Grigor'yants, V. V.; Zhebotinakiy, H. Ye.,
zazrr. Vol 57. 1969, p 1168.

Prrhevnskiy, A. x.. on. I SPEKTR” Vol 102, 1977, p 144.
Grisor'yants. V. V., 2331?, V01 58, 1970, p 15910.

Deni-0v, Yn. V.; Male“, I. V.; Kolobkov, V. P.; Rasteknyev, V. V.,
on. I sm., Vol 38, 1975, p 98.

Weber, H. J., PHYS. REV" V01 36, 1971, p 2932.

Caponteev, V. P.; Geyserova, L. 8.. T3218? non. V VSBSOYUZN. 3111?. P0
SPEKTROSKOPII KRISTALLOV, ARTIVIROVAW mm MYAMI I 3mm
01mm mu [Sultry of Reports of. the Fifth A11 Union Symposium
on Spectroscopy of Crystal; Doped with Rare Earths and Blatant: of

the Iron Group], Kern-1', 1976, p 70.

Neuron, 10.; Shionoye, Sh., J. PHYS. 800. JAPAN, V01 28, 1970, p 1260.

Anteiferov, V. V.; Chiner, A. V.; Dcriy, N. 14., et e1., 0PT. coconut.
V01 lb, 1975, p 388.

2610
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”A.

355 .

356 .

357.

358.

359.
360.

361.

362.

363.
366.
“s.

366.

$7.
58.

$9.

370.

371.

Belokrinitakiy, H. 8.; Zhabotinakiy, H. Ye.; Hanuil'akiy, A. 0., et
a1., DAN SSSR, Vol 185, 1969, p 557.

Arte-anon, H. V.; Hriakina, Ch. 1L; Sklernev, A. 0., mm [JournaL
of Physical Chadatry], Vol 69, 1975, p 353.

Kozlov, V. P.; Shapovalov, V. 8., P12. I m. sums. Vol 2, 1976,
p 165.

Ageyeva, L. Ye.; Przhevuakiy, A. K.: 'ro1atoy, H. 11.; Shapovalov, V. IL,
m, Vol 16, 1976, p 1659.

Dlitrydt, A. V.; larapetyan, G. 0.; Hikitin, S. V., ZIPS. Vol 18, 1973,
p 869.

Gapantaev, V. P., AV‘IORBF. mo. DI8., Hoocow, um AN SSSR, 1972.
Alekeeyev, R. Ye.; Gapontaev, V. P.; Ora-0V, A. K., et 31., TBZISY non.
III VSESOYUZN. 8114?. P0 omcmxm I SPW'IWH SVOYSTVAH STEKOL
[St-aria of Reports of the Third All Union Sywoaiun on Optical and
Spectral Properties of Glue], Leningrad, 001, 19710, p 107.

Kudryaahov, P. I., am RAND. DISS., Leningrad, (XII, 1976.

Lebedev, V_. P.: Lmter, S. 6.; Oveyankin, V. V., 0PT. I SPHKTR.,
Vol 61, 1976, p 631.

Hausa-Ia, 3.; Shidnoya, 811., J. m. PHYS., Vol 67, 1967, p 3211.
Rciafeld, 3.; Bchetain, Y., J. IOU-CRY“. SOLIDS, Vol 5, 1972, p 176.

Artmm. “o’vo; Briana... Ch. no; 10110, Va Pa, ms. “0 6' 1967,
p 112.

Kolobkov, V. P.; Zhlyreva, I. A.; Vejnberg, ‘1'. 1., SPHTROSKDPIYA
NEHDOGO 111A [Solid-State Spectroscopy], Leningrad, Hauka, 1969, p 150.

Reiafeld, R.; Bckatein, Y., APPL. PHYS. 1.311., Vol 26, 1975, p 253.
Rnpp, 8h. L; Chryaochooo, J., J. PHYS. CHEM" Vol 77, 1973, p 1016.

Gelant. Ye. 1.; Koslov, V. P.; Koricheva, I. V.; Shapovalov, V. IL,
P12. 1 mm. stem, Vol 5, 1979, p 110.

Hiaeberg, L. A., PHYS. m. LB‘l'l'., Vol 28, 1972, p 786; Solid State
Conan, Vol 11, 1972, p 669; PHYS. REV., Vol A7, 1973, p 671.

Daniaov, Yu. V.; Drhurinakiy, B. F.; Kizel', V. A., IZV. AN 88811: $31!.
nz.. Vol 32. 1968, p 1580.

265
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
372 .

373.

3710.

375.

376 .

377.

378.
379.

381.

382.

383.

3817.

385.
386.
387.

389.

MONO“. USE ONLY
Vasil'yev, I. V.; 2verev, G. 14.; Kolodnyy, G. “.3 Onishchenko, A. 11.,
mm, V01 56, 1969, p 122.

Przhevuskiy, A. x.; Savou'yanov, v. A.; Tolstoy, 14. N., Kvmowm
mum. V01 5, 1978, p 101..

Speed, A. 8.; Gorlick, G. I". J.: hasten, W. 8., PHYS. STAT. SOLIDI (a),
V01 27, 1975, p (077.

Avouris, Pin: 08391011, A.; Bl-Sayed, H. A., cum. PHYS. 1.3112, V01 50,
1977, p 9.

Flash, 11.; Hamilton, 1). 8.; Selzer, P. 11.: Yen, V. 11., PHYS REV. 1.311.,
V01 35, 1975, p 1034.

Salter, P. 11.; Hamilton, 0. s.; raw, 3.; You, H. 71., .7. Lumunscmcz.
V01 12/13, 1976, p 737.

Kruutsky, 11.; Noon, 3. 11., PHYS. REL, V01 88, 1973, p 1010.

Weber, H. 3.; Paisner, J. A.; Susana, s. 8., et 01., J. LUH'INBSCENCE,
V01 12/13, 1976, p 729.

Belokrinitakiy, N. 8.; Mail'skiy, A. 0.; Soakin, H. 8., m. 1'12. 217.
[Ukrainian Physics Journal], Vol 12, 1967, p 1720.

Zabokritnkiy, 3. Y0.; Hundl'okiy, A. 1).; Soakin, H. 8.; Odulov, s. G.,
SPERTROSKOPIYA MSW, Leningrad, Nam, 1973, p 2108.

Benn. v. m; 6:130!"me v. v.; zmbozmuy. u. Ye., us'm 2mm,
V01 6, 1967, p 721.

anchor, c.; Moeberg, L. A.; Robot, H. J., APPL. PHYS. 1.311., V01 30,
1977, p 1:75.

Przhemkiy, A. 1.; Trifonov, Ye. 1).; Troshtn, A. 8., 711', Vol 19,
1977, p 1661.

Sniczer,B., 308A, V01 55, 1965, p 1547.
Snitzer, 3., APPL. 0PT., V01 5, 1966, p 1687.

Buiyev, '1'. 1.; Voron'ko, Yu. L; brain, A. 70., et 01, ZEETP, V01 75,
1978, p 66.

Buiyev, ‘1'. T.; Voran'ko, In. K.; Hirav, 8. 8.; Prokhorov, A. 11.,
PIS'MA mm, V01 29, 1979, p 696.

Buiyev, ‘1‘. 1.; Voton'ko, Yu. L; Prokhororv, A. 11., SPEIG'ROSKOPIYA
KRISTALLOV, Leningrad, Nauka, 1978, p 83.

266
FOR OFFICIAL [SB ONLY
390.

391.

392 .

393.
394.

395.

396.

397.
398.

399.
400.
401.

402 .
403 .

404.

405.
406.
407.
408.

409.

Yen, w. .; Susana, S. 8.; Patent, J. A.; Weber, H. J., Preprint
UCRL 76481, Lawrence uvernore 1.06., uvernore, 1975.

Avenuov, A. 6.; Voron'ko, Yu. K.; beaker, 3. I., et e1.,
“MAYA 81mm, V01 6, 1979, p 1.583.

Helyehev. H. 8.; Pnhevuekty, A. K.; Trifonav, Ye. D.; ‘rroehin, A. S.,
m, Vol 19, 1977, p 1461.

Yen, W. 11., J. MISSING, V01 18/19. Part II, 1979. p 639.

Prehevueldy, A. 3., ”WHA “181m. Leningrad, Hanks, 1978,.
p 96.

Kravchenko, V. 3.; Rudnitekiy, Yu. P., “MAYA mm. V01 6,
1979, p 661.

Perun, Yu. Ye., UFN [Progress in the Phyeical Sciences], Vol so. 1963,
p 553.

Riaeberg,.1.. A... "non, N. 3., PHYS. REV., V01 174, 1969, p 429.

Andriyeeh. I. 8.; Gmer', V. Ya.; Vylegzhenin, D. IL, et 31.,
m. Vol 14, 1972, p 2967.

Sveehnikova, Ye. 3., 12V. AN sssn: sn. PIZ. Vol 39. 1975, p 1801.
Dodmov, Ye. 11.; Svutmikova, Ye. 3., 0PT. I SPIRIT... V01 36, 1974, p 340.

Macberg, L. A.; Heber, H. J., PROGR. IN OPTICS, hetetdm. north
Holland Publ. 60., Vol 14, 1976, p 90.

Bouloo. B. “.3 Kreidl. N. J., J. CANAD. CHM“. 3°C., V01 41, 1972. p 83.

Kovaleva, I. V.: Kolobkov. V. P.; Ieterinteev, B. V.; Yekhkind, A. K..
zaps, Vol 23, 1975, p 1021.

Caponteev, V. P.; Izyneyev. A. A.; Kravchenko, V. 3.; Sverchkov, Ye. I.,
TBZISY non. V VSBSOYUZN. 8111?. P0 SPBKI'ROSKOPII KRISTAIJDV,

Kezen', 1976, p 71.

Reisfeld, R.; Eckatein, Y., SOLID STATE 0031011., Vol 13, 1973, p 265, 741.
Reiefeld, R.; Bckstein, Y., J. m. PHYS., Vol 63, 1975, p 4001.
Reiefeld, 3.. J. NOS-CRY”. SOLIDS, Vol 15, 1974, p 116.

Retefeld, 11.; Liebnch, IL, J. ms. CHEM. SOLIDS, Vol 34, 1973, p 1467.

Reisfeld, R.; Vehpoldi, R. A.; Boehn, I... J. PHYS. 63314.. Vol 76,
1972. p 1293.

267
ml OFFICIALUSEONLY
610.

‘11.

412 O

613.

6110.

415.

616.

617.

618.

‘19.

620.

421.

622.
623.
624.

1025:

1.26.

627.

428.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reisfeld. R.; Boehl, I..; Bckstcin, 1.; Lieblich, 11., J. 1.111111138051103,
V01 10, 1975, p 193.

Reisfald, 3., 5mm AND BONDING, ed. J. D. Dmitz, 0t 01., Berlin,
Springer, V01 22, 1975, p 123.

Layne, c. 3.; Louderlnk, 17.11.; Weber, 11. J., In: J. QUANTUM
ELECTRONICS, Vol 03-11, 1975, p 798; ms. REV” Vol 316, 1977, p 10.

Gaunt, Ye. 1.; gummy. IL; hunter, 8. 6., at 8.1., KVAWAYA
mm, V01 3, 1976, p 2187.

Gapontaev, V. P.; Ore-0v, A. 1L: Izyncyev, A. A., at 01., PIS'MA MN,
V01 29. 1979, p 234.

Deniaov, Yu. V.; Hael', V. A., 0PT. I spam. V01 23, 1967, p 473.

Khodos, 11. Yn.: Potiyev, A. A.; Shun, A. P.; Galaktionov, A. 0.,
znrs, V01 24, 1976, p 529.

Yogorov, V. In; zwkov, V. 8.; 110k, A. A., SPEKTROSKDPIYA KRISTALLOV,
Moscow. Nauka, 1970, p 207.

Rudnitokiy, Yu. P.; Suit-now, R. V.; Chernyak, V. 11., KVANTOVAYA
ELEKTRONIIA, V01 3, 1976, p 2035.

Shekun, 1.. “1., m, V01 9, 1967, p 9108.

Brachkovakaya, N. 8.; Karapetyan, G. 0.; Reyshakhrit, A. I... et 31.,
on. I spam" V01 21, 1970, p 328.

00100:, Yo. I.; Reyahakhrit, A. I..; Tolstoy, 11. N., 0PT. I 8PM”
V01 31, 1971, p 266.

Huhkevich, V. 8.; Soskin, 11. 8., PIS'HA 2mm. Vol 5, 1967, p 656.
Heller, A., J. AMER. cm. 800., V01 88, 1966, p 2058.
Peterson, G. 3.; decnbough, P. 11., JOSA, V01 56, 1964, p 661..

Arbuzav, V. 1.; Brachkovakaya, N. 8.; Zlmyreva, I. A., et 01.,
KVANTOVAYA mum. V01 3, 1976, p 2005.

Manov, Ye. 11.; bruit, A. Y0.; Korniyenko, L. 8., KVAMOVAYA
MADEIRA, V01 2, 1975, p 622.

01.nov, Ye. 11.; bruit, A. Yb; Korniyonko, L. 8., et 01.,
KVANTOVAYA mum, V01 2, 1975, p 1665.

Wards, J. A., BRIT. J. APPL. ms., V01 1, 1968, p 4109.

268
FOR ONE. USE ONLY
‘29.

430.

‘31.

632.

6 33.

1.36.

635.

1.36.

637.
638.
639.
660.

661.
662.

653.

666.

Jscobt, R. 3.; Weber, M. J., I!!! J. QUANTUM ELECTMNICS, Vol QE-ll,
1975. p 846.

Dsutschbsin, 0. K.: Pnutrst, C. 0.; Svirchevsky, J. 11., REV. PHYS. APPL,
Vol 2, 1967, p 29.

Alekosyev, N. Ye.; Izy'ncyev, A. A.; Kopy1ov, Yu. I... et s1.. ms.
Vol 26, 1976, p 976.

Lunter. S..G.; Ruben, B. I"; Shunilov, 8. 1., mm non. VI
VSESOYUZN. 31119. PO WROPII msrALmv. AKTNIROVAW roam
mm'm I ‘ ' ' : ITALIAN [Salaries of Reports of the

Sixth A11 Union Smash-I on Spectroscopy of Crystals Doped with
Rare Berth end Transition Hstsl Ions], Moscow, 1979, p 271.

 

Gslsktionov, A. 1).; Shul'gin, B. V.; Khodos, 1!. Ya., ct s1., ZIPS,
Vol 21, 1974, p 339.

”10d”, 11. Ys.; Gslsktionov, A. 1).; Shtin, A. P., et s1., ZIPS, V01 24,
1976, p 631.

Alekseyev, N. Ye.; Izyneyev, A. A.; Kopylav, Yo. I... et s1., MISY non.
Iv VSBSOYUZN. sm. P0 OPTICIBSKIH I SPRImIAL'm SVOYS‘NAH m.
Rigs, 1977, p 107.

Brschkovskaya, N. 3.; Luntcr, s. 0.; Shunilov. S. K., TBZISY non. VI
VSBSOYUZN. sm. P0 SPMROSKDPII msmwv. AKTIVIROVANW IONA!!!
mozm'm I PM!!! mum, Hoscov, 1979, p 61..

Judd, B. 11., PHYS. REL, Vol 127, 1962, p 750.

Ofelt. G. 8., J. CHEM. ms., V01 37, 1962, p 511.

Krupke. H. P., I!!! J. owl'wu ELECTRONICS, Vol 03-7, 1971, p 153.

Csrnsll, w. 1.; Field, 9. x.; stnsk, x.. J. cazn. Pan.. v.1 49, 1968,
p 4.24.

DeutsChbein, O. K., ma J. mm mc'mtmcs, Vol 03-12, 1976, p 551.

3.1... V. 11.; Grigorjsnts, V. V.: Zhshotinsky, H. 3.. 1333 J. QUANTUM
mcrmcs, Vol 08-3, 1967, p 625.

Rudnitskiy, Yu. P.; Shim. R. V.; Sokolov, V. 1., I'BZISY non.

I VSBSOYDZN. K01". P0 mm LAZBROV [Sn-urns of Reports of the First
All Union Conference on Laser Optics]. Leningrad, 1976, p 68;

preprint of the Atomic Power Institute in. I. V. Kurchstov, No 1417,
1979.

Grigor'ysnts, V. V.; Zhsbotinskiy, H. Ye.; Harkushev, V. 11., ZIPS,
Vol 14, 1971, p 73.

269
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

445. 1131:, A. A.; Prilezhayev, D. 8.; Sorebryakov, V. A.; Starikov, A. D.,
on. SPMR., Vol 33, 1972, p 689.

446. Martin, P. 2.; Milan, 0., APPL. PHYS. 1.2113, V01 32, 1978, p 816.

447. Nikidn, V. 1.: Sookin, H. 8.; Khizhnyak, A. 1., PIS'HA 2317, V01 3,
1977, p 16.

448. Bond3r33ko, Ye. 6.: Saint, Ye. 1.; Lancer, 8. 6., 3t 31., TBZISY 0010..
NA 111 VSBSOYUZN. SM. P0 omcuzsmq 1 srm'm SVOYS‘NAH STEKOL,
Leningrad, 601, 1974, p 96.

449. Krwchenko, V. 1.; Tarabrov, V. V., ZIPS, Vol 13, 1970, p 719.

450. G311ch. c. A.; Kravchcnko, V. 1., m. 1’12. 28., Vol 20, 1975, p 1732.

451. Pogorelyy, 0. 8.; Soakin, M. 8.; Taranenko, V. 3., PIS'MA 231?, Vol 2,
1976, p 49.

452. Zabokritskiy, B. Y3.; H33u11'3k1y, A. 1).; Otlov, S. 6., 3t. 31..
m. F12. 23.. Vol 17, 1972, p 501.

453. Veduta, A. P.; Solokha. A. P.; Furzikov, N. P., at 31., KVANTOVAYA
mum, No 5, 1973, p 36.

454. Treat, R. P.; Gabezas, A. Y., J. APPL. PHYS" 1966, V01 37, p 3556.
455. But, 17., 308A, V01 59. 1969, p 851.

456. Shchavelev, O. 8.: mun. V. A.; Y31133, II. 11., et 31., P12. 1 nun.
sm, V01 2, 1976, p 449.

457. valor, a. 3.; Cleek, c. w.; Halitson. 1. 3.. et 31.. J. us. nu.
m. srm., Vol 75A, 1971, p 163.

458. “3113:, R. 11.; Clack, G. 17., J. RES. NAT. 31m. STAND, V01 77A, 1973,
p 755.

459. Blazhko, V. V.; Bubnov, H. 11.; Dimov, Y3. 14.; Chikolini, A. V.,
KVAN‘I‘O‘mYA W1“, Vol 3. 1976, p 1151.

460. Ora-0v, A. IL; Izyneyev, A. A.; Kopylov, Yu. I..; Kravchenko, V. 8.,
TBZISY DOKL. III-178380111211. SM. P0 OPTICHBSKIH 1 SPBKTRAL'NYH
SVOYSTVAH STEKOL. Iminsud, 001, 1974, p 24.

461. Grolov, A. K.; Izyneyev, A. A.; Kopylov, Yu. I... at 31., NOVYYB
Lemma GLAZURI, m1 1 YOSFOROSODERZIABHCBIYE swam, R133,
1973, p 152.

270
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
662 .

663.

666.

665 .

‘ﬁ.

667.
668.
669.
670.
671.

672.
673.
676.
675.

‘76.

677.

‘78.

‘79.

Meieev, N. Ye.; Capontuv, V. P.: ZhObotinnky, H. Ye., et 31.,
P300. XI INTERN. menus 0!! CLASS, P213110, V01 3, 1977, p 69.

Levonberg, V. A.; Lunter, 8. 0., P12. 1 mm. STEICLA, Vol 2, 1976,
p 63.

Berezinn, Ye. Yc.; uvcnbcrg, V. A.; Lunter, S. 0., F12. I ma.
3m, V01 3, 1977, p 617.

Rmchandran, c. 11., moo. 11mm ACAD. sc1., Vol 25A, 191.7, p 266.

Meghan, 8.; Veda, L; Kirshnan, ll. 8., PROGR. CRYST “'18., V01 1,
1958, p 139.

ProdhOI-I, 1... ms. CHEM. GLASSES, V01 1, 1960, p 119.
Chistyakov, A. 8., urn-m. moan. No 1, 1975, p 60.
Boruim, Ye. Y... opt-1m. PRO)!" no 9, 1976, p 63.
Racy-ova, S. 5.; Shchavelcv, 0. 8., CPL-1m. PROM" No 8, 1976, p 16.

Shchmlev, 0. 8.; 381614118, V. A.: Zola'nnkaya, H. V., on.-m. PROH.,
No 3, 1975, p 66.

Shchavelev, 0. 8.; Zelonakaya, H. V., om-m. PROH., No 10, 1976, p 50.
Holev, V. 1.; Shchuvolcv, 0. 8., mm, V01 69, 1976, p 755.

Holcv, V. 1.; Shchavelev, 0. 8., OMS-1m. PM” No 6, 1977, p 27.
Kuynova, S. 8.; Shchuvelev, 0. 8., 3m. TEDDY 608. m—n STERLA
gains. Works of the State Institute of Glass], No 2, (151), 1976,

shch‘velev. 0. So; Elev, V. In; YUM”. N. “a, oPro-m. MI,
No 9. 1976, p 22.

Crown, A. L; Izyncycv, A. A.; Kopylov, Yu. 1.; Kravchenko, V. 13.,
T8213! non. IV VSBSOYUZR. 8M;.PO 0??!anst 1 SPEKTRAL'NYH
SVOYS'NAH 5m, Riga, 1977, p 66.

Shchavelcv, 0. 8.; Blbkinu, V. A" F12. I ma. STEKLA, Vol 3, 1977,
p 519.

Deanna. L. 1.. nzno-xnmcumn osuovr PROIZVODSTVA
OPTICHBSKOGO 3m [Physiochentcal Principles of the Production of
Optical Glut], Leningrad, main, 1976, p 78.

271
FOR OFFICIAL [SI ONLY
low.

481.
682 .

683.
486.
1085.
486.
687.

1088.

489.

A” C

1.91.
692.
1093.
494.

1095.

496 .

697.

(098.

‘99.

FOIOFHGALUSBONLY
Shchavelev. o. 8.; Pluralove, N. Yu., PIZ. I noun. STEKLA, Vol 4, 1978,
p 98.
Hoyle, S. 8.; Di Docencio, 14., PHYS. RBV., Vol 81, 1970, p 193.

Bondov, 8.; Gianino, P. 0.; Tony, Y. 17.: Mitre, 8. 8., APPL. 0PT.,
Vol 13, 1974, p 2382.

Weuple, S. 11.; Di Domenico, 11., ms. REV. 1.811., Vol 23, 1969, p 1156.
Wylov, Yu. I... AM? RAND. 0188., Moscow IRE AN SSSR, 1980.
Hoyle. 8-. 8., PHYS. REL, Vol 87, 1973, p 3767.

Hoopla, S. 8., J. cam. PHYS., Vol 67, 1977, p 2151.

Pbrozova, I. 8.; Yakhkind, A. L, TEZISY non. IV VSESOYUZN. SHIP. PO
OPTICHESKIH I SPEKTRAL'NYH SVOYSTVAH STEKOL, Riga, 1977, p 21.

Veyko. V. P.; Libenoon, H. 11., LAZBRNAYA OBRABO'IKA [Laser Machining].
Leningrad, Lenizdot, 1973.

Kninekiy, A. A.; Pink, A. A.; Puhinin, P. P.; Popov, Yu. 11.,
SPRAVOCENIK P0 LAZBBAM [Later Handbook], Moscow, Sov. radio, Vol I, 1978,
p 237.

Bushinokiy, I. 14.; Dianav, Ye. 11.; m. A. A., SPRAVOCHNIK P0 LAZERAH,
Moscow, Sov. radio, Vol I, 1978, p 329.

m. A. A.; Am'yev. Yu. A.; Ygrukav. n. A., m, V01 92. 1967, p 373.
m, A. A.; Stepenov, A. I., opt-mm. P1102!" No 10, 1967, p 17.

KIGRB Q-88* PEOSPHAI‘E GLASS, USA, 1977 (Prospectus of the Kigre Comm).
Stokowoki, S. 8.; Soroyen, R. A.; Weber, H. J., Nd-DOED LASER GLASS.
SPECTROSCOPIC AND PHYSICAL PROPRTIBS, Lawrence Liverllore Lab. 11-095,

Livernore, 1978.

lotteri, 14.; Toubaki, 1.; Karate, P.; Tannin, 11., J. CERAM. SOC.
Japan, Vol 79, 1971, p 65.

Gel-ktionova. N. 14.; Yogorovo, V. F.; Zobkovo, V. 5., et a1., DAN 8881!,
Vol 173, 1967, p 1286.

Vodop'yanov, K..L.; beaker, B. 1.; Habit-ova, G. V., et a1..
KVAN'I'OVAYA WM, Vol 5, 1978, p 686.

Zheltov, G. 1.; Mon, 8. L; Rubenov, A. 3., ZHPS, Vol 22, 1975,
p 928.

Avaneoov, A. 6.; Vasil'yev, I. V.; Voron'ko, Yu. L. et 31., KVAN'IOVAYA
mun, Vol 6. 1979, p 1586.

272
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
'50“.

501.

502 .

503.

5010 .

505.

SM.

507.

508.

510.

511.

512.
513.

516.

515.

ﬂaulutu. A. 0.; Shluer, H. 8.. PRODUCTION LASER "UH-2 DRILLING--
NW. Laser. Inc.. 1976.

Konogsvs, ‘1'.; Intern, 11.; Rays”, 3., Japan, J. APPL. PHYS., Vol 5,
1966, p (0109.

Gsponov. s. V.; Gsrin, 1’. V.; Psrsnonov, L. V., KVANTOVAYA mum.
Vol 2, 1975, p 1556.

Grevtsev, N. V.; Yevdokinorv, V. A.; Skripnichenko, A. 8., 712. I
m. OBRABOT. HATER. [Physics and Chemistry of the Rotting of Materials],
No 3, 1969, p 20.

Bespslov, V. 1.; Gostev, V. 1.; Gruzdsv, V. V., et s1., opt-m. PM”
No 12. 1971, p 20.

Devidov, B. A.; Hurstov, V. 11.; Sons, 1.. 11., et .31.. Kvsntovsye
31.3mm. Vol. 1, 1974. p 2518.

Kurods, IL: “rode, 1.; Hunko, 8.: ”some, 8., IEEBIOSA (IMP. 0N LASER
ENGIN. A. APPLICATIOIS (DIGEST OF TECH". PAPERS), Washington, 1977,
p 51.

LASER macaw-um 1.1173100“ LAB. ANNUAL REP. NURCI. 50021-76,
Liver-lore. 1976.

Reisfeld, R.; Eckstein, Y., J. nos-cram. SOLIDS, Vol 12, 1973, p 357.

Quelle, F., PROC. WNP. 0N LASER RANGE 1313111., California, SPIB, 1968,
p 3.

Bruce, R. 3.; White, K. 0.; Megan, J. 3.; Buser, R. 6., In!!! J. QUANTUM
ELECTRONICS, Vol 09-5, 1969, p 1.79.

White, K. 0.; Bolt, 2. 8.; Woodcock, R. P., LASER FOCUS, Vol 6, No 7,
1970, p 51.

Ross, 11., mm PRIYMIKI [Laser Receivers], Moscow, Mir, 1969.

Gspontssv, V. P.; Rudnitskiy, Yu; P., TEZISY Don. VSBSOYUZN.
SOVBSHCHANIYA P0 INZIIENBRNYH PROBLEM}! UPRAVLYAYEMOGO TBRHOYADERNOGO
SINTBZA [Sun-cries of Reports on the A11 Union Conference on the
Engineering Problem of Controlled Themonuclesr l’usion]. Leningrad,

1974, p 36.
Snitzer, 8., AMER. CREAM. SOC. BUM... Vol 52, No 6, 1973, p 516.

Gspontsev, V. P.; Izyneyev. A. A.; Krsvchenko, V. 3.; Rudnitskiv. Yu.P.,
TEZISY DOKL. I VSBSOYUZN. KONF. P0 OPTIKB LAZERDV [Smries of Reports
of the First All Union Conference on Loser Optics], Leningrad, 1977,

p 9.

273
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
516.

517.
518.
519.
$20.
521.
522.

523.

524 .

525.

526.

527.

528.

529.

S30.

531.
532.
533.
53‘.

535.

MOMMlJSEONLY

Kudryuhov. P. I.; Veynberg, ‘1'. I.; Kolobkov, V. P., ZHPS, No 5, 1966,
p 6310.

Anal, 1'., ANN. mmc., Vol 21., no 5-6, 1969. p 199.

Robinson, 0., J. NON-CRYSI'. SOLIDS. Vol 15, 1976, p 1, 11.

Sandoo, J. 11.; Sarkiu. P. 11.; Parke, 8., J. PHYS., Vol 05, 1972, p 1788.
link. A. 1A., Nth-m. PM” No 1, 1979, p 5.

Kolobkov. V. P.; Petrovekiy, c. ‘1'., om—m. now, No 3, 1971. p 53.

Zh-yreva, I. A.; lovcleva, I. V.; Kolobkav. V. P., et 31., 0PT. I
89mm, Vol 22, 1966. p 509.

Judd. B. R., cm. PHYS.. V01 1.6, 1966, p 839.

Caponcsev, V. P., havchenko, V. 3.; Rudnttakiy, Yu. 1).. TBZISY non.
III VSBSOYUZN. 8111?. PO omcaasrm ”mm!!! SVOYSI‘VAH STEKOL,
Leningrad, 001. 1976, p 113.

Robinabn. c.. JOSA, Vol 57, No 1. 1967, p 6.

Kolobkov, V. P.; Kudryoahov, P. I.; Rubinov. Yu. A., at a1., ZIIPS,
Vol 17, 1972, p 161.

Kalinin, V. 11.; link. A. A.; Prilezhtycv, D. 5.; Franzel', V. 1...
2111?, Vol No, 1974, p 1328.

Snitzer, 3.: Woodcock, R. 1'.; Segre, 3., 1m J. QUANTUM ELECTRONICS
(DIGEST or mam. PAPERS). 03-4, 1968, p 360.

Snitzer, 3.; Woodcock, L, JOSA. V01 55, 1965, p 580.

Candy, 3. U.; Ginther, R. J.; Heller, J. P., PHYS. 1.3113, V01 16,
1965, p 266.

Angel. F” C. R. ACAD. SOL, V01 8263. 1966, p 765.
Snitler. 2.; Landry. J.. USA Patent No 3675155, 1972.
Oshe, G. 8.. I383 J. QUANTUM MCTRONICS, Vol 08-7. 1971, p 252.

Capontuv, V. 9.; Kravchcnko, V. 3.; sycrchkov, Ya. I., TBZISY non.
I VSBSOY‘DZN. m. P0 om WM. Leningrad, 1977. p 8.

Kahuna, V. N.; link, A. A.. Prilezhayev, D. 8.; Fronzel', V. A.,
PIS'HA 2311?, V01 1, 1975, p “9.

27!.
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
536.

537.

538.

$39.

5100.

561.

562.

5103.

566.

545 .

Sverchkov, Yu. Ye.; anontnev,,v. P., “218‘! non. V1 VSESOYUZN.
SIHP. P0 SPBICI'ROSKOPII KRISTALmV, WWW 10mm P. z. I
PEREKBODW W, Krasnodar, 1979, p 261.

Avdeyev. P. 5.; Berezin, Yu. 8.; Gudekovokiy, Yu. P., et 31.,
KVANTOVAYA WM. V01 5. 1978, p 220.

White, K. 0.; Schlenoener, s. 11., APPL. ms. 1311's., Vol 21, 1972,
p ‘19.

Avdeyev, P. 8.; Berezin, Yu. D.; Volkov, V. V., et 81.. TBZISY 0010..
II VSBSOYUZN. ROM. P0 OPTIKE LAZBROV [St-uric: of Reports of the
Second A11 Union Conference on Laser Optics], Leningrad, 001, 1979, p 280.

Berenov, N. 8.; Bykmkiy, N. Ye.; Zel'dovich, 3. Ya.; Sonatakiy, Yu. V.,
kvnntovaya elekcronih, V01 1, 1974, p 21450.

Anan'yev, Yu. A., KVAN'I’OVAYA 3mm, No 6, 1971, p 3.

Gorhnov, A. v.; wininn, A. 11.; Lyubmv. v. v.. et e1., zaps. Vol 17.
1972, p 617.

Baranov, S. A.; Kolpakova, I. V.; Kononova, 11. Yu., et e1., KVAN'I‘OVAYA
31mm. V01 5, 1978, p 176.

Snitzer, 3., AMER. CERAH. SOC. BULL” V01 52, 1973, p 516.

Segre, J. P.; Tmcott, N. 3.; Korea, 3. 1.. 1388 J. QUANTUM KIBCTNNICS,
V01 QB’?. 1973, P 6730

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", Glavnaya redaktsiya fiziko-mteuticheskoy

10845

1 iterntury, 1980

CSO: 8164/1223

.mm.

275
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY