FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10119

17 November 1981

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 7. July 1981

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS Publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions end broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION OE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10119

17 November 1981

USSR REPORT
NETEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 7. July 1981

Translations or abstracts of all articles of the Russian-language

monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by
Gidrometeoizdat.

CONTENTS

Short-Range Precipitation Forecasting.. ....... ................. ....... ......... l

*Nonadiabatic Model of Atmosphere in Primitive Equations for Predicting
Meteorological Elements Over Europe............................. ......... ...... l6

*Investigation of Patterns of Movement of Hacroscale Vortices Relative to a
Purely Zonal Flow ..... ........ ...... ............ ..... ............. ....... ...... l7

Informativeness of Global Systems for Observing Total Ozone Content............ 18

Axisymmetric Problem of Free Convection and Numerical Experiments for Dynamic
Modification of a Cumulus Cloud ..... ............................. ...... ........ 30

Cloud Extent in Zone 65°N-45°S Over Planet........ ........ 39

Results of Checking Methods for Determining Hater Surface Temperature Prom
'Heteor' Artificial Earth Satellites........................................... 47

Comparative Analysis of Methods for Calculating Turbulent Heat and Moisture
Flows From the Ocean to the Atmosphere........................... ..... ......... 59

Numerical Experiments Using a Model of the Ocean's Upper Layer...... ..... ...... 68

Hydrological Structure and Energy Reserves of Rings in the Main Black Sea
Current ...... . ..... .. ......... ..... ........... ........... ..... ................. 78

*Numerical Modeling of Hind-Driven Currents in Lakes.............. ..... ... ...... 87

*Structure of Atmospheric Pressure and Hind Near the Equator in the Central Part
of the Pacific Ocean......... ......... .... ..... .. ..... ........... ........ ...... 88

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- a - [III - USSR - 33 5&T FOUO

cm: nrclrul rs: 0V! V
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(H‘LY

*Role of Hydrogen Peroxide (H202) in the Formation of Mesospheric Clouds........ 89
Influence of Meteorological Factors on the Yield of Spring Hheat....... ...... .. 90
Experimental Investigations of Ultraviolet Radiation in the Lower Atmosphere... 96

*Heteorological Work of I. N. Ul'yanov (150th Anniversary of His Birth)........ 106
Review of Collection of Articles on Atmospheric Physics and Climate........... 107

*Seventy—Pifth Birthday of Ida Arturovna Gol'tsberg............................ llO

*Govermcnt Awards to Soviet Hydrometeorologiats............................... 111

“New International Hydrometeorological Code................ ..... ............... 112

*Notes From Abroad............................................................. 113

*Obituary of Nikolay Sergeyevich Shiahkin (1912-1981).......................... 115

* Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- b -

EnllofFuﬂkltﬁiEONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.324

SHORT-RANGE PRECIPITATION FORECASTING

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 (manuscript received
15 Dec 80) pp 5-17

[Article by A. I. Snitkovskiy, candidate of geographical sciences, USSR Hydro-
meteorulogicai Scientific Research Center]

[Text] Abstract: A method is proposed for predict—
ing the fact and quantity of steady precip-
itation for 24 and 36 hours by application
of the NOS concept. The possibilities for
predicting summer precipitation are consid-

ered.

The theoretical principles for predicting steady precipitation, developed by A. F.
Dyubyuk, have been set forth in the MANUAL [6]. The computation formula for the

quantity of steady precipitation has the form
IP

‘f%dpdt. (1)
6 Po '
where Q is the quantity of moisture concentrated in a column of the atmosphere be-

tween the levels P0 and P during the time‘A t: q is specific humidity at maximum
saturation; t is time; 3 is the acceleration of free falling.

am;—

It follows from formula (1) that the quantity of precipitation is determined by
the product of the baric thickness of air and the individual change of specific
humidity in it. The individual change in specific humidity is associated first

of all with the sign and intensity of vertical air movements. Since in a column
of air with a section 1 cm2 with a thickness of 100 mb the condensation of l g of
moisture in 1 kg of air is equivalent to the falling of precipitation in a quan-
tity of 1 mm. the working formula for predicting the quantity of steady precipi-
tation during some time interval will be as follows:

0'. L5 .‘ﬂuri-lﬁ Amos-£33090!)- (2)

0 are the individual changes of specific humidity

where Aqe 0’ Aqm and Aq 0
5 0 he levels 850, 700 and 500 mb.

in the case of ascent from t

Accordingly, knowing the actual distribution of specific humidity with altitude
and in this same time interval the vertical movements. it is possible to use (2)
to compute the quantity of steady precipitation and compare it with the actual

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY

ation on the prognostic values of specific humidity and vertical air movements. Th1
prediction of tropospheric humidity is accomplished in the usual way: on the basis
of a model of air particle trajectories and the advective humidity values, with
transformation taken into account. However, due to imperfection of objective anal-
ysis of the humidity field and errors in computations of air particle trajectories,
the prediction of humidity also contains errors. Nevertheless, the fundamental
error in the prediction of steady precipitation arises due to a failure to know the
real distribution of ordered vertical air movements, which are computed from the
equations of thermohydrodynamics. and naturally, the impossibility of comparing
them with the prognostic vertical movements. However, it is not for these reasons
alone that synoptic forecasts of precipitation are better than the forecasts pre-
pared by numerical and computation methods. It is most important that weathermen

in forecasts use information on weather phenomena and elements for the region

from which the transport of air masses occurs. whereas in numerical and computation
methods information on weather phenomena and elements are not used at all. Such
phenomena as steady rain, showers, thunderstorms, squalls and a number of others
are computed in numerical models on the basis of physico—theoretical concepts or
empirical dependences.

With these circumstances taken into arcount, in this article, in addition to known
atmospheric parameters, determining the formation of steady precipitation, as the
predictors, the same as in done by weathermen in the case of a real forecast, ex-
tensive use is made of information on advective precipitation quantities.

In this article. which is a natural continuation of [8]. we propose a method for
predicting the fact and quantity of steady precipitation in the cold half-year for
24 and 36 hours on the basis of a synoptic-statistical approach; the possibilities
of predicting summer precipitation are also examined. The forecasting method is
developed in the example of Moscow. In contrast to [8), where use was made of two
forecasting concepts —- PP (perfect prognosis) and H08 (model output statistics)
-- here we examine only the MOS concept as indicating, in accordance with [8. 9,
10, i3. 14],the best results in operational forecasting.

Initial Data and Processing Method

Data on steady precipitation were taken for the period from October through March
1974—1978. The predictant was the quantity of precipitation, averaged for all
meteorological stations of Moscow and Moscow Oblast during the period of day from
2100 to 0900 hours (for a 26-hour period) and from 0900 to 2100 hours (for a 36-
hour forecast).

The predictors were selected on the basis of general concepts concerning the phys-
ics of formation of steady precipitation and taking into account the latest re~

sults of investigations in this field [5, 6, 8, 10-16]. The list of potential
predictors. selected for the prediction of precipitation, is given below.

t**

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIST OF POTENTIAL PREDICTORS FOR PREDICTION OF FACT AND QUANTITY OF STEADY PRECIP—
ITATION IN MOSCOW AND MOSCOW OBLAST FOR 24 AND 36 HOURS

P0 is the pressure at sea level. mb;

H1000 is the geopotential at the lOOO-mb level. dam;

"850' H700, 3500 is the geopotential at the levels 850, 700 and 500 mb. dam;

D 00. D??0 is wind direction at the levels 700 and 500 mb. degrees;

f 700, 500 is wind velocity at the levels 700 and 500 mb. m/sec:

W350. H700. H500 are the vertical air movements at the levels 850. 700 and 500 mb.

mb/IZ hours;

K is the instability index. K - (H1000+H500)-2ﬂ850. dam; 35(T T)
— a
a”
is the total dew point spread at the levels 850 and 700 mb. 'C; 7m
2 q
as
is the total specific humidity at the levels 850 and 700 mb, g/kg;
In
2
mm] (ground)

is the total relative humidity at the ground level and at the surface 850 mb. x;
T. Td' T - Id are temperature. dew point and dew point spread at the earth's sur-
face, °C;

Pu500 is the precipitated water in the layer between the ground and the level 500

gr
mb, mm; PH500- S q r + q500/2. where qgr and qSOO is specific humidity in g/kg at

the surfacgrand at the level 500 mb;
Q1“ and Qadv are the fact and quantity of initial and advective precipitation.
Coding for the fact of precipitation: presence 3. absence 1. Quantity of precip-

itation. mm;
Qayn. Qiyn are the fact and quantity of precipitation in synoptic predictions of
‘ 0

precipitation. Coding the same;
QM, Qﬁo is the actual precipitation (predictants). Coding the same.

The archives of predictors for predicting precipitation for 24 and 36 hours in ac-
cordance with the MOS concept were obtained on the basis of prognostic charts of
pressure, geopotential and ordered vertical air movements. at whose initial points
data were read on temperature. humidity and other atmospheric parameters using a
model of air particle trajectories. The fact and quantity of advective precipita-
tion in the corresponding time intervals were determined from the prognostic
trajectory at the 700-mb level. If precipitation was noted at the ground along the
corresponding segment of the trajectory path at the 700—mb level. it was assumed
that the fact of precipitation is established and the mean quantity of precipi-
tation was determined along this very same trajectory on the basis of data for
stations falling in its zone. For the fact and quantity of initial precipitation
we took its mean value during the past night for all stations of Moscow or Mos-
cow Oblast in dependence on the territory for which the investigation was made.

The statistical processing of data included the forming of paired correlation
matrices. the "sifting“ of predictors for the purpose of finding among them those
which are most closely related to the predictant. and at the same time,

3

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independent of one another, the writing of multiple regression equations and
their evaluation. The evaluations of real forecasts were made using the correl-
ation coefficient (r), reliability test (a) and accuracy test (Q) [3]; the

total guaranteed probability. guaranteed probability of the presence and absence
of precipitation were determined.

The same as in [9], the ”sifting" of predictors was carried out using the algo-
rithm in [2]. in accordance with which in the first interval there is selection
of the paired correlation coefficient of maximum value between the predictant
and predictor and then the correlation coefficients between the selected predic-
tor and the others are found. Then. by means of a definite procedure, the ortho-
gonalization of the values of the predictors is carried out. Among the orthogon-
alized predictors the predictor most closely related to the predictant is again
selected. etc. Thus, such a number of predictors is selected that the difference
in the accumulated dispersions of the predictant in two adjacent intervals would
not be less than 0.03.

After ranking of the predictors a regression was formed using the algorithm in
[l], in which the number of predictors ensuring the best quality of writing of
the regression equation is determined. An evaluation of the regression is made
on the basis of the mean risk (1(3)). Such a number of predictors k is selected
as to guarantee a minimum value of the mean risk in the examination. A compar-
ison of the 1(k) values for different groups of predictors was the basis for
selecting the working regression equations for the purpose of forecasting pre-
cipitation.

The prediction of steady precipitation by statistical methods is an extremely
complex problem because the distribution of precipitation does not conform to
a normal law. An attempt to normalize precipitation by means of «G: and lg x did
not lead to positive results. An attempt at simultaneous prediction of the fact
and quantity of steady precipitation by means of regression equations also was

without success.

Bearing these circumstances in mind, it was decided to predict precipitation in
two successive steps: first prediction of the fact of precipitation and in the
case of its presence -- prediction of the quantity of steady precipitation.

An analysis indicated that the "pure" absence of precipitation in Moscow is ob-
served in only 20-30% of the cases. Accordingly, it was decided to regard as a
fact of absence also such cases when its mean quantity is 0.0 mm (we note that in
climatology a quantity of 0.1 mm or more is regarded as a day with precipita-
tion). With such an approach the newly formed class of absence of precipitation
has a probability on the average of 63-651. whereas the class of presence of pre-
cipitation (quantity of precipitation > 0.1 m) is 37-51.: respectively. that is,
the classes of presence and absence of precipitation have approximately identical
probabilities.

As a result. two approximately equiprobable classes were formed:

-- presence of precipitation -- cases when the averaged quantity of precipita-
tion for all the stations of Moscow or Moscow Oblast was 0.1 mm and more;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- absence of precipitation -- cases when precipitation in Moscow and Moscow
Oblast was absent or its mean quantity was 0.0 mm.

It is possible to separate these two classes by leans of a regression evaluation
of the probabilities of events, which. as was demonstrated in [7], is advantageous
in comparison with linear discriminant analysis. In this case the predictants and
predictors should have a binary character. Hence the following coding was adopted
for the actual. initial and adequate precipitation: precipitation -- 3, absence

of precipitation -- 1; for the ascending vertical movements -- 3, for ascending
vertical movements -- l. The remaining predictors could not be represented in bi-
nary form.

When the predicted value of the predictant in the regression equation, written
in accordance with a regression evaluation of the probabilities of events, ex-
ceeds a definite threshold (in our case -- two). the fact of precipitation is
predicted, and then using another regression equation the quantity of steady
precipitation is computed.

With this approach to the prediction of precipitation it was necessary to prepare
the eight data archives: four archives for predicting the fact of precipitation
for 26 and 36 hours. four for the prediction of the quantity of precipitation

for 26 and 36 hours in Moscow and Moscow Oblast.

Analysis of Results

For each of the indicated eight archives initially in all the potential predictors
we obtained correlation matrices. Analysis of these matrices indicated that an en-
tire series of predictors, including the surface pressure value, geopotential at
the levels 850, 700 and 500 mb, temperature and dew point at the earth, have vir-
tually no significant correlation with precipitation. As a result of many numerical
experiments it was possible to select predictors which relatively better than the
others were related to the fact and quantity of precipitation. We have

700 5
ffsoo, "700, K. E (T - Td). PH

8
tion with these pgzaictors for 24 and 36 hours are given in Table 1. Depending on
the archives and the advance time of the forecast. the degree of closeness of the
correlation changes and among the data in this table there are very small correl-
ation coefficients. Naturally, the correlation coefficients for 26 hours are high-
er than for 36 hours; for an advance time of 36 hours the correlation coefficients
are low. especiallv for predicting the quantity of precipitation. Two conclusions
can therefore be drawn: first -- there are difficulties in predicting the fact

and quantity of precipitation in general; second -- there is a low quality (in

the sense of prediction of precipitation) of the prognostic fields of vertical
movements and predicted trajectories of air particles obtained from numerical
models. at the initial points of which the initial data were taken. It must be
mentioned that the correlation coefficients between the fact of precipitation

and the diagnostic values "700 do not exceed -0.47. although it appeared that the
vertical movements in the middle troposphere virtually unambiguously determine

the falling of precipitation. It is evident that here only the vertical movements

of air are involved.

20, Qin and Qadv' The correlations of precipita-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l

 

 

 

Correlation Coefficients Between Precipitation and Predictors
M
an
03:
0.:
c
Territory :3
321
Moscow 24 |0.l? —0.32 —0.25 ~02? 0.01 0.43 ‘0.5l
36 :0.“ —0.2l I -—0.0Q —0.l7 0.02 0.40 0.44
I
Moscow Oblast 2; '0.l6 —o.32 -o.n —o.ao 0.:3 0.33 0.44
36 Imus —o.32 —o.os —o.n 0.09 0.45 90.40
Quantity of precipitation
Moscow | 24 ”3.08 —0.21 -—0.I1 ' —0.l'.’ 0.ll 0.|5 0.4-3
35 0.0l —0.07 -003 -0.I3 0.I4 0.“ 0.42
Moscow Ohlast 2% (M? —0.28 —0.19 —o.xa 0.14 0.l8 0.“
3') 0.0% —0.09 —0.08 -0.l5 0.17 0.12 0.3
Table 2

Correlation Coefficients Between Actual (Qact) and Advective Precipitation (Qadv)
and Quantity of Precipitation in Synoptic Forecasts (Q’Yn) (219 Cases)

 

 

cl QI ‘9 g I
l er § {9 ’8 \D :4 g
I u' U U 9 Inc :33 go an > >
- g I g g 8 '3‘” a 0:? ¢ I I: I“
I <7 . ‘7 ‘7 c7 . I <7 I C: c?
4 I 7 I 9

“J I 0.3 2 I

.:: um?_ 030 I

4 i v.¢1 (L44 010 I

'-I 034' ma: (Ln: 0J6 I

I.- . 0 4‘ I 0.“ 0.20 0.I6 0.99 I

. I “.1; I u.” (Mu; 0.39 0-17 0.50 l

.5 I 0J3 0 H 0J0 I 0 33 0.56 “.56 0.99 l

1- : 0,2: I ml; «.01 l—t-m 0.37 ".35 0,24 0.23 1

I" I 0.2: I 0.” 0.0?l 03%| 0.l- 0J2 0.2.3 0.25 I 0.03 I

 

He note that relatively high correlation coefficients (more than 0.10) are observ-
ed only between precipitation in Moscow and precipitation in the region from
which it moves toward Moscow. This circumstance reflects the well-known fact of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an exceptional significance of advective values of the characteristics of state
of the atmosphere in synoptic forecasts.

As a result of "sifting" of all the predictors. for predicting the fact of precip-
itation we selected W700. Q1“, Qadv: and for predicting the quantity of precipita-

tion Too
”7“), Ks Z (T - Td)’ wior Qin and Qadv'
850

we note that the predictors for prediction of the fact of precipitation for 26
hours explain not more than 26-29! of the dispersion of the predictant (R2); for
Moscow Oblast, naturally, the explicable part of the dispersion of the predictant
is greater than for Moscow. R2 of the synoptic forecast of the fact of precipita-
tion is 2-32 less. For 36 hours the R2 values decreased and for the selected prc-
dictors are 22-252; for a synoptic forecast they are 5-72 less. A similar rela-
tionship was maintained in the {(k) evaluations of the regression equations
written in accordance with the selected predictors and on the basis of a synop-
tic forecast. For example. I k for the regression equation with the predictors
for 24 and 36 hours were 0.93 3nd 0.88, but with allowance for a synoptic fore-
cast -- 0.97 and 1.00.

As a result of the analysis of the I( ) evaluations for predicting the fact of
precipitation in Moscow and Moscow Ob ast we selected the following regression
equations:

for 24 hours

on - -o.oos 14700 + 0.112 Q1“ + 0.076 0w, + 1.58,
(2,10 - -o.oos 11700 + 0.17s 01,, + 0.120 0“,, + 1.37; (3)

for 36 haurs

011 - -o.003 11700 + 0.060 01,, + 0.31. 0m + 1.81.
0,40 = -o.ooa "700 + 0.085 01,, + 0.47 cm, + 1.86. (A)

When the algebraic summation of the :ight-hand side of equations (3) and (4);)
2.0. precipitation is expected; if it is less than 2.0, precipitation is not ex-
pected.

A prediction of the quantity of steady precipitation is a considerably more com-
plex problem than a forecast of the fact of precipitation. This is indicated.
in particular. by the small correlation coefficients cited in Table 1.

Before proceeding to an evaluation and analysis of the regression equations for
predicting the quantity of steady precipitation we will examine the status of syn-
optic forecasting of the quantity of steady precipitation. These data are present-
ed in Table 2. As the quantity of precipitation in synoptic forecasts we used the
median quantity of precipitation in the anticipated gradation in accordance with
the current Instructions on Evaluation of Forecasts [4].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An analysis of the data in Table 2 makes it possible to draw the following con-
clusions:

-- the correlation coefficients between the actual quantity of precipitation and
the anticipated quantity are 0.43-0.55. which corresponds to the level of forecast-
ing of precipitation in the United States [13]:

-- approximately 80-85% of the information on the quantity of precipitation anti-
cipated in the synoptic forecasts is contained in advective precipitation;

-- the anticipated quantity of steady precipitation in synoptic forecasts for Mos-
cow and Moscow Oblast for 24 and 36 hours does not differ (r - 0.99).

For predicting the quantity of steady precipitation by means of regression equa-
tions the selected number of predictors was small

8'"

between them and t e actual precipitation they explained not more than 18-221 of
the dispersion of the predictant. Regression equations were written on the basis
of 2/3 of the sample and were checked using 1/3 of the sample. It was found that
the correlation coefficients between the predicted precipitation for 24 hours and
the actual precipitation for Moscow were 0.30, and for Moscow Oblast 0.4; for 36
hours the corresponding values were 0.36 and 0.34. Such evaluations enabled us

to write equations on the basis of a full sample, evaluating them using the mean
risk I(k)* it was found that in comparison with the 2/3 sample in the full sample
the 1(k) values decrease by 10-152 and for 25 hours for Moscow constitute 2.47
and for Moscow Oblast 1.80; for 36 hours the corresponding values are 2.18 and
2.16. Accordingly. taking into account the decrease in 1(kz with an increase in
the sample, it is correct to assume that in the operations checking of the re-
gression equations the correlation coefficients between the predicted and actual
precipitation will at least be close to synoptic values.

(W700. K. pu500 359(T - Td). Q1“, Qadv)' and by virtue of the small correlations
8 0

The working regression equations for prediction of the quantity of steady precip-
itation for Moscow and Moscow Oblast for 26 and 36 hours in the case of the full

sample were as follows:
for 24 hours

QM . -o.033 "700 + 0.462K + 1.51. 00220 +0 .20 01“ + 0.23 0““, -37.3,

a

030 - -0.030 H700 + 1.05 911230 + 0.19 01“ + 0.20 0m, + 62.9; (5)

for 36 hours
700

a" = -0431. um - 0.53 2 (r - Ta) + 0.21 01“ + 0.62 0m, + 23.1,
850

0,10 = -0.110 um —0.47 g0 (r - W + 0.13 01“ + 0.53 0m, + 20.7. (6)
850

In order to determine the quantity of precipitation in mml12 hours the resulting
sums of the rightuhand sides of equations (5) and (6) must be divided by 100.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Operat ional Check ing

In the course of October 1979 - March 1980 forecasts of the fact and quantity of
steady precipitation for Moscow and Moscow Oblast for 21. and 36 hours were pre-
pared almost daily on workdays in an operational regime on the basis of the de-
rived regression equations. A total of 94 forecasts were prepared. It is impor-
tant to note that in determining

700

"7w, K, W520, E (T " Id), Qadv
8 850

at the initial points we used the air particle trajectories at the isobaric sur-
faces from a numerical operational model. In this case Qadv was determined at the
earth's surface along the trajectory at the 700-nb level.

In order to compare precipitation forecasts on the basis of the regression equa—
tions and synoptic forecasts we also evaluated the latter. As the fact of precip-
itation for the synoptic forecasts and on the basis of regression equations we
used a case when the averaged quantity of precipitation for Moscow or Hoscow
Oblast was ) 0.1 mm. The quantity of precipitation in the synaptic forecasts was
determined as the median value of the anticipated gradation in accordance with
the Instructions (little snow -- 1 nun, locally limited snow (30! of the terri-
tory) -- for Moscow 0.3 mm, for the oblast 0.2 In, etc.) .

Table 3

Results of Operational Checking of Forecasts of Fact and Quantity of Steady
Precipitation and Synoptic Forecasts (October 1979-Harch 1980)

Advance Eval uat ions Regress ion Synoptic
time. hours ,
Moscow Moscow Moscow Moscow
Oblsst Oblast
24 Total guaranteed probability, X 76.5 79.5 61.6 64.5
Guaranteed probability of
phenomenon 78.0 85.0 95.0 95.7
Guaranteed probability of ab-
sence of phenomenon. X 75.0 719.0 28.0 33.3
H 0.53 0.65 0.26 0.36
Q 0.55 0.61 0.36 0.50
r 0.51 0.101 0.53 0.35
36 Total guaranteed probability. X 75.1. 77.8 62.3 59.8
Guaranteed probability of
phenomenon. 2 714.3 72.7 92.3 88.6
Guaranteed probability of ab-
sence of phenomenon, X 76.5 82.8 32.3 31.0
H 0.50 0.50 0.26 0.23
0 0.56 0.49 0.31 0.38
r 0.38 0.29 0.33 0.29
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of routine checking of precipitation forecasts are given in Table
3, where all the lines of evaluations, other than r, relate to a forecast of
the fact of precipitation, whereas r is the correlation coefficient between the
quantities of predicted and actual precipitation. It can be seen that when pre-
cipitation is divided into two classes (precipitation with a quantity 0.0 mm and
situations without precipitation are assigned to the class of absence of pre-
cipitation) the quality of the forecasts of the fact of precipitation on the
basis of regression equations is better than the quality of synoptic forecasts.
The principal reason for this is that in synoptic forecasts it is relatively
rare to give a forecast of the absence of precipitation and therefore the guar-
anteed probability of the absence of the phenomenon is low in these forecasts.
However, the guaranteed probability of the presence of precipitation in synop-
tic forecasts is high because in them precipitation is expected considerably
more frequently than it actually occurs.

A comparison of the correlation coefficients between the predicted and actual
quantities of precipitation indicates that in general the success of forecasts
using regression equations is somewhat better than in synoptic forecasts. How-
ever, as a rule considerable precipitation is not detected by synoptic fore-
casts and regression equations.

Our checking of the forecast of the fact and quantity of steady precipitation.
computed using a synoptic-hydrodynamic scheme [11, 12] for the period October-
December 1979 (61 cases) for Moscow.indicated that the total probable success
of the fact of precipitation 00.1 m) is 57.42, presence of precipitation
732. absence of precipitation 41.71 with the test a - 0.13. In a forecast for
36 hours H - 0.04. The correlation coefficient between the quantity of predict-
ed and actual precipitation for 26 hours is 0.29. It can be seen that the cited
evaluations are considerably inferior to synoptic forecasts and forecasts based

on regression equations.

In the forecasting of the quantity of precipitation using regression equations
it is important to estimate advective precipitation, because on the average it
makes the principal contribution to the quantity of falling precipitation. In
this connection it appears that if in the determination of advective precipita-
tion use is not made of trajectories at the 700bmb level, but precipitation in
those parts of the pressure formations at the ground level which were expected
in the prediction time period [9]. the results of the prediction of the quantity
of precipitation could be better.

Prediction of Summer Precipitation

The basis for the prediction of summer convective precipitation is inforuation
on the positive energy of atmospheric instability. In order to determine the
rate of convective air movements use is made of the relationship between the
vertical velocity of a moving particle and instability energy. It is assumed
that all the instability energy goes into the kinetic energy of convective

MOV emen E 3

 

_ g 2 T — T'
V"C0" /kcono +Z> (P — P0“ 1‘ )mean’ (7)

where "kin and "king are the velocities of convective vertical movement at the
upper and lower boundaries of the layer P and Po; [3 is air density; T is air
temperature; T’ is temperature of a rising particle.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As can be seen from (7), in the stipulated layer of the atmaphere "2“,“0, P .
P - P are virtually constant values and WC n is determined for the most part
by the difference 1" - T. For this reason aInoat all methods for the diagnosis
and prediction of convective phenomena, including shower precipitation, are

based on the correlations between 1" — 'r and the weather phenomenon.

However, such an approach to a forecast of showers is applicable on a practical
basis only in the case of thermal convection. In situations when there is de-
velopment of considerable ordered vertical moveeents in many cases the role of
convection any or may not be detected in ordinary thermodynamic computations.
For this reason in [11] two approaches to a forecast were simltaneously cor-
rectly used in the forecast: the first, based on thermodynamic computations. and
the second. based on allowance for ordered vertical air movements.

Taking these circumstances into account, we will examine the possibilities of
forecasting the quantity of summer precipitation for the current day using
statistical methods, employing the two mentioned approaches. For this purpose

we analyzed more than 200 cases of summer (June-August) daytime (0900-2100 hours
Moscow time) rains in Moscow during 1976-1979 when the quantity of precipita-

tion as an average for all stations was > 0.1 I.

Proceeding on the basis of the physics of forntion of sumer precipitation [5,
6. ll, 12], fur the investigation we selected anumber of potential predictors.
a list of which is given below. All the values of the predictors were taken
prognostically, for 12 hours in advance (forecast for the current day), that
is, in accordance with the MOS concept.

LIST OF POTENTIAL PREDICTORS FOR PREDICTING SUMER PRECIPITATION IN MOSCOW

Tmax' '1‘d are the maximum temperature and dew point at the earth, 'C;

T; 00: Td700- T500, 13500 are temperature and dew point at the levels 700 and 500

mb ,
PM")? is the quantity of precipitated water in the layer ground-700 mb, m;
(T'“- '1‘)50 is the deviation of the curve of state from the stratification

curve at t e level 500 mb. 'C; K is the instability indexﬁdam; u700, V700 are
the wind velocity components at the 700-1Ib level, n/sec; "850 is the averaged

value of ordered vertical air movements, rub/12 hours; H_1 o is the altitude
of the -1o°c,isotherm, km; T8? — T500 is the temperature gigference between the

ground and at the level 500 mb, 0C; type of front.

Table lo

Mean Errors (A) and Standard Deviations (0') of Predictors and Correlation Co-
efficients (r) Between Quantity of Precipitation at Moscow and Predictors
(1976-1979, 200 Cases)

  

Statistics

 

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4 (continued)

 

 

 

 

Ir—Tlro. K | a... I a... g ":3 ill-m: T.—T,.., lType of front
I I I
_ ______g;___——_
0.15 279.4 4.0 3.: l—m 4.3 ' 37.3 I . 3.6
2.3 5.2 6.0 7.5 5 37.9 06 3.4 1.4
0.22 0.23 —-o.3s o.” i -0.2l 0.24 0.03 0.02

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 4 gives some statistical characteristics of the predictors and their correl-
ation coefficients with the quantity of daytime precipitation. He note the near-
zero mean value (T' - T)500, mean small ordered ascending air movements ﬁ700. and
also the absence of a close correlation between the selected predictors aadothe
quantity of precipitation in Moscow. Even with (T' - T)5oo and the atmospheric
front type such a correlation is absent, which indicates a difficulty in pre-
dicting summer precipitaion in general and inadequate informativeness of the pre—
dictors used.

It can be postulated that the slight correlations between the quantity of pre-
cipitation and the predictors (Table 6) are attributable to the fact that the
sample included cases of precipitation caused by different atmospheric process-
es. In order to check whether this is so the entire sample was divided into two
approximately equal classes on the basis of the sign and intensity of ordered
vertical movements ("700). when H700‘< -30 mb/12 hours the cases were assigned to
the class of cyclonicafggions; inséﬂe remaining cases it was postulated that the
precipitation was caused for the most part by convection. An evaluation of the
informativeness of the predictors of these classes was made on the basis of the

Hahalanobis distance ([32): £32 _ [ﬂsAl _ m (3)] 2

0'

where m(A) and as?) are the mathematical expectations of the considered predictor
of two classes; d'is the averaged standard deviation of the predictor of both
classes.

The checking indicated that these classes were virtually inseparable by the select5
ed predictors, it goes without saying, except for ﬁggg, which indicates the cor-
rectness of the analysis made using the full sample.

Is it possible to increase the reliability of forecasting of summer precipitation
(in the sense of an increase in the correlation coefficient between the quantities
of predicted and actual precipitation)? He made such an attempt. A forecast of

the quantity of summer precipitation was prepared only in a case when rain (brief,
showers, etc.) was called for in the synaptic forecast of precipitation, since

the guaranteed probability of synoptic forecasts of the fact of summer precipita-
tion (2>0.1 mm) for the considered cases is 922; the guaranteed probability of

the absence of precipitation is about 40! (rain is predicted more frequently and
the absence of precipitation is rarer than it occurs). We also note that the mean
quantity of precipitation for Moscow in the particular sample is 4.2 mm with cf-
6.5 an. Accordingly, the term "brief rain" contains about 20' of the precipitation.
Therefore, in many cases a prediction of summer precipitation on a practical basis
contains information about the fact of precipitation, not about its quantity.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initially in the entire sample we "sifted" eight predictors: u 0 , K, (T' - T)5oo,
type of front, T6700, TdSOO’ ﬁ700. PH700, which explained shoal 98-202 of the dis-

persion of the predictant. 850 gr

An evaluation of the regression equations written using the eight predictors re-
vealed that with a decrease in the number of predictors to three the 1(k) values
virtually do not change, which indicates the difficulty of predicting summer pre-
cipitation and the inadequate informativeness of the selected predictors. An
equation using three predictors for forecasting the quantity of summer precipita-

tion is given below. 7
Q = 0.05 "'ng - 0.03 13500 + 0.282K - 76.1.. . (8)

Here 0 is in mm/lZ hours. The variables entering into equation (8) reflect atmo-
spheric instability and moisture content. In a teaching sample this equation en-
sured a correlation coefficient 0.4.

Under operational conditions the checking of equation (8) for predicting the quan-
tity of summer precipitation for the current day was made from 19 June through
4 August 1980. As a comparison we simultaneously made evaluations of synoptic
forecasts on the basis of a numerical synoptic-hydrodynamic model [11, 12] and
carried out a comparison of the precipitation measured with the radar at the
Central Aerological Observatory with the precipitation actually falling at Hos-
cow stations. The correlation coefficients between the quantity of falling pre-
cipitation and the quantity of precipitation: according to regression equations
0.20, in synoptic forecasts (median value of the anticipated gradation accord-
ing to the Instructions [4]) 0.10; in synoptic-hydrodynamic forecasts 0.05 and
with measurements with the Central Aerological Observatory radar 0-86-

As indicated by these data. the results of a forecast of the quantity of precip—
itation by means of regression equations are somewhat better than for other fore~
casting methods, but remain rather low. Precipitation > 15-20 mm is not detected
by all forecasting methods. It is entirely probable that the forecast of the
quantity of summer precipitation by means of regression equations could be better
if the forecast makes use of information on advective precipitation, which, as
demonstrated above, is of great importance in the prediction of steady precip-
itation.

Taking into account the poor results obtained in the prediction of summer precip-
itation, it seemed desirable to examine the problem of what atmospheric factors
better explain the physics of precipitation formation in a diagnostic plan. For
this purpose we analyzed 65 days with and without precipitation at Moscow during
the period 1 June-23 September 1980. In addition to the predictors which were
enumerated above, in the analysis we used: divergence of wind velocity at the
ground and at 300 mb (D), sec'l; (T' - T)maxu 'C; altitude of the condensation
level ("conq)» km; cloud thickness (43H), km; "500, mb/lZ hours; instability
index (I), C, taken from [a],

I I (TMI— TIN) + T‘m’ (TIN-I. r‘m).

Data on atmospheric parameters were taken from actual and diagnostic weather maps;
these were determined from a convection model by the particle method on the basis
of data for 1500 hours. Information on wind divergence at the ground level and at

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

300 mb was computed using observational data on the wind in a radius of 500 km
from Moscow. The number of stations with wind data was not less than 10-12

[610

In the diagnosis, as in the forecast, the closeness of the correlation between
the quantity of precipitation and most of the considered atmospheric factors in
general is low: r - 10.1-0.2. For example, the correlation coefficient between
the quantity of precipitation and (T' - T)500 is 0.09, with 15“ - 0.18, with .
H_ ooc -- 0.12, with D300 -- 0.28. However. there are a;mospheric parameters
which better than others are related to the quantity of precipitation. In par-
ticular, this includes wind velocity divergence at the ground ”8" correlation
coefficient r - —0.61; Td700' r - 0.32; I, r - 0.31; H ond' r ' '0.363 "700 and
"500, r = -0.43. These atmospheric parameters explain 37-401 of the dispersion
of precipitation. The regression equation written using these predictors has
the form

Q a .0016 D8" + 0.05 Td700 + 0. 01 I ' 0.69 “cond '0-03 “700 + 246 (9)

and in the teaching sample ensures a correlation coefficient 0.66 (here Q is in
mm/12 hours).

Therefore, from an analysis of the diagnostic factors it can be concluded that
precipitation is observed when there is wind convergence at the ground, there is
adequate moisture in the middle troposphere, there are ordered ascending air
movements and the condensation level lies below 1 km. If the wind divergence
value at the ground is less than -0.5-10'6 sec-1, it can be said with a probabil-
ity 832 that the situation is favorable for the falling of precipitation, where-
as with Dgr<-4.2'10'6 sec-1 with an almost 1001 probability it is possible to
expect precipitation and its quantity will exceed 1 mm.

Equation (9) was not checked on the basis of operational data because there is
still no solution of the problem where wind divergence at the earth should be
computed for the forecast: should it be the forecast region, or in the advection
region, or should their mean values be taken? Bearing in mind that evaluations of
the regression equation (8) give I(k) - 7.04 and for equation (9) give Ifk) - 4.6,
that is. differ considerably, it can be assumed that the results of the orecast
of the quantity of precipitation by means of equation (9) should be better than
on the basis of (8)-

Thus, in the prediction of the quantity of summer precipitation it is important
to take into account the divergence of wind velocity at the ground, ordered ver-
tical movements in the troposphere, generalized characteristics of vertical atmo-
spheric instability and also the quantity of advective precipitation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Vapnik, V. N., VOSS'IAMVLENIYB ZAVISIMOSTBY P0 DIPIRICHESKIM DANNYM (Recon-
struction of Dependences on the Basis of Ehpirical Data), Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

2. Dobryshman, Ye.M. and Tagaymuradov, Yu. T., "Use of the 'Sifting' Method for
Analysis and Prediction of the Geopotential Field Over Central Asia During
Cold Intrusions," TRUDY GIDROMETTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydro-

meteorological Center), No 39, 1969.
14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

6.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METODICHESKIYE UKAZANIYA P0 PROVEDENIYU OPERATIVNYKB ISPYTANIY NOVYKB METOD-

0V GIDROMETEOROLOGICHESKIKH PROGNOZOV (Methodological Instructions on Carry-
ing Out Operational Tests of New Methods for Hydrometeorological Forecasts).

Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977.

NASTAVLENIYE PO SLUZHBE PROGNOZOV. RAZDEL 2. SLUZHBA METEOROLOGICHESKIKH
PROGNOZOV (Instructions for the Forecasting Service. Section 2. Meteorolog-
ical Forecasting Service), Parts III, IV, V, Moscow, Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

Orlova, Ye. M., KRATKOSRDCHNYY PROGNOZ ATMDSFERNYKH OSADKOV (Short-Range Fore-
casting of Atmospheric Precipitation), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1979.

RUKDVODSTVO P0 KRATKOSROCHNYM PROGNOZAM POGODY (Manual on Short-Range Heather
Forecasting), Parts I, II, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1966, 1965.

Suzuki, 3., "Equation for Regression Evaluation of the Probabilities of
Events and Forecasting Using Minimum Risk," TEORIYA VEROYATNOSTEY I MATE-
MATICHESKAYA STATISTIKA V ATMOSFERNYKH NAUKAKH (Theory of Probabilities and
Mathematical Statistics in the Atmospheric Sciences), Leningrad, Gidrometeo-

izdat, 1975.

Snitkovskiy, A. I., "Short-Range Forecasting of Air Temperature, Steady Pre-
cipitation and Wind on the Basis of Prognostic Pressure Charts," METEOROLOG-
lYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 9, 1979.

Snitkovskiy, A. 1., "Short-Range Forecasting of Air Temperature," METEOROLOG-
IYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 12, 1980.

Snitkovskiy, A. I., et a1., SISTEMA OB"YEKTIVNOGO KRATRDSROCHNOGO PROGNOZA
YAVLENIY I nmmrov POGODY v ssm (System for objective Short-Range Prediction
of Heather Phenomena and Elements in the United States)(Review), Obninsk, In-
formatsionnyy Tsentr, 1978.

Uspenskiy, B. D., Mertsalov, A. N., Orlova, Ye. M., Belousov, S. L., Petri-
chenko, l. A. and Veselova, G. K., "Synoptic-Hydrodynamic Scheme for the
Quantitative Forecasting of Steady and Shower Precipitation," TEDDY GIDRO-
METTSENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center), No

157, 1976.

Uspenskiy, V.D., Mertsalov, A. M., Orlova, Ye. M. and Petrichenko, I. A.,
"Features of Forecasting of Precipitation in Numerical Operational Synoptic-
Hydrodynamic Schemes for Times Up to 36 Hours," TRUDY GIDROHETTSBNTRA SSSR,

No 176, 1977.

Bermowitz, R. J., "An Application of Model Output Statistics to Forecasting
Quantitative Precipitation," MON. HEATHER REV., Vol 103, No 2. 1975.

Boccihieri, J. 8., "A New Operational System for Forecasting Precipitation
Type," MON. HEATHER REV., Vol 107, No 6, 1979.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.313(4)

NONADIABATIC MODEL OF ATMOSPHERE IN PRIMITIVE EQUATIONS FOR PREDICTING
METEOROLOGICAL ELEMENTS OVER EUROPE

Moscow HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 (manuscript received
28 Oct 80) pp 18-26

[Article by s. 0. Krichak, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] A six-level adiabatic model of the atmosphere (3. L. Belousov, et a1.,
TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR. No 212, 1978) is being used at the present time in
preparing routine hemispheric forecasts at the USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific
Research Center. During 1977-1978 the author and his associates carried out work
for modifying the program of this model in FORTRAN language and implementing a
system of programs for ensuring one-sided interaction with a hemispheric model

in the course of regional forecasting. This gave a regional variant of the six-
level adiabatic prognostic model of the atmosphere whose use was approved in 1980.
Thereafter the principal nonadiabatic processes (influence of orography, surface
friction. heat flows from the underlying surface, radiation processes in the atmo-
sphere with allowance for the diurnal variation of the influx of solar radiation,
processes of macroscale and convective formation of precipitation, etc.) were in-
cluded in the model. The article discusses the principal characteristics of this
model. It is emphasized that except for the region of the forecast, resolution,
boundary conditions employed, filtering procedures, allowance for nonadiabatic
factors and inclusion of the humidity field as one of the predicted variables

this variant of the model coincides with the hemispheric model. The success of
such forecasts is evaluated. An example of prediction of precipitation is given.
Figures 1, tables 2; references 9: 5 Russian, 5 Western.

16

FOITOFFMJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.(EHZ(NVLY

UDC 551.(515.2:515.3)

PURELY ZONAL FLOW

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
28 Oct 80) pp 27-35

[Article by 8. Ya. Shmerlin, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Abstract] A model of the movement of macroscale vortices relative to a purely zon-
al steering flow is proposed. The movement of middle-latitude cyclones and anti-
cyclones is examined. The velocities of movement of vortices in a meridional direc-
tion were determined. The movement of tropical cyclones is also considered. It is
shown that there are three types of trajectories of tropical cyclones. The values
of the parameters of the vortices and steering flow for which each of the types

of trajectories is realized are determined. The conclusions drawn are compared

with observations of macroscale vortices in the middle latitudes and tropical hur-
ricanes. The analysis given here shows that all the parameters introduced into the
problem. describing flow and vorticity, are of considerable importance in predict-
ing the movement of a vortex. Near the values of the parameters at which there is

a change in the type of trajectory small changes in the parameters lead to consid-
erable changes in the type of vortex trajectory and this is very important to take
into account in predicting the movement of tropical hurricanes. The results pre-
sented here are easily extended to any (not necessarily purely zonal) geostrophic
steering current. The results can be applied in the parameterization of the mer-
idional transfer of heat and moisture by macroscale vorticea, in solving the prob-
lem of "self-consistent" formation of meridional and zonal circulation and in pre-

dicting the movement of tropical hurricanes. Figures 2; references 12: 9 Russian.
3 Western.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.510.534
INFORMATIVENESS OF GLOBAL SYSTEMS FOR OBSERVING TOTAL OZONE CONTENT

Moscow HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
2 Jul 80) pp 36-65

[Article by 0. H. Pokrovskiy, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
A. Ye. Kaygorodtsev, Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of a spectral scheme
for the objective analysis of the field of
total ozone content in the northern hemi-
sphere the authors made computations of the
characteristics of informativeness of the sur-
face ozonometric network (SON) and two remote
sensing systems based on methods making use
of backseattering of solar UV radiation and
characteristic atmospheric 1R radiation. Com-
bined observation systems are examined. Recom-
mendations are presented on the preferable
choice of solar UV radiation or atmospheric
IR radiation for measurements in different
latitude zones for each of the two seasons.
The article gives an analysis of the informa-
tiveness for individual orbits. The optimum
regions for the collection of information by
means of the solar ultraviolet and atmospheric
IR systems are defined with allowance for the
layout of the surface observation network.

The timeliness of the problem of monitoring atmospheric ozone distribution is deter-
mined by the fact that according to existing concepts [4] the ozone concentration
to a definite degree can be changed due to the influence of contaminants caused by
man's economic activity (nitrogen oxides, chlorofluoromethanes, etc.). The influ—
ence of anthropogenic factors is not limited to photochemical processes in the
stratosphere and lower mesosphere. It is of the greatest interest to study the in-
fluence of anthropogenic contaminants on the entire sequence of interrelated pro-
cesses of photochemistry, radiation heating and cooling, and also the transport of
air masses in the stratosphere and their resultant role in modern changes in cli—
mate. The inadequacy of actual data on physical mechanisms in the stratosphere, as
well as the impossibility of reproducing the mentioned chain of processes with ad-
equate accuracy and detail by means of numerical modeling,nake it necessary to

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

create simplified models which must be refined on the basis of the results of ac-
tual observations of the fields of ozone and other gas components and the prin-
cipal meteorological parameters (temperature. pressure. wind velocity).

ubservational data must serve as additional information for adaptation of the de-
veloped numerical models and for clarification of the degree of their adequacy in
predicting the possible consequences of anthropogenic modification.

The planning of new observation systems makes it necessary to study two parameters:
the total content and vertical distribution of ozone within the limits of the middle

and upper stratosphere.

The influence of photochemistry on the formation of the vertical profile of ozone
is reflected in the atmospheric layer situated above the 35-km level. The ozone
concentration at altitudes 50-60 km changes insignificantly with latitude and sea-
son, since here the ozone is in photochemical equilibrium. Accordingly, informa-
tion on the variability of the ozone concentration in the layer 35-50 km gives some
idea concerning the distribution of the "inputs" and "outputs" and is necessary for
adjustment of the photochemical part of the stratospheric model. However, this at-
mospheric layer contains only about one—third of the ozonospheric mass. The remain-
ing two-thirds are situated below 35 km and to a considerable degree are subject to
the influence of dynamic factors. The spatial distribution of total content re-
flects the peculiarities of atmospheric circulation in the upper troposphere and
lower stratosphere. Accordingly, information on the field of total ozone content

is necessary for refining the dynamic block of three-dimensional stratospheric mod-
els.

Thus, the formulation of the problem of remote sensing of the ozone field involves
measurements of the vertical distribution of total content of ozone in the middle
and upper stratosphere characterizing quite independent physical processes.

At the present time extensive observational data relating to a period of two
decades have made it possible to clarify the principal patterns of spatial and
seasonal variability of the total ozone content [5]. The existing network, con-
sisting of more than a hundred ozonometric stations, is very nonuniformly distrib-
uted even in the northern hemisphere. Nevertheless. the accumulated information
must serve as a basis for the rational expansion of ground observations and the
planning of new measurement systems. A satellite monitoring system can become an
important addition to the existing ozonometric network. This study is devoted to
an examination of the problems involved in evaluating the information content and
planning remote systems for monitoring the variability of the field of total ozone

content in the northern hemisphere, taking into account the existing network of
stations.

Formulation of ?roblem

During recent years several experiments have been carried out for determining the
total ozone content on the basis of two schemes for remote measurement of this
parameter. The possibilities of a method using data on the spectrum of UV radi-
ation in the Hartley-Huggins absorption band, reflected by the atmosphere, have
been studied most intensively. Experience has shown [9] that the method of back-

scattering of solar UV radiation makes it possible to determine the total con-
tent with an accuracy of about 61 at all latitudes. As a comparison we note that

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the relative error in surface measurements of total ozone content is lv22. How-
ever, the spatial resolution of such data is 150.200 km or less [9]. Other short-
comings include the fact that this method can be used only on the daytime side of
our planet. In particular. the extensive polar zone of the winter hemisphere,
where the ozone fluctuations are extremely significant, remains inaccessible for

measurements 0

Another approach is based on measurement of atmospheric IR radiation of the atmo-
sphere-earth system at the nadir in the region of the ozone absorption band 9.6 m
[7]. The error in this method is about 72 in the low latitudes [7] and increases
by a factor of approximately 3 in a poleward direction, attaining a maximum value
of about 202 at 7S'N [10]. where ozone fluctuations are most significant. The
relatively low accuracy of the IR method is compensated by a higher spatial reso-
lution. attaining 30-40 km [7]. An important merit of the IR method is its applic-
ability at any time of day. An extremely high spatial density of measurements can
be attained by means of scanning with an IR spectrometer across the orbit.

The problem of planning observation systems is characterized by those temporal and
spatial scales of disturbances of the ozone field. data on which are of interest
for practical problems. At the present time the considerable interest in ozone

is related to the problem of modern changes in climate to}. Here the following
characteristic scales are operative: time interval from a month to a season, zon-
al averaging from 20 to 360'. In addition to disturbances of a climatic scale

there is a broad spectrum of aperiodic fluctuations caused by synoptic processes
in the troposphere. In regions with a great (small) ozone content there is usually

a pressure field trough (ridge) [10].

Fluctuations of different scales can be separated by spectral analysis. This ap-
proach is used below for discriminating and indicating disturbances of a climatic

scale. The basis for determining the climatic modes of the ozone field in the
northern hemisphere was obtained by computing the empirical orthogonal functions
(EOE) on the basis of a 10-year series of mean monthly data from analysis in a
regular grid cited in the atlas [6]. Despite the spatial nonuniformity. the ozon—
ometric network of stations provides data on the most important regions of zonal
nonuniformity of the ozone field in the northern hemisphere.

It is well known [4. ll] that the redistribution of ozone from the low into the
middle and high latitudes is associated with the structure of baroclinic zones

forming cyclones and anticyclones and also planetary waves in the upper tropo-
sphere and lower stratosphere. An analysis of the results of satellite observations

[7] confirmed that the most important regions of zonal nonuniformity of the ozone
field are located in Western Europe, in Eastern Siberia, in the middle-latitude
zone of the Pacific Ocean coast of Asia and the Atlantic coast of North America.
For the most part the regions mentioned here are situated on the continent-ocean
boundary and are zones of active interaction between the atmosphere and ocean.
These regions were defined earlier on the basis of surface observations.

It is therefore not surprising that on the EOF graphs [1], computed on the basis
of statistical data [6]. it is possible to detect the mentioned regions. The EC?
base which we used for spectral analysis cannot be considered entirely adequate.
The feasibility of its use for the planning of remote sensing systems (RSS) is
determined by the fact that it contains all the information from surface measure-

ments.
20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal practical purpose of this study was an examination of three prob-
lems related to the planning of RSS: in what way is there a relationship be-
tween the surface ozonometric network, on the one hand, and the planned ass. on
the other? Which of the two RSS -- IR or UV -- should be regarded as the more
promising from the point of view of monitoring fluctuations of the ozone field?
In what regions is it desirable. taking into account the currently existing
surface ozonometric network, to accomplish collection of remote sensing data,
bearing in mind the limitations on the storage capacity of onuboard memory units?

In order to obtain answers to the formulated problems we will discuss the results
of numerical modeling in accordance with the spectral analysis scheme presented
below.

Method for Computing Informativeness Characteristics of Observation Systems

Now we will examine the method for evaluating the informtiveness of global sys-
tems for observing fluctuations of the ozone field. In the case of surface observ-
ations the relationship between the measured and true values of the sought-for
parameter has the form

;(5\-X($)-L£(S). (1)

where 8(3) is the random error in measurements at a station located at a point
of intersection of a horizontal grid s(s-- 1L....N). The equation written in terms
of deviations from the mean climatic values x(s) has a similar form. It can be as-
sumed that E, = (8(1). .... E (N))T is the random vector of observation errors hav-
ing mean components (9 (s) - 0) and a stipulated diagonal matrix of the covaria-
tions K; = (721 (I is a unit matrix. T is the transposition sign). The latter
means that the errors in observations at different stations are statistically in-

dependent .

It is known {2) that the interpretation of remote sensing data is related to solu-
tion of the linearized algebraic system

.\L (s)=A-Aq(s)-:-6(s). (2)

Here £»L and Alq are the vectors of deviations in the intensities of outgoin ra-
diation and the ozone profiles from the corresponding means L(s) and q(s), (s)
is the vector of measurement errors. h'e will assume that theS components have
zero means and a known covariation matrix K3 and that remote measurements were
made at H points (5 = N + 1,... N + H). The deviation of the Ax(s) value is a
linear functional of the form r ~Aq(s) (r is an arbitrary vector) from the ver-
tical profile of deviations Aq(s) at the 5 point of intersection. Here the vector
is the row xT - (b1.....bn); b1 are quadrature coefficients used for an approxima-
tion of the integral in computing the parameter of total ozone content in a ver-
tical column of the atmosphere. The evaluations Aﬂs). obtained in the form of

a linear function of AL(s). are related to the true values of the AMS) para—
meters by the expression

A; (s)-Ax (SH-s (s). (3)

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in which 6(8) - pT- 3 (s) - rTok-Aq. p7 - rT-A+. A“ is a matrix pseudoinverse of
A, R - I - A+'A. The dispersion 9(3) in (3) is described by the equation 0'; I
pT-Ks-p + rT-R-Kq'lbr, where Kq is the matrix of covariations for the Aq vector.

He will combine the observation equations (1) and (3) for the entire set of
points of intersection (s - 1..... NH), using a spectral form of writing. The
EOF base affords such a possibility. Assume that the matrix

2 I {211] :31. gm].

was formed by the values of the first It nor in a grid containing t points of in-
tersection. We will assume that k<N+li<t. For the vector of deviations of the

total ozone content at the grid points of intersection AX - (Ax(l),..., Ax(t))T
the following representation is correct

AX-Z‘C‘IFY. (5)

Here c = (c1.....ck)T is a set of unknown coefficients of the expansion, Yis the
vector of residues of the series. In the set of grid points of intersection we
discriminate the set N+H of observation points and denote it a) . Then from (lo)

we can separate out the subsystem

a

A,‘.,.—=Z.-c+s,. (5)

where 8“,- Xu+ 5.).5... is a vector whose components represent a set of observation
errors in (l) and (3). with the use of EOF as the system of base functions the

components of the vector c are independent random values with zero mean and stip-
ulated dispersions Ag (1 - 1.....k). The dispersion of the facts: is determined

by the "tail" of the series t
2A2.

1-1

The covariation matrix of thevvector cA- diag ()2..... Ai). We use IE; to de-
note the covariation matrix '5‘). For the residual cbvariation matrix/I. of evalu-

ations of the c vector the following formula is correct

K: (2'. - k." - z. -;- .x-I r'. . (6)

We note that here it is necessary to invert a matrix of the dimensionality It 3: k.
which is virtually always applicable. Transformation to a regular grid makes it
possible to obtain evaluations of accuracy on the basis of computations of the
matrix of residual covariations

5-2.3.21. (7)

It is desirable that the results be analyzed on the basis of absolute and rela-
tive accuracy characteristics. The values of the standard deviations 5:11 (i -
l,...,t). representing the square roots of the diagonal elements 2 . charac-
terize the accuracy in analysis 3f the ozone field. The values of the relative
residual dispersions d} '511/6 i - 1.....t). llereorz1 are the diagonal ele-

ments of the matrix for natural covariations in the regu ar grid 2- Z-A'ZT. 1t

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is also desirable to examine the mean values in_the 'grid.

, l

~~ l a

:-‘?-£¢io. 83:754..
[II ' '

Via. V77?
values will be called the analytical error (AB) and the relative analytical error
(RAE).

0"“

Henceforth the

Mean Indices of Informativeness of Observation Systems

The spatial grid in which BOP computations were made had an interval of 2.5' in
latitude and 10° in longitude. The EOF were computed for two seasons: I (winter-
spring), II (summer-autumn). Stations in the surface observation network were
modeled by the nearest grid points of intersection. It was assumed that the sat-
ellite observations are made in polar orbits, one displaced relative to the oth-
er by 20°. Three densities of satellite measurements were modeled along the orbit
with a latitude interval A91 2 3 . 2.5’, 5', 10°. In accordance with the com-
ments cited in the first section we modeled 2 RSS. The first was a solar UV sys-
tem simulating the UV measurement system, having a constant relative error along
the orbit equal to 61. In the computations of the informants for the solar UV
variant I (£0? for season I) we excluded the measurements in the polar zone (to
the north of 70°N). The second -- atmospheric IR, modeling an IR sensing sys-
tem, had a relative error variable with latitude along the orbit (as was indi-
cated in the first section).

How we will analyze the results of computations of the mean indices of informa-
tiveness of AE and RAE. presented in the table. During the period of season I
the surface observation system is somewhat more informative than any RSS. In the
course of season II the informativeness of the solar UV system appreciably ex-
ceeds the similar indices of the surface observation system. In this case the
atmospheric IR system is close in its indices to the surface observation system.
The dependence of the accuracy of analysis based on data on solar UV radiation
on measurement density, as can be seen from the table, is of the order of mag-
nitude 0 (/3), where m is the number of observations. Computations show that
the role of the indicated factor is also important in an analysis of the tropo-
sphere, with the surface observation system taken into account.-'Thu's, an in-
crease in the density of spatial measurements is an important reserve for an in-
crease in the effectiveness of the contribution of RSS data.

Due to the lack of data from UV measurements in the polar zone of the winter hemi—
sphere the solar UV system is inferior in its informativenesa to the atmospheric
IR system in the period of season I. Computations show that the absence of meas-
urements in the polar zone causes an increase in the AB according to solar UV

rad iation by a factor of approximately 1.5-1.7. EVen taking into account data
from the surface observation system, the AB increases by 20-251 as a result of

the indicated factor. 0n the other hand, during the summer hemisphere the solar
UV system has an appreciable advantage over atmospheric IR. This advantage al-
most disappears under the condition that atmospheric IR measurements are made

in twice as dense a spatial measurement grid as solar UV measurements. Thus,

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the relatively low accuracy of atmospheric IR can be compensated by the possibil-
ities of using a higher spatial resolution of atmospheric IR for increasing the

density of measurements.
Table 1

Characteristics of Informativeness of Different Systems for Observing Field of
Total Ozone Content

Observation system Season Density of remote AB RAE
measurements, degrees

SOS I ‘- 3.95 0011.
$05 II -- 3.72 0.18
SUV I 2.5 6.9 0.15
SUV I 5 6.3 0.19
SUV I 10 8.9 0.26
SUV II 2.5 2.9 0.14
SUV+SOS I 2.5 2.7 0.09
SUV+SOS II 2.5 2.2 0.11
AIR II 2.5 3.8“ 0.18
AIR+SOS II 2.5 2.61 0.13
SIR I 2.5 5.09 0.14
SIR+sos I 2.5 2.69 0.09

The A5 and RAE values. according to data from the combined observations systems
-- atmospheric IR + surface observation system and solar ultraviolet + surface
observation system -- virtually coincide in the winter hemisphere. The solar UV
system, in combination with the $05, is more informative in the period of sea-
son II than atmospheric IR. Changes in the AB according to data for the combined
observation systems. in comparison with the A3 for individual systems. occur in
conformity to nonlinear relationships determined by the complex dependence of

the matrix components }( in (6) on the dispersions of measurement errors entering
into Kc .

In summarizing the results of this examination, we note the following conclu-
sions. In the winter hemisphere the SOS has an advantage over the RSS; in the
summer hemisphere the opposite picture is observed. Ultraviolet measurements
must be oade in the summer hemisphere and IR measurements are more effective

in the winter hemisphere.
Latitudinal Distributions of RAE

The field of the total ozone content has a known latitudinal structure. The dis-
persion of natural ozone fluctuations decreases, although not monotonically, from
the pole to the equator. The SOS is distributed nonuniformly in the latitude co—
ordinate. Host of the stations are located in the middle latitudes; the tropical
and polar zones are covered less well. Accordingly, taking into account the spec-
trum of natural fluctuations of the ozone field it is desirable to evaluate the
possible information contribution of the RSS. to clarify in what latitude zones
satellite measurements are especially necessary.

24

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

The zonally averaged RAE values (129 (6 indicates a dependence on latitude), cor-
responding to different observation systems. are given in Fig. l. The surface ob-
servation system appreciably exceeds the RSS in the sinner season (Fig. la). In

the tropical zone atmospheric IR gives the minimum RAB values. Here the solar
UV has an RAB close to that which is characteristic for the surface observation

system.

In the middle latitudes, due to the increase in measurement errors. the informa-
tiveness of atmospheric IR becomes lower than for the solar UV system. Only in
the polar zone is it possible to note the advantages of RSS over SOS. During
winter (Fig. 1b) the RAE values for solar UV and $05 systems are close in the
middle latitudes. In the tropics there is an indisputable advantage of RSS. The
solar ultraviolet system is more informative than the atmospheric IR system. Due
to the absence of UV measurements in the polar zone of the winter hemisphere the
RAE values for solar UV here rarely increase. This circumstance ensures an advan-
tage of atmospheric IR. However, the SOS and atmospheric IR are close in their

informativeness in the polar zone due to the relatively low accuracy of the at-
mospheric IR method.

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Latitudinal dependences of RAE d}. a) season II: 1) SOS, 2) solar ultra-
violet (AG- 05°), 3) atmospheric IR (136- 2.5°); b) season I: $08, 2) solar UV
(49- 2.5° (AO- 2.5°, without polar region). 3) atmospheric IR (43- 2.5°); c)
season II: 2) 905 + solar UV (Ae- 5°), 3) $05 + atmospheric IR (A9- 2.5°); d)
season I: l)SOS 4» solar UV (49 - 5° without polar region), 2) $08 4- solar UV (A6
= 2.5° without polar region). 3) $05 + atmospheric IR (Ae- 2.S°); e season II:
1) Adi; (50$). 2) sag (solar UV); r) season 1: 1) Ad29(SOS), 3) Ad (atmo-
spheric IR).

An analysis on the basis of SOS and RSS data is of maximum practical interest.
The dependence of RAE on latitude for two variants of combined observation sys-
tems SOS + atmospheric IR and SOS + solar UV (Fig. l,c,d) make it possible to
draw several conclusions. The $08 + atmospheric IR system has a considerable ad-
vantage in summer in the tropics and in winter in the polar zone. The solar UV
system in combination with the $05 in sinner is more informative in the middle
and high latitudes. Since the measurements of solar UV have a lesser spatial

density than the atmospheric IR, the combined SOS + atmospheric IR is preferable
for winter season conditions (Fig. 1d).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the analysis of the informativeness of the combined observation system it is
important to evaluate the individual informative contribution of its individual
components in different latitude zones. For this purpose we computed the data
increments arising in the creation of combined observation systems. It is natural
to determine them usin the formulas: Ada (atmospheric IR) - d% (808) 43 (atmo-
spheric m + 303); Ad (solar UV) - a; 503) «a; (solar uv + sos); Ad; (sos/
atmospheric IR) - dé (atmospheric IR) -d (atmospheric IR + 908): Ad2 (SOS/solar
UV - d2 (solar UV) -d2 (solar UV + $05). Latitudinal increments of in ormation
show that the SOS has information advantages in the middle latitudes for both
seasons. In summer the advantages of the SOS are limited to the range 40-6098
(Fig. 1e). The solar UV system considerably dominates in the tropical and polar
zones. In winter the advantages of the atmospheric IR system also remain import—
ant in the tropical zone (Fig. 1f). In the high latitudes the role of satellite
observations is somewhat less appreciable.

An examination of the latitudinal aspect of the problem of informativeness of

the planned RSS makes it possible to conclude that the solar UV and atmospheric
IR systems mutually supplement one another. They also supplement SOS data. In

ing the solar UV system. During winter, on the other hand. the solar IR system
can provide useful iniormation in the polar zone. In the tropics and temperate
zones the solar UV system can have advantages over the atmospheric IR system.

a)
l”

:I 12}? M m a m m 3721 E

 

       

 

Pig. 2. Zonal dependences of information increments ASdi. a) season II: 1) SOS,
2) solar UV. b) season I: 1) $03, 2) atmospheric IR.

Zonal Structure of Characteristics of Informativeness of Measurement Systems

RSS have a characteristic feature: measurements along polar orbits close to mer-
idional circles. Obvious limitations on the volume of storage of the information
collected by means of on-board memory devices dictate the timeliness of the prob-
lem of optimum planning of observations. An examination of the meridional aspect
of the problem made it possible to formulate recommendations on measurements in
different latitude zones. The investigation of latitudinally averaged RAE values
d3 , being a function of longitude A, creates a prerequisite for the detection
of the most informative orbits. For $08 the informational contribution Adz;K
(SOS/solar UV) - d; (solar UV) «ii (solar UV + SOS) (Fig. 2a,b) attains maximum
values along the continental regions, and the minimum values -- for longitudes
corresponding to the location of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. The western
coast of North America and East Asia (excluding the Japanese islands) are poor-
ly supplied with data. In order to study the role of RSS it is desirable to ex-
amine the increments of the informativeness indices attributable to the contrib-
ution of satellite observations: Ad; (solar UV) - d3 (SOS) ~d; (solar UV + SOS);

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ads. (atmospheric IR) - d; (805) -di (atmosoheric IR + SOS). The curves of the
mentioned data increments shown in Fig. 2a,b give some idea concerning the
relative effectiveness of measur-ents in relation to different longitude val-
ues The maximum values of the information contributions Ada (solar UV) and
Ad; (atmospheric IR) fall in the central regions of the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans. In addition, a region of East Asia is defined where the ozone variations
are significant both in smaller and in winter and the network of surface ozono-
metric stations is inadequately dense, as is indicated by the Ad; minimum (sur-
face observation network) at A - 120°! (Fig. 2a,b)

5. /q] i I I
‘3" a zl. :-
r...! .7: 1‘ l,\ I [q 2

'I\ ~ "‘

\u/ Vw/i ﬁx) v t/\\.:~

(7 :20 20.1 150 0 120 2“! 15’ ‘ '

 

Fig. 3. Information contribution in individual orbits Ad (dependence on lon-
gitude of orbit A1). a) season II: 1) solar UV; 2) atmosp eric IR; b) season I:

1) solar UV, 2) atmospheric IR

These estimates relate to the influence of the entire set of observations on re-
fin-ent of the zonal component of the ozone field. However, for the purposes

of planning it is important to study the information contributions of measure-
ments in individual orbits. Since the measuraaents in a particular orbit with
)- % make the principal contribution to evaluation of the field at the sub-
satellite points, it is desirable to examine the values Ada (atmospheric IR
()1) - d2, (surface observation network) 42; surface observation network 4-
atmospheric IR (11); Ad2 (solar UV (21)) - d). (surface observation network)
42;! (surface observation network + solar UV ()1')). The aaximun values of the
functions describing the contributions of the measurements in individual orbits
(Fig. 3a,b) relate to the already mentioned central regions of'both oceans and
also to the eastern part of Asia. The effectiveness of the measurements in the
indicated regions is 1.5-2 times greater than for other orbits. The minimum
values of the information contribution relate to orbits passing over Hestern
Europe ()- 0-1005), Central Asia (7\- 80-90°E) and North America (A- 80—100°
N). In addition to these zones, having extremal indices of effectiveness of
satellite measurements, it is necessary to note :he adequately informative or-
bits passing over the western part of North America and the eastern sector of
the Pacific Ocean (A- 120-1400“). During sumer it is desirable to carry out
remote measurements at A - 6008, which supply information on considerable fluc-
tuat ions of the ozone field caused by the peculiarities of the dynamics of air
masses associated with the Asiatic monsoon in the northwestern sector of the
Indian Ocean. The similarity of the dependence Adz (solar UV (2)) and AdzA
(solar UV) on 2‘ , and also the similar characteristics for atmospheric IR

again confirm the conclusions in [3] that the horizontal correlation of the
ozone field has a spatial scale similar to that which is characteristic for tem-
perature and geopotential. Thus, the informative orbitr are situated not only over
the waters of the oceans. where there are almost no surface observation stations,

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but also over regions covered by measurements where there is a great variability
of the total ozone content.

Principal Conclusions

The systems for remote indication of the field of total ozone content in the
northern hemisphere in their informativeness are close to the surface network.
The principal contribution of data from satellite observations is from the high
and tropical latitudes. The IR system is most effective in winter, primarily in
the temperate and polar latitudes. The UV system has appreciable advantages in
summer in the middle and high latitudes. In the tropical zone the desirability
of using IR measurements is related to the possibilities of attaining a high
spatial resolution (30-50 km). The most informative orbits are those passing

not only over the central part of the waters of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans,
but also over regions of East Asia ()— 12093) and the western part of North Am-
erica (AI- 80-100°H). In summer it is desirable that measurements be made in an
Asiatic orbit at .X- 60°B. Observations with allowance for the cited recommend-
ations and with use of satellite systems will supply information which to a sub-
stantial degree is not dependent on data from the surface network of stations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kaygorodtsev, A. Ye. and Pokrovskiy. O. H., "Natural components of the Field
of Total Ozone Content in the Northern Hemisphere," HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDRO-
LOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 8, 1980.

2. Pokrovskiy, O. H. and Raygorodtsev, A. Ye., "Informational Content of IR
Ozone Measurements in the Atmosphere," IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA AJHOSFERY I
OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere
and Ocean), Vol 16, No 8, 1978.

3. Pokrovskiy, O. H., Ivanykin, Ye. Ye. and Xaygorodtsev, A. Ye., "Numerical
Modeling of Systems for Observing and Analyzing the Ozone Field," METEOR-
OLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 1, 1979.

6. CIA? HONOGRAPH 1. THE NATURAL STRATOSPHERE. DOT-TST-75-51, 1975.

5. Dutscb. H. U.. "The Ozone Distribution in the Atmosphere," CAN. J. CNEH.,
Vol 52, No 6. 1974.

6. London, J., et 81., ATLAS OF THE GLOBAL DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL OZONE. July
1957-June 1967, NCAR TECHN. mm. NCAR (TN), 113, 1976.

7. Lovill, J. E., et a1., TOTAL OZONE RETRIEVAL FROM SATELLITE HULTICHANIBL
FILTER RADIOHETER MEASURDIENTS, L. L. I... UCRL 521073, 1978.

8. Matcer, C. L.. et a1., "Estimation of Total Ozone From Satellite Measure-
ments of Backscsttered Ultraviolet Radiance," J. ATHOS. SCI., Vol 28, No

6, 1971.

9. Penndorf, R., ANALYSIS OF OZONE AND WATER VAPOR FIELD MEASURE-Jim DATA,
REP. PAA-BE-78-29, 1978.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Prior, E. J. and 023. B. J., "First Comparison of Simultaneous IRIS. DIN
and Ground-Based Measurements of Total Ozone," cmms. RES. LETTER, Vol

5, No 5. 1978.

11. Reiter. E. R. and bovill, J. 3., "The Longitudinal Movement of Stratospheric
Ozone Haves as Determined by Satellite." ARCH. METEOROL. GEOPHYS. 81061.1)!”-

01... V01 A23. No 1, 1971..

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.($58.1:576.ll:509.6l6)

AXISYHMETRIC PROBLEM OF FREE CONVECTION AND NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS FOR DYNAMIC
MODIFICATION OF A CUMULUS CLOUD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
30 Sep 80) PP 46-53

[Article by A. S. Kabanov. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, and
A. Ye. Klykov, Institute of Experimental Meteorology]

[Text] Abstract: It is demonstrated by a comparison of
an analytical solution of a simplified and numer-
ical solution of the axisymmetric problem of dry
convection with a constant turbulence coefficient
that the development of convection into multilevel
convection is a result of a stable stratification
of the atmosphere. 0n the basis of an exisymmetric
model of a cumulus cloud both with variable and
constant turbulence coefficients the authors carr-
ied out a series of numerical experiments for the
dynamic modification of a cumulus cloud for the
purpose of ascertaining the most favorable modifica-
tion conditions.

In [5] we compared the results of a numerical axisymmetric model of convection with
the results of analytical solution of a plane problem. which could cause doubts as
to the admissibility of such a comparison. Accordingly, the purpose of this ar-
ticle is first and foremost a demonstration that in the case of stable stratifica-
tion there is an effect of development of atmospheric convection into multilevel
convection. The proof is presented using an analytical solution of a simplified axi-
symmetric problem of dry convection and comparison of the analytical solution with
the numerical solution of the axisymmetric problem with a constant turbulence co-
efficient. A knowledge of the analytical solution of the axisymmetric problem and
its comparison with the numerical solution also made it possible to solve a number
of important methodological problems for ascertaining the extent of the reckoning
region undistorted by boundary conditions (simulating conditions at infinity) when
formulating a numerical model of a cumulus cloud. Earlier this model was used in
studying the thermal effect on a cloud [5].

Recently much attention has been devoted to dynamic methods for modifying cumulus
clouds for suppressing cloud activity. As is well known. descending movements favor
the evaporation of droplets and thereby the destruction of clouds. Among the

30

FOR 0F?1CL\L.US£I)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

methods responsible for the forumtion of descending currents are the helicopter
modification method, the flight of aircraft over clouds, the nneuvering of jet
aircraft with large pitching angles, and the dropping of powders of different
composition from aircraft: talc, sodium chloride. etc.

when powder is introduced into the region of the tops of convective clouds, in
addition to the powder there is downward entrainment of the surrounding air with
the moisture and cloud droplets present in it [6]. Unstable stratification in
clouds accelerates the descending flows, in which the air temperature is below that
of the ambient atmosphere and there is an intensive evaporation of cloud droplets.
The dispersal of a cloud occurs as a result of the outflow and settling of its

peak and "peeling off" and evaporation of the cloud at its base. The effect of

the powder is associated with the destruction of ascending flows in the clouds,
which leads to a cessation of its development and dispersal.

It was demonstrated in [2, 3] that in an unstably stratified atmosphere, under the
influence of the momentum of the descending air mvenent, the development of sta-
tionary jets is possible. The results of the theory of stationary descending flows
demonstrate that under real conditions the velocity of the descending jet can be
equal to the velocity of the ascending flow and even exceed it. The destruction
of the most vigorously developing clouds should occur more intensively, which is
associated with the more unstable stratification of the atmosphere. With the ar-
tificial formation of stationary descending jets it is necessary to take into ac-
count the intensity and duration of the downward-directed force.

Below, on the basis of the nonstationary problem, using numerical methods for so-
lution of the nonlinear equations of thermohydrodynamics with variable turbulence
coefficients, a study is made of the influence of the effect of the downward-
directed force on the development of a cumulus cloud.

Linear axisymetric problem of free convection in a stably stratified atmosphere.
without viscosity and thermal conductivity. He will examine the convection of an
ideal fluid in a cylindrical coordinate system when boundaries, humidity, viscos-
ity and thermal conductivity are absent and the nonlinear terms are negligible. In
this case the system of equations of free convection can be written in the form:

on _ or ,
7 “9:1? (1)

OT' .. _ (as. :)
7+(.¢—T)V.—%—v (2)

where the tangential component of vorticity is

.v, av, I may l or .iv'-"F\ (3)
"-—_—T=— —‘-——r--_ ...—I—]_
or a. r on dr u-_
1 a

’4‘ is a function of the Stokes current. V1. - - 'lja—z is the radial velocity compon—

ent, V; - _:_-_.’_9_;f is the vertical velocity component, 3 is the acceleration of free

falling, T' is temperature deviation from the background To. Ya - g/cp is the dry
adiabatic temperature gradient, Y- -JTo/J z is the background taperature gra-
dient Ya - Y>0, c is the specific heat capacity of air at a constant pressure,

)0 is air density, q is the stipulated density of the heat source.
31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the initial moment in time motion is absent and an arbitrary local temperature
disturbance T'o(r, z) is stipulated such that

(a. '\

j j rndraz u- a». (4)

«a

With (3) taken into account, the system of equations (1) and (2) can be repre-
sented in the form

0 l aw 1 INF 03¢ :27”
T,(.;———-a—+. —.)= ,w. (5)
Id?
T+(7.—1)——,=;$;. (6)

we apply the Laplace transform to (S) and (6). We have

L are too _ ¢¢ g as
P r (cm—Tar ' 77:) 7:7; (7)
‘ ~
p6+(~. —.) l 67:: Tye—m q, (a)

where p is the Laplace transform parameter.

<9: 6“! e'ﬁldt. B- - O‘T'Wdt q: :qe'P’dt.

Sol ving the system of equations (7), (8)0 relative to 6?, we obtain

oer» loo laov_1 07:} l6;
V—7w+7ﬁ?-W%’(T+EW)' ‘9’

where ,,
p: + m1

,,. Man-n75;-

With r-‘00 and 2-900 9"0. Applying Green's function, the expansion of the J(z)
function into the Fourier integral and Hankel transform for the J (r) function, the
solution of equation (9) can be represented in the form

no I“

UTE-74% (10)

a“ =

 

 

~,; yew J. (hr)J.(kr’)e-°“"="dkdr’dz.
‘.

where k is the Hankel transform parameter; Jo and J1 are Bessel functions of the
first kind of the zero and first orders respectively.

If the heat is released at the origin of coordinates, then

76=2trofcya(r')i(z'),q:fh— FT i(r')3(z'.) (11)
Here Q is the total quantity of heat released at the initial moment in time; q*
is the Laplace transform of (Ta -- the quantity of heat released in a unit time
at the origin of coordinates.

 

Substituting (11) into (10) and carrying out integration in the derived expression,
we find that

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFK]A1.USEGDNLY

0=

4.,“ 071W (Q + q.)- (12)

2
Here R - Jrz + 22. «)2 '52-6’0 Performing the inverse Laplace transform,w we find
an expression for the Stok a stream function

I
= 475,7: 7%[ 0f“) + aha—amends]. (13)
where
1
fm = rm... t) _ may: - =)J.[..(z—-.)]J, (mor)d1. (14)

Expressions (l3) and (16) represent the general spatial asymptotic solution of
the convection problem, which reflects the real variation of the process at dis-
tances R considerably exceeding the dimension Ro(t) of the region within which

is concentrated all the heat from the source. With R3>Ro the heat source can be
considered a point source. the current velocity with increasing distance from

the source tends to zero and the scales of the inhomogeneities of the velocity
and temperature fields increase. Accordingly, a solution at great distances from a
source can be obtained by neglecting the nonlinear terms and the terms taking vis-
cosity and thermal conductivity into account in the free convection equations.
When R)’M the nature of1 the attenuation of the velocity amplitude in conformity
to the law 5“, cos 5?) follows from (13) and (114). where the 59 function is
not dependent on R and __E 9’ang1e is reckoned from the vertical axis. However,
expressions (l3) and (14) still do not contain a definite final answer concerning
the details of the flow structure. By stipulating one or another specific form

of the heat source it is possible to penetrate without limit into the study of
the formulated problem.

Comparison of results of numerical and analytical solution of the dry convection
problem. If in equation (13) the second term on the right-hand side, correspond-
ing to the constantly operative heat source, is assumed equal to zero and one
leaves only the first term with the initial temperature momentum different from
zero only at the origin of coordinates, the stream function of the analytical so-
lution of the linear problem of free convection assumes the form

V: 0750'“) (15)

The basis of the numerical model of dry convection is a system of equations in
thermohydrodynamics in the Boussinesq approximation: to the right-hand sides of
equations (1) and (2) we added the expressions

0 0r. V.v,, ﬁr. 1 $111——
“"o—:_ VzT.*7"-(T+T%7'+ T: \.
07'107”
— '37 V1E+k("r’:+77+';;)
respectively. The initial conditions had the following form:
V -.-.V-_ . _0, T’(r:0 _T,',e-7"sln’:—:. ran-10003. :sz.=600.u.
0, r>lP00 .It. z>600.u,

To 'lK To(Z)-Tolo)-‘YZ To(0)=298 K.

33
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FF“JAI.US£ZONLY

 

Fig. 1. Evolution of Stokes stream functionHHlOS m3/sec) of analytical (at left)
and numerical (at right) solutions of the dry convection problem.

In the numerical solution there was satisfaction of the axial symmetry condition,
attachment condition at the lower boundary and heat absorption condition at the
lateral, lower and upper boundaries. The values of the parameters at the lateral
and upper boundaries corresponded to conditions at infinity for a motionless at-
mosphere. The turbulence coefficient k - 40 mzlsec. The initial thermal impulse
coincided in value with the thermal impulse of the analytical problem. In both
the numerical and analytical solutions Y- 0.008 Kim.

The calculations were made in an explicit scheme with variable right differences.
The Arakawa scheme [1] was used for the nonlinear terms and the remaining terms
were approximated by central differences. Equation (3) was solved by the method
of a decrease in dimensionalities [8]. The calculation region fell in the range
of 6,000 m along the r and z axes. The time interval was equal to 10 sec and the
spatial interval along both axes was 200 n.

An analysis of the analytical and numerical solutions indicates that nonstationary
oscillations with the frequency alarise in the medium; the frequency is dependent
on the coordinates. The dependence of frequency ad on coordinates leads with time
to stratification of the current into a number of eddies whose number after each
time interval, equal to the Brent-Vﬂisllg period ZJl/Ldo. increases by unity.

This effect was also described in [5, 6].

Figure 1 shows the stream function for the analytical and numerical solutions of
the dry convection problem. The numbers at the upper right corners of the rec-
tangles denote the corresponding momenta in time (in minutes) from the beginning
of development of convection. It can be seen from a comparison of these figures
that as might be expected, convection in the greater part of the space. excluding
the boundaries of the reckoning region and the region where the heat from the in-
itial impulse is concentrated. has an almost identical character. Naturally, the

31.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quantitative characteristics of the field of the convective current, described an-
alytically and numerically, differ somewhat. It should not be forgotten here that
in the numerical model the initial impulse occupies some spatial region with its
center situated on the z-axis and at an altitude of 300 m from the underlying sur-
face, whereas in the analytical model the initial impulse is situated at the origin
of coordinates and the underlying surface is absent. He note also that in the an-
alytical model the heat spot at all times remains at the origin of coordinates.
whereas in the numerical model it rises in the process of development of convection,
cooling as it rises. and is scattered as a result of turbulent diffusion. The prin-
cipal objective of the comparison is the proof (as can be seen from the figure) that
the_number of eddies is approximately identical in the analytical and numerical
models. as was already indicated in [5), where the results of the numerical model
were compared with the results obtained in analytical solution of the plane prob-
lem. Thus, nonlinear effects. viscosity, thermal conductivity and the underlying
surface exert an influence only on the configuration of the eddies, whereas their
number is determined by the degree of stability (that is. the a) value) in the
atmosphere and the time elapsing from the onset of development 0 convection.

In earlier studies [7. 9] it was also possible to note the well-expressed charac-
ter of multilevel convection. but the authors there did not reveal the reasons
for this phenomenon and the authors themselves did not devote due attention to
this problem.

The finding of new properties of already known phenomena and a description of the
patterns to which these properties conform can be considered successes of the
theory. In this case using the generally accepted equations it was possible to de-
tect an interesting property of free convection - the stratification of a current
into a series of eddies in a scably stratified medium.

In addition, a comparison was made of a methodological development of a numerical
model of a cumulus cloud. This made it possible to select such dimensions of the
reckoning region in which the current zone, distorted by the upper and lateral
boundaries of the reckoning region. did not intersect the region (Ro(t)) during
the time of development of the entire convection cycle - from rest to the moment
of activation of the temperature impulse to the maximum development of convection
and its subsequent attenuation. For the case represented in Fig. l at the right,
the development of convection from its beginning to the stage of maximum develop-
ment is 10 minutes, then after 5 minutes the current velocity (in the zone of ac-
tion of the source) decreased by half. In this case the R0 dimension differed in-
significantly from the dimension (103 m) of the initial heat impulse.

Dynamic modification of cumulus cloud. With dynamic modification there is clarifi-
cation of the problem of the possibility of cloud dispersal using a concentrated
downward-directed force imparted to one part or another of a cloud or cloudless
space and operative at all times from the beginning of modification to cloud dis-
appearance. The investigation was carried out on the basis of the equations of
thermohydrodynamics in a cylindrical coordinate system with a variable turbulence
coefficient:

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'0' 0' .

a»
+r%?-~%

A 0A (M l 0 0A 0 0A
%+m7+my+m—)h=—ka+;h? M)

an as. as _16 as a as

7 “WTWW' WrTWk7+K*E-
um

F=(.+qmy_ngg+mukJn
where

[3 = modification]
Fmod - 9(t)I-‘f(r, z)is the force of dynamic modiﬁcation

0 when t<t.0d.

9“) I {I when t}tmd.

tnod is the tine elapsing from the beginning of convection to the time of activation
of dynamic modification. Ff is a constant downward-directed force stipulated at two
points: on the axis and alongside the axis in such a way that the magnitude of the
integral 3‘ as

J 23] Ff rdrdz
,/ P

is equal to 4.940%. Ff at the grid points at which it differs from zero is of the
same order of ngnitudg as the maximum value of the buoyancy force.

Pbuoy ' (% 4-0.6! s'-3:,)g.

s' is the deviation of specific humidity from the background value so. c“' is spe-
cific liquid-water content.

_ as

r-'1ﬁ
‘ ’1 IT'-‘L€' s'-c. inacloud
h=l0 ' A-IT’ ' . B={s' outsideacloud

L is the latent heat of water condensation. A is the grid interval. ,0 is air
density.

In order to compute 9’. we used equation (3). and for the turbulence coefficient we
employed expression [10]:

*- -= wi)’ {1% (573,13 2 |(%):+ (%‘)3+ (*ﬂY'i (19)

where c is a constant coefficient which was selected empirically.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tlife’ mint:

    

tmod’ min I 3 21m

Fig. 2. Dependence of lifetime of cloud on altitude of source of dynamic modifica-
tion (a) and on the moment of onset of modification (b). l) for model with variable
turbulence coefficient: 2) for nodel with constant turbulence coefficient.

In the model with a constant turbulence coefficient k - 60 mzleec. The initial and
boundary conditions. reckoning region and also other parameters were the same as
in our preceding study [5]. We employed the same numerical method as in the dry
convection model.

Figure 2a shows the dependence of cloud lifetime on the distance between the under—
lying surface and the point of imparting of the concentrated force beginning to op-
erate in the first minute of cloud existence. The dimensions of a cloud in models
with both variable and constant turbulence coefficients did not exceed 103 m. In
both models a cloud without modification attained its naximum development in the
fourth ninute of its existence. Curve 1 illustrates the dependence of cloud life-
time on altitude of application of the modification source in a mdel with a ver-
iable turbulence coefficient. Curve 2 in this figure shows the results of a numer-
ical experiment with dynamic mdification of a cumulus cloud in a model with a
constant turbulence coefficient. It must be noted that in a model with a variable
turbulence coefficient the lifetime of a cloud without modification is 7 minutes.
and its center is situated at an altitude of 600 m. However, in the model with a
constant turbulence coefficient the lifetime is 6 minutes, whereas the center of
the cloud is situated at an altitude of 800 m. A maximum effect is obtained in
both cases if the modification is carried out at an altitude of about 800 m, that
is, between the peak and the middle part of the cloud.

Figure 2b shows that in models with both a constant and variable turbulenne coef-
ficient there is a directly proportional dependence between the lifetime/of the
cloud and the time of onset of the dynamic mofification. The modification effect
is the smaller the closer to the end of cloud existence it is activated. Evident-
ly, such a dependence is related to the small size of the cloud and its short
lifetime. in the case of well-developed clouds with a long lifetime this depen-
dence, if it can be established, will possibly have a somewhat different charac-
ter.

In our numerical experiments the great intensity of the imparted force under nat-
ural conditions can be identified from a helicopter hovering at a definite alti-
tude.

In conclusion the authors express appreciation to V. I. Bekryayev for useful dis-
cussions.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

lo.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGMPHY

Arakaua, A., "Scheme for Numerical Integration of the Equations of Motion of
a Fluid Over a Long Time: Case of a I‘m-Dimensional Flow of an Inconpres-
sible Fluid," CHISLENNYYE HETODY RBSHENIYA ZADACH DMIKI AMSPBRY I
Old-LANA (Numerical Models for Solution of Problems in Dynamics of the Atmo-
sphere and Ocean), Leningrad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1968.

Vul'fson, N. I., Levin. L. H. and Cherenkova, Ye. P., "Destruction of Devel-
oping Convective Clouds Artificially Created by Descending Jets," IZV. AN
SSSR: FIZIKA AMSFERY I own (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Phys-
ics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 6, No 1, 1970.

Vul'fson, N. N. and Levin, 1.. 11., "Destruction of Developing Cumulus Clouds
Using Explosions," IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA AMSPBRY I OKBANA, Vol 8. No 2,
1972.

Cayvoronskiy, I. 1., stelina, L. P. and Seregin, Yu. A., "Results of Exper-
iments for the Modification of Convective Clouds." IZV. AN SSSR: FIZIKA Ann-
Sl-‘ERY I OKEANA, Vol 6. No 3. 1970.

Kabanov. A. s. and Klykov, A. Ye., ”Model of Convection in the Atmosphere With
a Cloud and Numerical Experiments for Modification of a Cumulus Cloud,"
METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 3, 1978.

Kabanov. A. S.. "Plane Free Convection Arising From a Local Heat Source in a
Stably Stratified Medium," PRIKLADNAYA HAWAII“ I HEKHANIKA (Applied Mathe-
natics and Mechanics), Vol 43. 1970.

Arnason, G. and Greenfield, R.. "Micro- and Macro-structure of Nmerically
Simulated Convective Clouds." J. A1195. 801., Vol 29, No 2. 1972.

Ogura, M. A., "A Direct Solution of Polson's Equation by Dimension Reduction
Method," J. METEOROL. SOC. JAPAN. Vol 47. No 4, 1969.

Ogura. Y.. "The Evolution of a Hoist Convective Element in a Shallow Con-
ditionally Unstable Atmosphere: A Nmerical Calculation," J. A1105. SCI., Vol
20, No 5, 1963.

Soon Su-‘I‘zai and Ogura Yoshimitsu, "A Comparison Between Axisymetric and Slab-
Synlnetric Cumulus Cloud Models," J. ATHOS. 801., Vol 30, No 5, 1973.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. (576+507.362) (-062.l .45°:-062 .2.loS°)

cmup mm IN zom-z 45°N-as°s oven mm

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
30 Oct 80) pp 54-60

[Article by 0. A. Avaste, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, and 0. Yu.
Kyarner and S. Kh. Keevallik, Institute of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics,
Estonian Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: Assuming the albedo of clouds in the
indicated latitudinal zone of the planet to be
constant. and employing published data on albedo
of the earth's surface, mean monthly estimates of
cloud cover are made on the basis of two satel-
lite measurements of albedo. Employing simple
stochastic analysis, the climatic mean value of
cloud albedo is estimated. The conclusion is drawn
that the proposed method gives satisfactory results
in determining cloud coverage over a homogeneous
underlying surface and regions with a relatively
small albedo.

Many studies have been made to determine the mean cloud coverage over the earth*.
Most of these investigations have been based on surface observations. They have
given exaggerated values for rather extensive regions. Among the estimtes made on
the basis of satellite data, the most thorough are given in the atlas of Miller

and Feddes [10] and in studies carried out under the direction of Sadler [16, 15].
The first gives maps of the mean monthly cloud cover for the period 1967-1970. The
data taken from this atlas will henceforth be called H-F estimates. The studies of
the Sadler group characterize the period 1965-1975. These results will henceforth
be called 5 estimates.

A comparison of these studies reveals a considerable discrepancy in the climatolog-
ical estimates: the s-estimates exceed the H-F estimates by a factor of approximate-
1y 1.5 [a]. A far lesser scatter is indicated by a comparison of the mean zonal al-
bedos obtained on the basis of different satellite measurements (Fig. 1). According-
ly, in determining the quantity of clouds of this type the data could serve as a
point of departure. Here the principal difficulty arises in that an identical

a
A review of the corresponding literature can be found in [l] and [3].

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft”!(”ﬁﬂ(]Al.USEIMVLY

planetary albedo value is formed by several methods: with a small albedo of clouds
and a great cloud coverage. and also with a great cloud albedo and their small

coverage.

 

Fig. l. Zonal distribution of mean annual albedo values for the earth-atmosphere
system according to different studies. 1) [12, 13]. 2) computations by authors on
the basis of NCAA data, 3) [17], 4) [6].

In this study it is assumed that the climatological cloud albedo value is constant
and on this basis an evaluation of the mean monthly quantity of clouds is made on
the basis of data from two satellite experiments. Using a simple stochastic ana1~
ysis the conclusion is drawn that in the zone h5°N-4S°S a relatively small quantity
of clouds and a great albedo of clouds are more realistic.

Approximation. In evaluating the quantity of clouds use is made of the simple re-
lationship

a=(!—x) a.+x a,. ' . (1)

Here a is the measured albedo. to be more precise, that determined using data on
the measured brightnesses at different wavelengths and for known solar altitudes,
a0 is the albedo of the earth-atmosphere system in the case of a cloudless sky, a1
is the albedo of clouds, x is the quantity of clouds in fractions of total sky
coverage ms at $1) .

In our approximation we will consider so to be constant in a definite region of a
particular latitude zone in the course of one month, that is, we will use the data
sass a1 , where k is the month, 3 is the zone, 1 is the region. Each zone is div—
ided 1245 three regions. The ocean is denoted i - I; the coastal areas and the land
with a low albedo are denoted i - 2 and the land with a high albedo is denoted i -

3.

He will assume that a1 is not dependent on latitude and is constant in time. Then,
using (I), for the mean monthly data for a in squares 2.5 x 2.5° we obtain the
mean monthly quantities of clouds in the corresponding squares:

.. 3.12».
x— m-%' (D

In the squares where agao we will assume that x . 0, and where aaal, we will as-
sume that x - 1.

Initial data for a. The study is based on estimates of planetary albedo using data
from two satellite experiments.

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In an experiment with the "Nimbus-lo" satellite there were ten 15-day cycles with
transit of the equator at approximately 1100 LT. The processing of data for finding
estimates of albedo was described in detail in [12] and [13]. As a result, we had at
our disposal 15-day mean albedo values in the zone 30°N-30°S in squares measuring
2.5 x 2.5°, as well as the minimum albedo values for each cycle.in these same
squares.

From the results of measurements from satellites of the ROM system (intersection
of the equator at approximately 0900 LT) we used the mean monthly albedo values in
the zone 60°N-60°S in squares measuring 2.5 x 2.S° during the period from July 1971.
to June 1977. The method for obtaining these evaluations was described in [7]. The
zonal variation of the mean annual planetary albedo according to these data, to-
gether with the results obtained by other authors, is indicated in Fig. 1. from
which it can be seen that the albedo values according to ROM for the zone 40-5005
greatly exceed other similar albedo estimates. This can be attributed to earlier
intersection of the equator [7] .

Evaluations of so. In order to find the albedo of the earth-atmosphere system a0
we use published data on albedo of the earth's surface 0‘0 and a formula from [2]
ao-Aao-i-B-
On the basis of data for the entire earth Budyko found for the coefficients the
values A . 0.66, B - 0.1. Here we are interested for the most part in the region
30°N-30°S, where the albedo of the underlying surface is small («0‘ 0.35). For
this region, employing the least squares method. we found the values of the coef-
ficients A and B from the following data. The {010} data were interpolated for each
month using the maps from [8], which give the mean aonthly albedo values for the
earth's surface .‘or squares 10 at 10° for four montl-s: February, May, August, Novem-
ber. The {no} data wore obtained using data on miniaum albedo according to measure-
ments from the "Nimbus-3" satellite. These data were used in obtaining values of
the coefficients A . 0.85 and B - 0.05.

- Table 1
Frequency of Cases a; al for Different a1 Values

a1 "Nimbus-3" NOM NOM
' BOW-300$ 30°R-30°S AS°N~65°S

0.60 0.0005 0.0007 0.0012

0.55 0.0009 0.0030 0.0066

0.50 0.0028 ‘ ---- -----

The determined coefficients were used in preparing tables of the mean regional a1-
bedo values a1 . The separation of the land into parts with small and large albedo
values 0‘0 wagjgarried out on the basis of the maps in [8]. The coastal squares
were those where the seas were less than 752 in area.

Choice of a1. The use of the proposed method for evaluating cloud coverage on the
basis of albedo values for the earth-atmosphere system requires a predetermined

constant cloud albedo value a1. It is impossible to use climatological evaluations
of albedo a1 obtained on the basis of a priori zonal cloud cover distribution.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

Mean Zonal Cloud Cover Data According to ROM. a1 . 0.60

M
_ I - 9 1 .
\11 |\-111|1x I \- ..\1 .7111 ‘ Y“,

      
     

 

 

1 1 11 '1 -'

zone i I . ' i i i | I
45-425 14 who 45|41 39 35 36 33 3:1 35 45 41
425-40 45 I 441 43 39 33 35 34 29 29 2 43 35
40—375 43 42 39 £6 3': 13-4 29 25 28 :11) 4o 34
375—35 39 .19 35 34 31 29 27 24 25 2s 35 32
35—325 38 35 33 35 31 29 27 21 so 27 55 :41
32 5.315 as ‘3 31 34 32 25 25 25 27 25 :13 29
53.275 411-.‘29 311.30 25 27 25252225214'27
275—25 I24 -.-7 27 I 27 2s 25 29 23 24s 1.- |24 :1; - 25
25-225 I29 245 25 25 24 24 311 32 2: 22 23 2-. 25
525-20 '25 24'. 24 24 2: 25 32 35 29 24 24 2 27_
20.175 24 2:5 24 2:1 22 -. 32 35 31 25 23 23 25
175-15 21 -.9 21'20 21 25 31 34 311 25 2: 20 24
15—125 241 19 21 19 21 27 33 3s 34 2s :3 2o 25
125—10 22 21 22 22 27 33 2.9 42 41 '15 29 23 30
141-75 77 27 221 29 35 4-1 45 45 45 4s 39 32 37
7.5—5 33 34 7 3:. 441 41 42 40 32-4) 35 37:38
5— 25 35 '19 35 35 33 32 31 33 33 14 33 34 34
25-0 .24 37 ..- 31 25 2e 30 29 31 32 31 3.1 31
o-25- s :75 - 311 39 31 7 21 2s 27 so 12 52 33 31
25-5 4» .59 39 31 23 23 27 27 31 35 35 35 32
5—75 4: 39 .2127 21 22 27 27 31 35 36 35 31
75—10 40 35 .72I25,21 2. 2s 25 29 34 3s :5 30
1o-125 4'1 35 31|~.-5.21 22 25 241 29 :4 37 37 31
125—15 35 as .10 24 | :2 23 24 27 29 32 39 35 so
15—175 36 36 an 24 24 23 24 27 30 32 35 3- a)
175—20 34 34 27 24 24 24 25 27 31 33 34 34 29
20-225 .11 3o 25 23 24 25 26 27 31 31 31 31 25
225-25 39 29 26 24 2s 25 27 27 32 32 32 341 25
25-275 311 .41 7 25 29 27 341 30 35 34 32 31 30
275-341 31 32 2s 25 32 31 35 33 3» 35 35 32 32
39—325 35 35 32 33 35 35 39 35 41 41 33 35 37
sat-35 39 41 35. 37 41 39 41 41 43 43 43 441 41
35—375 44 4c; 46 43 44 44 4s 44 47 47 43 45 45
375-40 49 an 52 47 4s 45 so 47 no 51 32 51 so '
40-425 54 54 55 51 :o 51 :4 52 52 54 35 55 57
425-45 59 so___l____________57 54152 55 56 54 54 57 55 55 .15

 

Since model computations reveal a great variation of cloud albedo as a function of
types [16], in this study we have presented computations for several a1 values: 0.55
and 0. 60 for ROM data and 0.65-0 70 with an interval of 0.05 for "Nimbus- 3" data.
With each a1 value we registered the number 121 of cases where a)a1. The corres-
ponding frequencies n1/M. where H is the number of all the cases in the experiment,
are regarded as the probabilities that the entire month there will be a continuous
cloud cover over some square. He evaluate this same probability, taking into account
the asymptotically normal distribution of the sample means N(m,. a) and using evalua-
tions of the mean cloud coverage and the cloud cover dispersions obtained in other

studies [14,114, 15].

We will assume that the observations are independent. This assumption. which is suf-
Eiciently correct in the case of squares 10 74 10° [(4] may "not work" here with
squares of 2.5 x 2. 5°. Taking this into account. we will evaluate the probability of

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
observing a continuous cloud cover in the course of eight independent observations.
The maximum evaluations for the mean m value are obtained with squares 2.5 x 2.5°
in the zone AS°N-45° in the interval 0.65-0.70 (S evaluations for an average of 11
years). For the standard deviation from these same data we obtain 67- 0.1. Then
the probability that the sample monthly cloud cover mean is equal to l is found to
be in the range ;

o.ooooa<P (x—1)<o.0014.

since the l — m value falls in the range
30<l—m<4:.

The assumption with respect to squares with large mean quantities of cloud accord-
ing to S evaluations leads to the same results. For squares in the entire zone the
corresponding probability is still less.

The experimental frequencies n1/H in our computations with different a1 values are
given in Table 1. It can be seen that the best coincidence between the two assump-
tions concerning the probability of a continuous cloud cover over the course of a
month is obtained with the following a1 values: 0.60 according to NOAA data and
0.55-0.60 according to "Nimbus-3" data.

It is important to note that the latitude dependence of cloud albedo obtained in
many studies [5. 11] according to Our computations is manifested in latitudes
above 45° where the experimental frequencies n1“ increase sharply.

Results. The mean monthly estimates of the quantity of clouds, according to NOAA
data, averaged for zones with a width of 2.5° in the zone 45°N-65°s, are repre-
sented in Table 2. Tables 3 and a give these same estimates separately for the
sea; Table 3 applies to NOAA data, whereas Table 6 applies to the experiment with
the "Nimbus-3." In all the tables the quantity of clouds is represented in hun-
dredths of total sky coverage. that is, 61 should be read as 0.61.

Figure 2 represents the annual mean zonal estimates of the quantity of clouds ac-
cording to different studies. Here the curves 1, 3 and 4 represent cloud cover

over the sea and 2, 5. 6 reflect the total mean zonal estimates. In this figure the
values 6 give cloud cover estimates made on the basis of surface observations.

An analysis of the frequencies no/H, where no is the number of cases. when a<ao,
indicates that for the sea nolli (10‘3. Host of the cases a<ao relate to land
squares with a high albedo. The maximum discrepancy is obtained for the mountain-
0us regions of Asia in the zone 30-40°N, where the albedo of the earth-atmosphere
system [8] is greater than that measured from satellites. Accordingly. it can be
anticipated that the estimates of the mean zonal quantity of clouds for 20-45°N
and 20-3005 are artificially reduced due to the high albedo so for some part of
the land. Therefore. it is necessary to refine the albedo a0 and divide the land
into a greater number of regions with a definite value of the aboveqnentioned
parameter. The necessity for such a refinement is also indicated by the fact that
according to [8] the so variations between different squares can be considerable.
Bearing in mind the noted variations, it can be said that the determined frequenc-
ies noH cannot be interpreted as evaluations of the probability of cloudless
weather in the course of a month.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3

Mean Zonal Cloud Coverage Over World Ocean According to NOAA Data for
81 I' 0 . 60

 

45-425- 11 54 7 55 55 54 57 57 49 43 43 51 53 53
425—40 55 7 53 51 49 52 49 4o 39 45 51 54 so
45—375 55 54 51 47 45 33 4o 33 32 43 47 52 44
375—35 52 50 43 45 42 41 33 30 29 33 44 43 42
35—325 45434140333530232530394537
325-30 43 3939 37 3533 25252523353934
30—275 33343533322725252524333333
275—25 34 32 32 30 29 24 25 27 25 24 27 31 29
25—225 30 2923 27 242225292522232723
225—20 29 23 27 27 2323 23342324|2325 27
20—175 25 24 25 24 21 24 23 34 30 23 22 24 25
175—15 24 2 24 22 21 23 27 32 31 27 25 23 25
15—125 25 2 24 23 23 27 33 35 35 31 29 25 23
125—10 27 25 25 25 29 3.3 37 4o 42 39 35 30 32
10—75 33 31 33 29 35 4o 43 42 45 45 44 39 33
75-5 35 37 37 35 41 39 4o 37 37 33 39 42 33
5—25 35 4o 37 34 3030 312930323034 33
2.5—o 32 34 33 25 19 21 25 25 27 23 27 23 27
0—2.5's 32323425171524232527342327
2.5—5 34 33 35 25 13 21 27 27 29 31 30 23 23
5-75 35 34 31 24 19 24 39 31 31 34 34 30 so
75—10 37 33 23 23 22 25 30 31 32 33 37 33 31
15—125 33 34 29 23 23 25 29 33 31 35 37 35 31
125—15 33 35 29 25 25 25 29 31 32 34 37 35 31
15-175 37 34 29 25 25 25 23 32 32 34 37 35 32
175—20 35342927252329313335353532
25—225 33332923-293031313435373533
22.5-25 .15333030303332333737'333533
25—275 35 34 33 32 32 32 35 35 4o 39 39 35 35
275—33 37 35 33 34 35 35 39 39 42 42 4o 33 33
30—325 40 4o 37 33 33 33 42 43 45 45 44 41 41
325—35 44 45 43 4o 40 41 44 44 47 47 47 45 44
35—375 47 49 43 45 44 45 47 45 5o 49 51 49 43
375—40 52 53 55 49 47 49 52 49 52 53 54 :3 52
40—425 5 5-: 55 52 so 52 54 52 53 55 57 55 54
425—45 50 59 53 55 53 55 53 54 55 53 59 53 57

Mean Zonal Cloud Coverage Over World Ocean According to "Nimbus—3" Data e1 -0.60

   

 

 

Zone l 11 v I VI VII VH1 24
30-233 N 23 24 24 21 22 13
20—10 15 19 22 23 27 .23
10—0 24 31 23 25 23 m
o--1o* s 21 2o 20 21 25 22
10—20 23 21 19 24 23 - .23
211—33 23 23 27 24 25 27

44.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

NM ' . .s

Fig. 2. Zonal distribution of mean annual cloud coverage according to different
studies. 1) mean according to NOAA data; 2) mean zonal according to NOAA data; 3)
mean according to [10]; 6) mean according to "Nimbus-3” data; 5) mean zonal accord-
ing to [14, 15]. 6) mean zonal according to [9].

Using formula (2) we can also estimate the variation Ax of the quantity of clouds.
For the .sea albedo so in this latitude zone is 0.08-0.12. Then

A x—2Am.

Since in different studies (Fig. l) the variation 13a of mean zonal albedo attains
0.03, then [3x . 0.06. Interpreting this result as the width of the zone of uncer-
tainty of cloud coverage. we can say that our results for the most part coincide
with the M-F cloud cover estimates over the ocean. Accordingly, we note in conclu-
sion that the proposed method gives satisfactory climatic estimates of the quan-
tity of clouds over a uniform underlying surface and regions with a relatively

low albedo.

This investigation is a continuation of the joint work with scientists of Colorado
State University at Fort Collins [4]. The authors express sincere appreciation to
Professor 1'. H. Vonder East and Professor S. K. Cox for numerous productive dis-
cussions.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Avaste, O. A. and Vaynikko, c. .‘1., "Influence of Resolution of Television Cam-
eras and Radiometcrs on the Accuracy in Determining the Quantity of Clouds
From Satellites," HETBORODOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology).

No 3, 1973.

2. ATLAS TEPLOVOGO BALANSA ZDINOCO SHARA (Atlas of the Earth's Heat Balance), ed-
ited by H. I. Budyko, Moscow, 1963.

3. Kondrat'yev. K. Ya. and Timofcycv, Yu. 11., HETBONLOGICHBSKOYE ZONDIROVANIYE
ATHOSFERY IZ KOSHOSA (Meteorological Sounding of the Atmosphere From Space),
Leningrad. Gidromcteoizdat, 1978.

lo. Avaste, 0. A., Campbell, 6. 6.. Cox. S. K.. Deﬁasters, 0., Karner, 0. 0.,

Shiftin. K. S., Smith, E. A., Steiner, E. J. and Vonder Hear, ’1'. 1%., "0n the
Estimation of Cloud Amount Distribution Above the world Oceans," COLORADO

STATE UNIVERSITY, ATHOS. SCI. PAP., No 309. 1979.

45

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
10.

II.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cess, R. D., "Climate Change: an Appraisal of Atmapheric Feedback Mechanism
Employing Zonal Climatology," J. A1108. SCI., Vol 33, No 10, 1976.

Ellis, J. and Vonder Haar, 1'. EL. "Zonal Average Earth Radiation Budget Neat-
urements From Satellites for Climate Studies," COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY,
A1108. SCI. PAP., No 240, 1976.

Gruber, A. , "Determination of the Barth-Atmosphere Radiation Budget Prom MAA
Satellite Data," NOM TECHNICAL REPORT HESS 76, Hashington, D. C., 1978.

Hmel, J. R. and Reck, R. A., "A Global Surface Albedo Hodel," J. Am.
METEOROL, Vol 18, No 3, 1979.

London, J. , "A Study of the Atmospheric Neat Balance," REPORT CONTRACT Al? 19
(122)-165. College of Engineering. New York University, 1957.

Miller, D. B. and Feddes, R. 6., cwm ATLAS 0F RELATIVE CLOUD COVER 1967-
1970, Washington, D. C., 1971.

Paltridge. C. '11., "Global Dynamics and Climate -- a System of Minimum Entropy
Exchange," QUART. J. ROY. HE'I'EOROL. $0., Vol 101, No 429. 1975.

Raschke, E., Vonder Han, T. H., Pasternak, H. and Bandeen, w. R., "The Radia-
tion Balance of the Earth-Atmosphere System From Nuns-3 Radiation Measure-
meats," NASA TECHN. NOTE TN D4249, Washington, D. C. 1973.

Raschke. 3., Vonder Haar, T. H., Bandeen, H. R. and Pasternak, 14., "The Annual
Radiation Balance of the Earth-Atmosphere System During 1969-1970 From Nim-
bus-3 Measurements." J. ATKJS. 561., Vol 30, No 3, 1973.

Sadler, J. C. , "Average Cloudiness in the Tropics Prom Satellite Observations,"
INTERN. INDIAN OCEAN EXPEDITION, Honolulu, East-Nest Center Press, HB‘I'EOROI"
MONOGR., No 2, 1969.

Sadler, J. C.. Oda, L. and Kilonsky, B. J., "Pacific Ocean Cloudinesa From Sat-
ellite Observations," REPT. HETmROL. UNIV. HAWAII, 1976.

Helch, R. IL, Cox. 8. K. and Davis, J. H., "Solar Radiation and Clouds," Bos-
ton. Hass., American Meteorological Society. 1980. HETmROL. mm., Vol 17,

No 39.
Vonder Hear, T. H. and Suomi, V. 2., "Measurements of the Earth's Radiation

Budget From Satellites During a Five-Year Period. Part 1: Extended Time and
Space Means." J. ATPDS. 501., Vol 28, No 3. 1971.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551. (507.362+526.6)

RESULTS OF CHECKING METHODS FOR DETERMINING HATER SURFACE TMERATURE FROM 'HB'I'EOR'
ARTIFICIAL PART“ SATELLITES

Moscow HE'I'WROIDGIYA I GIDRODOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
22 October 80) PP 61-69

[Article by L. I. Koprova, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences. Ye. F.
Utkin and A. Ye. Bakhmatov, State Scientific Research Center for the Study of

Natural Resources]

[Text] Abstract: The authors tested two methods
for remote determination of water surface
temperature on the basis of measurements
of IR radiation in the spectral interval
8-12pun received from the "Meteor" artif-
icial satellite. In one of these methods
computations are made of the atmospheric
transfer function; the other is based on
writing of a regression equation. The ac-
curacy of the results of temperature de-
terminations is estimated under cloudless
conditions. Illustrative examples are giv-
en: maps of temperature of the water sur-
face constructed on the basis of satellite

data.

The remote determination of ocean surface temperature, which exerts an enormous
influence on the processes transpiring in the atmosphere, is a timely problem in
satellite meteorology [13. 17]. The "Meteor" artificial earth satellite is used

in making regular measurements in the IR spectral region A- 8—12pm and their
primary processing is carried out in an operational regime. As a result of the
primary processing it was possible to obtain data on the radiation temperature

tr measured with a spatial resolution 8 x 8 km and the corresponding thermal radi-
ation of the earth-atmosphere system in this spectral range. This value differs
substantially (up to 15°C) from the water surface temperature to, which must be
determined on the basis of satellite measurements. The accuracy in determining to
is evaluated by comparing it with the temperature of the surface water layer tlayv
measured on shipboard by the standard method. The principal factors responsible
for the difference in the tr and tlay values, as follows from [7, 18. 19]. are:
absorption of radiation by atmospheric gas components; absorption by aerosol;

(.7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

errors in geographical tie-in of satellite data; difference between the tempera-
ture of the radiating surface of the water film measured from the artificial earth
satellite and the temperature of the surface water layer measured on shipboard;
errors in the registry of It, using a measurement system.

In this article we examine two methods for interpreting data for the existing Inke-
up of measurements from an artificial earth satellite of the "Meteor" systu. mk-
ing it possible to obtain quantitative information on the temperature to of the
water surface.

Determination of Water Surface Temperature Using the Atmospheric Transfer Function
Method

One of the methods for taking into account the influence of the atmosphere on meas—
urements is the atmospheric transfer function method. The transfer function has the

form [12]

l.

AK IX 1';-
{f' _ n (1,) ( 1)
Pu. u: .. — —8“ m, .

f.‘ .4,‘ B, (m 4‘.

I
I
l

 

where I; is the intensity of thermal radiation at the wavelength 2 at the upper
boundary of the atmosphere, 3; is the Planck function. t is temperature, 5; is the
emissivity of the underlying surface (£12 1 for a water surface) , A) is instrument

spectral response.

As indicated by (l), on the basis of the characteristic radiation 14; measured
from the satellite and the known value of the transfer function P4) it is possible,
using the instrument calibration dependence 3M“) , to determine the temperature

to.

The transfer function, dependent on both absorption and radiation characteristics
of the atmosphere (vertical distributions of temperature. principal absorbing com-
ponents and their spectral properties) at the measurement time, is usually unknown.
However. according to [1-4], it is possible to determine to with an accuracy ac-
ceptable for some practical problems if use is made of values of the atmospheric
transfer function computed on the basis of climatic data on meteorological para-

meters.

With the above considerations taken into account, the transfer function from (1)
was computed using the radiation transfer equation [8] on the basis of the radia-
tion model and climatic data. The radiation model was selected after carrying out
a number of methodological computations and evaluations. He will give a brief de—
script ion of the mentioned computations and the results obtained.

As an atmspheric model. in the computations we used global climatic data on the
vertical profiles of meteorological elements (temperature, geopotential, specific
humidity. ozone) for the four central months of seasons of the year [9. ll] pres-
ent in the electronic computer machine catalogue. He took into account only absorp-
tion by gas components (water vapor 820 and ozone 03). Allowance as not introduc-
ced for absorption by aerosol since at present there are no reliable data on aero-

sol absorption.
48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l

Latitude Variation of Transmission Function tux", m — Total Moisture Content and

Ozone Content, cm) . l) Computations by Leningrad State University Employing Method

in [22, 24], 2) Computations by State Scientific Research Center for Study of Nat-

ural Resources Using Data in [11.], 3) Computations by State Center Employing the
Coefficients in [5]

  
 
 

  

 

2 3

60 0.9 0.314 0.802 0.788 0.835
45 LJ 0.310 0.770 0.753 0.797
30 l .3 0.258 0.783 0.772 0.809

0 4.7 0,226 0.584 0.5l2 0.56!
—30 3.3 0.245 0.61 I 0.603 0.644
—45 ' LS 0.279 0.719 0.709 0.748
—60 l . I 0.234 0.194 0.790 0.829

  

In the computations an evaluation was made of the influence of different factors
on the atmospheric transfer function, such as the spectral characteristics of the
satellite instrument and absorption by the atmspheric gases H20 and 03. the con-
tent of the absorbing components H20 and 03 and their variability relative to the
climatic values. The data cited below relate to a series of computations with the
use of climatic data on the meteorological parameters along fixed meridional sec-
tions for the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

The atmospheric transmission function £47. was computed by three methods using the
very same climatic data (Table l).

The first method was precise quantum-mechanical computations made at Leningrad
State University by Yu. H. Timofeyev. employing the methods and data in [22. 26].
Computations by the second and third methods were made in this study. In the sec-
ond method use was made of logarithmic (for 320) and generalized (for 03) absorp-
tion coefficients, averaged taking into account the structure of the absorption
bands. obtained by the processing of experimental data [16]. In the third method
use was made of the H20 and 03 absorption coefficients averaged for the interval
Al\' 8-12y.m [5]. The data in Table 1 show that the results of computations by the
method in [14] are closest to precise computations. The maximum ‘EA; differences,
observed in equatorial regions with a high humidity, lead to differences of about
0.3'C in determining water surface temperature to. Accordingly, as the radiation
model we thereafter employed the simplest second mettwd for computing {a} .

The standard instrumentation aboard artificial earth satellites of the "Meteor"

system contains two duplicating instruments for measuring IR radiation which are
interexchangeable in the process of flight of an artificial earth satellite. The
spectral responses of these instruments A; are somewhat different. Computations
of PA) . made without allowance for the spectral response (A). - l) and with al-
lowance for different A) (for three satellites of the "Meteor" system), indicated

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTﬂCIAl.USE10NLY

that failure to take A), into account can lead to errors in determining to as
great as l'c. Accordingly, for each instrument operating on the artificial earth
satellite it is desirable to take into account the influence of A) on the transfer
function.

 

Fig. 1. Dependence of the atmospheric transfer function 24; on moisture content H.
l) computations on the basis of climatic data on meteorological parameters along
meridional sections 30 and l70'E (curve a - averaged data) and using data from

[2] (curve b); 2) computations using radiosonde data over the surfaces of the White
and Baltic Seas and the Indian Ocean; 3) computations on the basis of data from the
"Meteor—2" - No 2" artificial earth satellite and on the basis of shipboard data in
northern part of Indian Ocean obtained during the "Husson-77" period.

The Pdﬁtransfer function is dependent on the total atmospheric moisture content W.
This dependence. computed on the basis of climatic data in this study and in [2],
is illustrated in Fig. 1 (curves a and b respectively). This same figure shows the
PA; values of two types which were computed on the basis of synchronous data for
different types of observations of the actual state of the atmosphere: according
to radiosonde data. according to data from observations of ozone content (2) and
according to data from satellite and shipboard measurements of temperature (3).
The first type of transfer function, obtained on the basis of experimental data.
was computed by the method described above. The second type of transfer function
was computed using formula (1), in which tr is the radiation temperature measured
on the “Meteor-2 - No 2" artificial earth satellite, and to - t1ay is the tempera—
ture of the ocean surface measured on shipboard. A comparison of the 24;» values
computed and determined on the basis of independent experimental data demonstrated
that the experimental P41 values were close to the a curve. The latter is evidence
in support of the selected model for computing the transfer function.

The atmospheric transfer function is also dependent on the ozone content. In some
studies. such as [5], it is asserted that the transformation of radiation in the
spectral range 8—11 p.m is determined primarily by the absorption of water vapor
and ozone absorption must be taken into account in the case of low moisture content
values. He will evaluate the influence of ozone on the atmospheric transfer func—
tion. we will represent the water surface temperature determined on the basis of
satellite measurements in the form

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

(o-lp-l-Al, (2)

At = into _ “o v
a 3 (3)

where Atuzo, Ato3 are temperature corrections taking into account. the influence
of the atmoSphere on measurements and dependent on the transfer function. They can
be computed on the basis of climatic or real data on meteorological parameters
using the radiation transfer equation. Such computations, carried out by the
authors of this article. indicated that despite the conclusions drawn in [S],
ozone exerts an influence on the transfer function at all latitudes and in both
the warm and cold half-years. The relationship of the corrections Atnzo and

Ato3 can be different: depending on the latitude zone, one or another correction
prevails. or they are comparable in absolute value.

Evaluations of the error in determining to as a result of failure to take into ac-
count variations in meteorological parameters relative to their climatic values

were made on the basis of data from 40 radiosondes, obtained for different ocean
areas during sumer -- in the Hhite and Baltic Seas and the Indian Ocean. This
error was 1.1’C.

Model computations made it possible to develop a machine catalogue of the global
distribution of climatic values of the transfer function in the atmosphere. The
catalOgue of P4) values, registered on a "Yes-1022" magnetic tape, is used as

a priori information in determining water surface temperature on the basis of
measurements from the "Meteor" artificial earth satellite.

Determination of Water Surface Temperature Using the Regression Method

In a number of studies [6, 20, 21, 23, 25] water surface temperature was determin-
ed using the statistical relationships between satellite measurements (intensity
of outgoing radiation or radiation temperature tr) and the parameters of the un-
derlying surface (its temperature or radiation) or between the correction taking
into «own the influence of the atmosphere and atmospheric moisture content. In
order to find the regression coefficients in the correlation equations it is neces-
sary to have a large sample of synchronous values of the initial parameters. The
regression coefficients can be determined on the basis of real satellite and sur-
face data. but such an approach requires that a special subsatellite experiment
be carried out on a global scale, which is difficult to accomplish. For this rea-
son the regression equations used in [6, 20. 21. 23. 25] were obtained by model
computations.

In this study we derived regression equations in the form

n. r1 .9: 2.,.;. m
ilo .

In computing a1 we used models of the atmosphere with climatic data on the ver-

tical profiles of meteorological parameters [9-11]. From the entire mass of cli-

matic data for the surface of the world ocean we selected only those which applied

to a cloudless situation. This choice was made using the following test: in a

cloudless situation the dew point spread td at all isobaric levels exceeded the

5!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

critical ‘d values [IS]. The tr values were computed using the radiation transfer
equation on the basis of the already described radiation model. Table 2 gives the
a1 coefficients computed for N cases relating to the entire ocean area in the tem-
perate and tropical latitudes. The values of the residual dispersions of these
equations with standard deviations to of about 7°C were 0.7-2.3'C.

21

   

_l

I! '5. 'C

 

Fig. 2. Dependence of water surface temperature tla on radiation temperature tr.
The dots represent data from simultaneous measurem ts on ships and IR measure-
ments from the "Meteor-2 - No 2" and "Meteor-2 - No 6" artificial earth satel-
lites; 1. 2) approximation of real data using regression equations for entire
ocean area (N I 224) and for Baltic Sea (N - 110); 3, I.) approximation of climatic
data for temperate and tropical latitudes (N - 500).

Regression equations of the form (1.) were also derived on the basis of a sampling
of real measurements. The sampling included measurements of the tr value from
the "Meteor" artificial earth satellite during the summer from 1977 through 1979
and measurements of the water surface temperature thy on shipboard and at shore
stations in the regions of the white. baltic. Black and Caspian Seas and the In-
dian and Pacific Oceans. Satellite and surface data differed in time by not more
than three hours and in space by 130 km; the total number of pairs N is 241. (Fig.
2. dots). 0n the basis of this sample we computed the a1 coefficients in equation
(a) for the entire ocean area and on the basis of the part of this sample relat-
ing to the Baltic Sea (N - 110) we computed the a1 coefficients for the middle
latitudes (Table 2). The residual dispersions of the regression equations were
2°C and 1.2'C respectively. Figure l and Table 2 show that regression equations in
the form (4). obtained on the basis of climatic and real data, give results dif-
fering by less than 1°C.

Another method for determining temperature to is based on the existence of a stable
statistical correlation between the temperature correction for the atmospheric in-
fluence At and total atmospheric moisture content W in the temperate and tropical
latitudes:

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

At =‘ X a. W'.
In. ' . (5)

where a1 are the regression coefficients. The to value is found using formula
(2)

Table 2

Coefficients a1 of Regression Equations and Evaluation of Accuracy in
Determining Hater Surface Temperature to by the Transfer Function Method (1) and
Regression Method (2)

 
 

Reg ion

 
 

Using climatic data

 

 

 

 

   
    
     

All ocean area If '7 {.II 0210.003 5.2L ITI0.004 Imoim 98 2.190 244
In 2..?|ll5!ll.02l I10.” 2.0 00
Middle latitudes '4 «s .4 I 040.000 5.“ Is 0002 500”. a 99 I s 06 16.3
Tropics .4 “1.2.1.020.“ 59l .Il'ooou :m'u 96 2.6 9: 79
Using measurement data .
Baltic Sea I I , toqoou. - IIO.I .9 2.2 112 55
All ocean area !3 I31.‘I;:.3fll:i! i 244;I.9 1.9 35
.u U

 

 

        

KEY:
A) Number of equation
B) "Meteor-Z--No 2"
C) "Heteor-2--No II"

[In equation of type (S) was used in an interpretation of measurements from the
MM operational satellite in the United States [19]. Data on H synchronous with

Cr values can in principle b found by means of model computations or by employ-
ing satellite measurement. n the IR or in the SH? ranges of the spectrum (from
which w is determined) use is made of radiosonde data (which are usually ab-
sent for the seas a oceans). In this study. on the basis of a sufficiently great
sample of climat 'data (N - 1000). relating to a cloudless situation and four sea—
sons of theKu‘ar.‘ we computed the t, values and the corresponding values At and

H. The a, efficients are given in Table 2.

    
  
 

The same regression equation was derived by computing the tr and H parameters us-
ing data from 1-0 rudiosondes in the regions of the White and Baltic Seas and the
Indian Ocean (Table 2). The residual dispersions of the determined regression
equations according to climatic and real data were close and do not exceed l’C.

Evaluation of Accuracy in Determining ldeter Surface Temperature

The evaluation of the accuracy of the proposed methods for remote determinaticn

of to was made on the basis of synchronous satellite and aubsatellite measure-
ments relating to diffcrent ocean areas (see Figure l, dots). The results of the

evaluations are given in the right-hand side of Table 2.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a measure of accuracy in determining to using different interpretation methods
we used the parameter -

 

1/ie

43+, . (6)

where d - tlay - to. n is the volume of the sample.

 

Fig. 3. Examples of maps of water surface temperature according to data from ar-
tificial earth satellites "Meteor-2 - No 2" (a) and "Meteor-2 - No b" (b). In

circles -- water temperature according to data from standard observations on
ships and at shore stations.

The effectiveness of the interpretation method employed can be determined using
the parameter

/=%2

H. -- (Pl

I: — 1;.

 

. 100‘}. (7)
which indicates what fraction (in 2) of the true difference clay - tr can be taken

into account with the employed method for determining to. Values f) 1002 mean that
the determined temperature to is exaggerated in comparison with the true value.

A comparison of thell values for to. determined using the climatic transfer func-

tion and regression equations of type ((0) and (5), obtained on the basis of cli-
matic data. indicated that the employed methods give close results. For example,
for the regions of the temperate latitudes an accuracy of l.5-l.8°C is attained,
in the tropics -- about 2.6’C. for the entire ocean - 2.0°C. The f value varies
in the range 96-992. The to values were determined with the same error using

56
FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regression equations derived using real data (see Table 2).

The regression equations (6). (S) were derived on the basis of a limited sample
of real data and require additional checking.

The regression method makes it possible to assimilate cm or SR? data on the emis-
ture content H in the interpretation of IR measurements. However, if together
with u there are simultaneous data from therlal sounding from a satellite it is
desirable to use the first method and compute the transfer function on the basis
of data on the actual state of the atmosphere.

The transfer function method was introduced into the routine practice of process-
ing and interpretation of IR measurements (in the first stage in a climatic vari-
ant), as a result of which quantitative information is obtained on to, the accur-
acy of which is constantly checked. For example. according to data from 12 revolu-
tions of the "Meteor-2 No 6" artificial earth satellite over the Pacific and At-
lantic Oceans during the period l9-21 Septeaber 1980 relating to the latitude
zone 140° and synchronous shipboard data (a sample of 100 cases) the accuracy in
determining temperature was about 1°C. A further improvement in the technical
means and methods of interpretation will increase the quality and reliability of
satellite information.

Examples of satellite maps of water surface temperature for the northern ocean area
and the tropics, constructed as a result of interpretation of data from IR measure-
ments from the "Meteor" artificial earth satellite with the use of the atmospheric
climatic transfer function, are given in Pig. 3. In order to construct such maps
we carried out a joint analysis of data froa IR measurements (radiation tempera-
ture maps) and TV photographs, as a result of which it was possible to discrimin-
ate cloudy and cloudless sectors on the tresps, on which the numerical values
apply to an area of about 20 x 20 km. For the purpose, to some degree, of exclud-
ing the influence of measuring system noise and partial cloud cover on the meas-
urements (without smoothing nonuniformities of some hundreds of kilometers). we
carried out averaging of radiation temperatures for areas of 100 x 60 km (for the
Baltic Sea) and 60 x 60 km (for the tropics). It should be noted that the problem
of averaging the tr field is a special problem and is not considered in this ar-
ticle. After the mentioned averaging we introduced to the tr values a correction
by means of the transfer function and then drew isolines of the restored field

t . 0n the to map we plotted data on water temperature obtained by standard meth-
033 at observation times differing by not are than three hours from satellite ob-
servations.

A map of the surface temperature of the Baltic Sea, constructed by this method on
the basis of data from IR measurements fro- the artificial earth satellite
"Meteor-2~-No 2" on 2 June 1978 at 0832 hours is shown as Fig. 3a. The temperature
field of the Baltic Sea is characterized by a considerable variability. Thermal
inhomogeneities with clearly expressed regions of heat and cold, which are charac-
teristic for the Baltic Sea during the considered period, are defined. Data on
standard water temperature measurements are available only for coastal stations.
Their comparison with the restored temperatures indicates that the sea tempera-
ture, according to data from contact and rents measurement methods, is in good
agreement. The range or temperature variability over the area of the Baltic Sea.
constituting 8-15°C for the two types of measurements, also coincides.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Figure 3b is a satellite map of the surface tem erature of th -
structed for the period of implementation of "MgNBKS-79" on 2; :zgiinlgggazcc:251
hours. The thermal inhomogeneities on this map are oriented from southwest to
northeast. which corresponds to the directions of the currents in this region.
The examined area of the Indian Ocean (1500 x 800 km) is virtually not covered by
meteorological data. The only ocean temperature value close in time to the meas-
urement was at a point with the coordinates 4.5°S and 42°B, measured on a ship;

it was 1°C hi her than the tem er t
basis of sate lite data. p a ure of the ocean surface reconstructed on the

Satellite maps give virtually instantaneous detailed information on the structure
of the water surface temperature field having distinguishing characteristics in
each ocean area. The cited examples graphically illustrate the possibilities of
satellite methods for investigating water surface temperature.

A further improvement in methods for the processing and interpretation of satel-
lite measurements will make it possible to obtain more precise and reliable data
on the global distribution of water surface temperature.

The authors express appreciation to I. A. Chetverikov and A. B. Uspenskiy for val-
uable comments on implementation of the study and M. S. Lyubanskiy for assistance

in the work.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Boldyrev, V. G., Koprova. L. I. and Malkevich, M. S., "Allowance for Varia-
tions in the Vertical Profiles of Temperature and Humidity in Determining
Temperature of the Underlying Surface on the Basis of Outgoing Radiation,"
IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATMOSFBRY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences:
Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 1, No 7, 1965.

2. Boldyrev, V. 6., "Computation of the Atmospheric Transfer Function in the
Spectral Interval 8-12;1m for the Territory of the Northern Hemisphere," IZV.
AN SSSR: FIZIKA ATHOSPERY I OKEANA, Vol 1, No 7, 1965.

3. Boldyrev, V. 6., "Problem of the Use of Measurements of Outgoing Radiation for
Computing the Temperature of the Earth's Surface and the Altitude of the Upper
Cloud Boundary," TRUDY MMTs. VOPROSY SPUTNIKOVOY METEOROLOGII (Transactions of
the World Meteorological Center. Problems in Satellite MeteorologY). No 8,

1965.

a. Boldyrev, V. 6., Koprova. L. I., Medvedeva, L. V. and Yakovleva, E. A., "Use of
the Statistical Characteristics of the Vertical Structure of the Temperature
Fields of the Underlying Surface Using Radiation Measurements From a Satel-
lite." AKTINOMETRIYA I OPTIKA ATMOSPERY. (TRUDY VI MEZHVEDOMSTVENNOGO SOVBSHCH-

ANIYA P0 AKTINOMETRII I OPTIKE ATMOSPERY, 1966 god, g. Tartu) (Actinometry and
Atmospheric Optics. (Transactions of the Sixth Interdepartmental Conference on
Actinometry and Atmospheric Optics, I966, Tartu), Tallin, 1968.

S. Romarov. V. 8., "Statistical Parameters of the Total Moisture Content of the
Atmosphere and Their Application in Some Practical Problems," TRUDY VNIIGMI-

MTsD (Transactions of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydro-
meteorological Information—Horld Data Center). No 28, 1976.

$6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

7.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Romerov, V. S., "Parameterization of the Vertical Hacroacale Structure of the
Temperature and Humidity Fields Applicable to Solution of Problems in Remote
Sounding of the Atmosphere," TRUDY mum-mu), No 71, 1980.

Kondrat'yev, K. Ya., Crigor'yev, A. A., Rabinovich, Yu. I. and Shul'gina, Ye.
M. , WNWGICHESNYB ZONDINVANIYB PODSTEAYUSW MWSTI IZ KOS-

msa (Meteorological Sounding of the Underlying Surface From Space), Lenin-
grad, Gidroneteoizdat, 1979.

Kondrat'yev, K. Ya. and Timofeyev, Yu. IL, WROLOGICRBSRDYB ZONDIROVANIYB
AMSFBRY IZ KOSIDSA (Meteorological Sounding of the Atmosphere From Space),
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1978.

Koprova, L. I. , "Catalogue of Global A Priori Information for Routine Process-
ing of Spectrometric Measur-ents Prom Artificial Barth Satellites," TRUDY
GosNITsIPRa (Transactions of the State Scientific Research Center for the
Study of Natural Resources), No 6, 1977.

Roprova, L. I. , "Global Distribution of Ozone for Different Seasons of the
Year," TRUDY CosNITsIPRa, No 9, 1978.

Koprova, L. I. and Uranova, L. A., "Latitudinal and Seasonal Variation of the
Total Ozone Content During 1965-1975," mmmwcm I GIDROLOCIYA (Meteorol-
ogy and Hydrology), No 5, 1978.

Malkevich, M. 8., OP‘I'ICHESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA AMSFERY SO SPUTNIKOV (Optical
Investigations of the Atmosphere From Satellites), Hoscov, Nauka, 1973.

Nelepo, V. A., SOVRDiENNYYI-Z PROBLEM! SPU'I'NIRDVOY OWLDGII. ISSLEIDVANIYB
ZEMLI IZ KOSDDSA (Modern Problems in Satellite Oceanology. Investigation of
the Earth From Space), No 1, 1980.

Niylisk, Kh. Yu. and Norma, R. 0., "Spectral Distribution of the Intensity
and Fluxes of Thermal Radiation in the Free Atmosphere," ISSLEWVANIYA RADI-
ATSIONNOGO RnI-IIHA ATHOSFERY (Investigations of the Atmospheric Radiation Re-
gime), AN ESSR, Institut Fiziki i Atmosfery, Tsrtu, 1967.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 KRA‘I‘KOSROCHNYH PROGMZAM POGODY (Manual on Short-Range Heather
Forecasting) , Part II, Chapter III, Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1965.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 GIDROLOGICHBSKIH RANTAM V OKEANAIOI I DDRYAKH (Manual on By-
drological Studies in the Oceans and Seas), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat,
1977.

Fedorov, K. N., "Hopes and Realities of Satellite Oceanology," ISSLEJOVANIYB
ZMI IZ KOSHOSA (Investigation of Earth From Space), No l, 1980.

Breaker, I... Klein, C. and Pitts, IL, "Quantitative Measurements of Sea Sur-
face Temperature at Several Locations Using the IRMA-3 Very High Resolution
Radiometer," non TECH. Mm. NESS, Vol 98, 1978.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

210.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

Drover. R. L., Dohrband. ll. 8., Pichel, U. 6.. Signore, T. L. and Walton.
C. C., "Satellite-Derived See-Surface Temperatures Prom 10M Spacecraft,"
POM TECH. MEL, NESS 78, 1976.

Cogan, I. L. and Willand, I. IL, "Measurement of Sea Surface Tenperature by
the EMA-2 Satellite." J. APPL. mmmu. V01 15, No 2, 1976.

Martin, P. L. and Salomonson, V. V., "A New Statistical Method of Estimtins
Surface Radiancea Prom Corresponding Satellite Window Channel Radiances,"
mu. HEATHER new, Vol 98, No 9, 1970.

McClatchey-, R. A., et 81. , AMSPHERIC assomron LINE PAWS COMPILATION,
AFCRL-‘l'R-73-0096, 1973.

Pastre. C. and Tournier, B. . IDTES INTERNES DE L'ESTABLISSDENT D'BTUDES ET
DE RECHERCHES METEOROLOCIQJES, No 350, 19710.

Roberts, R. 8., Selby. l. E. A., Sibel-nan, L. H., "Infrared Continuu- Absorp-
tion by Atmospheric Hater Vapor in the 8-13 Window," APPL. 0PT., Vol 15, No 9,
1976.

Smith, W. 1.. and Rao, P. K.. "The Determination of Surface Temperature Prom
Satellite Window Radiation Measurements." PMC. FIFTH SYHP. ON mammals,

Washington, D. C., June 21-21., 1971. Repr. Pittsburg, Pa.. Instrul. Soc.
Amer., 1972.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.665.7

COH?ARATIVE ANALYSIS 0? METHODS FOR CALCULATING TURBULENT HEAT AND MOISTURE
FLOWS FROM THE OCEAN TO THE ATMOSPHERE

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
13 Jan 81) pp 70-76

[Article by N. R. Nuriakhmetova, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research
Center]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives the results of
a cross-comparison of the heat and moisture
flows obtained using different parameteriz-
ations. Because of the peculiarities in the
mechanism of interaction between the ocean
and the atmosphere, and specifically the pres-
ence of a surface "film," evaporation and
heat transfer with the spray, the analysis
is made separately for cases of low and high
wind velocities. It is shown that the surface
"film" is one of the reasons for the disagree-
ment between the results of computations by
indirect methods and methods based on direct
measurements of turbulent flows. Recommenda-
tions are given concerning the applicability
of some methods. Conclusions are drawn con-
cerning the consistency of different parameter-

izations.

Vertical turbulent flows of heat and moisture are important quantitative character-
istics of interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere. A knowledge of these
parameters is necessary for solving a wide range of problems in meteorology and
oceanology. They can be determined either by direct fluctuation measurements or by

indirect computations.

The indirect computation method is based on the following premise. It is assumed

that the principal mechanism determining the vertical distribution of properties
from the underlying surface to a height of several tens of meters above it is tur-
bulent exchange. Therefore the turbulent flows are related to the vertical gradient
of the transferred property and the coefficient of turbulent exchange and are de-

scribed by the equation

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

F.= — R. £5
Here F8 is the flow of the property a, da/dz is the vertical gradient of the prop-
erty, k8 is the coefficient of turbulent exchange. However, over the sea the tem-
perature and humidity gradients are very small. Correct gradient observations can
be made only by the use of special buoys. 0n the basis of shipboard hydrometeoro-
logical measurements it is possible to obtain information on the wind velocity at
a fixed level and the temperature and humidity differentials between the water
surface and a fixed level in the air. Accordingly, the following formulas are the
basis for all the used methods:

' 1
H = Pep C” v:(t0 - tr)» :2:
E: («Cg Va(qo_qs)v
1’: WV}. ' (3)

where c is the heat exchange coefficient; CE is for the moisture exchange; cn
is the ﬁres coefficient;‘ﬁ)is air density; V2 is wind velocity at the level a; to,

tz is water temperature at the ocean surface and air temperature at the level_z;
qo, qz is the saturating specific humidity of the air at the temperature of the
wa‘er surface and air specific humidity at the level 2; c is the specific heat
capacity of air at a constant pressure; H is the heat flow; E is the moisture
flow; F is the momentum flux.

As is well known, the exchange coefficients are not constant parameters. Accord-
ingly, the question arises of the methods for their parameterization through the
measured parameters. Specifically these procedures distinguish one method for com-
puting the flows from another. In our analysis we selected the Arakawa [6] and
Louis [9] parameterizations. used in models of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere, and also the method proposed by R. S. Bortkovskiy, et al. [1], which

takes into account the humidity stratification of the near-water layer and heat

and moisture transfer with the spray during storms. In order to parameterize
such parameters as dynamic velocity and roughness level we used the results of
,the investigations of Carrot [8] and S. A. Kitaygorodskiy [4].

Until very recently there were only a few cases of direct measurements of atmo-
spheric flows. However. despite the complexity and limits of application of this
method. recently a definite quantity of data has been accumulated on the fluctua—
tion measurements of flows. The authors of [7] proposed a parameterization based
on these data which was used for computations of the heat and moisture flows in

this study.

we would like to note that a need arose for this investigation despite the exis-
tence of such studies on the comparison of methods for determining turbulent
flows. This is attributable to the appearance of new methods, both based on re-
cent experimental data and those used successfully in models of general circula—
tion of the atmosphere.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Review of Employed Parameterizations of Processes of Interaction Between the
Atmosphere and the Ocean

We will begin the review with the Friehe and Schmitt parameterization [7]. 0n the
basis of direct fluctuation measurements the turbulent flows of heat and moisture

can be computed using the lormulas

 

H=fl€,w'U' , ((0)
Ezﬁ'. (5)

Here w'0' is the mean covariation of vertical velocity and temperature, w'q' is
the mean covariation of vertical velocity and water vapor density. 69' are tem-

perature fluctuations, q' are water vapor density fluctuations. w' are fluctua-

tions of vertical wind velocity.

The authors of [7] systematized the data available in the literature on direct

measurements of the vertical turbulent flows of heat and moisture in the near-

water layer of the atmosphere over the ocean available in the literature. Using
the least squares method the data were represented in the form of the following
dependences for different stratification conditions:

with 05 VAT"- T:)<25
“Te ' = 0.002 + 0.97. 10-‘V,(T;= — Ta. = = 952' "ﬂ (6)

[Here and in the text which follows the subscript "CT" denotes stratification.]

with V.(Tn - T.) > 25 ’- (7)
a? : 1,-i6-10-3 v,(r,, — 7,), o =14,s.10- .o

1 __ s
“ ‘h u"U’ = 0,0026+0.86-10"‘V;(7a Ti °=3-2' 1°"? ( )
“VI—9’: L32 - 10" Vt(Qn- 0:)! ° = 6'4 ' '0-3‘ (9)

Here TCT is water temperature at a depth of approximately 1 m from the sea sur-
face (K), 12 is the potential temperature of air at the level 2 (K), Q, is water
vapor density at the level 2. QC? is the saturating density of water vapor at the
temperature TCT’ O'is the standard deviation of the approximation of the measur-

ed values.

Formula (6) was derived on the basis of 75 measurements. (7) -— 14. (8) -— 41.

The recommended interval for the use of these formulas is 20<IV2(TCT — Tz)<'160.
With respect to the applicability of formula (9) in computing the moisture flows.
the authors of [7] indicate an absence of data from measurements for high wind
velocities. We will note a peculiarity of this parameterization. Hith a zero dif-
ference between the water and air temperatures the heat flow is not equal to zero
but has small positive values.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a model of circulation of the atmosphere [6] Arakawa uses the well-known para-
meterization of Deacon and Webb [3] for computing the drag coefficient under
neutral conditions (to - tz - A t - 0)

q, = (1 + 0.07 v.) '- 10-3. - (10)
For computing the exchange coefficients the author proposes the following for-
mulas:
T‘
with “>0 (”=“="‘(1+l/Vj)' (11)
l
with Al<0 Cn"l=‘°—'_" __>_:_ ' (12)
. —- 1 Vi

Garret in his review of studies published during the last ten years, whose purpose
was to find the values of the drag coefficient, proposes a refinement of formula

(10)
cw = (0.75 + 0.06.7 u). 10-8. ' (13)

He will now examine the parameterization proposed by Louis. The author of [9],
like Arakawa, proposes analytical formulas for describing the dependence of the
exchange coefficient on the measured parameters in the following form:

. g.
To—7..::JT=(I (0:;3/Hné): (1‘)

\ a

with

AT) 0 c = = t -w- 1+ -—"—'_’=—=? '
with H E PM L f 5 (15)
I+l$.9r01 “1/ 7

_ 1 “+1.“! =
with 3T<0 ‘n=‘z-‘n6.'ﬁl V; . (16)

With values of the Richardson number above the critical level the flows are 683%-
ed equal to zero. that is

_ ﬂijgome H=0. 5:0.

with I' v: (17)

where g is the acceleration of free falling. T . 300 K.

A new parameter appears in formulas (110)-(16): the roughness level 20. In [9]
there are no recommendations concerning the choice of its value. Accordingly. in
this study we used the well-known Charnok formula

I.
4 = .. us)
Here 0L is a constant whose values are different in the publications of different
authors. In this study we used the values 0‘ - 0.035 [lo] and at -= 0.01104 [8]. How-

ever, in formula (18) there is still another unknown parameter - dynamic velo-
city. Garrat [8] proposes the following parameterization for its computation:

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

._ h |.-..' '
u, _ 0.0-3 V. . (19)

We will examine the following method for computing the flows. In source [1] the
authors propose nomograms expressing the dependence of the exchange coefficients
on wind velocity V2 and the so-called effective temperature differential

ﬂrzg—Q+QWMﬁ-qh

where E is saturation elasticity at the water temperature, ez is water vapor
elasticgty.

The introduction of the effective temperature differentials ensures allowance

for humidity stratification. The expressions on the basis of which the nomograms
were constructed were derived from a theoretical model of the atmospheric boun-
dary layer generalized for different stratification conditions. These nomograms
are applicable for wind velocities up so lb m/sec. The authors indicate a quali-
tatively different mechanism of exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere for
high wind velocities, and specifically the existence of heat transfer and evapora-
tion with a spray. Due to the small number of experimental investigations provid-
ing data for high wind velocities a table is given with the approximate values

of the exchange coefficients as a function of wind velocity. The authors also
deem it possible to neglect the influence of stratification under storm condi—
tions.

There is still another circumstance which governs the separation of situations
with low and high wind velocities on the basis of exchange mechanism: the exis-
tence of a surface "film" an the water. The authors of [2] by the term "film"
mean some surface water layer for which the quantities of absorbed solar radia-
tion, changes in heat content and advective heat influxes are small in comparison
with the total heat flow through this layer. This leads to the formation of a
layer of great water temperature gradients. It follows from [10] that the temper-
ature gradient in the "film" is directed in such a way that it favors a decrease
in the total water-air temperature differential.

Comparative Analysis of Results of Computations of Heat and Moisture Flows

In this article we used a two-month sample (January and November 1975) of on-ship
hydrometeorological data, which constituted 1,306 points for the ocean area of
the northern part of the Atlantic Ocean. Before proceeding to a comparative an—
alysis of the results of computations by all the above-mentioned methods, we will
examine the significance of the Garret corrections [8]. A comparison of the re-
sults of computations by the Louis method with different on values in formla (18)
indicates a systematic exaggeration of the values of the exchange coefficients
with 0‘ - 0.035 by 16-252. The use of (13) instead of (10) in the computations by
the Arakawa method gives lesser values of the exchange coefficients by 18-25%.
Thereafter computations were made in agreement with the Garrat recommendations.

Graphs were constructed for an analysis of the sensitivity of the methods to a
change of various exchange conditions. The Arakawa method was most sensitive to

changes in wind velocity. However, in the case of velocities greater than 22.5 ml
sec allowance for heat transfer and evaporation with spray leads to the largest

63

FOI:OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exchange coefficients by the method described in [1]. The Arakawa method reacts

to changes in temperature stratification most strongly in the case of instability.
whereas the Louis method reacts most strongly in the case of stability. The humid-
ity stratification, as pointed out above, exerts an influence on the value of the
exchange coefficient when using the method described in [l].

\W ‘0 ~{

  
    
  

1:.

.. ,.\
35: /"“:' 1’;\\ /o _

J!

T 1.-
.' C)
a 'x’f"

' u
_ m

I
l

.‘s

2,“
/0 j” }n\\

f
/
I.‘ / _
- .95
.1

*2

3 J,

K

\ 1M< y/ ,”<.
\\ a: ”k Tyne, \m\
__/ :6 ‘t‘”\' '__/ —L:” 2.7 \5<‘<:

' 40 -: p .5 m mz"

 

Fig. l. Flows of apparent heat ("/mz), computed using the methods developed by R. S.
Bortkovskiy, et a1. (a), Friehe and Schmitt (b). Arakawa (c) and Louis (d). U is
the wind velocity at the level 10 3:. AT is the water-air temperature differen-

rial.

In accordance with what has been set forth above, the analysis of the results of
the computations was carried out separately for cases with low wind velocities and

separately for storms .

A comparative analysis [5] of the results of direct measurement of turbulent flows
and the results of indirect computations revealed that the computed data are higher
on the average by 25!. The use of the Friehe and Schmitt method. based on the re-
sults of direct measurement of flows, confirms such a relationship (see Fig. 1).
this article an attempt was made to attribute this discrepancy to the presence of

a surface "film. "

In all methods. other than [7]. it is necessary to know the temperature of the ocean
surface. However. in actual practice use is made of data on water temperature deep-
er than the surface. It was stated above that the "film" favors a decrease in the
water-air temperature differential. that is, a decrease in the flows of heat and
moisture. If it was possible to compute the value of the correction for the "film"
on the basis of the measured parameters, for example, on the basis of atmospheric

6!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI

stratification and the wind, its introduction could lead to a better consistency
between the results of direct measurements and computations on the basis of theor-
etlenl uwtlmds. Due to the Imptmulblluy of inking into account the Influence of
stratification on the value of the gradient in the "film," in this study we used

a dependence derived by c. N. Panln in [10] (Fig. 2). The scatter of points is at-
tributable to failure to take stratification into account.

j a CT - stratification

 

In/ sec

Fig. 2. Dependence of difference Two - TVCT on wind velocity at height 10 m. TVO
-- temperature of water surface; Tum. -- water temperature below sea surface, U10
-- wind velocity at level 10 m.

u we?

 

Fig. 3. Flows of apparent heat computed by Arakawa method (1), Arakawa method with
allowance for correction for "film" (2). Friehe and Sclnitt (3). ll -- flow of ap—

parent heat. U10 -- wind velocity at level 10 m, AT water-air temperature dif-
ferential.

The results of computations by the Arakawa method with use of the correction for
the "film" are cited in Pig. 3. It follows from the figure that the allowance

for the influence of the "film" leads to some decrease in the difference between
these two methods. However, computation of the correction only as a function of

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(DNLY

wind velocity does not lead to a satisfactory consistency of methods in the case
of great water-air temperature differentials. It is necessary to ascertain the
dependence of the water temperature gradient in the "film" on stratification of
the near-water layer, the use of which with the introduction of a correction
could give a satisfactory result.

with respect to cases of storm wind velocities, Fig. 1 shows an appreciable dis-
crepancy of the results of computations based on the different methods. The Priehe-
Schmitt method gives low values for the flows of apparent and latent heat and the
magnitude of the discrepancy is comparable with the flows themselves. It was stat-
ed above that for storms there is no great number of cases of direct measurement

of the flows and therefore the parameterization [7] is based on a limited volume of
data and the standard deviation of the approximation from the real values is rather
great. A comparison of the results of computations by the three remaining methods
reveals a consistency of the methods within the limits of accuracy indicated in
[1], except for the region of a wind of hurricane force (Vz)»25 mlsec). In the lat-
ter there is discrimination of very high values of turbulent flows computed by

the method in [1]. However. it is necessary to take into account the approximate
character of the exchange coefficient values for velocities greater than 1‘ m/sec
and a relatively low frequency of recurrence of velocities greater than 25 m/sec.

Conclusions

1. In the :egion of low wind velocities the minimum values of the turbulent flows
of heat and moisture are given by the Priehe and Schmitt method, based on the re-
sults of direct measurement of the flows.

2. The assumption of an influence of the surface temperature "film" and the intro-
duction of a corresponding correction leads to some improvement in the consistency
of the methods.

3. In the region of great wind velocities the Friehe and Schmitt parameterization
is doubtful because it is based on the results of only 14 measurements, which give
a great scatter.

4. For wind velocities from 14 to 25 m/sec the parameterizations [1, 6, 9] agree
within the limits of 302 accuracy with an unstable stratification. and in the
case of a stable stratification -- within the limits of a 40! accuracy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Ariel', N. 2., Bortkovskiy, R. S. and Byutner, E. K., "Fundamental Principles
in Constructing Tables for Determining Turbulent Flows in the Lower Air Layer

Over the Sea." HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 11,
1975.

2. Bortkovskiy, R. 8.. Byutner. B. K., Halevskiy-Halevich, S. P. and Preobrazhen-
skiy, L. Yu., PROTSESSY PERENOSA VBLIZI POVBRKHNOSTI RAZDELA HDRYA I ATMO-

SFERY (Transfer Processes Near the Sea-Atmosphere Discontinuity), Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat, 1976.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

6.

7.

8.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deacon. I. L. and Webb. I. K., "Hicmscale Interaction," MORE (The Sea), Len-
ingrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1965.

Kitaygorodskiy, S. A.. FIZIKA ATHOSFZRY I OKEANA (Physics of the Atmosphere
and Ocean). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1970.

Hslkus. Zh.. "Hacroscale Interaction," MORE, Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1965.

Arakavs. A.. "Design of the UCLA General Circulation Model." Univ. of Califor-
nia, Los Angeles. Department of Meteorology, TECHNICAL REPORT No 7, 1972.

Friehe, C. A. and Schmitt, K. P.. "Parsmeterization of Air-Sea Interface Fluxes
of Sensible Heat and Moisture by the Bulk Aerodynamic Formulas." J. PHYS.
OCEANOGR., Vol 6, 1975.

Garret, J. R. , "Review of Drag Coefficients Over Oceans and Continents."
MON. HEATHER REV.. Vol 105. 1977.

Louis. J. F., "Parameterization of the Surface Fluxes," European Center for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, Research Dep., Internal Report. No lo, Feb 77.

Panin, G. N., Volkova, S. V. and Foken. 1‘. IL, "On Heat Exchange of Surface
Layer of Water Reservoir With Atmosphere. XVIII Congresso IAHR Italia 1979,

HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING m mm RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AND mm procrea-
mcs, Vol 3, Subject 3. ngltari, mm, Sep 1979.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.465.(152+53)(261.2)
NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS USING A MODEL OF THE OCEAN'S UPPER LAYER

Moscow METEOROLOCIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 (manuscript received
8 Jul 80) pp 77-85

[Article by G. Friedrich. doctor. V. P. Kochergin. professor, V. I. Klimok, A. V.
Protasov and V. A. Sukhorukov, candidates of physical and mathematical sciences

Institute of Oceanography, Hamburg University, and Computation Center, Siberian
Department, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: The article presents meteorological
and oceanological data from measurements made
in the FLEX experiment. 0n the basis of a mathe-
matical model of the upper layer of the ocean
with the use of FLEX data in the boundary con-
ditions it was possible to carry out numerical
computations for reconstruction of hydrodynamic
characteristics of the sea. The results of the
computations are compared with the experimental
data. The sensitivity of solution of the problem
to the model parameters is evaluated.

Measurement Data From FLEX

During 1978 Rest German oceanographers carried out measurements under the program
of the FLEX experiment in a polygon in the North Sea. The authors had at their dis-
posal the following filtered data obtained during the period 6 April-13 June with
a discreteness of 4 hours: wind velocity components u. and Va. near-water pressure
P. air temperature Ta and wet-bulb thermometer TV, total flux of short-wave radia-
tion F1, flux of outgoing long-wave radiation PB and temperature of the sea sur-
face Ta. Meteorological measurements were made at a standard horizon. Figure 1
represents these data by days corresponding to measurements at midday. A peculiar-
ity of this period is the heating of the upper layer of the sea and the near-water
layer of the atmosphere.

The measurements were made from the scientific research ships "Meteor" and "Anton
Dorn," which operated alternately. On individual days the measurements were made

outside the polygon: 5-7 May and 5-8 June -- the "Meteor" operated approximately

100 km and on 12-14 May the "Anton Dorn" operated 80 km.

He carried out a series of numerical experiments in which the FLEX data were intro-
duced into the boundary conditions of the problem. The parameters of wind frictional
stress at the sea surface 17"‘5& were computed for the two wind velocity compon—
ents:

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

73=C:?gu¢lualn .‘_\-=C'-Plvl|vl!‘ (1)

The fluxes of apparent F“ and latent heat of evaporation FE at the sea surface can
be computed on the basis of the BULK method:

m7.) = sepia: c.(r,— r.). (2,
F; (To = a. c0127. I L 1w.) - «7.1. (3)

Here [9. is air density; c is the specific heat capacity of air; L is the latent
heat of evaporation; q8(ng is the specific humidity of saturated air at the tem«
perature of the sea surface T8; qa is specific humidity; C{-. CD are the drag coef-
ficient and the heat exchange coefficient.

The specific humidity qs (Ts) is determined on the basis of the equation of state
of an ideal gas and Dalton's law acne.

93(T.)=P'-‘-W7Fe—£ (’0)

Here es is the partial pressure of saturated water vapor. The pressure es, accord—

ing to the Clausius-Clapeyron equation with a constant mean latent heat of evapor-
ation L, is approximately determined as follows:

61(72): e(7‘.) cxp[-£;(+o - 7'7"} = 6.!08 exp {l9.85(l — %)} (5)

Here To . 273.16 K, Rv is the gas constant for water vapor, I, is temperature in
Kelvin.

Formula (5) gives the e8 value in aillibars. differing by less than 22 from the pre-
cise values at a temperature below 30'C [2]. Formula (5) does not take into account
the salinity of sea water, which exaggerates the pressure value ea by_ZZ [2].

The specific humidity qa was determined through the temperature of the wet-bulb
thermometer Tv

. _ L
7'." " Tn— : ($1_$)~ (6)

where 88. S are the mixture ratios for air saturated and unsaturated with vapor re-
spectively. According to definition of the S value, it is the ratio of vapor density
to the density of dry air and the equation of state of an ideal gas

_ 0.6‘229.(T .l
S; — W. (7)

By definition. the mixture ratio is related to specific humidity by the expression

‘79 .': m. (8)

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

  
    

A
. - ‘._ I
. . 3

'c ‘ nap/(mt null-(cl:2 -'sec)
'2 A
I f ‘.
l .- I

    

.,:95g !

Fig. l. FLEX data.

From expressions (6). (7) we obtain

t 0.622 .lTp
$=(T,—T_,)-£‘1+T—T:TFJ" (9)

Substituting the 8 value from expression (9) into formula (8), we find the specific
humidity q . In computations of the flux of latent heat using formula (3) the L(T)
value was determined using the expression [2]

L(T) -591.3—o.56(T—To) cal/g. (10)

In numerical experiments the flux of latent heat was computed using the formula
proposed in [8] .

-, a.‘ __
F, (7;) =- “comm. [UTA “7”.) + ﬁl r. ‘7' 70’} (11)

which ls expansion of formula (3) into a series in powers of (T, - Ta)' Comparative
computations with formulas (3) and (11) indicated that the total heat flux into the

sea over a two-month period L
Q”: \ (Fl—.FD—FJ—Fﬂ)dt

differs from the results of computations using different formulas by less than 1:,
although the quantity of latent heat of evaporation at some times differs up to
501 and sometimes also changes sign. During this period of observations the heat
balance at the surface was determined by the flux of short~wave radiation and
therefore different methods for computing the flux of latent heat were not re-
flected in the total entry of heat into the sea.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICHI. l'SF ONIA

Figure 1 shows the change in the heat content of the 804m layer in the sea during

this period ,’”
' dT _
”0:5:9'C1Td‘dt'

which was computed by West German specialists using data on the vertical distrib-
ution of temperature. The difference between the entry of heat and heat content
increases with time and was caused by the error in computing the total heat flux
at the surface and horizontal advection. The error in computing the heat flux is
related to the inaccuracy of the computation formulas and the error in measuring
the initial parameters.

In the computations the input constants assumed the following values:

C-. = C,, = L3 1h". ?;=‘v2'10—1 g/cm3, cp - 0.24 cal/(godegree).
C I 1 cal/(g-degree), L . 59S cal/g.

Formulation of Problem
A study was made of the one-dimensional boundary layer of the ocean:

equations of drift movements

o‘u _ 0 du
37-!"— 5K1? <12)
6» - _ .v'. 1..
'0: — f" " 0: K 01' (13)
thermal conductivity equation
07' o - 37 .-":‘
3‘ : -;(I\-7‘ - Flo ' )9 . (11.)
formula for determining the coefficient of vertical turbulent exchange
. I" 0114 W! I 0 3- '
/\::CII’ —- --— — _._’
(.)',/(,,)+(,,} k”. x (15)
and equation of state a, a,
01 : (16)
The boundary-value conditions of problem (12)-(llo) are as follows:
__ _ "’“—-i:. .Lt‘_ "y
._0. [3- '0' Ads——I'
(17)

. 07 .
C!’0I‘37=F‘+Fl'.' F”:
if the last term FI e-Pz is absent in equation (3), then

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNI)

07' .
Cf'oK'o—‘=F.TfE+F"-F]=—QOQ

z-H=w03:u-v-Q 7-7” 08)

Here u. v are the velocity components of sea currents; T is temperature; f - ZaJsﬂiq
is the Coriolis parameter; Uis the angular velocity of the earth's rotation; ¢P is
latitude (9’- 59°N); h is the depth of the surface turbulent layer, which is deter-

mined from the computation point zk, the first from the surface, at which the fol-
lowing condition is satisfied

(C: 71)! II/W

\aa

(19)

0515 the coefficient of thermal expansion of sea water; ot- 1.5-10'4 degree'l; ‘3

is the index of absorption of short-wave radiation in the water medium; the z-axis
is directed downward.

The formulated problem was solved numerically on an electronic computer produced by
the "Telefunken" Corporation at Hamburg University. The boundary-value conditions
were computed on the basis of FLEX data. The equations of motion (12)-(l3) were
approximated in time by an implicit difference scheme and a spatial central-differ-
ence approximation. The derived system of algebraic equations is solved by matrix
factorization. The thermal conductivity equation (16) was approximated in time us-
ing an implicit scheme and was approximated in space by central differences. The
derived system of algebraic equations is solved by a modification of the difference
schemes method [6] which makes possible more careful computation of the difference
solution gradients in the neighborhood of the temperature jump. The entire system
of equations (12)-(15) with the boundary conditions (17)-(18) was solved success-
ively in time with a time interval of 26 minutes --10 steps between the measure-
ment data with linear interpolation between them. Vertically use was made of a uni-
form computation grid with an interval of 2.5 m. The details of the solution method
for such a formulation were given in [1].

Results of Numerical Experiments

There are a number of free parameters in the problem: the Ck coefficients in for-
mula (15) and the absorption coefficient K0. the drag coefficient C15 and the heat
exchange coefficient CD. The sensitivity of the solution to these parameters was
checked in the numerical experiments.

In the first series of computations the short-wave radiation was taken into account
by the boundary conditions of the thermal conductivity equation. The following ex-
periments were carried out in this series: with a constant value of the coefficient

of vertical turbulent exchange K, with different values of the coefficients Ck and
K0. In the second series of computations short-wave radiation was taken into ac-

count as a source on the right-hand side of the thermal conductivity equation (14).
The influence of the coefficients [3 and K0 was evaluated in this series.

1) Figure 2a represents the computed surface temperature with constant values of
the coefficient of turbulent viscosity K. On the basis of these results it is pos-
sible to estimate the characteristic value of the K coefficient which was equal ap-
proximately to 10 cm2/sec. The use of the model for the K coefficient considerably
improved the result. This can be seen from a comparison of Figures 2a and 2b.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0" "Fl-"1:“. I'SI'T ()NI \

 

Fig. 2. Temperature of sea surface. 0) FLEX data a) computations with constant

K coefficient: 1) K - 50; 2) K I 10; 3) K - 1 cub/sec; 4) K variable, C - 0.05,

x0 - 1 cmz/sec, b) computations with value K0 - 3-7.9 (z/H)1/2: 1) ck - o.21-o.2 2/
H; 2) Ck - 0.41-0.4 z/H; 3) Ck - 0.11-0.l z/H. Al: - 10 m; A) ck - 0.11-0.l zIH.

The formula for determining the K coefficient (15) is a special case of the dynam-
ic turbulence equations [1]. The Ck coefficient was found by solution of the dynam-
ic turbulence equations and in the case of weak stable stratification can be assum-
ed equal to 0.05 [1]. In a general case the Ck value is dependent on the thickness
of the surface turbulent layer [3]. The analytical solutions of the stationary
equations (12)-(16), obtained with the a priori coefficient K;hre substituted into
the left- and right-hand sides of formula (15): K - K1 and K - K1(1-z/H)2 - lez
(K1 - const) [4] and the Ck coefficient is evaluated using this method:
\3 I a 12 —
<C.r‘z)=[("“' +("”‘—iﬂ]' =(C.h)’1/-L. (20)

7;! .7“ p. d:

l h

Substituting the known solution obtained with a constant value of the K coef—
ficient into the right-hand side of formula (20) [4], we obtain

6 - (2e-l I.--l )H‘.‘ (2!“ “-1 ‘IIZ
r- a ”'5' — a“ )‘i‘ '- ' (21)

K' = (cm- x, c, = (£)"‘—.

ill

With a variable K coefficient, K = m2
(2("u" )ll? ’3'? (2‘—=P-l “'2

t
L... ______._______~

AtRer)(l-Re;‘”) (xm—e")”‘::o A (Rernl— Re;'") ’ (22)

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WIVN'I \l I'M "VI \

"m nu. >.=u.//. u3=I*-|;p.. Luz/sac.

T = (f6.- l-I.'2 u. Ar“, Re, = “a Lé-Il/Ko. A (RC!) =
= ”2“ + 2:.‘ln Rer)’ —- lj' ._1]m'

F; is the rate of turbulent dissipation.

    

E

2: 90 days my

4

Fig. 3. Temperature of sea surface (a) and temperature isolines (b). l)p- 75-10‘5,
x0 - 1; up - 75-10-5, x0 - 0.1; 3);; - 75-10-5, “o - a; :00 - 3°10‘3cm‘1, x0 -
8 cm2/sec. 0) FLEX data.

A decrease in the stratification parameter P(}t>0) under the influence of a de-
crease in wind stress or an increase in stable stratification leads to a decrease

in depth h and an increase in the ck coefficient, formulas (21), (22). For the
characteristic u-vslues in the ocean, equal to 10'1, l. 10, in formula (21) Cu -
0.29; 0.09; 0.029; and in formula (22) cu - 0.13; 0.035; 0.009 respectively.

Figure 2b shows the results of computations with a variable Ck coefficient. A con-
siderable increase in the Ck coefficient is poorly reflected in the evolution of
sea surface temperature. The principal parameter to which surface temperature is
sensitive was the value of the K0 coefficient and to a lesser degree the value of

the Ck coefficient.

The reconstructed surface temperature variation is exaggerated, especially after 37
days. At this time a storm occurred in the polygon and there was a marked de—
crease in heat content of the sea (see Fig. 1). This effect is not noted in the

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. I'SE 0N!)

conputed entry of heat into the sea. This difference can be caused by the measure-
ment error and the inaccuracy in the computation formulas for the heat flow. At
this time the measurements were made 80 km from the polygon. Hith an increase in
wind velocity the Cc and CY coefficients increase; failure to take this effect
into account gives up to a 51 understatement for the computed flow of apparent
heat and an understatement of the latent heat of evaporation up to 71 [5). In ad-
dition, frictional stress can be understated up to 602 due to the averaging of
wind velocity, and not its square. The mean value of the drag coefficient, evalu-
ated for FLEX data using the formula [7]

c, =(I.o+o.07227,:no-=, i; in m/sec, (23)

is correct in the case of a neutral stratification, equal to 1.4-10‘3. The total
heat influx, computed with this CD value, differs from the preceding by approxim-
ately 12.

Another distinct difference in the data was noted in the neighborhood of 60 days.
The surface temperature was below the data. The reason is also attributable to

the difference between measurement of heat content of the sea and heat entry into
the sea. At this time there was a high level of heat entry into the sea when there
was a very weak wind. Under such conditions the errors in measuring meteorological
parameters and computations of heat balance components at the sea surface should
be small. Accordingly the difference between the heat content and heat influx into
the sea was attributable to horizontal advection.

Figure 2b also shows the role of vertical resolution. The conclusion follows from
this that the result can be improved by making the computation grid more detailed.

An analysis of the computations shows that a particularly strong discrepancy with
the data is noted during the time of heating of the sea when there is no wind. At
such moments turbulent exchange is absent and therefore the surface teaperature
increases sharply in comparison with the data. A smoothing of this effect is at-
tained by an increase in the a priori K0 coefficient (Koarlo cm2/sec) or the dis-
tribution of the short-wave radiation with depth.

2) Four computations were made taking into account short-wave radiation in equa-
tion (14) (see Fig. 3). The ck coefficient in these computations is equal to 0.05.
The characteristic value of the K2 coefficient in this case is 0.1-4 cmzlsec. Hith
an increase in the K0 parameter t e surface temperature values_decrease and the
isotherms are deepened (Fig. 3b). In these computations the surface temperature

is less sensitive to the a priori coefficient K0, as was the case in the preced-

ing computations.

The absorption coefficient‘B exerts an influence on the surface temperature field
and the depth of the isotherms (Fig. 3). An increase in the absorption coefficient
B unexpectedly reduced the surface temperature. We will examine the stationary
solution of the thermal conductivity equation (14) with the constant coefficient

K:
Cp‘h'T:(z)=Fl(e'3‘—l)+(F,-! F‘s-FF”). (24)

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

T(:) = T”? %:Q., - 13%;: 1'” - r” I. (26)
Fr F:, F”. F,>0._
The surface temperature value
T. = r~+%«~00”7=ﬂr€7“ —e-'”) (25)
decreases with a decrease in the‘ﬁ parameter:
. 1—7;: ﬁn _ e4 M.I _' =7th e—au )0. (26)

The computations indicated an inverse effect. This can be attributed to a change
in the K value with a change in the ﬂ parameter:

F
in? = - $00. + "ix-3'2?“ ‘ "M" (27’

The sign of this expression is not dependent on the R value and is determined by

the expression F

310 —e-M;—H(F,—F, —F,— 1-3020. (28)

If PI )FB 4- PE + 1’“ (this is correct during the daytime). then expression (28) can
be simplified:

i; _Hr,=F,(7'§—no')<o.'

and with characteristic ﬂ values with an increase in the K coefficient there is a
decrease in the T3 value.

If PB + FE + PR)?! (this condition is satisfied at nighttime), then aTsla K>O
and with an increase in the K coefficient there is an increase in the T3 value. A
change in the absorption coefficient B leads to a change in the K coefficient and
it determined the variation of surface temperature.

The distribution of short-wave radiation with depth improved the result, especial-
ly the profiles of the isotherms in depth-time coordinates. There was no further
improvement in the temperature regime by careful choice of the ﬁnd K0 coeffic-
ients. The reason for this is the discrepancy in data on the change in heat con-
tent and the computed entry of heat into the sea. In this connection it is desir—
able to improve the formulas for computing the heat balance components at the sea
surface using FLEX data.

The authors express appreciation to Professor Yu. Sunderman for kindly affording
the opportunity for carrying out this study.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kochergin, V. P.. Klimk, V. I. and Sukhorukov, V. I... "Romance“ Layer of
the Ocean Hithin the Framework of 'Differential' Models," CHISLENNYYE HETODY
WIKI SFLOSHNOY SRDY (Numerical Methods in Hechanics of a Continuous Hedi-
un), Novosibirsk, Vol 8, No 5, 1977.

Kraua. Ye., VZAYPDDEYSTVIYE ATHOSFERY I OKEANA (Interaction Between the Anno-
sphere and Ocean), Leningrad, 1976.

Harchuk, G. 1., et al.. HATMTICHESKIYE MODELI ‘rSlRKULYA’l'SII V OKEANE (Mathe-
matical Models of Circulation in the Ocean), Novosibirsk, Nauka, 1980.

Harchuk, G. 1., Kochergin, V. P., Klimok, V. I. and Sukhorukov, V. A.. "Anal—
ytical Solutions for Elonan Turbulent Layer in the Ocean," DOKLADY AN SSSR
(Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 267, No l, 1979.

omnomcin. PIZIKA OKEANA (Oceanology. Oceanic Physics), Vol 1, GlDROPIZIKA
OKEANA (Oceanic Hydrophysics), Moscow, Nauka, 1978.

Sanarskiy. A. A., TEORIYA RAZNOSTNYKH SW (Theory of Difference Schemes), Mos-
cow, Nauka. 1977.

Deacon, E. L. and Webb, E. K., "Interchange of Properties Between Sea and Air,”
THE SEA: IDEAS AND OBSERVATIONS, Vol 1. 1962.

Haney. R. 1... "Surface Thermal Boundary Condition for Ocean Circulation Models,"
J. PHYS. OCFAMCRH V01 1. No lo. 1971.

77

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE13NIA

UDC 551.465.6(262.5)

HYDROLOGICAL STRUCTURE AND ENERGY RESERVES 0P RINGS IN THE MAIN BLACK SBA CURRENT

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
8 May 80) pp 86—93

[Article by A. S. Blatov. candidate of geographical sciences, Moscow State Univer-
sxty]

[Text] Abstract: It was established on the basis of
data from two synchronous hydrological surveys
in the zone of the main Black Sea current that
the process of ring formation in the Black Sea
is associated with the meandering of the main
Black Sea current. It is shown that the vertical
hydrological structure of the rings, discovered
along the coast of Anatolia and in the southeast-
ern part of the sea, is similar in structure to
the rings of intensive boundary currents. The
author gives an evaluation of the available poten~
tial and kinetic energy of the rings, on the ba-
sis of which it is concluded that the rings are
expressed less intensively in the Black Sea.

Due to the implementation of numerous oceanographic expeditions ("Poligon-70."
MODE, POLIHODE). as well as the successes of satellite oceanology, the study of
mesoscale and synoptic eddy (ring) formations in the ocean has considerably ad-
vanced. Researchers working in this field are faced with the task of generalis-
ing available observational data on such oceanic formations for the purpose of
formulating physically valid models of the formation and evolution of rings in
the ocean, standardization and classification of their spatial-temporal paramet-
ers. In contrast to the ocean, in internal seas, such as the Black Sea, there
has been very little study of these formations. However, in water bodies of this
type (great depths, considerable extent, presence of an intensive well-developed
main pycnocline and intermediate layers) the ring-formation processes can trans-
pire the same as in the ocean. The authors of [l], on the basis of data from two
hydrological surveys in the zone of the main Black Sea current in the neighbor-
hood of the Anatolian coast, carried out in July-August 1976 under the national
program for Joint Multisided Investigations of the Black Sea (SKOICh -- Sovmest-
nyye Kompleksnyye Issledovaniya Chernogo Horya), as well as data from observa-
tions of currents at three buoy stations. employing hydrological criteria, defin-
ed a powerful anticyclonic eddy and proposed an explanation of the mechanism of

78
FOR‘0511CLAL.US£GDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its formation. related to intensive meandering of the Black See current. The hy-
pothesea expressed in [1] concerning the mechanism of formation of this eddy are
more rigorously confirmed by additional in situ observations, and this constitutes
the subject of this study. in which we subject to further analysis the hydrological
observations used in [1], process and analyze data from a hydrological survey nade
in the southeastern part of the Black Sea carried out during November-December
1977. In addition. we epployed generalized data from synchronous hydrological
surveys in the 1950's and long-term instrumental observations of currents carried
out in the Black Sea.

A generalization of all the available observations of currents in the zone of the

main Black Sea current. and also the processing of the long-term mass of hydrolog-
ical data available at the Department of Oceanology at Moscow State University,

made it possible to confirm the prevailing idea that the main Black Sea current.
prepagating along the coast, occupies the entire sea as a cyclonic ring. It was
found that a cyclonic character of the circulation is observed over the course of
the entire year; the main characteristic of the seasonal restructuring of the
field of currents is attenuation of the cyclonic flow from winter to seiner. This
is somewhat contradictory to current concepts that a cyclonic circulation is ob-
served in 702 of the cases, whereas in 302 of the cases there is an anticyclonic
circulation. Restructuring to the latter is most probable in sunset [5].

 

Fig. 1. Position of axis of main Black Sea current according to data from synchron-
ous surveys in the 1950's. 1) 1951; 2) 1952; 3) 1953; l.) 1957; 5) mean position.

It was established on the basis of repeated surveys of currents with the 3411'“ ap-
paratus that the'min Black Sea current has the form of a narrow jet whose width
is 40-80 km. The maximum velocities in the jet (current axis) can attain 100-150
cm/sec. A comparison of the position of the current axis with the data from syn-
chronous hydrological surveys revealed that the main Black Sea current at depth
is associated with regions of increased gradients of thermohaline characteristics
and can be regarded as a boundary jet current separating the freshened waters of

* The 5111' survey data were provided through the courtesy of V. I. Zats.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-K'IAI. USP. ONLY

the coastal regions from the relatively saline waters of the abyssal zone of
the Black Sea. It was found that on the basis of hydrological criteria it is
possible to identify the position of the main Black Sea current, in particular,
to discriminate the axis of the current at a depth of 100 n on the basis of the

20°/oo isohal ine.

 

Fig. 2. Salinity field at the 100-111 horizon. a) in July 1976 along the shores of
Anatolia; b) in November—December 1977 in the southeastern part of the sea.

Figure 1 shows the position of the axis of the main Black Sea current at the 100-111
horizon obtained on the basis of data from synchronous surveys of the 1950's. Fig-
ure 1 shows the "wandering" of the main Black Sea current, which experiences
wavelike fluctuations, approaching the shore and withdrawing from it. Three
regions of the strongest meandering of the main Black Sea current are defined:

the region of the Anatolian coast (to the east of Cape Sinop), the southeastern
region of the Caucasus coast and the region of dropoff of the depths of

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the northwestern part of the Black Sea.

According to the hypothesis proposed in [l]. the main reason for the meandering
is the baroclinic instability of the main Black Sea current. Under definite con-
ditions (with an increase in wave disturbances of the main Black Sea current)
individual rings similar to those discovered in [1] can be formed in its zone.
Therefore, the process of meandering and ring formation in the zone of the main
Black Sea Current can be regarded as a manifestation of frontal instability of
the type of the Gulf Stream instability to the east of Cape Hatteras and other
boundary currents. It therefore follows that the rings in the zone of the main
Black Sea current must have properties similar to the properties of the Gulf
Stream rings.

It is well known [a] that one of the principal properties of the rings is an asym-
metry of the formation relative to the flow axis: along one side of the current
there is formation of only anticyclonic rings, whereas along the other side only
cyclonic rings are formed. Still another important property of the rings is that
the waters within these rings hays an origin which differs from the waters sur-
rounding them. Accordingly, on the basis of data from hydrological surveys they
can be discriminated on the basis of the difference in temperature and salinity
of their internal parts and the surrounding water. In addition, in the vertical
hydrological structure of the rings there is a substantial increase or decrease
(depending on the vorticity sign) in the vertical thickness of the intermediate
layers in comparison with the surrounding waters (for example, the presence of

a vertically thick interlayer of "18°" water in the anticyclonic rings of the
Gulf Stream).

we will attempt to trace whether the noted properties are observed in the hori-
zontal and vertical structure of ring formations in the Black Sea. Figure 2
shows the salinity fields at the loo-m horizon along the shores of Anatolia
(Fig. 2a) and in the southeastern part of the sea (Fig. 2b). Along the coast of
Anatolia in July of 1976 it was easy to trace two meanders, one of which is in a
stage of detachment from the main Black Sea current and in actuality constitutes
an anticyclonic eddy in which the salinity is 0.70-1.00°/oo less than the salin-
ity of the surrounding waters. In the southeastern part of the sea (Fig. 2b)
there are two cyclonic eddies detached from the main Black Sea current, whose
axis corresponds to 200/00. The eddies are characterized by increased salinity
values. which at their centers differ from the salinity of the surrounding
waters by 0.5-0.90/oo.

The ring along the Anatolian coast has an ellipsoidal configuration; the degree
of elongation of the eddy (the ratio of its greater axis (92 km) to its lesser
axis (52 km)) is 1.80. This ring. as was indicated in [l], is traced on the basis
of hydrological characteristics to the horizons 400-500 m.

The rings in the southeastern part of the sea have an almost regular circular con-
figuration with mean radii tor the first ring of 28 km and for the second —- 30

km; the degrees of elongation are 1.15 and 1.18 respectively. Vertically the
rings are elongated to a considerably lesser degree than along the Anatolian coast

and are traced in the upper layer to a depth of 200 m.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Vertical temperature sections. a) along lesser axis of anticyclonic eddy
along coast of Anatolia; b) through cyclonic eddy in southeastern part of sea. The
position of the sections is shown in Fig. 2. The cold intermediate layer is repre-
sented by shading.

The anticyclonic ring along the coast of Anatolia was formed to the left of the
main Black Sea current (looking along the current), whereas the cyclonic rings in
the southeastern part of the sea were formed on the right side of the current. In
addition. the anticyclonic ring was formed from less saline waters of the coastal
zone, whereas the cyclonic rings were formed from the more saline waters of the
abyssal regions of the sea, that is, apparently there is an analogy with oceanic
frontal eddies-rings. This is also confirmed by the characteristics of the ver-
tical hydrological structure. It is well known that a distinguishing characteris-
tic of the distribution of the cold intermediate layer (CIL) over the surface of
the Black Sea is a decrease in its thickness in the abysssl regions and an in-
crease in the thickness of the GIL in the coastal regions. Accordingly, in the
anticyclonic ring formed from the coastal waters there should be an increase in
the thickness of the CIL, whereas in the cyclonic rings this thickness should de-
crease. Figure 3 shows the vertical temperature sections for an anticyclonic ring
(Fig. 3a) and a cyclonic ring (Fig. 3b); it is shown that there is a correspond-
ing increase and decrease in the thickness of the CIL in comparison with its
thickness in the surrounding waters. In addition, the noted characteristics of
propagation of cold intermediate waters in the observed eddy formations are evi—
dence of intensive vertical movements in ring zones*. Thus, on the basis of the
correspondence between the characteristics of the rings discovered in the Black
Sea and the main properties of the rings in the Gulf Stream it can be concluded
that the formation of rings of the mentioned spatial scales (about 60-90 km) oc-
curs as a result of frontal instability of the main Black Sea current, having a
jetlike character.

' The possibility of the existence of such movements in the southeastern part of
the sea was for the first time noted by A. D. Dobrovol'skiy in [3].

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. la. Relative dynamic topography in zone of anticyclonic ring for different sur-
faces. a) sea surface; b) SO-decibar surface; c) 100 db; d) 200 db; e) 300 db; f)
500 db. The zero surface is 1000 db. The arrows indicate the mean vectors of cur-
rent velocities measured at automatic buoy stations.

In many studies devoted to investigation of rings in the Gulf Stream and other
boundary currents it has been demonstrated that the field of currents in the edd-
ies is in a quasigeostrophic regime. In order to check this point for the rings
of the main Black Sea current we carried out dynamic processing of data for the
used synchronous surveys and then made a comparison at the dynamic maps with the
results of instrumental observations of currents carried out at this same time in
this same region. As the zero reference surface the moo-db surface was selected.
Figured shows maps of the relative dynamic topography for different surfaces in
the region of ring propagation along the coast of Anatolia, from which it can be
seen that the anticyclonic ring discriminated earlier on the basis of the distrib-
ution of salinity and temperature is very clearly traced in the field of geo-
strophic currents and is most clearly expressed at the 50 and 100 db surfaces; at
the sea surface the ring is traced somewhat less clearly (it occupies a lesser
area), evidently due to the distorting influence of the intensive seasonal ther-
mocl ine, whose formation in the zone of the main Black Sea current leads to a de-
crease in the differences in dynamic heights at the sea surface in sumer. The
area occupied by the ring and the differentials in dynamic heights at the ZOO-db
surface are considerably less than at 0, SO and 100 db. whereas at the 300 and 500
db surfaces there is only one closed dynamic contour line. outlining a still less-
er area than at the ZOO-db surface. All this is evidence that vertically the anti-
cyclonic ring has a conical configuration.

Estimates of geostrnphic velocities were made for sections along the longer and
shorter axes of the ring. These revealed that the velocities on the periphery for
the shorter axis at the surface attained 60 cm/sec. and at the 50-11: horizon even
65 cm/sec; the mean weighted velocity in this section of the upper 200-m layer
was SO cn/sec, whereas on the greater axis of the eddy it was less (20 cmlsec).

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A comparison of the velocities of the geostrophic currents with the parameters

of currents averaged for the entire time of observations at the automatic buoy
stations in the eddy zone indicated their good correspondence with respect to both
absolute value and direction of the velocity vector at the horizons 25. 50, 75 and
100 m (Pig. 4). This is evidence of quasigeostrophicity of the field of currents

in the anticyclonic ring. Similar dynamic computations were made using survey data
for the southeastern part of the sea. These computations indicated the presence of
cyclonic rings at the surface and in the water layer to the zoo-db surface, but the
intensity of the geostrophic circulation attenuated considerably in comparison with
the anticyclonic ring. The maximum velocities of the geostrophic currents on the
periphery of the rings are 23 cm/sec.

It is of great interest to estimate the kinetic energy (KB) and available potential
energy (APE) of the rings and also the relationship between them because such es-
timates can tell about the stage in development of the rings and then also about
their lifetime. without drawing upon data from long-term observations of the hydro-
logical structure of such eddy formations.

The kinetic energy of the rings was estimated without taking into account the kin-
etic energy of the transfer movement, that is. only the KB of rotational motion
was computed:

u M
I c '2 z “I - =

= 91”de ( (R2'I'R2_) W 52,,
KB TI-Vl T," III T l t l ‘ (1)
where i is the number of ring "circles" included in the computations. j is the num-
ber of layers vertically. £521 is the thickness of the layer in dimensionless
units, £31n1 is the mass of a ring circle of a unit thickness, R1 and R1_1 are the
external and internal radii of the ring circle, aJE is the mean (angular) velocity

of rotation of the ring circle 1.

The available potential energy was computed using the formula
' (I .II .\
m -_.',._ \ ( \ [rapid/7) dS~.—' {[2 p,(a9),Ap,]As,. <2)
‘1‘ m 5.. . 95‘ nu .‘al '
where i and j are the same as for (1), (3:3 is the thickness of the layers in

pressure units, (381 is the area of the ring circle, (6 )j is the mean density
anomaly for a ring circle and pj is pressure at the j horizon; g is the accelera-

tion of free falling. [Do is the mean density of sea water.

In the computations it was assumed that M - 3, N I 11 for an anticyclonic ring and
M - 2 and N = 8 for cyclonic rings. that is, the entire volume occupied by rings
was broken down into three circles ”inbedded" in one another and 11 vertical lay-
ers for an anticyclonic ring; and for cyclonic rings -- 2 circles and 8 layers.

The mean density anomalies (6p) for the circle were obtained by averaging the
density anomalies at hydrological stations falling in the area of the correspond-
ing circle. The density anomalies for an anticyclonic ring were computed as devi-
ations from the undisturbed density field in the abyasal part of the Black Sea,
and for a cyclonic ring -- from the undisturbed density field in the coastal re-
gions of the southeastern part of the sea.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1 gives computed data for APE and K2 in several layers for an anticyclonic
ring along the Anatolian coast and one cyclonic ring in the southeastern part of
the sea.

The table shows that more than 851 of the total mechanical energy of an anticyclon-
ic ring can be assigned to APR and the ratio of K3 to APE is 0.13. that is, APE
exceeds K£ by approximately an order of magnitude. More than 902 of the APE is con-
tained in the main pyenocline (between the contour lines 75 and 150 meters), where-
as 592 of the K5 is concentrated in the 100-m layer. In the upper ZOO-m layer there
is concentration of more than 902 of the K3 in the ring. Such a relationship of
APE and KB and their vertical distribution are in good agreement with similar es-
timates made for Gulf Stream rings [6, 7]. However, with respect to absolute val—
ues the estimates obtained differ from those cited in [6, 7] by two orders of mag-
nitude: APE values of about 1024 erg were obtained for Gulf Stream rings. This is
an indication that less intensive rings are formed in the Black Sea during meander-
ing of the main flow.

Table 1

Distribution of Available Potential Energy (APE. 1020 erg) and Kinetic Energy KB.
1020 erg) With Depth in Anticyclonic and Cyclonic Rings

Thickness of layer, m KB APE Thickness of layer, m KE APE
Anticyclonic ring Cyclonic ring

0-100 7.50 27.9 0-50 1.16 1.53
100-200 4.32 56.7 50-100 0.73 2.68
200-300 0.68 6.3 100-150 0.29 0.82
300-400 0.12 2.2 150-200 0.18 0.35
600-500 0.07 0.9 200-300 0.05 0.10
Total energy 12.69 96.0 2.61 5.48

For cyclonic rings in the southeastern part of the Black Sea, which had lesser
dimensions and vertical thickness, an estimate of total mechanical energy was ob-
tained (1020 erg). For the ring situated closer to the acre of the main Black Sea
flow the relationship between KB and APE is 0.44. The APE accounts for 701 of the
entire energy in this ring and in the second cyclonic ring, more distant from the
main Black Sea current, APE already accounts for 552 of the entire energy of the
ring; more than 502 of the RE is concentrated in the upper SO-m layer.

Since the anticyclonic ring along the Anatolian coast was in a stage of detachment
from the main Black Sea current, it can be considered a young dynamic formation. It
is characterized by a low value of the KE-APE ratio - 0.13. The rings in the south-
eastern part are completely separated from the main Black Sea current eddies. The
ring formation conditions in this region are such that the region of propagation

of the rings is limited on one side by the main Black Sea current. and on the other
by the shoreline. This gives basis for assuming that the ring situated at a greater
distance from the zone of the main Black Sea current was formed earlier than the
ring situated closer to the main Black Sea current. The ratio of K! to APR for the

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

less old ring was 0.44 and for the older ring was 0.81.

A comparison of these estimates of K2 and APE and their relationships makes it pos-
sible to propose the following mechanism of redistribution of energy during the
evolution of the rings: in the process of meandering of the jet streams and ring
formation a definite reserve of both KB and APE is created in the rings. The ini-
tial vertical distribution of K5 and AP: is similar to that obtained for an anti-
cyclonic ring along the Anatolian coast. In the course of evolution of the rings
the RE dissipates due to friction (and possibly due to the excitation of internal
wave processes [2]). but the reserves of APE are constantly replenished, the ratio
of K3 to APE constantly increases and the K3 is concentrated in a surface layer
which is increasingly thin vertically. In the absence of additional sources of
energy of meteorological or topogenic character the rings. expending the entire
reserve of APE, degenerate. To be sure, the cited scheme for energy redistribution
during the evolution of rings is a qualitative picture and requires further con-
firmation by experimental data and theoretical computations.

Thus, as a result of detailed processing and analysis of the materials from two
surveys it was possible to confirm the hypothesis expressed earlier [1] that in
the Black Sea there can be a process of ring formation as a result of frontal in-
stability of the main Black Sea current, having a jet character. It was noted that
in the vertical structure of the rings and the distribution of kinetic energy and
available potential energy in them in the Black Sea there is much in common with
the Gulf Stream rings and rings in other boundary currents. However, in the Black
Sea the rings are expressed less intensively.

In conclusion the author expresses appreciation to A. D. Dobrovol'skiy, A. N. Ko-
sarev and Yu. A. Ivanov for comments and advice given in discussion of the work.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Blatov, A. S. and Ivanov, V. A., "Ring Formation in the Black Sea," KOHPLEKS-
NYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA CHERNOGO HORYA (Hultisided Investigations in the Black
Sea), Sevastopol’, 1979.

2. Vlatov, A. S. and Ivanov, V. A., "Problem of the Mesoscale Variability of
Oceanological Characteristics in the Black Sea." KOHPLBKSNYYE ISSLEDOVANIYA
CHERNOGO HORYA, Sevastopol', 1979.

3. Dobrovol‘skiy, A. 0.. "Dynamic Hap of the Eastern Part of the Black Sea."
IZV. GIDROMET. INSTITUTA CHERNOGO I AZOVSKDGO HDREY (News of the Hydrometeor-
ological Institute of the Black Sea and Sea of Azov), No l, 1933.

4. OKEANOLOGIYA. FIZIKA OKEANA. GIDROFIZIKA OKEANA (Oceanology. Ocean Physics.
Ocean Hydrophysics), Vol 1. Moscow, Nauka, 1978.

S. FilippOV, D. H., TSIRKULYATSIYA I STRUKTURA VOD CHERNOGO HORYA (Circulation
and Structure of Black Sea Waters). Moscow, Nauka, 1968.

6. Barrett. J. R.. "Available Potential Energy of Gulf Stream Rings," DEEP-SEA
RES., Vol 18, No 12, 1971.

7. Richardson, 9., "Gulf Stream Rings," OCEANUS, Vol 19, No 3, 1976.
86

FOR OFFICIAL l SE ONLY
F0!‘0FF“JAI.USE(MVLV

UDC 556.(556.2+072)(6"4.2)
NUMERICAL MODELING OF WIND-DRIVEN CURRENTS IN LAKES

Moscow HETBOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
28 Oct 80) PP 94—101

[Article by A. G. Bogachev, c. B. Volkova. V. I. Kvon, candidate of physical and
mathematical sciences, and T. N. Filatova, candidate of geographical sciences,

Tiyrikoya Lake Station. Estonian Administration of Hydrometeorology and Environ-
mental Monitoring. Institute of Hydrodynamics. Siberian Department, USSR Academy

of Sciences, and State Hydrological Institute]

[Abstract] Soviet and foreign authors have now developed a number of mathematical
models to be used in computations of wind currents in seas and internal water bod—
ies. However, not one of these models has been evaluated using sufficiently reli-
able in situ data. This article describes a new mathematical model and gives the
results of its use for computations of wind-driven currents in chudskoye Lake.
This water body was selected because unique experimental data on currents were
available which have been generalized in the form of maps of currents character-
izing a steady or near-steady process of transport of waters with winds of differ-
ent directions. The modeling problem was solved numerically by the implicit dif-
ference schemes method. The model examined here was used in computing the vector
fields of currents at different horizons and also computing elementary discharges
of Chudskoye Lake. Particular attention was given to investigation of the spatial
restructuring of the vector field with an increase in depth since the intermediate
horizons are poorly supplied with in situ measurement data. A study was also made
of stability of the vector fields of currents as a function of wind velocity. dis-
charge of the Narva River and the Coriolis parameter. A comparison of computations
made using this model and computations made using other models revealed that the
model defined in this article gives superior results. In particular, there is

more precise allowance for the coefficient of turbulent viscosity. The model is
recommended for computations of wind-driven currents in other internal water
bodies. Figures 2, tables 1; references 16: 15 Russian, 1 Western.

87
FOIIOIIICIALIJSEINNLY
FOIINHHIJA1.USE(NVLY

UDC 551.(54+55)(-062.4)

STRUCTURE OF ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE AND "IND NEAR THE BQUATOR IN THE CENTRAL PART OF
THE PACIFIC OCEAN

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
19 Sep 80) pp 102-105

[Article by N. A. Romanova. L. V. Kool' and Yu. A. Romanov, Institute of Oceannl-
osyl

[Abstract] During February-March 1980, on the 26th voyage of the scientific re-
search ship "Dmitriy Mendeleyev," specialists carried out hydrological investiga-
tions in the central part of the Pacific Ocean, in an equatorial polygon bounded
on the east and west by 163 and 167°" and 2° latitude on both sides of the equator.
While working in the polygon the ship repeatedly crossed the equator. During the
period 6-26 March hourly meteorological observations were made (total number of ob-
servations 504). These observational data were used in clarifying the real perman-
ent features of the pressure and wind fields near the equator. It was found that

at the equator the frequency of recurrence of the southerly. northerly and zero
values of the meridional component was almost identical. To the north of the equa-
tor it was the southerly component which predominated, whereas to the south it was
the northerly componenth At a greater distance from the equator the v distribution
was not so symmetric: in the northern hemisphere winds with northerly and souther-
ly components were almost identical with respect to frequency of recurrence; in

the southern hemisphere there is a predominance of winds with a northerly compon-
ent. The frequency of recurrence of strictly easterly winds decreases with increas-
ing distance from the equator to the north and south. Despite a minimum of atmo-
spheric pressure at the equator. there is a divergence of air flows, not a con-
vergence. The deviation of the easterly flow to the south in the northern hemi-
sphere and to the north in the southern hemisphere near the equator is evidence of
manifestation of Coriolis force. The asymmetry of deflection of the vectors on both
sides of the equator is apparently evidence of the superposing of the macroscale
circulation of both hemispheres on the easterly flow directed along the equator.
The wind distribution near the equator determined from observations on this voyage
agrees with the mean long-term wind field for March described by K. "yrtki and

G. Meyers (Hawaii Institute of Geophysics. 1975). Figures 2, tables 3; references
3: 2 Russian, 1 Western.

88

lillCﬂﬂﬂClAl.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAI.USE2CNVLY

UDC 551.576.11:566.11
ROLE OF HYDROGEN PEROXIDE (H202) IN THE FORMATION OF HESOSPHERIC CLO.uS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
1 Feb 80) pp 105-107

[Article by A. F. Kashtanov and B. H. Novikov, candidate of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences]

[Abstract] The role of atmospheric components other than water vapor in the forma-
tion of mesospheric clouds has been inadequately studied. Hydrogen peroxide (H202)
warrants attention in this connection. Until now its role in mesospheric processes
has been neglected because it is a relatively unstable compound and its atmospheric
content has not been precisely known. However, studies show that 8202 in its phys-
icochemical properties is more active in the condensation process than water vapor.
Computations show that the quantity of H20 molecules for d I 0.3 m is 6.72.108
cm‘-, which is ensured with a corresponding supersaturation in t e mesopause re-
gion. In the mesosphere there are regions where the H202 concentra::Jn is 107-108
cm‘3. This is adequate for the formation of mesos heric clouds with a mean diameter
of the particles 0.1y.m and a concentration 1 cm‘ . An appropriate supersaturation
is ensured with a temperature less than 160°K. It is clear that hydrogen peroxide
can play the role of primary condensation nuclei on which water droplets and ice
crystals, constituting a mesospheric cloud, are subsequently formed. However, the
lack of direct measurements of hydrogen peroxide concentration in the stratosphere
and mesosphere make it possible to consider the conclusions drawn in this article

to be only one of the possible mechanisms explaining condensation processes in the
mesospherc. Figures 1, tables 2; references 10: 8 Russian, 2 western.

89
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.5:633.16

INFLUENCE OF METEOROLOGICAL FACTORS ON THE YIELD 01’ SPRING “HEAT

Moscow HETEDROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
13 Oct 80) pp 107-110

[Article by V. N. Garmashov, doctor of agricultural sciences, and A. N. Selivanov.
candidate of biological sciences. All-Union Selection-Genetic Institute]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of many years of
experiments it is demonstrated that for
the formation of a high yield of spring
barley the factors of the greatest impor-
tance are not autumn-winter precipitation
and the reserves of productive moisture
in the meter soil layer by the onset of
the sowing period. but spring-summer pre-
cipitation. and most importantly, the pre-
cipitation falling during the tillering-
leaf tube formation period, which occurs
most frequently in May. At this time there are
adequately good moisture reserves in the
halfdmeter and especially in the cultivated
soil layer where a considerable part of the
spring barley root system is situated.

The cultivation of spring barley in the southern part of the Ukraine involves

the nrzstive influence of moisture shortage and increased temperatures. However,
as noted by A. Shishkin [10]. the reason for drought in the steppe zone must not
be sought in the paucity of the total quantity of precipitation in the course of
the year, but in its nonuniform distribution. According to the data of I. B. Buch-
inskiy [3]. over a period of 97 years (1872-1968) in Odesskaya Ohlast there were
41 years with a dry spring. Accordingly. it is assumed [2, A. 6. 9] that under
these cenditions a guarantee of the yield of spring grains will be the moisture
accumulated during the autumn-winter period.

However, other researchers [1, 5, 81 have come to the conclusion that the yield of
spring barley to a considerable degree is dependent on the weather characteristics

of the growing season.

In this connection it seems of interest to clarify how the moisture supply and tem-
perature exert an influence on formation of the yield of spring barley under the
conditions prevailing in the southern part of the Ukraine.'Compering the data on
the yield of the varieties Chernomorets and Nutans 265 obtained in experiments

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the quantity of autumn-winter precipitation and the moisture reserves in the
meter soil layer by the onset of the barley sowing period. we concluded that these
indices cannot serve as a reliable measure determining the yield level (Table 1).
More than 300 mm of precipitation fell during August-March in 1973, 1977 and 1978.
but the yield was different -- from 12.5 to 62.5 centners/heetare; however, in
1975 only half as much precipitation fell (153 mm) but the yield was the highest
in these years -- up to 49.0 centners/hectare.

A similar picture is also obtained when comparing the yield with the moisture re-
serves in the soil at the beginning of the barley sowing season. A high grain yield
was obtained with both low moisture reserves (1974. 1976) and when there were high
moisture reserves (1973. 1978), whereas the minimum yield in 1977 was with spring
moisture reserves close to the best during this period. For the Chernomorets var-
iety the correlation coefficient between these values was -0.30 and for the Nutans
24A variety it was -0.37.

The precipitation total during the growing season also did not constitute values
determining the yield because the minimum yield corresponded to the maximum pre-
cipitation sum (1977). However, an analysis indicated that the greatest influence
on the yield was from rains falling in May, as is indicated by the correlation co-

efficient, which for the Chernomorets variety was 0.84 and for the Nutans 246 var—
iety was 0.91. In other months the correlation was not significant.

The high dependence of the yield of spring barley on May rains is attributable

to the fact that in this month there is tiliering. formation and growth of crown
roots, on whose development is subsequently dependent the level of support of the
above-ground mass with water and nutrients, as well as a differentiation of the
apical cone into spikelets, which subsequently determine the size of the ear and
its productivity. During this period it is not only moisture supply conditions
which are of importance, but also the temperature factor. Precisely in May the
higher air temperature has a negative effect on the future yield, whereas at the
beginning of the growing season its positive influence is noted. The correlation
coefficient is equal to -0.54 and 0.52 respectively (Nutsns 244 variety).

It is well known that the prevailing weather conditions to a considerable degree
can change the dates of onset of individual phases in growth and development and
in the last analysis the length of the growing season for spring barley. It was
therefore of interest to ascertain how changes in the levels of the studied fac-
tors exert an influence on the final result -- the grain yield -- not by calendar
periods (months), but in individual corresponding segments of the growing season.
For this purpose we made computations of the correlation between yield and the
quantity of precipitation and the mean daily air temperature by interphase per-
iods and obtained the following results (table 2).

Between sowing and the tillering phase the increase in air temperature exerted a
positive influence on the growth and development of barley plants, which was re~
Elected thereafter in the yield. However, during the period when there was in-
tensive tillering and formation of the secondary root system the lower tempera-
tures were better, as is indicated by the negative correlation coefficient. The
reduced temperatures during this period, when the apical cone is in the third-
fourth stages of organogenesis, favor the formation of a great number of spike-
lets in the ear [7]. Later a negative correlation is also maintained between

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070034-3

2007102109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

c.0n H.0n
n.0u m.~a
n.¢c o.~e
w.o~ n.o~
o.oe o.o«
o.~q o.o<
gen nuance
acauaz locuozo
ouuuuo:

\muocucou . 3a;

A oases

we

on
co
co
and

No

hash

hp coauouuaquuun nosssolmcan;m

ac

co
«m
nc

an

no

«can

um
ad
Nn
«A
Nn

an

an:

3E .osucos

co

ac”
MN
on

mm
on

H«ng<

oo~ «ma
«an c¢a
«ma can
men Han
mn~ can
do“ nma
EB .m:«
as uaom no go»
.:o«ucu uco an uoaeﬂ
aunquoua _«0m nouoa
nun-.5: 5 9:530...
Iwcuuno o>uuuavoua
no Ham no no>vooo¢

Nun
awn
ann
oON
mmH

van

as .EOHuuuu
undocun Hausa:
unusuao uo Ham

vaour aoduun wcguam no acuuaauom ca avoauum uconuuuaa uo aaanaw aunumqox no ages

whoa
nn¢n
anon
mn¢n

en¢a

anon

know

92

FOI10FFKJA1.USE1DNLY

ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070034-3

2007102109:

APPROVEDFORRELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

yield and air temperature. but its closeness is reduced.

Table 2

Correlation Coefficient (r) Between Yield and Heteorological Factors by Growing
Seasons (During 1973-1978). Chernolorets Variety

Sowing- Sprouting- Tillering- Leaf tube Baring-total
sprouting tillering leaf tube formation— maturity
formation .earing

Yield and mean daily air temperature

0.27 0.63 -0.74 -0.45 -O.l7
Yield and quantity of precipitation
0.02 0.39 0.68 0.69 -0.05
Table 3

Development of Tillering Sprouts and Crown Roots in Dependence on Heather

Indices In "dry" years In "moist" years
Chernomorets Nutans 265 Chernomorets Nutans 2&6
Bushiness 1.6 1.8 2.4 2.9
Number of nodes, roots 2.2 2.6 A.8 5.1
Total maturity phase
Productive bushiness 1.2 1-3 2-1 2.7
Number of grains in ear 17.5 18.5 17.2 18.2

There is also a small correlation between precipitation and the yield, as with
air temperature, during the interphase tillering-stem growth stage, but in this
case it is positive. It follows from this that the period from the onset of
tillering to the onset of leaf tube formation is the most important in the fate
of the future yield of spring barley. An adequate quantity of precipitation in
the case of a low air temperature lays the basis for a high productivity of
plants, which later can be realized in a high yield, and vice versa. unfavor-
able conditions lead to a decrease in high productivity factors (Table 3).

The cited data indicate not only a considerable decrease in the tillering coef-
ficient and the number of nodal roots in barley plants in unfavorable years,

but also a decrease in their relationship. In a dry year for each tillering
sprout there are fewer roots than in the moist years. This leads to a worse
supply of the sprouts with water and nutrients, as a result of which a consider-
able percentage of them die out. And since the yield is closely related to pro-
ductive bushiness (correlation coefficient 0.84-0.91 in dependence on variety).
it becomes possible to understand the main reason for reduction in barley yield

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in years when there is hot and dry weather in the tillering phase.

The size of the ear and its productivity, it was found, cannot serve as a reliable
indicator of the yield level because these quantities are influenced, on the one
hand, by weather conditions, and on the other hand by the tillering stage. In the
case of great tillering there are fewer ears formed than when there is slight
tillering. In addition, soil fertility and the variety of barley are of impor-
tance. With the application of fertilizers the ears increase in size even in the
case of strong tillering. Among the biological peculiarities of the variety the
factor exerting the greatest influence on ear size is the sprout-forming capacity.
For example, in our experiments with Nutans 264 the number of grains in the ear
was less for the plants which thickened out well than for the Chernomorets variety.

The determination of the relationship between yield and moisture content of dif-
ferent soil layers during the growing season indicated that the closest correla—
tion was observed in the interphase period tillering-leaf tube formation with
layers 0—10 and 0-20 cm (r = 0.69 and 0.60 respectively). A less close correla-
tion was observed for the half-meter layer and especially with the content of
productive moisture in the meter layer. This can serve as an indirect indication
of the shallow positioning of the main mass of roots for spring barley.

Thus, our investigations indicated that the most important factors in the forma-
tion of a high yield of spring barley are not autumn-winter precipitation and
the reserves of productive moisture by the beginning of the sowing period in

the meter soil layer, but instead, the spring-summer precipitation and especial-
ly the precipitation falling during the tillering-leaf tube formation period, as
occurs most commonly in May. Good moisture reserves in the half-meter layer and
especially in the cultivated layer. where a considerable part of the root system
of spring barley is situated, are adequate for these purposes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Alpat'yev, A. M., "Rational Use of Precipitation - the Basis for Overcoming
Droughts," ACRDKLIMATICHESKIYE USLOVIYA STEPI UKRAINSKOY SSR I PUTI IKH
ULUSHENIYA (Agroclimatic Conditions of the Steppe in the Ukrainian SSR and
Ways to Improve Them), Kiev, Izd—vo AN UkSSR, 1950.

2. Borisonik, Z. 3., YACHMEN' YAROVOY (Spring Barley), Moscow, Kolos, 1976.
3. Buchinskiy, l. Ye., ZASUKHI, SUKHOVEI, PYL'NYYE 3031 NA UKRAINE I BOR'BA S
NIMI (Droughts, Drying Hinds, Dust Storms in the Ukraine and Contending

with Them), Kiev, Urozhay, 1970.

4. Verhin, A. A., ZASUKHA I BOR'BA S NEY V STEPI UKRAINY (Drought and Contending
With It in the Ukrainian Steppe), Odessa, Odesskoye Obl. Izd-vo, 1948.

5. Kudinov, H., "Influence of the Density of Sewing in Relation to Variety on
the Yield of Spring Wheat and Barley," STEPOVIY DOSVIDNIK (Steppe Reporter),
No 3, 1928.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Kulik, H. S., OSOBBNNOSTI ZASUKH V STBPNYKH RAYONAKH UkSSR I UCHET KLIHAT-
ICHESKIKH FAK‘I’OROV PR1 RAZRABOTKE SISTEHY ZMZDELIYA (Characteristics of
Droughts in the Steppe Regions of the URSSR and Allowance for Climatic Pac-
tors in Developing an Agricultural System). Moscow, Izd-vo HSKh, 1958.

7. Hordvinova, H. N., "Influence of Cooling of 5 Root System on Formation of a
Barley Ear," ISSLEDOVANIYE POCHVENNYIOI, MSTITEL'NYKH I FAUNISTICHBSKIKH
RESURSOV marru (Investigation of the 5011, Plant and Paunistic Resources
of Yakutia), Yakutsk. 1964.

8. Podgornyy. P., "Increasing Grain Yields," STEPOVIY DOSVIDNIK, No 3, 1928.

9. Rotmistrov. V. 6., SUSHCHNOST' ZASUKHI PO DANNYH ODESSKOGO OPYTNOGO POLYA
(The Essence of Drought According to Data of the Odessa Experimental Field).
Odessa, 1911.

10. Shishkin, A.. K VOFROSU OB UMEN'SHENII VREDNGO DEYSTVIYA ZASUKH NA MSTITBL'-
N051" (Problem of Reducing the Harmful Effect of Drought on Vegetation), St.
Peterburg, 1876.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.521.17
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION IN THE LOWER ATMOSPHERE

Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 (manuscript received
4 Oct 80) pp 111-116

[Article by N. F. Yelanskiy and Yu. L. Truttse, candidates of physical and mathe-
matical Sciences, and 0. A. Hatveyevs, Institute of Atmospheric Physics)

[Text] Abstract: This article gives the results of
measurements of the total fluxes of direct,
scattered and total radiation in the spec-
tral region 300-400 nm made from aboard an
aircraft. The results agree satisfactorily
with the results of numerical modeling.

Introduction. The numerical model of radiation transfer in the atmosphere pre-
sented in [4) includes such factors and dependences which cannot be rigorously de-
scribed mathematically. But the introduction of simplifying assumptions and rep-
resentations of different quantities in approximations with few parameters are
inevitably reflected in the accuracy of the results of numerical computations.
Their experimental checking is required. However, the making of observations in the
spectral range 290-340 nm meets with a number of difficulties which are caused by
an abrupt change in the intensity of the solar radiation reaching the earth's
surface and the complexity of precise calibration of instruments in this spectral
region. Accordingly, the number of such observations is rather limited. Neverthe-
less, the principal regularities in the geographical distribution of the total
fluxes of UV radiation at the earth's surface during different seasons have been
described and studied in [1. 4]. During recent years a number of measurements have
also been made to ascertain the spectral composition of the fluxes of UV radiation
in the ozone absorption region [7, 8]. These observations make it possible to re-
fine individual details of the numerical model, but they are inadequate for its
total certification. Additional information is needed on the vertical structure

of the fluxes of UV radiation and their dependence on rapidly changing observa-
tion conditions. For this purpose in this article we give the results of measure-
ments of the total fluxes of direct, scattered and total radiation in the spectral
region 300-340 nm from an aircraft.

Instrumentation and Measurement Method

The measurements were made using specially fabricated UV photometers in which the
radiation detectors are F-7 photocells. The maximum response of the F-7 corres-

ponds to a wavelength of approximately 225 nm. With an increase in wavelength the
detector response decreases and when )=!320 nm does not exceed 52 of the maximum

value.
96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The P—7 phoelement is Intended for the registry of the radiation arriving from a
hemisphere. Its angular characteristic is close to cosinal. Since individual
samples have their own particular characteristics, radiation detectors with a
spectral response dropping off most steeply in the sector 290-340 nm were select-
ed for installation in the instrument; for these detectors the angular character-
istics come closest to a cosinal dependence (the discrepancies must not exceed
3-61 within a range of angles 75-800 from the normal).

The precise absolute calibration of the UV photometers is a complex problem. And
although in the measurement of the vertical structure of the radiation fluxes

and albedo of the reflecting surface an analysis is made of the relative changes
in parameters, the relationship between model computations and experimental data
expressed in absolute energy units must be known quite precisely for a proper in-
terpretation. The calibration of instruments was accomplished by two methods: us-
ing an 51-8 standard lamp sue on the basis of direct solar radiation. Recent meas-
urements were made at the High-Mountain Scientific Station. Institute of Atmospher-
ic Physics. USSR Academy of Sciences (near Kislovodak. at an elevation of 2.070 m
above sea level) over the course of several months before and between aircraft
flights. At the same time measurements were made of the total ozone content and
the aerosol attenuation of radiation was evaluated. A knowledge of these para—
meters made the calibration on the basis of solar radiation adequately correct.

The aircraft carried two photometers with coinciding spectral characteristics in
the upper and lower parts of the fuselage. The lower photometer measured the ra-
diation reflected from the underlying surface and scattered in the lower layer

Fr [1; the upper photometer measured the total radiation Ftot and direct Fdir
radiation incident on the horizontal surface from above. For this purpose the
sensor of the upper instrument is mounted in such a way that it can move rela-
tive to the entry aperture by a distance up to l m. In this case the instrument
field of view is not greater than 8°. The angle within which the sun illuminates
the entire cathode is from 4 to 6°. depending on the position of the sun relative
to the time of the measurements.

The flux of scattered radiation was found from the difference Ftot - Pdir' The
error in determining this parameter. as a result of excluding the contribution of
radiation scattered at small angles. does not exceed 3-42, and as a result of de-
viation of the angular dependence from cosinal is not more than 31 for zenith
distances 90<60°. The total error in determining the Fscat/Pdir ratio for these
same 60 is about 10-152.

The total measurements of radiation fluxes using photometers in the region 300-340
nm have one substantial shortcoming. With a change in ozone content the nature of
the spectrum in this region changes. As a result. the effective wavelength of in-
strument response (Forbes effect) shifts. This usually makes very difficult the
interpretation of data from measurements carried out under conditions differing
greatly with respect to solar altitude, ozone content and optical characteristics
of atmospheric aerosol. However, in investigations of the relative changes in UV
radiation at different altitude levels in a particular place during the short time
of aircraft descent C90 and x change insignificantly and the influence of the
Forbes effect is small (Fig. l). Pith a further decrease of its influence the com-
parison of experimental data was always made with those computed values which were
obtained with the substitution of the true 60 and X values at each comparison:
point into the numerical model. It is only important that the optical

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SF. ONLY

characteristics of both instruments be kept so during the flight time. The in-
strument parameters were monitored under terrestrial and flight conditions
(change in position of the instrusents) by comparison of their readings during a
25-hour period (different 9 and x). As a rule. the selected photoelalents retain
their characteristics over a long period of time.

’3' at: :1. relative units

 

Fig. l. Photometer transmission functions computed for solar zenith angle 6- 0°
and altitude levels 2 - a and 0 km (curves 1 and 2 respectively) for zenith angle
6- 60° and z - lo and 0 km (curves 3 and lo). Ozone content 0.200 cm; aerosol dis-

tribution H1.

Measurements of UV radiation in the thickness of the atmosphere were made under
cloudless conditions during rapid linear descent (rarely ascent) of an 11-16 air-
craft from an altitude of 5-5.5 km to the earth's surface or altitudes 100-200 I.
Measurements of direct solar radiation were made each 250 or 500 m vertically. The
radiation reflected from the underlying surface was measured at altitudes up to
100 m.

The flights were made in Central Asia and to a lesser extent over the European
USSR. The observations were continued with interruptions from Hay 1978 through Hay

1980 and took in all seasons.

As has already been noted. for the proper interpretation of the observations of
variability of UV radiation in the thickness of the atmosphere it is necessary to
have data on ozone content. Accordingly. the aircraft carried two spectrophoto-
meters for measuring total ozone content continuously during the entire flight.
including in the descent segment. The measurement and computation method was de-
scribed in [3]. Some differences are related only to improvement in the system

for tracking the sun.

Analysis of Results

A total of about 90 vertical sections were obtained. The resulting profiles of the
fluxes of UV radiation 1" were characterized by a great variability. The maximum F
variations with equal 00 were caused by fluctuations of the aerosol component in
the lower atmosphere, as is in agreement with the conclusions drawn from model in-
vestigations if it is" taken into account that the Aeff of the instrument falls in
the range 317-322 nm with a change in 90 from 25 to 60°. During the flights there

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were no direct measurements of the aerosol characteristics. Therefore, an analysis
or the dependence of radiation fluxes in the region 300-600 nm on ozone content
cannot be entirely correct and is not given in this study.

The vertical profiles of radiation fluxes. supplemented by data on ozone content,
carry information on the processes of scattering of radiation in the thickness of
the atmosphere containing aerosol and in comparison with the results of computa-
tions make it possible to evaluate the reliability and limits of effective use

of the concepts of aerosol attenuation of radiation and reflection from the under-
lying surface serving as the basis of the numerical model in [A].

a) Total radiation. The vertical profiles of total radiation reflect that great
diversity of observation conditions which were encountered in the process of im-
plementing the work. In order in the comparison of these profiles with the comput-
ed values that individual characteristics be taken into account as completely as
possible, a comparison of data was made for the individual levels 0, l...., 5 km
with the corresponding values 6()and X. Such an operation made it possible to
discriminate four groups of data corresponding to the following regions and obser-
vation times: Central Asia (May-September), European USSR (Hay-September) and
these same regions during December-March. The ratios of the mean values of the
relative increase in F at with a change in altitude by 1 km (F1+ - F1/F1) to the
(F144 - Pi/P1)theor vs ues computed for mean global aerosol cond tions for these
groups are given in Table l.

The greatest differences between the computed and measured increase in Ftot with
altitude are observed in the warm season of the year in Central Asia; the minimum
values are observed in winter over the European USSR. In general, however, the in-
fluence of aerosol is more important than that which it must be as a global mean.
(Detailed tables of Ftot values at different levels in the lower atmosphere are
given in [4]. The nature of the change in the Ptot parameter with altituoe change
for a special case is illustrated in Table 2). Even in winter over the European USSR
aerosol attenuation predominates in the layer 0-2 km over the means for the earth.

During the warm period of the year the changes in Ptot with altitude to a consider-
able degree and everywhere differ from the computed value for a pure atmosphere

up to a level 4 km. In Central Asia the nature of the altitudinal dependence of Ftot
even on the average corresponds to a dust-filled atmosphere rather than a pure at-
mosphere. In individually considered situations (relating. as a rule, to the Samar-
kand region) the attenuation of radiation by aerosol is greater than follows from
computations for a highly dust-filled atmosphere (H2), which was regarded as an
extremal case. An example of such a situation is shown in Fig. 2. Above the level

4 km the change in Ftot with altitude virtually coincides with that computed for
the pure atmosphere and these variations are small. This means that local factors
exert no significant influence on the distribution of aerosol in the middle tropo-

sphere.

Thus. on the basis of a mean model of aerosol distribution H1 it is possible to
compute the vertical structure of the fluxes of total radiation in the entire in-
vestigated thickness of the atmosphere during winter. and at other seasons of the
year —- in the region above 3-4 km. Below this level during the summer in order to
determine the vertical structure of UV radiation it is necessary to change the M1

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R10FFKJAl.USFJONLN

distribution introduced into the computation program in accordance with Table
1, or, without changing the initial parameters, use the values present in it

as correction coefficients.

aﬂH

 

z: 10 m/r, :.

Fig. 2. Vertical change in Ftot in percent relative to the values at the level a
- 1 km over Samarkand on 26 August 1979. Dashed curve -- computed [)F1/P1 pro-
files for pure and dust-filled atmosphere (£90 - 42°, x - 0.360 cm. A - 0.11.

  

0 .' 2 J Flu/hf

 

scat/Fdir

Fig. 3. Mean vertical profiles Fscat/Fdir by intervals of zenith angles 25-3S°
(a). b0-SO° (b), 55-65° (c). obtained from observations. (Dashed curve - ver-

tical profiles computed for pure atmosphere and mean X and A values.

b) Direct and scattered radiation. During aircraft descent the direct radiation
decreases and to a greater degree the greater the solar zenith angle and atmo-
spheric turbidity. Since the latter factor varies in a wide range. a change in

Fecal with altitude also experiences a strong scatter from one situation to the
next. Taking into account that the experimental data are rather limited and that

in the turbid atmosphere the errors in determining Fdir increase, it makes no
sense no carry out a comparative analysis for Fdir similar to that which was

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
carried out for Ftot' From the point of view of comparison with model computa-
tions it is most convenient and indicative to examine the behavior of the Fscat/
Fdir ratio with altitude.

Table 1

Mean Values of Ratios (F1+1 - F1/Pfie‘P3(Ff+l ";1/F1)theor M 1 for Total Radiation
- . '0‘.

Region and time of Number of Levels. km
observation sections
0 1 1 2 2:3 3:4 4:5

Central Asia, Hay-
Septembcr 41 1.5 1.8 1.6 1.2 1.05

European USSR. Hay-
September 15 1.6 1.6 1.4 1.1 1.0

Central Asia. Decem-
ber-March 21 1.25 1.2 1.2 1.1 1.0

European USSR.
December-March 12 1.1 1.1 1.0 0.95 0.95

Table 2

Increase in Ftot (Z) Hith Ascent by 1 km in Pure (H1) and Dust-Filled (N2) Models
of Atmosphere for 60 - 30 and 60’ (Results of Computations. X - 0.320 cm. A - 0.1)

6%, degrees Aerosol Levels. km
0:1 1:2 2:3 3:4 4:5
30 M1 7.9 6.4 5.4 5.1 5.2
M2 15.9 13.3 19.8 11.4 5.4
60 H1 11.2 10.1 9.2 7.6 7.8
H2 19.0 18.0 27.8 20.2 7.7

Figure 3 shows the mean Fscat/Fdir profiles characterizing the peculiarities of
the altitudinal dependence of the ratio under the conditions of a pure atmo-
sphere. For this we selected such sections for which the change in the altitud—
inal dependence of total radiation approximately coincided with the dependence
computed using the H1 model. -

The profiles shown in the figure represent the results of observations of fluxes
of UV radiation in Central Asia and the European USSR averaged by intervals of
solar zenith angles 25-35, 40-50 and 55-65° over a anowless surface. Using the mean

6()va1ues from these intervals and other parameters it was possible to construct
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

theoretical altitudinal dependences Pscat/Fdir- Both curves on each graph have
virtually identical shapes -- Fscat/Fdir decrease monotonically with increasing
distance from the earth's surface. The absence of appreciable stratification in
the layer from 0 to 5 Inn is attributable primarily to the character of the choice
of experimental data and their subsequent averaging in time and place.

'10: /’.-, F

F
;

scat/Fdir IN:

   

Fig. lo. Angular dependence of Fscat/Fdir at sea level for different aerosol condi-
tions according to Shettle and Green model (see [9]) with allowance for photometer
transmission function (1', mean corresponds to mean aerosol attenuation) and on the
basis of the model considered in this study (dashed curve). Separately plotted are
the Facat/Pdu values measured on 21 August 1979 at Samrkand (l) and the mean val-
ue of the ratio for three 90 intervals (2) (see Fig. 3).

At the same time the figure clearly reproduces the discrepancies between experi—
mental and theoretical values Fscat/F ir' These discrepancies have a regular char-
acteristic: the measured values are afways less than those obtained by computa-
tions (the only exception is the layer 3-5 In: with small 90). The discrepancies
increase with a decrease in altitude and an increase in 60. In order to explain
this effect it is necessary to return to the measurement method. As already men-
tioned, in Fdir observations the photometer registers the radiation arriving from
an angle greatly exceeding the angular dimensions of the sun, that is. the in-
strument registers Fag-“Paw (PM, is the contribution from the aureole). Sub-
tracting the flux of direct radiation from the flux of total radiation. for the
scattered radiation we obtain a value not less than the computed value. The
brighter the aureole. the greater the discrepancy must be between the experimen-
tal and theoretical Romp/Pd” values. Qualitatively this is confirmed well by
the curves in Fig. 3.

He will estimate the contribution of the aureole quantitatively at the level of

the earth's surface from measurements. For 6 I 30' Facat - Pam-IF 1 + PM“. -
1.35. Facat/Fdir - 1.5. Hence it is easy to and that Faur Will be {[2 of

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the flux of direct radiation and la.22 of the scattered radiation. For 6 - 45°
8.6 and 3.82 respectively. for 60 I 60' -- 16 and 3.12 respectively. S milar-
ly it is possible to estimate the contribution of the aureole for other levels
in the atmosphere.

The cited figures coincide well with those values of the errors in determining
Fscat and Pdir which were obtained when carrying out calibration measurements.
Accordingly. within the framework of instrumental and methodological errors it
can be assumed that the model describes well the real Facat/Fdi profiles for
the atmosphere with aerosol characteristics close to the mean global values. In
a turbid atmosphere it is considerably more difficult to discriminate definite
patterns which could be compared with the results of numerical modeling. How-
ever. despite the great fluctuations in the experimental data, in general they
do not exceed the limits which are the results of computations for a dust-filled
atmosphere H2 (Fig. 4). although to a considerable degree they exceed the cor-
responding values obtained using other models of radiation transfer in an inhomo-

geneous atmosphere (corrections for these were made with allowance for instrument
transmission).

 

Fig. 5. Increase in Ftot (in 1) at different levels in the atmosphere with trans-
ition from the underlying surface with an albedo of 0.1 to a surface with an albedo

of 0.7. l) computed dependence [or pure atmosphere. 2) measurement data for 26-29
February 1979 with 60 - 45—552

In general the limiting cases (pure and highly dust-filled atmosphere) considered
in [4] actually take in the entire range of actually encountered situations. And

the fact that the I’m-"Elm“ experimental data agree with the computed data
(with allowance for corrections for the aureole influence) additionally confirms

the correctness of the model description of aerosol attenuation of radiation,

that is, there is experimental confirmation of the conclusion which was drawn from
a comparison of different published models.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI

c) Reflected radiation. As follows from computations, reflection from the under-
lying surface with a great albedo A should be reflected appreciably in the flux-

es of total and scattered radiation in the spectral region 300-340 nm. Observa-
tions confirm this conclusion.

An aircraft was used in measuring the albedo of different types of underlying sur-
faces and study of the character of its change with aircraft ascent to consider-
able altitudes. An analysis of the dependence of albedo A on altitude indicated
that the influence of the atmospheric layer situated below the aircraft becomes
significant already beginning with an altitude of 100-150 m. 0n the other hand,
measurements of A from altitudes less than lOOuzarealso infeasible due to the
difficulties arising in identification of the nature of the underlying surface
and those distortions which the entry of the aircraft shadow into the region of
instrument sighting introduces. Accordingly. the flights were made at an alti-
tude of 100 m. The errors in measuring albedo were from 1 to 3!, depending on
turbidity of the air surface layer.

The principal results of measurements of the albedo parameter for solar zenith
angles 30-60°, and with the presence of snow -- for angles 45-55°. are given
below (in 2):

Water surface (calm or with low waves) 2-4
Green plantings and rice paddies 2-4
Desert with sparse vegetation 3-5
Sand 5-7
Forest (snow on ground) 7-17
Snow-covered field 60-85
Dense cloud field 65-80

Flight altitude over the clouds was not constant but varied in the range 50-250 m,
but the influence of the scattered radiation in this thin layer was substantially
less than near the earth.

The albedo of the snowless surface adopted in the computations. equal to 0.1, some-
what exceeds the values cited above, but A - 0.7 for snow agrees well with the ac-
tual values.

It was possible to check the contribution of radiation reflected from the earth's
surface to the flux Ftot at different levels only in the caSc of transition

from a surface covered with snow to a snowless or snowy plain to a forested area.
Under real conditions it was impossible to find adequately extensive uniform sharp-
1y delimited surfaces. Therefore, the effect of modification of reflected radiation
on Fscat and Ftot is blurred and to a greater extent the greater the altitude. This
is attributable to a lesser increase in Ftot in comparison with the computed values
(Fig. 5) at all altitudes. However. near the earth's surface the jump Ptot with
transition from a snow-covered plain to a forested area in most cases is 23-282

and is close to the computed value.

Summary

The mean characteristics of the vertical structure of fluxes of UV radiation in
the lower atmosphere cited in this article coincide satisfactorily with the re-
dults obtained using numerical modeling [4]. Such a coincidence leads to the

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

canclusion that the proposed model can be used effectively in practical work. How-
ever, in order for the results of the computations to characterize the specific
situation reliably, it is necessary to know the aerosol characteristics. the al-
bedo of the underlying surface and total ozone content. The latter two parameters
can be determined rather simply and with good accuracy [5, 6]. With respect to
aerosol attenuation. it can be evaluated using the same materials from ozonomet-
ric observations [2, 6], which are being carried out in the USSR in a broad net-
work of stations. For most problems it is sufficient to know the mean values of
all these parameters for certain conditions.

3 I 81. IOGRAPHY

Belinskiy. V. A.. Caradzha. H. P.. Hezhennaya, L. H. and Nezval', Ye. 1.,
UL'TRAFIOLETOVAYA RADIATSIYA SOLN‘ISA I NEDA (Solar Ultraviolet Radiation and
the Sky), Moscow, lzd-vo HGU. 1968.

Gushchin. G. P.. OZON I AEROSINOPTICHESKIYE USLOVIYA V ATHDSFERE (Ozone and
Aerosynoptic Conditions in the Atmosphere), Leningrad. Cidrometeoizdat. 1964.

Yelanskiy. N. F. and Truttse, Yu. L., "Some Characteristics of the Distribu-
tion of the Total Content of Ozone and Nitrogen Dioxide in the Atmosphere
According to Observations From an Aircraft." IZV. AN SSSR: PIZIKA ATHOSFBRY
I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere
and Ocean), Vol 15. No l, 1979.

Yelanskiy, N. F.. Truttse, Yu. L. and Ustinov, Ye. A.. "Fluxes of UV Radiation
in the Lower Atmosphere," Deposited at the All-Union Institute of Scientific
and Technical Information. No 5168-80, deposited, 1980.

RADIATSIONNYYE KHARAKTERISTIKI ATPDSFERY I ZDMY POWSTI (Radiation
Characteristics of the Atmosphere and the Earth's Surface), edited by K. Ya.
Kondrat'yev, Leningrad. Cidrometeoizdat, 1969.

Khrgian, A. Kh.. FIZIKA ATMDSFERNOGO OZONA (Physics of Atmospheric Ozone).
Leningrad, Gidromcteoizdat, 1973.

Chou, A. T. and Green. A. E. 5., “Ratio Measurement of Diffuse to Direct
Solar Irradiances in the Middle Ultraviolet," APPL. 0PT.. V01 15, No 5. 1976.

Coulsnn. K. L.. SOLAR AND TERRESTRIAL RADIATION, Acad. Pr.. 1975.
Garrison, L. M.. Murray, L. 8.. Doda. D. D. and Green, A. E. 5., "Diffuse-

Direct Ultraviolet Ratios With a Compact Double Honochromator," APPL. 0PT.,
V01 17, No 5. 1977.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiofFﬂJAl.USE(MQLV

METEOROLOGICAL “ORR OF I. N. UL'YANOV (15073 ANNIVERSARY OF HIS BIRTH)

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 Omanuscript received
29 Apr 81) pp 117-118

[Article by V. V. Rakhmanov. doctor of geographical sciences. USSR Bydrometeorolog-
ical Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] July 1981 marked the 150th anniversary of the birth of Il'ya Nikolaye-
vich Ul'yanov, remembered by the Soviet people as the father and first teacher

of V. 1. Lenin. founder of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union. However.
meteorologists also recall that for more than eight years (from 1855 through 1863).
while an instructor of mathematics and physics at the Penza Hobiliary Institute.

he carried out regular meteorological observations. Il'ya Nikolayevich arrived in
Penza in June 1855 and continued his meteorological tasks until his transfer to
Nizhniy Novgorod in 1863. The scientific community at Penza regarded these observ-
ations as being highly important. The observational data which he collected were
sent to the observatory at Kazan' University and to the Agricultural Society of
Southeast Russia. His work was not confined to observations alone; during this
period he wrote a paper on thunderstorms and lightning rods. It provides evidence
that he was very familiar with investigations in the field of atmospheric physics
both in his land and abroad. After departure from Penza I. N. Ul'yanov became an
educational administrator who accomplished much beneficial work in Simbirskaya
Province. Soviet meteorologists. however, will remember him for his early, pioneer-
ing, effective meteorological observations.

106

INJR 0!1ﬂ(]Al.USII(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REVIEW OF COLLECTION 01‘ ARTICLES 05 ATMOSPHERIC PHYSICS AND CLIMATE
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 119-120

[Review by I. L. Karol'. doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, and V. A.
Frol'kis, of collection of articles "Pizika Atmosfery 1 Problem Klimata" [Atmo-
spheric Physics and the Climate Problem], edited by G. S. Golitsyn, corresponding
member USSR Academy of Sciences, and A. H. Yaglom, Nauka. Moscow, 1980]

[Text] The breadth and diversity of the problems now brought together in the theory
of climate make it possible (and as will be demonstrated below -- useful) to make
available collections of articles such as the one reviewed here. It includes

nine large (more extensive than those appearing in journals) articles on extreme-
ly different branches of atmospheric physics which have been studied at the Insti-

tute of Atmospheric Physics USSR Academy of Sciences.

Three articles in the collection are devoted to "abstract" problems of a theoretical
and sometimes an experimental character in laboratory models, investigations of sim-
plified models of so-called hydrodynamic systas (EDS) (articles by P. V. Dolzhan-
skiy and 1.. A. Pleshanova and A. H. Obukhov, et a1.) and a stochastic model (ar-
ticle by H. I. Portus). The objective of such investigations is the important, and
for practical purposes almost fundamental problem of prediction of changes in the
climatic system and its unambiguous realization with one and the same ambient con-
ditions. The HDS introduced by A. H. Obukhov and in some foreign investigations
make it possible by relatively simple mathematical and graphic laboratory procedures
to obtain and analyze the "changeover" phenomenon -- occurrences of different cur-
rent regimes (in particular, in ellipsoidal regions) in an ideal fluid under iden-
tical ambient conditions.

These articles develop HDS investigations at the Institute of Atmospheric Physics
and examine a model of convective currents (with few parameters) in a rotating flu-
uid described by equations similar to the equations of motion of a heavy gyroscope
with additional terms linear with respect to velocity and temperature (article by
Dolzhanskiy and Pleshanova) and the phenomenon of a changeover between quasista-
tionary regimes in HDS with the inclusion in the equation of the model of random
noise, which has an analogy in processes of general circulation of the atmosphere.

In an article by M. I. Fortus. for some class of random processes with sharp and
frequency-spaced spectral peaks with an increasing intensity for the lesser fre-
quencies (such are the spectra of many climatic elements), the author has

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An article by A. S. Cinzburg and Ye. N. Feygel'son is devoted to the implementa-
tion of radiation computations. They formulated the fundamental principles which
must be taken into account in formulating the radiation blocks of models of cli-
mate and general circulation. As a result of detailed analysis of radiation trans-
fer processes, the authors give quite simple expressions making it possible to com-
pute the fluxes in the ultraviolet, visible. solar infrared and thermal ranges, tak-
ing into account the scattering and absorption by water vapor, carbon dioxide, ozone
and aerosol in the case of a rough vertical resolution and minimum information on
the optical parameters of the atmosphere. Estimates are given for the integral al-
bedo of the system and the integral tranmission of the atmosphere in the solar and
thermal ranges. An effective scheme is proposed for computing the fluxes of thermal
radiation for a "piecewise-isothermic" cloudy atmosphere containing aerosol. Fur-
ther means are given for simplifying the parameterizations used, these being dif-
ferent for weather forecasting models and models of climate and making it possible
to include these parameterizations in models of different complexity.

A zonal climatic model of the atmosphere and surface layer of the ocean is present-
ed in an article by V. K. Petukhov. He proposed simple and original parameteriza-
tions for the dependences of the longitudinally averaged meridional macroturbulent
transfers of the moment of momentum, heat and moisture, as well as the vertical
gradient of temperature and humidity on the field of mean zonal temperature of

the atmosphere and also for heat transfer in the ocean.

of macroturbulent transfer, which makes it possible to dispense with the use of em-
pirical coefficients tied in to modern climate. In the article use is made of the

those of modern climate.

M. B. Galin, in an article entitled "Investigation of General Circulation of the
Atmosphere on the Basis a lZ-Component Model," gives a two-level quasisolenoldal
model for a hemisphere, making it possible to describe the joint effect of the
barotropic and baroclinic mechanisms, the "inputs" and "outputs" of energy, such
as radiation heating in conformity to Newton's law, and vertical turbulent fric-
tion. A solution is obtained which describes a stationary zonal circulation, which

atinn undergoes transition into a solution of the travelling wave type with a con—
stant amplitude. which also substantially transforms the temperature field, re-
sulting in a decrease in the thermal gradient from the pole to the equator. In
addition to a wave regime with a constant amplitude there are regimes with a per-

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excitation parameter the system returns to a wave regime with a constant ampli-
tude. An investigation of the interactions of waves with zonal flows and their
evolution indicated that the energy cycle of these interactions is close to the
cycle of energy transformations in the real atmosphere.

An article by V. P. Kukharts, L. R. Tsvang and A. H. Yaglom, entitled "Relation-
ship of Turbulence Characteristics in the Surface and Boundary Layers of the Atmo-
sphere." gives a review of the results of measurement of turbulence characteris-
tics in the surface and atmospheric boundary layers. It is noted that the discrep-
.ancies among the numerous measurement results are attributable not only to the in-
aCCuracy in methods and instrument errors. but also to the existence of some fac-
tors creating these differences which are not taken into account in similarity
theory. In the surface layer such factors are the vertical variability of the
turbulent flux of heat. the macroscale disturbances (of the ordered longitudinal
eddies type) penetrating from above into the surface layer. and in the atmospheric
boundary layer -- the radiational nonuniformity of the underlying surface. There
is a discussion of the measurement method and the results of determination of the
universal functions for the gradients of mean wind velocity and temperature. tur—
bulent fluxes, thickness of the atmospheric boundary layer, rates of dissipation
of turbulent energies and the structural characteristics of temperature fluctua-
tions.

The tables in an article by A. S. Aliyev. A. S. Zubkovskiy and L. R. Tsvang give
the results of measurements of the characteristics of turbulence in the near-
water layer of the atmosphere in 107 series of experiments. On their basis it was
possible to determine a number of universal functions in dependence on the strat-
ification parameter. It is shown that the universal functions for the near-water
layer coincide with the similar dependences for the surface layer within the lim-
its of their scatters known from data in the literature.

An article by G. V. Rozenberg. et al.. entitled "Optical Parameters of Atmospheric
Aerosol," generalizes extensive data from his own investigations and the litera-
ture. The analysis and generalization enabled the authors to propose a physical
model of aerosol in different layers of the atmosphere and provide a broad set

of parameters of its optical characteristics in dependence on atmospheric humid-
ity for tropospheric aerosol. Such a model makes it possible to compute the flux-
es of radiation in the atmosphere under the operating conditions for optical sys-
tems. The extensive tables in the article provide valuable material for this.

Despite all the above—mentioned value of the articles in the collection, it is im-
possible not to note that there is some excessive diversity of subject matter. In
the future, probably. it would be better to issue collections of articles of a
lesser volume (and price) on individual significant aspects of the considered
range of important problems.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFIICJAI.[EIE(MULY

SEVENTIETH~PIPTH BIRTHDAY 0F IDA ARTUROVNA GOL'TSBERG
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 p 121
[Article by the climatologists of the Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Abstract] April 1981 marked the 75th birthday and 50th anniversary of the scien-
tific activity of the well-known Soviet climatologist Professor Ida Arturovna
Col'tsberg. All her activity has been closely associated with the meteorological
support of practical needs, especially in agriculture. Between 1929 and 1962 she
worked at the All-Union Institute of Plant Cultivation and from 1962 through 1979
at the Main Geophysical Observatory. At the latter for nany years she headed the
Agruclimatology Section, later transformed into the Hicroclimate Laboratory. I. A.
Gol'tsberg made a considerable contribution to climatology, taking an active part
in the solution of timely problems in Soviet meteorological science. During the
prewar years she carried out a series of climatological studies, among which

there was a series of investigations devoted to world agroclimatic analogues of
the USSR subtropics. During the Great Fatherland war she worked at Leningrad. Dur-
ing 1956-1955 I. A. Gol'tsberg actively participated in an evaluation of the agro-
climatic resources of the virgin and idle lands. In her subsequent studies she
examined problems relating to allowance for microclimatic characteristics in agri-
culture and construction. In 1961 Ida Arturovna published the monograph AGRDKLIH-
ATICHBSKAYA KHARAKTERISTIKA ZAHDROZKOV V SSSR I METODY BOR'BY s NIHI (Agroclimat-
ic Characteristics of Frosts in the USSR and Methods for Contending with Them),
which still remains the most complete work on this phenomenon. Later, in collabor-
ation with her colleagues, she produced such original works as HIKROKLIHAI SSSR
(USSR Microclimate) and AGRDKLIHATICHBSKIY ATLAS HIRA (Agroclimatic Atlas of the
World). having great scientific and practical importance. 1. A. Gol'tsberg has pub-
lished more than 130 studies. During recent years, under the editorship of I. A.
Gol'tsberg, the “sin Geophysical Observatory has produced a series of climatic maps
of the zone of exploitation of the Baykal-Amur Railroad. I. A. Gol'tsberg has ac-
tively participated in the cooperation among the meteorologists of the socialist
countries, representing the Hydrometeorological Service in work on the theme
"Agroclimatic Resources of the Socialist Countries of Europe."

110

F!NI(HHWC1A1.USEGNVLY
FOI(HHHCIALIEiZONlY

GOVERNMENT AWARDS TO SOVIET HYDROMETEOROLOGISTS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 121-126
[Unsigned article]

[Abstract] The following specialists of the State Comittee on Hydrometeorology and
Environmental Monitoring have been presented government awards for active particip-
ation in the organization and implementation of Soviet Antarctic expeditions and
contributions to study of Antarctica: Order of Lenin -- Nikolay Nikolayevich 0v-
chinnikov, senior engineer of the laboratory of the AANII (Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research Institute); Vladimir Aleksandrovich Shamont'yev, head of the
26th Soviet Antarctic Expedition (SAE) of the AANII; Order of the October Revolu-
tion -- Nartsiss Irinarkhovich Barkov, senior scientific specialist of the AANII;
Arnol'd Bogdanovich Budretskiy, head of Vostok station. 25th SAB; Order of the Red
Banner of Labor - Il'dus Khaybullovich Abdrakhmanov. aerological engineer. 26th
SAE; Gennadiy Ivanovich Bardin, head of the Pevek Administration of the Hydromet-
eorological Service; Sergey Grigor'yevich Kovtanyuk. head of the personnel divis-
ion, AANII; Aleksandr L'vovich Matusov, laboratory supervisor, AANII; Vladimir Nikol-
ayevich Petrov, section head. AANII; Oleg Nikolayevich Struin, section head, AANII;
Nikolay Gavrilovich Taranov. senior work leader, 26th SAE; Yuriy Andreyevich Khab-
arov, participant on the 9th SAE, now head of administration at the State Committee
on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring; Artur Nikolayevich Chilingarov.
former head of Bellinsgauzen station, 17th SAE, now head of administration at the
State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring; Vladimir Yevgen'-
yevich Shirshov, deputy head of the SAE, AANII. In addition. the "Emblem of Honor"
was presented to 35 persons. the Order of Hark Valor (Third Degree) —- to 10 per-
sons, the medal "For Illustrious Hort" -- to 26 persons, and the medal "For Dis-
tinction in Work" -- to 35 persons.

lll
IN3l|0l1ﬂ(lhl.lEﬂE(ﬂVl¥
FOI10FFIJA1.USE(M‘LY

NEW INTERNATIONAL HYDROHETEOROLOGICAL CODE
Moscow HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 125-126

[Article by N. P. Pakhrutdinova]

[Abstract] A new international unified code for the transmission of hydrometeorolog-
ical data from stations of all types (manned and automated, on land and at sea, on
buoys and platforms) is being introduced by a resolution of the HMO dated 1 Janu—
ary 1982. The international designation of the new code is PH lZ—VII SYNOP (for
land stations) and PM 13-VII SHIP (for sea stations). It will replace six present-
ly used codes. The new international unified code consists of six sections which
are intended for the transmission of data at different exchange levels: global,
regional and national. The content of these six sections is outlined. The new code
will ensure the possibility of a more detailed transmission of hydroneteorological
data: air temperature and dew point are transmitted with an accuracy to tenths of
a degree; in coding of the state of the land surface provision is made for use of
20 digits (10 for the state of the soil without snow and 10 for the state of the
snow cover) instead of the 10 digits employed in existing codes; instead of using
one digit for the state of the weather between observations, there will be two,
making possible a more complete characterization of weather during this period.

At the present time much work is being done in the USSR for ensuring the intro-
duction (beginning on 1 January 1982) of the new unified code for all land and sea

stations of the State Committee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

112

ms omau. use only
FOI‘DFFIJAI.USE(NVLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 126-127
[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Abstract] A group of specialists at the Ha: Planck Institute of Aeronomy. Lindau,
West Germany, over a three-year period collected atmospheric samples from altitudes
between 10 and 35 km. Samples were also taken during aircraft flights between Zur-
ich and Stockholm. Unexpected results were obtained. It had been assumed earlier
that fuel combustion results in the rapid penetration of its product 602 into the
stratosphere. New data refute this. It was found that the conseu'ences of an in-
creased discharge of C02 into the atmosphere over Northern Europe begin to be re-
flected at an altitude of about 25 km only about five or six years later. It was
possible to construct a map of the vertical distribution of C02 over Northern and
Central Europe. Maps of the seasonally varying maxima of 602 content in the region
of the upper troposphere. which evidently supplies 002 to the lower stratosphere
through a slowly operating "filtef'(the boundary of the tropopause), were also
constructed.

kit

The ship of the arctic explorer William Barents spent the winter of 1596-1597 lock-
ed in the ice near Novaya Zemlya. To the surprise of the crew, the polar night end-
ed two weeks earlier than anticipated. At the time of sunrise the sun should have
been 5° below the horizon. This phenomenon, later known as the "Novaya Zemlya ef-
fect," was subsequently repeatedly observed. This has been most frequently attribut-
ed to refraction, but it was later found that atmospheric refraction cannot account
for more than one-tenth of the "Novaya Zemlya" effect. Specialists of the University
of Manitoba have now described the specific meteorological conditions responsible
for this phenomenon. It is necessary that the atmosphere over a great extent be
clearly stratified. that there be layers differing sharply from one another with re-
spect to temperature, humidity and pressure. "hen there is such a stratification

the atmosphere serves as a sort of light conductor, conveying images of distant fea-
tures (in this case the sun) far above the earth's surface. Eric the Red probably
set forth in his quest for Greenland after hearing reports of distant shores from
others who were misled as to distance due to the "Novaya Zemlya" effect.

*i*

113

ﬁOR¢HﬂﬂC1Al.USB(ﬂVLY
FOI‘OFEKJAI.USI{0NLY

American specialists have estimated that the total quantity of fresh water on the
earth is 37 million km3. However, 75% is locked in mountain and continental glaciers
and cannot now be used. Ground water accounts for 261 of the water supply and less
than 12 is in rivers, lakes and in the atmosphere. Evaporation from the seas is
about 430,000 km3 annually. and from the land is about 70,000 km3. Precipitation
falling over the land amounts to 110,000 km3 of water annually. Only about 14,000
km3 is available for human consumption, primarily surface runoff of rivers and
underground runoff. More than a third of the total water is carried in rivers
which traverse inaccessible or sparsely populated areas. With the present level of
consumption the available water will meet the needs of five or six times more
people than now live on the earth. In many parts of the world water is used with-
out proper allowance for hydrogeological conditions. The result is an inadmissible
rise in ground water. with the soils becoming swampy or saline. By the year 2000
fresh water will be in short supply in almost 30 countries.

11a

FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(HHLY
FIIICMNNCJAI.USEGNMLY

OBITUARY 0F NIKOLAY SERGEYEVICH SHISHKIN (1912-1981)
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 p 128

[Article by a group of comrades]

[Abstract] Professor Nikolay Sergeyevich Shishkin. doctor of physical and mathemat-
ical sciences, head of the Cloud Physics and Artificial Modification Division of
the Main Geophysical Observatory. an outstanding Soviet scientist in the field of
cloud physics and artificial modification, died prematurely on 17 February 1981.
He defended his doctoral dissertation in 1952. His monograph OBLAKA, OSADKI I
GROZOVOYE ELEKTRICMESTVO (Clouds, Precipitation and Thunderstorm Electricity).
written on the basis of the dissertation, became a reference manual for several
generations of specialists in these fields. The Division of Cloud Physics and Ar-
tificial Modification was organized on his initiative in 1958 and he headed this
division to the end of his life. Under his supervision and with his direct partic-
ipation the division carried out extensive investigations of natural and artific-
ial formation of precipitation and the dynamics of convective clouds. Studies were
made of apparatus and methods for the modification of clouds for the purpose of
forming precipitation. A method was developed for extinguishing forest fires by
artificially induced precipitation which helped to save millions of hectares of
forest. A special method for the short-range forecasting of convective cloud cover
was widely introduced into work for the regulation of precipitation. His work on
investigation of the electrification of cloud elements made a major contribution
to the formulation of a theory of thunderstorm phenomena and the methods for the
regulation of thunderstorms. N. S. Shishkin published more than 150 scientific
studies, including two monographs. He was the editor of more than 30 numbers of
the TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory) on cloud physics
and artificial modification. Shishkin represented Soviet science at many inter—
national conferences and symposia.

COPYRIGHT: "Meteorologiya i gidrologiya", 1981

5303 - m -
cs0: 1864/1

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY