FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10136
24 November 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 67/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also Yrom news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/1013

24 November

JAPAN REPORT

(POUO 67/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

LDP Factional Strife Updated
(SHOKUN’ NOV 81)0......OD0.0...OOOOOOIQOOOIOOIOOOIOO00.9.0...

Cabinet Reshuffle Focus of Political Activities
(THE DAILY YOMIURI, 2 Nov 81)................................

Cabinet Reshutfle: who Will Be Foreign Minister
(MI EVENING ”ms, 3%: 81)00.00....OOIOIOOCOOOIOOI.00'...

Pukuda-Tanaka Meeting Reviewed ‘
(Raisuke Honda: THE DAILY YOHIURI, 30 Oct 81)................

Suzuki's Plans Ripeninq for Personnel Resuftle
(Takehiko Takahashi: MINICHI DAILY ms, 11 NOV 81) 0.00.0..-

Sonoda Paces Difficulty in Retaining Post
(Minoru Shimizu: MUNICH! DAILY NEWS, 12 Nov 81).............

Setback in Japan-Soviet Ties
(THE: DAILY YOMIURI, 1 Nov 81)................................

Socialist Party Convention Preparations Underway
(Editorial: ASA“! SWIM NEWS, 4 NW 81’0eeooeecceoeeooooocl

MI LITARY

Japan, Superpower Strategy Analyzed
(Ryochi Nishijima, et al.: THE DAILY YOHIURI, various dates)..

-a- [III-ASIA-lll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

LDP PACTIONAL STRIPE UPDATED
Tokyo SHOKUN in Japanese Nov 81 pp 86-96

[Round-table discussion: "Rho Hill Cone After Suzuki?" Anony-ous partici-
pants (Dietnen)]

[Excerpts] [Question] What about the runor of a change of government in Nov-
ember which has been whispered lately?

[B] It has already vanished like the dew.

[C] First of all, it is a distortion, no matter how interesting sone try to
make the story.

[A] It has become common knowledge that under various pretexts Zenko will
serve out his tern at least.

[C] Until November next year, right?

[Question] But what about the case in which Prise Minister Suzuki suffers
an unlikely event like Ohira.

[D] By no means would Nakasone be agreed to.

[a] Right. I don't think Fukuda will be turned to either.
[0] In that case, perhaps Nikaido will be agreed on.

[Al It all depends on what the Pukuda faction does.

[8] Fukuda will not say OK to Nikaido.

[C] That isn't inevitable. The Fukuda faction would join if Shintaro Abe
is made secretary general and then follows Nikaido.

[Question] Could the election be won with a Nikaido government?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[C] If the election can't be won with a Nikaido government, it can't be won

with either Nskasone or Pukuda. There is no reason why the election can't be
won with Nikaidn.

[Question] But if "dirty" government official Nikaido becomes prime minister...
[C] There are no politicians who would say he is dirty.

[Question] That may be so in the world of professionals. but from the view

of the general voters, it would be distasteful for a dirty official to become
prime minister.

[C] Yet. Kakuei Tsnsks about whom that has been written so much is now the
most popular with the people.

[B] Being popular and being supported are not the same thing. If Kakuei
comes forth. people will be brought out. but the votes won't be brought in.

[C] when it is seen that Dietmembers for whom the election is more important
than life are joining the Tanaks faction in great numbers like the feces of
goldfish, it means he is popular with the people after all.

Inviting Kakuei's Popularity

[Question] In short, would you like to have Kskuei Tanaks come to give a
speech supporting your campaign when you are campaigning for election?

[C] Everyone wants him to come.
[Question] But is the result clear from this past Tokyo metropolitan election?

[cl A metropolitan election is somewhat different. That is. the present
executive committee wasn't very egressive. Therefore, the Tanaka faction

has taken responsibility for all the weak fellows. It is said that the rate
of the Tanaka faction's wins was small but the Tanaka faction had the great-
est number elected. It just says it took responsibility for doubtful fellows
who were unable to have anyone care for them. If a public opinion poll were

conducted now on who should be the next prime minister, the answer would be
overwhelmingly for Kakuei.

[B] A questionnaire was given at the Surugadai Prep School on whom would

you most like to hear. The first would be Kakuei Tanaka and the second.
Ryoichi Sasagsws.

[A] He may place somewhere in a public opinion poll, but I don't think he
would be overwhelmingly number one.

[C] No, no. There's no double he would be first. and I think he would be
far ahead of the number two person.

2
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Hhat is it about him that makes you have such expectations of him?
[C] His strong politics. Because of the present poor economic situation.

[Question] However, didn't Tanaka bring on extremely high prices of comlodi-
ties, and that proved fatal to him?

[C] Didn't the people understand it wasn't Kakuei's fault but that Arab oil
prices went up?

[Question] Oil prices went up but in addition, he incited a speculation craze
with his "plan for the reconstruction of the archipelago" and that was reflect-
ed in the market.

[C] There is no other nation in the world but Japan where prices didn't go
up that much even though 2 dollar oil went to 35-36 dollars. The people real-
ized that.

[D] However, Mr. 6.. once there was certainly a cry, "Kakuei should come
forth," when there was widespread economic depression, but recently we don't
hear that. It is recognized that economic depression is not something re-
lated to the policies and judgment of one politician but is determined by
the international state of affairs such as the Arab question.

[A] Well, Kakuei's popularity comes from the fact that politics is not very
interesting right now.

[8] That's right. There is no other attractive politician.

[A] So, that is the responsibility of the new leaders. From the mid-hO's
to the late 50's there were politicians who bore the expectations of the
people, such as Ichiro Kono, Yasuhiro Nakasone and Hakuei Ishida. But now
there is no politician with such popularity with the people.

[C] Don't the people have the feeling that only Kakuei has the vigor to do

what should be done for the country and speaks out, for example, on what
should be the relationship with the opposition parties and what should the

policies be.

[A] Once there were popular supra-partisan politicians in the opposition
parties, Such as Inajiro Asanuma. The present popularity of Kakuei is similar
to a Inajiro Asanuna style popularity.

[B] That's right. 0n the other hand, it is also like the strength of Ichiro
Kono. Unfortunately, there is not even one other person besides Rakuei.

Hichio Watanahe, Lone Half

[A] In essence. I think it is Nakasone who should have the popularity now.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rvn Ul'rnsuu. Unla- van-a

[Bl Somehow no popularity has gushed forth to him.
[A] Hakasone's popularity came in the mid 50's when he was a young officer.

[D] When he was a leader of the young men. Now that the handsome fellow
with the young man's topknot has become bald, you can't very well call him
handsome. (Laughter)

[B] About the time he was the leader of the young men. this man was not
called an opportunist.

[A] He wasn't called that. He was someone who gave the image of being ex-
tremely militant.

[C] He was the most splendid when he was rampaging under Ichiro Keno.

[Bl Next to Kakuei. isn't it Michio Hatanabe who is the topic of barbershop
political conversations?

[A] That's right. But won't the time come when the people gradually get
tired if his talk is simply interesting? Where is the difference between
Kakuei and Hichio Hatanabe?

[D] Hstanabe doesn't have Lockheed! (Laughter)

[B] Kakuei Tanaka now has fallen from being "imperial adviser" to accused
defendant, and that is the literary, or historical, narrative of the mutabili-
ty of life. But in the case of Hichio Hatanabe. it is as though Hitotsubashi

University is making the talk interesting.

[C] Hichio Hatanabe's popularity came from his seeking a quarrel with the
medical association which was taboo; and as for where is Hichio Hatsnabe's
excellence, it is only his quarrel with the medical association.

[8] One more positive point of Hichio Hatanabe is that he appears on TV

and speaks intelligibly on such subjects as public finance and medical insur-
ance, and makes politics familiar to the people. Quarrels and commentaries
---those two points, right?

[Question] His services were greatly conducive to the zero ceiling decision
in this special session on administrative reform.

[81 I think so too.
[C] But he is. after all. just a lone wolf. He is not a person who will
move up. He is not someone who can gather together people and build up power.

He is in the category of Honjiro Kogarashi and others; he won't he s Hidegoro
Omaeda.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[B] I don‘t think that‘s quite right. He always pulls together five or six
people. For example, Hirofuni ﬂute and Ibei chi...

[C] But it is just because Hicbio Hatansbe is finance minister that stray
birds flock around accidently. Nakagawa has for sore of the character of boss.

[A] Oh yes, that's right.
Rokusuke Tanaka. Prominent Political Fundraiser

[C] Nakagawa waged his own flesh and blood in this past election; at any rate
for 2 or 3 supporters.

[B] Coupared to Nskagawa, isn't Hatsnabe too intelligent and cunning and
causes others to exercise caution?

{cl Isn't it just the opposite. I feel Ratsnsbe is a superior but ill-natured
person; Nakagawa is quite the scoundrel but is kind-hearted. Therefore, al-
though he won't be a Ridegoro Onaeda, he is somewhat like a Chuji Kunisada.

[D] Watanabe is too sharp. I don't think Nskagsws is smart, but somehow is
dependable...

[A] The latter is preferable as a politician's disposition.

[6] Everything has gone too well for Michio; he has never stood in a place
where the sun doesn't sine. Nakagawa was deprived of a possible role because

he opposed Ohira.
[Question] Hhat about his ability to raise political funds?

[C] If anyone would conquer the whole country with his ability to raise funds,
it would be Rokusuke Tanaka.

[A] Is he the. renarkable?

[c] Yes. In addition to that. this nan is not especially skillful at speak-
ing like Hichio Hatanabe or Ichiro Nakagawa. nor does he have any star-like
qualities. but concerning his behind-the-scenes political power and the like.
whether it is true or not, he has publicized that he set up two cabinets. the
Ohira cabinet and the Suzuki cabinet. (Laughter)

[B] At any rate, that is because he pulls together no less than 50 Diet neu-
bers.

[C] To look at him. he has no appeal at all. Hatanabe has appeal in his own
way; Nskagawa has appeal in his own way. Compared to them, Rokusuke Tanaka

has new leader appeal neither in speech nor countenance. However, speaking
of the role he performed in actually sowing politics, aside fro- whether it

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is true or not, during the Ohira and Suzuki govern-ants, he was at the scene
where he can say, "I set up two cabinets." If he wasn't there, he couldn't
even tell the lie. (Laughter)

[D] Concerning his ability to raise political funds. I think whether he can

raise political funds or not will deter-ins his future when he resigns as
HITI minister.

[A] Isn't Hatanabe himself setting up a new to gather in money by using his
position as finance minister?

[B] I think Nakagawa's and Hatanabe's ability to raise funds will probably
continue even after leaving their posts, but in Rokusuke's case, won't he
fall noticeable when he leaves his post?

[C] However. now it is only Rokusuki Tanska who is collecting money and giv-
ing it to every'ne in the Suzuki faction.

[D] I don't think that's true.

[A] At any rate. it is certain that Rokuauke Tanaka has started to stand
in the new leader section since he became HITI minister.

[C] The order of our conversation is reversed but as for the new leader
champions, they are Takeshita and Abe, after all. Watanabe. Nakagswa and
Rokusuke Tanaka are below then. But it is sinply because Rokusuke Tanaka
and Natanabe are by chance in the nost fortunate positions that they became
subjects first, but if Hatanabe and Tanaka step down as ministers, they
would not have been sujects of our talks for an hour. On these points.
Tskeshita is now in the most unfortunate situation.

[Question] Takeshita once tried to take arms against Tanaka. Isn't his
popularity low because that was unfinished?

[C] It is outrageous for him to have taken up arms. Without Tanska, Take-
shita doesn't exist. Noboru Iakeshita has leaning because of the Tanaka
faction.

[8] Supporting the generation change theory. Takeshita set up the neo-liber-
alisn research society together with Shintaro abs and Kiichi Hiyazawa. That
incurred Kakuei's wrath.

[D] That's why he was made to scrub the floor. (Laughter)

[8] But that neoliberslisn research society was significant. It seems that
both Tanaka and Fukuda held down that society in that format, but as a result,
the new leaders becane finance minister and chairman of the Policy Research
Committee, and thus it can be said doors to various important posts were
opened. Without that society. control by the elders, the so-ealled era of
the influential political leaders, would have continued.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Shintaro Abe's Favorable Terne

[Question] How about Ganri Yamasbita or Toknsaburo Kozaka of the Tanaka
faction?

[c] Such persons can in no way be new leaders. Ganri Yameshita is a made-up
innge. Kozaka is not even a topic of conversation within the faction.

[B] If some accident happened to Tanaka, up to 90 percent of the Tenaka
faction would stay with Takeshita.

[C] No, it would be with Nikaido. If something happened to Tanaka and
Nikaido. 90 percent would go to Takeshita.

[3] Almost no one would stay with Ganri Yamashita. Thirty percent would
follow Kozaka.

[A] What about Kanamaru?

[B] He is Takeshita's guardian. Don't nore than half of the 90 percent
who would follow Takeshite idolize Kane-aru's virtues.

[C] At any rate, because Tanaka equals Takeshita, Takeehita cannot survive
if he rebels against Tanaka. The way for Takeehita to survie is to earnestly
and loyally serve Tanaka.

[Question] Tanaka is looking after Takeahita thinking he's an excellent fel-
low. As for those in the Tanaka faction. they pretend to be following after
Trkeshita because Kakuei is looking after him. But, should Tanaka have an
accident, isn't there the possibility they would converge not on Takeshita
but on another?

[Cl Just the opposite. Although Takeehita was acre or less given a cold
shOulder by Tanaka, I think the majority was sympathetic to Thkeshita.

[8] Therefore, it resembles when the Seto faction dissolved into the Tanaka
faction an! Fukuda faction, most went to Tanaka who had more or less been ig-
nored by Soto.

[C] Now, Ganri Yamashita is called a fine fellow by Tanaka. But no one
would follow him. Kakuei thinks Takeshita is the leader of the young genera-
tion who seeks a quick change of leadership, and sometimes talks ill behind
his (Tanake's) back---the rascal. Even so, he recognizes the strength of

the Tekeshite-Ksnamaru group and thinks he has to keep them close at hand
even while holding then in check.

[0] As for my view of the future, I think Shintaro Abe will certainly be
the first among the present new leaders to assune political power.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'vn Utttwuu. UDG UNI-l

[Question] "by do you say that?

[D] One reason is Fukuda's age. No matter how much he persists, Pukuda
has only 3 or 6 years left. He is in the fortunate position of having an
old boss. Secondly. he has no rival in the Pukuda faction. Thirdly, be
is neither a skillful speaker nor particularly sharp, but he stands above
others--sha11 we call him an absent-inded young man or young leader--and
he has the personality to be a natural leader of others.

[A] Both Rakagawa and Takeshita are nini-Tanaka types. however, they are
not, after all, aen who can outstrip Kakuei Tanaka. Fortunately or unfor-
tunately, because Abe belongs to a different type of politician, there is
absolutely no way he can be compared to Tanaka. That is also to his credit.

[5] One more point. He doesn't give the image of being extremely sharp,

but he has a sense of balance. As far as the Fukuda faction's course is con-
cerned, it is hawkish and to the right and it would not be strange if he ran
to the far right like Nakagewa. But within the Fukuda faction, he is a per-
son who gives a sense of security that he won't fly away fro. the conserva-
tive main current.

Noboru Takeshlta's Survival Path

[D] Contrary to other new leaders. he doesn't have to strain to bring in
money.

[C] Yes, that's right. He doesn't have to make any effort at all. Kishi
is looking after him.

[3] Coapared tc him. Rokusuke Tanaka is trying so hard.
[C] Frantically. (Laughter)

[A] Nakagawa is also working hard.

[3] That isn't so for Takeshita or Abe.

[Cl Takeshita once tried hard, but now he has become very quiet. The road
to a new life for Takcshita is to be forgotten by the public.

[C] It is better for him to disappear from the topic of now leaders.

[Question] How is the relationship between Takeshita and Nikaido? For example,
in a situation where some accident happened to Tanaka, wouldn't the Nikaido
faction and Takeshita faction split?

[C] No. No doubt, Nikaido would be the one turned to.

[3] However, that quiet strength of Nikaido has gradually cone to shine.
After Zenko. it will be Nikaido, and after Nikaido, Shintaro Abe.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[A] If "dirty" Nikaido becomes prime minister, won't there be various troubles
inside the 10??

[C] "Dirty official" is a word used only by the ease media and the opposition
parties. No one thinks Nikaida is a dirty official.

[Question] Didn't he get money from All Nippon Airlines?

[C] If he said he didn't get any money, then he didn't get any. (Laughter)
But if receiving money is dirty, there aren't any politicians who are not
dirty. (Laughter) Moreover, as for having received 5 nillion, if that is
dirty, I don't think there are any politicians who are not dirty. Hr..x,

if such is the case, then you are pitch black. (Laughter)

[Mr. x] No. I am told I'm deep red.

[B] As for Nikaido's personality. he is a simple, gocd man. I have that
impression. A negative criticism of him is that he is wrapped up too much
in Kakuei's shadow. Finally, whether :here is a Nikaido government depends
on how the public digests the problem of Rakuei.

[A] Therefore, conversely speaking, given a situation where Kakuei Tanaka
has an accident and dies and a Nikaido government assumes power, or a situ-
ation where Nikaido takes over the government with Tanaka still alive, the
public would have strong opposition to the latter.

[8] I think that there is also a case where there would be an atmosphere
which allows Nikaido if Kakuei is not around. A Nikaido government would
be easier if Kakuei is not around.

[C] Kakuei won't fall. He'll be around for another hundred years! (Laughter)

[A] But if Nikaido assumes power while Kakuei is around, won't there be
quite a bit of confusion? For example, if Kakuei's trail judges him innocent
and at the time Nikaido happends to be prime minister, it will seem that pol-
itical power controls even the judicial power.

[C] Everything is being put in order before that.
[D] Everything will probably be put in order by the fall of next year.
Tokusaburo Kozaka's Limits

[C] Hell, it is coannn sense to say it will be either Nakasone or Nikaido
after Zenko, but depending on circumstances, there is szsmoto, a dark horse.
After him, it will be the era of Shintaro Abe, Noboru Takeshita, Rokusuke
Tnnnka, Ichiro Nnkagaws and Hichio Natanabe. Oh, I forgot---we have to add
in Kiichi Miyazawa for the time being. Nikaido and Nakesone are of the same
rank. If Kakuei says Nikaido, it will be Nikaido; if he says Nakasone, it

will be Nakaeone. If these two are not possible, then Kawamoto or Hiyszawa
will emerge.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LUA\ Uaaob-m- ~v— sac..-

[A] I still think Tokusaburo Kouka is possible.

[C] No. Kazaka's biggest minus point is that he' doesn't have the experience
of being on the bottom rung of the ladder. In his case, when he was a first
and second year member, he did not acquire a sense of how to regulate by
suffering with his companions on committees, suffering in the deliberations
on the price of rice, nor in laying the groundwork here and there for electric
rate increases. He came forth from the outset saying, "I'll be a new leader,"
and he is, so to speak, one of those who are taco-ended from above to the
political world.

[D] he is in line with Aiichiro Fujiyama, Naoto Ichimnds and Tatsunosuke
Takasaki.

[B] In that sense, won't he follow the same fate as Shintaro Ishihara who
failed?

[A] Koaaka cannot be called a candidate for prime minister if he is so afraid
and intimidated by Bamako.

[C] Each has suffered being on the lowest rung of the ladder. Rokusuke
Tanaka is now showily handling the position of MIT! minister. but he has suf-
fered niserably at the lowest rung in order to support the Ohira cabinet

as vice chairman of the Diet Policy Comittee when Abe was chairman. So
each has his own suffering.

[B] The reason Hiyazawa is not more attractive is that he became minister
while quite young and so he has not experienced the bottom rung.

[C] Therefore. he has no sympathy from his companions. Takeshita, Abe,
Rokusuke Tanaka, Nakagawa, Hatanabe, they all have the mutual experience of
the bottom rung. Therefore, a mutual feeling of fellowship exists.

[D] The reason Kozaka somehow isn't popular is because he came from the
financial world. and has a mean spirit of not wanting to be a repetition of
Aichiro Fujiyama. 0n the other hand. if he is in the mood or spirit to
pour all that financial power into politics, saying it's fine if I am a
repeat of Fujiyama, I think he would become more popular because that would
be transmitted to others. I think there is no hope as long as he plays ten-
nis, cruises on yachts and worries about having his fortune dwindle.

[B] As for someone in the New Liberal Club, the reason it is said that
Toshio Yamaguchi, rather than Yohei Kano, has gradually won trust is probably
because there is the feeling about him that he has suffered and scrubbed
floors.

[C] If Tokusaburo Kozaka joined the Suzuki faction, a little more could be
done. lie joined the Tanaka faction even though he is older than Kakuei
Tanaka; isn't that political suicide?

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[B] The limits of his political sense can be understood when one looks at
the fact he joined the Tanaka faction.

Odds-on Favorite and Competitor in Prime Hinister Race
[Question] If you were to buy a parimutuel ticket in the post-Suzuki prime

minister race, who would be the odds-on favorite, the cmetitor and the
dark horse?

[C] Nikaido and Nakesone. lo and lo; Kawamoto and Hiyauwa, l and l.

[A] In terms of the significance of the post-Suzuki prime minister, it won't
be Rokusuke Tanaka. Nakagawa or Abe.

[B] Isn't Pukuda also about 0.5?

[C] I don't think so.

[D] Aside from how long the Suzuki government will last, it will be Nakasone,
a; Nikaido. 3; and Kawamoto, 2. The reason Hiyazawa is one is because there
could not be a third generation prime minister from the Kochikai. But if he
became prime minister, I give him a 1 because he would do well.

[Question] What about successive victories and double entries? For examle,
next would be Takeshita.'

[C] Then is would be Nikaido and Abe.

[A] Nakesone and Takeshita.

[B] I think Nakasone and Abe.

[Question] what about Zenko Suzuki's reelection in November next year?
[A] I think that has the strongest possibility.

[D] 1 think so too.

[Question] If Suzuki should fall, what would be the hurdles besides health
reasons?

[C] If the Tanaka faction leaves him.

[Question] Even if he gains no points politically. won't he continue as
long as the Tanoka faction is with him?

[cl Right.

[A] Tanaka won't leave him. For Tanaka, he is the most convenient prime
minister imaginable.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

[D] Now he is good for both the Tanska faction and the Fukuda faction.
There is a strange sense of security in that.

[C] There is another case. After Suzuki's reelection, lakuei Tanaka would
be prime minister.

[A] He finally appeared: (Laughter)
[B] That won't happen.

[c] If so. those who have been subjects of our discussions would all fly
away.

[A] Kakuei himself is not considering such a thing.
[D] What about his real intention?

[C] Only Tanaka knows that. However, because he intends to be active for
another 20 years or so, he would be a splendid post-Suzuki candidate. Right
now he thinks of nothing but having the courts declare him innocent.

[D] of course from his perspective, isn't his feeling one of how do I live

the rest of my life if politics is taken away from me. Actually, it's quite
distressing.

[8] Seeing him recently, I think he is getting more and more into a fascist
predisposition. Let's do our utmost so that such a person doesn't become
prime minister. (Laughter)

[A] If Suzuki continues another two years, how old will Kakuei be.

[8] 65. He's still young. isn't he?

Zenko who Made Politics Boring

[C] If Tanaka is reinstated, all the present new leaders would fly away.
Following him. it would he the era of the new "new leaders."

[A] Should Tsnaka be made prime minister one more time, the impression of
the new leaders would be that indeed they were negligent and extremely shabby.

[8] In such a case. what wOuld the ﬂakagsws and Abe group do?
[D] Perhaps split the party.
[C] They aren't capable of such resolution.

[D] However. when they tried to form a reformed liberal party, they would
have left if Fukuda had not said, "stop."

12

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
[B] No, they couldn‘t leave.

[C] They can't leave. Japan is a country where Hitsuhide Akechi could not
take over the whole country. One will take power in the end if one waits

faithfully for his turn within the system. Therefore. Ieyasu Tokugawa took
over the country. There is no one in 2,000 years of history who has seized

political power from outside the system.
[DI Hhat about Nobunaga Oda?

[C] He took advantage of Ashikaga as "shogun." At any rate, insurgents have
all failed.

[3] It means that the season of uninteresting politics will continue a little
while longer.

[C] One sees that when one reads newspaper articles on politics. There has
perhaps been no time as uninteresting as now.

[D] Yesterday when I went to the Ginza, there was talk of nothing but Hotoko
Ito. '

[A] Politics isn't a topic. When it was a question of whether Tanaka or
Fukuda, arguments about the political situation were barbershop talk. but
when it's a question of either Nakasone or Nikaido. it won't even become
a topic of barbershop political talk.

[B] In the same way, whether it‘s Abe or Takeshita just won't become a topic.

[C] On that point, the stars have all disappeared. since Suzuki, the expec-
tations toward the prime minister have gradually lessened.

[A] Zenko made politics boring.
[D] It's too bad but everyone supported him.

[CI Nothing is more fundamentally uninteresting than politics supported by
everyone.

[B] Since interesting politics lasted for eight years, we are now resting.

[D] we're tired. Tired from the 40 day dispute and the drama of dissolution.
We were too active for a year.

[A] The dissolution put a stop to everything. It was thought that just
couldn't be.-

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[BI Won't cvvryouc start to get bored and begin to grow restless again
around the (all u[ next year?

COPYRIGHT: The Shokun 1981

9‘00
CSO: 5120/13

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICM.

FOR OFFICIAL l'SF. (NI)

CAB 1 NET RESIIU FPLF. FOCUS 0F POLIT ICAL ACT IV IT 155

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 2 Nov 81 p 1

[Text]

Activities in Jenna‘s poli-
lictti world are qnlcitly
(«reusing on the expected
cabinet reatmﬂlc toward the
cud or this month. now that
the gowrnmcnt-proposcd
umnibus odmintrtrative end
tin-at reform blil hns been
unmoved by the house of
Representatives. lnlormcd
sources said Sunday.

The cannon-rain! bill on
which Suzuki said he would
stake his political life has
been the main business 0!
the present eximordittory
Dirt session.

To be carried out xlrnul-
uncanny with the cabinet
reshume will be a new line-
up oi three key executives
at the ruling utterei-Dvmo-
cmtlc Party tLDPl. whose
president ls Prvmler Sututti
liiinsoli.

tntormed mnrccx mid
tin-re wen- neurly 100 LB?
"11'“ who were qualiﬁed for
the 20 cabinet putt, and
they were utrcndy In it herit-
Ni rhco tor the “Mix

Brahms. lurUttti leaders
within the LDP are shaping
up their strait-Ky to win
the LDP's r-rrtldi-ntiul cloc-
timt which automatically
nromim-s ltu- premiers post.
The elm-tum is :thdiilﬂ' to
he held in .mtumn 1982.

't'hexr- dowtupinrnts nth-
u-u-d mom-ninth on October
:23 when tnrrni-r premier:
Knttuei Tunnita mid Taboo
t-‘ulmdn. who had been on

bod terms tor mnny years.
met at 3 Japanese recum-
took
place while Snark! no out
of the country to attend the
North-South summit in
Cancun, Venice. and touch-
ed oi! e rumor thnt the Te-

ront in Tokyo. This

unlit—Funk“
two inciione led by them.

faction on

it would help him win poli-

tical bottles in the future.

The heated race tor cubi-
perty executive
positions end the premier-
ship is reﬂected in u my

pertiu
through
the end of the yes: (or ID?

not pom.

u 15 tund-reielng
scheduled from now

"seller-5'

careful
cabinet members.

This nrtau mm the «at

w reellred tollowing the
unexpected deeth oi former
prime minister Imyoehi

3”“

Ohm. which ereoted

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oonierenoe
marked e thaw between the

AI in: u the cannot I'll-
shume ll Concerned. it II n
market." polltleel
observers sold, shrine almost
a tree head to Premier au-
zuki. but he must be very
in oelectiiu new

ittlcnl vecuuin within the
rum party.

Our mistake by Sunni in
the cobth reithuine will
endanger his post in the
next Lb? puddentinl elec-
tion scheduled ior next au-
tumn. the women said.

The moot cruciel points in
the reshuﬂte involve the
poet of the petty secretary.
(orient. followed by the two
other party mentive poets:
end whether or not Admin-
istrative “enactment Agen-
cy Director-General Yem-
hiro Huuone and m-
nomic Planning Agency
Director-General mhlo Ko-
moto would remain within

under en agreement
Irrived at between thece
(notions end moot other

poet of the
cut should so to {action-
other then thet of sum
to ovoid unfair rule of the

rty.
Under the «romances.
Hm (IFFIUAI. IESI'. (INIA

Informed sources said, So-
vuki is considering appoint-
lnu Executive Board Chair-
man Shaumu Nikaido to the
pmt. but this is oppoaed by
the Fukudn faction on the
ground that Nikaido is 'ra-
naka's closest nide.

Suzuki faction members
also oppose lenido's ap-
pointment to the key post.
They Say that the coffers
of the party would go under
Nikaido‘s control, and
moreover the next LDP
presidential election would
be run as Tamika liked.

The 20 members of the
Suzuki cabinet comprise
three members each from
the Suzuki. Tanaka and
Pukuda foctionx. two each
Il‘otl‘i the Nairosone and Ko-
moto factions. one from the
Naknxawu faction, three
who are not utililnted with
any faction and three
members or the Home 0!
Councilnrx.

The Tamika faction.
which has swelled to 105
members, or the largest
amount the LDP factions. is
crowded with candidates
struggling to get a cabinet
post.

The struggling is so in-
tense that some Tanaka
faction members have even
called on the Suzuki fac-
tion to refrain as much as
poerlhe trorn trying to
secure a cabinet post. "if
Suzuki wants to he reelect-

DAILY YOMIUKI 1981

16

ed LOP president through
the next election."

The Tartan faction has
been driven into a tight
corner arter the former
wife of Milo lucmoto.
former secretary of Tana-
ka. recently untitled in the
Tokyo District Court that
her err-husband had receiv-
ed a $600 million bribe
iron Lockheed Aircraft
Contention through uaruo
bent Corporation.

Nevertheless. it is not oer-
taln if the testimony will
really hurt the action In
the forthcoming reshume
of the key cabinet and par-
ty poets.

Some ohervera believe
that Tanaka would do his
utmost to increase his fac-
tion's influence both in the
party and the cabinet in
desperate efforts to main-
tain his prestige.

Indications also are that
Suzuki is expected to re-
tain both Nekasone and
Komoto within his cabinet
to avoid any unrest within
the LDP. .

Suzuki then wants to
tour the Middle East and
visit the US and China to
strengthen his position be-
fore the LDP presidential
election. the sources said.

On Sunday, Komoto was
reported to have decided to
remain within the Bunk!
cabinet accepting Susan's
requeat to this efiect.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

CABINET RESllUFFLl-Z: WHO WILL BF. FOREIGN MINISTER

Tokyo ASAlll EVENING NEWS in English 3 Oct: 81 p 3

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO :

The annual political game
of musical chairs ﬁts into full
swing soon end there are four
veteran conservative politi-
cians already emerging as Ja-
pan's next possible foreign
minister.

Prime Minister Suzuki is ex-
pected to reshuffle his Cabinet
after the end of the current
extraordinary session of the
Diet in mid-November.

The firing and bli'il' of
Cabinet minisers is overdue
for Sumti. His predecessors
normally re their Cabi'
net makeup every l2 months
or so.

Suzuki became party presi-
dent and prime minister in
the summer of 1980 following
the untimely death of Mass-
yoshi Obits.

Some ministers. notably
beads of LB? factions. have
been spared from the ax. but
many men in the Zomba
Cabinet barely have survived
more than a year.

Foreign Minister Sumo
Sonods. a World War ll pers-
troop officer who was brought
to his present post after his
predecessor resigned in pro-
test in May in a dispute stem-
min; from the interpretation
of a joint Japan-us. com-
munique, may survive. so
cording to rumors ﬂouting in
the political vineyard.

But others say Sonods may
face three toes-Shintarn Abe.
chairman of the LDP Policy
Board. Ymhio Sakursuchi.
LDP seeretarymeneral and
Mssumi Esnlti. a former min-

ASAlll EVENING NEVS

6120/53

isterofinternationaltndeasd
industry.

'l‘hoaewbobetonSonoda
meootheiobsayhebas
been bispruentpoettor
onlyafewmonths. Sands
bungled shortly snarl-ero-
placed forthorei Mio-
ister Maaayoahl Ito th s ro-
markthatseotnmuniqnedid

notmsananation’ai'nrgisn

policy.
Diplomacy is not

has specialized during most

lu'spolltlalcareerlnbeltbtli'

WW?

affairs.
Abe, regarded as a'
tial eoruervatlve party m:
has not served as foreign min-
ister. '
Salurauebi is reported to be
interested in ﬁtting a Cabinet
post. Foreign inistry otficials
call him a top political figure
rieguin experierioe. tl
reauents spparen y are
more favorable to Sakurauchl
than Stooda. who tends to dis-
y is strong Mm
Grader Sakutaucbtr {claim
service oifieers believe they
could reconstruct the nation
diplomacy guided by bureau-
mBsahu' ’ is idt be trendy
as o 1
Interested in getting back to
the “front stag.“ as be has
been an from any Cabinet
miniateria post for sometime.
ile recently visited the
Middle East and flew to Cairo
following the assassination of

1981

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

od
ibaveas

Minister Suzuki's tent, at a

but in the ﬁnal analysis, it's
up to Prime Minister Suzuki
t acids who he warns to
hie-foam minister.

e
33
3%
g“
ti

g 53;
e 5.33

2%- it:
fféiiiiazti

i
3
E
i

3
2
I-‘(Ili ()H’K'IM. IESI- UNI)

POLITICAL AND ISOCIOLOGICAL

FUKUDA-TANAKA MEETING REVIEWED

Tokyo Th5 DAILY YOMIURI in English 30 Oct 81 p 3

[Article by Raisuke Honda in

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:
4120/53

050:

The uhmhmunmﬂ and unexpected meet-
ma oi ioruwr pmm- ministers unmet 'i'a-
tziltn anti Tattoo Fukuda :utwnlahed the
political world. nlthouuh there are good
muons on both side: to repair their rup-
tured relations.

The Tnnuka-Nkudu talks were really a
surprise. The two have had very chilly
relations and have never met since 'l’a-
mikn resigned as premier under tire for
his "money-power politics" in 1914. ai-
though the hnnku and Pukiida faction:
now saw a: two separate mainstay: ot
the Suzuki government.

A little more than dozen years ago. Ta-
mika and Minnie used to he called the
two main pillars oi the administration oi
the late Eisuku Soto.

Tanaita did much (or the long life at
the Soto cabinet through his services
in raising: political iunde tor the Liberal-
Dornocrutic Party ”.09; Mid handling
other party ni‘lalrs.

Mudu. tor his part. played an impor-
tant role in helping iorrnulate and imple-
ment key policies or the Sato government.

At the end oi the Soto cabinet in me.
however, Tnnaka acted contrary to the
wishes oi the late snto who wanted Fuku-
da to become his successor.

When ‘i‘annka ran in the m2 presiden-
tial election tor LDP president and defeat-
ed Nkudn. they had a bitter telling out.

Why. then. did the two hold the“ per-
sonni thiizs utter so many years oi en-
may?

it is bl‘ul'vcd that n senior member oi
lite i‘uktttitt (notion. Mitstio Setoyama.
:u'tcd us "no-between" [or the Maha-
r'tikudu rrcnm-llintion talks.

According to L0? sources. Bctoyalna ar-
ranged the talks between Tannin end hi-
itudn OVI'I’ lunch at a Japanese reetaumnt
nem- the Diet building inst Friday with
ionncr Deli-me Attenry director-general
'l‘oxutoru Klmurn on host.

Setoyiuun. who In said eager to get
i-ither oi lhc three executive mete oi the
LDP in Itu- torthcomint: reahuilie to the
cabinet and party lineup, reportedly had

THE DAILY YOMIURI 1981

18

"Political Beat" column]

naked Kimire to invite Tanaka end In-
kuda to the luncheon. The two attended
a partyheld iut summer in honor at Ki-
mun.

Apparently with a .view to pinyin:
down the signiﬁcance oi hie am with
Tanaka.mmwaeqootedhy hhaidee
u uying: "I accepted xitnura’a invita-
uon only because he told _
would many attending the luncheon, in-
eludtna Ilr Tartan 1 was realty W
onlyiourcanetothenm' '1»-
thing important we: W‘ [any
ueanwhile, Tonal-I la quoted a} win:
told in advance that

attention paid to the Nata-Mada
meeting became it came only-a month
heiore the reehuii'lo oi the sun» and
party lineup scheduled tor late November.

A: 1.1)? Dietman well iniorme‘d oi the
party's interiactional relationa‘ eeya: “The
rtatnly' a great boon to

have talks with Malta." he continued.
“hut “rude seem to have not yet given
up the idea or taking the reins of govern-
ment again."

"it no. it in only natural for Moda to
want to meet Tannin to end their awk-
ward relations." the Dietitian speculated.

Prime minister Sunk] was reportedly
inionned oi the Tanah-Pukuda talks
while in Concun Hexioo. for the summit
conierenee oi rich and poor countries.

Suzuki reportedly kept hie composure
when hearing the news, saying only. “That
is not oi any signiﬁcance."

However. he may very well he ieelin:
very uneasy that the two main support-
ere of his government went into a huddle
when he was out of Japan.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070061-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITIOKL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

SUZUKI'S HANS RIPENING FOR PERSONNEL RESHUFPLB

[Article by Takehtko Takahashtl

[Text]

The Extraordinary Diet
session now under way is
scheduled to continue to Nov.
17. An extension may be
inevitable. LDP Secretary
General Yoshio Saturn-chi has
stated that he would like to see
the Diet work concluded by
Nov. 26. Since the term oi oiiice
oi the LDP ofﬁcers will ter-
minate on Nov. 27. what
Sakurauchi means is that he
would like to have the Diet
sessionendedby then.

Prime Minister Zenlto Suzuki
has been thinking trom some
time in the past oi carrying out
a cabinet reshuiile together
with a change oi party oiiicers.
But because at Justice Minister
Seisuke Okuno's statement
concerning the testimony by
Enomoto's divorced «tie. the
Diet may be extended longer
than earlier anticipated. Voices
have been heard within the 1.0?
that ll might be diiiicult tobrtng
the Diet session to an end by
Novlﬁ.

The late Prime Minister
llayato lkeda liked to carry out
a cabinet reshultle on the ”8"
days oi the month. that is. on
the 31h. 18th and 28th. It is
bt-Iieted that this was because
the Japanese ideograph tor "t”
can be seen to "open up toward

Tokyo MINICHI MILY NEWS in English 11 Nov 81 p 2

the end" 2631B
oonslderthisaluck

There is a cost:
ior certain days
sidered"lucity"an
days to be t
'unluclLy" For a
day called "Taia
ted-never a -

“3qu“ S
day oi "l'omobiltl
ioraiuneral.

In the liﬂit oi
stltion. it is thougl
Minister Suzuki
carry out a res‘
cabinetandpaﬂy
2 aiter the Diet
This is becaust
Wednesday. is al
"Talan."

Rumors!

Many rumors
circuiattngastol
cabinet and part:
consider sot
possibilities

LDP secreta
Considered as it
candidate is Su
tTanalta iacti
chairman otthel
Council. Becaus
involvement in
scandal. Niltaid

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4
nam— =n idea 3!. 68nd— a
.2539 235:6 so 23..“
$2.23 maﬁa...

2:63.. 33% :8 .33.,»
.223. 33 5.533 :5 :3...
3 mSaoSw 2333 5: =8

2.3.8.33 :5 8252.2.
E2 33.2. was“ .5222
5.82 3.5.8 5: 2 855
9:5. :53 a 50383 2.
85.2. 52 13.3» 3552.
$5.5 in! sea 32.23
2:65.. pm .8.”qu «433..
7.25.359 33.2. 3.53
55.32. 3.3.. 3.53» a
«:26: 828.. 8 31% =5
:3. “.2sz «253. 8:3
.33 :5 9.25 .25... .a so
:3. 25.7.2“. :83 53. an 3
“.8385 23: S 323 a
25.3 :2: :8 33385
:33. 38.8 :28...

925.3
32. 2 .
woman—.2“
“.335 a.
25 95.?
Era—.4 u
mean» .2
so 989
2:822.
.235 a
.5222. 7
sum was”
~33»; _
32:2. _
2.83 2.
a: s: 5
23:5 2
2:: was
2:85:
92:2
Varanasi
33. E.
:0 as :0— no— sin 5:. (Ed-
noazﬁp 92.293 5.2:
2:332». nag—o =8 32
52 54 $53 .85 Sou—an
32:33 2 5a «was .955:
32.2.. .3; 33:25; a?
2:8 5 o Sax 2 §3§~§
5 9‘ 3.6.53 2 836.. u?
E...» 3233 .8 u. :8 to...
29 :5.an 25 2.23529.
$.90 :2. Eu 3:: 3 :5
2.56 35.95.“ 2:2». 3a..
333. we. 53 333: :8 2.
E9392 2 =5 v.55: 92:2.

58 3:58.. 8 35% m :93:
3.1.53.9. 253533 g 3.0
299 o. .392. m @6833... :3
3:0 3:9 :23 8 939.8
98.22.. :8 2.58 5 8» 8..
2.0 56 .3535... B :8
305 333 .2. 82.. on...
2!...

mega 93 8.3 883.
28 a. 8.2. 3.35 9:89
awn-on”

I933 ch. 9633.8.
5 .30 62.3 7.0.83“ 555.
o... :33: 5.». .. 39.3
82. 8550588.. :8 Cw.
=8 3 2.9. 8 2.0 So 38...

13332.5 3.32. cm.
p333“!!! mas... o :2?
.5: 5 so: after... 8593
v.39... 7.0 i=9 5.... 5 £2.
2 5... 2.32558... 2 5p. 3....
9m:— F’inn .553.- EB .=
3.. 3:: 332% .5 83:8 9..
“2...... 52;. .m .5 causes c.
3.26:» .15." 325...:
2.22.24. 1588 3...: =8
65...... 55:539.: .3 1236
252?... 1.5:: E... ”u. 32.?
32.. 3.62:. :6— 5... 2.55
35.13.. 5.: 325cm 8 .39—
23 .5682“. .5 5... :3." e.
5.. 556.5% 5.16:8 533
E. €2.55 :5 259.95.: 2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4

POLITICAL AND SOC IOLOCICAL

SETBACK IN JAPAN-SOVIET TIES

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 1 Nov 81 p 2

["Bchind the Scenes" column by Minoru Hirano]

[Text]

The cancellation of the Vi!"- to ISM

by Soviet Education Minister Mikhail A."

Prokoiyev chilled the mood for mending

the Japan-Soviet ienee which had' been.

building up aince the talks between Phe-
cign Minister Sonoda end hi4 Soviet coun-
terpart Andrei Groinyko In Septemher. The
cancellation reminded the Japanese, onoe
spin. the dichnlty oi Japan-Soviet rela-

tiorut
The mean for the cancellation was pro-

cedural. The Foreign Ministry decided to '

tune a specific visa instead of a diplomatic
viea on the grounds that Prokoiyev had
been invited by the Parliamentarians
league for Japan-Soviet Friendship and
his coming would be part 0! the Japan-
Sovlet exchanges or parliamentarians.
There are precedents where the ”reign
Ministry issued a specific visa ior Soviet
mullet": except Foreign Minister Gro-
my 0.

But this is only one side at the story.
After the Soviet invaaion oi Afghnniatnn.
the Japanese Oovemment [Nae high-level
omclal exchanges oi personnel With the
Soviet Union as port oi ita sanctions
against that country. Inasmuch as the

soviet troops still occupy Afghanistan, the'

Japanese Government cannot totally tilt
the sanctions. It the government issues it

oiplomntic visa [or Proloiyev. talks be-_

tween him and members oi the Japanedo
mhlnet will have to be arranged. and then
this will be taken as «sin: of the sane-
Lions.

The Soviet Union probably intended to
lind n my to make Japan liit lie-sanctions
against the Soviets. The Soviet Union save
that Sonoda and aromyko agreed to pro-
mote Japan-Soviet government-level con-
tacts. The Soviet Government issued diplo-

24

mile vista when Jam
including former toseign'

of that and that Japan. to:
of the us' and West my
net. via: ire-coy. . -. _
__'nie situation is— comp
hostilsaititude oi many 1:
and the countable attii
Cuddlm"

_eonsidersd an advocate.o

é-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00880R000400070061-4
FOR OFI-‘K'MI. USE ONLY

Meander nu; repenteiy. md' otter; r'ee
turning to Tokyo. he chimed he hog rety-
ed on e rnedieiot between the two unpr-

ed eonode'e foreign pellet-Iberian“
at 1 meeting oizthe liberal-mac
member: of the MO “Ottoman u-
eembly on Octoberrusehet Jenn.- .whieh
depends on the 08 for ite “annulment”.
could not hope to eerve u -n mediator
between the US end mm .W

Sonodn and um hove-1m
on bed terms SonoGn-wnewiiedbyhie
toes In the “heal-Dementic- Perv (LOP)
at a joint reunion of are LDP eonmittoee
on foreign. eeenrity end alter thin
Thursday tor hie nip 0! tongue on Jenna's
foreign relntlone.

'roBonode. muundernaoeennot
reneures the "reign Miniotryle
Mninetreun oﬂlcieie o: the Nreicn lin-
lstry attech top importance to upon-US
relations. end ere worried ehont looodn‘r
policy. There a e etronc mood anon;
them to consider Booodo en "inveder" he-
mure Sonode mined the poet oi foreign
minister succeeding thi- m. who
resigned by main: responsibility tor the
Japan-US Joint mtement.

Will aonode be ehle to rennin in the
rebinet to foreign minister overcoming
such I hitter mood nuinet‘hini? It do.
pends on Prime mum emer- Mg-
ment alone. The {ohm oi hunsuviet
relations hinges on whether Genoa rev
mains in the poet or not.

5

YOHIURI 1981

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

SOCIALIST PARTY CONVENTION PREPARATIONS UNDBRUAY

Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English It Nov 81 p 7

[Editorial : "JSP Convent lon”]

[Text]

The Japan Socialist Party hes"stnrted prep'srin; for in
national convention in February 1982. It has drawn up a draft
for the revision of “The ﬂood to Sociallln in Japan.“ Which
has hitherto been a party plstIortn in all but none: 'nih drait.
which was drawn up alter lengthy debete. will be entail” In'
the convention. There are also moves to hold an erection oi
the party chairman. in which all the party members will parti.
cipste. prior to the convention.

The draft for the reVIaion of ”Them to Socialism"
takes an unprecedentedly realistic View oi .the donsotic end
international scenes. and is clearly deﬁned to establish a new.
course (or the i9803. a course IMI'II tar more realistic thanthe
oncestahlished I5 yesrssphy'TheRoadtoSochllun.“ Let
uslookatthechancesintheparty'sapprsisaloflheexleting
situation and at the steps it intends to take to cope with this-
situation.

For instance. it recounts the inward multi-
polarization and diversification of Intonation! relations and'
shows signs oi trying to escape from the simple Iormula oi
East-West controntation. it also states that problems with
regardtoderhocracyarecotnrnontothesociallstcotsntrieesnd.
that this springs Irons political immaturity. In. the drive to
reform the existing situation. the petty. sccordlng to the drift.
will not restrict itsell to opposing the Government's policies.
but will encourage the foundation ot a dessoerstie socialist state
by means of greater participation in popular mu.

Butlntheprocessolarrivlngatthlsdranthsrerensain
stnpicions about just how much dehete there was concerning
the implications of developments in mm and Poland.
In addition. despite the fact that the lneslleetuale who prepared
thedralthsdtalten sshroadapointolviewsspoaslhle. it
seems that, when the dratt was presented Ior discussion by the
party. the rightists and leftists merely hickered otter it in terms
0! their own narrow views.

In this debate. the main thetne. which concerned the
socialist vision of the Itmre. was carried over as a study theme
until the end of I982. HenesIorth. ﬂute should not be con-
lined tothe party; it isltnpcrtantthatthehnsrsstoIthe general
public thould be aroused. \ '

i
e

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400070061-4
FOR ()I’FIUM. USE UNIX

This debate will he greatly attected by the 181’s system
of leadership. and the ability ol its leaders. Since these factors
are connected with the course the party takes. it is only natural
that there should be interest both inside and outside the party
concerning who will lead the party.

Recently. there have been a series 0! problems that have
exposed the weakness of Asultata's leadership. In addition to
the waverinp with respect to the *adteinistratlve reﬁorm Diet”
and the split in the .lSP‘a Tokyo Chapter. there is the lack of
consistency concerning the action policy tor the Upper House
nationaleonstituencyelectiwialﬂl The'pawle'aderaﬂnt
doeidedonapollcyotdlvidingdteconsdtueoeyhyrceioeso
that candidates would get votes principally [torn the regions to
which they are assigned. In the face of strong opposition from
the labor unions. however. it seems that the leadere are now in-
clim to retain to some ertent the present lorrnnla, by which
candidates get votes from labor unions.

The rightist (actions within the party. which are dissatisﬁed
with the present confused situation. are thinking of setting up
a candidate to oppose Asukata. Bot observers within the party.
and particularly the WWW that intend to continue sup-
porting Asokata, believe that these moves are aimed eventually
at winning the post of secretary-general for the right. and not
the chairmanship. If this is two. the laétional politickin; that
has been endemic in the party has clearly notheen laid to rest.

Perhaps the selection of party leaders by means of corn-
promises reached between factions cannot he helped. But there
is no serious debate in the JSP concernht. what system of
leadership is needed so that the long decline in the party‘s
strength can be arrested. It is only these faction] transactions
that are noticeable.

The party should take a lool: at the changes in the environ-
ment surrounding the party. In view 0! the hhot lederatlons'
moves to form a umlied front. the election d she'lSPleaden
will have greater slsnillcanee than ever.

An election in whlcltihctlonal W'mndbwed
too much play will create grads. and will further reduce the
energy of the party. The party should consider a roe-oil vote
in an election in which all the party members participate. This
would be appreciated by the general public. (Nov. 2)

i1 EVENING NEWS 1981

.3 7

FOR (lH-‘K'ML “SI: UNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

JAPAN, SUPERPOWER STRATEGY ANALYZBD

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 19,20.22,23,24.25,26,27.29,30,31 0C: 81

[ll-Part article by Ryochi Nishijime, Akire Saito, Tetou Takahm, Kozo Kunure,
Koichi Hamazaki and Yasuo Suzuki: "Japan and Superpower Strategy"]

[19 Oct 81 p 1]

[Text] ASDF Must Destroy 30 Percent of Invading Eneny Aircraft

There hes been a met
npheevel in the world. eon-
terinr on the Middle Best.
and President Dunn ep-
perentiy wenle to cope with
the situation with e diepley
ol‘ I’oree. 'l‘hie her brought
ebont e eerteln mount ot
ecrilnony front the Soviet
Union and other Europeen
nations.

Jepen. too. he: been preo-
sured to lneroeoe its delenee
copebliity end this he: pro-
nented the country with e
nulnber oi diﬂienlt proh-
lento.

This Le the dret of e eerlu
in which The Yenluri Shin:-
i'nn will review lenen‘o de-
tense problem no objective-
ly in poulhlepﬁdlior.

e e o

The metallic, earspiittlntt
roar of jet tighter pianos
lent the elr at the Air Seli-
Dvleme Force (A80?) been
at Chlwee, Hokkaido. in the.
c-uriy morning of October 6.

An order came down lrom
the Northern Air Ill-lens..-
Headquarters in Nisan-t,
Minion-ken. whic‘h mm-
mundx the Second \'-"In-. 1-in-
I'umcd et chltoee Air Bose:

"More then to plane: oi
an unidentiﬁed llulimluiily
are approaching Wat‘mnel
and Tnbeteu red-«r sites.

They ere in two-piene for-
motions. Toke oi! imme-
dletely end intercept."

Squedrone of lighter-e, el-
rcedy on etendby in the elr
over the hole. ﬂew north.
followd immedietely , by
We end not:- on etend-
M on the around.

All detenee mottlleetlon
order hed only been tented
in the etternoon of the pre-
vlone dey end the AM wee

not lolly preperod for no-
tien.

soon the lnvedinr pienee
were reported to hove et-
teamed lo rode! eltee in Hot-
keido end the Tohokn die-
trlct in northern nonehn.
and then uonnd-to-el! Inte-
eile hone neer the chiteoe
and ween elr heeee. .

Another report eeld that
about three of the A80?
lntereeptore lied been dent-
and end the number ol‘
damped pieneeweelnereee-
lnr. '

Thirty minntee inter. t
second were of lnvedinl
pleneo—ebout the eerne
number is helore—errived.
nae-nine thet the invedlne
loreee had complete” Mic-
ceeded in mountine t Oilf-
rrlse etteok.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These were the mump-
tione on which the A80!
eerrled out o ale-week oom-
prehenelve enerelee begin-
ning Octdher 8. '

A tote] of see pione- pine
«.000 member: 0! the A80!
were mobilised in the ex-
ereloe which we: conducted
else on the assumption that
the US could not help Jepen
beeenee it needed it: pienee
lor operetione in other
ereee. ' '

Jepen’e eir epoce lo
molded by :8 reder etetione
acroee the country. which
are linked to eeven A80?
eir heoee. oi: Nike end eight
Howe uound-to-eir nieelle
unite. There ere e ”to! or
ehoet aoo lntereeptore et the
eeven eir heoee.

In the front line. wording
northern upon. to the Bee-
ond'wuu otetionéd et Chi-
toee Air Beoe'wlth to let
lighten. oomprleine ﬂour
and m '

“A llehter-botnber ete-
tloned et e hose in slberle'e
Merltune Province would
teke only ebont 20 minute:
to cue the Jepen See end
this puto us under e greet
etreln. eeid Mei Gen 'rede-
yoehl Yonehewe. eonmender
of the.wlne.
Lt-Col Kyoll Susishlta. 4t.
commander of the some
liquedron oi Finds. end Lt
Col Shinso Shimide. 4i.
commander oi the 203m
Equedron of not», both
stressed. “We can't eiiord to
be deieeted."

The elr base was built 25
years ego and planes sie-
uoued there scrambled tor
the 2.000th time lest July
9. it appeared that the
pilots ut the air base were
haunted by thoughts 0! So-
viet pinnes because all Ihe
scrambles have been caused
by soviet elrrrait.

"There are very lew cost-I

oi single-seated lighter
planes ﬂying over the Ja-
non See." said Yonekuwu.
He said SOVIct planes ny-
lng over the Japan See are
electronic reconnaissance
planes such as T0105 and
'l‘U95s es well as mas de-
signed to collect lnlormn-
tlon. They make on over-
one 220 nights a your
around anen, he added.
The Soviet Union maln-
telns 2,210 slrrrnlt in the
For m: lesion and this

H2: 81 p 1]

i 1

FOR OFFICIAL l‘Sl-j ONLV

leem open the question of
how Jepen een emotive”
counter them.

'The _inein question is-
how my Soviet plenes
carrying bombs ere cepeblo
or ﬂying to Jupen?" eteﬂ
omcers renterhed.

"A inordinmn of too of
these planes would probebly
haVe this cepebtiity end too
oi their» would be deployed
in : limited invesion." they
set .

"in order to thwart their
plans." the stei! omoen
said. “we here to inﬂict es
much demos as pus-ton
on the landing pisnss st
the very outset of the con-
lllct.

"We must shoot down at
leest 80 percent of the so.-
viet plenes in the first end
second wens oi en in".
sion to mute the Soviets
nbsndon their invssion
plans.

".lepen stone is incens-
ble ol destroying all So-
vtet rnllitery eirereit ste-
tioned in the Per ﬁst.

'in order to

the Soviets on en oousl
lootlns. the government
must rebuild Jspen's de-
iense capability within the
iremewort oi the Janen-
UB security setup."

_ exeruse wes epper-
Iﬂwm to determine

how long the snow would

be eble to meinteln its ioroe
shoot down 80

percent of en “ﬁnding sir-
mu' .' _ I:
n wss curried outing.“

 

U.S. Experts Japan To Play Significant Role in Her

The weather was glorious

towerd the Philippines vie

with the mercury hovering
around so degrees oen-
Ilnrnde. it was still summer
In Old-mm. and :spart':
mnihwertern see~iene was
as comrested es the meln
Ginsu Street in Tokyo.

At i030 em. the O-oweshi.
a. P2: antisubmsrlne recon-
naiseence plane of the Fifth
Mr Wing of the mnum
Bell—Deleon Force (W)
in" Nnhe Airport heading
southwest.

Meintelninu nn eltitnde 0!
only 300 meters end cruis-
Inn at 250 kilometers per
hour. the pisne was seereh-
lmr lor submarines nlonz
Ihe see-lune that stretches
:rom Japan's main isiends

7.9

Ohinswe. ' -
Almost eveuiininuts, the
plens's upteln. _l..t ' m
Eileen Selim. would nit-he
announcements.» the sir-
creit's ii: other crew meth-
bers such es "heighten
about 3,000 meters. to stera
boerd ehesd". or "'hro
ireishteu on the port side}!
Morin: down et the see
ironi the spotter‘s soot in
the (on section 0! the None
the water was crowded with
e lane number oi Jepenese
heighten tankers end asb-
lns boots. The Bimini. e 2.-
«rm-ton Chinese survey ship.
was also roernins erounl;
"Oi course. it will not be
on any» test to psoteetreil

. FOR OFF“ 1.“. l-‘Sl-T ONLY
oi them from enemy eub-
marines in case or war."eald
Petty Officer 2nd Class lil-
tnshi Harasuchl who was in
charge oi weapons.

Surveillance and Identiti-
cuuon oi the ships below
were not the principal tasks
or the aircraft. It: main
mission was antieabmarine
warlure in which it had to
locate. chase and destroy
submarines with torpedoes.

On Its return night from
Miyaito Leland. a ﬂying die-
iance o! 10 minutes trout
Oklnawa. it was announced:
"An enemy aub ie passing
through the area below."

This heralded the start of
n simulated antieubmarine
war-tare exercise.

The plane dropped more
candlea to demarcate the
area where the enemy sub-
marine wae supposed to be
cruising.

Then sonobuoye. which
are used to detect under-
writer sounds and transmit
them by radio. were
launched since the radar
system aboard the recon-
naissance plane was incapa-
ble of detecting the pre-
sence oi a submerged aub-
marine.

Creamer: aboard the
plane tried to deduce from
the data provided by the
eonobuoya and recorded by
a computer the direction.
speed and depth oi the aub-
tnarine. This was needed
betorc hominlt torpedoes
could be launched.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The simulated usrdee
ended with the captain ee-

clarine that the .euan
submerinehadbeenﬁet-
toyed.

Thewaterbeiowthe'reo.

continuance MW
ed peaceful but it near

this sea-lane that th‘e' Ja'o'
panese i’relditer
Maruwaesunkod e
by the us Polahe-t'
submarineanmaw
{33 mloeded w‘ivth
was -
launched ballistic 0"
(81.8”) at the time.
in another incident“. be

ﬁtted a soviet
near OkheIra m
iaety'ear. . ‘

The George William
me being remodeled into

an attack aahnr‘artne ”at.

Pearlnarhorwhen
respondent visithd
baee ”1W"!!!
Forceel'ecinc. "5
(Dept William ,

    

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

neatlymenhancad
Soviet nayal- power. '

‘l'he some hie also
peﬂecteti Mm [.m-

in. 1yphoan-type nuclear
entanarine.

$3.”

in eahnarine

deterrep t manual”.

Intheeaeeotlapan, the
w antleubenerine recon
kcn), who (Teﬂon-ken),
mnlnnI (Fukuoka-ken)
end on KIltanhInm Island
In the Anna! blonds. The
amm- cum etatIon
mIntnlne bunch ﬂatten
In wanna and Nemam,
both In now.

Some of these etntIons ue
teepowble for monitoring
the. 80'!” Unlon whlle the
rut Iowa on cnInn. North
Koren or other countrIes.
'Cholletsu. whlch Is bued
nt 0601’s regional head-
qunrton In Ichlcoyn, Tokyo.
nu n wotkloxee o! 1.100.
Seventy percent or these
penonnel m attuned to
redone! etottom or
branches. thch operete on
e tonnd-tbe-clock boats.

The lntellIsenee personnel
elthe: nonItor tnnunlntone
nth «whonu at noon n-
th: ”teeny-They on ex-
tremely pronoun: In Meta:

All Intonmtto'n collected
at theee atntlons I: sent to
the headquarters at lemu-
ya and thoroughly mlneql.

Nor Instance. the who
station. touted near who
Mr Base of the Mr Selt-
Detenee Pom (A801). 1:
used exclusively tor mu
cont-In; the Korean Penin-
win.

The elation tentnm n c1:-
cular antenna mm o tote!
of 36 steel towers. etch so
meters tall, tannin: a ct:-
rJ- 1.10 meter:- In dtnrneter.

Mohamed a “use to:
clenbnnts." It has been In
use since 1919. Employing
the moat eduneed elects-o-
nIc nnpmtua Ind techni-
ques. the notion In reported-
ly cnpeble of colleettng on
Informetlon ttnnemttted by
radio.

A sin-mu IncIIIty 1; main-
talned nt MguhI-Chltose to
monltor Soviet tulle oom-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070081-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

munlcatlonii. The' method snip!
A great deal of classified monitoring the an
information passes through nameae dismte u .
the Defense Agency's hands plied to the Soviet
but Chobehn'l operations and North Korea.
are considered team 'rhecaniinmbero
Outsiders are strictly prohi- m stationed in -
bited from entering Chobe- M areas where g
tsu'e regional or branch Wm u
stations and not a single munieations are
piece of information gather- monitored day and
ed by the unit is disclosed Unusual developm
to unauthorised persons. "pension of thee
It might even be a viola- muniosttons are
tion of regulations even to closely examined to
mention that chobetsu is mine whether or
engaged in gathering varl- enter-gem has aria
ous kinds of information. Nonmilitary coin:
However. it was Chobetsii lions. such as on
that most accurately pre- services and the di
dicted the start of lighting of the people, are a
on the Sim-Vietnamese bor- aidered important sit
dei‘ on hbruary 11. 1719. might indicate on
Chobcteo knew most of the military mastic
- the “call numbers" of A80? planes also
Chinese Air Force units and information with the
it realised that. beginning in radar. .
January 1970. these cell Changes in freigt
numbers were being used mania between the
more often In southern Union and Violas
China near the Vietnam between the Soviet
border. and Roethgxorea ar
Itwasaiertedbythefact wn'w. “I
that 100 Chinese planes. lri- MO Ii! ”time I
eluding mom. mom and tense torso .(aianri
the air force‘s treasured m. A {mgbefenee
were in the area. Air force dill; _ said
units had also been moved inﬂict!“ WM 1
from the Sim-soviet border could not be more 5
area. or accurate and a-
nused on this information satellite would bar
Chobetsu concluded that employed to imam
China had resolved to start mil! the l
a war with Vietnam. m M collected by C
any: later. China delivered and other defene
what it called a military “In“ in not comps:
"icsson" against Vietnam. diploma and .volit
This was one of Ohobe- formation Ml
tsu's motor achievements W 1t WM ‘
and reportedly surprised the as 3 m 0M
US.
32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4
[23 Oct 81 p 1]

[Text]

The Council on Pbrelun
Relations, which la houaed
in an old three-story build-
ing on 68th Street in New
York, came into existence
60 year: ago and pride: it-
sri: on being one of the
most authoritative crane
on foreign aﬂalrs in the
08.

However, the so~colled
“Soviet threat" has irreatiy
Inﬂuenced the council's way
01 thinking.

A typical example oi this
influence was the complia-
tinn oi a booklet entitled
"the Soviet Challenge" that
was issued by the council
last May.

Compiled alter the sub-
not matter had been thor-
oughly discussed by the
council's 14 members. in-
cluding former State De-
partment adviser Helmut
Sonncieidt. the booklet cov-
ers the “Soviet threat"
theory as it it were In line
with public opinion.

One of the most interest-
ing iaets about the hook-
let. however. is that three
“doves" leit the council just
belore It appeared. They
were George Kennan. tor-
mer ambosndor to the So-
viet Union. Senator Joaeph
Biden oi Delaware and
Leslie Gelb. former director

oi the Stale Department's
Politico-Military AllulreBu-
i-enu.

Winston Lord. president
at the council. said: ”The
three men were member: of
the council until the last
moment. They did not want
to cause it rilt in opinions."

Dmpih: this eaplonntion.
It appears that thc dovieh
opinion: oi Kennan and the
others were overridden in o
clash of views over the So-
t‘let Union.

In a recent treatise, Ken-
nan writea that durinl'the
part so yeara misunder-
standing and mutual dia-
trurt between the US and
the Soviet Union never grew
to ouch an extent that both
countriea had to pour 'all
their energies into military
attain.

it it not only Keenan that
holda that opinion. Paul
Warnke, former director of
the Arms Control and Die-
nrmarnent Agency, and
Frank Church. former chair-
man of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, believe
that US~Soviet ooealatence
depends on a reanmptlon oi
the Strateoic Arms Limita-
tion Talia (SALT).

But their voieea are
drowned by the daily you-
teroua clamor over the "So-
viet threat."

aemury oi’ Defense Cea-
par Weinberaer- virtually
makea it a rule to mention
the Soviet threat in the
some context as the mili-
tary expandon oi the Nada.

"The Soviet Union ia_ be-
having in the same manner
as the Axis Power: of Ger-
many. Italy and Japan did
when they invested huae
sum in armament: withthe
aim or conquering the world.
At that time. no one would
listen to Churchill'a appeah
to Parliament." Welnberacr
said in a TV interview on
September an

in the autumn of 1910.
George Bush. then director
at the Central Intelligence

Agency (CIA) and now vice.
president. formed “mm 3"
within in the CIA. After
sifting through the data col-
lected by the CIA. this team
became convinced oi the ex-
istence at a Soviet threat.

Washington liesnerizcd by 'Threat' From Soviet Union

Sovle

moat

to ”I
Sovu
nerve
"enei
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400070051-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[24 Oct 81 p 1]

[Text] “here Does President Reagan": Strategy Lead To?

The Einpemr visited wu-

 

uunshurz. Virginia, on the I‘m ‘1‘“ h” but “2
ilrst leg at his American depioy 100 it: W” 1" “19
tour back in line. The old out no "lemm: helped
city nestle in idyllic en- 8“: m and .il “9“
“mm the construction «ﬁn yet
In mid-September. ntlli- misalie m cat yarn“
tar: experts from various '1'. ‘1
countries huddled together The W mom of ita trigger
in a city conierencc hall ior kind “a“ the W laden
the annual meeting oi the administration, “19 Roma In 3
international institute for 9"“ ia W ‘0 Nb- em
strategic Studies urea). ““4"" “9““ "1' mm Mb!"
Britain's authoritative re- PM" W 0' WM!!! Tb.
March group. It w” the nuclear viarheada Rana:
first ever meeting held by with the new mm. the to?
the 1188 on the American Rum ”cabo- , "Do
continent. “"0!- a" 0Q Do ﬂ”. ‘0 III!
Many or the participants 10 m oeiv- proud
held key poets in marge oi able hill , ethic
their governmenta' military arm. by “if: he trl
or diplomatic airairs. in- It a. _ M . pact o
eluded among them were spreading”: tit, "i‘h
iormer US aecrotary oi state yearn. would entail “I. what
Dr Henry Kissinger; Mata- lay oi mo tiiiioa. or avaiia
tnka Koeaka. a Kyoto Unl- ly 1: parent at recur:
veraity proieuor. and two eedtuoowtion after
other Japanese and South dcienee budget for I con
Koreans. secretary oi De- period. not la
lune Caspar Weinherser M bur had to their W ‘
had hurriedly norm into the the ‘ weep:
city by helicopter to attend hi on aaaouatot linu- "no
the meeting. i cial on tr.
Divided into live pane a. Th la “mg, {m new
tire participants were en- that m‘m mph- they 1
turned in heated debate; (or tlon 0' ‘ US military bane leer
iuii iour days with the aub- In 309'- in I“; la likely avail:
loci: ranging loom the US to be «m for two years. aiill t'
and Soviet nuclear and com m w it to nerve aa . US not i
vuntionai weapon: to the atronuhold in Mideast For
balance 01 power and Proe- The US Navy too W not Dr
ident Reagan's hard-lute be able to secure as mm he‘ad‘
strategy. . W." - pa n
Boa-ever. both inxide and Siieng’inee :1. “’33:. Rea:
outside the hall were heard natty ”no“. dlacu
whispera among the parti- m M. Mn" waa appri
ripanta as they remained favorably received in the us ““-
skcpticai about Reagan'a Me. One paper pointed 7"
avowed policy of robuildini! out that bad man- ‘”
the us tom and to trim ﬁnancial au~ M“
it was openly pointed out thoritlu' earlier demand for 'm‘
that tlu- US faced a host of . cut ox 3” billion go 31; IO 1:
probirrna. including its tight bung" W1
iinances. inﬂation and the ﬁrmer mu marl“ lame
mounting opposition in Eu- Harold 3m and am" in t
rope aauinat US nuclear m“; m “a a,“ best:
unriare. Reagan ahould not hon "°"
Three weeks later. Reagan ”1m u‘, . lead
came out with fresh plans They mm a.“ mg ,9.- lt n
(or a US strategy to counter ductiou oi a}, um tore
tin.- Soviet nuclear threat. 'penﬂn' my“ came ‘ my «oh!
arnm the American allies- roar

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4
125 on 8] [1 1|

[Text]

Members or Japan'a de-
fense forces and-US Iorcea.
Japan. had no opportunity
to dim the “Soviet thre-
at" until two of three years
«to. which in the words of

US oilicera was “rather
strange."

The oilicers lnted out
that the pro oi the

Japan-US security treaty
coll (or cooperation be-
tween the two torcea in re-
sisting a limited iorelgn
invasion. pending the arrival

oi US troops.

Contact between the two
forces began only alter the
two countriea agreed in”?!
on the Guideline for Japan-
US Defence cooperation.
which Included an a'rliﬂe
calling ior on enhance oi
inlonnation neeeeeary ice
Japan‘s defense.

The "to iorcea have had
contact: in a number of
was since then. one of
them being a retailer meet-
Inu between intelligence
chiefs.

At one at these meetinu.
“lift! the prospect or a so-
ole-t lnvueion of Hokkaido
was discussed. it US omen
summed Japanese parti-
cipants by remarking. “nae
Soviets will never invade
Hokkaido."

ﬁle oliicer was Iii
by other US part! pant:
who ignored the remort-
xtrutlonl oi the chic! oi
Japan's omce or n (Intelli-
m-ncel. The Ground Bell-
Dcicme f‘orco 408D!) re-
mrmily expressed it- an-

Soviet: Invasion of Hokkaido Considered Highly Unlikely

noyance after we meetins.

Although it. view remains
basically the nine. the on
side has taxed down its
statement. moot probably
alter tical talks" be-
tween two countries.

Apparently became it
does not believe the Billet:
will invade Hokkaido. the
US has been urging Japan
to primarily strengthen its
Maritime Beli-Delenae ”roe
«mm and Air Sell-De-
ienee m (Alene).

A large map. owe un-
iibe ordinary mane eeen in
Japan. hang: in the room
or a nigh-ranting onicial oi
the on Deleon Deparunent.

The Arctic Ocean u in
the center or the map.
ﬂanked In the Soviet Un-
ion and North America. The
Paciﬁc Ocean in at the bot-
ion.

11:: Soviet union in abown
virtually announced with
Canada and the 03 to the
right. arroyo and the Mid-
dle East at the top. China
to the left and Japan at
the bottom. _

itoet military epeclaliate
agree that it the soviet Un-
ion reels new or plane
to expand tie hegemony. the
Soviete will invade
the Kiddie last dnce this
will give them a WS-
phical advantage and eaoae
the greatest Impact on the
Western powers.

In explaining the map.
the Pentagon omdal aaid.
"The row. tut mlaht be
the major trout in a war
but the Soviet Union could
also establish another trout
in the For Boat to abate
up its ndvermries. Under
the circumstances. however,
the opening up 0! 3 war
front in the For M by
the Soviets would only be
1 secondon nil’nlr.

"Pronto mention there
is no need (or the Soviets
to invade such o super-
power such as Japan. Cut
its oeu-innes? No. there's no
need to: that either.

"It only has to interiere
slightly with the sen-lune:
and titnt's enough. on sup-
pues will come to a halt.
Japan will no longer be
able to export in products
and its economic activities
will be iron“. The. Jon:-
nese people will ponic he-
oouse of these develop-
menu.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“We all up with us. It's
all over.‘ the “venue will
any. The volition system
will bedn to coll-nee. Per.
hope these developmentsore
what soviet threat- moon
to Japan."

UN autistic reveal that
oi the 3.6 billion tone oi
goods shipped“ Wt
the world tut 1m. one-
sixth or 020 million ions of
these goods were unloaded
In noon. computed with
tone end no
million tons nniooded in the
US end Soviet Union. re.
spectlvely. .

Theee alum live elo-

quent proof that the
tones are indeed the e-
ltne tor upon. o ioct tint
any potentinl enemy oi thll
country might take odylnt-
ece oi.

 

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jen-m northern terri
on still occupied by the
Soviets."

'A concede“! military
mun upon-33M thnt
tin mm. were norms-
ingly "min."

‘ A you no. it won ieued

'.mntmmu¢tcatnltor

norms would done become
at the Inn-Ina conﬂict. 1:
it hod cloned. whnt notion
would upon hove token!
Would noon hove done no-
thing even it its economy

had mum to tuna to n
_ halt?

There is o loud debate
over the eo-oelied Soviet
thrent. n debote thot smells
oi wer. but on important
inzrcdient is missing.
9381a >33 €53.22.
HE!- 5383 $48 9082.
8 55:33....» as. 52.26:
333 152. :36? :3
cm 2. Eu 9:: cat... :3
0353 .5 5a 8.82:. 2 9
=52»? go Ban—«2.
.33 E $32232. 3.5
.583 p85 :8 83.-
83—:- 0303 E 363
23.88.. 8. .33 5833
corn-son 3382 $6 :6
2.3.8 8 En. a. 3a?
2.5 3.3 28.3w». 58
982:: 9. :8 as: 8

‘3! Sci 0’ IQ"- alas—II
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pointed out by Communist
Party General Secretary
Brezhnev, Washington should
have found a pretext other
than Atghnnistan to criti-
cize Moscow."

Are the Soviets authoriud
to Invade its neighbor: it
only e threat exists in such
countries?

These countries. stretch-
ing from Asia to Europe.
are inhabited by two bll-
lion people.

These people view Soviet
military tnterlerenoe as ex-
waive defense and Moocow
has not yet given a con-
vincing explnnetion to
change their minds.

 

rms IMP Indicato- why the Soviet- loci
Shadedregienupmanie tumour... and
rope vhile bluiamlnelnleileus. otha
Madman-was nil!

I2]. 0c: 81 p 1]

[Text] 'Rear Economy' Keeps Soviet Forces in Field

From Curiat times until
recently, the Russian; hove
maintained the worlds lane

by the Soviet Army since
World War II. was carried
out in the Baltic Ben in

eat army but it: euectivev
ness is another mutter. One
view is that the arm“:
I 60 rren ope
333k unsther holds that it.
laces problems Ln obtaining
supplies and reinlOrcemenu.
These views. which must
have been ‘supzzisi "I:
aome facts. n e -
nest that the huge Roman
army is a mere incade.
But Western military ex-
perts were both surprised
end impressed when they,
saw the recent "West 81
maneuvers by the soviet
Army on their TV ecreem
The landing exercise. the
most extensive ever tinted

early September.

The stern of a mow-ton
aneuit landing ship opened
wide to diatom amphibi—
ous armored can end ho-
vercrai‘t. The hovercraft
moved a remarkable turn
at speed.

mu atteck helicopter:
new at a low altitude em:-
lng “enemy" podiiona while
per-dump heated to the
mnd. Armored trucks
were also dropped with re-
verse rocteta igniting only
one or two meter: above
ground to soften the im-
pact.

Western military experts
commented thnt the oner-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C. Huang! GOO-Ea ads—E

5 as 933 9.8:.

03. 1:2. 33. co 8:-
3 5a 838. 326.5. E
32.53 cm .85 :8 33?
.3 5.— 82. 935% on
95 38.32.. I. .8: 8
.3839 .52.. g on
28.25. 2:— 33 p.60.
e95:- 5 9532.. an
5: .80 on 9a .8325.

.55 052. E v 5.5.3
«898:8 .385 332.89
3‘ 53a 95 no .832: a
.38 3:25. 3823

.023. “B B:- 085033
31313 F I!!! 5 353-,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[29 Oct 81 p 1]

[Text]

"Japan really is a dread-
iui country, although the
Japanese are good-natured
and kind people." a mid-
dle-aged woman Russian
language teacher told my
vriie suddenly.

My wiie thought she was
joking but the woman. who
speaks Japanese and has
some knowledge oi Japan's
current ailaira. was serious

She quoted a Soviet TV
network as saying that Ja-
pan was promoting a mill-
tarization program in con-
spiracy with the U3 and
China. The broadcast also
claimed that Japan was ex-
pected to start a war to
recapture the Kunie is-
lands. she said.

My wife told her tuiorers.
"What the Japanese are
afraid oi is completely op-
posite to what you have
said." She added that she
realized how dillicult it was
to reach mutual under-
standing between the two
countries.

Smiling wryly. a Soviet
specialist of Japanese affairs
said that after he told a
Soviet audience recently
that Japan's militarization
was limited. members of
that audience complained
that they heard a comple.
tel'J diﬂerent story on TV.

it appears. therefore. that
reports from Tokyo cor~
respondents criticizing Ja-
pan are yielding unexpected
«fleets on Soviet 1‘! view.

t‘l’t.

A film depicting an an-
nual military review oi

Japanese defense iorces is
telecast daily. giving the
impression that military
parades are an everyday
occurrence in Japan.
Consequently, it also ap—
pears that the Soviet peo-
ple are being told at the
need to build up their
country's armed forces in
preparation against not
only China that Japan too.

Asked to comment on
this. Yuri Zuhm. a political
critic ior Pravda. do not
deny it.

But he did deny_ -
tions that the Soviet U" it
faced a threat irom Japan.
The Soviet authorities have
never said there was such
a threat. he added.

Other questions n-
ecrned the adviet mill
buildup in the Far East, in-
cluding the deployment oi
an assault landing ship in
Far Eastern waters that
could apparently only he
used for a landing opera-
tion in Japan and the de-
ployment oi. iso-mm' ar-
tillery with a range or 3'!-
kilometers on Kanashlrl
and Steroid Islanih; an-
other obvious threat.

The alleged deployment
oi 8820s in China was
tantamount to putting a
dagger at the throat -ol
Japan and China, I told
Zuirov. -

He said there was no
need ior Japan to tear the
Soviet Union since his coun-
try "views Japan as an im-
portant economic partner
and there is no likelihood
that the hr last will be-
come a major war .lront
ﬁrst."

“It the Soviet Union has
to attach Japan.".lie .eon-
tlnued. "it- would. have tp
attack US hases in Japan
ilrst. This would. lead to
another world war and
thereiore the Soviet Union
could not do this." '

Bis argument is quite
signiﬁcant,‘sinoe it corres-
ponds clearly with the US
View. ' ‘

The US insists that So-
viet pressure on J is
mostly of a tihai"
nature and that there was
no likelihood the Soviet Un-
ion would invade Jmn ‘

The Soviets claim 'that

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Union Considers Far East Military 'Heak Point'

the more not aimed at
Japan but at a country
reprsasnhnga threat-toth'e
'Soviot Union. ' .
Retired Hal Gen Koalov.
.a military commentator for
W mu Amy. .Isio.
' e US has military
inJapanandiis ' ‘
in Japanese waters carry
sea-launched ballistic like
silos (sum aimed at the
heart of the Soviet m
China too has. begun'to
build up a similar strength.
It is thereiors'naomsary‘lor
the, Soviet Union to shirt
its military forces around
and carry out onereises lb-
-aigned to show the US and
its allies. Japan and China.

that the Soviet Union has
its own decisive deterring
pour.” _
. However. he didsnot deny
that 88!): were deployed in
.ihe Far East.
. The .lntorviews . with
Zuhov .and Kosiov gave this
eorrespmtdent the impres-
sion that the Soviets he-
tievsd the Reagan admin-
istration was trying'to "lay
a chain" along the So’det
border, by integrating the
US. China. Japan and
South lions into a mili-
tary alliance as well as re-
.organising the Anodation
oi Southeast Asian Nations
”(M into a military
bloc. ' '
ac'l'lss Soviets bitterly con-
. mned Chino “I'- who
the US with sites to collect.
information, tor-.heing a US
ally and for its anti~SoVIet
militan.nollo! that they“
at

. E
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lands claimed by Japan was
in response to the conclu-
sion of the Japan-China
iriendship treaty.

The deployment of an-
other live soviet divisions
along the Chinese border
was designed to deter China
from invading Vietnam
again.

The deployment of the

8830s was to counter the
strengthening of military
cooperation between the US
and China.

In the eyes of the So-
viets, the Far East is still
a "weak point." they point-
ed out. adding that a lull-

. —

the Chinese are also trying
to plant anti-Soviet senti-
ment among the Japanese.

There are already dan-

gerou signs that Japan is

suspending pdtivsl'y to the

we...“ (Illness overtures.
tutor
"hummusttneos

will_a the Soviet Un-

as h
ﬂedged arms race was W. It is
abouttobcgininthel‘ar WWMIOI'uIto
3”" m' mLmaﬁ if”:

Then what role will Ja- l -
pan play? Ulralu. We are closely
The Soviet Union claims "W vii-t mm the
that the US is increasing 3W tab from now

its pressure on Japan to
assume a greater role in
the 113' global strategy and

[30 Oct 81 p 1]

[Text]

Conservative Us Senator ments

Ila-Soviet rela-

coming harder and thicker.

U.S. Govt Awaiting Post-Brezhnev Era in Moscow

Henry Jackson has a theory
that equates the Boylet
Union with a hotel thief.
According to this theory.
the thief knocks on the
doors oi the hotel moms
one after another until he
iinds one that is unlocked
and then enters the room
without hesitation.

lie says the failure or the
Mghans and their friends
to lock the door allowed
the Soviets to invade Ai-
aluminum and the only et-
tective way to counter Bo-
viet ambitions oi thistype
is through military power.

Jackson's view is Just one
oi many strong American
opinions about the Soviet
Union that appear to be
rather emotional.

'l‘en months haVe passed
since the inauguration oi’
the Reagan administration
and a study or develop-

tionsduringthisperiodgive'

the impression that the US
government ls playing ﬁler

m Reagan administra-
tion believes that mil-lied!-
ed negouations between
Washington and Moscow
cannot_ 'untll soviet
President d Breslnm
departs horn the soeneand
the us is hosting out its
strategy accordingly.

It is obvious iroin Rea-
gan's speeches and move-
ments that he does not
want to nest Brsahnsv un-
til the “mains the upper
hand in military street":
as a result oi the. current
desperate shorts 'to insti-
tute a new rollback policy:

Rumors. mostly trom Cid
sources. are rite in~:Wash~
ington that Brezhnev is sai-
iertng iron: throat cancer.
a heart disease or a drool»

4 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tory ailment and that his
condition is deteriorating.

' A George Washington
University pnxessat. an ex-
pert in soviet alltlrs. says
it will not. be strange it
preabnev retires within one
.year for health reasons.

Has the Reagan admin-
istration, theretore,'iorsaken
the Brezhnev administra-
tion as a partner in nego-
tiations? This may not be
true ludglng irotn negotia-
tions between the two coun-
tries in the 1m.

Oi course. Moscow under‘
Brestmev'e leadership adopts
a hard line in negotiations
but, at the sanie‘time. It is
reliable.

However. there is. no
guarantee that a dovish
leader will succeed Brem-
nev. ills noes-or 'Inight
adopt policies undesirable to
Washington. such as build-
ing up armaments to conn-
ter the us end tnklng
stronger lnternel measures.

It will tone the U9 ot
least four or the yen: to
rebulld lt: streteltlc toreee
as well n communlootlon
and transport oyltenu.
newer-y Item to stop 80-
vlet exponelonlem In the
name or ouletlnz forelm
llberntlon toroeo.

There ls.nleo no gunn-
tee that the Brethnev od-
mlnlstntlon wlll remain to
ofﬁce Whlle the as rebuilds
Its lorces. Thu mews the
us hm no elternotlve but
to play for tlme and thls
ndnltlonelly hu Riven the
Renunn Idmlnlxtmtlon a
headache.

With two month: to no
belorc the end 0! the year.
only two major meetings
were xcheduled tau-tween the
US and the Soldet Unlon
thls year. One was the
meetlns between US See-
retary 01 Store Alexander
Hale and ht: Sovlet ooun~
termrt Andrel oromyko et
the UN headquarters to
New York last month end
the other to a meeting on
theater nuclenr weopons In
Europe aeheduled next
month In Genoa.

Moreover. UB-Sovlet relo-
tlons have been rocky over
the put 10 months.

For lnotance.‘ Professor
Georgi Arbntov, head at the
lnstllute 01 U8 Studies or
the Soviet Academy or Scl-
ences ln Moscow. had hls
uppllcatlon to renew hls
vlsa turned down by us on-
thorltlex. He Is popular
amnng Amerleln cltlzens
ror hls l‘rlendly nttllude to-

FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SE ONLY

wtrd the US.

At Wuhlntton'e
Mrport. “1.930%“ Itrltner‘
“I 103M y 03.0132
clan a: lithium; that It
was any

uncles. ﬂlemp‘dlym
Unite ":tb ‘ "
. Ire-£15m: m

not be held on .eqmeum.‘
alter next sonata, oontruy
to rumor: mum; the 1m
nocurntlon or the Beaten
udmlnhtntlon that well 'e
meetlne would be held by
the end of thle your.

A Columole Unlveulty
proteuor meant” I In
3 them. entttled "
goucy In the 1m.” thet the

mhnev m m
to on Ong‘.‘ ‘ . '

He cal on leaders
to prepare ’themnwlm' to:
on me where they would
amen“ “a;

ve r. n m
younger then Brainstorm!»
Paula" only 3 llnlted

no About Men
eountrlee out would 13%
coneentnte on domestic
well-e.

that the new leader“. can-
nectlon 'wlth

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' oliolutely no

in the us today, thereulo

Impothe e

oomldent‘lon thot vs pree-

gﬁ In the meteorww‘gtg‘e
m ve

heeled dents within the

Kremlin.
I31 Oct. 81 p 1]

President Rewan is try-
ing hard to strengthen US
war potential, and Japan is
already feeling its eilect.

One military specialist in
Congress. who is well in-
iormed of the developments
in Japan. says that barring
a drastic turnaround in To-
kyo policy. Japan may not
be able to play a military
role as hoped for by the
Ream: administration.

"if Japan were to meet
the US demand. its dciense
spending would easily ex-
ceed two percent of Japan’s
gross national product
IONi't. not just over one
percent.

How best the US demand
will be met within Japan's
current framework?

"Perhaps. the best and
most practical way is to re-
order priorities. Firstly. the
US would have the Japanese
Maritime and Air Seli~De-
tense forces beef up their
strength. By the mid-19808.
they would be ready. if need
be. to block the Soya, Tsu-
paru and Taushinm straits,
and to safeguard Japan’s
sea-lanes. Their capability
would be further built up
so that they would defend
Japan's air space.“

Last June when .1 Japan-
US workiua level meeting
on serurlty was held in Ha-
wnli. the US came out with
a fresh demand for ereater
Japan defense capability.
especially in promptly meet-
ing and counterin" inrei-tn
nearession (or n musined
period of time.

in Washington. ii is be-
lieved. President iteuaan
has nut yi-l ﬁnalised his Js-
pan policy. though

Observers say. "State De.-
partment oiiiciait are be-
having themselves as it
there is a wcil~denned
blueprint. Chances are a
clear-cut concept on US
demands for a greater Jup-
zinesc rule may not surface

until toward the end of this
year or early next spring."

Of course. Japan's ”tree
riding“ on the 0! security
setup is still being much
talked about.

It shouldn't be aurprisinc
if Americans. well aware of
Japan's economic strides as
evidenced by its booming
auto exports are to put tor-
ward a still harsher demand
ior greater Japanese do-
fense spending as an answer
to what they regard as the
mounting pressure from
Japanese marketing inroads.

How has the Reagan
warning on the "soviet
threat" been received in
Japan?

"i think that the theory
is a little exaggerated. Per-
haps, the Ream admin-
istration wanted to em-
phasize the Russian threat
in Conaress. As i see it. the
us is still superior to the
Soviets in both nuclear and
conventional weapons." says
Masanuehi lnoltl, professor
emeritus of Kyoto University
and president of the Re-
search institute for Peace
and Security.

inoiti continues:

"it is true the Soviet Initi-
tary power has been con-
siderably strengthened. But
it seems everything else
noes amiss with the Soviets.
We can hear the Russians

compialning loud and bitter.
They've suiiered poor grain
crops for three years in a
row. Moscow has been una-
ble to ease Poland's food
still“.

The Mshan situation re-
mains unstable. Overali. the
outlook is far from rosy for

the Soviets in ion; terms."

Kou Mamyasna. former
administrative deputy direc-
tor-general of the Defense
Alrency. is one of many who
maintains the "threat from

.Moscow. linked to the

growing Soviet military
might. may not he as

[Text] Japan Caught Between Washington, Moscow Offensives

serh
US.’
"I
the
cont
curt
eept
seltn
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070061-4

COPYRIGHT:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

counterparts that Runlan
mllltary strenuzn has grown
to such an extent that they
would be able to launch in-
vaalonx slmultoneously In
the Mideast. Europe and
Asia. asking (or a boost ln
Japannc preparedness to
reslst such an lnvulon tor
a sustalned period or tune.
thus assuming greater re-
sponslblllty for Japan's own
dclcnse.

The Japanese were also
told that the US would
temporarily concentrate on
the defense of the Middle
End. and the American
mllltury presencc In the
Japan area would lnevltably
thin out"

Th.- remurk‘s sauce-ted

THE DAILY YOMIURI 1.981

CSO: 4120/52

END

44

the dlmculty for Ia
rely on US relnlorc
In ease or war thou:
formed a major plllal
Japan-US mull) t:

Indications u: the
admlnlstratlon aoulu
determlnedly push :
pan'a detemo build
ward the end at the
early next sprlng.

At the name an
Moscow drive to In
Japanue away fro
amncton policy W"
lntenslly.

Thus Japan wlll nu
caught between t:
superpower. with I
mate aurround lt
atlll aevcrer.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070051-4