I'UK UII‘ILIAL USE. URL!

JPRS L/10315
10 February 1982

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 5/82}

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
(rouo 5/92)

CONTENTS

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

PLO's Ad-Dsjani Criticizes UK Mideast Stand
(Baud Hortmr; THE TIMES, 26 Jan 82) ooooeeoeeeeeoooooeeee 1

Hague Court Hearing Arguments on Tunisian-Libyan Sea Frontier
($811111. Gharb1;JEUNB AFRIQUE, 21 wt 81) oooeoeooeooooeouoe-o 3

PERSIAN GULF AREA
Gulf Insurance Pims Viewed in Light of Iran-Iraq War

(AIPHATAN AIF'ARABI, 13-19 NOV 81) soeeoeeoceoeeoeseeeooso... S
ISRAEL
Kimhe Predicts Nomal U.S.-Israeli Relations
(Christopher Walker, Edward Kortimer; THE TIMES, 18 Jan 82). . 8
KUWAIT
Economr Discussed in Light of Iran-Iraq Her, Decreased Oil
Production
(All-"AT“ AIF'ARABI, 20-26 Nov 81) IOIOICOODOCOOIIIOOOOOOOCO. 10
LIBYA
Briefs -
Improving Relations With Frmce 13
(MAN
Composition, Role of New Consultative Council Discussed
(Ahmad Hafiz; AL‘wATAN AIF'MI, 13-19 Nov 81) o e o I e e o o e o e o e 1"
SUDAN
BC Funds Development Projects
(MARCHrb‘ TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS, 25 Dec 81) . . .. . . . . . . . . 18
-a- [III-usaA-izl FOOD]

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-APAB AFFAIRS

PLO'S AD-DAJANI CRITICIZBS UK HIDEAST STAND
PM261235 London THE TIMES in English 26 Jan 82 p 7
[Edward Mortimer dispatch: "Britain Upsets Both Israel and PLO"]

[Text] Beirut. 25 Jan--A British foreign secretary's lot is not s happy one. or
not in the Middle East anyway. In Israel Lord Carrington is likely to encounter
demonstrations by Israelis infuriated by what they regard a; his “undisguised
support for many of the aims of the Palestine Liberation Organization."

Yet at PLO offices in Beirut the visiting British Journalist is greeted by a
barrage of complaints about Lord Carrington's performance, particularly during
the second half of last year, when he was president of the EEC Council of
Ministers.

The complaints were voiced with particular earnestness. more in sorrow than in
anger, by Dr Ahmad Sidqi al--DsjaniI the PLO executive member responsible for
European Arab dialogue.

when Britain assumed the EEC presidency in July. Dr ad-Dsjani said in an inter-
view that the Arabs were optimistic about Lord Carrington's personality. but

the six months passed "without any small positive deed from the presidency towards
a comprehensive settlement.“

He asked why Lord Carrington kept imposing conditions on him and Mr Yasir 'Arafat.
the PLO chairman, whereas the foreign secretary was not going to visit Israel,
without conditions, "after Israel has annexed Golan, has bombed Beirut. has
tortured our people, and so many things?"

Dr ad-Dajani asked why Lord Carrington had not continued the contacts with the
PLO leadership maintained by his predecessors in the EEC chair.

The demand for "a signal towards recognition of Israel" was unreasonable, Dr
ad-Dajani said. since Israel did not recognize the PLO and its leaders had
declared frankly that they vauld have no dealings with the PLO even if it did
recognize Israel.

Mr 'Arafat and the PLO leaders' had made it abundantly clear in recent years that
their aim was a peaceful settlement, including an independent Palestinian state.

1
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

HAGUE COURT HEARING ARGUMENTS ON TUNISIAN-LIBYAN SEA FRONTIER
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1085. 21 Oct 81 p 27
[Article by Samir Gharbi: "A Smell of Gasoline"]

[Text] The final Tunisian-Libyan confrontation over delimitation of their maritime
frontier began on 16 September in The Hague International Court of Justice (ICJ).
Contrary to those that preceded it in 1976 and 1977, in the open see. this has

been very peaceful. Indeed, courtesy is compulsory in this 'Mnrld tribunal"
established by the United Nations in 1965. One of the cor-on expressions is

"our eminent adversaries," another. "fraternal countries." But to get to this
point it took 8 years of fruitless negotiations (1968-1976) followed by a serious
crisis. At last resort, on 10 June 1977 wisdom won out: the two governments
signed a compromise calling on the ICJ to decide not only "the principles and rules
of international law which could be applied" to delimit the continental shelf,

but also to "clarify a practical way" which would enable experts of the two
countries to mark the frontier "without any difficulty."

The matter is very complicated. It involves scientific, economic. juridical,
and historical facts. The issue is especially crucial to Tunisia since the dis-
puted sane is rich in petroleum.

Following the 10 June 1977 compromise, each government submitted to the court the
documents necessary to support its position (memorandum, counter-memorandum, and
reply). It is the oral proceedings now underway in The Hague, with an initial
stage of Tunisian testimony (16-25 September) and Libyan testimony (beginning

29 September) b Iore 15 independent judges, presided over by Nigerian Taslim
Olawale Elias.

0n the two sides there are some 50 lawyers, experts and advisers; British.
American. French, ltalian. Tunisian, and Libyan. Most are outstanding specialists
in international law. geology. geomorphology, physiography, and oceanography...
Some are from such prestigious universities as Cambridge, Paris. Geneva. Cornell.
etc. But the positions they are defending on behalf of the government which
hired then result in very different lines leading from the land border point, Ros
Ajdir. The Tunisian representatives maintain that the predominant orientation of
Tunisia's coast is east. However. the opposing party considers this direction

to be "abnormal" and "accidental" and thus negligible in relation to its own

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GULF INSURANCE FIRMS VIEWED IN LIGHT 0F IRAN-IRAQ UAR
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 268 13~19 Nov 81 pp 68-69
[Article: "Three Billion Dollars Lost Annually by the Arabs Because of Insurance"]

[Text] Llnyds Has Increased Its Insurance Premiums on Shipment
from and to the Gulf Area-on the Basis of Reports Thrust into

Its Hands by the CIA.

The Gulf Arabs have been concerned about the insurance and reinsurance sector ever
since the British company Lloyds. the largest insurance company in the world. began
to artificially raise the insurance rates for insurance against the dangers of war
and unrest in the Gulf area--a situation which has led to negative inflationary
consequences as far as the prices in the Gulf nations are concerned. This report
deals with Arab reactions to the policy of Lloyds during the last few years.

Doha--The events which took place in Iran. and then the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq
war. have led to rapid changes in the field of insurance and reinsurance trans-

actions in the Arab world. especially in the Gulf area.

Both government-owned and private local insurance companies in the area are
striving to absorb most or some of the estimated $3 billion of money which every
year is leaving the Arab world in the form of insurance payments to foreign insur-
ance and reinsurance companies. At the head of this list is the British company
Lloyds. whose annual income is estimated at $4.76 billion.

During the last 2 years. Lloyds. in particular. has resorted to setting high
insurance premium rates for insurance against the dangers of war and unrest for
ships and freight entering or leaving the Gulf area.

For example. for an oil tanker carrying 250.000 tons of freight costing $30
million. the insurance premium now is 830.000. that is. 0.1 percent. when the
tanker is in Iranian waters for 7 days. When the tanker is in Iraqi waters for
14 days, the insurance premium is $22,500. that is. 0.075 percent.

Lloyds based its arbitrary decisions to increase the premiums for insurance for

commercial traffic in the Gulf area on reports. leaked to the company by the CIA.
concerning so-called operations which armed Palestinian organisations had decided
to embark upon. These operations supposedly involved. for example. hijacking an

5
son OFFICIAL use 0qu
foreign countries--through insurance agencies end branches. [They said that] for
this reason it was necessary to devslop the Arab insurance sector so that this

sector's capital and revenues could be invested in the implementation of develop-
ment projects in the Arab countries--sspscia11y since insurance is considered to

be one source of financing.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

9468
C80: 4404/154

FOR OPPIéEAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISRAEL

KIMCHE PREDICTS NORMAL U.S.-ISRA£LI RELATIONS
PM181623 London THE TIMES in English 18 Jan 82 p l

[Dispatch by Christopher Walker and Edward Mortimer: "U.S. Israeli Relations
'Nearly Normal'"]

[Text] Jerusalem. 17 Jan--0nly a month after the furore caused by Israel's
annexation of the Golan Heights. diplomatic relations with the United States
have returned almost to normal. according to Mr David Kimche, director general
of the Israeli Foreign Ministry.

In an interview with THE TIMES, Mr Kimche predicted that the substance of the
recently-cancelled memorandum on strategic cooperation would be revived. and be
disclosed that Mr Alexander Maig, the American secretary of state, had chosen
to deliberately overlook the Golan issue during his talks here last week.

"I was in allthemeetings with Mr Haig except the one when he was alone with the
prime minister and the Golan issue did not come up." Mr Kimche said. "The
feeling is that we are more or less back to business as usual. Relations are
very much better than before the visit. I think Mr Haig has convinced everybody
that whatever happens, the foundations are so strong in our relationship that we
can overcome such difficulties as existed."

Mr Kimche's observations confirm the impression of many diplomats here that

Mr Menachem Begin, the Israeli prime minister has successfully weathered the
brief storm in relations with America caused by the introduction of the Golan

law and the subsequent tirade which he directed against the Reagan administration.

The head of the Foreign Ministry also said that there was no question of the
shortlived memorandum on strategic cooperation being "dead and buried." The
claim came as something of a surprise as the Israeli side recently declared the
memorandum nullified after America's suspension of it is a sanction against the
Golan annexation.

Mr Kimche argued that strategic cooperation between Israel and America was con-
tinuing, and the only thing that had been held in abeyance was the meeting of
committees from the two sides which had been scheduled to take place this month.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KUWAIT

ECONOMY DISCUSSED IN LIGHT 0F IRAN-IRAQ UAR, DECREASED OIL PRODUCTION
Paris AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic No 249.20-26 Nov 81 pp 6h-65

[Article: "In Kuwait the Private Sector Ia Active. But the Economy Relies on
Government Expenditures")

[Text] Capital which Had Fled the Country Has Returned Even
Though the Iran-Iraq War Continues.

The Decrease in Oil Production Has Not Affected Allocations
for Development.

The Kuwaiti economy is expanding in various areas and directions. Inside Kuwait.
investment is being diversified--from petrochemical industries to truck production.
In other countries Kuwaiti investments are participating in the exploration for oil
in the U.S. and marketing of oil in the islands of the Pacific. This report pre-
sents general. but sufficient. information about the economic activity going on in
this extremely vital Arab nation.

Kuwait--Once again the Kuwaiti economy is demonstrating its steadfastneas in the
face of shocks and crises. The Iran-Iraq war. which is occurring very close by,
has been a trial and test case for it.

Today they are saying here that the war is no obstacle to investment in, and
expansion of, industrial and commercial projects. Proof of this is the fact that
the capital which fled [Kuwait] at the beginning of the Iran-Iraq war has mostly

already returned to the local market.

The amount of daily business conducted here reflects the Clemendous amount of
economic activity going on in this small Arab nation which sits on one shoulder of
the Persian Gulf. For example. the port area of Hina' al-Ahmadi received 3 million
shipped items during the first half of this year. and this is a record figure when
coupared to previous years.

The government is normally interested in investing in petroleum industries such as
petrochemical industries. Today Kuwait possesses expertise which is ahead of the
expertise poss~saed by all of the other Gulf nations in this field. This expert-
ise is being drawn on in the implementatfon of join Gulf projects [in this field].

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The fact that the Kuwaiti economy depends on government expenditures does not deny

the fact that the private sector plays a large role. One can assert that the
Kuwaiti private sector. unlike the private sectors in other Arab nations. has con-
tributed toward anchoring the country's industrial base within the framework of
diversification of the economy. The economy has not at all been restricted to
commercial or financial projects which bring rapid and guaranteed profits.

There has been a decrease in oil revenues because of the decrease in oil prices

and cutback in production. It is estimated that Kuwait's income from oil this
year will be about $12.3 billion. In spite of this fact. the national budget has
not been affected and its total figure amounts to only $10.5 billion. which is
less than the oil income figure. And this figure does not include income
investments.

Another indication of the vitality and expansion of the Kuwaiti economy.
particularly in the field of industry, is the fact that the 1981/82 budget includes
large allocations for the production of electricity and for desalinization of water
in order to cover the growing and expanding needs of industrial projects.

Problems Hith 011 Customers

Oil production has greatly decreased. Lately production has gone down to 900.000
barrels a day. as compared to. for example. 3 million barrels a day in 1972.
Kuwait has been confronted with many problems with its consumer customers.
especially with Japanese companies which import the major share of Kuwait's oil
production and which have put pressure on Kuwait to lower its prices.

One of the causes of the dispute has been the fact that the decrease in oil
production has led to a decrease in Kuwait's production of liquid gas. 80 percent
of which is also exported to Japan. As a result of this Kuwait has embarked upon
purchasing gas at low prices from Saudi Arabia and Australia and reexporting the
gas. after liquefaction. to Japan at the previous prices. This is something which
has not pleased the Japanese.

Kuwait is fully aware of the problems involved in production and pricing and of
how difficult it is to cooperate with its customers. For this reason Kuwait is
trying to diversify its oil economy and open up broad fields and opportunities in
this area both inside Kuwait and in other countries.

In Kuwait the government-owned Kuwait 011 Company. as well as this company's
branch companies and establishments, is participating in vital projects such as
drilling for oil. gas accumulation. and the construction of oil refineries or the
development of existing refineries. Whereas in 1980 Kuwait exported about 75
percent of its crude oil production. in 1986 it will be able to refine about half
of this production locally.

At the head of the list of huge petroleum projects which will soon be implemented
is the project dealing with the development and modernization of the Hina'
'Abdsllah refinery. the estimated cost of which will be $800 million. worldwide
bids for this project will be received until next 7 December. There is also the
project dealing with the development of the Hina' sl—Ahmsdi refinery. the contract

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for which has been awarded to a Japanese company. The estimated cost of this
project will be between $500 million and $700 million.

On the international level Kuwait is boldly striving to participate in a vast

number of projects and investments in various parts of the world. For example.
the Kuwait Oil Company is participating in two projects dealing with drilling for

oil in the 0.5. It is also participating in a project dealing with providing both
crude and refined oil to the islands in the Pacific. The company is also partici-
pating in a Gulf project dealing with hydraulic dredging in the sea and a project
dealing with constructing a refinery in Malaysia.

Such enormous economic activity requires the support of a modern and vital banking
sector. The fact is that Kuwait possesses such a banking sector. In fact Kuwait
was able to avoid the shocks and anarchy in the banking field which has been

experienced by a number of the other Gulf nations during the last few years. The

Kuwaiti commercial banking sector is basically dominated by six large main banks-
as compared to. for example. the presence of 50 banks in the UAB. Kuwaiti banking

capabilities have reached the level where foreign banks are no longer permitted to
be active in the local market. Kuwaiti banks possess the necessary capabilities
and skills and are also utilizing the most modern methods of banking technology.
Right now Kuwaiti banks are busily engaged in expanding their building or in
constructing other large buildings.

Last year assets in Kuwaiti banks were estimated at about 7 billion diners ($25
billion). that is. an increase of 29 percent over 1979. And this increase took
place in spite of the flight of some of the capital after the outbreak of the
Iran-Iraq war.

Although the banks' interest rates on loans do not exceed 10 percent. Kuwaiti
capital prefers to operate in the local market. particularly in the field of real
estate. construction. and the stock market. These low interest rates have led to
the fact that foreign banks are taking out loans from the Kuwaiti banking market.
since interest rates are higher in other countries. As a result of this we have
seen the occurrence of congestion in financial liquidity. however. the situation
has improved this year after the Central Bank intensified its control [over banking
transactions].

Kuwaiti investments abroad are noted for being flexible. fast-moving. and bold--
unlike. for example. Saudi investments which are noted for being cautious. The
local market occupies second place as far as government investments are concerned.
It absorbs only 27.6 percent of them. whereas the Arab market only absorbs a very
small amount of them--only 5.2 percent.

Nevertheless official [Kuwaiti] financial institutions-with the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development. which was established 19 years ago. being at the head
of the list-have participated in about 177 projects in 62 Arab and Middle Eastern
countries. Recently this organization's capital was increased to 2 billion diners

($7.3 billion).
COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-HATAN AL-'ARABI

9668
680: 4604/154

12
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
IV“ 0011‘.th Vail; Vl‘lal

LIBYA

BRIEFS

IMPROVING RELATIONS HIT“ FRANCEv-The French government thinks that the Libyan attitude
is no longer one of destabilizing foreign governments; it has therefore decided to
take a series of steps to normalize its relations with Tripoli. This is the gist of
a statement issued on ll December by the ministry of Foreign Relations. France is

thus taking a position opposed to U.S. policy; Nashington is asking U.S. citizens'
to leave Libya. Mr Claude Cheysson. French minister of Foreign Relations said in

Brussels on 10 December that it would be a mistake to isolate Libya. The French
foreign office feels that it is time to try to establish normal relations with Libya.

The French declarations will no doubt ease the rapprochement between Paris and Tripoli
that began after Libyan troops were evacuated from Chad. The director of political
affairs at the Quai d'Orsay, Mr Jacques Andreani, recently visited Tripoli for conver-
sations with Libyan leaders. France had frozen its relations with Tripoli at the
beginning of the year and set two conditions for normalizing its relations with Libya:
the evacuation of Col Qadhdhafi's troops from Chad, which was completed last month,

and the restoration of the French embassy buildings in Tripoli. The embassy was
sacked last year, and repairs are presently under way. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX

ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1884, 18 Dec 81 p 3361] 8782

C50: 4519/88

13
FOR OFTWCLAL.USEZ(HVLY
COMPOSITION. ROLE OF NEH CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL DISCUSSED
Paris AL-WATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 248 13-19 Nov 81 p 34

[Article by Ahmad Hafiz: "Qabus Says: 'Our Confident Steps Are Inspired by
Realism'"]

[Text] As is the case with most of the Arab Gulf nations. the Sultanate of Oman has
come to have a consultative council. This council is tantamount to a particular
formula for practicing democracy in the absence of representative councils.
AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI's correspondent in Muscat attended the inauguration ceremony of
the Consultative Council. and recorded these initial remarks which he sent out in
the form of a letter.

Muscat—~Eleven years after he took over rule of his country, Sultan Qabus has
undertaken a new democratic step in his country which has the objective of having

the Omni people exercise some type of control over their own destiny. This step
was the inauguration, on Tuesday 3 November of this year. of the Sultanate's first
Consultative Council "which will share its opinions with the government concerning
issues in the developmental, economic. and social realms which the government
presents to it for discussion." according to the wording of the decree establishing

the council.

Since Oman is the second-largest Gulf nation in terms of area and population.
observers consider this step to be of special importance because it constitutes an
extension of the economic. social, and political steps taken by the Sultanate during
the last 10 yesrs--efter its emergence from the atmosphere of the Middle Ages.

What are the special features and functions of the Consultative Council?

1. It consists of 45 members. About one-third of these meubers are members of the
government who represent the government (representatives from the public service
ministries). There are exactly 17 such members, including 10 members who are in the
council by virtue of the functions which they perform and 7 who are there because

of their personal status. According to the chairman of the council. Khalfan ibn
Nasir al-Hahaybi. this is being done in order to guarantee a permanent presence for
members of the government in the council's sessions. The reason for this is to have
the council members and the people in the government be well acquainted with each
other and to have members of the government permnently and continuously be present
during the council's debates so that they can always keep the government abreast of

ecmOmic and social problems and issues and their various aspects.

11;
m OFFICIAL use ONLY
s'vts VAAAULIIH 0'.- an...

2. About two-thirds of the council matters (28 members) have been chosen on the
basis of being representatives for the inhabitants of Onon‘s various regions. They
are both large-scale business-en and people engaged in public service in Muscat
and the other large cities of Oman. These meniaers of the council representing
Dunn's regions are chosen on the condition that they permanently reside in their
regions, rather than in Muscat, except when the council is in session.

3. The decree establishing the council determines that the council shell have four
annual sessions distributed throughout the 12-month period. The purpose of this

is to guarantee that the council continue to be active throughout the year.

1.. The council's sessions shall be closed sessions. The purpose of this is to
guarantee that the council members-without having to keep up appearances--engage
in serious discussion dealing with the issues brought before them.

5. The members of the council shall serve for 2 years. after which they nay be
permitted to serve another term.

In the speech in which he inaugurated the council. Sultan Qabus underscored the
attributes of the Omani experience which stresses patient hesitation and delibera-
tion, when faced with the prospect of change. rather than a policy of adventurous
leaps. He told the council setters: "All of our experience and actions have been
the result of the reality of our situation in Oman and have been in conformity with
the traditions and values prevalent in our Islamic society. The reason for this
is that human experience everywhere and at every time has confirmed, and still
confirms. the fact that merely following the traditional approach is a sterile
approach, but also the fact that when any society tries to make leaps above the
practical realities of its situation and objective circumstances, this always leads
to enormous dangers. For this reason. we reject the traditional approach and we
also reject the approach geared toward taking big leaps. We prefer our realistic
approach in our thinking and our application in view of the fact that the course
which we have chosen has proven its soundness and usefulness. We do not take any
step until we have made a profound study and are completely convinced [of the step
to be taken]. When we undertake an action, we observe and keep an eye on the
results of this action. Our guide in this process is that of responding to the
logic of development and change. Opening up our country to the vast possibilities
of such development and change. and striving toward our objectives with confident
steps."

It is clear from the Sultan's speech that he neant to close the door to criticism
which could be directed at this limited experiment in denocracy in the Sultanate--
if the criticisn were made on the basis of the criteria of development and change
in the Western countries or other older experiments in democracy. All the council
members are concerned. A third of then will be representing the government and
will have the right to vote on [the council's] decisions. Furthermore. the de-
cisions which the council will be taking will not be binding. They will only be
advisory in nature. Sultan stus also said in his speech that. if one views the
council on the basis of Omani society's "objective circunstances and actual real
situation." taking into account the fact that Oman is more than 90 percent illit-
erate after the long centuries of backwardness which it endured in a state of
darkness and total isolation from the rest of the world up till 1970. in addition

15
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
to the fact that the exercise of democracy. in the modern sense of the word. is
something which the Omani people have never known at all. then using the criteria
of modern democracy when criticizing Oman's experiment becomes an approach which
is definitely not objective.

The President of the Council Talks

The question remains: what exactly are the functions of the Consultative Council
in a country such as the Sultanate of Oman with its distinctive characteristics?

I asked this question of the man who was chosen to be the first president of the
Omani Consultative Council, Khalfan ibn Nasir al-Hahaybi. Be summarized the actual
role of the council as follows: "The council will be. in the most general and
comprehensive sense of the word. a channel of communications between our citizens
and our executive bodies for the purpose of achieving as many of our Omani people's
hopes and aspirations as possible--vis responsible and conscious discussion
between the members of the council and the government or executive authority."

"The council will engage in studying the ministries' plans and other matters which
will be presented to it. These will include, for example. reviewing the laws and
regulations which have been in force in Oman and which have come into force since
l970-the year that Sultan Qabus took over rule of the country. The council will
also bring up and discuss problems of our citizens with representatives of the
government and will reach agreements on establishing solutions for them."

What exactly is the relationship between the council and the various ministries?

“The council will not keep track of and follow up on the ministries' programs
because each ministry is implementing its programs within the framework of a policy
which has been set for these programs. But there will be a type of assessment of
what the ministries have achieved and what they have failed to achieve. The
council will assess whether or not certain given proposals have been implemented

or not, and. if they have not been implemented. the council will assess the reasons
for their not being implemented. In any case, we have just begun our work. and

the course of our work itself will lead to a clarification and determination of
many matters which are still not clear to us at the present time."

Does the council have the authority to conduct hearings with government officials?

"Yes. One of the powers which the council has is the authority to conduct hearings
with government officials when holding its sessions or even when not holding its
sessions. But these will not be hearings in the traditional sense in parliaments
[elsewhere in the world.) These hearings will be conducted by means of delegating
members of the council to seek clarification from a government official concerning
matters having to do with the policy of his ministry or concerning other officials.
It will also be possible to officially summon a government official to the council
in order to ask him about what has happened or has not happened concerning a

certain matter. and the hearing will remain within the framework of the subject
being discussed."

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ova -----_— --- -.._.

Do the council members enjoy any immunities?

'The members of the Consultative Council will enjoy immunity only when inside the
council. Outside the realm of the council. they will enjoy the rights which all

ordinary citizens enjoy. and they will also have the same duties as ordinary
citizens. This is so that a council member will not be allowed to commit any
violation on the basis of his immunity."

When will the council actually begin functioning? And how many days will each
session last?

'ﬁhe council has actually already begun to prepare for its first session which
will be held next January. During the first session the members of the Executive
Bureau will be chosen and a number of procedural and organizetional rules will be
established. After that the council will begin to exercise the functions which
it was established for. The council will hold four [annual] sessions. and the
nuuber of days that each session lasts will depend on the issues which have been
put on the agenda for discussion."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI

9h68
CSO: 6406/156

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUDAN

EC FUNDS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25 Dec 81 p 3423
[Article: "Projects Financed by the European Community"]

[Text] The EEC is ready to help out financially in integrating the Egyptian and
Sudanese economies. This is the result of contacts made by EEC representatives in
Cairo last November. The amount of aid has not yet been set, but it is known which
sectors it would be applied to: roads, railroads, and work on the Nile, i.e. essen-
tially transportation.

The EEC is also interested in many purely Sudanese projects, which are in the sectors
of agriculture and infrastructures. In agriculture, there are:

rural development in Jabal Marrah (15 million ecus): This is a program for expanding
crops and improving the rural infrastructure, road improvement and maintenance, and

a program in forestry and rural community development. Consultants: Hunting Technical
Services (Great Britain).

rice crop development in 'Uwayl (5.75 million ecus): The initial 2 l/2-year phase
is intended to achieve a total irrigated area for rice production of 2,865 hectares.
Consultants: Euroconsult (Netherlands).

rural development in the Nubah mountains (6.65 million ecus): Harness tillage tech-
niques and improved Farming systems are to be introduced at two selected centers of
the region. Consultants: Satec (France).

tea crop development in Upper Talanga (8.35 million ecus): Some l,000 hectares of
tea plantations are to be established over l0 years in the province of Equatoria
(South Sudan). The second phase of this project has just started and will include,
notably, the construction of a tea factory. Consultants: Agrar und Hydrotechnik
(Germany). Bidding was recently opened for the factory (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS 27 Nov 8] p 3175).

gum arabic cultivation: Restoration of gum arabic production is planned in the
Sudanese gum belt, as is a study for cultivating gum arabic in the province of North
Kordofan. Consultants: Gitec (Germany).

18
FOIIOFI1CIAL USEGDNLY
I'vn V. I lﬁbﬂk Uh).- VI V‘s.

As for infrastructure projects, there are'

Juba airport construction (21.5 million ecus): Consultants: Naco (Netherlands).
Contractor: International Constructions Company (CCI) (France).

construction at the University of Juba, phase 2 (7 million ecus): additional buildings
intended to house about 400 students; 3 lodgings of about 1,100 square meters each,

a restaurant and kitchen of 360 square meters, 3 classroom buildings of 1,850 square
meters, and 21 houses for the staff, each of 170 square meters. Bidding will be
opened in early 1982. Consultants: Iwaco (Netherlands).

construction of second-cycle technical schools: improvement and enlargement of 4 exis—
ting schools with a capacity of 324 students each. Consultants: GBNA (Ireland).
A local contractor to be appointed.

study of thc Juba-Laboni road: Technical studies will be made on improving 106 km
of roads in South Sudan. Consultants: Gitec (Germany).

study of widening the the Khartoum-Wad Madani road: The study concerns restoring and
widening the present road. The consultants are being chosen.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie, Paris 1981

8782
cso; 4519/88 END

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY