FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOBZO
29 JUNE 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 13/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

\
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONbV\
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[i are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

Setguce AND TecuuoLosv
(POGO 13/821

Coureuts

Inwsmn. moms!

Reviev of CAD/CM Use in Punch Aerospace Industry
(m m ms, 2h m 82) 0......QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0

New Terms Coinsd

Sons Major Users, by Gerard Collin

CAD/CM in Subcontracting, by Nicole Beauclair
Use in nectronics Industry, by Gerard Collin
Develop-ants at 381)

Avionics Applications

Implications of CAD/CAI!

Software Developed for Counter-Aided lbatting System
(m & Mg 22 m 82) 000......OOOOCOOOOODOOOOOOOC

Briefs -
French Composite Materials

WSPMATIG

Am 2:2: TwentrSix Sold, ﬂare Orders Expected
(Am & W, 22 m 82) eeoeseeeooeeeaeeaeeeaaaoosee

Second Airbus A.310 Begins Test Flights
(AIR & mm, 22 W 82) 00.0.00...0.000030000000000.

-a- [III-NB-
POIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL W

Mini 01’ CAD/CM 083 IN PRBNCB AEROSPACB INDUSTRY
New Terms Coined
Paris AIR 8? com in French 2‘ Apr 82 p 23

iucerpt] Say "no" ['CAX'J and you enter into a world where all hulaan activity
is assisted. or aided. by a coaputer: Design. drafting, manufacturing, aainten-
ance. documentation, etc. A whole bevy of disciplines grouped generically under
acronyas such as can [cans couputsr-aided design (design)]. 0A0 [CAD (draft-
ing)]. [’30 [cam coeputer-aided manufacture], Ci'AO [can/cm], etc. Hultiforn
and extremely rapid developments that for acne years now have been in a fair way
to transforsing industries,and especially the aeronautics industry. into other
sectors of which their advance is continuing. The “CA!" era is upon us. to the
extent that nussrous are those who prefer to talk in terns o! 'coeputer-aided
engineering,‘ thus covering at'one fell swoop the gamut of high-level technico-
econonic activities and bringing all subcategories under a single heading, and,
what is more, integrating industrial sectoral activity tron its uppermost well-
spring downstream through post-sale support and maintenance.

AIR B'r cosms offers this week a bird's-eye view of these spectacular develop-
ments in the aerospace industry. particularly in trance.

This review is presented as a nusber of articles exploring methodically the
upstream side of the aerospace industry and bringing to our readers a sore de-
tailed overview of it.

This set of articles has been authored by Nicole Beauclair. Gerard Collin and
Pierre Langereux.

COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1982
Sons Major Users
Paris AIR 3? COSMOS in French 2‘ Apr 82 pp 28-31

[Article by Gerard Collin: "Having Begun with Aircraft Builders and Avionics
Companies, CAD/CAM Is Rapidly Spreading']

[Text] The accompanying table provides an idea or the CAD facilities in place
in France in the aerospace industry. To begin with, we wish to make it clear

FOROI'I'ICIKLUSEONLY
CAD and CAM
mutations

Printed circuits.
hybrids, hypertro-
quencies. integrated
circuits, software.

Mechanical parts
plans .
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070066-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.309
nuuoo no unoccum an

. moo.—
uvuﬂ new 56.503

use» 00:00:00 a»:
[.58 330230 o

.33 no can ”33
03?..00 03:02.8

50.33.00 v

.Iﬂwdmﬂll

4385 . wan—<0

¢HB¢U . v won—(U

.iu\vnouug

53 33359.8

5.33%"
533335980

.0303: 053 no 3000.5 an

80

.32.
:33 02.6.75

.3050 2639
+ c0333

n83

32.33

"am
33:03.38. . an

.cououbuwusn
:80 5-80.30
33:83.3. 32>

.xan
den 583.84

£038
53 33359-8

unmana—

.:m«aoo can wanna duo
tuna—.00! no 95330

$3.650 Aquino-do
can 053.. .3“...—
a n .o w an. 2:33..

63.358: 53.630
983302.. 633.3
.3303". 0353

.3303". 035.3
can 3360 ac Savanna

£035.31:
63386 .5300
.326qu 0353

. .30 333
new... «.323 .3333
0333623 333?:
3.5.5980 33300.3

.330 Acumen—.003 0:0
«madden—cum no :30!—

l. «cow-«quag
=5 9:. 98

300033 Baum

5mm

Em

94%

gm

oaooz H393

.Jﬁaooll

POI omclan USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500070066-7
12¢:

IA

uchtone

:ier-Hispano
{gatti

:ision Hecan.
.nel

Design, calculations,
drawings, wiring,
documentation. super-
vision.

Electronic circuits
and cards.

Electronics, circuits.
schematics. hybrids,
hypertrequencies. pre-
diffused circuits,

actuate, testing,
modeling, etc.

Mechanics . electron-
ics.

Hechan icel par ts .

Mechanics. kinematics,
structural calcula-
tions.

Electrical wit ing
and equipment.

IBM. Compute:
vision, etc.

Pr ime. negate

In”. em, '1
tronix, DEC.
age/5mm

cm. mm.
Detavision.

Couputervisic

VAX, 'rekttoni
"ATM, muvi

Conputervisic
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that this table has been based on information that was kindly provided to us
and lays no clais to being either precise or exhaustive. We trust therefore
that any "forgotten ones' will be good enough not to take us to task on its
limitations. . .

This having been said. we can go on to conclude from this table that some ”-066
companies already have acquired CAD facilities. ranging free the considerable .
ones possessed by Dassault and AEROSPATIAB [National Industrial Aerospace Com-
pany] (along the top-ranking worldwide) to the very silplest. turn-key type
installations. The number of interactive consoles is close to 400. indicating
that between 1,000 and 2,000 technical specialists are using then on a daily
basis.

In any case. this is a fleeting glispse at best. so great and rapid are the
developuents. expansions and additions of functions that are taking place. This
also permits us to conclude that at the present state of the technology. the
French aerospace industry represents one of the very first and foremost "offer-
ings' to the CAD industry... which actually issued in large part free the said
aerospace industry]...

The facilities currently in place are of two general types. although. it
goes without saying. the boundaries between the two types are in fact very flexi-
ble and at times indistinct: .

“CAD (duign) for three-dimensional mechanical parts and assemblies to which
' scientific calculations must be applied: strength of materials. aerodynamics.
kinesatics;

«CAD (design) and CAD (drafting) oriented toward the drafting of mechanical
parts or toward electronic circuits.

The choices available to the French aeronautics industry appear to be limited to
a few systole: Software of French origin for 'top—of-the-line' 30 applications
and systems of foreign origin for "bottom-of-the-line" 20 and and 30 applica-
tions, which explains. among other reasons. why many of these developnents have
been undertaken by the users thenselves in France: The case of Dassault, SNIAS
[AEROSPATIALE [National Industria Aerospace Cowany J. TRT Radio and Telephone
Telecomunications Company]. E80 Zﬁectronique Serge sssult

It will be noted that avionics is very well represented in this table, with 8mm
[Comany for General Applications of Electricity and hagnetiss]. SPIN [ﬂeasure-
nent Instruments Production Conpany]. snﬂh [French Air-Navigation Bqu pment Com-
pany]. 880, Thomson-CS? [General Wireless Company]. TRT, SAT [expansion unknown],
Crouzet. These are the "biggies” of that sector.

The principal suppliers of mechanical parts are going over to CAD (design). such
as Messier-Hispano-Bugatti and Alkan.

The .ubcontractors are also beginning to equip themselves: Ratier-Figeac, Heca-
chrome, SIMT [expansion unknown] Latecoere. Precision Hecanique Labinal. Charles
Robert. There is evidence as well of a continual flux extending toward medium-

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
size firms (less than 1,000 employees). Everyone, however, knows that can (de-
sign) is unavoidable: Many, in fact, have indicated to us their 'close watch“ on
this situation. Nevertheless, a decision is dependent upon two major considera-
tions: The adequation of systems and their comatibility with the CAD systems

of the aircraft builders, the engine builders and the clients.

AEROSPATIALB and Dassault

Much has already been written about the worldwide aerospace industry in the
field of CAD/cm. nore interesting than the description alone of these systems
and configurations is an analysis of these developments in the light of the work
being done in France by WSPATIALB and Dassault. Their efforts have in fact
positioned these two French aircraft builders among the world's leaders in their
field.

A first important characteristic of these developments is their originality.

ﬁnd this, for a good and simple reason which Mr Andy of AEROSPATIALE explains as
follows: "At the time we started up, at the beginning of the 1970's, nothing was
available that responded to our needs with respect to the treatment of complex

shapes. We had to create our own CAD tools: SIGMA expansion unknown] in Novem-
ber 1976 at Toulouse and SYSTRID [expansion unknown at Harignane.

The Dassault company, after acquiring broad experience in batch processing and
with interactive screens, began by buying Lockheed's cam [Computer Graphics-
Augmented Design and Manufacturing] software (the only major software it has
purchased abroad, Dassault points out...) , to substantially enrich it (and even
resell it to Lockheed), and to add to it a third dimension, around 1978, by way
of the CAT! [expansion unknown], which has since become the CATIA [expansion un-
known]. program; meanwhile, the number of program instructions has more than
doubled.

A second essential characteristic of these developments is the envelopmental
attack on the most complex of programs: Three-dimensional forms, aerodynamic
calculations, design and manufacture, creating can/cm.

In the latter regard, CAD/CAM received its first major imetus from the aircraft
manufacturers, at the level of their model shops. "This was our first objec-
tive," Pierre Bohn told us in this respect. ”The creation of wind-tunnel models
in a matter of weeks, indeed of days, where theretofore months had been requires,
resulted in spectacular gains in the optimisation of new programs. Similarly,
can/cm makes substantial gains possible with respect to the creation of tooling,
which is derived by a simple mathematical operation from the shapes of the
plane's parts.“

In AEROSPATIALB's case, the advent of CAD/CAM into its operations appears to have
been linked to the calculations of the complex formes associated with aerodyna-

mic calculations, in its Belicopters as well as its Planes Divisions. But also
in its case, the creation of models was rapidly taken over by CAD/cm. Thus, the

first modern (interactive) three-dimensional systems were born toward the end
of 1976.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Integrated manufacturing by way of can/cm has becoos an isportant industrial
reality in the resins of machining; pipe and tube bending: cutting, punching
and stamping of sheet metal (as with assosmumw 'Panoplies" software used
with a "rrmatic' machine). But it is unquestionably in the model shop that
the most integrated and advanced examles of CAD/CAM are faunda

can/cm is progressing both in the direction of robotics (as evidenced by the-.-
tests now being carried out at Seclin), and in that of the direct creation of
manufactured-product lines. As regards the latter, amps-trans is developing
'morphodiaensional codes' that should be applicable to the production of stock
parts for the ATR ‘2 line by describing the entire chain of creation through
the finished part. “We expect thus to achieve a standardisation of work
methods," indicates Mr Rudy.

Consoles by the Hundreds

All CAD programs have been enlarged. A convenient benchmark is the number of
consoles in service: Dassault has in service today 85 Ch‘i'lh consoles, without
counting the Computervision consoles used for electrical wirings and some
mechanical equipment applications. ht WPMIALB, the Studies Bureau of its
Planes Division already has 80 Computervision cansoles, lo 516“ consoles, lo
consoles for the P032000 (drafting of parts with VAX or CDC computers), plus
several others for UNISTRUC [expansion unknown , and... plans for 20 additional
consoles per year from 1982 through 1905! Add ng to these the NC [numerically
controlled] preparation muscles at Toulouse, Nantes, St-Nazaire and heaulte,
and still a few others, the current total comes to some 150 consoles... without
counting the facilities of the helicopters Division and those of the Ballistics
and the Tactical Missiles Divisions.

This proliferation of consoles (and of associated computers) is dependent. of
course, upon telecowmications networks on a European scale. Both Dassault

and ABROSPM'IALB make use of design and production units widely distributed
throughout the territory. from Seclin to Harignane and from Saint-Nasaire to
Annecy... But European cooperation r uires a comunications network that ex-
tends even beyond these limits. ”K38 Hesserschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm] communicates
with our data banks from Germany,“I says Mr hudy, 'which gives rise to two prob—
lens. The first is secrecy: We have instituted very strict procedures for acces-
sing the system. To date, no one has been able to break in on it... The second
major problem is that of inadequation of the canon-user comnications networks.
A plan described in CAD represents from 200,000 to 300,000 bytes, which take

15 minutes of line at 9.600 bauds to transaitl we therefore use MIC [microwave
integrated circuit}type links and are counting very heavily on telecomunica-
tions satellites. Prom snore general standpoint, we might say that can in-
creases all telecommunications needs by one order of magnitude,“ Hr Andy adds.

The creation of data banks is seen by both aircraft builders as an essential
aspect of CAD. In Mr Bohn's view, "this creation is the starting point for the
safeguarding of the company’s know-how, one of the features of CATIA which is

won to be marketed. The history of the creation of a part by the operator will
be preserved. In time,“ Mr Bohn says, 'it will thus be possible to better under-
stand the creative processes and to take advantage of the best among them..."

7
F0! Oil-10“. USE ONLY
Quantifying the Benefits

‘ It is not very easy to quantify the benefits of CAD; ABROSPM‘IALB has neverthe-
less calculated some orders of magnitude in the case of mechanical parts.

with respect to design and drafting times, gains of from 50 percent for simple
parts to 90 percent for complex parts are representative.

As regards NC preparation cycles. the gains are very substantial. being of the
order of 80 percent...

Another measure of gains is provided in terms of the time required to complete
a finished plan: At AEROSPATIALB. it was currently 5 weeks: today, with CAD. the
objective is 24 hours...

There is still another area in which gains are significant: CAD is in a general
way extraordinarily positive in its approach to everything that is evolutive.

JD Requirements

Apart from the aircraft manufacturers. French industry as a whole is gearing up.
as in the case of hessier-Bispano-Bugatti, to deal with the complex problems of
strengths of materials. volumes and kinematics.

Messier-Hispam-Bugatti's initial work in the domain of CAD began more than 10
years ago.

The axes along which the company's efforts have been deployed since the start
of the 1970's are the following:

"Aid to the resolution of graphics problems in two essential aspects: Problems
of kinematics and of displacement of volumes in space: and autosation of the
process of actualizing the design drawings of assemblies and of parts.

«Aid to the resolution of problems of calculation: Optimization of operational
performance characteristics and of weights, particularly of landing gear: stu-
dies of possible reductions. in a future phase. of certain qualification tests.

"Aid to testing: Exploitation and rapid adaptation of test programs and their
results.

"mechnical management: Exploitation of technical data banks and automation of
repetitive tasks (standardization, planning). through the use of facilities al-
ready in place for the resolution of the foregoing problems.

From a software standpoint, Messier-ﬂiepano-Bugatti has developed softwares that
are specific to its graphics and calculations needs. as well as used existing
softwares in the calculations domain (for exaaple, MSW [expansion unknown]
software).

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The company has also equipped itself with independent data processing facilities
dedicated entirely to its technical needs. (The powerful data processing facil-
ities needed for production management are. owing to their nature. entirely
separate.)

These facilities consist essentially of a comuter suited to the resolution of
scientific problems, graphics and alphanumeric displays, graphics-output peri-
pherals. test-data-acguisition and -processing linicosputers. etc (VAX computer,
'l'ektronix consoles...) .

Concurrently. Hessier-Bispano-Bugatti is equipping itself with new and powerful
softwares, noteworthy among which are mucus," which the company deems to be
well suited to the resolution of the couples problems of 3-dinensional shapes.
and a software that could be an interesting supplement in the domain of calcula-
tions.

0n the whole. the French aerospace industry has taken a very advanced position
in the field of CAD, particularly in top-or-the-line sectors, with its CATIA
(derived from bockheed's CADAH, which was revised and expanded by Dassault and
is now being marketed by Dassault Systenes and Isa), SIGHA and SYSTRID (devel-
oped by ARES TIALE, SYSTRID ing marketed by the Estelle Institute and
sum by c ntrol Data Corp. , and mm, which was developed by the ABC
[Atomic Bner Comission] and picked up by MATRA [Mechanicm Aviation and Trac-
tion Company through HATRA Datavision. French CAD ranks now anong the world's
leaders in the realm of 30, a considerable asset to the national economy and
national industry as a whole, and of course to the European aeronautics indus-
try... -

As evidence of French leadership we need only cite the worldwide acclaim of Pro-
fessor Bezier's 'polynomials“ and the choice (reciprocal) of CATIA by IBM, this
choice having been based on the competitive nerits of two American systems, one
Japanese and the CA’rIA system. And CATIA has now been bought by Seeing. Rock-
well, Grunnan, M38. Dornier. SNECHA [National Aircraft Engine Study and Manu-
facturing Company], m1 [expansion unknown]. Kajima. with its acquisition by
others pending. Still in the aeronautics sector. EUCLID made its successful
breakthrough at Hessier-Hispano-Bugatti. mm. Nornalair Garrett. M88,
Aersacchi, BSA [Buropean Space Agency], m [expansion unknown] Herstal, Oowty.
etc.

ABROSPA‘I‘IALB has sarketed its developments directly or thrOugh other companies:
CHI! [expansion unknown]. Volkswa en. NLR expansion unknown], BMW [Bavarian Motor
Works], NERPIC [expansion unknown, (:18! International Data Processing Services

Coapanyj ... .
French success in this 30 domain of CAD is apparently owing to two factors:

«The first is that the French aerospace industry depends for its survival--in
the face of American mass productionuon the ilperative need to reduce its non-
recurrent. hence developmental, costs as well as its production cycles, while

at the sane time clinging to demand through pronounced customizing of its pro-
ducts. 1‘he result can only be the most advanced of data processing facilities:

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o u... eve-two... urn-aa- Vh‘~C

--'l‘he second is undoubtedly the allure for the French mind in virtualization of
conceived objects. mere can be no question that the abstract approach made
possible by CAD finds in the French intellect a very favorable terrain, whereas
the Anglo-Saxon mind is more generally known for its pragmatism and its empiri-
cism.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

CAD/CAM in Subcontracting
Paris AIR B‘r COSMOS in French 2‘ Apr 82 pp 27, 36
{Article by Nicole Beauclair: I'Being a Suchntractor in CAD']

:Text] "How," you will ask, 'can a company be a C»! subcontractor without actu-
ally performing a machining operation on any-material?“ Actually, the term
"services” is perhaps better suited to types of tasks consisting of designing.

drafting and procuring for clients a magnetic or perforated tape that is vir-
tually usable in the numerical control of a machine tool.

The SIG [Graphics Data Processing Company was established in Prance in Novenber
1980. This French subsidiary of the Belg an holding company OOPIXBL [expansion
unknown] (61 percent Electrobel and 28 percent Joint Navigation Group) special-
izes in subcontracting, service bureau activities, continuous training and
consultation services to enterprises.

For these purposes, SIG started out with a Computervision CAD system. Several
factors influenced the choice of system. Daniel Picard, general manager of 816,
explains this choice, In the first place, it was a matter of having equipment
identical to that in use at Blectrobel, for obvious reasons of system compati-
bility in the event a work overload, a system failure, were to compel SIG
to have its subcontract work done by its opposite number CGS [expansion unknown].
The second factor governing the choice was that Computervision systems are well
established in France: According to Daniel Picard, more than 100 systems are
installed within our national territory, which makes for a substantial poten-
tial clientele and which therefore alone justifies the choice of a Computer-
vision system. As a services company, and although it was using a system like
that of its sister company, the management of SIG quickly found it necessary

to ensure the continuity, the security and the performance of its work orders.
Thus, a second Computervision system, in every respect identical to the first,
was purchased and installed in October 1981. 816's Computervision equipment now
consists of two systems with peripherals as follows: 5 graphics display screens
and alphanumeric consoles, l high-speed printer, 2 Benson tracers, l tape per-
forator. l digitizer table and one Boo-Mbyte disk drive. The basic softwares
for these two systems are CADDS ECOIIputer-Aided Design and Drafting System] 3's.
It is recalled that the (:th8 3 s of the branched type and that by the inser-
tion of specific applicational software the system can be adapted to the resolu-
tion of mechanical, schematic, tubing, electronic, NC, and other types of

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
problems. SIG is currently carrying out certain tests on CADDS 4 software, and
in this regard it should be noted that although CV [Cosputervision] software
compatibility is not total, it would appear to be effective in the direction
from CADDS 3 to cm 4 (upstream compatibility).

SIG's CV systems are able to handle mechanical, electronic, NC and other types
of assignments. It also appears that, the electronics market being as vast as
it is, SIG decided to have a system specifically designed for this sector of
its activities. Choice of its third system was arrived at by way of a different
approach. It was not necessary to seek a system compatible with the system of
its sister company, but rather one compatible with the largest number of systems
in use in this domain. Furthermore. to effectively actualize a CM operation.
it was necessary to have a high-resolution image tracer that would mesh neatly
between CAD and CAM to form an integrated whole. As a result. a British system
was chosen. Besides, Daniel Picard explains, it was clear to us, after consider-
able study, that the QUEST [expansion unknown] combined system offered the best
quality/price ratio. QUEST, which has been established in France only 8 months.
has nevertheless already sold 4 systems, and this bears out the fact that the
system is highly compatible with other systems: otherwise, how could SIG justify
an investment in a system that could not be made to duplicate the equipment of
its clients?

The configuration of the combined digitalization and image tracing equipment--
the 0 Plot 80--procured by SIG is as follows: P830 4 digitalization table, SAM
dialogue console, Tektronix display screen, Data General computer, 20-Hbyte disk
drive, tape unit, paper-tape perforator and reader. m 80 image tracer, roll-
paper tracer. The 0 Plot 80 works with a Quad digitalization software (known
also by the name of Q-Draft). A Gerber emulator renders the image tracer com-
patible with the system of the same name: in the near future. SECMAI Company
for the Stuch' and Design of Industrial Machines and Equipment] will a so be.

SIG thus has at its disposal an appreciable number of machine hours” that can be
made available on a subcontract basis or a service basis; that is, a client (who
may himself be a subcontractor, but at the same time also an aircraft manufac-
turer, engine builder, equipment maker... ) can come to SIG and work on a coop-
erative basis. This may be necessary as an initial contact with CAD, or in case
of an overload on the client's own system, or merely in case of a malfunction
in the client's system. SIG has its own staff of 27 persons (taken all to-
gether). Its CAD operators highly trained professionals: Bxperienced design
draftsmen with graduate technical certification and superior technical certi-
fication, under the supervision of engineers. It is a structure that appears
made to order to respond to the problem of CAD/CAM on a subcontract basis.

Still a Long Road To Travel

We have intentionally chosen an enterprise that is in the CAD/CAM vanguard, but
not unique to it, to concretize the adventure of being a CAD/CAM-oriented sub-
contractor. In the vanguard certainly, because MECACHROMB [expansion unknown].
with a plant installed at Aubigny-sur-Nere (Cher) and a staff of around 400

FOR OFFICE]. USE ONLY
persons, is often cited as an example because of its dynamism and its inclina-
tion toward investing in new technologies. We recall briefly that HBCACHROMB
comprises three plants: SILHECA [e ansion unknown] at Amboise (around 115 per-
sons), PRECIMECO [expansion unknown at Colombes (45 persons), and Aubigny-sur-
Nere (MBCACHROMB), the first two being subsidiaries of the third, whose head
office is in Paris. Only the Aubigny plant is CAD/CAH-equipped. As we have
mentioned heretofore, an enterprise cannot consider going into CAD/CAM until it
equips itself with NC machine tools. This was the case of MECACHROHB, which
began in the 1970's to equip itself with this type of machines: NC lathes (2
axes), then progressively 3-axis then 4-axis machines, to arrive at a total
today of around 70 NC machines, with an average rate of investment of one NC
machine per month) Although oriented toward, among other things, aeronautical
and space subcontracting (including armaments), the specialty of the Aubigny
plant is the machining of mechanical components (SILMECA is more oriented to-
ward the machining of aeronautical panels). Why did HBCACHROME decide in favor
of CAD/CAM?

"Our principal concern,” we were told by Jean-Yves Poncet, head of the group's
purchasing activities, “is, on the one hand, to remain a partner of our clients
and, on the other and from a technological standpoint, to be able to input
rapidly to the brains of our MDCN's [NC machine tools] the necessary numeric
commands." The choice of CAD/CAM system was made on the basis of a factor of
scale: Acquisition of a system whose characteristics would provide the best
possible match with the systems in use by the major client companies. The
solution was self-evident: At the time of the decision, most client companies
had CV equipment in place; and so it was that MECACHROME received its CV system
in October 1980. It includes a graphics display screen, a console and alpha-
numeric keyboard; a hard-copy output (direct photocopy of the graphics being
displayed on the screen), and a perforate: output, all working in accordance
with updated CADDS 3 software. Before beingequipped with CAD/CAM, MECACHROMB
had an automatic programming aid system: The HDSI Lexpansion unknownJ company's
Compact 1. This system was thea replaced by a Compact 2, which provides the
system with a broader range of interactivity.

Let us indulge momentarily in a glimpse of Utopia and see the relationship as
it should be between the giver and the receiver of orders, both being equipped
with CAD/CAM systems. The subcontractor should receive from his order-giving
client not plans, any longer, but rather a magnetic tape containing all the
characteristics of the part to be fabricated (geometry, dimensions, etc). This
tape would be introduced into the order-receiver’s CAD/CAM system, to produce,
in the form of magnetic or perforated tapes, a programming of tools for each
required machining operation; these tapes would then be directly usable on the
subcontractor's NC machine tools. And even these perforated tapes would not
exist if the subcontractor's shop were equipped with DNC [Direct Numerical Con-
trol], in which case the instructions would be transmitted via a central com-
puter to the NC units of the machines.

MECACHROMB is not presently equipped for DNC, which explains the need for trans-
mittinn instructions via a machine tape. 0n the other hand, there has not yet

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been a case of an order-giver's providing nscacmm with tapes. Thus. this is
how Claude Pardessus, head of HECACHROHB's Programming Service. and his staff
operate: All the data of a plan that has been provided are introduced manually
into the CV system, making use of the bill of fare provided with the graphics
console. so that all the information is inserted into one central-data base.
Based on the geometric description of the part to be machined, a machining pro-
gram is extracted, thanks to the system's use of APT [Automatic Programing Tool]
language to denominate the various entities that make up the part. which in turn
serves to generate in real time and interactively the run of the tool. All tool
runs can thus be visualized on the screen and in all the desired planes (x, Y.
2). For a given machining run, however, the perforated tape that is produced
from it cannot (at M) be fed directly into the machine NC's. The data
it contains must be converted to render them cowatible with the languages of
the different NC's in use in the shop. This is where the Compact 2. thanks to
the computer with which it works (a Digital Equipment PDP 11-34) comes into play:
The tape obtained from the CV system is processed by the POP which transform it
via the Compact 2 into a machine tape (The Capact 2 places at the disposal of
the user a substantial library of softwares that are machine translators). Of
course. many gaps remain to be bridged to render the system fully automatic, and
this is why an interface between the CV system and the cramputer with which the
Compact 2 system operates is being developed jointly by CV and Digital. This
interface, which should be operative within some 15 days, will eliminate the
need to produce a tape that must be reintroduced into the computer for proces-
sing. The processing of a design into a machine tape will then be... direct.

The CAD/CAM system acquired by mam, which permits, besides the proces-
sing of clients' plans. the design, for example. of machining montages. does not
however exploit all the possibilities opened up by this new technology. For.
is not the fact that the order-giver is continuing to furnish plans actually
owing to an incompatibility between systems, to a desire to guard against access
to data banks through procedures whose security still leaves much to be desired?

Would it not then be desirable, from the standpoint of being able to work with
several order-givers, that the subcontractor equip himself in accordance with
his own needs and develop or have developed for him the necessary interfaces to
render his system compatible with those of his different clients? This would
mean as many interfaces as there are order-givers. but a hedge against restric-
ting the subcontractor's field of action.

COPYRIGHT: A. G C. 1982

Use in Electronics Industry

Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82 pp 37-38

[Article by Gerard Collin: "Electronics, can/cams Privileged Terrain")

[Text] The electronics industry is, historically speaking. the first to have
taken advantage of the possibilities of CAD. This undoubtedly is in a way

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
related to the fact that electronics and electricity require essentially planar
descriptions of equipment, concretized by drawings, and finally electronic cards
plugged into a general interconnection card (matrix card).

True, the interconnections cries-cross each other, but this results at most in
interconnection layers (multilayer circuits), which are, after all, nothing more
than interconnected stacks of plane circuits.

Electronics is thus a bidimensicnal form of CAD, or at most a '2-and-l/2 D" form
of it; hence, the required calculating and graphics processing powers are more
limited than in the case of mechanical parts which, moreover, are at times mo-
bile.

Furthermore, the electronics industry and data processing have always made good
bedfellows... .

And a final argument: Electronics makes use of elementary component cells (tran-
sistors, resistors, etc) belonging to a limited nunber of families. Components
may even be reiterative on the same card; a borderline case is that of predif-
fused circuits, which are somewhat like micrometric checkerboards on which the
operator must apply connections between squares... . At this game, the com-
puter is lord and master and provides the designer with priceless assistance.

But CAD brings to the electronics industry--avionics, insofar as it directly
concerns us herein--its full potential as regards end-product quality (for exam-
ple, mask tracings far more precise than any obtainable througn manual drafting
methods) and universalization through virtualization of the circuit being pro—
cessed. Thus it is that, in the view of Mr Bodin, of the SPENA [French Air-
Navigation Equipment Company], CAD must be introduced into the company's opera-
tions in accordance with an overall policy: CAD is unquestionably a powerful
circuit-design tool, but it is above all 'a synchronization and organisation' of
the entire chain comprised of design, development, productiOn, customizing, and
post-sale support.

CAD and CAM are thus so integrated and closely tied to the other aspects of the
industrial cycle that they are subswned into a more embracing 'computer-aided
engineering" concept: design, transcription of the electrical schematic, simu-
lations, testability, testing, drafting of cards and circuits, automatic sort-
ing and routing, documentation, drilling, creation of masks, NC removal of
material, depositing, management of production and versions, laser-based adjust-
ments, characterization of components, arrangement of input components, relia-
bility management and post-sale service!

Computer modeling in space is beginning, as we were able to note at m [Radio
and Telephone Telecomunications Company , 8?!!! [Measurement Instruments Pro-
duction Company], BSD Eexpansion unknown and Thomson-CS? [General Radio Com-

pany]. All the forego ng can of course be applied to software in a practically
identical manner.

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The facilities being offered to the avionics industry are foreign-“uter-
vision. Applicon. Calms. Kongsberg. Perranti. Racal Redac Quest, Scientific
Calculation. Gerber-"with some few French such as sacrum expansion unknown]
and now some [expansion unknown].

This market being in its phase of rapid expansion, any attempt to cite all poten-
tial suppliers is at best illusory...

The avionics industry remains open. however, to systems adaptations. indeed to
the creation of original systems. Its own developments in this respect stem
from the fact that "turn-key'I systems are not very. indeed not at all, open to
the changes sought by its clientele. Bence the call for original systems. The
most typical emle in France is undoubtedly that of the W8 [expansion un-
known] system developed by BSD and SORED [French Air Navigation Equipment 00.]
1111' has also developed an original system for the design of hybrid circuits.
SFBNA sought out a little-known system. that of mm [Bell Northern Research
(Canada)], and adapted it with the assistance of the German firm CADP. [expan-
sion unknown].

Software CAD

Another important characteristic of the world of avionics is that it has for a
very long time practiced CAD/CAM. can has in fact been used for the tracing of
masks. particularly on film-stripping tables (examples: BSD. M). the stamping
of cards, removal of material. guidance of cosponents-implantation machines, of
connection-wrapping machines, testing machines, laser alignment machines. etc.
But the CAD/CAM label is still likely to be misleading. We cite the case of
SPBNA: I"l‘here unquestionably exists currently a gap between CAD and can that is
not bridged by the CAD/CM label. CAD/CAM is frequently taken to mean a simple
connecting up of the data generated by design systems to NC machines. This link
is of course necessary. but it is not enough. The I'universal joint.“ or pro-
cedures, that must be inserted between the design and the fabrication stages is
a domain in which data processing aids have yet to be developed.

"lhese computer-aided procedures, which could be defined as the set of softwares
that enable the preparer to choose the best solution, to write its procedures
and. more generally. to- document the methods used in the fabrication and control
phases.“

Worthy of note is the importance accorded to software. Our interlocutors (parti-
cularly smn, 'l'R‘r. BSD) stress the need to treat software in a manner similar to
that used for hardware, to structure the software, establish an accurate and up-
to-date documentation. etc.)

This approach tends of course to channel the processes along defined lines. But
it is generally conceded that this approach pays off. According to Mr Croiron.
a m technical director, this approach consists of putting the software as well
as the hardware "into a constrictive mold that compels the machine to simplify
the task of the designer. It is a method that generously rewards those who use
it.-

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
I van vs a ee—ueu was. va‘ul

The Advance Continues

The electronics industry anticipates further major advances in CAD, namely with
respect to automatic routing, enabling the CAD process to proceed directly from
the electrical and electronic descriptive schematic (as sketched manually by
the design engineer) to the design draft of the card and interconnections via
an interactive graphics console. All the companies contacted in this regard
confirmed they are in the process of acquiring such systems or developing their
own.

CALMA's [expansion unknown] "STICKS“ [expansion unknown] system appears to be the
first to have arrived on the market enabling the use of a symbolic design pro-
cedure without an integrated circuit grid. 280's 'LOCACB' appears to be a new
milestone in the design of printed circuits. A great deal of progress still

lies ahead... .

SAGE: Bubble Memries, Microelectronics, Prediffused Circuits

SAGEM [Company for General Applications of Electricity and Magnetism] has entered
the field of the CAD of electronic circuits as applied to the design of bubble
memories. microelectronics and. more recently. the production of prediffused
circuits (AIR ET COSMOS. No 901). The facilities in place include an array of
hardware and software covering: The transcription of the electrical schematic.
simulation. the design of the circuit, testing. characterization of components.
and fabrication.

These facilities are based on a DEC PDP ll computer and an Applicon conversa-
tional console.

TRT: Printed Circuits. Hybrid Circuits, Integrated Circuits: Software

The introduction of CAD into TRT's operations has taken place in a progressive
manner. beginning in 1968. At that time. it was more of a scientific calculation
facility. Today. its CAD/CAM covers four major domains; Printed circuits. hy-
brid circuits (including the hyperfrequencies). integrated circuits and software.

--Printed circuits: The initial motivation in this domain was provided by a
search for improved quality of the final tracing of the mask; the result was the
acquisition of a Computervision CAD facility along about 1975. one of the first
in France. From then on. manufacturing was added to the system: drilling,
photography. crimping. implantation. serigraphy, tracing tables, cutting. ...
with generation of machining tapes in APT [Automatic Programming Tool] language.

--Hybrid circuits: TRT has developed an original tool oriented on a VAX com-
puter. that generates a magnetic tape which is then processed by a Cbmputervision
facility. Alignment by means of laser is done automatically in a dynamic mode.
The design and drafting of hyperfrequency circuits are processed by a Computer-
vision.

16

FORIOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integrated circuits (including prediffused circuits): These are processed by

Megatek consoles associated with a VAX oosputer, followed by logic and electric
simulation, truth table, automatic testing.

«Software: m has developed a methodology that formalizes the developsent of
software, under the name of 'PLATINE.’ This methodology is considered by TRT
to be one of the most advanced in trance.

Crouzet : 4-Year Plan

Crouzet's Aerospace Division undertook a study in 1978 with a view to installing
a well-coordinated CAD system. Three do-ains of activity were accorded an ascend-
ing order of priority: Software, mechanics, electronics. A 4-year developmental
plan was drawn up to define the stages of implementation. The year 1980 saw the

putting in place of processing facilities and of softwares that were the first
links in the electronics CAD chain, as follows:

--A PRIME 750 computer with Hegatek consoles:

«A software for conceptual schematics;

--A software for the design of printed circuits compatible with the foregoing
(positioning of cowonents, management of interconnections. sorting and routing):

«Interfaces for the generation of numeric com-ands for the following machines:
fabrication of the negative, drilling of the printed circuits. insertion of the
components, testing of the unencapsulated printed circuits.

During 1981. the CAD program. was enlarged to include simulation of the operation
of logic cards and testability of electronic cards. The outlook is toward the
CAD of hybrid circuits and toward wiring (wrapping).

Thomson-GP: Hultiple Applications

The leading French professional electronics company is equipped with an il'pres-
sive array of CAD and CAD/CAM facilities. adapted to the needs of the group's
various activities. One finds there, for examle. CADAH s stems in its RCM
[Radan Self-Guided and Electronic Countermeasures Systems Division. Computer-
vision systems (Brest, Gagnes. Cu nemer...). QCI [expansion unknown] systems
(aagneux, TVT [expansion unknown, Guynener. Toulouse...). Applicon (on [ex-
pansion unknown: . Rem”), Racal Redac (R01. Sartrouville...), not to mention
the facilities specific to momson-CSP/EPCIS [Research and Manufacture of
Special-Purpose Integrated Circuits].

These facilities cover, first of all, the drafting of printed-circuit cards.
This is the case. for example, at the Sartrouville production center, which uses
Racal Redac facilities and POP ll and VAX computers. The conceptual drawing
(generally, manually sketched) is treated by information processing facilities,
the long term objective being to information-process the entire chain beginning

FOR OFFICKI. USE ONLY
. -.Q a. -a-~.n. or-.. era‘s-s

with the conceptual schematic and ending with a checked 'good-by-test-run"
card. The center is conteuplating the addition of 3-dimensional CAD for the
design of shelves and drawers that would shorten equipment development pro-
cesses. Under this heading, Sartrouville is currently testing EUCLID.

It is also to be noted that, in the domain of mechanical parts design, the RC)!
Division has equipped itself with CAD»! [Computer Graphics-Augmented Design and
Manufacturing] software processed through an IBM 4341 computer and 3251 interac-
tive consoles, with Benson tracing table. The use of 3 0 facilities does not
appear to be imminent. since part shapes are relatively simple and the excep-
tions (antenna clearances in radomes) do not appear to justify the acquisition
of decidedly more costly 3 D facilities.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

Developments at BSD
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82 p 41

[Text] The introduction of can at ID [expansion unknown] had its inception
in 1972 and was actually part of the start of computerization of the chain of
development and production of electronic circuits and cards.

The first phases were related to the simulation of logic and analog circuits.

Today, ‘0 engineers at BSD are dedicated to the development of CAD/CM within

its LTI [Software and Information Processing] service. This service is aiming
to create a continuous data-processing flow and integration as follows:

~-00nceptual level: Study of functional and general architectural specifica-
tions; simulation of the behavior of units: use of ‘0 terminals (APE. [expansion
unknown language) distributed throughout the company. using a functions library;
simulat on of unit behaviors by software: all IBM-computer based;

"Logic level: Creation of electrical schematics and simulation of their opera-
tion. Utilization of ACLIN [expansion unknown] software--designed by the Uni-
versity of Toulouse-- for hyperfr uency circuits: ASTDC [expansion unknown]
software (AR-designed) and ESTBL expansion unknown] (BSA- and Toulouse Univer-
sity-designed) softwares for analog circuits. The latter is a 'simulation by
propagation of event" software, which indicates that dynamic operation is ana-
lyzed by taking time into account--particularly, by the study of transitory
phenomena. overlapping of fronts, etc.

At this level, data processing makes available a virtual equipment of a decided-
ly higher quality than that of a test mockup... . This level provides a point

of departure for an analysis of testability and for the drawing up of the test
program for the model.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Ph;'sica1 level: The electrical schesatic is nade up by way of on. [expansion
unknown] components. thick-layer and thin-:layer hybrids. and integrated circuits
including uncomitteed logic arrays if required. The integrated circuits and uncom-
mitted lo ic were designed on CAU‘IA [expansion unknown] graphics units in as-
sociation with mm software.

ESD has already roduced uncomittged logic arrays based on Ferranti, Interdesign
Plessey and SP! expansion unknown J chips. Its aim is to possess the facilities
for producing the task by CAD. then proceed to the depositing of connections.
Circuits have already been produced and are in the process of being integrated
into equipInent. For the hyperfrequencies in particular. 28D has put in place _
a hyperfrequency-circuit implantation system called "TRICEPS' [expansion unknown
which enables production of a task by cutting on a precision board 50 microns by
2 meters.

For hybrids and printed circuits. BSD. rather than acquire an existing system.
preferred to undertake the developnent of its own system in cooperation with

the French company SORSD [expansion unknown]. This approach responded to its
concern for better understanding the nean process of the operators and for thus
achieving a better alignment with then. The result was a highly automated. inter-
active and performing system in dialog. This system. called 'wCACB' [expansion
unknown]. effects the placement and automatic sorting and routing of the com-
ponents. It utilizes high-quality ADAGB [expansion unknown J interactive graphics
consoles. LOCACB is for BSD the start of an information-processing chain ex-
tending to production, documentation. etc.

According to Philippe Dain, manager of 8081-20. this effort brings to the elec-
tronics and avionics industry a new, 'leading-edge' system. “ED.“ he says.
'chose to develop wCACB jointly with us in a spirit of effective cooperation
and unsparingly. 'me experience in implantation of electronics circuits pos-
sessed by 850's design division. particularly in the field of aeronautics. and
the quality of their data-processing service associated with SORED's work have
enabled BSD to take a cor-landing technological lead.“

--‘1‘est level (BSD produces, for example. some 20,000 hybrids per year...): 'nest-
ability is established starting at the high end of the circuit design process.
Use of the LASAR [expansion unknown] test program quickly brings cut the flaws

in the testability. This program is generated automatically on the basis of

the electrical schematic. ‘i‘est programs are run on automatic testers. for the
hybrid circuits as well as for cards.

From the software standpoint. the developsents undertaken by BSD attest to the
substantial effort it is deploying over the entire cycle: Design. testing. docu-
mentation. project nanageuent. In time. BSD is contemplating a 'software
engineering shop' that integrates all the aspects and stages of creation of
software. Efforts in that direction are already underway with ABROSPATIALE
LNational Industrial Aerospace Conpanyj (uses [expansion unknown] at Mureaux,

on a bid request from Official Services.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. a... eu- .‘v-a.~ vam- VII-cs

The definition of computer-aided software is also the object of a bid request,
this time from the Data Processing Agency, in response to which BSD is working
jointly_with AEROSPATIALB and STBRIA expansion unknown], in competition with
CII-HB 'expansion unknown] and CNBT National Center for Telecoanunications
studiesj. This study is aimed at achieving consistency of software with system
specifications .

380 has already developed methods for testing the software implanted in equip-
ment, the objective being to not disturb the integrity of the software for the
purposes of testing. The sole required intervention is the slowing of the com-
puter. These developments have led to the the installation of "software valida-
tion bays' especially in the Mirage Pi and Mirage 2000.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

Avionics Applications
Paris AIR 3T COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82 p 42
[Articles 'SPBNA: Taking up the Challenge of the A 310']

l:Textj SFBNA [French Air-Navigation Equipment Company] is France's leading com-
pany in the domaine of avionics: it is at close grips with the problems being
posed by an evolutive technology and a diversified clientele. CAD/CAM, accord-
ing to Mr Bodin, manager of the Guidance and Systems Division, has for years
been the object of developments based on the following considerations:

"Manipulation of large numbers: or components, instructions, words in storage,
equipment inventories (20,000 SFBNA LRU's Cline replacement units] throughout
the world for Airbuses alonel), mdifications, versions... 3

"Reduction of delays: More and more, the aircraft builders and client airlines
are demanding a complete service effective on the date of delivery: Hardware,
software, documentation, maintenance, training, support, and all of this at the
same time that each company tends more and more to customize its plane...

The most recent example experienced by SPRIA is v y much a case in point: In
April-May 1901, the CAM [automatic flight contra? system of the airbus A 300's for

Garuda had not yet been 'frosen,“ the printed circuit cards had not yet all been
drafted..., and yet the certification and delivery schedules made it possible
to deliver the six planes less than 1 year later!

"Followup of the clientele and the market: The requirement is for an ongoing
dynamic followup, backed by preservation of everything that has been previously
been generated;

--socio- or psycho-professional problems ensuing from invasion of the lofty tasks

by unattractive routine ones for which data processing is particularly well
suited.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use own}

As in the case of many other coapanies, the development of data processing at
sma began in a rather spotty nanner around the end of the 1960‘s. After the
coaputerization of nonenclaturee, there was the coqauterization of production
managesent around 1973-1975 to reduce production cycles, manage version, aodifi-
cations, work restarts. cost control. 'That was our first coordinated and
organized data processing operation.” This preoccupation with integrating all
data processing developments took hold then. leadingsto a plan for computerising
the firn's operating methods. which gradually embraced all phases of the market-
ing. technical and industrial cycle.

The plan embodied five major sectors of the firs's activities:
"Management of configurations;

«Drafting followed by design of electronic circuits and cards;
"Word processing;

--Scientific data processing;

«Production of software.

A concrete objective was set up on which these developmental lines would converge:
the A 310.

The A 310‘s CADV was frozen last year... and the first plane has already flown...
The first specific objective was the production of the cards and the printed
circuits. calling for a CAD system with links to the production equipment:
drilling. implantation of components. wiring, production of masks, testing. san-
agement of modifications and circuit reruns.

The system put in place was developed by BNR [Bell Northern Research] of Canada,
and adapted to Brain's requirements by CADB [expansion unknown] (m). It
includes a DEC zo-e- computer and seven Tektronix £010 interactive consoles. with
a digitalization table as well.

This system. which is now being enlarged, is evolving upstream. from drafting

to design. The objective is clear: ‘All information generated must be preserved
and passed throughout the chain of production, in the normal course of things."

In this approach. the treatenent of the software parallels that of the hardware.

In tine. therefore, the entire chain will be covered by CAD/CAN. ”The gains from
the standpoint of documentation should be prodigious,” says Mr Bodin. 'The most

spectacular gains will be made in the areas of updating and customizing.‘

(DPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Implications of CAD/CAM
Paris AIR 81‘ COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82 pp 43-“
:Article: "CAD/CAM: The Art of Integrating by Virtualization']

:Excerpts] Since its advent, the computer has been widely used in industry.
Generally speaking, it was first used primarily for management and administrative
tasks and for scientific calculations.

It was only gradually that the computer became integrated into industrial devel-
opmental, production and post-sale support activities. But the trend quickly
took on an inexorable allure: Computerization spread progressively to the very
core of every enterprise, so much so that it soon proved necessary to synchronize
and to integraterall developmental activities, leading eventually to the current
unique fundamental approach in which the computer assists the human being in all
the latter's activities.

In the Top Ranks

This historic movement has been spearheaded by the world's aerospace industry:
It might even be said that in very large measure it was the aeronautics indus-
try that created CAD. As evidence of this, we cite the original developmental
work done by Lockheed (CADAM [Computer Graphics-Augmented Design and Hanufactur-
ingj). McDonnell Douglas (through its subsidiary Mchuto), Northrop (NCAD [ex an-
sion unknownJ), Dassault (DRAPO [expansion unknown], CATI [expansion unknowns, _
CATIA [expansion unknown? , ABROSPATIALE [National Industrial Aerospace Company J
(SIGMALexpansion unknown-, SYSTRID [expansion unknownJ) . other developments
originated outside this industry, such as systems for the design of electronic
circuits, and such as EUCLID [expansion unknown] developed by the cans [National
Center for Scientific Research]. But the place occupied by the aeronautics in-

dustry is and remains a considerable one.

This placement of the aeronautics industry helps to explain the highly privi-
leged position occupied by French industry as one of the top-ranking in the
field of 3-dimensional CAD.

That said, the United States is now making short work of it with five programs
(designated ICAM, SCAM, STP, Tech Mod and IPAD*) supported by the three branches
of the 0.8. Armed Forces and NASA...

But CAD has broken through the boundaries of the aeronautics and defense sectors
into those of the automobile, architecture, shipbuilding, transportation... .
This explains why we are witnessing the absorption of CAD companies by major
data-processing or other groups: First, IBM bOught licensing rights on CADAM

 

'A program for which NASA has awarded Boeing a Sls-million contract.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE- ONLY

from Lockheed, then recently those on CATIA from Dassault: Perkin; Elmer is also
marketing CADM: mm [Hechanicm Aviation and Traction Comany] has absorbed
Dabavision; coc [The Computer Corporation] is marketin AEROSPATIALE's 31cm;
General Electric has absorbed Chm [expansion unknown 3 and Schlumberger has
absorbed Applicon, etc.

Virtualization

The aeronautics industry's particular interest in CAD is explainable: Manipula-
tion of large numbers (infinitely large or small, quantitatively). concern with
the, maximizing of performance, the shortening of design times and production
cycles, the customizing of products, etc. The complexity of aeronautical pro-
ducts, the demand for high performance, and the exigencies of the clientele .
required more and more compellingly an industrial machinery beyond the range of
unaided human capabilities. Recourse to CAD lethods enabled the entrusting of
conceptually trivial tasks to the computer: calculations, file management, up-
dating of documentation, statistical.followups... .. But suddenly, the- power of
data-processing facilities was making it possible to fine-tune methods and pro-
cedures. And eventually, the cosputer was doing much more than merely relieving
humans of trivial tasks: It was optimizing them in terms of performance and of
production times. For, the computer is able to confer upon a conceptual design
the state of a virtual object, enabling it to be treated as such and thus elimin—
ating the need to resort to a physical model or to constrain the design's role.
The computer thus enables the operation of the system to be simulated while it is
still in the design stage, and scientific calculations to be applied to its
weight, moment of inertia, volume, aerodynamic CR and C3, fatigue strength, etc.

And, above all, the cosputer enables the integration of industrial processes,
since, as soon as an object is fed conceptually into the computer, it can be
simulated under operating conditions, tested, fabricated (by numerical control).
and its associated documentation edited, at least partly automatically, and up-
dated. ‘i'hat is, the integration process eliminates zones of physical transporta-
tion of the object: For exauple, CAD/CAM eliminates the carrying of drawings
between the design office and the production shops, thus shortening processing
times and eliminating drafting errors, as was amply demonstrated by the proces-
sing of the Mirage 2000 via CAD/CM at Dassault. The precision of the mask
tracings obtained by means of CAD is bringing a substantial improvement to the
quality of electronics... '.

CAD/CAM thus becomes a universality—a total approach: An object is treated as

a reality, by data-processing methods, from its earliest state as a concept. A
plane is already "processed data‘I at the time the decision is taken to create it,
based on a computer-aided market study; it is processed data at the time of the
definition of its mission, its shape and performance characteristics, its sys-
tems, then its production, its customization to the requirements of each client,
through to its post-sale support and its maintenance... .

23
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
a V» vs a swans. vou VHLO

Paradox. . .

The interest of CAD/CAM lies in the wholeness of its approach to a concept as an
object, and it therefore becomes all the more directly palpable the more remotely
it is situated upstream or downstream from the design stage! All the users of
CAD/CAM have indicated to us that the first sector to benefit from CAD/CM is
that of documentation! It is in fact from the very moment an electronic circuit
is designed by can that it is possible to imediately print out the required test
program, repair program, listing by nomenclature of the parts to be stocked, and
descriptive drawings!

Another of the major benefits of CAD/CAM is the preserving of the company's past
know-how: An operator can access a library containing all the studies, plans and
actualizations effected by his predecessors, and even the mental processes of the
designers themselves. It actually elevates archives to the level of cultural
and technical capital assets. It is an evolution that could contribute substan—
tially to the resolution of the problem of archives and of the loss of know-how
with the retirement of staff--currently a particularly sensitive phenomenon with
early retirements.

CAD can also in certain cases eliminate physical test programs: Testing of elec-
tronic circuits, fatigue tests... .

This ranging out of the derivable benefits from CAD makes it difficult to address
its profitability if one is to take into account solely its application to the
design stage itself; and even this approach to assessing its 'profitability' is
arguable because ”likes" are no longer being compared. The computer does much
more. with it, there is no longer any hesitation about turning out, say, 30
different designs for the landing gear of a modern plane, each design adhering
tightly to the changes in the plane builder's plans... . It will refine the
calculations--for example, the meshing of calculations by the finite-element
method-with a view to reducing the design weight margins heretofore found neces-
sary owing to the limitations of the “manual" calculating mednds used.

In the realm of historical trivia, we might mention that the emblems of the air-
line companies on the sides of the Airbuses are CAD-drafted, to eliminate the
distortions produced by perspective: A use of can that was hardly to be imagined
at the outset, yet a very real one!

It thus appears illusory to seek to determine the profitability of CAD. Connents
in this regard run along these lines: "Any other approach is out of the question";
“It is a matter of survival in the face of the competition”: “We cannot afford

to be other than homogeneous with the aircraft manufacturers as regards design
capabilities." The latter is also the reason why the big equipment manufacturers
and, today, even the principal subcontractors cannot afford to do without CAD:
The aircraft builders will not be able to understand much longer why it should
take a subcontractor 1 month to redo a design drawing, when the builders can redo
the design drawings of the entire plane in a matter of a few days!... Incom-
pressibles in the PERT [Program Evaluation and Review TechniqueJ chart, beware!
CAD is lying in wait... .

21:
FOR omcm. use ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is clear that the aircraft manufacturers. and especially Dassault and AERO-
SPATIALB, are in the process of sweeping their subcontractors and suppliers
directly into the path of CAD... But is this not ensuring their dynamism their
competitiveness, indeed their survival? At the very least, the major subcon-
tractors see in it the condition I'sine qua non" for survival of their design
departments... .

One can also conclude from this that it is i-possible to show that CAD. in the
short term, reduces the starting and nethods employed in design departuentsu
an arguaent that sometimes finds little acceptance by managements!

It is nevertheless true, on the other hand. that can/cm requires less elployees
than wuld otherwise be required to keep in step 'nanually' with the evolution
of the technological context and of the market-a fact that is sumarized in
frequently heard comnent: “Sure, we could do it without CAD/cm, but with an
army of design draftsnen, less rapidly and less well.”

GDPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982

9399
C80: 3102/270

25
Iron omcm. use ONLY
SOPTUARE DEVELOPED FOR COMPUTER-AIDED DRAPTING SYSTEM-
Paris AIR 3. 008108 in French 22 May 82 p 21
[Article signed “.13.: "Computer-Aided Drafting Software")

[Text] Graphael, a public company created in 1976 by research scientists at
the Compiegne University, has been involved in computer-aided design since
its creation. At a press conference last week, Graphael introduced its
Alpha 62, a computer-aided drafting system.

The Alpha G2 system includes a Data General France computer, a Benson digital-
izing table. a graphic display and an alphanumeric display from H]! Electronique.
The Graphael software makes it possible to realize all schematic drawings.

In the basic configuration, the computer is an HP 100 containing a 16-bit micro-
processor with wired multiplication and division. It has a basic cycle of 1480
nanoseconds, and s 8.33 MHz clock. The computer manages a mass masory includ-
ing a fixed 12.5 megabyte disk and a removable dual-sided, dual-density 1.26
megabyte diskette. It is connected to all the peripherals and can also pilot

a drafting machine.

The Benson digitslizer (size A2 or A0) is the graphic data input unit. Its
active area is 600 x 423 m (size A2) or 1200 x 870 Ill (size A0). It also
supports the menu field giving access to the software function controls. The
resolution of the table is 1 0.02 m. The sampling tool is a cursor with a
magnifying glass plus four control keys.

The graphic screen (NB Electronique), 15 inches in diagonal (38 cm), has a
resolution of 512 x 512. The alphanumeric display unit, also from MB Electro-
nique (more precisely from its Phylec subsidiary) displays 2’4 lines of 80
characters; the QWERTY keyboard is detachable.

The Graphael software includes all the functions necessary to realize diagrams
with the highest efficiency. The menu and all messages are in French. The
operator has at his disposal all the usual features of graphic systems: draft-
ing functions; writing functions; zoom. erase. grid and scale modification
capabilities; 255 levels; 189 symbols possible with each library.

The. (having made or being made is stored at all times in the mass memory and is
thervfore saved in case of a power failure. The dradng can also be produced
by a drafting machine.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Alpha (:2 system is especially efficient with respect to the following:
electric diagram (single-Hire or developed); schematic diagram (PCP [expan-
sion unknownl.PID [Proportional, Integral. Derivative], PPS [expansion un-
known], etc.); layout diagram, hydraulic and automatic-operation diagram;
flowcharta. PM [Program Evaluation and Review Technique] program.
printed circuita; logic diagram.

COPYRIGH: A. d C. 1982

9295
080: 3102/316

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ML!
terested inthe market for high-performance composite materials. Two indus-
trial groups are about to realize their ambitions. 0n the one hand, Elf-Aqui-
taine in association with the world leading carbon fiber producer: the Japanese
‘roray company. A joint 65-35 percent subsidiary will be created to operate a
production plant located between Pau end Orther. Initial capacity: 300 tons
per year from an imported precursor (polyacrilonitrile). The capacity will

be increased later on, and the plant will then produce the precursor itself.
Operation will start during 1986. On the other hand, Pechiney-Ugine-Kuhlmann
in association with Hercules, a 0.8. company. The scenario is the same: joint
60-40 percent subsidiary (szrc [expansion unknovnl). Initial capacity:

200 tons per year; operation to start late in 1983. Plant at Pont-dc-Claix
(Isere). There again, the precursor would be imported, at least initially,
from Japan (Sumika-Hercules subsidiary). So, the French industry is making a
start: this is an important move. if one considers the highly strategic
applications for carbon fibers (aircraft, defense). Essentially, this French-
Japanese alliance is turning its back to the present European leader,'the

English Courtaulds. [Text] [Paris AIR 8: 008308 in French 22 May 82 p 21)
(COPYRIGHT: A. a c. 1982] 9294

C80: 3102/3110
Am 42: TWENTY-SIX SOLD. 10R! ORDERS EXPECTED
Paris AIR & cosms in French 22 May 82 p 16

[Article signed J.H.: "New Firm Orders for AIR £2. Aerospatiale and Aeritalia
Have Now Sold 26 Aircraft to 5 Airlines")

[Text] One month ago (see AIR & cosms No 903), two 0.5. comuter airlines
exercised the options they had purchased last year on the Am 52: Ransome
Airlines (six aircraft) and Comand Airways (three aircraft + two options)
thus bane the first two airlines to place firm orders for the French-Italian
twin turboprop.

The economic interest group Comuter Aircraft announced in close succession
the receipt of two new orders: one from a u.s. airline, the other from a French
airline. ‘

"right Airlines

Bright Airlines had been one of the first 0.8. companies to show interest in
the A‘l'R 42; in June 1981. it had signed an Option for eight aircraft with
Aerospetiale. This option agreement is now being replaced by a final agreement.
this time with the economic interest group A‘l‘R [Comuter Aircraft]. Under

this agreement, which was signed on 12 May, the first A‘l'R 62 will be delivered
early in 1986; these aircraft will replace eight Convair 600 now operated by
Wright Airlines from Cleveland (0hio)-where the company is headquartered—to
Detroit, Dayton, Cincinnati and Columbus.

The model chosen is the AIR 62-200, which has a maximal take-off weight of
15.550 kg, enabling the aircraft to fly 49 passengers nonstop over 1,650 km,

or (for instance) over 5 successive lSS-kn flight legs, without refueling (see
AIR a cosms No 903). With this weight, the AIR 62 will be an economic replace-
ment for the bO-SO seat engine aircraft of former generations.

By placing itself once again on the 0.8. comter marker-the largest-the
ATR 42 is undeniable making a further breakthrough.

Air Littoral

Air Littoral, headquartered in Montpellier, had also taken an option on two
Al'R 62 last year. There again, the option has been exercised and a firm order
agreement was signed on 16 May.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ML!
Air Littoral has launched a program of expansion and modernization of its
fleet which, at present, consist of Brazilian Bandeirante outfitted to carry
19 passengers; it connects with national airlines flights to serve the
Hontpellier-Nice, Hontpellier-Bordeaux and Montpellier-Perpignan-Valencia
lines. In addition, it serves a transversal Biarritz-Pau-Lyon line on which
an aircraft of about 30 seats will soon be operated, pending the arrival of
the AIR 62.

The first aircraft of this type will be delivered as early as October 1985,
the second in the spring of 1986. Actually. Air Littoral will be the first

airline in the world to operate an AIR 62. The model chosen is also the
ATR 62-200, outfitted to accomodate 69 passengers.

26 Aircraft Sold...

Following these 2 new orders, the manufacturers indicate that they have sold
26 aircraft to S airlines. This total obviously includes Finnair, the "launch-
ing company," who earlier this year decided to acquire 5 ATR 62 outfitted to
carry 66 passengers, to he delivered from late in 1985 to early in 1987. Ac-
cording to the Finnish press, Finnair has also taken an option on a 60-seat
model (the ATR xx), which could be placed in service in 1987-88.

... And Soon 36?

The economic interest group AIR is expected to announce an order from Air
Caledonia later this month. In May 1981, this company had taken four options,
two of which to be exercised within a year (negotiations are under way), the
other two one year later. The first two AIR 62 would be delivered in May and
Rovember 1986, the other two late in 1987 and early in 1988. ATR will then
have sold a total of 30 aircraft to 6 airlines.

However, another order should also be confirmed in the near future, that of
Scheduled Skyways, a 0.5. airlines who, last year, had committed itself to pur-
chsagin six aircraft. Later this month, ATR could thus be in a position to
announce that it has sold a total of 36 aircraft to 7 airlines.

Let us recall (see AIR & COSMOS No 881) that, when the ATR 62 program was
launched, i.e. on 7 Hovemher 1981, 33 airlines had already shown interest in
the new aircraft. fourteen of them had cannitted themselves to purchasing 62
aircraft (56 s 6). of these, six were in the 0.8., three in Central America,
one in Australia, two in France, two in EurOpe. Therefore, what we are now
witnessing is a clear confirmation of positions taken back in 1981.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982
9296

CSO: 3102/313

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SECOND AIRBUS A.310 BEGINS TEST FLIGHTS
Paris AIR s 003103 in French 22 May 82 p 19

[Article: "The Second A.310 Has Begun Its Test Plights. On 13 May, the Two
Aircraft Totalled 81 Flight hours")

[Text] As expected (see flash in our last issue). the second A.310 has nade
its first flight in Toulouse, on Thursday 13 lisy 1982. The aircraft, carrying
the colors of Airbus Industrie. was piloted by Gilbert Defer and Udo Guenzel.
Two flight engineers were also on board: Jean-narie Mathias and Philippe
Merville.

This first flight. which took place less than six weeks after that of the
first A.3lo (3 April) lasted 6 h 65 min. On that day. the two aircraft
totalled 81 flight hours and 22 flights; in other words. testing is ahead of
schedule. The overall results are fully satisfactory and the testing team
feels that performances will exceed expectations.

The maneuverability tests have shown that the use of wing fences. vortex
generators or other corrective devices (who automatically generate an addition-
al drag) will not be necessary: the A.310 will therefore have an absolutely
clean wing. This is a remarkable success for the European aerodynamics
engineers.

The second A.3lo is also entering its test and certification stage. The third
A.3lO will fly early in August; it will carry the colors of Lufthansa. to
which it will be delivered later on; this aircraft will therefore be equipped
with two General Electric (IN-BOA turbojets (as is known, the first two A.3lo
are equipped with Pratt and Whitney JT9D-7Rlo).

Airbus Industrie also confirmed that deliveries of the A.310 will start
after its certification, scheduled for March 1983. and that. to-date, 180
aircraft (90 fir- orders, 90 options) have been ordered by 15 airlines.

COPYRIGRI‘: A. 8 C. 1982

9296
080: 3102/313 run

31
FOR OFFICIAL 083 mm