APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00060R000200030028-0
Near East/North Africa Repo’rt

NO. 2056

Future 0! Electronic Industries in Egypt to 2000-

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
MB

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infer-tion was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transl iterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Vords or names preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supl. lied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'rimes within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govern-eat.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

ms publications my be ordered from the National Technical
Infomtion Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is reconsnded that the ms m-ber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Covert-eat Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Docuents, 0.8. Government Printing office, Hashington, 0.0.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal nausea,
title and series) are available from Bell & Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
my be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
REPOIT wIE'ﬂAﬂON .WI'NO. JPRS 7‘746

a'. m. on um. 5. than on.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT, No. 2056 11 December 1979

Future of Electronic Industries in Egypt to 2000

thud-7m wwwnmonam
Joint Publications Research Service >
1000 North Glebe Road - :
Arlington. Virginia 22201

nag-amoqmmmm Iavmdumamo—m

As above

II. Attire“ a.“ M m

This serial report contains inforlation on socioecononic. govern-ant. political.
and technical developnents in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

I). ow my». a. Manuela

Political Science _Inter-Arab Affairs _Libya _Su1tanate
Sociology __North African _llauritania of Gun
Economics Affairs _Horocco _Syria
Culture (Social _Afghanistan _People'a Deno- __‘l‘uniaia
Sciences) ___Algeria cratic Republic _United Arab

Ethnology _Bahrain of Yelen Bairatea
Geography x_ Egypt __Persian Gulf _Heatern Sahara
Techological _Irsn Area __Yelen Arab
Military Sciences Iraq ___Qatar Republic

Israel ___Saudi Arabia

Jordan _Spanish North

Kuwait Africa

Lebanon __Sudan

b. MIMI/W Yon-n

coon" nee/m... 5D. SC. 5K, 15

‘i— H no. M as: am now-n
""""?teé"73a11ab111ty uncussrnm _

Sold by NTIS gunman-non
Springfield, Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED

Mum-nun to. W on m mom I“ m “-7"
(1M Nils-)5)

Man-Dalm-
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT
No. 2056

FUTJRE OF ELECTRONIC INDUSTRIES m EGYPT TO 2000

Cairo AL-SINA'AT AL-ILIKTRUNIYAH PI HISR WA HUSTAQABALUHA HATTA
'AHM ALPAYN in Arabic 1979 pp 1-157

[Report: "The Electronic Industries in Egypt and Their Future Until the
Year 2000"]

[Excerpts] The Presidency of the Republic

The Specialised National Councils

Electronic Industries in Egypt snd Their Future Until the Year 2000
Cairo, 1979.

The National Council for Production and Economic Affairs

Report Presented to His Excellency the President of the Republic on the
Electronic Industries in Egypt and Their Future Until the Year 2000.

Cairo. 1979.

In the name of God. the merciful and the compassionate:

His Excellency the President of the Republic,

A greeting blessed by God.

The National Council for Production and Economic Affairs is devoting spe-
cial attention to studying the strategic industries in Egypt and to draw-
ing up long-tern policies to develop and enhance then and define their
future until the year 2000.

The attached report deals with the electronic industries in their capacity

as sone of the fundamental mainstays of numerous industries, led by the
telecommunications equipment industry and the usr industries. The council's

-1- [III-NEsA-IZI]
Industrial Production Branch prepared a comprehensive study on these indus-
tries, assisted by the information and data available to it. and presented
its study to the council. In the light of this study and of the opinions
and proposals discussed by the council. this report has been prepared and

I an honored to present it to His Excellency the President of the Republic
on behalf of the council.

It is hoped that your excellency will examine the report and decide the recon-
nendationa that your excellency doe-s fit in this regard.

Central Supervisor of the Specialized National
Councils

Muhammad 'abd-al-Qadir Hatin

Table of Contents

Page
Topic
General Review 11
Chapter One
Electronic Products and Technology:
Hove-ant of Electronic Production Develop-eat 29
Modern Technological Depth of Electronics 35
Details of International Inclinations in Electronic Industries 37
Estiaate of Invest-ants in Electronic Equipment in Egypt in 46
the Year 2000
Chapter T00
Electronic Industry in Egypt:
Beginning of Electronic Industry in Egypt 51
Technical Evaluation of Electronic Equip-ant Industry in Egypt 55
Electronic Industry Conpanies in Egypt 51
Chapter Three
Industrial Electronics:
Manufacturing of Electronic Equipment in Atomic Energy Authority 91

Electronic Industry Connected Hith Con-unication Equipment 95
Chapter Four

Military Electronic Industries:

Goals of Military Electronic Industries
Components of Military Electronic Industries
Military Electronic Industry in Egypt

Chapter Five
Training and Research in Electronic Industries:

Training in Sphere of Electronic Industries

Role of Scientific Res arch in Bolsterins Electronic Industries
Research and Training Centers
Recommendations

Industrial Production Branch
GENERAL REVIEW

This report includes five chapters that deal with the various aspects of
the modern electronic industries in the countries that have achieved the
peak of international progress, as in the United States and Japan, and in
the existing Egyptian companies and with the rudimentary current position
of the electronic industries in Bgypt--the means for assembling recreational
electronic equipment [sic]. The report also deals. in light of the various
[words dropped] to correct its course and streuline its direction, to make
it compatible with the rapid develop-eats undergone by the electronic indus-
tries and the local market needs, in addition to the research centers of
various levels. not only in term of developing the electronic industries
but also in terms of diversifying and improving the electronic products.
The research and designing centers occupy a basic place in the production
of the electronic industries. The centers top the elements of competition
in the electronic industries and this is why a special chapter has been
devoted to the electronic industries research centers in Egypt and to the
means to benefit fron these centers in the plan to develop this industry.
The report also deals with the importance of training the second ranks of
the electronic industry leaderships, nanely the technical managers who
shoulder the task of creativity end innovation in designing the production
models. 0n the basis of the principles on which the Egyptian electronic
industries test he founded, the report reco-ends the creation of companies
for the production of industrial electronics, both for the purposes of pro-
ducing the various scans of commication and for the purposes of producing
Arabic computers. The report also deals with the expected picture of the
production of nilitary electronics.

The current position of the electronic industry companies is considered
nsrginsl--s position that has not entered the sphere of the electronic in-
dustries yet. In tern of products. this position has not yet gone beyond
the production of television and radio sets for the local market. In terms
of industrial depth, the position is still in a rudimentary stage that lacks
designing and innovation, even though a successful plan was carried out be-
tween 1960 and 1965 and led to starting the production of television models
manufactured largely fro- local conponents and parts. however, elements
beyond the control of the companies stopped this production and this depth
has declined to the ninimal degree, despite the large production volume--
especially the production of television sets.
The first chapter deals with the various sections of the international

electronic industry and with the extent to which electronic equipment has
permeated all aspects of life.

Even though the historical beginnings of this industry were in the sphere
of telecomunications, the industry gradually entered the individual's
public and private life and has become a mainstay of information by tele-
vision and radio and an instrument of recreation, such as the video equip-
ment for recording both image and sound.

One of the basic fields of the electronic industries is the field of the
war industries which has extended to include the management of military
defense operations. Radio and missile networks and air defense units all
rely on electronic comunication equipment and on electronic computers.
Moreover, superiority in the air force has come to rely on sophisticated
electronic equipment capable of performing from within the aircraft all

the reconnaissance and missile-launching operations performed by the ground
networks.

Modern war has assumed a fundamental electronic quality. The large-scale
use of electronic equipment has opened the opportunity for the use of space
for offensive war and for disrupting con-unications and reconnaissance, in
addition to the fatal nuclear radiations discovered by man.

Electronics also play a major humane role. They have supplied doctors with
the means to look inside the body, with numerous means for radiological
diagnosis, with the means to bolster the senses, such as hearing [equipment]
and. shortly, with the means to make up for the loss of eyesight and even
with heart pacemakers.

Electronics also play a role in the transport movement, both by road and

by railroad. The latest inclination is the introduction in the future of
electronic devices to control car equipment and to regulate fuel combustion
and cooling through the use of a small electronic computer. There are other
details, many of which are covered by the first chapter.

Technology of Modern Electronics

The diversity and development of electronic production relies on a tech-
nology that has developed qualitatively in rapid succession. The electronic
equipment industry used to rely on basic electronic components or equipment
consisting of the production of various resistant units or capacitor units.
air coils [al-milaffat al-hawa'iyah] or coils with iron chests. The produc-
tion of electronic equipment from these components was achieved through the
use of the electronic valve as the basis for the electronic circuits. The

equipment produced was voluminous and placed in cheats that required venti-
lation and internal and external wire connections.
Then a sudden developnent occurred--a development which started in Horld
War lI--with the innovation of the transistor that has led to develop-
ing the theories of electronic designs by replacing the valve. The produc-

tion of the basic electronic components has also developed in the direction
of small size.

With continued development. it became possible to include most of the basic
components and the transistor unit in a single cell. It then became pos-
sible to produce the electronic computer from several plates of semi-con-
ductive materials assembled in a small box and carried in the pocket. The

production of these [pocket computers] has been based on the so-called tech-
nology of merged cells.

The size of these computers developed further and became thinner and the
technology came to be known as the "multiple merged cells." With still

further development. the technology has come to be known as the "super-
Iultiple merged cells."

The theory of manufacturing these cells from semiduxductivemmterisls, such
as silicon, is considered the basis for constructing the required electric
circuit, whether for the purpose of making computation, for opening and
closing operations or for hundreds of other electronic operations which
constitute different stages in the various electronic computers which have
capabilities in accordance with certain criteria.

The nature of this industry [computer industry] is different from the elec-
tronic industries, even though they all depend on utilising the qualities

of [certain] materials. However, the electronics technology has developed
in the direction of:

A shift toward the use of electronics inside semi-conductive materials in-
stead of confining the use to electrons released in vacuum within valves.

The use of surfaces with qualities different from those of the customary
resistant units, the use of density units instead of the previous condensers
and the use of conductive surfaces that merge the various elements within
the micronic dimensions, i.e. within one millionth of a meter.

This is the nature of the modern electronics technology. The inclination
of the electronics technology toward [the use of microns] must be stressed
so that this use may extend to the various types of electronic production,
even though there are still some types of production, such as radio transmit-

ters, with a capacity exceeding (L.O.) that rely in their operation on the
electronic valve and the separate electronic components.

The second chapter reviews electronic production and its companies in Egypt
in the following manner:

Production and Future Needs:
Electronic production in Egypt has been confined to consumer commodities.
The serious beginning started with the production of television sets, even
though it was preceded by the production of radio sets—especially the popu-
lar models. However. the production of television sets to meet the begin-
nings of the television service needs constitutes the industrial start that
depends on an acceptable degree of investment and on knowledge of a sophis-
ticated industry.

The volume of what has been produced since 1960 and what is expected to be
produced by 1980 amounts to 1,354,986 million television sets. The esti-

mated average production in the 1977-80 plan amounts to 145,000 sets an-
nually.

A study has been conducted to estimate the needs for television sets on the
basis of the spread of cultural and information awareness in its capacity
as the fundamental link resulting in the acquisition of television sets.
These future needs are estimated at an average that starts with 160,000

sets in 1977, rising to 286,000 in [year indistinct), to 1:00.000 sets in
1990 and to 736,000 sets in the year 2000.

This means that the total number of television sets that have to be produced
between 1978 and 1982 aaounts to 1.7 million sets valued at 300 million
pounds on the basis that 20 percent of the sets will be colored sets. The

number that information [sic] will require by the year 2000 will amount to
8.5 million television sets.

The value of the production of television sets may amount to 35 million

[Egyptian] pounds annually at the average, compared to 8 million pounds for
the 1976 production.

If the loss in production resulting from the idle capacities is to be cal-
culated, it is expected to amount to 8 million pounds annually.

Conditions of Electronic Production in Egypt:

Nearly 15 years have passed since the start of production in Egypt. How-
ever, this production is still at the same level with which it started.
Despite the leaps made in the methods of production at the international
level. the Egyptian companies have continued to operate on the basis of
purchasing the electronic components, confining their industrial efforts

to the operation of assembling and quality control. It is evident from

the various chapters of the report that the integrated manufacturing of
electronic equipment must be carried out in four stages. The most important
in terms of the technical and economic impact are the stage of designing the
products, producing the prototypes and constructing the components either
through direct contacts with industrial companies or through the production

of the special parts which constitute a distinctive section of the designing
outfit.
This situation has led to developing the electronic equipment plants into
a market for dissembled television and radio parts supplied by foreign com-
panies at prices that obstruct competition and prevent the Egyptian com-
panies from standing on their own feet. This is why the companies suffer
from similar problems, the most important of which are:

1. Lower production than the actual production capacity due to the short-

age of the production requirements consisting of conponent kits imported
in hard currency.

2. High costs of assembling that raise the cost of the set. thus increas-
ing the added value to (03 percent instead of the usual 30 percent.

It must be noted here that the steps to develop the production of television
sets had reached in sl-Nasr Television Company the point of producing nearly
70 percent of the components of each set. But the development was stopped
for reasons beyond the control of the companies and these companies resumed
the policy of importing component kits and closed their production units.

however. they recently resumed the production of these components on agree-
ment with a German company.

The general interest, both socially and economically, dictates preservation
of the existing production units that are represented in:

l. Al-Nasr Television Company.
2. The Arab Transistor Company.
3. The Electronic and Electrical Equipment [Company] (Philips).

4. The Banhs Electronic Industries Company.

An investment study conducted by the Industrial Sectors Industrialization
Authority [title as given] taco-lends that the production of television sets
be confined to the Arab Transistor Company and the Philips Company and that
the plant for the production of television screens owned by al-Nasr Television
Company be closed. This recomendation relies on some economic criteria con-
tained in the chapter on the production of consumer electronic equipment.

But the recouendation has not gone further to include a program to stream-
line or bolster this industry so as to eliminate the bottleneck this indus-
try is experiencing, namely confining the industrial operation to assembling

imported sets. This reco-endetion is remote from the industrial reform con-
nected with the Egyptian development plans.

The future defined by each company in the form of plans, though indicative
of the degree by which these companies have eabarked on the development stage,

is not enough to deal with the problem. The aspects of development are
suned up in the following:
1. Establishing economic and industrial connections and coordination
among the existing companies.

2. Speeding up the phase of terminating the importation of component kits
and proceeding with all the phases of manufacturing in reliance on the aid
agreements for full industrialization and on the efforts that can be made
by the research centers, especially the Electronic Industries Research Cen-
ter.

3. Devoting attention to the creation of middle-level technical leaderships
with the abilities needed to take charge of the responsibility of designing
and innovating in the sphere of the production of consumer electronic equip-
ment.

The third chapter deals with the industrial electronics in the sphere of:
l. Producing telephone centrals and telephone communication equipment.

The Egyptian Company for the Telephone Equipment Industry was created in
1962 and started its production which consisted of:

First, public crossbar-type centrals and private centrals.
Second, telephone equipment.

The Egyptian Company relies on an agreement with the Swedish Ericson Company
for technical aid. Its central and telephone equipment production capacity
is determined in the light of the needs of the Communications organization
[probably referring to the Arab Republic of Egypt Teleconnunications Organi-
zation] which have been estimated at 30,000 lines for the public centrals.
10,000 lines for private centrals and 70.000 telephone sets. The rate of
local manufacturing of the various products is estimated at the following:

Nearly 65 percent of the total value of the public centrals.
Nearly 60 percent of the total value of private centrals.
Nearly 84 percent of the total value of telephone sets.

The industrial depth achieved by the company indicates that it has followed
a sound course in terms of national industrialization. However, the com-
pany's average [annual] production throughout the years of its existence
has amounted to only 9,000 lines for public centrals. Moreover, the company
has also suffered from the fact that the [telecommunications] authority has
failed to pull out the company's production imediately or to pay its value
at the right time. This indicates that a degree of the difficulties that
have led to the deterioration of the telephone utility has been reflected
on the company.
0n the other hand, the company was receiving the technical information
necessary for development and improvement from the Swedish Ericson Conpany
but the unavailability of investnents did not help it to introduce the im-
provenents. This has led to the continued production of the old-type Cross-
bar centrals and has made it impossible to export this type of centrale to
many neighboring countries.

2. Embarking on the production of Electronic Centrals [telephone exchanges]:

Enormus developments have been witnessed in the production of connioation
networks and these developments underline two directions in the production

of equipment:

First, a shift fro: the system of auto-atic telephone comicationa to the
use of equipment based on electronic inventions and on control that leads to
selecting the wanted subscriber by coaputers.

Second. external conunication between subscribers to the autonstic telephone
exchange and the public centrals will use a cable network smaller than that
used presently. thus leading to the inclusion of numerous telephone cor-uni-
cetions (subscribers) in one telephone channel. Therefore. there will be a
dire need for the production of multiplex equipment (ajhizat sl-tamn] in
the efforts to develop telephone eonunications generally.

An estimate of needed the telephone lines indicates that the number will rise
from the 150,000 lines needed in current years to 250.000 lines in 1986 and
to nearly 300,000 thousand lines .mnually by the end of this century.

The need for telex equipnent will also increase to reach 10,000 machines by
1980. We must also take into our account that the networks to tranmIit the
information needed for performing public services or for connecting numerous
utilities raise the value of the various types of co-aunication equipment
that has to be produced. This value has been estimated in the telnet-ami-
cations chapter at the equivalent of 250 million dollars annually. This
figure calls for:

First, developing gradually the current type of centrals produced into the
new electronic types and raising the production capacity so that it say
meet the local needs.

Second. beginning a new industry to produce the various types of electronic
communication equipment needed for the comnication networks outside the
centrals.

3. Arabic-Language Electronic Brains and Computers:

The chapter concerning industrial electronics deals with—-in addition to

entering the field of the conunication equipment industry--the production
of electronic brains and computers, especially Arabic-language computers,

10
especially Arabic-language computers. to meet the general development re-
quirements that have been and will continue to be faced by the Arab coun-
tries.

General development or civilizational growth depends on the use of electronic
brains in endless spheres of life. The future indicates large-scale growth
in the use of small-size electronic brains. The production of such equipment
for daily use in home life is almost realized. There are even indications
that the car industry will resort to such electronic brains to control car

operation and to meet the increased need for the economical consumption of
fuel.

The use of electronic computers and brains in fundamental spheres has been
delayed in the Arab countries because of the dire need for brains that write
and store data in Arabic.

The chapter concerning this issue contains details of the technological
progress in accordance with which electronic computers and teleprinters and

similar telegraph equipment has been adapted to use Arabic and details on
how Arabic is more suitable for such use.

This is why the feasibility of the plan to produce Arab-language electronic
computers and brains is proven by a mere examination of the requirements of
civilizational progress in the Arab countries.

The fourth chapter of the report deals with the military electronic indus-
tries in the following manner:

1. The goals of the military electronic industry:

This industry seeks to produce the electronic equipment and systems neces-
sary for the military hardware used by the various branches of the armed
forces (the army, the air force, the air defense, the naval forces and
reconnaissance).

These systems and equipment are so numerous and cover all spheres and branches
of the electronic sciences. The most important types of electronic equip-
ment are summed up in the following:

Equipment for radio communications and data transmission over various wave
lengths.

All types of radar equipment.

Various kinds of missile guidance and control equipment (surface-to-surface.
surface—to-air, air-to-air).

Navigation equipment for military aircraft.

ll
Electronic jaming and electronic counter measures.
Electronic mnitoring and direction finding equipment.

Night vision equipment .

(Heat-seeking) electronic heads and other equipment.

These types of equipment are divided according to the nature of their use.
There is ground equipment, equipment filled into aircraft, missiles or ships.

Special position of military electronics industry in Eygpt:

Egypt waged in 1967 and 1973 wars whose main feature was that of an electronic
war. This made it necessary to enter the sphere of producing the equipment
for this war, especially since acquiring such equipment from foreign sources
has become subject to political relations and since it is very expensive.

The production of military electronics requires industrial precision and a
quality standard higher than that of any other electronic product. This is
why the units for this production are considered a factor for raising the
quality standard of the production of civil electronics.

Military Electronics and Banha Electronic Industry Company:

The plan to produce modern electronics started with the creation of the Banha
Electronic Industries Company. Even though the company was founded on this
basis. it turned in its early stages toward civilian production consisting
of recreational equipment. It then started to produce some co-Iunication
equipment for the armed forces. Therefore, the company should be provided
with all the components of military electronic production. whether in terms
of equipment or in terms of personnel, on a firm and scientific basis of co-
operation with foreign sides that are advanced in this sphere of production.
Such cooperation must be stipulated in all the contracts for the importation
of weapons for the armed forces.

Al-Nasr Television Company started as of 1967 to assemble some types of mili-
tary cos-unication equipment and is still specialized in the production of
some of these types.

In the fifth chapter, the report reviews research and training in the elec-
tronic industries and provides a description of the applied and basic research
centers, explaining the positive and the negative aspects. The applied re-
search centers are characterized by having good laboratory equipment while
lacking researchers and skilled labor due to the migration of workers either
to the Arab countries or to other work sectors.

There should be a special cadre for the applied research similar to the cadre
of the universitieis. taking applied research into consideration at time of
promotion. The basic research centers are characterised by having well-pre-
pared scientific persons while lacking proper laboratory equipment.

12
The report also explains the current spheres of work of each of the applied
and basic research centers and points out that the basic research centers
focus on theoretical research theses and that the researchers conducting
such studies are selected according to their scientific qualifications.

The report stresses the importance of coordinating the work of the various
applied and basic research centers, pointing out the distinguishing fea-
tures of each of then. The report also explains the distribution of work
among the research centers under the control of the service sectors and the
research centers and units under industry's control.

The report also discusses the importance of training and of giving [college]
graduates the largest degree of knowledge with modern developments. of under-
lining scientific knowledge, of providing laboratories, of conducting experi-
ments. of kindling interest in electronics and a spirit of scientific compe-
tition as of childhood and of preparing the electronic parts market to make
it compatible with these goals.

Kindling an interest requires organizing the hobby of amateur radio operation
and forming scientific societies in schools and universities.

l3
CHAPTER ONE: ELECTEONIC PRODUCTS MID TECHMIDGY
Estimate of Investments in Electronic Equipment in Egypt by Year 2000:

An estimate of investments in electronic equipment in Egypt in the year

1985 can be built on the basis of the international population average.

The estimate of these investments in the year 2000 can be based on quad-
rupling the investments in a period of 15 years.

The international investment in 1985 will amount to 200 billion dollars, as
already stated. Earth's population in that year will amount to nearly 6.5
billion people, at an average growth rate of 2.5 percent. If Egypt's popu-
lation in 1985 is estimated at 63.5 million people gst the said growth rate),
then the investments are estimated at nearly 200 1 $6. or the equivalent

of nearly 2 billion dollars (equal to about 750 million Egyptian pounds at

the official exchange rate). In the year 2000, these investments will rise
to 3 billion pounds.

If it is estimated that the local plants will produce only 25 percent of the
electronic equipment in the republic in 1985 and 75 percent of this equip-
ment in the year 2000, then the value of investments in electronic equipment

will amount to nearly 200 million Egyptian pounds in 1985 and 2,225 million
Egyptian pounds in the year 2000.

Estimate of Investment for Electronic Components in Egypt in 1985 and in the
Year 2000:

The same method of estimate followed in the preceding part can be followed
here. Therefore. the ezsimate of investments in electronic components
amounts to nearly 55 x '5 of nearly 650 million dollars (the equivalent

of nearly 170 million Mun poumls) in 1985 and :1me 700 million
Egyptian pounds in the year 2000.

Investments in electronic components industry will amount to nearly 50 mil-
lion Egyptian pounds in 1985 and 500 million pounds in the year 2000.

lb
CHAPTER THO: ELECTRONICS IhDUSTRY IN EGYPT
Beginning of Electronics Industry in Egypt:

Tangible electronic production Egypt started with the production of tele-
vision sets when it was decided to introduce the television service to the
new regions of the United Arab Republic at the time. As a basis for the
growth of this service, it was decided that it was necessary to manufacture
television sets locally. This production started in al-Nasr Company in
stages which took 6 years. The rate of [local] manufacturing of the sets
amounted in 1964 to nearly 75 percent of the components of the television
set. This industry was coupled with units for the production of various
parts of the set, namely:

1. Units for the production of electronic components such as the channel
selector, the loudspeaker, the transformers and the various coils.

2. A plant for the production of compressed wood cabins and polyester paint.

3. A plant for the production of screens.

4. A plant for the production of instruments for cutting and molding metals
by pressure.

It was hoped that the policy of real industrialization in this plant would
advance to the point where the plant would produce completely various models
of television sets. The plant did actually reach at an early stage, in 1965,
the point of producing a transistor television. thus scoring progress that
had not been made by many of the major international factories yet.

The experiment of introducing the electronic industries started in a scien-
tific and alert manner through al-Nasr Television Company which was controlled
at the time by the culture and information sector. This experiment. which
lasted only 5 years. made it possible to provide training and experience to

a vast generation of engineers and skilled workers. The experiment was even
tantamount to opening the door for the first time for the Egyptian women

graduating from high school to work in an industrial craft compatible with
her nature--a craft in which she achieved considerable success.

15
The experiment of manufacturing television sets by an industrial company

was tied to a national direction embodied in enabling this industry to

take into account the conditions of the television service in the country

so that its costs may not constitute a burden to the state, whether in terms
of the expenses of transmission and of program production or in terms of

the expenses of receiving this service in homes, by producing television sets
affordable by the Egyptian masses.

This is why the task of this industry was to make a profit capable of cover-
ing the costs of television transmisision and, at the sane time, to produce
reception sets sold at prices within the purchasing power of the majority

of the Egyptian people. The experiment succeeded in securing a television
service that lasted for a period of time, realized economic independence and
did not saddle the state with the burdens of financing it. The experiment
even led to a situation which will undoubtedly push this industry toward
progress and excellence under the impact of the direct economic link between
television sets and financing this service--llinkthatcreatesan interaction
between the service product through the sale of larger numbers of sets and
the use of the profits from sales to improve the television service, thus
creating constant progressive motion.

The television industry then followed the course that the authorities con-
cerned started implementing in the phase which started around l965--namely
the course of reduced production and higher prices. This led to hampering
the Egyptian television industry because it forced the industrial capacities
achieved in an atmosphere of enthusiasm and security to go idle as a result
of the reduced production adopted by the state plans and of the restrictions
imposed by those plans--restrictions that made it impossible to acquire in

an uninterrupted manner the raw materials or the basic parts needed for pro-
duction.

Comprehensive Picture of Electronic Equipment Industry in Egypt Since 1965:

The state's general plan has obstructed a sound industrial growth of the elec-
tronic industries. The situation in the various electronics plants reached
the point where production is concentrated in four major plants, namely:
Al-Nasr Television Company, Telemisr Company, Philips Company and Banha
Company. These companies focus on the production of consumer electronics,
the most important being radio and television sets. The industrial dimension
has been confined to assembling these sets from imported kits because the
aforementioned causes have made it impossible to proceed with the plans for
industrial depth. Moreover, transactions and deals were confined to the
eastern bloc countries, with the exception of Philips Company. The nature
of the structure of the Philips Company requires it to obtain its needs from
the foreign [mother] company with the capital, namely the Dutch Philips Cour
pany.

l6
[Horde dropped] fully manufactured and the kit, causing it to be consumed
by the costs of the production phase in accordance with the policy approved
on the basis of manufacturing the various electronic components, such as
resistors and capacitors. as a result of the change of the company's policy
toward the easy assembly production or as a result of the inability of the
equipment to keep up with the rapid development undergone by the electronic
components industry.

Technical Evaluation of Electronic Equipment Industry in Egypt and Complete
Picture of Electronic Equipment Industry:

The manufacturing of the various electronic equipment. whether recreational
or for communication purposes, takes place in the following stages:

A. The industrial designing sections shoulder the responsibility of design-
ing equipment to perform various functions according to special computations.
The designing phase does not end at this point. Rather, prototypes for this
equipment have to be built in special prototype workshops and various experi-
ments and measurements have to be carried out to prove the compatibility of
the prototype produced with the specifications on whose basis the previous
computations had been made.

3. Electronic equipment usually consists of basic components and of special
components. The basic electronic components are produced by specialized
factories and there is no need for these factories to belong to the electronic
equipment factories. As for the special components which are connected with
the type of the piece of equipment and the method of its design, these are
usually manufactured by the electronic equipment plants themselves. Conse-
quently, the phase following the prototype production phase is that of im-
porting the basic components from the specialized plants and of arranging
for the production of the special components in the plant which has the
right and the concession to manufacture the piece of equipment to be pro-
duced.

C. The third phase of production is to arrange for production lines prepared
to synchronize with the phases of assembling the equipment from the basic and
special components already supplied with a regularity compatible with the
production program.

D. The fourth and final phase is the phase of quality control. reliability,
durability and other specific limits set to determine the suitability of the
equipment-~a suitability connected with the type and place in which the equip-
ment is used and the purpose for which it is used.

These four stages constitute the mainstays of the electronic equipment in-
dustry. Even though the feur stages are integrated and have their impact on
the standard of the product, the first stage which pertains to designing and
building a prototype is considered a definite element in achieving success

17
and excellence by the various electronic equipment factories. Such excel-
lence and success depends on the ability and skill of the designers and
inventors of the various kinds of equipment. This class of industrial men
is considered a mainstay of the industrial depth. However, such capabili-
ties require superior education. "hat is more, such men gain their experi-
ence in the various methods of designing from specialization and practical
industrial experience achieved through their work in the basic units of the
electronic equipment industry. Companies consider the patents of the equip-
ment produced an industrial right and a secret that is not given away with-

The coammnies devote attention to attracting the skills capable of carrying
out the task of production designing. A company does not keep the prototypes
and specifications of the equipment it produces for more than one year, espe-
cially in the sphere of the consumer electronics.

The task of the designing sections also includes developing the equipment
and making various modifications that lead to the performance of new services,
to easier use and control, to higher performance efficiency, to higher effi-

ciency in electricity consumption, to longer durability of the electronic
components and to lower costs.

Method of Creation of Electronic Industries:

A developing electronic industry starts usually with the conclusion of agree-
ments for the transfer of industrial knowledge. The equipment-producing com-
panies refuse to have the transfer include the knowledge pertaining to the
first [designing] stage. They usually agree to transfer the knowledge be.
ginning with the third stage under which the component kits needed for the
production of the piece of equipment are supplied. This means that the rights
to knowbhow that are usually established through industrial agreements always

economic competition. The technical competition lies in the first stage,
namely the stage of industrial designing, and economic competition is based
on the second and third stages. As long as the [mother] company is the sup-
plier of the component kits that will be assembled, it usually makes allowb
ances for a margin of costs consisting of the difference between the price
of the fully manufactured piece of equipment and the cost of the component
kit--a margin usually consumed by the costs of the third stage in which the
kits are assembled into complete sets on the production lines. The [mother]
company confines the know-how right that it sells to the new company to just
this stage of production. Thus, the sale price of the product assembled on
the production lines of the new company has to be higher than the costs of
the same product manufactured by the industrial company with the concession

to produce the original piece of equipment. The mother company thus makes
sure that it will face no competition in foreign markets.

18
Course of Electronic Companies in Egypt:

The electronic equipment industry in Egypt embarked on this stage by pro-

ducing assembled recreational equipment and some types of communication
equipment introduced recently.

Contracts were concluded for the transfer of the know-how concerning the
assembling of television and radio sets with numerous international industrial
companies in the east, the west, Japan and the United States. The same
Egyptian company has vacillated between numerous foreign companies and has

not kept its industrial relationship with a single company for a long and use-
ful time that makes it possible to establish a firm relationship that creates
a kind of trust and subsequently leads to the full transfer of the various
stages of the industrial know-how. This happened to al-Nasr Television Com-
pany in its first production period between 1960 and 1965. The agreement it
concluded with the American firm did not deal with the aforementioned condi-
tions wherein lies the fear of competition between the original company and
the competing [new] company. Neither Egypt nor the Arab countries were among
the markets of the said American firm. Moreover, the agreement lasted for

5 years during which al-Nasr Television Company moved to the second stage of
the industry, namely. the stage of arranging directly for its needs of the
special electronic components. This was done with the assistance of the
original firm which supplied all the equipment necessary for this stage, thus

leading [al-Nasr'sl industrial depth to reach 75 percent of all the indus-
trial stages.

Al-Nasr Company also began to establish a section for design and development
relying on Egyptian skills. The elements of the electronic equipment indus-
try had been expected to be completed within a short period, were it not for
the setback suffered by this company-a setback that buried those efforts.

The electronic equipment industry companies were given full protection based
on banning the importation of recreational electronic equipment. This pro-
tection did not lead to any industrial progress in the stage of assembling
sets from the imported component kits. The market for this kind of sets de-
clined as a result of the restrictions imposed on importing the components
from any country other than the agreement countries.

Production of Some Conunication Equipment:

The policy of reduced production of the recreational equipment gave some
companies the cause to turn to the production of some types of communication
equipment for the armed forces. following the same method of complete com-

ponent kits and of confining the efforts to the process of assembling on the
production line.

As a result of this inclination. some of the following types of equipment
were assembled [locally]:

19
A. Halkie talkies for the armed forces.

3. Landline carriers for the armed forces.

C. Some types of loudspeaker equipnent.

Open-Door Policy and Its Impact on Electronic Industries:

As a result of the open-door policy and of the accompanying facilities

given for the acquisition of hard currency by way of the collateral market
or by way of importation without currency conversion, the trade of importing
foreign-made electronic equipment started for the first time after a long
period. Even though the state has imposed high custom fees on such importa-
tion with the aim of protecting the locally assembled production. the elec-
tronic equipment industry companies have begun to feel some sort of comps-
tition from the imported equipment, especially equipment imported from Japan-
ese factories. Even though the imported models were produced locally, the
difference (presumably in price] between the local product and the similar

imported product has not been sufficient to give preference to the local pro-
duction.

The customs fees have been raised to nearly 250 percent and this not in—
evitably provide high customs protection. This is in addition to imposing
the incentive price for hard currency. This has. naturally. enhanced the
ability of the local industry to face the imported equipment--that is if it
is imported officially. This ability is evident in the vast difference in
the price of the colored television sets produced by the local factories and
the price of those imported from abroad.

This protection that has been given to the local production has not led to
enhancing the industrial depth of the electronic equipment. 0n the contrary,
the electronics companies have taken advantage of the protection to reduce
the local manufacturing process which started with the importation of elec-
tronic component kits [and assembling them locally] to the importation of
semi-manufactured sets which have led to higher profitability as a result of:

1. Reduced assembling costs and increased profitability.

2. Increased production creating the conditions compatible with the elaents
of disbursing top incentive rewards to the workers of these companies.

Consequently, a kind of superficial industry has started in some of the
electronic equipment companies that supply foreign products which they
import semi-manufactured so as to avoid paying the high customs duties and
to take advantage of the high profit margin consisting of the difference be-
tween the cost of the importation of a fully-manufactured set and paying the
high customs fees and the cost of importing a semi-manufactured set at very

small customs fees and assembling it at a small cost on the company's produc-
tion line.

20
Evaluation of Position of Electronic Industry Companies:

A. All the factories suffer from surplus production capacity and weak pro-
ductivity. The reasons are due to meager hard currencyallocationsfor the
importation of components. This has caused the industry to be unable to

meet the local needs and has created a black market for both imported and
lOcal equipment.

3. Even with providing the hard currency allocations needed, some produc-
tion capacities will remain idle as a result of the future expansion plans
and of the fact that these capacities exceed the local needs.

C. The low quality will deny the local production the ability to compete.
It also encourages importation. When the high assembling cost is added, the

inability to export to the free markets, such as Saudi Arabia and others,
becomes obvious.

The attached list demonstrates the production volume, the value of labor

and the added value and shows that the total loss in the added value at the
national level is as follows:

Al-Nasr Electronic Equipment Company 2,170,000 pounds
The Arab Radio and Transistor Company 2,170,000 pounds
Al-Nasr Television and Electronic Equipment Company 3,250,000 pounds
Banha Electronic Industries Company 397,000 pounds

Grand Total 8,837,000 pounds

This means that the total loss in the added value amounts to 8,377,000 pounds
annually [figures as published].

Electronic Industry Companies in Egypt:

Banha Electronic Industries Company: It is located in the town of Banha

[al-Qalyubiyah Governorate] on the Cairo-Alexandria Agricultural Road and
is built on an area of 120,000 square meters. The area of the main build-
ing which includes the workshops and the production halls is nearly 40,000
square meters. Attached to the main building is the multi-story building
which contains the research and development laboratories and the designing,
industrial engineering, testing and quality control sections.

The original project was implemented by the Czech Tesla Company within the
framework of the Soviet [sicl-Bgyptian cooperation at the time.

The original project includes the production of the following equipment:

A. A total of 40,000 television sets annually.
8. A total of 100,000 home receiving sets annually.

C. A total of 2,000 special transmission and receiving sets for military
purposes .

21
The final stages of production included the production of electronic parts,
valves and transistors sufficient to meet the need of high [the need of the

existing] sets, in addition to the production of coils, transformers, mech-
anical and plastic parts and printed circuits.

All the equipment necessary for these workshops, including a workshop for
the production of the special instruments needed for quantitiative production
and the workshop for electrical painting, has been delivered.

The plan also included equipping the multi-story building with the labora-
tories needed for technical control of the electronic parts, the industrial
engineering laboratories for operating the components and the parts [sic],
the equipment and the chemical laboratories needed to test the raw materials
and the solutions, to conduct material research and to replace the raw ma-
terials in the future, and the measurement laboratories. Hith the start of
construction. the project also devoted attention to building the electronic
equipment designing sections so as to encourage local designs.

The electronic parts which the project was prepared to produce are:
A:

1. Carbon resistors.

2. Cable resistors.

3. Variable resistors.

B:

1. Ceramic capacitors.

2. Mike capacitors

3. Chemical capacitors .

lo . Paper capacitors .

This is in addition to the valves and the transistors to which we have al-
ready referred. The thought given to establishing this project accompanied
the comprehensive industrialization movement in the Egyptian republic in the
late 1950's and early 1960's. One of the most important goals of this move-
ment was to provide full employment. This is why the project's prevalent
pattern was to use as much labor as possible. This was evident in the method
of the production of electronic parts.

The implementation of the project was postponed for several reasons and the

company did not start producing electronic parts until the beginning of 1969,
valves until 1970 and transistors until 1971.

22
The project's connection with the eastern bloc had its major impact on
curtailing the Banha Company's share of local market sales, whether in terms
of home receiving equipment or in terms of television sets. This small share
resulted from the connection of the other compenies-~al-Nasr, Telemisr and
Philips--with the western companies at the time. This was the cause of the
company's poor economic position at the outset of its foundation, not to
mention the psychological impact and the tension that afflicted the manage-
ment.

Therefore, perhaps the company will not proceed to the industrial stages that
require greater local technical effort needed by this type of products.

After completion of the special equipment in 1970, the company started to
produce special electronic equipment, beginning with s receiver-transmitter
[walkie talkie] for military use on a special license given within the frame-
work of the aforementioned cooperation. Contrary to what happened in regard
to the home receiving sets and television sets, numerous factors acted to-
gether to enable this specialized production to start more successfully.

This success had its impact on the voluntary and involuntary transformation
in the thought and efforts concerning the production of special electronic
equipment, especially since this kind of production is distinguished by the
high degree of technology it contains, a fact which stirred the ambitions

of the company's engineering teams. This fact also led to better economics
in comparison to the home equipment production which contains a small degree
of technology that does not produce profitable economics through voluminous
production [sic]. Thus, local participation in the production of special
electronic equipment increased and the demands of the sides production of
special electronic equipment increased and the demands of the sides using
such equipment also increased as a result of their confidence in the quality
of the local products.

Almost at the same time (1970), the efforts of the company's designing sec-
tions started to become evident and a contract was concluded for the pro-
duction of a mine detector which was designed by these sections.

With the company's escalated efforts in the sphere of special electronic
equipment, it was deemed necessary to bolster the industrial components
compatible with this sphere with its diverse products and relatively small
volume. To complete these components, two new workshops were constructed:

One for the manufacturing high-precision metal frames and the second for

the production of super-quality printed circuits which give the local designer
the flexibility to produce unpatterned and various equipment with the pre-
cision required for the special electronic products.

The company's first production line was thus set to produce transmission
and receiving equipment manufactured on foreign license. The company will

bolster this direction after completing the local industrial components by
way of:

23
1. Increasing local participation by producing most of the unpatented [a1-
shayr namatiysh] parts for the products asnufactured on a foreign license.

in addition to assembly and testing work.

2. Initiating the stage of imitation [sic], along with the development re-
quired for the planning and industrial engineering outfits, the training re-
quired for the designing cadres and the improvement required in the company's
economics. Only the patented components will be imported, without any pay-
ment for the imported design and technology.

3. Local designs for the transmission and receiving equith expected to
be developed by local capabilities either through imitation or through pro-

viding the opportunity for training on design and development work in foreign
companies.

The company's designing sections have selected the first production sample
for an electronic central (with a capacity for 100 subscribers). This cen-
tral has been tested successfully. Its design has been fully developed 10-
cally by the company's designing sections. A contract has been concluded
for the production of this central. This product represents the company's
second production line for the foreseeable demand volume. Since 1970 and
until the present, the designing sections have presented numerous designs
for military use. Contracts for the designs were concluded and they have
been produced. The company's experience has actually developed through local
designing efforts to the degree that it can be said that the structure of
the company's special electronic equipment has improved considerably.

Electronic vision equipment will represent the third production line. The

company is about to conclude contracts to proceed in this sphere on a foreign
license.

The efforts in these lines are focused on either horizontal expansion by com-
pleting the production processes and systems or on veritcal expansion by
bolstering the [company's] presence and by making local engineering additions
with the company's ever-growing experience in the spheres of technological
research on operation processes and methods and of designing and developing
new products. with the increasing demand for these types of special equip-

ment, the company may decide in the future to terminate its production of
home electronic equipment.

With this strategy. it is obvious that dependence on local engineering
thinking is escalating. Therefore, it is necessary to draw up clear poli-
cies, supported by the state, in the spheres of training and research. To
achieve these goals, the company mt be supported with reinforced training
plans and with budgets that bolster research, development and the policies
of incentives for the workers employed in this sphere.

Al-Nasr Television Company:

25
The company has passed through several phases in its industrial activity.
Following are the phases of its development:

1. 0n the revolution's eighth anniversary in July 1960. which was also the
date of the start of television transmission. the company imported 125,521

fully manufactured television sets of various dimensions and models and mar-
keted then, providing the maintenance work.

2. In 1962, the company adjusted its program and started local production
by importing some dissembled components and assembling them locally.

3. In 1965, the company embarked on the phase of local industrialization.

It concluded a contract with an American firm to import raw materials. Indus-
trialization developed to the point where it reached 70 percent of the various
parts of the television set, except for the basic electronic components.

4. In the wake of the 1967 war, the company's production was affected severely
and the company turned to the eastern bloc countries. As a result, the quality
of its production dropped. Moreover, the rate of [local] industrialization
also dropped. This situation continued until 1975 when the company resumed

its transactions with the western sector.

5. The planned production rates amounted to nearly 50,000 sets annually,
even though this figure can be doubled. The reason [for not doubling it] is
the difficulty to marketing due to the relatively high prices and to the
availability of television sets imported from abroad by the private sector
or by people returning from official missions abroad (the number of sets in-
ported in this manner ranges from 20,000 to 30,000 sets annually).

6. The company's total production in white and black television sets from
the time of its foundation until 1977 anounted to nearly 600,000 sets.

7. The company has produced numerous types of multi-purpose electronic
equipment for both military and civilian use, such as transmission and re-
ceiving equipment (for the armed forces), carrier wave-carrier equipment,

electronic computers, loudspeakers. [power] tension regulators, sirens and
other types of equipment.

The following chart sheds light on a part of the company's effort in the
sphere of civilian and military production:

25
Year Value of Hilitary Production Value of Civilian Production

1969 36 3.637

1970 206 b.205

1971 840 free 1 July 1970 3.130
to 30 June 1971

1972 1,098 Iron 1 July 1971 5,695
to 31 Deceater 1972

1973 710 2.680

1974 961 b.0923

1975 1.380 3,969

1976 1,066 4.996

[No specifications or units given insofar as figures are concerned.)

8. The production of colored sets started in 1977. As a first stage. IGIl‘
assenbled conponents were imported and assenbled locally and tests were made
on then. The total production is estimated at 7.000 television sets.

9. The company possesses both hmsn and technical capabilities that can be
exploited (by setting up 13 plants for different types of products) in the
interest of electronic production for local consmtion or for exportation.

The Arab Transistor Radio and Electronic Equipnent Conany:

The Arab Transistor Radio and Electronic Equipment Colpany was founded at
the end of 1966 through the merger of three plants:

1. The plant of the Arab Transistor Radio and Electronic Equip-ant (Telenisr)
Comany in Isnailia for assedzling radio and television sets.

2. The plant of Egypt's Electro-Engineering (NICO) Omany which used to

belong to al-Nasr Electrical and Electronic Equipnent Company (Philips) and
which used to assedale radio sets.

3. Al-Barsn Plant which used to belong to the Egyptian Transistor and Elec-

tricity Coapany that used to assemble radio sets and to produce chokes and
(knuckle pipes).

lo. The administration of the projects controlled by the Egyptian Transistor
and Electricity Company.

In 1968, all these plants were mved to the emany's present site and pro-
duction started with a value of 1.5 nillion pounds.

In 1976, the projects administration was separated iron the rest and the
Industrial Installations and Service Coupany was set up. The workers of

the mains plants returned their previous plant where the production of
television sets started.

26
The company introduced expansions represented in establishing a line for
[the production of knuckle] pipes and a plant for the production of hone
electrical appliances.

In 1977, the value of the company's production amounted to 9 million Egyptian
pounds and included 115,000 radio sets and 65,000 television sets. The num-

ber of the company's workers amounted to 1,500 workers distributed between
Cairo and Alexandria.

The company also added new activities, including [the production] of radio
cassettes, car cassettes and loudspeakers and has concluded contracts for
the production of colored televisions and stereo equipment.

Most of the company's activities have been characterized by assembly alone
because of the difficulty which locally manufactured production faces in
competing with the imported production and also because of the difficulty of
acquiring the raw materials necessary for this production.

To develop the production and to gain international experience, there is a
plan to set up a joint project with the Japanese N.B.C. Company for the pro-
duction and manufacturing of black and white and colored television, in addi-
tion to other electronic equipment, at the company's plants in Ismailia.

Philips Company:

The international Philips Company owns 50 percent of this firm and the
Egyptian government owns the rest.

The company has produced 26-inch television sets from components imported
from the Dutch Philips Conpany.

The company's production capacity amounts to 60,000 sets annually, of which
only 5,350 sets can be marketed locally.

The company also produces electric bulbs.

The electronic production needed for the plans to develop the radio and
television [services] until the year 2000:

Man's use of electronic equipment in his daily life have become a charac-
teristic of the age in which we live. This use is increasing constantly
because of their connection with civilizational progress.

The consumer electronics are the industry connected with the electronic
equipment which man uses for informational or recreational purposes funda-

mentally. This equipment includes various kinds that can be divided into
the following:

27
A. Sets to receive radio and television transmission.

3. Recording and replay equipment and storage [al-hifz] equipment.

C. Electronic musical instruments.

At these, computers are included with the consumer electronics industries.
However, we believe that listing computers within the electronic computer
industry is more realistic and more useful for the purpose of analysis.

1. General Plans Expected to Be Implemented:

The main plan of the Radio and Television Union until the year 2000 can be
summed up as follows:

A. Spreading radio transnission over medium waves throughout all parts of
the Arab Republic of Egypt (nearly 5 programs).

B. Spreading radio transmission through frequency modulation [al-ta'dil
al-taraddudi] to carry musical programs to all parts of the republic. This
will be done by setting aside two channels in every television location [sic].

C. Spreading white and black and colored television transmission through-
out the republic (more than two channels).

There are definite plans to increase the activity in the field of producing
audio-visual programs in both the public sector and private sector studios.

2. Analysis of Preceding Plans:

Hith the purpose of determining the future of the consumer electronics indus-
tries and on the basis of these plans, the types of sets and equipment needed
can be defined as follows:

A. Radio receivers:

Medium and short wave receivers.

Frequency modulation [PM] receivers.

Stereo PM receivers (two channels).

Car receivers.

3. Television Sets:

“hits and black television sets.

Colored television sets.

28
C. Recording and Replay Equipment:

Equipment to record and replay magnetic tapes (one channel).
Equipment to record and replay magnetic tapes (two channels).
Record p1ayers--one channel.

Record p1ayers--tuo channels.

D. Recording and Replay Means:

Bra ed and recorded tapes.

Recorded record discs.

E. Musical Instruments:

Evaluating the local market's quantitative demand for each one of these types
of instruments requires studying three basic factors:

A. The increase in the number of sets in proportion to the population number
as a result of the rising individual income and of the rate of education.

B. Increase in the number of sets because of the population growth.
C. Making up for the consumed pieces of equipment continuously.
Four levels of the spread of this kind of equipment can be discerned:

A. The spread of the basic information apparatus, i.e., the small-size
radio.

3. The spread of the white and black television set. Even though this
apparatus is basic insofar as information is concerned, its spread is de-
termined by its price. The state must exert efforts to lower its price
with its ever-wider use.

C. The spread of equipment with special quality. such as colored television
sets, PM sets and the single-channel recording and replay equipment.

D. The spread of equipment with very special quality, such as stereo equip-
ment, car radios and electronic instruments.

3. According to the preceding analysis based on the level of use, the
quantities needed of each kind of equipment can be determined as follows:

A. Equipment with level A spread (small radio sets):

29
The current statistics indicate that there is one radio set for every 8
persons. It is expected that this ratio will amount to one set for every

3 persons in the year 2000. If we take into consideration that the average
"durability via radio set is 8 years, as well as the population growth, the
volume of the production required presently is 800,000 sets annually which
will rise to 2 million sets annually in the year 2000. If the average price
per set is 8 pounds, the value of the required number of such sets for the
local market amounts to 6 million pounds annually at present and will amount
to 16 million pounds annually in the year 2000.

3. Equipment with second-level spread (white and black television sets):

The current statistics indicate that there is one white and black television
set for every (20) persons. This ratio is expected to rise in the year 2000
to one set for every 5 persons. If the average use of a set is 12 years,

and in view of the population growth, the volume required amunts to nearly
200,000 sets in 1978 and will rise to 800.000 sets in the year 2000. If the
average price per set is 100 pounds, then the value of the current production
amounts to 60 million pounds and will amount to 80 million pounds in the

year 2000.

C. Third-level spread equipment (recorders, colored television sets, and
FM equipment):

Recording equipment: The number of recorders can be calculated on the basis
of a rising percentage of the number of radios and also by computing on the
basis of the preceding percentages of eight percent for 1978 and nearly 25
percent in the year 2000. Considering that the average price per recorder
is 30 pounds, the required nud>er of recorders in 1978 amounted to 64.000
sets with a value of nearly 2 million pounds. The value of the nud>er
needed in the year 2000 will amount to 15 million pounds.

Colored television sets: The under of colored television sets can be cal-
culated on the basis of a rising percentage of the order of white and black
television sets. beginning with ab0ut eight percent in 1978 and reaching
nearly 25 percent in the year 2000. Thus, the amber of [colored] sets in
1978 will be 30,000 sets valued at nearly 9 million pounds. In the year
2000. the value of the colored sets is expected to reach nearly 60 million
pounds.

PH sets: The use of these sets will begin at a large scale in 1980. The

approximate value of this equipment in 1978 is small. In the year 2000, it
is estimated that this value will amount to 10 million pounds.

D. Spread of equipment with very special quality: The use of this equip-
ment will continue to be limited at the outset and there will be no big
demand for the equipment in the local market. The total value of the required
volume of this equipment can be calculated at nearly 10 percent the value

of the equipment with special quality, i.e., a value of nearly 2 million
pounds in 1978 and nearly 8 million pounds in the year 2000.

30
E. Recording and replay means: The needed volume of this equipment can be
calculated on the basis of 15 tapes for every piece of equipment, thus bring—
ing the total number of tapes needed in 1978 to one million tapes valued at

nearly one million pounds and to 7.5 million tapes in the year 2000 valued
at nearly 8 million pounds.

The value of these tapes is almost doubled if the value of the recorded ma-
terial is added. Moreover, the possibilities of marketing abroad are increas-

ing by such a degree that makes the value of the volume required threefold
the estimated value.

As for recorded discs. the demand for them will drop as a result of the use

of tapes at a large scale. However, the production of recorded discs is ex-
pected to double by the year 2000.

Estimated Total Volume of Consumer Electronics Industries: Estimate of Value
of Required Volumes of These Industries:

Required in Required in
1978 (in Year 2000 (in
1,000 pounds) 1,000 pounds)

Radio Sets 6.000 16,000
Black and Hhite Television Sets 20,000 80,000
Colored Television Sets 9.000 60,000
Recording Equipment 2,000 15,000
FM Equipment - 10,000
Recording and Replay Means 2, 00 16,000
Very Special Equipment 2,000 8,000
Grand Total 61.000 205,000

Estimate of Rate of Spread of Television Sets and Future Needs Until Year
2000:

The estimates of the Ministry of Planning of the volume of television sets
produced and expected to be produced by 1980 are as follows:

Production volume in 1960-65 period: 182,513
1965-70 period: 245,195
1970-75 period: 266,312
1975-80 period: 661.966
Grand Total 1,354,986 sets

If we add to this locally produced volume the number of sets imported at the
start of the television service in 1960 and what has been imported through

various means since then, it can be said that the number of television sets
[in use] ranges between 1.5 million and 2 million sets.

31
This volume equates with the proper level of educstion by nearly:

One hundred percent of those with high education, plus 75 percent of those
with middle level educstion [perhsps 100 percent of those with high educs-

tion have television sets and 75 percent of those with middle-level educstion
have television sets].

If the future needs for these sets sre cslculsted, it becoees evident thst
they will rise fro. 160,000 sets in 1977 to 286,000 sets in 1986.

The totsl number of television sets needed to be produced in the period from
1978 to 1986 mounts to 1.7 million sets.

32
ll

.uouuucbuu...o nouu
loavonn uaauuwwusn ovu>oua
no: noov cauuonuOHQ Macon
cu noduaudauauoao o.h:an
Iaou .vucvcoua auaansc
30A .uouuuavoun 30am

uuuaa ounouuuouo unwounu
can coupon wadvsaouu
.uua mo oadc> uo uaoo
uuoa no Ou acuuauuau=caa
unaun an“: uazu canon
«unvoun cu was ”do“:
1:00» new Haw: aqua-o0
.vud uqoun=00u ....;u«a
unusuouuo co nu ouosh

              

.zucououwuo vac zuwada
sauna am“: sud: usuaouacaa
avooc acunloo .Houucoo
huuunsv we soon was vuuu
luau» coauuauoun anuuuuuuo
oucauuaouoo .ooo.oo~ wad
noncoua uo can-nun aawnaoo

  

.AHovsaoa_ soaﬂaaa
n no Hauunau unmanaavu
o.m=omsou no H-vanon_
.ooo.on~.uv an «as;
luuuunam nauuo>cw quash

uuoﬁoua many mo
oocwuuoasu naouuuuuooa>vo
van aucouuno vua: nauuaav
no. Ou ouou dud: nooaoun

        

    

    

an: .muuaa manuuacua nu lax can huunosuaa dunno
nuasuuuuan .uaoo acuuoavoua .uuao mugs: can sauna
unusuax .ooo.nn n« »u«0 ooo.~q ooavoun on ...

  

lumen cauuusvouo n.>cuaaoo suua ucaaoouuu nu wuoah
.oowuuoua magnunona

.voom aw ouaocauo cow»
nonvoum .uuazuo cusp woken
uaou coauuvvoum .oawaann
scum ouuo coauu>onuu saga

uc~..oo=mo~m .ooo.om nu“
Iosuoua mo ounoauo acunaoo

ma ao«u0:voun Adah
ucuouog «o ooc.aoe

naau uo uncouon me
ooo.onn.~ annuu<

  

         

  

coo.non
oonnoﬁ
ooo.ooo

                   

ooo.on~.n
wanna;
ooc.ooo.n

no :owuosvoun

                    

 

ooo.oha.~
cacao;
ooo.oo«.n
acuuoavonn Adam
uncouan «Q

ooo.on~.H Hasuu<

aaaaasaa
oom.~ nouuosvoun
annoy .ooo.0no.n
:ouuuavoua Hash
ooo.oo~.n unauo<

    

 
 

qgaqn

hauaaou
uuuzl:

haanaoo nuL+

Amandazmv aces
.«avm Huuuuuuoqm
van cacouuuuﬂm
now uaazuq<

33
-10

10

10

”bawo
man.

uwbnr

trnno

oowonoa
Howa<nnuou

wanonmnsu
nacwvllnn

a:
nacwualun

douw oval
anuu annual
loan

nooonawnu
can ”manna

nacuvlnun

Total Estimated Volume of Consumer Electronics Industry in 1978. the year 2000
2M. , 195
263,130

152,513

 

ears 1975-80 1970-75 1965-70 1960-65

Estimates of Ministry of Planning of Huber Television Sets Alteedy
Produced and Expected To Be Produced by 1980
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200030025-9

uucwuodsOM 0:» cu unsold swoon wanna. van-Idaho
on» nozu .ooo~ cu scan and.» ozu you «can a on Head» nu undouoa :d>o- no cyan endowed“ Hague. :- um

i I I no“ can can «an snousn hhoow>v<
«o 33.3.»

noun-03v" «05o;

nonuuqx nun:

Nun one and can acouuuuo no
uaoouom >u¢o>om

nounsvoun

en an no an Auuuuo>uap
_o uguudm VINE—n

33 Haggai-NH. .83 gag. 23 23 user

.uuoaou concouua ou mauvuoooa
gamma cu oouuuosvnw mauuooaauno do avaun vaaaquov a wouonvuoo on: ads» sauna» auooa>v¢ ogu mo ecu-a
nun-o ou cacao muo> «an ocean oz» uasu vasom noon on: aw .aouuauauo Hu>uanonvvua sun: sonauuo wan-u
unouuoa as can acouwuuo wouuoavo hazuqn ado-n ”nan-nonao no. >9 mag wanna. endow-a can no nan-n can

no ucwuquaodco an .aowuoosvo no Ho>oa no Ugandan-v .uoououdsu unusuaao no Ho>o~ no uwaon ounﬂaunm

nuum uoauﬂbldoh «0 0‘00: u.unhuw mo cadasnoz Anu< no Oudlduaﬂ

36

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000200030025-9
222 265

' 230.000

/I§6,ooo

3,000
03H¢> 60v:

NNO
no OMIUEOUhom

coo.on~.a asau> vouu<

!H_E
08.8» 8068.... E§_§ ooanﬁu 8.22;
892.”; 898....3EE—E 8°68; aﬁsoé

oomé: 8°63 So one 8062 E 80.03 oooJﬁ E noun: ~23

.
o-.n~n ooo.onn..~ conga; ooo.oo.n.n 0338 E00235...” 000.85...“ 0300
uuz uCOdOAloo
a

5.8.3.”; So So 8°68; 8°68; 8°68 2563: L33 couuﬂuou
99: odd 3 8H 3.2:
OOO.NH GOO-OOH OOO.nn OO0.00 OOn.o 00°.nn OOO.NN OO0.0N UOQVSA EH
_ ﬁg nauuavoum
2.5. .3372 p.22 2:35 SE: ~8qu an: 2:3..." 33:8 no 2.3

nous—«you .82 add—van on:

no.5 Quack..—

 

Ooo.omo.N Gouda mo and;

    

   

  

18” Si: hang-8
an 30>:

Ion .ouuun Odom
CIA-RDP82-00860R000200030026-9

2007l02I08:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

     

I

l

coo .

noun: madam
«0 . oz

Anon how venue—«awn

 

 

coo

auoxuo
no .02

 

uuuzm 25 30332. 3.33

.voo: 098m 09: non

I
I
I
a! s22. 82: a

non uoxuos
no.— uon madam nous: nouam anon—no:
mama: uo .oz no o=Ha> no .02 mo .oz

3033 8 9:382: 23

oaadﬂzm

   

meanness 2.3.23 a.“ uam saafﬁawa a we couuosvoum now mono.» mo uaoo van 03.3 no Saba—s...

          

39

ClA-RDP82-00850R000200030025-9

2007l02I08:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
00.00H

05.00

oo.uu

05.ne

_u¢w soc“
o~
Inﬂnn

.33
oe.a~

H0.HH

on.mo

om.oo

on.HH

HH.nH
Hu.na

no. caua
sauna:

 
  

nowadaaoo anon 0:» cu uom acuow>oHoH hon ouaou acquuavoum onoa no noowunnloo

  

  

ow.Ho

oo.ma

uun sand
ON
unuZIH<

 

ov.nw

om.mo

oc.na

uoo gone
NH

uoo auuw
Bowen:

OH.AHA

oo.oa

ouuum
huouoam

uuuoum
nounh

nouns
ououoa oouum

Sues

unou
aoauoavogm

unauuuvv<
Hauocou

noun:

nuwpoo

 

40
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l0ﬂ08: ClA-RDP82-008SOR000200030025-9

Production scentdtnu to
Butt-stud production to:

Sets -

100,000 -

87,500 -

75.000 -

62,500 -

50,000 -

37,500 -

25,000 -

12.500 -

 

Philips Arab Al-Nasr

Companies' Production of Television Sets Accordi
Budget and Estimated Production for 1981

61

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000200030025-0
CHAPTER THREE: INDUSTRIAL ELMONICS

Manufacturing of Electronic Bquipaent at Atoaic Energy Authority:

Since its creation, the Atoaic Energy Authority has devoted special atten-
tion to electronics and electronic equip-eat. It set up the electronic
laboratory (the nucleus of the current engineering and scientific equipnent
section) with the sin of carrying out maintenance and repair work for the
nuclear electronic equip-ant end of starting the production of sons elec-
tronic equipnent by the degree per-itted by the harm and laboratory capa-
bilities at the time so as to supply the isotope laboratories that were be.
ginning to be established in the various colleges at the tine.

M sealers were designed and ease-bled in 1956 with the aid of a 0.8. an-
pert who was present at the tine. The two sealers operated by the 3. [binary]
systea. Valves. neon leaps and an electro-uchanical gauge were used to
neasure pulsations end an ordinary stopwatch was used to neasure tine.

Several attenpts were also nade to produce Geiger pipes with the assistance
of the graduates of the Science College. a preliminary apparatus was aanu-
factured to detect radiation but the pipes aanufactured at the tine were
not fully successful and this caused then to be isported until they could
be aanufactured well locally. The radiation detector was successfully used
in the laboratory. But when used in the desert, where the t-perature rose
at tines to 50 degrees celsius, sole of its flaws appeared. Host of those
flaws were elininated at the tine through the use of a heat-insulating box
and through changing solae conponents in the electronic circuit.

Nuaerous atteapts were made to change the electronic circuits in the radia-
tion-detecting apparatus and to improve its qualities while continuing to
import Geiger pipes. This went on until the opportunity becaae available
to send an engineer on a scholarship to one of the Italian laboratories

for a year's training on the production of Geiger pipes. The engineer then
returned with enough data for setting up a plant to produce organic Geiger
pipes (filled with argon gas and alcohol). However. the ratios of acne of
these gases [sic] were not completely known. The plant with its various
components—furnaces, equip-eat for the purification of mercury gases and
for the distillation of alcohol-was set up and work then started on experi-
ments to find out the best ratios of the filling gases until these ratios
were discovered. The plant then started to produce Geiger pipes.

62
The experiments to compare the raw materials employed continued and alu-
minum, brass, topper and copper-plated aluminum were tested until the most
suitable raw materials and lowest prices were reached, along with effective
operation andidiversity in the sizes of the pipes. Large types were manu-
factured to detect cosmic radiation, at the request of a number of universi-
ties, to be used in research. End window models were also produced. with
mastering the production of these types, the radiation-detecting apparatus
was fully produced locally. This is in addition to the laboratory monitor

equipment. Electronic valves were used in the production of this equipment
and in the sealers also.

Because the radiation-detector is a portable piece of equipment that needs
two batteries, one for low tension and one for high tension, semi-conductives
were used in 1964 to produce this type of equipment and one small battery
was installed to operate it. As a result of this modification, it was neces-
sary to use a low—pressure Geiger pipe (because the organic pipe required a
high tension of 1,200 volts). The alternative was to use halogen pipes which
require a tension of only 400 volts to function.

The people in charge of the Geiger pipes plant made many attempts to produce
the pipes but the expertise was not sufficient. The aid of the International
Atomic Energy Agency was requested and the agency supplied us, by way of India.
with a plant for the production of halogen pipes. The plant was set up in
1975 and is still operating efficiently.

As for the scalers using the binary system, they were modified and metric
gauging valves were used in them. The stopwatch was replaced by an electronic
timer using the metric valves. Several types of this apparatus have been pro-
duced to fit various uses.

Other kinds of equipment were successively introduced into the production
plan according to the needs of the other sections of the [Nuclear Energy]
authority and the needs of the colleges, institutes and other parties. This
has brought the total number of the kinds of equipment produced by the en-
gineering section to more than 10 varieties.

The method followed was to start with a patented circuit for the piece of
equipment to be produced, then study this circuit and modify it to make it
suitable for the required purpose. A prototype would then be built and the
necessary tests made on it. Some of the parts of the circuit would then be
modified. if necessary, until the piece of equipment could perform the task
for which it was constructed. This piece of equipment would be then sent
to the production unit where a technician would break the circuit into sub-
assemblies and would prepare the layout for the components of each sub-
assembly. At the same time, the transformer unit would design and roll up
the coils needed for the apparatus. 0n the basis of these two processes,
the main chassis would be designed and the location of the valves, trans-
formers and other parts of the circuit would be decided and the chassis

63
would be constructed in the tinsnithing workshop. The circuit sub-ssseﬂlies
would be divided snag the technicians and each of them would build the re-
quired masher of the piece entrusted to him, depending on the number of the
pieces of equipment needed. "hen the units were manufactured, the equip-
ment would be assabled on the main chassis, the final connections would be
made and then the sets would be tested.

This is the procedure followed if the apparatus required is of the type that
is in widespread use. . But at times special equipment for research or for
specific use is required. The circuit for such equipment is designed by the
research unit of the [designing] section and a proto-type apparatus is built.
Tests and experiments are conducted on the proto-type until it is made cer-
tain that it serves its purpose. The proto-type apparatus is then sent to
the production unit so that this unit my produce the required number or the
proto-type itself is used if what is required is only one apparatus.

The chassis and cabins for the equipment used to be made of aluminum and
then sprayed with (Deco). It was decided to save in the use of aluminum
which came to be used for chassis only. Iron sheets came to be used for
constructing the external cabins. To gain more experience in metal redlin-
ing [al-taahtib] a technician was sent to al-Nssr Television Company for a
month's training on metal redlining, such as plating with chromium and
other materials.

The credit goes to the constant training given to the engineers and the
technicians in mastering the manufacturing of equipment. This training is
divided into two parts:

1. Training acquired through sending missions of engineers and technicians
for training abroad.

2. Local training given to technicians through theoretical and practical
studies on the circuits used in nuclear electronic equipment and through
familiarizing these technicians with the various kinds of semi-conductives,
their use and the precautions taken when these semi-conductives are used.
These studies are given by the training branch of the production unit.

Host of the technicians eeployed in the production unit are graduates of
vocational schools who spent their training period during their studies in
the various production plants of the engineering section.

A number of the veteran technicians have gained special experience in some
production operations. such as the layout process for the components, sub-
assembling the circuit and designing chassis in which to install the con-
ponents in the smallest space possible, while avoiding overlapping in the
various stages.

A number of engineers were sent on training scholarships to India, Italy
and Czechoslovakia and a nunber of technicians were sent to Italy and Liver-

pool.
A plant for manufacturing printed circuits has been set up in the produc-
tion unit. Even though this plant is small at present, it will still meet
the purpose until another full-equipped unit is built.

Electronic Industry Pertaining to Communication Equipment

In view of the large size of the communication equipment in the modern age,
the industry connected with this equipment is considered among the most im-

portant industries that can constitute the mainstay of the electronic indus-
tries in Egypt. .

Numerous countries, including Italy and Japan, have adopted this idea. as
for Israel, it has given top priority to this industry and its recreational

consumer industries did not begin until this industry had been established
and stabilized.

The level which this industry can attain in Egypt and the expected growth

in the use of communication equipment in Egypt by the yer' "000 can be derone
strated on the following basis:

Comnication Networks in Egypt Until the Year 2000

The world's communication networks are becoming rapidly diverse. In addi-
tion to the telephone and the telegraph equipment. there are the gradually
increasing (digital-type teleprinters) that are getting to be used at a large

scale. Moreover, the current communication means also include micronic waves
and axis cables.

Cable and Automatic Telegraph Communication:

It is possible to calculate the rate of increase in the number of cables
and of the automatic cable lines by using a relationship of the aforemen-
tioned kind [sic]. It can be predicted that the increase in the number of
telegraph cables will be much less than the increase in the number of tele-
phone lines because the expected improvement in the telephone service will
reduce the demand for the use of the telegraph. It is expected that the

increase rate in telegraphs in the next 20 years will amount to 50 percent
only.

As for automatic cabling [teleprinters]. the expected increase will be very
high and close to the rate of telephone increase. It can be said that the
automatic cabling equipment [teleprinters] will increase at the same rate as

that of telephone equipment and will amount to 6,000 automatic cables (200,000
minutes daily) in 1990.

Information-Transmitting Equipment:
It is expected that the demand for information-transmitting networks will

rise at the same rate of increase in telephones. and perhaps even faster.
Many authorities throughout the republic are about to conclude contracts

65
for the purchase of information-translitting equipment, such as the Bank

of Egypt and the Ministry of the Interior. There are also experimental
stteapts to link the coaputers with one another and to have then used jointly
by several sides. such as hospitals, banks and companies.

Private Networks:

Some ministries and authorities in Egypt have their own information-trans-
mitting networks, nalely:

The Presidential Office.

The armed forces.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Ministry of Tourism.

The Civil Aviation Authority.

The Ministry of Irrigation.

The Meteorology Authority.

The Ministry of Industry, Petroleum and Mineral Resources.
The Radio and Television Union Authority.
The oil coapanies.

The railroads.

The Ministry of Electricity.

These networks consist of terainals and communication equipment and their
planning is different in each case. Because calculating the growth rate
of these special networks is very complicated, this rate can be calculated

in the general plan on the basis of nearly 25 percent of the transmission
capacity of the telephone connunication networks.

in addition to these. there is a number of private communication networks
that require radio equipnent operating on very short and extremely short
waves and that can be used to perfora very quick services, such as calling
doctors in hospitals and linking a number of taxicabs with a nanagenent

rooa. There are currently no statistics on this kind of services but they
are expected to expand constantly.

66
Analysis of Data on Local Cam-unication Networks Hith din of Linking Them
To Future of Blectronic Industries in lgypt:

0n the basis of the previous data. this infatuation can be analyzed with

the aim of linking it to the future of the industries in the following man-
ner: '

I‘

The total costs of installing the telephone networks in the period until the
year 2000 can be calculated on the basis of an average cost of 2,000 dollars
per line. Thus, the total costs until the year 2000 can be calculated at
nearly 10 billion dollars. If we assume that the cost of the sets and of

the equipment is one half this sum, than this cost will amount to 5 billion
dollars. This figure can be considered a definite justification for setting
up a special industry which will have an average annual production valued at
250 million dollars. not to mention the addition of other kinds of communica-
tion networks and the production of a surplus for exportation. The equipment
pertaining to this industry can be divided into the following:

1. Local Network Equipment:

This includes telephone equipment and the subscriber cables and represents
approxmately 15 percent of the total costs. Both industries are already
present but it is necessary to develop them to meet the actual demands.

2. Communication Equipment:

It consists fundamentally of multiplex equipment and communication means,
such as axis cables and directional wave equipment. This equipment repre-
sents nearly 30 percent of the total costs, 10 percent of which is for the
multiplex equipment and the rest for the communication means. There are
currently no industries in this sphere and this is why it is necessary to
start establishing them.

3. Switching Equipment:

It represents nearly 45 percent of the total costs. There is already a
plant in the Egyptian Company for Manufacturing Telephone Equipment to pro-
duce switching equipment. But this plant is not producing the type needed
for the future and it is necessary. therefore. to develop the production and
to raise its volume so as to make it possible to meet the demand. The said
company is sufficiently prepared for this purpose.

Telegraph Networks:

The costs of the telegraph networks consist fundamentally of the costs of the
terminals for automatic telegraphing [teleprinters]. dhich will amount to

nearly 5.000 telegraphing sets by the year 2000. i.e. with an average annual
increase of 200 telegraphing sets annually.

47
This industry can be added to the telephone equipment industry as an
assembling industry. The production capacity in the conunicstion equip-
ment and local networks industry must be increased to neet the demand

for these networks.
Information [al-mu-tayat] Networks:

These are represented in the telegraphing networks and the major cost

is embodied in the terminals (besides the computers which will be presented
as an independent industry in the following sections). Considering that
television screens can be used abundantly in the terninals, thought must
be given to modifying the screen production plant to seat the demand.

in addition to its production of television screens.

Private Networks:

A plant with limited and flexible production can meet the need for these
networks. The kind of production in such a plant can be changed according
to the designs of the required networks and the plant can be attached

to one of the companies, such as Banha Electronic Industries Company.

Spread of Electronic Computers in Egypt:

Electronic conputers are used in the Arab Republic of Egypt for special
purposes, mostly scientific. However. the use of conputers has not spread
at a general level.

This use started with the establislnent of the main electronic brain
centers in one major authority, namely the Central Mobilization Agency.

The use then extended to centers belonging to the universities, to metero-
logical work and to collection activities by a number of the public service
authorities.

This use has not extended to private couercial business or to public
services in banks. hotels. or education. Obstacles continue to face
such use. the nost important being the lack of electronic computers that
store data and produce it in Arabic in a natural and readable nanner.

Nuerous attempts have been nade to modify electronic brains to use Arabic.
The backbone of most of these attempts has been the efforts to nostly
Arabic script to fit the equipment nanufactured funduentally to deal

with foreign languages. It is well known that Arabic requires that

each of its characters have three or four different forss that change

with the character's position in the word. Arabic. and none other ancient
languages. possess the exclusive characteristic of having letter forms

that amount to nearly 150 in nunber.

The attenpts of Arab researchers in foreign universities have come up
with technological innovations that make it possible to produce the Arabic

48
letters in their mechanical state, i.e. the amber of keys on a typewriter
or during storige in electronic conputers, for example. renains 28--
without letter veriatieae--end the characters take the forn of electrical
signals when transmitted by cable or by wireless. But when received

on paper. an‘innovation similar to man's nemory selects the proper fora

of the letter for printing. regardless of how nany are the various forns
of the letters.

This research has ended with types of electronic conputers and of telex
nachines that use Arabic in all phases and that produce printed cards

and other forms of docunents produced by electronic conputers with correct
Arabic script.

Arab Telex Networks:

This innovation will lead to correcting numerous conditions arising fron
the attempts to subjugate the Arabic script to the technology of the
western printing nachines. This appears clearly in the tolex networks.
It is surprising that the telex networks between the Arab countries use
English or French and that there isn't an Arab network.

The service of communication by telex is one of the modern nodes of
comnunication which is spreading and expanding. It is replacing all
the other forna of com-unication. be they telephone or telegraph
comnunications. In some cases. it is even replacing the mail service.

The innovative systen that relies on the memory-like nodification that
distinguished the position of the Arabic letter in a word and that leads

to selecting the proper letter form at the communication terninal restricts
the number of Arabic letters transmitted by cable or by wireless to 28
letters only. Thus. the wireless cipher is no longer incapable of
absorbing all the Arabic letters, considering that selection of the

right form of the letter takes place at the final reception terninal

and by a meaory that controls what form of letter is to be printed.

Inportance of Setting Up Electronic Industry for Arabic-[Language]
Computers and Telex Machines:

It is necessary that the Arab countries. led by Egypt. nove faster to

adopt the concept of the contemporary civilization in a proper Arab form.
It is also necessary that various forms of the electronic computer industry
he set up speedily and with the capacity and volune conpatible with the
various purposes. It is necessary that this industry he an Arabic-
language industry and that it reject the foreign attempts that seek
ceaselessly to efface the facts of the Arabic language. to eliminate

this language and to introduce foreign characters in writing it. Arabic

is the subline of all these languages and the one most suitable for

digital dealings. It has special neasures that nake it possible to

I

1.9
derive nouns. verbs and abstract nouns. Arabic is considered one of the
most suitable languages for nethelaatical balances and this sakes it a more
suitable language for electronic conputers and brains. Nmerous qualities
and merits of the language will become obvious when the use of electronic
brains and conputers spreads in the various spheres that are ready and pre-
pared to accept the electronic computers as a neans for numerous kinds of
work that go beyond nan's patience and kinds of work that are so coupli-
cated that they require long tine and references to perforn--kinds of work
that complicate both the problems of tine and place needed to carry out the
work with the ease and sloothness required for good perfornance.

“any problem apparent in dealing with the leases can be solved by the use
of electronic computers and brains, provided that they are in correctly
written Arabic. This has becone possible now that technology has been
subjected to the require-euro of Arabic scripe.

There is no avoiding the exertion of serious efforts to introduce the elec-
tronic conputers and brains into the various spheres of work sincerely.
provided that this is done according to our needs and in our Arabic language.
This sphere alone throws on the shoulders of the future electronc industry

the task of setting up numerous plants to produce Arabic conputers for various
purposes.

50
Egyptian Company for Production of Telephone Equipment:

The company was founded fundamentally to meet the Teleconunication Organi-
zation's needs of public centrals and telephone equipment and as a result of
the organization's decision to select the crossbar system, designed by the
Swedish Ericson Company, as the republic's adopted telephone centrals system.
The contract for production was signed with Ericson Company in 1959.

The company's current production program includes manufacturing the following
products on a license from Bricson Company:

Public centrals of the ARF 102 (Crossbar) nodel--30,000 lines.
Private centrals of the PAbK's node1--10.000 lines.
Telephone sets of the modern Dialog model--70,000 sets.

The production capacity for public centrals and telephone sets was decided
in the light of the Telecommunications Organization's needs, considering
that the organization is the company's sole client for public centrals and
its main client for telephone sets.

The rate of local industrialization is estimated at the following:

Nearly 65 percent of the total value of equipment in the centrals and approxi-
nately 80 percent of the value of the components of the switching [boards.]

Anavcrage of nearly 60 percent of the value of the private centrals.
Nearly 8!. percent of the value of the telephone sets.
Development of Company's Products:

The company's production of the old models started in 1963. In 1965. the
company began production of the Dialog model with its developed design (printed
circuit, unbreakable external parts and easy naintenance, considering that

the apparatus consists of seven units tied together by one nail) to replace
the old model completely by 1979.

Public Centrals:

The production of these centrals began in phases as of 1967. The final phase
was completed in 1971. No development has been made on this product due to
the inadequacy of the investments allocated for the company. to the drop in
demand on the part of the organization and due to the lack of a clear and
definite plan for the organization needs in terms of both models and of pro-
duction volume. The company's total supply to the organization from 1968

to 1976 did not exceed 70,000 lines at a rate of 9.000 lines annually where-
as the available production capacity is within the limits of 20.000 lines
annually. This has had a major impact on the inability to introduce any
developments.

Si
The company did actually begin in 1978 taking the necessary measures to raise
the technical standard of the products to equal the standard prevailing in
Bricson Company.

Company's Electronic Industry:

The company is, as a modest start, assembling currently the special printed
board for telephone equipment.

At the end of 1977. the Teleco-unications Organization approved the use of
the advanced in sodel of the Crossbar centrals-we model which is electroni-
cally controlled. A total of 20.000 lines of this type will he installed in
the Ramsis central in 1979. Agreement has also been reached with the organi-
zation to introduce this model in the conpany's production program as of 1979.
The company will begin delivering this model gradually as of 1980 so that it
may completely replace the current ARE model by 1983. This will he done with-
in the frnework of the approved 1978-82 plan which provides for [installing]
an average of 60,000 lines annually. The company has begun to prepare the
necessary studies with Bricaon company for selecting and assembling the
printed circuit units for the AR? and ARE models with the aim of training

the workers in this sphere as a first step toward emarking on the electronic
industry. even though the aforementioned volume is not considered economical
in itself. The equipment used in this sphere can be utilized to repair the
printed circuits in the centrals currently in use and those to be constructed
in the future.

52
CHAPTER FOUR: MILITARY ELECTRONIC INDUSTRIES

Goals of Hillary Electronic Industries:

The military electronic industry seeks to produce electronic instruments and
systems necessary for the military equipment used by the various branches of.
the armed forces (the army. the air force. the air defense, the navy and re-
connaisance) .

The instrments and systems are numerous and cover all spheres and branches
of the electronic sciences. The most important such equipment includes:

Radio communication equipment and information-transmitting equipment operating
on various wavelengths.

All kinds of radar equipment.

Guidance and control instruments for the various types of missiles (surface-
to-surface, surface-to—air. air-to-air).

Aviation equipment for military aircraft.

Electronic jamming and obstruction equipment.

Monitoring and direction-finding equipment.

Night vision equipment.

Electronic [heat—I seeking heads and other kinds of equipment.

These kinds of equipment are divided according to their use. There is ground
equipment, equipment fitted into aircraft and missiles and equipment fitted
on ships.

Importance of Military Electronic Industry:

The military electronic industry is one of the important strategic industries

and states are eager to set up and strengthen this industry because all mod-
ern weapons and military equipment use electronic means, systems. instruments

53
and sets for various purposes. The creation of an advanced military elec-
tronic industry in a country secures the equipment demands of the armed
forces of such a country and keeps confidential the secrets of the equip-
aent used by its army.

The military electronic industry is a scientific industry primarily and the
creation of such an industry leads to the development of a generation of
scientists. engineers and technicians with a high technical and technological
atandard--a generation that forms a reserve for supplying the non-military
electronic industries in the same country, thus enabling these industries

to advance and prosper.

Moreover. the military electronic industries are considered among the indus-
tries that yield a quick and important economic return due to the small cost
of the investment needed to establish these industries in comparison with the
value of the production and due to the short period of the production cycle.
Furthermore. there is an ever-increasing demand by the various countries for
military electronic equipment and an astonishing race for the acquisition of
the latest equipment or counter equipment for whatever the enemy innovates.
This fact secures for the advanced electronic industry an important and spe-
cial market where the price factor does not form the basic element in purchase.

The attached chart demonstrates the estimated sums spent in 1978 by 10 Mid-
eastern countries for the purchase of military equipment--a sum exceeding 25
billion dollars. Assuming that the value of the electronic equipment con-
stitutes only 20 percent of the value of this equipment. then the value of
the electronic equipment [purchased] in 1978 amounts to S bill'on dollars.
This makes evident the importance of setting up a military electronic indus-
try. This fact has urged the major powers (United States, Russia, France...)
to forge ahead with this industry and to control its international markets
both economically and politically.

Israel has also been aware of these facts. in addition to its conviction that
setting up this industry constitutes one of the mainstays of its security
The military electronc industry in Israel started in the mid-1960's and con-
centrated on the production of radars, missile guidance systems, electronic
war instruments and coammnication equipment. Israel has already moved into
the stage of exportation.

Iran also started a few years ago establishing a military electronic indus-
try. beginning with an electronic plant near the city of Shiraz as a nucleus
for a complete colomyof electronic industries. Iran started producing some
equipment for ground radars in cooperation with the U.S. Hestinghouse Company.
guidance instruments for the (Rapier) surface-to-air missile in cooperation
with the British Aerospace Company and guidance instruments forcheU.s. (TU)
missile in cooperation with the 0.8. Hughes Company. Iran spends generously
on this industry and encourages its citizens who are working abroad to re-
turn to Shiraz. giving them comfortable life. attractive salaries and scien-
tific, laboratory and industrial resources to entice their scientific and
technical ambition.

56
Estimates of Spending on Military Equipment by Mideastern in 1978

Number Country Spending
(In Billion 0.8. Dollars)

1 Egypt 6.37

2 Iran 7.9

3 Iraq 1.66

6 Jordan 0.20

5 Kuwait 2.06

6 Libya 0.299

7 Oman 0.657

8 Saudi Arabic 7.530

9 Syria 1.070

10 Emirates 0.100
Grand Total 25.576

Assuming that electronic equipment represents 20 percent of the total spend-
ing. the expected market for the military electronics amounts to 5,115,000,000
dollars.

Israel's defense spending amounts to 4.27 billion dollars. Consequently. its
spending on military electronics is estimated at 854 million dollars.

Hainstays of Military Electronic Industry
Personnel:

The electronic industry is a scientific industry primarily and it depends on
the ability to design and to develop. It isfocused on designing and producing
equipment and it is not conditional to embark on manufacturing the components.
except when it is impossible to acquire the needed components from the inter—
national market. Therefore, this industry relies mainly on the engineer capa-
ble of producing designs and innovations. The emergence of the modern methods
of productionhasled to reducing the unskilled labor in the electronic plants.
This has consequently led to a sharp rise in the number of engineers in such
plants--a number that exceeds 50 percent of the manpower in some of these
plants. This is why paying attention to giving the individual the highest
standard of education and training and providing the means of constant scien-
tific contact with the advanced countries are considered among the most im-
portant mainstays of this industry.

Setting Up Design and Development Laboratories:

It is necessary to set up design and dev lopment laboratories attached to the
military electronic factories so that they may be capable of developing the

product constantly and of maintaining its technical and technological super-
iority in facing the ceaseless competitions.

55
Providing Means and Methods of Production:

Military electronic equipment and instruments are subject to international
military standards that require precision. high efficiency and a very low
rate of damage even though such equipment is subjected to extreme environ-
mental conditions such as vibrations. shocks and varying degrees of tempera-
ture and hulidity .

These standards require the use of speical air-conditioned workshops that
are free of dust. They also require the application of numerous and precise
technical control and inspection systems during and after production. as well
as conducting performance tests at the same level and with the same rules as
those applied in the international nilitary plants.

Supplying Electronic Components:
Setting up a military electronic industry requires by necessity securing

quick and very highly efficient means for acquring the electronic components
from their original sources as soon as they are needed. This is in addition
to supplying scientific studies and publications constantly. regularly and
speedily in order to keep up with the latest scientific developments in this
industry.

Establishing Direct Cooperation Hith Armed Forces:
To secure success for this military industry, there has to be firm coopera-

tion between the user (the armed forces) and the producer (the plant) in the
various phases. especially:

In the phase of testing the equipment required to be produced.

In the phase of determining the technical specifications that realize the pur-
poses for which the product is to be used.

The phase of final tests and of performance evaluation.

The phase of the actual use of the equipment and of evaluation of the results
of the use.

Military Electronic Industry in Egypt:

1. The military electronic industry started in Egypt in the early 1960's
and use concentrated in two sites:

A. The Banha Electronic Industry Plant: This plant was set up to produce
Iilitary equipment and some conventional components. such as transistors.
resistors and capacitors.

The plant currently assembles and tests some parts of radio communication
equipment.

56
B. Al-Qahir and al-Zafir Plants: This plant designed and produced locally
the guidance. control and range-finding instruments for al-Qahir and a1-
Zafir (surface-to-surface)missiles.

This was done with the assistance of a team of Germans on personal contracts.
The equipment was produced in the laboratory and the flight tests were suc-
cessful.

With the cancellation of this project. activity in this sphere came to
a halt. This experience has proven that the Egyptian engineer is capable
of designing, producing and testing modern military electronic equipment.

At the end of 1975, the Arab Industrialization Organization(which includes

the Arab Republic of Egypt. the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. the United Arab
Emirates and Qatar) was formed with the aim of setting up an advanced military
industry, including the electronic industries.

The organization‘s efforts in the military electronic industry are confined
to the following spheres:

A. The production of missile guidance and control systems.

3. The production of (navigational and combat) radars and the equipment
attached to them.

c. Production and development of aviation and communication equipment for
the military aircraft produced by the organization.

D. Production of special electronic equipment at the request of the armed
forces.

The organization has followed a specific policy to secure the elements for
the success of this industry. These elements are embodied in the following:

The organization is supervised by a higher committee comprised of the defense
ministers of the four countries. This committee determines the organization's

general strategy in light of the demands of the armed forces and approves
the industrialization [production] program.

implementation of the modern methods of project studies, especially the
economic and technical feasibility studies in whose light the decision is
made on what to produce and on the depth and stages of production.

The technical committees select the latest equipment available in the interna-
tional market to guarantee the possibility of its use for long periods,

to make sure that it does not become obsolete [quickly] and to realize a
technological leap in order to catch up with the international bandwagon.

The method of forming joint companies is followed so that the international
firms may use a part of their monies with the organization. This realizes

57
the goal of making sure that these fines are eager for the continuation
and success of the projects. Moreover. the participation of the firms in
managing the joint plants provides a greater opportunity for the transfer
of managerial and technical expertise at the highest level.

The organization devotes attention to providing training at hone and abroad

in the various branches of the electronic sciences. The organization sends
large nuabers of engineers and technicians to get training in the international
factories, universities and scientific institutes.

Until the research and develop-eat cadres capable of working in the sphere

of military electronics are formed, the method of acquiring manufacturing
licenses and technical aid guaranteeing the right to the transfer of tech-
nology to all the cadres and levels is being followed. The organization

has also been eager to unite sure that the agree-ents include concentrated
programs for practical training in the plants of the fir- granting the nanu-
facturing license-«raining on the nethods of producing. testing, perforaance,
designing and quality control of the equipment covered by the agree-ant.

The organization is eager to include in its agreements provisions for partici—
pation by its engineers in the phases of designing and develop-eat of the
products covered by the agreement as a first step in creating the research
and development cadres for its future products.

58
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200030025-9

Estimates of Spending by Hideastern Countries on H11:
in 1978

In Billion
U.S. Dollars

 

5
‘U
h
0
"1

Egypt
Iraq
Kuwait

Iran

59

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000200030026-9
CHAPTER FIVE: TRAINING AND RESEARCH IN MC‘I‘WIC INDUSTRIES

The establisl-ent of the electronic industries had to be accoupanied by
the eatablislnent of a research and develop-eat center that builds a new
generation of researchers. engineers and specialized technicians with high
qualifications and with the capability to aeet the country's needs without
resorting to foreign experts in every case.

The Electronic Industries Research and Develop-eat Center carries out the
following:

1. Design and develop advanced prototypes for the equip-eat to which the
right of knowledge [sic] is acquired and then proceed to design and develop
gradually prototypes with all their technical cosponents for new equipnent
needed for the local narket and for exportation and with a profitable economic

return .

2. Conduct research and studies on the use of local raw eaterials and con-
ponents in nanufacturing electronic equipment.

3. Provide technical services for the industries engaged in the sphere
of electronic equipnent and instruments.

These were the goals set for the Electronic Industries Research and Develop-
nent Center of the Ministry of Industry when it was established in 1969.

Synopsis on Electronic Industries Research and Develop-eat Center:

The Electronic Industries Advisory Co-ittee “co-ended in l969-st the
tine when preparation of the projects of the third (1970-75) five-year plan
for the electrical and electronic industries was startsd--that an electronic
industries research and develop-eat center be established to increase the
nmber of scientifically trained citizens.

The Electrical and Electronic Industries Organization started to prepare
for the establisl-ent of this center. It purchased a mnber of scientific
neasurenent instrments fit for general purposes to equip the first two
laboratories. naeely:
The electronic measurement instruments laboratory.
The very high frequency [VHF] radio equipment laboratory.

The organization also purchased about 1.000 specialized scientific books

on electronics and the sciences connected with electronics and subscribed
to about 50 different technical magazines. A number of engineers were also
apppointed.

In 1969. the organization concluded a scientific and technical cooperation
agreement with the CDR which included the center's needs of experts and
scholarships to set up the two aforementioned laboratories.

In 1972, a sum of 500.000 dollars was allocated for the first phase and
the project document was signed in October 1974 and included the following:

A total of 105,000 dollars for experts.

A total of 50.000 dollars for scholarships.

A total of 325,000 dollars for equipment and other requirements.
A total of 20,000 dollars for miscellaneous expenses.

Grand total: 500,000 dollars.

Two GDR experts were brought to the country in accordance with the scien-
tific and technological cooperation agreement. One of them (Dr Paine) was
specialized in electronic measurement instrments and the second (Mr Kadan)
was specialized in high-frequency transmitters and receivers. Five scholar-
ships were also sent to the GDR.

In 1973. the foundation of the laboratory for the electronic measurement
equipment and the laboratory for the VHF equipment was started.

The two new laboratories were equipped with the (new) instruents previously
imported with the knowledge of the Electrical and Electronic Industries

Organization and with the (used) equipment purchased from al-Nasr Television
Company and from Factory 36.

Components and raw materials imported previously with the knowledge of the
Electrical and Electronic Industries Organization or purchased from Banha
and al-Nasr television companies were also acquired.

The experts started to train a number of engineers on research and designing,
each in his own field.

In 1974. the foundation of a third laboratory for television and radio equip-

ment was started. Equipment and instruments were imported to equip the
laboratory and training was given to teams of engineers.

61
Establishment of the mechanical designing and technology laboratory was

also begun under the supervision of a GDR expert in accordance with the
bilateral scientific and technological cooperation agreement. The document
of the U.N. Development Program concerning the Electronic Industries Research
and Development Center was also signed.

Implenentation of the project was started in 1975 in cooperation with the
United Nations. Equipment and accessories valued at 200,000 dollars and

a number of books and magazines valued at 15.000 dollars were requested“

for the center.

A draft was also prepared for the second phase of the project. covering

the 5 years from 1977 to 1981. The United Nations will donate 2.5 million

dollars toward this phase and the Egyptian Govern-eat will participate with
2 million Egyptian pounds to meet the expansion in the center's activities

in the following fields:

Telecoemunication equipment.
Electronic measurement instruments.
Conauner electronics.

Electronic components.

The center's fourth five-year plan for the 1976-80 period has also been
prepared. The plan's costs amounts to 2 nillion Egyptian pounds and provide
foracquiringland and building a new premises for the center on it.

On the other hand, research and developments have been made in the follow-
ing spheres:

Carrier receiver and transmitter--PTR 101: The laboratory prototype for

the receiver set units and lost of the transmitter set units has been com-
pleted and a mechanical design for the apparatus has been constructed. The
work has faced nunerOus difficulties because of the young experience of
those working in this field which requires long experience for overcoming
the difficulties of designing VHF equipment.

The Oscillescope 20 101: The prototype has been developed by using two
printed plates instead of five printed plates so as to improve the instru-
ment's performance and reliability.

Digital multi-Ieasurement set--DH 101: The first phase of the initial design
was started through use of the components available to the center with the

sin of benefitting fro- the experience gained to make other digital equip-
sent.

Economic television set: Initial designs have been made for the following
units:

62
Channel selector.

Visual signal circuits.

Sonic frequency circuits.
Horizontal deflection circuits.
Vertical deflection circuits.

These designs have been developed through the use of components available
to the center and in the local market.

Various (non-frequency) measurement instrtnents: The following production-
assisting instruments have been designed and constructed:

An instrument to measure insulation up to 3,000 volts.

Sweep generator.

An instrument generating a constant current of 20 volts.

An instrument producing a constant current of 100 volts.

An instrument producing a constant current of 15 volts.

In 1976. the center's Higher Technical Omittee recounended that greater
attention be given to projects for which contacts have already been con-

cluded so that the center's efforts may be divided as follows:

Seventy percent for solving the problems of the industry and of the projects
for which contracts have been concluded.

Twenty percent to projects for which no contracts have been concluded.
Ten percent for training.

Contacts have been made with the following companies to deal with the prob-
lems shown next to the name of each company:

The Alexandria Shipyard Company: Developing the control unit of the bal-
ancing machine so that it may not have to depend on Russian spareparts.

Developing the control units of the cavitation machines, both those opera-
ting by valves and by transistors, so that modern components available in
the international market may be used.

Instrument amplifier for the (operation) and control equipment.

63
Developing a local 600-watt radio station.

The Iron and Steel Company:

1. A SO-watt sonic frequency anplifier.

2. Standard control unit.

3. A VHF transmitter-receiver.

6. An instrulent amplifier.

The Arab Radio. Transistor and Electronic Equipment Conpany:
1. Developing the (final blast) testing unit.

2. Designing and constructing a network to supply the radio assanbling
lines with the required frequencies [sic] so as to control the quality of
the radio sets.

3. Developing and designing the electronic circuits for the Polish cassette
recorder that the company intends to produce.

In 1976, the center conpleted the control unit for the balancing nachine
of ‘he shipyard Company by using integrated circuits and transistors. Pour
control units were produced and they are operating well in the company.

The center also conducted studies on and prepared for the other projects.
The components and parts not available in the center and in Egypt have been

requested . f ro- abroad .

In 1976. a training course was given on repairing scientific electrical
and electronic equipnent. The course was given on behalf of the Arab States
Education . Sciences and Culture Organisation and was attended by 12 techni-
cians from seven Arab countries and two technicians fro. the Arab Radio
and Transistor Oonpany. The course provided theoretical and practical train-

ing for a period of 6 nonths.

In 1977, the center prepared the final draft [plan] for the second phase
of the um. project with the aid of the 11.11. expert. The most important

features of this draft are:

Setting up an electronic industries laboratory to solve the problems of
the industrial conpanies engaged in the field of electronics and to develop

the industrial electronic equipment and systeas.

Setting up a laboratory for precision conputers with the sin of training
the center workers on their use and with the sin of developing the systems
of use according to local needs.

66
Setting up a laboratory for quality control, for analyzing dmge and for
measuring reliability.

Studying the country's future needs of electronic equipment and components.

Designing and developing prototypes for consumer electronics. for communica-
tion equipment and for measurement and control instruments.

Setting up a laboratory for thick-plate electronic circuits and developing
modern electronic components that use this technology to meet the country's
needs, concentrating as much as possible on local raw materials. The United
Nations will donate 600,000 dollars in the 1978-82 period. The center also
seeks to acquire more aid through bilateral agreements to complete financing
the project. Egypt will also participate with 1.5 million Egyptian pounds
during the 1978-82 five-year plan.

In 1976 and 1977, the set up modern and advanced laboratories for a limited
production of the one-side and two-side printed plates are used in:

Precise computer controlled drawing facilities which are imported fr Switzer-
land and which give precision of up to 62.5 microns (a micron being $00

of a millimeter).

Photographing and ratioing equipment, including a ratiograph camera capable

of taking pictures at a scale of 1:1, 1:2 and 1:6. developing and drying
equipment and film storage facilities.

Numerical controlled drilling H. C. equipment from the Swiss Pesalux Company.
Photo-resist direct photographing equipment imported from Heat Germany.
Etching m/c equipment imported from West Germany.

Zinc. silver and gold plating equipment from West Germany.

Through-Hole-Plating equipment from Heat Germany.

Silk screen equipment (fabric binding--photographing--picture developing.
washing and printing) from Labsco Company in West Germany.

All these units have been installed and are in operation. Experiments are
in progress to produce a printed plate for the telephone equip-en; of the
Telephone Equipment Company.

In addition to the above. the following has been achieved:

Supplying the center with an oscillescope.

Setting up a small workshop.

65
Constructing control circuits for the cavitation machines of the Alexandria
Shipyard Company.

Designing and constructing a part of the frequency distribution network
for the Arab Radio and Transistor Company.

Repairing the digital control unit of al-Shurabji Company.

Research and Training Centers

Te leconnunicat ions Research Center:

A republican decree estabLishing this center was issued in 1973 and the
center has carried out a number of applied studies through forming work
teams of people working in co-Iunications. The center also introduced the
system of conducting research through agreaaents with the various universi-

ties.

A number of well-equipped laboratories have been set up, the most important
being:

A. The computers laboratory used for couunication purposes.

3. The centrals [telephone exchanges] laboratory.

C. The comunications laboratory.

D. Tue radio co-uniations laboratory.

E. The networks laboratory.

The center has also formed research teams in the same specialized fields.

The Comunications Authority supplies a certain percentage of the center's
finances and the rest comes from other resources.

Al-l-laram Research Center (Radio and Television Union):

This center, which follows the Radio, Television and Broadcast Engineering
Union. was set up in 1964. It represents currently the General Administra-
tion of the Broadcast Engineering Research and is divided into two main
sections:

A. The General Electronics Central which is in charge of the Electronic
Materials Control and the Electronic Equipment Control.

B. The General Com-unications Control which is in charge of the Precise

Frequency Equipment Control. the Antennae E1uipment Control and the Co-uni-
cation Equipment Control.

66
Each control has an averagely equipped laboratory. The center has carried

out more than 50 applied studies which have resulted in a long list of products
including precise frequency equipment, antennae. electronic materials and
studio and broadcasting equipment.

The center has also conducted a number of fundamental studies approved by
the International Radio Advisory Authority (the C.c.l.R.). The United Nations
has allocated for the center aid amounting to “50.000 dollars as of the

beginning of 1979. The center is currently experiencing various administra-
tive and financial difficulties.

Production Experiments Connected With Applied Research:

Engineering Section of the Atomic Energy Authority:

This section has been able to carry out successful studies and research

in the field of producing radiation-measuring equipment. These studies
have already moved into the sphere of production and a number of radiation-
measuzing instruments have been produced locally. The section even sells
its products to the various organizations. These efforts are considered
pioneer efforts in this regard.

Production Experiment in al-Haram Research Center:

The center has sold its production to the armed forces, to the broadcasting
station's engineering section, to the universities and to other organizations.

This experiment has proven the possibility of relying on production to finance
the various applied research activities.

Fundamental Research Centers:

The communication engineering sections of the engineering colleges of the
various universities are currently engaged in fundamental research work.
These sections are:

l. The communications section of the Cairo University Engineering College.

2. The communications section of the Alexandria University Engineering
College.

3. The communications section of the 'Ayn Shams University Engineering
College.

a. The electricity section of al-Azhar University Engineering College.
5. The communications section of the Asyut University Engineering College.
6. The communications section of al-Hinufiyah University Engineering College.

7. The communications section of Hulwan University Engineering College.

67
This is in addition to the electrical engineering laboratory of the National
Research Center.

Training Centers:

Engineers are graduated currently in Egypt free the con-unication sections
of the various universities. The idea of building the practicing engineer
who graduates from specialized institutes has ended [presulably meaning
has been put to inpleuentation fully]. Theoretical instruction in all
these sections is very good but practical application is very limited.

As for technicians, they are supplied by:

A. The technician training centers.

8. The vocational secondary schools.

C. Graduates of the preparatory technical schools.

These institutes and schools do not supply a sufficient number of technicians.
This is why the service agencies and soue companies set up their own training
centers to supply the technicians they need. Sane of these centers are:

A. The Conunications Training Center of the Commications Authority.

3. The training department of the Broadcasting Engineering [Authority].

C. The training department of al-Naar Television Company.

D. The training center of Banha Company.

As for the idea of providing constant training to the engineers and the
technicians. it is not ubodied fundamentally in the aforanentioned training
centers. However, this kind of training nay be acquired in an unplanned
manner, such as when the individual completes his own training by reading
and by practical observation.

There are also no set criteria to measure the rise in the standard of
the worker's [skill] and to reward the more advanced workers.

Status of Fundamental and Applied Research Centers in Field of Electronics-
Present Policy of Applied Research Centers:

Proper equipnent is available to the applied research centers at present
but the skilled manpower is not available in most cases.

The shortage of the right labor arises fundanentally fro- the presence
of. an obvious contrast between the wages of the labor working in these
centers and the wages that this labor can earn it it works in the Arab
countries or in some of the local private sector companies. Some of

68
the people working in research even abandon their work to enter the field
of service or of business. Some of the people who continue to work in
the centers do so in order to get their M. A. and their Ph. D. degrees.
Then the university, with its special cadre. its status and its role.
becomes more attractive and these people abandon their work in the applied
research centers.

Moreover. there is no coordination among the centers themselves or between
the centers and the production circles. There is also no coordination
between these‘centers and the fundamental research centers.

In the absence of a specific policy for these centers. they are often

asked to engage in work that is not within the sphere of research, designing
or development and that is mainly connected with maintenance. This is
especially the case in the research centers of the service agencies.

Many of the products developed by these centers have been received with
the objection that they are imitations of foreign products. The answer
to this objection is that the applied research center can meet the demand.
Moreover. the said imitation is not easy. The real difficulty of this
imitation lies in the production technology. Such a policy [of imitation]
has acted as a basic factor in developing the electronic industries of
many of the countries that are currently advanced in this field.

Current Policy of Basic Research Centers:

Due to the lack of a connection between the applied research centers and
the basic research centers, the former are not constantly made aware of
the problems directly connected with the local situation--problems for
which fundamental research is desirable.

This is why these research centers preoccupy themselves with studies selected
according to the desires of the researchers and without the presence of

a comprehensive plan. Such studies are beneficial in preparing the researchers
and developing their abilities and in supplying staff members to the universi-
ties.

Some of these centers have concluded contracts to carry out applied research.
They have also concluded successful contracts to provide instruction on
a number of advanced disciplines and curricula.

Many of the centers has large nubers of well-qualified researchers who
only lack a sufficient degree of contact with the applied aspects of work.
Moreover. many of the centers are experiencing severe deficiencies in
laboratory equipment.

As a result of this deficiency, there has been a definite inclination

toward theoretical theses that are prepared without any laboratory studies.
This confirms the theoretical inclination and the lack of actual practice

69
in many of these centers. The Scientific Research and Technology Academy
is trying. through the Specialized Council for Applied Physics and Elec-
tronics. to establish some planning and coordination among these centers.

Determining Role of Applied Research Centers in Electronic Industries:

The applied research centers in the Arab Republic of Egypt have become
numerous and their spheres of work have overlapped. As a result, the
role that these centers perform to energize the electronic industries
have also overlapped. In the absence of the right intellectual clarity.
deficiency in planning usually develops.

The applied research centers are divided into:

1. Applied research centers attached to the departments and ministries
that use electronic equipment.

2. Applied research centers attached to industrial complexes or to the
electronic industry centers.

‘l‘o integrate the efforts of these centers and to prevent them from over-
lapping, the spheres of work of these centers and their role in developing
the electronic industries are defined as follows:

Keeping up with the plan to develop the services. each center within its
field of specialization. and drawing up a comprehensive framework for
the centers according to a specific strategy.

Conducting early technical and econonic comparison studies for the various
projects connected with this kind of services.

Drawing up the detailed standards for the equipment to be produced locally
or to be purchased from abroad so that these standards may be compatible
with the definite strategy and in keeping with the international and local
recomendations in which these centers are usually represented.

Constructing prototypes for some equipment.

Presenting the specifications of the equipment or of the prototypes of
the research centers in the industrial complexes.

Following up the production of these prototypes with the research centers

of the industrial complexes and making sure that the product complies
with the specifications.

In case the equipment is for export. the research centers must draw up

the right specifications so that the equipment may be acceptable in the
foreign markets.

10
As for the research centers of the industrial complexes. they should carry
out the following:

1. Establish contacts with the applied research centers attached to the
departments and the ministries to acquire detailed specifications or the
prototypes of the equipment to be produced.

2. Determine the equipment that they will produce in accordance with
the company's production policy and with the marketing studies.

3. Draw up the specifications for the patented electronic equipment,
instruments and parts and conduct private research on them.

4. Build the prototype for the product.

5. Act in concert with the production departments to develop the implementation
technology and to improve the production economies.

To clarify this division. let us assume that what is acquired is to produce
a broadcasting transmitter. for example. In case this project is started
directly in the research centers of the industrial complexes. then it

would be necessary to acquire the needed expertise on the latest technologi-
cal methods and also to acquire international recommendations and agreements.
This would constitute a heavy burden for the applied research center [of

the industrial complex]. But if this expertise is offered the center

in the form of final specifications or in the form of a modifiable prototype.
then the center's role becomes limited. provided that the rest is done

by the research center of the broadcasting engineering.

But if what is required is to produce an oscillescope. for example. then
the work can be started directly in the research centers of the industrial
complexes according to the marketing studies.

Recommendations

In light of the previous review. of the studies and research submitted to
the council and of the debates. opinions and proposals of the members.
the council has reached the following recommendations:

General Recommendations:

The electronic industries are considered, in addition to their direct
connection with economic developments, among the national security and

defense necessities in view of the importance of electronics in the modern
defense and war systems.

Moreover. electronic equipment enters the various activities of the age.
Backwardness in the electronics industry is considered a form of civiliza-
tional backwardness. This requires that the folawing considerations be
taken into account in setting up and developing this industry:

71
The defense and security considerations as a basis for setting up and

developing the military electronic industries and for strengthening the
research centers specialized in this industry.

Economic and social considerations to provide comunication utilities
as a basis for producing and developing industrial electronic equipment.
such as coununication. control and aeasureeent equipment.

Cultural and informational consideration calling for continuation of the
production of the current coast-er electronics and developing them to

rise to the level of the international production in terms of quality
and prices.

Along with the necessity of taking into account the considerations of
the economic feasibility of the electronic conponents industry according
to the type and importance of the product. [it is also necessary to]:

Coordinate the production of the various electronic industry units to
prevent conflict and to lead to the integration of this industry. This

can be done through creating a holding company or establishment that plans
and coordinate the production of the various units and that sets up the

technical units necessary to implement the phased industrialization policy
capable of creating able and cooperative industrial entities.

lie-examine the present method of planning the electronic industries so
that the plans may not be confined to setting the production volme and
value only but may extend to complete advanced industrial phases. This
is done by enabling the plans to introduce the basic industrial phases
that start with designing the product, acquiring its components from the
specialized international companies and then adding some local components.
thus adding an industrial dimension to the production of electronics.

lie-examine the policy of the technical aid agreements to guarantee the
transfer of the basic industrial secrets. such as:

The methods of designing and the right to innovations, along with training

some Egyptian industrial leaderships in the foreign companies having the
concession.

Transfer the technology of the modern electronics industry with its new

industrial systems. especially the systems pertaining to the production

of sani-conductives and to their use in the simple and multiple integrated
circuits.

Release the freedom of importing the components suitable for the local
industry from the various sources of specialization according to quality
and stop the importation of component kits.

72
lie-examine the customs fees and the taxes levied on the production raw
materials and =requirements so as to guarantee proper customs protection
for the various stages of industrial growth and to make it possible to
supply the industry's products to the local consumer at suitable prices
that are competitive with the prices of the foreign products in the local
and foreign markets.

In the Sphere of Conunications:

Link the cosi‘aunication utilities with the units of the electronic equip-
meat industry needed by these utilities so that the production may be
compatible with the local industrial capabilities and compatible with
the needs of these utilities. This is considered a fundamental mainstay
for industrial development and for the economic situation generally.

Develop the production of the Egyptian Telephone Equipment Company and
increase the production volume to meet the expected increase in the demand
for telephone sets and exchange equipment. During the models produced

by the company to fit the models expected to be introduced into the tele-
phone networks and which consist of electronic models with space and time
sections.

Strengthen the Cable Company to enable it to produce the volt-e of cablea
required to meet the needs of the local network and of the axis cables.

Studying developing and bolstering the production of the television screens
factory so as to use its products in the information-transmitting terminals.

Set up a new multiplex equipment industry. especially for time multiples.

Produce various types of radio communication equipment at a suitable economic
volume so as to improve the provincial co-unications and to link them
with a single automatic network that covers all parts of the country.

In Sphere of Electronic Computers:

Electronic computers are considered one of the fundamental aspects on

which the modern civiliazation edifice is built. The rate use of these
computers in the Arab countriesuwhere the computers are needed dimly-

is due to the lack of computers that operate in correct Arabic. If the
estimates for computers are calculated on the basis of their spread in

a country like Japan, for example, in the past 10 years. then the value
required is no less than 3,000 units annually, especially since this product
will be suitable to export to all the Arabic-speaking countries.

This industry's productionmay include some types of telex equipment designed
especially to write in Arabic.

In Sphere of Military Electronics:

73
National security and defense requirements nake it necessary to master

the industry. technology and engineering of the military electronics be-
cause electronic war plays an important role in modern military operations.
Therefore. it is necessary that the state possess the ability to produce
and develop this kind of equipment.

In Sphere of Scientific Research:

There are several applied research centers that follow the various services.
such as: The Radio and Television Union. the Ministry of Communications.

the National Research Council and the Ministry of Industry. These centers
are considered important supports that can play a significant role in
strengthening and developing the electronic industries. This is in addition
to the research centers belonging to the universities. The situation
requires that the work of these centers be developed as follows:

These centers should undertake the task of planning and developing the
electronics industry and of linking it with the sides for whose sake the
industry has been founded.

The activity of these centers should focus on industrial production and

the centers should undertake the task of drawing up the specifiations

and designs for the various equipment needed. provided that they are equip-
ped with units to produce the prototypes of the electronic equipment.

In the Sphere of Training:

Attention should be devoted to providing education and training in the
electronic industries so as to enable the graduates to gain the highest
degree possible of technical skills and expertise. This requires:

The widespread introduction of demonstration experiments using electronic
means.

The use ofibdernelectronic equipment for measurement and experinents.
Practical Training in the factories.

Establishment of training units in the factories and publication of pan-
phlets and docuents describing the systems of work and its correct methods.

The establishment of pre-B.A. or post-B.A. disciplines to teach students
and engineers the methods of designing by the use of digital conputers.

Devoting attention to the documentation and familiarization [al-ittils']

centers and introducing the nodern systems for acquring. storing and dis-
seminating information.

8696
680: £802 - IND -

74