FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10020

29 September 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 49/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10 02
29 Septembe

WEST EUROPE REPORT
(pouo 49/81)

CoureuTs

ENERGY BCONMCS

ITALY
PSI Views on Soviet, Algerian Gas Pipelines
(Franco Mini; IL HONDO. 31 Jul 81)
Roundtable on Infrastructural Problels of Coal Industry
(IL 3013.210 ORE, 2‘ Jul 81)aoooooaooa¢oooooouoooooooooooooooooo
ECONMIC
ITALY

Negotiations for Labor Contracts Get Underway
(Lorenzo Scheggi; IL HONDO. 31 Jul 81).........................

Ferslpi Steel 1980 Balance Sheet: Libyan Purchase
(IL Mom, 31Ju1 81)....OOIOOIICOOOOOOOUICCOOOOOIOOOIOOUOCO...
rs: uni-MS cm SOVIET, mam} GAS rmmms
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 31 Jul 81 p 21
[Arrlcle by Franco Himni: "The PSI Has Two Gas Lobbies"]

[Text] it was already apparent in the economic plan that the PSI subnitted a few
hours before the government crisis :0 Arnaldo Porlani and right afterwards to
Giovanni Spndolini that the two pixelines create a problem. Item 9, under the
title "Energy Top Priority," stated: "Algerian methane in the South. Diversify
Suppllc-S. Look into USSR pipeline." Thus, ever since a request arrived from
Algiers approximately 20 days ago for a review of the price of methane which it

is Lo supply to Italy starting at the end of the year (the request was rejected by
E\I ,) one fears that quite a bundle was spent (about 3, 000 billion lire) for the
construction of a pipeline from the Sahara to Italy, to be faced in the end with
Lhc purchase of gas at unsuitable prices.

with regard to the USSR pipeline (it is to carry nethane from Siberia to various
European countries, including Italy.) there are sons who believe that Moscow,
through these additional supplies, (however not yet quantitatively identified) would
eventually place a rope around Europe's neck. Thus the agreement shifts frou econ-
omica] to political and is furthermore complicated by a suspicion of payoffs made by
9. 'H (a .11' s affiliate in charge of natural gas) to persons unknown and for unknown
rezasuvs for a 20-year nethsne contract stipulated with the USSR in 1973.

The events concerning the Algerian pipeline began in the 1960's, and then evolved

in 1973 into a contract between ENI and SHAH on one side and Sonatrach (ENI's Alger-
ian counterpart) on the other. In 1977 the contract was updated and, as far as we
know, the price of methane (12 billion cubic meters a year from the end of 1981

shun the pipeline is completed, destined to become 18 and perhaps lore when the
Pipeline is doubled,) was set at approxinately two dollars per BTU, depending on oil
gr'ras. A BTU is equivalent to 27.69 cubic meters. Today, according to some re-
purts, the price requested is around seven dollars, which means an expense of ap-
proximately 3,500 billion lire a year. 3N1 does not feel it is a fair price, be-
cause it does not take into account the costs that lust be met after the delivery.
Some torpedoes already have been fired from Algiers to exert pressure by blocking
some huge contracts with Italian firms and favoring others with competing countries.

Also the Siberian pipeline, a gigantic undertaking of 4,500 kilometers, costing
about 15,000 billion lire, already has an ancient history, but is at a standstill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A few days ago an Italian delegation went to Moscow. "We have further clarified our
respective viewpoints," declared Giuseppe Borga, head of the office for economic af-
fairs of the foreign ministry," but surely we are not yet close. "The Parnesina
[foreign ministry] expert summarized the aspects of the negotiations as follows:
'ﬁhe first aspect is the supply on the part of our industries, and here all is well:
we are qualified. Then there is the financial aspect, and it is a huge problem.

We should lend the money, and Moscow is asking for a highly privileged rate compared
to the current cost of money. Finally, there is the technical-energy aspect. The
quantity and price of gas are still to be defined. They are asking much more than
we can pay. Certainly it is an interesting project-for us, as a diversification of
snurce and for them, as recipients of foreign currency."

How and why have two economic problems become a political problem? The answer can
be found, above all, speaking to representatives of the PSI, the only party that, at
this time, seems willing to handle the matter (and their commitment to this is also
demonstrated by the government choices made: the PSI has the ministry of foreign
trade with Nicola Capris, the presidency of the commuttse for industry with Enrico
Nance, and has requested that Roberto Pclleschi, undersecretary for foreign affairs,
be given the responsibility for the department of cooperation and development).

But within the PSI too, not all the voices are in accord. The most reliable one
should be that of Frencesco Forte, who is the new person responsible for the party's
economic sector. And Forte, discussing the argument, comes up with Mansoni-like
statements such as: "The Russian pipeline should not be done." According to him,

there is at ENI "a group in favor of the USSR which has always adopted an unbalanced
policy."

The Algerian position can be discussed. A refusal to discuss it would mean pushing
forward the USSR. Forte does not steop here. "It must not be forgotten," he warns,
that Enrico Mattel died because of a screwdriver in the engine of his plane four day
days before a trip to Algeria for a global agreement. It was the strategy of di-
versification for balancing three sectors: Iran-Iraq, Libya, Algeria. We do not
today need the USSR which, in four years, will be dependent on foreign countries for
oil." Palleschi agrees: "The Siberian pipeline is a political choice for which

the reasons cannot be seen. It is not an undertaking for peace: When you hand
your house keys to the enemy you do not establish peace."

Nicola Cacace, president of the Institute for the Study of Industrial Relations and
Manca's economic consultant when the latter was at foreign trade, is of a different
opinion. "With respect to Algeria, it is only a question of price which has been
dramatized. As far as Russia is concerned, instead, the contract is still up in
the air, but the Italian firms are very interested: because the offer involves
works for 2,000 billion lire. Moscow's reliability? In 20 years the Soviets have
always kept their commitments. As far as dependence on Moscow is concerned, it
must not be forgotten that a pipeline has two faucets: the Russians have that for
the gas and we have that of the dollars they need. The financial cost? One can
discuss with socialist countries the way to do business, but all data must be ac-
counted for: also the cost of keeping our plants underutilized and that of unem-
ployment compensation for the workers in factories without orders. Not even Manca
believes that the Siberian pipeline could choke Europe. "Among other things," he
affirms, ”Italy has an advantage over other European countries, just because it can

FOR 0FFI( '
"gamble on the Algerian gee. Caution is needed, not fear. "hat lust be achieved is
that European countries be united in the negotiations."

While the discussion goes on, a weekly magazine published s docment according to
which, as said before, sum is making large payoffs for nethane it purchases free the
USSR. Sane right-wing Christian Mocrstic deputies have questioned the goverment
on the subject. "But is it possible." says Palleschi, that the Italian government
lacks the means to find out who are the recipients of the payoffs?" And Forte:
"Recently someone sent as, in a sealed envelope, a docusent requesting that the
money be paid. It was signed by m's Carlo Ssrchi. I don't know if it is genuine
or forged. It seems highly unlikely that the payoffs have been collected by the

PCI: it is not possible that the PCI would get involved in s latter as naive as
payoffs over a 20-year period."

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981

9758 .
cso: 3104/353

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY ECONOMICS ITALY‘

ROUNDTABLE ON INFRASTRUCTURAL PROBLEﬁS 0F COAL INDUSTRY
Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 24 Jul Bl pp 15.16

[Articlez "Untying the Infrastructure Knot"]

[Text] The results of a roundtable held in Rome by
IL SOLE-24 ORE concerning implementation of the coal
report. Difficulties have begun since the political
phase of the "energy choice": ports of debarkation

(all to be named) and distribution of coal to users.

The choice of coal in the search for an alternative energy strategy brings with it
not only general planning problems but also that of the infrastructures necessary
for the receiving, transport and use of coal.

To discuss infrastructure problems, IL SOLE-24 ORE held a roundtable recently in Rome
with the participation of the Honorable Francesco Compagna, then minister of the Mer-
chant Marine. Nith_him were the general director of the Energy Sources bureau of
the ministry of Industry, Giuseppi Amnussari; the supply director of ENEL [National
Electric Power Agency], Marco Gatti; Gian Ranieri Cuturi, representing CONFINDUSTRIA
[General Confederation of Italian Industry]; the president of the coal division of
AGIP [National Italian Oil Company], Francesco Coffrini; the vice-president of CON-
FITARMA [Italian Confederation of Free Shipbuilders], Eraldovalle; FINMARE [Shipping
Finance Corporation] President Luciano Paolicchi; Silvio Bobbi, president of AGI-CAR-
BONI [National Italian Coal Company]; and attorney Giuseppe Perasso, director of CON-
FITARMA.

The moderator of the roundtable was the public relations director of IL SOLEv24 ORE,
Salvatore Toriello. Also participating were the newspaper's editors in chief Desi-
derio Tedeschi and Claudio Alo, as well as journalists Roberto Piraino and Piero
Antonio Toma. The discussions were held at the Eden hotel.

Ammassari: Let me state one premise concerning the world scene so that we may eval-
uate the credibility of the coal option.

Energy growth in the next 10 years is forecast as going from about 7 million TEP
[equivalent in tons of petroleum] to 11 million TSP. Hith income growth estimated
at abOut 30 percent, the increase in energy demand is only about 2.4 percent.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Oil will remain essentially stable, becuase it is difficult to go beyond 3.1-3.2 mil-
lion TEP. quantities that will tend to reduce present production and consumption ca-
pacity. Energy demand may therefore be met by substituting traditional energy sources
(atomic energy, coal and natural gas) and, to a much lesser extent, renewable energy
sources (hydroelectric power and geothermal energy).

At the world level, according to international sources, the demand for coal will go
up from about 2 billion TE? to 3.5 billion TEP in 1990. In the countries of the OECE
[Organization for EurOpean Economic Cooperation [0ECD]], which is among the industri-
alized countries, energy demand will go from 4 billion to about 5.5 billion TEP.
Energy demand is expected to grow about 1.4 percent, less than world demand.

This increased demand will be met mainly by greater demand for coal, natural gas
and atomic power. As for coal, an increase from 840 million to 1.5 billion TEP
is expected.

In 1980, Italy consumed about 12 million TEP, and it is proposed to bring it to 36
million TB? in 1990. In physical terms, it means going from 17 million to about 55
million TEP; reaching this objective means solving large organizational problems.

An initial problem involves the possibility of bringing in coal at stable prices
and secure quantities. Serious questions have already arisen in recent years on
these two aspects: prices have shown a certain tendency to rise, while the most
easily extractable and transportable are being looked at by big international opera-
tors, including the oil people.

A second problem is that of supply infrastructures. This is one of the most diffi-
cult problems. and it must be faced in the next 3 or 4 years. Indeed, the existent
infrastructures of the traditional market, through which Italy has been receiving
its supplies and which it is counting on in the future, outside of Poland, the Uni-
ted States, South Africa, Latin America and Australia, will certainly have to be
brought up to date and reorganized. It may even be necessary to have Italian opera-
tors present at extraction sites to assure the possibility of exporting coal to
this country. A third kind of problem is debarkation infrastructures.

The plan provides for three coal terminals: the first at Trieste, the second at
Gioia Tauro. and a third at Alto Tirreno, which will supply a power plant,perhaps
the one at Bastia Pancarana.

l have omitted Taranto, not because it does not now have the only port presently
in existence that can unload ships larger than those presently in use but because
the pollution in that area has already aroused a series of objections that are
being considered and may disadvisc use of the presently existing infrastructure.

Evenif a fourth terminal has to be built at Taranto, it would have to be adjoined
to a coal-powered plant. but this plan seems adventuristic and premature to me,
because the Puglia region is already going to pursue a double nuclear and coal

option.

The fourth and last problem--really the most difficult one--is the distribution

of coal within the country. Once it has arrived and the crushable parts have been
separated out and sent to the power plants, the rest must be sent to the end consu—
mers. A fleet of smaller ships must be readied to transport the coal to other ENEL
plants located in shallow-draft zones (about 20,000 tons), and a logistics system
must be mounted to enable considerable quantities to be unloaded and shipped.

S
INJI‘OF!I(JAI.USEIOBHJ!
FOR¢MHHCJAI.USE(NVLY

if we consider these problems realistically, I do not think that coal consumption
for civilian use will increase very much. I don't see doorkeepers unloading coal
for condominiums and carrying out ashes (5 tons of coal produce a ton of ashes).
Rather, small coal-plant projects will have to be started up in residential neigh-
borhoods; these plants would supply energy and heat. They might also supply small
industries.

1L SOLE—24 ORE: Now that we have set forth for us the four big problems likely
to shape the future of energy from coal, we would like to ask Mr Gatti, as an engi-
neer. to tell us about ENEL's role in all this, especially considering the plans
for building coal plants.

Gatti: The use of coal was given a new start with the energy crisis of October
1973. Before then, coal had been on its way out; countries that did not produce
coal had almost ceased to use it. ENEL was the only coal user in Italy, consuming
about a million metric tons a year. Actually, the only coal-producing country that
had coal heating competitive with oil heat was Poland, an Eastern Bloc country where
the economy is sometimes a bit different from ours.

From October 1973 cn, coal attracted renewed interest; thus ENEL's first step was
to convert to coal or to complement with coal facilities those plants built with
double coal-oil burners.

Here are the figures: in 1976, we used 1.2 million metric tons; 1.6 in 1977; 2.0 in
1978; 3.2 in 1979, and 5 million metric tons in 1980.

The problem of receiving facilities for this coal has concerned us a great deal
because the plants in which the coal is used--there are presently 7 of them--have
different means of access, especially in regard to channel depths in the ports.

A plant like Monfalcone has a channel depth of only 22 feet; La Spezia has the most

with almost twice that.

If we sent a fully loaded ship to each of these plants, Nonfalcone could take a ship
of 6,000 metric tons, and La Spezia could take 55,000-ton ships. To get around this
inconvenience, the first step has been to adopt a system of double ports of call
whereby the ship unloads first at the deeper harbor and goes on to the second, shal—
lower one.

The next step was to enlarge ship capacity when the South African market opened up.
We import half of our needs from there.

We use 80,000-ton ships exclusively on the South Africa run. They are loaded with
71,000 metric tons of coal and go directly to La Spezia or else they are loaded full
(in actuality they take a maximum of 79,000 metric tons) and go to Marseilles, where
9-10.000 metric tons are unloaded so they can dock at La Spezia.

The next step we took last year with an 80.000-ton ship from SIDEMAP [Haritiue Demol-
ition and Repair Company] which was to bring the same size ship into Venice as well.

in 1976, the average cargo of ships on the ENEL circuit was 20,000 metric tons brought
into the country; in 1980, it was 44,000 metric tons. 1 think it will be over 50,000

metric tons this year.

6
FOR OFTTCTAI.USE(NVLY
F0! OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Increasing ship size is an indispensable technical and economic condition for sup-
plying large quantities of coal; it also involves the large technical problem of
increasing the unloading capacity of our coal plants.

We have rebuilt and brought up to date the Pusina traveling cranes, whose size and
height would not have allowed them to unload such large ships. we also expect to
modify the derricks at La Spezia.

Compagna: There is some argument about this use of Pusina.

Ammassari: The Fusina problems do not concern the port but the use of coal in
the plant. The start-up of coal plants and the conversion of oil-fired plants to
coal are taking place according to agreements between ENEL, the commune and the
region; smoke emissions are under the control of local authorities.

Gatti: As for sulfur, we are burning coal with only 1.1 percent sulfur. At Fusina,
there is the problem of sulfur dioxide and also that of thermal pollution of the water.
There is a rule that requires the plant to shut down if the temperature in the coolant
discharge zone reaches certain levels, but the problem is not due to coal: the problem
would be the same if the plant were run on oil.

As for future consumption, we plan to finish converting the coastal plants to coal
that are already planned and built for either coal or oil, at least as far as the
boilers are concerned, especially in Brindisi and Milazzo.

It will probably take longer than planned, particularly in Milazzo, where there is
some local opposition to the transformation. we should have the first groups in
Brindisi in 1983. Nith the conversion of these two plants, we think we will use
more than 10 million metric tons in 1985.

There is another question we have been following, one that might yield not inconsi-
derable results in the short term. It is the use of coal-oil, i.e. a mixture of
coal and oil. The coal is ground very fine and atomically linked to oil by a sta-
bilizer. I would like to dwell a bit on the supply problems brought up by Prof
Ammassari.

We make long-term contracts with the most dependable world suppliers. In 1973-76,
the only world exporter of coal for steam generation was Poland. Since 1976, South
Africa has burst onto the world scene as an exporter of steam coal. To be a world
coal exporter, you have to have adequate port facilities. China produces 600 mil-
lion metric tons but exports only 2 million because it does not have the terminals;
it can load ships only up to 25,000 metric tons. -

To be an exporter, you have to have the terminals, but the countries that have or
are developing them are few and far between.

South Africa began exporting in 1976 and by autumn 1979 had already reached its maxi-
mum because the Richard Bay terminal was operating at full capacity. It now exports
28 million metric tons a year, and a third phase is being planned for this terminal
to bring its capacity to 44 million metric tons in 1985; but at the moment it is
stuck at the maximum quota of 28 million metric tons a year

FIHICHHHCIAI.USE1DNLY
F0R10F?1C1AL USEiDNLY

This has had an influence on the level of prices. As long as South Africa could
supply the international market, prices were linked to South African production
costs, which are rather low. lhen South Africa reached the saturation point,

we and everybody else as world consumers had to turn to the only market that could
immediately meet our additional needs, the United States.

Right away the Americans, as always happens, realized there was money to be made

in the coal business and have been taking specific action to export coal. At various
times in recent years, the Americans have gotten all fired up about metallurgical

coal, but they have approached it carefully because they thought at first that the
boom demand in coal for energy might be a flash in the pan. Now, however, everybody

is convinced that the business wave of the future will be in coal for energy. Plans
have been mushrooming each more interesting than the last for modern terminals designed
to handle coal, terminals with large dumpsites and deep-draft docks. In America a:
present, harbor depths vary from 46 feet in Hampton Roads to 39-40 feet in New Orleans,
Mobile and Baltimore. New, according to the study made by the Interagency iask Force,
four terminals in America should be brought up to date: Baltimore, Hampton Roads
(Norfolk and Newport News), Mobile and New Orleans.

The Americans are said to be planning SSofoot depths for these four harbors. An
intermediate stage at 50 feet might be sufficient for the moment because it would
admit snips of more than 100,000 metric tons. Besides, America is not as far away
as Australia or South Africa, so there is no need to increase the size of the ships
too much.

However, movement in this area seems to be mostly backwards, as the Reagan administra-
tion seems to have no intention of financing the operations; thus, they will have to
be funded through a tax on ships.

Cuturi: CONFINDUSTRIA made a recent study in which we attempted to measure possible
consumption, to see what shape it would take in the future, and to shed some light on
the legal, financial and administrative aspects that might delay the movement of coal
in some industrial sectors. .

Industry is likely to make a notable contribution to coal consumption; our overall
figures for the next decade (and this fits into the energy plan forecasts) call for
6 million metric tons in 1985 and 9 million in 1990. If we compare this with the
latest drafts of the energy plan, I would say this is consistent with the maximum
levels of consumption for industry.

We are a little above this, because the target maximum is 5 million in 1985 and 8 mil-
lion in 1990.

It is interesting to note how this consumption will take shape in the future. If

we take as an example the largest consumer, ENEL, we see that in 1585 according to
energy plan estimates ENEL will be consuming about 8-9 million metric tons, while
industry is consuming about 6 million metric tons. or about 70 percent as much as ENEL.

It is clear that in the next 5-year period things will change notably, because ENEL‘s
new coal plants will come on line.

To conclude our consumption forecasts, I would say that two aspects stand out. The
first is the large increase in consumption that will take place as the decade goes on.
The second, which seems more interesting to me, is that most of this consumption
increase will take place in the next S years while ENEL's has yet to take off.

8
FOItOFFTCJAL USEIDNLY
I think if we look at things in the context of an energy strategy designed to reduce
dependence on oil, industry's contribution will be important in terms of both quantity
and location in the next few years.

The most important sectors will be cement, clay-based building materials and. in the
last 5 years of the decade, tht :ombined production of steam and electricity for indus-
trial uses.

The development in cement will take place in the shorter term. In Italy, cement is
based on coal. Up to the 1950's, coal was the most prevalent energy source in cement
production. Many of the present plants are based on coal but were converted to fuel
oil. Only those built after 1960 run on fuel oil alone.

From the standpoint of technology and efficiency, it is possible to return to coal
with a generally reduced output from plants initially designed for coal. It involves
not just boilers and coal crushers but also infrastructures, railroad connections,
depots and dunpsites.

Ammassari: And there is another very important fact: the cement industry can use
fuel with a higher sulfur content. And the ashes are used, too.

Cuturi: Indeed, as an industrial sector, the cement industry seems ready made for
coal. The problem is complicated by plants designed for fuel oil because it obviously
presupposes for each individual case not only the conversion of the plant but also
seeing whether the plant areas will allow building infrastructures, railways, etc.

We estimate that about 70 percent of cement production will convert to coal by 1985.

All this is having various consequences: first, ecological; second, infrastructural.
Cement-making products are located not far from the coast and small ports, but they
are located in the interior; thus, it will be necessary to watch out that infrastruc-
tures in areas affected by industrial consumption and ENEL plants (I am referring
to the Bastida da Pancarana zone, Chiasso and, especially, the whole Savona area)

do not develop shipping, unloading and road bottlenecks.

IL SOLE-24 ORE: Thus Italian industry will ask ENEL to avoid bottlenecks by planning
terminals for unloading, stockpiling and distribution by taking into consideration
their possible use by industry. But ENEL does not seem to be considering the problem
of equipping terminals because it won't talk about who might have to build them.

Gatti: Our receiving point is not a terminal. We like to call it that because
it is a fashionable word, but if we do, then we have 7 terminals, as many as there
are coal plants.

And you have to keep in mind that the receiving points of our future coal plants on
the coast will have to be able to unload 30,000 metric tons a day and have infrastruc-
tural dimensions capable of taking 150,000vton ships.

Ammassari: This corporate view in depth should be taken in light of the possible
needs of both other Italian coal consumers and those relatively in the hinterlands.
When you think of a large terminal in Trieste, for example, which the region, commune
and, probably, the operators will agree to, there is no doubt that at least 3 or 4
needs will have to be met. The first is an ENEL plant capable of taking in up to
5 million metric tons. The second is the need in the hinterland.

9

FOR 0511C1AL USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third point concerns the Padana valley. Sooner or later, some of the ENEL
plants now Operating entirely on fuel oil will go over to coal, which means there
will have to be a supply line up the Po valley to these coal plants. In that case,
Trieste will need infrastructures for ships or barges to sail up the Po river.

Nor should industry's needs be forgotten: cement and brick factories and other indu$~
trial consumers in the Padana valley can be supplied from an axis along the Po.

1 may be mistaken, but I think the infrastructure serving ENEL should also allow for
these other uses.

Compagna: I am thinking of very small terminals from which coal would be shipped

coastwise to smaller terminals according to national use, along the peninsula and
in the interior.

Cuturi: Industry does have a high general consumption figure (9 million metric tors),
but it does not justify in itself the construction of a terminal and a coal center.

On the other hand, since our use is spread pretty well throughout the country, what
Dr Ammassari foresees for the Po river can be extended to the surrounding seas: the
Mediterranean is a river running around the country.

industry need not necessarily benefit from a national terminal, because there could

conceivably be something else some day, a terminal located abroad, where industry
could supply itself, at least in part.

Gatti: we have a problem locating terminals. When we build a power plant along
the coast, we have to support it with an infrastructure that will supply the neces-

sary amount of coal, i.e. infrastructures on the order of what we now call terminals.
And these infrastructures could then be used by other operators.

Compagna: One thing should be made clear at this point: you had better decide first
where you are going to put the coal plants and then let us decide where to build the
terminals or else let us decide first where to put the terminals and then you decide
where to build the plants. Which do you want? We have to find out first where plants

are to be converted, where they are to be built and once we've done that then study
the surrounding waterways.

Gatti: But it is not up to ENEL to say where the plants should be built; we build
them where they have to be built. But I would like to undramatize this business of

terminals; our experience is making more than satisfactory progress even without the
biggest terminals.

Compagna: Do I have to wait for you or you for me? Who's on first? That's what
I'm asking. I have been wondering about this because I am responsible for ports.
I think you have to wait for me, even though you don't realize it. That's the way
I've got it figured out.

Gatti: At all the plants along the coast where we are planning to use coal (Taranto,

Cioia Tauro, Brindisi, etc.) we have also been studying the possibility of taking
150,000-ton ships.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'Compagna: At this point we can take for granted the three big terminals that Ammas-
sari indicated. There is still time to see if a fourth need be built. But let's say
we'll build those three. Let's take a look at them. Immediately afterwards, we will
have to consider the problem of the series 8 terminals. These are the ones (obviously
not 17 meters deep) somehow affected by your choice of location to be built after the
choice that Ammassari announced first and that I am repeating. Then I think we can
begin to put the first pins in the coal map of Italy.

Ammassari: I agree completely with what Compagna has been saying. Supposing these
are the three areas, some problems immediately arise. It is not enough to plan; we
have to construct and manage a system that will make it possible to reconcile diverse

interests. We have to consider how Austro-Hungarian interests might go together with
CONFINDUSTRIA's, with ENEL's and with the use of the Po.

IL SOLE-24 ORE: One of the big problems with coal is finding it and getting it.
The projected consumption for Italy in 1990 comes to about 20 percent of all the coal
shipped by sea in the world. This is a very important percentage. will we be able
to get all that coal? IMdchis the most effective system: to buy mines or to make
long-term contracts? Is it better to have a large national supplier, in this case
EN! [National Hydrocarbons Agency] or a lot of operators? How does it fit in with
security of supply and convenience of acquisition?

Coffrini: ENI is basically used for purposes assigned to it by the state, but it
is also used commercially to meet economic needs.

I think we can guarantee a supply to this country, though we have come on the scene
a little later than others, although a lot less late than with the oil problem.

The difficulties with logistics, infrastructures and transportation can all be over-
come if all goes well.

IL SOLE-24 ORE: Isn't ENI active on the international market in buying and distri-
buting coal? Is this something new?

Coffrini: No, it's not new; let's say the object is now to rationalize it and make
it more incisive. ENI has already taken an interest in coal, but a bit sporadically.
More than one company in the ENI group has been interested in coal; we now want to
create a company to manage all aspects of coal.

Ammassari: All this can be done only by political consensus at the top and at decen-
tralized levels of government (regions and communes). Thus, it is necessary to take
a moment for political reflection.

The time is yet long, but a substantial domestic consensus is forming with the appro—
v1l of ENEL's 10-year plan by the Interregional Commission and the CIPE [Interminis-
terial Committee for Economic Planning].

All that has been done under the energy plan presently being put into effect, and it

will certainly require a decision from the Council of Ministers or CIPE and a debate
in parliament, but it won't prevent progress from being made on some fundamental points.

11

FOR 0i11C]A1.USElDNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60mpagna: Waiting for the energy program may create a state of inertia in public
administration. But as concerns harbor infrastructures-sin our case receiving ports-
what worries me more is that, while Ammassari and I have already decided on the three
ports and even if we easily convinced the entire parliament of the necessity of equip-
ping these three ports as series A terminals for unloading coal, we still do not know
when parliament will give us a law on procedures for maritime work or whether it will
give us these procedures expeditiously, e.g. not only for Vado but also for Voltri.

The 3-year Stammati plan has proved very satisfactory for the Public Works ministers
who have succeeded Stammati. But it has also caused some concern about maritime
operations, which I think are due to their being more difficult than military ones.
We have made much more rapid progress in organizing a defense program, albeit well-
intentioned for civilian construction, than we have in maritime construction.

trip in what was supposed to be satisfactory time-.and I thought I would sneak one
more passenger aboard the bus, a stowaway if you want to call it that, so as to get
there first. The parliamentary commission agreed on rivers and harbors works. Any-
how, the bus broke down, obviously taking the side of the highway people. When I
realized this and was no longer responsible for rivers and harbors works. I was still
concerned about the time it took to complete rivers and harbors projects in my new
job, so I proposed for short routes to make an exception and throw out the three
articles on rivers and harbors procedures and have then taken care of independently
of freeway arguments.

If we have to build coal ports under the procedures presently in force, which are
dominated by the fear that somebody might steal something, they're going to steal
anyway, and we won't have the ports. To get the ports, I'll run the risk that some-
body might steal. But we can't live under the kind of obsession typified by that
article in REPUBBLICA. It can't be done. That is worse than environmentalism.

Ammassari: Minister Compagna has gone too far in his provocative remarks; he's
going to get himself beaten up saying that kind of thing. Even the energy plan.
once it has been approved, may need some guidelines. Let's consider just the insti-
tutional aspects, the choice of sites. The choice of sites, for example, is one of
the things for which legal approval is not enough. The 1977 plan had a consensus of
all the central constitutional political groups but was stopped when it went from
the regional to the communal government.

Then things went differently. It does no good to come up with a different, prettier,
more perfect plan; some of the problems have to be solved that halt the country's
decision-making process.

-lL SOLE-24 ORE: We have come to a crucial point, i.e. the transportation of coal,
which has to be done mainly on high-tonnage ships. Taking part in this roundtable
discussion are representatives of CONFITARMA and FINMARE, who can tell us something
about this.

Valle: Coal transportation has a bleak side that has not been noted for all the
other problems, from supply to infrastructure construction.

Dry cargo transportation involves the whole fleet: 70 percent private and 30 percent
public. Shipbuilders have improvement capability much more rapid than what the

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

market demands relative to infrastructure construction or supply.

To give some figures, the private fleet has available now 3.8 million letric tons

of combined shipping, i.e. ships that now carry oil but could be partly converted
to carry coal if need be.

I can say that there could now be available in an emergency 6 million metric tons
capacity of coal. But it is clear that the availability of ships, i.e. the avail-
ability of holds, depends on where they will be going to fetch the cargo and on the
time it will take to load and unload their cargoes.

Both ENEL and ENI have talked about long-term supply contracts, i.e. they have empha-
sized the necessity either to acquire mines or to assure long-term supplies. To
get a positive solution to a transport problem with Italian shipping, it would be
necessary to reserve some shipping to the flag of the nation selling us the coal,

probably, and to put an FOB [free on board] clause in the contracts so it could
specify the carriers and ships to be used.

Market conditions permitting, Italian transport can assure supply.

Ammassari: I want to verify what is written on page 102 of the plan draft. When
we were referring to the quantity to be shipped in 1990, we were supposing ships of
about 120,000 metric tons capacity coming from South Africa, Australia and the United
States. We also supposed an average round trip of about 60 days, or a cargo of
about 750.000 metric tons a ship a year.

Considering a coal shipment increase of about 25-30 million metric tons, about 40
ships were supposed to be needed for ocean transportation, plus smaller ships.

Valle: When I spoke of 6 million holds available, I was talking about holds that
are now being used abroad because we do not need them in Italy, obviously. Putting
this fleet to work on the Italian coal traffic, including 2 months at sea, which I
think is the maximum, means 6 trips a year. Six trips a year means multiplying
the 6 million by 6, or 36 million metric tons shipped. Thus we now have 36 million
metric tons of shipping ready.

Compagna: The coal question fed the illusion of shipbuilding activity. I think it
rather obvious that we should not have too many illusions about that, because hold
capacity is amply available, and there won't be a bonanza for the shipyards.

For short hauls, shipyards might be asked to build barges to carry coal from series
A to series 0 terminals.

Paolicchi: For steam coal consumption in 1980, it is clear to everybody that we
did it with the present fleet under national management. However, the present fleet
probably will not be sufficient any more for the consumption forecast for 1985. Some
more ships will have to be planned. It remains to be seen whether they should be
leased or bought and, if bought, whether new or used.

As for consumption after 1990, we will need more ships. Not, of course, those in
the national energy plan, which have generated expectations at the shipyards that
it would be wise to cool off.

13

FOR OFFKHAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Besides the already existing dry-cargo ships, we have to consider the possibility
of converting oil tankers into bulk carriers.

Bobbie: Particular attention will have to be paid to “shipping contracts," which
will have to be readied with the understanding that they will be continually brought
up to date, especially in light of port conditions, the contract market, the availa-
bility and cost of bunker fuel, etc.

Shipping will have to be planned for maximum economy (appropriate ships will have
to be found and positioned for loading and unloading according to the needs of ENEL
plants, coke mills and industry; other cargoes will have.to be found to avoid dead-
heading and thus keep down the cost of the ship rental, etc.).

It is of capital importance to verify and evaluate constantly the cost of shipping,
which cannot be limited to the numbers in the contracts but must also include port
costs, congestion and, therefore, idle time; financial exposure, money problems
(exchange risks, etc.) and other attendant costs (e.g. unloading costs, rising
costs for the crew and bunker fuel, etc.).

The cost of shipping will have to be reduced by using bigger ships or ships adapted
to a specific use, by reducing waiting time with suitable loading-unloading struc-
tures and equipment in port, and, finally, by assuring the coordinate, safe and
punctual movement of coal in the ports of embarkation.

These objectives require substantial changes in port structure and organization.
I can think of three, at least:

[1] Modifying the traditional multipurpose port and converting one large Italian
port to coal traffic.

(2} The ports intended for unloading coal should be treated as mixed public-private
companies to increase production and get positive management results.

[3] Conflicts should be reduced among the elements working in ports chosen for coal
traffic (businesses, shipfitters, shippers, agents, users, port companies, etc.).

Perasso: A large part of the Italian bulk fleet is used in cross-trade traffic.
Now, foreign transport traffic is more burdensome for the Italian shipper, for ob-
vious reasons (personnel turnover, repairs, natural and physcial reasons, etc.).

Thus, traffic to and from Italy would undoubtedly get priority from the Italian
shipper, who would naturally and easily turn to meet domestic needs, with more
satisfaction, once his generally short-term foreign contracts are up. It is a pity
that this does not always happen. The lament is frequent that foreign flags are
given precedence.

It is interesting to note that the Italian shipper does tend to give precedence in
his contracts to supplying Italy with raw materials.

The Italian bulk fleet is especially well-developed compared to those of other EEC
countries. It is equal to France's and West Germany's put together. The trend to
bigger tankers in the years preceding the 1973 oil crisis left much bigger ships.

It takes 4 months to build a ship in a shipyard and one day to sell it on the inter—
national market. The shippers can do their job when the time comes, but it is impor-
tant to face the problem of infrastructuﬁzs.
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USEIONLY

The solution outlined by Minister Compagna is agreeable, I think, to almost all
the major concerns affected: make three big terminals and then pose the problem
of choosing the type of ships.

Obviously, if there are 3 big terminals, the ships will be of more than 150,000
metric tons, and there will be all the time in the world to consider this option.
0n the other hand, if the choice of terminals is different, then the kinds of
ships will be different, too.

Compagna: The return to coal is not compressible relative to the measures outlined
in the various editions of the energy plan that we have seen. However the energy
plan is modified, the nation's need for coal will be much higher than the need for
oil was in the preceding age.

Today, coal lies over the ocean, not over the Alps. This might give us to think

that the cost of returning to coal will not be such as to unite us, especially in

the South, which suffers from conditions of geographical as well as energy inferiority.
The discussion has brought out two points: there is a general consensus on the need

to limit shipping of coal by land and to push the virtues of shipping coal by sea

and river.

The second point concerns the three ports of debarkation. 0n the basis of a series
of criteria checked by ASSOPORTI [expansion unknown] and Ammassari, we have identi-
fied these three ports.

But we are wondering whether they can all handle 150,000-ton gross tonnage. he will
have to watch carefully a gigantism regresses, and it is well that it is regressing,
because the Mediterranean is not well-adapted to gigantism. The Mediterranean can
be more traveled in the next decade if gigantism is contained.

I feel that at present the ports are not vainly contending for the coal trade. Every
port transports different goods, and some are more interesting than others. The
model of Leghorn is most interesting: Genoa is more jealous of Leghorn, which is
equipped for containerization, than it is of Savona, which is equipped for coal.

If we can take these two points for granted, the other problems we have to work on
relate to rivers and harbors procedures and the need for greater coordination with
the ministry of Public Works, because construction projects have to go through that
ministry.

We will meet again at the Sea Conference in Naples in October, where Vallega and I
will give you more precise information than we can today on the issue of the termi-

nals. We will seek to be more precise than we now can on the series 8 terminals.
At the moment, we are generally agreed on the series A terminals.

COPYRIGHT: 1980 Editrice ll Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

8782
C50: 3104/33?

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCONIMIC ITALY

NEGUIIATIONS FOR LABOR CONTRACTS GET UNDERHAY
Milan 1].. HONDO in Italian 31 Jul 81 pp 18-19
[Article by Lorenzo Scheggi]

[Text] Ottaviano Del Turco. secretary general adjunct of Hm, has no doubts:
"Perhaps not everybody is aware of it. but we are at the eve of the most important
negotiations in the history of Italy's industrial relations. and perhaps not only
Italy's." As a matter of fact, when the goveruseut and the unions, having completed
the preliminary phases, will meet Monday, 27 July at palasso Chigi to tackle the
core of the negotiations for defining the contents of the measures against infla-
tion, this will signal the beginning of long and complex labor negotiations that
will be developing in three successive stages. The first stage. as said. will be
the meetings between the goverment and the unions, then those between the con-
federations and business representatives, and last the renewal of labor contracts
for the major categories of industry. Maxi-negotiations, therefore, are character-
ized by the interdependence of the three stages on which Giovanni Spadolini's
government gambles for its survival, but on which a good deal of Italy's econoaic
future also depends.

But which are the major issues of these negotiations? And how, above all, are they
connected with each other? How will the outcome of each stage influence the solu-
tion of the others?

Government-Unions. It is the first and most delicate issue. because failure on
this front will most unavoidably block the successive negotiations between unions
and Confindustria [the body of industry representatives] and would prematurely
poison the renewal climate of the contracts. The chapters of this confrontation
are essentially five. The first is the nine-point package submitted by the union
(from the reconstruction of earthquake-damaged areas, to the employment plan, to
reform public administration reform, to the use of Algerian methane) which Spadolini
seems to be inclined to consider most favorably. The second and third concern con-
trolled prices, tariffs and acne indexations such as rent control and industrial
prices. The unions are making two demands of the government: A cosmitment to block
prices and tariffs under its control on the one hand (here, too, Spadolini met the
union's requests on sugar and medicines) and, on the other hand. the comitment to
exercise pressure on business operators to make them agree to contain industrial
price increases. Only if they obtain guarantees on these points will the unions
take under consideration the indexation of the cost of labor, including automative
wage indexation.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son omau. use any
SALARY manusis UNTIL ' 1984

(Necessary Increases in Salary for the Period 1982-84 to Maintain Current Purchasing
Power)

The table shows data pertinent to the projections made for the period 1982-1984.
Salaries of three categories of the manufacturing industry have been examined,
starting from an estimate made for 1981 (by CREL with data from Assolomharda).

Starting with the 1981 net salary, gross contractual increases necessary to re-
integrate the purchasing power of the salaries have been calculated, after having
accounted for the increases due to the cost-of—living adjustments. Two hypotheses
of inflation have been made: The first, decreasing (+ 18.5 in 1981, + 15 in 1982,
+ 13 in 1983, + 12 in 1984), the second, constant (+ 20 each year). Also rs:
hypotheses of taxation have been made: One according to the percentage system
established by the bill under approval which should, already in 1981, cffset fiscal
pressures; the second joining this last provision to the separate taxation (a

fixed 15 percent on all levels of income) of the cost-of-living adjustment matured
as of January 1982. The amounts thus obtained represent the average figure each
year (referred to 1981) which should be necessary in order to maintain the real
value of net salaries unaltered (these amounts, therefore, include also the in-
creases due to seniority, industry negotiations, etc.). If inflation decreases and
no fiscal remedies are found, gross salaries would have to be increased by 54 per-
cent in order to protect the purchasing power of salaries between 1982 and 1984. in
the event of a 45.4 percent price increase.

 

l) Hypothesis of Decreasing Inflation
(1981 - +18.5; 1982 - +15; 1983 - +13; 1984 - +12)

 

Taxation according to bill under approval

Mechanics Chemists Textile Workers

1982 58.184 73.580 49.088
1983 111.854 145.341 93.868
1984 181.735 233.291 153.277
Average 117.254 150.737 98.744
Taxation according to bill under approval

1982 41.469 56.013 33.121
1983 76.659 106.519 60.245
1984 124.693 170.471 99.423
Average 80.940 111.001 64.263

 

2) Hypothesis of Constant Inflation
(+ 20% a year)

Taxation according to bill under approval

Mechanics Chemists Textile Horkers
1982 76.457 97.849 64.354
1983 182.612 232.621 155.178
1984 308.580 394.077 262.365
Average 189.216 241.516 160.632
Taxation in the amount of 152 on the cost-of-living increases matured as of 1/1/1982
1982 53.721 73.543 42.723
1983 128.639 173.072 104.214
1984 206.500 280.994 165.853

Average 129.620 175.870 104.263

(Source 011.) FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fourth point concerns taxation. The union's demands on this point are also
twofold: The implelentation in 1981 of what was already established by the bill
under parliament's exmnination, timely deductions for spouses and the increase in
the exemptions from taxable income, with a year-end allowance in the adjusted
balance between 80,000 and 110,000 lire. And for 1982 the union is, in fact, re-
questing a drastic reduction of the fiscal drag. If they obtain positive results
on these points, salary demands in new contracts will be contained. Otherwise, as
the calculations made by 011. show (see box), they will be decisively higher. The
last point concerns taxation of the amounts covering social benefits. In negotiat-
ing with the goverment the unions will push in favor of such taxation. In effect.
industry will benefit from it, as will also the unions indirectly, since it will
create snore favorable climate for the direct negotiations scheduled for September.

Unions-Business Operators. Undoubtedly, the subjects to be discussed will be two:
The cantroversy concerning severance pay and general aspects of productivity that
will not be mmined later in the renewal of the contracts. The unions want to tie
in severance pay somehow with automatic tax indexation, as decided at the Montecatini
meeting. They are. however, divided on a fundamental choice which is entwined with
the strategy of contract renewal. CISL, in fact. declares itself available to a
slow down of the automatic wage indexation, but it expects mediate action as far
as severance pay is concerned (estimated increase in the cost of labor approximately
5 percent); OGIL and 1111., on the other hand, are prepared to make some concessions
on severance pay in exchange for other things. Then there is productivity which
depends on three factors. Relocation: An agremsent should be reached on the basis
of the previous contracts for steel-mechanic workers without waiting for the bill
on relocation.

The staggering of vacations: The unions are prepared to accept a greater utiliza-
tion of facilities by staggering vacations through July and August and do not exclude
the possibility of further lengthening the vacation period by extending it to June
and September, prox'ided that the government modifies the school year accordingly.
Absenteeism: The unions seem prepared to make some concession with regard to

public controls in the case of absences due to illness.

The stumbling block resins automatic wage indexation. Business operators want to
discuss it at any cost. But the union wants to see first what they can obtain from
the government on prices and tariffs, and must still, above all. find internal
accord. , .

Renewal of Contracts. In relation to the past, the delay in the elaboration of the
platform is considerable. The platform's contents began to be outlined only a few
weeks ago for the major categories whose contracts will be renegotiatad within the
next few months (first the steel workers, and then the chemists, construction
workers, textile, graphic arts. food industries). The confederationa began looking
into it onlv a few weeks ago (under the leadership of Enzo Ceremigna and Sergio
Garavini for CGIL, Cesare Del Piano for 0151. and ano Hattina for 011.), studying
the possible salary demands. The main points of the contracts will be five.

1. The so-called first part of the contracts concerning the right of information
(however, further requests to widen the contents and the topics of information

are not foreseen).

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFTC1AL USEICNVLY

2. Organization of labor. The nain request will be the extension of the Alfa
Romeo experience, namely the formation of study groups, and the restructuring of
job descriptions, easing compulsory work.

3. Work schedule and Part or Pull-Time Hark. 6181 will push for an almost general
reduction in the work schedule. Del Piano projects the following: Two hours less
work immediately for everybody. 35 hours a week as a long-range objective. CGIL
and UIL are backing different solutions according to sectors. type of work etc.,
yet are in agreement on the introduction of part-time work, which should also allow
a greater flexibility in the utilization of plants. All agree about trying to ease
unemployment compensation through a reduction in the work schedule. The results
relating to the work schedule will influence salary demands.

4. Contractual Structure. UIL and COIL are prepared this time to introduce a new
concept: To separate the part of the contract concerning rules that are likely to
remain valid for three of four years from the part concerning salary which, according
to Enzo Ceremigna could, for instance, be taken up in alternate years. Namely, one
year salary is negotiated at a national level by category and the other year at the
industry level. CISL, as well as some representatives of FLH such as Tonino Lettieri,
are opposed to this solution: "It's the end of articulated negotiations." they
sustain.

5. The Salary. The total amount of the requests will be determined only after the
conclusion of the negotiations with the government and business operators. The
requests, in fact, will be in conjunction with the results obtained in the areas of
taxation and tariffs, but also with the concessions made in the area of productivity:
"Part of productivity," say the unions, "must be translated into additional salary."
0n salary, the salient problems, besides that concerning the total amount, are two.
The first involves apportionment among the various items: Namely, how much must

go for the recovery of severance pay, how much for the reduction in the work schedule,
how much, ultimately, in the payroll. The unions' divergent positions are evident

in what has been said so far. The second problem, instead, concerns professionalism.
All agree that looking for equal increases for everybody is no longer valid, and that
higher standards of performance will have to draw more money than lower standards.
But how? Two are the ways. Either through a new salary scale (but after the agree-
ment has been reached, contract by contract, on the new organization of labor), or
through a differentiation in the value assigned to each cost-of-living increase
point. Even CGIL, who was opposed to such a model, is beginning to work in this
direction.

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1981

9758
C80: 3104/355

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCONMIC ITALY

FEWI STEEL 1980 BALANCE 91m; LIBYAN PURCHASE
Milan II. “(N00 in Italian 31 Jul 81 p 107

[Text] They certainly won a record in 1980; that of the clearest budget in Italy.
The unusual merit goes to a nediun-eised steel culpany fro- Brescia, Feralpi free
Lonsto, with a capital of 5 billion lire, 73 percent of which is controlled by
hicola Carlino Pasini, who is its president and chairssn. Perelpi'e elnost entire
balance sheets for 1980 are published in 1‘2 pages of tables. statements and tabu-
lation sheets. One can check, for ex-pls, in detail the esount of credits for
loans to employees, equal to 113 aillion lire, or the accounts receivable free each
client up to 31 Deceeber of last year, or the financial transactions with each bank
and also the list of goods stocked in warehouses at year end with the pertinent as-
sessed value. To satisfy further curiosity, there is even the book listing the
stockholders, which names five people besides Pasini.

Feralpi is perhaps alone along the large industries of the area, doing better than
Luigi Lucchini himself, in that it has felt allost none of the 1980 econolic
squeeze. Its steel production increased 13.7 percent (280.000 tons) and that of
laminated aaterial 12 percent, with sales totaling 126 billion lire, up 7.6 percent.
In spite of greater financial preseun, seasured by an increase in taxes and other
federal payaents (6.9 billion lire) iron 6 percent to 5.6 percent of gross sales in
1980, the net profit was 1.1 billion lire. only 112 Iillion lire lower than that °f.
the previous year. And, noreover, the prospects are bright. 0n the horizon there
is the rise of the dollar which, according to the financial statessnt, has ends in-
teresting some contracts entered during the first few nonths of 1981 at essentially
low prices expressed in dollars. And above all there is the Libyan leader Qadhdhefi,
whose representatives signed with Perelpi at the end of June a very advantageous
purchasing contract. The order. which vill be paid for in dollars, is for approxi-
eately 250,000 tons, almost the fira's entire yearly production. '

COPYRIGHT: IL H0100 1981

9758
080: 3106/2353

20
POLLS INDICATE BELIEF COALITION CAlNOT PRBVAIL

Hamburg CAPITAL in Ger-en Sep 81 pp 139-148

£5es§7 Is the coalition crunbling? Seventy percent of the public
do not believe that the SPD end FDP are still firmly united. The
hopes of federal citizens are shifting to the Union.

Emphasis

At a press conference held on 30 July in bonn, Elisabeth Noelle-Neunann, head of

the Allensbach Institute for Opinion Polls and professor of journalism at Heinz.
University, explained the results of the first part of this year's CAPITAL poll.

The effect on the nedia was resounding, that on politicians split. SPD federal exe-
cutive secretary Peter Clot: disputed the nost outstanding result--that the SPD
would obtain only 34 percent of the vote if an election for the Bundestsg were to

be held next Sunday. No discordant echo this tine from the CDU. though. Nor is
that surprising: The poll had given the CDU/CSU an overwhel-ing lead: 50.7 percent.

From 9 May through 1 June 1981 the Allensbsch Institute for Opinion Polls, on be-
half of CAPITAL, polled a representative ssnple of the public (16 years and older),
a total of 1,281 persons in the federal territory and Heat Berlin.

It is significant for this poll that those questioned were nenbers of a so-called
panel. in other words exactly the sane people who are regularly asked for responses
to the same issues.

In the following report Elisabeth Noelle-Neunsnn analyses the present dwindling of
SPD support-‘25 percent of the party's voters have changed their minds since the
Bundestsg elections--and the shifts of voters along the parties. Evidently more
has changed in the consciousness of federal citizens than predilection for one par-
ty. Political tasks considered urgent last fall are now felt to be even lore
pressing; the ordinary citizen obviously does not think that any of these problens
have been brought closer to resolution by the election results of 5 October last.
The CAPITAL poll ascertained which party the citizens consider competent to deal
with which issue. Here also the opposition enjoyed a considerable advance in con~
fidence.-- The table on this page confirns that claim: Regardless of which party
they themselves would vote for, 54 percent of those polled now believe that the
Union parties would do better than the coalition if elections were held now.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Changing Trend
In Septeﬂer 1980, shortly before the last Bundestag election, Allensbsch asked:
"Of course nobody really knows, but who do you believe will win the forthcoming

Bundestsg election, who will get mat voter-the CDU/CSU or the SPD and FD? jointly?
At that time the response was as follows:

 

 

Host votes Union Coalition
would go to 13 62

The figures represent percentages

 

 

 

In May 1981, half a year after the last Bundestag election, the same people were
asked on behalf of CAPITAL:

"Of course nobody really knows, but what do you believe would happen if the bundes-
tag election were to take place now: who would get nost votes. the CDU/CSU or the
SPD and FDP jointly?"

The response this time was as follows:

 

Most votes Union Coalition '
would go to 54 20

The figures represent percentages

 

Chancellor's Party
Loss of Voters

More than 25 percent of voters who had chosen the S?!) in October 1980
changed their allegiance by early aux-er 1981. Elisabeth Noelle-
Neuuann investigates the voter turnover which took place not least
between 8P0. PD? and the Greens.

Less than a year after the Bundestag election the ODD/0811 is able once again to
count on half the electorate, roughtly those 50 percent who gave a definite response
to the opinion poll question: "If Bundestag elections were to be held next Sunday. .."
At the last Bundestag election in October 1980 the CDU/CSU obtained 44.5 percent of
second preferences. By contrast the 81’!) returned to the long abandoned prison of

33 percent of the electorate; only 34 percent professed themselves SPD followers in
the early sumer of 1981. At the Bundestag election the 8?!) had gotten 42.9 percent
of second preferences. "here have last fall's SPD voters gone, and what are the
groups from which the cou/csu reclaimed voters?

The CAPITAL poll of May 1981 asked a representative samlenthe sane people who were
polled innediately after the Bundestag election how they had distributed their first
and second preferencesuhow they would vote now. The sin was to track the migration

or voters,

22
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last fall's CDU/CSU voters represented something like the solid core. Almost all
of then, 96.8 percent to be exact, had retained their allegiance to the CDU/CSU in
mid-1981. Only a few isolated CDU/GSU voters changed their party allegiance since
last fa11-2 percent went to the SPD, 0.4 percent to the POP, 0.8 percent to the
Greens.

Host of the followers of the Social Democratic Party lost by early summer--more

than every fourth SPD voter at the Bundestag election (about 27 percent)-hsd
changed their mind in the neantiae and nigrated to the 000/630. In early summer
1981 11.7 percent of BPD Bundestag voters intended to vote for the GDU/GSU, 7.8 per-
cent for the POP, 6.7 percent for the Greens, and 0.9 percent for other parties.

As far as numbers are concerned the FD? preserved its record following at the time
of the Bundestag election. In May 1981 about 10 percent intended to vote for the
FDP. But, as usual in the case of the EDP, its electorate had turned over by al-
most 50 percent: Rougly 5b percent of 1980 PD? voters only still proclaimed them-
selves ready to vote for the PD? in the early summer of 1981.

Twenty-two percent had turned to the 000/080, 15 percent to the SPD, 9 percent to
the Greens. These losses were made good mainly by voters who had chosen the SPD in
the Bundestag election. It is fairly obvious that opponents of Strauss among former
CDU/CSU follower; who had shifted to the PD? in the fall of 1980, have now returned
to the CDU/CSU, while on the other hand SPD followers who dislike the left wing,

now feel more at home with the POP;

The return migration of CDU/GSU followers is almost equally distributed among men
and women. _lf we equate the fall of 1980 to 100, the CDU/CSU following among men
has grown to 113, that of woaen to 111; yOung voters too have returned in about the
sane general proportions (index value 113). The really significant feature is the
return of Protestants (index value: Protestants 123, Catholics 103) and, coupled
with this factor, the strongest gain for the 000 in northern Germany.

’Though the young generation, as reported earlier, has returned to the CDU/CSU after
the Bundestag election in about the same average proportions, the percentage of
young CDU/CSU voters remains reasrkably low. 8y couparison with about 50 percent
of the general electorate who say they will vote for the 000/680, the percentage of
young voters was only 35 in the early summer of 1981. However, the SPD also has
ceased to be preferred by the young, or at least that preference is no longer so
pronounced as in forner years. Currently the under-30's tend to gather in above
average dimensions around the PD? and, nest of all, the Greens.

Farmers Vote cnu/csu

Voters intentions in the Federal Republic, explored in May/June 1981, yield the fol-
lowing inage of the current strength of the parties in the various population
groups:

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Population Group Stated Voter Intention in Favor of the
Union 81’!) Pl)? Greens
Semiskilled workers 46.9 40.8 6.7 5.0
Skilled workers 38.8 44.7 9.7 6.3
Lower echelon white collar workers 46.4 32.6 12.7 7.2
Higher echelon white collar workers 54.5 26.8 10.7 7.3
Junior civil-servants 56.9 29.9 10.0 2.1
Senior civil servants 58.9 29.7 2.3 7.9
Self-euployed 65.7 17.6 13.3 2.8
Farmers 80.6 14.6 3.3 1.5
Total 49.8 33.6 10.1 5.8

The figures represent percentages
m

Party Competence
Question of Confidence

The citizen knows that not all major political denands can actually
be realized. Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann pursues the question of what
--in the opinion of the citizens--a good politician can or cannot
accomplish.

The public do not think that it is possible to do everything. In fact the catalog

of urgent problems always presented by public opinion polls is quite misleading if

used to determine the political topics of the greatest interest to the public. 'lhe
ranking is totally different when we do not restrict ourselves to asking only which
political problems are currently deemed particularly isportant but go on to another
question: "After all, in politics also some things can be acconplished more easily

than others. What are the issues with regard to which, in your opinion, good poli-
ticians may accomplish something, and what are those which seen intractable in the

near future?" Whenever one issue is described as important but, at the same time,

as intractable, the topic is of little' interest; the proposals and promises of po-

liticians with respect to their resolution lack credibility.

For years every list of public anxieties has been headed by fear of unelployment,
rising prices and the devaluation of the currency. Exactly the same held true for
the CAPITAL poll of May 1981. Eighty-six percent considered it most urgent for
prices to rise less, 84 percent-for unemployment to be halted. However. in precise-
ly these two evils resignation has gained most ground among the public. slightly
more so in the matter of unemployment than inflation. Forty-nine percent who be-
lieve that something could be done to obviate unemployment are confronted by 35 per-
cent vho say "nobody can do anything."

The public tend to resignation most in matters of money; that includes the topic
“reducing the national debt" or "get the economy to move forward again," and "re-
duce taxes." Large sections of the public meat such propositions with incredulity.

As regards the accomplishment of other major tasks—environmental control, unpollut-
ed air. unpolluted water and. at the same time. the assurance that sufficient

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy will be available a few decades from now-the public is not unduly concerned.
The percentages with regard to energy supplies are interesting: 55 percent eapha-
sise the importance of assuring energy supplies and believe that it can be done;

22 percent expect serious difficulties, but they represent a relatively small an-
xious minority. In the general sector of public order the public tend mainly to
doubt the good will of politicians. If the politicians so wished. they could cope
quite well with crime, disruptions of public order, the violence of demonstrations
--that is the predominant attitude.

All the more odd, therefore, is public resignation concerning narcotics and drug ad-
diction. Seventy-five percent of the public believe it inortant to fight this, but
almost every third person concerned about the danger adds that nothing can be done
about it. The ratio of optimists to fatalists is most unfavorable among young
people.

It is likely that this reflects their own experiences and observations. Otherwise
yOung people certainly do not tend to be more resigned. Though often described as
apathetic,--"no future, no chance"--here, where they would have an opportunity of
voicing such feelings of "nothintg can be done," here in the public opinion polls,
nothing of the kind turns up.

Evidently the public do not consider the lack of consensus in society an obstacle
to resolution. If it were otherwise, resignation ought to predominate in the dis-
cussion of the topic "education." However, all age groups are as optimistic here
as if there had not been a long-standing tug-of-war about the educational system.

Climate of Opinion
Landslide

The opinion is widely held that the political climate is favorable
to the Union only between elections, not on election day. Elisabeth
Noelle-Neuasnn assigns this belief to the realm of legend.

Stock exchange climate -that is a serious matter, and a great deal of effort has
been expended on analyzing this phenomenon. It is quite otherwise with the climate
of opinion. Nobody goes so far as to dispute that such a thing exists, but nobody
is inclined, either, to waste much time on it--deemed sufficient is that which may
be observed by the attentive contemporary. Opinion polls are not really necessary.
Many people think they should confine themselves to ascertaining how many votes the
various parties would get if a Bundestag election were to be held next Sunday.

In fact. though, the stock exchange climate and the opinion climate have a great
deal in common. Both emerge from the assumptions of observations of individuals
concerning trends in their surroundings: "hat an increasing number of people will
think or do, or what more and more people will turn away from--in other words an
almost statistical calculation. That explains the special nature of the questions
used as criteria for the climate of opinion: We do not ask whether the person polled
is for or against something, we ask for his personal observation whether most pecple
known to him are for or against it. The person polled provides a statistical

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

estimate. When the same questions are repeated at intervals and the statistical
estimates of the 1,000 or more people polled combined. we do see how the climate of
opinion is moving.

The CAPITAL opinion poll questions read as follows: "Are most people pleased with
the CDU/CSU, or do you not think so?"--"Are most people pleased with the SP0, or do
you not think so?"--"Are most people pleased with the PDP..."

Even the famous question: "Of course nobody really knows, but who do you believe
would get most votes if the Bundestsg elections were to take place now, the CDU/CSU
or the SPD and EDP jointly?" is a question concerning the climate of opinion. It
calls for a statistical calculation by the person asked: Who is currently stronger?

In September 1980 13 percent expected a majority of votes for the CDU/CSU. Fifty-
four percent of the same persons, asked again in May 1981, thought that the CDU/CSU
would emerge victoriOus were Bundestag elections to be held now.

In autumn 1980 62 percent considered the SPD/FDP stronger than the CDU/CSU; in Hay
1981 only 20 percent maintained the same opinion. In the 1950's and 1960's the as-
sumption emerged that the SPD tended to enjoy popularity between elections, but
that this popularity evaporated as soon as elections came close; now the same is
being said with regard to the CDU/CSU. Upon closer scrutiny this assumption turns
out to be a myth, both as regards the past and the present. In the Bundestag elec-
tion year 1976 the climate of opinion was by no means unfavorable to the CDU/CSU,
and we should remember that the election (ﬁelmut Kohl was the chancellor candidate)
was lost by a hair's breadth.

No election can possibly be won without a favorable climate of opinion. Insofar
the climate of opinion, exactly like the stock exchange climate, represents the pre-
requisite for the creation of hard facts-provided a correct attitude is maintained.

Another question of the 1981 CAPITAL poll went like this: "What is your present
view of the situation in the federal territory: Do you believe that the SPD and FD?
continue to be firmly united in the federal territory, or that unity is no longer
quite so firm? That is not a question involving the climate of opinion nor a ques-
tion requiring statistical calculation. It does not ask for the opinion of other
people, it asks for the opinion of the person polled only. Seventy percent indica-

te dOubts. The public seem to be prepared for surprises.
__________________________.________________________________________._____.___________.._____

Upbeat Hood for the Union

Question: "what do you think--ere most people here in the Federal Republic pleased
with the CDU/CSU, or do you not think so?

_____—___————————————-———

The following response was elicited in June 1980 May 1981
Most people are pleased with the CDU/CSU 21 49
I do not think so 44 20
Don ' t know 35 31

The figures represent percentages
______________________________________.______.._____________________________._______.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Downbeat Hood for the SPD

Question: "Hhat do you think--are most people here in the Federal Republic pleased
with the SPD now, or do you not think so?"

 

The following response was elicited in June 1980 May 1981
Most people are pleased with the SPD 51 14
I do not think so 17 58
Don't know 32 28

The figures represent percentages

 

 

Hill the Coalition Hold?

Question: "Hhat is your View of the situation in the federal territory: Do you be-
lieve that the SPD and FOP continue to be firmly united in the federal territory,or
that unity is no longer quite so firm?" '

 

The following response was elicited in June 1980 May 1985?
Firmly united 42 16
Not so firm 39 70
Undecided 19 lb

The figures represent percentages

 

Voters Desires
Changing Image

Looking at voter expectations, we quickly find the issues with re-
gard to which one party may cause voters to desert the other.
Elisabeth Noelle-Neunann notes: Our parties remain quite distinctive.

It seemed only natural that in spring 1977, half a year after the Bundestag election,
all-~and I mean sll--political topics had lost their urgency as far as the public
was concerned. Quite obviously the Bundestag election campaign had provided a sur-
feit of politics. He in Allensbach were just about to turn this observation into a
dictum. But then, after the 1980 Bundestag election, the exact opposite happened.
This time political topics, including those on which the election campaign had
focused, became even nore urgent in the period from autuln 1980 to May 1981.

Before the Bundestag election 77 percent of those polled considered particularly
urgent ;he two concerns heading the list of anxieties "that prices should rise less

27

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

steeply" and "that unemployment should be overcome." In May 1981 the same people
were polled, and 86 percent and 84 percent respectively had the same priorities.

More people than before worry in May 1981 about such issues as environmental control,
education, aid for families with children, stopping socialism. Particularly pro-
nounced was the increase in anxiety about the national debt. The result of the

poll indicated a public already geared to appreciate the summertime coalition nego-
tiations about the budget.

Presumably two circumstances combined to ensure that political anxieties did not
fade in autumn 1980 but actually increased through the spring following. In fact
the situation did worsen drastically, in complete contrast to the situation after
the 1976 Bundestag election. Moreover, the 1980 Bundestag election was personali-
zed to such an extent that interest in issues slackened visibly in the months be-
fore the election. It would be quite feasible to interpret the increase in the in-

terest in political issues after the Bundestag election as the reversal following
the end of the Schmidt-Strauss confrontation.

The parties are often said to have become indistinguishable from one another. They
are accused of having lost their sharp image and of opportunistically promising
whatever the majority of the electorate want to hear. Accusations of this type
are very current in the Federal Republic. Are they justified?

The CAPITAL poll selected several political tasks to find out how cowetent the
voters feel the 000/080, SPD and PD? to be in these fields.

Consulting the answers to the questions relating to 12 of the tasks discussed in
the interviews-~fron the sectors economics, finances, energy and social policy--
and comparing the competence of CDU/CSU on the one hand and SPD on the other, we
get a result very advantageous for the 000/080. Everywhere and in every respect it
is expected to do better.

of course such a comparison is not altogether fair. The SPD has been governing for
12 years with its coalition partner FDP. The votes assigning special competence
for a specific task to the government coalition are distributed over the two par-
ties, and anybody who considers the PDP rather than the SPD particularly competent
to carry out a specific task, still remains faithful to the coalition. Hhen com-
paring the strong points of the government with those of the opposition we must
therefore combine the votes favorable to the SPD and the FDP.

Considered from that aspect we find a lack of definition in'many sectors. Iighting
unemployment, stabilizing prices, lowering taxes, taking care that there will be
sufficient energy available in future years, aiding families with children. even
"eliminating housing needs"--just about as many people expect the CDU/CSU to handle
these problems competently as the SPD/FDP. There are differences, though, in the
level at which the parties are considered generally capable or incapable of action:
There is a good deal of optimism about the parties ability to ensure sufficient
energy supplies in the future (CDU/CSU: 33 percent, SPD/PDP 30 percent). 0n the
other hand the public han*little real hope of any lowering of taxation (000/080:

17 percent; SPD/FDP: la percent).

28

FOR Ol-‘l-‘IOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

It is also somewhat disappointing that the CDU/CSU enjoys very little advance over
the SPD/FDP with regard to its ability to get going an upswing in business (CDUICSU:
29 percent, SPD/FDP: 23 percent). 0n the other hand there is one spectacular ad-
vance for the CDU/CSU and its 1980 election campaign topic-the national debt.

Twenty-nine percent of the electorate emphasise their belief in the CDU/CSU's abi-
lity to do something about the national debt, only 12 percent expect the SPD and
EDP to be able or willing to act in this matter.

A prize example of how a party may gain recognition is offered by the chief concern
of the electorate: "Pensions must be guaranteed." Eighty-five percent said last
May that this was an urgent matter. Actually it should fall within the specific
competence of the SPD: From its earliest days on the SPD has been the champion of
the weak. All political tasks involving the word "social" tend to be classified
with its sphere of competence, and not only because the word "social" is part of
the party's name.

In the election campaign and after the 1976 Bundestag election the CDU/CSU gained
the advance as to its competence for guaranteeing pensions, as a result of the so-
called "pension fraud." (In may 1981 38 percent said that the guarantee of pensions
is the CDU/CSU's strong point, compared to 33 percent for the SPD/FDP.)

The image of_any party emerges from many impressions gained by the electorate in
the course of many years, relative to political decisions, programs, campaign slo-
gans. The example of the pension guarantee clearly shows why it is so rewarding
to claim greater competence on the stamping ground of the opposing party.

“he Is Able To Do What?

The following emerged in answer to the question of what are the strong points of
the various parties, and which party is better equipped to deal with what task:

issue That is a Strong Point of the
Union Coalition
Coping with unemployment 25 22
Having prices rise less steeply 22 20
Ensuring an economic upswing 29 23
Reducing the national debt 29 12
Greater cuts in public administration 28 20
Reducing taxes 17 la
Ensuring sufficient energy fir the future 33 30
Expanding nuclear power plants 21 13
Ceasing the construction of nuclear power
plants 3 7
Guaranteeing pensions 38 33
Aiding and protecting families with children 31 32
Eliminating housing needs 21 23

The figures represent percentages

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE, ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Up to now we have spoken only of the electorate as such. The most important results
of the poll are those involving party followers.

First of all a party must be successful in convincing a large percentage of its fol-
lowers of its competence to deal with some important issues, and at the same time
ensure that other parties are left well behind. In the matter pension insurance

53 percent of CDU/CSU followers think that they could rely on the CDU/CSU; only

17 percent expressed confidence in the competence of the SPD and another 17 percent

in that of the PDP. That is a real link. It is at least as important to impress
the followers of other parties also.

In May l98l only 45 percent of SPD followers were convinced of the SPD's ability to
do something about guaranteeing pensions. Twenty-six percent--and also 26 percent
of PD? followers-praised the CDU/CSU in this same context.

These are the issues where party strategy may move to attract the floating voter.

The image presented here has so far lacked the most important trusp carcb cf the
CDU/CSU, such as its firmness on Eastern policy: "No further concessions to the
East without some return" (strong point of the 000/680: 31 percent; strong point of
the SPD/FDP: 11 percent). Here even those 8?!) and EDP followers who desire firmness

--just about 50 percent--consider the CDU/CSU more competent than their own prefer-
red party.

The question of whether the parties really have any distinguishing features turns
out to be most unrealistic in relation to the topic internal security. This is one'
of the top priorities for the public. Followers of all parties (excepting only the
Greens) consider "effective anti-crime measures" particularly desirable (CDU/CSU:
85 percent, SPD: 75 percent, FDP: 75 percent, Greens:38 percent). "Better laws
against violent demonstrations" are considered to be urgently needed by 72 percent
of CDU/CSU followers, 52 percent of SPD followers, 54 percent of PD? followers and
ll percent of Greens. In the abstract also, expressed as "for more law and order"
--however formulated-~majorities consider the matter urgent (CDU/CBU: 68 percent,
SPD: 54 percent, PDP: 53 percent, Greens: 12 percent). For CDU/CSU followers this
is an indisputable strong point of their preferred party, but SPD and FDP followers
also cast a clear majority of their votes for the CDU/CSU as more competent in
matters internal security.

Not every such advance is desirable. The CDU/CSU might fear that this particular
iauge of a party capable of maintaining law and order could damage it among the
young. Consequently the CDU/CSU's law and order image is kept under wraps. Still,
there is definitely such a thing as a party image. The parties have certainly not
become indistinguishable.

List of Demands

Many political problems up for resolution are a more urgent concern for the public

now than before the Bundestag election. That emerges from the responses of last
May:

30

FI"!(NHW(]A1.USEIDNLY
Political Task Before the Bundestag

(considered an urgent concern) Election
For prices to rise less steeply 77
For unemployment to be overcome 77
Environmental control, clean air and water 70
More cuts in the public service 9 63
Lowering the national debt 58
Good educational system 59
Aid and protect families with children 55
Preventing socialism from prevailing 36

The figures represent percentages

 

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Cub“. Bonn