FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10292
29 January 1982

East Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO U82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the scurce. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
BULGARIA

Bulgaria's Tanchev Views Macedonia, Mideast
(Petur Tanchev Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 12-25 Oct 81)..

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Government Moving To Crush 'Underground' Church
(David Blow; THE TIMES, 18 Dec 81) ....................

POLAND

Poll Conducted November-December 1981 in Poland Published
(PARIS MATCH, 25 Dec 81) ..............................

Commentary on PZPR—Solidarity Confrontation
(Jacques Renard; L'EXPRESS, 11 Dec 81) ................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BULGARIA

BULGARIA'S TANCHEV VIEWS MACEDONIA, HIDEAST
PM091403 Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French 12-25 Oct 81 pp 49-51

[Interview with Petur Tanchev, first deputy chairman of the Bulgarian State Council
and secretary of the Bulgarian National Agrarian Union. by Bourid Rouse. in Vhrna:
"The Desire for Peace"--date not given]

[Text] "we have been living in peace for 37 years. This is the first time that this
has happened in our country's entire history. And we will do all we can to ensure
that it lasts, to ensure that war is abolished and that the Balkans are no longer
synonymous with a powder keg." This remark by Petur Thuchev was the central idea

of the interview which he granted to us in the agrarian union's rest house in Varns
where, in the company of hundreds more cadres and members of that party, the State
Council deputy chairman spent a vacation which was in fact rather disturbed by
Bulgarian and foreign visitors.

"In the past," he explained, "there was a war every 10 or 15 years. That can be
explained by the fact that Bulgaria is a strategic region: It is at the junction
of three continents-Asia, Europe and Africa." »

Indeed the great roads of expansion and trade, religion and ideology have inter-
sected in this little mountainous country for centuries and centuries. Everybody
knows that it was in the Balkans in 1916 that the events which provided the pretext
for Uorld “it I took place.

"It was a question of establishing who would have control over the Balkans," Petur
Tanchev added. 'deay, following Horld War II, this region is a distinctive mosaic.
Bulgaria and Romania are Warsaw Pact members; Turkey and Greece are NATO members;
Yugoslavia is nonalgined whereas Albania is...China. Everybody can be said to be
represented in the Balkans."

It is obvious that this situation represents a constant source of near confronts-
tions, especially since the effects of the imperialist forces' divisive policy have
not yet been removed. These are seen in, among other things, ethnic and territorial
problems affecting Macedonia in particular. The originality of Bulgaria's policy
lies in the wisdom of its leaders who have always upheld the principle of mutual
respect and constructive dialogue.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"This policy led us to establish ties with Turkey and Greece after Horld Har II.

As you know we had had virtually no contact with them for a very long time. These
ties are now well-established, as is shown by the very intensive trade between them
and us. For instance, trade with Greece amounts to $500 million per year while
Turkey buys all the electricity it consumes' from us. [sentence as published] This
shows that the atmosphere is good. Of course, there is still the Macedonian question
which complicates our relations with Yugoslavia. But we do not despair of reaching

a solution. This is what our Comrade Zhivkov constantly says, and I think that this
wise attitude is now being imitated by the Yugoslavian leaders."

Nonetheless, Macedonia, that bone of contention, is poisoning relations between the
two countries and is particularly used by the western imperialist powers to under-
mine the natural solidarity between two socialist countries. Petur Tanchev re-
plied to this: "That's true. Everybody knows that Macedonia is inhabited by Bul-
garians. But we certainly do not want to claim that territory. You know, we have
waged three wars in the past and have lost all three. There can be no question of
a fourth war when we can settle the question by constructive dialogue. What is
unacceptable is to say that the inhabitants of Bulgaria are Macedonians. This is
ridiculous. Nonetheless, I repeat that it is necessary to go beyond the territor—
ial aspect to see what is beneficial for our two countries."

—/
But Bulgaria is not just European, it is also Near Eastern, only being separated
from the Near East by Turkey. The same policy of peace governs Bulgaria's relations
with the Arab countries. But the peace policy in no way means the abandonment of
the principle of solidarity and support for peoplea.struggling for their political
and economic liberation. This principle found its sphere of application during the
liberation wars in Algeria, Angola and Mozambique. It is still being implemented
today in those same countries and in others like Syria, Libya and Iraq which are
struggling to build an independent economy and are facing imperialism's maneuvers.

A Single Missile

And then there is the Palestine and the Near East crisis on which Petur Tanchev

gave a lucid judgment: "Our support for the Palestinian people in securing recogni-
tion of their legitimate rights is known because our line has always been one of
helping the Arab people who form a total of 100 million souls. But in our view the
essential problem lies in oil. The Near East Arab countries have a great deal of
011. That is why the Americans will do all they can to divide them and gain control
over this strategic region's oil. However, a solution to the Palestinian problem
must be found. And we think this is only possible if the proposals put forward by
the Soviet Union are taken into account. These proposals are constructive and
guarantee the Arab people their freedom and independence."

They do not seem to have been welcomed, I pointed out, although some Arab countries
have shown some interest.

[Tanchev speaks] Of course, it is the Americans who are opposing them because they
want to remain masters of this region. [Tanchev ends]

with regard to the many initiatives which have been emerging in Europe for some time,
Petur Tanchev said: "It seems to us that the Europeans do not want to openly oppose

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the United States. If they reach agreement with the Arab countries, with the Soviet
Union and with the other socialist countries then it is possible that a solution may
be found. The fact is that the European countries are trying to establish a pre-
sence in this region. That is understandable because they have strategic interests
there. This is true of relations between France and Iraq, for example. We consider
that the European countries' attitude is not belligerent like the U.S. attitude, and
that is very important. But the Arab countries need guarantees. They must realize
that without the Arab countries. withouth the PLO, the Soviet Union and the other
socialist countries, no solution is possible. However, we think that the Europeans
can play a positive role provided they take account of the factors which I have just
listed. But the fact is that U.S. influence exists. The United States is 13,000 km
away from the Gulf and yet they have installed a nuclear fleet there. Against whom
is it directed? Hhat does it want? What is preventing it from realizing its plans
for domination? The Soviet Union. Without the Soviet Union it would just take a
few missiles to destroy the whole region. But if they launch a single missile,the
Soviet fleet will respond."

This is a vicious circle for the people who live in a situation which they do not
control: "Yes," Petur Tanchev replied," that is why a reasonable solution must be
found quickly."

How can this be done? Is the idea of an international conference to which Bulgaria
subscribes still valid and possible? "It was possible under the Carter administra-
tion. which had officially accepted the principle of it." our interlocutor said,
"but Egypt's about-face scuttled the plan. The United States is now urging the

Arab countries to follow the same path as Egypt. It wants to establish military
bases in those countries and have closer control over the oil resources. For our
part we reject this way of viewing things and acting. The socialist countries do
not have oil interests in this region. Moreover we think it is up to the Arab coun-
tries to fix the oil price."

Can these questions of security in the Gulf region be treated separately or must they
be tackled by including them in an all-embracing approach? To this question the
Bulgarian leaders reply that the peace problem is an integral whole and that it

is necessary to do everything possible to move toward settling it. Consequently,

it cannot simply be a question of the Gulf or Europe but must also take in the
Indian 0cean--another strategic region where a formidable armada is concentrated
with nuclear weapons capable of destoying the planet. Petur Tanchev thinks that
"events are very complex. There are the Arab ecuntries, Iran, Afghanistan, Paki—
stan.... We think that an international conference is necessary to make an overall
examination of security problems which concern all peoples. It is in this direction
that the socialist countries' diplomacy is deployed. This is also why we regard

the proposals made by Indira Gandhi as very interesting."

In short, all Bulgaria's activity in the international arena is stamped with the
desire to contribute to the consolidation of peace and understanding among people,

to the suppression of war, the strengthening of detente and peaceful coexistence

in international relations, and to the triumph of the national liberation revolution.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie
CSO: 2200/35

9
J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FT)R¢0FF1C1AI.IJSEZ(M§LY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

GOVERNMENT MOVING TO CRUSH 'UNDERGROUND' CHURCR
PMlBlbll London THE TIMES in English 18 Dec 8l p 6
[Dispatch by David Blow: "Czechs Try to Crush 'Underground" Church")

[Text] Vienna, 17 Dec-Security police are now thought to have been responsible
for the mysterious deaths in Czechoslovakia this year of two Catholic activists,
members of the "underground" or “catacomb” church.

On 10 October the body of Pavel Svejda, aged 20, was found at the foot of a
crevasse near his home city of Brno. The authorities said it was suicide but
refused to allow his relatives to see the body before it was buried. Mr Svejda,
who was due to get married 2 weeks later, was known as a devout Christian and had
just returned from Rome where he had visited his uncle, a Jesuit theologian at
the Gregorian University.

Earlier, in February, Premysl Coufal. aged 49, was found dead in his apartment in
Bratislava. On this occasion friends managed to trick the authorities into letting
them see the body. They found the face and forehead heavily bruised, the left
ear torn and a deep wound by the temples. Mr Coufal had also been to Rome shortly
before his death and is thought to have been ordained there.

The "underground" church in Czechoslovakia has become the target of brutal repression
by the authorities. A special unit of the security police is even said to have
been set up to deal with it.

The declining numbers of officially authorized priests are expected to confine
the activities to the performance of church ritual, and are firmly discouraged
from any more active role in the community.

It is this deliberate attempt to squeeze the life out of the Catholic that has
given rise to the "underground" church.

There are as many as 500 secretly ordained priests striving to keep the Catholic
faith alive by organizing prayer meetings and bible readings. Anyone found to be
involved in these activities is liable to be severely punished.

Such trials are becoming increasingly frequent and there are now over 100 priests
in prison.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981

050: 2020/15
h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

POLL CONDUCTED NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 1981 IN POLAND PUBLISHED
Paris PARIS HAICH in French 25 Dec 81 pp 37-39

[Text] Just prior to the takeover, we questioned the Poles. This was the second
time. A year ago. PARIS HATCH and Public. S. A. p.11ed off a world "first": a
survey behind the Iron Curtain. in Poland. Four months after the Gdansk agreements
nod despite the presence of Lech Halesa at the head of Solidarity. the Poles no
ltnger had faith in them. If they had not yet given up all hope. their enthusiasm
had plummeted sharply. And at that time. PARIS HASCH reported that 3 percent of
the Poles would vote Communist if free elections were held. Behind this survey
loomed the picture of a great people, harassed but still indomitable. PARIS MATCH
and Public. 5. A. returned to Poland. This survey took a month. In all, 18 survey
takers traveled thousands of kilometers, and 600 persons were interviewed. A few
hours after this operation was completed. General Jaruzelski decreed martial law.
From this exhausted nation, this people bent on survival. some brutal conclusions
were derived. Solidarity and the [Catholic] Church represent the real country

(88 percent). If the Red Army were to intervene. there would be massive resistance
(71 percent). The Pope remains the most effective shield against the Soviets (59
percent). 63 percent of the Poles contemplate leaving their country to live
abroad, the majority in France (33 percent). And. like last year. only 3 percent
would vote for the Communist Party if free elections were held today. Henceforth.
legitimacy is maintained at gunpoint....

No to the Dictatorship--63 Percent
[Question] would you accept a return to a "hard-line" (neo-Stalinist) government

today which would eliminate poverty and reestablish authority. even if this would
mean a "turn of the screw" with regard to freedoms?

Yes. perhaps 22
Yes. certainly 15
No. newer 63

This question. like the others, was asked before the Polish Army seized power.
The responses justify the question as to whether the Polish people, despite "anarchy"
and poverty, will accept a dictatorial regime. even if it promises order and

"recovery."

[Question] Might a national unity government including the PZPR and Solidarity
be the best means of rescuing Poland from the crisis?

Yes 67
No 33

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This answer perhaps offers the hope of a solution to the crisis. But is such a
national unity government possible when it would mean an end to the Party monopoly?
For the Soviets. the tolerance threshold would then have been crossed.

Would Vote Communist in Free Blections-3 Percent

[Question] If free elections were held in Poland today and the following parties
nominated candidates. for which would you vote?

1981 1980
PZPR (Communist Party) 3 3
Socialist Party 20 27
Christian Democratic Party 63 3k
Agrarian Party 5 4
Liberal Party 20 19
No opinion 9 13

The "bourgeois" parties as a uhoLe (Christian Democratic. Agrarian and Liberal)

would represent 68 percent of the potential voters! In any case. the Poles massively
reject communism. the Party and the Soviet Union, but what Western statesman has
dared to date to urge that free elections be held in Poland?

Identify with Solidarity and the Church--88 Percent

[Question] What body best represents Poland and its people today?

Solidarity as
The Church 43
The Government 7
The Army 4
The PZPR 1

The vast majority of the people identify with the Church and Solidarity (88 percent).
as compared to 7 percent for the government and 1 percent for the Party. Until

1980. the Church‘could with full impunity enjoy rather considerable freedom. since

it was situated outside the "orthodox" scheme in the transmission chain of the
Harxist—Ieninist organization and ideology. Solidarity is a much greater threat

to the vital organs of the system than the Church could be. The Soviets and the
PZPR have drawn their conclusions from that fact.

[Question] Is there a privileged class or group in Poland. and if so. what is
it?

The PZPR Members 56
The Government 21
The Members of the Security
Service and the Militia 11
The Army 8
Other 4

Like everywhere else. the "Nomenklatura." or members of the Communist Party. are
regarded by the Poles. in their vast majority, as the "privileged" class in the
system. (it would have served no purpose to list at length the possible theoretical
classes included here in the term "other," for "other" represents the Poles as
a whole.)

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

IQuestlonl A. what "lrksome" privileges would have to be abolished. in your view.
to make relations in the country healthier and to create an atmosphere of solidarity
favorable to recovery?

The material advantages of the
"new class” (special stores.
priority in obtaining cars.

housing. supplies) 39
Inequality before the law 33
The Comunist Party monopoly

on the country's economy 11

The Communist Party monopoly

on the media (press—

television) 9
Other 8

[Question] 8. If you could make just one wish for yourself and your country.
what would it be?

Improvement of daily life
(procurement of supplies.
food. housing, consumer goods) 33

The hope of greater justice 26
The independence of Poland 19
A free and democratic

government 23
Political pluralism 4
Various, other 20

This question was an “open" one (in other words, the Poles could voice their own
wishes). and no specific list was suggested. The main wish of the Poles pertained
to everything involved in daily life, in particular "food." Everything having

to do with justice, equality, dignity. independence. etc. representing 26 percent
of the views. is linked with the views expressed in question A. on the new class.

[Question] In your view, who is responsible for the very serious economic crisis
Poland is experiencing today?

The Government 38
The PZPR 35
The USSR 16
Solidarity 2
The west 1
Do not know 8

It is communism which is Judged responsible for the crisis. confirming the views
already expressed in 1980 on the responsibility for the outbreak of strife. The
fact that Solidarity is regarded as responsible by only 2 percent of the Poles
shows that the government would have a difficult time discrediting the free Polish
trade union movement.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ul’"! ALLA]. USE. ONLY

[Question] Is Poland an independent country?

Not at all 54
In part 41
Totally 5

The Polish people, whose national pride dates back centuries. harbor no illusions
about the reality of the Soviet "big brother,“ or their own potential for action.

[Question] Do you think that Russian-Polish trade is:

Balanced, to their mutual

benefit 9
To the benefit of Poland 2
To the benefit of the USSR 85
No opinion 4

Even more than in its political and diplomatic life. it is in economic relations
that Poles believe their country to be subjugated. Even beyond higher principles,
they have the feeling of being the victims of a swindle.

[Question] Do you feel the influence of the Soviets in daily life in Poland?

Greatly 52
A little “1
Not at all 7

The parallels seen with the two preceding questions on the independence of the
country and the presence of the Soviets are remarkably consistent. In their hearts
and in their daily lives. the Poles are seeing their country develop, the leaders
act. and Solidarity make itself felt....But they are well aware that how their
history is written is subject to Soviet censorship.

Believe That the Army Is More Polish Than Communist-~66 Percent

[Question] In your view. is the Polish Army primarily:

Polish 66
Communist 11
Do not know 23

[Question] If the Soviets were to intervene in Poland, what would the army do.
in your opinion?

It would take the side of

the people 60
It would support the Soviet
intervention 17
It would remain neutral 3
Do not know 20

Before it took action. the Poles had confidence in their army, which they viewed
as national and ready to join the people in the event of Soviet repression. The
17 percent who foresaw support by the Polish Army of Soviet intervention were not
perhaps expressing a doubt about its nationalist spirit. but about the feasibility
of military resistance in practice.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Do you expect Soviet intervention in Poland?

Yes 32
No 63
Do not know 5

[Question] For what reasons. in your view. sight it occur?

Because at the risk Polish
"liberalism" poses of con-
taminating the Soviet bloc 44

Because in the end the Polish
crisis threatens the regime 42

Because Poland is beginning to
become too independent of
Moscow 14

To judge from their answers. the Poles are well aware of the example their experience
sets for the other peoples of Eastern Europe. and as good "Kremlinologists," they
place contagion at the head of the list of reasons which might lead the Political
Bureau of the CPSU to decide on military intervention.

Would Resist if the Russians lntervened-7b Percent

[Question] If the USSR did intervene. what would you do?

1981 1980
Submit 16 2h
Resist 7b 66
Do not know 10 10

It was precisely 8 percent of the Poles who. in the course of 1 year. joined in "re-
sistance." Representing 76 percent of the entire people. they constitute more than
a broad majority today. This is doubtless the main reason for the Soviet "restraint."
[Question] Would you resist the Soviets?

Responses by Sex and Age of Those Questioned

18—25 26-35 36-55 over 55

Would Submit 10 18 13 26
Would Resist 85 75 78 51
Did not respond 5 7 9 23

[Question] If the Soviets were to intervene in Poland. do you think that the West
would come to your aid?

Yes 36

No 59

No opinion 5
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UX‘ILU-‘Jul U013 Uh»!

Nenty-five years after Budapest and the sadly remembered echoes of Radio Free Europe,
how can 36 percent of the Poles imagine that the West would come to their aid in

the event of Soviet intervention? The Poles' lack of knowledge about the West and
the illusions they have about it are vast.

[Question] In your view, is the Pope an effective shield for the Polish people against
Soviet intervention?

Yes 59
No 37
Do not know «'0

Without a doubt, the former Cardinal of Krakow represents for the Poles the equivalent
of countless "divisions" (a comparison of which Stalin was fond) against the Political
Bureau of the CPSU. The fact remains that the Pope has shown singular caution since
the Polish military seized power.

[Question] Following the death of Primate Hyszynski. do you think that his successor.
Primate Clemp, will defend you?

Better 15
Not as well 29
Equally well 56

It is always difficult to follow a great national figure, particularly in the case
of Ca:dinal Hyazynski. a hero of the national resistance against commisn. Glemp.
who is not a historic personage like his predecessor, seems well accepted by the
population. to judge from the above figures.

[Question] A. Have you ever thought of leaving Poland. on a temporary or permanent
basis. to work abroad?

Yes, permanent 1y 23
Yes. temporarily 1.0
No 37

Thus 63 percent of the Poles have thought of emigrating. This percentage is surely
higher than that of the Cubans or the Vietnamese would be. During our earlier poll
in 1980. 19 percent of the Poles said "that they would not want in any case to live
elsewhere than in Poland." -

[Question] 3. What would be the deciding factor if you left?

Lack of hope for the children 31
The difficulty of life in

general 27
Poverty 13
The advent of the Soviets 8

It is very clear that the conditions of life (harshness and poverty) would be a key
factor in emigration. The possibility of Soviet intervention accomts for only 6
percent of the reasons for emigration. which serves to confirm the intention of the
Poles to resist in the event of Soviet intervention.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Would Prefer To Emigrutc to Franco—-31 Percent

[Question] C. If you emigrated, to what country would it be?

France 31
U.S.A. 15
PRO 14
Australia 12
Canada 8
Austria 7
Great Britain 3
Other 10

France is the favorite. Last year. in response to a similar question, the United
States ranked above France as the country of choice for emigration.

This poll was taken between 3 November and 5 December 1981 from a sampling of 600
persons representative of the Polish population. As is done for the vast majority

of surveys taken in France. the sampling plan was drafted on the basis of the quota
method. The lack of any complete and consistent statistical publications. such as

the general census of the population in France. made it necessary to process different
statistical sources and to take into account the concepts used in the realm of social
categories, among others. The sources used included the POLISH STAIISTICAL ANNUAL

for 1976 (French documentation), the UNITED NAIIONS DEMOGRAPHIC ANNUAL for 1978,

and the 1977. 1978 and 1979 LABOR STAIISTICS ANNUALS (1L0 [International Labor Organi-
zation)). The quotas used included active and nonactive population. by sex and age;
occupations of the active population, by sex; personnel in the scientific. technical,
liberal and related professions; higher administrative management and cadres; adminis-
trative personnel and related workers; commercial and selling personnel; crop raisers,
livestock breeders. forestry personnel, fishermen and hunters; nonagricultural workers
and laborers and transport vehicle drivers; urban and rural populations; and popula-
tion by region.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse SA

5157
C80: 3100/206

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

CCHMENTARY 0N PZPR-SOLIDABITY CONPRONTATION
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 11 Dec 81 pp 108-109
[Article by Jacques Renard: "Harsaw's Great Fear"]

[Text] The party's hardliners are ready for anything in order
to defeat Halesa. But the Polish crisis has brought out other

"Until now. I was afraid that this crisis would never end. Today, I tremble at
the thought that it might end very quickly and very badly." No less courageous
than the others, this man was freezing while waiting for a crowded streetcar in
front of the headquarters of the Party Central Committee on Jerozolimskie Avenue.
But it is this confused fear which, for several days now, has come on top of the
daily suffering of everyone, on top of the fatigue and the ration stamps.

Is this fear justified? Who can tell, when one no longer knows what to believe, when
the declarations of war of the "hardlinera" drown out the voices of the "moderates"?
when, for example, on Monday, 7 December, on Polish radio. one can hear a magnetic
tape recording "pirated" during a closed-door meeting held by the Presidium of the
Solidarity Trade Union in Radon on the preceding Thursday, at which time Lech
Halesa, the leader who usually is so cautious in his public statements, said that
"confrontation is inevitable and it will take place"? And he said further: "I

was wrong in my calculations. I would like in a natural fashion-~when everybody

is with us-—to achieve the overthrow of the Sejm, all of these councils!

Today we find that we can no longer pursue this tactic. We realize that we must

act fast."

The official newspapers devoted entire columns to this document in which other

union leaders mentioned "the creation of a provisional government" or "the establish-
ment of worker militias equipped with helmets and clubs" whose first action, ac-
cording to Zbigniew Bujak. chairman of Solidarity—Mazowsze (in the Warsaw region),
was to be "the liberation of radio and television." His deputy, Seweryn Jaworski,
likewise chairman of the union shop at the big steel mill of Huta Harazawa, nick-
named "Pr Tournesol” [Prince Sunflower] by the foreign correspondents because of

his astonishing resemblance to that famous scientist, challenged Walesa: "If you
take one more step backward, I myself am going to cut your head off. And if I am

not the one to do that, the others will do it in my place."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the concert of official media, apart from all the noise, the army journal ZOLNIERZ
HOLNOSCI commented: "So the masks have been dropped and the objectives pursued--
until now so carefully camouflaged by deceptive slogans-appear clearly. Hhat they
are after is to seize power and to overthrow the socialist system in Poland."

Hieslaw Bek, the spokesman of the Polish Communist Party (the PZPR) and editor-in-
chief of TRYBUNA LUDU. the official organ of the Central Committee, whom we asked
whether the dissemination of this paper really serves the cause of "national under-
standing" in which the PZPR still claims to believe, replied: "It was a good thing
for the millions of Solidarity followers--the overwhelming majority of whom do not
want confrontation but on the contrary want normalization--to know what their leader
really thinks." Hieslaw Bek is happy over having received many telephone calls from
people telling him that this document had terrified them.

"In what way does that serve national understanding?"

"To the extent that the Solidarity spokesman had to retreat yesterday. He had to
disavow these extremists. That is a good thing."

Does Hieslaw Bek know how this magnetic tape fell into the hands of Polish radio?

"You, the West, have a formula: ‘well-informed circles.‘ Let us say that it was
the well-informed circles who did what was necessary.“

But who in the media is disavowing the extremists in the party? Nobody. A man
such as Tadeusz Grabski, for example, in an interview in RZECZYWISTOSC , the weekly
magazine of the PZPR, declared: "I was in favor of Solidarity so long as it was a
labor union. But I am against those forces that want to transform it into a weapon
of war to destroy the socialist state. Of course, I am a hardliner but only to
those who plant anarchy in Poland."

A Letter From the Primate to Parliament

National understanding? He does not believe in it: "Just 15 months after the events
of August 1980, we all know tha: the real conflict was not avoided, that the crisis
is getting deeper all the time. that the threats tr the nation, including the threat
of a bloodbath, far from declining, have grown."

The remedy? "Immediately put an end to illegal propaganda directed against the
political system, against the State and its alliances. I believe that the over-
whelming silent majority of our country would accept the use of emergency measures."

The poison did its job: The Poles are afraid of this law on emergency measures which
the government got the Sejm to vote on a few days ago. Horrible things were said in
connection with it: It would eliminate the right to strike, it would limit the righttc
assembly and to free travel even within Poland, it would give the military tribunals
authority in areas until now reserved for civilian justice.

0n 8 December, nevertheless. the party's spokesman himself told us that the bill had
not yet been fully drafted and that it was therefore useless to make any advance
judgments as to its content: "I can assure you that this law will not permit the

13
FOR 0F1ﬂC]Al.USEi0NlN
F0..‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sejm to suspend strikes except for a period of 3 months. once a year only. For
example, 3 months in winter. And the emergency measures cover only that period of

time. They must be lifted on 31 March 1982." Halesa himself seems in favor of
a strike of this kind.

But, then. why allow these rumors to come up in the first place? "All we can say
is that the bill is still in the drafting stage."

This is a rather strange method which greatly contributed to raising tensions in
recent days. To the point of persuading the Presidium of Solidarity to declare
that a 24-hour general strike would be launched if the Sejm were to pass that law
and that an unlimited strike would immediately follow any implementation of emer-
gency measures.

The primate of Poland himself. Archbishop Glemp, after talking with Halesa on two
occasions, addressed a letter to parliament. imploring it not to pass that bill.

who is fooling whom? "he is provoking whom? How far away it now appears, that
"summit" of "national understanding" on 4 November when, as part of an unprecedented
event. the primate, Lech Halesa. and the party boss, Premier and Defense Hinister
General Jaruzelski, sat down around the same table. The coordination that should
have come out of that turned out to be short-lived. Negotiations bogged down. The
party's ”hardliners" barely concealed their joy: In their eyes, reconciliation
could turn out to be more dangerous than confrontation, to the extent that it would
entail the risk of hastening the decline of the PZPR. On 17 November, the commu—
nist cell at the Huta Usrszawa steel mill adopted a program designed "to save the
State from total disintegration." It called for a ban on strikes for 2 years,
categorizing them among "actions threatening the existence of the nation and its
defense capability."

The Sack Cloth of Understanding

The day before, universities and higher schools throughout Poland went on strike out
of solidarity with the students of Radon who were unable freely to elect their pre-
sident. The militant communists at Huta Harszawa demanded that "an end be put to
the antisocialist and anarchic activities of the Independent Association of Students
[N25]." The time was ripe for the leaders of the "dogmatists" who, at the Sixth
Plenum, pushed through the idea of using special powers.

Came the final blow to the sack cloth [shagreen leather] of understanding: Those
pictures of the riot police surrounding the Warsaw fire department officers school
whose students were on strike to avoid the total militarization of their status.

From the big factories in the capital, "worker militias" had come to mount guard
around the threatened school. They were only able to shout their defiance to the
forces of law and order. Solidarity-Hazowsze had decided to turn 17 December--the
day Pierre Hauroy was expected in Warsaw on an official visit--into a day of protest
against the use of force in social conflicts. Something broke on Hednesday, 2
December. Perhaps a last hope. "Our Christmas Eve will be more like an armed watch
if we keep on this way," said the man who was still waiting for his streetcar before

the headquarters of the Central Committee.

1h
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PHOTO CAPT IONS

[p 108] Warsaw, 2 December: The forces of law and order force the evacuation of
the fireuen'a school occupied by the students. Carneski-Gam.

[p 109] Lech Halesa: Hho's fooling when? Who is provoking whom? Philippot-Sygma.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 5.1L Groupe Express

5058

cso: 3100/ 192 3“”

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY