FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

JPRS L/10714

5 August 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO' 29/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
J?RS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lo714
5 August 1982

USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGKCAL AFFAIRS

(F000 29/82)

Centaurs

INTERNATIONAL

western Powers Scored for Opposition to 'Non-Uae of Porco' Principle
(3. i. Skakunov; SOVBTSKOY! GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO,

Jun 82) .................................................... 1

New Book on Legal Status of International Organization Emloyees
(0. V. Bogdenov; SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO l PRAVO,

Jun 82} .................................................... 6

NATIONAL

Ethnic Problems. Patterns in Soviet Sunbelt
(Yu. V. Arutyunyan. et. el. ; OPYT ETNOSOISIOIDGICHESKOGO
ISSLEDOVANIYA om ZKIZNI (P0 MIRIAM}! mwavsxor 88R).
11 Aug 80) oeoeoaoovo.a...aoaooone.ooo-oooeaeaoaegoeeoaoo'oa 6

Sociological Studies Aid in Selection of Leading workers in Georgian
SSR
(I. L. Vartanov; OBSHCHBSTVENNYYB NAUKI V SSSR: SERIYA I.
PROBLDIY NAUCHNOGO WIN. Hay-Jun 82) ................. 2!.

Interest in 'Noble Ancestors Must Be Contatted
(l. L. Vartanov; OBSRCHESTVENNYYE NAUKI V SSSR: SBRIYA I.
PROBLEHY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZHA. Hay-Jun 82) ................. 27

Televised Press Conferences By Soviet Leaders Useful for
Propaganda Effort
(1. L. Vertanov; OBSHCHESTVBNNYYB NAUKI V 8888: SERIYA I.
PROBLDIY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZHA. Hay-Jun 82) ................. 29

New Book on Career Values of Soviet Students
(P. I. Shlenin; OBSHCHBSTVENNYYE NAUKI V 8859.: SBRIYA I.
PROBLEM? NAUCHNOGO WIN. May-Jun 82) . 30

- a - I [III - ussn - 35 r000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New Book on Administration of Higration Patterns
(P. I. Shh-in; onsncnsmm W]. V 8853: SERIYA I.
PROBLEM momma mm. Hay-Jun 82)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

InTmATIONAL

“STERN POHEIB SCORED FOR OPPOSITION T0 Tim-USE 0P POKE' PRINCIPLE
Moscow SOVE'I'SKOYE GOSUDARS‘IVO I PRAVO in Russian N0 6, Jun 82 pp 121-129

[Article by E. I. Scakunov, senioreoiencific staff label: of the Diplomatic Acade-
ny of the USSR Hinistry of l'breign Affairs, candidate in Juridical sciences, do-
cent: "Qaracteristics of Codifying the Basic Principles of International m7

[Excerth As a rule. the Western states have always tried to torpedo any initia-
tives aimed at codifying the principles of international law. taking herein the
most rigid positions with regard to utilising the treaty aethod of codifica-
tion [20]. In striving to steer clear of those strict and specific limitations
which are inevitable when an international treaty is utilised as a fan of codifi-
cation, they prefer the comon-law nethods of interpreting the statutes of the UN
Charter. Although international col-on law on a Juridical level as regards its ob-
ligations is equal in value to a conventional norm. nevertheless. it constitutes a
more elastic fan of fixing an agreaent between states and is not bound up with
the necessity of their clear. precise, and sinultaneous response regarding the re-
cognition of the obligation provided for their conduct, which is an unchanging con-
dition of the acceptance of the conventional norms of intemational law. 'lhe prob-
lematical nature of disclosing the precise contents of a canon norm of interna-
tional law, particularly with the now-increased sake-up of the internatio con-
nunity; the vagueness of the territorial sphere of operation of the couon aw
noms, flowing fro: the need to establish their obligation as applied to each spe-
cific state.--all these traits of the common law. which. in large measure, corresf-
pond to the goals of the foreign policy of the imperialist states and inlediately
iapell all those who are interested in the stability of international law and or
der to strive for a treaty-type formulation of the results of codification.

'Ihese general tendencies are especially characteristic for the practice of the UN
General Assenbly in regard to the assertion. developent. and specification of the
principle of the non-use of force. It has become the object of the most intensi-
fied codification work of the issesbly on the level of explicating the contents
both of its own elements as well as the inter-relations with the other principles
and statutes of the UN Quarter. In addition to the 1970 Declaration of the Irin-
ciples of International law. which developed the contents of the principle of the
non-use of force within a conplex of other principles of international law, it has
been given concrete form in such documents as the 1961 Declaration on Banning the
Use of Nuclear and 'lhernonuclear Weapons, the 1966 resolution on the strict ob-
servance on banning the the threat of violence or the use of force in inter- ‘
national relations and the right of peoples to self-detemination, the 1972

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFICIALY USE ONLY

resolution on the non-use of force in international relations and banning forever
the use of nuclear weapons. and. in particular. the 1971‘ Definition of Aggression.
Many of the positions contained in these docunents have facilitated the fonation
of couon norms of international law. also adding precision to the sense of Par. ‘5,
Art. 2. Art. 39, and Art. 51 of the UN Garter.

Nevertheless. the contents of the individual none, and they are, lost likely. not
identical to the contents of the points of the resolutions which have been adopted.
the territorial sphere of Operation of each of the horns, and, finally, the eluci-
dation of the aggregate of these none, which have received close to universal re-
cognition.--all these questions continue to reaain pmblenatical within the pre-
sent-day understanding of the principle of the non-use of force, and they can be
explained only with the aid of a conventional completion of the process of codify-
ing the given principle by means of a world treaty on the non-use of force. ”The
proposal to conclude a Treaty," the USSR representative stated in reference to this
matter at the first session of the Special Cosmittee. "on a Juridical level is '
based on a reference to the existence of the common nous of international law, de-
veloping Par. 1», Art. 2 of the UN Charter and and emerging from a recognition by

which have been adopted by way of an interpretation of the principle of the non-
use of force" [21]. 'Ihe proposal to provide treaty-type formulation of points
specifying the UN Charter, points which have already taken shape in international
practice in connection with the established understanding of individual ale-ants of
the principle of the non-use of force. is. thus. within the mainstream of the UN's
traditional approach to solving analogous problus of codifying the basic prin-
ciples of international law.

In attempting to somehow provide grounds for their own negative position with re-
gard to a world treaty. the representatives of the Western states have asserted
that precedents from the area of codifying the principle of respect for basic hman
rights and freedoms, for example, cannot be used to provide grounds for a treaty-
type codification of the principle of the non-use of force (FRO). inasmuch as this
form is supposedly acceptable for the positive but not for the negative principles
of international law (Britain); testimony of this. as it were. is provided. on the
one hand, by the Pacts on Hman Rignte and. on the other hand. by the Definition
of Aggression (Italy).

It is hardly necessary to denonstrate that such "proofs" are in blatant contradic-
tion with the historical experience of forming the principle of the non-use of
force. The duel between the obligation not to use force and the "right to war.”
which began with the conclusion in 1907 of the Second Hague Convention on banning
recourse to war to recover debts in accordance with treaty obligations, was bene-
ficially ended with the victory of a negative obligation not to use force thanks
to a formal agreement to develop this obligation in the Statute of the League of
Nations. the Kellog-Briand Pact, and. finally. in the UN Charter. But as regards
the example of the Definition of Aggression, the ancillary materials used in its
preparation instantly bear witness to the fact that the conventional for- of the
Definition was not utilized solely in view of the political and procedural consi-
derations of the compiler-states. Par. 38 of the report of the Special Conmittee
on the question of defining aggression (1968) states the following about this

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

setter: "Another possibility (in comparison with an amendment to the Charter-E.
5;.) consists in working out a nulti-lsteral convention including such a Definition.
but in this case the procedural difficulties would be exceedingly significant. ,
even if, fro- a political standpoint, it would be possible to work out and adopt
such a convention. its inpleeentetion would require too much tine” .

principle of the non-use of force" [23]. Indeed a world treaty. although it does
not completely exclude. it does considerably lessen the number of possible contra.-
dictory interpretations of the principle of the non-use of force. It serves to
convey a uniform understanding and use of it by states and, therefore. its lore
effective influence on the relations between nation-states.

21. on Document A/AC.193/SR .13.

22. UN Document A/7185/Add .1.

23. on Document A/AC.193/SR .8. p u.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Neuka". "Sovetskoye eosudsrstvo i prsvo", 1982

238a
cso: woo/760

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MWATIONAL

NEH BOOK 0N LEN. STATIB OF INTERNATIONAL OWZATION mm
’bscow 30mm W0 I mvo in hissisn lb 6, Jun 82 pp “9-150

[Review by 0. v. Bogdanov, doctor of Juridical sciences, of book "Slushashchiye le-
shdunarodnykh organisatsiy. Rarsonal organisatsiy eietesy 00!!” [E oyeee of Inter-
national Organizations: Personnel in the UN Manisatlonal 7e by l. V. Nitro-
fanov, Moscow, 'ﬂeshdunarodme otnosheniya". 1981. 120 pages

[Text] A characteristic trait of this work is the fact that it has nude an atte-pt
at a conprehensive study of its topic. The author analyses not only the principal
traits of the legal status of staff workers of international organisations but

also the mechanics of its regulation in both international and inter-gunmental
law. One of the book's three chapters trests the question of the internal-orga-
nizational, legal position of staff workers. a question which has been cooperatively
poorly studied in the Soviet literature. It is a latter of the rules which are
published on this score by the international organisations and which regulate such
questions as the procedure of entering upon service. labor relations within an
organisation, pension safeguards for staff nesbers. etc. Such a stmctm-e of this

The core of this study is undoubtedly the material concerning the legal status of
personnel in international organisations. Concentrated here are the basic questions
connected with the characteristics of the legal status of international organisation
of: icials. Of interest are the theoretical aspects of the given topic. The author
argues against certain incorrect theoretical constructs which are scnetines encoun-
tered in the literature pertainim to the disclosure of the legal nature of the
immunity of staff workers in international organisations. It is a matter of
attempts to equate this immunity with diplomatic i-unity. which departs from the
spirit and the letter of existing international agreuents. The author does not
support such views, noting the differences between the two above-nentioned concepts
and providing grounds for the correctness of treating the inunity of uployeee of
international organisations ”as a particular institution. distinct ties the insti-
tuticn of diplomatic privileges and inunities" (p ls9).

Also convincing, in our opinion. are those parts of the work which analyse the
legal nature of the.status of international organisation personnel. The author
characterizes such a status as combining ”functional and civic eluents' (p 1&8).

which correctly anphasicea the presence of the two eluenta in this concept. Here

the author could have shown sore specifically what the attupts. typical for bour-

geois scholarship, to exclude the second eluent tron the above-sentioned concept
could lead to.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book exasines the question of the activity and nature of the UN Administrative
Tribunal. The author provides good pounds for rejecting the constructs thouynt up
by bourgeois scholars regarding the characterization of this tribunal as an inter-
national court organ, and he shows that the tribunal's function is to render deci-
sions based on the [111's internal law. Thereby he dehmks the attespts to present
this tribunal as some kind of "super-national organ."

The systematization of the internal organisational acts is also successful. The
author eubdivides then into two t es--acts of the organisation's internal law
(for example. a Personnel Statute and acts applying this law (for exasple. con-
tracts on hiring people for service).

Unfortunately. this work also contains elaents of unproven declarations. excessive-
ly compressed and poorly argued expositions. These qualities are particularly
prevalent in the chapter on resolving disputes with the participation of inter-
national organization personnel. Here it would have been appropriate to set forth
at least a few instances of disputes which were examined in the UN Administrative
Tribunal. or in the respective organs of specialized institutions. This would

have imparted to the contents of the chapter a sore objective nature and would

have helped the reader to better understand what the question was about in prac-
tical terms. These sane shortcosings are also characteristic of the saterial devo-
ted to the responsibility of the intemationsl organisations. Here too there is

a noticeable prevalence of abstract elements. excessively generalized analysis.
which could create the impression that the responsibility of international orga-
nisations is a purely theoretical latter. And, in general, filling up the book
with practical, illustrative material would have imparted a more specific nature

to many of the general positions formulated by the author. It is well known that
in the practice of the institutions within the UN system over the period of the
three and a half decades of their existence quite a few precedents have accunulated
of the type which merit concrete analysis; without this the points of view con-
tained in the book appear to be sosewhat abstract.

Finally, some words about the title of this work. The ten ”employees" is hardly
justified herein. The fact of the matter is that it does not reflect the tenino-
logy which has taken shape during the tile since the organisations of the UN syste-
cane into existence. The UN Charter. for example,- uses two tems--“ofi‘iciale" and
"personnel." The author uses practically only the latter. generally discarding the
toner. He does not provide any explanation for the reason for taking such a posi-‘-
tion. Moreover. there is scarcely any grounds for ignoring the term "officials,"
which, in a practical sense. has becoae very widely accepted in contract practice
and. in general, has becoae essentially the principal term used for designating
staff workers of international organisations. It would seen that this ter- has
obvious advantages over the term ”employees.“ which, aside from everything else.

is not free from a certain shade of chancellory speech.

This book is interesting in that it studies one of the nest important and complex
parts of the law of international organisations.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", i982

2381*
cso: moo/762 s

MWWONLY
FOR OPIICIAL US! ONLY

N‘TIONAL

ETHNIC PROBLEMS, PATTERNS IN SOVIET SUNBBLT

hoscou OPYT ETNOSOTSIOLOCICUBSKOGO ISSLIDOVANIYA OBRAZA 281281 (PO HATERIALAH
HOLDAVSKDY SSR) in Russian 1980 (signed to press: ll Aug 80) pp 1. 4-7, 210-217,
226-226. 263-249, 270

[Table of Contents and selected excerpts from the book edited by Yu. V. Arutyunyan
(Editor-in-Chief). L. H. Drobizheva and V. s. Zelenchuk; the author of the program
and the leader of the research was Yu. V. Arutyunyan; the book was written under the
auspices of the Ethnography Institute imeni N. N. Hiklukho-uaklay of the USSR Academy

of Sciences]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: OPYT ETNOSOTSIOLOGIcunsxoco ISSLIDOVANIYA OBRAZA ZEIZNI (Po
MATERIALAH HOLDAVSKDY SSR) (Bthnosociological Research on the
Way of Life (From Moldavian Materials))

Publisher: lzdatel'stvo Nauka

Place and year of publication: Hoscou. 1980

Signed to Press Date: 11 August 1980
Number of Copies Published: 1,500
Number of Pages: 270

Brief Description:

The book examines common traits in the labor life, family-marital relationships.
cultural and domestic conditions of the population as characteristic for the Soviet
people as a whole, as well as the national features in the any of life of the Hol-
davians. Russians and Ukrainians in the republic. An examination of all the changes
in the way of life for the different generations and attention to the social orien-
tation of the youth has made it possible for the authors to forecast certain develop-
ment trends.

Table of Contents
Page
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
Chapter I. The anironpent and People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

51. The Environ-eat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
52. The Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Chapter II. Bthnosociological Aspects of Horking Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . bl

51. alploylent and the Socioprofessional Conposition of the
Nationalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
52. The Growth of the Social Needs of the Population and Trends in

Social Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

Chapter 111. The Panily and Doneatic Sphere of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

51. The Socioethnic Diversity of Panily Structure . . . . . . . . . . . 69
52. Relationships in the Panily . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83

Chapter IV. Cultural Life: Conditions. Intensity. Traits . . . . . . . . . . . 106

51. The Pornation of New Conditions for Cultural Life . . . . . . . . . 107

52. The Intensity of Cultural Life for the Peoples . . . . . . . . . . . 126

53. The Sociopsychological Comonness and Certain Ethnic Features in
Cultural Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . 169

Chapter V. Bilingualisa in the Soviet Hay of Life . ..... . . . . . . . . . 170

51. Hays and Means for the Spread of Bilingualisn . . . . . . . . . . . 171
52. Bilingualisn and the Activation of Production and Cultural Life . . 181

Chapter VI. Internationality Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200

51. The Nature of Internstionality Contacts in the Moldavian Towns and
Villages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200

52. Basic Factors Determining Internationality Relations . . . . . . . . 205

53. The Further lnprovenent of Internationality Relations . . . . . . . 217

Chapter VII. 0n Certain Results and Prospects of lnternationalising the Hay
of Life (In the Place of a Conclusion) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230

Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
[pages 6-7]

Concrete research on the relationship of international and national traits in the
various spheres of life is essential for a thorough understanding and conscious
directing of social processes in our nultinationsl nation. These questions are at
the center of attention of ethnosociology which has developed in recent years. For
several years the Ethnography Institute of the USSR Acadany of Sciences has conducted
research under the project "Optinizing of Sociocultural Conditions for the Develop-
ment and Merging of Nations in the USSR." This has gone through two stages. In the
first, from the example of the Tatar ASSR, there has been a study on the characteris-
tic indicators for the nation as a whole for the economic. social and cultural deo
velopnent of two peoples, the Russian and Tater. This work has provided an

M0 n-e-vnvav ﬁrs- Ann"
FOR OFFICIAL USES ONLY

opportunitv not only to concretely analyze the real sociocultural processes but also
to work out a procedure for their sore thorough investigation.

In 1971-1975. a new stage in the research was carried out. In Moldavia and in a
number of the other Union republics, co—workers from the Ethnography Institute col-
lected statistical and archival materials and also carried out surveys representa-
tive for the urban and rural population considering their national coaposition. In
contrast to the first stage of the research, when basically the indigenous national-
ity of the republic and the Russians (Tatars and Russians in the Tatar ASSR) were in-
vestigated. in the second stage materials were also collected for other nationali-
ties in direct contact within the republic. In the program attention was given. as
before, to studying the socioethnic structure of the population and the typical
national traits and nationality features in the culture. everyday life, family re-
lationships, social psychology and interpersonal relations. All these questions
were examined in their reciprocal relationships and this opened up an opportunity to
describe the socioethnic diversity of the Soviet way of life. For ethnosociology the
way of life, in essence. is a collective integrating indicator of the sociocultural
processes involved in foraing the new historical community of the Soviet people.

At the same time when we speak about the community of ”the Soviet people," this in
no way means their absolute socioethnic unification. People have differed and con-
tinue to differ from one another. The difference between persons of different ages.
between "fathers" and "children" will always be felt, with all emancipation even on
the sociopsychological level men and women will not become the ease and people will
also differ in terms of their socioprofessional roles. Ethnic features will also to
some degree survive and be felt in cultural life and this is manifested in language
and the other indicators of culture. A social commonness means social integration
related to the unity of the political system and production relationships, a common-
ness of ideals. interests. basic standards and principles of conduct, interaction
and mutual understanding and considering the polyethnicity of our nation, also the
fundamental similarity in the way of life of people from different nationalities.

Excessive unification of the way of life means its impoverishment. The ethnic and
professional diversity in the way of life, with the unity of its social essence, is
a reciprocal enrichment which is expressed in the development of society as a whole
and each individual nation. The preservation of progressive national features in the
way of life and in its cultural and domestic aspects broadens the range of social
processes and makes them more diverse and effective. In studying the way of life it
is also essential to consider Other amplitudes in the variations of its manifestation
starting from ideal inages and ending with pathological ones. In our work. we will
naturally devote attention not to the ideal and not even to the normative (formal or
informal) features in the way of life and particularly not to the pathological devi-
ations (which are the subject of concern for psychopathology and criminalistica),

but rather the real vital manifestations expressed by mass conduct and reflected in
the concrete material of the ethnosociological research.

Hhat are the common features in the way of life and to what degree are they concrete-
ly expressed in the various peoples? ﬂow and with what intensity are national spe-
cific features sanifested in them? In what relationship are the social and national
parameters of the way of life?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Precisely, concrete ethnosociological research can help in answering these ques-
tions.

A certain division of labor can be noted between the social sciences in investigat-
ing the Soviet way of life. Philosophy and scientific communism focus attention on
investigating the principles of the socialist way of life, in distinguishing the
concept of the socialist way of life and the way of life under socialism. As for
concrete sociology, the actual way of life with all its social diversity should he
at the center of attention for this science. Ethnosociology in addition considers
the national features, having the task of determining the interaction and interde-
pendence of the internationality and nationality traits in the way of life.

We have selected Moldavia as an object for ethnosociological study of the way of
life and our ethnosociologicai research in the Union republic has started here.

The development of the Moldavian people as an organic part of the new historical com-
munity, the Soviet people, convincingly shows the effectiveness of the nationality

policy as well as the depth and result of the principles of internationalism in
Soviet society.

In an ethnosociological study of the way of life, as the final indicator of the de-
ve lopment and merging of nations, we have given particular attention to a study of
the most important fears of human activity and such component parts of the way of
life as labor, domestic and cultural life. The task consists in examining their in-
teraction and the changes in the place and importance of ethnic features in then. It
is quite apparent :In all the listed spheres of the way of life, not ethnic but rather
general social factors play the dominating and determining role. Education, profes-
sion and activities to a significant degree determine the similarity and particular
features of people from different nationalities. Bypothetically it has been assumed
that ethnic uniqueness survives and is manifested with growing intensity from the
labor sphere of the way of life to cultural activities and is most fully expressed

in the sphere of everyday life, particularly family life. The overcoming of patri-
archicai rudiments in this sphere is a symptom of rapid social change and the com-
plete internationalization of the way of life. At the same time the processes of in-
ternationalization in culture and in the family-domestic sphere can be facilitated
and accelerated by the historical comonness of cultural traditions.

An important task of the research is to being out the interaction of the various
spheres of the way of life and interpersonal national relations. It is assumed that
from generation to generation, the way of life of persons from different nationali-
ties acquires evermore common traits. At the same time, these processes do not mean
the leveling of national self-awareness. The growing cultural similarity is combined
with an intensity of national feelings. Depending upon the stage in historical de-
velopment. various mechanism are at work which help to preserve and strengthen
national self-awareness. The scientific and technical revolution has a dual role

for the cultural development of peoples. 0n the one hand, it contributes to their
evening out and mutual understanding, and on the other, in particular due to the de-
velopment of the means of coununications and other channels of culture, it encourages
the development of a national culture and the national self-awareness of the broad
masses of the population.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The subject of the given research is not the individual. concrete phenomena but
rather their system and the aggregate of interrelated processes. In essence. this
is a complex of different research carried out in one key and subordinate to a com-
mon goal, ultimately, to optimizing the sociocultural processes and providing an ef-

fective reconciliation of the general and particular, the national and international
in all spheres of life.

[Pp 210-217]

The party's nationality policy was also propagandized by the mass infatuation media.
In the radio and TV broadcasts. in the newspapers and magazines the ideas of the
equality of people and the significance of friendly relations between them were prop-
agandized in various forms. An analysis of the content of the republic newspaper
SOVETSKAYA HOLDAVIYA in 1970. using quantitative methods (content analysis) has shown
that virtually every day the newspaper provided materials on the life of the other
republics. it told about their successes in the economy and culture. it propagandited
the ideas of cooperation and mutual aid and published theoretical articles explain-
ing the principles of internationalism. Such broad scope in the propagandising of
internationalism has been determined by the decisions of the party congresses and the
decrees of the HCP [Moldavian Cosmunist Party] Central Conittee. Significant liter-
ature has been devoted to the problems of international indoctrination. In a number
of works attention has been paid to the importance of correctly combining the props-
gandizing of the international and the national in the life of the Soviet peoples.

In particular. the book by I. P. Kalin states that "...if in propsgandizing the eco-
nomic and cultural achievements an emphasis is placed on the successes of just one
("one's own") republic, without any analysis of the profound internal links charac-
terizing the unity of all spheres in the way of life of both the individual regions
and the entire socialist society, if little effort is made to overcome nationalistic
prejudices in the awareness and conduct of a part of the people (a disdainful atti-
tude toward the economy, culture and language of other peoples. the maintaining and
instilling of old rites and traditions which do not correspond to the spirit of the
times. the idealization of reactionary historical personages and so forth). this can
revive and engender national egoism. conceit. national exclusiveneas and an over-
estimation of the contribution of one's people to the development of the common
Soviet economy and culture."

One out of every three or four articles published in SOVEISKAYA MOLDAVIYA both in
1970 (during the year prior to the start of our research) and in 1979. could contrib-
ute to the indoctrination of internationalism. On the basis of the content analysis
data. one could clearly trace the structure. frequency and form of providing these
articles. Among all the material which appeared on the pages of SOVETSKAYA HOLDAVIYA
in 1970 and 1979 relating to national aspects of life. around 30 percent was made up
of materials on the life of the nation's fraternal republics. Sometimes these were
selections from articles under the headings "My Nation from End to and," "TASS An-
nounces" and "He Are the Soviet People," and sometimes individual releases reprinted
from the central newspapers and forwarded through TASS and AP“ [Novosti News Agency].

In the publications on events in other republics there was a predominance of articles

on the cultural life of the peoples (more than 30 percent of the materials). there

was somewhat less on economic life (22 percent). and the remaining articles were de-
voted to other subjects.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In reflecting the real processes of life, the newspaper showed the realization of
one of the basic principles of internationaliam, that is, the mutual aid and cooper-
ation of the Soviet peoples. In actual terms, one out of every five newspaper
articles on nodern life over the last decade was devoted to the economic or cultural
contacts between the Soviet republics as well as to their cooperation with the
socialist nations. Naturally, the ties of the Soviet peoples were treated more
widely. By the end of the 1970's, materials on cooperation with foreign countries
benan to appear noticeably more often (the share of them amcng articles on coopera-
tion doubled).

Naturally, much attention has been given to cooperation among the republics as here
Moldavia has taken a direct part. The table given below shows how the participation
of the republics in cooperation was reflected in the newspaper (see Table 4).

Table 6

The Reflection in the Newspaper SOVETSKAYA HOLDAVIYA of Various Areas
of Cooperation Among the Soviet Peoples (in Z of the Total Number
of Articles Dealing with Cooperation Between the Soviet Peoples)

Involvement of Involvement of Interaction Participation
Area of Coo ration Moldavia in De- Other Republics between Other of Moldavia in
9‘ 1n Moldavian Republics Joint Measures

velopment of
Other Republics Development with Other
Republics

 

       
   
  
   

 

 

     

   

            

1970 1979 1979

   

1970 1979 1970 1979

          
 

    

 

         

 

15.1 4.5 I 17.8 22.7

Economic I 38.6 29.5 28.8 63.1
7.5 5.0 I 63.9 26.2

Cultural | 8.9 11.1 19.7 57.5

As we see, in the newspaper there were no discrepancies between the share of materi-
als contributing to the formation of national self-awareness and aimed at the de-
velopment of international feelings. The geography of Noldavia's interrepublic ties
has grown wider year by year. In comparison with 1970, in 1979. reciprocal ties had
intensified not only with Russia. the Ukraine and Belorussia (as in 1970, these were
the most intense) but contacts became significantly more frequent with the Baltic
and Transcaucasian republics.

Finally, the newspaper published direct, focused information designed to propagandize
the friendship of peoples in theoretical articles and materials devoted to jubilee

dates.

We would point out that there were few materials directly involving national self-
awareness and national feelings. For example. such expressions as "we are the
first." "we are among the best." and "Moldavia for the first time in the nation"
were encountered in 3 percent of the materials relating to the national aspects of
life in 1970 and the figure in 1979 was 1 percent; not more than 3 percent of the
materials mentioned national specific features in culture such as music. customs,
clothing. domestic interiors and language.

11

IN]! OFINCJAI.IJSE.CNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The newspaper SOVETSKAYA MOLDAVIYA is published in Russian and is basically aimed at
urban residents. But it is read not only by Russians. This can be judged even from
the subscription to the newspaper. In the first place, the number of subscribers to
SOVETSKAYA MOLDAVIYA exceeds the number of Russian families in the republic and,
secondly, the newspaper is subscribed to by rural leaders as well, although there
are few Russians in the rural areas (according to the data of the Moldavian Republic
Administration of Soyuspechat' [Main Administration for the Distribution of Publica-
tions], in 1970 around 62 percent of the subscribers of SOVBTSKAYA MOLDANIYA were
rural residents). Obviously, the newspaper is read by persons of different nation-
alities who have mastered Russian.

Moldavian television also has given a large place to the propagandiaing of inter-
nationalism. It has shown feature and TV films on the life of the Soviet peoples and
has provided information on national events and events in the fraternal republics in
the sociopolitical broadcasts. Periodically. twice a month, Kishinev Television has
transmitted from Moscow the broadcast ”The Atlas of the Soviet Peoples" which is
fully devoted to the life of one or another Union or autonomous republic. 0n the
first program of Moldavian Television more than 5 percent of the broadcasts provided
information on the life of the fraternal Soviet peoples.

Republic radio broadcasting also devoted a portion of its materials to a familiariza-
tion with the economy and culture of the Soviet peoples. The exchange department of
Moldavian Radio receives and broadcasts over the air programs from different repub-
lics of the nation and they are concerned with virtually all the peoples of the
Soviet Union.

Not only the mass information media but also artistic literature, the theater, films
and painting transmit through the masses the standards and views of Marxist ideology,

that is, the ideas of equality and solidarity of peoples.

Hhen the earthquake occurred in Tashkent, on the pages of ROMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA ap-
peared the stirring lines of the "Tashkent Report" by A. Voanesenskiy:

Help Tashkent !

They need blood--help,
They need shelterb-help.
"here there is pain-help,
Yourself--help!

Ye. Yevtushenko visited Yakutia and what we call in politics and science a change in
the nature of internationality relations is found in his poetic understanding in the

verses "Diamonds and Tears" which condemn the ideas of opposition between peoples and
self-conceit:

People--this is a diamond placer.
The foreigner is only that person.

who dared utter: “Foreigner!"
0r mockingly tossed: "Dumb native!"

[n the course of our interviews among the prominent cultural leaders, the persons
questioned mentioned the names of Drutse, Aytmatov. Gamsatov and often justified
their preferences by the fact that the writers. poets and playwrights could "express
the soul of the people" and "show what we all feel.”

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The emotional impact of artistic literature on the views of people is indisputable.
From the ethnosociological viewpoint it is important to us how the diverse ideologi-
cal information is disseminated in the masses.

One of the important channels which ensures the assimilation of the standards and
ideology dominant in a society is education. Education is not only a store of know—
ledge which substantially broadens the understanding of the world but also direct in-
doctrination. It provides a notion about other peoples and at the same time creates
the necessary basis for a similarity of perception and responses to events and phe-
nomena and, finally, for commonness in the way of life and hence for nutual under-
standing in international contacts.

From the results of the ethnosociological research in the Tatar ASSR. the conclusion
had already been drawn on the importance of education for overcoming national narrow-
ness and prejudices particularly among the less educated strata of the population
(within the limits up to seventh grade, in any event). At present, when we possess
materials on comparative research, it can be asserted that the positive effect of in-
creased education in the sphere of internationality contact is particularly notice-
able among those peoples whose culture in recent decades has been the most dynamic.
The Holdavians are among these.

While among the Holdavians having an education up to fourth grade (in the city)
around 70 percent feel that the national composition of a collective is uninportant,
among those who have an incomplete secondary and secondary education the figure is 88
percent. A positive attitude toward nationally nixed marriages among people with an
education up to the fourth grade is about 57 percent (in the cities and countryside)
and among those who have an incomplete secondary and secondary education the figures.
respectively, are 73-75 percent in the city and 67-82 in the countryside.

Of course, the less educated people are basically older persons who grew up under
other sociopolitical conditions and who are fluent basically only in their maternal,
Moldavian language.

Education as a whole tells more noticeably on the attitude toward internationality
marriages than on the attitude toward internationality contact on the job and is
probably stronger in the countryside than in the city. Obviously, here one feels the
greater national exclusiveness of the rural inhabitants in the past and for this
reason increased education under today's conditions which has been combined with the
overall sociocultural growth and well being of the countryside has produced an obvi-
ous effect.

In the Russians and Ukrainians. the interethnic sets in the sphere of production con-
tact for practical terms depend little upon education (these are somewhat less favor-
able only in the group of uneducated which does not exceed 4-5 percent) but the pre-
disposition for internationality contact in everyday life for these nationalities in
the more educated groups increases (70 percent of the Ukrainians with a secondary and
higher education feel that nationality is unimportant in marriage and 55 percent in
the groups with an education up to seventh grade; among Russians such an opinion is
held by around 80 percent of the persons with a higher and secondary education and

around 70 percent for those with an education up to seventh grade).

13

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the city where the possibilities for internationality contacts are greater, inter-
nationality friendly intercourse is wider along the more educated groups of the pop-
ulation (particularly in the young and niddle-aged) (see 51).

Education is one of the indicators of the cultural level of people and, of course, it
not only broadens the range of cultural views and contributes to the forming of in-
ternationalism in their views and conduct. As a rule, the note educated people more
often read sociopolitical and artistic literature and are acquainted with the art of
other peoples. This provides a basis for a broader historical view of the experience
of neighboring peoples, that is, it broadens the approach to understanding events and
phenomena. The mastery of Russian as a language of internationality contact and the
spread of bilinguialism operate in the same direction. This not only facilitates the
direct contacts between peoples fron different nationalities but also broadens the
general culture of people and makes it possible for than to know more about other
peoples and respect then.

The results of questioning have shown that with a broadening of the cultural and
sociopolitical knowledge of people, as a rule, they relate more favorably to inter-
nationality contacts. Thus, among Holdsvians and Russians who regularly attend
theaters and read artistic literature, there are more people who do not give signif-
icance to nationality in professional and family contacts (by approximately 8-10
percent). Even more noticeably a cultural viewpoint is tied to the attitude toward
internationality family contacts.

For rural inhabitants the amount of cultural information is a sore significant fac-
tor from the viewpoint of their interethnic orientations than for the urban inhabi-
tants. But in the countryside culture first of all has a beneficial influence on

the informal attitudes of persons from the different nationalities (if the link be-
tween the viewing of TV broadcasts, the reading of artistic literature and the atti-
tude toward internationality production contact as calculated in coefficients for the
relationship of Yule features is statistically insignificant, in terms of family
contacts it equals 0.5; 0.48).

As for the particular features of the impact of cultural information on interethnic
attitudes in the concrete socioprofessional groups, for the Holdavians (in the
cities) there is a more noticeable predisposition for internationality contact among
those workers in physical labor, including with low skills, who not only regularly
follow the TV and radio news but also actively read artistic literature, regularly
attend the theater, that is, are accustomed to a culture which is more complex in
content. This confirms the conclusion drawn already from the materials of the ethno-
sociological research in the Tatar ASSR that the range of cultural measures elimin-
ates narrowness in the approach to internationality contact among the less skilled
strata of the population (and the less educated).

Here we can add that for the national groups in which a rather high cultural level
has already become stable, just an increase in the amount of general cultural know-
ledge, as statistical calculationa indicate, now do not play a marked role. Only a
substantial increase in more complex cultural information tells on their interethnic
sets. Thus, in the absence of national prejudices in virtually an absolute najority

of the Russians, still among those who constantly read artistic literature and show
a lasting interest in the theater, the range of unprejudiced persons is even wider.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0511(1Al.USEiDNLV

while previously ordinary cultural and educational activities were important for sur-
mounting national prejudices, now these can produce results even among the less edu-
cated strata of the population and in regards to a majority of the workers it is pos-
sible to count only on the effect of the directed propagandizing of internationalism
and the indoctrination of humaneness and profound inner intelligence which do not
make it possible to relate to other peoples except as to one's own.

The question arises: are internationality attitudes related to national orientations
in culture?

National-cultural orientations as a whole are a broad concept. They include the
attitude toward the professional national culture, toward folk culture surviving in
the traditions of the past, including in the standards of conduct, customs and

rites. If one were to speak about a system of traditional standards of conduct and
orientations, then the sets for interethnic contact, primarily in the domestic sphere
to a certain degree are interrelated with them.

Among those Russians, Holdavians and Ukrainians who do not feel it necessary to seek
the approval of their parents for marriage, who feel it possible to hold a wedding
without the traditional rite and among those who do not celebrate religious holidays,
there are 10-15 percent more persons who favorably view mixed nationality marriages.

In a system of traditional culture, as is known, "living" and "retreating" forms
survive. For example, parental advice for marriage for Holdavians and Russians (this
is done by over 60 percent of both nationalities) or the observing or national wed-
ding customs for Holdavians (over 70 percent observe then), these are living tradi-
tions. At the same time, the religiousness of the population which previously was
closely interlinked with national prejudices is retreating, as has already been said,
into the past.

The link between the preferences for intranational contact and the forms of tradi-
tional culture, although relatively noticeable, in the future will most probably
disappear. In any event, the decline in the link between these features in the
younger and more educated groups indicates this.

Naturally, the institution of traditional culture is more resillient in the everyday
life of the rural population. For this reason, the further overcoming of national
exclusiveness in the Holdavian countryside to a greater degree than in the city in-
volves the eradicating of traditions and religiousness which have survived here.
Thus. the various elements of culture, depending upon religious circumstances, to a
varying degree can influence internationality contacts.

The similarity of traditional culture is capable of significantly facilitating the
daily internationality contact. In Moldavia for some peoples such as the Ukrainians,
Russians and Bulgarians. traditional culture has common Slavic roots and in others,
primarily the Holdavians, it has maintained rather protracted historical links with
Slavic culture. For this reason, with a favorable socioeconomic basis for contacts,
the relative stability of traditional Moldavian culture does not tell noticeably on
the contacts and this also favors completely good, friendly internationality rela-
tions.

15
INNI‘OFIWCJAI.UGIZ(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Professional culture is more international and it can generally impede international-
ity contact only if it "wounds" national feelings or carries nationalistic ideas.

But under Soviet conditions. its entire ideological content is aimed at strengthen-
ing contact between peoples. For this reason an orientation toward a professional
culture of one's ethnos which in real life, as a rule, is combined in the Moldavian
peoples with an interest in the cultures of the other Soviet nations, does not sep-
arate peoples but rather contributes to the indoctrination of internationalist views.

As a whole, the process of the drawing together of the cultures of peoples, as is
presently occurring in our nation, contributes to their mutual understanding and to
the strengthening of unity. Here. as has been reaffirmed by our research, the in-
ternationality relations are decisively determined by sociopolitical conditions, by
the ideological ataosphere of our society and by the satisfying of the socioeconomic
interests of the workers.

[pp 226-226]

There is a notion that the overcoming of prejudices is aided by the joint work of
persons from different nationalities. In actuality. in the long-existing multi-
national collectives where roles are assigned customarily. according to professional
qualities and people are linked by cam-on production aims, ordinarily no importance
is given to nationality (one has merely to recall the experience of the Donets Basin
and other similar production associations). But in and of itself the national compo-
sition of a collective does not automatically influence internationality relations.
In any event. in the Moldavian cities there is an equally good attitude toward inter-
ethnic contact among both the Moldavians and Russians working both predominantly in
Moldavian collectives and in collectives where a majority of the employees is non-
Moldavians.

The frequency of interethnic contact does not influence the internationality sets in
all the socioprofessional groups.

Somewhat distinct are the interethnic sets of the Moldavians working in collectives
where there are "very few" representatives of their nationality. Possibly this is
due to a psychological sense of isolation from their own ethnic milieu which is un-
customary for the Moldavians. (It might be assumed that this was tied to a certain
socioprofessional situation but approximately equal shares of both Moldavian workers
and members of the intelligentsia work in such collectives.) This is not observed
smcnt Russians. Their attitude toward interethnic contact in collectives where
there are "very few" Russians is just as favorable as in the multinational collec-

tives.

The materials of surveys in Moldavia do not provide grounds to assume that inter-
nationality contacts on the job are closely tied to the attitude toward mixed mar-

riages. The attitude toward such marriages rather depends upon the breadth of inter-
ethnic contacts off the job. that is, the presence of friends, spouses and contem-
poraries of a different nationality. The attitude toward internationality contact

in the family is more interrelated to the friends and comrades around and less so to
the presence of relatives who have entered internationality marriages.

The relationship of the above-given indicators of the ethnic milieu and the sets of
internationality contacts in the family sphere differs in the socioprofessional

16
E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

groups. In the city (Kishinev) the influence of kinship contacts is of practical
importance only in the group of unskilled workers. but for them the circle of
friends is of less importance. In all the other socioprofessional groups, on the
contrary, the attitude toward internationality contacts in the family is related to
the circle of friends and does not correlate with the internationality kinship con-
tects.

From the standpoint of the relationship of internationality sets with the various
spheres of interethnic contacts. the contemporary countryside as a whole does not
differ from the city. Here the group of friends and not kinship relations is of
greater importance.

The present Holdavian villages although more uninational in comparison with the city
(over 70 percent of the persons questioned work in virtually uninational collec—
tives), but almost one-half of the rural inhabitants questioned have persons of
other nationalities among their circle of friends and a third of them have rela-
tives who have entered nationally mixed marriages. Naturally, internationality con-
tacts are wider in the large villages as they are more often multinational and their
link with the cities is closer.

The Holdavian villages over the last decades, as has been pointed out in the first
sections of the book. have rapidly altered their social make-up and cultural milieu
and this has been the basis for increasing social situations of internationality
contact that are similar to the city. The better the situation existing in the
labor sphere of the way of life, the more friendly the attitude toward internation-
ality contacts on the job.

The demands on the conditions of production activities have increased noticeably for
the rural inhabitants (see Chapter II). For this reason, it would scarcely be right
to assume that the measures of socioeconomic control for inturethnic relationships
are less significant in the countryside than for the city (in comparison with the
cultural and educational measures).

As the research materials indicate, under present-day conditions the greater adher-
ence of the rural inhabitants to traditional culture has virtually no tie with the
attitude toward internationality contact on the job but to a certain degree does
influence the attitude toward family contacts.

Thus, many specific circumstances in different social milieu and situations are of
importance for the climate of internationality relations with the determining sig-
nificance of the socioeconomic and political conditions inherent to the social sys-
ten. in order that the measures aimed at further strengthening internationalism in
the views and conduct of people be effective, they should be differentiated in terms
of the specific social situation. This is why it is advisable to constantly study
internationality relations in the different national areas and in all social and
demographic groups.

[pp 243-249!

The intensity in the integration processes for the spiritual content of the way of
life does not impoverish the national forms of culture. While the culture is trans-
formed and modernised, this is primarily not at the expense of the national forms.

17

FIHI(HHHCJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The languages and the professional types of art such as music, dance and literature
are developed in expressing (maintaining) the national specific features. Hith the
preservation and modernization of their own natural cultural resources, the Moldav-
ians. Russians. Ukrainians, Gagauzy and others at the same time more and more widely
assimilate the "assets" of other nations. The mastery of Russian by the indigenous
nationality of the republic has accelerated particularly noticeably. In the younger
generation virtually 90 percent of the urban Moldavians and 70 percent of the rural
inhabitants speak Russian without any great effort. Having mastered Russian. the
Moldavians continue to actively use their own mother language. Thus. the coeffi-
cients for the link of the "nationality" feature and the "culture" block feature"
are not merely the most significant but also stable.

The relationships between the "nationality" feature and the total indicator (block
feature) of the "family and family relations" are changing in a different direction.
As was shown by the total coefficient for the correlation of information. national
specific features are still relatively expressed in the sphere of famdly and domes-
tic relations. As was shown in the research, this is expressed both in the employ-
ment of women. in the assigning of roles in the family and in family-domestic rela-
tionships. It can be assumed that the family and domestic sphere is relatively more
sovereign and has its own opportunities for maintaining the ”nucleus" of traditional
culture. The overcoming of elements which do not correspond to modern standards in
this area is an important indicator of the internationalisation and the establishing
of cannon traits in the way of life.

In Moldavia this process, of course, is facilitated by the conmwmness of the cultural
and domestic traditions of the peoples inhabiting it. Among all the ethnic groups
of Moldavia, the nuclear family predominated with largely similar standards of rela-
tionships. Nevertheless. here certain differences are apparent between the peoples
of Moldavia although they have a "retreating" nature. Judging from the ethnoaocio-
logical materials, among the Moldavians and even more so among the Gagauzy, as yet
there is a relatively stronger traditional view of the family the absolute value of
which is higher for them than among the Russians. Ukrainians and Jews in the repub-
lic. The Moldavians are more active in utilizing their free time in the interests of
the family. they are less permissive and less willing to justify the possibility of
divorce and maintain rather close kinship contacts. The role functions in the_Mol-

davian and Gagausy families between husband and wife are more traditional than among
the Russians. Ukrainians and Jews. It is no accident that the family and the number
of children for Moldavians are larger than for the Russians. Ukrainians and Jews.
Among the urban Russians only 13 percent have three and more children, while among
the Moldavians in the city 25 percent have such relatively large families and 38 per-
cent in the countryside. Of all the peoples of Moldavia. the Gagauzy have the larg-
est families and traditional family relations are stronger also among them.

Of course. the relative persistence of traditional relations in the domestic sphere
has a more and more residual nature and over the long run will gradually be evened
out. It is no accident that the differences in the number of children between the
peoples are apparent because of the older generation while among the younger these
gradually are nullified. Among the young urban Moldavians 18-29 years of age the
number of children is the same as among the Russians. Two-thirds of both nationali-
ties in this age group do not have children while among a predominant majority of the
Moldavians and Russians who do have children. there is just one child and only

18
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MMLY
FOR 0F11C1AL.US£1)NLY

I percent (the share coincides!) of the Holdavians and Russians have two or more
children. A rather rigid dependence is observed between the number of children and
education and occupations. The more active the socioproduction functions of a per-
son the more quickly the historically caused domestic traditions are eliminated and
this is also reflected in the number of children. In the group of creativ‘ intelli-
gentsia among the Holdavians, Russians, Jews and Ukrainians. regardless of age there
are equally few children. As a whole the number of children declines more rapidly
than the sets related to the assigning of family roles and to an understanding of a
woman's function change.

It is quite apparent that the increase in socioproduction and cultural activity.
particularly among women. narrows the place of the family in the orientations of life

and this is reflected in the number of children and the way of life as a whole.

of course, it can be stated that the "labor expenditures" in the way of life, includ-
ing in "family" life as a whole are reduced by the shortening of the working day and
the improvement in domestic services as well as by the intensification of social in-
doctrination functions. But this is also accompanied by a rise in the social and
leisure activity of man (the parents) and at the same time by increased demands on
the raising of children. Although a child physiologically matures more quickly than
in the past, on the social level--since the social demands are growing and becoming
more complex-it later is capable of joining in social life and performing active
roles as now additional and diverse training is needed for this. While previously
"children were raised" only in their childhood. now this also occurs in adolescence
and often even later. The increased qualitative demands on childraising are reflec-
ted in the number of children. Due to the fact that the labor intensiveness of
childraising and the demands on it in fact grow. a person to a certain degree is ob-
jectively confronted with a dilemma: social activity or children. and solves this
dilemma by compromise and to a certain degree at the expense of the number of chil-
dren.

In actuality, the potential of opportunities and the interests of an individual is
not infinite. In encountering the problem of the "reproduction of man" not only
physically but also socially (and this. per se. is the basic function of man), a
person is confronted with the dilemma: for some it is more admissible and attrac-
tive to have and raise a child while for others the creation of conditions for its
social indoctrination and growth is more important. Those who decide not to have and
raise children should make a greater effort for society for its progress and for in-
proving living conditions and the reproduction of mankind. Of course. in either in-
stance false criteria for the indoctrination and forming of the individual are not to
be excluded. but these deviations are possible equally in both an individual and
social decision.

In one way or another. the inverse dependence between the number of children and
social activity can be traced in all stages of the path of life. The sociological
materials presented for the republic's urban population aptly illustrate this. In
actuality a person who has a lower education and a more passive socioproduction
life has more children. More than one-half of the persons who do not have children
(57 percent) are improving their education, while the figure is 44 percent among
those who have one child, 33 percent with two children, 20 percent with three and
10 percent with four. Among those not having children almost one-half is engaged

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in social work while the figure for those having one child is 46 percent, 39 per-
cent with two children. 23 percent with three and 11 percent with four. Quite under—
standably social roles (for example, the influence on solving important questions in
the collective) and leisure activities change correspondingly. Persons with many
children. as is reflected by the materials of the research, Iuch less are engaged in
sports and amateur artistic activities in their leisure tine. they read less artis-
tic literature, are more rarely at the theaters and so forth. of course, all of
this is due to the fact that there are more older persons among those with many
children but approximately the same ratio in the allocation of social roles and cul-
tural activity is observed in the same age and professional groups. and not only for
women but even for men. For example. in the middle generation (30-69 years), among
the males involved in physical labor and having one child, 50 percent continue to
improve their education, while with two children the figure is 32 percent and with
three and acre 21 percent; among those engaged in mental labor the number of persons
furthering their education is of course greater, but the dynamics of the dependence
upon the number of children is approximately the same (respectively, 72, 66 and 33
percent). This dependence is observed even more. of course, among women and among
the Holdavians and Gagauzy it is more expressed than among the Russians, Ukrainians
and Jews.

Thus. the existing socioprofessional structure. education and cultural activities
liait the standards of traditional family functions related to the number of chil-
dren. In this sense. as can be judged from the younger generation, the differences
retween persons from different nationalities are rapidly disappearing. Over time
the sociodemographic features, when fully freed from the "national influence," will
operate completely in a "pure form." These prospects which to some degree have been
disclosed by our research are shown in Fig. 13.

labor

Fig. 13. The relationship and prospects
of transforming the feature of "national-
ity" and the "labor," "culture" and
"fami'y" block features.

Direction of relationship: (+) increasing
relation; (-) diminishing relation; (2)
mixed relation (diminishing for some
features, increasing for others).
Intensity of relationships: l--Host sig-
nificant, 2-Significant, 3-Insignificant

  

culture

If

family

The relative dominance of common sociodemographic features (including "sex") over

the "national ones" reflects the process of the internationalizing of the way of life.
The all-round development of man is a sort of total expression of such international-
ization. The task set in the program of inproving the social conditions is needed,

of course, not for itself but rather for man and for his all-round development. The
research has reflected certain results of such changes. In a comparison of the gen-
erations or, more accurately, the age groups. we can see that the share of diversely
developed people in each nationality is growing. Culture and education are growing,

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social roles are becoming more complex and interests are becoming more diverse.
Conditionally we have endeavored to isolate a collective image of the most diversely
developed man. As the indicators for the development of a person and his activity,
we have isolated the following: (1) the growth of education and skills. (2) social
work. (3) participation in sports or amateur artistic activities. more precisely.
activities not-related to professional life, (6) the constant reading of literature.
(5) the raising of children. The full set of these five features has been condi-
tionally viewed as a collective indicator of diverse development. An exception for
one of the features was permitted. Correspondingly the population has been classi-
fied into groups of absolutely (with a full range of features) and relatively (with
an exception for one feature) completely developed. Re have endeavored to ascertain
how representative are the people with complete and incomplete sets of these traits
in the various demographic, aocloprefessional and nationality groups. It has been
discovered that all the isolazed indicators, if one excludes the "number of chil-
dren." are characteristic for approximately one-third of the men and one-quarter of
the women in the city and for 12 percent of the men and 9 percent of the women in the
countryside. National differences virtually were not felt (see Table b).

Table h*

Proportional Amount of Diversely Developed Urban Population
(by nationalities)

I I Including:

 

Holdavians 34.1. | 16.6 3.2
Russians 39.0 25.5 6.9
Ukrainians 62.9 26.8 8.1
Jews | 36.6 23.7 2.5

 

*Explanation: I--Share of persons possessing all established traits of diverse
development and also not having one of the traits; II-Share of persons possess-
ing all the isolated traits as well as those not having one of the traits but
with children; III--Share of the population with complete (within the materials
of the research) set of traits for diversified development and at least two

children.

The main thing is age. The younger the population the more harmoniously it is de-
veloped. Among the youth 20—26 years of age in the city more than one-half combine
the listed interests and occupations (excluding, of course. the having of children)
and in the countryside, approximately one-fifth. This ratio changes for the age
groups consistently: in the older age groups their share declines sharply both in
the city and even more in the countryside. Naturally. this activity is closely tied
to the type of labor: among persons engaged in mental labor it is relatively sig-

nificant (see Table 5).

At the same time it is perfectly obvious that, as was pointed out, a combination of
positive, to some degree ideal traits in the behavior of a person in all the basic

2!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F13I‘OITTCJAI.IJSEZ(MVLY

Table 5*

Diversely Developed Population in Different Social and Demographic Groups
(in 1 of Total Number in Each Group)

I City I Countryside
Including . I Including
I |-—---1----

II III

 

     

 

      

Total population:

   

Men 40 a 24 6 6.5 8.2 5.2 1.7
Women 33 6 l6 3 3.7 9.3 3.6 1.3
18-29 years of age 56 5 12 1 0.6 17.0 6.3 0.6
30-69 years of age 35.1 30.8 8.6 7.6 6.1 2.9
50 years and older 14.9 12.3 6.4 0.9 0.7 0.3
Engaged in physical labor I 18.3 10.2 2.2 6.5 1.5 0.6
Engaged in mental labor 62.1 I 36.1 I 9.2 50.9 31.8 13.2

 

*Key to Roman Numerals sane as in Table 4.

spheres of the way of life is an indicator of harmonious development. Labor activ-
ity should be intensified not by extending the working day but rather by the quality
of labor; the number of children is declining but the demands are growing upon the
upbringing and all-round development of the child; the tine for leisure activities
should be not so much increased as qualitatively transformed.

This is all true enough but here the rational proportions cannot be violated, that

is. the "quality" should not be allowed to prevail at the expense of a rational
" '0
quantity.

At the same time. the necessary standards are violated precisely’in such an impor—
tant sphere as family life. At present, we are observing, as was already pointed
out, a disruption in the standards of natural reproduction. Here the more skilled
the person is the note marked these disruptions, that is, the deviations from the
naturally necessary standards. It is obvious that the reproduction of man, the
birth and upbringing of children cannot help but be included in the harmonious de-
velopment of society. It is scarcely possible to exclude this function or not to
consider it, as is sometimes done in theoretical work devoted to the forming of the
individual. The growth of culture and of material prosperity create the conditions
for the reproduction and education of people, but the functions of creating these
conditions and the reproduction of man itself cannot be separated on a mass scale.
Such a "division of labor" in the forming of man, on the one hand, and the creation
of conditions for such formation, on the other. is of course inacceptable. For
this reason the optimizing of sociocultural development for the Soviet nations re-
quires attention to the questions of the birth of children and education. On this
level there nust be not so much a norsl (the longer the more active) but also ef—
fective material encouragement for the raising of children. This is also the sin of
state policy which is oriented at encouraging the birth of children. In essence,
this is the dominant and permanent policy of the Soviet state.

22
FOR OFFEJALIEHIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The harmonious development of man has many social mediations. Such development of
people from different nationalities is, in particular, both a condition and expres-

sion of improving internationality relations.

As a whole, r! experience characteristic for Moldavia of establishing and develop-
ing international common-Soviet traits in the way of life of people from different
nationalities is typical for the entire nation. But typical does not mean the same.
The uniqueness in the domestic and spiritual culture of the nation's different
peoples influences their way of life and social conduct in the broad sense of this
word.

in the southern republics. from Moldavia to the Transcaucasus and particularly toward
Central Asia, the traditional standards of conduct are more apparent, particularly in
rural localities where the vestiges of the past are stronger and internationality
contacts more limited. This is reflected in all aspects of social conduct. Even
such active forms of social conduct as migration and social mobility are directly
correlated with the components of everyday culture. The more active the migration,
the smaller the family and vice-versa. The size of the family and migration from
the countryside are in an inverse dependence. The largest share of migrants is
among the Russians, Lithuaniana, Belorussiana, Latvians and Ukrainians; an average
share is found among the Kazakhs and Moldavians while the smallest is among the
peoples of the Tranacaucasus and Central Asia. The indicators of social mobility,
particularly for women, show the same correlation. The share of women performing
active production roles, like the number of migrants, is particularly high in the
Baltic followed by the RSFSR and then Moldavia; in last place are the Central Asian
republics. For example, while in Estonia more than one-half of the production roles
requiring mental labor (in the countryside) are performed by women, in Moldavia the
figure is one-fifth while in the Central Asian republics not more than 10 percent.
The average size of the family changes in an inverse proportion. In Estonia where
there is the largest percentage of women employed in skilled labor, the average
family size is the smallest with 3.1, in the RSFSR it is 3.8, in Moldavia 3.9,
Uzbekistan and Turkmenia it is 5.8-6 persona, that is, the more the women employed
in skilled labor the fewer the children and the smaller the family (a correlation

of 0.96). The unique features of domestic culture in the various peoples of course
influence all aspects and all spheres of the way of life.

The research has reconfirmed the unity and at the same time the national variation

of the way of life among the Soviet peoples, the relationship and interdependence of
Its various components. with the rapid transformation of the social bases of culture
and with the active and effective poliCy of international integration among the
peoples, national uniqueness has been preserved and this is relatively more expressed
in the cultural and domestic sphere of the way of life. The fact that, in borrowing
many values from international life and in acquiring international traits, people dr
not lose their national specific features in the way of life contributes to their
mutual enrichment and to the broadening of the general cultural fund of the Soviet
international community. The historic transformation and internationalization of the
various aspects of the way of life do not violate the ethnic specific features which
in one or another manifestation (or one or another degree) are preserved and express-
ed in the various elements of culture.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", 1980

10272
C80: 1800/706

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAT IONAL

SOCIOWICAL STUDIES AID IN SELECTION OF LBADUK: wonms IN GEORGIAN SSR

Moscow OBSHCHESTVBMYE NAUKI V 8851!: SERIYA I, PROBLDIY WCIINOGO WNW in
Russian No 3. Kay-Jun 82 pp 160-1“

[Review by I. L. Vsrtanov of the book "Deyatel'nost' partiynykh organizatsiy po
podhoru i vospitaniyu rukovodyashchikh kadrov v trudovykh kollektivakh" (Activities
of Party Organizations in Recruiting and Indoctrinating Leadership in Labor Collec-
tives) by R. D. Bugianishvili. Tbilisi. Sabchota Sakartvelo. 1981, 180 pages.]

[Text] In the party's policy of recruiting and proaoting leadership personnel [exec-
utive]. one of the Iain principles is its class nature and reliance on the working
class. Over recent decades the party has done a good deal to broaden the sphere of
use of intellectual labor in "direct production." The introduction and operation of
modern technology requires a necessary secondary and often higher education. Thus,
in Georgia around 1,400 workers with a higher education are industrial workers who
are specialists at industrial enterprises. Highly educated and politically inforned
workers conprise an inportant reserve for promoting the workers to leadership posi-
tions. However, sociological research at three enterprises in Tbilisi has disclosed
that only 50 percent of the persons questioned feel the constant concern of the
party organization for their professional and cultural-technical growth.

The monograph examines the soot important forms and methods employed by party organ-
izations, in particular in Georgia, for widely involving the workers in the sanage-
nent of production. the state and society. These are primarily the Georgian trade
unions which are "one of the leading detactnents of the Soviet trade unions" which
bring together 2,306,500 persons, including 1,250,000. or 56.2 percent of all the
trade union nubers, who are workers (p 32). Then cone the pernanent production
meetings (POPS) concerned with the questions of improving economic activities at the
enterprises. while in Georgia in 1976 there were 2,237 POPS including a neatership
of 91,300 persons, in 1979 the analogous indicators were 2.569 and 18$.b00 persons.
Soue 72.7 percent of the PDPS aabership is representatives of the working class.
The scientific-technical societies (N10) are still another effective scans for in-
creasing the level of scientific-technical knowledge and production skills of the
workers. The collectives of several najor enterprises in the republic, including the
Rustavi Metallurgical Plant. have cone forward with the initiative: "Each arm
Council is to be a Staff for Seeking Out Production Reserves." This initiative sup-
ported by the Georgian Co-Iunist Party [GCP] Central Co-ittee has brought good re-
sults. For exasple, in the republic in 1978, lore than 30,000 workers participated
in rationalization and invention work and the total economic effect fro. the intro-
duction of the inventions and rationalization proposals was around 65 nillion rubles.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAL LSE ONLY

In invrcaslng the creative activoness of the workers an important role is also played
by "making each worker aware of the questions of the state of production and the
prospects of its development" (p 39). In the author’s opinion. where these ques-
tions have been raised to the proper level, labor and social activeness among the
workers is much higher. In desiring to demonstrate the interdependence of these
parameters, the researcher has given the results of questions asked by him at the
following enterprises: Elektrovozoatroitel' [Electric Locomotive Builder], Stanko-
stroitel' [Machine Toll Builder) and the aviation plant. To the question: "Does
the leader sufficiently inform you about production and the prospects of its de-
velopment?" Affirmative answers were given, respectively. by 82.6, 76.8 and 85.3
percent. To the second question of whether the immediate leader provided help to

proving product quality, an affirmative reply was given by 67.8 percent of the per-
sons questioned at Elektrovozostroitel', 65.7 percent at Stankostroitel' and 78.5
percent at the aviation plant. Finally. to the third question of "Does your imme-
diate leader listen to your proposals and critical comments and does he respond cor-
rectly to them?" For the corresponding three enterprises, 84.3, 85.4 and 85 percent
of the persons questioned replied affirmatively.

The training and promoting of workers to the leadership of party and production
bodies remains a leading trend in party cadre policy. The Plenum of the 00? Central

raykoms and gorkoms. Sociolotical surveys among the low~ and middle-leaders at the
Tbilisi Elektrovozostroitel' and Stanknstroitel' enterprises and at the aviation
plant indicated that, respectively, 16.7, 27.4 and 30.1 percent of the persons ques-
tioned had begun work as ordinary workers. Here is visual confirmation, the author
says, that the leaders of the party, soviet and economic bodies are not only a tech-
nocrntic ”elite," as certain bourgeois ideologists assert, but are "the best, most
talented and competent representatives of the working class and the people as a

In the monograph much attention is given to the question of training and indoctrinat-
ing a leadership reserve. The work describes the experience of the Tbilisi GCP
Corkom. "The search for candidates to hold as a reserve for the position of the
gorkom nomenclature upon the assignment of the gorkom secretary was carried out by
the gorkom section” which scouted the given sector (p 86). Then the organisation
sector was involved in a preliminary examination of the selected candidates, inves-
tigating among other questions, such ones as the composition of closest relatives,
their occupation, attitude toward labor and to state discipline and so forth. In
the next stage, when the candidates were included in the reserve, there was a "test-
ing for the actual suitability of the candidate for working in the positions of the
gorkom nomenclature." Along with an assessment of the professional and political
qualities there was a "study of the way of life of the candidate, his relations
with the leadership and comrades of equal rank.... conduct in the family and in
everyday life and the determining of his moral qualities" (p 87). After this, there

25
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lullowed a series of trial training periods in responsible work (over a certain
period of time), with the next stage of establishing the public opinion about the
candidate (the questioning of superior leaders, subordinates, leaders of public or—
ganizations and so forth) and. finally, the examination and approval of the candi-
date ss a reserve of the party gorkom at a session of the party committee or bureau
or at a meeting of the aktiv or collective where the given candidate was directly emv
played.

According to the author, "the creation of a viable reserve for promotion is not only
a personnel problem but also a social one organically linked to the creation of a
good coral-psychological climate" in the labor collective (p 95). Practice confirms
that if a worker is confident in the prospects of his growth and in obtaining "more
resporaible work" in time, he will not leave the enterprise. Thus, the problems of
stability and the growth of leading personnel are solved more successfully.

The periodic certification of leading, engineer and technical workers and other spe-
cialists is also an effective means. At the same time certification activates the
involvement of the labor collectives (in the person of its representatives) in per-
sonnel work. In Georgia, definite experience in studying and forming a personnel
reserve has been acquired in this manner. From the results of the conducted certifi-
cation in the republic. of the 108,000 specialists lore than 91 percent were judged
as suitable for the positions held, around 3 percent were recommended by the commis-
sions for a promotion while an insignificant portion was considered unfit for the
position held. At the ministries and associations of the Georgian Ministry of Light
Industry they have introduced "a new scientifically based procedure for evaluating
the professional qualities of the employees" (p 109). Thus, a leader who has under-
gone certification is graded for 22 criteria using tests which define his ideological-
political level (5 criteria), professional competence (6 criteria). attitude toward
work (6 criteria) and organizational abilities (7 criteria). Characteristically, the
author notes, even in the course of certification carried out in this manner every-
where they noted a strengthening of production discipline and increased activity and
responsibility of the persons being certified for the assigned job.

The GCP Central Committee gives unflagging attention to the Harxist-Leninist and eco-
nomic education of the personnel. However, in the republic only 14 percent of the
higher level leaders and 25 percent of the middle level are engaged in improving
their skills, while more than 3.000 leaders (from the deputy ministers to the direc-
tors of large republic enterprises) virtually are not improving their skills. In

the aim of eliminating these shortcomings in the republic, an Institute for National
Economic Management under the Georgian State Committee for Science and Technology

has been set up. In working in close contact with the Academy for the USSR National
Economy, the institute should improve the skills of the higher level executives on

a basis of modern programs and advanced forms and methods of instruction.

As a whole the work of the republic party organizations to improve the skills of the
middle- and lower-level manageaent personnel is carried out in three areas. The
first is to increase the educational level of the leaders who do not have a higher
or specialized secondary education. The second is to have the leadership with a
higher or specialized secondary education master such areas of knowledge as econom~
ice, the scientific organization of labor, production management, labor law, psy-

chology, pedagogics and so forth. The third is the constant updating of the leaders'
knowledge during all their professional activities.

COPYRIGHT: ["10“ AN SSSR. 1982

10272
CSO: 1800/810 26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

INTEREST IN 'MBLB' WESTORS HIST BE CMATI’ED

Moscow OBSHCBBSTVENIIYYE NAUKI V SSSR: SERIYA I. PROBLDIY MUCHNOGO MI“ in
Russian No 3. Hay-Jun 82 pp 166-167

[Review by I. L. Vartanov of the article by R. Kosolapov "Current Affairs Journalisa
and Ideological-Moral Indoctrination" in the book ”Gorisonty publitsistiki: opyt i
problemy" (The Horizons of Current Affairs Journalism: Experience and Problems) com-

piled by V. K. Arkhipenko with an editorial board of P. P. Aleksayev and others.
Moscow, 1981, pp 6-24]

[Excerpt] Strict succession and consistency and the forming of collectivism against
individualism are a most important task in party current affairs journalism. It is
particularly important to remember this now when certain unpleasant trends are begin-
ning to appear. Thus, in certain circles of the intelligentsia we can observe a
craze "to seek out among one's ancestors persona of aristocratic origin" (p 20).
There has also been a gravitating toward the rehabilitation of odious individuals.
"Prince Kurhskiy and Nicholas I-good patriots? Salieri did not poison “start? Even
a moral opposing of the image of Selieri to the image of Mozart from the viewpoint

of indoctrination is more precious than disclosing any specific criminal deeds..."
(Ibid.).

Current affairs journalism also should not overlook attempts at a positive compar~

ison between small-scale production and large-scale production; this trend can also
be traced both in the "village prose" and also partislly in science and practice.

The process of indoctrinating the new Soviet man presupposes a decisive struggle
against such a negative phenomenon as self-interest and money grubhing. It is no
secret that some people derive their material prosperity from "not completely social-
ist sources“ and this gives rise to cynicism. Consequently, the task is to achieve
the shaping of reasonable needs among which ”a growing need for labor" would play
the dominant role.

The ideological struggle is a most essential concern in party current affairs journal-
ism. The author cautions that detente at no stage provides a pretext for euphoric
moods or the dulling of class awareness. In the dispute against Hestern opponents it
is essential to firmly show the inevitable demise of capitalism as a hopeless system
and, on the other hand, to bring out the prospects and advantages of socialism.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the absurd dispute about tha “right. of Inn.” Heetern ideologiete endeevor to
force us, the author writee. into n poeition of inferiority. "Our teek ie to drive
then into e poeition of inferiority end be e nirror for the pervereim of cepitel-

in" (pp 22-23).
COPYRIGHT: INIOII AII $883, 1982

10272.
cso: 1000st

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INWR‘OFiﬂC1AL USE‘DNLY

NATIONAL

TELEVISED PRESS CONFERENCES BY SOVIET LEADERS USEFUL FOR PROPAGANDA EFFORT

Moscow OBSHCHBSTVENNYYB NAUKI V 8881!: SERRA I, PROBLBH NAUGHNOGO mm in
Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 82 pp 172-173 '

[Review by I. L. Vertanov of the article "Invade Life," by I. Brodskiy in the book
"Gorizonty publitsistiki: opyt i problemy" (The Horizons of Current Affairs Journal-
ism: Experience and Problems), compiled by V. K. Arkhipenko; editorial collective
P.F.Alekseyev, et a1. Moscow, 1981, pp 200-206]

[Excerpt] He, 1. Brodskiy says, see our task in using the television and radio
broadcasting media for "actively invading life," to eradicate the negative phenomena
in it and thereby make it better and brighter. The central place in many TV and
radio broadcasts (the author is the chairman of the Sverdlovskaya Oblast Committee
for Television and Radio Broadcasting) is held by the problems of morality and
morals. Practice confirms that a broadcast is successful precisely when "that hot,
'painful' point has been chosen for it. that urgent moral problem which cannot help
but touch a raw nerve because it is universal and concerns and excite: people"

(p 206). This can be achieved in television press conferences which involve. on

the one hand, the TV viewers and, on the other, the leaders of the party and soviet
bodies. There has been a great propaganda in that from such series of broadcasts as
"He Answer Your Letters," "The Juvenile. a Difficult Situation" and "A Prank Talk”
or on the radio "Evening Talk." The main thing in such broadcasts is a delicate and
psychologically convincing analysis of characters. events and facts. Only in this
instance, in the author's opinion, can the reader or listener himself correlate what
he has heard and seen with his own experience in life and drew the necessary moral
conclusion which has been "preprogrammed by the journalist." This requires that the
TV and radio connentator find the most vivid images, the most expressive words and be
"quite an artist." "Artistry. as TV practice indicates. is a necessary property for
a commentator" (pp 205-206). This is that measure of emotional and expressive (eel-
ing. the “organicness and charn" without which any depth of thought. the author em—
phasizes. remains in vein. a "thing in itself."

COPYRIGHT: INION AN SSSR, 1982

10272
CSO: 1800/80?

29

INII‘OFFIC1A1.lh5Ii(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEUBOOK on CARBZRVALUBS 0P SW18? smears

Moscow OBSHCBBS‘I'VENNYY'B NAUKI V 8883: SERRA I. mam MGM towns“ in
Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 82 pp 120-127

[Review by P. I. Shlemin of the book "Sovetakoye studenchestvo: sotsiologicheskiy
ocherk" (The Soviet Students. Sociologin Sketch) by 1.. Ya. Rubina, Koscow, Hysl’,
1981. 207 pp]

[Excerpt] The third chapter is "Socioprofessionsl Orientation of the Student
Youth." The life plans link the subjective aspect of the process involved in repro-
ducing society's social structure with the objective situation. Here the total of
individual aspirations does not always adequately reflect the social needs of
society.

cent of the respondents questioned in 1973 and 69.2 percent in 1977. However, one-
third of the students decided this question a year or less before (p 8‘). However.
one—third of the students made their final professional choice during the year be-
fore adnission. and 11.6 percent directly in subnitting their documents to the V02.
Consequently. "initially the plan is formed for a certain social position and then
for a profession which will ensure this" (p 87). The conformity of the future
specialty to abilities and interesting work were nentioned as the predominant
motives for admission to a W2. Such reasons as "the lack of other choices," "the
proxisity of the W2 to the place of residence" and "the availability of s dormi-
tory" described those students whose plans had seemed a corresponding focus a year
or less before admission to the W2. This motivation can also be explained by the
attitude toward higher education as a Ileana of self-iaprovement and development

of the personality. But the main reason is the uncertainty of personal plans ex-
pressed in the desire to continue studying.

among students from different social groups were disclosed only in the plans for
founding a faaily. Along students coming from peasant families such intentions
were absent. 0n the other hand, they had a much stronger interest in social work
which ‘as clearly insufficient among children coming from white collar personnel.
As a whole, the life plans of the graduates. in comparison with the first-year
students, were less linked to the three-V02 experiences and social affiliation.
The V02 nilieu shapes the socialist attitude toward labor. Among a majority of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

students in aiming at the position of a specialist there was a predominance of a
high assessment of professional activity, its content and opportunities for the
creative development of the individual. Only in a few plans could one see s "in-
strumental" attitude toward labor. An awareness of a hunanistic role of education
was rather high and widespread (among 26 percent of the respondents). Such a view
is generally justified. At the same time. it "is related to an underestimation of

the production-economic function which at present is of the greatest significance... c
(p 101). The gradual reorientation of the youth from study in a VUZ as the basic

type of activity in life to study as a means of professional training is essential
in the aim of shaping a communist attitude toward labor.

The differences surviving among the students at the assent of completing the V02
basically have not a social origin but rather are determined by factors of the pro-
fessional and skill division of labor within the intelligentsia.

Among the costs of VUZ training and planning one must put the facts at virtually
one-half the graduates from the agricultural and pedagogical VUZes work in positions
not corresponding to their education. The graduates of universities are not willing
to work in schools and the turnover rate is high. At the same time, a certain lack
of a scientific and general educational viewpoint was noted in the graduates of the
pedagogical institutes and a lower degree of satisfaction with their labor. Only

30 percert of the engineers work in the specialty acquired during years of study

(p 121). Diploma specialists do not show any particular interest in working as pro-
duction leaders.

COPYRIGHT: INION AN SSSR. 1982

10272
cs0: 1800/802

31

FOR 0FF1CIAI.USE|DNLV
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NIH BOOK ou AMIIISTRATION 0F MIGRATIOII PATTERNS

Moscow OBSHCHESTVMYYB WI V 8883: SERRA I, P103134! momma warm in
Russian No 3, Hay-Jun 82 pp 71-78

[Review by P. I. Shlemin of the book "Rasseleniye naseleniya: (Oanovnyye. ponyetiya
i metody)" (The Migration of the Population (Basic Concepts and Method”) by
B. S. Khorev and S. G. Smidovich, Moscow, Pinansy i Statistika. 1981. 192 pages.)

[Excerpt] The aim of controlling migration processes in the USSR is to improve the
existing network of settlements and form the unified settlement systea (YeSR) of a
comnist society which would create uniformly favorable conditions for the life of
the population in various regions of the nation. The basic tasks in the control of
migration consists of the following: the most rational support for the planned
location of production with a network of population points of different types and
sizes; increasing the effectiveness of the settlement system. and particularly in-
creasing the share of the most promising cities with a population from $0,000 to
500,000 persons, the forming of the agroinduatrial cleexes and the reconstructing
of the settlaent network; providing maximum conveniences for the population; im-
proving the regional settlement systems and creating the prerequisites for the for-
mation of a nationwide YeRS.

The shortcoming of the conglomeration theory, in the opinion of the authors, is

that it presupposes the intensified development of conglaerations over the long run
outside the specific socioeconomic conditions and vim a conglomeration as the only
effective form of urban settlement, without taking into account also the unfavorable
ecological consequences of the excessive growth of the conglomerations. Under
Soviet conditions, "it is essential to work not for the maximum development of the
conglomerations but rather for their planned control. viewing than as one of the
forms of territorial settlement systus within the limits of the scheme for socio-

economic zoning" (p 116).

The settlement system is ultimately determined by the development level of the pro-
ductive forces. The more rapid growth of the latter in industry to a significant
degree has caused the rapid growth of the network of cities, the increasing of their
average sizes. the appearance of conglomerations and the accelerated development of
the urban type settlements. At the same time. the forms of rural settlement have
changed much more slowly and the level of providing the rural population with a pro-
ductian and domestic infrastructure is lower than in the city. From 1917 through
1977. 3-fold more funds were invested in induutry per worker than in agriculture,

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISF. ONLV

while in the nonproduction sphere 11-fold more was spent per urban dweller than per
rural inhabitant (p 123).

The task of reconstructing rural settlements is complicated by the sharp decline in
the total number of rural population and the number of rural settlements. by the
small size of the settlements, by the lack of the essential link in the development
of the cities and rural population points and by essential regional features of
rural settlement. Thus. in 1980, the size of the nation's rural population was 90
percent of the 1959 number (p 125). Only in 5 percent of the rural settlements did
the number of inhabitants exceed 1,000 persons. A large portion of the nation's
territory is outside the zone of influence of the large cities. Not more than 15
percent of the rural population lives within the limits of a 2-hour gross accessi-
bility of the city centers (p 127). Dissatisfaction with living conditions in the
countryside leads to a situation where in certain rayons the outflow of migrants ex-
ceeds the economically justified outflow of the population from agriculture. Obvi-
ously without solving the labor resource problems in the cities, it is impossible to
solve the labor resource problem in rural localities. Urbanization in certain re-
gions still outstrips the economic development of the countryside.

The authors note with satisfaction the decision of the USSR Gosgrazhdanstroy [State
Conmittee for Civil Construction and Architecture] to refuse to divide rural popula-
tion points into promising and unpromising. Such a division which was practiced up
to 1980 led merely to the unjustified migration of inhabitants of the "unpromising"
villages to the cities.

The fifth chapter is entitled "The Territorial Mobility of the Population." This
concept is used to designate the aggregate of moves by people with any degree of
duration as well as linked and not linked to a change in the place of residence and
the place of employment. According to the functional feature. the territorial mo-
bility of the people is divided into labor, cultural-domestic. official trips and
recreational. In terms of time it is divided into return (back-and-forth) and non-
return (resettlement). "The various forms of the migration mobility of the popula-
tion are unified by the co-onness of their position in the system of the territor-
ial division of labor" (p 135). In keeping with social progress. the migration
movement more and more becomes a socioeconomic necessity and as a whole increases.
The measures taken administratively to restrain various migration moves can tempo-
rarily limit the nature and quantitative manifestation of this law but not eliminate

the law itself.

Back-and-forth migration is of special significance. It is caused, on the one hand.
by the scarcity of labor resources. by the rapid growth in the number of jobs out-
side agriculture, by their concentration in the cities, by the attractiveness of
working in cities for rural inhabitants. by the availability in the cities of pro-
fessions which are not prestigious for the inhabitants of the given city and by the
insufficient rate of housing construction in the cities; on the other, by the de-
velopment of all types of transportation. The back-snd-forth migration contributes
to a rise in the material and educational level of the rural population, it creates
conditions for raising its social mobility and familiarizes them with the urban way
of life. At the same time it sustains the extensive development of the economy, it

worsens the qualitative structure of the labor resources at the points where the
back-and-forth migrants live, it aggravates the problem of transport and other serv—

ices in the cities and as a whole increases the load on the most developed centers.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1975, the national indicator for beck-and-forth nitration was 510 percent and this
exceeds the 1965 indicator by 1.5-fold. In Central Asia. Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan.
the indicator of back-and-forth nigration has varied free 11 to 30 percent and in
the Baltic fro. 82 to 108 percent (p 165). The rural. settlnents in the zone of
beck-end-forth migration are population points with the beet duographic indicators
and with good prospects for developeent. At the sane tine, the back-end-forth
migrants represent a neceesery structural sis-ant of the city.

The concluding. sixth chapter is devoted to the basic concepts in a formalised de-
scription of population settlenent.

COPYRIGHT: INION AN SSSR, 1982

10272
cs0: 13001799 END

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY