non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10558
2 June 1982

USSR Report

METEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 2. February 1982

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transaissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suI-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trsnsliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUELICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOSSO
2 June 1982

USSR REPORT

HETEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 2. February 1982

Translation of the Russian-language monthly journal METEOROLOGIYA I
GIDROLOGIYA published in Moscow by Gidromsteoizdat.

Courtu'rs

*l'neory of Anthropogenic Effects on Local Meteorological Processes in City....... 1

*Investigation of Stability of Regression Scheme for Predicting H500 Field for
Northern Hemisphere........................................................... 2

‘Statistics of Errors in Predicting Geopotential.............. . . . 3
*Parameters of Statistical Monitoring of Vertical Hind Profile. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lo
*Spatial Structure of Horizontal Flow of Atmspheric Moisture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
*Parameterization of Pluctuat ions of Stratospheric Ozone Content . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

Effect of Hater Temperature Anomaly in North Atlantic on Circulation, Thermal
Regime and Moisture Cycle in Northern Hemisphere Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

Numerical Experiments Hith Model of Active Layer of Ocean. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
*Criteria Characterizing Flow of Fluids With Stable Stratification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Dependence of Accuracy in Computations of Parameters of Sea Wind Haves on
Principal Have-Forming Factors............................................... 31

*Dispersion of Suspended Matter in Honogeneous Hater Flow 38
*Spring Snow Thawing and Evaporation in Central Yakutia......................... 39
*(‘anputing Optimum Density of Planted Fields. 40

‘Coaputing Optimum Grids for Regional Short-Range Heather Forecasting Models... . 41

 

a
Denotes items which have been abstracted.

- a - [III - USSR - 33 SST P00

POD nmnu ll“ MIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

" Applying Separating Function for Alternative Diagnoaia or Prediction Using
Dependent Predictora......................................................

*Heandars of Cromwell Current................................................
* Problems in Heteorologicel Inge Recognition................................
* Bightieth Birthday of Yeliuveta Luareebovna Andronikova
' Awerda at USSR All-Union Exhibition of Achieveuenta in National Bconomy.....
* At USSR State Comittee on Hydrometeorology end Environaental Monitoring... .
* Notes From Abroad...........................................................
* Obituary of Yevgeniy Konstantinovich Fedorov (1910-1981)....................

e
Denotes item which have been abstracted.

-b-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

#2
b3
(.6
65
66
(.7
1:8
«'09
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.588.?

THEORY OF ANTIIROPOGENIC EFFECTS OR LOCAL METEOROLOGICAL PROCESSBS III CITY

macaw urrsonomclu I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian no 2. leh 82 (manuscript received
15 Aug 81) pp 5-15

[Article by h. Ye. Berlyand. professor, and H. ll. Zashikhin. Main Geophysical
Observatory]

[Abstract] A study was nsde of an urban heat island, with cnphesis on formula-
tion of a theory of change in air tsnpersture and hunidity. as well as wind
velocity and the radiation regime in a city. and also the diurnal variation

and interrelationship of these paraneters. Allovance is made for the advective
influence of air flow onto an urban territory from its neighborhood. The nethe-
natical fornulation of the prohlea of nodeling urban nicrocliaate is based on
solution of a systen of equations for the influx of heat and noisture in the
atmosphere, thereal conductivity of the soil. continuity equation and equation
of motion. The initial parameters for solving the problea are velocity of the
geostrophic wind, lean daily te-peratures of the underlying surface and the
gradient of vertical temperature decrease in the air and soil. the degree of
mistcning of the underlying surface. as well as the thermal conductivity and
heat capacity coefficients, both in the city and outside it. In solving the
radiation part of the problem it is necessary to stipulate the optical thick-
ness and certain radiation characteristics of urban air basin contamination. A
series of 6 exaaples with different para-eters was investigated. The couputed
values of the intensity of the heat island, the nature of its change in the
course of the day in its annual variation, and also the dependence on vind vel-
ocity. altitude. etc .. agree well with the known results of nuaerous observa-
tions. Aaong the factors taken into account in the nodel are air contamination.
the degree to which the city is built up. changes in the characteristics of
heat and noisture exchange and release of heat due to econoaic activity. Such
computations and their analysis made it possible to examine differences in the
diurnal fluctuations of air teuperature. wind velocity and exchange coefficient,
as well as the development of radiation fogs in the city and outside it. Pig-
ures 3; references 19: 10 Russian. 9 Hestern.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0'00 551 . 509 . 3164551 . 5&7 . 3 (215-17)

INVESTIGATION OF STABILITY 0? 336338810“ 8039!! FOR PREDICTIN H500 FIELD FOR
HORNE!“ “9418?!!!”

ﬂoscow meonowctu I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Tab 82 (manuscript received
3 Jul 81) pp 17-25

[Article by V. A. Steblyanko. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences.
and A. A. Burtsev. 088R Hydroneteorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] In most statistical weather forecasting schemes there is an in-
crease in the prediction error with transition from a dependent to an inde-
pendent samplerbecause the evaluations of the correlations between the pre-
dicted parameter and the set of predictors obtained empirically using a de-
pendent sample do not have adequate stability. The authors have attelpted to
solve the problem of formulating a forecasting scheme which insofar as pos-
sible takes into account the lisited nature of the sample and nonstationarity.
The scheme hes an adaptive character (its parameters can be adjusted in depend-
ence on newly arriving intonation). The probles is solved by a combination of
the "moving control" and "screening" methods. The ample considered here is a
variant of prediction of the nesn monthly H500 field, as the predictors tak-
ing some paraneters characterizing the preceding months. As ssible predic—
tors use was nude of the expansion coefficients for the 0T1 field in the
latitude tone 100.79“ on the basis of mixed polynomials (Chebyshev polynosiels
along the neridien and trigonometric functions along the circles of latitude)
and the coefficients of expansion of the “500 field in :2». polar region in
natural orthogonal functions. An algorithn is proposed for la.V¢.t183t1n8 the
asymptotic behavior of the parameters of the vector of regression coefficients.
This algorithm is based on the Robbins-Munro stochastic approxisation proced-
ure. Evaluations of the quality of forecasts with choice of the predictors
only by the "screening" seth and also by the "screening" aethod in coabina-
tion with "moving control" are given. Tables 1; references: 7 Russian.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.313
STATISTICS OP ERRORS IN PREDICTING GEOPOTENTIAL

Moscow HETIOROLOGIYA 1 GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. tab 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) op 26-32

[Article by A. H. Babaliyev and V. V. Kostyukov. candidate of physical and math-

ematical sciences. Karaganda State University and Heat Siberian Regional Sci-
entific Research Institute]

[Abstract] An attempt is made to study the errors in two specific prognostic
models presently being used in the USSR on the basis of a series of statistical
characteristics. The first mdsl is a hemispherical model based on primitive
equations. making it possible to obtain forecasts for s hemisphere (Ye. Ye.
Kalenkovich, et al., CRISLENNYYE HBTODY RESIENIYA ZADACB ZMMZA POGODY I
OBSHCHEY TSIRKULYATSII moan”. Novosibirsk, We 80 AN 8881!, 1970). The fol-
lowing statistical parameters were used: relative error. correlation coefficient
between two random values. evaluation of similarity of evolution of fields of
predicted and actual trends, mean square error, mean aritheticel error. "signal
noise." equal to the ratio of the dispersions of the field of errors and the
actual field. mean values H“. Hp; and the standard deviations 0,: and or” of
the actual and predicted trends. These evaluations were computed separately for
different physiographic regions. Six regions were defined. Table 1 gives the
mean values of the evaluations for two- and three-day predictions of gsopoten-
tial at the SOO-mb level. The success differed considerably for different re-
gions. The relative errors of tun-day forecasts were minimum for Europe, and for
three-day forecasts -- for North America. whereas the greatest errors were for
the Pacific Ocean area. Also considered, on the same principles and employing
the same statistical criteria, was a model for a limited territory (regional
model) (C. R. Kontarev. 12V. AN 888R: PIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKBANA. Vol ll. No 3.
1975). This model is also based on primitive equations and was developed for
the Novosibirsk region. A table gives evaluations of daily forecasts with the
regional model tor the SOO-mb surface. In both cases there is a discussion of
the problems involved in taking the errors into account in order to increase
the quality of forecasts. Figures 6. tables 6; references: 7 Russian.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fillCNﬂﬂCIAl.USE(MVLY

UDC SSI.509.314+551.$5
PARAMETERS 0P STATISTICAL HDﬂITORIRG OP VERTICAL "IND PID?ILB

Moscow HBTEDROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received
26 May 81) pp 33-37

[Article by S. I. Gubenove end S. M. Olevskaya, candidates of physical and math-
enatical sciences. USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Research Center]

[Abstract] It is more difficult to monitor the wind than geopotentisl or temper-
ature. However. due to the recent availability of new data on the statistical
structure of wind components the authors undertook computations of the appro-
priate parameters for monitoring wind components at nine isobaric levels from
1000 to 100 mb. In seeking the parameters for vertical statistical monitoring
by the optimum interpolation method need was made of the detailed date on ver-
tical statistical structure of wind components in V. D. Kaznacheyeve. et el..
"Generalized Characteristics of Vertical Hind Correlations Over the USSR."
PRINBNENIYB STATISTICHESKIKB HITODOV V HITEOROLOGII. Moscow. Gidroseteoizdet.
1978. Since there is a dependence of the interlevel correlations of wind com-
ponents on season and latitude (the zones 65-60'N, north of 60’N and south of
45'" are defined), computations were made separately for these latitude zones
for winter and summer. A table gives the computed monitoring parameters for
both components for January and July. This table reveals that the influence
of season on the values of the weighting factors a1, b1 in the key formula is
insignificant, especially for the zonal component and can be neglected for all
zones and both components. However. there is a dependence of a1. b on lati-
tude. If the zone t,(65' is excluded, for the two remaining zones t is pos-
sible to use the same interpolation weights. It is shown that the at. b1 val-
ues can be employed in experimental computations in a vertical statistical
monitoring scheme. In a sample test with use of actual data from 173 stations
in the Soviet Union it was found that the standard deviations of the zonal
and meridional wind components were from b to 20 m/sec. Vertically these para-
meters change approximately identically; they increase with altitude to sons
level near 200-300 mb and decrease aloft. Tables 2; references 8: 7 Russian,

1 Western.

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.571(571.1)(576)
SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF RORIZORTAL FLOW 0F AMSPERIC MOISTURE

Moscow msoaomcna I GIDROIDGIYA in Russian lo 2, Feb 82 (unuscript received
25 May 81) PP 38-“

[Article by L. P. Kusnetsova and N. P. Chernova. candidates of geographical sci-
ences. Institute of Water Problems]

[Abstract] The authors have endeavored to apply the aerological nethod in con-
puting the water balance eleeents of river basins of different areas and eval-
uating the feasibility of the objective interpolation method in studying the
spatial structure of the horisontal flow of atmospheric moisture in the basins
of the 0b' and Irtysh Rivera. In' this article eqhasis is on determination of
the space correlation functions for the flow of ateospharic moisture. Much of
the article is devoted to detenination of the values of the correlation coef-
ficients for the latitudinal and longitudinal space correlation function in
different distance gradations for the four seasons of the year. It was found
that the fields of components of the flow of atmospheric moisture have a clear-
ly expressed anisotropy caused by the seasonal characteristics of circulation
of air nasses. It is further shown that the space correlation functions. comput-
ed independently of direction, provide no adequate infatuation on the structure
of the spatial correlations in the noisture transfer field. They are suitable
only for very approximate computations and for short distances. In the consid-
ered region this distance is 800-1000 km. approximately corresponding to the'
width of the sons of intensified westerly transfer. Correct computations of

the horizontal moisture flow require the use of a system of space correlation
functions computed for individual components of the moisture flow and for dif-
ferent directions. Figures 1, tables 3: references 9: 8 Russian. 1 Western.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“DC 551.510.536

PAWIZATION 0P FLUCTUATIONS 0P STRANSPIIBRIC om comm

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 (nanuscript received
b May 81) PP 55-50

[Article by 0. H. Pokrovskiy. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences.
and A. Ye. Kaygorodtsev. Main Geophysical Observatory]

{Abstract} In this study of the paraneterization of fluctuations of strato-
spheric ozone concentration the initial data used were the lean aonthly fields
of total ozone content during a 10-year observation period 1957-1967 in the
northern henisphere in a regular grid. Then using the Bozhkov latitudinal-sea-
sonal regression method it was possible to reconstruct the mean ozone concen-
tration (to be nore precise, its partial pressure) in nine ataospheric layers
situated between altitudes 5 and 55 ka. Conputations were nade for a 10-year
sample for the northern heeisphere for two seasons -- winter and sun-er. In
sun-er the naxieun concentration falls in the low latitudes in the middle
stratosphere where processes of photochenical reproduction of ozone are most
intensive. In winter there are two anonalous regions of naxinun concentra-
tions. The first is the high-latitude region where a large quantity of ozone

is accumulated. transported by neridional circulation. The second is the trop-
ical zone where the processes of photochelical reproduction of ozone and its
transport fron the southern henisphere are important. Maxinun turbulent trans-
port is in the high-latitude region, whereas transport by stationary waves pre-
dominates in the temperate latitudes. Ozone is transported from the summer hesi-
sphere into the winter hemisphere by seen aeridional circulation and toward the
poles by turbulent dynaaics. both the stationary and turbulent components of
ozone concentration fluctuations are approxinated quite well by eapirical or—
thogonal functions. The first three enpirical orthogonal functions satisfactor-
ily describe the spectrun of natural variations in the eeridional section.
Figures 3, tables 1; references 9: 1 Russian. 8 western.

6
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 551.465.7551 .Sl3(26l) (215-17)

EFFECT OF HATER TEMPERATURE WY IN NORTH ATLANTIC 0N CIRCULATION, THERMAL
REGIME AND WISTURE CYCLE IN NORTHERN WISHING ATMOSPHERE

Moscow “EmkoLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian lo 2, Feb 82 (unuscript received
27 May 81) pp 51-62

[Article by V. P. Heleshko, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences.
and A. P. Sokolov. Main Geophysical Observatory]

[Text] Abstract: A model of general circulation of
the atmosphere was used in investigating the
influence of the water temperature anomaly in
the North Atlantic on general circulation.
thermal regime and moisture cycle in the atmo-
sphere. A positive anomaly is stipulated in
the tone of active thermal interaction between
the atmosphere and the underlying surface. sit-
uated in the northeastern part of the Atlantic
Ocean. The state of the atsosphere in the north-
ern hemisphere in January was computed by naans
of integration of a system of equations for a
period of two months, with and without allowance
for the water temperature anomaly. The article
gives a detailed comparative analysis of atmo-
spheric characteristics for the northern hemi-
sphere and individual regions on the European
continent.

Introduction. Recently a number of interesting investigations directed to study
of large-scale interaction between the atmosphere and ocean and evaluation of
the influence of water temperature anomalies in the upper layer of the ocean
on general circulation and thermal regime of the atmosphere have been carried
out.

Bjerknes [19, 20] established that the formation of a positive thermal anomaly
in the equatorial zone of the Pacific Ocean is accompanied by an intensifica-
tion of the zonal current in the middle-latitude atmosphere in winter. In his
opinion. this correlation is governed by an increase in ascending movements

and water vapor condensation over the region of the anomaly. causing an intensi-
fication in meridional circulation in the Hadley cell and an increase in the

7
FIHIGDFFICIAI.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transport of the moment of momentum from the low latitudes into the middle and
high latitudes. In the example of anomalous weather conditions over the north-
ern part of the Pacific Ocean and North America lamias [25-27] demonstrated
that there is a correlation between atmospheric processes over these regions
and water temperature in the northern and central regions of the Pacific Ocean.
He also established that in a number of cases water temperature anomalies of a
considerable extent can persist for a period of several months and therefore
data on them are of definite prognostic value.

The problem of the influence of the North Atlantic on the formation of average
weather conditions over Europe and the territory of the USSR has been examined
in numerous Soviet and foreign studies. In most of these studies attempts have
been made to establish synchronous and asynchronous statistical correlations
between the thermal regime of the North Atlantic and atmospheric circulation. on
the one hand. and weather conditions over Europe and the European USSR. on the
other. For example. V. G. Semenov [lS] established that during the winter months
when there is a negative temperature anomaly in the northern part of the Atlan-
tic Ocean (to the west and southwest of Iceland) a zonal circulation is observ-
ed over Europe. whereas when there is a positive anomaly there is an intensive
meridional transport of air masses. he noted the existence of a feedback between
water temperature anomalies in the northern regions of the ocean and air temper-
atures over the European USSR in winter and their relatively weak direct correl-
ation during the summer months. It was noted in a study by S. T. Pagava. et a1.
[13] that in order to detect the correlation between the thermal state of the
North Atlantic and air temperature in Europe it is extremely important to take
into account not only heat exchange between the ocean and the atsosphere, but
also information on the type of synoptic processes. In another study [14]. s. T.
Pageva formulated the conditions under which there are direct and inverse rela-
tionships between air temperature in Europe and water tenperature in the Earth

Atlantic.

0n the basis of observational data Ratcliffe and Hurray [28] established that the
development of blocking anticyclones over Hestern Europe and Scandinavia is asso-
ciated with the appearance of negative anomalies over an extensive area of the
ocean to the south of Newfoundland and passage of active cyclones was associated
with the formation of a positive anomaly. Among the other studies in this direc-
tion here we should mention as well the investigations made by A. N. Kryndin

[8]. A. L. Kata. et al. [6]. N. A. Bagrov and U. l. Hertsalova [2]. A. L. Duy-
tseva and D. A. Ped' [S]. A. I. Ugryumov and A. P. Krupyanskaya [16], L. V. Kli-
menko and L. A. Strokina [7].

Although the inportant role of the ocean in the formation of weather on the con-
tinents. especially over Europe. has been confirmed by numerous investigations
and a great number of different prognostic procedures have been proposed. the
basis for which has been the correlations between individual characteristics of
the ocean and atmosphere. the quality of long-range forecasts still remains un-
satisfactory. The reason for such a situation is evidently the extreme diver-
sity of the processes of thermodynamic interaction both in the atmosphere itself
and in the ocean-atmosphere system caused by the operation of mechanisms with

feedbacks.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F1WC1Al.US£1DNLY

A number of hypotheses have been proposed in which the long-observed devel-
opment of anomalous weather conditions over individual regions of the earth
can be attributed to such factors as the development of stable anomalies in
the upper layer of the ocean. the anomalous extent of sea ice and snow cover
on the continents. etc. Among the investigations in which a study was made of
the influence of water temperature anomalies in the Pacific Ocean on atmospher-
ic circulation and certain hypotheses explaining the formation of anomalous
states of the atmosphere over the North American continent and other regions
of the earth were checked we should mention the studies of Spar [30. 31}.
Chervin. et al. [21]. Kutzbach [22]. Rowntree [29]. Shukla and Bangaru [32].
The studies of G. I. Harchuk. et a1. [9. 10] proposed a mathematical approach
based on integration of the conjugate equations of hydrothermodynamics of the
atmosphere and ocean which makes it possible to describe some asynchronous re-
lationships between the atmosphere and ocean and to determine thermally active
regions in the world ocean. exerting a considerable influence on the formation
of macroscale air temperature anomalies over individual regions of the earth.

[he Soviet program "Razrezy" will be an important contribution to study of the
processes of interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere for the purpose
of establishing a correlation between thermal and dynamic anomalies in the
ocean and formation of anomalous thermal and circulation regimes in the atmo-
sphere. Implementation of this program has already begun. Our investigation
was carried out in accordance with the plan for work under the mentioned pro-
gram.

Model of Atmosphere and Formulation of Experiment

The objective of our investigation was an evaluation of the influence of the
water temperature anomaly in one of the regions of active thermal interaction
between the atmosphere and ocean. situated in the North Atlantic. on general
circulation. thermal regime and moisture cycle in the atmosphere.

 

Fig. 1. Distribution of total heat Pig. 2. Position of region with water
flow (turbulent flow and heat loss- temperature anomaly ('C). The dashed

es in evaporation) computed using line defines three regions on the Euro-
atmospheric model for January ("I pean continent.

m2). Regions in which heat flow is
over 180 "In2 are shaded.

9
INDR*0Ff1C1A1.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some information on regions of an active thermal effect can be obtained from
the NEAT BALANCE ATLAS [l], which gives the distributions of turbulent heat
flows and heat expenditures on evaporation, computed for different months of
the year. According to the maps cited in the atlas, during the cold season of
the year the greatest total heat flow values, including the turbulent heat flow
and expenditures of heat an evaporation. are situated along the eastern shores
of the Asiatic and American continents, and also in the tropical zone.

Figure 1 shows the distribution of the mean total heat flow. computed by means
of a model of general circulation of the atmosphere for January conditions.
Figure 1 shows the distribution of heat flows to the atmosphere as a whole to be
in agreement with [1], although the region of great heat flows in the North At-
lantic in the model was displaced in the direction of the European continent.
Accordingly, for stipulating of ocean surface temperature anomalies we selected
a region situated in the northeastern part of the Atlantic Ocean in which the
computed total heat flows entering the atmosphere from the underlying surface
were the greatest (see Pig. 2).

The investigation was made using a model of general circulation of the atmo-
sphere developed at the Main Geophysical Observatory imsni A. I. Voyeykov. De-
tailed information on the model is given in [ll] and therefore it will only be
described briefly. '

The model has three layers of equal mass; the integration region is a hemisphere.
The geographical distribution of the continents and their relief is taken into
account. The mean horizontal grid interval is 625 km.

The model makes use of a full system of equations in hydrothermodynamics in an
cr-coordinate system. The principal physical processes operative in the atmo-
sphere are taken into account: transport of solar and long-wave radiation, tur-
bulent exchange in the boundary layer, macroscale condensation and convection,
hydrological regime of the active soil layer and mesoscale diffusion. The flux
of solar radiation reaching the upper boundary of the atmosphere is computed
taking into account the temporal change in mean daily solar altitude. The quan-
tity of two-level clouds is determined using empirical expressions on the basis
of the relative humidity values in the corresponding layers of the atmosphere
computed in the model.

An evaluation of atmospheric response to water temperature anomalies at the ocean
surface was made in two numerical experiments. In the first of these the water
temperature was assumed equal to its climatic value (with seasonal changes taken
into account). Henceforth for convenience in exposition we will call this experi-
ment the control (CE). In the second experiment the values of the anomalies were
added to the climatic water temperature values in the region shown in Pig. 2.
Both the value of the anomaly itself and the horizontal extent of the region of
its stipulation were considered constant during the entire integration time. He
will call these computations an experiment with an anomaly (AB).

In each experiment the system of equations was integrated for 60 days with the
use of real initial data, which corresponded to 1 December. The computations

were analyzed for the period from 31 to 60 days of the forecast. corresponding
to January.

10

FOR OFF1CJAL.USEZ(N‘LY
v: ..- ,..LJ.I\\ .‘ .
ﬁcwdwﬁ. . #7?
«LI... _ a
I ﬁ. 43... m. . u

- «WM%¢WQ -
ed using data from 4
ill-2 ) 2nt underlying
0 ill-2 are denoted 1
denoted by light 81
crest-hatched); c)
ions with positive ‘
stun trnnsport (3/
cross-hatched) .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In discussing the rusulta it must be remembered that the differences between
the variables represented in the figures were obtained by subtracting the
values computed for the CE experiment from the corresponding values obtained
in the AB experiment.

Change in Circulation, Thermal Regine and Moisture Cycle in Northern Hemisphere
Atmosphere

In the formation of a positive water temperature anomaly the lower layers of the
troposphere began to receive additional heat over the region with an anomaly due
to an increase in the vertical transport of turbulent heat and the latent heat
of condensation. The quantity of the additional heat influx is dependent on
changes in the vertical drop in temperature and specific humidity, and also on
stratification of the lower layer of the troposphere.

Table 1

Quantity of Turbulent Heat Plow H and neat Losses
in Evaporation LB. Computed in AB and KB Exper-
iments for 31-60 Days of Forecast Over Region

with Water Temperature Anomaly

Heat flow, "In? cs as
H 81 206
L8 139 195

Table 1 shows that as a result of the effect of these anomalies the total heat
flow increased by a factor of 1.8. This change occurred for the most part due
to an increase in the turbulent heat flow.

It is interesting to note that with an increase in water temperature by 1°C the
computed changes in the heat flows considerably exceed the corresponding changes
in the flows obtained in [22] for the northern part of the Pacific Ocean. This
is evidently attributable to the fact that the thermal interaction between the
atmosphere and ocean in the northeastern part of the Atlantic Ocean is more in-
tensive than in the northern and northeastern regions of the Pacific Ocean (see

Fig. 1).

The computed changes in some characteristics of the moisture cycle, and also the
thermal and circulation regime of the northern hemisphere as a result of the ef-
fect of ocean temperature anomalies,are shown in Pig. 3.

Although the general picture was quite complex. from a comparative analysis of
the cited fields it is possible to establish a number of interesting peculiar-
ities.

Considerable changes in the total heat flow were obtained not only in the water
temperature anomalies. but also in other regions of the northern henisphere.
The greatest changes in the heat.flows are concentrated in regions of active

13

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE10NLY
FORIOFEKJAI.USE(MQLY

thermal interaction between the atmosphere and the underlying surface situated
in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (Fig. 3a).

A macroscale cyclonic eddy in the field of differences in the horizontal velo-
city vector. whose axis is somewhat tilted to the east with an increase in alti-
tude. is formed over the region with the anomaly (Fig. 3b). Hacroscale eddies
with cyclonic or anticyclonic rotation in the field of differences in the hori-
zontal velocity vector are observed in other regions of the northern hemisphere.
The lost intense eddies are formed near the eastern shores of the continents.
that is, over regions of active thermal interaction between the atsosphere and
the ocean surface.

It can be noted from a comparison of figures 3a and 3b that the formation of cy-
clonic eddies in zones of active thermal interaction is closely associated with
the sign of the difference in total heat flows: positive flow differences cor-
respond to cyclonic eddies and negative flow differences correspond to anticy-
clonic eddies.

The air temperature in the lower troposphere increases to the southeast of the
region with the anomaly and decreases to the north of it (Fig. 3c). Air temper-
ature changes which are large in absolute value and different in sign are observ-
ed at considerable distances from the North Atlantic. It should be noted that the
regions of increase (decrease) in temperature Agree well with the corresponding
regions of decrease (increase) in pressure. reduced to sea level. Large pressure
differences are observed prinarily over the continents in the middle and high
latitudes. The Icelandic and Aleutian lows were somewhat transformed: the first
extended in the direction of Western Europe. the extent of the second decreased.
An example of the important role which is played by circulation factors in forma-
tion of the thsrnal regime of the atmosphere is the temperature distribution
directly over the region of the ocean surface temperature anomaly. In the north-
ern part of this region. at altitudes of about 1.5 kn, there is a rather consid-
erable decrease in air temperature which is associated, as indicated by Fig. 3b.
with the formation of the mentioned cyclonic cell. and as a result, with the
transport of cold air masses into the Atlantic Ocean area from the northern part
of the_£uropean continent.

The problem of why in the A! experinent there was a change in the circulation and
thermal regime of the atmosphere in regions situated at a considerable distance
from the North Atlantic is quite complex. One of the possible explanations of
this phenosenon is as follows.

The heating of the lower layer of the troposphere over the region with the water
temperature anomaly favored a decrease in air density in a column of the atmo—
sphere and a redistribution of mass in the northern hemisphere. This was the
reason for some change in circulation. Since the water tenperature did not change
over other parts of the oceans in the AB experiment, the turbulent flows of heat
and the expenditures of heat on evaporation could change only as a result of

a change in wind velocity, air temperature and humidity in the lower troposphere.
These changes to a great extent are dependent on stratification of the planetary
boundary layer. The greatest heat flow changes can be expected in tones of ac—
tive thermal interaction. where the stratification of the lower layer is

14
FOR OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unstable in comparison with other regions. As a result. the initially arising
changes in circulation and the thermal regime in the lower troposphere can in-
crease over the zones of active thermal interaction as a result of the influence
of mechanisms with positive feedbacks.

The fact that substantial changes in pressure and temperature are observed not
only near the region with the water temperature anomaly. but also at a consider-
able distance from it. serves as a confirmation of the well-known hypothesis

of the existence of a conjugate character of atmospheric processes in individual
regions of the earth. For example, Spar [31] noted that in the modeling of glo-
bal circulation with a water temperature anomaly in the northern part of the
Pacific Ocean considerable pressure changes were discovered in the middle lati-
tudes of the southern hemisphere.

An analysis of the results of computations also reveals that in regions with the
greatest air temperature differences, which are situated primarily over the con-
tinents. the greatest temperature dispersion values also occur. These features
are in qualitative agreement with the empirical investigations carried out earl-
ier. For example. on the basis of an analysis of the natural orthogonal func-
tions for the temperature and pressure fields in the northern hemisphere N. I.
Yudin [18]. A. V. Heshcherskaya, et al. [12] studied oscillatory processes on a
planetary scale. In the temperature and pressure fields there was found to be a
number of nodes of different sign which resemble standing waves in the atmosphere
of the thermopressure seiche type described by V. V. Shuleykin [17]. A study by
E. I. Girskaya [4] also revealed macroscale temperature variations in individ-
ual regions of the northern hemisphere for different months.

Figures 3d and 3e give the differences in the intensity of precipitation and the
vectors of horizontal transport of moisture in the atmospheric layer 600-1000
gPa. Figure 3d shows that the zone of a considerable increase in precipitation
in the AB experiment is situated along the southern regions of the European con-
tinent and over the greater part of the North Atlantic. It is noteworthy that

an increase in precipitation occurred not only to the east of the anomaly. but
also in a westerly direCtion as far as the North American continent. that is,

opposite the main west-east transport of air masses.

Figures 3b and 3e show that in addition to the formation of a cyclonic eddy an
eddy of similar intensity was formed over the second region of active thermal
interaction between the atmosphere and ocean situated in the region of the Gulf
of Mexico (see Fig. I). As a result. these two eddies formed an intercontinental
circulation cell whose northern branch carries cold air onto the North American
continent from the eastern regions of Europe and the polar basin, whereas the
southern branch transports warm and moist air from the region of the Gulf of
Mexico onto the European continent and then to the Caspian Sea. As a result of
intensification of the zonal wind component along the southern branch of the

circulation cell evaporation from the ocean surface also increased in this zone.

Extensive regions with considerable differences in precipitation are observed in
other regions of active thermal interaction between the atmosphere and ocean and

the continents adjacent to it. The sign of change in precipitation agrees quite
well with the nature of change in the horizontal transport of moisture in the

15
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the continents precipitation increases in
sture in the field of differ-

posphere. In particular.
gions of the ocean

re the horizontal transport of .01
nd decreases in those re

.098! tro

those places vhe

ences is directed iron the ocean a

rt occurs from the continent.

where the corresponding trenspo

      

1M!!!"

(0 n Axum
I” 533’. 0 0 ll 3' 9' 1M "0 "I. 0

0 H I! :1! l"

Eurasia America Eurasia America

tude of 500 gPa sur-
experinent; b) wave
CE experiment; d) vsve

deviations of alti

uubers l and 2, CE
numbers 5 and 6.

e-tine distributions of

face (den) from zonal values. a) wave n
numbers 1 and 2, AE experiment: c) wave
nuﬂers 5 and 6. AE experiment.

Table 2

Fig. lo. bongitud

uare of Amplitude of Altitude of 500 gPa lsobaric Surface on
nd CE Experiments

Dependence of Sq
ude Zone SO-60‘N According to All a

Wave Nunber for Latit

Have Number
1 2 3 lo 5 6 7 8 9 10
CE 37.5 50.6 21.0 18.6 114.7 11.0 9.0 6.5 2.14 5.3
AE 19.8 88.9 11.3 18.0 25.7 20.6 9.7 5.0 3.7 6.1:

ges in Amplitude and Velocity of

e the influence of the water temperat
f wave disturbances in the stmosph
h the anomaly.

Chan

Now we will ennin

city of propagation o
passing through the region wit

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2 shows that considerable changes were exhibited by the amplitudes of
planetary waves with the numbers 1, 2 and 3 which are determined by the value
of the thermal contrast between the continents and oceans. The formation of an
anomaly in the North Atlantic favored an intensification of an ultralong wave
with the number 2 to a considerable degree at the expense of waves 1 and

3. The energy of baroclinic waves with the numbers 5 and 6 also increased ap-
preciably.

The evaluations show that in the considered latitude tone the energy of all the
waves increased by 182 in the middle troposphere. The energy of planetary waves
with the numbers 1. 2. 3 increased by 101 (with an increase in the energy of the
wave with the number 2 by 802), the energy of the baroclinic waves with the num-
bers S, 6 -- by 762. and the energy of all the shorter waves -— by 82.

Figure 6 gives the longitude-time diagrams (distributions of troughs and ridges)
for two groups of waves whose diameters were subjected to an appreciable change:
planetary waves with the numbers 1 and 2 and baroclinic waves with the numbers

5 and 6. These diagrams were constructed on the basis of data on the change in
the altitude of the isobaric surface 500 gPa from 31 through 60 days for the
latitude zone SO-60’N.

It follows from Figures 6a.b that an increase in the amplitude of the planetary
wave with the number 2 and attenuation of a wave with the number 1 in the AE ex-
periment caused an intensification of the ridge over the Pacific Ocean and a
trough over the North American continent. With respect to the trough over Eurasia
its intensity almost did not change, but it became less mobile in the AB experi-
ment.

The intensity of the troughs and ridges, which correspond to baroclinic waves
with the numbers 5 and 6 (Fig. 4c.d). increased over the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans and North America in the AB experiment. Moreover, whereas in the CB ex-
periment the ridges and troughs over North America and the Pacific Ocean were
motionless or moved little. in the AB experiment they became deeper and more
mobile. The mean velocity of their movement to the east was about l30/km day at
all longitudes.

A similar spectral analysis of altitude of the $00 gPa surface was made for the
latitude zone bO-SO'N. that is. to the south of the anomaly. which also indicat-
ed that the amplitudes of the baroclinic waves with the numbers 5 and 6 somewhat
increased. whereas the troughs and ridges became more mobile. If it is assumed
that the mentioned baroclinic waves correspond to large pressure formations in
the atmospheric model. it can evidently be assumed that in the formation of a
positive water temperature anomaly there is an intensification of cyclonic

(anticyclonic) activity and a meridional type of circulation in the middle lati-
tudes of the northern hemisphere.

Regional Changes in Precipitation and Thermal Regime Over European Continent
For a more detailed clarification of the mechanism of the influence of the water

temperature anomaly in the North Atlantic on the thermal regime of the atmosphere
over the European continent this continent was broken down into three major

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICﬂWNCJAl.lEﬂE(M‘LY

regions (see Fig. 2): northwestern regions of the USSR and Scandinavia (region
1). Western Europe (region 2), central and southern regions of the European
USSR (region 3). These regions include 9. 12 and 12 points of grid intersection.

Table 3 shows that temperature changes in different regions of Europe are not
identical. In western Europe (region 2) and in the European USSR (region 3) the
temperature of the troposphere increased, especially significantly in the first
of the mentioned regions. 0n the other hand, over the northwestern regions of
the USSR and Scandinavia it decreased at all levels in the atmosphere.

As indicated by Figures 3b and 3e. the main reason for the temperature increase
in the troposphere over regions 2 and 3 was an increase in the horizontal trans-
port of heat and humidity from the Atlantic Ocean onto the continent by the
southern branci of the intercontinental circulation cell. whereas the decrease
in temperature over region 1 was caused by an intensification of the horizontal
transport of cold air masses from the internal regions of the continent. Hith
respect to the insignificant decrease in temperature at the level 150 gPa over
all the regions, it was caused by a general attenuation of west-east transport
over Europe.

Table 3

Mean Differences Between Air Temperatures ('C) at Four Atmospheric Levels. Com-
puted Using Data From AE and CE Experiments for Three Regions in Europe for
31-60 Days of Forecast

Changes in air temperature Region
1 2 3
31150 -0.6 0.2 -0.1
éiggg 3:: 2:: 2:2 _
811000 -2.9 5.2 1.6
Table 6

Mean Intensities of Precipitation (in cm/day) Obtained in AB and CE_Experiments
for Three Regions for 31-60 Days of Forecast

Experiment Region

1 2 3
CH 0.27 0.27 0.19
AB 0.19 0.60 0.22

Table 4 gives the mean intensities of precipitation obtained in the AE and CE
experiments. In regions 2 and 3 precipitation increased by 58 and 162 respec-
tively, whereas in region 1 it increased by 302. With respect to surface pres-
sure, it decreased in all three regions: in the first -- by 6.0 gPa. in the
second -- by 11.5 gPa. and in the third —- by 6.1 gPa. Thus. in the AB

18

FOR‘OFFKJALIEEZONLY
FOR‘OFTWCIAL USE(NNLY

experiment over a large part of the European continent there was a warming in
the troposphere and an increase in the quantity of precipitation and only
over Scandinavia and the northwestern regions of the USSR did the temperature
drop and did the quantity of precipitation decrease.

Statistical Significance of Changes in Temperature and Precipitation

The question of the extent to which these changes in the thermal regime in the
troposphere and precipitation are statistically significant is of definite
interest. As a significance test we will examine the ratio [26]

l

I'. = c—'.
Here A - 5A - BK is the difference in two sample means in which 3A and 3K are
the mean monthly values of the variable 3 in experiments with allowance for the

stipulated water temperature anomaly and without allowance for it. (7% is the
mean square error in evaluating the mean.

The volume of the sample which is used in evaluating significance is very limit-
ed and therefore the evaluations obtained here must be regarded as extremely ap-
proximate. The evaluation of significance was made on the basis of 30 instant-
aneous states of the atmosphere with a time interval of one day. The mean

square error (7% was computed taking into account that the variables entering
into the time series are not random. First, on the basis of the results of numer-
ical experiments we determined the time autocorrelation function for temperature
at the level Cr- 0.833 and precipitation separately over the continents and
oceans in the middle and low latitudes. A comparison of the four normalized
functions for each variable indicated that the differences between them are in-
significant. Accordingly. in the r0 evaluations we used one (but different for
temperature and precipitation) normalized autocorrelation function. which was
approximated by an analytical formula ensuring its positive determinancy. The
evaluations indicated that the changes in temperature in the lower troposphere
were significant ( |ro |>rl) over great regions of the northern hemisphere, in-
cluding Hestern Europe and the European USSR.

Similar evaluations were made for precipitation and indicated that for the north—
ern part of the Atlantic Ocean, Europe. Par East and Southeast Asia the computed
changes are also statistically significant.

Summary

The results of the numerical experiment and the model of general circulation of
the atmosphere indicated that the influence of the positive water temperature
anomaly in the ocean on general circulation. thermal regime and moisture cycle
in the atmosphere is manifested very complexly. In the formation of an anomaly
in the northeastern part of the Atlantic Ocean there is an appreciable increase
in temperature of the troposphere and an increase in precipitation over western
Europe and a considerable part of the European USSR. 0n the other hand. a de-
crease in air temperature and decrease in precipitation occur in the northern
regions of Europe.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Changes in the therlal regime of the atmosphere are also observed in other re-
gions of the northern hemisphere: air temperature increases in the Far East

and in Alaska and decreases over the polar basin and over the greater part of
the north American continent. Substantial changes in precipitation are discover-
ed in the low latitudes. Macroscale pressure formations became more intensive
and mobile in the aiddle latitudes in the AB experiment.

The additional heat flow entering the atsosphere over the region with the water
temperature anomaly causes a redistribution of atmospheric mass and a change

in circulation. This is evidently the principal factor favoring appreciable
changes in heat transfer to the atmosphere over other regions of active ther-
nal interaction. The value and the sign of these changes are determined by the
complex of physical processes with feedbacks, so that it is extremely difficult
to establish a cause-and-effect sequence for these processes.

In this connection it is worth noting further investigations directed to the de-
ternination of the conditions under which the intensity of heat transfer from
the underlying surface to the atmosphere can change substantially in the re-
gions of active thermal interaction quite remote from the regions of formation
of water temperature anomalies in the ocean.

we note in conclusion that the results obtained in this investigation to a cer—
tain degree are dependent on the properties of the atmospheric model. in partic-
ular. on the presence of a boundary at the equator. methods for the parameterira-
tion of physical processes. etc. Tor this reason it is desirable to carry out
similar investigations with other atmospheric models.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. ATLAS TBPLOVOGO BALANSA ZEHNOGO SHARA (Atlas of the Earth's Best Balance),
edited by H. l. Budyko, Moscow, 1963.

2. Bagrov. N. A. and Hertsalovs. N. 1., ”Thermal Interaction Between the Ocean
and Atmosphere." TRUDY GIDROHBTTSENTRA 888R (Transactions of the USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center), No 66. 1970.

3. Bjerknea, 3., "Hacroscale Disturbance of Atmospheric Circulation Caused by
the Possible Influence of the Pacific Ocean Equatorial Zone," DINAMIKA
KRUPNOHASSRTABNYKB ATHOSFERNYKB PROTSESSOV (Dynamics of Hacroscsle Atmospher-
ic Processes). Moscow. Nauka, 1967.

a. Girskaya. E. 1.. SOPRYAZHENNOST' TEMPERATURNYKH ANONALIY SEVERNOGO POLUSHAR-
IYA (Conjugate Nature of Northern Hemisphere Temperature Anomalies). Lenin-
grad, Author's summary of dissertation, Leningrad. 1971.

S. Duytseva. M. A. and Ped'. D.. "Degree of Influence of Thermal State of Water
in the North Atlantic on Formation of the Temperature Field Over the Contin-
7 ent,” TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA $558. No 93. 1972.

6. Kate, A. L.. Horskoy. G. I. and Semenov. V. 6., "Formation of Large Air Tem-

perature Anomalies Over the Territory of the USSR During Winter," TkDDY TsIP
(Transactions of the Central Institute of Forecasts), No 29. 1957.

20
10.

ll.

12.

13.

11¢.

15.

l6.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Klinenko. L. V. and Strokins. L. A.. "Correlation Between Change in Heat
Content of Haters in the North Atlantic and Air Temperature Over the Euro-
pean Territory of the USSR During "inter," TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the
Main Geophysical Observatory). No 269, 1969.

Kryndin. A. N.. "Role of the North Atlantic in Formation of Air Temperature
Over the European Territory of the USSR." TRUDY GIDW’ISMA SSSR, No 23.

1968 .

Marchuk, G. I. and Skiba. Yu. N., OB ODNOY MODELI PROGNOZA OSRBDNENNTIB
ANOMALIY TEMPERATURY (One Model for Predicting Averaged Tesperature Anom-
alies), Preprint We 80 AN SSSR, Novosibirsk. 1978.

Marchuk, G. 1.. "Modeling of Changes in Climate and the Problem of Long-
Range Heather Forecasting." MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and
Hydrology), No 7, 1979.

Meleehlw, V. P.. et al., "Hydrodynamic lbdel of General Circulation of the
Atmaphere." TRUDY GGO (Transactions of the Main Geophysical Observatory).
No 610, 1980.

Meahcherskaye, A. V.. Rukhovets, L. V., Yudin, M. I. and Yakovleva. N. I.,
YESTESTVBNNYYE SOSTAVLYAWSBCBIYE MTBOROLOGICBESKIKH POLE? (Natural Goapon-
cuts of Meteorological Fields), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, 1970.

Pagava. S. T.. et al., VLIYANIYE SEVERNOY ATLANTIKI NA RAZVITIYE SINPTICH-
ESKIK}! PROTSBSSOV (Influence of the North Atlantic on the Development of
Synoptic Processes). Leningrad. Gidroneteoiadat. 1958.

Pagava, S. T.. "Nature of the Correlation Between the Thermal State of the
North Atlantic and Air Temperature in Europe," METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA.

No l, 1962.

Senenov, V. 6., VLIYANIYE ATLANTICHBSKOGO OKEANA NA 332th TEMPERATURY l
OSADKOV NA YeTS (Influence of the Atlantic Ocean on the Temperature and

Precipitation Regime in the European USSR), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat.

1960.

Ugryumov, A. I. and Kupyanakaya, A. P., "Some Correlation: Between Tempera-
ture of the Ocean Surface and Atmospheric Circulation in the North Atlan-
tic," TRUDY GIDRWE'I'I'SENTRA SSSR. No 147, 1975.

Shuleykin, V. V., "Macroacale Interactions Between the Ocean, Atmosphere
and Continents." PROBLEMY SOVRWNOY GIDROMBTmROLOGII (Problem in Mod-
ern Hydroseteorology). Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat, 1977.

Yudin, M. I.. "Study of Factors Governing Nonatationary State of General
Circulation of Atmosphere." DINAMIKA KRUPNOMASSHTABNYRB AWSFBRNYKB

PROTSESSOV (Dynamics of Macroscale Atmospheric Processes), Moacou, Nauka.
1967. '

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ejerknes. J. A.. "A Possible Response of the Atmospheric Hadley Circula-
tion to Equatorial Anomalies of Ocean Temperature." TELLUS. Vol 18, No 6.
1966.

Bjerknes. J.. "Atmospheric Teleconnections From the Equatorial Pacific."
nos. HEATHER REV” V01 97. No 3. 1969.

Chervin, R. 11.. Washington. H. H. and Schneider. 8. 11.. "Testing the Statis-
tical Significance of the Response of the NCAR General Circulation Model to
North Pacific Ocean Surface Temperature Anonalies." J. Amos. 801.. Vol 33.
No 3. 1976.

Kutzbach, J. K.. et a1., "Response of the NCAR General Circulation Model to
Prescribed Change in Ocean Surface Temperature. Part I: Hid-Latitude

Changes," J. A1103. 501.. Vol 34. No 8. 1977.

Laurman. J. A. and Cares. H. 1... "Statistical Considerations in the Evalu-
ation of Climatic Experiments With Atmospheric General Circulation Models."
J. ANS. $01.. Vol 36. No 8, 1977.

Leith. C. E.. ”The Standard Error of Time-Average Estimates of Climatic
Means," J. APPL. "21301101... Vol 12. No 9, 1973.

Namias. J ., "Seasonal Interactions Between the North Pacific Ocean and
the Atmosphere During the 1960s." HON. HEATHER REV., Vol 97. No 3. 1969.

Namias, J .. "The 1968-1969 "inter as an Outgrowth of Sea and Air Coupling
During Antecedent Seasons," J. PHYS. OCEAMGR.. Vol 1. No 2. 1971.

Namias, J.. "Negative Ocean-Air Feedback Systems Over the North Pacific in
the Transition Prom Harm to Cold Seasons," HON. WEATHER REV.. Vol 1015, No

9. 1976.

Ratcliffe. R. A. 8. and Murray. R., ”New Lag Associations Between North
Atlantic Sea Temperature and European Pressure Applied to Long-Range
Weather Forecasting." QUART. J. ROY. METEOROL. SOC.. Vol 96. No (.08 [year

not given].
Rovntree. P. R., "Statistical Assessment of Sea," SER., Vol 1, No 22. 1979.

Spar, J.. "Some Effects of Surface Anomalies in a Global General Circula-
tion Model." NOR. HEATHER REV.. Vol 101. No 2, 1973.

Spar. J.. "Transequatorial Effects of Sea Surface Temperature Anomalies in
a Global General Circulation Model." HON. HEATHER REV.. Vol 101, No 7,
1973.

Shukla, J. and Bangaru. 3.. "Effect of a Pacific Sea Surface Temperature
Anomaly on the Circulation Over North America: A Numerical Experiment
With the GLAS Model." CARP PUEL. SER.. Vol 1. No 22. 1979.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.66.01.001.57:551.5
NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS WITH I‘DDBL 0P ACTIVE LAY. OP OCEAN

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received
9 Apr 81) PP 63-68

[Article by V. A. Ryabchenko. candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
Institute of Oceanology, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: An integral model of the active layer
of the ocean [b] for taking into account the
feedback between the heat flow at the water-
air boundary and temperature of the ocean.sur-
face is given. Results of computations of the an-
nual variation of temperature in the upper
quasihomogeneous layer in the region of
weather station N agree well with observation-
al data. The results of numerical experiments
are given. These illustrate the sensitivity
of the solution to variations in parameters
of the model. It is shown that the reaction of
the solution is substantially greater with the
variation of the external (atmospheric) para-
meters and weaker with the variation of the in-
ternal parameters.

The authors of [4] proposed an integral model of the active layer of the ocean
based on the assumption of a proportionality between integral dissipation and
the production of turbulent energy of mechanical and convective origin. At the
same time it was assumed that mechanical turbulent energy dissipates complete-
ly within the limits of the Ekman boundary layer. The model was used for comput-
ing the seasonal evolution of characteristics of the active layer in the region
of weather station N in the Pacific Ocean. The results of computations of the
annual variation of temperature and thickness of the upper quasihomogeneoua
layer (UQL), although they do not contradict the observational data, neverthe-
less differed appreciably from them. Suffice it to aention that the computed
values of temperature of the UQL during the period of the maximum of summer
heating were 2-2.5'6 higher than the observed values. One of the possible ex-
planations for the noted discrepancy is the absence of allowance for a feedback
between the heat flow at the water-air discontinuity and the temperature of the
ocean surface (we recall that in [k] the heat flow values at the ocean surface

23

FOIIOFFKJA1.US£(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

were considered stipulated). In this article we will attempt to eliminate
this limitation and we will cite the results of numerical experiments illus-
trating the sensitivity of the solution to variations of different kinds of

parameters of the model.

The seasonal evolution of the active layer of the ocean in the case of weak hor-
izontal advection and diffusion can be described using the following system of
equations for temerature Ts in the UQL, temperature 1' at the upper boundary
of the seasonal theraocline. thickness h of the UQL any turbulent heat flow on

at the lower boundary of the 1101. (see [#1):

IT
k-d"=¢e—4M - (1)

I

41' M ‘ 0
7—2:;(7—33} with (7--v,)>o,

I

T. a 73° 4. "—3h.£(% -w,)(r,— 72o”! with (%—tc.)s0. (2)
-;'—,"—u-, - — —,f—"‘n—[I — '3' Rl-'F(.—:-)] with Fm'ng'
1%:1 _. gm "1th Rlao. (%—1r,)<0. (3)
(r,— m(%‘ - w.) with (1—: — w.) >0.
0. = 0 with (71'! -125) ‘0' (6)

Here qo is the specific (normalized to the volume heat capacity of sea water)

turbulent heat flow at the ocean surface, "h and ‘Y are vertical velocity and
the tenperature gradients at the upper boundary of the seasonal thernocline.

F _h_ _w-I:.-'n.) '1‘“ non.
(”J—10 with hzhg

he - u./ (C If I) is the thickness of the Sloan boundary layer. u, is dynamic wind
velocity. 2 is the Coriolis paraaeter. RI “,4!
" - a

L
e

is the Richardson flow umber. 0‘1. is the coefficient of thermal expansion of
sea water. 3 is the acceleration of free falling. c1. C2 and C3 are nuaerical
constants. t is time, the subscript "0" denotes the values of the character-
istics of the active layer at the tine t - t of change in the sign on qo fall-
ing at the beginning of the heating period. ghe teaperature gradient Y in the
seasonal thermocline is determined at the tine t - t1 of cessation of the ris-
ing of the lower boundary of the UQL
cm
(r—m<w

 

using the formila

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I
73-- 7v- n 2 4n __ __
1 a It. - In: '- ‘h' .- a“): £64" ‘9.er T“) d!

I)

and then is considered invariable during the entire period of deepening of the
lower boundary of the UQL an

m a}, 0)

up to a new annual cycle.

The system of equations (l)-(6) is closed and can be solved by stipulating the
heat flow 90 at the ocean surface. dynanic wind velocity u. and also vertical

velocity "h' In [a] the qo values were stipulated on the basis of observation-
al data in the fora of a periodic function of tine. There. as already noted.
no allowance was nade for the feedback between on and the tesperature of the
ocean surface (by definition the latter is equal to T.). In order to take this
correlation into account we will turn to the heat balance equation for the
ocean surface, in accordance with which

‘10 = Q, " (Q. + Q. 'l' 0.)» (5)

where Q8 is the flow of direct and scattered short-wave solar radiation. Q is
the effective radiation, oh and Q. are the flows of apparent and latent heat.
All the flow values were normalized to the volune heat capacity of sea water.

He will examine each tern entering into (5) in greater detail. The expression
for the total flow of solar radiation absorbed by the ocean can be written in
the form

0. - = 0.. (I -- Hum-1.). (6)

where 030 is the total flow of solar radiation incident on the ocean surface
in the absence of a cloud cover, 0: is the albedo of the ocean surface; No,
like 0.0. are known tabulated functgons of latitude and season of the year
(for exanple, see [3]), 9'(n) is an empirical function characterizing the de-
pendence of Q. on the lean tenths of cloud cover n (specific form of 99(n) can
be found in [1, 2]).

Adhering to [7]. we will represent the dependence of the effective radiation

of the sea surface on its temperature in the form of a Taylor series in powers
Ts - TA) (here ‘rA is air temperature in the near-water layer of the atnosphere).
Limiting ourselves to the first two terns of the series, we obtain

Q.=[Q.on+‘Q'o73(T‘- TAHIPQCOD (7)

where 0* - 0.985 (0.39 - 0.05 elI2)(1 - 0.6 n2) is a dinensionless empirical

A
coefficient taking into account the influence on effective radiation by cloud
cover and air huaidity. eA is water vapor elasticity (in nillibars) at the
standard altitude of meteorological neasure-ents, cr is the Stefan-Boltzuann

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constant, P0°0 is the volume heat capacity of sea water.
The TA and ‘1'. temperature values are given in (7) in K.

The an of turbulent flows of apparent and latent heat. as usual, are parameter-
ized in the form

2—“)

as + 00— - .a —CH’ 3. [(12—74) +_(qs "’ 74)] (a)

where “A is specific air hunidity at the'height of standard aeasurenents, q. is
saturating specific humidity at the tenperature Ts: PA is the value heat
capacity of air, CD is sea surface drag, l. is the latent cheat of evaporation.

If it is now assuned that q: aTA and the Clsuaius-Clayperon equation is used.

as a result we obtain
L I l
¢=“£‘°W{"1e:(-F-T”‘ (9)

where PA is atmospheric pressure at sea level, a. is the specific gas constant
of water vapor, so - 6. 11 lb is water vapor elasticity at a temperature To-
273 K. a: 0.622 is a numerical constant.

Thus. if the dynamic wind velocity u, air temperature TA . dew point teaperature
Tr and the cloud cover tenths n are functions of tine. equations (l)- (A) togeth-
er with expressions (5)- (9) and the initial conditions unambiguously determine
the temporal evolution of the thickness and temperature of the UQL. temperature
at the upper boundary of the seasonal thermoclina, and also the heat flows at
the ocean surface and at the lower boundary of the 00)...

Below we give the results of computations of the seasonal evolution of the ac-
tive layer for the conditions at weather station N in the Pacific Ocean ((P-In
30'“. A - 160'"). All the necessary initial infomtion was taken from [6].

that study it was shown that for the selected point in the ocean it can be as-
sumed that w]. - 0. n . 0 75. 0" Q. 4' Q. sin (at -u’IZ),

u. :7, +1)“ sln (at i 1}). 1“ =7; +7) sink! - s),
7', =77, + 1", sin (of - 1:), alert: -34 l lO-‘a-‘C/c. sec
32, = 13,4-IO‘°x-°Cic. u: =o,232 .e/c. :2. = 0.052 u/c. n/uc

7'. =18.5°c. 7‘,=14.5°c. fa - %,=3°c.

the line at top corresponds to the scan annual values; the sign "A" corresponds
to the aaplitudes of oscillations of the considered characteristic.

The values of the numerical constants Cl. C; and C3. figuring in expressions
(lo). are stipulated in accordance with [4] equal to:

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1
CO - 1.1'10'3. C, -{ 02 V1th QO)O,
with qo< 0.

024-!0-' with u,<§ 0.25 m/sec,

C": 0.3840" with u.) 0.25 m/sec, c3 ' 60'

As the initial values of the thickness of the UQL and teaperature we assume h
- 120 a and T. - Th - 18°C.

I - "f m1]: ICC
\

 

Fig. 1. Annual variation of dynanic wind velocity (a). heat flow at the surface
(b). thickness (c) and tenpereture (d) of upper quasihomogeneous layer at weath-
er station N in Pacific Ocean. 1 and 2) results of computations with determina-
tion and stipulation do; 3) observational data [6].

The results of computations of the annual variation of the principal character-
istics of the UQL are represented in Fig. 1. As a comparison, here we have giv-
en the results of computations with a stipulated heat flow go. It can be seen
that agree-ent with the observational data in the first case is appreciably
better than in the second. With stipulation of the surface heat flow the dis-
crepancies between the computed and observed temperature values at individual
tines in the annual cycle can attain 2-2.5‘6. whereas when determining the sur-
face heat flow in the process of solution of the problem they do not exceed
0.6'C. The second maximum in the seasonal variation of surface temperature, ob-
served at the beginning of October, is absent in both computations. This in all
probability is associated with the exclusion of the salinity affect and the ap-
proxinstion of the external parameters by only two terns of a Fourier series in
time. With respect to the thickness of the UQL. the nodel ensures only a quali-
tative similarity of the computed and observed h changes. The reason for this
is both the linitations of the model itself and known difficulties in determin-
ing h on the basis of experinental data. In actuality. on the one hand.

27

IN]! 0F11(1A1.U§II(HNLY
FOI:0F1WC]AI.USE1DNLX

the jump layer. whose thickness under real conditions is not less than 10-30
I, Is replaced in the model by a layer of zero thickness; on the other hand.
the accuracy in determining the lower boundary of the quasihomogeneous layer
on the basis of experimental data does not erceed 5-10 m (sea. for example. [5]).

m 4... .19

r I L.
a 3 ‘7' -.‘

    

    

Ila;

  

(5 u

 

Fig. 2. Relative changes in mean annual and extremal values of temperature and
thickness of UQL as function of variations of external parameters of model. The
values of the normalization factors. noted by the subscript "0". correspond to
the conditions of the main experiment (Fig. l).0t is any of the model parameters
cited in the figure.

For the purpose of investigating the sensitivity of the solution to the accuracy
in stipulating the internal parameter; of_the model (numerical constants Cl, C2,
C3) and atmospheric characteristics (TA. u. and n) we carried out a number of
numerical experiments. It was faund that the variations of the indicated para-
meters did not lead to any substantial changes in the phase relationships be-
tueen the sought-for variables. Accordingly, here we will limit ourselves only to
a discussion of their mean and extremal values.

Figure 2 shows that variation of the constants c1 and CZ. corresponding. all oth-
er cgnditions being equal. to the change in the contribution of thermal convec-
tion and mechanical mixing to the heat flow at the lower boundary of the UQL
(see first of the equations (3)), leads to insignificant changes in the tempera-
ture and thickness of the UQL. A decrease in the constant C3. equivalent. all
other conditions being equal, to an increase in the thickness of the Eknan lay-
er he. has little influence on the T. value and at the same tine causes an ap-
preciable increase in the nean value and amplitude of h variations. However,

even in this case the relative changes in h are less than vith a change in the

 

a
Here reference is to the Cl value with qo< 0.

28

FOR 0F1WCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dynamic velocity of the wind is. air temperature TA and the tenths of cloud
cover n. The same can be said with respect to changes in temperature of the

UQL. Hith an intensification of the wind and an increase in cloud cover tenths
as might be expected. there is a decrease. whereas with a temperature increase
there is an increase in the mean annual value and amplitude of the T. variations.

Thus, the reaction of the solution to changes in the external and internal para-
meters of the nodel is not the same: it is substantially stronger with a varia-
tion in the external and weaker with a variation of the internal parameters.
This circumstance is evidence of the reliability of the Iodel and the possibil-
ity of its use in mass computations of the seasonal evolution of temperature
and thickness of the UQL.

The author expresses appreciation to S. P. Snyshlyayev for assistance in carry-
ing out the conputations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Berlyand, T. 6., "Methods for Cliaatological Conputations of Radiation."
HETEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and HydroloCY). No 6. 1960.

2. Budyko, H. 1.. TEPLOVOY BALANS ZEHNOY POVERKHNOSTI (Heat Balance of the
Earth's Surface). Leningrad. Cidrometeaizdat. 1956.

3. Ivanov, A.. "Absorption of Solar Energy in the Ocean." HDDELIROVANIYB I
PROGNOZ VERKHNIKH SLOYEV OKEANA (Modeling and Prediction of the Upper Layers
of the Ocean). Leningrad, Gidrometeoisdat. 1979.

lo. Kagan. B. A.. Ryabchenko. V. A. and Chalikov. D. V.. "Parameterisation of
the Active Layer in a Model of Hacroscale Interaction Between the Ocean and
Atmosphere." HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA, No 12, 1979.

5. Kalatskiy, V. 1.. MODELIROVANIYB VERTIKAL'NOY TERMICHESKDY STRUKTURY DEYAT-
EL'NOGO SLDYA OKEANA (Modeling the Vertical Thermal Structure of the Active
Layer in the Ocean). Leningrad, Gidroneteoisdat. 1978.

6. Dormnn, C. 3.. Paulson. C. A. and Quinn. H. 3.. "An Analysis of 20 Years of
Meteorological and Oceanographic Data From Ocean Station N." J. PHYS. OCEAN-
OCR., Vol. 4. No a. 1976.

7. Haney, R. L.. "Surface Thermal Boundary Condition for Ocean Circulation Hod-
els." J. PHYS. OCEANOCR.. Vol 1, No 6. 1971.

29
FOR OFFKJAI.US£‘0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 532.517.‘
CRITERIA CHARACTERIZING M 01’ FLUIDS wrm STABLE STRATIPICA‘I‘ION

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received
25 May 81) pp 69-76

[Article by A. N. Shabrin. candidate of technical sciences. Iydromechanica Insti-
tute. Ukrainian Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] A study was aade of a model of a current in which a flow of fluid with
a free surface and the density ,0; flows into a water body filled with a fluid
with the density P2 (with P2>P1). An example of such a situation would be when
fresh water flows into the sea or aoaa wuter body filled with saline water. The
author seeks an answer to these two questions: 1) what are the conditions for

the penetration of saline water into the fresh water flow? 2) what is the nature
of the interaction of fresh and saline water when fresh water flows into the

sea? In solving these problems no effort is made to take wind-induced and tidal
phenomena into account. Solutions are sought for the case of stable stratifica-
tion. Different approaches used in the past in arriving at stability criteria

are reviewed and a new method is proposed for analysing stability conditions for
the interface of fluids of different density. merinontal and theoretical inves-
tigations made by the author both reveal that there is a clearly expressed and
unaabiguous interrelationship between interface stability and the ratio of flow
frequency and buoyancy. Knowing this. it is possible to employ parameters which
are quite easy to obtain experiaentally for an analysis of interface stability
conditions not only when there is a uniform density gradient in the entire thick-
ness of the layer. but also when the interface layer is divided into parts. Pig-
ures 3. tables 2; references 10: 8 Russian. 2 western.

30
FtﬂliiFFICJA1.lﬁﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.535.6

DEPENDENCE OF ACCURACY IN WATIORS OP PARAMETERS 0P BEA "IND WAVES ON
PRINCIPAL HAVE-P0101186 FACTORS

Moscow METEOROIDGIYA I (:1mean in Russian No 2, Feb 82 (asnuscript received
20 Apr 81) PP 77-81

[Article by R. A. Dalin. candidate of naval sciences. Leningrad Hydroseteorolog-
ical Institute]

[Text] Abstract: On the basis of use of the seth
of linearisation of the randoa arguments
function a study was made of the change in
accuracy in computing the lean heights and
periods of wind waves in deep water as a func-
tion of the errors in initial values of the
principal wave-forning factors: wind velocity.
its fetch and the duration of the effect. The
article gives the accuracy characteristics of
the principal wave-forning factors. which make
it possible to conpute the paraneters of wind
waves with an accuracy satisfying practical
requirements. It is shown that the main influ-
ence on the accuracy in computations is from
errors in wind velocity. There is a consider-
ably lesser influence on the results of con-
putations even of considerable errors in de-
ternining the fetch and duration of exposure
to the wind.

Methods for computing the parameters of wind waves which are reco-ended for
.mp1 ication in official docunents [3, S] are now used in the practice of hydro-
neteorological support of the transport and fishing fleets, in hydraulic con-
struction and in other work at sea. The basis for the mentioned methods is the

expressions derived by a group of Soviet researchers [2]. According to [3]. for
deep-water conditions these expressions have the for-

‘3; = 0.0042 (#5)"), (1)
{3, -.-. 0,0013 (Ag-rm, (2)
31 I

POIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ilcre h and x are expressed in setera and i and t are expressed in seconds.

If the dependence of the mean height h and the scan period ? of wind waves is
expressed in explicit forn on the principal wave-forning factors -- wind velo-
city V. fetch x and duration t of exposure to the wind and x and t are convert-

ed into kilo-stars and hours respectively. expressions (l)-(3) asst-e the for:

if: 9.1404317. (0

. 7;: , - 3” '
104 10' VTVT", . (5)

.. 75 5 "1

«=3 , .
v (6)

The last expression. with (A) and (5) taken into account. can be represented
by the fornulas

 

?— 0.45 3/4: w. (7)
?= 0.48 ‘ FT (3)

we note that the finding of the paraneters h and t by the use of formulas (lo),
(5). (7) and (8) when modern Iicrocalculators are availsble requires only a

few seconds and is considerably less fatiguing and more precise than when using
the nonograns cited in [3, 5]. At the ease tine. these formlaa sake it pos-
sible to establish the dependence of the errors in deter-lining the paraneters
of wind waves on the errors in the initial values of the wave-forling factors.

In actuality. if the method of linearization of [l] is applied to expressions
(6). (S). (7) and (8), it is possible to obtain the following relationships:

using expression (6) 0am: 1.2! ~ [04ya x Vow
, (9)

°e(:)=3,03'10" y s ;
_ '7' ' (10)

using expression (5) --
n —

cup, -_— l,65- m-r /9w 0,. (n)
cam = 0.43' IO": V? 0,; (12)

from expression (7)

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ x

«(v)=0.27 'ﬁ‘y. (13)
a
6m = 0-09 V2750; (1‘)
from expression (8) /._
d
“M ' 0'35 V '5‘." (is)
0 PW
°«»=°"2V 7 (16)

in formulas (9)-(16) 0". v) and 020,) are the mean square errors in computing
h and ‘6 respectively in dependence on the mean square error in wind velocity
UV; 0"“) and org?) are the seen square errors in computing h and t re-
spectively in depen ence on the mean square error in the fetch a": an“). 02“)
are the mean square errors in computing h and {respectively in dependence

on the mean square error in the duration of exposure to the wind at‘

In the considered case the legitimacy of applying the linearization method is
justified by the fact that as a result of the smallness of the errors in the
V, x and t values in comparison with their absolute values the functions de-
scribing the dependence of h and f on these values. not being linear in the
entire range of change in their arguments, are alnost linear in a narrow range
of their random changes.

Using expressions (9)-(16) for conditions close to those which are usually en-
countered in practical computations. that is. for wind velocities 5, 10 and
IS s/sec, a fetch of 200 and 300 km. duration of exposure to the wind of 6
and 12 hours. we computed the evaluations of the possible errors in determin-

ing the mean height and mean period of waves as a function of the errors fv,
0x and O’ .

The computed data are given in Table 1. An analysis of the table shows that the
errors in computing the wave parameters can attain considerable values. These
errors are particularly sensitive to the errors in initial wind velocity values.
Thus. even an insignificant error in wind velocity -- 1 m/sec -- results in an
error in computing the mean height of waves attaining more than 20 ca. It must
be noted that a mean square error in determining wind velocity of l m/sec is
entirely possible since the methods for determining wind velocity by use of
weather maps ensure a higher accuracy.

The errors in initial durations of wind action. especially wave fetch. exert a
lesser influence. However. in these cases as well, they can attain values
which to sons degree are capable of distorting the final result of the computa-

t ions .

lbwever. it should be mentioned that the value of the Oh and dcpsrameters is
not adequately indicative. In actuality. one and the sane error 0'... for ex-
ample. with great wave heights, can legitimately be considered insignificant,

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but in the case of low heights -- insdnissible. In order to take this circus-
stance into account it is desirable to proceed to a relative characterisation
of the error -- the variation coefficient [6], that is. in our case

(17)
k.=-.:‘- lw/e
and
.‘
l: = T Iw/o- (13)
Then. taking expressions (6) and (9) into account. it can be written that
‘ 'V w .
kum= —"3"V ‘ ls! . (19)
It follows fron expressions (5) and (10) that
lam =-§,—-';--Ioov.: <20)
from expressions (5) and (11) --
kuy) :- 1.581} 100%: (21)
fron expressions (5) and (12) --
km) = 0.42 if 1007.; (22)
fron expressions (7) and (13) --
hymns-'7 100%: (23)
fron expressions (7) and (16) --
4
fron expressions (8) and (15) --
O
kﬁv, = 0,75'vv 'W/.; (25)
and finally, from expressions (8) and (16) -
k1“) = 0, 25": L'W. (26)

It should be noted that using expressions (l9) and (21), derived fron different
initial fornulas, it is possible to compute one and the sane variation coef-
ficient kh(V)' which characterizes the dependence of the relative error in com-
puting the mean height of waves on the error in wind velocity. It is easy to see
that the “M V values. obtained using different foraulas. are rather close to
one another. (l sinilsr comment aust be made with respect to expressions (23)
and (25), which lake it possible to compute the variation coefficient ktﬂ)‘

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Using formulas (l9)-(26) for the sane conditions which were adopted earlier in
computing the 0'1: and 0‘ parameters. colputationa were nsde of the variation coef-
ficients as a function of the errors in initial data av. (1’x and 0". The results
of the conputations are given in Tables 2-4. The data in these tables lake it pos-
sible to draw conclusions which will be of interest for practical applications.

Table 1

Errors in Deternining Mean height of Haves 0", a (At Left) and Mean Period of
Haves oft sec (At Right)

Va 5 1!: lo a]: | 15 at]: V- 5 x]: I0 1!: l5 ﬁle all sec

XXI

   
 
 
  
  

2 0.24
c, a lo 0.01 0.05
0.02 0.10

 

 
  

“Inc 0.12 0,13
2 0.18 0,24 0.21 0.35 0.34 0.68
hours I 0.02 0.0l 0.05 om 0,11 0,14

     
     

  

0.!” OJ? 0,!5 0.21 0.28

 

First we should note the very "strong" dependence of the accuracy of coaputations
on the errors in wind velocity. In the case of weak winds even an insignificant
mean square error of 1-1.5 n/sec leads to an increase in the variation coeffic-
ient for wave heights to 30-50:, and with respect to periods -- up to 202, which
is an extremely high value. However. we should note the exceptionally weak influ-
ence of the error in the initial wind fetch on the final results of the coaputa-
tione. Even with a mean square error in fetch attaining half its absolute value,
the variation coefficient in computing the nean height and period of waves is in-
significant (less than 202). The latter lakes it possible to assert that in coaput-
ations of the parameters of wind waves no effort need be Iade to make a detailed
determination of fetch since even an extra-sly rough calculation of its value
will make it possible to obtain a result which is entirely satisfactory.

It is also necessary to mention a siailar insignificant. although to s sonewhat
lesser degree, influence of the errors in determining the duration of the wind ef-
fect on the results of the computations.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2

Values of Variation Coefficients khg‘)! and k; (v) as Function of Errors in
Determining H Velocity 0' V

V——T——__/_c u
4;
5 1015II—:—5lo l5
.3

 

 

hm" 'uw‘
0.5 13 1 4 o a 2
Lo '27 13 9 I2 6 4
1.6 40 20 la l8 9 6
2.0 5;) 21 Is 24 12 s

 

 

 

 

 

Table 3

Values of Variation Coefficientskh as Function of Errors in

Detaraining(51ndnd1’etk¢:“o’h‘x)

 

Table «‘0

Values of Variation Coefficients 1th (c) and kt t as Function of Errors in
Determining (Duration 0‘ Vind Effect 6‘t

 

! :1 hours

Gll2u6ll2

 

 

It must be noted. however. that Tables 2-4 and accordingly formulas (19)-(26) make
it possible to solve not only the direct problem - evaluation of the final accur-
acy in computations. but also the inverse problem - determination. by stipulating
the necessary accuracy in computations, that nean square error which can be allow-
ed in determining the initial data V, x and t without an appreciable decrease in

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the accuracy of the computed parameters h and 1:. For example, if the adnissible
value used for the level of the variation coefficient is 10-20%. as is usually as-
sumed when carrying out the computations, it is necessary that in the presence of
weak winds, for example, 0’ is not greater than 0.5 m/sec, in the case of mod-

erate winds, not more than n/sec, in the case of strong winds — not more than
1.5-2 m/sec.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Venttsel'. Ye. 8., TEORIYA VEROYATNOSTBY (Theory of Probabilities), Hoscov, Fis-
mtgiz, 1962.

2. Rshedlinskiy, G. V., Krylov, Yu. H., Hatushevskiy, G. V., Strekalov, S. S. and
Nazaretskiy, L. N., "New Method for Analysis and Computation of Wind Have Ble-

ments," TRUDY GOINa (Transactions of the State Oceanographic Institute), No 93,
1968.

3. RUKOVODSTVO PO RASCHETU PARAMETROV VBTROVYKH VOL“ (Manual on Computation of the
Parameters of Wind Haves), Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1969.

1;. Smirnov, N. V. and Dunin-Barltovskiy, I. V., KURS TBORII VEROYATNOSTEY I HATE-

MATICHESKOY STATISTIKI (Course in the Theory of Probabilities and Mathematical
Statistics), Moscow. Nauka, 1969.

S. STROITEL'NYYE HORNY I PRAVILA, CH. II. NORM? PROYEKTIROVANIYA, CL. 57. “AGRUZKI
I VOZDEYSTVIYA NA GIDROTEKHNICHESKIYE SOORUZHENIYA (Construction Norms and Spec-

ifications. Chapter 57. Loads and Effects on Hydraulic Structures), Moscow,
Stroyizdat, 1976.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.535.6

[Article by 0. I. Sansonov, candidate of geographical sciences. Moscow Institute
of Hater Transportation Engineers]

[Abstract] An attempt is made to develop a new approach to study of the dispersion
of suspended latter in a honogeneous water flow. The approach is based on the in-
troduction of additional terns into the equation for conservation of solid natter
for taking into account the change in the concentration as a result of accumula-
tion and erosion. A solution of the problen is complicated by the inadequate study
of the problen of conputation of the distribution of suspended natter with allov-
ance for the exchange of sedilaents betveen the flow and the botton of a water
body; this matter therefore is discussed in detail. Particular attention is given
to derivation of the two-dimensional turbulent dispersion equation and the one-
dinensional equation of longitudinal dispersion. Then attention is given to the
practical problem of the distribution of the concentration of suspended natter
resulting fro- the carrying out of dredging work. References 20: 12 Russian, 8
Western.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC SS6.12‘.3:556.136(571 .56)

SPRING SM mums AND EVAPORATION IN CENTRAL YAMIA

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian lo 2, Feb 82 (manuscript received
19 Hay 81) pp 91-96

[Article by A. 1.. Are. candidate of geographical sciences. and h. S. Petropavlovsk-
aya. candidate of technical sciences. Permafrost Institute. Siberian Department.
USSR Academy of Sciences. and State Hydrological Institute]

[Abstract] Central Yakutia has inadequate precipitation and snow plays a partic-
ularly important role. The snow cover accumulates over the course of 6-7 months

and by the onset of thawing the water reserve sometimes attains 100 II. In some
years up to 501 of the melt water becomes ground water. A monitoring of moisture
receipts requires determination of such parameters as the maxi-um and seen inten-
sity of snow melting. its duration. mean dates of beginning and end of melting

and moisture losses in snow evaporation. Daily observations were made in the

spring of 1978. 1979 and 1980 at the heat balance station of the Permafrost Inst-
itute Siberian Department USSR Academy of Sciences. The water balance method was
used; measurements were made at about 1700—1800 hours (when daytime thawing had
ceased); evaporation was measured simultaneously. Heasurement data were used in de-
termining snow density. snow depth and moisture reserve. Spring snow melting usual-
ly lasts 10-15 days. During thawing. periods snow evaporation varies from 0 to 1.7
ass/day. Two types of thawing occur: solar and solar-advective; separate formulas
are derived for expressing the relationship between these two types and air tear
perature. Figures 2. tables 1; references: 5 Russian.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“00 630: 551 . 521

COMPUTING OPTIHIH DENSITY 0F "ANTED FIELDS

lbscow KETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 (manuscript received
22 Jul 81) pp 97-103

[Article by Rh. 6. Tooming. doctor of biological sciences. Estonian Agroneteoro-
logical Laboratory, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Agricultural Meteor-

ology]

[Abstract] The optimum density of placement of plants in sown fields was investig-
ated in the example of potatoes. The most important period for yield fornation is

the period of naximua growth. During that period every possible measure must be
taken to ensure the proper density of plants. During a single 10-day period about
301 of the entire yield of tubers is fornad. Experinsnts were carried out with
plantings of different density. The increase in dry biomass and the relative area
of leaves in plantings of different density was determined. The photosynthetically
active radiation absorbed by plantings was measured or computed. Different produc-
tivity indices were determined. Then the optimun density of plants was ascertained
using the criterion of maximum efficiency of plantings during the maxinum growth
period. The procedures are illustrated in the example of experiaants with Sulev
potatoes. The experiments were carried out with densities of 3, 6, 10 and 15
plants per 1 n2. Once or twice each ten days the growth of total dry biomass of
the plants. dry biomass of tubers, leaves and other plant organs were deternined.
The dynanics of the leaf surface was ascertained. The total radiation incident on
the plants was continuously registered. Total radiation was transformed to photo-
synthetically active radiation. According to the maximum efficiency method the
optiaun density for the planting of these potatoes is 6 plants per 1 n2. figures
3; references 16: lb Russian, 2 Hestern.

60
FOR¢ﬂﬂﬂCLALlﬁﬂEONlY
IND! OFFIC1AL USEICMULY

UDC 551.509.001.57
COMPUTING OPTIMUM GRIDS FOR REGIONAL SHORT-RANGE HEATHER FORECASTING MODELS

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript received
17 Jun 81) Pp 106-105

[Article by 0- R. Kontarev, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences, Comput-
ation Center, Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Abstract] In an earlier article (”Solution of hydrodynamic Equations on a Sphere."
METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 7, 1978) the author proposed use of a grid region
for a polar stereographic projection with intervals nonuniform in this projection;
the maximum accuracy in that case was in the polar region, but with equatorward
movement to 30-60' the error does not exceed 0.0111x. Proceeding along these lines.
the author now proposes a method for computing the coordinates of the points of
intersection of an optimum grid for a stipulated region (in this variant the grid
pole can be selected within the limits of this region). For 802 of the area of the
region the error allowed does not exceed 0.0315: and is not greater than 0.115: at
the margins. An integration region is selected for a regional model with a center
having the geographic coordinates: latitude s and longitude D. This center is con-
sidered to be the pole of a new spherical coordinate system. The zero meridian is
the direction to the south relative to the initial coordinate system. The optimum
grid is constructed relative to the new pole. The initial parameters. in addition
to latitude and longitude of the new pole. are the dimensions of the grid at Paints
of intersection, the coordinates of the new pole at the points of grid intersection
and the grid interval in degrees along the meridian. The method for computing the
geographical coordinates of the points of intersection of the optimum grid is de-
scribed. Using the formulas of spherical trigonometry it is possible to compute

the distances between the points of intersection along the x- and y-axes. An algo-
rithm is proposed in the form of programs in FORTRAN. An example is given of comp
putstions of an optimum grid for which a numerical forecast is made for Novosibirsk.
References: 2 Russian.

bl
FIIICNNHCJA1.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.509.32

APPLYING SEPARATING FUNCTION FOR ALTERNATIVE DWSIS OR PREDICTION usmc
DEPENDENT PREDICTORS

Moscow HITEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 (manuscript received
11 May 81) PP 105-109

[Article by I. I. Harnershteyn and G. a. Hedvedev, candidates of physical and math-

eaatical sciences. Odessa Hydroeeteorological Institute and Central Aerological 0b-
servatory]

[Abstract] The use of mathematical statistics in aeteorology for forecasting pur-
poses usually requires the nondepsndence of series of randon values in the reach-
ing sanple, but under real conditions the predictors selected for a forecast are
always dependent on one another, possibly differing in degree and character. Hhen
there is a linear dependence between predictors it is shown in this article that
it is possible to arrive at a separating function in such a way that the region
of anbiguity of an alternative forecast will be nininun. The application of this
principle is illustrated in this article in the writing of a linear combination
separating cunuloninbus clouds into "hail" and "shower" types. The tendon values
used in this study were fron radar sounding of clouds and tenperature sounding of
the atnosphere obtained in holdevia during 1976-1978. With the pertinent para-
aeters it was found that the probability of a "hail cloud" was 272. Sinilar al-
ternative identifications can be nade for other phenonena, such as a thunder-
storn and fog. This aethod for arriving at a separating function is also suitable
for an alternative forecast. In this case the initial ssnple Inst reflect the
state of the object with such a tine in advance prior to onset of the phenonenon
with which the forecast is to be eade. It is possible in this way to predict not
only weather phenonena, but also the possibility of transition of the value of
sone neteorologicsl elenent through sone critical value. such as passage of air
tenperature through 0°C. The alternative diagnosis or prediction nethod can al-

so be used in solving nany hydro-eteorological problens. Figures 1; references:
7 Russian.

42
FOI‘OFIICIAI.US£GDNLY
FOI:OF1WC]AI.USEIDNLN

UDC 551.665.5(26S.07)
“RAIDERS OF CROHUELL CURRBﬂT

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 (eanuscript received
11 Feb 81) PP 109-111

[Article by V. A. Bubnov, candidate of geographical sciences, and V. 0. Yegorikhin,
Atlantic Division, Institute of Oceanology]

[Abstract] During February-March 1980, during the 26th voyage of the "Dnitriy Men-
deleyev," in a study of synoptic fluctuations of currents in the central part of
the equatorial Pacific. a series of self-contained buoy stations was set out in a
polygon involving two neridional sections across the equator. along 167‘" and
163’15'0. near 1'30'8, O'AS'N, 0', 0°‘S'S and 1'30'5. Current recorders et 10 buoy
stations gave tine series of observations of a duration up to 39 days. The duration
of synchronous observations along these sections was 25-27 days. The vertical struc-
ture of the velocity field in the layer 0-600 a is for-ed by three tonal flows:
South Trades Current. Equatorial Subsurface Countercurrent (Cromwell Current) and
Hestern Equatorial Intermediate Current. The Cromwell Current has an easterly direc-
tion which takes in a layer with a thickness of about 200 a. Polygon observations
indicated that the velocity field is subject to a considerable teaporal variabil-
ity with periods fron a half-day to two weeks. The most energetic fluctuations of
the Cromwell Current are associated with its meandering relative to the equatorial
plane. At the depth of its axis the latitudinal amplitude of the eeanders is about
30~60’, in some cases attaining 1'. However, it is difficult to detersine the pre-
cise parsneters of this leandering. especially when estimating the phase difference
of the oscillations between sections. This is due to distortions of the neander
wave by oscillations of other periods. For this reason it is better to exaaine lat—
itudinally averaged data. A special analysis revealed that vithin the polygon the
Cromwell Current neanders with a period of 10 days. These oscillations are closely
correlated on both sections. It wee possible to conpute the pareseters of aeanders
(period in days, phase velocity. wave length). Figures 2. tables 1; references 6:

6 Russian. 2 western.

b3
FIHICIWHCIAL.US£‘OBHJV
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.508.9:519.53
PROBLHIS IN IIE‘I'EOBOLWICAL IMAGE WMTION

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROIDGIYA in Rusaien No 2. Feb 82 (unuecript received
16 Dec 80) PP 112-119

[Article by V. P. Peehchenho. doctor of physical and nethenticel sciences. Sci-
entific Reeeerch Institute of Instrunent linking]

[Abstract] tinny meteorological pereneters can be deecribed by one or two nunbers
obtained by contect of e sensor with the nediun, but neteorologicel phenonene
euch ae clouds. fogs. sunshine end renge of visibility can be described only by

a set of may nunbere. In this article the author uses the tern "nethmticel
inge" or einply "iaage" for the specially formleted set of numbers. An "ieege"
can be a single nunber. line fron a set of nunbers. colun fron a net of numbers.
matrix. natrix rov, etc. If the etructure of the netheneticel inege is found for
e eeries of neteorologicel phenonene. end the operatione on the ingee are deter-
nined, the problen of the neeeurebility of this phenonenon will thereby be eolv-
ed. A "neteorologicel inege" is defined as a repreeentetion of the totality of
the pareneters end criterie detenining s11 meteorological eituetione in soee eub-
set. The nein body of this article treces all the eteges in the forning of neteor-
ological ineges (in different etagee in the exposition, for the eeke of clarity,
the repreeentetion process is illustrated by the ceee of opticel sounding) end poe-
eible approaches to the identification of neteorologicel inegee ere set forth. The
nethod an e whole in applied to an eveluetion of the possibility of using en 11-105
instrunent (for nurturing the altitude of the lover boundery of c1oude end esti-
neting vertical visibility) for identifying Ieteorologicel phenonene. tigures 2,
tables 1; referencee: 11 Ruseien.

[Ob
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EIGHTIm BIRTHDAY OP YELIZAVETA LUARSABOVNA “DMIKOVA
)ioecov METEOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. lob 82 p 120

[Article by A. S. Korovchenko. Ye. 8. Selesneva and V. D. Stepanenko]

[Abstract] Yelisaveta Luarsabovna Andronihova. an outstanding librarian in the
fields of meteorology and climtology, working in the Hydroeeteorological Ser-
vice for aore than a half-century, coepleted her 80th year on 21 Hove-bar 1981.
Following her college studies at Moscow State University in the Physics-Nathan“-
ics Faculty, she became affiliated with the ruin Geophysica1 Observatory, where
she still works. It can be said that she node a significant contribution during
the Great Fatherland war by the preparation of clieetic descriptions and collect-
ing needed eaterials from world publications such as were available in the ar-
chives of the min Geophysical Observatory. the largest library of this type in
the USSR. In 1966 she was called upon to bring the library resources into proper
order after the reevacuation of the Main Geophysical Observatory. In this task
she exhibited outstanding qualities as a librarian and as a specialist in the
field of aeteorology and clintology. In 1966 Ye. L. Andronikov was designated
head of the scientific-technical library and continued in that post until 1979.
This was all during a period of intensive growth of the library. (This library.
dating back 130 years. includes alaoat 600,000 books). 0n the 100th anniversary
of the Main Geophysical Observatory she coepiled the BIBLIOGRAPICHESKIY mm'
RAM (:60 (1869-19408) (Bibliographic Index of Studies of the Main Geophysical 0b-
servatory (1816-1948)) and on the 50th anniversary of the October Revolution she
was a coauthor of the BIBLIOGRAIICIIESKIY UKAZAI’EL' RABO‘I' 060 2A PERIOD 1818-1967
(bibliographic Index of Studies at the Main Geophysical Observatory During the
Period 1818-1967). In addition. she prepared bibliographies of the works of Acad-

emician H. A. Rykachev and Professor 1’. A. Holchanov.

65
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hoacow HETEOROWIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian lo 2. Feb 82 pp 121-123
[Article by H. H. Kuznetaova]

[Abstract] A series of awards has been presented to participants torganitations
and individuals) in a special exhibit "Study of the Arctic, Antarctica and the
World Ocean.. ." and the display "liydrometeorology..." in the "Bydrometeorological
Service" Pavilion. First-degree diploaas were awarded to: the Arctic and Antarc-
tic Scientific Research Institute -- for geographical investigations of natural
conditions in Antarctica, as well as developments in the support of navigation.
fishing and aircraft flights. Central Design Bureau for hydrometaorological In-
atruaent mking -- for developing. fabricating and introducing the "cidrosond"
couples for measuring and registering the principal parameters of sea water.

Kain Geophysical Observatory -- for equipsent on an aircraft-laboratory. develop-
ing methods and progress for flight tests. and creation of a unique couples of
on-hosrd seasuresent apparatus. this being of great value for subsatellite exper-
iuents. Institute of Experiaental Heteorology -- for developing a spectroradio-
meter for investigating the spectral conposition of please formations. Second-
degree diplomas were awarded to: State hydrological Institute -- for evaluating
the water resources in the tone of the Baykal-Anur Railroad and developing neth-
ods for computing hydrological characteristics. (halt Territorial Administration
of Bydroneteorology and Environmental lbnitoring (1AM) -- for hydrometeorolog-
ical support of construction of the Konsoaol'ak-Surgut-Chelyabinsk gas pipeline.
Leningrad Heather Bureau of the Northwestern TAM -- for hydro-eteorological
support of ships in the Baltic. furnishing the- with recon-ended navigation
routes in the North Atlantic. hydrometeorological Observatory of the Koai ASSR
of the Northern mm - for excellent hydroneteorological support of the nation-
al econosy of the Koni ASSR. Moscow Division of the All-Union Scientific Research
Institute of Hydrometeorological Information-World Data Center -- creation of an
Atlas of Cliaatic Characteristics of cloud cover on the basis of artificial earth
satellite data. Krasnodarsk Zonal Bydromateorological Observatory of the Northern
Caucasus TAM - for hydrometeorological support of rice cultivation in Krasno-
darskiy Krsy. Rostov-na-Donu Aviation Center of the Northern Caucasus TAM --
for developing and introduction of new forecasting sethods. Ukrainian Aviation
Meteorological Center - for high-quality servicing of two KRAHS-H stations.
Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute - development of technical specifications
for reoutfitting a Yak-60 aircraft into a meteorological laboratory. Other organ-
iaat ions were awarded third-degree diplomas. A total of 639 individuals were
given lesser awards. '

(06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AT USSR STATE comm-rte ON WWW AND ENVIROIHBN'I'AL WITORING
Moscow HBTEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 123-125

[Article by V. Zekharov and G. K. Veselova]

[Abstract] During the period 2-3 November 1981 the Presidium of the Scientific and
Technical Council of the State (Jo-ittee on Hydrometeorology and Environmental Hon-
itoring discussed the plan for scientific research and experimental design mark

for 1982. hphasis will be on methods for predicting meteorological. hydrological
and heliogeophysical phenomena and the development of methods and equip-ant for

the collection, processing. transmission end dissemination of environmental data.
Other important work is planned on study of the effects of contamination. aeens

and methods for artificial modification of meteorological processes. methods for
evaluating climatic changes and the effect of such changes on the national economy
and evaluating clintic, agrocliaatic and water resources. 0n 6 October the Central
Methodological Comission on hydrometeorological Forecasts examined the results of
testing of a number of long-range forecasting methods and methods for hydrological
forecasts. For example. it approved a hydrodynamic-synoptic-statistical method for
forecasting the mean five-day maximum and minim!- eir temperatures for the European
USSR and Western Siberia (see details in HETBOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA. No 6. 1973.
No lo. 1977. A yearlong testing of this forecasting scheme has given satisfactory
results. The (Dominion also approved a method for predicting air temperature with
two-month averaging for the most important agricultural regions of the USSR based
on a linear regression scheme and using as predictors the coefficients of expan-
sion of temperature fields in the northern hemisphere in natural orthogonal compon-
ents. The first forecast is prepared 10 months in advance end is later updated. tak-
ing into account the development of hemispherical macroprocesses (see details in
TRUDY cmm‘nsmu SSSR. No 195. 1977. No 211. 1978). Also examined were methods
for preparing territorial long-range forecasts of the volume and maximum of spring
high water in rivers of the Volga and Severnaya Dvine basins. (A detailed descrip-
tion of these methods is given in TRUDY cmmsm 838R, No 186. 1977. No 223.
1980 and No 236. 1981). The Cosmission approved the special handbook "Use of Satel-
lite Information in Synoptic Practice." based on the results set forth in the "Han-
ual on Use of .Satellite Information in Weather Analysis and Forecasting." Only two
of the proposed three chapters were approved for publication at this time. The first
describes use of cloud cover photographs from satellites in the analysis of fronts.
cyclones and anticyclones. The second gives reco-endations on the use of cloud

cover photographs for predicting the synoptic situation.

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! OITHC1Al.lEﬂECNNLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 125-126

[Article by a. I. Silkin)

[Abstract] It has been reported in SCIENCE NEHS, Vol 119, No 21. 1981. that a nat-
ional center for climatological forecasts has been established at the Scripps
Oceanographic Institute. La Jolla. California with its task being defined a8 1-.

provenent in the long-range prediction of temperature and precipitation for the
coming seasons of the year. Three different forecasting methods will be employed

and these will be evaluated for comparative effectiveness.

The journals HONLD ANCEAEDLOGY. Vol 13, 1981. and NEW SCIENTIST, Vol 91. No 1263.
1981, report that the archaeologist E. Marshall, after conparing data on the
structure and siting of aan's dwellings in the Neolithic in Europe and ao-called
longhouses now constructed by Melanesian tribes in New Guinea. noted that the Hal-
anesian dwellings always have their narrow aide in the direction of the prevail-
ing wind. During the Neolithic European dwellings had their narrow facade toward
the northwest. It was therefore concluded that in the fourth century s.c. the pre-
vailing winds. especially in winter. were northerly and northwesterly. This cor-
responds to the opinion snong paleocliastologists that between the sixth and third
millenis (B.C.) in Europe there was a so-called Atlantic climate during which the
tenperature was higher and the precipitation was more abundant than at the present
tine. that is. the climate was similar to the present-day climate of the highlands

in New Guinea.

It is reported in the JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH. Vol 86, 1981. and NEH SCI-
ENTIST, Vol 91. No 1261, 1981. that Canadian hydrologists have aade a study of the
problen of the relationship between sea level fluctuations and the calving of
glacier masses. leading to the formation of icebergs and floating ice islands. Par-
ticular attention was given to glacier "tongues" floating on the sea surface; these
evidently successively pass through different phases of growth and breakup into
large icebergs. It is postulated that an important role in this process is played
by the resonance phenonenon: the detachment of an iceberg is stimulated by a co-
incidence of the frequency of oscillations of sea waves and the characteristic fre-
quency of vibration of the glacier. The critical moment arrives when the frequency
of the characteristic oscillations of the tongue coincides with the frequency of
the constant sea surf in the region where the tongue is afloat. The resonance ef—
fect comes into play and the aaplitude of the glacier oscillations increases. Stress-
es accuaulste and the strength of the glacier is exceeded and part is detached in

the form of an iceberg.
68

IN)! OFFIC1A1.UEII(MVLY
OBITUARY 0F YEVGBNIY KONSTANTINOVICH PBDOROV (1910-1981)
Moscow HEIEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 127-128

[Article by board members of the USSR State Committee on Hydrometeorology and En-
vironmental Monitoring]

major contributions to the development of Soviet geophysical science, investiga-
tion of the Arctic and Antarctica. development of space research and safeguarding
of the environment. At the same time he was an effective champion of world peace.
His entire life was dedicated to hydroseteorolosy. beginning with work at polar
stations in the Arctic, on Franz Josef Land and Cape Chelyuskin. He was a partic~
ipsnt in the legendary drift on the ”Severnyy Polyus-l" station and was designated
a Hero of the Soviet Union for his contributions there. In the 1930’s he became
director of the Arctic Instituteand in 1939 was designated head of the USSR Hydro-
meteorological Service; he headed this service for almost 20 years (1939-1967, 1963-
1974). He was largely responsible for raising the service to its present-day
outstanding level. In 1956 he organised the Institute of Applied Geophysics and
served as its director until 1968, and then from 1974 to the end of his life. Under

mental monitoring and study of heliophysical processes in space. His fields of in-
terest included: weather and climate, water resources. investigation of the seas
and oceans, the ionosphere, earth's magnetic and radiation fields, artificial mod-
ification of hydrometeorological processes. environmental contamination. During

tute of Hydrometeorological Information, State Scientific Research Center for the
Study of Natural Resources, Central Asian and West Siberian Scientific Research
Hydrometeorological Institutes. Figures 1.

COPYRICRT: "Neteorologiya i gidroiogiya", 1982

5303 ‘ 3ND ‘
C80: 1866/8

49
F0! OFFIC1A1.lEﬂE(NVLY