POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10409

24 March 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 19/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and Interial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS WERNING MERSHIP 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(3000 19/82) .

Coursms

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Suzuki Seen as Flagging in Reform
(KenJi Kitshara; THE DAILY YOMIURI, 5 Mar 82) ...........

Athinistrative Reform Plan Rita Snag
(George mum; ASAHI EVENING ms, 3 Mar 82) ........

Unity of Centrist Forces 'Absolute Must'
(Ichiyo Hino; TRB JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 2 Mar 82)

Troubled Solvo-JSP Relationship Examined
(TakehiJo Takahashi; MAIRICMI DAILY ms, 16 Mar 82)

Trade Friction Breeds anity
(Minoru Hirano; THE DAILY YOIEURI, 21 Feb 82) ...........

Bureaucracy Blunts Administrative Reform
(Editorial; THE DAILY YOKIURI, 23 Feb 82) ...............

Diet Operation Ranains Under LDP-JSP Influence
(Takehiko Takshsshi; MAIRICHI DAILY ms, 2h Feb 82)

Role of Moderate Opposition Parties Viewed
(Editorial; MAUICEI DAILY ms, 25 Feb 82)

MILITARY

1.1)? To Study U.S. , USSR Military Satellites
(m1 Summ, nFeb 82) '9............OOOOQOOOAOOOOO

PL-JEICB AID TECHNOLOGY

Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Activities Reported
(Various sources; various dates)

-a- [III-ASIA-lll

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
(UK UFI’LCLAL USE ONLY

Int-82 Budget Draft

Potent Agreement with. IBM

Expansion of Ovarseas Activities

Study of Changes, by Kimiaki Sudo, et 31.

Export of Nationally Owned Patents to U.S. Under Study
(m m0 8mm. 9 Dec 81) ooooooooooooooooloooooo

Toshiba Electron)": lithography for 1.8]: Mass Production
(Shoichi Saba, at 0.1.; KIKAI 811mm, Dec 81) ...........

.1).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUZUKI 5834 AS P'LAGGIN IN REFORM

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 5 tier 82 p 4

[Political Beet: column by Kenji. Kitahue:

[Text]

COPYRIGHTi

C50:

“Adminisiretive reform is sort of e re-
volution. But only in the Meiji ltestore-
tlon end in the postwar oecnpetion under
Allied Forces end Gen Doueies Winn
did such e revolution succeed."

This is whet tormer premier Nohusuke
Kiehi. nichnemed the “meter of Shove
are" beeeuse or his epperently everlesting
inﬂuence in the politicei world. recently
told Yesuhiro Nekesone. director-genera
or .the Administrative Menenment Agen-
cy.

The veteren politieien is well ewere thet
bureeucrete ere certein to vehemently op-
poee reform or this kind which my
threeten to chenge the edministretive or-.
geniaetion end result. in let. power end
euthority for themselves.

ills remerhe may be considered e wern-
ing thet edministretive retort. is not
cut end mey be e eereestic ieh et Prime
Minister Busuki who has pledged to stoke
his politics! cereer on this test. _

threeiitysusuki.whoonceweseoeeur
shout this. seems to heve lost interest to
someextentelthoughhestilineverteiis
to support edminietretive reform.

But the hidden attentions oi the premier
me! have been reveeied lest idendey when
he met Home.

The Administrative Reform eternal wee
scheduled to submit its hesic report with
recommendetione tor drestlc reform in
July end ennounce detailed pointe_in its
ﬁne! report in March.

But Nehesone situated to Sumhi thet
the besic recommendation be divided into
pert 1 end port 2 saying the compiletion

The Daily Yominrl 1982

4120/190

1

"Flagging Reform Arden")

teelt or the council hed been deleyed end
thet the mum-Dementic Petty (LOP)
did not went e single strong report thet
might iolt the government. ..

ausuIiIostnctimeineseentlngtoNe-
kesooe's proposed. The two eiso egreed
thet recommendetions covering such trou-
blesome ieeues es reoreenieetion or min-
istries end sceneies end streemlining of
government locel breaches will be cerricd
in pert two or the divided report.

Suzuki.whoseekemlectioninthemP
presidentiel election scheduled to: Novem-
ber, would like to evoid en: sitnetion
which mey disturb en extreordinery Diet
seseion.

With-the eltnetion es it is it is believed
that he would not like to hove recom-
mendetions covering diilicult issues cerried
in the report.

But this ettitnde seems to strongly in-
dicete thet Insuhi hes cooled towerd his
promise to eerry out enminietretion re-
one.

Withsnchecomminneneausukiehould
consideredminlstreiivereicrmmcreim-
portentthenhhndeeumset perhspe
muadnotreelise.esxishidid.hw
diluenltthsteskwouidbewhenhemede

me on his Met
increeee carried out lest summer.

We don't reeiiy know Neheeone's moti-
vetion for dividing the report. However,
wedoknowthetthepeopiewiiibevery
hem it sum: is secretly determined to
cerryoutthediihcultworkoiedminietre-
tive reform eiter he is sorely reelected.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

WNIS‘I‘MM REFORM PLAN HITS SNAG

Tbkyo ASAHI svsuxnc news 1n English 3 Mar 82 p 5

Weekly Bewamic Review")

[The Nation column by George Murakami:

I.

a

m

w...

.m

[and

mmww w%

W: mamwwmw wwmmm

”$.me “.mm: .

mmmemwmu
m: “WWW”

Wm.” .WWMM
Mm“ «Wm “mmmum m

“Emmy“ mm

mmmwmmmqu

mm wmwwmﬁ

W WSW“.
”mam

(Ill.

mm...

mmwmmwm

3 mm x
Mummmmﬂm WWW
L.
mm... m...
LE. Em Wm
.L W. L
Ea”... ”mm“ “mm.
mmmm mmmmmmwmm

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Eig‘égﬁgieaag gig;
EEEEEEE éaE“:
zaﬁgsggg iii‘i ggi

:wi
.EEEEEEE EEEE EE
JLITICAL A“) SOCIOIDGICAL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITY OF CENTRIST POKBS ‘ABSOLU‘I‘E MUS!"

'lnokyo rim JAPAN economic some!» in Biglish 2 Mar 82 p 10

[Political Scene colimn by Ichiyo Hino:

Unity?”

(Text)

ntion oi the"
Democrntic Socialist Part
originally designed to adopt the use action

The intended conve

program and consolidate moored!!!» (or trust tones w t be as trust a
the coming "political Ammunition in man" the Randi». the mod 90

when the Lower home election and unified mg, drops out oi tine and inks
local elections are slated. Discussions atthe action as the LDP end the J
convention however revealed minim All this was quite inn-omen
DSP‘s increasing ogpniee and irritation over up the rlli the omeito 1

its incapacity toobtein even: slightprospeci three centrist par“ for a. time being

tor unifying middleoi-the-md lorcel and

immune the helm 0‘ swer- own party pianomrmnemn uptaimone
‘l‘heconvention reconﬁrmed the preiduisly 99°?“ ahwt thelr stance in

mood polity that four centrist ponies unification.

-- the Komeito (Clean nl Partyl. 0n the

the 08?. the New Liberal Club and the W was at the causation. the

ederation — will

Socialist Democratic l-‘

cooperate in the lutnre. but many 05? mem-
bers have voiced serials dotbls over the
feasibility of unifying those loin centrist
This is because.
amid the controversy over the bombing gear
of F-4 Phantom let ﬁghters in the Diet. only

Roulette, among four centrist
parties, has participated in
voting on the 1981 supplemen-
Others were the
ruling Liberal Democratic Par-
ty (01.?) and the Japan Social—
Komeito's
e into the

forces in the convention

tary budget.

ist’. Part? (JSP).

action drove a wedg
four middle-of-the road-cams.

(iomrnlly smiths. it is an absolute must
tor the centrist lorces to unite and create a

political environment in which L0? and the
Opposition are very close. Otherwise. they
cannot bmalt up "the ms
motion“ in VINCII the present

politieel lor-
politleel setup.

Especially over the

leading officials e

lrom ”68

Wemmwen

possession of tar-re
fighter bombers.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.

”Can Centrist Forces Really

05? Senior Adviser litito W end other

not to oppose the fitting of mm gear to
F4: bee-me. they aid. the militnry
viraiment summing Japan
when the Government
take oil bombing gear from For. The
deﬁnition of "threat to other nation toot"
will orange as time goes by. This way of
thinking is exactly like that oi the Govern-
nd the L0? and alien lrom that of
the stance oi

recognizing the defense force
only to secure territorial in-

tegrity and is oppose

hum
decidedto

d to the

Moreover, on three non—nu-
clear principles, the DSP
announced last May {vain former.

0.8.AWEdthnmsm-nd
up an upon over “lbs W 0!
nuclear arms to Japan." that it could
“possibly remain the m within
territomneuormelnchuﬂudmdw
Whtmemmls"muthe
most "ﬂexible same’LWW by:
cum-in party on datum. "awhile. tho
round]? has enacts?) £4” policy to
cm: WW . amSecuﬂty
my and an Sou-Defense Poms." 11:“
Is. thoselwrcmlrbtmmlnm
overttcwmlddmpoﬂcy.hnmnoc
mﬂyinmrdmwﬂcmu
clearly illwntedbythcﬂ gar m.

hon Kauai Shinbm, Inc.

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLDGICAL

mum SOHYO-JSP RELATIONSHIP EXAMINBD

'nokyo mnucm DAILY ms in English 4 Mar 82 p 2

(Nagatacho Doings column by Takehiko Takahashi:

Relatimehip']

[1‘6th

Theﬁrstmeetinghetwcenthe
Japan Socialist Party's new
executive committee and
leaders oi Sohyo (the General
Cotmcil oi Trade Unions oi
Japan) was ﬁnally held on
March I. When the decision on

was made earlier at
the JSP convention. Sohyo
oppoeedtheaelectionoilioham
BahaasJSPaecretaryuneral.
Chairman lchio Asukata
loot-ed Sohyu's dauand and
Baha became the aeotetary

general.
Secretary General Baha was
not only by Sohyo but
also by the anti-Aswan group
within the JSP. Because
Chairman Asukata iorclhly
made Babe the seculary
general it the term ol "the
chairman’s decimation." Diet
members belonging to the anti-
Asuitata group related to ac-
cept any post in the executive
committee.

Sohyo's Chalrman Mototumi
Makieda recently attended a
meeting of the central
executive committee oi Deniti
Roren (the All Japan
Fedention oi Electric Machine
Workers' Unions). lnhisepeech
theme. Makieda went so laras to
say. “i cannot stand the .181":
actionsony longer."

Under such circumstances.

6

the Japan Socialist Party's new
executive committee had been
Mkmlﬁ! '3 81104122..

to Sohyo. the party's most
important supporting

minimum
executivesonliatchtJtM
timea wasteoeivod

“to loan a united party
structure."

‘Unlted Structure'

The anti-Milan group has
aleodetnaodedthehoidingoian
"extraordinary party con-
vention in auhuno to form a
united party structure."
Chairman Antheta does not
seem to have given a repty to
thlsonewayortheother.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Troublesome JSP-sd'iyo
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040055-2

COPYRIGHT :

‘ aeematoheve eaid
atthe archlmeettncthatthe
demand [or a “united party
unmeHoeenotaeaa'uhe
regiment oi cretery
Gendhbaﬂhthtbairmen
WendBehaoeemtohave
heengreetlyrelievedhythie

BothBehaendhiaidedahave
had relations with the Japan
Teachers Union. There was at
onetimethe"ageotChah'man
Itiyenohara. Vice Quail-man
Babe and Secretary General
Ilakieda” in the in an
‘i‘eechera Union. liy
hecameememherottheilouee
oi Councillors and tree chairs
mea ol the JSP's election
committee.

Priortotheiormetionoithe
new executive committee. the
reiationshetweenilakiedaand
Bebewerenotverygood.8aba
returned to Kumeinoto and
enteredpoiitica.

The reason why Babe and
Mallede were not on good
termaisnoteleariykmnhmit
wouldnotheamieteketoaey
that the relationship that
exhlcdhetweenthetwothenis
continuing to cast a long
shadownow.

As seen by the Sohyo eide. the
Japan Socialist Party is able to
maintain its position as the No.
i opposition party solely
because oi Sohyo's strength.
Sohyo is the main support

the JSP to gather
campaign (nude and votes.

The .13? received the strong
inﬂuence at Sohyo. So much so
that the criticism wee heard
that “the Japan Socialist Party

Hainichi Daily News 1982

C80: 4120/190

7

lb Sohyn'o

lent."
But thle

'Amunu

"estabiiahme
autonomy."

Sohyo's wish
eeieetion oi
general. 1'
disagreeable
add tuel to ti

whomliakie
heenplaced
tmponantp

general.
This has e

trealithemo
Althoughti
tween theJS
committee a
has h:
i. this
meenthetth
rent the
arisen vi
executivecor
Sohyo Se
Niteuo Tomi
hietnteotioo
tniiicetioa o
rectudyoitht
and to hold
Babe in the
the relations
acdtbeKoml
Within Sch;
anviewatha
for the 1%:
decision' rho
regard to th
executivecoi
the right-n
repeeeented

Can Chain
emphasize:
com pietel
RIMIpt
noteneesiiy.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040055-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AID SOCIOIDGICAL

TRADE FRICTION BREEDS WITY

Ibkyo THE DAILY YOHIURI 1n Blglieh 21 l'eb 82 p 3

[Behind the Scenes column by Minoru Hiram:

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

C50:

Questioned in. the House of Coundiors -

Budget Committee about the ”reciprocity
bills" Introduced to the US Congress, Prime
Minister Susuki 'mesday replied that such
endeavors by Japan as accelerated reduc-
tions of import won and abolition of
nontasiif barriers (NIB) were not under-
stoodwellenoughintheUSandthiswes
due to deﬁcient public relations.

moreciprocitybiliscalionthevsaov-
eminent to take legislative action to re-
strict imports from Japon when it is Judg-
ed that 08 products are being shot out
oi the Japanese market. The Japanese
Government is annoyed that though it is
taking steps to correct the Japan-US trade
imbalance. the US Congress does not ap-
preciate such eﬂorts at all but is hurling
emotional blasts at Japan.

The lack of public relations efforts is '

not the whole problem. One top Foreign
Ministry ofﬁcial said the root of the prob-
lem lies in the weakening of the world
economy and that Japan should study
what it can do to revitalise the world

economy.

“meworldeconomrinihissense

means the Us economy. The Japanese side
thinks that unless the US economy be-
comes stronger. there will be no end to
08 attacks on Japan.

More serious is that Japan-OB psycholo-
aicel friction is intensifying. Chis! cabinet
Secretary Kiichi Miyaaawe once compared
Japan-0a trade friction and Japan-Europe
trade friction and said that Japan and the
UScooldholdedialogcnthebesisoi
economic rationale and that things were
simple. but Japan-Europe relations were
much more complex and dili'icult to han-
die. But these ideas no longer apply.

The late French president Charles de
Oaulle once labeled the late Japanese
prime minister Hoyeto Ikcda "o salesman
of transistors." The boaey of the “yellow
peril" originated in arrope. Witness the

The Daily Yomiuri. 1982

4120/18! 8

"A Vicious Circle“!

no report'which described the Japanese
as workahollce living in rabbit hutch“,
TheUSinthepastrex-elyusedauch

contemptuous words in reference to Japan.

Recently. however. the US vocabulary has
begun to resemble Iurope‘s. '

as Secretary of Commerce Helooim
Beidrige said at a meeting in Washington
last December that Japan's cultural tradi—
tion iiseli was hampering opening of the
Japanese market. Later, he told Japanese
Ambassador Yoshio Okawera rather apolo-
getically that his remarks were out of
order.‘ not in rebroary, Salaries repeated
the expression at a meeting of the Joint
Congressional Economic Committee. as
Ambemador to Japan like Hensneid. back
in the 08 temporarily. said that each ne-
tion has its peculiar cultural tradition.
thus indirectly criticizing Baldrige. ' ,

The editorial titled “A Patter Japan Is
A Safer Japan" in the February 8 issue
oftheNewYorlemesestoniahedtba
Japanese even more. The editorial said:
“Japan has to be persuaded to
lea oi its phenomenal energy on satisfy-
ing foreign consumers and more on im-
proving living standards for its own peo-

~ ple" and “ . . . spend little, save much.

The tradition has left Japan with a sur-
prisingly low living standard. notably in
housing.” Just before that, Prime Minister
Suzuki had told the Japanese that “enjoy
ing freedom, peace and prosperity, Japan
may without exaggeration be counted
among the most blessed of countries to-
day.“ What irony!
borne Japanese think that US blasts
against Japan are due to "loss or self-
conﬁdence," “uneasiness about the future”
and “jealousy toward Japan, a bright boy.”
But the US would get even more hysteri-
cal if Japan says so. '
Trade friction breeds emotional enmity.
which amplifies trade friction. This vicious
circle should be broken.

FOR OFFICKAL USE ONLY
BURBAOCRACY BLUN'TS WINISMTIVE REFORM

'lioityo “1'33 DAILY YCHIURI 1n B19118!) 23 Fob 82 p 2

(Editorial: "Bureaucracy stunt-.3 Reform“!

[Text]

Attempts are being made‘ by the Liberal-Demo-
cratic Perty (LDP), government ministries end
egenciee, and privete business lenders to mutilate
the work being cum-led out by the second Ad Hoc
Administrative Retonn Council. .

The council is currently concentrsting on detsiis
of reports by its verious working amps. I! it no.
cumbstomountingpressmurromvestedintereste.
thenthierareopportunitytogivebirthtoreelad-
minietrative reform will be aborted with serious
consequences for the economy.

The beckstnge mnneuvers by renting once}. or
ministries end agencies to inﬂuence members of the

council is perticulnrly oﬂensive. LDP Diet members
withinnuenceoverthedistiibutionoi’mbeidiesalso
are being approeched. Even bodies enlieted with
the government ere lobbying to sabotage the retorm.

' Dietreuful Picture

Wewillnotsay thatelitheergumentsofthese
gmupsmwrongbutwewillsayﬁheyareeilbesed
on vested interests. Therefore. they ell have become
theenemiesotedministrativereforntAnditlsmost
distrustul that some Diet members are pressuring

the council too. , - .

But the ettsciu ngninst sdministretive reform
sre not limited to bumucrets end politicians. Even
business lenders ere trying to foil‘the council's_ ef-
orts. '

This is surprising since it was the business com-
munity. which tightened its own belt to 'cope with
the slowdown of the economy, that demanded thst
sdminbtretlve reform be carried out for fear the
economy would suirer from the malaise'of Western

‘ nations. But with the' stegnatlon of the economy,

many of these business bodes: with only near-term
economic vision blemed austerity in public spending.
'l‘hey'heve dusted oi! the old theory tint stepped-
up public spending will stlmniete the economy.
COPYRIGHT:

C50:

4120/181

Prod Government Again ‘

tht tho business community should do is unite
to demsnd agnin that'the government carry through
eaective administrstive refonn. Although the Fed-
erstion of‘ Economic Orgnlsstiono \Keidanren) is
supporting the council's chairman Toshiwo Doko.
the views of company pmidento are diverse.

Fortunntely et this critical moment, volunteers
in Mancini circles are preparing-to isunch "s no.
tionul forum to promote Administrative reform." The
entire business community should-hack this forum.
Attheumeumgmunhersofthecouncilmmt
stand firm against preesnres and do their duty for
the nstionsl good.

Although the udor of the people for administrs-
tive reform has diminished 'from last year, never-
theless opinion polls show the public wants the m-
ernment to carry out the necesssry reforms. The
people now must carefully wstch the behavior of
politicinnn sod bummrats in their nttempts to
thwsrt those reforms.

The Daily Youuuri. 1982
DIET OPERATION WINS UNDER LDP-JSP mwm

mkyo WHICH! mini! NEWS in Blgliah 24 Fob 82 p 2

[Nagatecho Doings colinn by 'rakehiko Takahaahii

LOP-J8? Basis“)

[Text]

The National Diet is an in-
stitution that the people in
general iind diificuit to un-
derstand. Since the Liherah
Democratic Party holds a
stable majority in both the
Home of Representatives and
the llouse ol Councillors. it
would seem that any issue.

following thorough discussions.
would be decided by a majority

vote. Things are not necessarily
quite that simple.

in discussing the sup-
plunentaryhudgetdraitforthe
fiscal year Ml budget. the
Japan Socialist Party took up
the problem oi remodeling the
F4 Phantom lighter planes.

Saying that even Prime
liinlster Zeniro Suariri was not
fully aware of this problem. the
government agreed to impose a
freeze for some time on the
funds intended ior use in the
remodeling. This compromise
enabled the discussions to he
resumed on the supplementary
budget. leading to its passage.

There is no agreement.
however. on when or in what
way the lreuing of the finds
will he ended. in replying to en
lnterpeilation in the Diet; the
prime minister stated that he
would like to have the
remodeling carried out as soon

11

as possiiileiscii:l the end oi the
current r t to
Marchsn. it“ up

it so. the "freezing" is in
name only and has no sili-
m. _ I ;

The Democratic Socialist
Party has «pressed its op-
positioiitotheentire .
declaring that it is_
unreasonable for an item once
included in the budget to he
froeen. For 'that reason. the
DSPhoyeoitedthevotingonthe
supplementary dralt in the
Lower House Budget Com-
mittee. The New Liberal Ciili
iollowedsult. .

Norwasitoniytheopposition
partles.DirectorGeneralichiro
Nairagawa of the Science and
Technology Agency disap--
peared iron the Budget
Committee.

Director General Nairagawa
is dissatisfied by the fact that
Prime Minister Sunilrl did not
know about the remodeling of
the F4 Phantoms The same
thing was includedinlhehudgst
lortheiastflsealyearJustaslt
is in the budget for iiscal year
1902. it is impermissible lor the
person inthehigheet poaitionof
responsibility fortheLDPaotto
have known about it. Nakagawa
also asserts that when a budget

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Diet Operation Carried Out at
....8 wax .u a 3.38. via
13.9. B - 5.8819338.

=8 8. 3.3.8 33.33.89 5
So. 5.28.3... a... =
328.5. 9. 3:8 9.. can.
.55.. .8 .3503 89268..
.33 9a 5% .2. .8: .2...
8:8 :5. ...o any. 9: :8 a
Eng 8508...

.38..» 93.3... 4-5....
tﬂpzasgaﬁa .23
8.. 3328. S. :8 .2...

as. .8... £8 v.28 .3263
:5 Rain...- .2. :5 .906 It:
mu: W ”SKATE OPPOSITION PARTIES VIEWED

Tokyo ailment DAILY ms in English 25 Feb 82 p 2

[editorial :

[Text]

“Unity of Middle-Readers”)

The moderate opposition Democratic Socialist
Party (DSP) and the New Liberal Club (NLC) have
ended their party conventions. Each party showed
enthusiasm aimed at unifying Japan’s middle-of-the-
road forces which plan to, jointly gain power. The two
conventions have showed us that such unity will not
be easy to attain.

What do voters expect from the middleof-the
roaders? in short. they want them to implement
reform and activate. Japanese politics. Many people
are discontent about the longtime single-party rule of
the Liberal-Democratic Party, which has resulted in
inﬂexibility, bureaucracy and corrupt politics.

Many people. including even supporters of the
ruling party, now want to see the emergence of a non-
LDP government. We believe this to be a national
feeling. and voters are placing expectations on the
middle-of-the-roaders to play a leading role in this
respect. Ryosaku Sssaki, DSP chairman. said in his
speech at the convention that “Japanese politics is
facing an historic turning point..." in its action
policy. the NLC called for “an historic duty and role”
for its members in unifying a wide~ranging rally.

We believe that i' e two parties have become
aware'ot the role smaller parties must play from an
historic viewpoint. and are-trying to find a way to
attain their purpose. They seem to believe that the
time has come to change the domestic political
situation. This trend is worth noting.

During the past few years,- the Komeito, the
Democratic Socialist. the New Liberal Club and the
United Social Democratic parties have followed a
trial-and-error course in spite of their slogan calling
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for unity. ‘i‘his Indicates the difficulty of uniting
political parties with different backgrounds and
dogmas.

. Prior to the NLC and DSP partyconvcntlons.
disputes erupted among several parties concerning
the "experimental remodeling" of the F4’figbter-
bomber. Differences were exposed between the
Komelto and three. other middleof-the-roadera.
deepening the latters' distrust of the Komelto.

' It is said that any hasty move aimed at uniting the
mlddle-of-the-roaders will not help them achieve their
purpose. Timing is also important. Prudent and
determined steps must be taken in concert, and in this
respect. Seiichi 'i‘agawa. representative of the NLC.
emphasized the importance of three points in
achieving unity: l) fundamental rules must be
respected; 2) talks must not be confined to just party
leaders; and 3) basic recognition must be established
on common problems. We support Tagawa's opinion.

;. in addition to unity. the four parties must know on '
what points they can agree and what programs they
can put intopractice. We say this because they can
solidify their ties through actions in and out of the-
Diet. Earlier. the four parties created a liaison
council for the promotion of nuclear disarmament
prior to the opening of the second special United
Nations General Assembly meeting on disarmament.
We appreciate their efforts because this was their
first joint action. -

,'- At present. the l-trilllon-yen tax cut demand is'
also an urgent issue for them. Whether or not they can -_
unify themselves for this purpose will-be a'test. We
also attach importance .to Tagava’s statement which.-
criticized the attitude- of former Prime Minister
Kakuei Tanaka who is on trial in connectionwith the
Lockheedbriberyscandal.. j _' '

Addressing the fifth party conventional the NLC
last Friday. Tagawa criticised Tanaha tor wielding,
strong inﬂuence in the Liberal-Democratic Party and
leading an LDP intraoparty faction with more than ‘
too members. its called for _'i‘anaka to immediately _’
resign from his Diet post if he is'found guilty by the
TokyoDistrictCourt. __ ." i, , . _.'.

-‘ We believe that the problems relatedto Tanaha's
trial are closely related to the very-foundation of
party politics, and we are watching for possible
reaction to Tagawa’s statement-fmm three other
middle-of-the-road parties. ,' . .

Some people believe that Japanese politics will

1!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
encounter rough sailing in the latter halt oi this yearl
In some cases, these moderate opposition partioa
may haVe to play an important role depending on the
outcome of political developments. We hope that
these parties will not try to reap a quick hhry'eet but
rather take action which is easily understood by
voters.

.chi Daily News 1982

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H IL ITARY

m? To sum 0.5.. ussa mums! swam
Tokyo SANKEI SEIHBUN in Japanese 11 Feb 82 p 2

[Text] The LDP's Special Committee on Space Development (Chairman Taro Nakayama)
decided at a meeting on 10 Feb that it would re-examine Japan's space develop-
ment activities because various countries are developing artificial satellites,
including military reconnaissance satellites. The committee is planning to
study the mechanisms and the operational space development systems of these
countries. The committee will invite JDA officials to a meeting on 12 February
to brief committee members on the status of the military satellites which the
0.5. and the u.s.s. R. are developing.

LDP members interested in defense issues have been voicing their opinions for
some time on the use of artificial satellite for peaceful purposes, saying
that the JDA should start research and development of communication and re-
connaissance satellites. However, the committee's position is that "we are
just trying to understand the status of various countries' military satellites
as part of our study to reexamine Japan's space development activities and
that we have no opinion yet whether the Japanese should develop military
satellites independently."

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1982.

C80: 4105/70

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIPPON TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE ACTIVITIES REPORTED
“-82 Budget Draft
Tokyo DENPA snnnnm in Japanese 1 Sep 81 p 5

[Text] Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) subnitted its
budget draft for ﬂ-82 to the Minister of Posts and Telecon-
municetions on 31 August. According to the draft. the
corporation has an optimistic view and anticipates business
revenues of b.166,100.000,000 yen. a 6.3-percent increase

over the previous year, even taking into consideration the
effect of lower rates. The draft is characterized by an
emphasis not only on the amount of money but also on the policy
of improving the corporation's financial condition. Although
the construction investnent of 1.75 trillion ya: 18 60"“

1.1 percent, the corporation hopes to accomplish its basic
goals by reviewing objectives and making investments effectively.
As for personnel increases. none are requested.

A 6-Percent Increase in Telephone Revenues

According to the ”-82 budget draft. revenues are 55.7 billion yen fron telegraph
services, down 5.9 percent; 3.688,300.000,000 yen from telephone services. up 6.1
percent; 310 billion yen from leased lines, up 13.0 percent; and 112.1 billion yen
from miscellaneous sources. up 2.7 percent. The anticipated telegraph revenues
include 28.6 billion yen from telegren fees, 26.1 billion you from telex fees. and

3 billion yen from other fees. Due to a decrease in telex connections. total
telegraph revenues are expected to fall by approximtely 3.5 billion yen.

Telephone revenues are 1.106.700,000.000 yen from telephone user fees (893.1
billion yen from basic charges and 213.6 billion yen from supplementary service
fees). 2.362.700.000.000 yen from telephone call fees, 137.2 billion yen from
public telephone fees. and 101.7 billion yen fron other charges (such as temporary
telephone installation fees). The anticipated telephone call fees include
2.2M,800.000.000 yen from direct-dial calls, 25.6 billion yen from operator-
assisted calls. and 62.3 billion yen fro. pinkphone calls. The anticipated leased
line revenues include 96.6 billion yen from general leased lines and 213.6 billion
you from leased data co—unications lines. Since the budget draft includes Sunday
and holiday discounts and a lowering of long distance rates. this is a rather
optimistic outlook.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WK UL’L‘LUML 035 URL!

Business expenditures are held to 6.077.700.000.000 yen. a 6.6-percent increase.

by trying to reduce the labor force and make it more efficient. Personnel expenses
are 1.410.600.000,000 yen. up 8.5 percent when wage increases and scheduled
increases are taken into account. Procurement is 655.6 billion yen. up 5.8

percent. Contracted business expenses (postal services. pocket bells. automobile
telephones. and so forth) are 141.8 billion yen. a 10.3-percent increase.

Depreciation expenses are 1.26 trillion yen. up 0.9 percent.

As for ratios relative to total expenditure. the highest three are personnel
expenses at 34.6 percent. depreciation at 30.9 percent. and procurement at 16.1
percent.

Expansion of Hinifax

As for construction. the general construction plan totals 1.285.900.000.000 yen.
down 33.5 billion yen. Of this. the construction costs of service facilities are
281.8 billion yen (down 1.6 billion yen). This includes 1.2 million general tele-
phone connections (1.3 million last year). the transfer of 2.1 million connected
telephones (2.1 million last year). 60.000 connections of building telephones
(60.000 last year). 640,000 extension telephone sets (670.000 last year). 750,000
business telephone sets (700.000 last year). 260,000 home telephone sets (220.000
last year). 71,000 public telephone sets (74.000 last year). 25.500 facsimile
terminals (14.700 last year). and 46.000 silverphone sets (45.500 last year).

The most attention is being paid to the large increase in plans for push-button
phones and facsimile. In regard to push-button phones. NTT anticipates a large
increase by dividing push-button phones into two kinds-simp1e push-button phones
with just the single push-button function and multifunction push-button phones
equipped for simplified dialing and so forth. It plans to increase simple push—
button phones by 720.000 units and multifunction push-button phones by 630.000
units. NTT anticipates a 70-percent increase in facsimile terminals. This
includes the demand for minifax. Among the 25.000 terminals. 19.000 are minifax
(12.000 terminals for public network use and 7.000 terminals for leased network
use). The 71,000 units of public telephones are mostly those usable with 100 yen
coins and also include those which accept magnetic cards.

Increase in Optical Communications Tests

The investment in general facilities construction. which belongs to the basic
facilities category. is 580.8 billion yen. down approximately 27.2 billion yen.

As for construction of new telephone offices. NTT plans to build 131 branch
offices and 30 long-distance telephone offices. a total of 161 offices. down 64
offices. It also plans to install 87 sections of coaxial cable (102 sections last
year) and 193 sections of microwave (203 sections last year). Concerning optical
communication networks. the corporation plans to conduct commercial application
tests in 13 sections (12 sections last year). Nine of the 13 sections are con-
tinuations of last year's work. The four newly assigned sections include one
between Otemachi and Husashino-Mitaka. and one between Amagaaaki and Shinfukuchi-
yama. Electronic telephone switchboards will be installed in 352 telephone offices
(332 offices last year).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Expenditures include 44 billion yen for disaster prevention plans (50 billion yen
last year). 362 billion yen for replacing facilities (358 billion yen last year).
and 17.3 billion yen for expansion of connection districts (20 billion you last
year). As for expansion of connection districts (to expand from 5 km to 7 km in
radius). the corporation plans to work in 110 of the approximately 2.000 connection
districts to be exbanded throughout the country. As a result. the nunber of house-
holds outside the connection districts will be reduced to approximately 6.000 by

the end of PY-82. For these 6.000 households. NTT plans. as a measure for
telephone network development in areas now outside connection districts. to promote
a sparsely populated area communication system which enables formation of new
connection districts in communities of more than 10 households in a 4-year plan
from FY 82 through 85. In FY-82. the new plan will cover 3.400 households in 200
regions. Investment for expansion of connection districts is 17.3 billion yen.
down 2.7 billion yen from last year.

Investment in data communication systems is approximately 106 billion yen (99.9
billion yen last year). It includes installation of 37.800 data communication
circuits (24.600 circuits last year) and 29 systems for data communication facili-
ties (26 systems last year). In addition. the draft includes 43 billion yen for
research facilities (37 billion yen last year). 11.8 billion yen for development
of telephone networks in remote rural areas (24 billion yen last year), and 57
billion yen for joint facilities (60.3 b11lionyenlsst year). and 246.3 billion
yen for facilities and equipment (229.4 billion yen last year).

Control of External Borrowing

As for the capital supply plan. NIT intends to operate in accordance with its
basic policy of controlling external borrowing. A total of 2.431,500.000.000 yen
yen-including the 1.75 trillion yen required for construction plans. the 120

billion yen payment to the national treasury. and 561.5 billion yen for redemption
of N11 bonds-«must be supplied. NT‘I plans to meet these needs with l.378,800.000.000

yen in external funds (1,120,700.000.000 yen last year). External funds are being
reduced by a large margin.

Abolition of User Bonds

External funds consist of 254.2 billion yen from users' bonds (268.2 billion yen
last year). 141.5 billion yen from facilities and equipment fees (143.5 billion

yen last year). 170 billion yen from financial investments (150 billion yen last
year). and 487 billion yen from special bonds and borrowing (559 billion yen last

year). NTT is working in the direction of abolishing users' bonds in the future.
1.5 Billion Yen for Investments

Honey invested in FY-82 is over 1.35 billion yen. Major investments are 34

million yen for Communication Satellites Organization. 590 million yen for Japan
Automobile Telephone Service. 350 million yen for the New Japan Automobile Tele-
phone Service. 25 million yen for the Okinawa Communication Service. and 50 million
yen for Japan Electronic Technology. Losses of invested money are 90 million yen
from the Captain System and 100 million yen for JATIC.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunsha 1981

19
FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

Patent Agreement with In!
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Nov 81 p 1

[Text] Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NIT) and IBM of the
United States signed a cross-licensing agreement and a memo-
randum on the exchange of technological data at the NTT
building in Uchisaiwaicho, Tokyo. on 19 November 1981. By
concluding this agreement. NTT and IBM will have free access
to each other's patents in the field of information processing
systems. In addition. both parties can freely conduct a mutual
exchange of engineers and technical information. Thanks to
this agreement, large-scale and close exchanges in advanced
technological fields are to be expected between NTT and IBM.
IBM is the second company to sign a cross-licensing agreement
with NTT. Western Electric of the United States has already
done so. However. in the agreement with IBN. NTT has obtained
subcontracting rights. which entitles it to license third
parties to manufacture 13H patented products. The special
characteristic of the agreement is that its conditions are not
unfavorable for NTT. which does not have its own manufacturing
division. in comparison with IBM, which is a manufacturer.

NTT reports that it held approximately 9,800 patents at the end of 21-80. On the

other hand, IBM possessed over 30,000 patents. The contract specifies that the
patents to be freely exchanged are limited to "those related to information
processing equipment. including electronic switchboards. and do not include
communications apparatus." Therefore, each party cannot freely use every patent
possessed by the other. Nevertheless. since both NTT and IBM are superior in the
information processing field and are proud of their technologies being the world's
most advanced. technical innovation in this field is expected to accelerate
hereafter.

Nowadays the telegraph. telephone. and data communications fields have all entered
the electronic age. Telephone awitchboards have been gradually replaced by
electronic switchboards. In the area of information processing for communications.
the conversion from analog to digital has been progressing. For this reason. the
subjects for research and development at NTT are diversified. NTT is currently
engaged in developing new technologies concerning electronics as a whole. such as
development of VLSI's, which are the heart of an electronic switchboard, pattern
recognition devices for transmitting not only voices but also pictures and hand-
written letters, and optical communication devices.

As a result. the number of NTT patents has been increasing every year. The number
of patents was 4.920 in FY-70. But it has reached approrimately 9.800. almost
double, in FY-80. Among NTT's patents. the prominent ones are semiconductor
technology related to electronic awitchboards and digital sign processing
technology. The corporation's voice synthesizing technology has been widely used

recently. The technology to synthesize voices is called the paakooru [phonetic
reading] system. When composing a voice artificially. this system pays attention
to information concerning the sound source which describes the characteristics of

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the throat and"the,shape of the mouth. Based on the information extracted. the
system composes a voice. It has the characteristic of requiring only one LSI for
the entire process. Ihe method of manufacturing a lowbloss optical fiber (in
which a laser beam barely dimishes at all) the core of an optical communication
system. is also NII's own technology. These NII technologies are at present at
the highest level in the world. NII patents are exerting a great influence on
manufacturers in various countries as they develop new products.

On the other hand, IBM is the largest computer manufacturer in the world. IBM
possesses over 30.000 patents. IBM also comes out on t0p in the world in the field
of information processing technology. However, it was IBM which strongly sought
the cross-licensing agreement with NIT. It is not clear where IBM's true intention
lies. NII Vice Bresident Yasuaada Kitahara said: "IBM explained that it was not
after the patent.£or any particular NII technology. Instead, it said that it

be able to avoid inadvertent violation of MIT patents when developing new products
if it had a general agreement on patents with “TI. That was why IBM wanted a
patent agreement with NIT."

The merits of having a patent agreement with IBM are also great for NII. MII has
also signed the same kind of contract with Western Electric, a wholly owned
subsidiary of AIGI and the possessor of Bell Laboratories. However, because NIT
does not have a manufacturing division. III cannot make use of “B's patents to
manufacture HE-patented products. On the other hand, the agreement with IBM
recognizes a subcontract right, which entitles NII to contract with a third party
to manufacture IBM-patented products. For this reason, a large effect is expected
in developing Japanese information processing industry.

Initially. IBM wanted a free exchange of all patents. including those in the
communication field. However, because IBM was not so heavily engaged in the
communication field. both agreed on a contract which did not include the communi-
cations equipment technology except for electronic switchboards. As a consequence.
Japan's state-of-the—art technology for optical communication systems is protected
from diffusion into the United States. VLSI and other semiconductor technologies,
to which attention has been paid recently and in which many technical innovations
have been made, are to be exchanged.

On 19 November NIT and IBM also signed a memorandum on exchange of technological
data as well as the contract on cross-licensing. Vice President Mitahara said:
"this exchange has a greater significance to researchers." The memorandum was

intended to promote the transfer of technologies between MIT and IBM through
exchanges of researchers. discussions. and seminars. Kitahara said: "He have not

decided anything specific yet. We are thinking of having a window for this purpose
on both sides and to conduct exchanges itemrby-item in the advanced techology
field."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expansion of Overseas Activities

Tokyo DENKI SHIHBUN in Japanese 11 Jan 82 p 5

Bureau. Recently. NTT signed a patent agreement with IBM of the United States. In
addition, industrial nations such as England and France have proposed technical
exchanges with NTT. Hoveover. NTT has been receiving requests for technical cooper-
ation one after another from underdeveloped nations such as Thailand and Malaysia.
Consequently, the present liaison room cannot sufficiently cope with all this
activity. Furthermore, as a public corporation with the world's highest level of
technology in the communications field, NTT must promote positively and strongly

The International Bureau will handle part of the work previously handled by the
International Supply Policy Roan. In the midst of ever-intensifying trade friction
over communications equipment, the International Bureau will occupy an extremely
important role in dealing with N'I'T's international policies, which include
purchasing supplies overseas.

The Overseas Liaison Room has representative offices in Bangkok. Geneva. New York,

Brasilia, and London. It (1) offers technical cooperation to underdeveloped
countries, (2) exchanges technology and information with advanced countries. and

(3) offers to cooperate in international conferences.

these activities in accordance with national policies in this field. For this
reason. its activities were relatively passive at the time of establishment.

At present. however, NTT's communications network is second only to that of the
United States and. moreover, it exceeds the United States by far in terms of
stable administration. In addition. NTT's technologies have reached the world's
highest level. For these reasons, the expectations and requests of various

foreign countries vis-a-vis NTT's technical cooperation have been increasing more
than ever.

Last November NTT signed a patent agreement with IBM of the United States. NTT
also reached agreement on the exchange of technology with Western Electric of the
United States. Recently, NTT has proceeded to give concrete form to a Joint
research project with ATST.

Ruthermore. NTT has received a proposal from France to exchange advanced

technologies such as optical fibers. The movement toward technical exchanges and
cooperation with advanced countries has been intensifying.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with the People's Republic of China in 1980. Furthermore. Indonesia. Thailand.
and Huluysis haVe approached NIT for technical cooperation.

Thus, NTT has decided henceforth to engage more positively in international
activities with an emphasis on technical cooperation and transfer of technology.
As a result. NTT is going to dissolve the Oveseas Liaison Room and establish the

International Bureau.

The International Supply Policy Room. which was established in October 1979. has
been conducting purchasing procedures as a window for the purchse of communications
equipment overseas. With the settlement at the end of 1980 of the Japan-0.8.
problem concerning materials supply. the volume of clerical work has been
increasing.

Under these circumstances. NTT established the International Supply Policy
Committee to study how the work of purchasing supplies overseas should be dealt
with in the future. With the establishment of the International Bureau. NTT
decided to dissolve the International Supply Policy Room and to transfer its
business to the International Bureau and the Materials Bureau.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

Study of Changes
Tokyo NIKKEI BUSINESS in Japanese 16 November 81 pp 42-53
[Article by Kimiaki Sudo, Yuji Sonomoto, and Yoji Koike]

[Excerpts] Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) has come to a
turning point before its 30th anniversary (see Figure 1). Even
though it has acquired the world's most advanced technologies
such as optical communications. it is inevitable that the
telephone business. from which the corporation's growth sprang.

is going to shrink in the future. In order to leap into the
future. "Doctor Shinto" has begun an operation intended to
activate the huge organization of 330,000 employees by instilling
profitmindedness and anticipating administrative reform. The
goal is to move on to become the dominant force in the information

industry. In order to do so. the corporation must get out from
under the government's umbrella, which restricts activities as

well as allowing an easygoing outlook. Row to achieve autonomous
management-therein lies NTT's difficulty.

The Shinto Revolution That Asks 330.000 Employees To Change Themselves

A revolutionary storm has been brewing in NTT, the chief temple of the information
industry. It is intended to enforce strict official discipline and to accomplish
administrative reform in advance. The man who sits in the center of the revolu-
tionary storm is President Hisashi Shinto. It is already well known that he was

appointed the president in the spring of 1981 to solve a large accumulation of
difficult problems such as putting an and to false bookkeeping and to cope with

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the liberalization of access to circuits. Hr Shinto comes from the private

sector and has nothing to do with the indecisiveness characteristic of bureaucrats.
His logic is sharp and clear, and his actions are swift. Therefore, NTT's high
officials are tense because they are unable to predict what he will say next.

One example is the budget request for the next year that NTT has submitted to
the Ministry of Finance. NTT has compiled a business plan for the next year that
assumes a manpower reduction—-involving only 81 persons--for the first time since
its founding in 1954. The report of the Provisional Administrative Research
Council advised a personnel reduction. In the Diet. it has also been pointed out
that. "compared with an electric company, a similar type of public utility. NIT
has more employees and earns less money." Despite all this, a request for a
manpower reduction from the corporation itself is still something never imagined
in the case of the old NTT.

Labor-Management Consultations: Aimed at a Revolution in Consciousness

One aspect of NTT's change. the ”Shinto Revolution." was observed in last October's
dialogue between management and the corporation's labor union, the All-Nippon
Telecommunications Workers' Union. Union members who watched President Shinto
answer questions in the Diet on television criticized him. saying: “Bis objections
to conversion of NTT into a private enterprise sound weak." or "It is not right
that arbitration has been only partially honored." As the union's distrust and
concern toward President Shinto rose, it proposed a meeting with management. The
meeting was fruitful. Union President Kazuo Oikawa said: "He exchanged opinions

more thoroughly than ever."

They had a discussion in elaborate detail on business plans and personnel problems.
including "how to cope with sentiment for conversion of NT? into a private enter-
prise" and "how to establish a financial base." Of course, President Shinto did
not accept the union's objection to conversion of NTT into a private enterprise as
it was. NTT is supposed to study the feasibility both of converting itself into

a private enterprise and of remaining a public corporation, and to report both

the merits anddemeritsof each alternative to the Provisionary

Investigation Council by the end of November 1981.

It is not that the union's assertions were accepted by President Shinto. However,
union President Oikawa evaluated the talks. saying: "Although I cannot understand
30 percent of what President Shinto says, I can understand 70 percent. He is a
fine man with really daring and unique ideas." This positive reaction also
existed because all the corporation executives, including the president. vice
president, and executive directora--the equivalent of all executives above the
managing director level in a private company--attended the meeting and talked to
the union officials for a full 2 heurs. It used to be a case of "management
cutting off the meeting after 30 minutes even though a 1-hour meeting had been
promised. There had never been a meeting before that all of the executive
directors attended."

President Shinto directly instructed the manager of the personnel department to
arrange a meeting between management and the union, and the meeting was planned
without any obstacle. The reason for this is perhaps President Shinto's judgment

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that it is better to have two channels. one channel through the organization and
another through the union. in order to carry out reform and the revolution in
consciousness smoothly." As for the reform. the president has already taken
measures to prevent the corruption and balse bookkeeping that have often been the
targets of the media. One measure was the appointment of a former general director
of the Board of Audit as inspector to strengthen the internal auditing system.
Another was a change in the accounting system.

Monthly Settlement: Efficiency Consciousness as in Private Enterprise

NTT had been operating under the so-called integrated revenue and expenditure rate
system. This is a system that annually assigns each organ. a telephone official
for example. a revenue target rate and an expenditure target rate. Under the
system. as long as an organ achieves the revenue target.rate. it can freely spend
to the same degree. Briefly speaking. if one organ can increase revenue. it can
also increase spending. This aspect of the system tended to invite corruption.
This is one of the factors that allowed the occurrence of corruption amounting to
1.2 billion yen within 2 years. For this reason. President Shinto ordered the

adoption of the monthly settlement system used by most private companies.

However. even though a different system has been adopted, it will be meaningless
if each organ cannot produce good results. Therefore, President Shinto picks a
region such as the Kinki or Shin‘etsu every month and has all divisions within

the region report their monthly statements directly to him. In the case of the
Kinki region. there are 11 communications departments and each must report the
contents of its monthly financial statements directly to him. This started in
August. "He must count all revenues and expenditures. Then. we must also explain
reasons for success or failure. When we cannot come up with good explanations

for bad results. we receive the president's thunderous condemnation: 'That is not
a reason at all.‘ Some managers who have been yelled at by him could not raise
their heads during the rest of the reporting session." President Shinto does this
thoroughly.

However. for ordinary private companies the monthly settlement system is now a
matter of course. Taking a factor such as variations in the exchange rate alone.
a private company cannot afford to have a leisurely annual settlement system. In
order to insure profits. a private company rust take measures promptly and needs
to check its results as soon as possible. When we consider this fact. President
Shinto's true intention in adopting the monthly settlement system may be to
permeate the corporation's entire management with efficiency conscousness.
Prevention of corruption is a side effect.

In fact. President Shinto has been acting vigorously since his inauguration to
break down the lukewarm environment in NTT and to awake a consciousness for
autonomous management. First of all. he took day trips to all 11 telecommunica-
tions offices throughout the country and gave lectures on NTT's basic management
policy. Moreover. "since giving lectures is only a oneway street and I cannot
hear the voices of employees in the field." he revisited all 11 telecommunications
offices. The second time. at each telecomnmunications office he called in about

20 officials of telephone office manager rank and exchanged opinions with them.
He also directed that the contents of his meeting be reported to all employees

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
throughout the country by means of NTT's internal newsletter. The number of NTT
employees is 330,000. It is difficult to direct them all in the same direction.
But. unless this is done. complete reform is difficult to carry out. Therefore. he
chooses themes suitable to promote the revolution in consciousness in each
division--one theme suitable for telephone offices. another suitable for research
institutions--and thereby encourages employees. One example is the liberalization
of the black telephone business. The black telephone is called the main telephone
device in NTT's terminology. At present. sales and installations of black
telephones are monopolized by NTT. But NTT is going to revise its regulations so
that other private companies will also be able to sell and install black telephones.

Although it sounds simple to say liberalization of the black telephone business.

it is a serious matter for NTT. From the user's standpoint, it has the merit of
"enabling a customer to choose a telephone that he likes." Some people hold the
opinion that "since there is no restriction on terminals for data communications.
it does not make sense to have restrictions on telephones. They are an anachronism."
however. liberalization of the black telephone business forcibly exposes NTT to
competition from private companies in the same line of business. If NTT cannot
compete and win, those employees currently engaged in sales and installations of
black telephones will not have any work in the future. They have no choice but to

try to improve work efficiency.
Image Change: Visible Research and Development

President Shinto recognizes the accomplishments of the NTT research institutionsand
engineers who have developed the world's most advanced technology for optical
communications systems. He said: 'Thare is no problem purely in the technical
aspect. The transfer of technology from invention to the production stag is also
carried out very smoothly." However. he also commented: "Researchers an engineers
do not have a strong consciousness that they too have a responsibility for NTT's
economic activities. This is because the leaders are too ignorant of the world.
They cannot strongly sense society's needs. In other words, research forresearch's
sake is not good. Researchers must conduct research that will produce things

society needs."

A typical example of research and development that meets society's needs is the
mobile equipment for both portable and automotive use developed by NTT's Yokosuka
Electrical Communications Laboratory. This equipment with such a long name is. so
to speak. a pocket telephone. It can be put in a shirt pocket. The director of
the institute. Reijiro Pukutomi. said: "Whenever President Shinto saw me, he told
me: 'I want you to develop it in the greatest hurry. It will replace the pocket
bell and become a very promising service in the future. They will surely sell

tremendously and become a source of profit for NTT.‘ I was repeatedly urged to
hurry up development."

A pocket telephone was recently perfected and a prototype was shown to the public.
It is in the we-hope-to-conduct-experiments-next-year (1982) stage. Why has
President Shinto been pressing for early completion of pocket telephone development?
Perhaps he has the intention of making pocket telephones a good example of research
and development that matches society's needs. It is an example of the "research
and development based on needs" President Shinto repeatedly has been urging upon

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NTT's researchers and serves as a stimulant creating a revolution in consciousness

among the engineers. At the same time, he wanted to show a visible accomplishment
to the public and tried to create a different image of NTT.

NTT is, in truth. a prime targetfor the administrative reform. However. NTT is
also in a process of internal transformation. Regularly held meetings with HITI.
which President Shinto suggested and started in August. symbolize NTT's transforma-
tion. NTT has been under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Posts and
Teleconmmmmications. Although NTT has had discussions with HITI in the past over
the future of the information industry. HITI has been basically a government agency
with which NTT has had few dealings. However. NTT broke its own shell and
approached HITI. This is a radical change from NTT's traditional attitude of being
its own lord under the umbrella of the HPT.

Revenue Sources: New Kinds of Services

"hat is the true purpose of this change in NTT? Hr Toshiro Takahashi. the head of
the Data Communications Headquarters. said that "the first meeting with MITl con-
cerned development of the next-generation computer and the future of data
communications." Herein lies the course on which NTT is setting itself. In brief,
making the communication business a basis, NTT wants to go into the information
industry. Precisely speaking, NTT intends to expand the scope of the data
processing business. in which it has already been engaged a little, and to make it
a source of future profit. President Shinto's presence at the enthusiastic
announcement of the conception of INS (information network system) early last
August made the corporation's intentions clear and specific. Briefly explained.
INS is a plan that will enable the corporation to outgrow the limited telephone
and telegraph businesses and to develop new kinds of audio and visual services such
as minifax. which was introduced in large cities in the middle of last September,
and the visual response system, which is currently in the experimental stage.

Meetings with HITI can serve as a method to obtain HETI's understanding in order
to proceed with NTT's business strategy in the future.

The final goal of NTT's transformation is a leap from its present position of
"patron of the ccmmmnications industry" to that of "patron of all industries."
Because NTT-developed technologies such as optical communications and VLSI can be
applied in robotics and other noncommunications fields. they can be a weapon to
advance further the office automation that is presently one focus of public
attention. Not only that. "NTT has an accumulation of technologies, although no
longer advanced, that can still be useful in fields other than communications."

The reason NTT has been desperately trying to change itself is that NTT does not
want to experience the "melancholy of ATGT." which has been shut off from the path

of growth because its business is restricted to communications and cannot extend
into the information industry. Putting aside discussions of NTT's management
structure. the reason President Shinto urges efficiency consciousness upon
employees and applies principles of competition to NTT's businesses is to realize
the aforementioned intention of NTT. Internal reform by cutting off the oldw
fashioned and stick-to-the—old-customs bureaucratic way of business and implanting
an enterprising spirit full of creativity seems to be the true feature of the
“Shinto Revolution.“

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Organization. Honey. and Joint Research That Build a Technological Kingdom

with the invention of the optical fiber and the VLSI, NTT's technological level
moved to the world's most advanced (see Figure 2). The secret of strength in
technological development is farsighted management at the top. NTT's technologies
flow into the private sector through joint research. President Shinto wants to
accelerate the flow. However. NTT's technical capabilities are insufficient in
the basic research area. It is questionable how many more creative ideas NTT can
produce in the future.

Optical Fiber: Recognized by the world

San Diego, California. USA. At the convention center in one corner of this port
city an international academic society's convention is underway. The attendees
number 600. A message from President Reagan is delivered. At this grand conven-
tion, a Japanese is the focus of attention. It is 39-year-old Mr Tatsuo leave. He
is an NTT researcher (a research director at the Research and Development
Headquarters).

This academic society is known as SPIE, the Society for Photographic Instrument
Engineering. He received the Achievement Award. To researchers engaged in the
study of optical communications, one of the leading-edge technologies. this award
is perhaps one of the highest honors. Of course. Mr Irawa is the first Japanese
to be awarded it. The date was last 26 August.

He wanted to have further contacts with other researchers in attendance at the
convention. but he returned to Japan immediately. 0n 2 September. 1 week after
the convention, he went to the NTT headquarters in Hibiya. Tokyo. to report to
President Shinto concerning the award. It was Mr Irawa's first face—to-face meet-
ing with the leader of 330,000 employees.

The conversation between the two did not end with just "congratulations" and "thank
you." President Shinto: "what is next (target for research and development)?"
Izawa: "Yes, I think it will be an optical 10. a circuit part for lasers."

President Shinto: "Yes. I have been thinking the same thing." President Shinto's
every word strongly impressed and also surprised Hr Izawa. who was more or less
nervous in front of the president. President Shinto: "You certainly seem to be
studying physics very well. But you are not studying this sort of thing. are you?"
As he spoke, President Shinto handed a book to Mr Irawa. 0n the cover was the
title, "Modern‘Thoughtsand Dogen" [Dogen. who lived from 1200 to 1253. was founder
of a major Zen sect].

Human Resources: Attractedby Research Funds They Gather

An optical fiber is a revolutionary material which reportedly will be a replacement
for copper wire in the future. Although it is as fine as a hair. an optical fiber
possesses the possibility of transmitting 10.000 times more information than the
cables presently used. Hr Izawa received an award for developing a production
method for "a fiber that a laser beam passes through." The production method is
known to the world as the VAD method. the vapor phase axial deposition method (see
Figures 3 and 4). The characteristics of this method are. in short. the three

28

FOR OFFICIAL UNE ONLY
elements of "continuation," "mass production." and "high speed." These character-
istics have been a long-sought dream of researchers in optical technology.

It was in the spring of 1975. just after he returned to Japan from study in the
United States, qhat Hr Izawa started to engage himself seriously in research on
optical fiber. He was assigned to NTT's Ibaragi Electrical Communications
Laboratory. His rank was research special investigator in the Dielectric Haterials
Reserach Officer Only two men, Mr Shoichi Sudo and Mr Pumiaki ﬂanawa'(at present,
both are in theﬁpgtical Materials Research Office and Kr Sudo is a chief
researcher). helped Hr Izawa. A team of only three men started the research in
early 1976.

It was in October 1976 that they could see a slight light in their research. A
mass of chalk-like glass ( a porous basic material) became transparent as it was
being heated. "He did it!" The three men reported it to their boss and then went
to Hito to have a small celebration....

Hr Izawa now recalls his past experience as a researcher and sometimes wonders "if
I had stayed at the university, could I have done this sort of research?" The
true reasons he entered NIT were materials and money. In other words. he was
attracted by RTT's abundant research funds and facilities. He said: "My research
team spent a nine-digit sum of money in 3 years" to develop the van method.

Moreover. it was a technology where "we were unsure of success" (Hr Izawa). It is
a technology a private research institution could not develop by itself.

th is NTT strong in developing technologies? In searching out the secret of NTT's
strength. we have concluded that is is materials, money, and human resources. It
is common knowledge that the best electrical engineering students enter NTT. Hr
Iaewa's professor. Nasahide Kamiyama. a professor emeritus of Tokyo University.
highly praises Hr Izaws, saying: "Hr Izawa did very good work when he was in
grandate school. too."

Hr Isawa passed the most important period for a researcher in the latter half of
the 1960's and the 1970's. During that period, not only NIT. but all of Japan was
rigorously engaged in advancing technological development and caught up with and
overtook the United States and Europe in the advanced optical fiber and VLSI
technologies. Being in the midst of the development of these technologies. he was
blessed with good luck as a researcher. Hr Izewn is in a sense a nun symbolizing
NTT's developing technologies.

VLSI: Pushed by Organizational Power

"hat is NTT's technological level in the VLSI field. one of the corporation's two
advanced technologies? This can also be said to be at the world's highest level.
Let us take as an example the question of how many elements (such as transistors)
can be integrated on one chip. In the case of the memory chip called a RAM, which
can randomly read out and write in information, NIT developed the world’s first
256 kilobit VLSI in 1980 (a bit is the basic unit of information). It is a VLSI
that can contain 600.000 elements on a silicon chip only 6 millimeters square.

29
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next target for development is, in the case of the RAM. the l megabit (1.000
kilobit) chip. It will be a VSLI with four times the integration of a 256 kilobit
chip. Once this is perfected. an entire TV screen can be stored in one chip.

In the case of both the optical fiber and VLSI, for which NIT now enjoys the
world's highest reputation, NTT's research was behind that of the United States
until a few years ago. Yasushi Takahara. the chief of the Research and Development
Headquarters. commented that "the semiconductor technology of NTT's Electrical
Communications Laboratories was ignored by other people before." How could NTT
catch up with others so quickly? It is not sufficient to explain simply that NTT
had all the materials, money, and human resources. More than anything. it is
because of the strong management of research and development at the top.

In the spring of 1974. Shigeru Yonezawa. then president of NTT. (currently the
chairman of the Telecommmunications Association). instructed the leading researchers
that "it is not good just to follow behind the world's leaders. It is necessary

to advance basic research more positively in the 1975-1985 decade. I would like
you to think of three subjects for this research."

As instructed by the president, the Technical Bureau of the headquarters and
leading members of the laboratories discussed the matter for about 6 months. As
a result. they came up with three subjects for research: optical fibers. VLSI.
and digital technology. In order to develop them, the president ordered "a
considerable expansion and improvement of the research organizations." For
example. the number of researchers engaged in development of the VLSI increased
from 150 to 500 in one effort. He were surprised to discover how much effort NTT
had concentrated on research.

In the case of optical fiber, too. if it had not been a definite target of the
organization. the technological level probably would not have reached the world's
highest. Isn't the reason why Mr Izawa succeeded in developing the VAD method.
about which he was initially "uncertain of success," that the entire organization
was moving in one direction?

Joint Research: Utilizing Competition Between Companies

Moreover. joint research with private manufacturers may have contributed to NTT's
technological success. In regard to the joint research system, not a few people

point to the adverse effects of "NTT's collusion with certain manufacturers." As
far as technological development is concerned, however, we can give great credit

to this system.

The manufacturers who joined with NT? in joint research were four electrical cable
makers. including Sumitomo Electric Industries in the case of optical fiber and

the triumvirate of Nippon Electric Company (NBC). Hitachi. and Fujitsu in the case
of the LSI. Although it was called joint research, the experimental facilities of
each partner were separate. Manufacturers never got together to conduct research.
NTT's researchers and the manufacturers' researchers sometimes used the same basic
experimental facilities together at NTT. But it was always NTT's researchers
together with one manufacturer's researchers at any one time. Althoughtechnologies
were transferred from NTT to the manufacturers. “they were never transferred

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
between manufacturers. nor did NTT intermediate such transfers," said Nobukazu
Niizeki, the director of NTT's Ibaragi Electrical Communications Laboratory.

Manufacturers are divided in joint research. Consequently. competition among
manufacturers is'very severe. Moreover. "NTT decides how many orders each
manufacturer wilr‘get in accordance with how much each manufacturer has contributed
to the joint research” (0&1 Electric IndustriesConPany President “8880 Hiyake).
Therefore. each manufacturer cannot help but try hard. The managing director of
NEC, Hichiyuki Uenohara. said: "Consciousness of competition among researchers in
NTT's joint research is totally different from that of researchers at Bell
Laboratories in the United States. where the manufacturer is within the same
organization." Of course he means that Japanese researchers have a stronger
consciousness of competition.

What is the merit of this for the manufacturers? The greatest merit is that NTT's
basic technologies flow to manufacturers through joint research. Let us take the
example of the VLSI. Oki Electric Industries Co developed a l megabit ROM chip
through joint research with NTT. "The technologies our researchers acquired
through the joint research contributed to the production of a kanji [Chinese
character] printer" (President Hiyake). Furthermore. this is the easiest way for
manufacturers to get the most up-to-date information on technologies. of course.
joint research also guarantees manufacturers a purchaser. NTT. for the product.
In addition. Tsuneo Nakahara, the head of Sumitomo Electric Industries Research
and Development Headquarters. says: "Since a specific target for research and
development is given in joint research. it is easy to work with."

To NTT. the joint research system may be quite convenient because it forces
manufacturers to compete while raising the technical level of each manufacturer.

The transfer of technologies through this type of joint research is certain to
become more and more important in the future. Considering the fact that semi-
conductors are used in many fields of industrial machinery and household goods.
the influence of NTT's technology extends across extremely wide areas.

President Shinto emphasizes the utilization of NTT's accumulated technology. By
doing so, he does not mean only the transfer of technology through joint research.
In addition. he intends to transfer NTT's technologies to the private sector
through Nippon Technology of Electrical Communication (NTEC-organized by former
employees of NTT's Electrical Communications Laboratories). Technologies developed
by NTT's research institutions are sold to NTEC. and the NTEC sells them to private
manufacturers. One example is the voice synthesizing technology called paakooru
[phonetic]. President Shinto seems to fire up NTT employees when he says: "Let's
promote this sort of transfer of technologies and earn more." In line with the
intentions of President Shinto, last October, the chief of NTT's Research and
Development Headquarters instructed each laboratory "to list technologies which

can be used by private manufacturers."

A Worry: The Thin Layer of Basic Researchers

NTT's research and development division seems to be running very well. But is
also seems to have many problems.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of them is a problem of materials supply. According to new regulations
promulgated at the end of last year [1980]. NTT will give more opportunities to
foreign manufacturers to participate in supplying material to the corporation. Of
course. NTT's management will benefit if competition among manufacturers becomes
more severe and thereby lowers the cost of supplies. Hovever. if an unfamiliar
manufacturer joins research projects that have been conducted with only certain
manufacturers, efficiency in research may fall. Hiroo Toyoda, the former director
of NTT's Musashino Electrical Communications Laboratory asked if "it won't be
difficult to retain technological continuity." Some researchers say that "this is
the most serious crisis since NTT's laboratories were established."

An even more serious problem is the size of the corporation's research capabilities.
Let us compare NIT with Bell Laboratories. The number of researchers at Bell
Laboratories is approximately 26,000. Among them, those engaged in basic research
number l.500-l.600. 0n the other hand, at NTT only 200 out of 3.100 researchers
are engaged in basic research. Bell Laboratories is in a completely different
class from NTT. Moreover, Bell Laboratories even has geneticists and psycholo-
gists. Will this difference in basic research capabilities not affect future
competition in the development of advanced technology? In particular. in the
development of basic technologies?

"Japanese research has been always conducted for the purpose of improving
efficiency. Researchers knew what to make and how to make it. However. when we
do not know what to make in the future. our method of conducting research will not
be effective any longer" (Hr Toyoda).

This crisis mentality seems to be shared by research managers themselves. Takahars,

the chief of the Research and Development Headquarters. said with tension showing
in his face: "A strategy formulated around 1974 almost by accident turned out
well. This is the truth of NTT's success. There is no guarantee that our strategy
will turn out well next time. We cannot afford any mistakes in formulating
strategy hereafter."

As is often pointed out, in the case of both optical fiber and the VLSI. NIT has
developed more practical forms of a technology. Researchers have been working
hard on matters such as reduction in the loss of the laser beam and increases in

the degree of integration. NTT's improvement of these technologies have almost
reached the limit. If a completely new type of advanced technology or compound
technology is developed in the United States and Europe in the future, can
Japanese researchers, who are so used to improving already invented technologies,
compete with 0.5. and European researchers?

He asked a researcher outside NTT about this. Professor Jun'ichi Nishizawa of
Tohoku University (the Telecommunications Research Institute) is a pioneer in
optical communications.

"It is true that NTT's development capability is number one or two in the world.
However. it is not yet sufficient in terms of developing unique. creative ideas."
President Shinto may be keenly aware of problems like these. for he himself is an
engineer. We seem to hear him saying: "Future technological development cannot
emerge from a way of thinking based on the past framework." Didn't President

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Shinto try to gi.e advice to NTT's researchers in the guise of the book given to
Mr Izawa? “”

The Achilles' Reel of Management That Is Inefficent and Makes Light of Needs

Though it is a technical kingdom, NTT has many serious management problems. It
cannot get rid of the government-will-foot-the-bill way of business which is
inefficient and ignores people's needs. One goal of NTT is to expand its services
in fields other than telephones. However. in those fields it faces an accumulation
of problems, such as criticism for being a monopoly and competition with private
companies. The future of NTT depends on whether or not it can succeed in realizing
the concept of INS. However. more immediate problems are to improve its financial
condition. to reform the fee structure, and so forth.

18 Versus 2: A Big Difference from Private Companies

The work done by 2 people in private companies is done by 16 to 18 people at NTT.
This is an excerptfromthe shocking remarks in the "Report on the Results of an
Administrative Review of Data Communications" published by the Administrative
Management Agency last July. This is a comparison of the manpower NTT and computer
service company 'Tf' require to maintain the online business of a mutual financing
bank. Moreover. this is only a comparison of dayshift workers on weekdays. The
report goes on to say that H assigns nobody to work on Sunday. while NTT assigns
five people to work on Sunday. The report sharply highlights NTT's inefficiency.

To this criticism, NTT offered the excuse that "we needed many workers because the
computers frequently broke down in the past" (Toshiro Takahashi, chief of the
Data Conmunications Headquarters). But it also recognized that "we certainly had
too many employees on the job." This example is only the visible peak of an
iceberg. Nevertheless, it clearly shows the inefficiency of NTT based on "the
government-will-foot-the-bill" way of thinking that is still deeply rooted in NTT.

Since NTT is an enormous organization with annual business revenues of a trillion
yen, waste also accumulates on an enormous scale. Since domestic telephone service
is monopolized by NTT. the corporation's productivity in this field cannot be
compared with any other entity in Japan. Therefore. let us compare NTT with ATGT,
which provides approximately 80 percent of all telephone service in the United

States. ATaT's business revenues and number of employees are almost three times
those of NTT. when we compare productivity in PY-80. NTT's sales revenue per

employee of 12 million yen is considerably less than the 14.1 million yen in the
case of ATGT. As is shown in Figure 5, AT&T’s superiority in this respect has not

changed for the past five years.

When we compare the productivity of money. gross interest burden as a percentage
of ssles--financing expenses as a percentage of total revenue--is 11.2 percent
for NTT and 7.6 percent for AT&T (in FY-BO). AT&T is superior in this respect.
too. It is obvious that ATsT's net profit as a percentage of employed total
capital. which is a general indicator of earning power. is much more stable than

m's.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Criticism: Services Without Service

As has been already mentioned in detail. we have no doubt about NTT'a technological
superiority. However, it is questionable that NTT utilizes such a "treasure" to
the full extent. NTT's method of business is somehow amateurish. NTT does not do
business in ways that suit customers' needs or offer special products or services
that customers want. One example is DEMOS, a scientific and technical calculation
service. one of the two main services of the Data Comnications Division, which
has been recording an enormous deficit along with the Telegraph Division. The
service hours for this system are from 8 am to 10 pm. Considering that customers
who use this sort of service often work at night, NTT cannot be said to be offering
the most convenient service. There are some private companies in the same line of

business that offer 24-hour service. Consequently, the difference in service
between NTT and private companies is obvious.

In the case of DRESS. a sales and inventory management service. another of the
principal services of the Data Communications Division that uses public circuits.
service hours are from 8 am to 8 pm. With these service hours. it is only natural
that “users have not increased as we initially planned" (Hr Takahaahi). Moreover.
these services are intended primarily for small- and medium-sized businesses.
Recently, however, small- and medium-sized businesses have tended to use personal
computers and office computers. Therefore, NTT has to compete intensely with
these small computers. This is directly related to the failure to increase
revenue from these services. An organization that grew up in the telephonebusiness
where it had a monopoly naturally has a difficult time in the competitive market.
Moreover, competition with private companies is expected to be more and more
intense in the future. A delay in responding to market needs may become fatal for
m.

NTT has exhibited this tendency from the beginning. but recently criticism and
questioning in various forms. such as the idea of converting NTT into a private
enterprise and requests in the Provisional Administrative Research Council to open

NTT's circuits. have been increasing. The desire for " a telephone installed at
once" and "a telephone connected at once" was shared throughout the nation in

the past. For this reason. people rarely questioned the rationale for NTT's
existence. At present, however, when the long waiting list for telephone
installation has diminished and telephone calls can be made by direct dialing
throughout the nation. it is no wonder that the voices questioning NTT's existence
have been getting stronger. Because NTT itself has been placing emphasis on
services other than telephones which are the fields expected to grow in the future,
many people criticize NTT's monopoly from the standpoint of efficiency and opine
that NTT could be activated through conversion to a private enterprise.

INS: A Business To Revive NTT

The strongest weapon to deal with criticism of NTT would be development of a
business that insures the significance of NTT's existence. It is the concept of
INS that, under President Shinto, NTT as a whole started campaigning for this

year. Although NTT has possessed the concept of INS for a long time. it is only
in this time of severe criticism of NTT'a management that NTT has started

vigorously to campaign on the outside for the concept of INS.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The INS concept would replace the existing telephone network. which uses analog
signals transmitting sound waves as electrical waves, with a digital network using

digital signals that transmit information as a combination of "1" or "0." In this
way. DDX. the new date communications network that NIT began to establish in 1979.

the facsimile ditwork that NIT started servicing last September, and the nationwide
telephone network can be completely integrated.

the INS telephone; facsimile, data communications. and visual communications can

be passed througﬁ‘one network at low cost. Furthermore, various services are
computed according to the volume of information, so the fee structure can be
rationalized and the distance differential in the telephone rates can be eliminated.
In addition, INS,enables us to make a telephone call and use facsimile or data
communications concurrently. INS is, so to speak, a get-three—birds-with-one-stone
system. For this reason, if the INS is completed. office automation will be
furtherpromoted. It will then create a new work system under which people work

at home. or work places and residences are brought together. Such a blueprint has
been drawn up.

According to NTg's explanations. as illustrated in Figure 6, with the completion of

If the necessity of INS is recognized. a strong step will have been taken in the
direction of restoring the significance of NTT's existence. No one other than

NTT can maintain a nationwide network that combines state-of-the-art coumunications
technologies such as optical fiber and the most advanced computer technology.

It is also true that an enormous amount of money is required to complete INS. NIT
is supposed to invest over 10 billion yen in the experiment by 1984. This does not
seem to he a big burden on NTT. which has earned net profits of approximately 400
billion yen in the past 4 years. However, management is gripped by a strong crisis
consciousness concerning NTT's financial base. Although President Shinto has
recently avoided saying so for internal reasons. when he first became president he
often said: "If the ratio of financing expense to total revenue reaches 11 percent,
a private company would go bankrupt." Certainly. the burden will become heavy
because NTT's payments on principle and interest will exceed 1 trillion yen a year
hereafter.

Capital: Finances Far from an Offensive Posture

Some people say that the interest burden is naturally heavy because the c

commications business is a typical public utility. A heavy interest burden does
not matter because NTT can absorb the burden and still make a profit. But NTT's

executives are concerned. because: "Demand for telephones has reached the ceiling
now. Therefore. the annual increase in revenue has fallen below a percent. In
spite of this. the annual increase in expenditures is still almost 6 percent.
NTT's financial condition has become such that an 80-billion-yen deficit arises
every year" (President Shinto).

In order to cope with this situation. NTT must slow down investment. Investments
for FY-82 are 1.75 trillion yen, a decrease from the previous year's total for the
first time since NTT was founded. Another source of pain is the possibility that
after 1983 NTT will not be able to issue the users' bonds now sold on a mandatory
basis to telephone customers. This has been a large source of capital. The law

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

authorizes users' bonds only for a 15-year period, and the 15 years will expire in
1983. In its FY-82 budget NTT expects to receive over 250 billion yen from users'
bonds. If this source of capital is eliminated. the loss will be greater.
Moreover. NTT has to pay to the national treasury a total of 480 billion yen, 120
billion yen every year for 4 years. commencing in FY-81. NTT must find a new way
to meet this additional demand for funds.

For this reason, NTT changed its policy of raising money through bond issues and
for the first time borrowed 10 billion yen from a commercial financing institution
last March. This was intended to diversify the sources of supply for funds. At
the same time "this was intended to obtain capital at as low an interest cost as
possible“ (Takeshi Iwashita, the accounting manager). The interest rate for this
loan was 0.3—0.4 percent less than the bonds issued at that time. Although late to
begin. NTT seems to have started watching all factors in its financial strategy as
private companies do. However. since NTT is obliged to deposit surplus funds in
the national treasury (at an annual interest rate of 3 percent). WTT cannot manage
its funds as it likes. NTT's financial condition seems far from an offensive

financial strategy.

As mentioned previously. NTT has numerous problems. Under these circumstances.
what moves the organization is after all human resources. President Shinto says:
"Stop using NTT language and use Japanese." With this catch phrase. he intends to
impress upon all employees the importance of the revolution in consciousness. Can
the Shinto Revolution. which aims at activating the organization by adopting the

ways of thinking of private enterprise, permeate throughout NTT? Professor Hiroshi
Kato of Keio University (the chairman of the Fourth Division of the Provisional

Administrative Research Council) noted the following: "NTT should adopt more of
the good aspects of private companies. For example, there is no private company

in which the president cannot appoint the vice president. 0n the other hand.
NTT's president does not have the power to appoint the vice president. This is

a problem as an organization." Meanwhile. the fact is that thosewhoarefascinsted
by President Shinto's daring way of thinking are predominantly young employees.
The solution to this sort of problem seems to be a key to the restoration of NTT.

Seek a Road Toward the Third Sector

NTT is at present in the process of administrative reform. Whether NTT should be
converted to a private enterprise or should reform and remain as a public
corporation has been under discussion. However. management structures are not
limited to a choice between these two. There is another structure of management.
the third sector-semigovernmenta1 management. The third sector seems to be the
best way to satisfy both conditions of the communications business as a public
service and the need for efficiency in management as long as there are no obstacles
elsewhere.

Do Not Let a Giant Grow Too Big
Next year NTT will celebrate its 30th anniversary. Over the past 30 years.
technology has progressed and society has changed. Given this history. it is

rather unusual that nobody has ever questioned why the telephone business has been
a government monopoly. Why is the third sector a better alternative? If NTT were

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
converted to a private enterprise. the adverse effects of bureaucratic work
habits insensitive to public needs could be eliminated. but conversion might
become an obstacle to the develcpment of the information industry.

If NTT is convcfted into a private enterprise. the brakes currently imposed on

the data communications business will be removed. Then.usingits abundant capital.
advanced technology. and human resources as a weapon. NTT may overpower other
private companies and become a Gulliver-type oligopolistic enterprise. If the
concept of INS is realized in the future. NTT will become an organization of
incomparable power. The result will be the birth of a giant which controls the
brain called computers and nerves called networks in one hand.

Whatever management structure NTT has, its business ought to have limits. Clearly
speaking. NTT should. in principle. be in the business of offering communication
circuits. and its involvement in the data communications business should be limited
to those fields of public interest, such as the Postal Savings online system. and
pioneering technologies. The latter. however. must be transferred to private
companies when they become capable of handling the technologies.

If NTT evolves beyond a public corporation and enters the third sector. freedom of
management increases. Under the present system in which each rate increase must
be approved by the Diet. it is hard for NTT to establish a financial base. Of
course. even with freedom of management. it is necessary to have a public hearings
system. and rate changes must be approved by concerned government agencies.
Moreover. under the present system in which N'I'l‘ cannot raise rates unless its
finances fall into deficit, strengthening of NTT's management seems impossible.

Concerning rates, people strongly desire correction of differentials based on
distance. 0n the other hand. NTT is said to face an unavoidable financial deficit
in FY-SS. How can these pressures be coped with? First of all, shouldn't NTT
take measures to lower long-distance rates and raise local rates before it is too
late? One condition for doing so should be NTT's adoption of a large zone system
that expands the minimum rate call zone to neighboring prefectures. After doing
this. it would be justifiable for NTT to raise rates when its finances go into the
red .

Step Out into a Freer System

NTT hardly has profitmindedness. NTT makes too little effort to improve its
business. For instance. if HIT supports various kinds of telephone consulting
businesses and collects fees as an agent. usage of telephones will surely increase.
In the case of the minifax service started last September as well. if NTT allows
private companies to sell the minifax on a commission basis. the demand for minifax
will be developed further. NTT must change its attitude and bad habits of
approaching business only on the basis of present technology and fee structures.

The day is near when many companies become internationalized and communication
satellites are put into use. Then, what will NTT do about its relationship with
Kokusai Denshin Denwa (KDD) [International Telegraph and Telephone--Japan's

international telecommunication monopoly]? If business territories cannot be
divided, NTT and KDD must consider merging. In order to activate an organization

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and make management efficient. a system free from government budgetary controls.
in which wages are independently determined, will be indispensable. NTT ought to

move toward a freer system.
Interview With President Shinto

"Content of Communications Services To Be Changed to a Return of Technology to
Society"

[Question] NTT has the world's most advanced optical communications technology.
NTT's technical capability is certainly great. Does NTT‘s concept of technological
development differ in any basic sense from private companies?

[Answer] They are quite different. In the case of telecommunications. the
performance characteristics of equipment are precisely the grade of service.
Therefore. priority must be placed on technological development. In this respect.
NTT's achievements are great. We have already had technologies prepared for
services which will be required 15 years hence. We do not need to buy from others.
Those who can say this may be only NIT and AIbT. The question is how efficiently
in economic terms we can utilize accumulated technology to serve society and
satisfy the public. The aim of management hereafter will be to change the contents
to a higher communications service.

[Question] There is a question as to whether or not NTT's technologies are
really effectively serving society. Are there any technologies not fully utilized?

[Anser] Yes, a problem concerning technologies exists. In the process of
developing technology. we have come up with some technologies that can be very
valuable to other industries. However, due to the law governing NTT. we cannot
go into areas other than telecommunications. We have many technologies for which
we cannot find any use. One example is byproducts produced in the process of
developing 16's and glass fibers. Even if the law is revised. it is not good to
move into the fields of private companies if NTT is to remain a monopolistic
enterprise as it is now. On the other hand, communications equipment is going to
be automated in the future and does not require much manpower. If we only sell
patents. we cannot support a large family.

[Question] What kinds of influences and effects do you expect open procurement and
the cross-licensing of patents with IBM to have on technical development?

[Answer] Until recently we have been dealing with only the so-called NTT family.
But with the open door. we are now able to deal with anybody in Japan and the
world. In fact, Motorola has become involved. It is good to increase the
companies we deal with. It does not affect our technological development at all.
The merit of cross-licensing agreements is.in addition to access to patents. to
enable our researchers to go into the counterpart's research institutions freely
and have discussions with their researchers. If you change one's way of thinking
even slightly, the situation sometimes changes dramatically. This helps to

increase efficiency in developing technology. The exchange of software helps.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Thé‘o'ther day the All-Japan Telecomnication Workers Union announced

its objection to the conversion of NTT to a private enterprise. However, the union
also opposes the same salary schedule as other public corporations.

[Answer] Everybody dislikes the phrase "conversion to a private enterprise." The
basic principle is to obtain rewards suitable to one's work. Taking telephone
charges as an example. we have been reducing rates instead of increasing them. The
result of reducing rates is to be criticized as earning too much. Or we are asked
to pay surplus funds to the national treasury. This is nonsense. Employees cannot
have a life worth living nor work worth working. If salaries must be on the same
salary schedule as other public corporations regardless of business results. it
would be better to remove the self-supporting account sync and merge N11: into

the concerned government agency. But, that would not be good. would it?

 

       
  

  
  

[graphics]

(63-’:_.#. O—_ —-—.-#v s- ----- m-v~_‘ O -- -—‘ ‘- —- -- D h -
, (1) $3; (7) 21(8)
rmmzrr . .25? - -. _
. I15; 5! ‘ 61(12)
3.x 4‘] a i’l (11) :
3° 5 1' t - N? E

m r n . . s , a

I z 9“ I I, '-

3 I (9):; (10): .33 -.
;’° ‘3 no a 99 +
. it” I a; i_ :

l“ I a I

. a '5; g
10 i
. '1‘- n E
.0 (4) a; (5) g .

‘ - - n
"w "4'7“ m'wym mum-Mm 354"“.

Figure l. The Trend of NTT's Business Results.

(1) 100 billion yen (2) Expenditures (3) Revenues (lo) Fiscal year [shows]

(5) Forecast (6) Inaugurated the wide-area time system (one local call limited
to 3 minutes) (7) Started public data comnications service (8) Rate increase
(the mininum rate raised from 7 yen to 10 yen) (9) Completed the instant
connection system throughout the country (100 percent dialing system)

(10) Inauguration of President Shinto (ll) Announced the concept of INS. Started

minifax service (12) Complete payments to the national treasury (120 billion yen
a year for I. years)

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

(2) unummm 7 3mm

noouuxnezn :"""
oAlLtc) .iﬁ};

   

(1) 3.93m.“

MRMan
(nlnAHN)

 

.(10)

'l‘l Qllliﬂﬁ'dﬁ
8*) (11)
~N¥JXRM

Figure 2. 3.100 Researchers in Charge of Advanced Technologies (NTT's Research
System.

(1) Research and Development Headquarters in the HusashinoElectrical Communications
Laboratory) (2) Musashino Electrical Communications Laboratory. 1,700 researchers

(including personnel of the Research and Development Headquarters) (3) Basic
research, design, and microprocessing (6) VLSI (5) Ibaragi Electrical
Communications Laboratory, 1,100 researchers (6) Research on parts and materials
(7) Optical fiber (8) Yokosuka Electrical Communications Laboratory. 300
researchers (9) Research on systems and applications (10) Communications
satellites (11) The Fourth Electrical Communication Laboratory (in Atsugi)
expected to open at the end of FY-82 (12) Specialized research on VLSI

Figure 3. Manufacture of Optical Fiber by the NTT-Developed VAD Method(inPart).

(1) First stage: produce a chalk-like
mass.
(2) Second stage: make "chalk" transparent.
(3) Raw Material
(4) Oxyhydrogen burner
(5) Minute particles of glass
(6) Porous basic material
(7) Heating furnace
{\9nnau (5) (8) Transparent basic material
(5) (9) Starting material

n1:nn*

 

hO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.._--______—_.._ .__

Wilmer (I All: nihilimlto'lio Ozannvaurnh xﬂlnlt Ob évwmizm: LII“: ox M

(1) «max (anunuusm (5)
to
(3)
“(3)

tom)

  

[ATT

 

 

5 5

(6)
_——n . J—b—l _...__a. ___—_-5_._ . .A__
int»! 52"" T—sTT s: 52 3 is 55 5| W 54

.1: t r'»-236nril. arm-m 9: E os-savﬂlnlr-uuaa)

Figure 5. Comparison of Management Indicators between an and AT&T.

(1) NT? is inferior in earnings per employee (sales per employee).

(2) Million yen

(3) NTT

(b) AT&T is also better at using money (gross interest burden as a percentage of
sales).

(5) There is a big difference in earnings stability between the two (ratio of net
profit as a percentage of employed gross capital).

(6) Fiscal year [shown]

(7) Note: The exchange rate is 235 yen per 1 dollar. AT7T's figures are quoted
from the 0.8. Financial Data by Needs-Standard and Poor.

b1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

mi9vl—’--Ilhrhﬁz.IIkZﬂl-’-iﬂﬂt6 Tvavra-h-IIIHT
a47+oueeeb(13)

Figure 6. NTT's Concept of INS.

(1) Information processing center

(2) Connunications processing center for relay
(3) Communications processing for customers
(4) Mobile units

(5) Terminal connection device

(6) Telephone set

(7) Facsimile

(8) Data terminal

(9) Video terminal
(10) Telemeter
(11) Telecontrol

(12) Telex
(13) Note: Telemeters read gas and electric meters from a distant place.

Telecontrols operate switches by remote control.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McGrau-Hill Inc 1981

9896 -
cs0: 4106/51.

h2
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
EXPORT 0i NATIONALLY OHNBD PATENTS T0 0.8. UNDER STUDY
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 9 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] New Technology Development Association To Seriously Consider Technology
Export; In Cooperation With Mitsubishi Corp, Exports of Japan's Nationally
Owned Patents To Resolve Economic Frictions

Reportedly, the New Technology Development Association (chairman Yoshinitsu
Takeyasu) and Mitsubishi Corporation (president, Yohei Minute) have reached
basic sgreenent to jointly export Japan's nationally owned patents to the United
States. A memorandum will be officially signed between the two parties by
next week at the latest. The purpose of this agreemt is to convey the assoc-
iation's plans to promote technology transfer to the United States by exporting
research results of advanced technologies developed by Japanese universities
and national research agencies, fully taking advantage of Mitsubishi's exten-
sive information network in the United States. This is the first attempt by
the association, a Japanese Government organization, to consistently engage

in full-scale technology export. Although Japan's technology exports to the
advanced Nestern countries have shown a gradual rise, both the nudaer and the
amount of exports are still sull comared to those of technology imports. If
this operation runs smothly, it is expected that it will not only improve
technology trade but also help in resolving economic friction between the
United States and Japan.

The New Technology Development Association is a corporation having special
status under the Science and Technology Agency. It plays a role as a mediator
between universities and national research agencies, on one hand, and enter-
prises, on the other, by entrusting the latter with the research results of the
femur so as to realize commerci'alization potential. In the past 20 years
since its establishment, the association has handled approximately 350 cases
of comaissioned development and technology mediation which led to commercial-
ization. however. there is hardly any record of technology transfer to foreign
countries, except one, to the United States, on option contract tern, con-
cerning "technology in glucose isonerization by the enzyme methods." from the
National Food Research Institute of the Ministry of Agriculture and Porestry.

Mitsubishi Corporation. on the other hand, has a technology knowhow team with-
in its headquarters Business Planning Boom and has been esphasizing the area of

technology trade through importing advanced technologies to Japan under the

ha
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

domestic sole agent contract with the 0.8. Bechtel Research Institute, the
world renowned agency for sales and mediation of technology. Recently, Hit-
subishi exported the technology of the Japanese National Railways.

with these in the background, the New Technology Development Association has
decided to cooperate with Mitsubishi by engaging in both domestic and overseas
operation of technology transfer. The specific contents of the cooperation have
not been disclosed, but it is known that:: l) the New Technology Development
Association will commission Mitsubishi Corporation to conduct marketing re-
search in the United States for potential clients; 2) the association will se-
lect prominent advanced technologies and request Mitsubishi to introduce reci-
pient 0.8. enterprises; 3) Mitsubishi will fully take advantage of the branch
office networks of its u.s. corporation, Mitsubishi International Corporation,
and conduct marketing research for potential clients. It will receive some
percentage of the patent fee when a contract on technology transfer takes
place. However, the association is responsible for making the official con-
tract.

The association will select technologies among those which: 1) have foreign
patents, 2) have been completed and have some achievements in Japan, and

3) those for which permission from inventors and enterprises has been obtained.
For the time being, examination are underway regarding "oxidized med>rane
production technology by ion plating," "weak electrode chemical ltninescence
detecting technology," "method for manufacturing short metallic fiber,"
"flowing material for artificial kidney dialysis," and "a mthod for synthe-

sizing sexunl pheromones . "

Although Japan's balance of technology trade is said to be improving, the num-
ber of technology imports is about 2,000 cases in ”-80 ad the amount paid is
1.439 billion yen, while the amount received for exports is as low as 378 mil-
lion yen. Since Japan aims st being a technologybbaaed nation, it is con-
sidered that the promotion of technology exports in the future will also serve
to resolve economic frictions with the United States.

COPYRIGIT: Nikkan Kayo Shiliaunsha 1981

9711
(:50: 6106/46

Ms
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOSHIBA ELECTRON BEAM LITHOGRAPEY FOR LSI MASS PRODUCTION
Tokyo KIKAI SBINKO in Japanese Vol 16 No 12, Dec 81 pp 75-83

[Article by Toshiba Corporation President Shoichi Saba; Kinichi Noga, inspec-
tor; Yoshiyuki Takeishi, deputy director, Comprehensive Research Institute:
Yushi Hatsumoto. chief, IC Research Center, Comprehensive Research Institute;
Hachie Koike, chief, Machine Tool Division, Toshiba Machine; Akira Naito,
chief, EBH Production. Toshiba Machine]

[Text] Preface

Electron beam pattern lithography has become essential for development and
manufacture of LSI and super LSI replacing the conventional photoetching.
The system concerned is an electron beam lithography system which has been
put on the production line for the first time in Japan to manufacture master
masks and reticles after various improvements and developments corresponding
to the needs of the actual semiconductor manufacturing plants, based upon the
research results obtained bythe super LSI Technology Research Association.
Along with the system, applicational software and the photoresist process
necessary for practical use of the system have been developed, uhich facili-
tated the completion of an excellent system that can be operated freely on
the production line.

The system has already been introduced in several places and is taking an
active part in development and production. In view of the fact that the
majority of semiconductor manufacturing equipment is imported, it is highly
significant that an excellent system has been completed for use in production
through domestic technology. The point of the development was concentrated
on constructing a well-balanced stable system with the highest technologies
currently available at hand.

This system is equipped for the first time in the world with a function to
produce reticles necessary for wafer steppers, which have spread dramatically
in recent years. In addition, an inexpensive machine that is furnished
singly with this function has been also completed, and it is being introduced
to the production line by popular demand.

Development and Background

Conventionally. LSI circuit patterns are made from a set of master masks, each
produced first by feeding designed pattern data to a pattern generator (PC),

'5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FIMRCHHWCJAL.USEIDNLY

which generates a reticle 10 times larger than the final size and by photo-
graphically reducing and reproducing the image of the reticle by a "step-and-
repeat" process (Figure 1). In this method, the LSI is highly integrated and
the following problems are known to be associated with the reduction in dimen-
sions of the patterns.

3. Due to the limit of optical resolution, forming of fine patterns is not
possible.

b. In complex patterns, PG takes too long to generate a reticle to be really
practical.

c. The power of the step-and-repeat :amera makes'it difficult to form LSI
patterns over 10 x 10mm in size.

At Toshiba Corporation, a team primarily composed of the members of the
General Research Institute started to develop a utility model and completed

a prototype in 1976. Subsequently, the company contracted a project to devel-
op and produce a trial model of the VL-Rl machine, which adopted a similar
lithographic system from the Super LSI Technology Research Association, and
completed it in 1977.

In parallel to this work, Toshiba Machine Co planned to merchandise this
system using technology provided by Toshiba, and promoted the development in
cooperation with the above described Toshiba team. Starting around this time,
serious discussions concerning the practical application of electron beam
lithography on the production line had begun to develop and many questions
were raised regarding the function, operability, stability, maintainability
and costs.

Those in charge of the project from both companies were united in an effort

to answer these questions and devoted themselves to improvement and develop-
ment of a utility model. In 1978, the first model was completed and activated
for actual operation. In parallel, improvement of electron beam resist and
its process and development of the mask process such as Cr film etching, all
necessary for the practical application of this system, were completed.
Eventually, we started to offer the system to users.

System Outline

This system forms a large family, including the EH3~1053 for mask and reticle
etching, the 130/40 for 6-inch substrate high—speed etching and the 105R 3
for reticle etching only. However, in the following, the 1053 model will be
described as representative of the rest.

Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the arrangement and etching method of this system.
Etching data is read from magnetic tapes and stored in magnetic disks using
an EBH format original to this system. This data is pulled out during etch-

ing, developed into dot data through a unique circuit shown in Figure 4 and
transmitted to an electron irradiation system blanking electrode.

h6

FOR.OETWCLAL.USE10NLY
(Note) Location in LSI lithography of electron
beam lithography system utilizing ultraviolent
ray, x-ray and electron bean (photocathode trans-
ference, reduction projection)

Figure 1. Location of Electron Beam Lithography System in LS! Lithography

Key:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

pattern data (8) master was]: printer
pattern generator (9) working neat
electron beam lithography ayaten(10) reduction projection aligner

ion beam lithography ayatem (11) contact aligner
reticle (12) moi-magnification projection
step and repeat camera aligner
master mask (13) new method aligner (note)
(14) wafer
h?

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2---

 

Pigure 2. Systen Arrangement

(9) electron gun

magnetic tape (10) electromagnetic lens
magnetic disk (11) deflection electrode
console (12) laser interference neter
graphic display (13) motor

control interface (16) table

operation panel (15) auto feeder

blanking electrode (16) oscillation proof pedestal
electron irradiation system (17) power source

     
 
 

 

 

 

(I.

_—__:1M¢ _ p — “I. jaiggzﬁgégﬂﬁﬂ
._K:ﬂ!!EEZL. .J?_-
.Jf'ﬂ’" 512.--

Figure 3. Explanation of Etching Method
beam (a) bean scanning direction and
deflection plate table step traveling direction
traveling direction of table (x axial direction) '
at a steady speed (Y axial (5) etching node
direction) (6) bean scanning span

(7) bean deflection width
(8) number of dots within 6

h8
F!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USEINNLY
ff)".

Figure 4. Pattern Generation Etching Circuit

(5) dot pattern memory 1
(6) dot pattern memory 2

nerator (7) dot pattern memory 3
(8) read out

 

Figure 5. Arrangement of Software

1&9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Etching is produced by a so-called continuous traveling raster scan, a com-
bination of linear deflection of the X axial electron beam and Y axial
reciprocating motion of the substrate. Data transmission, linear deflection
start and the relative position correction of the electron beam and the sub-
strate are controlled by the signals of the laser interference meter.

The system has three etching modes, as shown in Figure 3. Automatic irradia-
tion and deflection system adjustment functions are provided so that the
system can speedily accommodate the changes of the etching conditions. An
autofeeder stores substrates up to 10 sheets and automatically loads and
changes substrates on the table.

Data processing and etching are operated and controlled by a miniconputer
TOSBAC-7/60. The principal arrangement of the software is shown in Figure 5.
POPS-II is adopted for 06 because of the merit of its nultiprogranning pro-
cess. Other software includes: JCL for selection of jobs, PGIN for pattern
data processing, CHKCE for pattern data change inspection, LAYOUT for lining
chips on substrates. and DRAW for operation and control of etching. Various
applicational programs are also available besides these. The external
appearance and functions-of the software are shown in Photo 1 and Table 1

respectively.

 

Photo 1. Electron Beam Reticle Etching System

Table 1.

' "“1“ 3“" nan-1053 BEN-130
Height of the main body 2,200mm 2,200mm
Magazine loading height 940mm 1,000mm
Floor area of the main body 1,600mm x 1,450mm 1,600mm xl.500mm
Gross weight of the main body 3,200kgf 3,500kgf

50
FOR|JFHKJAL.USE(MVLY
Possible when changing data

Possible at every 90°C

Vector mode and dot mode

Randon alignment, standard angle/
round alignment

Chips of same dimensions,

chips of different dimensions (when
considered as chips of the sane
dimensions. there will be no decline
of the throughput)

Multireticle pattern/substrate

Dsw-aaoo (GCA), NSR-lOlO (NIKON)
and others, for various machine
models

Option 0-10 when changing data,
A node 0.8 - x1.2 and B and C
nodes X0.7-Xl.2 when etching
o Autofeeder

Cassette one/substrate/cassette (all sizes)
Magazine 10 cassettes/magazine
Running mode continuous.or individual sheet

0 Pattern Dimensions and Accuracy by Mode

 

 

Etching gigimum ine Width Pattern Pattern Accuracy Scanning
mode width Increase Accuracy Among Masks Width
A 1 0.25 20.12 0.2 128
B 2 0.5 £0.14 0.3 256
c b 1.0 £0.20 0.4 256

 

o Throughput

gminutez

 

Etching Etching ragga

node 50x50 75x75 100x100 130x130
A 56 118 203 334
B 17 33 56 90
c 11 20 32 50

-_______________.______..___—.———————————-———————

0 Additional Functions
_________________________________________________________________________

Number Function Outline
.______.______________________._____.____._____________________________._________

1 Chip merge function make one chip data by joining two chip data

2 Mask merge function make one mask data by joining two mask data

3 C A L M A I N transform GDS format data of CALMA to BB!
format and register it in disk file

A B E L L I N transform BELL format data to BB“ format
and register it in disk file

5 PCIN (inch system transform inch system PG data to BEE format

and register it in disk file
6 Data check function dung BBM format data in chin file
52
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Technological'Peatures
The technological features can be summarized in the following eight items.
I. Etching Method

By the development of the pattern generation etching circuit shown in Figure 6,
graphic data expressed by trapezoids can be transformed to dot patterns at a
high speed and etched sequentially in a band from one end to the other

within the etching range as seen in Figure 3. The practical effect of this
invention is immense, as will be described later.

2. Data Processing

In this type of system, graphic data is transformed in advance into dot
pattern data corresponding to the beam diameter before etching. The follow-
ing improvements were added to this process in this system.

a. Development of algorithm that dissolves quantize errors associated with
the data transformation to a practically harmless level.

h. Compacting of data volume by dividing circuit diagrams into trapezoids
and expressing them in instruction word format. By adding this graphic data
to the previously described etching circuit, it can be transformed into dot
patterns in real time in parallel with etching, which has realized the short-
ening of data transformation time, and the restriction and elimination of

graphic etching.

c. The shortening of data transformation time was realized by developing a
merge function where a circuit diagram is systematically divided into blocks,
data-transformed and subsequently reunited.

3. Highly Accurate Sample Table

It is required that accuracy be maintained in a vacuum--for instance, up and
down movement-below-2um from the point of patternaccurecy and stable
accuracy relative to traveling several hundred km from the point of continu-
ous running. Also, from the point of accuracy of the position of the elec-
tron beam. the table is composed of nonmagnetic materials and requires correc-
tion relative to temperature changes. In order to meet these requirements,
numerous investigations and elaborate tests were conducted regarding struc-
tures, materials, lubrication and manufacturing methods to complete this
table. Incidentally, this table received the Okoshi Memorial Award for 1980
from the Precision Machine Society.

4. High Luminance Long Life Electron Gun

For the first time in the world, a single crystal Labs cathode was built in
an electron gun and adopted. With this new idea, beam current density and
life was improved more than 10 times compared to the conventional tungsten
cathode. The points that contributed to making the new cathode practical

53
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were determination of the optimal azimuth of the crystal axis, clarification
of crystalline properties and correlation between the quantity of impurities
and the characteristics, and establishment of an optimal grid bias value and
cathode temperature.

5. Highly Efficient Electron Irradiation System

The electron irradiation system was developed in line with the optimal table
traveling speed, deflection width and beam current in relation to the required
etching speed. In other words, deflection angle was reduced and deflection
distortion was minimized by designing a shorter focal length, which increased
beam current and focal depth and curtailed disturbance to beam position.

6. Software

Besides the basic arrangement shown in Figure 5. the software is complete
with programs which correspond to variousfunctions shown in Table 1. Other
programs available are for intermediate format input-output, ID letter input,
disk and magnetic tape file management and recording of operational conditions.

7. System Expandability

The following optional functions are available and can be added to the basic
structure: expansion model which processes etching and data transformation

in parallel using an additional data transformation specialty calculator
system independent of the etching control; wafer direct etching; double speed
etching.

8. Self-Diagnostic Function

Etching accuracy automatic diagnostic function, sample table dynamic charac-
teristic analytic function and etching circuit diagnostic function are furn-
ished to insure proper management and maintenance through prescheduled regu—
lar inspection and diagnosis. Fail-safe measures are provided besides

these functions for each module by means of failure diagnoses and various
interlocks.

Practical Features

1. The system has made it possible to shorten drastically the turnaround
time of LS! development. Etching speed in PC is about 200 flash/min.
Recent LSI requires a total flash number of as many as some hundred thou-
sands and takes some tens of hours for etching. However, the etching time
by this system is less than 30 minutes.

2. It is equipped with an inexpensive 105R B model special machine for
etching reticles necessary for the use of wafer steppers, which have been
very popular imports in recent years. This machine is characterized by
extremely high cost performance; nothing comparable to this product exists.

3. As the beam current density is 10 times greater than other systems. posi-
tive resist with stable characteristics such as PHHA can be used.

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo. Because of a long cathode life, the system is not shaped as frequently
as others for replacement of the cathode.

5. Monochromatic inversion of pattern data can be achieved easily, and only
one variety of resist and process are needed on hand. Also, monochromatic
inversion does not affect the etching time.

6. Etching time is determined not by the complexity of the patterns but
only by the etching mode and etching area. Consequently, it is easier to
project a production plan for etching.

7. Many kinds of chip patterns can be etched in one sheet of substrate with-
out slowing thw etching speed. (Figure 6)

8. Hith one application, a chip is etched up to the maximum 105 x 105mm in a
105 size and to the maximum 130 x 130mm in a 130 size.

9. Multiple reticles can be generated on the same substrate. When LSI of
small chip size is fabricated by a wafer stepper, the throughput will increase
by several times (Photo 2).

10. when etching, the scaling ratio can be changed for every line of chips.

11. A substrate autofeed function is provided to make it possible to etch
up to 10 sheets.

12. Because of the automatic setting function provided for the electrion
irradiation deflection system, changing of scaling and etching mode and es-
tablishing and changing of minute beam disasterand current are simple.

13. Vibration proof and thermostatic equipment incidental to the installa-
tion of thissystem can be of a simple design so long as it does the job.

14. The system runs stably and demonstrates an operating ratio of over 94
percent and a production yield of over 90 percent.

 

Figure 6. Various Chip Patterns

55
FOR OFIWCIAI.USI:€HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3 ; ‘
Y ‘1
3g}

3““

:MSO-

-v9

I
I
r,
'8
,.
r"
,a
I
f)

i

L.
I
Q

 

Photo 2. Multiple Reticles

Status of Industrial Property Rights

Among the patents (including utility model) applied pertaining to the system
under discussion, 109 cases were opened to the public, 9 cases are being
officially announced as patents, 12 cases were registered and 5 cases were
registered as American patents.

Registration Number Title of Invention

 

No 888406 (Patent announcement ShoSZ-léOSS) Function generator in raster
display system

No 900143 (Patent announcement Sh052-28529) Graphic display system

No 967337 (Patent announcement Sh054—1433) Exposure system

No 981699 (Patent announcement ShoSA-l6l92) Exposure accuracy measuring
method for electron beam exposure

apparatus

56
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
2,. v
No 982551 (Patmt announcement Sh054-l3754) Electron 58.! exposure apparatus
No 982552 (Patent announcement ShoS4-l3755) Electron beam exposure apparatus
No 992785 (Patent announcement ShoS4-24831) Electron beam exposure apparatus
No 992786 (Patent announcement Sh054-24832) Electron beam exposure apparatus
No 994579 (Patent announcaaent ShoS4-28270) Electron beam exposure apparatus
No 1006054 (Patent announcement Sh054—39710) Electron beam exposure alignment
mark forming method .
No 1008771 (Patent announcement ShoS4-42588) Electron beam deflection circuit
No 1027640 (gaunt announcement ShoS4—l3353) Electron beam exposure apparatus

USP-4063103 Electron beam exposure apparatus
USP-4145615 Electron beam exposure apparatus
USP-4151417 Electron beam exposure apparatus
USP-4151421 Method for compressing pattern

data and compression processing
circuit for radiant beam exposure
apparatus
USP-4158140 Electron beam exposure apparatus

Conclusion

Fabrication of circuit diagrams is one of the basics of semiconductor tech-
nology. The system under discussion has improved the fabrication in accuracy,
miniaturization, speed and flexibility on the basis that data processing and
etching take place in parallel. With these features, it can be said that the
system directly contributes to the speedup of the super LSI era and the pro-
gress of the super L81 technology.

Likewise, it has generally become an established theory that mass production
LSI patterns will be generated on wafers by a projection aligner in the 1980's.
The mask and reticle production necessary for this process is expected to be
fully acconnodated by the family of this system. In particularly, it is re-
garded as an optimal pairing from the aspects of functions and coats to pro-
duce reticles by the special reticle etching machine 105R 8 model for the
reduction projection aligner, which is considered to be in the mainstream of
the future.

However, it seems necessary to have a new system, including super-high-speed
wafer direct etching by electron beam, for non-mass production 1.81 which is
expected to encounter increased need in the future and for 1.51 in the 1990's.
We are determined to continue our technological development efforts to meet
these demands.

COPYRIGHT: Kikai Shinko Kyokai 1981

8940
080: 4106/36

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY