FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10346
22 February 1982

Translation

AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION

By

B.I. Demin. V.P. Yegozov and Yu.A. Ratyuk

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infatuation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes with in the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10346

22 February 1982

AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION

Moscow STROITEL'S'I'VO AERODROMOV in Russian 1981 (signed to press
4 Nov 80) pp 1-248

[Handbook “Airfield Construction” by Boris Ix‘ranovich Demin, Vladimir
Petrovich Yegozov and Yuriy Alekseyevich Ratyuk, Izdatel'stvo
”Transport" . 4, 600 copies]

CONTENTS
Annotation 1
Preface 1
chapter 1. Organization of Airfield Construction Work 3
1.1. General principles for organization of airfield construction
work 3
1.2. Main normative docuaents for airfield construction 1.
1.3. Industrialization of construction and complex mechanization
and automation 5
1.4. Planning the organization of construction and work
production 7
1.5. Periods and organizational and engineering preparation of
construction 10
1.6. Duration of airfield construction and sequence of work 11
1.7. Continuous method of organizing work 13
1.8. Organization of material and technical supply of
construction 15
1.9. Organization of labor, operational planning and nanagenent
of construction 16
Chapter 2. Materials 19
2.1. Soils 19
2.2. Soils strengthened with binder materials 2
2.3. stone materials 3“
2.4. Mixtures of stone materials treated with inorganic binders ‘3
2.5. Asphalt concrete and asphalt concrete mixtures 1“
2.6. Organic binder materials 5"
2.7. Concrete 58
2.8. Materials for sealing detonation joints of rigid pavement 8"
- a - [I - ussn - G F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.9.

6.10.

Chapter 7.
7. 1 .

\IQQ
ee

wa
.

Chapter 8.
8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
8.4.

Chapter 9.
9.1.
9.2.

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-l ONLY

Preparatory and Excavation Work to Construct Plying Field
Preparatory work and work with vegetation-laden soil
Excavation of channels

Construction of fills

Grading and agrotechnical operations

Conducting excavation work under special conditions
Organization of excavation work

Construction
General data
Organization

of Drain-Runoff System
of work to construct drain-runoff system

Construction of Flexible Pavement

construction of pavement and beds from strengthened soils
Construction of pavement and beds from crushed stone
materials treated with organic binders

Construction of asphalt concrete pavement

Construction of metal sectional-removable pavement

Construction of Rigid Airfield Pavement

General data on rigid pavement

Installation of master cords and rail-forms

Final grading of soil bed

Installation of artificial beds

Shaping of pavement

Maintenance of hardening concrete

Installation of deformation joints

Characteristic features of constructing monolithic pavement
at negative tanperatures

Characteristic features of constructing pavement with top
layer of high-strength concrete

Construction of precast pavement from reinforced concrete
slabs

Production Enterprises in Airfield Construction

Organic binder materials bases

Asphalt concrete plants

Cement-concrete plants

Proving grounds and shops for manufacture of concrete and
reinforced concrete articles

Machines
Machines
Machines
Machines
Cranes

Used in Airfield Construction

for preparatory and excavation work

for installation of beds and flexible pavement
for installation of rigid pavement

Quality Control and Acceptance of Airfield Construction Work
General propositions

Quality control and acceptance of preparatory and excavation
work

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9.3. Quality control and acceptance of work to install runoff-
drain systems
9.4. Quality control and acceptance of work to install beds and
construction of flexible pavement
9.5. Quality control and acceptance of work to construct rigid
pavement
chapter 10. Safety Procedures in Airfield construction work
10.1. Gmeral propositions
10.2. Safety regulations during preparatory and excavation work
10.3. Safety regulations during construction of drain-runoff system
10.4. Safety regulations during construction of beds and flexible
pavement
10.5. Safety regulations during construction of rigid pavement
10.6. Safety regulations at production enterprises
Bibliography

Subject Index

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANNOTATION

This handbook contains reference data on modern methods of organization and
production of airfield construction work, data applicable to construction ma-
terials, machines and mechanisms. Rules and standards for monitoring and ac-
cepting the work, as well as safety procedures, are examined. The latest prod-
uction esperience and the latest recommendations of scientific research organi-
zations have been included. The handbook is intended for airfield engineers and
construction technicians and for students of airfield construction.

PREFACE

['I‘ext] The increase in the capacity and work quality of the entire transportation
system and also improvement of transport communications between economic regions
of our country are the basis for more complete and modern satisfaction of the needs
of the national economy and of the populace for freight shipments and movement of
passengers.

air transport is being developed at high rates. The continuous growth of shipments
by air transport, especially over long distances and to difficultly accessible re-
gions, requires development of an extensive airport network for ground support of
aviation.

The main integral part of an airport is the airfield--a specially prepared land
section that includes the building and equipment complex to support takeoffs.
landing. taxiing, storage and maintenance of air liners. One of the main and ex-
pensive engineering structures of a modern airfield is the pavement of takeoff and
landing strips. taxiways, ramps and aircraft parking areas. Modern aviation places
very high reguiremnts on the strength, evenness and operating stability of the

su'. face layer of airfield pavement. The safety and regularity of flights is
largely determined by their quality.

The high operating qualities of airfield structures are dependent to a consider-
able degree on the methods used and the quality of performing construction and
installation work. Soviet and foreign experience shows that more than 50 percent
of the defects that appear in operation of airfield pavement are the result of in-
adequate construction.

In this regard improvement of the methods of organising airfield construction work
and the technique of conducting it and also introduction of progressive structures
and materials acquire special significance.

The problem of airfield builders is. along with high operating qualities and dura-

bility of airfield structures. to continuously achieve an increase of the rates of
construction and labor productivity with a simultaneous reduction of its cost.

) FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This can be achieved on the basis of using highly productiva machines, complex
mechanization and automation of production processes, leading methods of organiz-
ing construction and raising the level of industrialization of construction.

A considerable reduction of the deadlines for construction of airfield pavement
and an increase of labor productivity are achieved when using highly productive
complexes of railless concrete-laying machines and precast paveuent from pre-
stressed concrete slabs. The quality of airfield structures depends to a consid-
erable degree on the quality of the materials used to construct them.

Sectional paveuent from pre-stressed concrete slabs of the PAG type, serially pro-
duced by plants of the reinforced concrete industry, have gained wide introduction
in the practice of airfield construction. Highly productive railless complexes of
Soviet machines are used to construct rigid one-piece sections and introduction of
high-strength airfield concrete with tensile bending strength of 60 kgf/cln2 or more
has begun. All this will contribute to a further increase of the efficiency and
quality of airfield construction.

Support of builders with the necessary technical literature is also important.

A large anomt of normative, reconunandation. information, academic and scientific-
engineering literature has been developed and published on the basis of the results
of scientific research and study of leading experience of airfield construction
organizations.

At the sane time no handbook has been published until now in which the basic data
required by airfield builders for operational solution of nany problems could be

concentrated. The first attempt to fulfill this task is aade in the present
handbook.

The main purpose of the handbook is to assist engineers and technicians in solving
practical problems in support of airfield construction at the modern level with
high quality.

Candidate of Technical Sciences B. I. Demin wrote the preface, Chapters 2 and 6 and
sections 5.] and 5.4 of Chapter 5, Engineer V. P. Yegozov wrote Chapters 3, 4, 7,
8 and lo and sections 5.2-5.3 of Chapter 5 and Candidate of Technical Sciences Yu.
A. Ratyuk wrote Chapters “1 and 9 for the handbook.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER ONE. ORGANIZATION OF AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION WORK

[mart] 1.1. General Principles of Organizing Airfield Construction Work
The general principles of organizing airfield construction work provide:

1. Performance of airfield construction work is usually the more progressive con-
tract nethod from a construction organization plan (P05) and work production plan
(PPR) previously worked out and confirud.

2. Conpulsory performance of organizational and engineering preparation for it
prior to the beginning of construction.

3. Conformity during construction to the requireunts of construction norms and
regulations (SNiP). existing construction norms (SN). specifications (on) and
standards (0051‘) and also rules and regulations on labor protection, production
sanitation. safety techniques and fire safety.

4. Performance of airfield construction work by industrial methods with maximum
introduction of complex mchanization and automation, application of the latest
advances of scientific and technical progress and production processes that ensure
the required level of work quality.

5. Production of work by the lost progressive methods of construction organiza~
tion and specifically by the continuous 19th of organising the work and differ-
ent varieties that ensure an increase of labor productivity, reduction of cost and
reduction of construction deadlines.

6. Maximum possible surmounting of construction seasonality and conversion to
year-round production of work.

7. Clear and continuous complete supply of construction with material and techni-

cal resources within deadlines provided by calendar plans and work production
schedules.

mu omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. Use of progressive forms of organization of labor, operational planning and

management of production that ensure an increase of labor productivity and reduc-
tion of construction deadlines.

9. Implemntation of measures during construction for environmental protection
and recultivation of agricultural lands and forest lands disturbed during
construction.

lo. Extensive introduction of the advances of science and leading experience into
construction practice.

ll. Organization of a socialist competition among builders, which is a mighty
moving force for development of productive forces of a socialist state that ensures
an increase of labor productivity and iuprovement of construction.

1.2. Main Normative Documents for Airfield Construction

The general regulations of construction legislation related to all types of con-
struction should be observed during airfield construction. The main directive and
normative documents in which these regulations are outlined are as follows'x

1. Construction norms and regulations.

2. All-Union instructions on production and reception of materials and articles.
3. State All-union standards for mterials and articles.

4. All-Union normative documents on consumption of materials in construction,
mechanization of work and operation of construction machines, problems of labor
and wages in construction.

5. Regulations on contract agreements for capital construction.

6. Regulations for financing of construction.

7. Regulations on the relationships of organizations--general contractors with
subcontracting organizations.

8. Finishing norms for construction of enterprises, buildings and structures.

9. Nouns for the length of construction of enterprises, buildings and structures
(SN 440-72).

10. Instructions on the procedure for compilation and confirmation of plans for or-
ganization of construction and work production plans (SN 47-74).

 

-I
See the "List of Existing All-Union Normative Documents on Construction," pub-
lished annually by Stroyizdat.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One should be guided by existing regulations on protection of labor of Gosgortek'x-
nadzor [state Comittee of the Council of Ministers for Supervision of Industrial
safety and for Mining Inspection] of the USSR, Gosenergonadzor [state Inspection
for Industrial Power Engineering and for Power Engineering Supervision]. Hinenergo
SSR [USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification] and other regulations and norms
confirmed in established procedure by bodies of state inspection and the corre-
sponding ministries and agencies of the USSR in problems of protection of labor
and safety techniques, along with norms of SNiP III-a.II-70.

The basic normative documents related directly to airfield construction are the
following.

Construction norms and regulations:
Part 2. Design norms, Chapter 2-47, Airfields;
Part 3. Work production and acceptance regulations, Chapter 46, Airfields:
Part 4. Estimation norms, Volume 5, Chapter 4-47, Airfields.

Instructions on the use of soils reinforced by binding materials to construct
foundations and highway and airfield pavement (SN 25-74).

Common regional unit estimates (YeRBR). 1968, collection No 33, Airfields.

The construction organization plan (POS) and work production plan (PPR) on air-
field construction are worked out on the basis of the enumerated normative docu-
ments and also orders, directives and regulations of superior organizations.

1.3. Industrialization of Construction, Complex hchanization and Automation

Industrialization of the construction is the basic and most important principle of
modern construction. Methods of industrialization of airfield construction work
are as follows:

extensive use of section structures and articles (unit construction) in
construction;

complex mechanization and automation of production processes, conversion of
construction to a mechanized process of unit construction and installation of
structures from finished sections:

introduction of leading organization and techniques of work (the continuous
method of work organization and year-round production cycle.

The use of unit structures is related to iuplenentation of procurement processes
for enterprises, as a result of which cost expenditures for manufacture are reduced
and the quality of manufactured structures is increased and the capabilities of

year- round construction increase .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Work in airfield construction is industrialized by the following methods:

bY extensive use of airfield surfaces from sectional pre-stressed concrete
slabs;

by use of sectional reinforced concrete pipe and the foundations under it,
sectional cosponents of manholes, rain-collecting wells and block and tackle pits
in construction of drain-runoff systems:

the use of stock metal, glass-reinforced plastic and other slabs in construc-
tion of sectional-precast surfaces.

The unit structure of construction is characterized by the unit construction fac-
tor, which is the ratio of the cost of sectional components to the total cost of
materials, semifinished products, structures and parts.

Mechanization of construction and installation work can be partial, canplex and
brought up to automation of production.

Individual construction and installation processes are mechanized in partial
mchanization.

Its no does not fully resolve the problem of industrialization of construction
since manual labor is retained to a significant degree in this case.

Couplex mechanization of construction and installation work envisions the perform-
ance of all (or mainly all) production processes included in each work complex
using a complete set of different, but mutually supplementary machines and mechan-
isms. There is a drive machine in each complete set that determines the rate of
work production. The types and number of remaining machines and mchanisms are
selected according to its productivity.

Thus, for exauple, when constructing one-piece concrete surfaces, complex mechan-
ization of concrete work is suppored by an automated concrete plant, dump trucks,
concrete distributing and concrete finishing machines and joint cutters: The

use of complex mechanization has a great advantage over partial mechanization since
manual labor is excluded to a significant degree and labor productivity is
increased.

Automation of construction and installation processes is a higher form of complex
mechaniration and permits the elmination not only of manual labor but of the func-
tion of machine control as well.

In this case the worker performs only functions of monitoring the operation of
construction and installation machines.

Couplex unchanization is usually enployed in airfield construction work. The types
and dimensions of the leading and complementing machines are determined on the
basis of the characteristics of the planned facility and local conditions, the
volumes of work, progressive technology and the established construction deadlines.

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll "FFIFIAI. USE ON. V

The operating nodes of the machines should ensure complete use of the characteris-
tics of machines and the established production norms and shift factor.

Final selection of the means of mechanization is made on the basis of comparing the
economic effectiveness of possible versions of mechanized performance of work with-
in given deadlines. The composition of the fleet and number of machines are deter-

mined on the basis of volumes in physical measures ' 'd the operational productivity
of the machines.

The degree of equipping the construction organizations with machines should be es-
timated by indicators of its machinery and power available per worker. while the
degree of mechanization of work should be estimated by indicators of the level of
uechanization of work and labor mechanization.

The level of construction mechanization is the ratio of the volume of work in full-
scale and cost indicators performed by means of mechanization to the total volume
of work of a specific type expressed in percent.

The machinery available per worker in construction is the ratio of the cost of
construction machines, mechanisms and transport equipment used in construction to
the estimated cost of construction and installation work for a given year.

The energy available per worker in construction is the output of the engines (in
kW) used in construction per million rubles' worth of construction and installation
work.

The following indicators should be used to estimate the effectiveness of utilizing
the machine fleet: the calendar time utilization factor, the indicator of time
utilization of machines, the utilization factor of intrashift time and the indi-
cator of fulfilling the machine output norms.

1.4. Planning the Organization of Construction and Work Production

Modern airfield construction is a complex production process. Therefore, success--
tul performance of it is possible only if there is timely development of mark or-
ganization plans that determine the deadline, sequence, methods and means of ful-
filling the tasks in airfield construction.

It was established by instruction SN 47-74 that the construction organization and
work production plans should be worked out prior to the beginning of construction.

The construction organization plan (P05) is worked out to ensure timely introduc-
tion of capacities and basic funds with the least expenditures and with high qual-
ity by increasing the organizational level of construction. It is an inseparable
part of the contract-detail or contract design. The pos is developed by the plan-
ning organization.

The initial materials for working out the construction organization plan are:
engineering and economic substantiations (Tao) for airfield construction, survey
materials, decisions on the use of construction materials and structures, methods
of organizing construction and means of mechanization of work coordinated with the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction ministry (or main administrative board or trust), data on the possi-
bility of supporting construction with local work personnel and buildings for their
disposition and maintenance and data on the capacity of the construction organiza—
tion and the presence of a production base.

The construction organization plan includes a calendar schedule of construction, a
general construction plan, organizational and production schemes for erecting the
main structures, instructions on the composition and accuracy of the geodetic lay-
out base, information about the volumes of work, schedules of the need for materi-
als and articles, construction machines and work personnel and explanatory notes.

When selecting the construction site, the planning organization is obligated to
coordinate with the contracting construction organization decisions on the use of
local materials, the use of means of mechanization in performing the work with re-
gard to their availability and selection of the transportation layout with provi-
sion with local construction materials.

The construction organization plan worked out by the planning organization should
be coordinated with the construction ministry or upon his commission with the con-
struction organization.

The work production plan (PPR) is worked out to determine the most efficient
methods of performing the construction and installation work that contribute to a
reduction of cost and labor, reduction of the length of construction, an increase
in the degree of using construction machines and equipment and improvement of work
quality. It is forbidden to perform construction without a PPR.

Work production plans are worked out by the general construction organizations.
The PPR is worked out by the organization performing this work for individual types
of general construction, installation and special work.

The work production plans can be worked out by the Orgtekhstroy [expansion unknown]
or by planning organization upon order of the construction organizations With pay-
ment from overhead expenses in construction for construction of objects erected
under complex geological and severe climatic conditions.

The initial materials for working out the PPR are the summary estimate, construc-
tion organization plan, detail plans, information on the deadlines and procedure
for delivery of material and technical resources, about the number and types of
machines and mechanisms planned for use and also about work personnel and the as-
signment for working out the PPR.

work production plans are worked out for individual elements of the landing strip
of an airfield, individual buildings and structures or for a group of objects and
also for work of the preparatory period.

The work production plan includes a complex network schedule or calendar plan for
production of work as a function of the complexity of the object, a general con-
struction plan, delivery schedules of materials, semifinished materials and arti-
cles to the facility, the needs for work personnel and basic construction machines,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK‘IM. “SI-I ONLY

process flow charts for complex work and work performed by new methods (standard
process flow charts tied into the facility and to local conditions are used for
the remaining work), diagrams of the layout of symbols to perform geodetic ties
and geodetic control, solutions on labor protection and safety regulations, docu-
mentation to monitor and analyze the quality of construction and installation work,
measures or. organization of work by the brigade cross-accounting method and explan-
atory notes.

The work Production plan for the prepatory period contains a calendar schedule of
work production, a general construction plan for the entire construction site, di-
agrams of symbol layout for geodetic ties and mnitoring the position of airfield
components and comunications lines, detail plans or diagrams for installation of
air traffic control hardware and brief explanatory notes.

To monitor and analyze the quality of airfield construction work the PPR should
include:

instructions on tolerances according to the requirements of $311? and detail
plans;

diagram (charts) of operational quaJity control of work performed;

a list of reports for certification and intermediate acceptance of latent
work:

instructions on the deadlines for checking work quality that require labora-
tory tests of materials and structural components;

instructions on estimating the quality of individual types of completed
facilities.

The work production plan is confirmed by the chief engineer of the contracting
construction organization while sections of the plan on installation and special
construction work are confirmed by the chief engineers of the corresoondinq sub-
contracting organizations upon coordination with the general contracting organiza-
tion. The confirmed PPR should be transferred to the construction site two months
prior to the beginning of work.

One proceeds from normative deadlines when working out the airfield construction
organization plan. Based on "Norms for duration of construction" (SN 440-72), the
total length of construction of a facility, starting complex and individual struc-
tures (roads, pavement and three-dimensional structures) is established. The se-
quence of erecting structures is then established. The norms for distribution of
capital investments and the volumes of construction and installation work should
then be maintained according to the construction periods. A calendar plan in which
the priority and deadlines for construction of the main and auxiliary buildings and
structures, starting complexes and work of the preparatory period with distribution
of capital investments and the volumes of construction and installation work in
monetary terms by time is then compiled.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The remaining documents of the POS are then worked out using consolidated norms
to determine he volumes of work and the need for material and technical resources

compiled from calculation per million rubles of cost of constru:tion and installa-
tion work.

The work production plan for airfield construction or individual structures of it
is worked out on the basis of the planning volumes calculated fromldetail plans
using production norms. Compilation of the calendar plan for work production
should be preceded by work organization planning by the continuous method.

1.5. Periods and Organizational and Engineering Preparation of Construction

The process of creating basic funds of the national economy by construction and
reconstruction of facilities is divided into the following periods:

preplanning period in which the problem of the feasibility of planning and
construction of an object is solved, the section for construction is selected and
the assignment for planning is worked out;

the planning process in which surveys and design of a facility are made;
the period of organizational and engineering preparation of construction;
the main process when the main construction and installation work is performed:
the concluding process in which the facility is turned over for operation.
A complex of measures in organizational and engineering preparation for production,
including organizational measures and performance of preparatory work, should be

fulfilled according to the requirements of the chapter of SNiP 3-1-76 to ensure

successful fulfillment of the main work and turnover of the facility for operation
within established deadlines.

Organizational measures include:

study of the planning-estimate documentation and local construction conditions
by engineering and technical personnel of the construction and installation
organization:

designation of organizations (participants of construction): the contracting
organization and specialized subcontracting organizations to perform specific types

of work, solution of problems of the need to relocate them or to increase produc-
tion capacities:

formulation of earth removal:
resettling of persons living on the section allocated for construction:

solving problems of the capability and conditions of use of existing roads,
engineering networks, enterprises of the construction industry, apartment build—
ings, Warehouse buildings and so on for the needs of construction;

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

canclusion of contract and subcontract agreements for capital construction;

disclosure of construction financing and organization of material and techni-
cal support of construction.

Preparatory work includes :

work on assimilation and engineering preparation of the terrain for
constiuctiom

creation of a geodetic layout base for construction;

performance of preparatory work outside the site: construction of external
access routes, communications lines and electric power transmission lines with
transformer substations, water conduit networks with intake structures and sewer
networks with purification plants:

organization of water drainage and drainage of the construction territory;

relaying of existing engineering communications lines, installation of per-
manent and temporary roads within the site and laying water and energy supply net-
works and telephone and radio conununications networks;

creation of general site warehOuse facilities;

installation of temporary stock buildings, mechanized installations and
structures and with corresponding substantiation--erection of permanent buildings
and structures used temporarily for construction needs:

support of the construction site with firefighting water supply and inventory,
mans of communications and signalling equipment.

The volume of preparatory work subject to completion prior to the beginning of the
main work should be reflected in the calendar plans and should be refined during
construction by the general contractor upon coordination with the customer and the
planning organization.

The main types of preparatory work include work on development and engineering
preparation of the terrain, including clearing the territory of trees, small trees
and bushes, stumps and stones, organization of temporary drainage and drying of
the construction territory, removal and transfer of structures and engineering net-
works and so on.

1.6. Length of Airfield Construction and Sequence of Work

Airfield construction should usually be carried out year-round. In this case in-
dividual types of work should be performed as a function of natural climatic con-
ditions of the construction regions during the most favorable times of the year.
Airfield construction work, with the exception of individual types of work (for
example, agrotechnicai and layout of sites with zero datums) can be carried out
during the entire year. “ever, the scope of additional expenditures related to

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production during the winter should be taken into account when planning airfield
construction and individual types of work should be postponed to the summer season.

The season of the year when the average daily ambient air temperature is not below
+5°C and the minimum daily temperature is not below 0°C is most favorable in air-
field construction to perform one of the basic types of work--oonstruction of pave-
ment from monolithic concrete and reinforced concrete.

Under these conditions monolithic concrete and reinforced concrete surfaces can be
laid usually without additional measures related to negative temperatures.

The country's territory is divided into four zones according to the length of the
period with average daily temperature of +S°C and above: zone 1 (northern) with
length up to 100 working days per year, zone 2 with 125 working days, zone 3 with
150 working days and zone 4 (southern) with working days above 150.

The duration of constructing airfields, starting complexes and airfield surfaces is
established by the "Norms for the length of construction of enterprises, buildings

and structures" [SN 440-72) depending on the zone to which the construction region

is related.

The duration of construction has been established from 27 months for zones 3 and 4
to 30 months for zone 1 for airports of class 3-c with a total complex of build-
ings and structures and it has been established from 19 months for zone 4 to 30
months for zone 1 for cement surfaces on airfields of this class.

The normative length of construction has been established at 21 months for all
zones for airports of class 4-D and from 17 months for zone 4 to 20 months for
zone'l for cement surfaces on airfields of this class.

The preparatory period, the duration of which is three months for all zones for
the :lasses of airports indicated above, is included in the total deadline for
construction of airports and pavements.

The duration of construction of airports of classes l-A, 2-D and 5-: has not been
established by SN 440—72 and should be determined by the construction organization
plan.

Many years of airfield construction practice indicates that a number of jobs whose
volume comprises up to 50 percent of the total volune of work planned for the year
can be performed during the spring-winter season at negative temperatures. This
work includes clearing the construction territory of timber. small trees and
bushes. uprooting and removal of stumps. creation of the production and engineer-
ing base (PTB) for construction, manufacture of sectional reinforced concrete ar-
ticles and structures at production enterprises and other types of work. Construc-
tion of buildings and structures from precast structures and brick and production
of work of the zero cycle using pile foundations and footings are most effective
during this season. Universal introduction of sectional reinforced concrete pave-
ment for airfields and access roads expands the year-round nature of construction
to a significant degree.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Performance primarily of work of the preparatory period is provided in airfield
construction when establishing the sequence of work production.

Excavation work on sections for construction of VPP [Take-off-landing strips], RD
[Taxiways], MS [Parking areas] and ramps with subsequent excavation work on the
soil part of the landing field.

Drain-runoff networks are usually laid prior to the beginning of pavement
installation.

Construction of the bed under pavement and construction of the pavement itself are
performed after completion of work on laying the communications lines, installation
of drain systems, rain collecting wells, bypasses and so on has been completed.

Temporary strips and final finishing of the surface of a dirt landing field are
completed after construction of the pavement is completed.

Agrotechnical work is carried out after completion of all excavation and grading
work with seeding of the landing field with sod-forming grasses within deadlines
dependent on the climatic conditions of the airfield construction region.

1.7. Continuous Method of Organizing work

Under modern conditions the main method of construction organization is the con-
tinuous method. It is based on separation of the total production process into

constituent construction processes and combinations of performing them in time,

which also predetermines its main advantages.

The continuous method of work organization in construction of airfield pavement of
VPP, RD and “8 provides uniformity‘and continuity of work production, reduction of
the construction deadlines due to combination of individual types of work in the
flow, minimum requirement for machines and mechanisms and efficient use of them and
stable specialization and stability of the composition of brigades and sections.

Formation of complex and specialized brigades with stable composition contributes
to an increase of the qualifications of building with the continuous method, im-
provement of their work and product quality and in the final analysis leads to an
increase of labor productivity.

The main components that characterize the flow are the rhythm and rate of the flow.

The rhythm of the flow is understood as the duration of work of brigades (sections)
during each individual job.

The flow rate is the volume of production performed by the flow per unit time (per
day or shift) in full-scale indicators-~linear or square meters and so on.

Three stages are distinguished in development of the construction flow:

the organization period characterized by sequential inclusion of the brigades
into the flow;

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the period of the organized course of work when all brigades work in the flow
and when all work cycles are completed;

the curtailment period characterized by sequential exclusion of brigades from
the flow.

The development and curtailment periods do not ensure efficient use of the forces
and equipment of the construction and installation organization. Therefore, they

must be reduced if possible in work organization planning so that work on jobs with
lesser volume should first be begun.

The priority of work organization planning by the continuous method depends to a

considerable degree on the calculated versions. Two main versions of calculation
are possible.

Version 1. The construction deadline is given. Efficient organization of work
must be planned, i.e., the efficient flow parameters (intensity of work. number of
work cycles, jobs and flow rhythms) and the requirement for labor and material

and technical resources are determined.

Version 2. The capacity of the construction organization, i.e., its labor and
material and technical resources, is given. Efficient organization of work must
be planned and the construction deadlines must be determined.

The first version is most frequently found in airfield construction practice. The
following planning procedure corresponds to it.

1. A list of specialized flows for airfield construction is established on the
basis of analysis of planning data. This list usually contains the preparatory

work. excavation work, installation of the drain system, construction of pavement
and agrotechnical work.

2. The number of working days within which each specialized flow should be com-
pleted is determined. weekends and holidays and if necessary days off due to nat-
ural climatic conditions are excluded from the normative deadline provided by ex-

isting norms of the duration of construction or by the plan of the construction
organization.

3. The list and volumes of work and also methods of completing it are established
for each specialized flow. Individual construction processes are combined into
work cycles and the leading work cycle is selected. The leading cycle in construc-
tion of pavement from monolithic concrete is usually concrete work and laying of
slabs is usual in construction of sectional pavement.

4. The production scheme of work is selected and the number and scope of jobs and
the priority of organizing them are designated. The scope of the jobs should en-
sure effective use of machines and mechanisms and the work of brigades without
conversion to another job not less than during one shift.

5. The intensities of partial flows (work cycles) within the specialized flow are
established by dividing the corresponding volumes of work by the duration of per-

forming them with regard to the period of development and curtailment of each
partial flow.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. The required number of executors (workers, machines and mechanisms) is deter-
mined for each partial flow and the possibility of their disposition on jobs is
checked.

7. The flow schedule during which the final tie-in of partial flows with each
other is made is constructed.

A calendar plan of work production is organized in linear form or in network
schedule form on the basis of planned specialized flows, during which individual
specialized flows and also auxiliary and miscellaneous work not contained in the
flows are tied in.

1.8. Organization of Material and Technical Supply of Construction

The most iuportant condition of planned and rhythmic work production in airfield
construction is timely and complete support of construction with material and tech-
nical resources, the need for which should be satisfied in complete accord with the
sumary calendar plan of deliveries and the schedule for delivery of material re-
sources to the facility. The priority of stpmrting construction with material
resources is established by the "Regulations x . the priority of Supporting construc-
tion with materials, articles and equipment."

According to the "Regulations," the contract and subcontract construction and in-
stallation organizations should themselves support the work performed by them with
all types of construction materials, articles and structures and also with con-
struction machines, mechanisms and transport equipment, with the exception of ma-
terials and equipment related to deliveries of the customer. The customers deliver
the production, power engineering, electrical engineering and other equipment, in-
cluding nonstandard equipment.

The material and technical resources are divided into the following groups depend—
ing on the nature of planning and distribution:

funded or centrally distributed from stocks of USSR Gosplan and Gossnab;

decentralized planned distributed by ministries, agencies and territorial sup-
ply organizations of Gossnab, Oblispolkom and so on.

self-procured, i.e., procured by the construction organizations themselves.

The material and technical supply of construction is planned during the preplanning
year in CH!) phases with presentation of orders for funded and planned materials
within established deadlines. Orders for material resources are compiled and sub-
mitted during the first phase (in May-dime) to the corresponding planning organi-
zations in combined nomenclature. The final composition of the plan for material
and technical supply is compiled during the second phase (in September-October of
the preplanning year) after funds have been received from the planning
organizations.

The needs for material and technical resources are calculated on the basis of the
planned volumes of work in full-scale expression and on the basis of

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UH’ILIAL USE ONLY

enginearing-substantiated norms of consumption and norms of production reserves.
The consumption of materials for jobs performed due to overhead expenses and jobs
performed under winter conditions and also the consuuption of materials that takes
into account their losses according to the norms of standard losses should be ad-
ditionally determined.

Delivery agreements are concluded after requisitions have been received from the
planning organizations and after the construction organizations have been registered
with the delivery organizations. The requisitions are iuplemented by the corre~
sponding supply organizations--offices of material and technical supply or admin-
istrations of production and technological supply, which are divisions of the con-
struction and installation organizations. The most effective and promising is the
form of supplying construction directly through organizations of USSR Gossnab.

The main principle of material and technical supply of airfield construction is
that of continuous complete delivery of resources and maintenance of the level of
production reserves according to existing norms.

Materials are delivered by transit and warehouse methods. The most widespread form
of supply with basic materials and articles in airfield construction is the transit
method that provides for delivery of materials, articles and so on directly from
the suppliers, doing away with intermediate warehouses.

According to the existing "Regulstions on contract agreements for capital con-
struction," delivery agreements are concluded for the entire construction period,
for the year or for the deadline of manufacture or delivery of a block of products.

If the consumer receives products directly from the manufacturing enterprise, the
parties conclude a direct agreement. Agreements.on delivery of products in non-
transit quantities are usually concluded by the consumers with the supply-service
organizations which in turn conclude agreements with the manufacturing enterprises.

One should be guided in acceptance of material and technical resources by the con-
ditions of the agreements concluded between suppliers and consumers, by the "Regu-
lations on deliveries of products of production-engineering designation.“ by GOSTs.
specifications and other normative documents.

1.9. Organization of Labor, Operational Planning and Management of Construction
Organization of labor in construction should provide a system of measures for ef-
ficient use of the work force, normalization and stimulation of labor, creation of
safe work conditions and should ensure an increase of labor productivity, improve-
want of construction quality and a reduction of construction cost.

The main form of labor cooperation in construction is the brigade. Specialized
brigades should be organized in performing jobs of the same type.

Complex brigades should he formed when performing several types of interrelated
jobs with common final product.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The numerical, occupational and qualification composition of workers in brigades
and sections should be established as a function of the planned volumes of work and
the deadlines for completing it with regard to the production technology and the
achieved level of production norms.

Job sites should be made available on a timely basis to brigades and assignment
details should be made on time.

The work of brigades should be usually planned for a prolonged time period (up to a
year).

Safe working conditions must be provided and production sanitation requirements
must be adhered to in organization of job sites.

The piecework-bonus system of wages with issuance of piecework orders should be
used to create material incentives of workers in increasing labor productivity.
improving work quality and reducing the deadlines of completing jobs.

The most progressive form of labor organization is the brigade contract on a cost-
accounting basis. Both the brigades of the contracting and subcontracting organ-

izations performing work in construction of a given specific facility are converted
to the brigade contract.

Extensive introduction of scientific organization of labor (NOT) into construction
practice should play an important role in achieving high labor productivity.

Iuplementation of NOT includes:
establishment of the actual state of labor organization on job sites;

working out proposals on scientific organization of labor and compilation of
the NOT plan:

introduction of the NOT plan into construction practice, determination of the
effectiveness of implementing it and application of NOT in all work sections.

The main documents for scientific organization of labor of workers should be pro-
duction flow charts contained in the work production plan, charts of labor proces-
ses and also charts for operational control of work quality.

Operational planning has the purpose of ensuring rhythmic work and clear interac-
tion of production subdivisions and their maintenance enterprises and facilities.

It includes quarterly and monthly plans, weekly-daily and hourly work production
schedules for sections of work superintendents, foremen and auxiliary production.

The production program, work production plan and data on the state of work and the
capability of supporting it "ith labor and material and technical resources are
used as the input data for working out operational plans.

17

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE(HVLY
PW UPPILIAL USE. ONLY

Fulfillment of operational plans should be unaltered systematically with summariz-
ing of the results of production activity of subdivisions during the corresponding
period.

Operational management of work production should usually be carried out through the
dispatcher service. Its main functions are operational monitoring and regulation
of construction and installation work and tying in the work of production subdivi-
sions, material and technical support subdivisions and enterprises of the produc-
tion base.

A general work log on construction of airfield pavement and other airfield compon-
ents is maintained during construction. It is filled in monthly, beginning with
the ﬁirst day of work on the facility, by the person responsible for its construc-
tion (the work superintendent or senior work superintendent). Special work logs
for individual types of work (concrete work log, welding work log and so on) are
maintained along with the general work log.

The network planning and management method (SPO), which provides for planning and
performance of construction and also monitoring the course of construction, opera-
tional supervision and managemnt of it by network schedules (SG) and executive
network schedules (156), should be universally introduced into construction prac-
tice to improve operational planning and management of airfield construction.

A special service--network planning and management department (division) (0590)"
should be created in construction organizations for work according to network
schedules.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 2. MATERIALS

['l‘extl 2.1. Soils

The soils in airfield construction are used in excavation work (installation of the
earth bed under pave-ant, the soil part of the landing field, the drain-runoff sys-
tem and so on) and in installation of foundations and surfaces of reinforced soils.

Soils are divided into rocky and nonmcky.

Rocky soils include igneous, metamorphic and sedanentary rock with rigid bonds be-
tween grains, deposited in the form of a solid or cracked mass. Rocky soils have
various forms depending on the corpressive resistance. softening factor and degree
of weathering.

Nonrocky soils include large-fragment, sandy and clay soils. Nonrocky soils are
usually euployed in airfield construction.

Large-fragment and sandy soils are divided into types by granular composition (con-
tent of different soil fractions by mass expressed in percent) according to Table
2.1.

To establish the type of soil according to Table 2.1, the particle content is added
sequentially: larger than 200 In initially, then larger than 10 an and so on. The
type of soil is used in the order of arrangement of the names in the table accord-
ing to the first satisfactory indicator.

Gravelly coarse and medium-coarse sands are one-size and consertal depending on the
coefficient of irregularity, determined by the formula

where deo and dlo are the particle diameters less than which 60 and 10 percent of
the particles. respectively, are contained by less in the given soil.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.1. Types of Large-Fragment and Sandy Soils

I‘nrnwnwum- earl-II um airy-net's.

 

 

Mn '9’"'“ (1) (2) ’f. m mama rymm In":
prnuo-saIyao-mw
(4) (5) (5')

Buynuul Ipym npn apeodnananuu mu Kliynurc 20" nu ﬁance 50°].
manna": uctnn random. r

rue-"moan! rpyur upn upmdnananu Krymm l0 an (out .107.
neon-taxman umn «Gen-emu (7) . '

l'psunncmﬁ rpynt «pa Wanna" prmm: 2 um (mare :01
neonate-mu: «lac-run uuccummu (3)

(lemma: (9)

l'lecoe rpanoancnan (10) Kry‘ﬁt‘ 2 can «593 25';
1 prumr (If. nu “H.100 :JI'L
’ upymmll (1 I (15) f
D (punch npynnocrn (12) prmu 0,25 mu m- «cm-c .131.
a woman (13) , prnm: 0.! m- m- ucmv 751.
a manual (14) Krymw 0.! an mm 75!.

l. 'Iypes of soils

2. Particle distribution by coarseness, percent of dry soil mass
3. Large-fragment

4. Rubbly soil with predominance of unrolled block particles

5. larger than

6. More than

7. Pebbly soil with predominance of unrolled crushed stone particles
8. Gravelly soil with predominance of unrolled pebble particles
9. Sandy
10. Gravelly sand
11. Coarse sand
12. Median coarse sand

13. Pine sand

14. Dusty sand

15. Not less than

Sands with coefficient of irregularity not greater than 3 and also fine sands with
content of not less than 90 percent particles by mass measuring 0.10-0.25 m are

regarded as single-size. Sands with coefficient of irregularity greater than 3 are
regarded as consertal.

Sandy soils are divided by the density of their texture determined by the porosity

coefficient in laboratory tests or by cone submrgence resistance in sounding into
dense, medium-coarse and brittle (Table 2.2).

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.2. Classification of Sands by Textual Density

Note .

ﬁ

2)II;1!-';w't c.u--ft..—-;-:—
nun min- (1) ”4a Jigs" "‘33:

E

 

 

A. "a noun/«macaw unpuaocru e (6)

re:::nn(uet3 spynwe s queue (7) ' <35!» ill—00’; :~0.7
< .6 . - . - ' 0.75
Immune (9) (1°) <01? .6--0.8 :0.”

l5.- Ila cmmnueuun noepysmum xnnyca 9,, reclu',
npu ﬂaIUINKOl nonhuman

prnnuc a (punch swans-In (11) > I50 Isa-m r'

Meme (9) >120 I'm—m 223
I'Iuaeeamc. umomnanue n Masses (12) >l00 loo—an (30
"surname mannammmsue (13) > 70 10 90 (:20

(141'
u no gunman announce-may conmruucuwo museum may“ P .
Im‘luu', npu (Imllﬂft‘lﬂl mdumeuuu ‘

pruuuc I channel spy-moon (11) >l25 I'IS- 35 (.15

Mount sumnaxnue s en’s-an (15) > Ino loo—m <60

Menus nonmmumcunue, nus-awe IWIJI- > 3!. ll!» m (20
mac n Man-mile (16) .

 

 

 

A cone with angle at the vertex of 60° and diameter of 36 In with static

probing and 74 m with dynamic probing is used in probing soils.

Key:
1.
2.
3.

11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

Types of sand
Density of sand texture

Dense

Medium-density

Brittle

A. According to coefficient of porosity e

Gravelly. coarse and medium

Fine

0051:?

8. According to cone enersion resistance Pg, kgf/cnz, during static
probing

Coarse and medium-coarse

Dusty, low-moisture and wet

Dusty, water-saturated

c. By specific dynmic cone enersion resistance P9, kgf/cm2 during dynamic
probing

Fine low-misture and wet

Pine water-saturated. dusty lov-misture and wet

Clay soils are divided into -ypes depending on plasticity nulber (Table 2.3) and
consistency index (Table 2.4). The plasticity masher expresses the ditturence be-
tween the moisture content of soil at notability and rolling boundaries. The con-
sistency index is determined by the fornula

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm: unIuAL USE ONLY

where w and Hg- is the natural moisture content and the moisture content on the
rolling boundary, respectively and WP is the plasticity mnber.

Table 2.3. TVpes of clay Soils Depending on Plasticity Number

 

 

-. (1) . ‘
Ila-o u lam-Wu! "Iv-m- (2) 'lnn- Iuarm-M-rl- I I.
-- . (3) o.m<w.ro,o7
«‘33:... (4) 0.01 < I'- 4: 0J1
Lanna (5) W. > 0J7
Key:
1. Types of clay soils 4. Loan
2. Plasticity number up 5. clay

3. Sandy loam

Table 2.4. Varieties of Clay Soils According to Consistency Index

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

New n-ymne (1) (2, llo'ulrm. lv-canrnunln II
C 'I' 3
”Turns-2r (4) n < l)
u mun-mm (5) 0 < R g l
[My-luv (6) I! > I
(:VLIINIRM u uumu (7)
IIII'II me (4) n < n
"mum-nae (3’ II 1:, I! 5; "2'.
tyrmmm‘m-I-mb (9) 0.25 < I! r. 0.5
uslnnnsurm-mm-(10) ".5 <2 I! t; 0.75
"Kym-"JarIu'ullu' (11) 0.7.": v: ll 1’. l
nay-mo (6) ll :2 I
Key:
1. Types of soils 7. loans and clays
2. Consistency index 8 8. Semi-hard
3. Sandy loans 9. Hard-elastic
4. Hard 10. Soft-elastic
5. Elastic ll. Plowing-elastic
6. Plowing

2.2. Soils strengthened with Binding Materials

Soils strengthened with binding materials are used as artificial bedding of all
types of e'.r£ie1d pavement and also pavemnt of airfields of classes 2 and P and
airfiel- )r agricultural aviation.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main normative document that determines the requirements on strengthened soils
is "Instructions for use of soils strengthened with binder materials for construc-
tion of highway and airfield beds and pavements"--SN 25-74.

Mineral and organic binding materials are used to strengthen soils. The most wide-
ly used are portland cement. slag-portland cement, lime, ashes, liquid petroleum
asphalt and asphalt emulsions. Complex methods of strengthening using additives of
different substances are usually employed for efficient use of binder materials and
to achieve higher indicators of the physicomechanical properties of strengthened
soils.

The indicators of physicomechanical properties of strengthened soils should corre-
spond to the requirements of Tables 2.5-2.7.

Table 2.5. Indicators of Physicomechanical Properties of Soils Strengthened with
Mineral Binders

. _. -_ ..._— ._____—____ ‘-

yhnun-u. nu aura-w urn-m n-

 

 

 

(
Mann-wwm-m (meme (1) x ' l II III

 

 

"pun npomwcm npu exams soaouacunmumx (il- 40 40-40 ‘20 -IO
oopa'mnu. nﬁ/CI’. its usage '
"pence npomlortn Ms pat-unease «pa usrqu no. l0 6 I
aomcuummux 0693mm. etdcu'. as sense (4) '
KO'Muunem uopoioc-roamus (monomer upeno- 0.75 0.7 0!»
1o: "pa-mot"! u: can-rue eonwscumemux on-
(s‘ununn some u an anuopanueaumonaueaune),
no scucc
Bnnmuucu. 06min: notat- uonununa us saunpn- 2 4 4
mmmmc-mmuszmuc mop: onruusnmol npn
ynnomnum, ‘7. new. IIe 60m (6)

Note. The indirators of the physicomechanical properties are given for specimens
aged for 28 days for soils strengthened with portland cement and slag-portland ce-
ment and those aged 90 days with strengthening of soils by other types of mineral
binders.

Key:

1. Physicomechanical properties

2. Index by strength classes

3. Compressive strength of water-saturated specimens, kgf/cmz, not less than

4. Tensile bending strength of water-saturated specimens, kgf/cmz, not less
than

S. Frost-resistance coefficient (ratio of compressive strength of water-
saturated specimens before and after freezing-thawing) , not less than

6. Moisture content of specimen after freeze-thawing testing above optimum
with strengthening, percent by mass, not sure than

The binder material and additives are selected as a function of the type of soils

and the road-climatic zone of their use according to the reconuendations of
Tables 2.8-2.9.

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FUR OHI'ICIAL USE ONLY

Consumption of binder materials and additives is established on the basis of labor-
atory selection of the compositions of the mixtures.

Requirements on soils. All types and varieties of large-fragment, sandy and clay
soils, except rich clays with plasticity number greater than 0.27, can be
strengthened for installation of pavement and bedding with regard to the following
main requirements:

the total number of particles from 2 to 25 mm should not exceed 70 percent of
the soil mass in large-fragment soils with maximum grain size up to 25 mm;

particles measuring less than 0.5 mm in large-fragment rock should have plas-
ticity number of not more than 0.12;

the content of humus particles in the soil should not exceed 0.2 percent in
road-climatic zone 2 and 4 percent in road-climatic zones 3-4.

The following additional requirements and restrictions are also taken into account
when determining the suitability of soils for strengthening with binder materials.

Table 2.6. Indicators of Physicomechanical Properties of Soils Strengthened with
Asphalt anuisions or Liquid Asphalt Together With Cement and Also with
Asphalt Emulsions Together with Carbamide Resins

ll-I-aulrm 1- sum
( ) n man-u- fyv "
an "at”! urns-Inn

 

 

 

«no-mIa-nnue twirl-J (1)

 

 

    

llpeaen npwuocm npn‘aamuuu smoueculuclmux odpnuoo 40—25 25—15
um: 20‘ C. umlm’
(4)11ch npmuucm upu uterus npu WC. uwlcu’. me some 20 12
.Ilmcn npo-Iuonu mu prom-tense up" unrnrne soaonacu- 10 o
Inn-mu Mpumm mm 20‘ C. m-Icu'. no.- Hence (5)
Kowommom «opens-tosses". we some (6) 0.85 0.3
limo-Immense. '5 06"“. he Gone (7) 3 5

Key:
1. Physicomechanical properties
2. Indicators of specimens aged 28 days by strength classes
3. Compressive strength of water-saturated specimens at 20°C, kgf/cm2
4. Compressive strength at 50°C, kgf/cmz, not less than
S. Tensile bending strength of water-saturated specimens at 20°C. kgf/cmz,
not less than
6. Cold-resistance coefficient, not less than
7. Water-saturation, percent of volume, not more than

1. When strengthening soils with portland cement or slag-portland cement:

it is permissible to strengthen noncarbonate clays with cement only together
with lime and different salt additives:

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carbonate varieties of clay in road-climatic zone 3 can be strengthened with
cement after introduction of sand, gravel or crushed stone waste additives with

particle size up to 25 m;

clay soils should have misture content of not more than 55 percent on the
rla-wnI-I Hly lam-July:

soils characterized by acid medium (pH less than 7) shOuld be subjected to
preliminary neutralization with additives of lime, caustic soda or other alkali

compounds;

salty soils can be strengthened with portland cement if the salt content in
then is not more than 4 percent of soil mass with chloride, sulfate-chloride and
chloride-sulfate salinization and 2 percent of soil mass with sulfate salinization

(1 percent for pavement);

salinized soils with salt content greater than 4 but not more than 6 percent
of soil mess (with the exception of sulfate salinization) can be strengthened with
portland cement only together with lime additives (1-2 percent by mass) and also
with calcium chloride, ferric chloride and iron sulfate (1-1.5 percent by mass);

soils should not contain more than 10 percent gypsun impurities in road-cli-
matic zones 2 and 3 and more than 20 percent in road-climatic zones 4 and 5.

Table 2.7. Indicators of Physicomechanical Properties of soils strengthened with
Asphal Emulsions with Lime and Liquid Asphalt Additives

. —._.... .

I I - - .
£132.23. fry-w. 111‘ urn-mo All-lu-

Mlyunuu l‘ rah-In. no- hr.
:3: mt. nun-nu sauna-u: n no"...

 

  
   
  

 

 
 

1 I U0‘.hﬂll'l UTIQIQ ll
«arrange-Io "pk!" m;- (1% —‘.s.)_ _
3%.": max "mgr:

I'm!” can empow-

 

llpnm npmmrn upu cunnn nemmo- J!» I2 lle
unrummnux oﬁpnuos npw 20' C. unme-
nur;- u’. ue unm- sums
10 m... up. .vru, ark-nu. no nonco- (7) 9 7 To use (12
"pom-1 npmn-u-m non rxanm nonmna- 1 6 4 )
a) cumrmmx nﬁpnnoll npn 20.6, "deg”.
( [If "I'll"
ll..(.yn.umc. 5 emu-v.1. uc (mace (9) 4 5 II:
me-
Kaunnnlmm unumnrumcuuo. 'ﬁ 061.08%? lie (1 ) 5 #1::
m‘ (NWT mue-
sluts
Kn adadmlumu summit-manner". are lg}? 0.7 0.6 v

Note. The cold-resistance coefficient is given for specimens aged 28 days and the
remaining indicators are given for specimens aged 7 days.

[Key on following page]

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Physicomechanical properties

2. aﬂlsstrengthened with asphalt emulsions with lime additive

3. Soils strengthened with liquid asphalts with or without additive of active
substances and surfactants

4. Upper layer of bed or pavement

5. Lower layer of bed

6. Compressive strength of unsaturated specimens at 20'C, kgf/cmz. not less than

7. Compressive strength at 50°C, kgf/anz, not less than

8. Compressive strength of water-saturated specimens at 20'C, kgf/cm2 not less
than

9. swelling, percent of volume, not more than

10. Capillary water-saturation. percent of volume, not more than
ll. Cold-resistance coefficient, not less than

12. Undetermined

2. When salinized soils are strengthened with waste ashes. the salt content in
them should not exceed 3 percent with sulfate aalinization and 5 percent with
chloride salinization while the pH value should not be less than 4.

3. when soils are strengthened with organic binder materials:

large-fragment soils of non-optimum granulometric composition, sands of the
same size and sandy loans with plasticity number less than 0.03 must be strengthened
with liquid petroleum asphalt after their granulometric composition has been im-
proved by additives of active substances or light loans. Only lime must be added
when these soils are strengthened with asphalt emulsions;

heavy loams should have plasticity number of not more than 0.15 when they are
strengthened with asphalt emulsions. Loans with plasticity number greater than
0.15 and also humus-containing loans with plasticity number from 0.1; to 1.5 can be
strengthened with asphalt emulsions when granulometric additives of coarse sand or
stone-crushing wastes and lime are introduced in them. Heavy loams should be
strengthened with liquid petroleum asphalts in road-climatic zones 11 and III with
granulometric additives. lime and surfactants being introduced to the soil, while
those in road-climatic zones IV and V should be strengthened only with granulomet-
ric additive or lime additive;

granulometric additives, lime and surfactant additives must be introduced when
clays are strengthened with liquid asphalts:

the content of easily soluble salts should not exceed 1 percent in salinized
soils strengthened with liquid asphalts, and the content of Nazsoa and H9804 salts
should be less than 0.25 percent, the Na2C03 and NaHC03 salts should be less than
”.1 percent and the total content of absorbed sodium should be less than 20 per-

cent of the soil exchange capacity;

salinized soils with plasticity number less than 0.17 can be strengthened with
liquid asphalts if they contain up to 5 percent easily soluble salts (including
not more than 2.5 percent sodium sulfate and sodium carbonate) only if lime and
surfactants are added after granulometric additives have been introduced to the

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Soils

 

‘ragment uncemented, close to
looszposition, gravelly, coarse
ium different-granular sands

ragment uncemented soils of
mum composition, coarse, medi-
l'ine sands of the same size

mds and different sandy loams
lsticity number less than 0.03

m following page]

Binder Materials and Additives

Portland cement: asphalt. emulsions togethe
with cement or with lime additive: waste
ashes in combination with cement or lime o
with electrolyte additive: liquid asphalts
with additive of active substances

Liquid petroleum asphalts together with ce
ment and liquid asphalts

Portland cement with additive of waste ash
or organic materials (high-resin crude pe-.
troleum or liquid asphalt); waste ashes or
waste ashes in conbination with cement or
lime or an electrolyte additive: asphalt
emulsions together with cement or with lim:
additive

Asphalt emulsions together with carbamide
resins

Liquid petroleum asphalts together with
count; liquid asphalts with additive of
active materials

Portland cement; portland cement with addi-
tive of waste ash or organic materials (his
resin crude petroleum or liquid asphalt);
waste ashes or waste ashes in combination
with cement or lime or with electrolyte ad-
ditive: asphalt emulsions together with can
or with lime additive: liquid asphalts with
additive of active materials

Asphalt emulsions together with carbanide
resins
Soils

 

tame close to optimum composi-
I light coarse and dusty sandy

sty sandy loams, light loams
t dusty loams

I heavy dusty lonms

Binder Materials and Additives
Liquid petroleum asphalts together with

Portland cement, portland cement with at
of waste ash or organic materials (high-
crude petroleum or liquid asphalt); asp)
emulsions together with cement or additi
lime, waste ashes or waste ashes in corn
with cement or with lime or with electrt
additive

Liquid asphalts with additive of active
materials

Liquid petroleum asphalts with cement an
liquid asphalts

Portland cement, portland cement with ad
of lime, waste ash or electrolytes; wast
or in combination with cement, lime or e
lytes; asphalt emulsions together with c
or lime: liquid asphalts with additive o
tive materials

Asphalt emulsions with carbamide resins

Lime with additives of electrolytes or w
glass

Lime or line-slag cement; liquid petrole
asphalta together witn cement

Portland cement with or without additive
lime or electrolytes: liquid asphalts wi
additive of lime and surfactants
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

2007/02109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

025.0%“.qu

>IHHH

>IHHH

>IHHH

>~>H

>|HHH

00:3

canal—undo
1—39—

.> 0:8 030230608 5“ 0.3.3009: uoﬁo uo
050:0“: um condo «0 audacmou uaauuu nu“: coconumcouuu on can mun 05000 :« «anon 0:9 .0902

. h~.o
ugwuwvua 0u>aouuuouo ”50:01; he 59!: 05.3 3 a: Hog: handyman“ :04: 0>0~U .0

£3600 0301033 no 08.“.— Bonanza
3030 no «no; noun: no 023360 :33 03.3

uuﬁuocuuan 0:0 06: «o
o>uuauuo no“: nudanmua uuavua ~000>Houuuouo -.o cans one:
no 0...: .«0 005.3260 sud: £50200 casino“. yo: .385: >uwo$03u :33 0:40 .5

3332. 3.63

5.0500 036:8: ho 05.3. .00u>.nouu
.630 uo 000.3 noun: «0 023.360 23.3 03.3

 

12,363. v5 2.2.3:. 03.5.. «38

Avgawucouv o.~ wanna.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
:ials and Additives in Strengthening Soils with Liquid Petr:
>ds of Application

:enented
timum com-
y coarse
(different
ns, close
ltion

:emented
.nn compo-
und medi-
eous sands.
ids and
plasticity
nan 0.03

navy dusty
plasticity
3.03 and

asty loans

navy dusty
s and
plasticity
an 0.02

Road-Climatic Zones

II and III

IVandV

 

Materials and Additives

Lime and shale ash
Cation-active
materials

Dry waste ssh, ash-
slag mixtures with-
out line additive,
crushed limestone
and crushed opoka
with lime

" or lime

Limestone together
with anion-active
materials

Lime

Dry waste ash, ash-
slag mixtures with
and without lime ad-
ditive, crushed
limestone, crushed
opoka with lime and

lime

Line, non-iatrogenic
materials: OP-‘I or
OP-lo wetting agent,
sulfite-yeast grains,
line together with

A-A-H
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soil in a quantity in which the total easily soluble salt content does not exceed
1 percent:

salinised soils containing absorbed sodium of more than 20 percent the ex-
change capacity of the soil should be strengthened with liquid asphalts only with
additives of active materials and surfactants: in this case the plasticity nunber
ofthe soils after introduction of granulometric additives should not exceed 0.17.

Requirements on binder materials. The cements used to strengthen soils shouldmeet
the requirements of 605? 10178-76. It is recommended that finely ground portland
cements with high specific surface, including plasticized and hydrophobic cements,
be used.

The loss in mass during roasting should not exceed 2 percent. It is recommended
that the mark of cement not below 400 be used.

Lime-slag, lime-pozzualanic, lime-clay and lime-ash cements may be used in construc-
tion in road-climatic zones IV and V.

Construction grades I and II according to 6051‘ 9179-77, air-hardening and hydraulic
and also hydrophobic lime are used. hydraulic lime is used in powder form and the
M90 content in it is not regulated.

Dry waste ashes should meet requirements of Table 2.10.

Liquid petroleum asphalts of classes 56 andsnc, marks 25/40/, 40/70 and 70/130
(with viscosity of not more than 100 s at C60). corresponding to the requirements

of 6051‘ 11955-74, are primarily used to strengthen soils.

Table 2.10. Requirements on Indicators of Composition and Properties of waste

 

 

 

 

Ashes
(2-; llmwmIr-xa ma 0-:a—u—rc—ve-p‘
III-II"!!! III-Hiﬂnllm
M'Immnuue "£332"- "Inn-£1)».- (4) 2*“"“‘"' “'1":—
Ia-m lacy-I'm
C “MD. ' s-(ILD
Cuncpummc cn'ﬂuunﬂ oil-pa Ianumn. "e (8 He (9“ —
'1. sense 8 00.1“: i
Vat-mala- noeepxuoﬁs. tu’lr (10) He He He
sense aooo ram 300 were 3000
Cumulus (spunk-nu u «pundit; 0 3 -—
(unleash (n Immune ml 50.). $.
ne 60m
"ways I mecca nps a «mum. In 5 IO l0
«e 601m (1 )
Key:
1. Normalized indicators 2. Use of waste ash as

[Key continued on following page]

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UI'I'ILIAL URI. UNI-V

[Key continued from preceding page]:

3.
'3.

12.

An independent binder

As Hu- ev-i Ive was-(men! M’ a mixed binder

with cement

with lime

Free calcium oxide content, percent

Not less than

Not more than

Specific surface, cnz/g

Content of sulphur and sulphuric acid conpounds (calculated for 803):
percent, not more than

Losses in mass during roasting, percent, not more than

The class and mark of asphalts is established as a function of the climatic con-
dition for use and the properties of the strengthened soils: it is recommended
that asphalts of class so and MG. marks 40/70 and 70/130 be used in road-climatic
zones Iv and V and that asphalt: of class so and HG, mark 25/40 he used in zones
II and III)

asphalt: of nurks 40/70 and 70/130 are used to strengthen large-fragment and
sandy soils and those of mark 25/40 are used to strengthen clay soils.

Table 2.11. Emulsifiers and Alkali Materials Used to Prepare Asphalt Emulsions

6.

_:‘— Ito-mm. %—_ mu man‘s-n 0.1-1...
(2)_:'_.__‘

 

 

 

any-n..." I new

Run-run I'M um ‘I‘ ”*IPI‘I

(3) lane, (‘) Ihvyu

—\

 

 

l‘norcuepampuau n mum-ms men‘s) —
as — Isl-«1cm. npssmn nuporou

an! super A u 5 7

Eaul saw (6) I10 (titanium-my —-
(a) nanny

ll "anus cym-ilmxncnotu Mama .4 4.6 --

r
Bull sup (6) ll» mmuumouy —
[Int-I017

forums" won (9) R -In 3--5

Enuni new (6) ll» rnmnuuouy --

brown "man rnpou (10) ”it", 3..-".

‘lnuunstptwar Isms (11) 2 ._

Emulsifiers and alkali materials
Quantity, percent of water or asphalt mass
Upon introduction to water

Upon introduction to asphalt

Gas-generator and furnace tar--wood-pyrogenous softening agent of marks
AandB

Caustic soda

[Key continued on following page]

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Key continued from preceding page]:

7. By special calculation

8. Petroleum sulfonic acids of uric 09
9. Gossypolic resin

10. Secondary fatty oil tar

ll. Sodium tripolyphosphate

Anion asphalt emulsions of the direct type that break down slowly (class HA) pre-
pared in petroleum asphalts of marks END-200/300, WHO/200, 3ND 90/130, 8ND 60/90
and MD 40/60, emulsifiers and alkali materials indicated in Table 2.11 should be
used to strengthen soils.

An emulsion prepared on sulfite-yeast wastes (503) with the following content of
components in percent of mass of the emulsion: 50-60 percent asphalt, 1.75 percent
508 and 48.25-38.25 percent water may be used.

The asphalt content in the emulsions should comprise 35-55 percent of the mass of
the emulsion. lower values are used to strengthen sandy logs and loam soils and
also those having moisture content not above the optimu, while higher values are
used in the remaining cases.

When selecting an emulsifier in preparation of asphalt emulsions, one proceeds
from the following:

wood gas-generator and furnace tar and petroleum sulfonic acids can be used
without restrictions by soil-curated zones and types of soils:

gossypolic resin. secondary fatty oil tar and 808 should be used primarily
for emulsions in road-climatic zones III-v: 808 can also be used in zone II if the
ambient air temerature is not below +15’C:

petroleum sulfonic acids and gossypolic resin should be used as emulsifiers
to strengthen sandy loans and loans with misture content equal to 0.2-0:3 of the
moisture content on the flowability boundary and also barkhan sands in zones IV
and V.

Asphalt compounds prepared in solid emulsifiers are used in road-climatic zones

III-v to strengthen large-fragment soils, sands and sandy loans with plasticity
nusber less than 0.03; their composition is designated according to Table 2.12.

One is guided by the following when selecting the emulsifier in preparation of
asphalt comoundsz lime can be used without restrictions on road-climatic zones
and types of soils;

soil emulsifiers (clays, loesses and loans) can be used only in zones Iv and
v with ambient air temperature not below +15°c.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.12. Compositions of Asphalt Compounds

 

——

I: urns-e I any-em: mu: Imam.

 

 

 

a. (1) (2) % Iain-u earn:

""'°“ (3) I (4) (s)

hiya any-wane II-u
Hansen uoaonl Inc}!!! (6) 50- 55 3-..? 4'). 33
Hnacctlvnymnuua (7) 45- .m l5-20 40 -m
Gunny — apex-cums rpm. I ganja) -m .50 26-00 M- -‘20
l'anum n ‘l’llﬂ'ﬂldf (yuan-m? 4" .M 8—20 30-45
116mm u auto-name cyrunulIlO) 40 —45 12) 20 40- 35
Illa: cosueerao c nmomm‘n 40—45 Jlécc -- l4 ‘3 "-13

mama— 3 ‘
I13)

1. misifiers
2. Content of components in asphalt coupounds, percent of nass of compound

3 . Asphalt
4 . mulsi fie r
S . Water

6. Ground quicklime

7. Air-slaked line

8. Filtered sewage sludge

9. Clays and heavy loans

10. [bosses and loess-type loams

11. Mesa together with air-slaked line
12. mess -
13. Lisa

2. 3. stone Materials

stone materials are divided into natural (crushed stone from natural stone, crushed
stone from gravel, gravel and crushed stone-sand, gravel-sand and crushed stone-
gravel-sand mixtures and sand) and artificial (slag rubble, slag sand and kermzit).

Crushed stone from natural stone (6081‘ 8267-75). Crushed stone from natural stone
is produced by crushing rock. It is characterized by the following indicators:
grainy composition, grain content of plats-type (slab) and spiny shape, strength,
grain content of weak rock, cold resistance, dusty, clay and ooze particle content
and petrogrsphic composition.

Crushed stone is divided into four fractions as a tunctionof grain size: from 5
to 10 mm, more than 10 to 20 um, more than 20 to 40 an and more than 40 to 70 m.

The use of rubble in the form of a mixture of two related fractions and upon agree-
ment of the parties in the form of a mixture of several fractions and also crushed
stone of fractions 2-10. 10-15 (or 5-15), 15-20 and larger than 70 an is permitted.

The grain composition of each fraction of crushed stone or mixture of fractions
should correspond to the range indicated in Table 2.13.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.13. Requirements on Grain Composition

 

Men-nu. I)“ ‘ ”woodman-Ins (new many-seems
run 1

ram E mm. 'L ""

 

"and "ones In
on“ In ANN. %

 

 

 

R... 1.1. Q‘;&-

0'511 (lime);

. + use :

2.2“. ° mm. 37:“ ”a; «mo
'5 (a) an (4) 95-100 cm“ ”‘2' 50‘"
l0 us I done 90-")0 at...“ o_|o

. L25 1! sub 0

Kay:

1. Size of control screens

2. Total residue on screens by mass, percent

3. on?“ for fractions with smallest grain size:
4, An above

5. of one fraction

6. or mixture of fractions

Crushed stone is divided by grain shape
tion of the grain content of plate-type
width of which is one-third or less the

into three groups (Table 2.14) as a func-
(slab) and needle shape (the thickness or
length).

   

Table 2.14. Groups of Crushed Stone by Grain Shape

'_ ‘ I I .1M-- _ “VIN-I" autumn-«am. (arm
r"""" '"c'" "' W" ”W 2) l stun-ml 01mm um mm. 9'. In- em"

M
Kym-mums (3 l5
hymn-muss (4 25
06am” (5) 35

Key:

1. Group of crushed stone by grain shape

2 0

more than
3 . Cube
4 . Improved
S . Ordinary

Grain content of plate-type (slab) and needle shape by mass, percent, not

Crushed stone from natural stone is divided into marks according to strength (Table
2.15) established by the crushability of the crushed stone upon compression (crush-
ing) in a cylinder, by wear in a shelved drum (Table 2.16) and by cold resistance

(Table 2.17), determined by testing the crushed stone by alternate freezing and
thawing and for preliminary analysis in a sodium sulfate solution.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPI'ILIAL UBI‘. UNLV

Table 2.15. Mark of Crush Stone According to Strength

(2) "om- - nun-ea?" up u-vunn- nudes-nun men
(1)

 

 

u.” W." II «emu :'erlvv?g-)hwmx (4) n “M“! W
ﬂ UM" E
. $6,). .. (7) (8)
5) (0:21.: ' :7. "“23: met-u wows-«I
___________________________________________________
I100 — - [lo )2 no 9
I200 (9)11o ll Ito H I2—Io 9—II
IL—Ia 11—43 le-zo IL—IJ
13—15 l3--- l5 20—25 13—15
I:n--l9 15 421). 25—34 15—20
I9~24 am—2u —- -
21 93 28-38 _ ’ _
23 . .15 38‘ m — —

1. Mark of crushed stone according to strength

2. Losses in mass, percent, when determining the crushability of crushed stone
3. From sedimentary and metamorphic rock

4. From igneous rock

5. In dry state

6. In water-saturated state

7. Intrusive
8. effusive
9. Up to

Table 2.16. Mark of Crushed stone According to Hear

 

(1) It (2) J4. I- Mun-(«.S.
"xzm‘ ﬁséﬁr ”rm“ ' mug—g»
________—_.
PM | (i2) 25 PM" ‘ >3§-45
H-ll >5—35 PHV >4o—60

Key:
1. Mark of crushed stone according to wear
2. losses in mesa, percent. during testing in shelved drum

3. Up to

The grain content of weak r0ck with compressive strength in a water-saturated
state of less than 20 kgf/cm2 should not exceed 5 percent by mass in crushed stone
of mark 1400 and 1200 in strength, 10 percent by mass in crushed stone of marks
1000, 800, 600 and 400 and 15 percent in crushed stone of marks 300 and 200.

The crushed stone should not contain foreign contaminating impurities and the con-
tent of dusty, clay and ooze particles should not exceed 1 percent by mass for

crushed stone of igneous and metamorphic rock, 2 percent for crushed stone of sed-
imentary rock of marks 600-1200 and 3 percent for marks from 200 to 400. The clay

content in the pieces should also not exceed 0.25 percent in all cases.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.17. Marks of Crushed Stone According to Gold Resistance

 

__——

H . _...._ ..._._
(ymOxlunnul I wanna Mmll um: M7950 Mmlm “polio Mm Rpm
#—-————_ _ —_

 

 

 

 

 

 

£2)
llnnrpcncunoc Jauopamlaun

- "I“:
":3::".:3§.............. (3) 1:. 25 an mu m am am

mum: on man's nurse mfg) III In 5 5 5 5 5
nuts-me. $. we «once
I! ransom cwnouucnoro 1:311

”annuwrlo uuuoe (3) .1 5 IO N i5 '5 l3
nouns a «cue «cm “((4 m m '0 5 5 .1 2
annals. t we 6mm

1. Method of testing and indicators
2. Alternate freezing and thawing

3. Number of cycles
4. Loss in mass after testing, percent, not more than

Rock waste from gravel (COST 10260-74'). Rock waste from gravel is a product of
crushing gravel and boulders. The content of crushed grains, whose surface is more
tan half knocked off, should not be less than 80 percent by me in rock waste from
gravel.

The division of rock waste from gravel into fractions by grain size, into marks by
cold resistance and also by grain shape is the same as for rock waste from natural
stone.

The grain composition of each fractional mixture of related fractions of rock
waste from gravel should correspond to that indicated in Table 2.18.

Table 2.18. Grain Composition of Rock Waste from Gravel

 

 

 

0.5m 47g...

 

 

1 JL_‘- I as
h . n .. 3) ‘ 1:. ~-
Ir' Bulb-emu a m ‘n ,0); "J6 nu.“
' 4.2) . ”70 no 7o 0.? 0
House. on» In rare, ”I. 95—l00 «I . .p
”ounce

Key:
1. Dimensions of control screens

2. Single fraction
3. Mixture of fraction
4. total residue on screen, percent by mass

The strength of rock waste from gravel is characterized by its marks according to
crushability (Table 2.19) and according to wearability (Table 2.20).

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VE V'l'l‘ IAI- ‘Iﬂl’. UNL'

Rock waste from gravel should not (“KW—air. grains of weak rock more than 10 percent
by mass for marks Dr.8, Dr. 12 and Dr. 16 am 15 percent by mass for mark Dr. 24,
while the content of dusty, clay and ooze particles in it should not be greater
than 1 percent by mass for marks Dr.8. Dr.12 and Dr.16 and 2 percent for mark
mum, and the clay” in Hm plucou should nut he more than 0.25 [we-room”. In all

cases .

Table 2.19. Mark of Rock Haste from Grave Awarding to Crushability

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mag-us. llr‘al m l "were I m‘aL-ﬂe ‘ Man-n muff-II ~- | Ih-Iru .- --...-.- a.”
"-6..."- m (1) nuns-an. ‘3', apt-mun- eum :u' I. '3
—_ "' " '—('31__—'-‘."' "
mm 110 m “ mun u m
Jl.-.I2 m — H 11.92% Is an

Note. The approximate compressive strength of rock consisting of rock waste grains
comprises more than 1,000 kgf/cm2 for Dr.8, more than 800 to 1,000 kgf/cm2 for
Dr.12, more than 600 to 800 kgf/cm2 for Dr.16 and from 400 to 600 kgf/cm2 for Dr.24.

Key:
1. Mark of rock waste according to crushability
2. boss in mass after testing, percent

Table 2.2-7. Mark of Rock Haste from Gravel According to Wearahility

 

 

Mal-Ia mrfm- nu 'Illll re a ‘42)..‘Jl' A1" . luv-tun an II- "I" n u-u- llfk
uni-[untru- (1) "nuns-m. ". rru-I-ara-u m .n-rmuu an, ".
"J l (930 20 ll II III I 30—40
ll-ll 20-40 II IV 40-50

1. Mark of rock waste according to wearability
2. Loss in mass after testing, percent

Gravel (GOST 8268-74"). Gravel is produced by screening natural gravel-sand mix-
tures. The requirements placed on gravel are mainly the same as for rock waste
from gravel. The difference is as follows:

gravel may contain crushed grains in a quantity of less than 80 percent by
mass:

the mark of gravel according to crushability inacylinder is established by
the loss in mass after testing, which is permitted as follows: up to 8 percent for

mark Dr.8, more than 8 to 12 percent for mark Dr.12, more than 12 to 16 percent for
mark Dr.16 and more than 16 to 24 percent for mark Dr.24.

Sand (COST 8736-77). It is divided into natural sand formed as a result of natural
breakdown of rock, and crushed sand produced by crushing of rock.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Natural sand is divided into natural sand in the natural state, natural fraction-
ated sand with separation into two or more fractions or in the form of their fin-
ished mixtures and natural enriched sand with improved granular composition.

Natural sand in its natural state is divided by grain size into four groups (Table
2.21).

Table 2.21. Groups of Sand by Coarseness

 

 

l'py-na In In (1) ” “J. 5 m “a “one ennui-m Ml
MM)...» >50 >25
Comm» (5) 30-60 5—2
Memml (6) 1040 2—l 5
Owens «and (7) < l0 l.S—.l

Note. If the sand does not correspond to both requirements of Table 2.21 simultan-
eously when determining its group by coarseness, the Mk value is the decisive one.

Key:
1. Group of sand
2. Total residue on screen No 063, percent by mass
3. Size modulus Mk

4 . Coa rse
S . Hedi an
6. Pine

7. Very fine

The content of gravel grains larger than 10 mm should not exceed 0.5 percent by
mass in sand. of grains 5-10 In should not exceed 5 percent and of grains passing
through a screen with mesh size No 014 should not exceed 10 percent.

The number of dusty, clay and ooze particles in sand should not exceed 3 percent
by mass, including not more than 0.5 percent clay.

Natural fractionated sand comprises two fractions: ooarse--S.0-l.25 III or 5.0-0.63
mm and fine--l.25-O.14 m or 0.63-0.14 m. The grain composition and amount of
sand delivered in coarse and fine fractions should be in the range indicated in
Table 2.22.

The presence of grains measuring more than 10 m is not permitted in coarse sand
fraction and grains measuring from 5 to 10 me should not be more than 10 percent by
mass. The grain content of fine fraction in the coarse fraction, as in the content
of coarse fraction in fine fraction, is permitted up to 15 percent by use. The
number of dusty, ooze and clay particles should not exceed 2 percent by mass, in-
cluding not more than 0.25 percent clay.

Natural enriched sand should meet the following requirements by grain composition:
size modulus in the range from 2.5 to 3.25. total residue on screen with mesh size

39

ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.22. Grain Composition of Fractionated Natural Sand

(1) (2)

_-

 

___-~

(3) (4)
hssrp rial-1"!" Vasvr "In-print Ihamq .(u... .u nouns”- Irv-I'l-
~- man. an mug-mam nu. um mm, 1'. n. nun-e ""1 Olin-ﬂ- Ivy--
d I tar-ma mun.

 

 

 

prnuuc 95qu 5—1,” a. (5)

Idlc

.5.
2.- 20—50
1.25 1.2. mo ”‘5"

J

Mount ¢muuu (5)

Inn .1: .50
0.3-5 :3: m m .50
u," an in

prnuau: @paxuuu 5- 0,63 u (7)

- 3,!”
',5 u an . .
0'63 L25 .3! 7o ' 3"" '0
0.53 Inn

Mane ﬁpaxuuu 013-0,“ an (8)

0.3!!) 4" .m 7! -30
u.” 90 -lw

Note. 'lhe conformity of the grain composition of each fraction is determined by
the requirements of Table 2.22 after grains larger than the naximm grain size of
the given fraction are removed from it.

Key:
1. Maximum grain size, In
2. Dimensions of control screen mesh. m
3. Total residue on screens, percent by mass
4. Relationship of delivered quantities of coarse and fine fractions
5. Coarse fractions of 5-1.25 m
6. Fine fractions
7. Coarse fractions of 5-0.63 an
8. Fine fractions of 0.63-0.14 In

No 063--not less than 50 percent and passage through screen with No 014 mesh-«not
more than 5 percent. The presence of gravel grains measuring more than 10 Illl in
natural enriched sand should not exceed 0.5 percent while grains from S to 10 m
should not exceed 5 percent by mass; the number of dusty and clay particles should
not exceed 2 percent by mass and clay particles should not exceed 0.25 percent.

Crushed sand is manufactured from unweathered igneous, unetamrphic or dense sedi-
mentary rock and also from gravel. It can also be manufactured from rock or gravel

crushing wastes in production of crushed stone.

40

roe omcm. Us: ONLY
Crushed sand is divided by strength into two marks 800 and 400.

The grain composition of crushed sand should meet the requirements on coarse or
medium sand according to Table 2.21. The number of grains passing through screen
No 014 should not exceed 10 percent by mass and the content of dusty and cozy
particles should not be greater than 5 percent by mass, including 0.5 percent clay.
There should be no foreign contaminating impurities in crushed sand.

Slag rubble (COST 33440-73). It is produced by crushing and screening or only by
screening waste slag or slags of current production and ladle residues. slag rub-
ble is divided into the following fractions: up to 5 mm. from 5 (3) to 10 mm, from
10 to 20 mm, from 20 to 40 mm, from 40 to 70 mm and from 70 to 120 mm. The grain

composition of each fraction or mixture of fractions should meet the requirements
of Table 2.23.

Table 2.23. Requirements on Grain Composition of slag Rubble

   
 
 

_ 1-. r-"' _

inpmntﬂeh I llvwn‘ I23 «In ll Pa‘ur'ullfmﬂ

 

 

"-qu trum- m

was“: car (1 cum. 7. In new: null-mam: on renal. 9'. m mus

 

”I‘ll 95—100 II.“ o...5
0.5 (anvil + ‘0—70' I 25 ﬂu...“ 0
4' null“)

Key:
1. size of control screen openings
2. Total residue on screens, percent by mass

slags used to manufacture rubble are divided into high-active, active and
low-active.

The activity of slags is determined by the compressive strength of specimens after
special testing of them.

It should be greater than 50 kgf/cm2 for high-active slags. 25-50 kgf/cm2 for ac-
tive slags and less than 25 kgf/cm2 for low-active slags.

The rubble is divided into four strength classes according to Table 2.24.

Table 2.24. Strength Class of slag Rubble

‘ <2) “1..."... 1.31. _,_ M...

Human I me I ucnun
Kurt WII neon-(1) I We Oe ur. %
me. so ﬁne:

as apt-urn. n nuns-Ir. X
"’ on users (I Mun-M"!
nice-m). at Once

 

[Key on following page]

41

FOR OFFTCJAL.USE|JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. strength class of rubble
2. losses in mass during testing in shelveddrum, percent by mass, not more than

3. Losses in mass during testing for crushability in cylinder, percent by mass
(in water-saturated state) . not note than

Rubble is divided into the following marks according to cold resistance: Mrzls,
HrzZS; nrzso, Mrzloo, Mrzlso and Mrzzoo. The indicators that characterize the cold
resistance of rubble when testing by direct freezing or in a sodiun sulfate solu-

tion should be the same for slag rubble as for the corresponding marks of crushed
stone from natural stone (see Table 2.17).

slag rubble should be stable to all types of breakdown.

The content of weak grains, including breakdown of refractory brick, should not

exceed 5 percent in rubble of strength classes 1 and 2 and 15 percent by mass in
strength class 3.

Kermit gravel (COST 9759-76). This is an artificial porous material produced by

swelling of silicate rock (clays, tripoli earth and shales) upon annealing or from
ashes of thermoelectric power plants.

Keramzit gravel is divided into three fractions: from S to 10 m, from 10 to 20
m and from 20 to 40 um. Keramit gravel is used mainly in airfield construction

as a coarse filler for concrete used in the artificial beds of rigid and asphalt-
concrete pavement and in heat-insulating layers.

Keramzit gravel is divided into marks as a function of the volumetric bulk mass
and into classes by compressive strength according to Table 2.25.

Table 2.25. strength Indicators of Kerauit Gravel

 
  

 

     

Ill-auras leases. are]: 0'.

(2) no In‘ea "FNWPI- rye-es. Ink-3|.

“I I-(fl

(1)

   

Mane

Mar-a rpm-e
150 -l 3
2m 5 4
250 7 6
.mn lo a
«no If! 0
400 l6 '2

  

1. Mark of gravel 2
2. Strength of gravel, kgf/cn , for class

The mark of keramit gravel should not be below MrzlS according to cold resistance.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.4. Mixtures of Stone Materials Treated With Inorganic Binders

Crushed stone-sand. gravel-sand and crushed stone-gravel-sand mixtures and sands
from natural and artificial stone materials are used for strengthening with inor-
ganic binders.

The strengthened mixtures are divided into coarse-grained with grain size up to 70

and up to 40 m, medium-grained with grain size up to 20 m and fine-grained with
grain size up to 10 m and sandy with grain size up to S m as a function of. the

largest grain size of the stone material.

The strengthened mixtures are divided into the following marks: coupressive
strength of 60, 40, 20 and 10 and cold resistance of M225, mls and mm.

The strength indicators of the mixture should correspond to those given in Table
2.26. The consumption of air-attracting neutralized resin, naphthenate soap and
osidol in a «sent-strengthened mixture comprises 0.01-0.02 percent of the cement
mass.

The water content in the strengthened mixtures should correspond to the optimum
value determined by the maximum density of packed specimen with regard to the mois-
ture content of the initial materials.

Strengthened mixtures used to construct pavement and the upper layer of beds should
have strength mark not below 40. The strengthened mixture and the stone materials
should correspond to the requirements of Table 2.27 in cold resistance.

Table 2.26. Indicators of strengthened Mixture

ﬂuv- ul ensc- W -n Inn-Inns

     

‘2;-

 

 

"mom as «at». urclcu'. s 91,9»

(rte:7 (4)
(yr. ueI-iQHee 50 3|) I5 6
28 (ft. » . (5) a) «I 20 In
"mums us pamsxcnmc ups quIOe I 12 I0 6 2
smme 28 qt. Irt/cu'. no sense
K mien noposocro u u a soap: 0.75 0,75 0.7 0.65
we cyr, no uence 5 7)
"personal! pacxon emymero. ‘ or
new yxpcnacnuoh cuccu. ups lapse
..;xy)w"0:
6 -R 5-0 3 4 2—4
500 7- 9 5- 7 4-“. 3—4
«)0 8- IO 6-4! 4. 6 3-5
.100 9- I5 6— l') 5— ﬂ 4- ‘6
200 III-49 7- l5 6‘ l0 5- 7
lg '28- .‘M IR '3 12-48 [2-41

5”— 35

Note. The final consumption of binders is established by laboratory selection of
the composition of mixtures on specific materials.

[Key on following page]

43

FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Xey continued from preceding page]:

1. Indicators

2. Norm for mixture of mark according to strength

3. Gospressive strength, kgf/cmz, of age

4. Days, not less than

5. Tensile bending strength aged 28 days, kgf/cmz, not less than

6. Cold-resistance coefficient aged 28 days, not less than

7. Approximate consunption of binder, percent of less of strengthened mixture,
with mark of binder

Crushed stone, crushed stone from gravel, gravel, slag and sand used to manufacture
strengthening of the mixture should meet the requirements of (3)5‘1‘ 8267-75, GOST
10260-74“, GOST 8268-74., 6081‘ 3344-73 and COST 8736-77, respectively. The stone
material should correspond to the requirements of Table 2.28 in grain composition
and Table 2.29 in strength.

The content of clay particles in the stone material should not exceed 4 percent,
including 1 percent lumps of clay measuring more than 5 an.

Cements, cements with surface-active plasticising, air-attracting and gas-forming
additives, crushed high-active slags from ferrous metallurgy, uncrushed granulated
blast furnace slag with cement additive, crushed slags from ferrous metallurgy with
cement or lime additive, crushed granulated slags with water glass additive and
crushed fuel slags from ash with portland count or line additive are used as bin-
der materials in strengthened mixtures.

Portland ceunt, plasticized and hydrophobic portland cement and slag-portland
cement meeting the requirements of GOST 10178-76, are used in strengthened mixtures.

Cement should begin to set up no earlier than 2 hours after hardening. To extend
the setting periods and to reduce the consumption of cement, surface-active addi-
tives are added to the strengthening mixture during manufacture.

Binder based on slags from ferrous metallurgy should meet the requirements of
Table 2.30.

Binder based on fuel slags and ashes should have a mark not below 200 and should
contain 75-85 percent slag by mass and 25-15 percent portland count or lists.

Fuel slags and ashes should be crushed to a specific surface of 3, soc-4,000 cmzlg
and should meet the requirements of Table 2.31.

Slag binder from high-active slags without activators should be crushed to specif-
ic surface of not less than 3,000 cm2/g.

2.5. Asphalt Concrete and Asphalt Concrete Mixtures

Asphalt concrete (005T 9128-76) consists of stone material (crushed stone or grav-
el and sand), mineral powder and asphalt.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- I 2 3 I r.— 2 3 a 3.3 alas! .83 extra:
. 2 B an 9 «a 2 mm on “Mm-.28.. coho ensue. - 03.598: emu-“wrux al.3083—
m
I I 2 I 2 2 n. 2 :5 nus-8.80 .55 2.5::
_ I o. 3 Q m. 2 an. a 3.3 aux-8.0a .26 axing
o. 3 _ a 2 3 55.4””? a: 3.3 .7538: 0.3 391.. 5:35.27.»

 

Aw. vol! or $88.33 3.9.1.

.5 ET? ,........§u.£|

’40» payouts-1!:

_> > .ﬁ—uvw:
in?! 3:89. 1925. any

         

 

.03 on“: as..- g
E 3

 

3.1.3003; 2.03 can 3.5tz ugmnumzwuum no 00:53an 38 :o mason—33$ .34. «and.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.2“. Requirements on Grain Composition of stone Material

"'_'v . . . ___‘, 1... _.1 ...

(1) t (2) "NW mini car. no

 

   
       

--.——

"9R 1 91- mo
- 7— -- ”2-419
N -- ..m 904m
'0 —9. _ ans-91
5 — tub-.96
Rev:
1. Maximum grain size, In 3. ‘notal residue on screen, percent
2. Dimensions of screen nesh, an by mass

Table 2.29. Requirements on Strength of Stone Materials

.__. ..1 . . .-.

_.-_ '"'('3T_':.EE:

M1 .1 m n I "I...
m "mg-3w ~“---"- 51.1."...

 

 

Manger-n . ..., I nun-r mu 9' I a“ In
' "mm"- 51's:-
'"""———"T§T"'""'T_-""""_'_']
111062115 n: ncano-mux u unauorﬁmne- 2m 54 ll-IV
cxux topnu: nopoA '.
3:561:25 NJ wyaunuux topuux ﬂap-mm) 3:: 233 - n-R/I
b u: unmu ropnux nopo -
lllcceub us prpamm npwumng) 400 111124 M-IV
£00 xttlcu’ (8)
l‘puml (9) 400 119.24 ”JV
"[0369"; In nuance «pm unauyﬂm 4 46 55
Key:
1. Material

2. Mark, strength class
3. Mark by crushability in cylinder or percent of losses in mass. not more

than

4. Mark by wearability in shelved drum or percent of losses in mass, not more
than

5. Crushed stone from sedimentary and utamorphic rock

6. Crushed stone from intrusive rock

7. Crushed stone from effusive rock

a. Crushed stone from gravel with strength of 400 kgf/cnz

9. Gravel

lo. slag rubble from ferrous metallurgy

Asphalt concretes are divided into compact having residual porosity of 2.5-5 per-
cent and which must contain mineral powder, porous having residual porosity of 5-
10 percent, rubbly. gravel and sand.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

new

Table 2.30. Requirements on Binder Based on Slags rm Perrous Metallurgy
1 - I - _'(—5) ”nu-a “mummx; me .1un .
"rt-E'- "magic;- mzz. —s— “‘6" m
rocr sou-u .mi’g'zg" ummen'ir um 113.1. m
I!!! I0 5 —
50 50 1200 II . 2 —
Ill!) ‘2 l 5
ﬂ 3 r. '
IN :00 3’00 5 _ . I0
1% :3 _ ~-
200 200 3000 [0 [0 IS
100 --- — --
300 300 1200 J) _ -.
sow 15 — 20
Key:
1. Mark of binder according to 0051‘ 334443
2. Compressive strength aged 28 days, kgt/cnz, not less than
3. Specific surface of slag, ﬁzz/9
4. Additive of activator. percent of binder by me
5. Cement
6. Line
7. water glass

Table 2.31. Requirements on Fuel Slags and Ashes

§

1.
2.

4.

6.

 

Many» muonnocru. a: notice (3)
e aural—0cm. 9 . (4)
Contrast-me «puma u ccpuouc

wow-ma (n ncpme as 80.).

no name. no (noun

5)

ll

'1.
(6)

Norm nnn npmtuunaunu. 1. no net-cc.

m- f-Mcc

Indicators
Norm

Alkalinity modulus. not less than

Activity modulus, not less than

Content of sulphur and sulfuric acid cowpounds (calculated for

cent by me, not more than

Losses during roasting. percent by me, not more than

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

47

$03).
FOR OFFICIAL usr. ONL'V

Asphalt concrete mixtures are divided into hot, warm and cold. Hot and warm
asphalt concrete mixtures are divided into coarse-grained with grain size up to
40 um, medium-grained with grain size up to 20 m and fine-grained with grain size
up to 15 (10) m as a function of the largest dimensions of the crushed stone or
gravel. Sand asphalt concrete mixtures may contain grains up to 5 m. Cold as-
phalt concrete mixtures can only be fine-grained or sandy.

viscous asphalts of marks END 90/130, 3ND 60/90 and BM!) 40/60 are used to prepare
hot asphalt concrete mixtures; viscous asphalts of marks 8ND 200/300 and 8ND

130/200 or liquid asphalts of marks 3ND 70/130 and 56 130/200 are used to prepare
warm asphalt concrete mixtures and liquid asphalts of marks 56 70/130 and HG 70/130

are used to prepare cold asphalt concrete mixtures.

Dense asphalt concretes are used in the upper layer of the pavement and porous
concretes are used in the lower layer and in the bed.

Dense asphalt concretes are divided into types (Table 2.32) and marks (Tables 2.33
and 2.34).

Table 2.32. Types of Dense Asphalt concretes

_.'. .. ... __

 

In solemn-Mnem- (2) I’m- K-umnv «on (rpm-l up n.“ I
"run (1) ammo"!!- (3) awrvﬂnmwcm.%
rope-me n lemme A 50—65% "£35?“ (6)
(4) 5 35--50% - (sputum)
B 20 35% e e
1' He Hence 33$ (”segue l.25--5.0 Im a
apnononou lime ( )
n lle «once l4$ Qpamum l.25---5.0 In! a
npupoauou nccxc (8)
Xoao-umo (9) 5: 35-401. also“ (rpanulNlO)
B: 20-35% a a 1*)
)1: Ne ucncc .130]. 993mm: 1.2;“ .0 III e

apoGneuou um 15']. a mpoaloe nc-
('Kl'

Key:

1. Type of asphalt concrete mixtures

2. Type of asphalt concretes

3. Amount of crushed stone (gravel) or sand in asphalt concrete mixture,
percent

a. Hot and warm

5. Crushed stone

6. Gravel

7. Not less than 33 percent of fraction l.25-5.0 mm in crushed sand

8. Not less than 14 percent fraction of l.25-5.0 m in natural sand

9. Cold

10. Crushed stone (gravel)

11. Not less than 33 percent fraction of l.2S-5.0 can in crushed or 15 percent
in natural sand

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.33. Marks of Dense Asphalt concurs: fro- Bot and "an Mixture:

. .-._.~—. _—.

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. B its-apnea» mo
B ;:pOMop-(9) 1000
«cc-m
n 31:10 I1 (15) o
n m a lpod- man u-
A. 5 Damn: le- I000 mute M- a: ne- Mme-nun“. a
B ”poo-um nee 2. .1 mm npu- 'I'Itlte. «autum-
10) 4mg! c. M: a. {Egg—m
8 (Xuonnugilip-l IOOO acne I"
' 0113th
6 Ilium": lung's-2) l
u nypnmﬂgL_ 2
r, Inc-(mu. m 53%;?- )l ["18
[1 mm Ila”
"" “"' (16)
I‘ —- - uporumuu c MK me

new 2 us mpmx
nopnu. twp-neut-
uux u an mod”
n um: I 11m A
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ontinued) .

   
 

_——_

Mm.- «Icy-um.

  
   

 

a roan-Ar mu "m Hahn-Aunt mm“
. I ‘IIPmN
.2!

 

19

r - — llpodueml‘c its ue
ueotee 8 u: roman:
nope». ammun-
uux I an: mm:
a Inpue ll 11m: A

ll - — Hymnal : Mu ue
Hence 2 m Cleft
upupomooro c nood-

 

 

 
   
  
   

 

    
 

aenuu (20)

a. B Hauopmemme a mo (21) Tonumgoaze unpac-
nmamp- npnpoxm. c MK I: 0ch mouse no.
I'm-09mm ucuee I. I nme nu (I‘OCT

. aroma-ml «rm—7m u mum--
I: ( an-Iuwuap- mac "8M -
u ﬂounmur n mo u "in!

 
 

mute mama. no-
pomxooﬂpnnue o:-
xoau ape-unmea-

Imxapfnmat-

III-ﬂ‘ (23)

 
  

     
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ill nom-
1‘._ n [Illa-um unu- 3
nypl nl'lﬁ‘ull'
I; lllcfmll.llum.$)|}lp [2
u -_lﬂu I pmum “IE-'6
[1 I — — "punctual c M: in
Meme I
, Touxouoamue uptic-
3 "3337.3?“ 1: a (25) umme u IquOo-
win-«Tune To no "an0 topuue no-
—_ poau. ﬂown-ood-
m-‘NW'IW “lh purine anon! upo-
Ii Mum-Im- u 600 uumneuoc‘rl
n mxapﬁtmar. 300
W | Illn MIN“ | j (26)
-. :Iu .. ~
ll .1vlu worm-w- 4- ’ 1° K.
r. juctmn. u u l pa- 11...".
H mm u I puma [19.24
)1 l I .
of asphalt concrete 3. Mineral materials
of asphalt concrete 4. Crushed stone (gravel)

ed on following page]

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

S. Ibck and mterials

6. Mass according to strength or class

7. Sand

8. Mineral powder

9. Igneous and carbonorific

10. Sedimentary noncarbonate

11. Sedimentary carbonate

12. metallurgical slags

13. Crushed stone from gravel

14. Natural and crushed with Mk not less than 2 and also natural activated with
HR not less than 1.7

15. Primarily activated and also nonactivated (GOST 16557-78)

16. Crushed with Mk not less than 2 from rock used in the form of crushed stone
in mark I of type A

17. Igneous and metamorphic

18. Activated and nonactivated (COST 16557-78) and also finely crushed metallur-
gical slags

l9. Crushed with Mk not less than 2 from rock used in the form of crushed stone
in mark II of type A

20. Natural with Mk not less than 2 or mixture of natural and crushed

21. Natural with m: not less than 1 and also crushed

22. Finely crushed carbonate rock (GOST 16557-78) and basic metallurgical slags
and powdery wastes from industry

23. Sedimentary carbonate and noncarbonate

24. Crushed stone from gravel and gravel

25. Natural with Mk not less than 1

26. Finely crushed carbonate and noncarbonate rock and powdery wastes from
industry

Asphalt concrete mixtures should meet the requirements of Tables 2.35 and 2.36 in
granular (granulonetric) composition of the mineral part and the content of asphalt

in than and the requirements of Tables 2.37-2.39 in indicators of physicomechanical
properties.

The remanded range of application of dense asphalt concretes for the uppe‘r layer

of pavement is presented in Table 2.40 as a function of clinatic conditions and
the normative load category.

The error in proportioning the conponents of asphalt concrete mixtures should not
exceed the values presented in Table 2.41 and the tenperature of the mixtures
should correspond to the requirements indicated in Table 2.42.

Petroleum highway asphalts corresponding to requirements of GOST 22245-76' and
GOST 11955-74“ are used to prepare asphalt concrete mixtures.

The mark of asphalt should be selected as a function of the type of asphalt con-
crete and the conditions of use according to the data presented in Table 2.43.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.34. Mark: of Dense Asphalt Concrete: from Cold Mixtures

 

(2) (3————_——_~-_—_-——__—_~ "surname ant-um 14) ‘

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

é
1) I . Inch. (IDIM)(5,
( g F g (6) 2!! Mum-1:: mm
1‘ 1 “mm: 95 1)
z 2 22
10 12)
Cl‘ 5: Huepxamue a 1000 npumﬂlupo: "poSuymmno
B: 1:11qu 300 «ml ch autumn-oun-
uem 2 a nu- mm. a name
nu: npu nun noun-upcom-
autnnupgmuuﬁ WI “OCT
5: Ocuumme np- 800 1: Mn u: acne: ”557—76). 10-:-
Bx Gamma: u 600 L7 Kouoaome oc-
aunpoonarr- uonuue actu-
uuc (13) ' ayprumunc
' umnm
(id—— |
I}: "In“ unn- 1
-91- awn-"me
(15$
Bx lllefmu. u1 I1»:- 11px
m"; _‘“'1 11!“?
}l\ — ..
no mun-c 2. Inpu-
lumuui "tunn-
[mom-nun c MK
m III-nu- I] u
ux cum
Cl l'n llJurpamuur n! all)
M Eh ‘IOVﬂ-Hllp'tllllfl €300
HUI? l
"" " ""' 'T‘m " (ll) (18)
Ex Oranmnuo up-
”, 6...... . "”"m'1:‘W "7"222322223':
"NW‘W" nun-c 2. .1 nu mall {FOOT
m” me Ill-“puma“ "3557-48). um-
aI!"IN'ImIm-Inull wuommc nr-
" c Mu m- ucucc uommc Incum-
ru lllnaxu anu- 2 LT ”pm-cram-
Bx «warm-Inc 3 nun"
W‘
lllcfxsuu m Iva-Ill». I?
an n maul] ller-
Mark of asphalt concrete 3. Type of asphalt concrete
Mark of asphalt 4. Mineral materials

atlnued on following page]

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

5. Crushed stone (gravel)

6. Rock and materials

7. Mark according to strength or class

8. sand

9. Mineral powder

10. Igneous and metamorphic

11. Natural and crushed with Mk not less than 2 and also natural activated with
M): not less than 1.7

12. Primarily activated and also nonactivated (GOST 16557-78) and finely crushed
basic metallurgical slags

l3. Sedimentary carbonate and noncarbonate

l4. Metallurgical slags

lS. Crushed stone from gravel

16. Crushed with Mk not less than 2 and natural activated with M): not less than
1.7 and mixture of them

17. Crushed stone from gravel and gravel

18. Nonactivated and activated (GOST 16557-78) and finely crushed basic metallur-
gical slags

Crushed stone from natural stone, gravel and metallurgical slags and gravel that
meet the requirements of GOST 8367-75, GOST 10260-74‘. 6081‘ 3344-73, 6051' 8268-74“
and Tables 2.44 and 2.45, respectively, can be used for asphalt concrete mixtures.

Crushed stone from argillaceous (narly) limtones. argillaceous sandstones and
argillaceous shales may not be used.

Crushed stone or gravel should be graded by fractions of 20-40, 10-20, 10-15, S
(3)-25, 5 (3)-15 and 5 (3)-lo nun. The presence of scale-type (slab) shape in the
grains should not exceed 15 percent by mass for hot and warm asphalt concretes of
type A, 25 percent for those of type B, 35 percent for those of type C, 25 percent
for cold asphalt concretes of type ﬁlth and 35 percent for those of type mm.

The nunber of particles of carbonate rock should not be more than 30 percent in
crushed stone from gravel while the number of silaceous particles should not be
more than 25 percent for asphalt concretes of mark I. The content of grains from
weak and weathered rock should not exceed 10 percent by mass in the grains of the
crushed stone (gravel) for asphalt concrete laid in pavement and 15 percent for
asphalt concrete laid in the bed. The content of dusty and clay particles should
not be more than that indicated in Table 2.4 in the crushed stone (gravel).

Coarse, medium and fine natural sands meeting the requirements of GOST 8736-77 and
also crushed sands are used for asphalt concrete mixtures.

The use of fine sands (Mk less than 2) for asphalt concretes of mark I and II is
permissible provided that they are enriched. The capositions of hot and warm
mixtures for asphalt concretes of types A and B are selected with fine sands es-
sentially of intermittent granulometry indicated in Table 2.35 in the absence of
coarse sands for enrichment.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Natural sand with Mk 1-2 may be used to prepare hot and warm mixtures of asphalt
concretes of marks III and Iv provided that the granular composition of the mix-
tures conforms to the requirements of Table 2.35.

Crushed sand for hot and warm mixtures of asphalt concretes of marks I and II and
cold mixtures of mark I shOuld be manufactured from igneous, metamorphic and sed-
imentary rock of mark not below 800 in strength or from gravel with crushability
indicators not below Dr.8 and that for hot and warm mixtures of asphalt concretes
of marks III and Iv and for cold mixtures of mark II should be manufactured tron
igneOus, metamorphic and sedimentary rock of mark not below 400 in strength or from
gravel with crushability indicators not below Dr.16.

crushed sand from igneous rock of mark not less than 1000 is used for sandy asphalt
concretes of type D.

The content of dusty and clay particles in natural sand should not exceed 3 per-
cent, while the content of particles finer than 0.071 nu should not exceed 5 per-
cent, including 0.5 percent clay particles, in crushed sand.

Activated and nonactivated mineral powders from carbonate rock used for asphalt
concrete mixtures should meet the requirements of 005T 16557-78. Pawdery wastes
from industry used as mineral powder should not contain free calcium oxide (Cao)
and should meet the requirements of Table 2.47.

2.6. Organic Binder Materials

The main organic binder materials used in construction of airfield pavements and
artificial beds for them are petroleum asphalts and asphalt emulsions prepared on
their basis.

Viscous and liquid road asphalts and sore rarely construction asphalts are most
widely used.

Viscous petroleum road asphalts (COST 22245-76) are used to prepare asphalt con-
crete mixtures, to install pavements and beds from stone materials treated by im-
pregnation and mixing methods, for surface treatment of pavements and also to
prepare scaling materials of expansion joints.

Viscous petroleum highway asphalts are divided into marks BNO 200/300, 3ND 130/200,
3ND 90/130, BNO 60/90, BND 40/60, BN 200/300, 3" 180/200, 1»: 90/130 and 8N 60/90,
the property indicators of which should meet the requirements of Table 2.48.

Liquid petroleum highway asphalts (GOST 11955-74) are divided into three classes
as a function of the rate of structural formation: 06 (quick-setting), 56 (set-
ting at average rate) and HG (slow-setting).

The marks of liquid highway asphalts are as follows as a function of viscosity:

86 25/40, 36 40/70 and 83 70/130 for class 86;

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zlc 8'3 8'8 —OT|0N Z Slum. owls 93'3— I

od'oé . .

0.54.0 Ila alﬁ glen 1 gig slum. 8|3 813 8—40
Quin...» ﬁlo BIO «8'3 Gala glow Nolan 31% Ava—loo I
=.h|ﬁ.m 3'0 o_l¢ «NIT. glow glam. «aria owls. wolmw. 311.8
o.¢|o.n SI» :lo 2'0 onlﬁ 8': coin 8'3 8_|mo I
064.». .lv :lo ﬁlo alm— mmlt 8'2“ almd 2'8 ocula—
mama Ugandan 30 >8:

.800." E30: 5.? hound
~26.— ozu as 0.30% 0 0» 0.30.55 on 50 manna? on» 5 novzom Hung—«E no 2303- ...F .v

.cgucuucdvnnsn 030.800 can 93.30593 uﬁvcomnauug on» :3": saga uo 94.»:
.333 .5 a.“ won: on >1... Pagan “3&9; 23 Mon woo—39800» nous»!!— ououocoo vacant .n

.3098.“ ~30
I5...— ooua>auua 05d: :25 usaom 04.6.0 an 000300.» on 0.39.... 8399—5530 93m: 05.. .N

in... nu v.36 3:250 can: 33302. on 3:93 a“ 509.. a.“ can» How—.52. can:
nuances.“ on 3205 393a vocals-8a 05 53 8:53.? 05 5 ugoucoo «noun cop—nan 3:. .H .30:

~33?»

3|» ole ale :I8 81..» 3|...» SIS 312.. SIB 8.13 | I .2338:
0:81.33

1 To 9.1.. ”T8 2.13. 9.78 918 ﬁlm» 8I8 8|”... 8T3 I annex:
VIESQH

olq To SI: oTS SIS SIS $15 31:. 8|: «TS alﬁ 8.13 2.59.33
01.5533

wélo olo 2|“ Slo palm. male. owls... 3|? 3l8 Ago—Ia I I 6533.:
35-18

I .1. «T... 2|» 8|» ale ale SIR ﬁlm... 8|: 878 I .oﬁaac
80
out}:

oi. Tc «TN 21 0th 8|... oTe SIR 2J4 Slum. I 873 6.93.3:

. “KIOFG
xxx!=z

- 9.010

“O vizosxac

.35

62.3%“

038..“

.on unﬁ. .=
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]

1. Designation of. asphalt concrete mixtures and of asphalt concrete
2. Omtent, percent, of grains of mineral material finer than, an
3. Approximte asphalt consumption, percent of mass of mineral part
4. Continuous granulometry

5. For dense asphalt concrete used in the upper layer of pavement:
6. Medium-grained mixtures of asphalt concretes of types

7. Pine-grained mixtures of asphalt concretes of types

8. Sandy mixtures of asphalt concretes of types

9. Intermittent granulometry

10. For porous asphalt concrete used in lower layers

11. Coarse-grained mixtures

12. Medium-grained

13. Pine-grained

56 25/40, 56 40/70, 86 70/130 and 56 130/200 for class 86!
K3 25/40, no 40/70, HG 70/130 and HG 130/200 for class HG.

hsphalts of classes as and 56 are used in all road-climatic zones, while those of
class MG are used in zones 3, 4 and 5. Liquid asphalts are produced by liquefying
viscous asphalts with liquid petroleum products of established fractional couposi-
tion with addition of surfactants.

The physicomechanical indicators of liquid petroleum highway asphalts should meet
the requirements and norms presented in Tables 2.49-2.51.

Highway asphalt emulsions (GOST 18659-73) are produced by dispersion of asphalt in
an aqueous solution of an mulsifier or alkaline uterial. The emulsions are di-
vided into three classes by the rate of breakdown upon exposure to mineral mater-
ials: BA--fast-disintegrating anion, SA--medim-disintegrating anion and “Anslow-
disintegrating anion. mulsions of classes BA and M are divided into marks 35-1,
aA-z and m-l, Fla-2.

2. 7. Concrete

The concrete used to construct rigid airfield payments and beds should meet the
requirements of GOST 8424-72. “Highway concrete.“

Highway concrete is divided "into marks 55, SO, 45, 40, 35, 30, 25, 20 and 15 by
tensile bending strength and 500, 400, 350, 300, 250, ?00, 150, 100 and 75 by com-
pressive strength.

Mark 45/350, not lower than. of concrete is used for single-layer and the upper

layer of two-layer pavements and mark 35/250 is used for the lower layer of two-
layer pavements.

The cold resistance or concrete and coarse tiller used to prepare it should meet
the requirements of. Table 2.52.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n ”.73.. elc elo _8|9 8|: 8|:

.Iuogon «anon...-
vouguuoa use: no.3 0533 oénmd an nous—you on 330.3 saga—30 333: 05. .u

.05. 02330 933 :05. vogue.“ on 0.30:. a“ o:- 230 “canvas
05.3 a...) coo-935 on 0.90:. 393» 009.2380...— on» :3 unouaoo 0:3. c.2350 IE. .H 6302

M 3-5.— 3.83
".34; als 8|: ”To. 1 84. 813 873 I I 4.4.8. :4 2:38:

21: ale aim :Ia 3:8 SIS «72 2:13 I a a: .5885...
9:... :4. ﬁle .79 Big a; 8|...» 8|». SJ.» 87.3 .8 5.... 3.8....»83:

3.

Elm BIA: maln— oule SIR 3|»... nhlno 2:18 I In 2...... «3:02.59
glen 3|?» 3|? ave—Ia .8 I3. Stun-gt

A3

 

5.. ﬂ 2.. - :2 ﬂ 2...

.13... luau-MI” «8‘3 III-2.3
40"“: «Bugs in. ’30.. I i

II .0943] 1.55:... 93.36!!! I‘cn Jo .‘cgoo aﬂv Adv

 

:23

 

505.. 5 0:00:00
32%: can Ion—3.3.: 0032.00 3232 300 no :Owuanomeoo Han—Educ :0 3.333% .on.~ 0.38.

A»

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030066-3
3&2. 05333 no any:

.HHEH

3:3 0395.968» 5 «E59. om coooxo go: 3.6.... 0.0 u ... an .3253: 59.93. «E. .v

.> can >H mono»

uuuawuonuag .5 van» 0..- agauo mean: so...) £30qu on an 93 2.30 62.350 953..
:2... 8030.30 323: new accouom cm .3 .0323...“ 0.3+ I a. u... 1.0.339..." 59.939 0:... .n

$3330.30 0..» .3 voucououm on: 309330

Bug won one...» 93 henchmen... on» 5 coy—.339 o...- uwuonucoo 3233 no: up... 330035 .~

2.0.39. 5.. 005359.. on v.32? auuuouom 3.»ch v.3 concusuau noun: no .55..» 30H 0:... .H .nouoz

3630.0
6.25.0
ca—
20

20

:3—

a;
0..
In. . ﬁnale.—

v
4.3.1.

o...
1.231..."
a 83o a.

a1:
2|».

8:25.025
86356 366....
«.23 36
3— 8.
22 ad.
I 08.
2.. So
I «d
2.8 a...”
o; 0..
oi
In._.oo..vnlo._ 061....
4.3.3.. maul»...
.I ”.14.
o.»
4.03.15; . n.+ln.m
«a 83o o: l
9|». 9|».
2|». Elm.

5:00:00 09.3830! «.093 and:

8.3 .688 cit-r coinage-Ia o nab—3 3.85.30

vol: on .5
86 36 .oam .810- SOIE l... A a
06 2. awn 02!: on .IBo‘EuOio- 5.8%

8. 8.30»- 59.39.0389.an
2|... - 3: w.
”a. 3: n . m

338! 8-253-90- npd UbM+

3.5 a: 89:... noon nogooragvn :3. 0.8+

£5.83: o- ...15 .385 In .8359. 542.:

m... A: 33 08.8 on 5808 2. ﬂ dinning:
3.1.... .3 H _. a
nélm... .— n m
n.1.« 3. a

"naxmhwoaoﬁoouazooa .3. 5830 o.— 8 daalunxonon

m...ln.u $1.83.. 2. 4. 152.38.. 559—200
.I H. a
«ml... am. .— - 05 o.—
m.lm. .3 m n 4 2.9.. 3.882....- u .5.

an. Rage 3 ﬂ .3950 823.39....- 3.8.5.3:

 

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCMI. l'SI-I 051)

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Indicators

2. Norms for asphalt concretes of marks

3. Porosity of mineral skeleton, percent by when

4. For asphalt concretes of type a and B

S. For asphalt concretes of types C and D

6. Residual porosity, percent by volume

7. Water saturation, percent by volume, for asphalt concretes of type
8. B and D

9. V and E

10. mulling. percent by volune, not more than

11. Compressive strength, kgf/cmz, not less than. at

12. +2o°c for asphalt concretes of all types

13. +50°C nor asphalt concretes or type

14. a and v

15. 0°C for hot mixtures of all types, not more than
16. water-resistance coefficient, not less than

17. Water-resistance coefficient during prolonged water saturation. not less than
18. Adhesion of asphalt to mineral part of mixture

19. Not more than

The water-cement ratio in preparation of the concrete mixture should be not more
than 0.5 (0.45 is permissible) for single-layer and the upper layer of two-layer
pavements and 0.6 for the lower layer of two-layer pavements.

The mobility of the concrete mixture prior to laying in the pavement should corre-
spond to the data of Table 2.53.

Air-attracting and plasticizing additives indicated in Table 2.54 should be intro~
duced to the concrete mixture to increase the quality of Operational resistance
and durability of the concrete during its preparation.

The nusber of additives shown in Table 2.54 should be refined when selecting the
coupositions of concrete mixtures with regard to the given properties of the con-
crete and the materials used.

The volune of drawn-in air determined according to 6081' 4797-69' should comprise
5-6 percent of the values of the mixture when using air-attracting additives.

Portland cement. plasticizing. hydrophobic and sulfate-resistant portland cement

without mineral additives that meet the requirements of GOST 10178-76 are used for
concrete preparation. No more than 10 percent tricalcium aluminate is permissible
in the cement. The cement should begin to set no sooner than 2 hours after mixing.

It is mecca-ended that the mark of cmnt not lower than 500 be used to prepare
the concrete used in pavemnt and not below 300 in beds.

The sand for concrete preparation should be natural or crushed coarse and medium
that meets the requirements of GOST 8736-77 and the following additional require-
ments: size modulus of sand for pavement concrete should be no less than 2 and

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2.38. Physicomchanical Properties of Dense Cold Asphalt Concrete:

 

 

 

 

 

"ml-u nu «Os-Minne-
‘1’ (2) W'-
llrlueven -
l 2
(3)
Mormon». IImN'li-‘Ml-"MO MIMI. T no oﬁmly. Ilt
(mm ,ma around-emu no.1: 4)
B! Is I!
In .2" 20
11! 2| 2|
Gunman: nopurrocn. '5 no oomy (S) 0.40 5...").
"moan-amen”. $ no My (6) 5.9 5_9
Hanna-me. 7. no 06300. we done (7) (8) ['2 2.0

"mm npmmru ape cum. nnlcu’. no late.
"pl vunpnm +20'C no new:

unammrmuﬂmm Malamute"- (9) ll": "8
cyxum “teams (10) I5!" Iona-
norne npm ma: (1],)
noaonacumenuom «Quandrmm (9_) IGIIO JOII!
ryxom ochamchmun (10) """ 10/20 13/15
KMInnm aononoluocvu. no menu: (12)
no woman (13) 0.75 0.60
nurse upwpcan (14) 0.90 0.80

Raw-uncut enuncroﬁxocte up! Wallﬂo-
nm‘umcmm. uc um:

no Mom-1 (131 0.50 0.40

mcne “le ( 4) 0.75 0.66
liacmmaeuu-n no "my ynapon. ue Gone (16) l0 l0
Cantu-nee (nary-u c unuepanuoﬁ «tn» actm- Bunyan-um (18)

macro-um. menu (17)

Note. The indicators for fine-grained asphalt concretes are presented in the nu-
merator and those for sandy asphalt concretes are presented in the
denominator.

Key:

1. Indicators

2. Norm for asphalt concrete of marks

3. Porosity of mineral skeleton, percent by volume. not more than
4. For asphalt concrete of type

5. Residual porosity, percent by volunn

6. Water saturation, percent by volume

7. Swelling, percent by volume. not more than

8. Compressive strength, kgf/cmz, not less than, at +20°c prior to heating
9. Of water-saturated asphalt concrete

10. Of dry asphalt concrete
11. After heating
12. Hater-resistance coefficient, not less than
13. Prior to heating

[Key continued on following page]
FOR OFFICIAL USli ONLY

[Key continued free: preceding page) :

14. After heating
15. Waterbresistance coefficient with prolonged water saturation, not less than

16. Caking by number of blows, not note than
17. Adhesion of asphalt to mineral part of asphalt concrete nixture

18. 'nolerates

Table 2.39. Properties of Porous Asphalt Concretes

 

liven-nu (1) “no.
_—___________.__————————-
ll aorta unnepuworo onoea. 1, no oases-y. as done (3) 24
03:01:“: uopmocn. $ nc My (4) 3—;0
NAOMItUMGIIQ. 1. no nﬁuey (5) {-5
Ilaaynnc. ‘1. no oowy. he done (6) -
Key:
1. Indicators
2. Norm

3. Density of mineral skeleton, percent by volume, not more than
4. Residual porosity, percent by value

5. Water saturation, percent by volume

6. Swelling, percent by volume, not more than

the content of fractions determined by elutriation can be no more than 2 percent
by ms in natural sand and 5 percent in crushed sand.

‘me granular oonposition of the sand should be in the range shown in Figure l.
Crushed sand for concrete of single-layer and the upper layer of two-layer pave-
nente should be manufactured from igneous,-metamrphic and sedimentary rock of

mark not below 800 in strength or fro. gravel with crushability index not above
DR-B.

   
   

l- . ..
I f.‘ 7.:
ﬂdﬁﬁ‘hgm Win-’1 run. a (2)

Figure 1. Requirements on Granular Couposition of Sand Used to Prepare
Airfield Concrete

Key:
1. Total residues on control screens, percmt by mass
2. ﬂash size of control screens, Ill

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2.40. Recommended Range of Application of Dense Asphalt Concrotos for Air-
field Pavement

(3)?!" u UIMAF-nur Ivym

 

 

 

in, mm...
a m H! v
5 3 i; i ‘7) 9 i 3 g
3: 2: " ‘4 1
£3 a! 3i 5% 5. .23 :2 a

 

l ropmqe) l A.5.l' LII A.n.n.r u A.s.9.r

Tonnm (9) l A. B. l‘ I. II A. B. B. I' II A. B. B. l‘

 

I'opn-mc I A. n. l‘ I. II A. B. D. I‘ II A. B. ILL
Ill 5. I)
(10)
ll. Teunm lle npnuemlmcn II A. 5. ll. I‘
(ll)

      

Ill Xoaomme He npuueunonl

fopuue l A. 8. l‘ I. II A. B. B. I' ll . 5.
III 5.
IV. Tuuue He npnueumcn II A. B. 8. l‘
V
Xonoauuo He apnea-mu

[Continued on following pawl

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
won-

F()R ()I-‘I-‘K'IAI. “SI-I ()NIJ

Table 2 . 40 (Continued) .

... _~—_- -H. —. .. .

(4) "m nan-u map-u. "war-ta

..___———

uency an

   
   
   
  
   

Ill 5. I9 LII I\. D. 8. II

Ii. I)

III I3. 9 I. II A. r.__ n.

Ill [5. D

II 5

III I}. l)

Notes. 1.

6. B I. II A.B_. 8. II

 

l AFFB. II A.5.II.I‘

 

 

III 5. D
II A. 6. n. l'

' m 5. 8
He npn- ll AB. R. l'
Keenan-n l 6:. )1:

A. 5. B. I'

III 5. II

He npu- ll AI». 8. l‘

"HIIDTCI

I Mull: l 51:. Ex. 11:

 

3 e

a; I;
i. 5

IV 5. B, 11
IV [3. 3. 11
IV 5. B. 11

IV li. a.
I. II 6:. Max
w B. B. 11

IV 5. U. 11

I. II 5!. Bx. Ill

Cold asphalt concrete mixtures are not used in road-climatic zone I.

2. Asphalt concrete of mark I of types A and B may be used for normative
load categories I and II in repair and strengthening of existing rigid

pament .

[Key on following page]

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NI.\'

[Key continued from preceding page]:

 

l. Road-climatic zone
2. TYpe of asphalt concrete mixtures
3. Takerot'f-landing stripe and main taxiways
‘. Miscellaneous sections of airfield pavement
5. Normative load categories
6. Mark of asphalt concrete
7. Type of asphalt concrete
8. Hot
9'.- "arm
10. Not used
11. Cold
Table 2.41. Permissible Error of Proportioning Components of Asphalt Concrete
Mixtures
..__ .__ . .
Il-QPIII. “.3. In amnnh.
(1) 1mm. ecu-q
“I‘M" Q)
I—II III IV
Illeﬁeua (rpaauﬁ)(3) 13 15
llama a uuuepusuuli nnpomox (4) l-3 1:5
liutyn (5) ti}: :i:l.5
Key:
1. Components
2. Norm, percent, for asphalt concretes of marks
3. Crushed stone (gravel)
4. Sand and mineral powder
5. Asphalt

Crushed stone from natural stone, gravel, blast furnace slag rubble and gravel

that meet the requirements of COST 8267-75, GOST 10260-74, COST 3344-73 and 6081'
8268-74., respectively, are used as coarse filler for concrete.
natural stone and from gravel should usually be employed for concrete of single-

Jayer and the upper layer of two-layer pavements.

The indicators of crushed stale and crushed stone from gravel should meet the re-

quirements of Table 2.55.

The compressive strength of the initial rock in the water-saturated state used to

prepare crushed stone should not be less than that indicated in Table 2.56..

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Crushed stone from
Table 2. 42 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Requirements on Temperature of Asphalt Omcrete Mixtures

 

(3) Tum-um mm. -c

 

 

   
    

(1) (2) In Ion-yen In emu. £3m'333525
Mu MIN uni. no use

SHII 90/I30

sun 60/90
mm mm too-m m-uo :20 mo
Trust (9) snnzoolaoo
BHHIW IIO—Iil) NIL—I'll) 80 80
5r mm
(10) crumoo m—lm al—loo (11’? 10 c

ao—Ioo He unite +5° unto.
30—100 1128 +IO‘ omuo

Xoaouue CI' 10/!30 90- I no
Mr 10/130 Ell—I20

1. Types of mixtures

2. Mark of asphalt

3. Temperature of mixtures, °C

4. Upon release from mixer

5. In asphalt layer when laying in structural layer, not below
6. Without surfactants

7. with surfactants

8. Hot
9. Warm
10. cold

ll. Not below +5“ in spring
12. Not below +10' in spring

The largest size of coarse ﬁller for concrete should be:

20 m tor the upper layer of two-layer payments:

40 m for single-layer and the lower layer of two-layer pavements;

70 m for beds.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8:2 :4 _ a . .. _ : _ 8:2 .2

8:2. .3 unimim _ —

3.5.3 __

       

 

.3

8:2 .5 2.2:.de

    

ugaall a: 3.3

       

   

 

    
 

            
    

 

 

852 .8 8:8. .6 a .n m wk:

8:2. .3 wind .2. 8:3 .6 ud.» 8:2. 2 n m E «as!
8208 53 a .m |_.=l 838 SB 0838 «in L .n .n .< = 8.
8325:. : _8§_mzn §§_u=m La.“ _ N _

  

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

d .n .m >—
828 ﬁlm
830 “In
8.30 dim . . . .
83¢ 53 d n m :_ d m m _: emu}..—
83v .
ﬂaw“ mumm— ._.m.< : ...m.m.< _ : ._.n.m.< :
mg mm b .m I as, E .
83. 53 < ~ ._ m < _ ._ m < _
lllllllll‘lll'
m m m
__ ESL-1 821""...- Ik mm 2551-! .ooﬂhunao-o- In. m» annual-S. £0213...» o .223
_ Q W mg as mvm .0339!
l ' llwalllrllll' I 3
_ > .. >. :_ .. :

 

an 38 ugiiéiunon

 

ouwuucoo
panama NO as was on: no 303350 no cone—Bu a an. 3232 we 3:: canny—“Suva

.nv.N manna.
339355.... 3......- =ovon _.o 3.9..
.82.. 2... snub-8.8.5... .. E..........

E... .8 5:8

3.
4.. in. P... Eco... ..u 02.39:... :86?
.8 :33

0
x38 :59... .8 33-333...."de
Ears.

8

3......- =...«..... ..u 3...... E... :6. n. .3
22.3

:26... 3:42... .. :22 :2. 5.53%».
- 92.3.6: one-oust. .8. .3 «.28....
E... :59... 3 84832:...3 3......

1.2 39...... 3....- a:
2... 3-3: .. 53... .5 Gal... 2.3

#3383... u 2.5. 3...... - kg
3 3.2.... .3 .32». an 32.8

:3
£33.33: :33. a... 3359...... :-
EEi-R: - gun-axis... <n.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

5. And

6. Mark of crushed stone from igneous and metamorphic rock by strength upon
crushing in cylinder, not less than

7. Mark for crushed stone from sedimentary rock, not less than

8. Class of rubble from metallurgical slag

9. Mark of crushed stone from gravel or gravel, not less than

10. Wear (losses in mass during wear in shelved drum). percent not more than

11. For crushed stone from natural stone of all rock

12. For gravel and crushed stone from gravel

13. Number of crushed grains in crushed stone from gravel, percent by mass. not
less than

14. Nunber of cycles when testing for cold resistance under climatic conditions
15. Severe and moderate
16. Mild

Crushed stone and gravel should be divided into the following two fractions with
subsequent individual proportioning of them:

 

Dnaib'm
5~10and10-20m....................... 20
5-208n620-40m....................... 40
5-40and40-70m....................... 70

The granulometric composition of each fraction or of mixtures of several fractions
of crushed stone or gravel should be in the range presented below.

Mesh size of control screens, mm Dnaim 0.5(Dnun + Dnaib 1.25%.“,
Daub)

'notal residue on screens in per-
cent by less 95-100 40-70 0-5 0

Hater suitable for drinking can be used to wash the fillers and to prepare the con-
crete mixture without preliminary investigation. Water with soluble salt content
in it greater than 5,000 mg/liter and 504 ion content greater than 2,700 mg/liter
may not be used. The pH value should not be less than 4.

High—strength concrete. 'Ihe surface layer of the concrete of airfield pavements
undergoes intensive effects of different factors during operation such as loads
from aircraft wheels, the gas-air jets of jet engines, climatic factors and so on.
The practice of operating rigid pavements shows that frequently the reason for
capital repairs of pavements is breakdown of the surface layer of the concrete
(peeling. separation and knocking off the edges of slabs).

An effective method of increasing the operational qualities and durability of
rigid airfield pavement is to use to high-strength concrete 6-7 cm thick in the

upper layer. High-strength concrete of two types is uted: that based on portland
cemnt and that based on expansible cements.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
«58:38:22. : was
3 9 n» ..¥ 3 9. mm on nm 3 .33.; a: 56...! 5%
as a...
.3 v- .88: on B .330
.13 30:55.. . I235
39¢ 08-: n :98... no.3:
Edd. 9.3.4 I I 2.2... 2.2.- 2.56. 9...” I I I I I I ANA Add and-E «‘2
8d .39. n. :63: 3.5-2

33...... 22....
gnabéapormwi 5605 8-3.

8.8:
o. .32... Sacha“... as:
53.3 c. 362.. SA .8: 8.

8.0!
o: .188 uni—3&2. 5:.
.838 a. $62.. :3. .8: o...

 

m . «2.2.
.

was»: a: .8355: a a...
6.5.31.3 2.: 282.82.
2. «one: ”38:33:13: 2
21.38.38»: 2. 562.. 3.32

3.

 

I lei-lo:
.I:L|..I_II_I__ILILII 3

3.52438 i» .3“ 2; 3524.8. I;

 

nonn- ccvlu-ug M

a :3 .33 n3 ‘8: _ «8-! out,» alien-083.198 ulna: .. ‘32 Id In?! ad»
8 8 8 8. 8 2 8 8 2 8 8. 8 8.
3 8 I I S 3 3 8 I I I I I
3 8 8 8 S 3 3 8 8 3 a 8 2.
2 a 3 8 a 2 2 a” 3 3 a... 3. 3 _
3 a 2 8 9. 2 2 a. 3 3 I 2. I ,

 

£30.23 "Shun“. 3:..uiuﬁo: 15-: .386 axle—321......) ~13! .. 5.112 :4 :23:

.-.|.I|II|I||.\||III|||\|I|IIII|II|

.Avoscwuaoov mv.~ «anon.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

Me of asphalt concrete

type of asphalt concrete
tier): of crushed atone from igneous and netanorphic rock by strength during

cruahing in a cylinder, not less than

Mark for crushed stone from sedimentary carbonate rock. not lose than

Mark for crushed stone from remaining sedimentary rock, not lees than

Clan of rubble from metallurgical slag

Hark of crushed stone from gravel

Mark of gravel

Wear (lose in me during wear in shelved drun), percent hymen. not more
than

For crushed stone from igneous and metamorphic rock

For crushed stone from sedimentary carbonate rock

For crushed stone from retaining sedimentary rock

For crushed stone from gravel

For gravel

Nutter of crushed grains in crushed atone tron gravel, percent by mass, not
less than

umber of cycles when testing for cold resistance under climatic conditions
Severe and noderate

 

 

Mild
Table 2.46. Haximn Home of Dusty and Clay Particle Content in crushed Stone
(Gravel)
_- I —_. — Gun-near ear-Am :- ..
"—qu ennui. ﬁ no lane.
(1) (2) MM

"an" ocean-mum." «and I" cum: 3mm

unﬁt-nan $33:

“W“ man-nu:

 

an
___________L4)
' (5)

[bump a 1mm cum an "mime a 399me
not out-urea uepou:
16 I

III e IV 3 ;
xmcrnee out" upon: (7)
2
ll 3 ;
rape-me n venue cum m mean. (a) 4 3

l. Designation of asphalt concrete mixture:

2. Content of dusty and clay particles, percent by mass, not more than
3. non sedimentary carbonate rock

4. Pros: igneous, metamorphic and remaining sedimentary rock

[Key continued at following page]

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

  
 

5. Bot and warm mixtures for lower and upper layer of pavuent of marks
6. And
7. Cold mixtures of marks
8. Hot and warm mixtures for beds
Table 2.47. Requirements on Mineral Powders from Powdery Industrial Wastes
— gyms-emu;- W— I — I.
u) “4.3., (4) cs)
lions-wean sun-1M 3.... "I nanny-m
ut unl- u 1% non-omen
mart-Intent uro-
vupen some
(65
39”” come. 'I. no am. no sense: :00 100 100
name I” ll (7)
’ 3-3;? ’ 3'3 5‘ 9"
D . b 35 70
“connects. on omen-y. Ie duo‘s) 35 45 45
lloéyxauue unoo u; were lune-( ) 2.5 He nopuu- 2.5
W aopoeln c n on. no
my. no 60sec m " 01'va
KoWumt eoaonoluocn «SHIE- He uopmu- 0.6 0.8
as cute a man I: outyuou (12) m
nonuten» tyuoeuxocm. moo en '3'. to (l ) Kl! 100
“Grumman obese). as bone
Consume Ionopacnopauex mung » l 6
mm. $ no niece. we done 4)
Banana-m 0]. no latte. no (base (1 |.0 2.0 2.0
Consume omens menu-aux asupa- He aopen- lle nooue- 6
36:0. wigs; K0). 1. I0 Item. no pym pyem
nee
llorepu upon upounnulnm. no latte. To me 20 He in Ill-
"¢ Gone (1?) ”3|
Notes. 1. The use of not less than 60 percent mineral powders with particle con-
tent finer-than 0.071 m is permissible in mixtures of mark Iv
2. Porosity, water-resistance coefficient and specific asphalt content of
ash-slag mixtures from thermoelectric power plants are determined for
the part which passes through the screen with size 0.315 m.
3. The specific asphalt index is determined only when the suitability of
new material (rock) is established for preparation of mineral powder.
Key:
1. Indicators

2. Norms for types of powder

3. Basic metallurgical slags and noncarbonate rock

Waste ashes of TE'rs
5. Waste dust of cement plants

7. Finer than 1.25 m

[Key continued on following page]

4

74

Granular composition, percent by mass, not less than

Porosity, percent by volume, not more than

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

9. Swelling of specimens of mineral powder-asphalt mixture, percent by
volt-1e, not more than

lo. Nor normalized

11. Water resistance coefficient of specimens of powder-asphalt mixture

12. Index of specific asphalt content, g/lOO cm3 (absolute volume), not more
than

13. content of water-soluble compounds, percent by mass, not more than

14. Moisture content, percent by mass, not more than

15. Content of oxides of alkali materials ("go-K20), percent by mass, not
more than

16. losses during crushing, percent by mass, not sure than

The mark of concrete not below 60 in tensile bending strength is used. The com-
pressive strength of concrete aged 28 days should not be less than 400 kgf/cm2 and
the cold resistance should not be below 200.

The cement consumption is established by selection of the concrete composition.

It can initially be taken at 340-360 kg/m3 for portland cement of mark 600 and
360-380 kg/m3 for portland canent of mark 500 and expanding cements. It is recom-
mended that a water-cement ratio in the range of 0.33-0.38 be used.

The stiffness of the concrete mixture should not be less than 40 3 according to a
comercial viscosimeter imdiately after pouring from the concrete mixture and in
the range of 60-100 s at the point where it is laid for pavement. The stiffness
of the mixture can be used according to Table 2.57 for preliminary selection of
the concrete composition.

Plasticizing additives, the approximate amount of which is presented in Table
2.58, must be introduced to the concrete mixture to ensure the required stiffness.

The following are used as binder for high-strength concrete:

portland cement of marks 600 and 500 that meet the requirements of 6081'
10178-763

expanding portland cement (Me) of marks 400 and 500 corresponding to the
requiremnts of SNiP I-V2-69 "Inorganic binders and additives for ccncretes and
mortars" and "Recomnendations on concrete work using expanding cements" (VNIIST,
Moscow, 1970):

stressed cement (m) with low self-stress energy that satisfies TU 21-20-18-
74 in material composition.

Expanding portland cement is produced by joint fine pulverization of portland ce-
ment clinkers, high-alumina blast furnace slags, granulated blast furnace slag or
active hydraulic additive, gypsum and lime.

stress cement is produced by fine joint pulverization of portland cement clinkers,
alumina slag and gypsum.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
                       

 

 

 

 

 

Roma 93.838 :0 vossucou :5

">0!

 

 

  
    

 

30H!— uo: .oo .vcuomzuanh 2n." :15 one." vac ‘“use at .o
as 90... .0. eunuch?» «023.333 .OH comm a: .m
0.0 “.4 .m :Owuduvoaom H.052... mo sumac .v
3.33.59... .o 93......» «0 no.3... .n
can» :0." ya: 83!: .3 33.32 .N
.0. .323» 93 95» songs... 9:51:95» 9.2.038 4. 9.3302 :n
. _ 8.30 0.. I a
_ .3lo.2..50..o: I I I I n... «6 n6 «6 «.o .058 nag-rises.- o-an! qou
. Pan-saga . ANN.
5.85.98... 3 95.3..
.23.... xxosvo-aauo o: 3 “5...... I. 8...: _ 2:... I . 8...... 3.3 3:388: Sun-S
2.5.9.20 0:352. on. on.
«In ... 2. 55833.54:
_. o 21.3: .50.. .. 85% on .u. .3092... «32.
_ «his—o. .50.. o: o o s o o w a h a 3:02.33 as?! 50.8.8:
_ a .2. 2.380 3.3
. < «95: . >335: 2.3.3
_ .gloa: .50.. o: I l I I Snags; NC 1282. 3.... local-9. u 2:08.830
. 3.3
" column» .50.. a: 8n can 8a :8 an 93 §_ 2h. :8 .325... a: .U. .5535. oar-95$...
”slug: ﬁx... a: I l l l 2| 2| 2| 2| 8| 2.....- o: .0. .3595»: nut-no.5:
I I I I I a... 3 o 8 Ed 3. u... a... a
ﬁImS: .89. o: S 8 e I 3 S S 8 I .9 0.8 a... ..
nOv ”lb giichunﬂ
0...! on . o .32..
”pl-8w: FOOL 0: 2. 9. so an .m. 3. 2. an an .. “Maya: 9. EEOC-3n... a 92.33.
l l l l a. 8 mm on m... 3. 028.. 2. .0... x... 3
8. can 8n 8. 8a. 8..
cal—3.. #00.— 0: loo l3. l2... Ian 8 3|? IS IS. Ian 3. 0.3 an: .-
3» A: in... sagas-35.... «36:...—
au .. .
2...... 35 a... 7.... 7...: a...“ a... a... a... 3:2. £1 :3...
_ .2

 

.3 ll! 3 3:3:

 

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

12. Adhesion to marble or sand

13. 'nolerates by control specimen No 2

14. According to

15. According to 6081‘ 11508-74. nethod A

16. Variation of softening teuperature after heating, 'C. not sore than

17. According to (30$? 19180-72 and 0081' 11506-73 with supplantation by
section 3.2 of this standard

18. Penetration index

19. +1—-l

20. +1- -1.5

21. According to reference appendix to this standard

22. Content of water-sonmle compounds, percent, not sure than

Table 2.49. Requirements on Asphalte of Marks 86

 

_.._—.— :_.__

_£) "own-«Iv-

(3)

Mun-en man-Q
Fl‘ 13:40 H “I,” f-I' Nil.)

 

 

yum-n ssvxm(t.‘)no 25—40 «~70 7l—I30 I'OCIII503--74

sun-nouns c oner-
tmu 5 “'33.. 0301;. c

Ken-sense acumen»? N 7,5 7 I’OCT llfm-JZI
mes pan-auras up»
uncommon" on Is
I rem-onus ( C.
5 s) an a sex ump-
nottatc (I00' I a).
'5 or new any-u.
us acne:
Tcuscpavypa puss“) 3.1 31 31 [OCT mm- 73
mun maua mm
Illl’lf‘flﬂﬂlﬂ UM.‘N'-
as rupee-mire [m-
anua‘lue, '(2. m: mu-

uc ( ) . _ _

Team-pat”). "nun" I. 37 .17 37 101.1 “LU-~48
onpmm nor». 'C, ‘
he "as

“cumulu- ua mung) Bluepamu‘?) emu I'OCZT noon-.74
see c Ipeuopor III C Kalfpolhllll no Iciﬂly [3
mos obpuuou M 2 (10)

l. Indicators
2. Norms for marks
3. ‘rest nethods

4. Specific viscosity according to viscosineter with opening of S In at
60°C, a

5. Amount of evaporated liquefying agent during aging of asphalt in thermo-
stat (60'C, 5 hr) or in a vacuum thermostat (100°C, 1 hour), percent of
asphalt ease, not less than

[Key continued on following page]

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL use ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

6. Softening temperature of residue after determination of amount of evapor-
ated liquefying agent. °C, not lower than

7. Plashpoint in open crucible, °C, not lower than

0. Testing for adhesion to marble or sand

9. Aged according to control specimen No 2

10. By method 3

Table 2.50. Requirements on Asphalts of Marks 56

 

(1) ‘21 "new mum (3)
Menu“
llv- ‘
mm" cr um LI’ um l or 101m lcu IQOM ""‘""‘"
(4) .. . ..
)‘cnnuuu «mom. no lei—40 4| ..7() 7|— -130 LII—200 IOLT
uucmnuucrpy c Imep- "501-74
cram. 5 Ha up" (il'i . r
Kmamectuo ucaapnnwe- I') III a 1 IOCI’
mu paaxtunmmn mm IIEHM 74

(5) maennmnauuu duty-u
a tcpuonatc (IOU’C.
3 w) tum a naxyyurcp-
nor-tare (IOII'C. 2 u).
'5 or narru ﬁlm-v.1.“
'MI‘IM'I'

Tnmrpavypa mnmr'm- 3| 2" 39 J" IUILT
tr.“ urlaru Im..|\ 115m; -73
onpmcnouun Roan-m '-

(6) an numpunuu‘ m‘l pan-
)mnummn. '('.. no Im-
mo

Tcunoparypa ucnuulu A -|" 45 50 60 mm
(7) mxpumu rune. 'C. 1311—“
no mmc ‘23,. . "
llcmnmmc u: cumm- Duncpmmacr a con (run [OLI’
(8 mo c unauopun mm c nunrpmumu oGpuuou Na 2 “503- 74
«new no nanny 5

Key:
1. Indicators
2. Norms for marks
3. Test methods
4. 1pecific viscosity according to viscosimeter with opening of 5 mm at
60°C, 3

a. The amount of evaporated liquefying agent during aging of asphalt in
thermostat (100°C, 3 hr) or in a vacuum thermostat (100°C, 2hr). Percent
of asphalt mass, not less than

a. Softening temperature of residue after determination 'of amount of evapor-
ated liquefying agent, °C, not lower than

3'. Flashpoint in open crucible. °C, not lower than

:3. Testing for adhesion to warble or sand

9. Aged according to control specimen No 2

‘0. By method a

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.51. Requirements on Asphalt: of Marks HG

 

(1)

"manna

_llueuu sea—sens 22 (3
.
nr em nr n/m Hr mm W

 

 

 

"PM

 

 

 

 

4
Vanessa InIth’ts so 25—40 “—70 "—130 I30— l‘OCT

encaosuu c one - W—
cmcu 5 umgs 60‘ C. op ll 7‘

Koamecrso mains. 9 O 7 5 I'OCT
toss peasant-rue up! "600-73
emepnaaasn a '
s 309.09?!" (II C.
a was e an .

soc-rate (100' 3,373.

S or Itasca duty“.

In sauce

humm- psnsmc- 27 2B 29 a) I'OC‘I’
an octane aocne ”501;...“
ownemn mamm-
u scuapulum'oce pa.)-
nuun'ens. 'C. as n-

was
Teqncpnyps acumen a IN 100 no no l'OCT
mspmou Mo. 'C. 4.133- 48
II! "MIG
(9)
"antenna as meane- Duacpxsunseecootsercnuu I'OCT
Inc c u auopoa nun: c uompoaumu odpuuou Nb 2 llsm -7t
men 8) no notony [3
Key:
1. Indicators r

2. Norms for marks

3. Test mthods

4. Specific viscosity according to viscoeimeter with opening of S m at
60'C, s

S. The amount of evaporated liquefying agent during aging of asphalt in
thermstat (llO'c, 5 hr) or in a vacuum thermostat (ioo'c, 3 hr), percent
of asphalt mass, not less than

6. softening temperature of residue atter determination of amount of evapor-
ated liquefying agent, 'C, not lower than

7. Plashpoint in open crucible. 'c, not lower than

8. Testing for adhesion to marble or sand

9. Aged according to control specimen No 2

10. By method 8

The ultimate strength of standard specimens aged 28 days should not be less than
that indicated in Table 2.59.

The requirements placed on sand used to prepare high-strength concrete are the
same as for ordinary concrete.

Crushed state from igneous rock with strength not below 1,200 kgf/cm2 of 5-10 am
fraction, produced by secondary crushing of 10-20 mm traction, should be used as

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.52. Requirements on Cold Resistance Hrs of Concrete and Coarse Filler

 

 

 

(1) Comma-eu- mu '(3) ' “I'M-"t"
nee-rm I say"
Muses-en Out- Ida's???" so We I "zx'LW'

__T€)—_I7T_m———‘.—'
nu oamsoluux e Or 0 so —5 mo .50
macro eso- neyx- : —5 ! —|$ ISO I“)
uoleux now-Inn zines —l5 200 I50
nu “seem caoe r 0 so —5 60 25
seyxuoenux no- : —-5 s —:5 50 so
some. (10) Ilene —IS 100 “IN
11:- ocuoeunn (11) Or 0 so —5 25 IS
Ilene —5 60 25'

l. Designation of concrete

2. Average monthly air temperature of coldest month, °C

3. Cold resistance

4. or concrete, not lower than

5. or coarse tiller, not lower than

6. For single-layer and upper. layer of two-layer pavements

7. From
8 . To
9 . Below

10. For lower layer of tun-layer pavements
11. For beds

Table 2.53. Requirements on Mobility of concrete Mixture

Method of concreting Hobilitx, cm
By rail-travel complex of mchines 1-2
By railless coupler of machines at concrete-layer speed, m/min:
up to 2 1-3
2-2.5 2-4
2.5-3 3-5
By small mechanization equipment 3-4

coarse tiller. The use of crushed 10-20 Ill fraction is permissible to supplement
5-10 Inn fraction. The ratio of fractions in this case is established by the maxi-
mum volumetric mass of the mixture of two fractions. The content of particles
determined by elutriation should not be greater than 0.5 percent. including 0.25

percent clay particles. Organic impurities are not permitted. The content of
grains of scale and needle shape should not exceed ls perce.'.t by mass.

The cold resistance of crushed stone should be no lower than 200.

It is recommended that syrup (SP)--molasses--be used as a plasticizing additive to
the concrete mixture manufactured from portlend cement and one can also use

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lery

Lng

HRTUI

COST 1|
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.55. Requirements on Crushed Stone and Crushed Stone from Gravel

Designation of Crushed Stone and
maimed stone from Gravel

For Concrete of For Concrete of
single-Layer and lower Layer of
Upper Layer of Two-Layer
Indicators M-Lamr Pavements Pavements
Content of particles determined by elu- 1.0 1.0
triation, percent by mass, not more than
Content of grains of scale (slab) and 25 --
needle shape, percent by mass
Content of grains of soft rock, per- 7 10
cent by mass
loss in mass after testing in shelved
drum:
of igneous rock 25 45
of sedimentary rock 40 45
of gravel 30 45

Table 2.56. Requirements on Strength of Rack Used to Prepare crushed Stone

Strength of Rock, ngcm2

of Igneous Sedimentary
For single-layer and upper layer of 1,200 200
two-layer pavements
For lover layer of two-layer pavements 800 600
For beds 800 300

mixtures of syrup and sulfide-yeast grains and syrup and sulfide-alcohol distillery
grains.

A setting retardant--boric acid, which should be used in combination with SP, 853,
SDB, PEI, SP 4- P31 and SDB + PEI (see Table 2.58)--must be introduced to the con-
crete mixture prepared on expanding and stress cements.

The composition of the concrete mixture for high-strength concrete is selected

from achieving given tensile bending strength, mark by cold resistance and optimum
ease of laying with minim]: consumption of cement.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2.57.

 

(1)

been"!!! tel-nann-
..uyn qua bum-n-
un. '(‘.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Approximate Stiffness of Concrete Mixture

 

 

 

 

 

‘ "“sz "—‘— "7.:.:.:.:::’;—'(3s—‘
'?'*':::'~:.: “‘ (s)—
mgrt. .. 1.4.1.. I .. ..... ,......

5 -II_) (5) 11a 20 m—ao mu Inn
“3- I.» w—m 00— III)
1.» =19 0040 60-- mo
20m?» 50—70 60—30
1’5» w «’40 mum
5-- 19 21-40 m—m m — mo
Ill--l-) 00—70 70- II”
I5~dﬂ ﬂL-70 7ou-um
:19 2a «)-.50 (in—Ru
24...?! 40 -50 60 410
.‘n- I!) III-~45 mm 70 Ian
!9 l» a» a) nL.uu
A 1"} 50—70 70 -lm
Q-‘.' E" w. on mum
2.. .1: must] on .70
Key:

1. Ambient air temperature during concreting, ‘C

2. Length of transporting nixtum, min

3. Stiffness of mixture, 5

4. At plant

5. At point of laying

6. Up to

Table 2.58. Plasticizing Additives
Mount of
Additives of
Normative Cement Mass,
Me of Additives Document Etcent Remarks

Plasticizing and setting

retarders :

sulfite-alcohol distillery

 

0.15-0.25 Calculated for dry

grains (SSS) matter

aultite-yeast grains (SOB) HRTU 13-04-35-66 0.15-0.25 "

sultite-nolasses grains (SP) TU 18-409-71 9.20-0.30 "
Setup retardant--boric acid (BR) 6051' 18704-78 0.8-1.2 "

Texture- fomingupolyethylanine MR'I'U 6-02-422-74

(PEI)

0.8-1.2 Calculated for pro-

duct with molecular
weight of 10,000

The mxture, like that for ordinary cement, in selected in three stages: theoret-
ica1 calculation, laboratory check and correction and treatment of the composition

under production conditions .

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.59. Strength of Specimens

‘21 "was: WI: e eastern 23 «yr. alt/cm.

(1 )
News In". "1 221m. l "‘12-...

(5)0091)“ a: Pllll

 

 

400 ‘00 l 55

500 I 500 60

600 600 65

(6) Gamma In llu
400 I 400 I 60
500 500 65
Key:

1. Mark of cement 4. Bending strength
2. Strength. aged 28 days, kgf/cm2 5. Specimens of Rm
3. Coupressive strength 6. Specimens of Me

2.8. Materials for Sealing Expansion Joints of Rigid Pavement

Based on the designation and operating conditions, sealing materials that fill
expansion joints of rigid airfield pavement should be sufficiently heat-resistant,
deformative and elastic over a wide temperature range. Rubber-asphalt binders
(REV): polymer-asphalt mastics (Pan) and thiokol sealers are now used to fill
joints.

Rubber-asphalt binder is a mixture of asphalt, rubber chips. indene, oounarone
resins, nK-lS oil and P-200 polyisobutylene, prepared under plant conditions by
heat treatment and plastifioation. RBV of three marks-~RBV-25, RSV-3S and REV-50"
is used.

The REV conpositions are presented in Table 2.60 and the indices of the physico-
mechanical properties and the recommended range of application are presented in
Table 2.61.

Rev is heated in asphalt boilers to 180-200°c prior to use, the length of heating
should not exceed ten hours and the viability of RBV is one hour.

Polymer-asphalt nastics (PBM) are prepared on a base of water-insulating heat and
cold-resistant asphalt (plastbit) that meet the requirements of TU 38-1253-69.

Polymer-asphalt mstics are manufactured in two marksnPBM-l and Put-2. The com-
positions of the mastics are presented in Table 2.62.

PIN-l mastic is used in road-climatic zones II-IV and Pan-2 is used in zones I-IV.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.60. Ooapositions of Rubber-Asphalt Binders

 

 

 

(1) I (2) ._ (3_)(_2_:m-. 9‘ m “m
0"- ueaeng; I‘OIJ In. IV
"Ill-1" MI a mu '-
(4) -
Buy-a BIHV I‘OC'I 66l1—76 GB 6‘ 63—58
Dunno-u «pom TV 384006—70 20 '10 If:
"nanny-among) - 5 6 5
(“MI
Macao MUS (7) - 7 7 7
"ﬁgohnoymku (8) [OCT man-o1
Key:
1. Components 5. Rubber chips
2. COST or TU 6. Indene-counarone resin
3. Composition, percent by mass 7. Alt-15 01‘.
4. aN-Iv asphalt 8. 9-200 polyisobutylene

Table 2.61. Physicomechanical Properties and Range of Application of RSV

 

_—..__.________'_-:

 

 

 

(1) (2! Mar-- many-ow nay-um-
[In-emu» Mun-nun“: car-Ann " §'
" “M”W mm mus l mm
—____—_(5}__
Tuncparypa pullﬂelml. 'C. II: 60:21.; 160 160 160
TeunqnypoyctoI-mnocm 'C. I: name 160 I60 |60
5)
Tea-mama wynuocrn no Opucy. 'C. 25 35 50
ne notice
Cuenacuue c (mauve. nut/cut m.- ue‘uﬂ 6 5 5
v (8)
Paton-annual 061mm. npuucuamu (a IV--V l M II npu name tuna
pomno-muumnuan sou) no 7 u; III. IV llpu

Anne llllllf an 7 u;
Ill 1: IV npn naune
mun A020!

1. Indicators of physiconechanical properties and range of application

2. Mark of rubber-asphalt binder

3. Softening temperature, °C, not mre than

4. Temperature stability. °c, not lower than

S. Praas brittleness teaperature, °C, not lees than

6. Adhesion to concrete, kgf/clnz. not less than

7. Reconnended range of application (road-climatic zone)

8. I and I! with slab length up to 7 meters: IIIand IV with slab length up to
7 meters; III and Iv with slab length up to 20 meters

85

FOR OFF-10A! USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.62. Compositions of Polymer-Asphalt Hastics

.-_.——

 

(Lena. '.'n III Haul!)

 

 

 

(1)

 

 

 

 

K" "" " mun-u l nun-2
53’ 10
ﬁlm: mpouaonslmosuul mounpomcro um 70
(MN!)
5m- Bmi 40/60 (sun 60190) (4) (5) so —
151..qu aacuop auauumulponuoto tenuousno- 13 I5
nucn (ACT) I pnctuopnmc
Mucpnnuml nopomou m1 sweeten: wow): I 25 35
Key:
1. Components

2. Composition, percent by mass
3. Water-insulating heat- and cold-resistant asphalt (plastbit)
4. END 40/60 (END 60/90) asphalt

S. 15 percent divinylstyrene thermsetting plastic solution (DST) in solvent
6. Mineral powder or asbestos chips

The procedure for preparation of polymer-asphalt mastics is as follows:

the DST is dissolved in a solvent. xylene or naphtha at 18-2o°c, 3-4 days
prior to preparation;

plasbit is melted in a boiler at 140°C. The melted plastbit for Pan-l mastic
is mixed with 3ND 40/60 or END 60/90 asphalt heated to lZO’C;

the dissolved DST is introduced with constant mixing to the melted plastbit
or a mixture of it with asphalt with the burner of the boiler extinguished;

the mixture is heated to 140'C and held for 3-4 hours until the light frac-
tions of the solvent are completely driven off. mineral powder or asbestos chips
are introduced to it with careful mixing and it is boiled for 30 minutes, produc-
ing a homogeneous mass--finished mastic:

the finished mastic is poured into natal moulds and briquettes are produced
after doolinq.

Thiokol sealers are produced on the basis of liquid thiokol-polysulfide polymers
(COST 12812-72'). The wet effective for filling the expansion joints of airfield
pavement are Gidrom thiokol sealers whose physioomschanical indicators are pre-
sented in Table 2.63.

These sealers can be used to fill joints in all road-climatic zones.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONLY

Table 2.63. Physicomechanical Indicators of Gidron Thiokol Sealers

 

 

In) I 3)

 

"IIIIOII- (1) .l'upe-l' .nmon-r
Tennepatypa pun-Imus. 'C. not Gene“) 220 m
tunqarypoymdsusmb. 'C. we Inns (5) 250 2“)
[ampﬂy'a spyssoctu no ”any. ‘C. «e ”53) -80 -60
(hmmunc a: ﬁctmm. "clef. uc some (7) l2 8
Key:

1. Indicators

2. Gidrom-l

3. Gidmm-Z

4. softening teuperature. 'C, not note than

5. Mature stability, 'C, not below

6. Frees brittleness temperature, °c, not less than
7. Adhesion to concrete, kgf/cmz, not less than

Thiokol sealers are prepared by mixing the components in special forced minors
immediately prior to filling the joints.

The ambient air tenperature should be above 0'. I’M-15 soot is initially intro-
duced with continuous mixing until a homogeneous mass is achieved and hardening
paste No 30 is then introduced to V-3O sealing paste. Coal tar is introduced to
the sealing paste prior to the addition of soot when preparing Gidros-Z sealer.

The viability of thiokol sealers is 2-8 hours.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USI'. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3. PREPATORY WORK AND EXCAVATION T0 CONSTRUCT THE FLYING FIELD

[Text] 3.1. Pre; aratory Work and Vegetation knoval

Preparatory work includes preparation and development of the construction area
(Table 3.1) and can be performed only after the airfield design has been transfer-

red to the terrain (Table 3.2).

Vegetation-laden soil is cut prior to installation of recesses and embankments and
is subsequently used to create a firm cover over the entire soil area of the flying
field. The thickness of the cut layer of soil is taken from Table 3.3.

When working with vegetation-laden soil one must clean sections of stones on which
work with vegetation-laden soil must be carried out, avoid mixing the vegetation-
leden soil to be cut and to be restored with underlying layers of soil: the removed
vegetation-laden soil is cleaned of roots, tree branches and forest floor litter;
the natural moisture content of the vegetation-laden soil is retained when it is

removed and piled up.
The methods of working with vegetation-laden soil are presented in Table 3.4.

The final operations of any of the indicated methods are grading and rolling of
the tilled-in layer of soil.

3.2. Excavation of Channels

Requirements on excavation of channels. Excavation of a channel is begun after
remval of the vegetation-laden soil. The channel is excavated without reaching
the planned mark to the depth determined by control packing.

Deep channels are excavated in two phases:

during the first phase excavation does not reach the lanned k -
to avoid excess digging into the soil: p ”r by 8 10 Cl!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.1. work Performed During Preparatory Period

Name of Hark

 

Cleaning area of bushes
and small trees

Cleaning area of trees

Uprooting of stunps

Removal of stumps

[Continued on following page]

Gosposition and Sequence of work and
Method of Performing It

Preliminary inspection of the area subject to clean-
ing. removal of large stones, large-diameter stunps
and trees mre than 30 cm in diameter. cutting off
humps, filling holes, ditches and so on. Cutting
bushes, very small and small trees up to 20 cm in di-
ameter and separately standing trees \p to 30 cm in
diameter with brush hogs. Raking cut bushes and re-
moving tham beyond the cleaned area with brush rakes,
stutp removers-gatherers or rippers. Cleaning the
area of roots and small stumps with a bulldozer with
teeth or stup pullers-collectors.

Cutting bushes and small trees. Dividing the section
into individual strips (divisions) 50-100 meters wide.
Installing straight and main paths (portages) for
transportation of removed trees. telling of trees.
Cutting or sawing of brush at tree-felling site. Col-
lection and cutting of brush beyond section to be
cleaned or felling and burning it at the collection
site. Cutting (finishing) of branches (performed at
the felling site or on a previously selected site).
Trimming of trees-moving tilber from production sec-
tion to tenporary storate area or site for loading on-

to transport equipment.

Performed by unchanical method: by using stump pul-
lers with stunp diameter up to 45 m. using bulldozers
with stump diameter up to 40 cm, using tractor stup-
remover-winches with stump diameter from 40 to 70 cm:
by explosive mthod usually in winter season. After
pulling, the stumps are removed beyond the section to
be cleaned.

hmval of stones an to 2.5 m3 in volume partially
ewedded in soil with bulldozers, stuap remvers-
collectors and by tractor. Stones more than 2.5 m3

in volune are pulverized by explosives. Small stones
are collected into a pile with bulldozers or stmp
pullers-collectors for swsequent removal. The stones
are moved (to a distance up to 150 meters) by the same
machinery which was used to remove the stones from the
soil and using special accessories (PEN. sleds or
tractor trailers) and dump trucks.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3. 1 (Continued) .

Nana of Vbrk

 

 

Breaking or demlishing
of old pavement

Removal and transfer of
structures and engineer-
ing systems

Preliminary drainage of
construction sections

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Couposition and Sequence of Work and
Method of Perﬁorming It

Pavement of precast slabs is asseubled with subsequent
use of it to install parking areas for trucks and
transportation equipment inside airfield roads and
other purposes. Crushed stone and gravel surfaces are
broken and pulverized with rippers. Asphalt concrete
paven'ent is broken with bulldozers with steel teeth on
the blade. heavy rippers, scarifiers, concrete break-
ers and also with pneuatic or electric tools. Ce-
uent-concrete pavemnt is broken by sechanical
methods.

Buildings and structures are loved only it an area
has been prepared for them on a new site beforehand.
Communications lines and electric power transmission
lines are disassembled and removed after the corre-
sponding coordination and without interrupting their
operation.

Carried out in cases when the section is superwet or
swam and it must be preliminarily drained by creat-
ing a temporary network of open ditches that includes
auxiliary ditches (small furrows with brow toward
water-directing ditches) . water-drain ditches from
0.5 meter or more deep, main ditches from 1 to 4 me-
ters deep and catch drains to catch water from adja-
cent areas.

Table 3.2. Phases and Types of Work in Transferring the Design to Terrain

Phases

 

Ems of work

I Inspection, checking and restoration of the geodetic network created

during surveys z

checking for the presence of all geodetic signs on the terrain
and control levelling of all benchmarks:
coaparison of the planned layout of the all points (if necessary):
transfer of restored geodetic network according to report of con-
tract construction organization

11 Layout and full-scale attachnent of basic lines and points of

structures :

detailed layout of structural couponents:

installation of additional working benchmarks and corner markers
III Layout of excavation work:

establishing full-scale outlines of recesses and fills:

removal of planned excavation marks beyond terrain;

layout of excavation work with installation of troughs for beds

of airfield pavelont

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
—___—————-

XW yon-a (1) (2)1” true-mo col. cu
____________——————————

our WWIIOI(3) 5-12

me was (4) I5—l8

me man (5) I5—25

ristic of section 4. Plowed lands

3 of layer to be cut, cm 5. Forested sections
surface

ads of Working with Vegetation-Laden Soil

Characteristics of Method

More productive with distance to move soil of 40-60 meters and
thickness of layer to be cut more than 10 cm. Shift productiv-
ity of bulldozer couprises approximately 1 ha

Most effective when forming enbankments beyond the profile to be
worked on the soil part of the flying field and removal of vege-
tation layer from areas intended for installation of trough; The
recomnded thickness of the layer to be cut is 10 cm or more and
the distance of moving soil is from 50 to 300 meters with bucket
capacity up to 3 m3 and to 500 meters with bucket capacity of

6-9 m3. The shift productivity of a towed scraper with bucket
capacity of 6 m3 at thickness of layer to be cut of 10 cm, length
of soil remval and moving path of 50-100 meters comprises 0.1-
1.0 ha

Moat feasible with shallow layer of vegetation-laden soil and
short moving distance (up to 15 aetere)

Joint operation of grader and bulldozer in removal and cutting
of vegetation layer of soil. A grader moving along the section
to be treated removes the layer of vegetation-laden soil and
forms longitudinal rows of it every 2-3 meters. A bulldozer.
moving perpendicular to the section to be worked, then pushes
thc piles formed by the grader beyond the site, forming large
piles. It is recommended that the method be used when removing
vegetation layer 10-15 cm thick
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the second phase excavation is carried out to the planned mark.
shallow channels are excavated during one-two passes of the earth movers.

Soils of groups II-III must be tipped during excavation. Rocky and frozen soils
must be broken up with explosives and must be excavated with excavators.

Low-quality soils (mud, peat, solonchaks and so on) should be removed and replaced
with good-quality soils.

Soils are classified into groups as a function of the difficulty of excavation
(Table 3.5).

Table 3.5. Distribution of Unfrozen Soils into Groups as a Function of Excavation
Method

 

l‘n-uu "you In". pay—.wlo_ 2)

(6) 11,17). (8)

CII’W‘I

 

 

 

 

 

l'ranuauo-rumme: (9)

pmucpou 13cm no 86%?) I
pamepou wacnm 60.1w II

80 III (11)

fauna: (12)
mupnaa unru- u ““59 I
own 693 npuueoeh ' II II II II
1'0 no. c npuueclm IIROIII.
tgauu 'um crpoumlwo II II II I” III
(1‘) m.‘ nuyropa a 061mm no

alumna: um“ n nmtu III — II II
norm 1‘ "punt-cm moa-
na.rpnnua.r.1.1mu nan
(15)npmre.1motnu mm s
MIN-our («um mi.
umxnn napmnnu 16 --
untena- muon- snangm- w — 1‘ II! III
(17 an momma ”pun up
um" um xmépuﬂ-
tuna
I'pyum parmleammm 93?
ﬁt) lows-I1 u III-nuke! ! I
I: any-mun. nyl3|lllll|t£19l I II I I: l
AWN"! (20
c «punt-m mam. rpnaml I II I II
mm crpnmeaumro uyco-

Pa (2].)

[Continued on following page]

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030065-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. 5 (Continued).

_ I I 2 | 3 a I I
rpytsrzuzluuuom mom-non-
lemu (uopeulue):

«econ uopennui c (0.111;.-

muulou ”mow um

(23Moaec 50 «r (email

guuw bone 30 on) no

05 no may. I nu-

)Ic ram am" Ito-

pcmu c tannin npo-

moﬂnnn ammun-
rroro ma

new: unpeuuuh c coup-

xaum-u nuynon unto.

24 (max- 50 Kr (Ounce

( )30 cu) m 5 lo IO'I. no

oﬁmy; cyuerm. cer-

unx in run: aim-me c

«amt-nun uuyuoa

Macro“ 60M? 50 If {60'

m :m m) .10 5% no

0(1le

 

    
   

J" i 25
“1.501(6)“! «pummel! (26)

to me. C IIIIIHIIP‘59) mama

"an I’ZIJMII
omqumumﬂ (23)

I [I l
I II II

ﬁewu: (29)

(m npnucceﬂ. a "43°?
npuuccm mcﬁlll. rpnunn.
ummm mm (YIN-unnum-
m Hymn: u ammo no
10%

10 no. c "palm-mo a 061.:-

6! I0
(3%xzam’ur; u :0"an (32)

P. I N "C(33)
“lgnmaucummpmmmuﬁ 34
cumoumpmamml (35)

Conan-mt n comm-n: (36)
IIII'INO (37)
onqmoumuc (39)

Cyrmuwu: (39) (40)
MIR II Moan-HI 6e:
"punt-«I
acmm u ﬁrm-nun! c

(Alfplnxm medal. mum
“ll ctpmuuwmo I (20'
pa 9 We no lo

Iowan (523614“ 60m ll — ll

[Continued on following page]

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
43

"Atrium? do “£804. I c
"lumen-n mean. 1'me.
ran-«II all etymo-
m uycnm I 06m: no
10%

m m. r .muutruo I 06»
one Cum '0‘ (441'

C limit: (45)

y 6e: mun-eh. I tax-(“6
npnuccuo rpuun. rut-
uu. mean: mm upon-
mmcoro uycopa I othe-
uc .10 l0$

to he. «- ups-norm I 06»
nu- fronee I05 (47)

Crpomcnuum uycop: (48)

puum'c u (nemuuuiu (4 )

tuwumlnpounnuh (50)

Tom" (51’
6e: ween-u: Iopuel (52
c ape-annual Iopnnuu
mammal no .10 uu(53
C :lpemuuun uopulll
(5 4-50.11“qu 60m 30 an

Horn: 3:“: «23- 531mm“ rpy‘ﬁs’

omqm-Imul ( 38)

“Jun: (55)
untenamﬂ (57)

unauyprmeuul Im)
pullllm'k‘ﬂ

to m. numetpuuuulc‘sg
llleGem. (60)

III
II
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

42.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

Heavy broken shale hard jurassic carbonate or cambrian

Soils of vegetation layer

without roots and impurities

with roots of bushes and trees

with inpurity of crushed stone, gravel or construction waste

Soils oz glacier origin (moraine)

Moraine sand with boulders weighing more than 50 kg (average size of more
than 30 on) up to 5 percent by volume and also varvad moraine clay with thin
interlayers of fine-grain sand

Moraine clay with boulders more than 50 kg in size (more than 30 cm) from 5
to 10 percent by volume: sandy loan, loan and moraine clay with boulder in-
clusion of more than 50 kg by mass (more than 30 cu) up to 5 percent by
volume

noose -

Soft without inpurities

Soft with gravel or pebble inpurities

Hardened

Sand

without impurities and also with impurity of crushed stone, gravel, pebbles
or construction waste up to lo percent

without impurities and also with inpurities sure then l0 percent

Barkhan and dune

Shell rock

Slightly cemented

Cemented

Solonchak and solonets

Soft

Hardened

loam

Light and loses-type without inpurities

Light and loess-iike with impurities of crushed stone, pebbles or construction
waste up to 10 percent

Light and loess-like with impurities of crushed stone, pebbles or construction
waste more than “.0 percent

Heavy without impurities and with impurities of crushed stone, gravel, pebbles
or construction waste up to 10 percent

Heavy without impurities and with inpurities sore than 10 percent

Sandy loan

without inpurities and also with inpurities of gravel, pebbles, crushed stone
or construction waste up to 10 percent

without inpurities and with ilpurities more than 10 percent

Construction waste

loose and caked

Cemented

Peat

without woody roots

with woody roots up to 30 m thick

[Key continued on following page]

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

54. with woody roots more than 30 mm thick 58. weathered metallurgical
55. Chernozem and chestnut soil 59. -Unweathered metallurgical
56. slag 60. Crushed stone

57. Boiler

Excavation of channels with bulldozers. The most economical distance for moving
soil with a bulldozer is 50-70 meters on a horizontal section and up to 100 meters
on a sloping section.

The methods of performing work with bulldozers are presented in Table 3.6 and pro-
ductivity is shown in Table 3.7.

Table 3.6. Cutting Schemes and Method of Collecting Soil (Figure 2)

Soil Cutting

Scheme Method of Collecting Soil (Reconnendations According to Use)
Rectangular The bulldozer blade is dug into the soil by 10-15 cm, cutting an

even section of soil in the entire path of collecting it. The
length of the soil collection (cutting) path is equal to approx-
imately 10 meters and the volume of excavated soil is 2-2.5 m3.
Cutting is carried out in second gear and the cutting time is
16—20 seconds. The scheme is most effective when working on the
slope and excavation of the channel in inclined layers

Hedge Used in light soils. The bulldozer blade is first dug into the
soil at its greatest depth (25-30 cm) and then the blade is grad-
ually raised as the bulldozer moves forward, collecting the soil

on it. The cutting path is approximately 5 meters and the soil
collection time is 5-8 seconds.

Com-shaped "sad when excavating heavy compact soils. The bulldozer blade is
first submerged to the maximum into the soil and then is raised
by approximately three-fourths of its submerging depth with the
engine rpms reduced. This submergence of the blade into the soil
and raising it is repeated two- three times, during which the soil
is completely collected on the bulldozer blade. The soil collec-
tion time is 14-15 seconds and the cutting path is 5-? meters

Excavation of channels with scrapers. The main production rules, upon observation
of which the most effective scraper work is achieved, consist in the following:

soil is excavated when the scraper is moving on a slope. The optimum slope is
8-10 percentv

the soil is first ripped and pulverized when working on coupact and heavy
soils;

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the met effective scheme for soil excavation is selected for complete fill-
ing of the bucket within the shortest minimum time;

linearity of the scraper motion during collection and duaping of the soil in
first gear is observed:

the length of the channel excavation section should be greater than the path
of the total collection of the scraper bucket;

the scraper makes turns with an empty bucket but the mnber of turns should
be as few as possible;

earth-hauling paths are prepared in time and with quality.

 

Figure 2. Diagram of Cutting Soil with Bulldozer: a--rectar..,u1ar; b-wedge:

c--comb-like (the direction of bulldozer motion is shown by the
arrow).

Towed scrapers with bucket capacity up to 3 m3 with hauling distance \p to 300
asters. 6-8 m3 with hauling distance up to 500 meters and 10 n3 with hauling dis-
tance up to 3-5 km can be used.

The schemes for excavation of channels with scrapers (Figure 3) and their charac-

teristics are presented in Table 3.8 and scraper productivity is shown in Table
3.9.

Excavation of channels with excavators. The range of application is excavation of
channels from 1 meter or more deep, excavation of trenches catch drains, drain
ditches and loading soil into transport equipment. Excavators with bucket capacity
from 0.25 to 3 m3 with interchangeable equipment show in Table 3.10 are the Mist

used. The scheme for excavation of a channel with an excavator is shown in
Figure 4.

The approximate productivity of excavators can be taken from Table 3.11. The rec-
ommended dimensions of faces for excavators with straight bucket are shown in
Tables 3.12 and 3.13.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.7. Bulldozer Productivity

 

(Inc-m1: magma-am- I00 1: _--.I______l Tut-mp WMM- 15a. r. —(3)

(1) ”WIN WI. _—__._“

___|_LL___
W mm TIT I. .I

_———

 

 

 

Note. 'ma volume of soil collected by the bulldozer blade is equal to 1.25-2 m3
with tractor horsepower of 100-110 hp and 4-6 n3 with horsepower of 130-180 hp.

Key:
1. Moving distance, meters 4. Group of soils
2. Tractor with power of 80-100 hp 5. Productivity, m3/shift
3. Tractor with power of 54-75 hp

 

Figure 3. Diagrams of Excavating Channels with Scrapers: a--one-way ellip-

tical; b--two-way elliptical; entigure-eiqht: 1--oollection of
soil; 2--dumping of soil

Sel f-dumping tractor trailers and dump trucks are enployed to transport soil when
it is excavated with excavators.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he awroxiute need for transport equipment can be determined from Table 3.14.

 

 

 

 

   

Table 3.8. Scheme for Excavating Channels With Scrapers
Scheme Characteristics and Range of mlication
One-way With distance from excavation to embankment of 300-500 meters. The
elliptical scraper makes a working pass only in one direction with this scheme
during one cycle and makes a return empty pass with two turns
Mway men excavating a channel between mm: to which soil is moved
elliptical and with soil moving distance of 200-250 meters. The scraper makes
two working passes in both directions with this scheme
zigzag and with parallel arrangement of channel with embankment extending
figure- along the contour. The scraper completes a series of operations in
eight a specific order which are contained in a single working cycle with
these schemes, which include mvement of the empty scraper to the
soil excavation point, cutting into the soil and filling the bucket,
moving the loaded scraper and dumping the soil
Table 3.9. Scraper Productivity During Soil Excavation
(2) Iowan-nu n-ue "ma. :- _ - "-
(3) f I. I
”“413“ Jul 0 I In C-I l ,‘a m ,,7._ l 3‘ 3?:
Inn-n "ye- ._—____—— _.
II. n Xaunmnn man 6)
Itml'te) l l‘ | l‘ I" I l...
m opp-nee none. run an“ [and M Ame. venue. M.
so no 295 no can _ _. -- - _ _
I00 2‘!) m 53': 410 13) coo 700 9‘0 W M
200—250 I50 IJ) 365 am M) 300 450 MO 650 W)
300 ms 95 270 235 — _. .. .- -
400 85 75 215 IN _ _ _. . _ _
500 70 so too 160 am an m «5 413 us
600 58 52 155 135 — — — -- - —
100 50 45 I35 no — — -- -
coo - —_ m 105 _ - . . . _
IM — -— 96 88 zoo 2|5 IN 255 270 255
I200 — — B2 14 ._ ._ _ __
Moo—1500 - — 7| so l35 I45 I3 I75 l9! I75
moo .. -. 5:; u _ _ _ _ ..
2M - — — -- :05 120 I05 [.15 15" I35
3000 ._ _ _ _ 12 so 72 96 «u 96
sooo _ .. _ — do 45 on 56 m 56
Key:
1. Distance of mving soil, meters 6. Soil characteristics
2. Scraper bucket capacity, m3 7. Light
3. Up to 8. Medium
4. lo with 200-250 hp tractor 9. "saw

5. 15 with 300-350 hp tractor

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 4 .

ma ilFHt'lAl. l5}: UNI. \

 

2--transport equipmentI I-IV--nuli>ers of faces

Table 3.10. Interchangeable Equipment of Excavator and Range of Application
hype of
Interziinange‘afle Range of Application

straight shovel

Reverse shovel

Dragline

Grab

Table 3.11.

on) that does not form peaks

(trenches, ditches and so on)

when light and medium soils are excavated and also soils in

damp faces or under water

When excavating loose or thin soils below the level of. the

excavator

excavator Productivity with Soil Loaded onto Transport Equipment

 

 

 

‘ (2) (3) .
nun-nonu- a- an (up-Mal tuneup-1| lam-unru- I' ell-I.- ups-lulu). II
I‘ "n...
'"“'“" n11.on| 03—0“ on llo—l15—_ 015 «as as —‘—.—ou"_": ..',
———_-“l-l-p-I':n_anmn. u’ltwwy (I,

   
 
  

     

ISO-J15 300-4 5'10
II ”5—140 273 "'50 410
III ”#I 220—285 350
IV - - ISIS-205 240

[Key on following page]

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scheme for Excavation of Channel with Straight-shovel moavator:
A--sections excavated with bulldozer or scraper to torn nininun
height of face: B--sections excavated with excavator; l--excavator;

when excavating deep channels with soil loaded onto transport
equipment, high faces in brittle rock (sandy, gravel and so

Wen soil is excavated below the level of. the excavator
ma owl-161M, use ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Group of soils

2. Bucket capacity (straight shovel), n3
3. Bucket capacity (dragline). n3

4. Productivity, n3/shift

Table 3.12. lowest Recommended Height of Face During Operation With straight-
Shovel Excavator

 

 

(1) ( )N-ueuwu we use - III-rants av mun-u men. n
I
“mam "I" v ‘2‘! I III IV
0.25 I 2 :I
0.5 1.5 2.5 1.5
I.0 2.5 3.5 4.5
(4)
2 a bone 3.5 4.0 6,0

Note. The height of the face should not be sore than 6 meters in heavy soils.

Key:
1. Bmket capacity. m3
2. Minimum height of face depending on group of soils, meters
3. I and II
4. M or more

Table 3.13. Recommended width of Soil Face for Straight-Shovel Excavator

 

     

(l) (2) ﬂ
Interment. meeue. I. III-pus lean. ll Immune nan-e. u' Ill-w. Mal. a
0.25 4.6 1.0 8.7
0.5 6.8 2.3 ”.6

Key:
1. Bucket capacity, 11:3
2. Width of face, meters

It is recounended that semicircular buckets with solid cutting edge be used to
increase excavator productivity ('reNIIS Hintrensetmy [Ministry of Transport Con-
structionl) (Table 3.15).

The operating procedure of single-bucket excavators and the dimensions of faces
when soil is loaded onto transport equipnent are presented in Tables 3.16-3.17.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.14. Approximate Need for Transport Equipment per Excavator

 

(2) Decca-on: wen- I-rulﬂwl» II'

  
  

to I15

Ken-«ecu»1 rye-snowmen mue-

we man-enema». :

1. Distance of moving soil, km
2. Excavator bucket capacity, In
3. Up to

4. Nunber of dung) trucks with capacity, tons

5. Number of transport trailers with capacity, tons

3

Excavation of channels with grader elevators. It is most reasible for grader ele-
vators to excavate channels up to 1.5 meters deep and not less than 500 meters long

in soils of groups I-III, except loose sands that are overmoistened and are in a
viscous-plastic state.

A grader elevator is used with the highest productivity when the soil is excavated

into a pile. Its productivity reaches 500 In 3lhr or more in this case and the work
time utilization factor comprises 0. 85-0. 95.

Table 3.15. Range of Application of Straight-shovel Excavators Having Semicircular
Cutting Edge

        

     
 

 

  

 

—H(1) (2—):lnI-na "Iv-uh I'm-ma nun-n
nw- ”II-«ug- "i. ll _T_ﬁi-"— Imwz': I II III
_(3) nut-Iva Ill-I. a nun me ‘6‘. n
.'I 4 1.5 2 0.5!
n ﬂ'I 2 4 Ll 1 5
1.5

 

 

 

l. Bucket capacity, 11:3
2. Group of soils
3. Height of face, meters

102

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conditions and Working Procedure of Single-Bucket Excavators When
Excavating Channels

Equipment

:avators

 

pvel with
> transport

:h soil ex-
: a pile or
; onto
auipnent

Order of Performing Work

Excavation of pioneer trench
by “frontal" method and con—
struction of ramp from zero
marker

loading soil into transport
equipment

Excavation of channel in
longitudinal passes. The
earth-hauling paths are lo-
cated on one or two sides
Excavation with widened face
(to total width of
excavation)

Collapse of edge. Excava-
tion of channels in longi-
tudinal passes: the proce-
dure and working conditions
are the same when loading
into transport equipment as
when using a straight shov-
el; the excavator moves in
a shuttle scheme

Auxiliary Means of
Mechanization

Bulldozer for excavation
or driving beginning
trench

Transport trailers or
dump trucks

Tractor trailers or dump
trucks, rail or conveyor
transport

Bulldozer and powered
grader

Bulldozer. The transport
equipment is the same as
for a straight-shovel ex-
cavator. Bulldozers for
straightening terraces.

Recammded Dimensions of Paces When Soil is Loaded by Excavator

 

(l)

Ian-lumen nu ( Faun-alum
wen-mun. ‘1

   

(2) Perm not-I'm: eye-tre-

~—

0 «on. "mac (3) 4, pin nun

n mus-aru-
ao men—u. l l I

 

om g:

avator bucket capacity, m3
angenent of transport equipment

sane level

ued on following page]

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

pm") a:
urn-m Pa‘ee'? m
M a I I (y’a- q.
:! non eon mu
‘ Wdﬂl Caruso -.
ea ea—I- r71“ . .
nu.-

a:
6
8
8

l2.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued frou preceding page]:

4. At different levels
5. Distance from excavator axis to bottom, meters

6. slope
7. Face

8. width of face along bottom, meters
9. Height from bottom of face to top of bed of transport machine, meters
10. Unloading radius with greatest loading height, meters

Table 3.18. Recomended Angles of Setting Cutting Dis): of Grader Elevator

(2) VIM. ms

 

 

 

 

(1) ﬂ-
- .42» I 49.. pew
Cyuecs (6’ 45-45 35-63 l5- 20
Cymsuox *7) ill—25 45 l5—2ﬂ
runs (8 3 50—40 l0-—15
Pnpuueuuua (9) 33—4) 55-50 ~-
Key:

1. Soil 6. Sandy loan

2. Angle, degrees 7. loan

3. Cutting 8. Clay

4. Grab 9. Broken

5. Dressing of cutting edge

The face should first be prepared with a powered grader or bulldozer by cutting a
furrow with vertical wall up to 0.4 meters high for a grader elevator to operate.
The recommended angles of setting the cutting disk of the grader elevator should
be taken from Table 3.18.

3.3. Construction of Pills

M methods of dmnpingulongitudinal and transverse--are used when constructing
fills.

No schemes can be used with the longitudinal method: "from oneself" when dunping
of the soil is begun with sections of the contour of the fill located closest to
the excavation in which the soil is excavated and it is carried to the opposite
end of the fill, and "to oneself” when filling of the fill begins from the sections
most remote from the excavation and it is carried out in a direction toward the
excavation.

Only the "to oneself" scheme is used with the transverse method when the soil is
dumped perpendicular to the strips since intersection of the soil hauling paths
with the direction of mtion of the packing machines is inevitable in the case of
dumping “from oneself."

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-m

The driving machines should be selected from Table 3.19 as a function of the condi-
tions for constructing the fills.

Recomendations on construction of fills by different machines, the coupositions
of the sections and productivity are presented in Tables 3.20-3.27.

The maximal permissible slope when collecting soil with a scraper bucket comprises
15-20 percent, the steepness of the ramps onto the fill should not be more
than 200 percent and the distances between access ramps should be 50-100 meters.
A width of the fill of 8.5 meters is adequate for the scraper to turn.

Methods of constructing a fill with scrapers are shown in Figure 5.

Packing of soils. It is most effective to pack soils with optimum moisture con-
tent (Table 3.28).

Soils with moisture content less than 80 percent of the optimun prior to packing
should be vetted down, but if the moisture content of the soils in the fill or
drain channel is above the optimum, the soils should be drained prior to excava-
tion or movement into a fill.

The methods of packing soils and the recommended operating modes of machines are
presented in Tables 3.29 and 3.30.

3.4. Grading and Landscaping work

The coeposition of grading work is as follows: ripping the surface layer of the
soil (when working with heavy soils), preliminary grading and packing of the sur-
face, final grading and packing of the surface. The recomndations on performing

grading work are presented in Table 3.31 and the productivity of the machines is
presented in Table 3. 32.

The following grading schemes are usually employed: with length of cut of 500
meters or more and width of not less than 100 meters:

a) Circular with machines moving from edge of section to its middle or vice
verse, from the middle of the section to its edges;

b) the shuttle scheme is used with alternation of machine passes in mutually
perpendicular directions with length of cut from 200 to 500 meters and width up to

100 meters and the scheme with working pass in the same direction is used with
length of cut up to 200 meters.

The purpose of landscaping work is to create a firm sod cover of vegetation uniform
in thickness on the soil part of the flying field (Table: 3.33 and 3.34).

The quality of the sod cover is characterized by the nunber of shoots of sod-form-
ing grasses per unit area (20 x 20 cm) (Table 3.34).

The composition of landscaping work and recommendations on performing it, are pre-
sented in Tables 3.35 and 3.36 and the rates of fertilizer application are given in
Table 3.37.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
250-500

Dependent on

concentrated
work conditions

50-100

Bulldozers. Scrapers with
bucket capacity up to 10
m3 or dragline excavators
with bucket capacity up to
l m3

Motor scrapers with bucket

capacity of 10 m3 or more
or excavators with bucket

capacity of 1-1.5 m3 and
transport equipment

Excavators with bucket
capacity up to 3 m3 with
group of dump trucks hav-
ing capacity of 7-10 tons
and motor scrapers with
bucket capacity more than
10 m3

Universal bulldozers and
excavators (straight shov-
el or draglinc) with buck-
et capacity of l m3
nuouoaausn
.uxoauu mean no macaw

can mi n 0» a: >uuu~muo
uoxosn sum: ououu>ooxm

nodua>ooxo awoa unaucazo
Ioaouo>£ wan unusmdnum

auououuasn Homuw>aca can
mxoauu mesv >uaouma0100uud
.mE ~ 0» a: >uuocmau v0
Ixosn 5:3 nusgﬁoxu .935
Ian: xoun and unannouaaoo
Table 3.20. Recommended Distances of Moving soil with Scrapers Having bitterent
Bucket Capacity

 

 

 

 

   

 

lent-nan. ma, "pun «Rb»... Burn-me.» mus. Ilse-nu - mu qty-u.
I ‘I l
(1) "
ﬂmqmusapuum 'Canoxoauou cupcaepu
“ o 3 [lo 250 110 6 110 two
a 6 n 300—350 a H) t 2500
. lo a soo—Iom » l5 » 3000
r [5 » 1500-4000
Kay:
1. Bucket capacity, n3 4. Up to
2. Range of hauling soil, meters 5. Motor scrapers

3. moved scrapers

Table 3.21. Becamended Thickness” of Cut “hen Collecting Soil with Scraper and
Height of Filling Bucket

(1) (2) CFO-l" (4) Gym.
Tutu-“n an... 2' Wmmml 431—“;—
(5) tom (Inns. u
o 3 loo—120 2—3 3—4
(6)11: 6 ISO—150 4—6 6-8
a 10 ISO—2m _ 8-40 I0-—l2
a l5 230—250 12—44 Ii—IG
25 250—210 IB—IO “—20
Key:
1. Bucket capacity, 11:3 4. Sandy loan
2. Height of filling bucket, cm 5. Thickness of cut, cm
3. Loam . 6. Up to

Table 3.22. Length of Path When Collecting Soil with Scraper

—.,_ .. . .__ _.... .
(1 (2)

. [Inn "you". c apno- ll.- yuLgA tar-W
I at moo-<19 I‘FII‘. '1 P“. I c yum. unnam- lyu
spa-u. u

 

W; 3.0 9.5—9.6 0.0-3.0
5.0 4.0 13.‘ —'l 3.5 6.5—7.2
9.o—u.o 13.0—14.0 8.0—".0
I59 — ”.0 ‘53—'55 "Lo—23.0

Key:
1. Bucket capacity, n3

2. Length of scraper and tractor, meters

3. Length of filling section with regard to initial cutting path, meters

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
position of Scraper moup (with Flow Rate up to 3,000 Meters per 5'

of Group

ith bucket
m3 or motor
cket capacity

100 or T-180

ine) on T-lOO

(the tractor
her if

aders

rollers or
atic tires

machines
tations

rank
n and fifth

rank

rations Performed

Excavation and moving soil from
drain channels or excavation
with preliminary levelling to
fills

Moving soil over short distances

Preliminary ripping of soil of
groups II and 111 before collec-
tion of soil by scraper

Layer by layer levelling of soil
prior to packing

Layer by layer packing of soil
into fills

Wetting of soil during packing
Lighting the job site

Driving the machines
Maintenance and repair of machines

Refueling and lubrication and
staking work

Height of Fill
1.5 5
Number of Mac)

 

3-5 E

8-10 12
4
with
pneu-
[6-50

llar

u—vu r-u---u.uu., -uvvc‘auu’

Layer by layer packing of £111
soil

Grading of fill and bottom of
drainage channel

Preliminary ripping of soil in
drainage channel

Lighting the jobsite

weration of machines

Maintenance and repair of

machines
sauna and minm'l‘lnn-nne inh-
Table 3.25. Most Efficient Angles of Setting Powered Grader Blade when Construct-

 

 

ing Pills
.. _ . __ . . 2 , . . -
0‘2, 1 ) Wm. M
III .
.9). ”$3.2 l 9...
3apuuue tpyuu (0e: yanurnau): (18)
pupuuevmoro new 7 o I!) no 40 15
10 me. wxmrcm H a 40 IS
uqmwuxuuuom "emanate (9) 40—45 D 35 '5
"epueumuu- rﬂuu. (10) '
emu-mt 40—60 N N
cyxom ( 35—105 05—40 1.1
ﬂea-woo“ (131 45—00 5—40 I“
Paapuuuuume'( 4)
c yuotlcuucx (15) 70—90 60—60 '2
6e) yluomcuun s ) 55-60 45—50 3
Open: oum‘m ({ ? 60—66 40—45 5"
Operations 10. Moving soil
Angles, degrees 11. Wet
Grab 12. Dry
Cutting l3. Levelling
ot slope l4. Grading
Cutting of soil (without extender) 15. with packing
Of broken soil with plow 16. Without packing
or broken soil with ripper 17. Cutting of slopes
or unbroken loose soil 18. Up to

Table 3.26. Distances for Transverse novenent of Soil with Powered Graders

 

 

(l) as— | T | as u.
(In-nab Mme ——————_._ _. _

Faun-me Lupe..." urem- mm-
Iyu van-I IPIII'IP. I

4)

r," mam-men: |.6 |.9 '2 ‘2 J .)
c nines yanunuu-ncu (5) 2.0 2.4 2.8 .1.)
C ”ye. ygmumvnuun (6) 2.4 2.9 3,4 .1,"

 

 

 

 

Method of operation

Grab angle, degrees

Distance of transverse movement of. soil with single pass. meters
without extender

With single extender

With two extenders

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3.27. Calculated Productivity of Heavy Powered Graders when Constructing
Pills Up to 1 Meter High

 

(1) I‘m-use ”you“ (2)

'““",',';;:f':‘“ "" I | u l nu

"ma- Invnmve. I'lnuwy (35

ISO I35 I20
IO!) 92 BO

88

lo l 3"! l 260 2.15

1. Distance of moving soil, meters 3. Productivity. n3/shift
2. Group of soils

 

Figure 5. Methods of Constructing Pills with Scrapers: a--longitudinal
method; b--transverse method; c--construction of fill ”from one-
self" with longitudinal method; c--oonstruction of fill "to one-
self" with longitudinal method: e--construction of enbanknent “to

oneself" with transverse method; l-6--sequence of unloading scrap-
er; I-IX--sequence of filling strips

Key :
l . Packing

Grass mixtures and sowing seeds. Grass mixtures are selected from several spe-
cies (4-7) of grasses which have different beginning and ending of the vegetation
period, which contributes to the longest extension of the operating season of the
sod cover.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.28. Values of Optimum Moisture Content and Maxim: Density of Soils

 

 

 

  
 
  
 

(1)

I've:

(2) In.“ a.
Oueaueus m- m 37:11. ..;_—
«m yum-p.

~, ﬂee.

   

(4)

l'lecnsnuﬁ 8—13 LII—MB
Gym-ml (5) 9—”) ”6—2.“
nusssaful (6) "5—20 LEI—IN
Cyranmwnuﬁ (7) 12— IO l5—l5
Emma! ry‘mmmctui “(8) ”—32 It'lm

mmmﬂu nI-mesam -— I ,‘M
flaunt-mi (10) (9) i6-30 LBS-[.70

1. Soil

2. Optimum moisture content, percent

3. Maximum soil density with standard packing, g/cm3
4. Sandy

5. Sandy loam

6. Dusty

7. loam

8. Heavy loan

9. Heavy dusty

10. Clay

Table 3.29. Methods of Packing Soils and Packing Equipment

Method Packing Devices
1

- 2

Rolling Static machines-—rollers (towed and self-propelled with smooth

 

wheels and sheepsfoot rollers on pneumatic tires). Their productiv-

ity is 100-600 m3/hr

Recosnended tire pressure (P, kgf/cmz) for soils:
2.0 for sandy
3-4 for sandy loam
4-5 for light and medium loams
6-8 for heavy loans and clays

Most efficient speed of rollers when rolling:
2-2.5 km/hr during first and last two passes;
8-15 km/hr during all intermediate passes.

It is recumnended that heavy cohesive soil be packed with differ-

ent mass rollers-~light, medium and heavy. while noncoheeive

soils be packed with light and medium rollers. The previous pass

must be overlapped by 15-20 cm in all cases

Vibration Motorized and towed vibrating rollers and motorized towed and sus-
pended vibrating plates. Vibration is most effective when packing
noncohesive soils (sandy. sandy loan and gravelly with no more than

[Continued on following page]

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.29 (Continued).

Method Packing Devices
1 2

5-6 percent clay particle content and having optimum moisture con-
tent) in layers more than 0.5 meter thick. Vibrating plates are
sure applicable in finishing trenches to pack soils under cramed
conditions

Tamping Taming plates with mass of 1-3 tons suspended to the boom of a
crane or excavator, towed rollers with falling weights having mass
of 0.8, 1.2 and 1.7 tons, motorised impact-tamping machines, pneu-
matic and electric tapers for packing nonoohesive. cohesive and
rocky soils. The productivity of tamping plates is approximately
15-125 n3/hr

Electric and pneumatic tempers are used to perform small voluues of
work in cramped places. a levelled layer of soil of 25-30 cm can
be packed with light tempers (with mass of 40-60 kg) during two-
four passes on the same track, while a layer of soil 30-50 cm thick
can be packed with heavy tampers (with mass of 150-200 kg) during
two-four passes

Note. Smooth-wheeled, vibrating and pneunatic tire motorized rollers are used only
during the last stage of packing soils. The use of pneumatic tire rollers with air
pressure control systems in the tires are most effective.

The sequence of work in sowing seeds is:
sowing half the rate when the seed drill is moving along the strip;
sowing the second half with the seed drill moving perpendicular to the strip!

working in the seeds with toothed harrows or brushwood drags from 0.5 to 4 cm
deep:

rolling in one pass with light wood rollers:
watering at the rate of 1.5-2 m3 of water per 10 m2 of area:

caring for the plantings (periodic watering during the entire vegetation per-
iod, sowing grasses, weed control, destruction of rodents, mowing the grass stand
and top dressing with mineral fertilizers).

3.5. Performing Excavation Work Under Special Conditions
Filling fills in swamps. Sections with swamps of only first type with smallest
thickness of the peat layer are selected for airfield construction in swampy lo-

cales. The methods and procedure of performing excavation work in swamps are
shown in Table 3.38. .

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.30. (pentlnq Modes of Son-Packing Machines

____,_ ‘ . ____.—————_

 

_. —_..- . _..__..—

Dene-g) mn- mm“ ‘3.

 

 

amt-rm u Inma- "- "DI-0
(1) I’:.I'DI "If e- 7‘2"” $.-
Y-o-nmm nun-u m "“7
"e nu. C-aed ”tensed Cue-.4
mm mm m'" mm

Km»: npnuennue ua unuumxux
Ilmau umol.

 

 

 

Io—w ‘I’ (7) 20:46 3—30 ii i
- 15—20 10—15 6-8 8-12
l5—30 . 3—40 30—36 1—_6 11
25—30 55:23 6—8 a .10
so r mm $.40 11 2
35-1!» 237?! 64 8—10
IO!) » (a) 90-400 (yo—an 4—8 6-40

Knox "mom-mi ua mlenuuuecmx
mum“ nan-oh:

 

 

“1—25 1’ 30.35 25. :l) 4» 6 6—8
2?. Jo Is .20 6—8 0- In
30—15 » (9) w m 40-45 4-6 5..“
Ryan-Income um npunmuuc naccoﬁ:
(10)!“ 9 Y - 15-220 - _6_1
--lo
o 30 O .. 10.45 4—6
' 6 --|o
Karin! unropuuc antenna (11) J.“ . 35 _. 4-5 _-
(12) 20-4.) 6-~B
BIIOpoynaomnmuuc naumuu. lpuucnnue 50—150 -- '1 ~6 --

nuﬁpouﬂ’lul enrol 2.5—6 1’

Hum maggots“ n ”cu-ugly 3040 10—80 2-4 4-43
nun-oh no )0 If. ”new: a num- —‘_—“ -" “L“
le a npn nun-mp: nucom I u (5'40 3)" 7" ‘ '6 6

To no. npu nut-«In c nucotu 2 I (14 loo—Ho 80—90 2-4 “-5

.—__—

—-R
(15) m--9o 70- On 4—“ G

Cauowauue ululuuu:
yaapuo-rpnuOynomo admin (16) w—lm 30-30 2—4 4—6
rut-ammo minus (17) 50-60 40-40 I |

_—.—

(18, {0— 50 m—W
unapotpauoy-oumﬂ «no: uncool 6 1' 60—80 15—20 4—5 5 -I0

 

 

 

40- «5 5—45
Note. Up to density not less then 0.95 in the nuneratot end 1.0-0.98 in the de-
nominator of the maximum density during standard pecking.
Key:

1. Packing nechines
2. Optimum thickness of packed layer in dense body, an

[Key continued on following page]

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page):

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

Approximate nunber of passes (or blows) of packing machine over the same track
Noncohesive soil

Cohesive soil

Towed rollers on pneuatic tires with mass

‘l‘ons

Motorized rollers on pneunatic tires with mass

Towed sheepsfoot rollers with mass

Up to

Motorized heavy rollers

Vibrating packing machines and towed vibrating rollers with mass of 2.5-6 tons
Tamping plates on excavators with mass up to 2,000 kg measuring 1 x l aster
in cross-section when dropped from a height of 1 meter

Tamping plates on excavators up to 2,000 kg in mass measuring 1 x 1 meter in
cross-section when dropped from a height of 2 meters

Motorized machines

Impact-mum

Static

Vibrating tamping roller with mass of 6 tons

Table 3.31. Recomendations on Grading Operations

location
of Work Rooosmendations on Performing Hork

Sections with The work is performed in two phases: the first phase is rough

zero datun grading of the section and the second phase is final finishing of

marks the surface by levelling data: marks. The machine used is a mo-
torized grader with the blade set at an angle of 45-60', with
cutting angle of 40-60° and with angle of inclination of 18-25°

Sections of The work is performed inmeidately after completion of excavating

excavations the mineral soil and control levelling of the entire excavation
surface. The composition of the work and the setting of the
blade angles are the same as when performing work on sections
with zero datum marks. The surface of the excavations is finally
finished only after the layer of vegetation-laden soil is re-
stored. The number of passes of the grader is from two to six on
the same track

Installation It is completed prior to the beginning of trenches dug earlier

of trough when laying sewer lines. The work is performed shortly before
installation of the pavement. Grading is carried out only along
the longitudinal axis of the trough with constant check by
levelling

On fill The composition of work is layer by layer levelling of the soil

sections in one-two passes with a bulldozer (when dumping soil with dump

trucks or tractor trailers) or with scrapers (when they are used
to fill in a fill) , rough preliminary grading with bulldozers or
graders and final surface finishing after packing the top layer

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3.32. calculated Productivity of Machines in Grading Operations, nZ/shit't

(3) u-y-u- Inc“

will. $31.7?

 

  

 

‘T‘I—ﬂ

 

I Ilan-wloauetn. ulkun-y (4)

 

 

 

 

 

(6)

A my... (5) l 5 4100 um .1500

"12““;- nﬁuuﬁSWIV” .0 s «50 mm 31m

Key:
1. Machines 5. Heavy motorized grader
2. Distance of moving soil, meters 6. Up to
3. Group of soils 7. Towed grader

4. Productivity, m2/shift

Table 3.33. Characteristics of Sod Depending on Thickness of Layer

 

 

 

 

(1) (2) l I
"ilIlf-“II' mu: Iran-uh vent-a. ra- llnwum um: I'm-un- uxu. n.
(Ana-uh (310 6 Mann’s) I? 48
Cpemmfl (4) s-nz 0m". Mum-man) Is
Key:

1. Name of sod 5. Up to

2. Thickness of layer, cm 6. Thick

3. Shallow 7. Very thick

4. Median

Table 3.34. Estimating the Quality of Sod Cover

Ito rut-r m
I strum-Irm- “ﬁle-run-

tam (3) m
mun-mun mom— I- on can.

 

  
   
  
 

C’lll' cm-
In mum'—

(1)

Kn-m n. sanctum mm

 

"'(6)

("nu-"Inc > 400 >2!” >100
Annual" (7) M IN-m 50—1“,
.\ u-umrtmqnnrnmm(8) < "II-200 50— IM 35—“)

llJ-mu- (9) .l00 <50 <55
FOR OFFICIAL IlSl-Z ONLY

Table 3.35. Wpes and Composition of Landscaping Work

HE” of work

Preplanting
working of
soil

Preparation
of fertiliz-
ers and ap-
plication to
soil

ﬂaition‘ Desiﬂation and Characteristics of work

Carried out after completion of entire complex of excavation work
on flying field, including removal and restoration of vegetation-
laden soil layer. Composition:

plowing performed with agricultural or brush plows. The pur-
pose of plowing is to break up the top layer of soil, to destroy
weeds and to work in the fertilizers applied to the soil. The
depth of plowing is 20-25 cm in unbroken or firmly packed and
salinized soils. The moisture content of the soil should be in
the range of 40-60 percent of total moisture capacity:

disking perfoer immediately after completing of plowing the
section. The purpose is to break up dense layers of heavy cohe-
sive soils and sod. It is performed with tractor disk barrows
and heavy disk cultivators.

Disking is carried out in three-four passes on heavy soils, two-
three passes of less cohesive soils and in five-six passes on
virgin sections:

disking performed after plowing and disking of the worked
section. The purpose is additional breaking of the soil, reten-
tion of moisture in it, removal of undestroyed plant residues
and working in mineral fertilizers and grass seeds. It is per-
formed with barrows to a depth up to 10-15 cm

rototilling--a process which replaces plowing , disking and
harrowing simultaneously. It is performed by a special machine
with a working nemberua cutter. The depth of rototilling is
from 8 to 25 an usually in two passes;

rolling, performed both during preplanting working of the
soil and after sowing of seeds. Its pquose is to break up small
clumps of soil, smoothing and packing of broken soil and improve.
ment of the capillary system of the soil and contact between
seeds and soil particles. Rollers with mass up to 5 tons are
used during preplanting working of the soil and on light soils
and rollers with mass up to 2-3 tons are used on heavy soils.
The worked surface is rolled with light wooden rollers after the
seeds have been planted and worked in.

Organic fertilizers are applied when creating a sod cover on sec-
tions with vegetation-laden soil layer up to 10 cm thick. The
turf is specially prepared prior to application to the soil: it
is aerated to avoid iron oxide compounds and to reduce its mois-
ture content to 60-75 percent (the duration of aeration is 7-15

[Continued on following page]

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3.35 (Continued).

HE” of Work mention, Designation and Characteristics of Work

days), it is composted, i.e., it is mixed with other types of
fertilizers (manure, lime, ashes and so on) and the mixture is
aged in piles up to 1 year. Before mineral fertilizers are ap-
plied to the soil they must be dried, pulverized and passed
through a screen with mesh of 5-6 mm

chavation work in sandy deserts. All excavation work is usually performed in
winter and spring when the sand is mist when constructing airfields in sandy
deserts and semideserts. Artificial wetting is employed during the dry season of
the year. Excavation wrk should be carried out continuously and finished sections
should be strengthened immediately.

Hoist and cohesive soil from quarries is usually employed to construct a 10-30
centimeter layer laid between the fill constructed from sand and the bed under the
pavement during excavation work on poorly drained or barkhan sections. This layer
prevents the bed material from sinking into the sand and improves the base packing
conditions.

Excavation work is usually not carried out on overgrown and semi-overgrown sands
to preserve the vegetation, but is limited to low-scale grading work. abankments
are made sloping in excavation work and are immediately reinforced with panels or
are treated with organic binder materials.

Excavation work on salinized soils. Salinized soils are divided by types into
solonchaks, solonets and takyrs and they are subdivided as a function of the per-
centage content of salts in them into slightly salinized, mediun salinized, strong-
ly salinized and excessively salinized.

Excessively salinized soils are unsuitable for constructing fills and strongly
salinized soils are suitable only when a nunber of specific measures are imple-
mnted. An invariable condition when constructing fill from salinized soils is
to protect the uppez: layers of the fill against wetting.

Excavation work should be conducted during the SW! season and during the fall
before the onset of rains on cohesive salinized soils (clay solonchaks) with high
level of standing groundwater. The mrk should be conducted in spring or the be—
ginning of the sinner season on noncohesive salinized soils (sandy solonchaks)
with high level of standing groundwater. The fill is poured from hauled-in nonco-
hesive soils (sands and sandy loans) on wet salinized soils (clay solonchaks). The
bed should be protected from a salt crust in sunner prior to pouring the fill.

Excavation work on loess-type soils. Loessy soils are unstable sagged sandy soils
that run easily when vetted. A thoroughly packed artificial bed not less than 0.6
meter thick must be installed under them when pouring fill on these soils. A pro-
tective zone up to 60 meters wide to prevent accumulation of moisture in the air-
field region and consequently to avoid possible sags of soil is established around
the perimeter for the entire period of construction and operation of the airfield.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘UII OI'II'II'IAI. l-SI-f ()NI."

comm 0:» >2
vocusuouoo and cauuaouammu nouuauuMOu no «can» 0:9

56 om.nm no :vmov a 00 ozouuuz uo muoua>uuaao >n
oocn>oa cu :« voxuos and nuonwuwuh0u wanesmaosm odds:
.50 man we canon a Cu zouua: a no .303 05 gun: cu
uoxuo: «no can mcwvoow on uOuum >u00~¢905§d Adam on»
o» nonumuo oun muouuauuuou Esammouom can camouuwz

quuu>uunzu

can axnww saw: woman acououuuv no H«0m Quad 0&5»
uxaa on» ocuxuoz can naaunu out» on: unannouaw mean:
noun ouuuco any uo>o acquanuuuuav auOuuns "vocunv
now ucwzonaou on» :« ”won 0:» cu nodumma and-:05
own .auonuawuuuu Esunuquoa can nauonmoonm .comouu«:
no ouauxus a ..o.« .quNuuuquu ”change cucumsou

wouuauu Huouoo 0:1 OEBOOH uo unawuuac

concuua: on» ou¢>auoa a» can: van 0:: avoom £u«3
uonuooou Huoa on» on codaamn on: >059 .qum on»
cued MO3OHQ :«5» and 0:6 uo>oo vasouo ucoam oomom
scum on» no 00w» 0;» :0 >Huuouuo voua>wuuao and >059

ouuuooz Mom «:0» ecu Ou on scum

nun anon covaomiOu uo omega ﬁnd «so» cow 0» con souu
one aqua owuazuooz can ooaoaﬁooov ”~03 no newuuo
lawman no mouau 0:8 .moadu win vouaomou and accuvu
uuomo 0:9 .uouuuuuuou uo cauuuom axon no ocuxue can
acuvuoumm .couaoau on 00 uosaa ”won on» no canon
ouuuco 0:» 00 uuouuso ho mackuog xamv sud) acuxuz
.vouuouu on 0» noun me ﬁne: oogmuanduuc «0 v\a 0»
m\a an muovuoumm aoaoomm and»: :oHusnwuumuo shaman:

 

coauooaa no .oocoa m. vegan:

Aco on cad gnu .unua anamuou
Ion .ouauasn asannouom .ouw
InOnzo nﬂuunuuom. sawnnuuom

“so

0» 0:6 H006 0:09 .13... can
Iuozmnozm .ouu:moo:m «150:»
.mouacmmonnuuasmv mnuozmuozm

:0 on new nouomuHua auunu
.ocmuoHAU e:«8955a .ounuuuc
Eaaumduom .ouauuuc abusesﬁu
.ouuuasu EducoaaunscooouUuz

canouqnu unwed.»

Icoo mounds Huoa one «woman
uuuuou Howuouuom .:o On vac
couo> .o>o~o .Ouuouuo ~ocaaau
"Amouuuovum. mouscue :oouo

ouacue new uuum

nouﬂdquuom uo mmum

danced:

ownomuo

muouﬂuauuom

J.) \u. 14,

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
od (S_eguence) of 32211:

if there is increased
up to 5.5). Gypsum is
alkaline soil. Line is

235 than a week prior l
s sown uniformly by men
special drills with But
to the entire depth of
is): cultivator: or a ct
§

FOR ()l-‘l-‘IC‘IM. “SI”. ONLV

Table 3.37. Rates for Application of Nutrient (Active) Substance of Nitrogen,

Note .

Phosphorus and Potassiun Fertilizers

 

,_——' —. -. -. _._._

 

2)Mlorwnenno ys-ﬂnnlo Isuzu-enm-
(1) ("In-yum». )r-ru-u

Ike-1 at "'3’ | *EIW magi-Ir"

. ——|_____

"mum Ilftfﬂll ya Own-I. ulna (6)

 

7
Coicpnaum no 2'1. tyuyta —y.£y1?nu¢n. w 90—m- '.II— I'm
nu lowest mm apyfuuu ovrumcrm-
n noOauauu

Coup-(amen 60.194: 2'5 ryeyca- «mac ﬁlo—m on -‘.I0 Sll- I'll!
u. ml cyan-nun: n nerxuryumm
na- (9)
"0110.111ch cyrnumu r111 11 Man-nun 30—50 311-420 40- en
Cera- act-nun cyu mum "minute-10ml 30- 430 Gil-40 6‘.) 90
ml «pnuam (10) .
Cyumuuln (11) 2i)--Z;U 60-1!) .II ("I
Mum-nan ncpumeu (12) . :I) an . .
Kmmmmna (13) Jon-lo m .-

1b determine the required amount of each type of fertilizer, recalculation

is made with regard to the percentage content of nutrient (active) materiel in it,
which is indicated on the fertilizer bag. For emple, with a rate of nutrient
material application of 80 kg/ha for phosphorus fertilizer, the required amount of
superphosphate with 20 percent nutrient matter is (lOO-80)/20 - 400 kg/ha.

Key:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8|
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Soil

Mineral fertilizers of nutrient (active) matter

Nitrogen

Phosphorus

Potassium

Rates of fertilizer application, kg/ha

Containing up to 2 percent hunus-iwroved with peat or other organic
additives

Containing more than 2 percent humus—podzolic, sandy loam and light loam
Podzolic loam and clay

Gray forest loan and leeched chernozem

loam

Thick chernozem

Chestnut

Canals must not be constructed, drain channels must not be installed and any struc—
tures for collection of moisture must not be constructed in the protective zone.

Excavation work during the winter season. The types of work performed in winter are:

removal of peat from frozen swamps with simultaneous pouring of fill;

laying pipelines in water-saturated frozen soils:

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 3. 38.

Method

 

Pouring fill
with total
removal of

peat

Pouring fill
with partial
removal of

peat

Hith instal-
lation of
vertical
sandy drains
and drain
cuts

‘0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Methods of Pouring Fill in Swamps

Mme of Work

The peat within the contour of the fill is completely removed with
an excavator equipped with a drag line if the peat is up to 4
meters thick with the formed trench being filled by a bulldozer
hauling in drain soil. If the peat layer is more than 4 meters
thick, the explosive or hydromechanical method is used with sub-
sequent pouring of fill to the mineral bottom. Total peat removal
is also possible during operation of an excavator (to a depth up
to 4 meters) and a dredge (more than 4 meters)

The peat is partially removed within the contour of the fill. The
lower part of the peat layer is squeezed to the sides under the

weight of the fill soil and the fill is poured onto the mineral
bottom

Sandy drains are installed to construct fill. The sequence of
work is pouring an easily-draining sandy layer 25-30 cm thick over
the entire area, installation of drains 30-50 cm in diameter in
alternating order at a distance from 1.8 to 6 meters from each
other and at a depth from 3 to 30 meters with special equipment,
filling the drains with coarse sand and constructing the fill to
the design marks. Drainage cuts (trenches) from 0.4 to 1 meter
wide located from 1.5 to 3 meters from each other are installed on
swamps with peat layer up to 3 meters using an excavator with wide
tracks which moves on standard planking. The cuts are filled with
sand with a bulldozer immediately after they are cut out

deep excavation work in dry sands and other nonfreezing soils;

pouring of fill from dry noncohesive soils.

Excavation work during the winter season should be preceded by careful preparation:
indication on the terrain of excavation and fill profiles, construction of earth-
hauling paths and temporary drain channels, procurement of panels for snow reten-
tion and heat-insulating materials (local), preparation of machines and mechanisms
to operate under winter conditions, construction of worker warming stations, or-

ganization of lighting and so on.

To protect the soil against freezing or to reduce the depth of freezing, it is
ripped to different depths and disked and snow-retaining panels are installed and
the soil surface is covered with local heat-insulating materials (straw mats,
IIDSS, brushwood, dry peat, sawdust, slag and so on).

In these cases excavation of the soil is begun with removal of snow and heat-in-
sulating materials. The area of the exposed soil should be excavated during a

single shift.

minimal.

The duration of loading the soil into transport equipment should be
Thawed soil should be completely packed before the temperature drops to

+2'c. It is recommended that tamping plates or meshed rollers be used for packing.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Excavation work with frozen soil is performed by the methods indicated in Table

3.39.
Table 3.39.

Method

Ripping

Breakup
(Fracturing)

Drilling-

explosive

‘l‘hawing of
soil

Excavation work Hith Frozen Soil

3223s of work and Means of Hechanization

Employed when the thickness of the frozen layer is 10-20 on.
Bulldozers with stingers on the ripper blades are used. Exca-
vators with straight shovel are used if the depth of freezing is
up to 0.5 meter

It is used when the thickness of the frozen layer is more than
0.5 meter. The frozen soil is broken up (fractured) with a wedge
or spherical attachment having mass of 2.0-2.5 tons suspended to
the excavator boom or with wedges driven into the soil with a
diesel heater or vibrator

It is used in excavating large volunes of deeply frozen soils.
If the freezing depth is 0.6-2.0 meters. the work is carried out
with blast charges 45-70 mm in diameter and if it is more than
2.0 meters it is carried out with hole charges with hole diam-
eter of more than 70 mm drilled by mobile rigs. The size of the
explosive charges is determined by calculation and is refined by
test explosions. To avoid freezing. the broken soil is sampled
every 3-4 hours with severe cold and during the shift with tem-
perature up to -lS°c

The fire method using a set of metal semipipes that form a chan-
nel through which hot gas coming from burners with nozzles is
passed. The heat formed in the channel heats the strip of soil
lying under the channel and the soil is thawed to a depth up to
1.5 meter within 12-15 hours

The thermochemical method using lime, which releases heat when
ignited. Unignited line is poured in a layer 8-10 cm thick and
it is covered with a layer of sawdust 20-25 cm thick or other
heat-insulating material on the section subject to thawing. The
layer of lime is moistened with snow and upon moistening inten-
sive release of heat occurs which warms the soil to 1.5 meters

Using electricity--steel electrodes 12-19 mm in diameter and 1.5-
2.0 meters long driven in checkerboard fashion into the soil be-
low the freezing boundary. Electric current which, passing
through the thawed soil, is passed through the electrodes, heats
the soil and by transmitting heat from the warmed thawed soil to
the frozen soil, it thaws gradually from bottom to top

The work should be performed on a small front and without interruption with any
of the indicated methods of excavating thawed soil to prevent its freezing. The

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SI-I ONLY

surface of excavated sections should be protected against freezing during forced
interruptions.

The fill should usually be poured from thawed soil without ice and snow in it.
The content of frozen soil clumps should not be more than 15-20 percent and not
more than 15-20 cm in size. '

The work processes in pouring fill are as follow:
cleaning the bed for filling of snow and ice:

layer by layer pouring of soil with the calculation that packing of the mois-
tened layer is done before it freezes;

packing the soil by tamping or rollers with mass not less than 25 tons or with
vibrating or vibrating-tamping machines. The degree of packing should correspond
to established norms.

3.6. Organization of Excavation Work
The excavation work plan (PPR) should provide:

the use of complex mechanization of excavation work by supplying sections and
brigades with different earth-moving, packing and transport machines with the cal-
culation that all components of the process flow diagram of excavation work are
mechanized:

performing the work by the continuous method by organizing a special flow in
which all processes are performed in parallel and simultaneously. Each of these
processes is a partial flow;

a high degree of rhythm in work during the entire year, which eliminates the
seasonal nature of tuudutLing the work, raises the degree of nsshiu: "tiliratic:
and reduces the turnover of personnel and the total period of construction work.
The composition of the work production plan is:

a diagram of the flying field layout to sections of the sequence of perform-
ing the work. In this case excavation work should primarily be completed at the
point where the pavement is installed in the following sequence: the trough for
the takeoff-landing strip, shoulders and end safety strips, RD, Ms, taxiway and
the ground part of the flying field:

process flow charts for all types of excavation work included in the special-
ized flow;

making up the machines into sections and brigades to perform individual types
of excavation work:

the excavation work flow schedule;

the calendar schedule of performing excavation work.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total length of the specialized flow of excavation work consists of the fol-
lowing three periods:

1--period of organizing the flow-preparation of the front for operation of the
driving machines (removal and piling of vegetation-laden soil, ripping mineral

soil. preparation of the face for the excavators, installation of pumping stations,
drains, chutes, debris lines and so on);

2--the period of the total course of the flow. The main leading processes of ex-
cavation work (excavation of channels, pouring fill and so on) are performed:

3--period of winding down the flow. The final work of the main processes is per-
formed (grading work, restoration of the vegetation layer, rolling the surface of
channels, packing and grading fills and so on).

'me nunber of leading earth-moving machines for a brigade is determined by the
formula

”HAL,
n

where H is the number of machine-shifts of the leading earth-moving machine re-
quired to perform excavation work, :1 is the number of shifts, M - Q/P, P is the

productivity of a machine per shift, m3, and Q is the volume of excavation work,
m3.

The need for machines to perform auxiliary operations is determined by the same
formula.

The best version of supplying a brigade with leading machines is that in which the

greatest volume of excavation work is performed within a given time at the lowest
cost.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPI‘ER la. CONSTRUCTION OF THE DRAINAGE-RUNOFF SYSTEM

[Text] 4.1. General Data

The drainage-runoff system of an airfield is a unified system of installations
designed to protect the airfield area free the influx of water from outside, to
collect and drain surface and ground water from the flying field within its lin-
its and to drain the bed under pave-ants.

The designation and characteristics of individual components of the runoff-drain-
age system of an airfield are presented in Tables 4.1-4.5.

The diagrams of runoff and drain systems of airfield pavement are presented in
Figure 6 while standard designs of the couponents are presented in Figure 7.

4.2. Organization of Work to Construct Drain-Runoff syeten

The basis for organization of work to construct the drain-runoff system should be
as follows:

sequence of its different conpments during construction;
tying this construction to performance of other types of work;
the continuous method of conducting the work.

Besides collectors, installation of the components of the runoff-drain structures
should be carried out simultaneously with the pavement.

Installation of runoff ditches, drains and drain channels on a dirt flying strip,
of deep drains, halweg pits, rein-intakes, overflows fraa rain-intakes and thal-

weg pits and collectors should be carried out upon oonpletion of gradin
operations. '

12?

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Without pipes 40-60 meters long. They
are laid with slope of 0.006-0.0ls.
with pipes the length is 50-75 meters.
They are laid with a slope of 0.002-
0.01. The drain is a trapezoidal or
rectangular trench filled with filter
material. Water flows into collectors
along the bottom of the trench or
through a pipe laid on the drain layer.
Asbestos-cement pipes 75-100 m in di-
ameter and ceramic pipes 40-50 and 75
m in diameter are used to construct
pipe drains.

The working part of the collectors con-
sists of asbestos-cement. concrete or
ceramic pipes 189 or 235 an in diameter
laid on the bottom of the trench. The
length or the collectors is 200-250
meters

_ . . , a:.,, J.: u_,e,1
Designation

3r water runoff from a closed runoff sys-
m to a water intake. They are installed
nly beyond the limits of the flying field

a capture surface waters running off to

he flying field and to drain than to lower
oints or reservoirs. They are installed
eyomd the airfield on the catch drain

ids. An earth barrier embankment is in-
talled along the drain on the airfield

ide

o discharge water from the drain-runoff
ysten

o collect water from lower sections of
he dirt flying field with subsequent
rainsge of this water along overﬂows to
ollectors. If the slopes of the dirt
hutes are up to 0.005, the distance be-
ween wells is 100 meters and if the
lopes are mre than 0.005 the distance

s up to 200 meters

Brief Ch

 

Trapezoidal shape
0.002, width of t
than 0.4 meter al
slopes are constr
soil. The depth
as a function of
flow rates and th
are reinforced

Open trapezoidal
inforced slopes.
established by hy

Rivers. reservoir
other low places

The design of the
for rain intakes.
stone 20-25 cm th

wide is laid arou
well.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gonna vac occuu>uudav

.ovouocoo Ounuuuocos .uucoconaou Guano
1:00 vacuoun no nous Qua hone .ovaso
can muoboo .uuaz unuuuommsn a we uuwucoo

umcauuuo «duos

sud: no» :0 vouc>oo and «van 0&8 .ououo
Icoo ounuuuocoa no unaccomﬁoo ououonoo
utouOucuou Hocoauoou no yum hauamcuuoou
a mo Exam ozu cu codename“ oua acne

HE 000

uoow no uuouosdau nuaz unusocduoou can
is com 00 a: uuouoaduv uouooHHoo nu«3
udaauuao one wouogaaa 0:9 .uzaaoucduuo
uo>oo uOu coauunu 0:» 00 cucuuso saw:
oocomooo can nuuuoonauaouo ca unasouuu
can un~=0c¢uoou on :10 >osa .xuwun
can ououo:00 oqsuauocos .auaoconeoo
ououocoo unencucuou auscuuuon we can:

acuom ouoouu Haoa 0:» mo ans»

coca anon uo: a“ mnw>aa no sumac 0&9
.ououuaoo ooououcuou no ououocoo aqzuuu
nocoe mo anon a co neon one nouoeuqv :«
as com :15» once anon» cues: monocomﬁou
nouoouaou ououocoo uouuoacuou hem ”and
and nauoadwv :« BB oooIOOn Oman ovouo
Icon vooHOucuuu and oaouocoo .55 com
on: nouoouuoo on» no accuncoswv Soﬁacue
ass .uuoauOAHoo Hauuucu on no»: on:
~86 me one? .535... a»? 33 vegan
noun >uuuuoomu a :0 wand locum ououucoo
voquucuou and ovouocoo .ucoeoouaoumonac

 

nouunuuouOGuunu madam

Human mcazoaHOu :0 vosawucoo.

oxaucw Maud: a 0» nouuoauoo
0:0 Beau Humane mud an»: noun: o>wooou OB

omuaconav 00 can acuso>um m: and am .mm> «0
005:0 come :0 macaw mcuccnu noun: uoo-00 09

noduuom nouuoa

ndoo 0:» no ocwzcwman any an and may!» OUSOu
nouooaaoo oz» ones: «unwom ad .uouooHnoo on»
:«on ucdquv 0mm“ cums: nucuom as» an mousou
uouoonuoo :0 wouuaumcw on ends :10 mode:
sad: .0« no occuuoou usmuauun :0 can uouoou
Idea on» no ocuzcdmon on» an .>ua> uouoaddv
omum no woaouw on» can: .0usou 0:» mo acunv
an .:«0n no:wa muoesu nonuo no n30~uuo>o
anon: unawom on auouooHuoo uo :uam on» :0
vaguouuca and acaoncuz .Eoua>m muons“ on»
no uuumou van oococoucaus ”accuuuuomo you

uu scum muouoa oHum mo oocdumuv c an
unoeo>om as» no movvu osu macaw covcuuuu
0&0 muouuounoo ash .ououuuuu ozu cacaon
uu omuazouuv 0» can acqnuv awn 0:4 moxau
Icalchu .muouooaaoo scam noun: o>uouou or

:OMuQCMMnoo

Amauwnv
nousuuauun
omuanonwo

«and:
oxaucuucudz

nanosca:

muoauoHuou

unocmmaoo

HO DE!!—

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
water: under pavement.
along the edges of the

flowing along the surface
md to discharge it to

:x from rain intake (thal-
I collector
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 4.3. Precast Bases for Concrete and Reinforced Concrete Pipes of Runoff
Collectors
l'luo‘2)Ie-IIIIOI¢. ll .(7 I ._ “Ext!
(1) 2% Q It ._._.-._-
E2
, '50 5.1) 220 u. 300. 0.2! 3.38 0.5“?
3:), 13'.” m 2000 340 II :qu 0.4-1 h" IJIL’»
Key:
1. Inner diameter, m 7. Breaking load on press, kgf
2. Base dimensions, In 8. Mark of concrete
3. Height H 9. Consumption of materials
4. width A 10. Concrete, 13
5. Length of section 2 ll. Steel. kg
6. Radius of perimeter R 12. ”ass, tons
Table 4.4. Reinforced Concrete and High-strength Concrete Pipes for Installation
of Runoff Collectors
________
_ """I7T—
”(3) g: a ! I'm-Inn
new. In: 3 a; d. 0...:-
II (1) (2) _’?5 Q ”Ulrika--
are I
now"- TPV‘“ I —'at I — (10)
$3 33;; 8(5 3 t -
i E 3
h__ ______ .. ____ {5:5 9 ) )3 II
| Kg-mn- 5“! MI MIMI II.IIr. I2..I 03W.
(II-muuue 7-30 :1 Ell-I Rum 0,2.‘Il 23,”. ".0328
won I-zII Iznu I-Imn 2"" mm mun I um
(12) I750 l-III I.'I.'H 12m llﬁ')" 32,51; ['53,
rDCIOIIIINI'? 300 0‘! 4‘2" 4 III :NHMI '
IH-‘Ll Inn/so II n70 II,IoII
(11) 5 37" 34"]50
ll )KencJo- 500 m 6m 47: mm. mm 0,355
Omque 750 m '9!" 643 0.231 [9.0! ".628
I00" I?" I'M" 711! 0.41) 415.19 Lot“
I250 WI I5.» 9“! 0.620 69.“) 1.5"
Key:
1. class of facility 7. Consumption of material per
2. Pipe: running meter of pipe
3. Dimensions, m 8. Concrete, III
4. Thickness 9. steel, kg
5. Breaking load during testing 10. Mass, tons
on preee, kgf ll. Reinforced concrete
6. Mark of cmcrete 12. Concrete
132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ocast Pits
—I_- — - (2) Mm vacuum (5)
uncut-(v2. uneas- (3) (0 M. v
Fem, .0 £78., I?

 

ﬂpamynmd xoaodeq 70x70 u

 

(7)
Bopxuee mo 0.405 1.65 0.91
lluuuce new c ulna an al... — l 0.14 I 25.“ ‘ 1,760
- 42 cut (8)
(9)
ﬂpuoyeouuud Juneau. 100le u ‘f
(10)
lo mm; x 0.47 10.31 l.|3
Grail-cc mini“ I 0.59 H.“ l [.42
Human awn c gunman (12) 0.96 ”.13 2.3!
(13)
pruui xonodou D — 70 at
7
“(15qu mum (3) 0.3'6 6.6) 0.7.1?
Ilium; Jlﬂlu c :ummcll mm 4",. - 0.6“) 24.6“ | l.515
II 4 CI

 

 

limpmd mam-u D = 100 u

 

 

 

 

roman-ma momma 0.37 11.65 0.38.3
(Ivan-Ice :ncno 0.46 9.21 l I."
"name anono r mmmm 0.93 15.32 2.26
(14)
[luxdcnpuruuwl xoaudm r ammn noun-nod
14
Aoumpuemm‘ 113.101“: c 0mm»! po- l 0,13 1.” l I.“
lam-ma . ‘ .
(15)
Ilpuoy.'n.muud nut-7m c lu-mcnarod Iqwuurod u mnolmuwu
nominee mom. 16 0.521 RAH 1.29
Ilmmm- «.mm r :umncu up“ "June I "JG“ 27.99 2.05
lo!» (M
"971
llmchnpuc-nuue u M mm: xoaodqu c day-n manna-a !
liq-nee mm 0.43! IGJ ' 1.22
Ila-move a (18) I 1.28. I 7.65 | 3.10
(19)
llomknpuauuc u yafmuue noaodqu c .rpc-n panama
"elm-cc Juno | 0.63 I 8.9 ' | [.60
llllnmcc D LM I0.5l . 4.95
of component 6. Rectangular pit 70 x 70 c
nption of materials 7. Upper section
ate. m3 8. lower section with bottou
, kg an” =- 42 a:

tone 9. Rectangular pit 100 x 10'
d on following page] ‘

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ()NIY

[Key continued from preceding page] :

10. Manhole

ll. Riddle section

12. lower section with bottom

.3. Circular pit D - 70 cm

14. Drain-intake pit with single grating

15. Rectangular pit with grating cover and settling tank
16. Lower section with bottom at height of 105 cm

17. Drain-intake and thalweg pits with two gratings

18. Lower section

19. Drain-intake and thalweg pits with three gratings

shoulder drains are installed upon completion of work to construct the dirt base
under the pavement or simultaneously with it.

Open concrete gutters on pavements are installed during concreting of the gutter
row while closed gutters are installed before concreting of the pregutter row.

Dirt gutters along the edges of the pavement are installed after completion of
work to install the pavement.

Work to install runoff collectors should usually keep ahead of excavation work on
the airfield. This work is performed in the following production sequence: dig-
ging of trenches (ditches) and reinforcing their walls, installation of the bases
for pipes and pits, installation of manholes, laying pipes and finishing joints,
checking pipelines for water tightness, lowering the pipes into the trenches with
packing of the soil and installation of sills.

When laying collector pipes, the strength and tightness of the butt joints, tight
abutment of the pipes to the base, stability of the pipelines against shearing
forces and adherence to the planned profile of the pipeline must be provided. The

pipes are laid only from bottom to top along a slope. Pipes should be laid after
the conformity of the base marks to the planned marks are checked and prior to the
concrete in the base reaching not less than 50 percent of its planned strength.

Excavation work in digging trenches under collectors should move ahead of pipe lay-
ing. The bottom of the trench should be protected during the fall and winter sea-
son against freezing by incomplete removal of the soil or covering it with
insulation.

Pill should be poured and packed not less than S cm from the planned mark of the
top of the collector if the runoff collector initially passes through the fill and
the trench should then be opened and the collector should be laid. Digging tren-
ches for pipes and also holes for pits below groundwater level should be carried
out after their level has been artificially lowered or by using open water
discharge.

when filling in trenches, the soil must be packed in layers without permitting dam-
age to the joints of the pipe and moving it. The wall reinforcement of.the tren-
ches should be removed prior to this.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, ”ﬁll/MI”)?! .‘
- ”{ﬁﬁmuumnu

 

“grams of Runoff and Drain Systems (Profile and Layout) of
101d Pavements: 1--tha1waq pit: 2--d:lrt chute; 3--br1dge:

avenent; S--chute 1n edge of pavement; Susannah; 7--bed a
rain layer; 8-mter-intake pit: 9—-overnom 10--conectox
ago drain: 12-43“: without drain layer

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY
.-'I-'.~'I'

‘l

      

'— 'rvz-_——:r-—_—.;::':

Figure 7. Manhole: and Rain-Intake Pits: a--circular manhole: b-mcungular
rain-intake pit with one-section grating: c--roctangulgr rain-in-

take pit with three-section grating; durectanguht rain-intake pit
with two-section grating
(Figure continued on following page)

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In winter trenches should be filled 0.5 meter above the pipeline with local thawed
soil immediately after the pipe has been laid with the layers being packed no more
then 0.2 meter, while sections of trenches under pavement should be filled with
sandy soils to the entire depth of the trench with careful layer by layer packing
and installation of barriers against spring flooding. The pipe joints should be
insulated prior to the completion of preliminary testing for water perneability.

Lateral grooves are ooncreted after the joints of concrete and reinforced concrete
pipe have been finished. The concrete mixture should be packed with deep vibrators.
The for: must be resumed no sooner than 12 hours after concreting. Maintenance of
the concrete should be performed by wetting it or applying a waterproofing film to
it.

shoulder drains are installed in the following sequence: the trenches are dug for
drain pipe, the sand base is installed and the drainpipe is laid on it, the notches

and joints of the pipe are packed with moss or another filter material and the
trench is filled in with drain material. ‘

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Portholes and Thalweg pits are installed in the following sequence: layout of the
pit loottion in cross-section, digging the trench, preparation of the base, concret-
ing or installation of precast components of the bottom and walls of the lover part
of the pit, installation of flexible abutment of pipes, installation of the gutter,
concreting or installation of precast components of the walls of the upper part of
the pit and filling in the ditches (trenches) with packing of the soil.

Prefabricated pits of rings are installed in the following sequence: laying out
the position of the lower ring on the bottom, applicationtof mortar in a ratio of
1:2 not less than 2 cm thick on the bottom, installation of the lower ring with
holes for collector pipes, joining the collector pipes and finishing the circular
slits between pipes and the walls of the pit with resin oakum and waterproofing
mastic, installation of the form for the gutter and concreting of the gutter, wip-
ing the surface of the gutter with mortar after the form is removed, application
of a two-centimeter layer of mortar to the upper cut of the bottom ring and in-
stallation of the second ring, then of the third and so on and wiping the joints
between the rings on both sides.

The ring is backfilled after the hatch and cover have been installed.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5. CONSTRUCTION OF FUEXIBLE PAVEMENT

[Text] 5.1. Construction of Pavement and Beds from Reinforced Soils

It is recoumnded when constructing pavements and beds from reinforced soils that
the reinforced mixtures be prepared in mobile mixing units with forced mixing and
in the case of mixing soil with binders that one-pass soil-mixing machine be used
at the site.

Rotary hoes may be used to treat soils in construction of pavements and beds of
airfields of classes 8 and P and in agricultural aviation. The plasticity number
of argillaceous soils should not be more than 0.22 in this case.

Fractions coarser than 40 mm should be first screened when preparing reinforced
mixtures from large-fragment soils of them in units.

Soils reinforced with binders by mixing on the site should not contain fractions
coarser than 25 mm.

Argillaceous soils are pulverized prior to treating them with binders. The content
of dust-clay clumps coarser than 5 mm should not exceed 25 percent by mass, includ-
ing 10 percent of pieces coarses than 10 m in the pulverized soil.

The mixture prepared in a unit is laid or soil with binder is treated on the site
with optimum moisture content of the dirt trough.

The composition and sequence of performing the work when installing pavements and
bases from reinforced soils are presented in Table 5.1.

The amount of water or salt solutions added to the mixture when preparing it in a
mit or mixing it on the site are determined by the formula

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.1. Composition and Sequence of Performing Work when Installing Pavements
and Bases of Reinforced Soils

Driving Machine Msitim and ﬂuence of Performing Work

Quarry mixing unit Preparation of reinforced mixture in unit. Hauling. distribu-
tion and levelling of mixture. Packing of mixture. Mainten-
ance of laid pavemnt or bed

Single-pass mixing Excavation, hauling, levelling and grading of reinforced soil.

machine Packing soil to density of 0.85-0.9 of maximum. Pulverization
of soil (in the case of reinforcing argillaceous soils). Work-
ing soil with soil-mixing machine at working rate of 0.4-0.7
anhr when treating large-fragment and sandy soils. 0.23 ka/hr
when treating sandy loans and light loans and 0.1 km/hr when
treating heavy loans and clays. Packing of reinforced soil.
Maintenance of laid pavement or bed

Rotary hoes Excavation, hauling, levelling and grading of soil to be
strengthened. Packing of soil to density of O.85-0.9 of max-
imum. Pulverization of argillaceous soils with two-three
passes of hoe on the same track and working speed of 0.23
kn/hr when pulverizing sandy loam and light loam soil and 0.1
km/hr when pulverizing heavy loans and clays. Application of
binder to soil. Mixing of soil and binder. Wetting mixture
to optimum moisture content through the proportioning device
of the hoe or by using Hater machines. Mixing the moistened
mixture to homogeneous state. Shaping and packing of
strengthened mixture. Maintenance of laid pavement or bed

Note. The soil should be moistened to the optimum moisture content prior to appli-
cation of the binder to the soil when strengthening soils with organic binders by a
single-pass soil-mixing machine or rotary hoes.

,,. J'. a 2‘
" n \_V(l0ll _ mu)‘
Ion
where P is the mass of the soil subject to moistening. tons, W is the natural mois-
ture content of the soil, percent by mass, and H0 is the optimum moisture content

of the mixture, percent by use.

The amount of organic binder added to the mixture and water contained in the as-
phalt emulsion are taken into account when determining the required amount of water.

It is recommended that the finished mixer prepared in quarry mixing units be laid
by using a motorized universal placer (in strengthening with mineral binders) or
asphalt laying machine (in strengthening with organic binders).

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mixture is distributed and graded with motorized graders in the absence of plac-
ers and also in strengthening soils by the on-site mixing method.

It is recolmnended that motorized graders equipped with automated blade control sys-
tem Profil' l, which permits grading operations to be carried out by maintaining a
specific angle of transverse profile without manual control of the blade angle.

The mixture is levelled and graded with a notarized grader equipped with the Profil'
1 system during three cycles by the shuttle scheme with no-load backwards pass.

Rough levelling of the mixture is carried out in the first cycle, which is per-
formed in the manual mode of controlling two passes of the shaper on the same track
(with overlapping of tracks by 0.7 meter).

Final levelling and preliminary grading of the mixture is carried out in the second
cycle. performed in the automatic mode of controlling the blade with minimun sensi-
tivity of the automatic system by a single pass of the shaper on the same track.

Final grading of the mixture to the design marks with regard to the margin for
packing is carried out in the third cycle, performed in the autocratic mode.

One is guided by the following rules when strengthening soils by the on-site mix-
ing method:

additives of surfactants used to retard the setting of the mixture
prove packing conditions or additives used in complex strengthening of soils are
added to the soils prior to application of the main binder to it, they are mixed
with the soil with a hoe and the soil is packed to density of 0.85-0.9 of maximum;

oil is first introduced to the soil and then cement and water are added in
sequence when strengthening soils with cement having additives of crude petroleum;

the binder is applied to the soil at the full rate during the first pass of
the hoe when treating soils with organic binders using rotary hoes.

Optimum wetted soil is packed with rollers or pneunatic tires with overlapping of
each previous pass by not less than 20 cm.

The number of passes of the roller over the same track, which must be done to pack
the mixture to the given density, is determined experimentally and it can be ap-
proximately taken equal to 12-18 when packing mixtures of soils and mineral binders.
lO-lS when packing mixtures of soils and liquid asphalts, tars and emulsions with
active additives and surfactants and 5-10 when packing mixtures of soils and as-
phalt emulsions or liquid asphalt together with cement.

Film-forming materials are 2’applied to the surface using a motorized road oiler at
the rate of 1- 1.2 liters/m2 upon completion of packing to maintain the wetted pave-
ment or bed.

Operations to install pavements or beds of strengthened soils are performed in
sections, the length of which are designated at 250-300 meters when treating

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

large-fragment and sandy soils using a single-pass soil-mixing machine and 150-
200 meters in remaining cases.

The approximate laboriousness of work to install some types of pavements (beds) of
strengthened soils, the brigade compositions and the need for basic machines. in-
ventory and tools are presented in Tables 5.2-5.7.

Table 5.2. Laboriousness of Performing Work When Installing Soil-Cement Pavement

Note .
in the

Key:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.
10.

or Bed Pros Mixture Prepared in Mixing Plant

 

 

 

 

4
(1) “(3‘)" (3) "I” 1-(r‘zlltlh'
lrlww-swnwuupus ”VIN" ”Own yea-n um:- :21:
(5) I5,
l’uﬂsswuuc paﬁom. «sputum-e yucr- seal-u --- l6
xa 9.1607. nines rum. pyunas saun-
posxa. mummy. ponumm nos-episo-
cm. Ysmma u IMIIIIIIM yxpelmseuoto
mm (7)
Hourovmlxa auuupeﬁnepa k paéme. pc- s’ [600 4.6
Ilournss Mauupusn rpyurosom oeso-
nmmn «ma ycrnoacvuon yum-cun-
w mos, summits CAP lemmas:-
pa. patpanuuuause n mam-nan
Yuma-mum cuecu
yuan: rpynmnm ocuoeauss cum I?) u' IHII 3.9
mums-um Inpudmnﬂpmauus I yum!
qu-(‘Illlucum‘n runs nanou Ill mm-
Mﬂlll'ltI'IIIl IIIIIIIDI
Pmmm "mm-«Inna: mum museum 1 L6 0.“
ammyapmnmopm
Ilruro 3a menu-yo sun-am] 200 u I | 24.3

mm in" (10)

The labor expenditures of road grader and roller operators for work perforud
absence of a work front are not included in the labor factor

Production operations

Unit of measurement

Volume of work

Laboriousness for entire volume of work, man-hours

Layout work. enclosure of work section, reception of mixture, manual level-
ling, checking the evenness of the surface. slope and thickness of the
strengthened layer

Han/hours

Preparation of notarized grader to work, repair grading of dirt bed prior
to installation of strengthened layer, adjustment of notarized grader auto-
matic control system and levelling and grading of strengthened mixture
Rolling dirt bed after repair shaping and rolling of strengthened layer with
roller on pneunatic tires

Pouring of film-forming liquids with road oiler

Total for shift section of 200 meters (1,600 m2)

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HR ()Fl-‘li'lAl. “SI" (DNIA

Table 5.3. Laboriousness of Performing Work to Install Soil-Cement Pavement or

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

Bed Using Ds-lGB (D-39l-8) Machine

 

 

(1) FEEL. (3) hymn-tn.
Tum-er even-es II'MI 06v. we -I mu m-
‘ (5)

"WIQIIIIIMJIIIQ utomeMcpou mynm- 11’ I600 L5
nnru «manna

Donn-ma r monom ocuoeu-ue nunno- n' I600 I.7
"no: ,(

Puéumuue puma”) 8) «can — '2

Pampammunue u luau-900x guest-Im- u' I“ 0.7
m rpyma nunmhu‘pou (9

yna.1ou'{se(f6)nnynna noctoponuux um- weal-4 — L7
'K‘Illl

"pun-nu :pyura removal) I" woo IA

Oﬁpnrmxa rpynu eamnuol 110%? u' Hm I6
(Ii-39H» r813)

"Wanna-um tpynmuewmruoﬂ can u' Hill I."
aurorpcﬁawuw c m-npeueum-M M‘-
Qmumu not? epyunylo u npwclmon
npo¢nae no enemy

muons-we rpynoneueuml atom (14) u‘ '0'” 2-"

Poun- uaemoormn mud menu-rte en- v M! 0."
n-rymummpo- 15)

"101'“ na menu)» 39363;“ 200 I I I ”‘3‘

(Icon I")

Production operations

Unit of measurement

Volum of work

laboriousness for entire volume of work, man-hours

Shaping dirt bed with uotorized grader

Rolling dirt bed with pneumatic roller

Layout work

Man-hours

Levelling and grading of hauled-in soil with mtorized grader
Removal of foreign objects from soil

Rolling soil with roller

working soil with 05-163 (0-391-8) machine

shaping soil-cement mixture with road grader with correction of defective
points by hand and checking the shape by a template

Packing soil-cement mixture

Pouring film-forming liquid with road oiler

Total for shift section of 200 meters (1,600 .2)

strengthening soils with cement at reduced temperatures (from +5 to -lO°C). The
following requirements should be observed when constructing pavement or beds from
soils strengthened with cement at reduced temperatures (from +5 to -lo°C) :

the moisture content of the soil to be treated should not be more than 0.7
of that on the flowability boundary:

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.4. Laboriouuneen of Performing Work to Install Pavement or Bed 16 cm Thick
From Soil Strengthened with Cement by On-site Mixing Using Hoes

 

nu
"MMIPOOIIIQ Barnum mino- - 1500 0.92
eoro «menu
Vuonmme unto-n rpyltoeonz-lgcaou- 16%): 1500 l.”
mu
Paw-amuse pawn (9) e —- 2.9
1mm»: 1:) 1‘9"?! WWI auto- a — 4.33
‘° )
' Pnpumunee I MIIIPDII new“; a 1500 0.58
uoro Ipynu anorpehepou P
Pun-cam“: rpynn nopomcmm ope- » moo . 13.5

3mm (12)
ﬂuent-nu ncﬂﬂl‘l’l rpyur pummel- -,
team ueweuu (1.3)

(14)
nepwmuuamue cum. 01min". 1- onto. )

u'wnumu ynnammulm out). ( )
|'-u.1p:mlmu:mnc I annulpmn can Jls

mrpt-qua

Ill-mum "mono-mom “Mull no .919) —
nnuy c ucnpaucunel ouuuuwx nut!
upynuyn 5

)‘nncmucunc neururnrpymoeoﬂ are u'

nan-m 9,3). 1'

If“) 2,”.

Puumm nnmumﬁmaymux num- ".7

ant-u ynpouampnu

“untouatemo-uumugzwe pm- .— I — 2.66
n,

 

mm 9.5
ISM 1.07
- 5.07
I .5...

llroro m cut-union Janene ”-963, I
M) u (I500 11’)

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of unasurement
3. Volume of work
4. Laboriouaness for entire volume of work. man-hours
5. Preparatory-final operations
6. shaping dirt bed with motorized grader
7. Packing dirt bed with roller
8. n2
9. Layout work
10. Removal of foreign objects from soil
11. Levelling and grading of strengthened soil with motorized grader
12. Pulverization of soil with rotary hoes
13. Introduction of cement to soil with cement mixer
14. Mixing of mixer with hoes with simultaneous wetting with water
15. Levelling and grading of mixture with motorized grader

16. Checking transverse profile by template with correction of individual
locations by hand
[Continued on following page]

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(1AI. USU". ONI \'

[Key continued from preceding page]

17. Packing cement-soil mixture with roller
18. Pouring film-forming materials with road oiler
19. 'notal on shift section 200 enters long (1,500 1112)

Table 5.5. Laboriousness of Performing Work to Install Pavement or Bed 16 cm
Thick Prom Soil Strengthened with Asphalt Emulsion and Cenent by
On-site Mixing Using Hoes

    
  
   
  

(4

  

(2)

(1) "I. ‘l’ venous
luau-"Issues usurp-uni ‘2'"...- on»: re“! '"lko chew

pl: 0 ,geu-e

llonroroenrnmwlemma-Jenn pedo- — —- 2.!"
T“ (s e .m-
"Mutant-name nosqlxlmn unmann- w’ la” 0.9“
aerorpeﬁnepow (6)
(8)
yuan; rpymoumo uceoesmm xenon (7) To we l6)" 0qu
Pups-unuanne myuu no mupuee 1 w . WI) 0,42
anorpehnepow (9)
(10)
Vamuuc u: my”: xpymmx none- u . If“) 8.0
nocwpocmux eauuomml
yuan: cnuuuponuuom rpyma I338. - Hull ".5
12
I‘nucnueuue myuu ”each as an npg- » Hm 9.52

ms no onuowy (any (cum or
I73 no 207 wln)

Bmexme e rpysr «mum "M e 1400 3.5
”each u can upon-u no oanowy
may (anyone 20‘] wle)

l'lepewemwnaune mm: c Gnu“)! e "00 4."

wynxuﬂ any“ ”can a: an lipo-

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of veasurenent
3. Volume of work
4. laboriousness for entire volume of work, nan-hours
5. Preparatory-final operations
6. shaping surface of bed with motorized grader
7. Falling dirt bed with roller
8. m
9. Levelling of soil to width or 7 meters with motorized grader
lo. Removal of large clods and foreign objects from soil
ll. Rolling graded soil with roller
12. Pulverization of soil with hoe within two passes on sane track (Speed from
l73 to 207 n/hr)
13. Introduction of asphalt emulsion to soil with hoe during one pass on same
track (speed of 207 n/hr)
l4. Mixing soil with asphalt emulsion by two hoes during two passes on one
track (speed of 360 n/hr)
[Table and key continued on following page]

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.5 (Continued).

~_. . . . .__——. ___

 

_ Tm Inc-mm u.
ulnar-«true moan-u- a"';:,.:"' (la- men: e: um "he.
DIG-Ir. eu-q

 

 

to.“ no 0.1»on cmy («wont

360 II!)
llafmnnnlue Ja parnpenunteneu ﬁg)»

ta

nyno nepouemnnnue morn c «11.8%.. at HO" Mi
«.1 mum "puma 15pm; on onlmuyuuu
ay (motions 450 NI!)

Vlunmmmo era-n npn uouomn ($331.: .1 I400 2.07
n 0.1m: mxon no OAIIOIY many
(women ul-I)

_. -- '2,"

ﬂopcunalnlemue ynnmneuuol «~93?»- ‘nssgze l m 2.0?

an“ .m mum npoxm no mnouy (my
(nu-porn (50 IN)

Pampanmlnnmw I. npo-pumonnnur (flog!)- , llim l.l
non cum: no neck mnpnnc mug-nun

(8 u) anon-pennepon ”on yuany

(20)
Uponcpna npowum mnooann u tonuu- , I600 5.I7
uu cam. news-mm: otaenulux u-
wtuux um

21)
ynnonmme CNN“ KIVKOII I0 “C9 Im-
puue OCIIWIIIII

[Inna-u In antoﬂuryuouma “Jay! 1. “.7 3.15
uyncnu I pacnpencnnunuyu ouch
“Y MW"!

3arpyaxa ucucurou pmmunnpaz- 152:: 16.7 0.”
mum

24
Pncnpeucncunc ucurnta no um (moo): a! Hm 0.61

rpyntn r ﬂnrymmn wyau‘ueﬁ
(25)

”Ml": non" nommo'nmnu “mun-ml u' '16 2.07
o paaupcneaneunyn CWY my
Mn ynmamumnn cum
1 I.“
I

Poo-mo naeunooopaaywero Mingus).
umryaponuopou

0.8

(27)

"tom Ila cue-Inna naxunc much

54.67
an n "600 u’)

 

[Key continued from preceding page]:

15. Observation of cement distributing machine
16. Dry mixing of mixture with cement during one pass of hoe on same track
(speed of 450 III/hr)

[Continued on following page]

146

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1(‘IAI. “SI-I ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

17. Wetting mixture using hoe within one pass on same track (speed of 450 m/hr)
18. Mixing moistened mixture with hoe during one pass on same track (speed of

450 m/hr)

l9. levelling and shaping of finished mixture over entire width of bed (8 me-
ters) with motorized grader for rolling
20. Checking shape of bed and thickness of layer and correction of individual

defective points

21. Packing of mixture with roller over entire width of bed
22. Delivery of asphalt emulsion from asphalt truck to distrubting system of

hoe;

23. Loading cement distributor with cement

24. Distribution of cement along layer of soil and asphalt emulsion mixture

25. Delivery of water by water machines to distributing system of hoe to wet

mixture

26. Pouring film-forming material with road oiler
27. ‘Dotal on shift section 200 meters long (1,600 In?)

28. Tons

Table 5.6.

Cor..ositions of Brigades and Need for Machines and Mechanisms When

Installing Pavement and Beds of Strengthened Soils

Name of Work

and Method of
Stren ening

Installation of dirt-
cement pavement or bed
from mixture prepared
in a plant with dis-
tribution of mixture
by notarized grader

Installation of dirt-
cement pavement or bed
using single-pass
dirt-mixing machine

Comﬁition of Brigade

Motorized grader operator.
sixth rank-~l
Pneumatic roller operator,
sixth rank--i

Road workers:
fourth rank--1
third rank-~l

Soil-mixing machine opera-
tor, sixth rank-~l
Assistant operator, fifth
rank--l

Motorized grader operator.
sixth rank--l

Pneumatic roller operator,
sixth rank--l

Road workers:
third rank-4
second rank-~l

[Continued on following page]

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Machines Used

Name

02-31-1-2 (0-557-1-2)
motorized grader
DU-31A (0-6273). DU-
29 (0-624) pneumatic
roller

05-163 (0-3913) Soil-
mixing machine

03-31-1 (D-SS'I-l) Mo-
torized grader

00—th (D-627A). DU—29
(0-624) Pneumatic
roller

Num-
ber
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6 (Continued).

Name of Work Machines Used
and Method of Num-
Strengt_hening gemsition of Brigade Name ber
Installation of dirt- Motorised grader operator, Ds-lah (D-S30A) Rotary 3
cement pavement or bed sixth rank-d hoe
using rotary hoes Pneumatic roller operator, DS-9 (0-3433) Cement l
sixth rank-~l distributing machine
Rotary hoe operators, sixth Dz-3l-l-2 (0-556-1-2) l
rank—~3 Motorized grader
Cement distributing machine DU-3lA (D-627A), DU-29 l
operator, fifth rank-~l (D-624) Pneuatic
roller

Road workers:
fourth rank-~1
second rank-d

Installation of pave- Rotary hoe operators, IDs-18A (D-S30A), D544 3
ment or bed of soil sixth rank--3 Rotary hoes
strengthened with as- Motorised grader operator, 02-31-1-2 (0-557-1-2) 1
phalt emulsion and sixth rank--l Motorized grader
cement using rotary Pneumatic roller operator, DU-3lh (D-627h), 00-29 1
hoes sixth rank-«1 40-624) Pneumtic
roller
Road workers: Ds-9 (D-3433), 05-72 1
fourth rank-d Cement distributing
second rank--l machine

Note. Machines (dump trucks, scrapers, cement trucks, water trucks, road oilers
and so on) , the number of which is determined by calculation as a function of the
hauling distance and the need for materials or which are assigned to a brigade for
temporary work, for example, a road oi ler for pouring film-forming liquids, are not
taken into account in the table.

the soil-cement should harden at air temperature not below -lO°C:

salt additives according to the data of Table 5.8 should be introduced to the
soil to reduce the freezing point of the liquid phase;

strengthening a mixture of coarse-fragment and sandy soils should be prepared
in mixing plants while strengthening argillaceous soils should be prepared with
single-pass soil-mixing machines. In the latter case adding water-binding addi-
tivas to the soil and mixing soil with them are carried out with a cement distrib-
uting machine and rotary hoe and the length of the section should not be more than
120 meters;

packing of the strengthened mixture should be completed no later than 5 hours
after additives that reduce the freezing point of the liquid phase of the mixture
have been introduced to the soil;

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘l-‘K L“. USE ONLY

Table 5.7. Implements and Tools Used in Constructions of Pavements and Beds Prom
Soils Strengthened with Binders

 

 

 

 

"emu-Ir Imus-- Inn-nap: _m-Tl_ lulu": lane I-In-Iv art K-w-Ir-
I II' I ll yuan: (1) K".- II Imﬂlfﬂl (II-I
-153. ____ ._ .____ ___._.__—_____ __
IIIIIIc.;1III ! I 'McpIIIIx tMIIuIIm «man-0) 1
"mm III- ,IIIuo lm(1ug(2:) '2 “IIJIIDMI. noun-Inﬁll) |
11mm uopnan( 5 I l’ynma muapmenmu 12) I
llpuﬁop Kamila: £11. I “cum Atpcnnmmc(].3 133‘ In
ipnncuh chIIItI-nunsm A II {I I Jlounm cmmnr.mme(14) '2
| u XIII-amt orpamacnnl II cur- I
"Inf-Jun .1.“ nponopuu um)" I unnux canon (15
III
PcI‘IIIa 1.1IIIIIII1 II n (9) l 1
Key:
1. Name of implement and tool 9. Straight edge 3 meters long
2. Quantity 10. Layer thickness gauge
3. Leveller ll. Sighting devices, set
4. levelling rods 12. "ensuring reel
5. Tape measure 13. Wooden stakes
6. Kovalev's device 14. Construction spades
7. One-meter construction length level 15. Set of barriers and signal
8. Template to check profile devices

the freshly laid soil-cement is maintained with a layer of sand 6-8 cm thick.

Table 5.8. Amount of Salt Additives That Reduce Freezing Point of Liquid Phase of
Mixtures

 

 

(1 Kraut"! IMIIII- I1- !D‘I-a o— n“ I nuyunmrur-I“ turn!
1 ) tn mop-m Ont-emu row-I). ‘5. I... In" (2)
fllwl'ﬂlyrﬂ .II‘V‘I

 

 

II n-yun. «I
(m. NnCl "em.
(8%)... 1 ”0’4 8 9 In
> --!'I s -7 I3 l5 I7
- 7 I III I7 20 l9

1. Air and soil temperature, °c
2. Concentration of salt solutions in soil-cement mixture (content of anhy-

drous salts) , percent by mass
3. From
4. To

Strengthening soils with moisture content above optimum. It is permitted to
strengthen these soils with cement, lime or lime-slag binder if the following con-
ditions are observed:

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the moisture content of the soil to be strengthened should not exceed values
prmmnied In 1‘!th "u"!

the dirt trough should be constructed from soil having optimum moisture content
and packed to the required density;

the pavunent or bed of overmoistened soil can be laid only in a single layer
not more than 22 cm thick in a coupact body:

the moisture content of the dirt trough overmoistened aa a result of precipi-
tation falling on the upper layer to a depth of not more than 25 cm should not ex-
ceed 1.6 no (0.9 wt) for sands and light sandy loams, 1.4 no (0.8 Wt) for dusty and
heavy dusty sandy loams and light loans and 1.3 No (0.7 wt) for heavy loams and
clays. Here No and wt are the optimum moisture content and the moisture content of
the soil on the flowability boundary, respectively;

the upper overmoistened layer of the dirt trough is treated with additives of
crushed unslaked line with Cao + Hgo content not less than 50-60 percent or with
portland cement of mark not above 300, the amount of which is designated according
to the data of Table 5.10, to dry it.

Table 5.9. Maximum Permissible Moisture Content of soils to be Strengthened

. .....- == . .- . _. .

m... u) |"mm.m“::::..",:::;.::;~.'-:;:~-

mam nuns-awe (3)

 

 

I35
Cynmc acrxne (4) (5) 1.25
a numame. “menu: uummame. l.l5
cynmuxu net-sue
(iymuuuu "meme. rnmm nma‘ﬁgme l.l

II IJIHIIJ nuncnamc

 

 

 

Key:

1. Soils

2. Permdssible moisture content (in fractions of optimum) with packing coef-
ficient of 1-0.98

3. Dusty sands

4. Light sandy loam

‘. Dusty and heavy dusty sandy loans and light loans

6. Heavy loans and sandy and dusty clays

5.2. Construction of Pavements and Beds Prom Crushed Stone Materials Treated With
Organic Binders

Pavements tron: crushed stone materials treated with organic binders are used on air-
fields with normative loads of categories Iv-VI in road-climatic zones I-V.

Construction of crushed-stone pavements and beds by the impregnation method. Im-
pregnation in a layer 8-10 cm thick and semi-impregnation in a layer 4-? cm thick
are distinguished as a function of the thickness of the pavement or bed layer.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.10. Amount of Drying Additives Introduced to Soil

 

 

 

K-urm nu “an , man-sue a ryyu ugu nail-rue
(2) run a nun-mean“! nus-nu m mum‘s-II

(1) --————‘- --———————

 

 

 

 

fry-m- L: I u | I,o l u . | u
— “-64-“ bflllllkl'.
n-dlea - ., I r i.
___ __ __ . 3) “In 1.7;. "dt:u':;;::a (4”)"3:T;':'; %
fluncsame nmm u ryuccu (5) -- I 0.5 l l.-"I
Lyrnmlxu sense (6) 0.5 1.:- ",5 l.5
' - l .‘I
l‘nu-m net-ununue u Imnens- I,» 3 -. 3 5

a "menu: (7) (8) L"! l I

"It

1. Soil

2. Amount of additives introduced to soil with moisture content in relative
units of optimum

3. Additives of crushed unslaked lime, percent of soil mass

4. Additives of portland cement of mark 300, percent of 5011 mass

5. Dusty sands and sandy loans

6. Light clays

7. Heavy clays

8. Sandy and dusty clays

Pavement and beds are installed by the impregnation (semi-impregnation) method in
the absence of rain during the warm season of the year at air temperature of not
less than +5°C in spring and summer and not below +10°C in fall.

Installation of pavements and beds by the impregnation method includes preparatory
work. installation of pavement or beds and maintenance of the finished pavement or
bed during forming. Preparatory work includes acceptance of the bed, height and
cross-sectional layout an” installation of lateral supports. A binder is poured at
the rate of 0.6-1.0 liters/m2 on the finished surface if the pavement or bed thick-
ness is not more than 6 cm in those cases when the state of the surface of the un-
derlying layer does not provide adhesion to the new layer.

Pavement is installed from three or four fractions of crushed stone and the bed is
installed from two or three fractions as a function of the thickness of the layer
and the size of the coarsest fraction of crushed stone.

The maximum size of the crushed stone for pavement or bed should not exceed 0.9
the thickness in a dense body.

The consumption of crushed stone of the first (coarsest) fraction should be deter-
mined from calculation of 0.9 of the desiqn thickness of the pavement with an in-
crease of this volume by 1.25 for packing.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l1m second traction of crushed stone when using two or three fractions or the second
and third fraction when using four fractions are intended for wedging.

The last fraction of crushed stone when installing a pavement is intended to create
a dense waterproof cover. Its consumption is 0.9-1.1 n3 per 100 m2.

The sequence of work in construction of pavements and beds from crushed stone mater-
ials treated with organic binders, the consumption of materials, the :ecomended
marks of asphalt and their heating temperature are presented in Tables 5.11-5.12.

Table 5.11. Sequence of Work in Construction of Pavements and Beds and Consumption
of Materials

 

__ ‘___ —'._.u'

 

 

 

In: Ina usury-u... ’l‘l mum-r ten-pum-

 

 

 

 

 

(1) L2) IIII Itasca-um (It.
lint-(tummy pr u. pan-.1 I E —-— _ '- -—- —
li—(uulm Urn-‘12.“- ll: -“"£:'__ Ila-«lull?
l’avuth-nwuc ormumoﬂ :‘mmuu (sign-ﬁne 'J
puuqum 40—70 In. III” II' (6)
yummmme unmou. wumn npoxmon no 5-— ! 3- 7

nammy may

Pmnus nnmyulcro. nlu’ 0’

Parnpmcncuuc parmmmmmucats‘mn I‘-
nmqmml) Ium ocummol (us oc-
:mumamm) (span-mu means puucpou

-«| (25—40) nu. u‘IIOI) u’

Wigwam» "mm. “(In upnumon no 2.‘ 5-3] 4
mnmy may (5)

Panama "Kym-to. a/n’(7) (9) '2. 3 — s

Pmncncunc nmpou pacummumcﬂ l-l. I -- 0.9
cppumum moans pan-mu I0 -20 IN
(15- 25 Am). u'llm u’

)‘nnorurnuo mums. smut, npoxmon ll“ .1-
naumay may (6)

Donna nnmyuu-ro. alu'(7) 10) l.5- "
Parnponcnmnc sauulanomcn Q xuun 0.9—
Inefmn panama ’3)— I0 Mn 5

(J)- I.' In. M’IIOO q
ynnummmo "tau-n tum-1m npoxoaon no 3—1 -— 3 I
away 1' .1e.1y (6)

—~ &
I
.
—N

La -'
.I -. 0.9-.

Note. The lowest norm of consumption of the main crushed stone fraction and binder
during the first pouring is related to the least thickness of the pavement, while
the highest norm of consuming these materials is related to the greatest thickness.

Key:
1. Sequence of work

2. Consunption of materials with pavement or bed thickness, cm
3. Pavement

4. Bed

5. Distribution of main crushed stone fraction measuring 40-70 an, m3/100 m2
6, Packing with roller, number of passes on same track

7. Pouring binder, liters/m2

8. Distribution of Hedging (for pavement) or main (for bed) fraction of
crushed stone measuring 20-40 (25-40) m, m3/100 m2

[Continued on following page]

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Key continued from precec

9. Distribution of s.
an (15-25 mm). «.3.
10. Distribution of cl
(3)-1s mm, m3/1c-o

Table 5.12. Recommended:

(1)

hue-rum...” .

Note. 1. Asphaltn n! ma
same viscosity.

2. The cannery :n
centimeter of pavement a:

3. The long”? n’
5 hours.

4. The road oilur
binder.

Key:
1. Climatic zone
2. Mark of asph l?
3. Heat inf; tungm.

The length of a sectinn i
a single day or at lousr
crushed stone.

Crushed stone of mark 6%?
Crushed stone of law «rte
water per 1 m2 of surface

Construction of pavement
went from mixtures pre.cr
loads of categories Y en

Sandy, fine-grained and n
by the on-site mixing met
beds.

The mixtures should ye 9;
ing the dry and warm seal
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The moisture content of the stone materials shOuld not be above 4 percent by mass
when using liquid asphalts. stone materials dry out with higher moisture content
and stone materials become wet prior to mixing in regions with dry and hot climate.

The stone material is placed on a section in fractions in individual piles and is
then mixed with a motorized grader until a homogeneous mixture is achieved. The
mixtures on the section are prepared in mobile (motorized) mixers or are mixed with
motorized graders: fine-grained and sandy mixtures should be mixed using motor
graders together with rotary hoes.

The use of a rotary hoe to mix large-fragment stone materials and binders is per-
missible if the rotational frequency of the cutter rotor is reduced to 75-100 rmp.

The binder mrterial is poured by road oilers in several passes, mixing it with the

stone material after each pouring. The amount of binder in one pass comprises 1.5-
2. 5 liters/m2.

The app aximate number of passes by the motorized grader for final mixing is as
follows: 25-40 with volume of stone material in the dense body of 0.25-0.3 m3 per
meter and 50-65 with volume of 0.3-0.4 m3. with joint operation of the motorized

grader and hoe, 10-15 passes of the hoe are required for final mixing and the num-
ber of passes by the motorized grader is reduced by a factor of 1.5-2.

When preparing a mixture with a motorized grader jointly with a hoe or without it,
it is recommended that the mineral powder be introduced to the mixture after the
last pouring during final mixing.

The finished mixture is distributed by a placer or motorized grader in a layer of
given width and thickness with regard to its packing.

The distributed mixture is packed by motorized rollers on pneumatic tires or with
metal wheels 5-10 tons in mass within three-five passes along the same track, car-
rying out packing from the edges to the middle with overlap by one-third of the
previous layer.

5.3. Construction of Asphalt Concrete Pavement

A pavement of asphalt concrete mixtures is installed on a dry, cleaned and unfrozen
layer during dry weather at air temperature during laying not below +5°C in spring
and summer and not below +10°c in fall and pavement from warm mixtures is installed
at air temperature up to -10°C.

The surface of the bed or lower layer of the pavement is treated 3-5 hours prior to
laying the mixture either with 56 130/200 liquefied or liquid asphalt or asphalt
emulsion (Table 5.13).

The length of the shift section when installing pavement is determined with regard
to tne actual shift productivity of the mixing plants by the formula

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Note. Treatment with binder materials cannot be done if the pavement is installed
on a freshly laid be: ucnxurucued ty using organic binder and also when laying the
top layer onto a freshly laid lewer layer.

Key-
1. Binders . 5. Viscous asphalt
2. Pouring norm, liter/m3 G. Liquefied asphalt
3. For bed 7. 50 percent asphalt
4. For layer of asphalt concrete pavement emulsion

where Q is the shift productivity of the mixing plants, tons, b is the width of
the pavement, meters, and 1 IS the conqumrtinn norm of the mixture, kg/mz.

The mixture is laid in strips parallel to the axis of the pavement from the center

to the edges with two-roller transverse profile and in the direction of the slope
with one-roller profile.

It is recommended that the length of the laid strip be in the range indicated in
Table 5.14 as a function 0” air reoperature.

Table 5.14. Re umnended Length of ;aid Strip of Pavement

I. I I (2) " ""' r- """‘-Im-Iﬂ r-nu n- nun-I. u
. .. ...f’.’ ,, "'m - ... . .. .
rung» :4. - "VI? ‘2' I ' I ... “mm"..."l." "I .1”. (4)
w -p-.m.ua :- .n u-u ya". .. "lag-nun Y“ nun

 

... .- e [uh-nu amount l

(3? I5 .$§)E|" 1: tun ! 95 :m
» ll'l . ||'. I." Inn :In 3.0
~ -|a - I21 nu IMI an my
Inuu' l'.‘-- I‘.n 'mn pm Inn

Key:
1. Air temperature in absence of wind, °C
2. Length of laid strip of pavement, meters

3. 0n built sections protected from wind and forest sections and in deep
excavations

[Key continued on following page]

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

4. Onopen sections 6. To
S. From 7. Morethan

The thickness of the layer should not be more than 10 on when using sandy mixtures
and not more than 20 cm when using granular mixtures during a single working pass.
The width of the laying strip may be designated as a multiple of the width of the
pavansnt.

The mixture may be laid with several placers arranged in benches one behind the
other at a distance or 10-15 meters to ensure adjacent strips have no seams. It is
recounended that an asphalt laying machine of new models on pneumatic wheels or
caterpillar track be used to lay an asphalt concrete mixture with the width of the
strip up to 7.5 meters (within one pass) and with an automatic system that ensures
evenness of the pavement and precise adherence to the transverse profile.

The top layer of the pavement should be laid no earlier than 24 hours after the
bottom layer has been laid.

The thickness of the unpacked layer of the asphalt concrete mixture is designated
at 15-25 percent greater than the planned thickness to achieve the given thickness
of the pavement or bed layer.

It is reoomnended that the tanperature of hot asphalt concrete mixtures be taken
from the data of Table 5.15 for effective packing.

Table 5.15. Reoosuended Temperature of Hot Mixtures

 

 

 

‘2"
luv-(r1330: ":13". I In- rmece T';TIE"-
A. Mmromeoenwme‘” no- I60 r. ”connecting-1w":- m—uo
5. neuedeemue éd) 120— MO mm 7
B. asoultﬁulecrue( ) loo—.100 ll. Hummus u: npul‘dno- ill—I'll)

m nema
Cum Me summers cm) m—uo

Key:
1. Type of mixture 5. C. Snell crushed stone
2. Temperature, °c 6. D. Sandy from crushed sand
3. A. Multicrushed stone 7. 8. Sandy from natural sand
4. 3. Medium crushed stone 8. Mixtures for bottom layer

The recommended temperatures should be reduced by 10-20 degrees when using surfac-
tants or activated mineral powder.

Asphalt concrete mixtures are packed with motorized smooth-wheeled rollers. rollers
on pneumatic tires or vibrating rollers.

156

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'n m'qu-nl a-lhc-rzinn m ”w mnplmlt concrete mixture to the wheels of the rollers,
it is recounended that they be wetted with water, a mixture of water and kerosene
(1:1) or a 1 percent aqueous solution of deterth wastes.

Defects determined during packing must be corrected immediately: mixture must be
added to low points while high points must be tipped with rakes and the excess mix-
ture must be removed with a shovel. Porous sections with disturbed continuity of
the layer. discovered during the first passes of the rollers. should be corrected.
Defective points (fatty, dry, gulleys and so on) detected on the pavement after the
ccnpletion of rolling should be dug out, cleaned carefully, the edges smeared with
hot viscous or liquid asphalt and replaced with a new high-quality mixture.

A support board or straight edge is placed at the end of the rolled strip to avoid
unrolling of the mixture. The working joints should be perpendicular to the axis
of the laid strip.

Pavement and beds shOuld be packed in layers more than 8 cm thick with rollers on
pneumatic tires and rolling should be completed with heavy smooth-wheeled rollers

(Table 5. 16).

Table 5.16. Operating Speed of Rollers

__— ._._..———__——_

 

 

 

 

 

 

luau u".- (1) l (2) [:6 run "an"... em“.
'__'_ " (3') _—
r.'l.‘IAll0nn:|I.lluuuc u-«ua‘uuc (nu-"mm [,5 2 (a Ina-mu yum. a homo ml-
nmn) wanton 6 r u "smote um: 1n Iuocm upoxnnoa no mum, cae-
uamoﬁ 8-48 1’) 5 ny— 3---5 xul-u)
Ilasnueuwnm-ccrxu mun.“ u. A 8— 5--8
I 7
lhlﬁpnuumume )IJCI‘IIII 4-4 7 2---3

- .._ _—

 

——_.__ _. _—._-

1. iype of roller

2. Operating speed, km/hr
3. Swath-wheeled motorized (light type) with mass of 6 tons and of heavy

type with mass of 8-18 tons
4. At beginning of rolling and after five-six passes on same track--3-5 km/hr

5. On pneumatic tires with mass of 8-18 tone
6. Vibrating rollers with mass of 4-8 tons

The number of passes is an average of two-four with light rollers and 16-18 with
heavy rollers on the same track and is refined by test rolling.

It is recommended that pavement from mixtures of all types be packed with motorized
rollers or. pneumatic tires. The most important advantages of these rollers are the

great depth of packing, the possibility of regulating the contact pressure and high
productivity.

The procedure of packing with rollers on pneumatic tires is as follows: prelimir '
ary packing with a roller having smooth wheels (two-three passes), then with a

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roller on pneumatic tires (8-10 passes) and final packing with a heavy-wheeled
roller (2-4 passes).

The canposition of the roller section is designated as a function of A32 produc-
tivity and also as a function of the area of packing the pavement during the shift
and the type of mixture. Three rollers-~one light and two heavy-are recommended
on the average to pack pavement to normalized density with plant productivity of
30-35 t/hr. The approximate area of rolling the pavemnt during a shift by this
section is 2,700-3,000 m2 for mixtures of types A and B, 2,500-2,700 m2 for types
c and s and 1,500-2,ooo n2 for type D. The ntnber of rollers in the section must
be increased to four with high plant productivity.

Packing the pavement is considered to be completed if no appreciable tracks remain
on the pavement after a pass of a heavy roller.

The degree of packing of the upper layer of an asphalt concrete mixture, character-
ized by packing coefficient, should not be lessthan 0.99 from mixtures of types A
and B and 0.98 for types C, D and z.

The packing coefficient of the lower layer of pavement and the bed is not less than
0.98.

The packing coefficient of an asphalt concrete pavement is determined as the ratio
of the average density of specimens of pavement (notches or cores) to the average
density of specimens reformed from the same notches or cores. The density of each
specimen is calculated with an accuracy up to 0.01 g/cm3. The average density of
the specimens is determined as the mean value of the results of testing three-four
specimens. A divergence between results for specimens sampled from pavement from
the same location should not exceed 0.02 g/cm3.

nechanized sectons should be created to install asphalt concrete pavement (Figure
8) consisting of a motorized asphalt laying machine, motorized rollers, auxiliary
machines and attachments.

The required number of trucks to haul the asphalt concrete mixture, the hourly
hauling schedule and the need for machines, equipment and tools are presented in
Tables 5.17-5.19.

The composition of the complex brigade to install asphalt concrete pavement with
a 05-1 asphalt laying machine is as follows:

Asphalt laying machine operator, sixth rank
Heavy motorized roller operator, fifth rank
Heavy motorized roller operator, sixth rank
Pneumatic roller operators, fifth rank

Asphalt concrete laying machine, fourth rank
Asphalt concrete laying machine, third rank
Asphalt concrete laying machine, second rank

HNHHNHH

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8. Process Flow Diagram of Installing Asphalt Concrete Pavement: I--clean-
ing the bed of dust and dirt: Jib-smearing edges with priming cost; 111
and III'--delivery of hot mixture and laying it in bottom and tsp layer
with asphalt laying machine, respectively; Iv and Iv‘--rolling bottom
and top layers with light roller: V and v‘—-rolling bottom and top lay—
ers with heavy roller; VI--tinishing of bottom layer for installation or
top layer: VII--finishsd section of asphalt concrete pavement on shift
section; l--mechanical brush: 2--mobile asphalt boiler; 3--drying unit:
4--asphalt laying machine, S--motorized roller with mass up to 8 tons;
6--roaster for tools (spades, rakes, tempers and drags): 7--motorized
roller with mess up to 15 tons; 8--dump truck with asphalt concrete mix-
ture; Lushift section; 11. 12 and l3--partial sections to production

process

Installation of beds from coarse stone. Mixers with periodic or continuous blades
are reconnended to prepare coarse stone no coarser than 15 mm while mixers with
free mixing can be used to prepare coarse-grained coarse stone. The accuracy of
proportioning the materials is +1.5 percent binder and 1 3 percent slag of each
fraction by mass.

The temperature of the coarse stone and the normal consmption are presented in
Tables 5.20-5.22.

A bed of coarse stone is installed by the principle of sequential wedging of
coarser fractions of slag with less coarse fractions during dry weather at air
tenperature of not less than +S°C during spring and 8m! and not below are in
fall. slag of fractions 20 (25)-40 In and 10 (lS)-20 (25) m are used to install
the beds. The process of installing the beds is:

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

Table 5.17. Hourly Schedule for Hauling Asphalt Concrete Mixture (tons) to Asphalt
Laying Machine at laying Rate of 500 Meters (3,500 :12) of One Layer
per Shift

_", _____ _ 1:____ . ,. _ --u . .
2 as
m l H m — “9.2..
In em- 3‘
l I 2 3 d I I I I l 7 I I (may
I“)
prnnoaqm c u 37 60 G) 60 so 60 G) .10 427
141' IIIKNQI‘O
anon mmnuol
5 cl
Mmmepnucmw) 23 42 42 4-2 42 42 42 23 am
,nsu nqnnuo
(non roams-nod
3.5 cu
Notes: 1. The consumption of mixture per square meter is 122 kgtfor the bottom

layer and 86 kg for the top layer.

2. The amount of mixture is determined from the operating condition of the
A82, having two D-S97A (0-508) mixing unite and 0-617-2 unit with total shift pro-
ductivity not less than 300 tone 0: tine-grained and sandy mixture or 427 tons of

coarse-grained mixture .

Key:
l. W of mixture
2. Working hours
3. ‘l‘otal for shift
4. Coarse-grained for bottom layer 5 cm thick
5. Fine-grained for top layer 3.5 cm thick

 

 

 

Table 5.18. Required Number of 9132-205 Dump Trucks
‘1‘ 2) Mumevuenea cam 03) unsavory—cue clues
run-mun man a nun luau-re. Canes (mu m, M 4)
I“
so so I to l 40

IO 5 4 1 ' 6

20 [0 7 [2 I0

30 14 I1 IR I4

40 IR 14 23 I8
Notes. 1. The last dump truck with the mixture should leave the AM with the cal-

culation of arriving at the laying site no later than 30 minutes before the end of

the paving shift.

2. The time of transporting the mixture from the A32 to the laying site

should not exceed 1.5 hr.

Key:
1. One-way hauling distance, km 3.
2. Fine-grained mixture 4.

Coarse-grained mixture
Average speed, anhr

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.19. Need for Machines. Equipment, Tools and Innuents for Mixture-Laying

 

Brigade

Required Equipment for Required Equipment for

Mixture-Layla Brigade “tuber Mixture-Laying Briﬂde umber
Ds-l Asphalt laying machine 1 Metal measuring roller 1
00-93 (D-dOOA) Motorized 1 Stakes 6

wheeled roller Buckets . 2
00-31 (0-627) Pneumatic rol- 2 Blunt-nose blacksmith sledge- 2

1ers with smooth tires haulers
Dump trucks By cal- Steel construction sledges 2

WIN-1°“ Save to cut asphalt concrete 2

PBS-4.5 Mobile electric power 1 Boards for working joints 3.5 2

station by 20 by 400 cm and S by 20
STU-27742 nobile asphalt 1 by 400 an

boiler Metal nails to secure boards 10
Roaster for heating tools 1 Surveyors tape 1
steel construction spades 5 Traffic control barriers 2
Floats 2 Road signs to enclose working Complete
Rakes 2 section set
Drags l VO-8 shower car 1
'.evellers 1 vo-B din ;ng car 1
Levelling straight edges 2 vo-s car for foremen and stores 1
Manual steel tamper 1 Mobile toilets 2
Gauges 3 moved water tanks with capacity 1
check straight edge 3 meters Complete 0: 2-5 tons

long with measuring wedge set First aid supplies 1
Layer thickness gauge 1
Construction level 1 meter 1

long
Thermometer

0—H

Nisted flax-hemp rope
delivery of the coarse stone:

distribution of the coarse stone of fraction 20 (25)-40 am by a slag distrib-
utor in layers 25-30 percent thicker than the planned layer:

preliminary packing of the slag layer with four-six passes of a light roller
on the same track;

distribution of coarse stone of fraction 10 (lS)'20 (25) m:

packing in three-four passes of a heavy roller on the same track.

The layer of coarse stone should be finely shaped by rolling with rollers on pneu-
matic tires or by running trucks over the entire area of the pavement. The number
of passes on the same track depends on the thickness of the layer, the viscosity of.
the asphalt and air temperature and comprises approximately 4-8 on the same track.

161

FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Table 5.20. Temperature of “eating Coarse Stone when Discharged From Mixer

 

 

u) ! "rim" 11':_~- “c ‘
. nu Indus I «am nan-rm usea‘n 5%)“.

I bps-mic "(was (5)

6
l'nuyu mil-mum. mumm Iillli {DO/Ho, nlUl 00/90. 140—100 mtg—.140
nun-woo
Tammi «06m (7) 8
lint)“ nutmumhummuh BlUl 200nm. B‘Ilh ”0/200 “0—130 lull—I20
l'mryu menu-mil muaxnn CI‘ ”0/20". MI' ”01200 (9) 80—1") 80 -|Io
.\'o.ux)uud («client (10) (11
l'mvyu "Mate-mo mlmullﬂ Cl‘ I70ll30. M 70ll30 90-- ll" non-mo

Note. The length of mixing the slag and asphalt in the mixing section with over-

flow cover closed for hot slag is 3 minutes and for warm slag is not less than 4
minutes.

Key:
1. Type or slag and mark of binder
2. Heating temperature, °C
3. without surfactant
4. with surfactant
5. Hot slag
6. END 90/130, 8ND 60/90 and 8ND 40/60 viscous petroleum asphalt
7. Warm slag
8. END 200/300 and am 130/200 viscous petroleum asphalt
9. 86 130/200 and ac 130/‘200 liquid petroleum asphalt
10. Cold slag
11. 86 170/130 and MG 70/130 liquid petroleum asphalt

Tabie 5.21. Temperature of Coarse stone Prior to Laying, °c

 

 

 

‘15 (2) . (3) (4)
Iculrlniyrl luuyja. 'C rug-ma mph-I. le-uul Ilrfu-lb luau-u. aydnls
l5, -

l‘umcc 10 120 80-430 I0

33-- lo IJO 90—70 I0

(I -5 HO Hm—M) I0

I) (—5) — ”0—90 --

r. .(_m) -— I20---100 --

Note. The temperature of hot slag can be reduced by 20°C during laying if surfac-
tants are used.

Key:

1. Air temperature, "C 4. Cold slag

2. Hot slag S. More than
.1. Warm slag

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.22. Normal Consumption of Coarse Stone

—‘ - -__—

(2) manna 20(25)—40 on. sale.

 

 

(1’ -——————————————————————- (5) «a
.. (3) mes-«annu- :waaaul I -
“433:“? ' av- Wlt‘ a case taught-mm; ms nu) "In"
W
______JAl_______________________
‘ 95—94 lav-l9 9—ll
i: 9|—97 I8—l9 9—H
2:7 94—Ioo 19—20 l0—l2
23 93—104. 20—2: l0—I2
2'9 loo—I06 20—21 11—13
320 104—110 . 21—12 “up:
u 107—1 I3 22—23 I I— :4
3.2 III—I26 22—23 H— .

1. Density of stone material, g/cm3

2. Fractions of 20 (25)-4o m, kg/m2

3. with S cm thickness of layer

4. Add for each centimeter of thickness with greater thickness of layer

s. Fractions of 10 (15)-2o (25 mm) kg/mz

Maintenance, which includes traffic control over the entire width of the strip and
elimination of possible deformations, should be provided during the initial period
of operating the bed of coarse stone. The time of final shaping of the coarse
stone layer depends on weather conditions and traffic intensity and is in the
range from 7 to 15 days. Pavement on a bed of coarse stone can be constructed
within 8-10 days (after defects of the bed have been determined and corrected).

5.4. Construction of Sectional Metal Surfaces

Metal airfield surfaces are designed mainly to support the operation of aviation

in difficultly accessibly regions during periods when roads are out of service and
losses of carrying capacity by the soil.

PMP-l-S3 and K-lD steel plates and AAP aluminum plates, the main characteristics

of which are presented in Table 5.23, are now used to install metal airfield
surfaces.

Metal airfield surfaces are delivered in a set by industry. Besides the main arti-
cles (plates, semiplates and fasteners). the set also includes installation tools

and accessories (Table 5.24).

Plates and semiplates packaged in bundles are hauled by rail on flatcars and in
gondolas and from the railroad to the installation site by stakebed trucks, dump
trucks and trailers.

The approximate standard outputs for unloading and loading bundles of plates are
presented in Table 5.25.

163

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NQLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. "SI-Z ONLY

Table 5.23. Main Characteristics of Metal Airfield Plates

 

 

 

 

 

- luau—um
(1) ____.____. :3 .42).-..
Luau-pun Inn-a ran-u I I
nuwnu nun AA"
_"_—"" .— —l ‘1‘“ . __
7— ' "T3 ‘-
16. .. _ ; _
1 Iiiﬁlil“u)‘“"'” ”u an: :rm run}.
mupmm (5) Illl 4)?) it?
nuron npodmnn (5) 2| M -II
Nuirxrauc pa'mt-pu. am: (7) JOIS . 3'“) Ill")
mnluum (8) 3‘ I 4'!" 4“:
Nonnum- 1'33”“ mnni Imnu. u’ mr. L!!- |.-
Macon. Il':
2H 4.1 )9
.‘umm ‘ 1' "i
. I u’ unspums (10) II M Guara- @unca-
kPI‘IIm-Imr mmt n mmpmnu (11) 2 ll'ly‘usnu- mwn ( "109mm
unuu I Iupuo- II VII-Im-
( 3)amm IUIIII
(15) (16) Imauuun unnuunu
llmunmmn-n. mum-«onus nmcnmmx Hum!
Imm u- u'mpuml (17) 9.8)
Ilun yuan-mm mun u unnymur a-um
)‘ (-z r 4c mwopu lla'llul "an. an: .- '
' 22:..22 ' (m 3:3 “3.;
I:::',".',',':‘ (20) .13" 3237345 4.10 2:60
Kunu'm'nm "III” I lln'lll‘. lllf.(21) m 10 .
M : r .
aunt-unto: mm (22)23) :33 2%); r1):
' 7 a I I I
[loan-mu $131.3“ (mun 031183931". 3L!) )5.) I 3-)
“I
Fey:
1. Characteristic of plate 14. Fixers and end cleats
2. Type of plate 15. Possibility of removing individual
3. Overall dimensions, um plates from surface
4. Length 16. Yes
5. width 17. Type of packaging of plates and
6. Height of profile semiplates
7. Laying dimensions, mm 18. Bundles
8. Useful area of one plate, m2 19. Overall dimensions of bundle of
9- "‘83: *9 plates, mm
10. l m2 of surface 20. height
11. Attachment of plates in surface 21. Number of plates in bundle, pieces
12. Spring-loaded pins 22. of bundle of plates
13. Pixers and end cleats 23. Of bundle of semiplates

24. Useful area of plates of one bundle, m2

The composition of work to assemble the metal surfaces include: unpacking the bun-

dles of plates, delivery and laying of the plates, securing the plates with pins
and end cleats and securing the edges of the laid surface.

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.24. (mposition of Installation Tools and Accessories

 

(1)

Manual-u. manual!
I "pare-robu—

_..—‘..-__

(2) (3) “we! as u"
Illa-u:

"""‘ " nun-:4: I ml

 

 

AMI
Jlommu unmammc 91.5, [00 50 50
Know mm 1100 an (5) . loo |00 loo
9 I 300 a (6) a 100 100 mu
Momma cnmnpnuo ant-con 0.8 ”(7) e — 50 _ -
a , a |.5—2.0 xr ‘8 9 —- -- 50
Kyaaama “mm 6 Ir (9 1°) , — I0 [0
I'm-mu an mpuonux Mano-t TIN ( , — 50 :-
» n Jinn-Iowa (11) a -- '1" 20
“Mam-[m (1 g a '20 - .I(—) i6
13 . _
T::::$:u3e npumocoﬁncuma (14) . — l0 l0
Key:
1. Installation tools and accessories 8. Carpenters' hamers weighing
2. Unit of measurement 1.5-2.0 kg
3. Set of plates 9. sledge banners weighing 6 kg
4. Installation jimies 10. levers for ”-4 end cleats
5. Books 1,100 m long ll. levers for fixers
6. Books 300 III long 12. Pin holders

7. Carpenters' hamrs weighing 0.8 kg 13. Shears
14. Rigging attachments

Table 5.25. Production Outputs in Loading and Unloading Bundles of Plates with
Truck-Mounted Cranes

*. _.._.._

 

 

 

(l; 2
M "an I Get:- 1)."! 3-)mlrmml
4
ﬂoroynn xpmon KC-ISG; )(KC- "Imp-sgznmuu-u
4563) nun mm noun“?! m I-mu. ‘ 2.30
mannmopo mu: m: nuauunxn— nu. '
.tnyxocnuc‘w ope (E3 330
urmpemcme (8) (9) (5)
Bu yam upanou KC-lfﬁ‘l (KC- To me
I .1) mun mu nonyluun a: '
meaenuoaopoxuux naawopu:
anyxocuux 245
uetwpexotnux (10) 350
Hot yna xpauou K0156? (KC- 9 205
-I ) man an noaynam us

"mom" mm alarpysxa I:
agronommcﬁ

1. WP. of work

2. cosmosition of section

3. Production output of section during 8 hours, bundles

4. loading of plates or semiplates with Its-1562 (KS-1563) crane onto railroad
flatcars

[Kay continued on following page]

165

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

S. Driver-crane operator--l person

6. Rigging operators--4 persons

7. Two-axle

B. Four—axle

9. Unloading plates or semiplates with xs-issz (Ks-1563) crane from railroad
flatcars

10. Loading plates or semiplates with Ks-1562 (Ks-1563) crane onto trucks or
unloading from trucks

Unpacking the bundles of plates and semiplates includes removing the T-shaped pack-
ing skids from the holes on which the plates rest. This work is performed by the
plate unpackers included in the surface assembly brigade. Their number is estab-
lished from calculation of one unpacker for two-three sections of haulers.

All the packing material (T-shaped steel skids, wooden spacer beans, lockpins and
so on) must be collected and retained for subsequent reuse.

The plates are carried and laid on the bed of the surface by carriers who work in
pairs. Two carriers transport one PMP-l-SJ or K-lD plate each and two AAP plates
with hooks, laying them on the bed with the long side perpendicular to the direc-
tion of assembly of the surface with the ends bound toward the semiplates. PEP-l-
53 plates are laid so that the direction of the teeth of two adjacent rows of
plates are opposite, while K-lD and AA? plates are laid so that the teeth are in
the direction of the beginning of the front for assembly of the surface. Every
seventh row of PMP-l-S3 and K-lD plates laid first on the bed should be laid in
two layers. This eliminates the gap between laid rows of plates and the assembly
front formed due to overlapping of laid plates. Rows of AAP plates are laid on the
bed in two layers at a distance of 30-35 cm from each other. A reserve of laid
plates should always be maintained before the laying front in an amount required
per hours of laying: 30-35 rows of PMP-l-Sa plates, 40-45 rows of KrlD plates a
30-35 two-layer rows of AAP plates.

The approximate production output to carry and lay the plates is presented in
Table 5.26.

The plates are laid in the surface in one or several fronts simultaneously.
Multifront laying can be departing, oncoming or convergent.

The number of laying fronts is established as a function of the presence of work
force, transport equipment and the given deadline for constructing the metal 2

surface.

Assembly of airfield surface from PHP-l-S3 plates begins with laying of two marking
rows.

They are laid strictly perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the surface over
its entire width by measn of a theodolite and a stretched cord. The marking rows

166

FOR.OFFKJAL.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.26. X‘roductinn Outputs to Curry and Lay I‘lMon on l|o.l

——. _ ___._._.___———_— . _

 

I'm euge‘mm I. nume- ﬁtmen-

 

 

(1) (2) (3 ea 1! e, m.
0m no" rum- nu — —-———
mm-na «as l AMI
(4) (5)
- Demons 1: paccnun nmu Punt-cw-

na "oarovmeunm «no. w --

unue ucpu yum-1m nn- 2 ml.

xpuuu upn umpuuc em.

u:
9 455 {510) 420 (ﬁlm) Mn arm)
[2 420 (620) 390 (an) 1!» mo)
I8 365 M80) .115 (520) 680 (R40;
2| 315 (430) MO («0) ‘30 (Bio,
24 325 (420) 290 (390) .305 (72!»

Notes. l. he production outputs in unloading bundles of plates on both sides of
the surface at a distance of 1-1.5 meter from each of them are given in the paren-
theses and the production outputs when unloading bundles of plates along one edge
of the surface are given without parentheses.

2. The production outputs are reduced by 25-30 percent during nighttime
work and by 15-20 percent during periods of bad roads.

Kay:
1. Type of work
2. (Imposition of section
3. Production output per worker during 8 hours, units
4. Carrying and laying plates on prepared bed prior to laying surface with
width, meters
5. Carriers--two persons

are secured to the bed with spikes after the plates have been secured with pins.

Laying of subsequent rows of plates is begun after the correctness of laying the
marking rows is checked.

A section of layers consisting of three layers and one pin installer lays the
plates. Two layers. lifting a plate to be laid, insert its teeth into the grooves
of the plate ahead of the laid row while the third layer moves the plate until the
teeth butt tightly against the end walls of the grooves.

The plate is immediately lowered onto the bed and the pin installer fastens it with
3-4 pins.

The edges of the surface are secured in the following manner: the longitudinal
edges are attached by tying the end of the outermst plate with a wire twist to a

wooden anchor boat driven into the soil toward the inner wall of a triangular
trench opened along the edge of the surface.

167

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plates are secured every other row on the and sections of a takeoff-landing
strip (the length of each of them is equal to one-fourth the length of the takeoff-
landing strip) and the taxiway and every fourth row on the average section of take-
of f-landing strip and parking apron.

The end edges of the surface of a takeoff-landing strip are secured by anchoring
two rows of plates into the soil, while the end edges of a taxiwey and parking
apron are attached similar to attachment of the longitudinal edges.

The dug-out grooves or holes are filled in with soil and carefully packed upon com-
pletion of attaching the edges of the surface.

Assembly of a surface from K-l-D and AAP plates compared to assembly of a surface
from PHP-l-SZ) plates has the following characteristics:

a) assembly begins with laying of one marker row of plates. In this case if
it is suggested that laying be carried out only in one direction, the marker row
is laid from ordinary plates (with one-sided arrangement of grooves). If the sur-
face is assembled in two directions (on both sides of the marker row). the marker
row is laid from plates with two-sided arrangement of the grooves for the teeth.
All the plates of the marker row should be secured to each other by end cleats
imediately after laying;

b) laying of subsequent rows should be accompanied by careful checking. One
must follow that the plate fasteners of each laid row enter the groovers of the
laid plates designed for them;

c) laying is carried out with continuous shifting of the rows of plates: one
row to the right and the other to the left;

d) the plates are attached in end. joints with end cleats which are inserted
into combined end grooves of connected plates. The expanded part of each cleat is
bent downward with a special lever or hamer, its end is inserted into the end
groove and is then bent until the projections stop in the wall of the corrugation;

e) the plates are laid by sections consisting of two layers. If deformed
plates are being laid, each section of layers is supplemented by one auxiliary
worker. A section consisting of three layers installs the end plates when laying
K-lD plates and one consisting of two installers when laying APP plates.

The approximate production outputs to assemble a metal surface from PMP-l-53, K-lD
and MP plates are presented in Table 5.27, while the compositions of the brigades

and the need for implements and auxiliary materials are presented in Tables 5.28
and 5.29.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.27. Production Outputs in Assembly of Surface

___ . .. -.._ __-_.. ..-.'..--_.__

 

 

 

 

(2) "urea :unonla It: "urn-frail"-
II I'."’ ‘I 'I .I" ' '11'
Iln I(I1'-l)l'|l u’v‘u‘rTIl-z: u-n‘afte-ul (x) . ”u",- M '2':—
llMll-I-M mm um
_.__t5.,___ .._. .__...__ .____.___ ._-_ -
n.” '.|..I mm In Inner-my: ‘2) "SIX-m- 2.x! —
r spounouurn 'Irxnun .. 4 . .
Yuma-m mm a mmpu‘teul e ( “I Inna-3.1 -- 5|" KID
3; $191 n - - 2 sea.
Gunman mpnoeux u an ~ Mmugmmz 1) -- um mm
In: - - -
erunnme Input-em "$1.201 Suﬁ-3’s K1mmatf I5 I5 I'.
nun-mun c Janna-mm ( “an" .
mam-n ﬂ CIPYTM I! M- "mum '-
pun-mil tpamm «many» 4 WI
To axe. uponnnmtn xpowon e To nub.— Jl 3.1 1!
t nip-maul npwnuxoe we- fwd. .
pm nauun pea (15) 6

Notes. 1. Laying of new plates in dry weather during daylight is provided by the
norms; the soil is of medium density.

2. The production output is reduced by 25 percent when assembling a sur-
face during nighttime hours and by 15-20 percent when working in seasons without
roads.

3. The production output to secure the edges of the surface is increased
threefold with mechanized digging of trenches.

4. The production output to lay the plates is reduced to 165 units when
assembling a surface from PMP-l-Sa plates that have been used.

5. The section of layers consists of three persons when assembling a sur-

face from previously used K-lD plates and the production output per worker is re-
duced to 340 Plates.

Key:
1. Type of work
2. Unit of measurement
3. Concosition of section
4. Production output per worker during 8-hour shift with assently of pavment

from slabs
S. Laying plates in pavement with fastening by pins
6. Pieces .

7. Layers-4 persons

a. laying slabs in pavement

9. Layers-~2 persons

10. Fastening of end cleats

11. Installers»? persons

12. Fastening end edges of pavement with preparation of rings and twists and
digging trench by hand

13. Running meters

14. Edge fasteners-4 perems

lS. Fastening longitudinal edges with digging of holes every second row

16. Edge fasteners-4 persons

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.28. standard Communion of Brigades to: Assembly of Surface on e single

 

 

 

 

Front
—-— __=—--
'Iernu arm I Innu- urn III-[Our
a) (2) (3) ”name-um: nap-nu - n:
he Mn Corn- aer— -_——-'—
vlnllnlﬂlu
(5) (6) Hum nun-1.5.: 0”
PyKoeoacno ”Goran Spurnnp—I «a. I l I I I
Pacnuoeﬁfam um I'acmxoemux — I I I I 2
I In. (8)
Panama I pacrnaxa WWW" -- 2 nu. I I 2 '2
mun WIMIJI‘MAW. o 1
IIOKPHI'IIG 12)
”Manx: "an? e n - Yuan-m ;--- I an. I I '2 2 3
no t apt-"mum 1e-
nun (13) (14’
review-maul KMW realm-m"- I III“. I I I I I
Kpcnnclmc Ilspouox nu- eruuunuuu - 2 2 2 2 2
xputln (1 ) 3 sea. (16! ___ _
17 ' _ ' —
"tom n (marine )Ile- I5 I5 2| 2| III
noun (unma- MI-
Imp.)
(18)
”mm K-IR
7I’ymmmcno pnﬁmauu IIrIIIJJIIII -I am. I I I I I
'I’acunxmu na-Icl MM Pmunuumx— I I 2 '2 .‘I
I we».
-I’nnocxa n paccmnua Paautxnmu- - 2 mu. I 2 .‘I 4 ‘3
run! nepu yuuxol
e MIW‘I’IC (19) (20)
Vuuxu mm s noxpu- yxnnwnn- 2 an. I I ' 2 '2 3
me
'I'macumemﬁ IIDII‘IIIOAB I'mneaurr l-u-n. I I I I I
‘llunaumx? topnoeux ”(Inga-Inns" u.1.1- I I 2 2 ‘I
Manon 21) mm - 2 «ca
ermlmur urn-mu no- Krmunwumu— , .‘I II .‘I 3 ‘I
Ipum .‘I «M . I
I'lhnro n cpl-MIR). I III I 20 I 27 I 29 I .16
no."
(24)
Ilium AA” '
(Pylon-mum- pafmrnun liplrnnnp I um. I I I I I I
I'arnnmnn nan" nan! l’nmalmmlul - I I I '2 2
I «M.
d‘asnorua I pmm‘ma I'aJuoc-mnn---2 «0.1. I I 2 3 4
Mn! nape- yuauol
I nonpurne

[Continued on following page)

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. 28 (Oontinued) .

Nuns: u" e napa- Vuuuln — 2 us. I l 2 2 3
no

Cconcmeecusl rompers I'm?- —- I «In. I I l l I

:nocrnoou topsoil-Ix "or um us- I I _ I l 2
mum um -- 3 «on.

Mlle xyonos oo- Kym-nuns“ - 4 4 4 4 4
rpm" 3 sea.

Mroro e Opurue ne- 2| I 2| 20 I '19 Ili
roses

Note. One additional person is added to each section laying the plates when assen-
bling a surface from previously used plates.

Key:
1. hype of work
2. Composition of section
3. umber of sections in brigade with width or laid surface in meters
4. PMP-l-53 plates
5. Supervision of workers
6. Brigade leader--one person
7. Unpacking bundles of plates
8. (he unpacker
9. Carrying and arranging plates prior to laying in surface
10. M carriers
11. Laying plates in surface with attachment with pins
12. me layer
13. Geodetic control
14. One surveyor
15. Attaching edges of surface
16. Three attachers
17. 'notal persons in brigade (including brigade leader)
18. K-lD plates
19. Laying plates in surface
20. Two layers
21. Delivery of end cleats
22. 'mo cleat installers
23. Total in brigade
24. up plates
25. Three cleat installers

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5.29.

gm of Work

unloading bundles of plates
from transport equipment at
airfield

unpacking bundles of plates

Carrying and placing plates
prior to laying of surface
Laying plates in surface

Installing end cleats or
driving in pine

Joining the oncoming assem-
bly front of the surface or
points where taxiway meets
the takeoff-landing strip
and parking apron

Attaching edges of surface
with preparation of spikes,
wire twists and digging of
holes

[Continued on following page]

Implements and Auxiliary Materials Used in Assetnbly of Surfaces
from Metal Plates

Blunts and Auxiliary Materials

Name

 

Rigging attachment
Fitters hammers

Installation jiuaies

Fitters hamsrs
Axes

Books 300 m or 1,100
m long

Installation jimies
Sledgehammers

Levers for fasteners
Hooks 300 Ian long

Fitters banners

Jimies for fasteners
Hooden hammer

Jimies-pin holders

Hooks 300 m long
Hooks 1,100 m long
Sledgehamers
Installation jimmies
levers for fasteners
Cutting along metal
Reinforcement shears
Tension wire 3-5 an in
diameter

shovels

Cross-cut saws

Axes

Sledgehamrs
Reinforcement shears
'nension wire 3-5 m in
diameter

Stretcher d - 8-10 cm

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

umber

 

One set per truck-mounted
crane

One piece per section of
riggera

One piece per section of
riggers

One piece per worker
One piece per worker

One piece per worker

One piece per section
One piece per section
One piece per section
'rwo pieces per section

One piece per worker-cleat
installer

One piece per section of
layers
'No pieces of PMP-l-53

One piece per worker
One piece per section
is

One piece per worker
One piece per section
0'

As needed

'No pieces per section
I

One piece per section

60 kg per 100 running
meters of edge

0.45 m3 per 100 running
meters of edge
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. 29 (Continued) .

Iglenente and Auxiliag Materials

 

 

m of Work blame ﬂmber

Checking correctness of as- 'rheodolite One piece

senbling the surface neveller (he "
Stakes 25 pieces Per 3
Levelling straight M " °
edges sun
Haunting tape 'ruo "
Steel roller tape M "

173‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 6. CONSTRUCTION OF RIGID AIRFIELD PAVEMENT

[Text] 6.1. General Data on Rigid Pavement

Rigid pavement includes monolithic (concreted on the site) cement-concrete. armored
concrete and reinforced concrete ordinary and pre-stressed pavement and also pre-
cast pavement installed from finished reinforced concrete slabs manufactured by a
plant.

Rigid pavement is usually laid on artificial beds of materials treated with inor-
ganic or organic binders.

A separating interlayer consisting of roofing materials or a layer of sand-asphalt
mixture is laid between the artificial bed and the monolithic pavement and also be-

tween the lcwer and upper layers of two-layer pavement.

A levelling layer of sand-cement mixture 4-6 cm thick is installed between the
slabs and all types of artificial beds except sand when constructing precast pave-
llent and the separating interlayer is not laid in this case.

Monolithic pavement is divided into individual slabs with colpression and expansion
joints.

Compression joints are oblique and the slabs in the them have vertical edges
formed during concreting by the mold and false edges which are achieved as a re-
sult of forming a crack in the cross-section weakened by cutting a groove.

Besides cunpression and expansion joints. monolithic pavement has production
joints, installation of which is determined by the restriction on the width of the
section of the concrete laying machines and by forced interruptions in concreting.

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The distances between the transverse coapression joints are equal to 5 meters for
single-layer and the upper layer of two-layer commit-concrete pavement, 7-15 meters
for armored concrete pave-lint, 15-20 meters for ordinary reinforced concrete pave-
ment and 10 meters for the lower layer of two-layer pavement.

The distances between the transverse expansion joints in mnolithic paveuent are
taken in the range of 40-90 neters according to existing norms as a function of
the thickness of the pavement and the climatic regions of the region in which the
facility is constructed. However. a tendency toward rejection of installing them
has recently been noted with regard to the fact that expansion joints are the main
focal points of breakdown of the pavement.

Therefore, expansion joints in mnolithic pavement, except pre-stressed joints. are
not installed in those cases when climatic conditions permit.

Expansion joints are not installed in the lower layer of two-layer pavement in all
climatic zones.

The distances between longitudinal coepression joints are equal to 3.5-5.0 meters
for cement-concrete pavement and 7.0-7.5 meters for other types of pavement. They
are mually combined with production joints.

Butt joints in the form of pins or keys are installed in joints to reinforce the
edge sections of slabs. The edge sections of slabs can be reinforced with rein-
forcing or thickening of them.

Monolithic pre-stressed pavement has biaxial compression (in two mutually perpen-
dicular directions) and uniaxial compression (only in a single longitudinal direc-
tion). In the latter case the pawuent is reinforced in the transverse direction
by ordinary unstressed reinforcing. Uniaxial-coapressed cross-braced pavement, the
pre-stressing in the concrete of which is created by high-strength wire 3-5 m in
diameter stretched prior to concreting, is mainly used in Soviet practice of air-
field construction. Anchor supports in the form of reinforced concrete slab:. with
lugs sunk into the soil are installed to receive the forces from the stress of the
reinforcement on the edges of sections. the length of which is in the range of
500-700 meters. However, monolithic pre-stressed pavement has achieved limited
application in our country and is now not used with regard to the complexity of the
installation technique and the great laboriousness.

Modern airliners place high requirements on the cleanliness of the pavement sur-
face, which depends to a significant degree on the strength and operational stabil-
ity of the surface layer of concrete, by which the mean cycles between repair and
the total service life of the pavement are determined in most cases.

A promising trend in increasing the life and operational qualities of rigid mne-
lithic pavement may be installation of it with the upper layer 6-7 cm thick from
high-strength concrete with tensile bending strength of 60-70 kgf/cmz.

In this case the separating interlayer is not installed between the upper and lower
layers and the upper layer of concrete is laid iumediately after the lower layer.

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monolithic pavement is constructed by the mchanized nethod, using for this special
sets of rail-travelling or railless concrete laying machines. In the first case the
machines move on special rails (rail-forms) which at the same time are the side form
and in the second case the machines have caterpillar track and move on a prepared
bed while the side edqes of the slam are shaped by a sliding form.

A railless set of machines is considerably more productive than a rail set and
provides better evenness of the pavement.

The pavement is concreted at average daily air tenperatures above +5°c. If it be-
comes necessary to work in lower temperatures, special measures are taken to ensure
the concrete hardening process and to achieve its design strength.

standard pre-stressed reinforced concrete slabs of types PAC-14 and PAC-18 (smooth
airfield slab) l4 and 18 cm thick, respectively. are usually employed when construc-
ting precast pavenent. Drawings of these slabs have been confirmed by USSR Gosstmy
and an album of the detail plans is published by TsITP [Central Institute of Stan-
dard Designs] . USSR Gosstroy (classification number 3.506-3).

Pre-stressed road slabs of type 906 (smooth road slab) may also be used for air-
field pavanant designed for load categories V and VI.

The main characteristics of airfield and road slabs of types PAG and PDG are pre-
sented in Table 6.1.

Table 6.1. Main Characteristics of PM: and PDG Slabs

 

 

 

 

I Pal I..\ .‘Il-‘.AE\'|‘II In rant,
(1) I (2 .(3) (4) "(3.) l (6, ....
1". I I" ' “III-II“: u'..r-'.:.'.-Iu.- ""3- ' her-ha. 'u' . “-—-— .. --_-— I '—
. . mum-Inn“ lIfIIJI'l Ital L “I"...
I l1 'I 'l
.__ 71;- eL'_:__91
II.\1'-11 ll 2,1; 1.2 1.01 72.1: 1.2.1 111.1
‘ 12,117“? "IITI'I' 1'71?»
“M II 1': II 2.1; 1.1 1.611 77.6 TL! 111.]
l '1'.‘,I'I'T 'T'."_II' 1.:.-1:'.
IIM'.1: I :1 11 2 I. . 1.2 1.6a 61.11 72.1 1:11:15:
' 'ﬁ'fu‘ 'TII I I .:I1
II\I Ix IR ' 2,1; 5.1 2,113 .7.1 11131. Jig.)
7'22”? TIPS» 1-1.11
IIAl M In 2» 1'. 5.4 2.11: 117.1 111.1 2.3
I "3",‘2? ’77:. 1-1 .11
Hill .'1- I 11 ' 2x1. 1.2 IJ'IR rem m," ”.73
' 1.? ‘52P. 'ii.’n
11:11 .1:. 1.. II 1.5-.1. :1,1.-'. 1.26 “"3. 3:1,; yﬂ
[:13 3.117 111.:1

[Key on following page]

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Npe of slab 6. Consumption of reinforcing per
2. Thickness, cm slab, kg/III2

3. Cross-sectional dimensions, meters 7. stressed

4. Mass, tons 8. metressed

5. Volume of concrete, m3 9. Mel

6.2. Installation of Master Strings and Rail-Forms

Installation of master strings. The characteristic feature of a set of railless
mchines is that the height and cross-sectional position of the working members is
determined automatically during work by the tracking system with respect to previ-
ously established master strings. The strings are installed on one or both sides
of the row.

Strings are installed on both sides when installing the mrker row or when there is
no confidence that the bed is sufficiently rigid and has no deviations from the de-
sign marks.

The optimum distance between strings when installing them on both sides of a row is
14 meters. The line of each string should be strictly parallel to the axis of the
rut. The strings are located above the bottom of the trough at a height of not
less than 30 cm and not more than 125 cm and the recommended height is 45-100 cm.

The length of installing the strings should not exceed 700 mters to ensure the re-
quired tension of the strings with tightening winches. which is required for accur-
ate operation of the machines.

The composition of the mark is installation of levelling pegs, installation of
posts with brackets, transverse rods and screw clamps, tightening the string and
final straightening of it in cross-section and in height and remval of the master
strings, posts and levelling pegs.

A diagram of installing master strings is shown in Figure 9.

The installed levelling pegs are at the same time points that show the cross-sec-
tional line of the string and datum points for installing the string in height.
The levelling pegs are installed so that a line passing through the top of the
pegs coincides with a line passing through the edge of the row or is parallel to
this line on each transverse section. The distance between levelling pegs. as be-
tween posts. is usually equal to 15 meters in the longitudinal direction.

Levelling pegs are initially installed on transverse sections driven into the edges
of a section and all the intermediate pegs are then installed in the line of site
of the first and last pegs using a theodolite and measuring tape.

The posts are installed in assembled form (with brackets and screw clamps attached)

from the outside of the levelling pegs at a distance of 25-30 cm from them and are
firmly driven into the bed.

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

, s

/ I

.4.
I",-
: ,4} ‘

0".

Figure 9. Diagram 0: Installing Master Strings: 1--tightening drums:
:ustring: 3--levelling pegs; 4--brackets: S--posts

The bracket is installed perpendicular to the tension line of the string by moving
the screw clamp along the post and the bracket in the screw clasp so that the notch
is always precisely above the center of the levelling pegs and at the accepted
height, using a theodolite and special template for this (Figure 10).

The string is tightened after installation of the posts in the following order:

the tensioning drums are installed in front of the first and behind the last post
at a distance of approximately 10 meters from them and in the cross-section along
the line of the levelling pegs, the string is laid along the tensioning line and
its ends are secured to the drums with clearance (10-12 meters of string) for
splicing in case of. a possible break, the string is pro-tightened to a state so
that it can be easily set in the notch of the brackets but so that it does not junp
out of than without application of force and the string is aligned in cross~section
and height and is finally tightened.

exceed 700 meters. The scheme shown in Figure 11 is used to ensure continuity in
installation of the string of adjacent sections. The string of the next adjacent
section is inserted in the notch of the bracket of the last post of the previous

section. Thus, the boundary post is cannon for adjacent sections and two strings
are suspended on it.

Operations to install the master strings are performed by a section consisting of:

Surveyor-engineer............ .....l

Roadworkers:
fourthrank...................1
thirdrmk ceases-oases eaeoool
secondrank.............. ..... .2

Auxiliaryworker,firstrank............... 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.2. Volumes and Laboriousness of Work to Install Master Strings (for 700
meters of string)

 

u) m Elm.

Inn-unnumnmr nut-renu- IWW". ()ﬂwu [no-um «a a

 

 

(S

ﬂomomnvemmu-nummcnmuc Inﬂo- — — 2,5
TIJ. yu‘talmnxﬂ n tlllvuc :Iuaxoa ornam-
Iu-mu ywacnoo 916m

Puma-la nun-ram: u mimosa: M). M 700 8,75
norm «mum-no a "name no no-
Ronny
Jar-nu uuuonupuux annual-ma non”)- £18?) 50 1,5
uctuy
Knurpuuwoe nnnuuponaune Iluneanp‘mx a 50 1.6
xonumuno 0
Urnuonu u ”(man strung"): » 52 3.9
uncx r xpumarcﬁunuu
l’cnnmxa upnnmu-ﬁm-e nu WM}. » 5'2 3,5
men xoauuuxauu no mount] a
unfunny 12
I'm-manna. "names-«c n Janonu cw - u 700 3.0
am a npuprm lpnlllll‘rfINnn
"pom-ma yummy-nu cum": a lung” I 7"" ”I."
no nut-me (14) m l '
(Inﬂur n vuu ~ 7 ,n
Jloumlmntv'cmrx (npu neoaxonnuncgslz mt. 5"! 2.75
unneaupmu mam-mm), o-mcrua u no- (8)
rpyma ux uu Aux-nun m NOOMI yu-
(mu
.__——__ ———.__.
Htoro Ma 7003: (16) I I 40

l . Prodmt ion operations

2. Unit of neasurement

3. Volume of work

4. Laboriousness, man-hours

S. Preparatory-final operations and installation and remval of barrier signs
of work sections

6. Driving stakes and installing levelling pegs in cross-section by theodolite
7. Driving levelling pegs for marker

8. Pieces

9. Control levelling of levelling page

10. Installation and driving of metal posts with brackets

ll. Installation of brackets above levelling pegs by theodolite and temlate
12. Laying, tightening and winding up string in bracket notch

13. Checking installation of string in height layout

14. Removal of string

15. Disassembly of posts (and of levelling pegs if required) and cleaning and

loading them for delivery to new section
16. natal for 700 meters

The laboriousness of installing master strings and the need for implements and tools
are presented in Tables 6.2 and 6.3.

Installation and removal of rail-forms. The evenness of the paverent surface and.
the linearity of the longitudinal edges of the slabs depend on the accuracy of

179

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 10. Template to Check Height of Tightening String: l--upper shelf:
2--rod with divisions: 3"qu tube: 4--handle; S--stop screw

6--bottom shelf

(1) 7.‘ (2)

ﬂprlhufywm y.- 'I‘I'IIIII ‘ M'MZ’UIIHIU- war/rm:

¢=_.—-.===r== -
: 5139-“-

    

Figure 11. Diagram of Tightening String on Adjacent Sections: l--tensioning
drums: 2--bracket; 3--post

1. Previous section 2. Next section

installing the rail-forms when using the rail-travel set of concrete laying na-
chines. Therefore, the work to install the rail-ferns should be carried out es-
pecially carefully. The rail-forms are installed only during daylight. a: this
basis the rate of installation is designated as equal to a two-shift rate of work
of concrete laying machines.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

Table 6.3. Couplete Set of Implements and Tools to Install 700 Meters of string
in One Line

_' .___— ._.

 

.i‘.
s
E

__——._ _-_____—_———__

(1) ‘2
Ilumuupn. a rut ». rpwmv
.‘i 3)}

._——... .___. __ -.—.— ._-___ _..__-

new!"

ﬂile' Cull

 

Hunt-nut u H"!)"""' ‘

 

 

 

Ilanmmc ﬁnpaﬁnl‘a) u (.9 4 )lopensunue (1316mm: D 2
«u (nun-cine)
[Jungfrau xenumm“) v 50 ﬂours uquum r W D l
Crm‘mu n n'mpc c snow 1 52 mmll "mun:
uueﬁuusu u rmyOun- l’ some techno-many; ‘ I
"new (7) l uyp wpm-mgmmmmﬂ ’ l
Cvpyun anmnr-run.-nnnnn( ) \I 7‘25 20 u (18) ._
Knlymnu ans - III)" (9) wt '2 Kynamu I! 4 ur (19) ‘ 4
mm..." c umuuuh (10) - I 11.... (20) ‘ _|,
I‘luﬁumnp o nonun’olf%1) . } 4!"'"'m(21) : 2
LEI-gulgnfh'wmo‘ ) z I (1:13:43?) 1I|:Illl(m anu I
lk‘lmtw (14) n I" I «III-14.10""! y-mmn mm:
Inf-u! (24)
Key:
1. Iuplements and tools 13. Cross-staff
2. Unit of masurement 14. stakes
3. Number 15. Wood templates (straight edges)
4. Tensiming drums and winches 16. Measuring tape with set of pins
5. Pieces 1‘). 20-meter ribbon tape measure
6. levelling pegs 18. 20-meter surveyor's cord
7. Posts assembled with brackets 19. sledge heaters, 3-4 kg
and screw clamps 20. Crowbar
8. Polyethylene string 21. Spades
9. Reels for string 22. Banners
lo. Theodolite with tripod 23. signal signs to enclose work
11. Leveller with tripod section
12. Levelling rods 24. Conpiete set

The sequence of work is:

the direction of installing the rail-forms is laid out by theodolite and it
is secured with pins or pegs which are driven to the design mark of the top of the
pavement, wooden spacers are laid according to a tenplate at the joints of rail-
forms, the rail-forms, previously checked for quality and cleaned of concrete and
dirt, are installed with a crane on wooden spacers and they are straightened in
cross-section and height positions, the rail-form are joined :0 each other with
lugs, secured to the bed with pins and the cavities are filled with sand, the rail-
form is rolled with a shaper or concrete distributing machine, the height position
in each joint of the rail-forms is checked with a level after rolling and detected
deviations from the design position are corrected by tapping.

The rail- forms are rennved no earlier than 24 hours after the concrete has been

laid at anbient air tenperature below +lS'C and within 18 hours at higher
temperatures.

181

FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is reconnenud that tenplates and the attachments presented in Figures 12-14 be
used when installing and removing rail-forms.

       

.' t : 5
S , .
_ 12.1..2... .__.: ‘ s

Figure 12. Template to Install Pad Under Rail~Form lute-plate; 2--pin
installed by level: 3--pad2 4--1evelling layer: Susan-cement
bed

1. Mark of rail-forms

 

Figure 13. Implement to Raise Rail-Forms During straightening: l--handlex
2--frame: 3--hook

The need for machines, tools and accessories is presented in Table 6.4. The sec-
tion to install rail-forms consists of:

Truck-mounted crane operator, fourth rank . . . . . l

Rigger.secondrank................l

Ibaduorkers:
fourthrenk..................l
thirdrank..................2
secondrank..................l

The section to disassemble the rail—forms and to deliver them to the installation
point consists of: '

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Truck-mounted crane operator, fourth rank . . . . . . . l
“9902,8000!!er..................1
Roadworker,thirdrank................l

 

Figure 14. Implement to Pull Out Pins of Rail-Pom: l--cap; 2--fork;
3--poet: 4—-section of channel iron; 5--handle; 6--collars
7--pin of rail-fora

Table 6.4. Machines, Tools and Implements Used to Reinstall Rail-Pom

u)";'_';';;'w‘1'3{';.‘,:;"' |...,S3.3... “ f:::,-.:z:'.::‘."' u...........
Ammqnn R 5| (3) I Jluuu nﬁuun-moummul) |
)lnyxurnun mulcmnf-nnmuﬂ I Jluu r nzumﬂ (12) I
"lulu"! ’ llpm‘lul‘lﬁnnluo An unrur- l
“Inf-mm an. Imulmlm ypnn- ? u pcauc-anm npn pnx-
IIn unnuum um; luau-r- mul- 3)
«’upnu (5) ”rm-mm men-no MI illicit '3
Knuuuwmn pram manna | mumm- mmlwn ( 4
‘ ‘l (6) llnmmmuw manunnn r 1!
"Ir-(mm Ann Imam...“ nn- I ,1“:me pmun (15)
mm yrmnmxn pulm- Jznnnr an supmmmm I
111mm (7) penlov'mpll (16
”mam nonﬁlwume (8) 3 (III-mun .mnam-ml mm '2
llomlmnmul ,u-pu-mmluc (9) 2 (Hanna |I¢‘.'IM' Qmpu (17)
Kyumuua uy'llmmm' (10) '2
Key:
1. Machines. tools and implements 3. x-Sl truck-mounted crane
2. Number 4. hoe-axle truck trailer

[Key continued on following page]

183

FOR OFI-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

5. Template to check level of pads under rail-form

6. Control rod 4 meters long

7. Template to lay out line for installation of rail-forms
8. Assorted shovels

9. mod mallets

10. Blacksmith hamsrs

11. Ordinary crowbars

12. Crowbar with claw

13. Isplement to raise rail-forms during straightening
l4. Inplement to draw out pins

15. Wood smothers with long handle

16. Clamp for securing rail-forms

l7. Spade scrapers to clean rail-forms

'me main engineering and economic indicators of installation and removal of rail-
forms are:

Laboriousness per 1,000 m2 of pavement (with construction
ofadjacentrows).man-days ............... 4.02

Averagerankofworkers...................3

Output per worker per shift of reinstalled rail-forms,
meters..........................35.6

6.3. Final Grading of Dirt Bed

when constructing rigid pavement using a railless set of machines, final grading
of the dirt bed is carried out with s 050108 subgrader iuuediately prior to in-
stallation of the artificial bed.

Excavation work is carried out in this case in channels with underexcavation of
the soil by 5-8 cm and in fills with overexcavation by 5-8 an.

The subgrader has four working members: a cutter with cutting teeth in rip the
soil and helical blades of the screw to move and distribute it. a front blade

for the first cut and to level the soil, a screw conveyer for uniform distribution
and moving of excess soil and a rear blade for final grading of the soil.

Preparatory work, which includes restoration of the longitudinal axes of rows.
levelling of the dirt bed, removing foreign objects from the path of the shaper:
enclosing the work section and installation of the master string. are carried out
prior to the beginning of operation of the shaper.

Final grading of the dirt bed can be performed without cutting the soil or with
cutting (ripping) it.

Grading by the first method is done in those cases when there is no prolonged in-
terruption between excavation work and grading of the dirt bed. Grading of the

dirt bed with cutting of the soil is done to create a dirt bed of equal strength in
those cases when it has considerable deformations and nonuniform packing.

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When grading a dirt bed without cutting the soil, the position of the working mem-
bers of the subgrader should be as follows: the front blade is raised, the cutting
edge of the rear blade should be on the planned mark of the dirt bed and the screw
conveyer should be 2-2.5 cm above it.

A cutter which is installed 0.5-1 cm above the planned mark of the bed is used in
dense heavy soils.

The bed is usually graded in one pass of the subgrader at a speed of 5-10 m/min. I
If there are points with lack of soil after one pass of the subgrader, then the
required amount of soil is delivered to these points and a second grading is car-
ried out at a working speed of 15-20 m/min.

The bed is rolled after grading with pneumatic rollers of type 0-627 in 2-3 passes
on the sane track.

The following operations are performed when grading the dirt bed with cutting of
the soil: "outlining" (marking), cutting the soil, distribution and grading of
the soil, packing the soil, clean (precision) grading of the dirt bed and rolling
the bed.

"Outlining" is carried out during the first pass of the subgrader to cut bumps and
to even the surface of the bed. The rear blade and cutter are set somewhat higher
than the planned mark of the dirt bed during "outlining.“ Dirt is hauled and lev-
elled with a notarized grader or bulldozer to points where fill is required.

The soil is cut to a depth of 10-12 on with the reverse pass of the subgrader with
the cutter only (with the remainim members raised) a a speed of 10-15 m/min.

The soil is mistened by the distrubuting system also installed on the subgrader
if necessary.

The ripped soil is distributed and graded with loading of excess soil onto trans-
port equipment during one pass of the subgrader at a speed of 5-10 m/min.

The position of the working members is as follows: the rear blade is set higher
than the planned mark of the dirt bed by the margin for packing with rollers and
for cutting the soil during clean grading. which are established experimentally;

the screw conveyer of the blade is set 2-2.5 cm higher than the cutting edge
of the blade:

the cutter and front blade are raised to the transport position.

The flaps of the central opening of the rear blade are opened to dump excess soil

onto the feeder of the loader-conveyer and the side openings of the screw conveyer
and the doors of the cutter are closed.

The soil is packed with rollers on pneumatic tires immediately after the pass of
the subgrader. Rolling is carried out from the edges of the road to the middle
with overlapping of each track by 30-50 cm. The work front should not be less
than 25 meters for mtorized rollers and 150 meters for towed rollers.

185

FOR CFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ihe required number of passes of the roller on the same track is established by
test rolling and it couprises approximately 6-8.

The first two passes of the rollers on the same track are made at minimum speed and
speed is increased to 12-15 km/hr with sibsequent passes.

The first passes are made with pressure of 2-3 kgf/cm2 if the air pressure in the
roller tires can be regulated and subsequent passes are made at pressure of 4-5
kgf/cmZ.

The soil is mistcned to optimum moisture content when it is being packed during
dry and hot weather.

Clean grading of the dirt bed is carried out with the shaper imediately after the
soil has been packed by rollers. The correctness of installation and tension of
the master string is checked prior to the beginning of grading.

The work is carried out with the rear blade, the cutting edge of which is set pre-
cisely at the level of the planned mark of the top of the dirt bed. and with a
screw .onveyer set 2-2.5 cm higher than the cutting edge of the rear blade. The
cutter and the front blade are raised. The flaps of the opening on the rear blade
are opened and the side flaps of the screw conveyor are closed.

Table 6.5. Laboriousness of Work to Grade Dirt Bed Without Cutting Soil

 

 

 

 

 

Inn Isa-1 nw- II.)":"‘.’:"_ ‘Iuvurn'uflnr “-1“; '
Imq-mne (1) “u”. «erg-sum! era-n
Ilommumm 14.1"?qu 1: p.1- .,5 ()uunxn u Imﬁm npm (61I.IIII1II- 2
60m. “lumen-1.: (um-mun) ponmoua II IImIIIcﬁepn- Hut
xnm-n‘InIn-Iwgmmansions. myymatcnl a some pa-
perynupmxa [Inf-mu: 09- (mm anus II aanpanua
fauna n;mr11u.1upmnmlu.- rnpurmw V
II.1.1IuI[quII.1 Ipyummmu oc- 21,5 "omen-em xnmI u [1.1 ml 0,!
Inna-m- IIpIquImIpnI-IIIII- 1:1qu3": mnnnlnu. (-1.1-
nun r nulpyauun Ipyurn n ma, yin: an uauluuoﬂ n
I||.|Ill‘lllli|flllu‘ I||01I'HI:I (4) ammo pnrunm
Iln,u.:1n..1 .mmulmm m- 7.2 "1qu 11:1 humanly AJIIIII-a 1’
ummmu mnmw nulmmh lam mu,1mwmmn E! u
“-Illl'ln un IIllIll.l‘ (5) “3“" M’)
Ila Hm «I (9) 2233

Key:

1. Production operations

2. Laboriousness. man-hours

3. Preparation of machine to work, attachment (suspension) of conveyer-loader
and adjustwnt of working meubers of shaper

4. Grading dirt bed with shaper with soil being loaded into transport
equipment

5. Rolling dirt bed with roller on pneumatic tires

6. Cleaning and washing of shaper and conveyor-loader at end of work; lubri-
cation and refuelling

7. Preparation of roller to work, refunlling, lubrication and maintenance of
machine at end of work

8. Total for section 1, 600 mm long and 8. 4 meters wide (13,440 m2)

9. For 1, 000 m2

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grading is carried out in one pass of the subgrade\ at working-speed of 10-15 m/min.

After the dirt bed has been cleanly graded, it is rolled with rollers on pneumatic
tires of type 0-627 in two-three paseee on the em track.

The dirt bed is graded by a brigade consisting of:

.—

Shaper operator, sixth rank . . . . . . . . . . .
Assistant operator. fifth rank . . . . . . . . . 1
Roller operator, sixth rank:
when grading without cutting . . . . . . . . . l
whengradingwithcutting .......... 2
auxiliary worker, second rank . . . . l

The length of a shift section is equal to 1,600 mters when grading the dirt bed
without cutting and 900 meters when grading with cutting of the soil.

When grading the bed with cutting of the soil, the shift section is made for two
equal sections along the length to create the work front for rollers. Work on the
sections is organized alternately.

The laboriousness, engineering and economic indicators and need for machines. in-
plements and tools in grading the dirt bed are presented in Tables 6.5-6.8.

 

 

 

 

 

Table 6.6. Laboriousness of Work to Grade Dirt Bed with Cutting of soil
(1 - .-.
Iﬁ‘znr-ln-wm- :(.2) lrl-nwrnwlr 5 i

“VIM“ 5:: mu [alu- :3:
31: dd
IIonIomnun nlpmauluu‘neulnn l.."v 'l:m.uanurv:n.n(:32 pnfuuu, -|II|'I- I z
« pnfmm upnnrnxa (IIIIE- as u nm'nm IIpI-Qumllluullllllxﬂ
rum) v-nuuurnrpn-nepnpyuan- u nun-nonopn-nnwpymmrm.
m1, prlynuplenm plﬁurml np~ IilllllﬂlllJ Inns-Hm! u "-115:
Immn nlnnlmnnpcmnulxa .VInunu-mm npmm hulk-1“" K.“
IIIID‘K‘II'III-mnm‘ “maven-ms}, .1 mm» «Newman-us u mm-
)ma) nupmmhaso IIMumq-nnluu-
Open-Immune lmum III-«(5)0- 4.5 mm -
[Innmu xnne mmpuauywmum- ll-mmma I|Iylllllﬂllzn mnmm 2.:
m mm lullﬂ‘lll n-r.u~ 'uulvunﬂ
I'm-Ilprnrmwmo ll lunuupunln R [manhunt-«MI (11) -
rpynm c Ilﬂlpy‘ltoﬂ Mlllllloro Il":l|lmulu.| un'nmn u :Inf-nlr. l..:
. mynm n lpall‘llﬂtllllldc rpm nun-(a u mulls-um “um-um.
"at: (6) «mun-(a uamun n mmm- lu-
IIt'lN'IuII "paI!ul.1n|mnnuma I I..'I . (mm (12)
nun-may y-Iarrxa (-nﬁpnmuﬂ Tum-mm-mano nope-puma” 3.1
10.1) (7) "me we :Inxnmxy autumn m
Nun-nun namnuumun uwum- 3.5 900 w. umpmmﬂ M u’
'Im'u emu-mums norm- yxar- (7550 u’; (14)
an Impynuﬁ rpyuu 14 Ha "Ill “(15) 5.29
tpamuornme rpuu'ma (a)
[Key on following page]
187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Key continued from preceding page]:

 

 

 

 

 

      

1. Production operations
.'. lnlun qumm:u., unu-lmurn
3. Preparation of subgrader to work, attachment (suspension) of conveyor-
loader and adjustment of working members of subgrader
4. Outlining (layout pass)
5. Cutting soil during reverse pass of subgrader
6. Distribution and grading of soil with loading of excess soil into trans-
port equipment
7. Run of subgrader to beginning of section (reverse pass)
8. Clean grading of dirt bed after rolling with loading of soil into trans-
port equipment
9. Final work, cleaning and washing of subgrader and conveyer-loader,
retuelling and lubrication
10. Packing soil with rollers after cutting and grading it with subgrader
ll. Malling dirt bed with rollers afer clean grading
12. Preparation of rollers to work, lubrication and refuelling and cleaning
machines at end of work
13. Production interruptions
14. Total for section 900 meters long and 8.4 m2 wide (7.560 .13)
15. no: 1,000 m2
Table 6.7. Engineering and Economic Indicators of Grading Dirt Bed
(1) Luau-ww- m
llruuuan Gunner-tun. emu-rpm.
( )m 'I'VNIN If.“ "I’ll.
‘I'pyAN‘vxnu. "a l000 u' rpynlongéa ocmnmmu. 0.3 0.66
Cltfniilﬁlupmpen pane-aux (6) 4.8 5.0
“nay-[u gm urmnuunmms nluudumngmmunn (In 0.36 "3‘6
llpcllt'ull II teatime ('IICIIM '
Key:
1. Indicators
2. Grading of bed
3. Without cutting soil
4. with cutting soil
5. Laboriousncss per 1,000 m2 of dirt bed, nan-days
6. Average rank of workers
7. Utilization factor of shaper during shift

6.4. Installation of Artificial Beds

The dirt bed should be graded to the marks, rolled, certified and accepted by the
representative of engineering inspection prior to installation of artificial beds.

Reliable drainage should he provided on all work sections.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.8. Machines, Implements and Tools Used in Grading Dirt Bed

 

 

 

-—- - .-.....-.—._.—.-—_.

 

 

 

 

 

 

ET I72)-
Il.Ie\r.a-a.-ar Han-"1 In - IIMI MOI-emu. Kuurwr III -
npotpunupnnmux llC-IMU) I Jlrnm nepuu can”)?! I
Kmuwﬁcp-ucpnp mavens I mum‘row manna.
il(:.sm.\ 4) uuunn.
Karim IIJ gun-warmest“ Illuyp nuanusmmmaﬁ PI) I I
mun.“ ( (on-mm Clpyuu). ulna.
up" luau-ammo (no; I JIImen-ta woman. my.“ I
(6) Opt‘JCPI'IIIIIIII rpyma I'c-‘Iua scream-wuss rpex- l
mm Imam-[unnu- c ntpc- 2 someone (16)
7) Jcpmsmum rpyuta Ma-pmm umpim mun-mun I
At! uuGunn-ram-cnssu an "0(9) man. “If. (1 )
mn-na nuymn (8) par-wry llmunu mun-mu: um (18) ’-
Ilwmnn-m-vnuuc mam-mu ll" ) nonfm-mmur. ""(19 2
(IIPII umﬁxcmuwm‘tn) (10 Inc-my I‘uunp. IIIY. (20) :
ll . i .- an a - I 0 most In p.14 on
12112 .m"':...:;.*(m ’" “(21)
lieu-nu. III! (12) In I
KEY
1. Name 12. stakes, pieces
2. Nulber 13. steel measuring tape with set of
3. IDS-108 subgrader pins, complete set
4. IDS-98A conveyer-loader 14. 20 meters of surveyor's tape
5. Rollers on pneumatic tires (section of string). pieces
6. When grading without cutting soil 15. Measuring straight edge. pieces
7. when grading with cutting soil 16. Metal three-meter straight edge
8. Dump trucks to haul dirt 17. Wedge-shaped clearance gauge,
9. By calculation pieces
10. Watering-washing machines (if 18. Bayonet spades, pieces
necessary) 19. Assorted spades, pieces
11. Level with tripod and set of 20. ﬂamers, pieces
rods, couplete set 21. Set of barrier

A 05-108 subgrader or 05-109 materials distributing machine equipped with a vibrat-
ing beam is used to install artificial beds when constructing pavement with a rail-
less set of machines. The soil-cement and sand-cement mixtures are usually pre-

pared in this case in mixing plants.

A Ds-502 (0-345) subgrader is usually employed to install artificial beds from soil-
cement and sand-cement mixtures prepared in plants when constructing pavement with

a rail-travel set of machines. Artificial beds of other types are installed by the
sale machines and methods as flexible pavement (see Chapter 5).

Installation of a crushed stone base using the 05-108 subgrader. The work to in-
stall a crushed stone bed includes hauling the crushed stone, levelling it.with a
bulldozer and grading with a motorized grader, rolling with rollers, grading the
crushed stone with a subgrader, packing the stone with rollers and treating the
surface with asphalt or an asphalt emulsion (if it is provided by the plan).

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Crushed stone is hauled to a prepared dirt bed by dunp trucks. The distance be-
tween unloading points is determined by calculation on the basis of the given
thickness of the bed with regard to a 30-35 percent margin for packing and the
capacity of the body of the transport equipment.

The crushed stone is rolled to create a sufficiently strong bed for subsequent op-
eration of the subqrader. It is performed by light rollers of type 00-50 in five-
six passes on the same track at a speed of 1.5-2 km/hr. The rolling is completed
when a wave no longer forms in front of the wheels of the roller and the crushed
stone is not shifted when the roller moves.

A crushed stone base is usually graded with a subgrader in one pass at a speed of
5-7 m/min.

The cutting edge of the rear blade of the subgrader is set above the planned mark
of the top of the bed by the margin during subsequent packing with rollers for
grading the crushed stone layer, while the screw conveyor is set 1—2 on higher than
the cutting edge of the r- at blade.

The crushed stone layer is initially packed with heavy wheeled rollers of type
DU-48A in five-six passes after it has been graded with the Shaper and then with
rollers on pneumatic tires of type DU-31A (D-627A) within 10-12 passes on the same
track.

The speed of the rollers during the first two-three passes on the same track is

3 kn/h: for wheeled rollers and 5-6 km/hr for pneumatic-tire rollers. The speed
is 4-5 kin/hr for wheeled rollers and 10-23 km/hr for pneumatic-tire rollers during
subsequent passes.

Rolling is done from the edges of the row to the middle with overlapping of tracks
by 30-50 cm. Rolling is carried out with wetting at a rate of 15-25 liters/m2.
Netting is considered normal if there is moisture on the bottom surface of the top
crushed stone bed.

The crushed stone bed is treated with asphalt or asphalt emulsion using a road oil-
er inmediately after rolling. The asphalt is distributed in one procedure and the
asphalt emulsion is distributed in two procedures: the first half of the total

rate is first distributed and the second is distributed after 2-3 hours of drying.

The work to install a crushed stone bed is conducted in sections approximately 800

meter-z long. A diagram of organizing the work is shown in Figure 15. Complex
brigades are organized to perform the work (Table 6.9).

Engineering and Economic Indicators for Installation of Crushed Stone

Bed
Laboriousness per 1, 00 m2 of bed, man-days . . . . 2.05
Average rank of workers . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.8
Output per worker per shift, 21:2 . . . . . . . . . 480

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.9.

'31. E of Work Performed

Levelling, grading and rolling crushed
stone

Grading crushed stone with subgrader
Packing crushed stone

Treating crushed stone layer with asphalt
or asphalt emulsion

@:.n;rﬁ-krn' u ehI-ﬁl - :
hr!" (2) I

 

5V . _c I;
,1 £3". '9‘: .‘g
m u »-\ ”a" "
.- - “"7 .:.

Figure 15 .

- ("4)

Composition of Complex Brigade to Install Crushed-Stone Base

Comma ition of Sect ions

Bulldozer operator, sixth rank--l

Motorized grader operator, sixth rank--l

Motorized roller operators, fifth rank-3

Road worker, third rank--l

Subgrader operator, sixth rank--l

Assistant operator, fifth rank--l

Bucket loader operator, fifth rank-~l

Roadworker, second rank--l

Pneumatic-tire roller operator, sixth
rank--l

Heavy wheeled roller operator, fifth
rank--l

Road oiler operator, fifth rank--1

Assistant operator, fourth rank--l

'I JI.ﬂ'n . - 5. ,- nu-uhl ....-I,~ n‘ 3)
1.143.“, :y-"vc 4 ' (4)

new era: 'u .. t '
1.me .-.. nre

  
 
 

Q1)

<1) M...“ :r (5
CD“..- (Mined-nus: mm». '(6 “(1%),
' " " “I I
(-1)". “-5; .__:C' .v 251'; I
‘II-i-- . --_ '1

.i :I I;- .1 $211 If I.
‘ I ;
nm'I]\ - . -
I ' L
FL'I'

Diagram for Organizing Work to Install Crushed stone Bed:

l--motorized graderxzndunp truck with crushed stone: 3--
light rollers; 4--bulldozerx 5--DS-108 subgrader; 6--bucket
loader: 7--dump truck; 8--heavy wheeled roller; 9--pneum-
antic-tire roller: lO--road oilerx ll-—master string

Key:
1. Name of work on sections A, 8, B
2. A--hauling, distribution and rolling of crushed stone
3. Enrolled crushed stone section
4. C--final grading of crushed stone with shaper and packing with heavy
rollers
S. D--section prepared for treatment with asphalt emulsion
6. £--treatment with asphalt emulsion
7. Axis of VP?
8. Flow diagram

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The need for machines, equipment and implements to install a crushed~stone base
is presented in Table 6.10.

Table 6.10. Machines, Equipment and Implements to Install Crushed-Stone Base

Machines, Eggignent and Implements Number

08-108 subgrader
Bucket loader
Dz-3l-l (0-557-1) motorized grader
02-18 (D-493A) bulldozer
DU-SO motorized wheeled rollers
DU-48A motorized wheeled roller
DU-3lA (D—627A) pneumatic-tire roller
DS-39A (D-640A) road oiler
Ds-lO (0-351) tank truck-asphalt hauler
Wetting-washing machine with 5,000
liter capacity
Dump trucks to haul crushed stone 8y calculation
Poreman's office car 1
Towed water tank (3,000-5,000 liters) 1
Level with tripod and set of levelling 1
rods
Stakes, pieces 1
Steel tape measure, 20 meters
wood measuring straight edge, 80 cm
Joint spades
shovels
Hammer
Capron brushes on long handles
Funnels to distribute emulsion by hand
Set of barriers and signal signs

 

HHHHHUPHO—‘H

HNNHNNHHO

Installation of a soil-cement bed using a 05-108 subgrader. The composition of
work to install the bed is as follows: preparation of the work section, hauling of
the strengthened mixture and levelling of it with a motorized grader, grading the
strengthened mixture with a subgrader, packing the mixture with rollers, clean
grading of the bed by a subgrader with cutting of the edges and distribution of

film-forming materials to maintain the bed. The process flow diagram of installing
the bed is shown in Figure 16.

The bed is installed by marker rows every other one. The bed is installed on in-
termediate rows after the strengthened soil of the marker rows achieves the
strength required for passage of the shaper.

The soil-cement mixture prepared at the mixing plant is hauled to the prepared dirt
bed by dump trucks and it is initially levelled with a motorized grader to increase
the productivity of the subgrader. In this case the mixture is not distributed
over the entire width of the row to the installed forms but 20-30 cm is left to

the edges. The mixture is distributed over the entire width (8.4 meters) of the
row with subsequent grading by the subgrader.

192

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The position of the working members of the subgrader during grading is as follows:
the cutter and front blade are raised, the cutting edge of the rear blade is set

higher than the planned mark of the top of the bed by the margin for packing (15-
25 percent) and the margin for cutting during clean grading of the bed (0.5-1 cm).
the screw conveyor is set 2-2.3 cm higher than the cutting edge of the rear blade
and the side openings of the screw conveyor and cutter are closed.

The strengthened mixture is usually graded during one pass of the subgrader at a
speed of 10-15 m/min.

Figure 16. Process Flow Diagram of Installing Bed with 08-108 Sub-
grader: I--hauling strengthened soil with dump trucks and
levelling it with motorized grader; II--distribution and
grading of strengthened soil with subgrader; III--packing
strengthened soil with rollers; iv--clean grading of bed
with subgrader; V--distribution of film-forming materials
to maintain bed; l--dump trucks; 2--motorized grader: 3--
subgradsr; 4--pneumatic rollers; S--road oilers; 6--master
string

The strengthened mixture is wetted to optimum moisture content in hot and dry
weather when it loses moisture intensively during laying. In this case a water
distribution system is installed on the subgrader and the work is performed in the
following sequence.

The screw oonveyer and rear blade are raised to the transport position and the
cutter is lowered without it reaching the bottom of the bed by 1-2 on after the
first pass of the subgrader.

The strengthened mixture is mixed with water by the hoe during the return pass of
the subgrader (with the distributing system connected to the water carrier). The
speed of the subgrader is 5-10 m/min during this operation. Final levelling of
the mixture by a roller is then carried out with a second pass of the subgrader.
which operates similar to the first pass.

Packing, which should be completed no later than 3 hours after preparation of the
mixture. begins immediately after levelling of the strengthened mixture with the
subgrader (no later than 5 hours at air temperature below +10'C).

Packing is carried out by pneumatic-tire rollers of type DU-3lA (D-627A) or DU-29
(D—624). Rolling is done from the edges of the installed row to the middle with
overlapping of strips by 20-30 cm. The approximate number of passes by the roller
on the same track is 12-18 and it is finally established by test rolling.

193
EWDR 0571C1A1.USEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The speed of the rollers during the first two passes on the sam track is 7.5
km/hr, it is gradually increased to 12-15 km/hr during subsequent passes and the
final two passes on the same track are also made at a speed of 7.5 Ion/hr. If the
air pressure in the tires can be regulated, it is regulated at 4-5 kgf/cm2 during
the first passes and is increased by l kgf/cm2 for each two subsequent passes: the
final passes are made with maximum pressure permitted by the tires.

clean grading of the bed with the subgrader is carried out immediately after pack-
ing of the strengthened mixture with rollers, after which it should take on the
given planned marks and transverse profile. Therefore, the working Inember of the
subgrader to perform this operation should be set and regulated especially carefully.

The cutting edge of the rear blade is set at the level of the planned mark of the
top of the bed, while the remaining working nunbers are arranged above it: the

hoe by 0.5-1 cm, the cutting edge of the front blade by 1 cm and the screw conveyer
by 2-2.5 cm.

Clean grading is carried out at a speed of 8-10 m/min during a single pass of the
subgrader. The edges of the bed are cut during clean grading on the marker rows,
installing special devices on the subgrader for this. The service of the bed is

covered with film-forming materials immediately after clean grading.

The film forming materials are distributed by using a road oiler or an Burs-3M ma-
chine. modified to operate on pneumatic tires.

The distributing systems of the machines are supplemented with devices for treating
the edges of the bed.

when using a road oiler, the work is first carried out on one and then on the sec-
ond half of the row.

Installation of the paveme..t or passage of production machines and transport
equipment over the bed after distribution of the film-forming materials is author-
ized no sooner than 14 (R35.

The work to install beds is carried out in shift sections approximately 800 meters
long. Because of the limited periods permitted to pack the mixture after prepara-
tion, the shift section is divided into four sections, performing the work with a
shaper in the following sequence. The first section (200 meters) is graded for
rolling and then a second section is graded. The shaper returns to the beginning
of the section and performs clean grading of the two sections, completing packing
of the strengthened mixture on them by this time. The work on the next two sec-
tions is carried out in the same sequence.

The composition of the brigade to install the bed is as follows:

Subgrader operator, sixth rank . . , . . . . . . . .
Assistant operator, fifth rank . . . . . . . . . . .
Motorized grader operator, sixth rank . . . . . . . .
Roller operators, sixth rank . . . . . . . . . . . .
Roadworkers,thirdrank..............

NNHHH

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

A road oiler. road oiler operator, fifth rank and assistant road oiler operator,
fourth rank are given to the brigade for terporary work.

The laboriousness of the work and the need for machines, equipment and implements
during installation of a soil-cement bed using a 05-108 subgrader are presented in
Tables 6.11 and 6.12.

Installation of a sand-cement bed with a 05-109 concrete distributing machine. when
installing a sand-cement bed with a concrete distributing machine, a vibrating beam
is attached to it to pack the mixture and the sliding side form is lengthened. A

stock towed pneumatic-tire hopper can be used for preliminary proportioning of the
mixture.

The bed is arranged with marker rows every second row. The tracks of the distrib-
uting machine pass over the sand-cement marker rows that have achieved sufficient
strength when performing work on intermediate rows. The sliding form is removed
in this case and master strings are not installed. The surface of the bed of the
marker rows serves as the level indicator and their lateral edges serve as the
COurse indicator.

The work to install a sand-cement bed includes preparation of the distributing
machine for operation. reception, distribution and packing of the sand-cement mix-
ture and distribution of film-forming materials to maintain the sand-cement.

A process flow diagram of installing a bed is shown in Figure 17.

The position of the working members of the distributing machine when installing a
sand-cement bed is as follows: the cutting edge of the blade is set higher than
the planned mark of the sand-cement bed by the margin for packing, the screw con-
veyor—hoe working member is set 5 cm above the cutting edge of the blade and the
vibrating beam is set at the level of the planned mark of the top of the sand-
cement bed.

The rear wall of the towed hopper is raised with the calculation that the trans-
verse area of the triangle of the sand-cement mixture laid by the hopper was equal
to the transverse area of the sand-cement bed of the row laid in the broken layer.

The scheme for installation of a sand-cement bed is as follows: a dump truck de-
livers the sand-cement mixture to the hopper on one trip and unloads it, the mix-
ture is proportioned in volume by the rear wall of the hopper during movement of
the distributing machine, is distributed over the entire width of the row by the
screw conveyer-rotary hoe working members, is levelled with a blade and is packed
with a vibrating beam.

The speed of the distributing machine is 1—1.5 m/min; it is established on the
basis of providing the required density of the mixture.

The film-forming materials for maintaining the sand-cement bed are distributed by
a DS-lOSA machine included in the set of concrete laying machines or by a road
oiler. The chassis with the DS-lOSA distributing machine is installed so that the

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAL USE ONLY

Table 6.11. laboriousness of Work to Install Soil-Cement Bed 15 an Thick

 

 

 

—‘"“"—(—1)"‘——""{:. ——‘(‘.i ,
Tue-hm mu- Iﬁ‘é.“ (lou- nab-v ”eat-rm
(5) , - a
llpaoun a y-m yxpemumoh cum I: 1400
l‘agpummmmc cum: aurotpcﬁacpou (6) ! Hm B
ﬂonrotomta npoounpoeuulxa n paﬁort (7 -- — | '
l'luaunpounu cuecn npottmnupoamuw u' 61‘)“ 5,.3
(l‘l npoxonl ’
0693mm ma ”mi-350mm“ c any» 9 6le ...o
damn-1mm mow ) _
thalamus-nova" no.1 yearly (2 a npn~ t 6720 4.6
m' \ .
IIviwland:”Illnllpumllllnn I nu-nuy yrm- I WI! [,8
cu:
“In-«Ian ll.l:lllll[|nlll:l «mmaanna ITTu- II' 6|!" L6
anpmmmmm t nl’npvunnl'l "lav-u ( 2 -
(Mun-(a n um‘nm «an-nusfuauu yr , I,“
ﬁll“, IIII|I-IIn-I lllpli'lllﬂ ' '
yum-nuns.- rem: nanauu (14) II' 6].)" I?
l’avnpmnmmr uncultuﬂpa'oynomux Inw- a 0070 2,8
pnanm (15)
[Inn n nn ruruu In aaxualxy mum-nu (cm: a!) l l SLR
so» u y (16)

Note. The laboriousness of work to deliver the strengthened mixture, film-forming
materials and water to vet the mixture was not taken into account.

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of measuremnt
3. Volume of work
4. laboriousness, man-hours
5. Acceptance and accounting for the strengthened mixture
6. Levelling of mixture with motorized grader
7. Preparation of subgrader for operation
8. Grading of mixture with subgrader (first pass)
9. Return pass of subgrader with wetting of mixture
10. Grading mixture by roller (second pass)
11. Run of subqrader to beginning of section
12. Clean grading of bed by subgrader with cutting of edges

13. Cleaning and washing the machine. lubrication of assemblies and refuelling
14. Packing mixture with rollers

15. Distribution of film-forming materials
16. Total for shift section 800 meters long

distance from the nozzles to the surface of the sand-cement bed is equal to 45-50
on. The pressure in the distributing system should be 4-6 kgf/cmZ. The film-form-
ing materials are distributed in two processes to half the norm during each proc-
ess. The speed of the machine is 14-16 m/min with normal pouring of 0.4 liter/m2
during each process and 9-11 m/min during normal pouring at 0.5 liter/m2.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.12. Machines, Equipment and Implanents for Installation of Soil-Cement Bed

 

Name of Machines, @ipmnt and Iglements Huber
08-108 subgrader 1
05-9” conveyor-loader 1
02-98 motorized grader 1
05-53:. (0-772) road oiler for temporary work 1
amp trucks By calculation
DU-31A (0-627) pneumatic-tire rollers 2
Hater-washing machines to deliver water (if necessary) By calculation

Car and storehouse (for foremen)

Towed tank truck for water for technical needs

Level with tripod and set of rods

stakes, pieces 1
steel tape measure, 20 meters, pieces

Surveyor's tape, 20 meters (segment of string), pieces
Measuring straight edge, 80 cm

Three-meter straight edge, pieces

Layer thickness gauge, pieces

Template to measure transverse slope, pieces

Kovalev's device (density meter) , pieces

Shovels, pieces

Assorted shovels, pieces

Manners, pieces

Capron brushes on long handles, pieces

Funnels to distribute film-forming materials, pieces
Set of barriers and signal signs, complete set

HNNkuHHHHr-HHOHHH

The length of a shift section in installation of a sand-cement bed with a 05-109

distributing machine is 350-500 meteer the work is usually carried out in two
8 ifts.

Table 6.13. uboriousness of Work to Install Sand-Cement Bed with 08-109 Spreader

 

 

 

._— —

   
   

 

 

 

 

 

(I) "‘1‘" " 'HI-vu-
‘I’Muuv-l tiff-If "" "' III leﬂt.'lmn g..- Sm “: n
"1.1"..- ”ﬂ" "6“" Illﬂ‘wﬂﬂﬂ "l- I’M.
|UQIIL “'6 "e
. ‘ W "IN
3 6 '
lion-moan pm‘uuwm'l‘IIR'I-M |.7 "onerous: ("gun-mu 0,5
x paﬁmc )le IOSA u pm’mu-
lllmrn. |I|u-:|n:n|unr.'ll.ww Iln‘ 7.3 l’m-npcm-nrum IIMIIImr-llv-I H .8
.mlu-nmmr. parlun-nMrnm-. \yrulun In n-punmm ( )
nupn-ummum' 3 ynnomc- ()vmnxa unu n pawn-I‘- ".7
"no cucru N

Immu‘mam-‘n c u-‘u‘uu ‘8)

llrcu 0 In 1‘3)» (mm u’) n;

Jannernlllrnulm‘ JIM“. 3,3
n-umxn «amuma (g) l

 

[Key on following page]

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Production operations

2. laboriousness for entire volume of work, man-hours

3. Preparation of spreader for operation

4. Acceptance, preliminary proportioning, distribution, levelling and pack-
ing of mixture

5. Final operations and cleaning of machine

6. Preparation of DS-lOSA machine for operation

7. Distribution of film-forming materials

8. Cleaning machine and spreading system

9. Petal for 800 meters (6,000 1:2)

Table 6.14. Need for Machines to Install Sand-Cement Bed

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 3 .. .
Ilauv- un- .mv unnu- :‘fal Hanan-amen- en—n- $2.."
_. __ ._ __ _. _____ 5 _. -
Pnrupmmmr-u. (mum Kama. I Illmm-n "gem"... Mn (-0-qu I
Muppunmrnuﬁ nuf-pnf-mmu r nm-uuooblnajyrnlumu new
In npucuuuu (mum-m puma-am: (7)
Maw-um llC-loﬁ-H I (\nmuuﬂnmI-cnum‘nuu Mn no "0 pac-

cvamul Imxom-ucmmﬁ me- "cry

f" (6)

Note. The need for equipment and implements when installing a sand-cement bed is
the same as when installing a dirt-cement bed (see Table 6.12).

Key:
1. Name of machines
2. Number
3. 05-109 concrete spreader equipped with vibrating beam and receiving hopper
4. DS-lOSA machine
5. Two-axle trailer for barrels with film-forming materials
6. Dump trucks to deliver sand-cement mixture
7. By calculation

The cosposition of the section to install the bed is:

Spreader operator, sixth rank
Assistant operator, fifth rank
Road workers, third rank
Road workers, second rank

Hun-u—

The laboriousness of work and the need for machines when installing a sand-cement
bed using a 05-109 spreader are presented in Tables 6.13 and 6.14.

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Murat h" -. -' nr-nm-I (1)

L._I__I_ I._I

-__.——_._

    

Figure 17. Process Flow Diagram of Installing Sand-Cement Bed: l--dunp
truck: 2--DS-lO9 distributing machine: 3--Ds-105A film-forming
distributing machine; dumaster string; 5--sliding form; 6--
vibrating beam; 7--receiving hopper-proportioning device

Key:
1. Direction of flow 2. Section of 500 meters

Engineering and Economic Indicators for Installing a Sand-Cement Bed with
a 08-109 Spreader

Laboriousness per 1,000 m2 of bed, man-days 2
Average rank of workers 4
Output per worker during 8-hour shift, m2 500

6.5. Formation of Pavement

Pomation of pavement when using a railless set of machines. When using a railless
set of machines, pavements are formed with a 03-109 concrete spreader and a 05-111
concrete placer and final finishing of the pavement surface and imparting roughness
to it are accomplished with DS-lOdh and DS-lOSA machines.

A layer of asphalt-polymer or asphalt mastic is applied to the edge of the slabs of
the adjacent row prior to the beginning of pavement forming work and the bodies of

the butt joints are installed at the points where transverse deformation seams and
rebar grids (in reinforced concrete pavement) are located.

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The asphalt-polymer mastic is applied to the edge of the slabs of the adjacent row
with stiff brushes in a layer 2-3 mm when it is hot (approximately 100°C). In this
case the surface of the edge is first cleaned of dirt and dust and is primed with
liquefied asphalt. The mastic is applied no sooner than 1.5 hours after priming is
completed.

The bodies of the butt joints and the rebar grids are transported to the installa-
tion point in packets on specially equipped frame-hauling trucks. The rebar grids
are unloaded and installed on the bed with a crane having a boom of not less than
10 meters.

Before installing the rebar grids, the location points of the transverse seams are
marked off and the butt joint frames are installed strictly along their line. The
rebar grids are then installed. The grids must be welded to each other (in the gaps
between transverse joints) if the distance between transverse joints is more than

10 meters. In this case the grids are installed with overlap of 25-30 cm and the
ends of the longitudinal rods are welded, first having cleaned them of dirt and
rust.

The concrete mixture is received and spread by a 05-109 concrete spreader, which
has reloading equipment in the form of a hopper with belt conveyer to receive the
mixture from the side and to move it to the row to be concreted.

The machine is equipped with a snake conveyer with a working member and blade to
spread the concrete mixture over the entire width of the row and to ensure the
reguired thickness of the layer and it is equipped with a side moving form to en-
sure the width of distributing the mixture.

The position of the working members of the machine after adjustment is:

the lower point of the snake-conveyer working member should be S on lower
while the cutting edge of the blade should be 2-3 cm higher than the planned mark
of the top of the installed pavement.

The concrete mixture can be hauled to the spreader more easily as concreting pro-
ceeds from the side of the concrete placer.

The sequence of performing the production operations on reception and spreading of
the concrete mixture is as follows: a large-capacity dump truck of type KrAz-256B
with the concrete mixture travels somewhat ahead of the spreader. the hopper-con-
veyer moves. the truck feeds it while travelling in reverse, the mixture is un-
loaded, which is moved by a belt conveyor within the row to be concreted, the con-
veyer-hopper retracts inside the frame to permit the next truck to pass and after
two trucks have been unloaded spreading of the concrete mixture by the snake-hoe
working member and levelling of the spread layer with the blade begin.

The shift productivity of the spreader is approximately 600 meters of pavement.
which is considerably below the possible productivity of the 08-111 concrete plac-

er, with the data and the machine time utilization factor during a shift equal to
0.85 presented in Table 6.15.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One should bear in mind that the length of a work cycle in spreading the concrete
mixture is frequently considerably higher in practice than that presented in Table
6.15, reaching 400 seconds or more. In this case approximately 50 percent of the
working time is expended to clean the bodies of the dump trucks of the remains of
the concrete mixture. A reserve for a significant increase of spreader productiv-
ity is to use higher capacity dump trucks to transport the concrete mixture and
dunp trucks equipped with special devices for fast complete unloading of the con-
crete mixture.

Table 6.15. Approximate Time Distribution to Perform Production Operations
That Affect the Length of the Work cycle of a 05-109

—"‘" ‘71—)— Ill-717'" __ - — ___-K-.T..

[flu-n: .l ‘ -- an" tel-Inn- AI"- ILI 1- I II \‘I 1"" III! l'IIv “III“ smog.

I'i IL I I {II-,f

______.____ .-_|___-__.___.____ _-| ._
(3, | UNI-'In sum-.1 ”IlliImllqul! 2»

mm; (I)llh|'|)_\' \mfnnu III III-InInI-n ruwu
Paul-yum (-Mnqu-I‘i IIIr-‘II (:3) I ‘13

mull-"Mu ll (-\'|Inl';l £5!

 

"mun: .‘IIIIIMIII'II'JH I. I'l'm“! V) ‘
f

(In-II IIIII III :I.-.I'\lI-I‘III14(1 ) 7
I‘:II‘II|-I-.u-.:I-IIIII- Illl- \-.' fu-IIIII 16
U-Iuran I.)ll'll.| m n-I:II - 2H II-II'I I'm-III I-:I .- n III-nruIII-I
rlﬂ‘I‘I III, I |I,| my. I I ' III
()u-m 5......u..r.....u(6) (n 7 I 1' m I "".'1!‘.1‘). ".
"".“.::.’::..: .'.'.'.'::';‘.'.:':.:t:: “"W (12) ...... ..
I’M: ;-I. In: IIn-III “mum mu" 2"
MIMI-:1 “ (8)

1. Production operations

2. Length, seconds

3. Approach of truck to receiving hopper

4. Unloading concrete mixture by truck into hopper

5. Cleaning body of remains of mixture

6. Departure of truck

7. Approach of second truck to receiving hopper

8. Unloading mixture by second truck

9. Cleaning body of second truck of remains of mixture
10. Departure of second truck
11. Spreading of 10.6 m3 of concrete mixture per 5 meters of pavement (pave-

ment thickness of 28 cm)
12. Total

After the concrete mixture has been spread, all subsequent treatment of it (pack-
ing. shaping the final profile, forming and finishing the edges and smoothing the
surface) is performed by a 05-111 concrete placer.

N do this. the machine is equipped with the following working members: distribut-
ing screw conveyer, proportioning blade, package of deep vibrators. vibrating pro-
portioning beam, two rocking beams, edge formers and smoothing beam.

The concrete placer is equipped with side forms approximately 5 meters long which

serve as a travelling form. The forms are hinged to the frame and they are raised
and lowered by hydraulic cylinders.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

The position of the working members after adjustment is as follows: the blade in
set 3-4 cm higher than the planned top mark of the pavement to be laid. the vibrat-
ing beam is installed 0.3-0.4 cm above the lower edge of the frames with angle of
attack of l-2° and the second is in talled 0.1-0.3 cm above it with angle of attack
of l“ and the vibrators should be 3-5 cm above the reinforcing.

The work of the concrete placer begins at minimum speed. After the space under the
vibrators is filled with the concrete mixture, they are lowered to the working pos-

sition. the machine makes the final placement and it is changed to working speed
and automatic work mode.

During the work one sees that the deep vibrators are completely submerged in the
concrete mixture, that there are no foreign objects on the smoothing beam and that
there are no obstacles in the path of the concrete placer tracks.

If defective points are discovered on the surface of the pavement after the concrete
placer has passed, they are corrected with smoothers on long handles, while edge de-
fects are corrected by using an attached form and metal smoother.

To shape the pavement normally, there must always be a ridge of concrete mixture
20-25 cm high in front of the first rocking beam and 10-20 cm high in front of the
second rocking beam during operation of the machine. The vertical structure of

the slab edges is achieved by the appropriate setting of the side (travelling) form
and edge-shapers: the upper edge of the form should be moved 1-2 cm inside the row
to be laid while the edge of the edge former is raised 1-3 cm above the pavement
surface.

It is very important when laying concrete with a railless set of machines to ensure
smooth operation of the concrete placer and spreader and constant mobility of the
concrete mixture. One must try to see that there be no stops with minimum produc-
tion break between the concrete placer and spreader since this leads to disturbance
of pavement evenness.

nonuniform mobility of the concrete mixture makes it necessary to constantly regu-

late the working members of the concrete placer and leads to disturbance of the
configuration and vertical nature of the lateral edges.

After the concrete has been laid, the spreader and concrete placer are moved forward
and are prepared for work during the next shift: the Sensor-master cam is removed
and the working members are cleaned and flushed with water and the surface of the
deep vibrators is cleaned especially carefully.

The working joint is installed at the end of the concreting section: a board with
butt joints is installed perpendicular to the row to be concreted.

An accessory side form is installed along the edge of the final section and the
final section is concreted with small machinery.

The surface of the pavement is finished with the DS-lOdA machine, whose working

members are two smoothing pipes and a smoothing blade after the concrete placer
has passed.

202

FOR 0F?"JAL.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The surface is finished in two procedures.

The surface of the pavanent is first finished by shuttle passes of the machine
(forward-backward) within two or four passes depending on weather conditions and
the properties of the concrete mixture. The surface is finished in sections 30-50
meters long. Prior to the beginning of finishing, the pipes are installed so that
their lower edges are on the planned markeof the top of the pavement and the pipes
are then removed and rotated in the horizontal plane by an angle so that their ex-
ternal ends lack 10-20 cm of reaching the edges of the pavement. 'Ihe pipes are
then lowered until they touch the concrete surface while the machine is travelling
at low speed and the machine is then changed to working speed.

At the end of the section the pipes are raised, rotated by 90° and are lowered to
the pavement surface w'..ile moving smoothly backward. The speed of the machine is
14-18 m/min during the first pass, 17-24 m/min during the second pass and 25-30
m/min during the third and fourth passes.

The pipes are sprinkled with water through the spreading system during hot windy
weather; it is not permitted to sprinkle the concrete surface with water.

The concrete surface is finally finished with the smoothing pipes and blade during
one pass of the machine at a speed of 16-18 m/min. In this case the smoothing
pipes are set in cross-section by an angle so that their ends protrude 10-15 cm
beyond the edges of the row of pavement. The productivity of the DS-lOdA concrete
finishing machine is approximately 1,000 meters of pavement per shift.

After final finishing of the pavement surface. roughness is created on it by using
the DS-lOSA machine, with which film-forming fluids to maintain the hardening con-
crete are also applied to the pavement surface.

The working members of the machine are a transverse brush to create roughness and
a spreading system to apply the film-forming fluids.

The machine is prepared for operation at the beginning of the shift, it is in-
stalled with resp-nct to the string, the linearity of the guides to move the brush
is checked and they are set parallel to the pavement surface, the spray nozzles
are selected according to the diameter of the outlet opening and the distributing
system frame is set so that the height of the nozzle is 45-50 cm.

After the machine has been prepared, creation of surface roughness begins: the
brush is set 1-2 cm from the left edge of the pavement and its ends are introduced
into the concrete to a depth of 3-4 mm by means of hydraulic cylinders, the brush
is moved to the right edge of the pavement and is returned to the initial posi-
tion, the brush is raised and the machine moves forward by the width of the brush
and the operation is repeated. Having completed the work to create surface rough-
ness on a section 150-200 meters long, the machine returns to the beginning of the
section to apply the film-forming material to the pavement surface.

The work to form pavement is usually organized in two shifts, performing it in two
(when concrete pavement is installed) or three (when reinforced concrete pavement
is installed) sections (Figure 18). Work to prime the edges of the slabs of the

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

adjacent row and to apply the asphalt-polymer mastic to them is carried out on
section No l; the butt joint frames and rebar are installed on section No 2, the
concrete mixture is spread and packed, the pavement profile is shaped, the surface
is finished and roughness is imparted to it on section No 3.

       

I‘nr wlrmr a (-11)“
(4) u’l- mu "J's-H mu

 

, . .l. "1—9;" M. v c 1.1-".-
( ,hl’ if. . -:-.- g!" .u ;:;~:‘:;'§:l
NW” (2) w.‘ ”J . (3)

[(5), .. .....

ti '-'-’ w.-

  
       

Figure 18. Process Flow Diagram of Installing Reinforced Concrete Airfield
Pavement with a Railless Set of Machines: l--mobile boiler for
heating asphalt and tank for preparation of primer; 2--mobile
boiler for preparation of mastic; 3--frame-hauling truck) 4--
rebar; 5--crane; 6--sand-asphalt cover; 7--Asa-300 welding ma-
chine; 8--master string; 9--KrAz-2568 dump truck; 10-05-109
concrete spreader; ll--DS-lll concrete placer. The rank of
workers and operators is shown in the circles; the 08-105 ma-

chine is not shown.

1. Type of work

2. Priming the edges of the slabs and application of mastic
3. Installation of rebar and welding of joints

4. Spreading and laying of cement-concrete mixture

5. Flow diagram

6. Number and length of section

The composition of the brigade, the laboriousness of installing the reinforced con-
crete pavement and the need for machines, equipment and implements are presented in
Tables 6.16 and 6.17.

The main engineering and economic indicators to install reinforced concrete pavement
from slabs measuring 7.5 x 7.5 meters and 26 cm thick are the following:

Labor expenditures to install 1,000 m2 of pavement, man-days . . 5.6
Averagerankofworkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.63
Outputofoneworkerpershift,m2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178.5

Forming pavement with a rail-travel set of concrete-spreading machines. The fol-
lowing operations should be carried out before laying the concrete mixture: the

204

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNI)

levelling or distributing interlayer should be constructed, the rail-forms should
we installed and checked, the edges of the slabs of the adjacent row should be
coated with an asphalt-polymer mastic or asphalt, the butt jointsframes should be
installed and the rebar or reinforcing frames should be installed when constructing
armored and reinforced concrete pavement.

Receiving the concrete mixture from the dump trucks, spreading it over the width
of the row to be laid and proportioning are carried out by means of a 08-503 (0-375)

hopper concrete spreader. The hopper is set in height with regard to the packing
reserve.

The concrete mixture is spread in transverse rows with overlapping of the laid row
by one-third the width of the lower opening of the hopper.

When constructing unreinforced cement—concrete pavement, if horizontally arranged
cylindrical bars are provided as butt joints, they can be installed in the planned
position by using a special loading device (Figure 19) with which the concrete
spreader is equipped.

The work is performed in the following sequence: the spreader is stopped near the
compression seam, a rod with loading forks is installed 3-5 centimeters from the
concrete surface with hydraulic cylinders, rods are set under the forks, the work-
ing member is installed in a floating position and the electric vibrator is
switched on, submerging the rods to the planned depth.

The concrete mixture is packed and the surface of the pavement is finished with a

030 7-7.5 long-base concrete finishing machine or 05-504 (0-376) concrete finish-
ing machine.

The working members of the machines are adjusted prior to the beginning of work.

ML '3:— r. ”1 1/;
as {ma ,,,~-, m

Figure 19. Diagram of Device t< Submerge Rods: l--welded bracket (welded
to 05-503 machine): 2--hydraulic cylinder; 3--loading fork; 4--
vibrating straightedge of R65 rail: S--adapter coupling

 
 

The diagonal vibrating beams of the one machine are set at the level of the rail-
form heads and regulate their angle of attack. The position of the smoothing vi-
brating beam. the lower surface of which is set on the same level with the rear
edge of the vibrating packing beam for a concrete mixture with cone settling up to
1.5 cm and it is set 2-3 m below it for more elastic mixtures. The required

angle of attack of the smoothing bee. is set, which is determined experimentally.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
93839 05 9.26002:
acaducuoao
dauuuhuouuuaoum
"Guava?
ououocounuaoso no
9.50193.“ 93 csvaooox
ovuuo “anon
mo coﬁaaaauncu
«nous m4.
>uo>o uoﬁuuu 99qu
9052 no acuuaauounc.“
2.0.39.3an
genitouauaoua
”93an 3.» x
x cm.» mean-.305 no.7;
ash?» and man—cum ”Eden
3...... no sewuuzauwcn
onus... widen—I323
and mo gaucoaamc
ans—and 00.3
:05qu cu“: mud—Jam
uncauuuomo
uncuunhusuuaoum
«03a!—
uauauuacr—awo uo
noduoozmmo 0:0 and:
no mom—v0 23 m:«5um

a

accuuaug
no.“ 3:095
mrations
1

Formation of concrete
mixture:
preparatory- 21m
operation:
formation of mix-
ture with concrete
spreader
concreting the final
section with small
machinery
Final finishing of pave-
ment surface with 135-104“
machine, creation of our-
£ace roughness and appli-

cation of film-forming
ﬂuid with 09-105). machine

_.__ __-_ ‘I

M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.17. Machines, Equipment and Implements Used to Install Armored Concrete

Pavement
Name of MachinesI Eguipmggt and ggplements number

For priming edges of slabs and application of mastic

Mobile boiler for heating mastic

Mobile boiler for heating asphalt

Tank to mix primer

Pails

Master forms to prevent liquefied asphalt or mastic from
falling on edge of pavement

wire brushes

Soft flat brushes

Hard brushes

awn-cw

NNNN

To install butt joint frames and rebar grids

GKM-7.S crane
Crosspiece to install rebar grids

H H

To spread concrete mixture

05-109 concrete spreader
Long-handled shovels

NH

To place concrete mixture

DS-lll concrete placer

Deep vibrators (type 1-116)

Checking metal straight edge 3 meters long
Long—handled smoother

Shaped metal smoothers to finish edges of pavement
Metal smoothers to finish grooves
Assorted shovels

Polyethylene rope or steel wire

Ten-meter spool

sledge hammers

Carpenters hammers

N
O

ters

HNHaNNNND-‘NH

For final finishing of pavement surface, creation of
surface roughness and application of film-forming fluid

DS-lOdA concrete spreading machine

Metal control straightedge 3 meters long
DS-lOSA machine

Pistol-grip sprayer

Metal brushes

Galvanized pail

HNHHHH

207

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 05-504 (0-376) machine has the following: the blade shaft (the lower edges of
the blades) are set 2-3 on higher than the heads of the rail-forms. the rear edge
of the bottom of the packing beam and the lowe: surface of the smoothing beam are
set at the level of the rail-form heads and the lower edges of the packing and
smoothing beams should be strictly parallel: the angles of attack of the working
members are selected experimentally.

The height of the concrete mixture or mortar roller should be equal to 10-15 cm in
front of the blade shaft, 8-10 cm in front of the vibrating packing beam and 1-3 cm
in front of the vibrating levelling and smoothing beams if the working members of
the machines are set correctly.

The spread concrete mixture near the walls of the rail-forms is first packed with
deep vibrators or the concrete-finishing machines are equipped with special attach-
ments for this purpose (designed by 50 [Construction administrationl-9lo of the
Yuzhdorstroy Trust, Glavdorstroy), the electric circuitry of which provides submer-
gence of the vibrators, vibration for 30 seconds, raising of the vibrators to the
initial position and automatic repeating of the pracess and also automatic emer-
gency raising of the Vibrators with the machine stopped and during repeated passes.

The pavement surface should be even after the concrete finishing machine has
passed (the gap under a three-meter straightedge should not exceed 3 mm) and there
should be no grooves on it deeper than 5 mm.

Small cracks and air pours are finished by hand using a long-handled wood smoother.

The cement milk is removed from the pavement by capron brushes with long handles.

The outer edge of the pavement of the row to be concreted is worked with a metal
smoother with rounded rib.

The compositions of the sections and the need for machines, tools and acoessories
when installing armored concrete (reinforced concrete) pavement with a rail-travel
set of machines are presented in Tables 6.18 and 6.19.

The approximate engineering and economic indicators when installing armored con-
crete pavement with shift productivity of 160 meters (1,120 m2) are as follows:

Laboriousness per 1,000 m2 of pavement, man-days 13.4
Average rank of workers 3.6
Output of worker per shift, In2 of pavement 74.6

6.6. Maintenance of Hardening Concrete

The designation of measures to maintain hardening concrete consists in the
following:

do not permit water evaporation from the concrete since this leads to a re-
duction of its density, strength and cold resistance, especially in the surface
layer;

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6.18. Compositions of Sections and work Performed by Them Hhen Installing
Armored Concrete (Reinforced Concrete) Pavement with Rail-Travel Set

 

of Machines
Number of
Name of work composition of Section Workers
Installation of butt joint frames Crane operator, fifth rank 1
and rebar grids (frames) Riggers, third rank 2
Reception and spreading of concrete Spreader operator, sixth rank 1
mixture
Packing of concrete mixture and Concrete worker, second rank 1
finishing the surface of pavement Concrete-finishing machine 1
with concrete finishing machine operator, sixth rank
Assistant operator, fifth rank 1
Concrete workers:
third rank 2
second rank 2
Final finishing of pavement surface concrete workers:
by hand and treatment of edges fourth rank 2
third rank 2

Table 6.19. Machines, Tools and Accessories Used to Install Armored Concrete
(Reinforced Concrete) Pavement with Rail-Travel Set of Machines

Name of Machines, Tools and Accessories Number

 

05-503 concrete spreader

030 7-7.5 or Ds-504 concrete finishing machine
0101-7. :3 crane

Crossbar to install rebar grids

1-116 vibrators with flexible shaft

Rope, meters 3
sledge hammers (blacksmith's and blunt—nosed)
Shovels (assorted)

Hand brushes

Brooms

Long-handled wooden smoothers

long—handled capron brushes

Shaped metal smoothers

Floats

Control straightedge 3 meters long

NHHr-H

HHNMNNOONO

reduce the tensile stresses occurring in the concrete due to a temperature
drop, which may cause the appearance of temperature cracks in the pavement.

Maintenance of concrete should begin immediately after the final surface finishing
and removal of the cement milk from it.

209

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Various methods of concrete maintenance have been used in the practice of airfield
pavement construction. The most widespread recently is a method of maintenance
that includes covering the pavement surface with waterproof films. To do this,
film-forming fluids--pomarol, ethynol laquer, synthetic latex and asphalt emul-
sions--are applied uniformly to the surface of freshly poured concrete over the
entire pavement area. It is recomnended that the film-forming fluid be applied to
the pavement surface in two layers, expending half the normal rate of application
on each layer, which is used according to Table 6.20. The first layer is applied
imediately after the pavement surface has been finished and misture has disap-
peared from it and the second layer is applied 20-40 minutes later when the first
layer has set up.

Table 6.20. Norms for Pouring Film-Forming Fluids

 

I--u-qauy--I rue-'a' on urn- (wt-«alumnae

(1) ..__ ‘2’ ..':'T"_"".';"" _ ._. _
l|.~-~----A-.nrmnn sun-u It £..3.)7'- '7'.('4)"”'
“'¥-—'“-‘T--~5-7?-_:~"-€~I.?-:’i‘:(_'53
—_m(6) —_———— I “II
III ' II. If"
lit-rink» (7) Mn 3:3
liutyu-uw vuyslnnl (8) (:13 401)

Omnru-m-xuﬁ nan-ac (9)

l. Film-forming fluid

2. Air temperature during concreting of pavement, °C
3. Up to

4. Or more

5. Norm for pouring in two layers, g/m2

6. Pomarol

7. Ethynol varnish

8. Asphalt anulsions

9. Synthetic latex

When using black films, they are lightened by pouring an aqueous lime solution (one
part powdered lime and four parts water) or they are sprinkled with a layer of
sand 1‘2 cm thick to reduce the effects of solar radiation.

A heat-insulating layer of sand (sandy loam) not less than 6 cm thick is laid on
the concrete surface above the films innediately after they set up when construct-
ing pavements in dry and hot climates and also sharply continental climate (fre-
quency of daily temperature drops of more than 12°C more than 50 times per year).
Straw or reed mats, the thickness of which is not less than 6 cm, can be used in-
stead of sand.

The concrete surface must be protected against the direct effects of wind and
solar rays before the film-forming fluids are applied to it when concreting pave-
ments in windy or in hot and dry weather (air temperature above +25°c with

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relative humidity less than 50 percent). To do this, the pavement surface is
covered with standard tents or thin roll films, which should lie tightly against
the surface of the slabs over the entire contour and should be vapor- and water
proof.

The film-forming fluids are applied to the pavement surface by the mechanized
method.

The film-forming ﬂuids are applied with a Ds-lOSA machine when constructing pave-
ments using a railless set of machines, alternating performance of this work with
creation of surface roughness. Having performed the work to create roughness on

a section 150-200 meters long. the machine returns to the beginning of the section
to apply the film-forming fluids to the pavement surface. The speed of the machine
when spreading the materials in two layers is 28-32 m/min with pouring norm of

400 g/m2 and 16-20 m/min with pouring norm of 600 g/m2.

Table 6.21. Duration of Perfoming Production Operations with os-losa Machine on
Section 150 Meters long

—__

 

_-_ _. . .‘

*7?) '

II|~ III
Ira-mam nun-we "urn-en '

RET‘“ ..

ll Irina-am woo-1 nut ”ml-um

 

—._._. —.——————_--._ ._-._

 

—- “un—

lumnm-mw than n.m;-.5»%.).m | '16 Hun-m1 punmv 'uNn'NI.1II(6II):I 'J
nm'nmn unmunu tkl‘llln’lll U4 nlunu

llnm-n-um- Im‘llnvuuntuﬂn ‘1) 22 l limnpmunlm- unlmum x “3‘? G
mmgnum-u. (net-ma 5) l .1 y-mnx: cu rxulun-nm

lhnnpaIIu-nuc mmmuu x Ila-ﬁr G ’2.v NIMIIII (8)
.IV run-u; m uupmu." lite-pan p-umm mmaluuu ".1 9
25 ululm can-[mull Ill ulmul

 

I —_—___ ~

II "1012) ' 7K

1. Production operations

2. Time, min

3. Filling tank with pomarol by machine pump

4. Application of roughness to concrete surface

5. Return of machine to beginning of section at speed of 25 m/min
6. First pouring of pomarol at speed of 18 m/min

7. Return of machine to beginning of section at speed of 25 m/min
8. Second pouring of pomarol at speed of 18 m/min

9. Total

The pressure in the spreading system should be equal to 4-6 kgf/cmz.
The productivity of the Ds-lOSA machine in creation of roughness and application
of the film-forming materials with utilization factor of 0.75 in time during a

shift compris..s approximately 700 meters.

The duration of performing the production operations with a Ds-IOSA machine is
presented in Table 6.21.

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC" 8!. USE ONLY

when constructing pavement with rail-travel machines, the film-forming fluids are
applied to the surface of freshly poured concrete with an Ems-3M self-propelled
machine or with a road oiler.

6.7. Installation of Deformation Joints

Installation of deformation joints in rigid monolithic pavement consists in cutting
grooves and filling than with sealing materials.

The joints are usually cut in monolithic pavement in hardened concrete after it
has gained strength of 80-100 kgf/cmz. The timeliness of the cutting the trans-
verse grooves is very important in this case.

If the grooves are cut prematurely when the concrete has not yet gained the required
strength. the edges of the concrete shear in the joint zone and if they are out
late. formation of spontaneous temperature cracks in the pavement concrete is pos-
sible. The time required for the concrete to gain the strength indicated above is
dependent on the ambient air temperature, the composition of the concrete, the
properties of the cement and the type and quantity of additives introduced to the
concrete mixture. It should be determined by the construction laboratory based on
the results of testing control speciments of cubes of different age. It can be de-
termined approximately from Table 6.2 .

'me depth of cutting the groove should not be less than one-fourth the thickness of
the pavement and the recommended depth is one-third the thickness of the pavement.

It is recomended that the cutting be done with diamond disks, which permit a sig-
nificant increase of productivity and reduction of the laboriousness and cost of
work compared to carborundun disks.

Table 6.22. Approximate Time for Concrete to Gain Strength of 80-100 kgf/cn2

——_ __..—_———.___._______

 

————...

 

 

 

 

 

|2|vuns "Sip-«cum Wiggle. Inca-Mun. Hwy-use nun-qmyp ups-e. --. emf-u-u-w

aria-um". s-nv 01-0 no web-1n Ip-e- cent-M":- nu-nv- "I nub-pa IPI‘II-Iflﬂ
Ia. 'I' I mum III .Ibl .n'luu n. '(2 m. J!” uni-u!
5-40 | H 8 I 5— l5 I5 '1"
15—25 m. :2 I r. u max“ (3) 24—30

Key:
1. Average ambient air temperature, 'C
2. Time, hours, required to gain strength of 80-100 kgf/cm2
3. Five and below

The practice of constructing airfield and highway pavemnt shows that in some
cases, especially under continental climate conditions, cracks form in the pavement
before the concrete has achieved a strength of 80-100 kgf/emz.

Under these conditions the joints in the hardened concrete must be cut in two
stages or they must be installed by a combination method.

212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When cutting joints in hardened concrete in two stages, when the concrete has in-
itially achieved a strength of 50-70 kgf/cmz, narrow notches are cut in control
joints every 20-25 meters. The cutting must be done with diamond disks at a ro-
tational speed of not less than 4,600 rpm. After the concrete has achieved a
strength of 80-100 kgf/cmz, the Ipper part of the groove of the control joints is
then cut to the required width and joints are cut in the gaps between the control
joints.

when the joints are installed by the combination method, the grooves in the control
joints or in all the joints are initially installed in freshly laid concrete and
grooves are then cut in the hardened concrete in all the joints after the concrete
has attained the required strength.

The joints are cut by using cutters of different types. The most productive are
Ds-llZ cutters for cutting transverse joints and os-ns cutters for cutting longi-
tudinal joints. Transverse and longitudinal joints are also cut in hardened con-
crete with Ds-SlO (D-903). D-433A and D-432A modified cutters. Joints are cut in
freshly laid concrete with a DNShS-60-34 cutter.

Cutting transverse joints with a four-disk 05-112 cutter. The work includes laying
out the joints and preparation of the cutter for operation, cutting the joints and
final operations.

The joint cutting lines are laid out prior to cutting the joints and the line of
motion of the cutter wheels are laid out at a distance of 1.52 meters from one of
the longitudinal edges of the pavement. The line of motion of the cutter wheels is
laid out on both sides if there is a heat-insulating sand layer on the pavement.
The pavement is cleaned of sand along the lines of motion of the wheels to a width
of 50-60 cm and along the lines of the joints to a width of 15-20 cm as the cutter
uoves along.

When the cutting disks are installed or replaced, the carriages are regulated so
that the disks on all four spindles are strictly on the same straight line.

To cnzzure accurate setting of the. cutting disks above the line of the joint, the
carriages are centered above the joint alternately: the right carriage is ini-
tially set on the line of the Joint with pads placed under the left wheels and
then, having placed the pads under the right wheels, the left carriage is set on
the line of the joint.

The outriggers are set after the cutting disks have been aimed, the hose with the
cooling fluid is switched on and the joints are cut. The cutting speed is set de-

pending on the depth of cutting the joint and the strength of the concrete. It is
approximately 0.8-1.2 m/min.

After the joint has been cut. the cutting disks are switched off and raised to the
transport position, the cooling fluid feed valve is closed, the outriggers are

raised and the cutter is moved to the next joint, at the same time moving the car-
riages to the extreme righthand position.

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work of cutting joints is usually conducted in two shifts. The composition of
the section includes a cutter operator, fifth rank, and assistant operator, fourth
rank. The section includes one or two road workers, first rank. if there is a
heat-insulating sand layer.

Main Engineering and Econonuc Indicators of Cutting Transverse Joints with 08-112
Machine (Distance of 7.5 Meters Between Joints)

Laboriousness of work per 1,000 waters of joints, nan-days:

with absence of heat-insulating sand layer . . . . . . . . . 2.61

with presence of heat-insulating sand layer. . . . . . . . . 5.22
Average rank of workers:

with absence of heat-insulating sand layer . . . . . . . . . 4-5

with presence of heat-insulating sand layer. . . . . . . . . 2.75

time utilization factor of cutter during shift . . . . . . . 0.85

Note. Labor expenditures to supply water to the cutter are not taken into account.

The length and laboriousness of performing production operations in cutting trans-
verse joints with a 05-112 machine and the need for machines, equipment and imple-
mnts are presented in Tables 6.23-6.25.

Cutting joints with DS-Slo (0-903) two-disk cutter. The sequence of performing the
oprations are: the cutter is ained on the line of the joint so that the indicators
located on a rotating disk along its diaseter coincide with the layout line when
travelling on this line, the cutter is raised to the rotary disk and rotated by an
angle so that the indicator of longitudinal symmetry coincides with the layout

line of the joint, the cutter is lowered to the travel wheels and the joint is

cut, gradually increasing the feed rate (using the choke of a hydraulic engine)
from minimum to maximum possible for given strength of concrete and given depth of
cut.

Transverse joints are cut on adjacent rows during a single procedure and on marker
rows during two procedures: part of the joint is initially cut on a length of
1.5-2.0 meters from the edge in the direction of this edge and the working member
of the cutter is then raised to the transport position, the cutter is raised on the
rotary disk, rotated by 180° and the remaining part of the joint is cut.

A longitudinal joint is out after all the transverse joints on the section have
been cut.

The work section includes a cutter operator, fourth rank, and a road worker, first
rank.

The nuaber of sections is determined on the bases of the overall rate of construct-
ing the pavement, the length of the joints and the productivity of the cutter.

The approximate laboriousness of operations to cut joints with a 05-510 (0-903)
cutter with diamond disks with distance of 5 meters between transverse joints and
need for machines, equipment and iuplements are presented in Tables 6.26 and 6.27.

214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.23. Length of Performing Production Operations of One Cycle with Joint
Cut to Length of 7.5 Meters with Distance of 7.5 Meters Between Joints

 

_____————-———u')——————_—

(1) llpm- l-lyuu:
‘lu-oumMI-r man 11;: “WW“? “"3"" :33...
C C
_______________————————-——
(6)
chnonn "spawn”: p360- “ "cpcucmeunc «spew-n I u- an
m.- nonomenue am. can mmo man us p80
3arny6mum~ pcutymux xpylon (4 15 noun .5 u c cam-pump
llnchxa ulna c nonunml pt" HO nun ncpcuculcuneu npctou
wymux gpyrou nocae "3- II autumn npaaoc nonu-
pcnuc ( mos

 

(7) Htoro 240

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Length, seconds
3. Setting cutter to working position
4. Submerging cutting disks
5. Cutting joint with raising of cutting disks after cutting
6. Moving cutter to line of. next joint by a distance of. 7.5 meters with simul-
taneous mvement of carriages to initial righthand position
7. '1th

Table 6.24. Laboriousness of Performing Operations in Cutting Transverse Joints
with 05-112 Cutter per Shift Voluu of Work

 

 

 

(1) (2) (3) Tynan-mu
Tuna-awn: .. won-c Lam 2.6:: 51:: 3.“...
(4)”.-‘
(S) 135
Hounds-us napcnlm x 9-6031: mnpan- Hummus I I
u "mm“. yen-«mu puma)“ nu-
ma. mpooouuue ua mack-mu mav
yuan-mu nape-«nu u Mum mu.na- Mum‘s m2 ”.6
print «ma. nevi”: mam-um x cne- .. 735'
nymurny may
Meant: Ipcllmllmﬂ penal-r. noun prmy- — -- IA
uuu upyroa. nxnmnnnwm) pafmm
(9

 

 

(“When 0 111W!“ I"? I I6

u "765
Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of measurement
3. Volume of work
4. Laboriousness per shift volume of work, man-hours
5. Preparation of cutter for work, fuelling, setting cutting disks and check-

ing on idle
[Key continued on following page]

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-‘K'IAI. USE ONIJ

[Key continued from preceding page]:

6. Preparation
7. Setting cutter on line of joint, cutting of joint and moving cutter to

next joint
8. Joints/meter
9. Minor fastening repair, changing cutting disks and final operations
10. ‘Ibtal

Table 6.25. Machines. Equipment and Implements

 
    
      

 
     

Ila-noe- nan-I «ac-I. «uni-un-
«no

“(3)- lhunouaar Illll. nous-yawn"
I ma,- (1) we"

I In."

  

lla 1mm: noncpug)‘ moon I Uluyp amps-sullen“ mum-won I

CM? 5 we. ”anon 20 u
Illunr pom-own name on I "Inch: Human cmuawevpo- I
50 am. annmh 20 n (4 III (7)
Penxu an pamenm moo-(5) 2
Key:
1. Rune of machines, equipment and implement
2. Number

3. 05-112 transverse joint cutter
4. Rubber hose 50 m in diameter and 20 meters long

5. Straightedges for marking off joints
6. Capron rope S nu in dinter and 20 meters long
7. Steel centimeter tape measure

Main Engineering and Economic Indicators for Cutting Joints with 03-510 (0-903)
Cutter

Laboriousness of operations without regard to supplying

water to cutter on 1,000 meters of joint (580 meters

of transverse and 420 meters of longitudinal joints),

van-days ........................ l
Averagerankofworkers..................
Time utilization factor of cutter during shift. . . . . . .

0PM
Dino

Cutting joints with D-432A modified cutter. Manual control is replaced by auto-
matic control in the D-432A modified cutter. It is set on a self-travelling cross-
bar of a DS-502 (D-345) subgrader on which two guide framesua transverse 9 meters
long and longitudinal 10 meters long--are mounted to move the cutter when cutting
joints.

The end of the longitudinal frame rests on a two-wheeled chassis. An electric
power station with output of 30 kw, a telpher line for adjusting the cutter on the

guide frames, a mechanism for raising and lowering the frame and water tanks are
installed on the crossbar.

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.26. Laboriousness of Work to Cut Joints with 05-510 (0-903) Cutter

 

 

 
 
  
 

(l)

 
 

 

A”... Cut—II I TPleququh u
lune-mum‘s» nun-un- "5,"...L id‘s-w: cmrléﬁu
(2) 3 ' '
5)
{Inn-manna nap-mun a patient- (oclnrv. 0.67

“pm-Inna tropcyuol, "vacuums-me
III.1.'|III‘|I6 "all“! lull“. JuIII)'l'K I! III")-
:prn muratmn. npmpua paOum ne-

wmunuou) .
yuan-um: annulus: xpylun (5) 0.2!
Pazmcua muepﬂmu IIIIOII (7) II 90 0.7.!
llapnka s a (3) s 90 8.:1.
"emu x na-uny .1: Ilgnul a.“ unpcm — _. 0,2.

uponuM-Imm mu 9 .

Pawn“ nptummnm tuna 110) u 6.? 9.48
"alarm: . r ( 1) t 6.1 .230
MMqu xpoucmmn pcmmr. Jam-aux:- m- — 2.86

plmun. urn-u pafuwnx. Jam-murmu-
um: pafmm (12)

_—_———-———_
——

(13) Htoro l | IG

1. Production operations

2. Unit of measurement

3. shift volume of work

4. Laboriousness per shift volune of work, nan-hours

5. Preparation of cutter for operation (inspection, cleaning nozzle, connect-
ing water delivery hoses, starting and warming up of engine and checking
operation of mechanisms)

6. Setting diamond disks

7. Layout of transverse joints

8. Cutting of transverse joints

9. Moving to beginning of section to cut longitudinal joint

10. Layout of longitudinal joint

11. Cutting of longitudinal joint

12. Minor fastening repair, refuellinq, rest of workers and final operations

13. metal

When cutting joints with the D-432A modified cutter, the transverse joints are laid
out by cuts while the longitudinal joint does not have to be laid out.

To cut a transverse joint, the cutter is set on the edge of the transverse frame,
the cutting disks are lowered to the pavement by means of a screw, they are sub-
merged, simultaneously switching on the water supply and the mechanism for moving
the cutter along the frame. The speed of the cutter is 0.83 m/min.

Having cut the joint, the cutter is stopped, the diamond disks are raised with a
screw, the cutter is returned to its initial position, the frame is raised to the
transport position and the unit is moved to the next joint.

21']

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.27. Machines, Equipment and Implements men Cutting Joints with IDS-510
(ID-903) Cutter

Ila-mm: nan-Wuhan: l vi". “ Ilse-browser menu nun-reuse $2.1.
Ilapewuk moon SIC-510 I Penna Ms pawcuu mm l
(ll-903) Jlonue (7) I
Eunocu- Ml COIK “13"” I IUnaur pcwnoeui ““th I
(2—4 5") us mum-no 4 .10 Mu. Mind: 45 a
Nation great-aux uncrpyomr I
ma ( scum.
Key:
1. Name of machines and implements 5. Set of fitting tools
2. hunter 6. straightedge for laying out joints
3. 05-510 (D-903) joint cutter 7. shovel
4. Tank for lubricants or water 8. Rubber hose 30 m in diameter and

(2-4 m3) on trailer 45 meters long

A longitudinal joint (if it is provided by the plan) is out after the transverse
joints on the entire section have been cut. To do this, the cutter is reinstalled
with the telpher line from the transverse frame to the beginning of the longitudinal
frame. The joint is cut in sections 8.5 meters long, determined by the length of
the longitudinal frame.

Having cut a joint 8.5 meters long, the cutter is stopped, it is moved to the in-
itial position, the unit is raised to the transport position and is moved to the
end of the cut joint. A cut is then made on the next section 8.5 meters long.

An operator. fifth rank, performs the work on cutting the joints with the D-432A
modified cutter.

'me laboriousness of work to cut joints with the D-432A modified cutter using dia-
mnd disks in concrete pavement with distance of 5 meters between transverse joints
and the need for machines, equipment and implements are presented in Tables 6.28
and 6.29.

Main Engineering and Economic Indicators for Cutting Joints with o-aaza modified
Cutter

Laboriousness of work per 1,000 meters of joint (580
meters transverse and 420 meters longitudinal).
mn-days.o.o.oo........o..........6.45
Averagerankofworkers...................5

Time utilization factor of cutter during shift . . . . . . . . 0.81

Cutting longitudinal joints in concrete pavement with os-ns three-disk cutter.
To cut a longitudinal joint, the joint line is laid out and if there is a heat-
insulating sand layer on the pavement it is cleaned along the lines of motion of

218

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.28. Laboriousness of Work to Cut Joints with D-d32A Modified Cutter

 

_ ________._-__-.______.
(1) (2) (3, Tl'yllelrvuu
Tuna-Inst“!!! mama £321.:- cwﬁzw" xrza.
V'l-‘I (4)
Hum: napcnuxa 1: p360“: 0.2"
Venison: Manna: Ipymn 6) u.l7
"spun nonrpewux mass 7) u 90 3.6
l'lepecnmmm IIRMJ‘IIIK? c IIOW‘IOI 0.]
pauu na npuaoaulylo 3)
Ilaptum nponomamro Inn (9) u 65 2,5,!
ncpmn MPH-mu In mmyto sunny |_:r2

a mum: paOoacﬁ mum. umunﬂ upt-
nmnuh pono'm. Janpaau tonlmmn.
nnmmumuc pam (10)

 

(lilhoro

 

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of measurement
3. Shift volume of work
4. Laboriousness per shift volune of work, nan-hours
5. Preparation of cutter for operation
6. Installation of diamond disks
7. Cutting transverse joints ,
8. Reinstalling cutter from transverse to longitudinal frame
9. Cutting longitudinal joint
10. Moving cutter to new section at end of working shift, minor fastening
repair, refuelling and final operations
11. 'notal

Table 6.29. Machines, Equipment and Inclement: in Cutting Joints with D-432A
Modified Cutter

llama-mu. mun-a. scum-am

 

It“) [III-elm“. uni-u. alumnus-I lun-

 

n anneal-w cum I lane-Inp- emu--
lune-u xnIIL‘lpnyqu Kin-‘3“:- I (8)3neupocumula ”(SC-30 I
“"1"" mm task-um mums “23:9ch? =

lmi NIP-1|" I c on . um" um-
mnnc-I‘Inuuulnnuumm "3‘50 1 11)::(16) I‘m.“ I'Y (Wm.

mm ulmm jl-IJZA Illamn' lu-mmmm‘u minimum I

Inna Mu lulu-nu IIIIII‘F‘XI- I '2" In .mlmﬂ I5 u(11)
um I Il|n-.'lmn.nu\ Illllull JlunmnaS) |
Mon mt nwu|m1m|manmua l

)u: rm 01 1mm?)

Key:
1. Name of machines, equipment and implements
2. Nmber

[Key continued on following page]

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

3. Unit designed by Kievdorstroy for cutting joints

4. Including

5. 0-432» modified joint cutter

h. Frame for cutting trenuvoree and longitudinal joint"
7. Crossbar of 05-502 (0-345) eubgrader

8. ZhEs-JO electric power station

9. Telpher line

10. Set of fitters tools
ll. Rubber hose 20 mm in diameter and 15 meters long

12. Shovel

13 . couplete set

the cutter wheels to a width of 40-50 cm and along the joint line to a width of 15-
20 en. The cutter is set so that the cutting disks and the course indicator are
precisely on the joint line. Therefore, the speed of the machine when cutting a
joint is 1.4-1.7 meters/min and can be increased to 2-2.5 meters/min.

A section consisting of an operator. fourth rank, and assistant operator, third
rank. performs the work.

The laboriousness of work to cut a longitudinal joint with the 05-115 cutter and
the need for machines and implmnts are presented in Tables 6.30 and 6.31.

Table 6.30. Laboriousness of Work to Cut longitudinal Joint with DS-lSS Cutter

(2) MEL...

(1) u cue-M
tome-o cup-aw .:"— eh:- pin.

”.4

 

 

 

__—______———-————_———-‘——-

(5)

ﬂonrmoua IIapeJIull x mm. aun- 0.7
«a runaway room“ ycnnauy p:
mynuu upytoe. onpobouuuc “a mae-
nox may

llapcnu mode) (7) I 6m I4 .
Cum: may!!!" upymn vcxymm‘l [Ifllnﬂ‘l’ |,.I :
u noun-muﬂmum 1.3mm.

.__._ __.—__—_____—.

(8)1Itoro l | 16

Key:
1. Production operations
2. Unit of meestn'ement
3. Volume of work
4. Iaboriousness per 0. ‘nift value of work, man-hours
5. Preparation of cutter for operation, including refuelling, installation of
cutting disks and testing at idle
6. Cutting the joint

7. Changing cutting disks, routine maintenance and final operations
8. mul

220

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Table 6.31. Machines and Implements When Cutting Joints with DS-llS Cutter

 

 

 

 

 

"anti-ﬂaunt man-u RaLg) Ila-Aeneas: nan-s Inn-
(1) I ”Dr-III! IKIOO 'I I‘ll-n m“
(6)
Hanna-4m: mnon llC-Ilfp (3) l lllnyp nkummumowi Ana-en l
Illum- pmnmmuh uneasy»- ! pan 5 ml nation 80 u
50 MM. .umum 20 u ﬂlafmon Ms Jane 1 magnum u I
Pym-tn IllﬂigIsﬂ‘lII-ILII net-.1 1 Myth"... mna(
muck:-

1. Name of machines and implements

2. Number

3. 05-115 joint cutter

4. Rubber hose 50 mm in diameter and 20 meters long
5. Metal measuring tape

6. Hemp rope 5 mm in diameter and 80 meters long

7. Master form for measuring width and depth of joint

Main Engineering and Economic Indicators for Cutting Longitudinal Joint with 05-115

Cutter
Laboriousness per 1,000 meters of joint, man-days . . . . . . 3.33
Average rank of workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.5
Time utilization of cutter during shift . . . . . . . . . . . 0.88

Cutting joints in freshly laid concrete with the DNShS-60-3M cutter. A groove is
cut with the DNShS-60-3M joint cutter is freshly laid concrete and at the same time
a polyethylene or 1501 spacer is laid in it. The operating principle of the wozk-
ing member of the machine is based on vibrating movement of a plate in freshly laid
and packed concrete when it has not yet begun to set.

Being forcibly moved and vibrating, the vibrating plate opens and separates the
concrete. forming grooves and introducing the spacer into it. Joints are cut slow-
ly in freshly laid concrete after the pavement has been finished with a concrete
finishing machine and the interval should not be more than 10-30 min (depending on
air temperature).

The vibrating plate and rubber smoother must be cleaned of concrete and flushed
with water periodically both during breaks and at the end of the shift and one
should also see that the electric vibrator of the working member operates at the
cal culated voltage.

The spacer should be embedded in the concrete by no less than one-fourth the thick-
ness of the pavement and should protrude above the pavement surface by 0.5-1 cm.

Bossible defects in operation of the DNShS-60-3M cutter, methods of correcting
them, the duration and laboriousness of performing the production operations and

the need for machines and implements in cutting joints are presented in Tables
6.32-6.35.

221

FOR OFFICER]. USE ONLY
Ito

tape

Possible Causes

The notch of the vibrating plate
has barbs or has been clogged
with drying concrete

The tape is too wide

The tape is incorrectly inserted
in the notch

Insufficient vibration of the vi-
brating plate due to malfunction
of electric vibrator motor, break-
ing of flexible hose, insufficient
voltage, incorrect installation of
rubber shock absorbers on column
shaft

Extremely high speed of working
member

Delay in cutting seem (the con-
crete has begun to set)
nonuauawv
soon as: uououna> and nouns
UuuuUOHo oz» coozuon mcauoucou

.68 23 o... Bax. 9.:
ouoaucou as» no unavasouaUquonm

nouacualucou mu ya
no ucUOMunsu on ma uuozu no use
:uo: I>¢£ monuuaon uoauunm> 0:9

 

mocano oanwnuOQ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.33. Time to Perform Production (perations of One Cycle When Cutting Trans-

verse Joints with DNShs-60-3M Cutter

(1) ‘12.)- In-

 

Tenn-«morocco au-a-an- Iouuwvunsv Ina-l-
ODIN... nas— oI-opuu-I Ir»
I -¢l|-. C In). t
_3——_'—'_5_'—
Ranpanuu mum n "pun-c): "906- I63 llama-u lmﬁptlll'lﬂtlmlll‘ u) m m
pun-.mnmm. umpcunmmc ILII'WI‘IIIII‘ tram-morn
Komm scum n dmxrnmpc, ”(1me I ('ncayunu-u ' may ".1 72
nnynmmur nudponaacmuu I pncclonlmc IO M (6

¢nxcmopa n (mun
Harem: luoucpcumu I as tour I20
no“ 7.5 a $4?

 

 

(7) lltmu 420

Production operations
Length, seconds
Loading tape into notch of vihrating plate, securing end of tape in

fastener, lowering vibrating plate and fastener in concrete
Cutting transverse joint 7.5 meters long

Raising vibrating plate and removing fastener

Moving to next joint by distance of 10 meters

Total

Table 6.34. Laboriousness of Performing work in Cutting Transverse Joints with

DNShs-GO-JM Cutter with Distanre of 10 Meters Between Joints

 

 

 

—_

 

 

 

(2) Ilium-Inna
(1) ﬁlly-nu:- In run-uni
“mm-nmc-w wow-nus “ﬁlm...- pOur vheu FOI'P.
4)Ifl‘
5 ..
Houomuxa uach-mxa & 3:6??- «$.94 II: ' 3,71;
liapcua Iumcpuuux mmm ( u mnos __-' .~! ..
in! mmm $0—
Jaxmnurcmnmr paOum. omm‘glmmx 6) «rs-u |.9
H10! 0 na nuan)‘ 600 u xmnpung‘o’ l | Ni

Production operations

Unit of measurenent

Volune of work

Laboriousness per shift volume of work, nan-hours
Preparation of cutter for operation

Man-hours

Cutting transverse joints

Meters of joints/units of joints

Final operations and rest of workers
Total for pavement section of 600 meters

224

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work in cutting joints with the DNShs-60-3M cutter is performed by a section
consisting of a cutter operator, fourth rank, and concrete worker, fourth rank.

Filling the joints with sealing materials. Before the joints are filled with seal-
ing materials. they are prepared to ensure reliable adhesion of the filler to the
concrete. It is recommended that the joints be carefully flushed with water issued-
iately after they have been cut, that they be covered with a film or pergamyn and
that they be kept clean before filling with the sealer.

Table 6.35. Machines and Implements Used in Cutting Joints with DNShS-60-3M Cutter

...- .
(1) “u.” noun -¢ u"...
llsum- I.»- my In-I- -II II a wrung-a vnn- Ila-Inn mam wsI-IIIII II III I «an--

 

 

 

 

lhIpcI'IIIII IIIImII )lIlIIIa I'Iu .IM Mann-1hr??? .I1IIIIIma (3) :
AIIaI;I1'I':1‘II-Ir(I.sII IIIIIIHIIu-I I.1.1 32:2;zl-Icrxae IIIC‘IK'I (10) I
Mcr;In.1II'Ir-...III'I uaIIIIwIII(S) I MrlnnnII-MIIIIII IIuIIIIII r npn- I
K'IIVIIIK ..:I IIIIuI-m-Ium .‘K‘II‘ I I"'"'"' (11) 1
In AI "fill" (12)
III n u I III II II um I
‘.1:III'IJ" “ MII” n I"?
Key:

1. Name of machines and implements 7. Knife or shears to cut tape

2. Nuaber 8. Metal shovel

3. DNshS-60-3M joint cutter 9. Fastener

4. Shaped metal smother 10. Metal brush

5. Metal trowel 11. Metal brush with notch

6. Book to remove tape 12. Pail

If this condition is not fulfilled, then the joints should be cleaned immediately
prior to filling with a steel hook munted on the air duct sleeve of the compres-
sor, simultaneously blowing them with compressed air, and then flushed; the walls
of the joint are cleaned with a steel brush and again blown with compressed air.

The sequence of operations in filling the joints with mastics based on asphalt is:
a cotton or jute rope is placed in the joint, the walls of the joints are primed

with liquid asphalt, the joint is filled with mastic using a pourer or tapered
funnel first to two-thirds the depth of the groove and then flush with the pave-

ment. After the mastic in the joint has cooled, the excess and spillovers are cut
away with a trowel.

when joints are filled with cold-hardened sealing materials, the work is usually
performed with a special set of equith in the following sequence:

the sealer is prepared imediately prior to filling the joints by mixing
for 5-6 minutes in the cold state in the pourer tank of the sealing and vulcaniz-
ing paste;

the walls of the joint grooves are wiped with acetone:

225

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cotton or jute rope or a rubber tube is placed in the lower part of the
joints:

the joint is filled with sealer in one procedure, without reaching the pave-
msnt surface by 3-5 In.

The work to fill joints with sealing materials is usually performed in one shift.

The composition of the sections is taken with regard to the filler material and the
means of mechanization as follows:

when filling joints with asphalt-based mastics using the 05-67 joint filler:

joint filler operator, fifth rank. .. .. . l
roadworkers:thirdrank................ l

secondrank............... 1

when filling joints with asphalt-based mastics using tapered funnels:

compressor operator, fourth rank . . . . . . . . . . . . l
roadworkers:thirdrank................2
1

secondrank ...............
when filling joints with thiokol sealer using the Soyuzdornii unit:

mixing unitoperator, fourth rank. . . . . . . .. .. . l
roadworkers: thirdrank................ l

secondrank l
The length of one shift is 600-700 meters of joint per shift.

The need for machines, equipment and implements to fill joints with sealing mater-
ials is presented in Table 6.36.

6.8. Characteristics of constructing Monolithic Pavement at Negative Temperatures

When constructing monolithic pavement during negative temperatures, measures must
be implemented that protect the hardening concrete from freezing until it gains no
less than 50 percent of design strength. N do this, it is recounended that the
therms or electrothermos method be used.

with the thermos method, positive temperatures are ensured in the hardening con-
crete during the period required for it to gain minimum permissible strength by
warming the pavement immediately after its surface is finished with a layer of
heat-insulating material (sand, slag, sawdust, straw, reed mats and so on). This
layer is maintained on the pavement surface during the entire period of negative

teQeratures and for not less than 15 days after the onset of stable positive
teuperatures.

Waterproof roll materials are laid before the insulating material is laid to pro—
tect the pavement surface against damage and to eliminate moisture erosion.

226

POI! OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6.36. Machines, Equipment and Implements Used in Filling Joints (Per Section)

 

 

(2) Ken-crun-

 

(1) I I "
llama-nae Inn-II. Muss—s mufﬁn-nu: ecu-new) J61
I nosey-pa _— IP‘I.‘ I- In"

W Inn-yum: "MINI-Ml
AW 5) nuts-a

 

3.1.1unumu 11067 n ”gunman" I — --
K SIB-€523 (8)
osnpcccop 3I‘lO-55 -
Ilcpuanumoﬁ amen Inertia-0cm» 3569) - l
MI paaorpcn sacrum (1°
Konycuue Inc-Mu summmcmo loo 1 - I
a.“ paJorpeI-a Gnryun
Ennocw wt 6mm»! (1})
C 9 a an“ (12
TDJMIHQ upmam
s menu (093-0)) (14)
lllnareuu 8.5)
“up: (1
Kucm (17%
[Scream (1 ) 25 u 2
Menu-I (19)
{gonna $20
ouunex « an" mm 'x —
Cotonopuunfaﬂ ( P) mm
B to: mamas;
cun-nnmd )
SIM'JIIIIII msoa (24)
Ilpucnocooacnnr us mncnm moon or
moo“ u myun
Ilpucnocodncnuc us mums whom 01’(2 -
men n mum
[Ipncnocofmcnue an: npocymxn moon (27
, » :axueﬁuu sums 6 -
uarol (58
Mopuue mum: (29) - — 2

Ell.-

ggn———!

to
:n
8

ﬂ

-—"'~n\:.—_-.—
.. I»

u.—
u—

III
III
A:

1. Name of machines, equipment and implements

2. Number

3. When filling with asphalt-based mastics

4. DS-67 tiller

5. Tapered funnels

6. When filling with thiokol sealer

7. 05-67 filler mounted on UAz-4SZD truck

8. ZIP-55 compressor

9. Mobile boiler with capacity of 350 liters to heat mastic
10. Tapered funnels with capacity of 100 liters to heat asphalt
ll. Gasoline tank

12. Water tank

13. Steel hooks
14. steel brushes
15. Putty knives

[Key continued on following page]

227

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

16. Pails
l7 . Brushes
18. hope

19 . Brooms
20. shovels

21. Set of equipment (designed by Soyuzdornii)
22. Including

23. Mixers

24. Joint fillers

25. Device to clean joints of rock and soil
26. Device to clean joints of sand and dust
27. Device to dry joints

28. Device to glue paper to joints

29. Measuring tanks

with the electrothermos method, the concrete mixture is heated to 45-55‘C after
laying, using standard plate electric panels or reinforcing bars laid in the con-
crete with distance between them of 15-20 cm. After being heated, the pavement is
kept under a layer of insulator until the concrete gains the required strength.
Regardless of the method used for winter concreting, the upper layer of the bed
not less than 10 cm thick, being a thermal cushion, should be in an unfrozen state
at the moment the concrete mixture is laid, for which it is first heated or thawed.

When installing pavement on a sand base, the upper layer of the thawed sand is
poured imadiately prior to laying the concrete mixture. The type and thickness
of the insulator during winter concreting is designated on the basis of heat en-
gineering calculation by selecting the appropriate thermophysical characteristics
at which the required rate of hardening of the concrete is achieved.

One is guided by the following rules when constructing nonolithic pavement during
negative tenperatures.

The materials used to prepare the concrete mixture must be stored in large stacks.

when using unheated materials, the moisture content should not exceed 3 percent by
mass for sand and 4 percent by mass for crushed stone. The sand should be screened
prior to use to remove frozen clumps coarser than 10 m.

The concrete mixture is transported in dmp trucks with heated bodies covered with
insultating panels or covers and if the outside air temperature is below -lO'c,
the bottoms of the bodies are also heated with the engine exhaust gases.

The concrete mixture is laid with a set of rail-travelling machines, reducing to
the minimun possible the interval between spreading the concrete mixture and fin-
ishing the surface. The concrete mixture cannot be laid during a snow storm and
the surface of the pavement also cannot be covered with water or a salt solution.

If the insulator is laid on pavesent without waterproof materials, the concrete
must be maintained for 15 days by wetting the insulating layer with water with the
onset of stable positive temperatures.

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The temperature of the hardening concrete is checked during 15 days from the time
of concreting, for which pipes are installed in the middle of the pavement and on
the edge of the slab every 150-200 meters during concreting into which a saline
solution that does not freeze at -20‘C is poured.

6.9. Characteristics of Constructing Pavement with Upper Layer of High-strength
Concrete

The concrete mixture for the upper layer of pavement should be prepared at cyclical-
ly operating cement-concrete plants in concrete mixtures with forced mixing. To

do this, a special concrete mixture designed to prepare the concrete only for the
upper layer is allooated at the TsBz [Cement-concrete plant].

The length of mixing the components of materials when preparing the concrete mix-
ture for the upper layer is determined experimentally and it is approximately as-
sumed to be 180 seconds with a concrete mixer tank up to 1,000 liters and 240
seconds with a larger tank.

Table 6.37. Maximum Permissible Time Interval Between Laying Upper and lower Layers

 

 

 
 
   

(2) M..rr-ea.m-- ”myth-nu. pal-no In spur-n. un-

 

(3) up: comm-4 mun" i ‘42 m mum I‘ll-m

Curr-alum "VI-saunas": Ian-ma a “nun". 1'.

(1)

Toe-royal". nan-an
mm. a-aqyn. 'C

    
  

 

 

(6) I I l
u. s 1—" >l0 an s :40 w
5 — In rm m 00 I20 I20 90
> IO--I5 I'm 60 (it) 120 9.) G"
>- I:'- 20 90 m 4.5 9.) (in 00
>1"! ’3!- 43 an ‘10 so 4‘» :m
> 23 30 w '20 Is 45 30 'N

1. Ambient air temperature. °C

2. Maximum permissible time interval, min

3. During sunny weather

4. During cloudy weather

5. Tricalcium aluminate content in cement, percent
6. Up to

The concrete mixture for the upper layer is transported in dump trucks with bodies
that exclude the loss of moisture from the concrete mixture during transportation.
To do this, the rear of the body is sealed with rubber gaskets and the mixture is
covered with a waterproof tarpaulin on top regardless of the weather.

Thermal insulation of the bodies should be used and they should be painted on the

outside in light tones when concreting pavement in hot weather (at air temperature
above +25°C) .

The sequence of work to form pavement with the upper layer of high-strength con-
crete is as follows: the concrete mixture of the lower layer is spread from

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ordinary concrete, the concrete mixture of the lower layer of ordinary concrete is

spread, the concrete mixture of the lower layer is packed, the concrete mixture of

the upper layer of high-strength concrete is spread, the upper layer is packed, the
pavement surface is levelled and finished, the freshly laid concrete is maintained

and the joints are installed.

The concrete mixture of the lower layer can be spread and packed with a 05-109 con-
crete spreader equipped with a vibrating beam when constructing pavements using a
railless set of machines.

The concrete mixture of the lower and upper layers is spread with two Ds-503 (0-375)
concrete spreaders when using a rail-travel set of machines, while the concrete
mixture of the lower layer is packed with a 05-504 (0-376) concrete placer or DS-
502 (0-345) subgrader. A BBQ-7-7.5 or DS-504 (0-376) machine is used to pack the
upper layer and to finish the surface. The upper layer is laid before the concrete
of the lower layer begins to set.

The time interval between laying the upper and lower layers should be minimum and
should not exceed the values presented in Table 6.37.

The freshly laid concrete is maintained and the joints are installed by ordinary
methods.

6.10. construction of Precast Pavement from Reinforced Concrete Slabs

The following operations are carried out (with a prepared artificial bed) when
constructing precast pavement from reinforced concrete slabs: unloading and storb
ing of the slabs (to create the required reserves), grading the slabs and control
tests of them for crack resistance, installation of the levelling layer of sand-
cement mixture, placing the slabs in the pavement while ensuring close contact with
the bed, welding the steel cleats and finishing the joints.

Unloading and storing the slabs. The slabs are delivered to the construction facil-
ities from the manufacturing plants usually by rail on flatcars or in gondolas. The
slabs are unloaded from the railcars into stacks or are transloaded to trucks that

deliver them to the installation point or to the storage area next to the facility.

The stacks of slabs are arranged on one or both sides of the roadbed at the rail-
road warehouse, maintaining a distance of not less than 6 meters from the first
row of stacks to the nearest rails.

The railroad and facility warehouses are arranged on graded and packed soil plat-
forms with artificial surface. Usually lO slabs each are laid in each stack. The
bottom slab is laid on wood pallets located 1 meter from its ends, not less than
15 cm thick with dirt pads and not less than 10 cm thick with pads of artificial
surface. The last slabs in the stack are laid on two wood pallets 2.5-4.0 cm
thick, which are arranged along the vertical strictly above the pallets of the
bottom slab.

It is not permitted to lay the slabs on unlevelled andtrpackeddirt pads and also
on three or more pallets (spacers).

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
l-Ult UH-lL'lAL USE ONLY

The distance between stacks is not less than 80 an so that the slabs can be inspec-
ted and the lateral edges can be primed.

It is recommended that loading-unloading operations at the rail and facility stor-
age areas be carried out with motorized pneumatic-tire cranes having capacity of
not less than 1c tons.

The work is performed using crossbars in the form of a rectangular steel frame with
vertical arrangement of the straps.

The couposition of the section that services one crane is:

Crane operator, sixth rank . . . . . . . . . 1
Riggers,secondrank............ 4
Productivity of section . . . . . . . . . . 120-130 slabs per shift

Grading and control tests of slabs. All the slabs coming to the construction
facility are inspected, the conformity of their quality to specifications (Table

6. 38) is checked and they are graded into three categories according to the data
of Table 6. 39.

Table 6.38. Specifications for Finished slabs of Type PM;

Parameters of slabs

to be Checked irements
Geometric dimension Deviations from planned dimensions should not exceed:

+6mmin lengthand+5minwidth, +3mmin
thickness of the protective layer of concrete for
the lower and upper reinforcement;

by arrangement of joining cleats: + 5 m in cross~
section, + 3 mm in height and + 2 mm by protrusion
beyond the edge of the slab

Geometric shape The difference of the lengths of diagonals should not
exceed 1.2 m. Lack of smoothness (greatest deviation
of one of the corners from the plane passing through the
three other corners) and also the concavity and convex-
ity of the slab surfaces and lateral edges should not

exceed 5 mm
External appearanc. and The working surface of the slabs should be even and have
quality of surface some roughness formed with a caprvon brush or burlap tape

or should have corrugation. No more than three cavities
or open air bubbles up to 5 mm in diameter and up to 3
m deep is permitted on l-m2 of working surface. Local
unevennesses should not exceed 3 mm in height. The to-
tal length of splitoffs of the concrete ribs more than
5 mm deep on the working surface and 8 m deep on the
nonworking surface should not exceed 50 mm per meter of
length (width) of the slab. Peeling of the surface and
cracks of any origin (temperature, shrinkage, stress
and so on) are not permitted

231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 6. 39.

Category
of slabs

 

II

III

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grading Slabs by Quality

Qualitative Condition of slabs

Slabs completely correspond to
specifications

slabs have the following deviations from
specifications: splitoffs of concrete
corners and edges not exceeding one-fourth
the height of the slab, indiVIdual cavi-
ties, slight temperature-shrinkage cracks
not more than 20 cm long, insufficient
quality of surface finishing, buildups of
concrete near the ends up to 10 cm high
and deviation of geometric dimensions and
arrangement of joining cleats above the
established tolerances

Slabs having significant defects: through
cracks, extensive splitoffs of concrete,
destruction of the surface layer of con-
crete with exposure of reinforcement and
so on

Recounendations on Use
of Slabs

Used according to direct
designation on all pave-
ment sections

Used according to direct
designation but laid on
secondary sections: outer
rows of VPP, platforms and
HS and auxiliary RD

Not used for airfield
pavement

me of 500 slabs is sampled and tested for crack resistance according to the dia-
grams presented in Figure 20.

Slabs similar to those tested (PAC-l4 or PAC-18) are used as loading ballast.

Figure 20.

 

Resistance :

Diagram for Field Tests of FAG-l4 and PAC-18 slabs for Crack
a--lower zone; b--upper zone: l--PAG-14 or pas-18

slab used as loading ballast: 2~~slab to be tested; 3--test

load of two FAG-l4 or FAG-18 slabs

ﬂue loading slab must be lowered smoothly onto the slab to be tested without per-
mitting jolts and impacts.

The slab is held under load for not less than 30 minutes and it is assumed to pass

the test if visual inspection reveals no cracks in the tension zone.

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The slab is
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

initially tested for crack resistance of the lower zone according to the diagram of
Figure 20, a and this same slab is then tested for crack resistance of the upper

zone according to the diagram of Figure 20. b. Distances a and b are taken accord-
ing to Table 6.40.

Table 6.40. Distances a and b "o Figure 20)

   
  
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) Patna-Ian. nu-
1’. ar-urueueol Te- llmnneenul —
llama ‘ 0 WM ‘ I .
"Fr—*— A _'_
Ml 'l-l IWO - 800 [MI 48 '21!!! I'll)
DAT-H T-I 61X) 910 IMF-INT ”I! ll!!!
[Mr-H T-2 coo 850
Key:
1. Type of slab to be tested 3. PAG

2. Distances, mm

Device for levelling the layer of sand-cement mixture. The levelling layer of the
sand-cement mixture is installed to improve contact of the slabs with the bed. The
sand-cement mixture is prepared in plants and is delivered to the installation point
by dump trucks. The mixture is levelled and shaped with a 05-502 (0-345) subgrader
in two passes: the subgrader spreads the mixture during the first pass and finely
shapes it during the second pass. A ridge of mixture 6-8 cm high should be con-
stantly in front of the blade of the subgrader during the second pass.

Placing the slabs in the pavement. The slabs are placed into pavement with the
long side along the basic direction of motion of the aircraft. The lateral sides
of the slabs are first primed at the facility or rail storage area to ensure good
adhesion of the sealing material of the joints to them.

The slabs are delivered to the installation point by sidebed trucks, trucks with
semi-trailers, tractor-trailers and so on.

The slabs are laid in the pavement by motorized cranes on pneumatic tires. The
cranes usually operate from laid pavement, laying strips in front of them consist-
ing of three slabs in width. The placement is carried out using crossbars with
vertical arrangement of the straps.

The highest productivity is achieved by using the following placement procedure:

a slab is removed from the truck by the crane and is carried to the placement point
by rotating the boom. the slab is lowered to a level so that its bottom is 3-5 cm
below the surface of adjacent placed slabs, the longitudinal edge is brought into
contact with the longitudinal edge of an adjacent slab already placed by rotating
the boom, the transverse edge of the slab to be laid is brought into contact with
that already placed by the crane moving backward and the slab is lowered onto the
bed.

233

FOR‘OFFNJAI.US£(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Benches in the joints of adjacent slabs should not exceed S In after placement,
the longitudinal and transverse joints should be linear and their width should be
8-10 m.

If the bench exceeds 5 m, the slab is raised, it is moved aside, the bed is addi-
tionally levelled with smothers and the slab is again placed.

To ensure close contact of the bottom of the slabs and the bed (the levelling layer),
the slabs are seated by vibration or the pavemnt is rolled with heavy trucks in
two-three passes.

vibrating placement is performed using the “~66 vibrating placement machine. The
machine is installed alternately on each slab for vibrating placenent. The vibrat-
ing time is determined experimentally as a function of the type of slab (its mass)
and the thickness of the levelling layer. The vibrating time is taken as the mini-
mum time at which complete contact to the surface of the levelling layer is pro-
vided and the contact area is determined visually by the impression of the slab
after it is raised.

No fewer than five slabs should be subjected to experimental vibrating placement to
determine the optimum vibration time.

Welding the connecting cleats. The connecting cleats are welded after vibrating
placement (rolling) of the pavement, first having cleaned them of dirt, dust and
rust with scrapers and steel brushes with blasting by compressed air.

Welding is performed with 8-42)\ or 8-34 electrodes 4-5 nan in diameter using welding
machines of type ASE-300 and so on. The length of the weld seam is equal to the
length of the cleats, the width is one-half the diameter of the cleat and the
height is one-fourth the diameter of the cleat.

If the gap between the cleats to be welded does not exceed 4 m, welding is per-
formed with a single continuous seam.

If the gap between cleats exceeds 4 m, an additional bar 2-3 mm greater in diam-
eter than the width of the gap is placed on them and welding is performed in two
seams (on both sides of the bar).

Finishing the joints. The joints in precast pavement are finished after the con-
necting cleats are welded. To save sealing materials, the lower part of the
joints (except expansion joints) are filled with a sand-cement mixture to two-
thirds the thickness of the slab.

The upper part of the joints and the expansion joints are filled to the entire
depth with sealing materials, preferably with rubber-asphalt and asphalt—polymer
nastics.

Before filling the joints with the sand-cement mixture, they are carefully cleaned
of dirt and sand and are blasted with compressed air. After they have been filled
with the mixture, the joints are flushed with water to accelerate the hardening of
the sand-cement mixture and to clean the upper part of the lateral edges of the
slabs.

234

FOR OFHCML USE ONLY
mu mtu'lat USE ONLV

Before filling the joints with mastic, they are blasted with compressed air and
the upper part 3f the lateral edges of the slabs is primed.

The joints are filled with mastic by a 05-67 joint filler or tapered funnels.

Operations to install precast pavement are usually organized in two shifts. It is
reconnended that the rail-forms be installed (finally straightened and checked)
only during the daytime shift.

The work section is divided into four shift sections: installation of rail-forms.
installation of the levelling layer, placement and vibrating placement (or rolling)
of the slabs and welding the connecting cleats and finishing the joints.

The length of the shift section when laying in three rows is designated as 200-240
meters (100-120 slabs). The length of the first section is equal to double the
length of the remaining sections.

The work is performed by a complex brigade whose composition and also the labori-
ousness of performing individual types of work are presented in Table 6.41.

Work to install and remove the rail-forms and to fill the joints with mastics is
performed when constructing precast pavement by using the same machines, equipment
and implements as when constructing monolithic pavements (see Tables 6.4 and 6.36).

A list of the machines, equipment and implements used to install the levelling -

sand-cement layer, to place the slabs and to weld the connecting cleats is pre-
sented in Table 6.42.

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu: 0!

Measurement

Meters of
section

slab/In2

Slab

Slab

VOLWO

of Work

400

2,400

 

200

200

VOLUM or
W

80

24

80

15

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Machines, Equipment and Implements Used to Install Levelling Layer,
to Place Slabs and to Weld Cleats

 

 

 

Km».

Ilium-ale. «nu-mu. "Gunmen-e- I ‘3) ll "nun-nee: mama. «I q.,........ m,”

a ne- male (1) sense I amt-y-

"""""""""‘T3T""""""""""""""“'""“

 

Illulloluulmlmum ,‘lC-502 I Iicmnmccup MN. 53 (8) I
(ll-3.1!.) .- hllﬂllﬂthlllu prnuc- Marlin-u: (Mu-or miners"; 4
. upnpu ( Nib-300 9)
nlucnuoxoamluﬁ alum “ﬁlm I “Inf-noun MI «In-mummy - 4
”“6 nova mm nun-ma I (-ynmf- nun-puma mmmIlO
A III- ”(55 l'ml-u yxopu-mnmcul) 4
Ammnufmnu mum-“nan AM An- "0 path J'luu‘namn ;
nan-MI Imminent-mum's me- very 5(1anch 13 '
ca (5 I‘rﬂxa um Imupmm unuouu I
Ann-402ml: (mm-"mo Mucnu- To me noxpmn Ammo“ 3 u 14)
nynpuucnov Mn nuns-um (:IIANIUC menu (15) 2
lllllll’ (7) Lupctmu mm pacnucuudg n 2

e of machines, equipment and implements

her

502 (0-345) subgrader with set of rail-forms
4362 pneumatic-tire crane

66 vibrating placement machine

p trucks to deliver send-cement mixture
eboard or semitrailer trucks to deliver slabs
355 compressor

9300 electric welding machines

ter forms to ensure required width of joints
rt hooks

wfoot crowbar

ch gauge

aightedge 3 meters long to check evenness of pavement
e1 brushes

epers to clean joints

237

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 7. paooucnon ENTERPRISES IN AIRFIEID CONSTRUCTION

[Text] 7.1. Bases of Organic Binder Materials

moaning binder materials of different marks and types on asphalt bases or in shops
of asphalt-concrete plants undergo a mnber of mechanical and thermal effects re-
flected in their quality to one degree or another. The processes related to prep-
aration of the binder should proceed with the corresponding temperature modes

while adhering to the established production requirements.

Liquid binder materials (asphalt and tar) and liquefying agents are transported in
special railroad cars or trucks. Railroad tank cars with capacity of 50-60 tons
or more or hopper gondola: with capacity of 40-60 tons (four-six sections of 10
tons each) and also road oilers with tanks having capacity of 3,600-5,000-7,000
liters or asphalt haulers with saddle-type tanks having useful capacity of 7,000-
14,000-22,ooo liters are used as transport equipment. Railroad tank cars and tank
trucks and hopper gondolas usually have heat insulation and devices to heat the
asphalt (steam with coils or live steam, furnace gases and electric heating
elements).

Hopper gondolas for passage of steam have double walls with distance of 40-50 mm
between them.

If the temperature of the viscous materials is 80-90’C upon arrival to the unload-
ing point, they can be poured immediately into the asphalt storage tanks. If the
asphalt has congealed, it must be heated to flowability temperature prior to pour-
ing. Liquid asphalts are poured without heating at air temperature above lO‘C,
while it is heated to +40-50'C during the cold season.

when pouring, the asphalt is also heated by steam, which is passed through steam
coils or the chambers of the tank car and to the steam sleeve of the hopper. The

length of pouring and the consumption of steam for heating are presented in Table
7.1. '

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Table 7.1. Time for Pouring Asphalt and Consumption of Steam for Heating

      

2 [and Gwyn. arms, easy!
(8)

(4) "us were are
Ileana-near ease as It.»

lzlmkryu _

1 (4) Page. naps. "In. IO- (.00
H 7-" “Puma"... (s, I! MRSMIWIM‘I

  
   
 

 

we» emu .£§é‘ I ”L73“ memo. ( _”~").I:I,:N
(so- 1) eat-rm
HMS?) 2-3 93% - <l 50(Ill'o4) sa
Jleto (10) I— -- B—IO <l To ate .
_ . 40-60
Ocean» (11) 3—4 no no <I no
3mu(12) 2 — '5—20 13)
Key:
1. Season of year 8. Steam consumption when pouring
2. viscous asphalt from railroad tank cars (50-60
3. Liquid asphalt, tar and meant tons), kg/hr
4. Length of pouring, hours 9. Spring
5. Consumption of steam, kg/hr, when 10. Sumner
pouring from railroad cars 11. Fall

6. Tank cars (50-60 tons) 12. Winter
7. Hopper rail cars 13. Up to

14 . without heating

Asphalt storage tanks are of the closed type. They should be protected against
both outside and ground moisture by installation of special buildings or
suspensions.

Asphalt storage tanks are equipped with a heating system (steam. gas, oil or elec-
tric) and asphalt pumps.

7.2. Asphalt Concrete Plants

Asphalt concrete plants for preparation of hot and warm asphalt concrete mixtures
should be located from the placement point by a distance so that the time of trans-
porting the finished hot mixtures does not exceed 1.5 hours and that of transport-
ing warm mixtures does not exceed 2-2.5 hours.

Asphalt concrete plants are divided by arrangement into rail (Figure 21), on whose

territory there is a railroad siding and facility plants located near the airfield
under construction.

Asphalt concrete plants have been equipped in recent years with heated storage
bunkers for temporary storage of the finished mixture, which permits a reduction

in the time required to find transport equipment for loading and thus makes it
pessible to reduce their requirement.

There are two plant schemes in the deployment of machines and equipment at the

plant--t0wer and pit, determined by the layout of saving the materials in the mix-
ing plant--vertical and horizontal.

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1)

flu/arm I

 

in] c:()[::] mum :

Figure 21. Versions of Production Lines for Preparation of Asphalt Concrete
Mixtures: Version 1--arrangqnent of asphalt-mixing equipment
without teed unit: Version--arrangement of asphalt-mixing equip-
ment with feed unit: 1--railr~oad siding: 2--receiving device with
hopper at railroad: 3--storage area for fractionated stone mater-
ials: 4--portable conveyer; S--radio-stacking conveyor: 6--silo
mineral powder storage depot; 7--closed atphalt storage area: 8--
equipment for preparation of surfactants or polymer-asphalt
binders: 9--asphalt-mixing equipment; 10--conveyer belt; 11—-
hopper; 12--feed unit: 13--£ront loader

Key 2
l . Version

Asphalt concrete mixers are divided into two groups--periodic (Figure 22) and con-
tinuousuby the principle of preparing the mixtures, distinguished from each other
by the methods of proportioning, loading and preparation of asphalt concrete, as-
phalt mineral and other types of mixtures.

Industry produces asphalt concrete mixtures and equipment of several types.

The main specifications of the production equipment used at asphalt concrete plants
are presented in Tables 7.2-7.11.

the working temperature for heating the asphalt is taken from the data of Table 7.2
with prepared asphalt concrete mixtures, the time required to mix the mixtures is
taken from Table 7.13 and the tewerature of the mixture when it canes from the
mixer should be in the range indicated in Table 7.14.

240

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 22. Process Flow Diagram of 0-597 Asphalt Mixer: l--feederp 2-.ele-
vator for cold materials; 3--drying drum; 4--dust-trapping unit;
Suburner: 6--hot elevator: 7--screens 8--mineral powder elevat-
or; 9--hopper for hot materials: lO--weighing hopper; li--two-
shaft blade mixer: 12--asphalt pipe with nozzles in mixer; 13--
surfactant proportioning device: l4--aspha1t proportioning device

The activated mineral powder is prepared at special plants or in separate shops of
an [Asphalt concrete plant] (Figure 23). Production of activated mineral powder
includes the following processes: drying the crushed material in rotary toasters,
heating the asphalt and surfactant to working temperatures and preparation of ac-
tivating mixture from then, proportioning and mixing of dried crushed stone with
activating mixture in any type mixers, delivery of. the mineral material coubined
with the activating mixture to the crushing unit and crushing of it to activated
mineral powder and delivery of powder to storage hoppers or to warehouse. 'lhe
crushing units my also include humor or roller breakers for preliminary crushing
of limestone prior to drying.

To produce activated concentrated gravel, the A32 is pre-equipped with special

units for crushing and preparation of the activating mixtures included in the over-
all prOcess flow diagram for preparation of the asphalt concrete mixture.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7.2. Sets of Production Equipment to Prepare Asphalt Concrete Mixtures

   
   
 

II- um”. I- I' III sunny-I
Inlmlj

“MY-3 ‘I-M'u! l-Iﬂ-J

 

‘13-“ I II-Sﬂ-I l l-ClI-l

 

 

     

 

2
muommmnu‘umonu nguzlm- I2 '15 I 50 50 III) III!
1:. III
Tun noun-mu (3) (£29!- "9 Seaaupyc- (.‘Islzumuapuuﬂ 229e-
(7) ammo. (~qu - (amp.
ooulan non-mm“: (8 -
nexrpnamrucnoi. u l’ a» N0 :llﬁ 3M «0 4m
mvmyularpﬁatead. mp 40 51.5 I46 HG I‘m an
mam; tom-mun. "I1 (10 ”7.5 3'20 550 551) IMO I'll!)
Man‘a maniac-"a. v (11 40 87.5 ”0 I20 I65 W)
Pawn-u unuuum u! Imm- 25X” 40x27 40x20 43x30 60x40 00X“)
ncun. u (12)
Curm- uummcu‘ra. (13)
(14)
I Armat nmnon-nuu- {1019 11-581
ms "Mum u um:
KMu-m‘um arpcramu n | | l I 2 2
I mum-one. un. (15)
2. Arm-rat AM cymxu (311' [1065 11-538 11-620 [L646
uatpcna moon: a twin
Konmeﬂm apes-non u | | | n u I

ununmvc. ll". (15)

7
3.1mm.“ cuccunnuug) new 11.539 11.4w) 11-6I9 m; M 114347
me-cecuo "Ix-tam. n | 1 | l 1 l
mmnmtc. Int. (15)
(18)

4.1mm" lplllﬂlll u 110- 11c.“ 11.59. ;;.5o| 3059' 11059 11.59.
mponannn unuqnmnm

aopomu
Mum-no :u rut u g . I
unnunexvo. utthlST I I l
S Amer." «upon 64%.? _ “.592 11-592 [1‘55” ll-M! ll 5‘»:
l IPIIIHIUIII!
KMu-Iccmo annerarm . _ ' l l .2 2
uounmre. m. (15)(2
0
6 Atperu (m‘lnonunannu __ 11-50“ ".5” 11-6”! 11-649 11-04%!

a uarpru (miyul Iln pa-
Oouci "mu-min»:
Kmu-Icuno upctuo. u
nommrc. IIII’. (15)
(21

7 O’mmamu «mull . . . . ~ 9 J.
pummmm Jauata ny- AC 65 ﬂ 59‘ 1159‘ 1159‘ ll 5 ‘ 11 m

In
Kmuunwm mu u . .
mum". u". (23) l I I ' z 1

[Continued on following page]

242

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7. 2 (Continued).

Note.

Key:

. .-

 

 

 

 

"”“"‘.:.?.‘,'.'.‘.""""" nc-s um nan-I um am: am
2 )
'B.Odotpeneun um. — 11-695 11-595 [L595 1115 11-395
All! XPIIICUIII I MIMI
amnoro manna
Konmecuo «acm- - l I l I
IOIIIIMI‘I’C. m.
(24) 25) .(26)
mea pscnoaoneun an up"? bllﬂl- nanny Bauwn- Bnmu- "aprop-
neran . In an an an an nae
Tun cuecuteaa (27) 23) Mansion-mm area-en Nonpr-
pal-no-
l I I |
_ cuun

All equipment has autonated control.

Indicators and composition of units in set
Productivity of set, tons/hr

Type 0! set

Mobile

Redeployable

Stationary

Total output

at electric motors, kw

or electric heaters, kw

Fuel consmption, kg/hr

Mass of set, tons

Overall dimensions of sit for set. meters

Composition of set

Crushed-stone and sand feeder-proportioning device unit
"tuber of units in set, pieces

Crushed stone and sand drying and heating unit

Mixing unit

Mineral powder storage and proportioning unit

Asphalt heating unit in storage area

Unit for dehydration and heating of asphalt to working temperature
Heated tank of asphalt service reserve

Nunber of tanks in set, pieces

Heated tank for storage and consumption of liquid fuel
Layout of unit

Pit.

Met

Npe of mixer

Periodic operation

Continuous operation

243

FOR OFﬂCIAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7.3. Sets of Mobile Automated Production Equipment for Preparation of
Asphalt Concrete and Other Mixtures

 

 

  

Xo'olnpucn-a a mun nun-name 1619 16-95 Iii-IRI
(3 4
Tan (2) Hepuonuecuoto nehcnun Ilcnpcpuo-
uoto menu-
I".
"pouaooaumum 7/1 25 w IN
061:" ycnuouemcu 7931mm». .37: ( )
nempounranm ISO 262.2 M6
mnpouorpenm (8) 55 I5I.6 I94
Pouoa tonnnu noun-tumult. xrls (9) 300 530 I000

Heoéxoauuuc pannepa Iuouum u: «”le 43.5XI73 MIX”
toluene (10)
Aryan nmmul (Indus. mos): (11)

up" (12) 11019.5 11C-587A-l 110- I20

m. ,I
3 :I 4

11079.2 11095.2 llC-l 19
110193 11095;! llC-l2l
uuoxssoo IMX 7000 2200x0000
333 00 90

cacao Oynuwoo (13) 14
Amt" cyumnuuﬂ c numr‘emzueu:

II. ”1(12)

”new X was. In: (15)
-ycrauoueuuu nouluocn. KB? (16)

A It .uecnmaul ammo. ne-
muoﬂ: (1'73"
Iapn [KC-79.4 11096.4 110122
taxman no ntpyaxe. Ir (18) 600 900 2309
6H 68.5 91.0

ycuuoummu sou-lot". I3?
Amer" wan‘cnn u ”upon-Im- I“?
pauuom nopomu:

Inm- 11019.8 11079.8 110130

um tpaucnopmponnnl (20) (an)
21 (22) "muavmuu
0.3”" cunocnoﬁ 6mm mm 6"”), 15 W 20
Arperat (mtyuomniubwﬂ: (23)
aapn llC-l1 IKE-649 llC-M‘J
(ll-50M)
upmimnuvnmocn m (24) 3 lo I0
Ilncupua. oOotpcucnu an pacnonuoso 11065.7 IlC-‘J‘I nc-umo:
unoca Mryu (II-649)
Ban Ml "unto Iona-ma (adv-menac-
NNI‘): (25) . .
unpxa 11-595 Jl(.-95.!. [IL-95.5
npoumonmlmorn. "In 600 Hm I400

(anonpoooorm)
ﬁyulep amnion cmcn (uauouunu‘m: (27

«non nonla 11995.4 [KI-m
"mum". r (28) I2.5 I75 '00
Kara-Inn onepnopa c uyauou y42094-
Ill:
up“ 11019.9. I IlC 435.9 110 79 9.]
VIC-65.9 2)
mm "Gum. u’( 30) a 6.6 6
Key:
1. Characteristic and composition of set 3. Periodic operation
2. Type 4. Continuous operation

[Key continued on following page]

244

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page}:

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Table 7.

Key:

0

e

\IO‘U‘QUNH
.... .

Productivity, k/hr

Total established output, kw

or electric motors

of electric heaters

Maximum fuel consmption, kg/hr
Required dimensions of site for complete set
Feed (crushed stone or sand) unit

Mark

leber of hoppers

Drying unit with dust separation
Diameter by length, mm

Established output, kw

Mixing unit with blade mixer

Load capacity, kg

Mineral powder storage and proportioning unit
hype of transportation

Volume of silo banks or hopper, m3
Pnetmatic

Asphalt melting unit

Heated service tank for asphalt reserve
Liquid fuel tank (heated)

Finished mixture hopper (storage)
Electric heating

Capacity, tons

Operator's cab with control console
Cab area, m2

4. Crushed Stone and Sand Peed-Proportioning Device

____________________—.—_

(1)

llmnlul (2) "9

____—————————-

06qu cuxocu. 6yuxcpne arpcra'roo. u‘ (3)
Bum-muons oaunl cesium Mum-pa. u’ (1)
llpuonmnmnhmn amampa-nnutcnn. II' It: (5)
)‘nauoanrunan unmnocn uextpoanurarcm. :81 (6)

Man-a «Verna. 1’ (7)

Indicators

0-587

'notal hopper capacity of units, m3

Capacity of one hopper section, m3

Productivity of feed-proportioning device, m3/hr
Installed capacity of electric motors, kw

Mass of unit, tons

245

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

2L!
5.:
2.l6--
14—"
7,!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7.5.

--.._— . _ _._.- _—

(2)

 

 

       
 

      
       
   
 
    

 

Crushed Stone and Sand Drying and Heating Units

 

 

   

 

     

    

 

 

Ilwlamnunauons upnrlgaulu'cm un- 10—12 25—30 45—00 4515)
c mun o . ‘l'
¥czm=::'?cr:n;:;canc 63mm": no 9!}- I25 us ”5
we. Irlu' u r (4)
Panncpu cymunsnorn (urn nan: _
Anna" nap mm“ um ”00 um um
uni-.1341: (6y) ‘5) 500 6500 851!) um
om». u' (7 5.5 9.7 2L3 20.3
Pacxon may". urge (3) Is! 2m 4m ”00
Tm: oopcyuuu (9 (lam-yum,“ union nmnnn
Mom-com ”amen-munch, x8! (11) - .5 61.8 ’7J,5 I I903
Macca arpcun. 1' (12) l0.3 l2.8 11.! 45.4
Key:
1. Indicators 6. length, mm
2. Productivity with 5 percent moisture 7. Volume, :13
content of mineral material, t/hr 8. Hunt consunption, kg/hr
3. Specific moisture tension of drum, 9. Type of nozzle
kg/m3-hr 10. low-pressure air
4. Dimensions of drying drum 1].. Output of electric motors, kW
5. Diameter (outside) 12. Mass of unit. tone
Table 7.6. Mixing Units
093m- | Luz-65 new | IMO I AM!
(2) 53 I’ll
"poumonutenmncln ropuc- 20 34 - .
m ”mam a, 1’ u 3
nponnonmzumn rpo‘xo? 20 36 50 no
K n, 11': (4) 1 1 1 1
0 women cut . . . . .
[lot-1:09 Ann unnepanm‘é) ARM-3YM Mlllﬂmlb )l 677
unepunnou (7) £3! 9)
Tun nonacmoﬂ uclunnu ‘6) noplulolman )1” man.- I euprpun-
mm mm) Ilean-
IIII
Maura sum. ”(10 240 GOO I'lm 3400
Hunt IL'II any... (1 ) HEN-500 [”47
Momnorvh ﬁzwnnnmrc. — 4| 5‘! I42
non. xlh J
nun-munch. IlaKOIIIlIr.}-I?- 4.5 8.0 N." 20.0
32. Syn-mp: mm.“ “c. -- 26.6 — 43.0
Man-a. ‘I (14)
Key:
1. Indicators 4. Number of screens
2. Hot elevator productivity, t/hr 5. Proportioning device for miner
3. Screen productivity, t/hr materials
[Kay continued on following page]
246

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

6.

8.
9.
10.

Type of blade mixer 11. Asphalt pump

Portion 12. Capacity of electric motors. kw
'mo-shaft 13. Capacity of. hot mixture storage
Continuous operation hopper, tons

Haas of batch, kg 14. Mace, tone

Table 7.7. Mineral Powder Unite

mm | A... l m.
. (2) as 20
Eﬁlﬂﬂﬂéﬂié" .321? If '(3) 2’s :0
Mommas uvxtponamateun. I87 (4) 44.5 0.4
Mac“. 1' (5) 1.5 5.0
Key:
1. Indicators 4. Electric motor capacity, kw
2. Unit productivity, t/hr 5. Mass. tone
3. silo bank capacity, m3
Table 7.8. Heating-Pumping Units
(I; .
"nann- | am: l-M-2
llpomnnamenmlocn npu nmpcle or IO no 90121! 3 0
IIIKIMK'II 5%. 11%
Packun nnpa up» Manama H urtlcn’. II’I'I (3) 280 £30
"menu-urn unrpcna. u' (4) 50 75
lllmnnnnuwnmlocn ("yum-r0 llama. ﬂu (5) H M
Mumuutn ueuponnnrawn. m1- (6) 6,5 5,5
l'abapntuuc pauucpu (uuupumxuuuaxaucora). 11(7) 16x2.6x 2.6x2.6x
' x056 M0.”
Matte, r (B) 2.3 3.1
Key:
1. Indicators 4. Heating surface, 1:2
2. Productivity when heating from 10 5. Asphalt pulp productivity. t/hr
to 90° and moisture content of 5 6. Electric motor capacity, kw
percent, t/hr 7. Overall dimensions (width x length
3. steam consumption at pressure of x height). meters
8 kgf/cmz, kg/hr 8. Mass, tons

 

 

 

The granulometric composition of the mineral mixture is regulated by the operating

mode of the hammer breaker.

of asphalt concrete consisting of the required amount of crushed stone, artificial

I

247

FOR OFHCIAL USE; ONLY

The operating mode of the breaker is practically main-
tained in which the crushing product is a finished mineral mixture for preparation
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

    
  
   

 
   
   

    
       
 

Table 7.9. Asphalt Melting Units
Emmi.” 11-338 I A-III I I“! | [um-I2 I nous-n
(3) ' 4 ' "‘
Tun "pet-nu) Henpcpuuoro mum» l-leépo’wmo- mm...
to nu nepn- om ul-
oauecmro mm
7 nun
npuumm ‘31- n mum‘s )caoe B noauou o6uue tom
on aunapn- l (8)
um: um
on any” (10) (ll) 12 ‘13}.
an muouocn- C rue-nu C pwauuomo-Iom- o- C u put -
1e" (9, mam-cu mum-u wyouwuu otpoaou mu two.-
(3 16. uni-puma- c any Mﬂn’potll- unmoun-
‘ nun n c uynnuuea runs: In Ao-rpnueuun ml ran-m
mou- uoauureuwuu unwo-
und warping)- (c mo.
non
Pam-In lug-4) M
"norm. .1- 16)
ocuoanoro 8500 "300 291!” .006 at (ten mom
a nun-
(15) Oman”) I" 30000)
pxxu‘ux 30000 (11- 30an thx3 “5le 40200“
nono- ( ”(2') (Ian 3) (Mn 5) (an 2) (no 3)
un
Venn-ad”) (19) (19)
nuance-n.
x81:
ammo”:- l7.l I95 24 .5 6.5x? 4 6 X 24.0.6
(21 cl
’ 33pm. ﬁg) 176 :39 m lie!
(22) manual
Pacxon mama no 40 no 45 IIn—IUZ Her 26
In W .
"1W5” . (26) (27
"poms-un- 25 3 6 10 23 am (-0- Upon p
tenuous 9t cllllellll cm a: o! 8-
nuonuu (upn 11mm".- 3 51020—241
Maniac-m nu» nu |.3 (ynenwoe
5'5 II name- npu <oemme~ 0.25—0.05
aeogtcso' [no mun on 1/!) 29)
I1 . r u been.
Macc- yluuoo- 9 200. ii! 800 22 000 4 100 mos (81n-
KI. If I I” ml
(28) muo- an
mum-o 10-
(30) -\ uauna)
flown-mac 1625x 8025»! IOSOOX 4150): amxs ‘00
puuepu Ill 2290xl1‘0 2760X3 XMSOOX x2250x (90M) up: (31)
IXBW x2860 we): mun
(1 ‘95) 2 “0 (6:0
IMHO“)
rpyOu) (32)
Key:
1. Indicators 4. Continuous or periodic ope:
2° W130 of unit 5. Periodic operation
3. Continuous operation 6. Working principle of mist:

evaporation from asphalt

[Key continued on following page]

248

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

7. In thin layer
8. In total volume of boiler
9. Type of heat carrier
10. with gas heating (heat tube) and with heat insulation
11. with radiative-convective tubular heaters with gas circulation and
additional electric heating (with heat insulation)
12. with electric heating by electric heaters
13. with heat tubes--hot gases
14. working capacity, liters
15. or main unit
16. 4,000 and (heat exchanger-5,000) 15,000 X l (or 2)
17. or service boilers
18. Or
19. Up to
20. Installed capacity, kw
21. Of electric motors
22. of electric heaters
23. No
24. Fuel oonsmption to nozzles, kg/hr
25. Productivity of installation (with 5 percent moisture content and heat-
ing from 90 to 170°C), t/hr
26. 2.3 with “triangle" connection or l.3 with "star" connection
27. Heating time: from 6-8 to 20-24 hr (specific time of 0.25-0.6 t/hr)
28. Mass of installation, kg
29. 29,105 (bank of three boilers for liquid fuel)
30. Overall dimensions, mm
31. With three boilers
32. without flue

Table 7.10. Heated Asphalt Tank

 

 

 

(l) I
ll-uutcn [IN-4 ll-um'mvll [1.311
lhurrvumx-u. nun-"mug?" 2:0 I[pun-$3,!"tonnunwn. (-ntyuuon ”.0
mum-.1. riu (5)
Ilnnncmlc cumuu Naomi G Mouumcn. ~u1onvlumnurnrcna. 5.5
an. nrc/cn’ ulh

.o
H
o

Indicators

Tank capacity, m3

3. Pressure of steam heating system, kgf/cm2
Asphalt pump productivity, t/hr

Electric motor capacity, kw

N
a

'Jlb
es

249

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Table 7.11. Asphalt Mixing Unit
“Alla-I ‘ 11"?" “ Hanna-nu “~77
____________—_____.
Tun yuaumxn (2) (lfmrmgpn- Ilpenmu At‘ﬁloammn mu- loo—100
(Iopllal. Oa- “emu-um nutcpuam.
lutlllil If
a ﬂpcarm (7) Amuponuua 0.6—6.0
ﬂpouaoonu‘ruu‘ I. (no! 26--30 anunusnpymnux aoﬂac
Manon». mme am.- nos. ur
nominammua 3.5 I. Pauon 10mm) (nny- 420—280
til: 7.1). Kl’l'! 9*
Mom-mm. “must: ura- 73
Montana llama-«mom 700 reach. an: (9* )
Micron (ultra oauo- I‘nﬂnpmu yuan 9 n 20.4X8.56X
ro Jaurca). Kr moment "momma". n x9.5
Mag-n ycnuonnn. 1 26.9
(11)
Key:
1. Indicators
2. lype of unit
3. Assembled-separable, tower
4. Productivity (with 3.5 percent moisture content of mineral tutorial). t/hr
5. Cyclic mixer (mass of one batch), kg
6. Range of proportioning mineral materials, kg
7. Range of proportioning activating additives, kg
8. Fuel (mazut) consulption, kg/hr
9. Capacity of electric rotors, kw
10. Overall dimensions of installation in working position, meters
11. Mass of installation, tons

Table 7.12.

Note .

Working Temperature of Asphalt Heating

 

  

(2) Tequyarnu naive-a. "‘3

 

 

(1) __
mm M". ‘2’. mm (42 mm
__________..___—._____———————-
5"“ 90/I30
”"11 60,90 } I30—|50 U0—l30
Bull «M50
rllﬂ Ml“ _ _
rlun 1.101200 } I00 I20 90 no
Cf ”0/200 90—I00 N-Im
CI‘ "VIM __ ._
m 701m } °° 9° ’0 9°
[31' 7||llfl| 10—80 70—“)

The indicated asphalt heating tanperature can be maintained for not more
than 5 hours. The teuperature of viscous asphalts may be maintained no
higher than 80°C and that of liquid asphalt: can be maintained no higher
than 60°C for not more than 12 hours.

[Key on following page]

250

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page] :

 

1. Mark of asphalt 3. without surfactants
2. Heating tenperature, °C 4. with surfactants
Table 7.13. Mixing Time of Asphalt Concrete Mixtures in thread Blade Mixers.
Seconds
(1, I minimum—(u. Nye-teem. T—
l
’ "I"! (3) (yin-n- it’s-nu

——%s)__—__

CMNII, IIPIIHPIIIIPHIM‘ I IIDPII'K‘M ("CIVIL
IIIIII:

net-Ia ‘uv (5) l5 45—60
mnxo- n l‘1iﬂllll' «plum-rm: (7) l5 30—45
upynnmrpnm-mr (8) - 20—30

Notes. 1. The mixing time of sand and tine- and medium-grained mixtures in old
model machines with counterflow motion of materials should be increased 1.5-2-
fold. 2. The wet mixing time should be increased with a reduction of asphalt
content on an increase of the mineral powder content.

3. The wet mixing time can be increased by 15-30 percent when using sur-
factants and activated mineral powder.

4. The mixing time of coarse-grained mixtures in tree mixing mixers is
120-180 seconds.

5. The mixing time of cold mixtures should be 1.3-1.5 times greater than
that of hot mixtures of the same type.

Key:
1. TYpe of mixture 5. Mixtures used in hot state
2. Mixing time, seconds 6. Sand
3. Dry 7. Fine- and medial-grained
4 . Hat 8 . Coarse-grained

Table 7.14. Temperatlre of Asphalt concrete Mixtures men Poured from Mixers

 

 

 

 

 

 

iII-IlI-ﬂ-nlﬂu until. ‘C
m 2 .. —_ —'
«w‘ . Mm... T m... I (.52....
l‘opn'mr (6) lilljl 9mm
mm mm } I-Io-Im I20-- I40
mm mm
7) . , . .
T"""‘“‘ ( a”): {$1522} } IIO no mo I20
lil' minao m-smo .,
CI' ”0/200 ao—-Ilo JUL-am
Xnmmnuc (8) (21' mum no. am
Mr 10/130 90-420 ”0"”
[Key on following page]
251

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Me of mixtures S. with surfactants
2. Mark of asphalt 6. Hot
3. Tauperature of aixtures, ‘C 7. "arm
4. without surfactants 8. Cold

 

Figure 23. Process Flow Diagram of Installation to Prepare Activated Mineral
Powder: l--storage hopper for screening: or crushed stone: 2--
transporter to feed screenings or crushed stone to storage hopper;
3--conveyer to delivery to rotary roaster; 4--drying-mixing unit;
S-- proportioning tank for activating material; 6--conveyer to
delivery material to storage hopper; 7--storage hopper; 8--rotary-
table feeder; 9--ball mill; lO--elevator for activated mineral
powder; 11--distributing hopper: 12--acrewed conveyor for load-
ing transport equipment

sand and mineral powder. The activated gravel crushing products are fed by means
of a hot elevator to the blade mixer of the asphalt concrete installation and are
mixed with the given quantity of asphalt. The finished asphalt concrete mixture is
delivered to a storage hopper or directly to the body of a dump truck.

7.3. Cement Concrete Plants

Cement concrete plants (Team are organized to prepare the concrete mixture in air-
field construction with cement concrete pavement, which may be:

at the railroad, constructed directly near the railroad siding (Figure 24) or
at the facility, constructed in the immediate vicinity of the airfield under con-
struction by the nature of operation:

cyclic using periodic operating machines and batch proportioning devices for
proportioning the components of the concrete mixture and continuous operating
(Figure 25) where the processes of proportioning, mixing and delivery of the fin-
ished mixture are combined in time and preparation of the mixture is a continuous
flow by the operating principle of the production equipment:

small capacity with productivity of 30-40 m3/hr, median capacity with produc-
tivity of 60-90 m3/hr, large capacity with productivity of 120-150 m3/hr and super
large (double) capacity with productivity of 240-300 m3/hr (Figure 26) in capacity;

252

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tower with vertical arrangement of the equipment such that the materials fed
upward to the service hoppers, then are moved downward from the hoppers to the
concrete transport equipment due to gravity flow and stepped with arrangement of
the production equipment in the horizontal plane--one row with another, in the
configuration of production equipment;

mechanized--the main production processes of intrawarehouse handling of ma-
terials and preparation of the concrete mixture are performed by machines and
mechanisms controlled manually and automated--the production processes of delivery
and proportioning of components and modes of mixing and unloading the finished
mixture are regulated automatically--by the degree of mechanization and automation;

stationary--usually located in stationary structures and designed for long-
term operation (not less than three years), standard--located in assembled-separa-
ble type structures with operating life up to three years, and nobilenlocated near
the point of installation of the pavement and designed for short-term use at one
location (from one mnth to one year) by the degree of stock inventory.

Regardless of the type of TsBz, the production process of preparing the concrete
mixture includes unloading and storage of the materials, intraplant storage of ma-
terials and delivery of them to the hopper of the mixing installations, proportion-
ing of the components of the concrete mixture (crushed stone, sand, cement, water
and special additives), mixing the proportioned components and delivery of finished
concrete mixture to dump trucks. The plant contains various equipment, installa-
tions, machines and so on.

Mobile cement warehouses are used to store the cement in mobile TsBz (Table 7.15
and 7.17).

A standardized series of facility storage areas with capacity of 360/240 and 720/480
tons has been developed for large-productivity mixing plants. These storage areas
have two modifications: with delivery of count by a pneumatic cement elevator and
delivery of cement by a pneumatic screw-type pump.

Hopper and semi-hopper cement warehouses do not now meet the requirements placed on
modern cement warehouses. In this regard automated railroad silo cement warehouses
with capacity from 240 to 4,000 tons (Figure 27), Table 7.18, have recently been de-
veloped for stationary and standard TsBZ.

The mixing equipment at TsBz is divided by the method of loading the components and
delivery of the finished mixture into cyclic-periodic (Table 7.19) and continuous
(Table 7.20) concrete mixers. The initial materials in cyclic concrete mixers are
loaded in individual portions and then each new portion is delivered to the drum
after the previous batch has been unloaded from it.

The charge of initial materials, mixing and unloading of the finished mixture are
continuous in continuous concrete mixers.

Concrete mixtures are divided into gravity-flow and forced as a function of the
method of mixing the components of the concrete mixture. In gravity-flow concrete

253

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

um I 7 I i)

 

{- ' ............ ; II.T£n;:‘.+I-~? 9.; -“ ._f .4 .. ...'.'.-.'." . . -,.__
'3' l" ‘E‘éi‘fifwnﬁ .»" ‘ :T’W‘ "i913?"
v ’1 ‘4 ii'ﬁﬁ "‘iiEi-J‘J/ ” ' ~{Ilfijl_;]!'<_h_?fi,_i')

Figure 24. Diagram of Railroad Base for T382 Having Productivity: a--
120 m3/hr: b-—240 m3/hr: l--filler storage area: 2--cement
storage area; 3--conpressor plant; 4--fuel-refuelling depot;
S--canopv; 6--truck traffic routes

Key:
1. crushed 2. Sand

mixers, the materials are mixed in rotary dnns on the inner surfaces of which are
blades. When the drum rotates, the mixture is formed as a result of the collision
of flows of the components freely falling from the blades due to the effect of

gravity .

In forced concrete mixers, mixing is carried out by means of blades moving inside
the body of the concrete mixer than intensively move the mixture.

Concrete mixers are mobile and stationary by the method of installation.

Concrete mixing plants are designed to prepare a concrete mixture from components
delivered from warehouses. Concrete mixing plants contain a hopper section with
devices for reception, distribution and delivery of fillers and cement, a propor-
tioning section for proportioning then and a mixing section for preparation and
delivery of mixtures to dunp trucks.

The plants are divided by operating principle into cyclic (Table 7.21) in which
cyclic (batch) proportioning devices and mixers are used and continuous (Table
7.22) in which continuous proportioning devices and mixers are used.

254

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 25. 88-109 Concrete Mixing Plant: 1--nineral material proportioning
unit; 2--cement proportioning unit; 3--standard cauent storage
area; 4--inclined conveyer; 5--mixer with water proportioning de-
vice: 6--additive preparation unit: 7--belt conveyer to deliver
mixture to dunp trucks; 8--p1ant control console: 9--cenent stor-
age area control console; lo--horizontal conveyerx ll--propor-
tioning devices for cement fillers

7.4. Proving Grounds and shops for Manufacturing of Concrete and Reinforced Con-
crete Articles

Concrete and reinforced concrete articles-~pipe sections, base blocks for sewer
pipes. components of precast manholes and thelweg pits, components of mouth

255

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 26. Diagram of Cement Concrete Plant Based on 'No 58-109 Mixers:
infiller storage area: 2--concrete mixing section; 3--additive

preparation section; ducalpressor plant: Sutruck traffic
routes

Key:
1. Crushed stone 2. Sand

Table 7.15. Specifications of 58-33 (8-753) and 58-65 (8-998) Mobile Automated
Cement warehouses

 

1 I5
II—v‘Sl')‘ l Sgt“) ‘ (Sf... ‘ (2) llama-um
‘———_—_—'—_—_ﬂ')—
"pullInlellll-ﬂalor‘rh nu urn-manual H—la no 11M upueua «menu
nmuc “IO U. m (3 u: “Immature-o-
son I IIIIIIIII Geo
mocnomneaumx
mammal nponao-
autumn-mo
(5) MIN!
Buorumm‘nr
Input-Munro tyne”. 1 (6) 4.5 4.5
manta. r ( ) 95 95
nuepmro mm. 11’ (8) .05 —
llanfmwma lumua ucmumnp‘aa. 50 —
u
H fall war no mpmxnauﬂOi go ._
unlummr MIIRYII, xn'lm' (1 ) 2.5".1 --
'Ifarxon mnyxa, u‘lmm (12) 0— —
nﬁapumm panama. um: 13
mum: (14) ( ) 9800 .4200
magnum (15) .2800 m
mum" ) 800 MM
Mecca. at (f;? 0200 0900
Decayuualloamn nopconu, an (18) I I

[Kay on following page]
256

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Indicators
2. Designation
3. Productivity by given length of 100 meters, t/hr
4. For receiving cement from cement haulers and feeding of concrete mixing
plants with productivity of 30 m3/hr
5. Capacity
6. of receiving hopper, tone
7. Of silo, tone
8. or chamber-type pump
9. Greatest length of cement line, meters
10. Including that along the vertical
11. Air pressure, kg.’/c|n2
12. Air flow rate, m3/min
13. Overall dimensions, mm
14. Length
15. width
16. Height
17. Mass, kg
18. Maintenance personnel, persons
Table 7.16. Specifications of 58-74 Mobile Automated Cement warehouse
~—-—_—ﬁ————__—
Huang;- (2) :3: Ken-£31111,
._a.,____________——_.
nvccrunocn cum: 1’ 25
”msmnurcnwocn paernyn (5) than (6) 0.5—I
P060!“ peapcmeuue o numplle (7) IFICI' (8) I "-3
llutnoat noaun npu purpyue (9) u 5
I} 10s “as no nrpmxul (10) t 15
[Magnum (iii-inns mun. (11) to: 10400
nmpmm (13) z 3%
Magmil‘alﬂlf’) 16) am
I l' I
2':.::;:::°,?.':.°':.;.r:::; :17) us)": moo
Key:
1. Indicators 10. Including vertical distance
2. Unit of measurement 11. Overall dimensions of warehouse
h umber 12. Length
«1. warehouse capacity 13. width
5. Unloading productivity 14. Height
6. Tons/min 15. Mass of warehouse
7- “Otkinq vacuun in tank 16. Without compressor unit
6. Kg/clll2 17. With compressor unit
0. Delivery distance when unloading 18. Kilogrems

structures, small parts and so on--are used in airfield construction.

These arti-

cles are usually manufactured on proving grounds of reinforced concrete articles

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

257
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

Table 7.17. Specifications of Hobile Cement Warehouse with Capacity of 480 Tons
"(islau'n l(2)n::m.e l K a",
___________________—

Summit“ (4) . 1 4:00
nueﬂuuwn Mum llllcll'pllu £5) (7) s 8
Konumtno numepn-Iomon ( ) an. In"
"ponmanmulons no numyue ncueum (8) (9) 11-. 50
Autumn» noun laments (10) " ,0
Baum nonauﬂll) ’ ”45
Pecxoa toanyn npu psarpyaxc (12) '9‘” 3) I’ll" 2
Vacant nausea-m noanyxa npn purpyue. u '2 670
Manna nucvepnu I nutpyucuuou coaolmm (15) (17)."- 4170
B me «an: as «Amns‘cncmm yﬂpohﬂioum ’ 190° .
ua Janmolo on. (139)
l‘alia mum paaucpu:
,3...” (20) ’ '2533
mnpuna (21) ’ ‘ 00°
wona (22) ’
Key:
1. Indicators 12. Air consumption when unloading
2. Unit of measurement l3. m3/nin
3. Number 14. working air pressure when unloading,
4. Capacity kgf/cm
2:. Capacity of one tank 15. Mass of empty tank
6. umber of boiler-tanks 16. Including on saddle-clutch device
7. Pieces 1‘]. Kilograns
8. Productivity in unloading cement 18. On rear axle
9. T/hr 19. Overall dimensions
10. Cwent delivery distance 20. Length
11. Height of delivery 21. width
22. Height
Table 7.18. Specifications of Railroad and Facility Silo-‘1‘ype Warehouses
(1) "warm: I ‘22 "ppm-l can I Ill-Mum. run ‘3)
Bumunocucxug.)r 360 no I700 4M 3d) 7m
(5) 1'10 «o I!!!) '7‘. il '40 480
romnol rpyaoodopot. I? III 82 I96 I? 35
'W- T (6) 5:! ﬁ lui l5 2:!
Ycrauumuuu unm- I56 ISO 244 - '3 0| 6|
:3?" "‘"""°" m m m 291 51 5|
"IIOOJINIII ”cm 36.4 30.4 47.5 7|.S [0.5 "1,5
cut-mo may".
u’llum
Konu-Ierno odeny‘ﬂ) 4 4 5 5 2 2
”macro nepconun.
‘0].

Note. The indicators for six silos are given in the numerator and those to: four

silos are given in the denominator

[Kay on following page] I3

258

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Indicators
2. Railroad warehouse
3. Facility warehouse
4. Warehouse capacity, tone
5. Annual freight traffic volume, thousand tons
6. Installed capacity of motors, RR
7. Highest compressed air flow rate, m3/min
8. Number of maintenance personnel, persons
Table 7.19. Specifications of stationary cyclic Concrete Mixers
(1) -. ' . ..
"mum-Ir.- “SS-3"" .éﬁléﬂ) ‘4‘“. "s u :{Elll'l} “2:11:31
(Mm-u I'Ilm'mrmmmn (Mllilv 5"" 5m .1!) 75“ I'll" 2m"
ﬁmm. .I (3)
“(II-4'“ lulmuuu mun-u. ll'll 3C“ .L'I) .‘Illl l“! mun
"IN'II'JMIJII smumz‘y. m- 7" 7" 7" 7" I2" I50
llll.llll|l|‘l(‘ll. \l‘l ( s
('xnpm‘n. npaulwmu ('\I$t'l)- “L3 ”L? "‘32 IR," '7 '2.“
h- mum-n fmpnﬂnun, nﬂlum.
h‘crnnnnmnun mmunu'nt 1.6 9.| 3.5 I." H.“ '25."
nlh 5) 9
llpunul IMNMIIM u'm-rllnxu. 7) l‘nwnuu-mwlﬂ ( ) lsuu)I-u:‘nI-wauﬁ
unm nag-snails
Ilnlnmlul' nnmyxa n wm.(10)- 5L5 '1."
Kn‘k‘n"
Ilhnnrmn- n mmwunr-w, in II) II) In
nrrlvu' (11)
l'nfmpuumv mun-p", uu(1 )
nan-In ( 3 2600 2670 22m I750 31m 1'“)
mupunn (1 ) 2200 '22!” 2100 am 2750 4200
nun-Ma (15) 1M!) 1’!!!) Hm ”I” 2526 3W)
Macra. nr (16) I370 2:00 I!!!) 1250 mm ﬁlm
Key:
1. Indicators 9. Pneumatic 2
2. Volume of mixing drum, liters 10. Air pressure in system, kgf/cm
3. Volume of finished batch, liters 11. Pressure in hydraulic system,
4. Maximum coarseness of fillers, mm kgf/cm2
5. Rotational speed of mixing drum, rpm 12. Overall dimensions, m
t. Installed capacity, kw 13. length
7. Angle drive of mixing drum, 14. width
8. Hydraulic 15. Height
16. Mass, kg

which can be created as independent enterprises at facilities under construction

or as an integral part of a cement-concrete plant.

The proving grounds are temporary enterprises and are designed only for the period

of airfield construction.
products annually.

259

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

Their capacity does not exceed 15,000 m3 of finished
In this case the work is conducted mainly during the warm season
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 27. Diagram of Railroad Cement Warehouse with Capacity of 2,500-
4,000 Tons: l and 2--receiving hoppers; 3--cement hauler rail
car,- 4--cloeed rail car with cement: Sucenent hauler tank: 6--
air output filter after cement has settled in silo bank: 7--
cement precipitator-hopper above silo bank: 8--upper air chan-
nel; 9--silo banks; 10--side cement unloadera from silo bank:
ll--pneunatic bottom unloader; 12--cenent hauling truck: 13--
bottom air channel; l4-—pneumatic cement unloader: lS--cenent
delivery hopper: 16--pneumatic screw-type pulp

Table 7.20. Specification of Continuous Concrete Mixers
_—__—_—-_—————’_——__—’
‘3)
)

“$1.1":- lam 099' “#5 C571 2"ﬂg,‘

 

 

 

   

   

3) ,- . .
ll un‘unn-mmmm. v'I-I a In .I) 60 m
Ilmxmmnnﬁ mun-p xpymmm meg-I’M" 4" 70 7|) 1" ‘20
"an. In
. MMIIllm'h. mtuvmnnumveaﬂ, any (5) 4 7 20 40 «I
I‘am nmuv .um- u, \m: 6
IEmma (9 p ( ) 'uno 3M0 41.15 am ”65!)
umprua ( ) 6‘)? ”no 1655 ‘22“) 2am
Imam ‘9) I 25‘" I W '2 4')" I “I“ 5670
Marco. «I (10) G70 9:!) 3! ”5 5!!!! mm

[Key on following page)

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IM. USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page):

1. Indicators 6. OVerall dimensions, m
2 . Gravity- flow 7 . Length

3. productivity, m3/hr 8. Width

4. Largest size of coarse filler, mm 9. Height

5. Capacity of electric motor, kw 10. Mass, kg

Table 7.21. Specifications of stationary Relic-Me Concrete Mixing Plants

(1)

 

 

(:54 cl: 1 mm:
"'u “If .- menu» a: nut» l «mu In
|hummuum-.u.uwn.. at“: (2) 36—38 72—76 I5
.Vl'lmlulnrlulau uomnm-n. army-Lfanla- M L11 «15.9
.nw'l. nlh (4
llunwﬁum-u. n Ham-u mum)“- IM 1 II‘ I 3| 0.5
num.1yxllml_ u' (5)
Mau‘n H‘uummu-M'umn M’mpynnnuumlﬂ 32.3 55 20,9
Mau‘a mum.mmm'n'ymniL u (6) 55.4 96.2 3|.l
lirmmxwrunn. (7)
Tun (8) CB-ll C'IB-Il c-mn
((3.302) (L. :urz)
KIIMI'II‘I Inn (9) 2 -l 2
llun-mmu-n. no cup) "5!, .I (10) .200 '20" 500 ‘
(Mu-u mlmmm \nun'a. a (11) mm N!) .130

l. Indicators

2. Productivity, m3/hr

3. Installed capacity of electric motors, kw
4. Need for compressed air per cubic meter of product, m3
5. Mass of production equipment, tone

6. Mass of assembled steel sections, tons

7. Concrete mixer

8- me

9. Number

10. Charge capacity, liters
11. Volume of finished batch, liters

of the year on open sites. The warehouse, reinforcement, mixing, shaping and ther-
mal-moisture assemblies are created on the proving ground, on which all production
processes are performed, beginning from reception and storage of materials and end-
ing with storage at articles and loadizg them into transport equipment for delivery
to the work production site.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7.22. specifications of Continuous-mm Plants

—__—T)' ' "—————

“unan- C511

«(z-m, c515 arma- (mm

   
 

 
 

 

I'Ipumnnnun-Julmn, u'lu 30 :n m l2!) 2")
KOJII‘IH'TOU Wan-mi .Iannmlntc- I
Mi: (3)
mum (4) l I I I I
turf-em. (5) :I II .‘I II :I
Bun-rumor". [mm mu (mm--
pun. -u' 6“
"enema (7) I“ M -m -I0
:mnuanunmﬁ (8) ' ) l2 I2 70 75
"nut-Minus“ pmmep mmum‘a- 40 40 70 40 40
. an'n. ill (10)
[Ksﬂxm'l'n "punmnuncuon cue- (11) llo. com-(- in 50
M. c
ﬁrm-«Immune umunorn. («-1 32.2 37.5 57,3 lit'n 155
nun-.12 «rm-urn). xlh ( 2)
rnfmpuruur pamrpu. MM (13)
,uull.n(14) an no menu :Iﬁﬁm «(no snow
Immune {15; 61'.” SI '250 4“” II III) 3m
mum. 16 840) I250" I'IIllI ”WI 2."!!!
Mu-ru. ur (17) 23!!" 28350 iIiIIllI mm
Key:
1. Indicators lo. Stiffness of prepared mixture
2. Productivity, m3/hr 11. Not more than
3. Nunber of filler fractions 12. Installed capacity (without
4. Sand cement warehouse). k"
S. Crushed stone 13. Overall dimensions, am
6. Capacity of service hoppers. m3 14. Length
7. of cement - 15- Width
8. Of fillers 16. Height
9. Largest size of fillers, mm 17. Mass, kg

There are three main methods of manufacturing concrete and reinforced concrete
articles: bench, unit-le and conveyor (Figure 28).

with the bench method (Figure 28, a), the form and the article mufactured in it
are located on a bench during the entire period of producing it and is not moved
anywhere. All operations to manufacture articles--installation of the reinforcing
body or frame. placement of the concrete mixture, packing. heat treatment of the
article and removing the form from it--are carried out with equipment which is
mved directly from one form to another. The article is saved to the finished
product warehouse only after the form has been remved.

with the unit-flow method (Figure 28, b), the machines and devices for manufacture
of articles are fixed at special stations, on each of which a specific production
operation is perfomd. while the forms are moved from one station to another by

means of hoisting-transport equipment. mlike the bench mthod, the articles are
eat-treated in special evaporation chaubers rather than on the form site. The use

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 28. Methods of Manufacturing Concrete and Reinforced Concrete Arti-
cles: a--bench: b--unit-flowx c--conveyer- l-~bench--2--fixed
forms (posts) with articles; 3--movement of articles with forms
removed to finished product warehouse; 4--mobile production
equipment by means of which all operations are performed; 5--
forms moved from one station to another: 6--chamber for heat
treatment of articles: 7--stations for removing forms from ar-
ticles; 8--direction of motion of articles with forms removed;
9--empty forms; lO--stations for preparation of empty forms for
placement of mixture; ll--mobile pallets-trolleys; 12--chamber
for heat treatment of articles

of this method is feasible at stationary proving grounds with produced product
volume of more than 15,000 m3 annually.

With the conveyer nethod (Figure 28, c), the forms are moved with the articles from
station to station on a closed ring by means of a conveyer. A specific operation
is performed at each station. The chamber for heat treatment of the articles is a
conponent of the closed conveyer moving ring. This method is used at large rein-
forced concrete products plants.

The forms for manufacture of concrete and reinforced concrete articles should be
manufactured with high accuracy. they should be rigid, strong and easy to assemble
and disassemble, easily separated from the article and easily cleaned of residues
of the cement-concrete mixture. Metal forms are nest widely used and they are con-
venient and reliable in operation and have high reusability. The forms are cleaned
with manual or mechanical brushes and scrapers and are lubricated with brushes or
sprayers. Mixtures (for example, kerosene and solidol), an emulsion of spent oil,
cement and water in the ratio l:l:0.3 and so on are used for lubrication.

The reinforcement for manufacture of reinforced concrete articles is procured at
the reinforcing assembly of the proving ground, which consists of a reinforcement

warehouse and reinforcement shop. The reinforcement is manufactured in the rein-
:‘orcement shop at reinforced concrete products plants.

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reinforcement warehouse of the proving ground is a closed building equipped
with racks and different devices to store the reinforcing steel. The reinforcing
steel up to 14 mm in diameter is trimmed and cut on PO-6, AN-l4 and 5-336 machines.
ﬂeavy machines are used to straighten large-diameter reinforcement. The rein-
forcement is cleaned of rust, scale and dirt on special electric machines with
rotary metal brushes.

The reinforcement is welded with different methods: contact-butt electric arc weld-
ing, electric-arc spot welding and electric-arc welding. The most widely used me-
thod is contact-butt welding.

Electric spot welding is used when manufacturing rebar grids and three-dimensional
frames to connect rods from 2.5 to 60 unlin diameter at the points of their inter-
section. Electric-arc welding is used mainly to connect large-diameter rods.

Assembly and manufacture is the final process of reinforcement preparation. Grids.
frames, assembly loops. insertion parts and other reinforcement are assembled from
rods or wire by means of different devices (jigs, racks, benches and so on).

Reinforcement of articles is completed in installation of previously manufactured
reinforcement in the form in precise accordance to the plan and with reliable
fastening.

Articles are formed by filling a previously cleaned and lubricated form with a
cement-concrete mixture and packing the mixture.

vibrators, vibrating forms (for articles from 500 to 1,000 kg in mass) or a vibrat-
ing platform with capacity from 2 to 16 tons are used to pack the mixture.

Concrete and reinforced concrete pipe and also cylindrical components for pits of
the runoff system are manufactured in vibrating forms. The mixture is placed in
the forms by a special concrete placer installed above the top part of the form.

 

Figure 29. Diagram of Heated Bench: l--heat-insulating layer (slag); 2--
concrete base: 3--special layer: 4--heat-protective cap; 5--
hoisting loops: 6--connection pipe for steam feed: 7--articlex
e--form: 9--openings for heat carrier

Key:
1. Steam

The nnlded article should acquire the required strength. Under normal conditions
(at temperature of 20 1 5° C), concrete acquires its design strength within 28
days.

264

INIR‘OFFTCJAL USEZCMVLY
I'UI! 0|- FICIAI. USE ONLY

 

Figure 30. Diagram of Hole-Type steam Chamber: l--oommon concrete; 2--
reinforced concrete; 3--oover: 4--slng; S-—concrete wall; 6--

reinforced concrete slab; 7--oement coupler with reinforcement:
8--pipe for steam delivery

The artificial nethod is used to accelerate hardening of concrete. Concrete is
hardened under these conditions on benches (Figure 29) heated with steam or another
heat carrier passed through openings installed in the base of the bench. The arti-
cle is covered with a heat-protective cap to reduce heat losses.

Steaming is carried out by using saturated steam at tenperature from 70 to 100°C at
relative humidity of 90-98 percent. This steaming is conducted in special steaming
chambers submerged in the soil and constructed of concrete or reinforced concrete
on open sites or in closed buildings of proving grounds and plants.

The chambers are hole type (Figure 30), into which articles are loaded with cranes
through the top, and the tunnel type with articles loaded through openings in both
ends of the chalber.

The mode of steaming the articles usually consists of three phases: the first is
to age the articles with a gradual tenperature rise to the established range (the
length of the phase is 2-4 hours, the second is to steam the article at the estab-
lished maximun temperature (isothermal heating) for 6-8 hours and the third is to
age the articles with a gradual reduction of temperature, which continues from 3
to 10 hours. The highest permissible steam-heating temperature of concrete and
rein forced concrete articles manufactured from portland cement is 70-80'C.

The forms are removed from the concrete and reinforced concrete articles at the
end of heat treatment. After the articles are removed from the forms. they are
loaded onto transport equipment and sent to a warehouse.

The finished products warehouses are well graded and packed open sections of the
proving ground or plant. The articles are stored in the horizontal position in
stacks or in the vertical position using racks in the required cases. The stacks
of articles are arranged so that each of them provides free movement of trucks and
loading-unloading equipment.

Each article laid in the stack should rest on wood spacers, while the bottom row

should rest on pallets. The thickness of the spacers and pallets should be so that
the gap forned by them between laid articles freely adnits the forks of a forklift
or strapping cable. The spacers are arranged strictly along the vertical one above

the other in the height of the stack along the line of the installation loops and
openings or near them.

In all cases work at the storage area should be organized so that the possibility
of cracks forming, corners and edges breaking off or other damage to the articles

during acceptance, storage and delivery of them to the customer be completely
prevented. 265

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

CHAPTER 8. MACHINES USED IN AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION
[Text] Machines for Preparatory Work and Excavation
Table 8.1. Brush Cutters and Stump Rollovers
) _ __ (zﬁE‘T ' '—"__' annual..— a:
1 __-__.__ ._ .____. _ _ _
‘lmnnrm (ﬂan, ‘ ’III .‘I ﬁlly: l ”fl-3:“ | ""11
Balm-m1 TrumpinI--¥--l;l-0.\-\‘ll:ll 'I’ |1|0| III-755 'l-IImM‘H'II 3:30.
10: -u.. .1 c. (5) Ion mo 75 ms I60
[1333.» client-mu £§’ 200—300 ‘-- 300 450 #50
mm. an
012n- umpnna sum 2.) 3000 3600 2 I10 I380 I330
“\I
.\'m.1 ycralmmul "and”? 64 M — - —'
mane. Ipu
anammw (9) (1 ) l'unpanmmmuu-uO)
I'M-alumina]? mop“. In: 7 1!“) 1m" .. 0'10 '. '35“ r. 33"
31'313...(1§) 3 km :1 mu 2 152 3 mo 5; 2m
nun": (14) 1 ) .1150 21250 2300 3N1) .HHI!
Marv:- ( munyalau‘ui I1 42" I7 Ill) IO'IIrD ”mm mm”
lll:::au'\)p;n=:«autumn-X16) 0.! 0.5 0.5 MI 45 [Incl [In 20 met“
r: !-I
Knalvvrrvm .Iyﬁu'n 9:2.) _ ._ a 4 4
"9mm“; .Im nyﬁnounu - - —- 2-"! 400 —
nymﬂl. In (18) I
Key:
1. Indicators 2. Brush cutters
[Continued on following page]
266

FOR OFT-TOM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

 

 

 

 

3. stump removers 10. Hydraulic
4. Base tractor 11. Overall dimensions, mm
5. Output, horsepower 12. Length
6. Diameter of trees to be cut, an 13. width
7. Blade: width of grab, mm 14. Height
8. Angle of setting knives in 15. Mass (operating), kg
cross-section, degrees 16. Productivity, ha/hr
9. Control 17. Nmber of teeth (tines)
18. Extent of teeth submrgence, In
Table 8.2. Bulldozer-Ripper Units
' ' '_(If—_Q3 "
1 . ,- “”537." ‘ . =*.'
“LL"... .5553. ”£521.. un-o: P343” .....“.‘.‘;...
AIL-m: mm:
Han-muf- nmxmp (4) Toll!) M3I'Il T-:3ﬂ TleilKC 1131.250!“
I -I
A|.m......-.... .1. .-. (5) um um um nu ma
Byamuu‘pn-w mupymnlﬁl- un-Iu Ila-rm: 113-27.: 113.1%: 113 an:
(ll-493MULM7C) (11.5:r3(:) ”1.575(1) (11.57213
l’uxaim'nlmm- (7) I "ll-5C Illl-Sl‘. [Ill-5C All-22C llll-DC
\ (8 Ul-5l5C) (ll-mac) |(ll-ruse) 9 III l-25M‘.)
. .u -I - v . - '
M‘Ernngmlnu)¢'I:olmnl.llloc) l0.” ' l0.” unllllt;mmml,;,‘{ ) l9."
pmmmcnun. Kul'l (11)
I'nﬁnpnnlur pm-wpu, mt
.umun (12) 6 350 5 am 61330 x :m u «355
nmpmm 13 39"! :mm 3200 Jam 15-!"
uucorn {14} 5 3069 3'13!) “Ti". 2825 Man
Marta ("mun-.1munmmagl. ISIM l5|m ”900 22710 £183.50
Kl
Key:
1. Indicators 9. Hydraulic
2. 02-353 bulldozer with DP-225 ripper 10. Maximum speed, kin/hr
3. 0-348 bulldozer with DP-9s ripper 11. Overall dimensions, In
4. Base tractor 12. Length
5. Output, horsepower 13. width
6. Bulldozer equipment 14. Height
7. Ripper equipment 15. Mass (operating), kg
8. Control

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. n _ 8: 2.3.3 «3.3
mum: : z n. can 82.. _. 2 23 n _ 9.8; 83.3 2.3
m3... .3. n 82.. 8...» 12 . . an _ $8.. p 33.5

.32 .ﬁﬁsmm. a."
.8985: 0 «Reign

   

I 942 83 can 8:. n _ _.._._.8_.._. 833 8.3
I 32 8% n 82. a on. E43 379.
I 8. z n on 82. n _ 59.8.. .— 2815 2. ma.
Q a "31°.
692.1 m .8398
111.838: 9 982:3
I 8. 2 n n 8:... -n _ .932. u A835 us. mu.
I a 3 82 83 8o... _ E4...— 372.
I 23. a 93 83 z... _ .32; a. d. 03. 2.
I 83 83 .3 82. 83 835.. ow.8?3 «fwd
I 8; 32.. 8»... 92. ... 8.: 833 on. an
I 968 8“ n 3 83 w o8 magma G homo. us. 2..
I 83 32.. 8.. a. 82. Z. 3.27.8.2: 8.3
I 3 can 83 8. o . 8: _ 528...— 680? S u$.mn.

58.63....

.2?! .— sons-S a...»

.5385. o 2..
Mazda n
Table 8.4. Towed Scrapers

 

 

”MK"..- 5.353. 113.1" | (:93, “3:2, n-m:
lino-uh rpanop pm llT~75C2 mum T-Ioomrc 1430.11 1.130”
Bunmuocn route. 11’ (3) 3 4,5 1 7 8
Holman-15.10.“) 15 I30 IQ ISO [60
lina. 1111(5) 4000 530 5600 56M “00
lllupnun peJamun. 9411(6) 2|00 2454 mo 260 ”ID
In)¢'-uu.1 penum- «91(7) zoo 300 .100 350 -
Pa'mep 1mm 8) goo—20 n4. oo—zo moo—20 moo—2411,0045

You. name (9)

rumpmuuc damp" MI: ( 1, (1° I‘mpaulmlm

alumna 6800 7‘25 8185 875 9720
umPnI-a iii?) 3‘“) 2°75 3'33 3'35 3078
1»:va '9” 25” 2660 2600
Mam.” (15) 270° 7” l 1000 9200
Key:
1 . Indicators 9. Control
2. Base tractor 10. Hydraulic
3. Bucket capacity, 1113 11. Overall dimensions, m
4. Rating, horsepower 12. Length
5. Base, m 13. Width
6. Cutting width, mm 14. Height
7. Cutting depth, m 15. Mass. kg
8. Tire size
269

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0005000300554

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8.5. motorized .1' tapers

a

"mm-(:1) ”w”.
‘——'———
_ Bloom-moat xoama. u‘ (2) l5
l‘pysonmmuocu. 1' (3) 21
Kinsman “pays: (4) 4X2
Mom-tons urn-u. n. c (5) 300
Ban. ma (6) 0200
Koacn. ml: (7)
urn-u (8) 2490
uncut-pa (9) 2350
Mauruuanuua cxopocn. "menu-menus. min (10) 45
Tpaucunccua (11) run”.
llllpuna pans”. nut (13) 2926
I'Aytmua , (14) 350
l’nnucp {mm (15) 27—33
Yunnan: (16) ramps.
ranapnmuc pannepu. an: (17)
Mums (18) mm
' mnpuna (19) 3400
mum (20) 3500
Mama (neunynuulmmu). «r (21) 34000
1‘
Key:
' 1. Indicators 12. Hydraulic
2. Bucket capacity, m3 13. Cutting widtl
3. Load capacity, tons 14. Cutting dept]
4. Hhee1 formula 15. Tire size
S. Tractor output, horsepower 16. Control
6. Base, in 17. Overall dime:
7. Track, an 18. Iangth
8. Of tractor 19. width
9. Of scrape: 20. Height
10. Maximum speed, km/hr 21. Mass (operat:
11. Transmission
270

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00050R000500030065-3

Table 8.6.

H”! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lbtorized Graders

 

 

 

 

 

rm- :1 .. .... . I .'._...—.
' lJ-ml'n .:|'.':|.
A‘I'IIIIII‘I'2I)I.. .I r 90 lﬁm
Kn mum. ulptn m (3) IV. 2‘( IX 2X3
rpm. \m 14} 5-200 sano‘
Mum. “H 5 6) ’8'." 2070
“an. Inn unmu Q‘MDINM'II- Ill‘prJﬂllﬂl‘Lll“. MM .37 7
Lu n '
'lmurulluuu 7 (8) \
‘ - Nun-PIN
3:3:4'3'2335 '2 '2“ ”-2"
I mun (11) IMHO .
uurmn (12) 500 ‘01:)"
run ||l‘l.lllll|l, up.” (13) (14) 30-70 30 -70
mutual-nu- mom. nuul-n-ui noun-lum- 250 25"

cm. nu
.Vnpnarnw (15)

Inf-J'uuuur lumqua. ml: (17) I'Iullmun-Iu

,I.Illll.l " I

umrmmuii ; 35a: ;:93

um um 12 2 985 3 ”5

Mm“ I'm-u.“annulmmzm)_ «r (19) 0350 mm
Indicators 11 . Length
Output, horsepower 12. Height
Wheel formula 13. Cutting angle,
Base, m 14. lowering below
Track, mm 15. Control
Maximum speed, Jun/hr 16. Wdraulic
Transmission 17. Overall dimens
Mechanical 18 . width
Tire size 19. Mass (operatin
Blade, m
271

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600030056-3
FOR OFFICIAL USII‘. ONLY

Semitowed Elevator-Graders

—————— ———_-_

 

   

(1) [LI-.1- (ll(-.'|2I:)A| I I V II J',-‘£35) mun-nu."
II-uu-ru was-um“ nut-"1w noun-en mm mm.-
tutu In u- 5 I:
[1|qumumn-mmm‘w. MI?) (5) 630 75°
}lmln.1|¢.1l. "pun-ma yum-n». u uf-cIMJMH.
nus:
“13.10.". (6) CMJl-HK Chill-MK
ummmcw. .1 c. (7) 75 75
Itarumu'u‘ugvsrnu: (8) 'l C
nm . IK'XOMJII .nmumul
Imam-no Jm'un. 1m (12) 10) 800 ( I’M" (uuuguma
Junta) (13)
yum mum-u. Ipn,‘ (14) 3|) “.15 20 -55
114.:n-nuvu. aqlufrummu upvlll'n. ”(15) (16110 9 ll» ”.5
rpm - nplvp'
umpmm .‘Icum. 1m (18) I200 I200
c-ranpm'u. mum-um: Mum, «It (19) 3.6 1,6
num‘lu Mullq'llﬂ, ms (20) JIOO .1400
yupam-uuc (21) I‘Mpmyccnoe ammonium:-

l'afmpumuv panwpu, uu(24) (23)!“11110!

:umla (25) 62M GNP-'-
umlmun 26) 96“) Jill"
norm.“ 7) 4250 3000
Naval. xr (28) 3200 8760
icators

50 (D-347A) to caterpillar tread tractor, class 10 t-f
47AK to K—700 wheeled tractor, class 5 t-f

ductivity, m3/hr

ve motor of working equipment

el

put, horsepower
king mber

e

1:

vol

k diameter, mm
th of grab

ting angle, degrees
1 duping distance. meters
to

veyer

th of belt, m

t speed. m/s

ting height, m
trol

raulic
ctrohydraulic

rail dimensions, mm

gth
th
ght
3' *9 272

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬂ"! (WHCIAI. USE ONIJ

Table 8.8. Motorized Packing Machines (Rollers)

  
  

III-hum- unu-

‘1—5

(1) a
“nonuni- (3). q-
3; 4. fa!
. -:-'-: ‘7‘ 2"!“-
I::* s; 3.2:!

 

(7)

Mar”, 7'
-'-r- IIISIJJRI‘L'I (8)
r 6; hr .
lllul-mml I_\':.'::I"I‘III($\?I?II "0.449)

"l:ll|\llll mum“. \N: (11)
llr m If" (12)

.....r.:;-:-'.':.'.".‘. 9%}...

Cqulll‘ll- urpouumu-mm ar-u

  

' '7;
5

mm, nu -: IL" . , Ph_
1|
Munch-ma mum-um.- III.1l-lu»‘.16 “I
“I‘III:(‘II||:IIUI0!IIIIII’II (17) I" l
Ins-"panmum-mug) 7 III .
_ (- I'm-um 1m: 19) 1" m
[Arum-mm lmml-‘M. uu- (20)
.‘Imum (21 2”!!! 45!!! If?!"
mn'mua (2 ) :00" mm 2H7"
nw'mn(23) 220" mm I Mr!
Key:
1. Indicators
2. Vibrating
3. halo-wheeled 00-104 (D-dSSA)
4. Two-wheeled DU-BV (D-399V)
5. Static
6. Three-wheeled
7. Mass, t
8. Without ballast
0. With ballast
in. Width of strip to be packed. mm
11. width of wheels, mm
12. Driven
13. Drive
14. Output, horsepower
15. Working speed, km/hr
16. Linear pressure of rollers, kgf/cm
17. Vibrating
18. Guide
19. With ballast
20. Overall dimensions, nm
21. bength
22. Width
:3. Height

273

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. 2.7;: |_!Il

ML"? ______

 

 

”cw-tumulnur
.__( )____ _.
a d
a g 95% =.
‘a L: :5 i:
G 9.4 [0.2! II
It IJ IR ll!
Hill) "L's" I?!” I}!!!
mm IMO I2'll
"m, 2.31m? I'lm . .
3.0 m 50 50

1.25; 3.2-3:

3.42 3.26; 5.26;
n.” a,"
.‘u 7.} m In!
-I Inn Jam Gum (ML?
mm IN?! 207" 20m
mm mm .1 2m :1 L30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8.9. Pneumatic-Tire Packing Machines (Rollers)

    

 

   
  

    

 

(1) ‘2) (Lilo-annular “I“ "w u Ins-Terror
“0-4
”ma-Luna uyl_“_\ . EEK-l “ram mun-a

    

“1.33.: ll)

  

(ll-Q5) (II-Imp

 

Muwn, 1" (5)

60: ﬁnnncw‘g; 8.3 I55! 7.?! ‘ 6.28
c (mam-rum ) m 30 25.9 I2!) 25
Ululmun vu mmuvum’u mum-cu. WOO 2220 2620 2200 2530
MM
)luurnu- n- (9) AMA AM-nIA — — —
Mammoth. .1 (‘.(10) (11 9|! L10 -- "' --
Jlunncune sunny“ 1. animal. 3-5.5 3.5-I0 — ll!» 5.!» 3.5 -79
Ilrr'cu' (12) 13 (17)
Cnurun prrynup-mmum unmy llc‘npmumanuuas
1: II Inmmx (15)
Tpanruurnm (14) rumouemmmccxn
(imports Hep-2| m. Ims u-nfm- 7. I2; 110 25' I5 - —
'I.'III). a\l-"I “as 2: (
2"}; 17)
rpulmmpmnu. win (18) — -- 40 — —-
l'nfmpmnm- palm-Ina, Am (19)
Lima (20) 5;“! mm IMHO 5100 5700
unlpmm (21) I970 2890 3045 2340 2H3“)
T u:umn(22) 32m (HID 29.10 IR?" 2000
sr-II ’l . .
fags-nevi:mmclms. In: (24) — — — 250 ”gloom”
Key:
1. Indicators 13. Centralized
2. Motorized 14. Transmission
3. Semitowed lS. Rydronechanical
4. Towed 16. Speed (working), )m/hr
5. Mass. tons 17. Up to
6. without ballast 18. Transport. kin/hr
7. with ballast 19. Overall dimensions
8. width of strip to be packed. m 20. length
9. Motor 21. Width
10. Output, horsepower 22. Height
11. Air pressure in tire<, itgf/cxn2 23. Towing vehicle
12. Air control systetr in tires 24. Depth of packing, m

25 . Tractor

274

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8.10. Inpact Machines

(1) mm;-

‘Ilnsuneau ”‘41”;
J‘Ilgtz‘ﬂ). I: (3) 65
"um a .60 n mun
oIlIIOI'IKIII‘III‘I‘u I?” a L42
llaomau. nmrm. u’ (5) LOG
Burma uonu‘ua mum. mu (6) ”00
llucno yaapon Mum: n l mm (7) l2—I8
Illupnu: ynnumneuon non-rm. an (8) 2500
rayon": ynnmnemll. 5. (9i l.2
faﬁapumuc ”new. MM:( 0)
Ilium I {5, 59m
umpuua 2500
nucon (13) 30l5
Key:
1. Indicators 8. Width ‘
2. Mass. tons m
3. of suspended equipment 9. Packin
4. Of single plate 10. Overal
S. Area of plate, 1112 ll. Length
6. Height of raising plate, mm 12. Width

7. Number of impacts of plate per minute 13. Height

Table 8.11. Sheepsfoot Rollers

 

 

(1) l 111.20 I tum
Iluuvuu (ll-IN) (A6100
- (2,
Ma .1. I
(In. Manama :2; 3 I2
(- 63.1.1110; '
Ulnpuua ym‘mm'ncuoﬁ nonocu, MI (5) 1800 If“)
VAN-hum.- nannnmc nun/lulu. xtrlcu' (6) 50 57.5- 130.0
Illupmla mama. MM (7) (8) IBOO 2600
I' On Irma. am 1m. M'J' , _
. Lukas ‘ 50"} 7h!”
mupmm 10) 2I96 $180
aucma 11) 1300 3.25“
Key:
1. Indicators 7. Width of :
2. Mass, tons 8. Overall d:
3. Without ballast 9. Length
4. with ballast 10. width
5. Width of strip to be packed, m 11. Height
‘ 6. Specific roller pressure. kgf/cm3

275

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8.2. Machines to Install Beds and Flexible Pavement

Table 8.12. Hoes and Soil-Mixing Machines

 

(1) (2) I'm-nth!“-
Ila-nun 1123‘ 2:553.“ 0K: 1101: 'm5 7:5“
“14"!”
(5)—
Xnnunan «51331. [In 520- I‘m-2:131)”; llnuuo-
mourn.“ uncut:
Snouun tpaxmp (7) (9 T458 1.1mm “30.1.12: Comm-team
Mmuunru. aunt-Mean. .1. c. 165 IN H0 3“)
lﬂupmna ooparnonu, u (10) 2.4 2.60 2.50 2.40
rnyémm oOp;.(unxn. ca (11 25 20 20 8—25

C ' I':
(12) ""333-«3'59'355 335) o.u2—o.9s 0.l0—0.76 o.u—o.3l mom—05¢

tpamunpmue (1 6.4 l0!) LEM-41.6
(15)
llupma nmuponmmn, unu’:
Alum“ namyuuu n In 16) -- 6-50 6-50 ”2-405
II
_ .m-‘nmla. mun-In(l7) — . ‘1 HI)
”673:3?153mPH' w (1 ) 104m 14m 1468 um
Mama (20) 2350 30m 3040 3 1m
mnpnna ) 2 950 _ 3 N30 3 073 II R50
Man-a. 1 (18} 12.6 I “.8 ”J 2-H
Key:
1. Indicators 12. Speed, kin/hr
2. Hoe 13. Working
3. Soil-mixing machines on 05-168 14. Transport
(0-3913) 15. Proportioning norms. lug/m2
4. Travel part 16. Of liquid binders and Hate
5. Pneumatic tire 17. Of cemnt and line
6. Caterpillar tread 18. Overall dimensions, m
7. Base tractor 19. Length
8. Special chassis 20. Height
9. Engine output, horsepower 21. width
10. Width of treatment. meters 22. "ass, tons
11. Depth of treatment, cm
276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 8.13. Comm: Spreaders

(1)

III-nun

(2)

Tan nan-um

mnpunl pompmmclml. u (5)

cm Manna-(6)

Hop-In Aoauponamln. xrlu’U)

Cnoyonu uopuuunmu. n1? (8)
c xoaoyuouumurexn 5

 

693 onoyuenummnn (11)

Hmno news-n (13)
3arpyna Gyunopa. linen-pun (14)

‘ . z (17)
faugmlﬁ 1‘33“” nu

Into" (19)
"mm“: (20)
Marta. tr (21)

Indicators

Type of machine

mowed

Semibowed

Spreading width, meters
Hopper capacity
Proportioning norms, lug/In2
Speed. kin/hr

with reducing gear
Spreading up to

Without reducing gear
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8.14. Construction Materials Spreaders

*ﬁf)"

 

“—

 

 

 

 

 
 

c .
than»... (#7:; I .515}; I 11-1315
13) 4
hm (2) Canoxoauun Caumoamgﬂ)” rymnu-
I'll KORNIW "0“ Ion]
"DOM'IIOJHI’PJIHIOt‘no. (5) mam
lip:,).)acnpv.1¢.1cunu xaueumol}ﬁnouu. 75 — 70
(7)
npur pmulrm‘mmnn Inn-rum. Ipnnllu. — 75-4“) --
‘|."I 8)
up" pm‘npv Ink-nun nut-z: u.Iu(n-lnl‘- — 60 -
mm It IIuIIImu-II run'll. I.'l
Mun-Hume n. npm‘nmml fry-twp“, lll(9) 4.5 4.5 3-5
(Int-pawn. ncprJuuAu-mm ".m (10)
lmfn'lﬂr "l'" [nu-mun]. . mu mnu‘umui (11 232 6.3
. mn'u mun-m 2
['n A“. tutu.qu‘u-n-uunﬁ u .-..,-..nmga _ «.013 “03 Jlolﬂt
rim“, mrfmw
llLlllI'llII'Illlﬂ'J (13) {MG—3|. 2-” 9
I'm' mavdngyu-pu, ml (15) 7 14*" I"
. . 8000 3800 7870
m Imm(17) 40") JIGII iWI-"D
nurma (18) 2950 3000 30-13
Mat-(:1. hf (19) 9350 SH!” "UN”

1. Indicators

2- W90

3. Motorized on wheeled chassis

4. Motorized on caterpillar track

5. Productivity

6. When spreading grit, m3/hr

7. men spreading crushed stone and gravel, t/hr

8. When spreading asphalt concrete and soil mixture, t/hr
9. Capacity of receiving hopper, m3

10. Speed, Ian/hr

ll. hbrking speed when spreading grit

12. lurking speed when spreading asphalt concrete and soil mixture and crushed

stone
13. Transport speed
14. Up to
15'. Overall dimensions. mm
16. length
17. Width
18. Heighi.

19. Mass, kg

278

FOR OITICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00050R000500030065-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8.15. Road Oilers

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600030056-3

  
  
   
  

 

(1) “——
:..I'O
liven “nun JA‘MM"
lhm'nmnrn. Iuwrrpuu. .l (2)‘ 3500
(".mpurn. m-mzunmvmm. nun-z”)
pafm-ml (4) 3.5- 24.6
lpalwlmpm: :- I'M mu (5) (6) 40- m
ll.mfmu.um mzl gnu-:I'wuxmmu. am INN)"
Illnqmm l nu luncnrruzu-ual, war" I!!!
Ilupwn put .1'u’ (8) ' 0.5—3.0
"mum-Jun. IIu‘TI- unvrn‘pm-m.nru - 840
mm. .1 M Y5)

(Import-II. umpvnn (unyim. rp:-.L .(10) "Jag“! :2 ”3%:
roman --

I'nfnn puruucdzaagu-pu. .\I u. (12)

:1.“ I.

Ilmgn‘ua (14) 33300

um‘nm (15) 2 ‘30
Mar” 1' mm u“ up) mu_ hr (16) 9450

Indicators

Tank capacity. liters

Speed, km/hr

Working

Transport with load

Greatest spreading width, mm

Interval of spreading width, mm

Pouring norm. liters/m2

Productivity of gear-type pump. liters/min
Asphalt heating rate. degrees/hr

Not less than 25 in the range of 76-87'C
Overall dimensions. mm

Length

width

Height

Mass with full load, kg

279

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m’.
(ll-r

3.5-

40 -
4 u

'1
it":

97
2.1

HI
Table 8.16. 0-709 Plant

 

 

 

 

_ (1) "1‘2“ l I! 70!
llpmnmulm- mun-15. I‘uzl) (4) '00
Tm: wan-nun”) Jlonaciuu. ”ny
Mmm-m‘u. u-npn munan-.m. nﬂr(5) mama-g)?! I
Illmlllm' .mcnunona. rm: (6)
IIM‘I’JICM‘ﬂ tpylua {7; 50—100
.14. mmlm lll'llﬂlln 8 2_||
: runny-nu "Mum-m (9) 0.5—4.0
naconm .wt mun-u“ unmyulm u no.1" (10) 0,l—|9
“vacuum". ﬁ)I-xcpa‘lnnn:lrc.-m I'm-ma. u‘ (11) 2.00
"acct-wont. I1)lecpn-unnoulll’mu noromm rm\1|_n(1 ) 2.1
Man-m )cmnonm. 1 (1'3) - 22,0
Indicators
Productivity, t/hr
Type of mixer
Blade, two-shart, continuous operation
Electric motor output, kw
Productivity, t/hr
Of soil feeders
of ceuant proportioning device
of bulk additive proportioning device
of liquid binder and water pulps
Capacity of soil hopper-feeder, m3
Capacity of finished mixture storage hopper, meters

Mass of plant, tona
_-___.. | -
vu}.}-2,.. l m.-I:-: ”mi... I :1- 'I I .22.”,

_._.___.. ._ _ _. _ .____.___._((4_5__
I. . ‘ . .mm-

"m (2’ ‘3’2y322233.1111"l.l'.‘y \umnu'l

llpuu "alumni-In Ho. 15': (5)

[llnpnna \n.l;uuau.u-umi mnucu. n (6)

szm

mo my am

3.03 - 3.0. 3.5. 3.03. 3.5;
3.53 3.75; LII 3.73

TIIJIIIIIIIJ _\mnmmu-um-u mun. ma (7) I‘m-200 30- I50 20- ’50 .10 I50

nuﬁluum II. Ill-“Multan f-yuurpzl. In (8)

)lmu am“. (9)
m! In“. (10)

\lulIullK‘I’b, .1 r.(11)
(Tu-pawn. IIrp-wulm-nml. (12)

pnfuu-mu. vfmm (1 3)

‘lIJIII'l|l|||III.III I\\I'l (16)

(17)

Him-nil tum-ms npmlum n ucxnuluna
MPH-“mom:-

I aﬁnpnnuu- In nun-1m. Mr (20)
.umu- (21)
Ilmpa-u (22)

nun-um (23)
“mu. au (24)

lcators

:rized on caterpillar track
>rized

luctlvlty, t/hr

:h of strip to be spread

:kness of layer to be apraad, m
uclty of recei-ring hopper, kg

)2

Line. meters/min

281

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6000

11-3"?-
421

L7 -7ﬁ

5100

3 I50
30m

I2 200

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

4 Mn 80m mum
. um

yum )[JmZCI [MI

40 50 90

I .6 .‘H I. IR ”'5

(I I - ”.01 [7,!
(1‘ Ema“: humor!)

:05 ("3;“) 5m ”.45

(18)Mnmm-I«w§ u )l'nnpu.

mrlctuun

5 (I30 5 950 7 mu
.1 I50 I! ’30 3 mo
2| I25 2 II!" .3455
I! M M 500 I7 30‘!

Forward

inverse

Transport, kin/hr
Drlva of working then
travel nachanian
Mechanical
Hydraulic

Overall dimensions,
Length

width

Height

Mass, kg
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Conposition of 05-110 Railless Set of Machines

Desiﬂation

For levelling top layer of packed dirt pan
and for finishing profile of binder-
strengthened dirt bed

For pouring any materials of the bed and
the dirt pen in a pile or into transport
equipment

For receiving concrete mixture and spread-
ing it over the width of the pavement

For enbedding reinforcing mesh, first laid
on the surface of concrete pavement, to a
specific depth

For arrangeuent of reinforcing mesh on it
For final spreading and packing of concrete
mixture and finishing the pavement surface
For final finishing of the surface of con-
crete pavement, including levelling the
profile of the paveuent and imparting the
required texture to the concrete surface
For application of transverse roughness
and film-forming fluids

For reception. spreading along the width
and packing of road construction materials
with simultaneous finishing of the pave-
ment surface

8.3. Machines to Install Rigid Pvaement
Table 8.18.
Name of Machine Index
Subgrader (Figure 31) os-loe
Loader-conveyor 05-78
(Figure 32)

Concrete spreader 05-109
(Figure 33)

heinforcenent embedding Ds-102
machine (Figure 34)

Reinforcement truck

Concrete spreader Ds-lll
(Figure 35)

Concrete finishing os-iou
machine (Figure 36)

Film- forming materials IDS-105A
spreader (Figure 37)

Asphalt spreading 05-106
equipment

Trailer (based on MAZ- Ds-lo7

53'! tractor with
capacity of 40 tons)

Table 8. 19.

 

(1)

”noun:-

(7)

Ilpommmnuu:ms. ulcucuy
Moulmnm. hurl-snore unrate-

M. .l. f. (9)

l-Iulniflh umpeauingtnms, u/unn: 10)

pnﬁmns
Ipaucnnpmas .(12)
“human oﬂpaﬁorn. II (13)
(14)Toaumna cac- oopaéonm. ’
Kom. u (16)

Mum. t (17)

[Key on following page]

For transporting the machines of the set

Main Parameters of 03-110 Set of Hachines

up“):

Tdm‘f‘mlél... 3.4.)“.

(s ) Pat-m. .

linem- Ine no...

m...- _ " mum-es Wyo-
ugyuugtn 36$? 7:81}? new; “we?”
at." now“
u: (8) .
oro Ito-menu 600—1000 I: (mm
425 300 400 O1 41
—'8 O-Io 0-)8 0—67
0—54 0—72 0—54 0—67 3:2;
8.1—9.6 -llo 8.6 1.5 (MS—7.6 355—15
'“ Wag {P235 51% ‘ ‘
. - . . — 8.2—9.6 13 —
36.2 8M 34 6.2 35.6”,
\
282

\
e

roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:ontinued from preceding page]:

Indicators

. DS-lOB subgrader with 05-78 loader-conveyer
. DS-109 concrete spreader

. Ds-lll concrete spreading whine

. DS-IO4A concrete finishing machine

. DS-lOSA film-forming materials spreader
. Productivity, meters/shirt

. GOO-1,000 or mre for complete set

. Diesel engine output, horsepower
.sm«,munmm

. Working

. Transport

. width of treatment, meters

. Thickness of treatment layer, meters

. Up to

. Track. asters

. Mass. tons

    

   
   

.
. . 7.
‘|,:. 1

A'.’

L;'

 

Figure 31. 05-109 Subgrader: l--frame-floor grating; 2--frame support arm:
3--ceterpillar track fork: 4--caterpillar track: 5--control con-
sole; 6--hydraulic steering cvlinder: 7--main tram; 8--power
plant; 9--quardraile; 1c «screw conveyer setting indicator: 11-—
screw stop of warm conveyer setting; 12--caterpillar track drive;
11--wing; 14--aide stop; lS--screw conveyer blade; 16--ecrew con-
veyer drive: l7--side cover of screw conveyer: lB--screw conveyer;
l9--screw atop of screw conveyer-hoe setting; 20--acrew oonveyer-
hoe blade; unscrew conveyer-hce drive; 22--eide cover of screw
convever-hoe: 23--screv conveyeu-hoep 24--rod: 25--sca1e; 26--
pointer; 27--aupport

283

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

I) . .
‘.,-v““:"'

LI 1 4r ‘ «3:53:

-5: .-_.--~-—4—.'\.$-.-- .‘n . - " - " . . . I

Figure 32. 05-108 Subgrader with 05-78 loader—Conveyer

 

Figure 33. 05-109 Concrete Spreader: l--contrul console; 2--screw conveyer-
hoe setting indicator; 3-—raceiving hopper of conveyer; 4-—frane
support arm S--caterpillar tracks; 6--conveyer frame.- 7--etear-
ing control rod; 8--extensible conveyor unit; 9--screv conveys:-
hoe drive; lounain frame; unscrew stop of blade setting: 12--

power plant

Suspended equipment installed on any motorized chassis of a concrete spreading com-
plex (OS-5028, 05-5038 or 05-5048) is also used to cut transverse joints in har-

dened concrete. The suspended equipment is a guide beam with all mechanisms for
cutting joints with productivity of 350 meters/shift of joint up to 60 m deep.

The guide beam serves as a track for movement of two carriages on which the cutting
disks are instalied. The carriages move in such a manner that each of then cuts

284

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UPPILIAL USE. ONLY

 

Figure 34. Ds-102 Reinforcing Mesh mbedding Hechine: 1--working mesber:
2--bodyx 3--workinq member steering wheel: 4--travelling form;
S--wheel; 6-—vertica‘. support: 7--thrust beam; 8--bracex 9--

stop on frame of working Mnbers of concrete spreading machine

the grooves of the joint to half the width of the pavement (from the edge to the
axis and from the axis to the edge) with the disks located on it while moving at
the same time. The output of the working electric mtor is 10 RH and that of the
power plant is 27 kw. The mass of the suspended equipment is 2,485 kg and the
speed of the machine is 2—2.5 meters/min.

A small motorized single-disk cutter, which is a motorized machine with self-con-
tained internal combustion drive engine (SD-15 two-stroke i ernal combustion motor
with nominal output of 15 horsepower), is also used to cut trol joints in har-
dened concrete. The cutter is moved in the working mode fro ”i mtor through a V-
belt driw, which also rotates the disk and the centrifugal water pump that feeds
the disk water-cooling system.

The cutting depth is regulated by a steering wheel by changing the position of the
rear wheels with respect to the drive wheels.

Joint-sealing machines. 05—501 and 05—67 joint filling machines are used to fill
the grooves of joints with asphalt-polymer and asphalt—rubber mastics.

The DS-SOl filling machine is a boiler with capacity of 50 liters for the mastic
in which a heat pipe is installed. not gases created by a burner pass through it.

285

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
e--overall view hwdiaqrmn

2--pover plant: 3--hydraulic
--oontrol console; 7-—

unit; 8--working nerber frame; 9--travelling

- lO--rocker been setting indicator: ll--deep

tor; 12--ectew conveyor; unscrew conveyer
tor chamber; lS——vibrating bean-proportion—
l7—-secondary rocker beam;

systems tank;
vibrator control
tom (side form).
vibrator drive genera
blade: l4—-deep vibra

ing device: 16--priuary rocker beam:

18--sole plate

aft driven annually is

mounted on a carriage. A four-blade eh
There is a thermometer to unsure the mastic temperature

filled with mastic through a special nozzle and the
is controlled by a tapered needle valve.

All the equipment is
installed in the boiler.
in the boiler. The grooves are

rate of delivery of the mastic

is moved by hand during operation.

The pouring machine

286

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.iqure 36. DS-lOdA Concrete Finish'ng Machine

 

Figure 37. DS—lCSA Film-Forming Materials Spreader

The 05—67 pouring machine is mounted on a (Ml-452:) truck and has a tank with ca-
pacity of 330 liters for the mastic. It is equipped with a system for heating the
mastic and mixing it and with a compressor for cleaning the joints with compressed
air. There is a tank having capacity of 25 liters and one for priming the walls
of the joint with capacity of 40 liters to fill the grooves with lrastic.

They are moved by hand. The productivity of the pouring machine is approximately
‘.':)C running meters of joint per shift.

287

FOR OFHCML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

f5... .2 ....E+:c 155.6 a 521.51: .

">8—

..uozomouuo: an. 03% nouauocom 5.73.. v.3 u..\~s on" «0 3.3558,. .55}. 98%.. «o 9.208. 05
no «.0st uguuu .53.}. no.0 no 0023 a an .9238. mﬁlt 533 oeuuaoumu ouuuco 05 0... 059.6 033m
a 9.0:. @590... .4083... ocuxuoa wanna... 60.30:: .81 0.559.. on» no «Ouuouuuuouuono CE. .3030»!—
magenta—Hum 052. :25 393.30 Eu 58252. 3 can: a.“ Aaguuucquucu: no. 05:01.. nuaazm CE. .000:

 

        
 

 

I I I n.— 3 — I . .l :3 .x 693.3 980:;
an
3 8 on I I 8 on .33 805313031. £536...
8o». 88 88 38 88 33 am: 83 3.— 5. .332
83 83 on; «own . $3 :8 3.8 ”mm 28..-
o...» 88 88 83 83 83 33 2.1.5.
88 8: 8.. 82 82 3S :3 3: 2.5.4
_ and .5 .3973“ 01‘5”“...—
wd .06 3.0 m 3... 3.... 5.... 36 Aﬁdv.¢nv9v2m i=xo§=nuoaun 3.83:9
82 .82 83 82 . 82 _ ... :8... 82. and . 22:32:.
82 .82 SP. .. 82 h .. 83°85 .. Sun 8.: x 89. 83 a 82.. 8.:~ .. we...” :3 ....__....x.3 03...»..823
_ NH AOL: in
8.3.. «0:31:33... 3.8.5.—
EOSOMH. 3 0v 0.. 3 3 3. am. 0 r. £5.33.” 53:33,.
:5qu
.8 . . . . . u . . . .332..-
.wqmwm u»... q mg 5. mg q m a d m? a. who ﬂ xubxgooirgﬁ
_ 3 5.3.8.. 332?. .8 3.3.30 5..
I | I I I 08 8a boon 2336.5...3 3.2.3583:
8... 8a _ own Sm on. _ Sm od 8m _ SN .3...de ...o.. .ﬁuoxa..o:.nonnsonc
".202" _ .333 22.3... 323.. _ 72.7.... .33.". _ 231...
$8.0... 59.0... 33.3 . 3. .un 33.2.. _ «use... I... an...
1.33.: allxnvnunB-or-u A.“ 3qu 8.5.33 225......“- w 1:

 

 

22.23.. 332.8 23...: 3 «2.22.: ”3.8.723. no pom .86 03a...

288

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
1.

Indicators

05-112 for cutting transverse joints
DS-llS for cutting longitudinal joints in hardened concrete
DNShs-GO for cutting joints in freshly laid concrete
umber of cutting :lisks

Type of disks

Segmented diamond cutting

Disk diameter, Inn

Cutting depth, m

Up to

Water consumption per disk, liters, min
Mark of engines

Electric motor

Installed capacity, horsepower

Travel speed, m/min

Joint cutting productivity, m/hr
Overall dimensions, mm

Length

width

Height

Mass of machine, kg
ooanX:.K:.X. n unlo— m
xii. 7.2 3.823... _ IZIS _ 3
8.3.3.... _ . m . .
x952 x.. .2... 23.9... . BI... _ 8
83......“ _ .
x8e: _.....“ c863... T.I.....Io_ 2
l . ... 3..—693:3..m I 3..
I _ I 82.3... BI... . 2..
I 3.. 3.323.633. a 3.
82x
..n89...Ao.8. .6 2.75.». 3:16.. o...
88.3.. m... «Enid: . . _
383...; . 2 $.93... .91» _ o.
Sonyakx _ _
x8e... 2...... . Sang... _o.._.lmn... o3
. .«88..._ .
3x88. . ....._ 83...... Sale... _ n
s... _ _ . _ . .
~.8—mx8_£ r... . 4.3.3... . SIC... m...
82x. _ _ _ . .
x8.....63.3_ ...._ 3.3.9.... _ El... 3...
83.x _ ._ _ .
.\..:3~.\...3 _..... S... _..:n _ mm. 2.
89.x _
1.228.... . 3. .m 9... _ m... S.
w _ _..”
. .mu
’7 .19}.- .I _ u
..n...u....u..un .3 a 1.0.3.1. 3.1:.-.1 .» .. . Md.
Fiani: ANHV 5w nan. 3.33.”... _.m
u: bin .. 2.. . . F... .
”3..?“ ca.— AHH OHV . m
. u
and _ _ 3

  

  

‘3 .NJ In“! a!“

 

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. _ _ as...
.4 3...; on a... 3.“ o. ..-?...3...3_. 02.9%....” $5.
.... .1? TL 3 m... o.. 893:. . 22.x
... _ I u 8_ L I _ 9. 83.3.3.3. “we... 68.3.
| n... __ o.. w a." _ 2 ﬂ 98.3.33. .03....6-33 .3732:
w 2 ﬂ 9 3 3.. _ o. 38.9.... “_...“qu 33.
| m _ h _ 3. ~ m... 8a. 3.2— .orxﬂﬁdd 3:30
-. . . . . . . . on. 53 $32.53. .
3 3 a“ _..h an we. nu. _ 8mmn53._ 33.8 mm: K3.
3.6 0.3., “3.. _.....“ ..T-_ one 393.33. .05....326. 8.3 333.
3.... ... .6 T... a... 3..... 93.2.... 3.3 .3.
.3. o... _... 3... n: 3.... 8......n__.oom.waau£ 583.3
rd _.....3 _od 1...: a... o.» 3.8. 3..; a _ «3.03
. . . _.. m .. _ . no. .3...— Amd o... o._._ T
_..—335......3-.. 03. 3. .3328; 3.3
c... 3.: _..3 e..._ .1. Q... _ on... 5:”. 355333.. 80.3....
. _.. .. m. _ . .3325 _
3.... _... _..... 1...... a; _ um _ 3.5.33... .2..a:..ém_ 3.9.3.3
. - m n .. n u u n 3 . _ .
”inf—mutuwﬂw: _
.n m m n u u _ .
III“ Amy _Amv. ”up _ SLIP. .5... 33:133.
_......_.......s .. .5 _..uuﬁ... .2 u E E
.Vr pr :9 .1. 2-. u I L:
...J.a.rh.a¢..nﬁa .u LAM“... .HL..QWMAU._ _
0.386 3.03.... a no 002502 2330 .~.o 0.31...
a mosh—U Jim
gala

                 

     

   

SﬁxSSxSE q: 8. 83H 5... : 8 a a; N 3 Wanipﬁgn
n
Bavxsmnxsom win 8. 028‘ o.“ 2 mm 3. w a an unsung-nos.
3:
=53
89x83x83 :38 a. can.» a... o... .aéwmﬁs...
w m. u
IxAg .. n m mm
... E! I .
uﬁﬁnizﬁa .3 .. :13 m 9 :mm
I a ..
A AN." . F
.3

sauna. uuuawmuouco :0 monouu unauQuOm :15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 9. QUALITY CONFROL AND ACCEPTANCE OF AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION HORK

[Text] 9.1. General Propositions

Organization of the system for control and acceptance of airfield construction work
envisions that the following will be carried out:

production control in construction and installation organizations:

inspection control on the part of the customers' engineering inspectorate and
the inventors' inapectorate;

special control of state and agency control and inspection organizations and
other organizations.

Production (engineering) quality control in construction and installation organiza-
tions includes input (preliminary). OPOrational (current) and acceptance control
with an evaluation of quality at all phases of work production.

Input control includes a check of the conformity of construction materials, struc-
tures. articles and engineering equipment arriving at the construction site to ex-
isting standards. specifications, certificates, the requirements of detail plans
and also a check of adherence to unloading and storage requirements.

Input control is usually entrusted to the service for production and technological
completion of a set (UP‘I'K) and is acccsplished at make-up bases or directly at man-
utacturing enterprises. Materials and articles are tested in required cases in the
construction laboratory. The work producers (foreman) are obligated to carry out
quality control of structures, materials and articles by external inspection and a
check of their conformity to established requirements.

Operational control is exercised during work upon coupletion of production opera-
tions and construction processes for timely determination of defects and the

292

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0“ Ul‘ﬂLIAL USE ONLY

reasons for their occurrence and also timely implementation of measures to correct
and prevent them.

Control is exercised by work producers and formen with recruitment of construction
laboratories and the geodetic service while self-control is exercised by the per-
formers of work.

When exercising operational control, conformity of work techniques provided by the
work production plan (PPR) and standard process flow charts (T110 and the conform-
ity of their fulfillment to detail plans and Ship and COST requirements are checked.

The basis of control should be operational quality control schemes (SOICK) developed
within the PPR. SOKK should contain drawings of structures with indication of per-
missible deviations and the required measurement accuracy, data on the required
characteristics of material quality, an indication of the couposition, deadlines
and methods of control, a list of operations and processes subject to control on
the part of the mark producer (foreman), including the participation of a construc-
tion laboratory and the geodetic service, and a list of hidden jobs subject to cer-
tification and intermediate acceptance with compilation of official reports.

The results of operational quality control should be recorded in work logs.

Acceptance control is accomplished to check and evaluate the quality of airfields
on which construction has been entirely completed or individual units and coupon-
ents, buildings and structures or parts of them have been completed and also with
intermediate accpetance of hidden work and individual crucial structures.

The quality of hidden work is accepted and evaluated by the contractor, usually in
the presence of the customer's representative, and more crucial structures are ac-
cepted and evaluated with the participation of the representative of the planning
organization (author's supervision).

The conformity of work perforated to the plan and to detail plans, fulfillment of
the requirements of corresponding chapters of the SNiP, the accuracy of adhering to
the design dimensions and established tolerances and the correctness of filling out
the technical documentation (work logs and so on) are checked during acceptance.

Work quality is accepted and evaluated with respect to the finished components of
an airfield and individual buildings and structures by working comittees of the
customer according to the requirements of SNiP.III-3-76.

The quality of airfield construction (reconstruction) as a whole, an individual
unit or starting complex is accepted and evaluated by the State Acceptance Committee
according to the requirements of SNiP.III-3-76.

The quality of individual types of work performed, structural components, individu-
al units and starting complexes and also of the airfield as a whole is evaluated
according to existing instructions on evaluation of quality SN 378-77.

Cowlex evaluation of the quality of individual work performed is determined with

respect to the facility as a whole by the mean arithmetic indicator K” by the
formula

293

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where P5, P4 and P3 are the number of types of work that have received marks of
"excellent,' "good“ and "satisfactory,“ respectively.

The mean values of index Kgr correspond to the following evaluations:

From 4.51 to 5.0 . . . . . . . . . . . mark of "excellent"
From3.Sltod.S...........markof"good"
Prom 3.0to 3.5 . . . . . . . . . . . mark of "satisfactory“

9.2. Quality Control and Acceptance of Preparatory and mcavation Work

Quality control and acceptance of preparatory and excavation work should be carried
out according to the requirements of SNiP 111-8-76 and instructions SN 121-73 and
SM? 111-46-79.

Quality control of preparatory work envisions a check of the correctness of per-
forming the work with respect to development and engineering preparation of the
construction territory according to the requirements outlined in Chapter 3. In
acconplishing quality control, the following are checked:

the volumes, sequence and timeliness of completing preparatory work and
their conformity to the plan:

the correctness of performing survey work;

adherence to technical regulations for producing all types of preparatory
work:

the timeliness and correctness of filling out the work log and official re-
ports for concealed work.

Production of the main types of airfield construction work is authorized only after
completion and acceptance of preparatory work from an official report. Preparatory
work is accepted by inspection of the sections of terrain prepared for production
of main work an checking the production-technical docunentation (official reports
about formulation of earth removal. completion of geodetic survey work and so on).

Quality control of excavation work includes a systematic check of the conformity of
work perforated to the plan and observation of technical regulations of producing it
according to the requirements of chapter 3. Control is exercised in the phases of
performing work with vegetation-laden and mineral soil.

The excavation mrk plan is drawn to scale prior to the beginning of work and if
necessary the levelling grid of squares 40 x 40 meters is restored. when convert-

ing the plan to full-scale, layout of the staking and positive points should be
performed with an accuracy up to 1 0.1 meter in cross-section and 1 1 an in height.

294

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e soda ‘1. I 0‘ Cal.- onsll. Vl‘I-I

Data on conversion of the plan to full-scale and subsequent geodetic control of
excavation work are entered in a special survey, levelling and angle measurement
log. Upon completion of work to convert the plan to full-scale, an official report
is compiled on the production of geodetic-nuns surveying, which together with all

the documentation on geodetic work and control. is presented when the airfield is
turned over for operation.

Conformity of the following requirements should be checked in performing work with
vegetation-laden soil:

the boundaries of the work production contours and the thickness of the re-

moved and restored layers of vegetation-laden soil should correspond to the planned
boundaries:

the vegetation layer subject to removal should be crushed on the site to
total thickness and cleaned of stones, remains of roots, pieces of unbroken sod and
so on:

vegetation-laden soil may not be mixed with the underlying layers of mineral
soil:

during ripping and breakup, during banking and storage in embankments and
during restoration of the layer of vegetation-laden soil. it should not be permitted
to dry out.

The thickness of the layer of vegetation-laden soil to be restored is checked by
saving S-lO pieces for each 1.000 m2 of excavation area. Deviation of thickness of
the restored layer from the planned thickness should not exceed 1 10 percent.

Quality control on channel excavation work and construction of fills from mineral
soil includes:

preliminary examination of the soil in the channels (drainage canals and quar—
ries) of the soil intended for pouring into fills and checking its conformity to
the plan:

checking the quality and density of soils in the surface layers of channels
and in the bases of fills and the absence of low-quality soils in them:

operational control of the conformity of H~e technology of performing the
work to the provided work production plan (by standard process flow charts).

Soil samples are taken from holes equal in depth to the planned excavation depth

at calculation of one hole for each 5,000 m3 of soil poured into fills when examin-
ing soils in channels. The total number of soil samples taken in channels and also
in poured fills is established from calculation of not less than one sample for
each 300 m3 of soil to be excavated or poured into a fill. The type of soil, its

optimum moisture content and the maximum packing density are determined from the
samples .

295

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quality of preparation of the bed (with compilation of an official report for
concealed work), the quality of poured soils and their conformity to the plan, the
conformity of the thickness of the poured layer of soil to the packing capability
of the means of mechanization used, the moisture content of the soil during pack-
ing, the modes and degree of packing, the planning marks and the evenness of the
flying field surface are controlled when constructing fills.

The quality of packing is checked by determining the actual density of the soil,
expressed by the density of the soil skeleton with its subsequent comparison to the
maximum density during standard packing.

Soil density is determined by the following methods:

by the method of sampling soil with undisturbed structure by means of metal
cylindrical soil probes for clay and sandy soils:

by the method of taking samples of soil with disturbed structure from a hole
with subsequent filling of it with homogeneous sand for gravel-pebbly, sandy and
clay soils with inclusions of coarse fractions.

Soil packing should be controlled during layer-by-layer pouring of fills in each
layer to be filled at five points (along the axis, edges and at intervals) for
each 2,000 m2 of area of dirt flying fields and 1,000 m2 of area of the soil bed
under pavement. when filling in trenches, holes and gulleys passing v der pave-
ment, not less than one sample is taken for each 50 m2 of trench or :Jie or 50 m2
of gulley.

When making the check, soil samples are taken from a depth of 8-10 cm from the soil
surface. The soil density in the sample shouldnot differ from the planned density
by more than 4 percent in the direction of a decrease. In this case the number of
points with maximum deviation should not exceed 10 percent of the total number of
measurements.

Upon final acceptance of work, a hole is dug to the total height of the fill on the
fill contour being accepted and three control samples of soil are taken to deter-
mine its density in the top, middle and lower parts of the fill. After taking the
samples, the hole is filled in with soil and packed to the planned (required)
density.

The criterion of the required degree of soil packing is the packing coefficient in-
tended by the plan and expressed in fractions of the maximum soil density with
standard packing. If there are no instructions in the plan on the required degree
of packing, the value of the least packing coefficient is taken from Table 9.1.

Quality control of grading the surface of the flying field includes establishment
of the conformity of height marks to planning data and slopes of the graded surface
and also its evenness. The neight marks of the soil part of the flying field and
of the landing strip is controlled by geodetic levelling at all points of the

planned levelling grid. Deviations of the actual marks from the planned marks--
macrounevennesses--should not exceed 1 50 mm.

296

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOP OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 9.1. lowest Values of Soil Packing Coefficient

 

Knva-mm yuan-Inw-

Hamlin-mfg) u tum—:9. «what.

”an. aim-u- all. "va
(1) "man-at m. sun-cm no- (7) (8)
Pas n-muncn- n-ywn fry-mne- ll- mu

IR"- 30- m»
we "all “I

    

“ecu. cynea!
(name (10)
Inn! (11)

Note. The packing coefficients are taken as for the layers below the freezing
point for climatic zones IV and V.

Key:

1. Variety of soil
2. Packing coefficients
3. Cement-concrete, asphalt concrete and asphalt-mineral pavement
4. Crushed stone treated with asphalt and cement-soil pavelent
5. Upper layers in freezing zone
6. Layers below freezing point
7. Soil part of flying field
8. Safety strips
9. Sande and sandy loans
10. Loans

11. clays

The evenness of the dirt flying field surface is evaluated by the size of meso-
unevennesses. characterized by the value of relief breaks on sections up to 40
meters long every S, 10 and 20 meters and by the value of microunevenmsses char-
acterized by the open spaces under a three-meter control rod.

Mesounevennesses are checked by levelling the transverses on defective and doubtful
sections every water. In this case the algebraic difference of contiguous slopes
of the uesorelief should not exceed 0.025 with levelling spacing of 5 meters, 0.020
with spacing of 10 meters and 0.015 with spacing of 20 meters.

Microunevennesses are checked with a metal control rod 3 meters long. The permis-
sible unevennesses of the microrelief should not exceed 30 m.

When preparing the soil bed (trough) for pavement, the following are checked: the
position of the axis, the linear dimensions and slopes of the bed and the height
markers and microunevennesses of its surface. The width and slopes are checked
every 80 meters and deviations from the planned values by more than l/l,000 in
width and by more than l/2,000 in length are not permitted. Deviations of slopes
from those adopted in the plan should not exceed 1 0.001.

297

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Control levelling of the bed surface is carried out at all points of the planned
levelling grid: deviations of the actual marks from the planned marks should not
exceed 1 40 m. Hicrounevennesses of the soil cover under the pavement are checked
by means of a three-meter rod and gaps of not sore than 20 In are permissible.

When constructing frost-protective and drain layers, their thickness, transverse
slope, height markers (along the axis), surface evenness and quality of packing are
checked every 50 meters along the axis and edges of the pavement. The extent of
permissible deviations are t 5 percent but not more than 20 an in thickness. +0.002
for slopes and 1 20 m for height markers. The greatest gap under a three—meter
rod in layers under a monolithic pavement is 10 mm and under precast pavement is

S an.

Intermediate acceptance of excavation work with cospilation of official reports for
concealed work is carried out upon completion of the following types of work: sur—
veying, preparation of the dirt bed, packing of the constructed fills, final grad-

ing of the dirt bed (cover) under the pavement and installation of cold-protective
and drain layers.

9.3. Quality Control and Acceptance of Work to Install Runoff-Drain Systems

men exercising operational quality control and acceptance of work to install run-
off-drain systems of airfields, one should be guided by the instructions of exist-
ing SNiP III-30-74 and SN 121-73 and also by the operational quality control schemes
(charts) (50K!) worked out by planning and other organizations.

Operational quality control of work performance envisions the checking of the qual-
ity of materials, prefabricated structures and parts used, a check of the conform-
ity of technological work production regulations (see Chapter 4) , certification and
intermediate acceptance of than with reflection of the results of quality control
and evaluation in work logs, process flow control charts and official reports for
concealed work.

Intermediate certification and acceptance of work with compilation of official re-
ports for concealed work are carried out during the following acceptance phases:

finished sections of trenches for runoff-drain systems;
beds under pipelines, manholes and thalweg pits, storm-water inlets and so on:

finished sections of pipelines, prior to filling in with conducting of pre—
liminary hydraulic tests)

work on back-filling of runoff-drain systems.

When finished sections of trenches are accepted, their linearity is checked (with
a theodolite), the conformity of the bottom and slope marks to the planned marks is
checked (with a leveller and sighting devices) and the evenness of the bottom is
checked (with a three-meter rod).

298

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deviations of the bottom marks of trenches from planned marks should not cxcuod
1 2 cm and deviations of slopes should not be more than 1 0.0005 whilu conforming
to the general direction of the planned slope. The gaps between the control rod
and the bottom of the trench should not exceed 1.5 cm.

when accepting open drain ditches, the correctness of making the slopes is also
checked (by means of templates) and the quality of strengthening them is checked.

When accepting finished sections of beds for pipes. the value of longitudinal
slopes of the bed surface and their conformity to planned values, the thickness of
the bed and the evenness of its surface are checked.

Longitudinal slopes are checked at the planned points of breaks along the leval,
at intermediate points by sighting devices not less than every 2 meters with slopes
up to 0.003 and every 3-5 meters with slopes greater than 0.005. Deviations of
the slopes of the bed surface from the planned marks should not exceed :_0.0005.

The thickness of the bed is checked no less than every lo meters and the permissible
deviations from the planned thickness should not exceed 1 5 percent.

The evenness of the bed surface is checked by means of a three-meter rod not less
than every 10 meters and also on doubtful sections the permissible gap under the
rod is not more than 0.5 cm.

The linearity of pipelines in cross-section and their vertical position. the tight-
ness of the pipes lying on the bed, the quality of finishing and waterproofing of
the pipe joints, the walls of pits and abutments of pipes to pits, sealing of joints
and the waterproofing of pipelines and pits are checked during acceptance of fin-
ished sections of sewage conduits.

The linearity of pipelines in cross-section is checked on sections between adjacent
pits by inspection for light using mirrors. In this case deviations from the regu-
lar shape of a circle along the horizontal are permitted by not more than one-fourth
the p£oeline diameter but not more than 50 mm in each direction. Deviation from the
regular shape of a circle along the vertical is not permitted. Possible vertical
deviations of the position of pipes from the planned position are not more than

1 10 mm and deviations of the marks of covers in manholes from the planned marks
should not exceed 1 5 mm.

. The tightness of the pipes resting on the bed is checked by selective inspection.
The pipes must not rest on pads.

The water impermeability of pipelines and sewage conduit pits is checked by hy—
draulic tests which should be conducted twice:

preliminary tests before filling in the trench:
final tests after filling in the trench.

The tests are conducted in sections from pit to pit and are carried out by one of
the following methods as a function of the conditions of laying the pipelines:

299

FOR 0FF1CIAI.USEIDNLY
FOR!OFFK3AI.US£(NVLY

by determination of water leakage in dry soils and also in wet soils with
location of the groundwater level near the top of the pit at a depth equal to half
the depth of pipe placement or greater than it (counting from the cover to the
apex):

by determination of water influx in wet soils with location of the ground-
water level above half the depth of pipe placement (counting from the cover to the
apex).

Hells having internal waterproofing are tested by the first method and wells having
waterproofing on the outside are tested by the second method. The tests should be

begun no earlier than 24 hours after the pipelines and wells have been filled with
water.

Pipelines of asbestos-cement pipes on cylindrical couplings with rubber packing
rings arenottested.

During leakage tests, the hydrostatic pressure in the pipeline is created by fill-
ing a temporary standpipe with water installed at the upper point of the section
to be tested or in the upper pit if it is subject to testing. Pressure is deter-
mined by the excess water level in the standpipe or in the pit above the apex of
the pipe or above the groundwater level it it is located above the apex. The ex-
cess should not be less than the depth of pipe placement (counting up to the pipe
apex) and should be maintained at a given level during the entire test.

If the pipe diameter is more than 400 mm and the placement depth is greater than 4
meters, the test pressure sho.ld be taken as equal to 4 meters of water column. The
permissible decrease of the level in the standpipe or in the pit should not exceed
0.2 meters during the tests.

Preliminary testing of the pipeline and pits is carried out by filling them with
water and by external inspection. The pipelineand pits are acknowledged as passing
the preliminary test if no visible water leaks are detected upon inspection.

The extent of water leakage during the final testing is determined in the upper pit
of the section to be tested by the volume of water added to the stnndpipe or pit

to the level indicated above. The extent of water influx ‘8 determined in the lower
pit by the volumetric method or by means of a runoff. The length of testing should
not be less than 30 minutes.

The section of sewer conduit is recognized as having passed the final test if the
specific leakage or influx of water during the test does not exceed the permissible
values presented in Table 9.2.

The quality of the soils used for filling, the correctness of performing work on
filling and packing (see section 9.2) and the quality of filter materials when lay—
ing edge drains and installation of drains with filter filler are checked during
back-filling of the edges of runoff-drain systems.

Runoff-drain systems are accepted on the basis of operational control charts, offi-
cial reports for concealed work, test data and certification of systems in full-
scale and includes:

J00

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm Utrll MI. US}: ONLY

Table 9.2. Permissible Leakage or Influx of Water During Testing of Sewer Conduits

 

(1) Amyrueval arm-Ia yin-ell nun emu-u man. I'll-n. m I u am
he (2) n-yh-pmu an nanny- "go, nu.
Ink-yon“:
rm

5'0 coo

 

...| MI 4...]...

3 .
H3 (:e’lous ) 7 '10 '24 26 I) 3') M 36 38 40
um. none
:oOetonuux
I: warn)-
nncmuux
(us “unnu-
pn-Ietxu
uyMax 6e:
ynnonu-
nnunux K0-
acn) tpyﬁ

 

 

 

Notes. 1. The permissible leakage or influx of water for pipes more than 600 mm
in diameter is determined by the formula

where q is the permissible leakage per kilometer of pipeline, m3/day and Do is the
inner diameter of the pipeline, inches.

2. The standard leakage permissible in Table 9.2 is taken with factor of
0.5 for reinforced concrete pipelines with butt joints on rubber rings.

3. The permissible leakage is taken the same as for reinforced concrete
pipelines equal to them in cross-sectional area for sewer conduits constructed from
precast components and blocks.

4. The permissible leakage (influx) of water through the walls and bottom
of the pit per meter of depth is taken as equal to the values presented in Table
9.2, reduced to one meter of pipe length, the diameter of which is equal to the
inner diameter of the pit.

Key:
1. Type of pipeline
2. Permissible leakage or influx of water, m3/day. per kilometer of pipeline
with pipe diameter, mm

3. of concrete, reinforced concrete and asbestos-cement (on cylindrical coup-
lings without sealing rings) pipes.

external inspection of the systems (pits, drain channels and so on):

a check of the linearity of pipelines:

an instrument check of the shoot marks in pits and a check of the absence of
standing water in them;

hydraulic tests of systems (if required):

checking and acceptance of technical documentation.

301

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9.4. Quality Control and Acceptance of Work to Install Beds and Construction of
Flexible Pavenant

When implementing operational control and acceptance of work to install artificial
beds (levelling interlayers) under pavement and flexible pavement, the following
are checked: conformity of the bed (pavement) structure and the materials used to
the plan, the quality of materials, the width and thickness of the bed (pavement).
the conformity of height markers and slopes of the bed (pavement) surface to plan-
ned marks, the evenness of the bed surface and the degree of packing.

The sand, sand-gravel mixture and gravel and crushed atone materials used to install
beds should correspond to the instructions of the plan and the requirements of ex-
isting COST (see Chapter 2 of this handbook). The quality of the materials is
checked by external inspection and from data of laboratory analyses of not less

than two samples taken every 1,000 m3 of materials installed in the bed.

The width and thickness of the bed (pavement) should be checked not less than two
times for each 400 m2 of area.

Heighv marks and slopes of the bed (pavement) surface are checked by control level-
ling at the levelling points of transverse sections every 40 meters along the
length of beds (pavement) and also at one-two points between transverse sections.
The evenness of the bed (pavement) surface is checked with a three-meter metal rod.

The permissible deviations from the parameters indicated above from the planned
values should not exceed the values presented in Table 9.3.

Table 9.3. Permissible Deviations in Construction of Flexible Pavement and
Dialuation of Work Quality

 

 

(1) (2) I'In-Iynaenue "Ii-w
“nu-IIw—yiruur In one! u
I V owl?!" algﬁL“ “I— 'y Iran's-5';
(6) ,
lllIIpIIua mmnnuul (mmpnl'luu) ru -I .1 I m
'Immuma I ma mmmnnmI (Inn utml). % H) --l 'I. .‘llo(1 ) [:5
) nc (Innoc
Tn )xc un(3) ) I m -_+_I.S .L'ZO
'Inllllllllln I-upmuIIIun-wuuﬂ III-crash". ((2 0.3 0,4 0,5
But-mum um- nu II" nnI mayo) 1 LS 2
Mourns-mun yum-1m (11) ) 0.00! 0.00l5 0002
IlaIIfummmu‘u npm'm'r mm IIN‘XHCTWI‘P '
pI-I‘Ixm'I: (13)
ocIII-nmum no.1 mmnnmlmc nmqm- 5 8 l0
I'm, Inc $14)
non-Mun" mm c-‘mpuuc "mum Ill, 3 4 5
Mn
nupnnunaalmum- “roan-Mn. \m (15) I 2 3
ocnonmma II mxpuma In rpymnnn 3 5 7

xmmnux uarmnnnou. nﬁvaOmau-
rm namyumuu. am (165

[Key on following page]

302

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (”11(1AI. “SIC ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Parameters checked

2. Permissible deviations

3. Excellent

4. Good

5. Satisfactory

6. width of bed (pavenent), cm

7. Thickness of bed (pavement), layer, percent
8. Thickness of bed (pavement), layer, In

9. Thickness of levelling interlayer, cm

10. Height marks along axis, cm

11. Transverse slope

12. Greatest space under three-meter rod

13. of bed for monolithic pavement, mm

14. of bed for precast pavement, an

15. Levelling interlayers, m

16. of bed and pavement of soils and stone materials treated with binders, mm
17. But not more than

The degree of packing the beds is checked:

when the sand bed is installed by determining the density (see section 9.2)
of the sand at not less than two points every 1,000 In2 of area. In this case the
value of the packing coefficient should not be less than that indicated in the plan
(not less than 0.98 if this is not indicated in the plan):

when installing a sand-gravel bed with control passes of a smooth-wheeled
roller 8-10 tons in mass and a track more than 0.5 cm deep should not remain on the
bed after the roller has passed:

during installation of gravel, crushed stone, slag and sand-cement bed with
control passes of a smooth-wheeled roller 10-12 tons in mass. In this case no
track should remain on the surface of the bed during movement of the roller and
the ridge measuring 40 m discharged under the wheels of the rollers should be
flattened and should not be squeezed into the bed.

The quality control of beds installed during winter is accomplished during produc-
tion of mrk and acceptance is accomplished after couplete thawing of the layer of
bed, elimination of detected defects and deformations and repeat packing.

The quality control of work to install beds and to construct pavement from soils,
sand-gravel and crushed stone-sand mixtures and other mineral materials treated
with binders should be carried out according to the "Instructions on the Use of
Soils Strengthened with Binders to Install Beds and Pavements of Highways and
Airfields“ (SN 25-74).

When making the check, one must check no less than once per shift the granular com-
position of the soil and mixtures, the density and moisture content of the pre-

pared dirt bed, the plasticity nmber and degree of pulverization of clay soils by
screening medium samples on screens with mesh size of S and 10 m, the accuracy of

303

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHFMI INF "NI \

proportioning and the uniformity of introducing binder materials , the moisture
content of soils to be treated and the finished mixture prior to packing, the de-
gree of packing and the evenness of the surface layer of strengthened soil (mixture)
and conformity of maintenance conditions of the bed (pavement) of strengthened soil
(mixture).

The granulometric composition and the physicomschanical properties of soils are
checked by taking three-four samples for each 200-300 m3 of treated soil.

Operational quality control of performing all the production processes and opera-
tions is accomplished during work production according to SN 25-74.

The degree Of packing the 90115 6W3 also of the gravel-sand and crushed stone-sand
mixtures treated with inorganic binders is checked by determining the packing coef-

ficient, expressed by the ratio of the volumetric mass of the soil skeleton (mix-
ture) of cores to the volumetric mass of specimens packed with optimum moisture
content by the standard packing method.

The degree of packing of soils, gravel-sand and crushed stone-sand mixtures treated
with organic binders is checked by determining the packing coefficient, expressed
by the ratio of the volumetric mass of cores to the volumetric mass of specimens of
soil (mixture) packed with optimum moisture content and load of 300 kgf/cmz.

The core samples are selected at the rate of three units for each 100 running meters
of pavement (bed).

The packing coefficient of beds and pavement of soils. gravel—sand and crushed
stone-sand mixtures treated with binders should not be less than that indicated in
the plan, but not less than 0.98.

The movement of construction transportation on the bed or pavement of soil (mixture)
treated with asphalt or tar is authorized immediately upon completion of packing
and surface treatment provided that traffic is controlled for not less than 10 days.

The movement of transport equipment on the bed or pavement of noncohesive or low-
cohesive soils treated with inorganic binders (cement, lime and so on) is author-
ized no sooner than 14 days and that treated with cohesive soils is authorized no
sooner than 7 days after completion of work to install the bed (pavement).

Work to install and pack the dirt bed and work to install the structural layers of
pavement (bed) from strengthened soils and mixtures is subject to intermediate
acceptance with compilation of official reports for concealed work during operation-
al control.

The width and thickness, height marks, slopes and evenness of pavement (bed) and
degree of packing are checked upon acceptance of pavement (beds). The degree of
packing is checked by test passes of a smooth-wheeled roller 10-12 tons in mes.

A noticeable track should not remain on the pavement (bed) in this case. In doubt-
ful cases the density is checked by core specimens.

304

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum urntuu. uot ONLY

The quality control of work is carried out during construction of asphalt concrete
pavement in the phases of acceptance and storage of materials, preparation, trans-
portation, placement and packing of the mixture and maintenance of the pavement.

The quality of the mineral material (cleanliness, granulometric composition and so
on), the quality of the mineral powder (volumetric mass, porosity, moisture con-
tent and hydrophobic nature), the quality of organic binder materials (viscosity,

softening point and so on) and adhesion of the binder to the surface of the mineral
material are subject to selective control.

The conformity of the composition of the mass to the plan and the accuracy of pro-
portioning the mineral and binder materials (not less than once per shift), the
temperature conditions of preparing the mixture in each batch and the temperature
of the finished mixture and the quality of the finished mixture (granular composi-

tion, homogeneity and so on) are checked during preparation of an asphalt concrete
mixture.

The time for transportation and the temperature of the mixture during placement and
packing, the quality of preparing the base, the thickness of the installed layers
and the quality of making joints, conformity to given conditions and the quality of
packing, observation of planning dimensions and also the evenness of the pavement

and the quality of the formed layer of pavement are checked during transportation
and placement of the asphalt concrete mixture.

The temperature of the asphalt concrete mixture should be checked in each dump
truck.

The thickness of the installed layers is checked by the level of setting the sole
plate of the asphalt spreading machine.

The degree of packing is checked visually and by core samples on the basis of de-
termining the packing coefficient within 10 days after placement--the ratio of the
volumetric mass of the specimen to that of a reformed specimen packed under a

standardized load. The value of the packing coefficient should not be less than
that indicated in the plan.

The evenness of the pavement surface is checked with a three-meter metal rod or a
movable multisupport rod designed by Soyuzdornii.

The width and thickness of the pavement and the conformity of the transverse slope
to the planned slope are checked not less than every 100 meters of pavement.

Pavement is accepted and work quality is evaluated upon completion of all work on
the basis of external inspection and checking in full-scale the width and thick-

ness of pavement, height markers and slopes of the evenness of pavement surface.
Permissible deviations should not exceed the values indicated in Table 9.4.

The quality of asphalt concrete (asphalt and tar-mineral) pavement is evaluated
by the following indicators:

305

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 9.4. Permissible Deviations in Acceptance of Pavement

 

(1) (2)

 

“wipe-”rune nape-emu 110-qu W
Ill-puns "mum. :IO ca (8)
Tons»: ) (4) t|0$. no u: Wee l0 ll
Basement nmenm no 001(5) 12 cu
ﬂompesuuﬁ yum: (6) $0,002

.HanOoauuni npocset "on tpcxnetponoﬂ pram» (7) 3 u.

Key:
1. Parameters to be checked 6. 'l‘ransverse slope
2. Permissible deviations 7. Greatest gap under three-mater
3. Width of pavement rod
4. Thickness of pavement 8. But not more than 10 mm

5. Height markers along axis

'excellen " if no more than 20 percent of the total nmber of gaps 3 mm in
size are found under a three-meter control rod, the pavement surface is uniform, has
no cavities, there are no cutouts of poor-quality spots and the edges of the pave-
ment are even and packed:

"good” if the number of gaps of 3 m is found to be no more than 30 percent
of the total nunber of gaps, there are individual cavities (not more than 2 percent
of area) on the pavement surface, there are no cutouts of poor-quality spots and
the edges of the pavement are packed but hava slight unevennesses;

”satisfactory“ if gaps measuring 3 In are found with no more than 50 percent
of the total number of gaps, there are slight cavities (not more than 5 percent of
area) and there are other defects not corresponding to the requirements of excellent
and good marks.

9.5. Quality Control and Acceptance of Work on Construction of Rigid Pavement

The following are checked when implementing operational quality control of the per
formance of work to construct monolithic concrete, armored concrete and reinforced
concrete pavement with a prepared and adopted artificial bed:

the correctness of installing the rail-forms or master strings:

the quality of installing the separating layer and priming of the walls of the
rail-forms and lateral edges of the slabs:

the quality of manufacture, installation and strengthening of reinforcement,
components of butt joints and inserts in deformation joints;

the quality of materials and of the finished concrete mixture and conformity
to the regulations for its preparation, transportation and placement:

306

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI UPHLIAL USE ONLY

the degree of packing and stratification of the concrete mixture and the qual-
ity of finishing the surface of the pavement and edges of joints:

conformity to the rules of maintaining the concrete and removal of the rail-
forms:

the quality of installation and filling of deformation joints with mastic:

the strength of the concrete of control specimens and directly in the
pavement.

The correctness of installation and the reliability of attaching the rail-forms are
checked by visual inspection and control levelling. Individual unevennesses of the
rail-forms in the vertical plane and a difference of the marks of rail-form sections
at joints should not exceed 2 mm and deviations in the horizontal plane should not
be more than 5 mm from a straight line. variation of the marks of rail-forms and
mutual excesses in the joints after control passes of the subgrader or concrete
finishing machine should not be more than 3 mm.

The following are checked during manufacture and installation of reinforcement and
components of butt joints: the diameter and number of bars, the quality of connec-
ting the bars, the dimensions of cells and the absence of curvature of the rods,

the conformity of the position of reinforcing mesh, frames and components to the
planned position and the reliability of attaching them and provision of the required
thickness of the protective concrete layer. Deviation of the height position of
reinforcement from the planned position should not exceed 1 cm. Before installing
the reinforcement, the quality of installing the separating layer is checked: the
number of layers of roll materials, the correctness of placing them and the absence
of gaps.

Installed reinforcement in components of butt joints and also a prepared separating
layer are subject to intermediate acceptance with compilation of an official report
for concealed work.

Main quality control of materials and the finished concrete mixture are carried out
at the concrete plant. Visual inspection of each machine with concrete mixture is
carried out at the placement site to detect visible violations (separation, water
separation, drying, the presence of foreign objects and so on). If these viola-
tions are discovered, the mixture is rejected and a report is made immediately to
the concrete plant.

Moreover, the suitability of the mixture to be placed is determined at the place-
ment location at the beginning of the shift and also during it (in the case of am-
bient air temperature variation by 5°C) and if necessary a correction is made to
the variation of the consistency of the mixture during transportation. The degree
of packing of the concrete mixture is controlled by determining its volumetric mass
after passage of the concrete finishing machine. The volumetric mass of samples of
the concrete mixture taken from the pavement should not differ from that of a mix-
ture packed in a laboratory vibrating bench by more than 2 percent.

307

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The degree of stratification of the concrete mixture is checked immediately after
the passage of the concrete finishing machine by measuring the thickness of the
dissolved part of the mixture in the surface layer of the pavement, which should
not exceed 3 mm.

The degree of packing is determined on samples taken during the first week of ope
eration and on one sample taken the following week, while the degree of stratifica-
tion every 5 meters at three points is determined on the edges and along the axis
of the concreted row.

The evenness of the pavement surface in the longitudinal, transverse and diagonal
directions is checked by a metal control rod three meters long. Unevennesscs
(gaps) under the three-meter rod should not exceed 3 mm.

Control specimens of concrete should be manufactured for compression (three speci-
mens) and tensile bending (three specimens) tests for each 200 m3 of laid concrete
mixture, but not less than once per shift. The results of testing the specimens
are entered in a concreting log.

The following should be checked during installation of deformation joints (expan-
sion and compression joints) in the pavement: provision of planned expansion of
joints and the conformity of expansion joint spacers with them. the correctness of
selecting the method and adherence to regulations for cutting the joints according
to the requirements of section 6.7. provision of the planned width and depth 0'
joint cutting, the linearity of joints and the extent of unevennesses between their
edges and the quality of filling the joints with sealing mastics.

The following are checked during the phase of maintaining the concrete: the time-
liness and correctness of performing operations at all stages of maintaining the
concrete, installation of warning signs with indication of the concreting time and
periods of maintaining the concrete, adhering to the deadlines for rereval of rail-
forms and excluding the passage of transport equipment on pavement sections with
inadequate strength of the concrete. The quality of applying the film-forming ma-
terials on freshly laid concrete is checked once per shift on a section 20 x 20 cm
in area. A 10 percent sulphuric acid solution or a 1 percent phenolphthalein solu-
tion is applied in a uniform layer to a section carefully flushed with water and
wiped with clean rags. The number of detected flawed points should not be more
than two per 1 square inch of surface.

The thickness of the pavement should be measured not less than every loo meters as
the rail-forms are removed and the permissible deviations should not exceed 1 5
percent, but not more than 15 um. Cavities in the concrete, detected on the edges
of slabs, should be filled in with cement-sand mortar in the ratio of 1:3.

work to construct pavement is accepted on the basis of full-scale certification
with taking of the required control measurements and tests and familiarization

with the production-technical documentation. The width and thickness of the pave-
ment, the height marks and extent of slopes, the state of the pavement surface
(evenness, absence of cracks, cavities, peeling and so on), the quality of making
the seams (linearity, finishing and conformity of the edges and filling with mas-
tic) and the strength of the concrete in the pavement are checked during acceptance.

308

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(DNLN
DUI UH‘IL‘IAL USE ONLY

The thickness of the pavement is checked by holes along the lateral edges, by tak-
ing cores and if the corresponding equipment is available, by the acoustic method
using ultrasonic instrunents.

The evenness of the pavement surface is checked by means of a multimarker rod de-
signed by Soyuzdorni‘. or with a three-meter metal rod by measuring the gaps under
it at the rate of not less than 100 per 1 kilometer of each row. The permissible
size of the greatest gaps is 3 In.

The strength of the concrete is evaluated from the results of testing control spec-
imens of concrete (cubes and small beams) and cores cut from the pavement at the
rate of not fewer than 3 per each 10,000 m2 of pavement area. If the appropriate
equipment is available, strength is tested by nondestructive methods directly in
the pavement.

The extent of possible deviations by the parameters indicated above should not be
sore than indicated in Table 9.5.

Table 9.5. Permissible Deviations from Planned Dimensions of Basic Characteristics
of Cement-Concrete and Reinforced Concrete Pavement and ENaluation of

 

 

 

Work Quality

(1) I. - (ZTTUYCLkIlI-or unborn—l— — -
no urns-tun. on (5,——
Or we r m r w. :- ”£22" I ”(.3)”! l 6.21:3“.

“Mu-mm newsman, m (5) m 'l .| .r.

Tmumua IND-(punN, ”a (7) .5 3 -H I3

13) ”0 III‘ («are
To At. “(8) 15 1- I0 .

 
 
  
 

Bm‘ulmw unu'llul Im "(10)“ (9) 1| 1| .,;';
‘ ' (11)

yum-u, 1. 50,00| 10,0015 .I LIIQ
l runner! gnu-,1 nu-wenmunn 2 2.5 3
f? _ {12) .
w. uprnmuﬂlm "mun-n ".111 n 2 2.5 J

0pc) lIl.ll.I|IJ‘ ll llllllt‘lh‘ﬂllut l'ld>.l\. M“

Key:
1. Main parameters and measurements
2. Permissible deviations
3. Excellent
4. Good
5. Satisfactory
6 width of pavement, cm

7. Thickness of pavement, percent

8. Thickness of pavement, mm

9. Height marks along axis, cm

10. Transwrse slope, percent

11. Greatest gap under three-meter rod, mm

12. Greatest excess of slab edges in longitudinal and transverse joints, in
13. But no more than

309

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hbrk quality is evaluated during acceptance of pavement by three indicators: No 1--
strength of concrete, No Z—quality of joints and No 3--evenness of pavement
surface.

The following marks are established by indicator No 1:

"excellent," when the entire 100 percent of tested specimens have strength
not below the planned strength:

”good,” when compressive strength of 5 percent of the tested specimens is not
less than 10 percent of the planned strength. In this case deviations from the
planned tensile bending strength are not permitted;

“satisfactory,” when the compressive strength is not less than 10 percent of
the planned strength in 10 percent of the specimens and the tensile bending strength
is not below the planned strength for all tested specimens.

The following marks are given for index No 2:

”excellent," if the joints are made in complete accord with the plan and
specifications: the joints are cut to the full depth, their edges are vertical.
the edges are linear, the excess of edges is in the permissible range, there are no
chipoffs, cavities, cracks and boiling and the joints are carefully filled with
mastic. Deviations from linearity by no more than 3 cm in 2 percent of joints in
length of the total length of tested joints are permitted in this case:

"good," if the same requirements are observed, but deviations from linearity
up to 3 cm in 5 percent of the joints are permitted;

"satisfactory," if deviations from linearity up to 3 cm in 10 percent of the
joints are permitted.

The following marks are given tocording to index No 3:

"excellent," if gaps 3 an in size under the three-meter rod occur no more
than in 20 percent of the total number of measurements:

”good," if 3 m gaps occur in no more than 30 percent of the total number of
measurements; .

"satisfactory," if 3 m gaps occur in no more than 50 percent of the total
mnber of measurements.

Individual deviations from the normative gap up to 5 an at the rate of not more
than 5 percent of the total nunber of measurements are permitted for the marks of
"excellent" and "good" and not more than 10 percent for the mark ”satisfactory."

metal evaluation of the quality of concrete, armored concrete and reinforced con-
crete pament is determined by indicators No l, 2 and 3.

310

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Pavement that meets the requirements of the plan and the instructions of 5N 121-73
receive the marks:

"excellent,” when all indicators or two of them have a mark of ”excellent”
and the third indicator has a mark of "good;"

”good." when all indicators have a mark not below 'good:'
“satisfactory,” when all indicators have a mark not below "satisfactory.”

A mark no higher than "satisfactory" is given if 2 percent of the slabs in the pave-
ment have temperature-shrinkage cracks.

Acceptance of pavement for operation is formulated by a report.

Quality control of work to construct precast reinforced concrete pavement is car-
ried out in the following phases:

acceptance, transportation and storage of slabs;

acceptance, storage and checking the quality of materials used to install the
artificial bed and the levelling layer under the pavement, for welding butt cleats
and finishing the joints between slabs:

installation of the artificial bed and the levelling layer under the pavement:

placement and vibration placement of slabs:

welding of butt cleats:

finishing the joints between slabs:

acceptance of finished sections of pavement.
The thickness, degree of packing and evenness of the bed and levelling layer are
checked during installation and intermediate acceptance (with compilation of re-
ports for concealed work)--the permissible gaps under a three-meter rod should not
exceed 5 mm.
The following are checked during placement and vibration placement: the correct-
ness of layout and placement of the marker and subsequent rows of slabs, provi-
sion of linearity, the required width of joints and evenness of pavement at joints,
observance of the established modes of vibration placement (rolling) of slabs and
provision of complete and tight contact of slabs with the bed.

The marker row of slabs should be laid along a guide cord with systematic selective
control using a theodolite.

The width of the joints between adjacent slabs should not be greater than 15 mm
and the maximum mutual excess of slab edges should not be more than 5 mm in longi-
tudinal joints and not more than 3 am in transverse joints.

311

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The degree of contact of the slabs and base (the levelling layer) is checked by
selective raising of one slab of every 100 slabs, but not less than once per shift,
with the contact area being fixed by the visible imprint of the slab on the bed.

A repeat check is made on five slabs in the absence of complete contact of control
slabs. A second vibration placement (rolling) of all slabs on the section of pave-
ment being checked is made with negative results of the additional check.

The vibrating placement conditions are established in the presence of a representa-
tive of the customers' technical inspection.

Table 9.6. Permissible Deviations in construction of Precast Reinforced concrete
Pavement and Evaluation of Work Quality

(2) Ilmycm-w «nu—en-

 

 

 

lﬁlg'll'zru (3) (4) I .ya.£§.‘.
.nI-Iuo' .wr-w' "W
1;. "tum-(3&2!!! a cut +.| 1|.5 :t'l
‘muﬁ YIM :0 OJ!” t0,lll|5 1",”)2
l'aumua n ypnnuu upouor "anew-gm“ l 2 3
Inllm, en ‘9)
J’mmma « woauu wpcmou npoaonuu 3 4 5
mmn, \l‘l
Key:
1. Indicators 6. height marks along axis. cm
2. Permissible deviations 7. Transverse slope, percent
3. Excellent 8. Difference in levels of edges
4. Good of transverse joints, mm
5. Satisfactory 9. Difference in levels of edges

of longitudinal joints, m

In welding butt cleats, the quality of preparing them for welding (cleaning of
dirt and so on), conformity of the type and mark of electrodes used to the plan and
specifications and observation of the established welding conditions are checked.

The quality of weld seam is checked on the basis of visual inspection, measurement
oftheir geometric dimensions, tapping with a hammer 1 kg in mass and from the re—
sults of control rolling of the pavement with a heavy truck (pneumatic-tire rollers)
during two-three passes with subsequent inspection of the seams. The results of
control are reflected in the report for concealed work.

The quality of cleaning and priming the lateral edges of the slabs, filling the
lower part of joints to two-thirds the thickness of the slabs (except expansion
joints) with a cement-sand mixture and the quality of filling the joints with seal-
ing mastic are checked when finishing the joints.

The joints should be filled with mastic without gaps and beads on the slab surface.

Precast reinforced concrete pavement is accepted by analogy with acceptance of
monolithic pavement with formulation of an acceptance report.

The extent of permissible deviations in construction of precast reinforced concrete
pavement and evaluation of work quality are presented in Table 9.6.

312
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
run UI‘I’ILIAL 08'- UI‘LI

CHAPTER 10. SAFETY PROCEDURES IN AIRFIELD COBTRUCTION HORK

['next] 10.1. General Propositions

Supervision and responsibility for observing the requirements on safety regulations
and production sanitation according to section 32 of SNiP III-A.ll-7O is entrusted
to the engineering and technical personnel of the construction organization.

The construction organization plan and the work production plan should contain
specific engineering decisions:

on creation of conditions for safe and harmless work at the construction
site, facilities and job sites under ordinary and under winter conditions:

on sanitary-hygienic servicing of workers:
on lighting the construction site, passages, thoroughfares and job sites.

Sanitation-service buildings and devices--locker rooms, washrooms, showers, toilets,
drying rooms, first-aid rooms, rooms for dedusting of special clothing, rooms for
personal hygiene of females, rooms for warming and resting, snackbars and so on--
must be available at the construction site. A dispensary with medicines should be

available at each facility. '

Easily visible, warning and indicator inscriptions or safety signs lighted after
dark. posters and safety instructions shouldbehung on all construction sections
where this is required according to work conditions. Barriers should be erected

in necessary cases or watchmen should be appointed.

Organization of job sites should provide safe work conditions. Outside personnel
may not visit the job site.

313

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Workers should be supplied with special clothing, special footwear and equipment

for individual protection according to the nature of the work performed and the
typical norms of free issue of special clothing, special footwear and protective
accessories.

There should be drinking water according to existing sanitation norms at the con-
struction site.

Construction machines, mechanisms, equipment, implements, tools and accessories
should correspond to the nature of the job being performed and should be in good
working order. The movable parts of machines and mechanisms must be enclosed at
locations of possible access of people. It is prohibited to leave machines and
mechanisms operating while unattended. It is prohibited to permit workers and
service personnel not being authorized to service the machine to control construc-
tion machines.

It is prohibited to conduct construction-installation work, to store materials and
to park machines in the right-of-way of overhead power transmission lines without
coordination with the organization operating the lines.

Work in the right-of-way is not authorized without a permit.

It is prohibited from operating excavators, boom cranes, loaders and other construc-
tion and road machines directly under the wires of operating overhead power trans-
mission lines of any voltage.

Work and movement of the indicated machines near an overhead power transmission
line are possible if the distance from the hoisting or extensible part of the ma-
chine through the air and also from the load to be hoisted in any position, includ-
ing the greatest hoisting or overhang, to the nearest wire under voltage is not
less than:

with line voltage up to l kv . . . . . . . . . . 1.5 meters
with line voltage of 1-20 kV . . . . . . . . . . 2 meters
with line voltage of 35-110 kv . . . . . . . . . 4 meters
with line voltage of 150-220 kV . . . . . . . . 5 meters
with line voltage up to 300 kV . . . . . . . . . 6 meters
with line voltage of 500 kV . . . . . . . . . . 9 meters
with line voltage of 800 kV (DC) . . . . . . . . -9 meters

The working members of a machine should be in the transport position when passing
under a live power transmission line.

Work in the right-of-way of overhead power transmission lines and near an electric
power transmission line should be conducted while fulfilling the requirements of

the “Safety Pegulations in Operation of Overhead Electric Power Transmission Lines
with Voltage of 3S kv and Above” of Hinenergo [Ministry of Power and Electrifica-

tion] of the USSR.

314

FOR‘DFFKJAL.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10.2. Safety Regulations in Production of Preparatory and Excavation Work

Safety regulations in preparation and development of territory. The following
requirements must be fulfilled when cleaning a section of bushes and small trees:

the site should be cleaned of stones, stumps and trees when operating a brush
cutter;

when two brush cutters are operating. each of them should operate on a separ-
ate strip, the distance between which is taken as not less than 40 meters;

carefully follow the working order of the enclosure that protects the opera-
tor against blows from cut trees:

auxiliary workers removing cut trees should be no closer than 25 meters from
the brush cutter.

The following reqirements should be fulfilled when felling trees:

creation of a forbidden zone with radius not less than 50 meters around the
perimeter of tree-cutting, enclosed with portable warning signs: "Pedestrians and
vehicles prohibited-~tree-cuttingl "1

workers should wear hard hats:
the distance between sections of tree-cutters is not less than 50 meters;

preliminary cutting of limbs from hanging. dry, rotten, crooked or hollw
trees and those with broken or hanging crowns;

observance of other safety regulations in tree-cutting work.

The following requirements should be fulfilled when removing stumps:

the working order of the brake drums of the sump-removing machine and the
winch of the tractor, the reliability of the cables being attached to the support
stump and the stump being removed, the working order and conformity of the cable
diameter to the diameters of the stamps being removed and the reliability of at-
taching the pulley blocks to the stumps;

location of blasters no closer than 50 meters from each other, knowledge and
adherence to the location and direction of movement of neighbors and blasters being

under cover after ignition of the fuse and detonator. A brigade leader should
supervise the work of blasters.

It is prohibited for people to be closer than 15 meters in front of bulldozers or
stump pullers when they are used to remve large stones. The reliability of strap-
ping the stones and preventing them from rolling are provided during hoisting,

movement and loading into transport equipment. People may not be in a radius of
10 meters of an operating crane.

315

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Safety regulations when conducting excavation work. The main safety regulations
which should be fulfilled in excavation work are as follows:

Engineering personnel must inspect all locations daily where collapses, slides and
formation of dirt lips are possible at the faces of quarries prior to the beginning
of soil excavation in channels. These locations should be enclosed, equipped with

warning signs and soil should be dumped without expecting spontaneous collapse of
it.

Fulfillment of safety regulations during operation of earth~moving, earth-moving-

transport, grading and packing machines should be specially checked during excava-
tion work.

It is forbidden to be lOcated between a towed mchine and tractor, to pass under the
towing device and to be located on it.

One must be guided by the "Unified Safety Regulations in Conducting Explosive Work"
of USSR Gosgortekhnadzor when performing rock and excavation work with explosives.

The following main safety regulations must be fulfilled during operation of individ-
ual machines:

a) during operation of bulldozers-mo one should be located between the trac-
tor and blade before the engine has completely stopped, the blades should be lowered
to the ground during stops, the soil should not be sloped more than 30', the bull-
dozer blade should not be moved beyond the lip of a pile when soil is being dunped,
the bulldozer should not turn with loaded or submerged blade, work should not be
conducted in clay soils during rainy weather, it is prohibited for the bulldozer to
back up with lowared blade, heavy parts of the bulldozer should be raised only with
functioning jacks and tackle, crowbars and other devices must not be used for these
purposes, the speed should not be greater than second gear when a tractor is oper-
ating in broken terrain or when crossing a poor road, suspended equipment of a
bulldozer can be installed on a tractor and disassembled from it only under the
supervision of a brigade leader;

the wheels of the machine closer than 1 meter to the edge and closer than 0.5 meter
to the cut of a channel, do not move soil on slopes steeper than 30° and do not load
it when moving backward on the pile, do not work in wet clay soils or during rainy
weather, transport the scraper with bucket fixed in the raised position and with

the winch switched off, clean the scraper bucket of adhering soil with a scraper or
shovel only after the tractor has completely stopped, do not sit on the scraper or
stand on its frame, the blade should not cut into the soil, the levers of the con-
trol mechanisms must be switched off until the bucket has reached its maximum posi-
tion when raising or tilting the bucket:

316

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
run 0er MI. use ONLY

son, oversize pieces of rock, logs, boards and beams may not be raised and moved
with the bucket, it is prohibited to change the boom overhang during operation with
the bucket filled. to tow a load with the boom and to work the brakes with the buck-
et raised, extreme cutting of the blade into the soil is not permitted when an ex-

unload and move with an empty bucket only after the bucket has left the ground, the
lever must not be moved to the extreme position when excavating heavy soils, the
bucket block may not stop against the boom block when lifting the bucket and one

317

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fill closer than 3 meters counting from the brow of the fill to the caterpillar

track and a tractor with installed camping plate should not cane closer than 0.5
meter.

10.3. Safety Regulations in Construction of Runoff-Drain systems

The safety regulations outlined in "Safety Regulations in construction, Repair

and Maintenance of Highways,“ confirmed by the USSR Ministry of Transport Construc-
tion and the RSFSR Ministry of Highways, 29 April 1977, and coordinated with the
Central Trade-Mien Committee of Motor Transport and highway mrkers, when perform-
ing work to construct a runoff-drain system.

special attention should be devoted to providing work safety when cutting trenches,

laying pipe in trenches, disassembling the supporting walls of trenches and during
backfilling of trenches with soil.

To prevent tailings or slips, the soil removed from the trench or materials placed
alongside it should be placed at a distance of not less than 0.5 meter from the lip.
To do this, no materials of any kind can be put within the soil collapse triangle
of the trench not having wall support.

$1stematic checking should be established of the condition of the walls of tren-
ches not having reinforcement. The walls of trenches should be reinforced relia-
bly and without any projections from established regulations or standard plans.
The reinforcement is disassembled only in the presence of a work supervisor or
foreman.

Special care should be taken when lowering pipe or precast canponents of structures
into the trench or ditch. It is categorically prohibited to suspend loads whose
mass exceeds the capacity of the mechanism on a crane.

when lowering pipes, the rings of precast pits or other components, workers in-
stalling them in the trench or ditch should be at a safe distance from the load
being lowered.

10.4. Safety Regulations When Constructing Beds and Flexible Pavement

The following basic regulations should be observed when constructing beds and pave-
ment from strengthened soils, crushed stone and gravel: one may not be in the
body of a dump truck or in a distributing hopper when unloading and spreading stone
materials (crushed stone, gravel, sand and so on), cement or limestone, a dump
truck loaded with stone materials can back up only if the spreading machine or
spreader operator or an auxiliary worker gives a signal, it is forbidden to ap-
proach closer than 1 meter to the lip of a fill when a spreading machine or spread-
er is operating on fills, it is forbidden to clean a hopper during operation of a
placer or spreader, it is categorically prohibited to regulate the thickness of the
layer being spread or placed and also to regulate the vibrating plate of a crushed
stone spreader or to correct or change the belts of vibrators during operation of
machines, the density and tightness of hoppers, tanks, hatches and throats and the
readiness of pumps, conveyors, coununications lines and proportioning devices

318

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I ‘1'. U. I system. Veil. VI‘Ia.

should be checked on rotary hoes, soil-mixing machines and binding material
spreaders prior to the beginning of work, it is forbidden for persons unrelated to
the operation of a given machine to be on jobsites and on the frames of all ma-
chines, the operator must ascertain the absence of people or different objects in
front of machines at a distance of not less than 50 meters prior to beginning the
operation of motorized soil-mixing machines and towed mixers, chemical products

must be mixed and dissolved in solution assemblies, mechanical and pneumatic de-
vices must be used for loading and unloading and pumps must be used to puup fluids,
machines should move so that the operators, drivers and workers are on the windward
side as little as possible when spreading loose and liquid products on a strip to

be treated and when mixing them with soil, machines travelling to the garage or to
parking areas should be completely freed of chemical products at the end of work and
their working members should be flushed with a strong stream of water on sites allo-
cated for this, it is prohibited from removing and raising the cover of working mem-
bers of mixing machines during operation and it is prohibited from replacing the

blades on the shafts of mixing machines when the mixing chamber is raised. The
chamber should be installed on strong pads.

The possibility of resins falling on the skin of workers should be prevented, work-
ers involved in pouring resins should use safety masks, rubber boots, gloves and
aprons and should be upwind, there should be a reserve of solvents (acetone and
raw alcohol), clean water, neutral soap, gauze, spare glasses, respirators and
breathing masks on the job site, the duration of continuous work on machines when
pouring furfurol and aniline should not exceed 4 hours during cold and moderate
weather and 2 hours during hot weather and it is forbidden to treat soils with fur-
furol and aniline when there is no wind during hot weather when strengthening soils
with synthetic resin (furfurol-aniline, carbamide and so on).

Liquid materials should be stored in metal tanks with hermetically sealed spouts.

The inscriptions: "Poison" and "Flamable" should be in red on all tanks designed
to store toxic and flamable materials.

The following basic requirements should be observed when installing asphalt concrete
pavement: it is forbidden to be near the side walls of the hopper when loading the
hopper of an asphalt spreader to avoid burns by the hot mixture, one must follow
the normal operating conditions of all assemblies of the spreader when spreading
the asphalt concrete mixture, one should avoid touching the housing under it when
working with a heated screed, the body of the dunp truck must be greased prior to
loading at the A32 to facilitate unloading of the asphalt concrete mixture into the
hopper of the asphalt spreader, the body of the dump truck cannot be cleaned during
unloading, it is authorized to unload a mixture that has become stuck in the body
by using special scrapers or a shovel with handle not less than 2 meters long,
standing on the ground, workers are prohibited from sliding into the hopper of the
asphalt spreader and into a tilted dump truck body and of rocking it if a mixture
is difficult to unload, the tools used for asphalt concrete pavement from a hot
mixture should be heated in a mobile roaster (on wheels), it is prohibited from
heating tools on open fires, it is prohibited of finishing (wiping) porous spots

of pavement in front of a moving roller, when several rollers are working in se-
quence, the distance between them and also between the asphalt spreader and the
rollers should not be less than 5 meters, the asphalt spreaders and rollers must be

319

FOR OFFICYAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cleaned, inspected, parked in a specially allocated site and braked during pro-
longed interruptions in work (6 hours or more), asphalt layers should be stopped
in the same sequence in which they being work, barriers with red signals should be
placed on both sides of the column of machines-~flags during the day and lanterns
at night, hoses should be reliably connected to the connecting pipe of the road
oiler or asphalt hauler during loading and spreading of liquid binder materials,
the movement of the road oiler is authorized only upon a signal of the operator or
foreman, it is forbidden to be closer than 10 meters from the delivery pipes when
pouring asphalt, it is prohibited from igniting and regulating the burner of a
road oiler, truck-mounted asphalt hauler or burner of an asphalt spreader while
under way and the operator should be at the side of the nozzle during this opera-
tion, a tank can be filled only through a filter with low or medium revolutions of
the pump, it is prohibited from pouring material into a tank if there is liquid
(water or solvent) in it, it is prohibited from liquefying binder material in a
tank and to stand under a filled tank, fuel should be initially delivered in a small
stream when igniting the burner, gradually increasing the delivery to normal, a
burner may be ignited only by means of a starter with a long handle and the burner
must be extinguished and the valves of the fuel delivery pipelines must be closed
before beginning pouring of the binder material.

10.5. Safety Regulations When Constructing Rigid Pavement

when working with a set of rail-travel concrete spreading machines, one must ob-
serve the following requirements: the rail—forms must be hauled on stake-bed
trucks or tractor carriages with single-axle trailers--the rail-forms are loaded,
unloaded and installed by cranes while observing safety regulations for loading-
unloading work (see section 10.6), regulations of the priority of engaging the as-
semblies of a cosmon transmission and individual units must be observed when start—
ing machines, it is prohibited from moving machines without a signal, the signal
for operation of a concrete mixture hopper-spreader is given after the dump truck
has departed, the concrete mixture is unloaded from a dump truck into the hopper of
the spreader after the b-"dhrekc of the truck has been set end an audio s’"na1 has
been given, it is prohibited from cleaning the walls of the hopper during movement
of it or the movement of machines, one must follow the normal operating conditions
of mechanisms and not permit people in the operating zone of machines when spread-
ing the mixture and finishing cement-concrete pavement, when concrete spreading and
concrete finishing machines are working jointly, the distance between them should
not be less than 10 meters, it is forbidden from being between the machines before
they stop, it is forbidden to stand on the vibrating beam and the finishing beam
during operation of the machines and blocks must be installed on the rail-forms on
sections with longitudinal slopes to prevent spontaneous movement of the mach.nes.

The following safety requirements must be observed when installing joints in har-
dened concrete: the functioning of cutting disks, the presence of water in the
tank and the functioning of the delivery system must be checked, each cutting disk
is set strictly vertically and one sees that it come into contact with the wall of
the joint in the plane during rotation, the groove of the joint is cut only while
wearing safety glasses and with the safety housing of the cutting disks in working
order, it is prohibited from regulating and moving the machine when cutting joints
(with rotating disks) and from working with the disk in an unfixed position.

320

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R10FFKJAI.USE(MNLY

The following safety measures should be observed when filling joints using a spe-
cial machine: the tank boiler should be filled with asphalt mastic to no more
than three-fourths its capacity and the temperature of the mastic should not exceed
170°C after heating (to avoid ignition), there should be a box filled with sand on
the job site to eliminate possible ignition of the mastic and the mastic is deliv-
ered from the base to the job site in closed containers.

Film-forming materials used in maintenance of freshly laid concrete (ethanol var-
nish, latexes and so on) should be used while observing safety measures in work
with noxious and poison substances.

10.6. Safety Regulations at Production Enterprises

General reguireuents. The territory of the base or plant should have an even sur-
face and slope for runoff of surface waters. Ditches and holes should be covered
with strong tight flooring or barriers and two-sided guardrails one meter high are
installed at points of human traffic and light signals are placed during darkness.

Walkways not less than 0.8 meter wide with guardrails one meter high should be
built at crossings over ditches, trenches and conveyers.

Instructions, posters and warning signs on safety regulations must be hung on ma-
chines and mechanisms in all sections of production bases and plants where it is
required according to working conditions.

Production bases and plants should be equipped with fire extinguishers.
Basic measures on safety regulations at A82.

The functioning of electric motors, fuel, steam or compressed air delivery system
in a burner and asphalt lines must be checked prior to starting up an asphalt con-
crete plant, after which a warning sound signal must be given about starting and,
having turned on the electric motor, the operation of the asphalt concrete plant
under no load must be checked.

When the asphalt concrete mixer is started up, one must initially switch on the
machine, then the screen. the hot elevator, the rotary dryer and the ooldelevator.
If no malfunctions are detected during idling, one can ignite the burner, having
ascertained the absence of fuel in the burner. having first opened the steam or air
delivery valve, and then the fuel delivery valve.

If there is no automatic ignition, burners must‘be ignited with a lighter having a
handle not less than 2.5 meters long. One must stand aside of the burner when ig-
niting the nozzle and regulating the fuel combustion intensity. The flame in the
burner must be observed through a window in the enclosing screen of the burner.
During operation of the mixing plant, one must see that the temperature of heating
the mineral material in the rotary drum not exceed 220-230'C, that the steam pres-
sure in the steam generator be in the range of 5-8 kgf/cm2 and that the temperature
of heating the fuel in front of the burner not exceed 70-80°C.

321

FOR.0FF1C]A[.USEI)NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Operation of the rotary dryer is not permitted if an outburst of flame into the
atmosphere through the ignition opening or through the slits of any part of the
burner or the annular slits between the burner sleeves and walls of the rotary
dnm is observed.

Inspection and repair of the internal parts of the rotary drtm and mixer should be
made after they have stopped, cooled down and completely freed of materials.

The mixer must be cleaned of asphalt concrete mixture only after the machine has
been stopped and measures to prevent sudden starting of it have been implemented.

During operation of the mixing plant, one must follow the cleanliness of working
surfaces. stairs and passages. Places contaminated with asphalt can be sprinkled
with sand after cleaning.

The asphalt storage area must be enclosed and covered with a canopy and all hatches
of asphalt melting boilers must be tightly closed with safety catches and covers.

Passages not less than 1 meter wide should be located between the throats (hatches)
of boilers and also between the throats and enclosures.

Asphalt melting boilers should be loaded with asphalt by pumping previously heated
asphalt from storage areas. When heating asphalt in boilers one must load the
boiler to three-fourths its volume, increase the fire in the burner gradually to
ensure slow melting of the asphalt and part of the asphalt must be punped to a
spare boiler if signs of foaming appear. It is forbidden to pour hot asphalt from
boiler to boiler by hand and asphalt in boilers must be mixed with mechanical mix-
ers or by means of a circulating system.

Asphalt is pusped through pipelines only after the functioning and tightness of the
flange joints of valves and pups have been checked. The pumps should be started
up with open valves of the asphalt pipelines and heating of the asphalt in them.

To avoid ignition, the valve to a road oiler or other tanks must be opened with
special care when pouring hot asphalt from an asphalt melting boiler to the hang-
ing bucket of a proportioning device.

The following requirements must be observed when unloading asphalt from railroad
tank cars and gondola hoppers: blocks are placed under the wheels of the rail
cars, the working order and tightness of the steam sleeve of the hopper gondola is
checked before admitting steam and the hose for delivery of steam to the connecting
pipes of the tank cars and the steam sleeve of the hopper is connected with the
valve on the steam pipeline closed.

The hopper can be freed of its retainers and tipped over only upon a signal of a
responsible person. Only mechanized tipping (with a winch or other equipment) is

permissible. There should be no people on the unloading side in the range of a
lS-meter zone.

The following safety measures must be observed when heating asphalt in an asphalt
storage tank and in boilers with electric heaters: see that the insulation or

322

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enclosers of all conducting components of the heating device are in working or-
der, do not permit the coils of the electric heating elements to become exposed
(they should be completely submerged into the asphalt). switch on the electric
heater and lighting lamps only by starters and knife switches, do not connect and
disconnect an electric wire under load, do not use metal objects to measure the

asphalt level and to mix it and do not leave the storage tank and boilers with
the electric heaters switched on without inspecting them.

The posters "Danger" and "Current on" must be hung on the electric heating sections.

Basic measures on safety regulations at was. There should be a reliable system of
audio of light signalling at the T582 that ensures timely stopping of any machine
and individual mechanisms. Preparation of the concrete mixture should be stopped

if the signalling systqn is damaged and should be renewed only after elimination of
the damage.

The working order of all moving assemblies, units and motors must be checked prior
to starting the plant equipment. A warning signal must be given prior to starting.

A signal must be given immediately with sudden stopping of the concrete mixer (or
another machine of the production cycle) so that the other machines of the produc-
ton complex can be switched off. A plant can be started into operation after such
a stop only at the authorization of the shift engineer.

It is prohibited from lubricating, repairing and adjusting machines and equipment
during operation of the plant. The inscriptions "Do not switch on--men working”
should be hung on the control consoles.

Operation of a plant with open covers of the mixer, removed housings and barriers
and also in the case of misalignment or slipping of the conveyer belt is prohibited.
Conveyer belts cannot be cleaned by hand while running and cleaning under a convey-
er belt and drive rollers is prohibited with the conveyer in operation.

The machines and equipment of a T882 should be repaired and inspected only by qual-
ified personnel who know the regulations and instructions for operation of the ma-
chines and equipment of the plant and the safety regulations during repair work.

All machines and mechanisms should be in a position that eliminates the possibili-
ty of their starting by outside personnel during nonworking hours. Therefore,
starters are locked and knife switches are enclosed in locked boxes.

Possible causes of explosion of the steam boiler-~insufficient water in the boiler,
excess normal pressure in the boiler, formation of crust on the heating surface and

the appearance of severe breakdowns (wear of the boiler)--must be eliminated when
operating steam power plants.

There should be no fewer than two safety valves that eliminate an increase of
pressure above normal on a steam boiler.

1b eliminate the danger of an explosion during operation a compressor, one must
provide normal operation of the intermediate compressor cooling system, delivery of

323

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uncontaminated air to the compressor, timely and correct lubrication of the com-
pressor cylinders with lubricating oils of the corresonding quality and grade de-
pending on the air pressure, major cleaning of the compressor not less than once
every two months and the correct operating mode of the air collecting tank and one
must also warn of the possibility of an extreme increase of pressure in the systeg.

Fire hydrants, fire extinguishers, sand boxes, water tanks and so on should be in-
stalled on the territory of the T582.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Tsikkerman, L. YA., M. A. Berliner, A. M. Vas'kovskiy et a1, "Avtonatizatsiya pro-
izvodstvennykh protsessov v dorozhnom stroitel'stve" [Automation of Produc-
tion Processes in Highway Construction], Moscow, Transport, 1972.

Antonov, A. M.. v. A. Bochin and Ye. V. Kelechits, "Organizatsiya i planirovaniye
dorozhnogo stroitel'stva" [Organization and Planning of Highway construction].
Moscow, Transport, 1968.

Vasil'yev, A. A. and N. v. Martynov, "Mashiny dlya postroyki i soderzhaniya avtomo-
bil'nykh dorog” [Machines for Construction and Maintenance of Highways], Mos-
cow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1973.

Glushkov, G. I. and s. s. Rayev~Bogoslovskiy, ”Izyskaniya i proyektirovaniyo aero-
dromov' [Surveys and Design of Airfields], Moscow, Transport, 1972.

Glybin, V. s., "Tekhnologiya dorozhnogo tsementobetona“ [Technology of Highway
Cement-Concrete], Moscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1972.

Dashevskiy, E. M. and B. I. Demin. "Stroitel'stvo aerodromov' [Airfield Construc-
tion], Moscow, Transport, 1972.

"Highway Construction Materials,"TPUDYGIPRODORNII, No 9, 1974.

Vasil'yev, A. A.. I. A. Vasil'yev, B. N. Prussak and M. M. Urusov, "Dorozhno-stro-
itel'nyye mashiny. Spravochnik“ [Highway Construction Machines, A Handbook],
Moscow, Mashinostroyeniye, 1977.

"Zakrepleniye i uplotneniye gruntov v stroitel'stve. Materisly VIII vsesoyuznogo
soveshchaniya" [Strengthening and Packing of Soils in Construction. Proceed-
ings of the Eighth All-Union Conference], Kiev, Budivel'nik, 1974.

“Izyskaniye i proyektirovaniye aerodromov. Spravochnik' [Survey and Design of Air-
fields, A Handbook], edited by G. I. Glushkov and D. A. Mogilevskiy, Moscow.
Transport, 1979.

"Instruktsiya po opredeleniyu ekonomicheskoy eftektivnosti kapital'nykh vlozheniy v

stroitel'stve" [Instructions to Determine the Economic Effectiveness of Capi-
tal Investments in Construction], SN 423-71, Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1972.

324

FIHICHﬂﬂCJAl.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Instruktsiya po razrabotke proyektov organizatsii stroitel'stva i proyektov
proizvodstva rabot" [Instructions on Developing Plans for Organization of
Construction and Work Production Plans], SN 47-74, Moscow, Stroyizdat. 1976.

"Instruktsiya po ustroystvu pokrytiy i osnovaniy iz shchebenochniykh, graviynykh
i peschanykh naterialov, obrabotannykh organicheskimi vyazhushchimi" [In-
structions on Installation of Pavement and Beds from Crushed Stone, Gravel
and Sand Materials Treated with Organic Binders], VSN 123-77, Hintransstroy,
Moscow, Transport, 1978.

Maryshev, B. S., A. K. Petrushin and A. H. Sheynin, "Skorostnoye stroitel'stvo
dorozhnykh odezhd s tsementobetonnym pokrytiyem" [High-Speed Construction of
Road Surfaces with Cement-Concrete Pavement], Moscow, Transport, 1978.

Pinus, E. R., s. v. Konovalov and A. M. Rodin, ”Stroitel'stvo tsementnobetonnykh
pokrytiy avtomobil'nykh dorog" [Construction of Cement-Concrete Highway Pave-
ment], Moscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1975.

Polosin-Nikitin, S. 11., I‘Osnovy tekhnologii dorozhnykh rabot" [Pundamentals of High-
way Technology], Moscow, Transport, 1972.

Rayev-Bogoslovskiy, B. S., A. N. Zashchepin, 8. I. Demin et al, 'Predvaritel'no
napryazhennyye pokrytiya aerodromov i dorog" [Prestressed Airfield and Highway
Pavement], Moscow, Transport, 1972.

"Rukovodstvo po proizvodstvu zemlyanykh rabot skreperami" [Handbook on Excavation
Work with Scrapers], Moscow, stroyizdat, 1976.

"Rukovodstvo po razrabotke tipovykh tekhnologicheskikh kart v stmitel'stve"
[Handbook on Working Out standard Process Flow charts in Construction], Mos-
cow, Stroyizdat, 1976.

"Rukovodstvo po sovurshenstvovaniyu organizatsii i provedeniya kontrolya kachestva
pri proizvodstve stroitel'no-mntazhnykh rabot" [Handbook on Improving the
Organization and Conducting of Quality Control in Construction and Installa-
tion Work], Moscow, stroyizdat, 1977.

"Rukovodstvo po statisticheskim metodam kontrolya i otsenki prochnosti betona s
uchetom yego odnorodnosti po COST 18102-72" [Handbook on Statistical Methods
of Control and Estimation of the Strength of Concrete with Regard to Its
Homogeneity According to GOST 18102-72], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1974.

"Rukovodstvo po stroitel'stvu dorozhnykh asfal'tobetonnykh pokrytiy" [Handbook on
Construction of Asphalt Concrete Highway Pavement], Moscow, Transport, 1978.

Sviridov, N. v.. ”Povysheniye dolgovechnosti tsementobetonnykh aerodromnykh po-
krytiy" [Increasing the Life of Cc..ent-Concrete Airfield Pavement], Moscow,
Transport, 1979.

SNiP 11-47-80, "Aerodromy. Normy proyektirovaniya” (Airfields. Planning Norms],
Moscow. Stroyizdat, 1980.

325

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SNiP III-40-78, 'Avtonobil'nyye dorogi. Pravila proizvodstva i priyenki rabot"
[Highways. Regulations for Production and Acceptance of Work], Moscow,
stroyirdat, 1979.

SHiP III-46—80, "Aerodromy. Pravila pmizvodstva i priyenki rabot" (Airfields.
Regulations for Production and Acceptance of Work], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1980.

SNiP 111-15-76, "Betonnyye i zhelezobetonnyye konstruktsii. Pravila proizvodstva
i priyeuki rabot" [Concrete and Reinforced Concrete Structures. Regulations
for Production and Acceptance of Work], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1977.

”Spravochnik inzhenera-dorozhnika. Stroitel'stvo avtomobil'nykh dorog" [Handbook
for the Highway Engineer. Highway Construction], edited by V. A. Bochin,
Moscow, Transport, 1969.

"Spravochnik po dorozhm-stroitel'nyr materialam" [Handbook on Highway Construction
Materials], edited by N. V. Gorelyshev, Moscow, Transport, 1972.

Degtyarev, A. P., A. V. Kurtinov, V. P. Leshchilovskiy et al, "Spravochnik po ob-
shchestroitel'nym rabotam. Zealyanyye raboty“ [Handbook on General Construc-
tion work. Excavation Work], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1975.

Goretskiy, L. I., V. I. Barzdo and s. H. Polosin-Hikitin, "stroitel'stvo aerodromov"
[Airfield Construction], Moscow, Transport, 1968.

"l‘ekhnicheskiye ukazaniya p0 ustroystvu osnovaniy dorozhnykh odezhd iz kamennykh
materialov, ne ukreplennykh i ukreplennykh neorganicheskimi vyazhushchimi"
[Specifications for Installation of [bad Surface Beds of Stone Materials,
Unstrenqthened and Strengthened with Inorganic Binders], VSN 184-75, Hintrans-
stroy, Moscow, Transport, 1976.

"'l'ekhnologicheskiye karty. Ustroystvo tsenentobetonnykh i zhelezobetonnykh aero-
dromnykh pokrytiy" [Process Flow Charts. Installation of Cement-Concrete and
Reinforced Concrete Airfield Pavement], Moscow, Orgtransstroy, 1976.

"Ukazaniya po primeneniyu v dorozhnom i aerodromnon stroitel'stve gruntov, ukrep-
lennykh vyazhushchimi materialami" [Instructions on the Use of Soils
Strengthened with Binder Materials in Highway and Airfield Construction) ,
SN 25-74, Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1975.

"Ukazaniya po proyektirovaniyu aerodronnykh pokrytiy" [Instructions on Design of
Airfield Pavement] , SH 120-70, Hescow, stroyizdat, 1970.

"Ukazaniya po proizvodstvu i priyemke aerodromm-stroitel'nykh rabot" [Instructions
on Production and Acceptance of Airfield Construction Work] , SN 121-73, Hos-
cow, stroyizdat, 1973.

shestoperov, s. V., I'Dorozhno-stroitel'nyye materialy" [Highway Construction Mater—
ials], Vol 1, Moscow, Vysshaya shkola, 1976.

shestoperov, S. V., "Dorozhno-stroitel'nyye materialy" [Highway Construction Mater-
ials], Vol 2, Moscow, Weshaya shkola, 1976.

326

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030066-3

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY

SUBJHZT INDEX

LOriginal pagination]
A

Motorized graders 85, 89, 202
Motorized road oilers 206
Automation of construction and installation processes 7
Mineral power units 184
Crushed stone and sand drying and heating units 183
Agrotechnical operations 90-93
Reinforcement storage area 197
Asphalt concrete plants 179-188
«safety regulations 237, 238
Asphalt concrete pavement:
quality control of work during construction 22$
materials 37-58
hauling the mixture 121-122
preparation and installation of bed 118, 123-125
acceptance of work 226, 227
placing the mixture 118, 119
packing the mixture 119, 120
Asphalt concrete mixtures:
granular cowosition 41
marks 37-40
materials 37, 41, 57, 58
types 37
Asphalt concretes:
from hot and warm mixtures 37-39
' from cold mixtures 37, 40
marks 37-40
dents 37-41
porous 37-47
types 37-40
Asphalt mixing plants 180, 186
Asphalt spreading machine 207
Airfield 3

Organic binder bases 178, 179
os-no taillass set of machines 207, 208
High-strength concrete 61-65
"highway 59-61
Concrete mixture 59-65, 227, 228
Concrete finishing machine 211
Concrete mixers 192-194
Concrete spreading machine 210, 211
Asphalt tank 186
Asphalt pastes for strengthening soils 26, 27
«emulsions 26, 58

327

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Asphalt melting units 185
Asphalt storage areas 179
Asphaltsx
for asphalt concrete 37, 41 51, 56-58
"for strengthened soils 25, 26
highway 56-58
Brigade contract 15
Brigahs:
in construction 15
ﬁor assembly of pavement from metal plates 129, 130
complex for installation of asphalt concrete pavement 122
complex for installation of crushed stone bed 144
for levelling dirt bed 141
for installation of armored concrete pavement 155
for installation of soil-cement bed 147
for installation of pavement of strengthened soils 113
Bulldozer-ripper units 19°
Bulldozers 75, 200

Additives for strengthening soils 24
Moisture content:
of stone materials 116
of strengthened soils 20, 114, 115
of packed soils 86
Water for concrete mixture 62
water saturation:
of asphalt concrete 46, 47
of soil strengthened with binder materials 20, 21
Water runoff ditches 98
Water intakes 99
Hater-cement ratio 59
Air-attracting additives 60
Selection of means of mechanization 7
High-strength concrete 61-65
Channels:
excavation with bulldozers 73
excavation with grader—elevators 79, 80
excavation with scrapers 73-75
excavation with excavators 75-79
requirements 71
Binder materials:
for asphalt concrete 37, 41, 51, 56-58
for concrete 60, 61 64
for strengthening soils 19, 22-26
for strengthened mixtures of stone materials 34, 36, 37, 57, 58

D

Thiokol sealing agents 66, 67
Argillaceous soils 18, 19

328

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Clays 19
Gravel 30
--for asphalt concrete 41
--for concrete 61, 62
--keranzit 33
Grader-elevators 202
Towed graders 89
Soil-mixing machines 204, 205
$01 13:
clay 18, 19
large-fragment 17
nonrocky 17
sandy 17, 18
rocky 17

Deformation joints:
filling 168-170
quality control during installation 228
cutting 160-168
Directive documents for airfield construction 6
Dispatcher service 15
Storm-water collecting pits loo
Crushed stone and sand proportioning-feed device 183
Permissible deviations from planned diaensions of pavement 224, 226, 229, 231
Highway concrete 59-61
Drain-runoff system:
quality control during installation 221-223
acceptance of work 221-223
construction 105, 106
diagrams 102, 103
safety regulations during construction 234, 235
components of system 97-102
Deep drains 100
--edge 100

Rigid pavement:
monolithic 132-172
precast 172-178
quality control during construction 227-230
acceptance of work 228-231
safety regulations during construction 236, 237
Stiffness of concrete mixture 63
Work logs 15, 16

Pouring devices 214
Setting retardants 63, 64

329

FOIIOFFHJA1.USE(NNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Excavation work:
during winter season 95
in sandy deserts 93, 95
construction of fills 80-88. 93
quality control 218—221
in salinized soils 94, 95
in loess-like soils 95
levelling operations 89, 90
acceptance 220, 221
excavation of channels 71-80
safety regulations 233, 234

Granular composition:

' of asphalt concrete mixtures 37 , 41-45

of gravel 30, 33
of soils 1?
of fillers for concrete mixtures 61, 62, 64
of stone material for strengthened mixtures 36
of mineral powders 55
of sand 31, 32, 61
of slag rubble 32
of crushed stone from gravel 29
of natural crushed stone 27, 20

Ashes for binders 34, 37
“waste for strengthening sells 25

H

Lime for strengthening soils 25
Industrialization of construction 6, 7

Stone materials:
gravel 30
keramzit gravel 33
sand 30-32
crushed stone 27-30, 32. 33
Rollers 203, 204
_ Sewage conduits 99
‘ Pits:
storm-drain 100, 104, 105
precast 102
manholes 100, 104
thalweg 99
Complex mechanization of construction 6-8
' Quality control:
input 217
operational 217
acceptance 217
production 217
engineering 217

330

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3
Quality control of work:
of excavation work 218-220
in construction of rigid pavement 227-230
in construction of flexible pavement 225-227
in installation of drain-runoff system 221-223
in installation of beds :24, 225
of preparatory work 218
Labor cooperation in construction 15
Master cords 133-137
Stump movers 199
Coefficients:
of water-resistance of asphalt concrete 46, 47
of specimens of mineral powder and asphalt mixture 55
utilization of intrashift time 8
--of calendar time 8
of cold resistance of soil strengthened with binders 20, 21
soil inhomogeneity 18
of sand porosity 18
prefabrication 7
of packing asphalt concrete pavement 120
of packing soil 220, 225
of packing layer of asphalt concrete mixture 120
cranesmounted on truck chassis 215
----on caterpillar tracks 216
Brush cutters 119

Dirt chutes
--open

Marks:
of asphalt concrete 37-40
of concrete in strength 59, 62
of asphalt 41, 51, 57-59
of binder based on slags 36
of gravel by crushebility in cylinder 30
of sand 32
of strengthened mixture in cold resistance 33, 35
-- -- -- of strength 33, 34
of cement 61, 64
of crushed stone in crushability 30
-- -- wear 28
-- -- wearability 3O
-- -- cold resistance 29, 32
-- -- strength 28
Polymer-asphalt mastics 65, 66
Material and technical resources 14
Material and technical supply 13, 14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Materials:
asphalt concrete and asphalt concrete eixtures 37-57
concrete mixtures 58-65
asphalts 57, 58
gravel 30
soils 17-26
sand 30-32
polymer-asphalt mastics 65, 66
rubber-asphalt binders 65
mixtures of stone anteriale treated with inorganic binders 33-37
thiokol sealers 66, 67
crushed stone 27-30, 32, 33
asphalt emulsions 58
Machines for cutting joints 214
Metal sectional-removable pavement:
designation 125
installation 126-131
characteristics 125, 126
Methods of eanufacturing concrete and reinforced concrete articles 196, 197
Mechanization of construction and installation work 7
Machinery equipment supply 7, 8
Mineral powders 41, 55, 187, 188
strength modulus of sand 30
Monolithic pavement:
quality control of work during construction 227, 228
general data 132, 133
acceptance of work 228-230
construction in negative temperatures 170, 171
installation of master cord and rail-forms 133-139
installation of defamation joints 160-170
"of bed 139-151
maintenance of concrete 158-160
shaping of pavement 151-158
Cold resistance:
of. concrete 59, 62
of soils strengthened with binder materials 20, 22
of coarse filler for concrete 59
of strengthened mixture of stone materials 34, 35
of crushed stone 29, 32

Swelling:

of asphalt concrete 46, 74

of soils strengthened with binders 21

of specimens from mineral powder and asphalt mixture 55
Catch drains 99
Pills:

construction with motorized graders 84, 85

«with bulldozers 85

«under special conditions 93-95

332

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we on“ Mt. use ONLY

--with scrapers 82-83
selection of drive machines 80-82
quality control of work during construction 219
filling by transverse method 80
«by longitudinal nthod 80
Scientific organization of labor 15
Flexible pavenentx
asphalt concrete 118-125
of strengthened soils 107-115
"of crushed stone treated with organic binders 115-118

quality control during construction 225-227
metal 125-131

acceptance of work 226, 227
safety regulations during construction 235, 236
Normative doctsnents on airfield construction 6

Operational planning 15
«control 15
Organizational and engineering preparation of construction 10, 11
Organization of labor 15
Beds:
soil 139-141
soil-cement 145-147
of strengthened soils 107-115
"of metallurgical slag 123-125
--of crushed stone materials treated with organic binders 115-118
sand-cement 147-150
safety regulations 235
crushed stone 142-145
Basic construction funds 11
Drying additives 115
Dryers 98
Evaluation of work quality 218

Overpasses 101
Supermoistened soil 115
construction periods 10
Sands 17, 18
Sand:
for asphalt concrete 41
--concrete 61, 64
--strengthened mixtures of stone materials 34
crushed 32
natural 30-32
Levelling operations 89, 90, 139-141, 220
Plasticizing additives 60, 63, 64
Reinforced concrete slabs 133, 134, 173-176

333

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

--neta1 125, 126
Soil density 86
Reinforcement embedder 210
Surfactants 60
Mobility of concrete mixture 60
Preparatory work 67-70, 218, 232, 233
Contract method of work production 5
Indicator of specific asphalt content 55
--of consistency of clay soil 19
Proving grounds and shops for manufacture of concrete and reinforced concrete
articles 196-198
Polymer-asphalt nastics 65, 866
sowing grasses 93
Continuous method of organizing work 12, 13
Need for machines, equipment and iuplenents:
when constructing fills with bulldozers 84
-- -- -- with scrapers 83
-filling joints 170
--cutting joints 163-166, 169
"redeployment of rail-forms 139
--leve11ing soil bed 143
“assmbly of pavement from metal plates 131
«laying asphalt concrete mixtures 122, 123
--insta11ation of master cord 137
--insta11ation of armred concrete pavement 156, 158
-- -- soil-cement bed 148
-- - sand-cement bed 150
-- -- pavement and beds of strengthened soils 113, 114
-- - precast pavement from reinforced concrete slabs 177
-- -- crushed stme bed 145
Ultimate strength
of asphalt concrete 46, 47
of concrete 59, 62
of rock 62
of soils strengthened with binders 20, 21
Acceptance of work:
of excavation 220, 221
for installation of drain-runoff system 221-223
- - of rigid pavement 228-231
- --‘ of flexible pavement 226, 227
-- -- of beds 26
of preparatory 218
Principles of organizing airfield construction 5
Duration of airfield construction 11, 12
Construction organization plan 5, 6, 8, 9
--excavation work 95-97
-- -- work 5, 6, 8-10
Planning of construction and work production organization 8-10
Steaming 197, 198
steaming chambers 198

334

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Impregnation during installation of pavement and beds 115, 116
Subgraders 207-209

Spreaders:
of concrete mixture 209
of film-forming materials 212
of construction materia1s 205, 206
cement 205
Consumption:
of binder for surface treatment when laying asphalt concrete mixture 118
--of strengthened mixture of stone materials 34
-- -- of strengthened soils 19
of steam to heat asphalt 178
of cement 63
of meta11urgical slag 124
Rubber-asphalt binders 65
Rail-forms 137-139. 227
Rail-travel machines for installation of concrete pavement 213

P

Prefabrication of construction 6, 7
Prefabricated structures 6, 7
--of pavement from reinforced concrete slabs:
finishing joints 176
quality control of work 230, 231
acceptance of work 230
unloading and storage of s1abs 173
placing of slabs 175
Network planning and management 16
Cement storage areas 191-193
Scrapers 76, 201
Caking of asphalt concrete 47
Replaceable equipment of excavator 77
Mixing units of asphalt concrete plants 184
On-site mixing during installation of pavement and beds 116-118
Manholes 100
Collectors 98
Stages of construction flow 12
hymns 19
Sandy loams 19

Thalweg pits 99

TEmperature of asphalt concrete mixtures 48, 119, 187
--concrete heating 117, 186
--meta11urgica1 slag 123, 124

335

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Safety regulations:
at asphalt concrete plant 237, 238
-cement-concrete plant 238, 239
general data 231, 232
during excavation work 233, 234
"preparatory work 232, 222
”metruction of drain-runoff system 234, 235
-- -- of rigid pavement 236, 237
-- -- of flexible pavement 235, 236
- - of beds 235

Engineering and economic indicators:

of cutting joints 162, 163, 165, 166
of levelling soil bed 142

of installation and removal of rail-forms 139

of installation of armored concrete pavement 154
not sand-cement bed 150
--ot' crushed stone bed 144
Process flows heets:
of asphalt miner 180
for installation of asphalt concrete pavement 121, 122
--cf bed with subgrader 145, 146
not sand-cement bed 147, 149

Production equipent for manufacture of asphalt concrete mixtures 181-186
Thiokol sealers 65-67

Grass mixtures 93
Runoff collector pipes 101
laboriousness of performing work:
in cutting seams 163-165, 168
--levelling soil bed 141, 142
«installation and removal of rail-forms 139
--of master cord 135
--insta11ation of armcred concrete pavement 155
-- -- soil-cement bed 148
-- -- sand-cement bed 150
-- -- pavement of strengthened soils 109-112
-- -- precast pavement of reinforced concrete slabs 177

R

Placement of asphalt concrete mixture 118, 119
"of metal slabs 127, 128

"of precast reinforced concrete slabs 175, 176
Strengthening of soils:

selection of binders 19, 22-25

materials 19, 25-27

construction of pavement and beds 107-115
requirements on strengthened soils 19-25

physicomechanical properties or strengthened soils 19-21
Strengthened mixtures of stone materials 33-37
Packing:

of asphalt concrete mixtures 1119, 120

336

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of concrete mixtures 152, 157
of 8011 86-88, 219, 220
of beds 140, 143, 146
of strengthened soil mixtures 109, 114
of metallurgical slag 125
of crushed stone materials treated with organic binders 116-118
level of mechanization 7, 8
Acceleration of concrete hardening 197
0-709 installation 206
Maintenance of hardening concrete 158-160, 228

S

shaping monolithic pavuent 151-158

Shaping concrete and reinforced concrete articles 197
Cutting soil 140

Hoes 204, 205

Cement-concrete plants 188-195
“safety regulations 238, 239
Cements:
for concrete 60, 61, 64
--strengthened soils 25
“strengthened mixtures of stone materials 34

U
Partial mechanization 7
Black stone 123-125
Plasticity number of clay soil 18, 19

V

slags:
for binder 34, 36, 37
-- crushed stone 32

Joints in precast pavement of reinforced concrete slabs 176, 178, 230
"deformation 160-170

Crushed stone:
for asphalt concrete 41, 53-55
--concrete 61, 62, 64
«strengthened mixtures of stone materials 34
from gravel 29, 30
--natural stone 27-29
slag 32, 33

337

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Crushed stone pamnt and beds:
construction by impregnation method 115-117
- - on-site mixing 116-118

Alkaline materlah 26

Excavators 77

mnlsifiers 26

Asphalt emulsions 58

Power available per worker 8

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport", 1980

6521
(:50: 8344/0266

-5”)-

338

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030055-3