I‘Uﬂ 0“?le var. Ul‘hl

JPRS L/10311
8 February 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS Daues
xpouo 7/32)

CONTENTS

ASIA
INWNESIA

Increased Uee of Harihuana by Students
(KWAS' 12 “a 81)OOOOOOOOOOO...OOQIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Briefs
Theft 0! Evidence

HAMYSIA

Briefs
Drug Detouiticatien Center Proposed

PAKISTAN

Haehieh Seized on Panamanian Ship
(um, 17 J.“ :2)OOOIQOOOOOOOOOOOOO-OOOOCOOOOOIOOOICOOOOOOO

Briefs
Baluchiaten Opium Seizure
Opium, Charae Seized
PEOPLE'S RBPUBIJC OF CHINA

Hoecou Radio View: Beijing'e 'Opiun War'
(“W “610' 19 am 82)0......OOOOOIOOOOOOOOOCOOO§OOOO0..

THAILAND

once Chief Says PRC Preferred aa Narcotics Transit Point
(81“ MT wpm “My 23 NOV 81)eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeee

- A - [III - WW - 138 Pt

FOR OFFNJA1.U8E1NVLY
l‘Ve‘ VA'Ab‘Ibm VOU \Il‘bl

Progress in Poppy Suppression Drive Noted
(SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICBAN, 8 Nov 81)........................

Royal Figure Assists Heo in Evading Anti-Poppy Measures
(SIMMI' 1‘ "w 81).000.0.000...0OOOOCOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

Meo Continue To Plant Poppies
(81“ MT] 21 we 81)O0.0000000000000IOOICOOOOOOOIOOCOOOOOO

Ties with Burma Play Role in Narcotics Suppression
(Saengthai Khacphuthai; SIAM RAT. 3 Nov 81)................

Columnist: Size of Opium Caravan Warrants 0.8. Help
(Suk wannssaka BAN HUANG, 12 Oct 81).......................

Morphine Bound for Malaysia Seized
(MO St”! 21 mt 81)O0.00.00.00.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO.

Suspects ﬁeld with 50 Grams of Heroin
(msT' 19 Dec 81)0.00000COO0.00.0.0.0...OIOOOOOO'OOOOCOOOOO

Three Branch Nationals ﬁeld for Smuggling Beroin
(MT, 2‘Dec 81)OOOOOOOOOOQOOIOOOIOOOOOOOCOOODOOOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs
Former BPP Corporal Held

LATIN AMERICA

BOLIVIA

Briers
Five Cocaine Factories Disnantled

COLOMBIA

PERU

Briefs

Pills Seized
Cocaine Traffickers Alrested

Cocaine Confiscated

Briefs
Popular Action Deputy Suspended

VENEZUELA

Overall Yearly Balance of Antidrug Activities
(Alonso Zulbrano; BI. NACIONAL, 21 Dec Bl)..................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

NEAR EAST AND NOKHIAPRICA

AFGHANISTAN

Finnish on Drug Expert Reports on Country's Narcotics Use
(“mlmtu MT, a J” 82)O0......OOOOIOOCOIOIOOIOIOOIOI

Briefs
Opium Seized in Kabul

IRAN
Briefs
Drug Arrests

Mashhad Opium Seizure
Narcotics Stash Seized

SUBFSAHARAN AFRICA
IVORY COAST

Internal Security Plans Antidrug Campaign
(MARCHES TROPICAUX 8T MBDITBRRANBENS, a Jan 82)............

SOUﬁH AFRICA

Detective Seizes Shipment ct Dagga in Reitz
(Rita van Green: THE CITIZEN, 19 Jan 82)...................

Briefs
Dagga Destroyed
Dagga Seized
Mandtax Arrest

WEST EUROPE

DENMARK

Report: Only Two Percent Hashish Seizures Pros Christiania
(ImmTloN' 19-20 Dec 81)O...DIOOOOOOOODOIOD’OOII.0......

Arrests Break Up Gang; Distributed 480 Kilogram. ct Bashish
(Bent Bak Andersen; BBRLlNGSKB TIDINDB. 15 Jan 82).........

Police Report Hashish Users Are Increasingly Younger
(Kirsten Sorrig) BBRLINGSKB TIDENDE, 16 Jan 8)............

Briefs
Prime Minister on Smuggling Appeal
INCREASED USE OF HARIHUANA BY STUDENTS
Jakarta ROMPAS in Indonesian 12 Nov 81 pp 8. 9

[Text] Life for the youth in Banda Aceh is being threatened by the influence of
narihuana and other drugs. Secretely, for acne tine. there have been naribuana
dealers along the students, including those of junior and internediate school
level. Hisvar Suleiman, secretary of the Aceh, Level I Regional Legislature De-
velopeent Union. learned about the situation. based on the survey results; con-
ducted over the last 3 years. Dre Sudarnadji. Police Lt Col of Banda Aceh 101
Police Force Regional Con-and, confirned the report of the Regional Legislative
nenber. During the interview on Saturday with IOHPAS, Sudarnadji said that. at
this tine, the police have uncovered considerable evidence that nsrihuana is be-
ing distributed among the youth, prinarily students. The police have a list of
naaes of those who have used nsrihuana. According to Sudarnadji, the police have
not yet carried out repressive neasures, such as arrests or raids in the schools
where they know narihuana is being distributed. At this tine, the systea of de-
terrence that is being used is that of issuing a warning. According to Sudar-
nadji, if these measures, being inplanented now. do not achieve significant re-
sults, than no other alternative renains but to arrest and search those who are
involved at the schools. He agrees that this can ruin the school's reputation
in the eyes of the public. Because of this, he urges all participating teachers
and principles of the school to closely watch the activities of the students who
are involved in this evil. Sudarnadji is of the opinion that schools were se-
lected by the drug pushers in bands Acah because the police had assessed then as
an ideal place for drug trade. The sane situation has been observed by Hisver
Suleiman, nonber of the Regional Legislature, Aceh Level 1. According to their
investigations. among the narihuana users. nany are the children of officials
and vealthy families. This group becones the target for narihuans dealers be-
cause they have the noney to buy it. Hisvar states that the narihuana is dis-
tributed in small packets. at a price range of 500 rupiahs to 1.000 rupiahs per
packet. It appears that their organisation is operated secretly. They don't
want to sell narihuana. except to those accomplices they already trust. Within
the organization, Misvar emphasised. are officials involved as the mainstay of
the operation. Because of this. it is difficult for the officials to arrest or
search the people behind the narihuana dealers. It is believed that the esti-
huana source in Aceh is generally in the South East Aceh, Central Aceh Districts.
and several areas in other regencies.

9556
C80: 5300/8312
BRIEFS

THEFT 0F EVIDENC2-Hsl, an employee in the office of the Jakartt district attor-
ney, in the Evidence Collection Section. is being questioned at this tine by the
Central Jakarta 701 District Command, the harcotics Special Unit Police. because
of involvement with s norphine selling syndicate. Based on the investigation of
the Police Special Narcotics Unit. they suspect Hal has already distributed 2500
pinches of morphine. valued at 7 million rupiahs. to the morphine distributors in
Tanah Tinggi, Central Jakarta. The police indicated that the narcotics sold by
Hal, are the evidence from the Jakarta district attorney's onice. According to
the "SH" source, during the case, pertaining to the smuggling of 5 kilograms of
morphine by an international syndicate, caught by the customs officials with the
help of the Republic of Indonesia State Police. this evidence was obtained from
the Central Jakarta office. When the session ended, the evidence was taken to
the Jakarta district attorney's office. At that time, one of their employees re-
turned it to the previous office. The prohibited material was not sealed. The
officer in charge at the Central Jakarta office told "88" that they did not ec-
cept the S kilograms of norphine because it was not sealed. Shortly after this,
the Central Jakarta Police 701 Special Narcotics unit successfully arrested a
morphine dealer whose operation was in the Tanah Tinggi. Central Jakarta area.
One of the members, named 63, was shot in the stomach because he tried to run
away. He is being treated at the East Jakarta Persshabatan hospital. His
friend JTB, also caputred, confessed to the police that the morphine they vere
distributing had been received from an employee in the Jakarta district attor-

ney's office. Hal. [Text] Jakarta SINAR RARAPAN in Indonesian 19 Nov 81 pp 1.
12] 9556

C05: 5300/8312
BRIEFS

DRUG DENXIPICATION CENTER PROPOSED--Penang (Mayan). 2 Jan—The Malaysian
Government has been urged to open a drug detoxification and rehabilitation centre
on an island to cater for addicts in the country. The National Anti-drug Agency's
Penang Coendttee member. Dr Tang Hock Nan. said an island would be ideal as it
could house up to 30,000 addicts at one tile and prevent escapes. Dr Tang said
that while the current nationwide operation aimed at eradicating drug addiction
was a good move, steps should have been taken to see that there was enough space
for all detained addicts. All the detoxification and rehabilitation centres in
mainland Malaysia would face problems in accommodating the addicts. he added.

Dr Teng said that although a centre on an island would coat the Government more
money, the expenditure would be justified as drug addiction was a serious prob-
lem. "All the addicts and traffickers could be segregated and treated on an
island until they were safe to return to society," he said. "On an island, it
will be possible for the addicts to carry out farming projects. Ihey can be

given vocational training so they will return as useful citizens." he said.
NAB/AF? [Text] [Rangoon THE HORKING PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 6 Jan 82 p 7]

C80: 5300/4916
gsgsgé: E

54%?
BRIEFS

BALUCHISTAN OPIUH SEIZURE-Islamabad, 1 Jar-Custom seized 1,295 kilograms of
opium, with s market value of about three Iillion dollars, near Kalat in
Baluchistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. it was reported here
Thursday. A mobile custom squad uncovered the haul Hednesday after learning
that s consign-sot of raw opiun was being transported to Karachi by lorry for
shipment abroad. No people, including the driver of the truck, were arrested.
the report ssid.--m/APP [Text] [Rangoon THE WORKING name's DAILY in English

2 Jan 82p 5]

OPIlM. CHARAS SEIZEm-Ssrgodham-A big consignnent of contraband opium and charas
worth as. 1.1 million was seized and three persons were arrested here on Jan 2.

According to details the Inspector. assisted by staff of local Excise and Taxa-
tion Departnent conducted successful raid and Shunoon Klan. Buksh Pathan and

Sikendar Shah of Kot Pareed uere arrested. [Text] [Karachi MW in English
9 Jan 82 p 5]

cso: 5300/6599
MOSCOW RADIO VIEWS BBIJING'S 'OPIU'H WAR'
BK200952 Moscow Radio in Burmese to Burns 1430 GMT 19 Jan 82

IL'nattributad connentary" "heijing's Opiua Har"|

[Text] The recently-concluded talks between burns and Thailand prove that trafficking of
narcotic drugs continues to be the lost serious probleu for Southeast Asian nations. As

all or you listeners know. 70 percent of the world's illegal drugs cones fro. the inaccessible
(‘mluen Triangle situated in the barder regions of bum. Thailand and China.

According to figures roleised by the United Nations. 700 to 800 tons of opiua are produced
annually in that region. Opium is transported by draft aninals through onerous eountainous
routes to clandestine laboratories where it is refined into heroin. iieroin. which leaves

the traffickers with profits in the millions. is aainly distributed free Bangkok and llong long.

The Burmese Govern-eat scrively works to stop the narcotics traffic. it destroys clandestine
poppy plantations every you while its troops expose drug traffickers and Illlh laboratories
producing heroin. Burn. believes that its campaigns against heroin will be even nore success-
ful if Beijing would stop supporting the traffickers.

The reccntly puhliah-d pamphlet by the infatuation Departnant of Burns contains irrefutable
fans that Beijing-influence rebels are trafficking drugs in the Golden Triangle. leijing

and in: henchmen have no qualms about associating with the Chinese "mafia" gang which controls
the manufacture and distribution of drugs in Southeast Asia. as well as the transportation of
drugs to western countrien. it would not be an exaggeration to say that China is associating
with the gang with crlninnl intent. Beijing acts in such a way because of its greed for profits.

A large part of the illegal profits are funneiled into China through ares purchases from China
hy rebels operating in burns and other Southeast liaion countrias. hijing leaders have yet
another plan for the Colden Triangle. Thi- region has sufficient strategic inortsncr for
them to interfere in the affair» of neighbu-rlng countries. Increasing activities by Maoist
groups based in the Golden Triangle revual China's attawt to control antigovarnlent groups

in harm and Thailand. the cmmterrevolutinnaries in Laos and the Pol Pot gang eediars.

11w inktha Pveithu chia warned: we cannot ignore the fact that black-narketeering and drug
trafficking are connected with sul'Nersive elaaanta who are struggling against the lures
aocialiat program. 11m opiua war waged by Beijing is part of its hegeaonistic design to
hrlug rmmrrion in the region under its influencr.

CSO. 5300/2135
ONCB CHIRP SAYS PRC PREFERRED AS "W168 WIT POINT
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA WICHAN in Thai 23 Nov 81 pp 7. 8
(Article: ”The Future of Narcotics: A New Route Looks Toward Peking'l

[Text] In narcotics trafficking. it is the heroin refineries that are considered
to be the important element that producesthe drugs and that stipulates the
routes to snuggle the drugs to world markets, both in Asia and Europe. The

place where the best No 4 heroin in the world is produced is the infaaous

Golden Triangle area.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary—general of the Office of
the Narcotics Control Board (ONCE), stated that the best quality heroin
presently being produced is the heroin being produced at the refineries

of Hr Lao Su, an international heroin kingpin who escaped free a Thai prison
and established a base at Doi Luong along the Thai-Burmese border. he has
been able to improve production techniques to the point whee he can produce
98 percent pure heroin.

Concerning these heroin refineries, froa what has been learned, they are
located at 13-15 places along the 1hai-Burnese border. During the middle

of this year, 40 border patrol police carried on an operation in accord

with the narcotics control plan in the area of Pa Sang Commune, Has Chan
District, Chiang Rai Province. As lor the result of this operation. before
the police could reach the refinery, they clashed with the defending forces
of the narcotics traffickers for about 15 minutes. They seized goods and
found the narcotics refinery. It was about 100 meters long and had four
guardhouses. One N79, two large pans. No 999 opium seals, 80 liters of acetic
anhydride, scales. 1.200 liters of cooked opium. air pumps, power generators
and morphine presses were seized. The officials burned everything before
they left. but they were not able to capture the producers because they

fled after the clash.

The narcotics are smuggled out of the Golden Triangle. This area usually
produces approximately 500 tons of opium a year. but this year, it is estimated
that 700-1,000 tone will be produced because the good weather has helped

the hill tribes obtain a better yield than last year. Thus, it is believed
that the smuggling of narcotics will certainly increase too. The route used

to smuggle the narcotics from the border usually passes through the Chiang
Saen area in Chiang Rai Province. Merchants from Thailand travel to Burma
and contact the drug traffickers, most of whom are Ho Chinese.

An Interpol news source stated that the contact point that resembles a narcotics
trafficking center is located in Ban Pong Khun in The Khi Lek District,

Chiang Rai Province. This is a major center located only 2 kilometers from

the border on the Mae Sai side. Merchants who go to purchase drugs here
comunicate with each other mainly in Chinese. The price of brown No 3 heroin

is approximately 7,000 baht per pound. No 4 heroin is twice as expensive,

that is, 14,000 baht per pound. '

Concerning this trade, the real buyers must go and observe the harvesting
and bagging on the mountains and affix seals in order to keep from being
cheated. After that, others will make contact. The pick-up man, the person
who transports the goods and the person who pays the money all carry out
their tasks separately; they do not know each other. After the real buyer
has looked at the bags, he pays 20 percent down. The gathering place used
most often in order to transport the drugs to the plains is 001 Phami. The
method used to transport the drugs is to hire hill tribesmen to carry the
goods from the mountains to Mae Sa- or Chiang Seen. It takes about 1 day
to make this trip on foot.

After that. the drugs are smuggled from Mae Sai to Bangkok in gasoline trucks.
The drugs are stored beneath special gasoline tanks and this hides the smell
well. These gasoline trucks take tue drugs to designated places in Bangkok
for further shipment to Hong Kong, Holland and Malaysia. Those who go to
pick up the "narcotics" use a code. Usually they use six Chinese characters,
or they tear a l baht or 500 baht banknote in two and then match them. If

the two halves match, the code is correct. The money is paid in cash or
payment is made through a bank. But from interrogations of suspects, it
appears that little money is kept in these bank accounts because the money

is paid through foreign banks in order to prevent the money from being seized
if the person is arrested as a suspect.

As for contact between the dealers and the smugglers, who do not know each
other, false names are always used over the telephone. Prom investigations

made by Interpol, it has been learned that thought is being given to establishing
heroin refineries in the south, particulaly in ﬂat Yai. Houses will be rented
and used to store narcotics transported from the north. In the future, southern
officials will seize sore opium than heroin since these drug traffickers

feel that the south is safer for smuggling. They first chose Sadao District

but because the area was unsafe, they chose Hat Yai, which is a bigger city.
Transportation is convenient and there are many more people here than in

Sadao. [Because] there are few poeple in Sadao, there may have been leaks

about their operations and they could have been caught easier than in ﬂat

Yai District, Song Khla Province.

Malaysian narcotics traffickers wi 1 travel to Hat Yai in order to pick
up drugs and smuggle them directly into Malaysia by giving the code to lake
contact. Mosc of the heroin smugglvd into Malaysia will be sent on to Holland.
But if .singaporean traffickers are involved, the drugs will be smuggled
into Singapore by boat and on the return trip electrical equipment will
be smuggled into Thailand, especially by way of the Andaman Sea.

It can be seen that the route that uses Bangkok as the transit point is
starting to shift to the south. There is also a trend showing that heroin

is also being produced and mggled into northeastern Thailand by Laos even
though the heroin produced in Laos is not popular and is of very poor quality.
But this ,is still very alarming and it is placing a greater burdenon the
narcotics control units to intercept it.

Furthermore, Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of

the ONCE. revealed that a new route has been discovered that is used to
snuggle narcotics from Bangkok to ﬂong Kong. Instead of sending the drugs

to Hong Kong directly, the drugs are being snuggled indirectly by way of

Peking since the Chinese officials there have little knowledge about narcotics
suppression and getting through customs there is easier than in Hong Kong.

Once the drugs reach Peking, they are snuggled south and then into Hong

Kong.

Shipping the opium to refineries in southern Thailand is one element in
the clever plan of the narcotics traffickers who want to escape the legal
penalities imposed by the narcotics. acts, penalities which range all the
way to execution for the possession of heroin with intent to sell. Thus,
by shipping opium, they hve a greater chance to escape with their lives.
also, the transport route is shorter as compared with having to transport
[heroin] free the north to collection points and then snuggling it abroad.

Malaysian police have reported that, even though no poppy is grown in Malaysia,
they are encountering a greater drug problen. A heroin refinery was discovered
for the first time at Bukhit Hear Tachan in Kadah State along the border

with Thaialnd. Based on investigations, it is believed that there are at

least six other refineries similar to this one. Thus, more and more narcotics
are being snuggled through various regions of Halaysia.

Concerning narcotics suppression last year, Thailand was able to make drug
busts and arrest about 25,000 suspects. This is the highest figure ever.

But even so, it does not appear that it will be possible to halt the snuggling
of narcotics abroad. Rather, the trend is for even greater amounts to be
smuggled out this year.

Because of the harsh [penalitiesl and the high price of narcotics, more
heroin, opium and aarihuana addicts are turning to thinner and benzene,
which are just as dangerous as heroin.

It can be seen that bangkok will probably become a center for narcotics
snuggling again. Even though a substitute crops program has been started
in the north in order to have the hill tribes turn to cultivating other
crops and even though educational institutions and youths are being supervised,
the budget for suppression activities has been increased and the United

Nations nd other co nt ies a coo rat‘n s lin te hni s change
constantly because 0 t e greig pro its trail 03%;. g c gue
Thus, the routes used to 1ranspoert these goods are changed constantly and
so it is difficult to suppress [the trade] or make arrests. When the old
route has been watched too much, new routes never seen before, such as the

Bangkok-Peking route, come into existence. Thus, it is as if a "new road
is heading for Peking."

11943
C50: 5300/4579

10
PROGRESS IN POPPY SUPPRESSION DRIVE NOTED
Bangkok SIAM RAT SAPPADA HICRAN in Thai 8 Nov 81 pp 10, 11
[Article: "let Us Have so Years to Destroy the Poppies']

[Text] November 1981 is the deadline for the joint poppy suppression program
in Chiang Mai in accord with the program to “prohibit" and "eradicate" poppy
cultivation. Poppy cultivation will be “prohibited" in 51 villages in 10
districts and one subdietrict and poppy plants will be destroyed in 10 of

the villages in seven districts and one subdistrict.

Concerning the goal of the poppy suppression drive in these 10 Villages,
the government wants this to be an opium free zone. It is expected that

it will take about 4 years to carry out this program to resolutely prohibit
poppy cultivation in these areas. If the hill tribesmen violate the law,
they must be punished in accord with the legal measures that the government
is trying to put into effect in the mountain areas.

The government feels that while community development activities have been
carried on in places where poppy is grown. including economic. social. educational
public health and agricultural activities that have been carried on with

the cooperation of the United Nations since 1973, the Thai hill tribes in

the “substitute crops cultivation and Thai hill tribes development” project
villages are still secretely growing poppy. In particular, based on the
1980/1981 poppy cultivation survey, it appears that poppy cultivation has
increasd 24.49 percent over the 1979/1980 cultivation season. That is, tron
29.084 rai, the area lplanted in poppy] has increased to 34,661.46 rai,

and the yield has increased from 15.49 tons to 48.57 tone, which in percentage
terms is an increase of 213.56 percent.

Concerning the resolution calling for a prohibition on poppy cultivation

in 51 villages and the “eradication“ of poppy cultivation in 10 of the villages,
the stipulated measures are not the same because these 51 villages have

not been developed and promoted equally. All of the villages are located

in Chiang Mai Province. Based on the survey. it appears that poppies are

grown all over the province. A total of 11.068 rai are under cultivation

with 154 villages, 4,502 families and 31,080 people engaged in poppy
cultivation. Also, there are another 416 rai planted in poppy that belong

to Ban Hue Mae ﬂat and Ban Pieng Luang in Chiang Dao District and Ban Luang

11
in Fang District, which are Ho Chinese villages, and to Ban Mae Nachon in
Mae Cham District. which is a plains Thai village. Thus, the total area
in Chiang Mai Province that is planted in poppy is 11,484 rai.

In this, the area that has the largest area planted in poppy is Mae Chan
District with 3,305 rai. Next is Chiang Dao District with 2,152 rai. The
district with the smallest area planted in poppy is Huang District with
only 15 rai. But concerning these suppression activities to destroy the
poppy plants, only 10 villages have been targeted. These 10 are: Ban Khun
Chang Khien in Huang District, Ban Nae Sa Mai in Mac Rim District, Ban Buat
Chan in Mae Rim District, Ban Khun Hang in San Padong District. Ban Pha
Mon in Chon Thong District, Ban Hin Fon in Mae Chan District, Ban Phui Tai
in Mae Chan District. Ban Mae K0 in Hot District and Ban Doi Sam Meun in
Chiang Haeng Subdistrict.

To carry out the destruction of the poppy plants in these 10 villages, one
eradication team has been established in each district. Each team is composed

cf one administrative official, one provincial police official, one district
development official, one district agricultural official, one ONCB official,
local kamnans and local village heudnen. At a meeting, it was further stipulated
that one group of officials (12 people) from the provincial police office

and the border patrol police will be responsible for supervising things.

The poppy eradication teams must not have more than 40 members, who are

to be selected from among the general population.

As for the areas where "prohibition" is to go into effect, it is not necessary
to establish operations teams. The district officer is the person who will
normally carry this out since the hill tribes both respect and fear thedistrict
officer. The goal of this prohibition is to inform the hill tribes so that
those who have poppy seed in their possession turn over the seed to the
officials. After that, a memorandum will be sent; if the officials think

it proper, they are to conduct a search and seize the poppy seed found.

In both suppressing poppies and prohibiting poppy cultivation, it has been
specifically stated that neither Village Scouts nor Volunteer Defense Corps
forces should be used. The local police should be the Ones to establish

forces to carry out things. Also, the use of military forces should be avoided.
However. if the use of military force is necessary, only small numbers of
troops should be used, with the provincial governor being the one who directly
contacts the military unit in the locality. The reason for this is that

an atempt was once made to destroy the poppy plants of the hill tribes in

Nan Province by having the military mobilize Village Scouts and Volunteer
Defensu Corps members to go destroy the poppy plants of the hill tribes.

But instead of destroying just the poppy plants, they also turned down the
houses in the hill tribe villages. The government had to pay tens of thousands
of baht in compensation. This caused both psychological and political

damage that can affect the security of the state.

As for the hill tribesnen who make their living by growing poppies, during

this suppression drive, there have been people who have said and proposed that
the hill tribes have been induced to grow poppy because opium was bringing

l2
a very high price last year. If the government really wants to eradicate
opium, it should send both private and government merchants to purchase

the opium. If the government canno1 solve this problem, the hill tribes

will find remote hidden areas to cuntinue growing poppy since no other crop
earns as much money as poppy. Also, the government usually just makes threats
rather than actually carrying out suppression activities. 'The government
only announces a prohibition and threatens that it will destroy the poppy
plants but it has never carried on a real suppression drive.”

The hill tribes claim that they have not made any profit from growing substitute
crops and that, at present, they have already invested money to grow poppies.
Thus, they have asked to be allowed to grow poppy this year, which will

be the last year, so that they can earn money to pay their debts to the
investors who loaned them the monev to grow poppy. As for Ben Mae Sakai,

it has asked to be allowed to grow poppy for another 50 years. As an alternative,
it has asked that the government p:rchase the opium to process medicine

or that it stipulate poppy cultiva ion areas along with solving the marketing
problems for the people who grow substitute crops in accord with the United
Nation's program by purchasing the entire yield produced by the hill tribes.

It was decided to destroy the poppy plants in November because, looking

at the agricultural cultivation schedule of the hill tribes, [it can be
seen that], in October, the hill tribes plant the main poppy crop (annual
poppy), weed the poppy fields, harvest and dry the rice and harvest the
hybrid crops, all of which takes twem about 1 month. In November, they have
to weed the poppy fields and harvest the main rice crop before they can
harvest the poppy and extract the opium in December. In January, they extract
and collect the opium. Thus, Novemter is the right time to cut down the
poppy plants since the poppies are not big enough to be harvested or to
flower and they are not so small that they will come up again. If they are
destroyed in December, this will be too dispiriting and this will not be
good for the officials or for the owners of the popppy fields since the
plants will just be uprooted and thrown away.

Police Major General Phao Sarasin, the secretary-general of the ONCE, stated
that, in these 10 villages, in reality, they must definitely stop growing
poppy. The income of these hill tribesmen, who do not have to grow poppy,

is adequate to support them. If they secretely grow poppy, we will not

be sympathetic. Concerning this problem, together with the governor of chiang
Mai Province, we have formed a joint management committee for the eradication
of poppy cultivation in order to solve the problem. At the conference it

was proposed that a real suppression drive be carried on since the substitute
crops cultivation program has achieved satisfying results. Based on its
assessment, the United Nations has provided additional funds to carry on

the program in another 40 villages and a German support project is now getting
underway with the opening of a school at Khun Chang Khien to which hill
tribcsmen will be sent for traininq.

13
As compared with 10 years ago when opium production reached 100-l50 tons,

last year, the people who made surveys on foot and who took aerial photographs
found that opium production reached only 48.57 tons. This is a reduction

of more than 50 percent. Also, the coffee that has been planted is bringing
greater profits. The hope that we «ill become a second Brazil is beginning

to come true. For example, at presunt, at 001 Sam Meun Mr Lao Yang's income
has risen from 40,000 baht to 60,000 baht and this year it is expected to
reach 90,000 baht. he has sent his children to study in Chiang Mai,

and he has purchased additional land in Mae Rim.

Based on what has happened in the past when forces have been sent in to
destroy the poppy plants of the hill tribes. something violent usually occurs
since the hill tribes rise up to oopose this and they use weapons to keep
the Thais from coming up the mountlin. And in some villages, there are
infiltrated areas of the terrorist;, areas of influence of the 93rd Division
and areas of influence of the Ho Cminese and Burmese minority groups, who
earn money from the opium trade and use it to purchase weapons to fight

the Burmese government. Thus, this is something that the ONCB and Chiang

Mai Province should give careful thought to and find a way to prohibit and
suppress this so that the desired results are achieved. But to carry on

such activities only when pressured by foreign governments or.to please

the United Nations is to forget that “opium is a weapon in the political
struggle.”

11943
CSO: 5300/4579

14
ROYAL FIGURE ASSISTS “30 IN BVADI“G ANTI-POPPY MEASURES
aangkok SIAM MA! in Thai 14 Nov 81 pp 26-28
[Articlez |"l'he Opium Policy: who Is Right?']

[Text] “Pros summaries of various reports received by the Office of the Narcotics
Control Board (ONCE), it has been learned that during this year's poppy

growing season, large numbers of Thai hill tribesmen, especially those in

the Ban Luang, Ban xhop Dong and Ang Khang areas in Chiang Mai ProVince,

will grow poppy end no alternate crops will be grown because opium is bringing
an especially high price this year. There is a credible report that states

that Honchao Phieadet Ratchani, the Royal Projects chief, has given permission
to the tribesaen in these areas to grow poppy and supported than in doing

this.

”Concerning such a situation, besides the fact that this will enable narcotics
to spread even more widely, this will also affect the crop substitution
program both in carrying on activities, with the sin sing to control and

halt opium production in the future, and in [receiving] foreign support.‘I

This is from a report by the ONCE.

On 23 September, General Prachuap Suntharangkun, the deputy prime minister,
stated that he would travel to Burma to discuss cooperating in suppressing
opium. As for suppression activitius. Thailand has quickly concentrated

on controlling poppy cultivation since September, especially in the hill
tribe villages that were suppossed to cultivate substitute crops. Besides
this, General Prachuap also stated that an attempt will be made to draft

a law prohibiting poppy cultivation in five northern provinces. An effort
will be made to put this law into effect in November. After that, this will
be done in other provinces.

But on 14 October, hr Amnuei Yotsuk, an HP from Chiang Hai Province who

is a mentor of the Social Action Party, told a reporter that he is troubled

by the fact that the Meo are clearing the jungle in Chou Thong District,
Chiang Mai Province,since they will then go on to clear areas on the mountains
and during the cold season these areas will be filled with poppies just

as in past years.

15
"This cold season, healthy poppies will be seen everywhere. Fertilizer has
been used to promote growth because the Bank for Agriculture and Cooperatives
(SAC) has given them loans since they can sell their yield at a high price
and the SAC is curtain that the loans will be repaid. I once went and asked
them whey they did not grow crops. They told me that they were not stupid
like those below who are occupied only with growing crops that cannot be

sold as easily as theirs. By living in a village that produces opium, with
just one cup of the drug, things are fine....'

These are opposite paths.

Concerning the bad results, a report from the Administrative Subcommittee
for the Study of Drug Problems stated that:

On the economic front, thvre are a total of about 500,000 drug addicts.
Each addict must spend about 100 baht per day to support his drug habit,
which amounts to approximately 18.25 billion baht per year. Besides this,
moet addicts are the country's young people and laborers and this causes
labor losses amounting to approximately 27 million baht per day, or 9.855
billion baht per year (based on a minimum wage). Also, each year the state
must spend 200 million baht on [narcotics control] and the cultivation of
substitute crops.

On the social front, this will probably generate more crime, which can be
seen from the fact that 20 percent of all criminals held by the Penitentiary
Department are narcotics offenders. This may lead to degeration in society
and cause trouble both for those involved and for others.

On the political front, the state must take responsibility for the low-quality
youths and the country's labor losses. It must also spend money each year

to solve this problem. This may affect the country's security. One result

is that Thailand's image [will be tarnished] in the eyes of the world.

Also, narcotics crimes are usually organized crimes. There are systematic
networks known as crime syndicates. Many criminals work together and do

this as a profession. They carry out activities in secret with overlapping
networds that coordinate things both in and outside the country. The responsib-
ility for carrying out the actiVities if divided by level.

It is [usually] very difficult to arrest the heads, or high-level people,
of the syndicates because-ofa lacktvfevidence of their guilt. Usually, those
who are arrested are the minor traffickers and transporters. And the arrest
of these people does not help sole the problem since the major criminals
have escaped the hand of the law and the sources of the narcotics have not
been completely destroyed.

"At present, we are first giving wnrnings to stop. We give three warnings.

The first time, we carry on public relations activities to get them to stop
growing poppy [saying that] otherw-se we will take strong action. Two weeks
later we go out again and ask for the poppy seed and tell them to find other

16
crops to grow instead. If they still do not believe us after the two warnings,

we wait until the poppies have grown to a height of about 50 centimeters

and then we go and cut them down. We wait until they are only about 50 centimeters
because then they can still plant substitute crops. If we waited until the

poppy plants were taller. they would not be able to plant any other crops.

“The villages chosen to grow substitute crops will be villages that have

been developed and that have received some training concerning the cultivation
of substitute crops. All of these villages are in the ONCB's program. Other
than this. we are not involved," said Mr Chaiya Phunsiriwong to SIAM HA1.

Thus, the resolute action that the state has hurriedly tried to carry out
is the "total destruction of the poppy fields” by Section 3, the Administrative
section of the Region 3 border patrol police headquarters and the ONCE.

But the operations gave rise to a concern that prohibiting the Thai hill
tribes in the program area from growing poppy would lead to poor psychological
results because the enemy night distort things to their advantage in spreading
propaganda. Besides this, Region 3 border patrol police headquarters presented
six plans of operation on 9 Nova-bar 1979 in order to take "resolute steps.‘

But after things were discussed with Momchao Phisadet Ratchani, it appears
that he did not agree because his policy was to allow the hill tribes to
cultivate poppy (according to an ONCE report) in order to keep then from
moving and growing poppy in other areas, which would ruin the royal project.
Chiang Mai Province and the Region 3 border patrol police headquarters are
still in awe of Honchao Phisadet with the result that no resolute action
will be taken soon.

But Moechao Phisadet denied this, telling SIAM MAI:

“Think about it. Who am I to prohibit one group from growing poppy and to
allow another group to do so. since I am just an ordinary citizen, what

right do I have to do souething like this? Instead, you should go and ask
the ONCE why they haven't achieved results whereas we have. I should not

say too much when they say things like that -- that I support the cultivation

of poppies.“

However, the things that should be discussed are the Opium Act of 1929,

the Narcotics Control Act of 1976 and the laws concerned. These cannot generally
be used to coerce people because the government's policy of leniency toward

the hill tribes who grow poppy has allowed the hill tribes to get used to

this and they do not see the sanctity of the law. When this is added to

the policy which the head of royal projects has toward the hill tribes,

it becomes an obstacle to using the laws of the country to coerce these

hill tribes.

Besides this, it causes conflicts during operations between the government units
that are carrying out things in accord with the laws, or their duties, and the
government units that are carrying out things in accord with the policy of the
head 0! royal projects.

11943
CSO: 5300/4579 17
HEO CONTINUE TO PLANT POPPIBS

Bangkok SIAH RAT in Thai 21 Oct 81 pp 1, 12

[Text] The HP from Chiang Mai proposed that the government urgently consider the
problem of the mountain people aggressively trespassing on forest reserve and
being granted bank credits for agriculture without collateral. This has caused

misunderstanding in their heavy destruction of the forest. The public has the
misconception that the government is more interested in the mountain people than

its own citizens.

Amnuai Yotsuk, HP from Chiang Hno, Socialist Action Party, disclosed to reporters
that he had sent a letter to Prime Minister Gen Prem Tinsulsnon to give urgent

consideration to the problen of the ﬂea tribe intruding and destroying the forest.
He had received complaints from the residents of Ban Doi Kaeo, Amphoe Chom Thong,

Chiang Mai, that they had suffered hardship since the Men from Mae Daeng. Amphoe
Phrao. Amphoe Fang, and Chiang has had made fields for shifting cultivation in

the vicinity of the Inthanon highlands, which is a forest reserve and the begin-
ning of the watershed, 200 families clearing the land 2 months ago, to plant
crops and opium.

Amnuai Yotsuk stated that in addition the public complained that the Bank for
Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives granted credit to these farmers with-

out property aa collateral, giving them the idea that the government supported
the destruction of the forest. The action of the Man has given rise to the

problem of the ruin of the forest and watershed with the subsequent hardship for
the residents. It has also made difficulties in government.

The Chiang Mai MP said that the problem of forest destruction by the ﬂea is long
standing and has occurred in every province of the north. If the government does
not take sincere corrective measures. the Thai people will have the misconception

that the government has a policy of pleasing the mountain people rather than the
citizens. So he has asked the prime minister to order concerned government units
to study a solution.

9615
050: 5300/4562

18
mas um! sum PLAY sou: m unconcs surpasssrou
Bangkok sum an in Thai 3 Nov 81 p 7

[Article by Saengthni thophuthai]

[Text] After the prime ndniater returned from the United States it was thought
that he would overhaul the opium heroin suppression openly. whether this would
please America or he must eradicate it completely is not known. To get two birds
with one stone is to destroy the cold hearted death merchants and to destroy the
financial base of the politicians.

when narcotics eradication is publicized the way the prime minister declared

would be done openly. the past records in these circles should be examined
before facing the dangers of jungle and explosions. The people who die from

opium and heroin addiction are many. Those who die on the political scene
because of the opium trade are many. Those who die because of narcotics sup-
pression are many also.

An example of a person who dies from the political setting and the power of opium
is Police Gen Phao Siyanon whom Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat could not force out
of Thailand.

At that time the CIA supported Phao by getting markets for him. so there was a

route to get out the opium of the KNT Chinese. settled in the north, to the world
markets. This supplied capital in the struggle against the threat of the Chinese
mainland, under the power of Mao Zedong. Because Phao's downfall was so frighten-

ing, it was difficult to find any influential person bold enough to find a place
for him later.

A man who lose his political standing because of narcotics was Thanin Kraiwichian,
former prime minister. formulator of the joint opium suppression program with

Burma and the founder of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board directly under
the Prime Minister's Office.

At that time Thanin vigorously. with a large investment, swept narcotics and
equipment of every kind together for burning at Sanam Luang, just as in the time

of Field Marshal Sarit 20 years before. But Thanin did not have the good fortune
of the Field Marshal "Phakhama Daeng" because he was released from political
circles.

19
However, the opium suppression policy of Thanin had one factor in coma with the
policy Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanon mentioned several days ago, that is,
cooperation with Burma in the suppression of opium cultivation and heroin fac-
tories. At that time Thanin sent Upadit Patchariyangkun to promote friendly
relations with President Ne Hin of Burma, asking Burma to cooperate with Thailand
in marshaling force to destroy opium cultivation and heroin traffic. The outcome
was that Burma laughed in resentment because Burma was the one pressing for
cooperation from Thailand, not the other way around. It was known that Burma
was hurt and put up with a lot from Thailand.

At the time of the Ne Vin coup U Nu fled to Thailand for political asylum. Burma
mde no objection because that was normal politics. If Ne "in were overthrown,
he would also have fled to Thailand. But when Thailand allowed U Nu to use the
Thai border as a sanctuary for those fighting with the Burmese, Burma was angry.
But their anger was short-lived because in the end U Nu showed himself as no
threat. The Karen and the Hon did not join him since in his time he had
oppressed these groups the same as Ne "in.

What aroused Burma's greatest resentment against Thailand was the action when
Burma could not suppress its minorities in fighting that lasted more than 30
years. The cause came from Thailand. Burma cited three major reasons. Whenever
Burma pressed these minorities along the ‘lhai border to destroy them, their groups
escaped into Thai land. Following them caused incidents. The minorities or rebels
as Burma called them knew the game. Whenever the Burmese government soldiers
closed in on them, they turned their back and hung on the ropes to save them-
selves, just as Hohammed Ali did with George Foreman.

There was a protest at the beginning of 1977 when the Burmese government army
with five battalions attacked a Karen base at More Island, opposite our Hang Kha
in Tak Province, on the edge of the Koei River. Some units of the Burmese troops
set up an ambush for the Karena in 'ihai territory because they knew that this
group would flee into Thailand, since they were acquainted with Thai officials
and always traded with them. Burma attacked the Karena and pushed them to fall
back on Hang Kha, and destroyed shops and houses. Fourteen people were killed
but they had no victory over the Karens. The Karens accused the Burmese of low
body blows for the ambush on the Thai side. Thailand protested to Burma that

the attack on Hang Kha was a violation of their territory.

Burma withdrew but paid no attention because Hang Kha was a center for goods
crossing to Mura island. From Mura Island they were sent to the heart of Burma,
entered the black market. and brought the Karena a profit of 3 million baht a
month for their army. This damaged Burmese economy since the merchandise
appeared on the black market.

Another cause for Burmese anger was that some people in Thailand took over the
trade of heroin and morphine of the Free Shah Army of Khan 5a or Chang Si I-‘u or
Chan (.hangtrakun, and the traffic in opium or heroin of the Kifl‘. This was a stab
in the back for Burnu. In the northern part of Thailand then these groups had
money to support the army continually fighting with Burma.

20
In addition, the Thai set up heroin factories in the mountain ranges on the Thai
border with Burma.

The final reason for Burmese resentment was the fact that Thai or influential
persons from the Thai side were agents to procure weapons and military equipment
for the liberation armies in Burma. Recently they arrested such a source.

Therefore, when the Thai asked for Burmese cooperation in Thanin's time the
Burmese laughed in their faces.

"However hard and skillfully we tried for 6 months, the opium and heroin traffic
in the north of Thailand reverted to its former condition." an side of he "in
replied. The Thai representatives returned.

if now General Prem sent men to negotiate in the same manner. we do not know
whether the result would be as before.

Although the Thai were ushered out. the Burmese narcotics suppression officials
followed Thanin's representatives to ask them back.

"There is very little change, only a glossing over the surface. The benefits for
the Thai received in the offer (from the Shan State) are much better than an
agreement with Ne Hin. The people in Bangkok know it very well."

The people in Bangkok who know it well are the same group that ousted Thanin.

Let us go back to the drug trafficker, Khun Sa or Chang Si Pu, Khun Suk Chan. who
has poppy flowers blooming in his heart. He expressed his distress when he saw
the announcement of the 500,000 baht reward for his arrest, leaflets which the
Border Police helicopter brought to scatter in the vicinity of Ban liin Taek, Ban
Huang Song. Tambon Mae Thom, Amhoe Mae Chan. Chiang Rai Province. recently.

"I myself want to see opium wiped out from the Golden Triangle, but there ought
to be certain conditions." Khun Sa's conditions are to have the United States
and Western countries, which are the victims of narcotics, to buy the opium from

the mountain people stipulating a reduction in the cultivation each year and to
introduce alternative economic crops. In 6 years the replacement crops would

give sufficient results that opium cultivation could be abandoned. "My death
would not halt opium growing in the Shan State because this has been going on

for more than 200 years. I am just over 100. I have no meaning for spins in
this area at all."

That indicates there is someonc over Khun 8a but he did not say who it was.

Burma's return to the talks has significance. while there was destruction of
heroin factories on the Burns side in February 1980 the Burmese soldiers crept up
in the middle of the night. for lo nights. to reach a mountain peak. the site of
a factory, to deal with the heroin producers. who gave no resistance.

not while the soldiers made their way up the mountain. there was the sound of a
gunshot, a danger signal warning the drug group, which came from Thai territory.

21
Later a helicopter secretly flew from the grounds beside the factory to enter

Thai territory and disappear. "Someone with privilege had the use of the heli-
cOpter." the Burmese officials announced after the suppression. Bum invited

international newsman including Thai to observe the suppression.

Before this Burma had intercepted a white Thai Border Patrol Police helicopter
loaded with 30 men. But the men declared that they were on official duty (secret
as usual) and had lost their way. At that time Burma was conducting a successful
operation against narcotics producers in that area. The incident occurred in
June 1977, when Burma destroyed three heroin factories. '

Burma said no more when the Thai Government asked for the return of the helicopter
and the men.

At the seizure of the heroin producing canps Burma also found many chemicals for
the extraction of heroin. such as acetic anhydride ether, ammonium chloride, etc.,
which are prohibited chenicals under strict control.

How much Thailand supplien is not known. There is a large agency not far from
SIAM RAT and there are two locations for sales.

Acetic anhydride is an element used with many other processes, so both drug fac-
tories need to use it.

Burma received from the United States 12 helicopters, Bell 205 A, for narcotics
suppression operations, just the same as the United States gave Thailand. Burma
will be disturbed when it finds a helicopter intruding over the border, saying
"It is the same model as ours."

Take a look at the narcotics suppression in the north of Thailand. If we do not
count Khun 5a, there are still the KMT divided into three forces. The 3rd divi-
sion of Gen Li I Thinn or Li Woen Huang has over 1,500 men in the Than Ngop
district, .1 short distance west of Chiang Rai. Another group is that of Gen

Tuan Chi Noon, who died not long ago. with an equal nunber of men at Doi Mae
Salong and Hiang Ngoen in Chiang Rai. The independent division of Gen Ma Ching-
Kuo was supported by President Chiang Ching-Kuo, the son of Marshal Chiang Kai-
shok, for spy ing on mainland China. The first two engage in opium trade because
they do not receive any subsidies and the CIA now does not hire them as merce-
narius. They are a problem in suppressing opiun and heroin because they are an
irritation and involvu confrontations betwevn nations. Khun Sa himself said when
he saw the Thai acting tough. "Etestroying these forces is opening the way for the
communists to take one step nearer the door to Thailand."

We cannot say whether the tough narcotics suppression policy of Gen Prem
'l'insulanon's government at this time will be a repetition of that of Thanin

Kraiwichin. Isut we raise this example briefly to see that in the past there
were such incidents as these.

”('1 'D
(150: 5 300/4562

22
COLUMIST: SIZE OF OPIUH CARAVAN HARRANTS U.S. HELP

Bangkok BAN HUANG in Thai 12 Oct 81 pp k, 5
[Article by Suk Hannasak: "Narcotics, a World Problen")

[Text] It is true that drug caravans from neighboring countries entering Thai-
land sometimes meet patrols of the Border Patrol Police or of the army and a fire
fight ensues. It is an old story. School children have heard it this way from
the border police that whenever they found a caravan they hit it hard.

But the news, announced recently by the Supreme Comnd Headquarters, of a clash
between a caravan and soldiers in the area of Ban Noi Phaya Saaakkhi, Tambon Hae
Khan, Asphoe Mae Chan, Chiang Rai is frightening because the large force encroach-
ing on our territory numbered 700.

It is surmised that they transported opiun. But details “t come later since
Lt Gen Son Khattaphan, director of the Information Office of the Suprene Comand,

stated only that the military communications network had not received detailed
reports.

that focuses attention is why the caravan protection force is 700 people. If it
is organized like an army, it is cowarable to a battalion, raised to fight nore
than to transport opium.

In the View of the world, narcotics, Thailand, and the Thai people cannot be
separated. Actual conditions force one to ave it that way, because in the past
'lhailand has progressed Dre than Bum and Laos. ‘lhe borders of the three
nations neet in the vicinity of the Golden Triangle.

For the transport or opium and chemicals to produce heroin along the 'lhai-Burma
border there is a convenient route to every region, whether for Malaysia or
snuggling abroad, all depending on Thai territory.

11m traveling to Hong Kong or Taiwan say that Cmton there cake a close examina-
tion if they hold Thai passports because they do not trust then and fear that they
will bring in drugs to sell in those countries.

That is not the image of the Thai people, the imge of insult.

23
Even Gen Prem Tinsualnnon, the prime minister, on his trip to the United States,
brought up the subject, that there is no escape from the narcotics problem. Gen
Prachuap Suntharangkun, deputy prime minister, and Police Maj Gen Phao Sarasin,
secretary general of the Narcotics Control Board, held discussions. Later
President Reagan expressed satisfaction with the narcotics suppression policy of
the Thai Government and gave assurance that the United States was prepared to help.

This should be because drugs have become a headache for the United States and are
considered a worldwide problem.

From the incident of the major clash with the force transporting drugs the govern.
men: should take this opportunity to publicize the news throughout the world,
especially in the United States, to make them recognize the situation of Thailand.
which is surrounded by people who are intent on producing and trafficking in
narcotics.

The policy of the government is severe repression. The police in making arrests
are killed. For a final solution how many more police must give their lives for

the suppression of narcotics? The greater the suppression, the higher the price
for drugs becomes. The addict must struggle to get money for drugs by any method.
This usually means that honest people suffer as a result.

Another problem is to have the mountain people change their crops. But there are
some reports that these people are hired to plant opium. Also, however good the

price of the other crops they raise may be, it does not compare with the price of
opium. For the United States to give assistance we must find out whether it is

true abOut the hiring, who does the hiring, to get to the source.

in discussions with the United States, Police Maj Gen Phao Sarasin will take what-
ever assistance is offered.

9615
C50: 5100/4562

24
[Text] The Suppression Division arrested a gang dealing in morphine at a two-
story row building in the center of the city, seizing 20 kg of illegal drugs

worth over 13 nillion baht on a foreign market. The four norphine traffickers
confessed that they had engaged in snuggling from the southern provinces into
Malaysia for a long tine bc-fore they were captured.

Police Col Rungrot Yanokkun, comder of Section 7, Suppression Division, at a
briefing on 20 October 1981 at 0600 hours stated that the two-story building

No 156/38 in the lane behind Hat Nakhon Than, Ban Chang no Precinct. Bangkok Roi
District, Bangkok Metropolis was the site for the secret mrphine traffic for
some tine with shipments goint to the southern provinces for Haleysie.

So with Police Lt Col Prakat Satenan, Police Lt Col Nitiphan Singhonke, Police
Lt Col Khodtrit Phetphongphanit. deputy col-sanders Section 7, Police Lt Col
Choetchai Chonthnwat, inspector sub-division 2, Section 7, and a police force
they surrounded the building. At 1100 hours Police (‘01 Mgrot Yasokltm led the

whole group in an attack, entered the building, and found the four sen waiting
to keep appointments with customers. He inforeed then of the charges. He ordered

a search of the house. They found seven uorphine bars packed in a yellow paper
box, trademark 999, weighing 13.6 kg, valued at l nillion baht in Thailand. It

would be worth 13,600,000 baht abroad. This was seized as illicit goods.
Inforned of the charges were Somuk Rotrusng, age 1:6, owner of the house, Hire
Saengphong, age 39, address No 7 Soi Ansesi, Talbon Amnei, Alphoe Huang,
Songkhle Province, Hichai Hakphong, age 28, address No 56 Teﬂon Ko Thuat,
Amhoe Pak Phansng, Nakhon Si Thamrat Province, and Krachang Hakphong, age 35.
They were detained on the grounds of possession of narcotics with intent to sell.

Police (‘01 Rungrot Yamhkun brought the confiscated drugs and the four culprits
to the Suppression Division for prosecution of the case.

9615
680: 5300/4562

25
SUSPECTS HELD WITH 50 GRAHS 0P HBROIN

Bangkok POST in English 19 Dec 81 p 5

[Text] Chiang Hai--A provincial narcotics police team on Thursday arrested four
men from Chiang Rai who allegedly were about to deliver 750 grams of No. lo heroi:

No other suspects managed to escape arrest. police said.

Following a tip-off that drugs were to be delivered in the area of Ssnaakeera Road
in Huang District. Chiang Mai Narcotics Suppression Unit police waited there until
a group of six suspects arrived.

Two of then fled when the police approached, but the other four were arrested alle-
gedly with two bags of heroin in possession.

The arrested were identified as Sseng Paths. Chuchart Srihssens, Hanu Hongsupha
and Boonpsn Chsiruan.

They are being held on charges of possessing heroin with intent to sell.

CSO: 5300/4917

26
'05 nmom lofn! omculu can). lo
ll"! 1'0 lurchlhm '
gr:“3°: ~ Mlu Flnll allegedly
‘ M° MMmmadhn-
" ' no oln hidden on Mr nom-
00:013.: 0: uh while Mr- Aluou ul-
W Id loudly luduognmmu
‘ " ' :dem m rm body.
. moo vu uld lo but
a": “(3: lo [unmet hlddcu
In Flak. 33. underhb mm loot
illslo Fet- They won lulu-Hy
u. 11. and charged with mull"
Sumo; 3). and attempting to may
on board (lo herow had won
rmuuotul handed our to Don
n In. on Mum; puma further
whchuo condom.
.‘_~_.__._—

  

I

Alayou WM. errand cu Mplam won about to

27

  

(can for.kom.
Santa-.Molmtotahcmw

hutch”.

28
BRIEFS

FORMER BPP CORPORAL uELD--Police arrested a Former Border Patrol Police (3??)
corporal as he was allegedly about to deliver 3.5 kilogrannes of heroin yesterday--
the second time he had been held on heroin charges, police said. Pol Cpl Sa-nguan
Panchakhan was arrested when he arrived at Huay Kwang market at about 3 p. a. yes-
terday. Police said a waiting Crime Suppression team, tipped off there would be

a heroin delivery, found the Double Lions brand heroin when they searched
Sa-ngunn's pick-up truck. Police claimed Sa-nguan admitted snuggling the heroin
from Hae Sai District of Chiang Rai for clients in Bangkok. He was detained at
the Crime Suppression Division on an initial charge of possessing the drugs with
intent to sell. Former corporal Sa-nguan, a native of Mae Sai District, was pre-
viously arrested on January 9, 1978 when he and two others were allegedly waiting
to deliver about 3.5 kg of heroin smuggled from Mae Sai. However, Pol Cpl
Sa-ngaun was acquitted by the three courts for lack of evidence, while the other
two were sentenced. [Text] [Bangkok POST in English 8 Dec 81 p 5]

050: 5300/4917

29
BRIEFS

FIVE COCAINE PACTORIES DISNANTLBD——lt was reported today that in recent hours
the Santa Cruz narcotics department dismantled five cocaine factories in the

northern part of Santa Cruz department and arrested several persons involved

In drug processing. Persons onnagcd in robbing cocaine manufacturers or

swindling them with counterfeit money were also arrested. [La Paz Radio Illiusni
Network in Spanish 1700 GMT 18 Ian 82 FY]

csu: 5300/2139

30
BRIEFS

PILLS Sl-ZiZED--Yesterday evening, police autinarcotics units confiscated a shipment
of 2,315,000 (Leann 714) pills, of broad spectrum, near Aeandi in Choco Department.
The seizure took place at the farm known as (Villa Maria). The drug had been
processed in Colombia and was ready to be shipped to the United States. [PA23124lc
Bogota Radio Cadena Nacional in Spanish 1730 Off 18 Jan 82]

(:mwm-z TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED-~l.eticia--The police have broken up a well-organized
drug traffickers' song that operated in southern Colombia. At a farm located in
(Atacnyi). the police captured (Jose Reynaldo Ramirez). (Oliverio Samuel Turbege)
and (Lenardo Castillo Ardila) when they were packing 2,500 grams of pure cocaine.
A modern well-equipped cocaine processing laboratory was also found. [PA250318
Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 2300 GMT [8 Jan 82]

COCMNE CONl-‘ISCATEDuBogota. 18 Jan (AFP)--The attorney general's office has
reported that 10 kg of cocaine were confiscated from Colombians Gabriel Gomez and
Hernando and Grace l’radilla in the crater of Bogota. The police also discovered
and destroyed two large coca plantations in Miraflores in Meta Department.
[PA250318 Paris APP in Spanish 0235 (:HT 19 Jan 82]

(:50: 5300/214 3

31
BRIEFS

RJPULAR ACTION DEPUTY SUSPENDED-~The national plenun of the Popular Action last
night reSulved in a hunted session "to‘separate indefinitely" from that party
deputy fur Huanuco Reynaldo Rivera. vhu has been accused of being implicated in
narcotics trafficking. It also severely reprimanded Ayucucho representative Julio
Cesar Calindo. This information was released by Prime Minister and Economy and
Finance Minister Manuel Ulloa Elias, in his capacity as vice secretary general

for political affairs of his party. [Excerpt] [PY160218 Lima BL COHERCIO in
Spanlsh 13 Jan 82 pp 1-4]

650: 5300/2160

32
OVERALL YEARLY BALANCE OF ANTIDRUG ACTIVITIES
Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 21 Dec 81 p 0-11

[Article by Special Correspondent Alonso Zambrano: "1981 Operations: Drugs
Amounting to Hore Then 1.5 Million Bglivars Seized by the DISIP {Directorate of
Intelligence and Preventive Services/ in Zuliazl

[Text] Maracaibo, 26 Dec-The DISIP confiscated marihuana and mandrax tablets valued
approximately at 1.5 Million bolivars in Zulia in various operations this year.

Commissioner Victor Rivera Azuaje. district chief of this organization. today said
that officers of his departaent seized 100 kilos of this drug and some 10,000 mandrax
tablets.

Commissioner Rivera also mentioned the disarmament operation that was carried out in
Zulia. Even though he did not specify the quantity of equipment that was seized. it
is presumed that an entire arsenal fell into the hands of the 0151?.

Hachineguns, PALs, 9 mn pistols, rifles, revolvers, and "pineapple“ grenades were
seized in house raids in Le Guajira. Maracaibo, Colon, Sucre and in the districts of
Bolivar, Miranda, Barslt and Lagunillaa along the eastern shore of the lake.

The DISIP chief spoke of the most recent Operation in the Paez district (Guajirs).
where 10 members of a gang of murderers and holdup men led by Jose Manuel Fernandez
alias "El Jountro." were arrested. These persons raided Venezuelan territory and
hid out in haicao.

It was learned that this past month "81 Jountro" sparked the greatest police-military
mobilization that ever took place in Zulia.

Members of the army and security forces were recently mobilized to search for him.
They had received information that "El Jountro" and his 10 followers had formed

a guerrilla group which could well have connections with the “-10 [as published] of
Colombia.

however, later investigations ascertained that this was a question of a focus of
criminal activity and that there were charges of murder, robbery. rape against the

gang.

5‘)
Border Operation

Ten persons were arrested and an equal number of weapons were seized as a result
of an operation that the 0151? carried out in Sierra Azul, Los Laureles, and

Los Cerritos, jurisdictional districts near the border with Colombia, the scene of
several crimes and where the police force had not been effective.

Commissioner Victor Azuaje reported that the weapons that were seized-—rif1es.
guns, shotguns. revolvers, and 9 mm caliber pistols--were turned over to Caracas.
The 10 persons who were arrested for the most part are Colombians without documents.

Squad

The Zulia DISIP will be strengthened next 2 January through the addition of 100
new officers who recently graduated from the Police Academy and 15 patrol units.

Five of these units will be assigned to suburban patrol in fringe areas.
According to an announcement by Commissioner Rivera, on 2 January a Protection
Squad will be activated in fringe areas. The officers of this squad will have
jeeps and will patrol areas until now not covered by the police because of.
difficulty of access.

Commissioner Rivera made these announcements upon his return from Caracas, where
the president of the republic conferred the Police Armed Forces Cross on him.

Rivera also reported the arrest in the past 6 months of 6.000 undocumented
foreigners and also the recovery of many vehicles.

8255
cso: 5300/2125

34
FINNISH UN DRUG EXPERT REPORTS ON COUNTRY'S NARCOTICS USE
Helsinki HELSINGIN SANOHAT in Finnish 8 Jan 82 p 8

[Article: "Finnish Crime Inspector Returns from Afghanistan; In the Land of the
Opium Poppy Even Children Receive Narcotics to Induce Sleep and to Feel Harm"]

As the first Finn to be appointed to the duties of an expert with the UN narcotics
division. UNDND. Risto Veijalainen, a crime inspector with the Finnish Crime Police,
returned to his homeland from Afghanistan at the end of 1981. His duties there
were as a criminal investigation consultant in the narcotics unit of the interior
ministry of that country.

From the outset Veijalsinen's two-month tour included the managing of the UN
narcotics project budget, coordination of customs and the work of the narcotics
police, and the organizing of narcotics crime investigation training. The lack of
timerequiredpostponing the training until spring 1982. The most important task,
which was left uncompleted. was the renewal of the UN narcotics project.

"No UN officials were permitted to go outside of Kabul. The atmosphere in Kabul
was more tense than it was during mv previous official trip there in the spring of
1981. “any military aircraft were observed overhead daily." Veijalainen relates.

Crime Investigator Veijalainen had a conference with Interior Minister Gulabzoy

in Kabul, at which they discussed narcotics matters. According to the minister, an
"undeclared war" prevails in Afghanistan, which is one of the factors hampering

the work of the narcotics police.

In early December 1981 a bomb was thrown into the sentry post shelter in front of
the building housing the UN officials. Fortunately. no one was killed in that
explosion, according to Veijalainen.

Two days later, together with a Cuban UN colleague, Veijalainen was witness to a
bomb explosion in which one Afghanistan soldier died. Veijalainen does not have
knowledge of any of the 200 UN officialsin Afghanistan having been killed or
injured in the shootings and bombings.

For the time being. no one is being sent to Afghanistan to replace Veijalainen
in the duties of UN narcotics division expert. If conditions in Afghanistan
permit. this Finnish expert is due for a renewal of his contract. possibly for
four months during 1982, for the same narcotics project in Kabul.

35
Confiscations Becoming More Numerous

The state of war situation notwithstanding, Veijalainen was able to prepare the
projected 1982 budget for the UN narcotics project and to draft a report on the
narcotics situation in Afghanistan for UN headquarters in Vienna. In addition,
Veijalainen functioned as consultant in the interior ministry narcotics unit in
Kabul, distributing European crime investigation infatuation to the local police
chiefs. Veijalainen also put into operation the radio repair shop that was
commissioned by the UN, which notably aids the work of the narcotics police.

The UN started the narcotics project in Afghanistan in 19710. Since then the
narcotics police has been organized and partially retrained. Veijalainen feels
that there is truly a great need for narcotics investigation training in Afghani-
stan. In addition to the expanded narcotics unit in Kabul, narcotics units have
been established in the capitals of each of the eight provinces.

The UN has procured about 60 vehicles for use by the narcotics police and new
accounwdations for narcotics investigation, including modern investigation
equipment.

The objective of the UN narcotics project in Afghanistan is the reduction of the
growing, selling, black-marketing, and smuggling uf opium. Afghanistan ranks as
one of the highest opium poppy producing countries in the world.

Veijalainen states in his report that the nunber of narcotics confiscations is
increasing in Afghanistan. partially as a result of the UN project. In 1981 over
ll tons of crude opium, about 100 kilograms of heroin. and about 2,000 kilograms
of hashish were confiscated. The amount of opium confiscated in 1980 exceeded

6 tons.

"Opium has been used as a medicine in Afghanistan for thousands of years. The
smoking of hashish also is an age-old tradition, and it is this sense of tradition
that presents one of the greatest obstacles to ending the propagation of the opium
poppy. In addition to all else, the opium poppy is the only cultivated plant

that thrives high in the mountains."

According to Veijalainen, no figures exist of the extent of the internal narcotics
problem in Afghanistan. The vast majority of the 16 million residents in the
developing country of Afghanistan are still illiterate. and there are no official
population statistics.

Opium Even for Infants

The use of narcotics always brings with it serious health problems. According

to Veijalainen, children as young as 3 years old have been brought to the hospital
in Kabul because of malnutrition caused by opium use. The Afghanistanis, particu-
larly those who live in the mountains. have been known to give opium to their
children to induce sleep and to ward off the sensation of chilling. among other
reasons.

"The extent to whi~h the mortality rate in Afghanistan is affected by opium
addiction is a matter of pure speculation, but it must perforce be considerable.

36
The first care center for drug abusers was to be established in the northeast part
of the country. but that has been delayed because of the prevailing situation."

The selling and secret transporting of narcotics is prohibited by law in
Afghanistan. The penalties, compared to those in Europe, are truly minimal.

On one occasion Veijalainen accompanied the Kabul narcotics police on a mission of
confiscating 500 kilograms of crude opium. The normal penalty in that country for
a violation of that magnitude is 2 years' imprisonment. The opium was hidden in
the floor of the cargo compartment of a motor truck, packed in a double thickness
of plastic bags. ready for transport across the border. The regular load on the
truck consisted of hauling livestock.

Afghanistan is a traditional transit area for the international narcotics trade

and also a country of origin where in many instances the growing of the opium poppy
is the only means of livelihood for mountaineers. Pashtunestan, which is the
boundary area between Afghanistan and Pakistan, is an area of brisk narcotics
smuggling in which it will never be possible to provide adequate surveillance. A
continuing flow of refugees aggravates the situation all the while.

As long as it is impossible to offer an alternative crop plant to the opium
growers, everything will continue, according to Veijalainen. as it did a thousand
years ago. Afghanistan needs water and an irrigation system in order to make
rational use of its arable land area.

5955
680: 5300/21 21

37
BRIEFS

OPIUH SEIZED IN KABUL--New Delhi. 27 Jan (APP)-Governnent security forces in the
Afghan capital have seized 2,122 kilograms of opium in the biggest haul of this
kind, the state-owned newspaper KABUL NEH TIMES reported. The opium, packed in

46 sacks and apparently meant for smuggling, were seized in Kabul on 17 January,

a copy of the newspaper reaching the Indian capital today said. The security forces.
aided by members of the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA),
arrested eight persons and seized from them 350,000 in Afghan currency (about
U.S.$7,956), the paper said. The Soviet-backed Babrak Katmai regime in Afghanistan
has repeatedly accused the Muslim rebels fighting the regime of smuggling opium
from the country to Pakistan. Reports appearing in India have said that the rebels
had frequently sold smuggled opium in Pakistan and bought weapons with the money.
[Text] [BK271245 Hong Kong APP in English 1230 GMT 27 Jan 82]

CSO: 5300/5359

38
BRIEFS

DRUG ARRESTS--According to the Central News Unit. the antinarcotics headquarters

of the Bsfahan Guards Corps issued a statement announcing: The headquarters
discovered 6.7 kg of opium from 22 December to 20 January. According to this
report, during the same period, seven supporters of the hypocrites organization
[Mojahedin-e Khalq], who were involved in the sale of opium. were arrested by the
groups attached to that headquarters and were handed over to the Islamic Revolution
Court after their dossiers were completed. According to this report, the anti-
narcotlcs officers of Shiraz Revolution Guards Corps also discovered 26.3 kg of
opium. A number of smugglers were arrested and handed over to the Shiraz Revolu-
tion Court. [Text] [LDZSO310 Tehran Domestic Service in Persian 1630 GMT 24 Jan 82]

MASHHAD OPIUH SEIZURE--The Mashhad antidrug squad has seized 1.5 kg of opium and
50 grams of heroin from a number of persons. [GF301642 Mashhad Domestic Service

in Persian 1630 GMT 30 Jan 82]

NARCOTICS STASN SBIZED--Tehran, Jan. 11 (IRNA)--A stash of various types of nar-
cotic drugs weighing 400 kgs was discovered in Howlsvi Street, southern Tehran
on Saturday night. This was announced by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps
of Tehran who added that the narcotics were concealed in cooking oil tins. The
report also indicated that those connected with the narcotics were arrested and
handed over to Judicial authorities. [Text] [Tehran KAYHAN INTERNATIONAL in
English 12 Jan 82 p 2]

C80: 5300/5355

39
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

INTERNAL SECURITY PLANS ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 pp 80-81

[Text] Ivory Coast plans to intensify its fight against the peddling and use
of drugs domestically by organizing an "antidrug campaign" to be launched soon.

ﬁts most widespread drug in the country is cannabis. still called locally
"guedji," of which several plantations were recently destroyed in various
regions. Nonetheless, a significant amount of the herb continues to flow in

from neighboring countries, as do the barbiturates and amphetamines appearing
on the Ivorian clandestine market.

As to hard drugs (heroin and cocaine), Ivorian authorities say they are vigilant,
especially since everything seems propitious for their introduction and marketing
domestically.

Gabriel Cnogbo Couamene. Ivorian secretary of state for internal security, has
moreover called for the participation of all in the upcoming campaign. Referring
to his ministry's strategy in the antidrug fight, he stated that from 1960 to
1970. assorted discreet countermeasures were in effect "so as to not arouse
curiosity." "Since 1975, we decided to demythologize drugs," he added.

From now on, said Gouamene, we will be informing the people of the "daily increaaely

devastating effects" of drugs among them. Customs and police moreover continue

to step up their fight so that Abidjan will cease to be considered as a center
for drugs.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeaux et Cie Paris 1982

C80: 5300/5623

‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030020-1

DETKTIVE SEIZES SHIPMENT 0P DAGGA IN RBITZ

Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in mglish 19 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by 81k. van Gram]

[Text]

CSO:

5300/5622

Al’reew ”gauge;
the seized. «has
worth ' 3900

9
§
E

SE

gsgéggegwigesse
-§2325§§.%E§=§§§§
ﬁg 3 a? giegag
i 3? § a; z:

4].

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600030020-1
BRIEFS

om DESTmtm-Durbann'menty tons of dagga worth more than 8600 000 has already
been destroyed in the lhnkonaas Valley. by a police force of 60 led by Colonel J
Joubert of Pieternaritzburg. The police raiding party, assisted by a helicopter.
are conbing the dense valley looking for dagga plantations. Several fields have
been located and destroyed. Three Black men were arrested after police found five
grain bags of processed dagga. More arrests are expected. The operation will con-
tinue into next week. Host of the dagga fields are well concelaed and can only be
spotted from the air. [Text] [Johannesburg Th}: CITIZEN in English 16 Jan 82 p 10)

DAGGA Baum-Police have seized dagga worth al.5-nillion contained in 84 bags af-
ter they had stopped a truck driving through Soweto streets. The big catch, be-
lieved to be one of the largest ever to be cracked by the police, occurred at unid-
night on Friday when the truck transporting the drug was stopped by Constable
William hand in Union Road. Eldorsdo Park. Captain Marais Bonthuys. police public
relations officer for the Witwatersrand. said yesterday that three Soweto men have
been arrested, have made their first appearance and will appear again on Thursday.
Captain Bonthuys said police spotted a suspicious truck which did not have rear
registration nunbers and stopped it. The truck also did not have a mowed licence
and it was locked at the back. The three men were asked to open the back. but
claimed they had lost the key. ”After some tine police broke the lock and to their
ammnt the truck was full of dagga.’ he said. Police said the dagga in the 84
bags was worth about Ri,S-eillion. The men are believed to have been on their way
to deep Soweto where they would have made a fortune by selling the weed. {Text}
(Johannesburg THE SWAN in alglish 22 Dec 91 p l]

HANDRAX ARRESTnPolice have seized more than 8 000 nandrax tablets valued at about
R90 000 after stopping a car at a roadblock near New Canada outside Soweto. This
is the second biggest drug haul in Soweto in a week. last Monday narcotic detec-
tives confiscated 84 dagga bags worth 3500 000 in Eldorado Park. A man was or-
rested on Sunday morning when a polioeaan shopped a car near New Canada railway
station. They found 8 44!! tablets. It is believed the habiteforaing tablets

were on their way into the city where they sell for no each. Witwatersrand Police
Liaison Officer. Captain Marius Bmthuys, said it is absolutely illegal to use or
prescribe aandrax tablets. (Text) [Johannesburg THE SOWBTM in English 29 Dec 81

pl]

C50: 5300/5622

42
REPORT: ONLY THO PERCENT HASMISH SEIZURBS PROM CHRISTIANIA
Copenhagen INFORMATION in Danish 19-20 Dec 81 p 5

[Text] According to estimates made by the People's Movement
Against Hard Drugs only 2 percent of the hashish in Denmark
is sold in Christiania.

The repeated attacks on Christiania as the "Nordic Narcotics Center," which have
been presented recently by various Nordic politicians, police people and portions
of the Danish press, are now countered by the People's Movement Against ﬂard
Drugs which has done some figuring on the basis of reported sales of hashish and
narcotic substances in Denmark.

0n the basis of police seizures the following calculations were made. In 1980
1375 kg of hashish were seized in all in Denmark. No statistics were available
for the entire country for 1981 but it is known that in the months January to No-
vember seizures of 882 kg of hashish were made in Copenhagen, including “5.6 kg
found in Christiania.

This shows according to the People's Movement that only 5.2 percent of the Copen-
hegen sales took place in Christiania and if the entire country is included
Christiania's "share" is only 3.3 percent of total sales.

A Ton in Christiania

But the People's Movement thinks it can go even further, writing in a press re-
lease:

"Police activity in Christiania ls disproportionately high in relation to activity
in the rest of Copenhagen and in the rest of Denmark. As a result of this it must
be assumed that a larger share of the available hashish in Christiania is seised
than in the rest of Denmark. Therefore it must be concluded that actual sales of
hashish in Christiania probably amount at most to 2 percent of all hashish sales
in Denmark.

"No one knows the total consumption of hashish in Denmark. It is reasonable to
make an estimate on the basis of police seizures. If one estimates that the po-
lice aeise 3 percent of Danish consumption the total would be almost 50 tons, of
which 1 ton is sold in Christiania.

‘3
"One arrives at the same consumption if it is assumed that there are 250,000
regular hashish smokers with a daily consumption of 0.5 grams (- 05 tons).

"These figures should be taken with all possible reservations, however--it is
possible they should be cut in half. The figures are based solely on percentages
of police seizures."

The People's Movement also looked at heroin sales. Total seizures of this sub-
stance in the entire country amounted to 12 kg but only 1.8 grams of the drug
were found by police in Christiania during the first 10 months of the year.

If one looks at sales in terms of money the People's Movement has the following
figures. According to the police annual sales of heroin add up to 500 kg. At

"street prices" this means 1.8 billion kroner while hashish sales are estimated
to have a value of 1.75 billion kroner. Total sales would thus be 3.55 billion.

On this basis the People's Movement arrives at the following conclusion:

"This amount includes only heroin and hashish, not all the other drugs. Drug
sales in Christiania (only hashish) correspond to a value of 35 million kroner,

which is less than 1 percent of total sales in Denmark."
BERLINGSKE Errors

The People's Movement has also discovered that the editors of BERLINGSKB TIDBNDE
are not very well-informed about prices on the hashish market.

As an example they say that BERLINGSKE TIDENDE recently wrote that l98l drug
seizures in Christiania were worth 7 million kroner, including about 6 million

worth of hashish.

But since the quantity seized was 45.6 kg of hashish this would mean a sales

price of 130 kroner a gram and the People's Movement does not believe hashish
pushers in Christiania could get anyone to pay that much. The actual market price
in 1981 was 30-50 kroner a gram. That means that the quantity of hashish seized
had a value of 1.5-2 million kroner.

The People's Movement concluded with the following evaluation of the situation:

"As it appears from the calculations the myth of Christiania as the Nordic Nar-
cotics Center is a fairy tale with no basis in actual conditions today.

"Some 3 years ago--before the big narcotics blockade that is still effective--
Christiania was on the way to becoming a narcotics center and that is probably
the picture many people still have of Christiania. But the attacks are coming
3 years too late. As the figures show Christiania is practically high and dry
when it comes to hard drugs and the sale of hashish is very small compared to

sales in the rest of Denmark.

44
"There are two reasons why Christiania has been singled out with regard to hashish
dealing: first it is an excuse to shut down Christiania and second the sales
occur openly in contrast to the much larger drug dealing in the rest of Denmark.

"The way to solve the problems of hashish abuse among Danish and Nordic young
people is not to close Christiania. It requires an educational and preventive
effort of an entirely different nature, something Danish and Nordic politicians

should open their eyes to."

6578
C50: 5300/2127

45
ARRESTS BREAK UP GANG; DISTRIBUTED 680 KILOGRAHS 0P HASHISﬂ
Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TIDENDE in Danish 15 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by Bent Bak Andersen]

[Text] Sentences extending from fines to as much as b yeers in jail are the pre-
liminary result of the unraveling of three big hashish rings in Helsingor. In
all 53 people have been charged and the three ringleaders have been convicted of
distributing a total of 680 kg of hashish.

The last of the three ringleaders--the leader of the biggest narcotics gang--was
sentenced Tuesday to k years in jail. Another 31 people in that gang who were
middlenen to pushers or in one case also functioned as "warehouse nan" since he
stored large portions of hashish while the leader--30-year-old Niels Erik Greve--
was out finding new markets have also been charged.

Police in Helslngor say that Niels Erik Greve was behind the distribution of more
than 200 kg, but that was all he was charged with in court.

Another of those sentenced, 31-year-old hjarne Hojlund Petersen, was sentenced
last June to 3 years and 6 months in jail. charged with dealing in 200 kg of
hashish. In his wake 17 people were charged for violations of the strict drug
paragraph of the Penal Code or the law on euphoric substances. The police expect
that Bjarne ﬂojlund Petersen's earnings were around 1 million kroner.

The last of the ringleaders, 38-year-old Poul Vino Lindberg, was sentenced for
dealing in 80 kg of hashish. He denied everything but last October he was
sentenced to 3 years and 6 months in jail. 0n the same day his wife was sentenced
to 1 year in jail for conplicity in distributing the drug.

Characteristic of the group of cases is that all those sentenced and charged are
from Helsingor and vicinity. Host of the hashish was sold in Helsingor, the rest

in Sweden where a long list of pushers received sentences.

Just before New Year's the police arrested another two men--one foreigner and a
Dane with close ties to large sectors of the European drug network with the two
being suspected of having delivered the large batches of hashish to the three
ringleaders in ﬂelslngor. This part of the case which would round out the drug
gang case is expected by police to be completely investigated by summer.

C50: 5300/2127 46
POLICE REPORT HASHISH USERS ARE INCREASINGLY YOUNGER
Copenhagen BlRLINGSKﬁ TIDBNDE in Danish 16 Jan 82 p 1

[Article by Kirsten Sorrig]

[Text] The police are coming in contact with more and more children who are drug
addicts--and girls begin earliest. This is shown by the latest figures for 1981
from the Copenhagen Police Station.

During the year the.riot patrol was in contact with three boys and two girls under
13 years of age, all of them affected by hard drugs. Four of the children were
arrested for selling or being in possession of narcotics. The riot patrol was in
contact with six girls and three boys of 13 and 13 girls and lo boys of lb. Among
lS-year-olds the police were in contact with 21 girls and 18 boys.

"There are more girls among the youngest group but after 15 the number of male
drug addicts rises sharply," said the leader of the riot patrol, Ove Nielsen.
Thus the police were in contact with 83 boys and 25 girls in the 16-year-old age
bracket.

Ove Nielsen estimates that there are between 10,000 and 15.000 drug addicts in

Denmark, with most of them between 23 and 29 years of age. He says the drug prob-
lem has stabilized in the last year and does not think there has been either an

increase or a decline in the number of addicts.

"But there is a clear tendency for drug addicts to begin earlier and earlier.
Almost every night we see a dozen children who are only 9 or 10 years old under
the influence of hashish. The new generation of drug addicts that has started so
early worries us very much for if children get into a drug environment at that
early age it will be very hard for than to adjust to another environment later

on," said 0ve Nielsen.

6578
C808 5300/2127

47
381335

PRIME MINISTER 0H SWGGLING APPEAL-~Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen has now assurcd
38-year-old Pakistani Altai Hussain in a personal letter that he will not be ex-
pelled from Denmark before his application for political asylum has been duly
processed. Altaf Hussein will have served I: years in jail as of 25 February for
the sale of a large number of Pakistani morphine pills and on release he stands
to be expelled by Justice Hinister Ole Espersen unless he is granted political
asylum. In the letter, which is dated 8 January. Anker Jorgensen thanks Hussein
for his ”Christmas card" and writes that he has informed the Justice Ministry of
the application. Anker Jorsensen did not want to talk to BERLIHGSKB TIDBHDB
about why he had answered Hussein personally instead of turning the case over to
the justice minister. Hussein could have been released as early as April 1980
but has remained in jail "voluntarily" for the last 21 months in order to avoid
being expelled. [8y Jorn Brandt] [Excerpts] [Copenhagen BERLINGSKB TID£NDB in

Danish 16 Jan 82 p s] 6578

080: 5300/2127 END

48