FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10516

3 May 1982

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMAI ION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPIS publications contain information pri-rily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by ms. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was su-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itus are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Govern-eat.

COPYRIGiT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPROWCED HEREIN REQUIRE TEAT DISSEHINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
. USSR REPORT
Cvnsauerxcs, COMPUTERS AND AUTOMATION TecnuoLosv

(P000 9/82)

ExceaPrs FROH ‘COHPHTER ENGINEERING'

Couteuts

Mnet.tim oeeoeeeeaoooooooeeooooeoeooeeaoooOoooooooaooaeeeeeeeeoeeeooo

Introduction eaaeaeeoooeeoooeeeoooeeeooeeeolteoooooeoooooeoeooeeeeeoeoo

Blenent Syaten of the Unified Syaten of Coqutero......................
Integrated Circuita Uaed in the Unified Syeten of Counters ...........
Unified Counter Syatea Auenbliea ................L.......'............
Code Cowarieon Aoeenbliea ............................................
On-Line and Read-Only Henry ..........................................
Proceaeor ...... .......................................................
llicroprogran Control ..................................................
Arithmetic-logic Unite ................................................
Monitoring and Control Panel ..........................................
General Informtion About Information Storage .........................
Electric Circuitry of the Tape Storage ..............._.................

Characteristic Pailurea of Magnetic Tape Unite, Their Detection
.nd Eli-in.t£°n 0.0.0..IO...'0CC'0.0..0000...OOOOOOOOOCODOOOIO00....O

Preventive Control Operationa .........................................

Magnetic Tape Storage Controller ......................................

- a - [III - USSR - 21C 88']

mo 0mm". USE ONLY
Magnetic Drum Storage ................................................
Magnetic Disc Storage ................................................
Characteristic Failures, Detection and Blinination ...................
Preventive Control Operation .........................................
Yes-5551 Diac and Drun Controller ....................................

Controller Circuitry .................................................
Characteristic tailures ..............................................
Displaya .............................................................
Yes-7906 Display .....................................................
Yes-706b Graphics Display ............................................
Methods and Software for Checkout and Technical Diagnostics ..........
Technical Maintenance Software .......................................
Preventive Maintenance ...............................................
Installation and Servicing ...........................................
Autonoted Railroad Transportation Control Systen .....................
1/0 Devices for Yes-1022 and 2.9.1033
Bibliography .........................................................

T.ble of contmt. sososetaosossocooessossoosssoeososooooeaesoeasosssso

FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY
FOIOFFIOALIJSEONLY

unc 681.3(075)
cm naclmunc

meow wausum'mu 13mm in Russian 1981 (signed to press 27 Feb 81)
pp 1-363

(Annotation, introduction and selected passages iron the hook "Comuter
Engineering" by Nikolay Aleksandrovich Hitreykin, Valeriy Pavlovich Peoktistov
md Vladimir Il’ich Zelenkov, punished under auspices of USSR Ministry of Higher

and Secondary Specialized Education for use as e textbook in the
technical high schools, Izdatel'etvo ”Transport", 18,000 copies. 3“ pages]

{Excerpts} A study is node of the arithntic ad logical prindples of the con-
puters in the unified systen, the elenant base, the prinary functional and strup
tural diagram of the assesblies and circuits of the mified systen of culputera
ad their operetion, data and instruction formats, the structural principles of
the data input-output system and the cowuter eyetee interface. The structural
design and operating principles of the peripheral devices of the unified comuter
systen are described. ad infatuation is given on the nonitoring and preventive
work during operation and neintenance. The fmdanentala of tedmical nintenance

and repair of the unified systen of comuters at the conuter centers are investi-
gated separately.

The textbook is designed for students of technical high schools, and it can
also be meful for specialists working on counters.

There are 226 illmtratiom, 25 tables and 17 references.

The book was written by II. A. Mitreykin, Chapters ’1 to 1‘; V. P. Feoktiotov,
Chapters 15 to 20; md V. I. Zelonkov, the introduction and Chapters 1 through 3.

The reviewers were V. M. Fokin and G. V. zwareva.

MWWMY
we OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mmwcuau

The third generation coquuters in operation in the USSR and in other socialist
countries are built by the united efforts of eight “er countries of the can
(the Hungarian People's Republic, the Ger-an Desocratic Republic, Cuba, the
People's Republic of Bulgaria, the Polish People's hpublic, Ronania, the USSR
and Czechoslovakia). Sir mdela of the first series of computers naking up the
unified cowuter systee (Yes 8V1!) vere developed in a short period of tin under
the supervision of the Intergovernmental Codttee on Cowuter Engineering formed
in 1969: Yes-1010 (Hungarian People's Republic), Yes-1020 (People's Reputlic of
Bulgaria, USSR), Yes-1021 (Czechoslovakia), Yes-1030 (Polish People's Republic.
0881!). Yes-1060 (Germ Denocrazic Republic), Yes-1050 (1381!). The industrial
production of the indicated ndels of the unified syste- of conputers was started
in 1972. The Yes-1022 sud Yes-1033'coaputers were developed soesuhat later in the
088R. In parallel with the creation of ndels of the unified system of couputers
in the new series (series 2) reflecting the next phase of develop-ant of nitro-
electronica, the countries of socialist cooperation beg-u work in 1976 on the
ninicowuter systen (SH mo progran.

lbdels of the second series are the Yes—1011, Yes-1015 (Hungarian People's
Republic), Yes-1025 (Czechoslovakia), Yes-1035 (People's Republic of Bulgaria),
res-104$ (088R), Yes-1055 (Ger-n Democratic Republic), the 8)! M [ninicoquuter
systes], SH 1, SH 2, SH 3, 8!! lo (038R), SH 52/10 (Hungarian People's Republic).
The models of the 8}! EV)! constitute a new family of nodular cmuter engineering
Ileana designed for operation in control system. They are constructed on a nodern
element base, they have higher speed (260,000 to $0,000 operations per second)
and gmter “cum nenory capacity, broader possibilities with respect to connecting
peripheral devices coqaared to the 11—6000 and 11-7000 ninicoquutere produced at the

present tine .

The fourth generation of cowuters is being created on the basis of large-scale
integrated circuits (1.81). The ”Iain-6" comuter built on the baia of the

[.81 has already been put into series production, the production of fourth-genera-
tion universal multiprocessor conplexes with a total output capacity of note

than 100 million operations per second has been started. For the first tin in
the USSR, a single crystal nicrocoquuter, the "Blaktronika “Ts so," was built in
1979. This coqauter contains $0,000 crystal eleunta 6M6 h in size. It works
with 16-bit nders at a speed of us: to 550,000 operations per second. In the
future, it is proposed that a ﬁlo-bit single-crystal nicrocoquuter be built which
will contain up to 1 million elements. In parallel with further inrovesent of

MOMMONLY
POI OFI'IGAI. USE ONLY

Computer engineering is used broadly on railroad transportation. At the present
time comuter centers have been built at the road administrations, at a nud>er of
plants. several shmting yards and in the Hinistry of Railways. More than 70
different tvpes of planning. accounting, Ionitoring and malvsis problems are
solved at these comuter centers. The automated "stpress" system is operating
successfully in the Moscow Railroad Network for reserving and selling railroad

tickets. A transition is being made from solution of individual problems on
computers to integrated processing of information obtained from transport documents
especially adapted for this purpose.

Since 1971 railroad transportation has been working on the creation and introduc-
tion of a branch automated control system (ASUZhT) which must provide for
automated gathering and processing of the infomtion needed to optimize the
control of the railroads and enterprises of the Ministry of Railways. The ASUZhT
[automated railroad transportation control system] is a subsystem in the national
automated data gathering and processing system for accounting, planning and control

The development and introduction of the ASUZhT is divided into three phases. The
first phase was introduced on the railroads in 1975. It was based on the second-
generation computers and subscriber telegraph network operating at a transition
speed of 50 bits/sec. In the first phase the ASUZhT includes about 30 standard
medium range and operative planning problem and the control of freight ‘shipnents,
some problems of statistical and bookkeeping accounting. the administration of the
operations of the Hinistry of Railroads, and so on.

The second phase (1980-1985) presupposes the creation of up to 30 junction comuter
centers (Me) in addition to the road computer centers and the main computer

center of the Ministry. The nudser of solved problem will increase to approximately
150 in 1980 and 300 in 1985. During construction of the second phase, information
banks must be created, including a dynamic data file on the location and condition

of each unit of rolling stock (cars, locomotives, trains). During introduction of
the second phase of the ASUZhT the plan calls for beginning the application of
automated reading of intonation from moving rolling stock.

The third phase of the ASUZhT requires still higher output new-generation conputers
and data transmission means. It will be characterised by further expansion of the
nunber of solved problem (to approximately 500) and interpretation of them,
introduction of automated information reading from the rolling stock and other
team of automatic primary data gathering. During this period. message switching
centers have been deve10ped which permit sure flexible and efficient use of the
unified data transmission network. The creation of the Me and We [computer
centers] at the large plants and the group collective-use computer centers for
servicing a group of enterprises will be completed. The "brain" temnalg

(data transmission systems equipped with a minicomuter) are being developed.

The Yes-1010, Yes-1011, Yes-1020, Yes-1022, Yes-1030 and Yes-1033 and also
individual models of the modular computer hardware (ASVT-H and 8!! EV")
are used as basic data processing and control devices on the railroad.

MWLWONLY
”MUSEMY

MR3. WSYMOPTBMMSYSMOPW

In the lower-end nodels of the unified system of ce-puters (Yes-1022 to Yes-1060)
and in the najority of peripheral devices. integrated transistor-trainer logical
circuits (111.) series 155 are used. The control units for the input-output devices

and the storage elenents of all nodels are created on the basis of the series 155
m'drcuit‘a

In the lore powerful nodels of the Yes-1050 and Yes-1060 in the processors and
channels, series 137 and 187 logical circuits based on current switches with
codained emitters (cutter-coupling trmsistoriaed logical circuits - mn-
circuits) - are used. The enitterconnected logic is the ma. engineering
type bipolar unsaturated integrated logical circuit in whida the enitters of the
input logical transistors are connected to the enitter of a reference trmsistor.
Both the I'm-circuits and the ESE-circuits are built fro- silicon plates by
planar-epitazdal technology. Silicon plates with licrocircuits are placed in

sealed plastic rectngular homings with 16 pin leads. The housing dinnsions are
20X7X6 -.

The first structural level of the conputer -- the standard replacenent element

or card (1'22) (Figure 3.3) - is bued on integrated circuits. The

1'82 is a functional unit of the conputer, its basic nodule. M types of rrz have
been developed. One of then contains 26 integrated circuits haed on the two-way
printed circuit board. Another - designed for counters with higher output capac-

ity — is built free a nultilayered printed circuit board on which it is possible
to locate 72 integrated circuits.

The next structural level is the panel with 40 first or second type m. The pnels
(usually six of then) are placed on a frne. The last structural'level is the rack
on which three fra-ss are mounted, the Iiddle frale stationary and the ones on the
edges on hinges. which insures easy access to the wiring elenents.

“WWW!”
Figure 3.3. Stndardized structural elensnts of the mified system
of counters

3.2. Integrated Circuits Used in the Unified Systen of Counters

Transistor'rransistor logical Circuits. The base elenent of integrated circuits
m. is the lab-NOT type logical elewnt (Figure 3.6. a and b). It includes a
two-emitter transistor T1 forming the All) circuit with two inputs and a couple):
inverter crested from the transistors T2 to T6, the diode D and resistors R2 to R4.
For a feed voltage Bl of +5 volts, the high input voltage level “lei-2.6 volts
(corresponds to code 1). and the low input voltage level 11,190.10 volts (corresponds
to code 0). The voltages U. and Uh fed to the inputs of the elenent vary within
the sac limits. There are different versions of base elenants in which the input
transistor Tl contains 3. 5 or 8 eeitters. on the basis of which the input coinci-
dire circuit has the corresponding nuiaer of inputs.

If voltage levels 01 corresponding to l are fed. to all the eaitters of the
transistor T1 (see Figure 3.5. a), then the bus-emitter junction is shifted in the
return direction and closed, and the base-collector junction is shifted in the
forward direction and opened. The forward current of the base of the T2 transistor
flows through the resistor R1 and the open base-collector junction. The transistor
T2 is opened by this current, and it goes into the saturation node. Sinntaneously
the transistor T6 free which the output inverter is executed opens oonpletely. The
low output voltage level U0 (code 0) is picked up fro. the collector of transistor
T6.

In this case transistor T3 is in the closed state. This state is insured by a low
voltage level set up on the collector of the transistor T2. The diode 01 is used
for reliable blocking of T3. .

 

Figure 3.1.. AND-NOT elenent: a - circuit diagran: b -- legend
Key: 1. output 0‘; 2. input 03; 3. 3|: (+5 volte); lo. k-mllector: S. E-
enitter

U.

MWLUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with transistor 1'6 open, a voltage is set up on its collector which corresponds

to the level 0 {0.1 to 0.‘ volts). and on the collector of the open trmsiator 72,
the voltage ukl‘Z'ub.el'4+uk.eT2'(o'8 to 1.1) volts. The difference between the
collector voltages of transistors 1'2 and u is less than 0.7 volts. his voltage
drop is insufficient to block the base-enirter junction of tramistor 1'3 and the
diode D inumch a the response threshold of each of then is about 0.7 to 0.8 volts.

transistor T1 is shifted in the forward direction, its base current is switched

to the enitter circuit, and the transistor T1 goes into saturation. The resistance
of the collector-enitter junction of the transistor 'l'l drops sharply, which blocks

the transistor 1‘2. Consequently, transistor 1'6 is also blocked. Transistor T3 is

respect to the 0R input (Figure 3.5) (the LR logical elemts). The sane outputs
of the logically connected circuits (LP) (expander: with respect to the OR inputs)
are connected to the logical elements LR. As a result of parallel incluion of the
transistors T2, the L! and LP elemts, a circuit is obtained which realizes the

 

Figure 3.5. Input logic expander of the m elenent:
a -- circuit diagram b —- legend
n) b) 0

  

. s L] "
I
'1 n r]
suns: 11-. s, l L—
"T’ l. ’ '1.—
-J
I!
-1
. l
’ .
15-40(3)
(f-u

Figure 3.6. Three-input 381.1. elsnent:
s - circuit diagran; h - legend

1. Output 1
2. Output 2
3. -5 volts
lo. E
Se emf

Emitter-Connected Transistorised Logical Circuits (2811.). The functional base of
the logical circuits based on current witches is the All) and AND-M type
elenents with paraphase outputs (Figure 3.6, a and b). The input half of the
current switch of the elenent is executed fron ‘l'l-‘l’3 trmsistors, and the other
half, from the 1'6 transistor. The source of the reference voltage! consists
of the transistor 1'5, the diodes 01, 02 and resistors 33, R5, 36. The?! output
sigmls are put out throng: the enitter repesters executed fro. the transistors 1'6,
1'7 and resistors R7 and RB. Hith feed voltages 3142-5 volts, the circuit is
switched by signals toning to the input. and it outputs outputsigials which very
fron “0"(0'7 to 0.95) volts to Ill-(1J5 to 1.9) volts.

The circuit is switched by input signals with aqlitude 440.25 to 0.6) volts and
-(0.25 to 0.7) volts which are sy-stric with respect to the reference voltage
level Eur-1.2 volts.

For low voltsgs level at all inputs 8, 9 and 10 (see Figure 3.6, s) the transistors
1'1. 1'2. T3 are closed, ad the trmistor TI. is opened. This state is sustained
mtil the high level signal 00 reaches the base of my of the transistors ‘1'1, 12
or 1'3. In this case the transistor. to the input of which the high level signal
has cone, opens, and the transistor T4 is blocked, and the current flowing through
it flows through the open input trmsistor.

In silicon transistors the voltage drop st the bese-enitter jmction is (0.7 to 0.8)
volts. For a voltage drop of 0.7 volts and input signal -0.95 volts on the
emitters of the trmsistors ‘l‘l to 1'6, the voltage will be -0b {-0.95 to 0.7-l.65
volts. In this case the difference between the reference volta'ge and the

voltage on the enitters of the transistors T1 to 1'6, 31' f—E‘ wombat—1.244 65-

0.105 volts is insufficient to block transistor 1'10, fort-i. response threshold

7
MWLUSEONLY
“MLLSEONLV

is 0.7 to 0.8 volts. If the transistor 1'6 is open, the voltage difference

Bret‘ub -l.2-0.7-l.9 volts is present on the joined culture. The obtained
result hill occur when signals of the levels {If-1.65 volts are fed to all the
inputs. The obtained potential difference will in this one be insufficient to
block the transistors 1'1. 1‘2, 1'3, for "l'aref'ub )-l.4$+l.9-0.$5 volts. In the
investigated circuits the transistors operate in the unsaturated node; therefore
the £511. have hid: speed by coqlarison with other types of digital elennts.

 

Figure 3.7. Input logic expander Figure 3.8. Circuit diagru of the
of the 2811. elenent: input logic expmder

a - circuit diagran; b — legend Key:

Key: 1. B

l. E-enitter

 

Figure 3.9. Provisional representation of OR, Oil-M elensnts

The output emitter repeaters that shape the output signals and insure high load
capacity of the elensnts (Kdec‘lS) are used for decoqlling between the current
switches and the load and also insure may of the output signals with respect
to the reference voltage level. Taking low potential levels 01 corresponding to
code 1 and high potential levels 11 corresponding to code 0, we obtain the logical
coupling of the first output circuit (terninals l, 2) to the inputs by nesns of
the relation xl-alaza . and the Econd output (tarninals 12, 13) to the inputs

by scans of the relation xz-a1a2a3, where a1. . a3, ... correspond to 0‘1. 0.2.
0.3; x1, :2, ..._correspond to 0‘1, 032. .... on the presented relations it
follows that xz-xl.

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
FOROl-‘FICIALUSEONLY

The number of inputs can be increased as a result of the expanders. Figure 3.7
shows the diagram of a three-input expander. In order to increase the amber of
inputs on the AND, AND-m type circuit, one or two three-input expanders with

k and e terminals on each are connected to the sane terminals of the current switch
(Figure 3.8). The mum nuber of inputs for elements of both types can reach' 9
in this case.

The elements assewled from current witches can also correspond to the logical
circuits on, Oil-NOT if code 1 is placed in correspondence to the high potential
level, and code 0, the low potential level. In this case the inputs are depicted
as the inverse (Figure 3.9). The output variables :1 and :- shown in Figure 3.9
will be related to the input variables a1, a2, a3 by logic expressions

a

x1- '5, V71, V 7i, and x, — 5: V a: V 4,, From these relations it follovs that 39-;1.

YO! OFFICIAL USEONLY
“JRWLUSEONLY

CHAPTER 1;. WIRED 001001333 SYSTEM ASSEMBLIES

The useialies of the Yes-1010, Yes-1020, Yes-1022, “8403), Yes-1060 coquters
of the unified systen are executed fro. m. elenents. 1hey contain AND-NOT, AND-OR-

nor cells, OR expander-s, Rs, D, J! type flip-flops. and so on. The application of
two-step AND-OR-NO‘I' logic promotes increased speed of the muter by reducing the
equipment ad the comections.

  

um ma (a)

 

Figure 6.1. Tina disgrsn for the shaping of clock pulses:
1 - 31, Tu; 2 - 82, 1'12; 3 - 83, 1'13; lo - 86, TN;
5 - $12, 1112, 6 - $23, 1123: 7 -- $31. 1131; 8 - 8&1, H41;
9 -- hslfcycle pulses I; 10 - halfcycle pulses 11
Key:
a. cycle tile

Each uicrooperation is executed using a special signal generated by the caputer
control mic and sent at the required tin to the corresponding control bus. Acting
on the electronic circuit connected to this bus, the control signal (05) actuates
the circuit, as a result of which the given nicrooperstion is performed. The tine
spent on performing one or severe]. nicrooperstions sinultaneomly is called a cycle.
A colputer cycle usually consists of a series of 08 providing for the required

operating sequence of individual functional asselblies during execution of the
nicrooperations.

In the coeputers of the unified system the cycle is determined by the non [read only
nesory] cycle tine (the son is one of the storms of the computer where nicro-

instructions for the execution of nicrooperstions are stored). For eunple, in the
Yes-1022 colputer, a cycle is equal to 600 nanoseconds (Figure 6.1), end it contains
two series of basic ($1. $2, 83, $6 end 111. 1'12. 1'13. 116) and delayed ($12. $23.

10
mmmomx
$36, $41 and 1112, T123. 1136. nu) sync pulses following each other after 125
nanoseconds. The pulses are generated by a special asseﬁly of the conputer -

the synchronirer or tiling unit. The basic and delayed series 5 pulses are
generated constantly, and the ‘1']: series pulses can be started as needed or stopped
by a special start-stop circuit. In addition. the tiling nit generates potentials:
halfcycle I, halfcycle II. All of the enumerated pulses are designed for atartins
and synchronizing the operation of the counter assetlies and nits.

6.7. Code Conarison Assetblies

Several versions of the code conparison operation are med in coquters: conpsrison
with respect to modulus. conpnrison with consideratim of the signs of the nuiaers.
colparison of the orders of the meters. The lost complete is the ccwsrison

operation in which the fact of satisfaction of one of the following conditions is
established: _ . -_ ...__

X=Y.X>Y. X<Y.

No nethods of executing cowarison operations have bees-e the met widespread.
The first method consists in the fact that one meter is subtracted fron the other.
and the sign of the remainder is med to deter-inc whether the last two indicated
conditions are satisfied. In. the second uthod the attraction operation is
performed by an adder with a circuit for holding the zero code of the renainder
which is obtained when x - Y. This procedure is inexpedien‘. fro- the point of view
of additional load on the computer adder. Therefore in the unified systen of

conputers special combination cdncideme circuits are med. These circuits can be
used to perform three. two or one of the following three functions:

I forX—Y.
0 earX-ﬁY.

I forX>Y.
ofot X<Y,

, - lfor X<Y.
mm {om by.

.Amn4

nmnﬁ

 

Figure 4.27.. Code equality circuit of the Ye8~1022 cowuter

ll
I’OIOWICIALUSSONLY
MMWONLY

 

Figure 4.23. Circuit for performing the function of counting
1’2 and P3

In practice it is frequently required that only one of the function- be perforned.
The circuit perfomins the function 171 is called the code equality circuit. The
code equality circuit illustrated in'Pignre 6.22 is wed in the nelory protection
nodule of the Yes-1022 toquter.

. The Operation of the circuit muting coqariaon functions F; and P3 in easily
followed by sending the bite of the two canned three-bit binary code. to its

corresponding inputs (Figure 6.23).

12
momanmonu
MWLMONLY

CHAPTER 6. Oil-LINE AND READ ONLY “RIBS 01' m3 UNIFIED SYSTBH OP morass

The on-line storage is distinguished by hid: speed (access ti- 0.3 to 10 Iicro-
seconds), relatively small equity (10s to 10 bits) and complexity of electronic
equipnent. Ferrite cores and thin nemetic film are used as the “17 elenent

in the on-line storage of the comuters of the mited systen. The speed of the
on-line nesory nust correspond to the operating speed of the central processor.

 

Figure 6.1. Menory structure of modern computers

Key:
1. Ts? - central processor 5. 0P2!) - on-line m:
2. 80211 - rapid—access storage 6. 320 - butter nemry
3. SOPZIJ - rapid-access ROM 7. V2!) - external nenory
lo. 020 - on-line meson 8. W20 - external ROM

Rapid-Access bury (80211). The high speed of the logical elenents permits the
creation of arithnetielogic mite (All!) that perforn operations in fractions of a
microsecond. The speed of the 0le (on-line nenory) in this case linits the speed
of performance of the operations in the computer. This linitation can be renoved
by introducing the 8020. The access title of the 8020 is 20 to $00 nanoseconds, and
it differs little iron the ALU speed. The 8020 stores internsdiate calculation
results an! intonation used repeatedly in the current phase of the calculations,
which it is 'inerpedient to send to the 0211. The 20 is included between the aw

and 020. The 3020 has ”an capacity -- 102 to 10 Ma. The scan is constructed
from integrated circuits, semiconductor devices and thin negnetic film.

13
MONK!“ MONEY
“MUSEONLY

Buffer )bnory (87.11). A medial-site (107 to 108 hits) and nediun-speed (ta s
fron 0.1 to 10 nicroseconds) 32!] is med to natch the operating speeds of Eﬁﬁ‘
slow VZU [external nesnry] and fast 02!! [on-line neeory] in the counter.
Usually Inenories ude of ferrite cores or mmtic druns are used as the m.

6.6. 'l'hin Magnetic Pile moories

A layer of magnetic nterial. the thickness of which does not exceed the domain
dinensions is called a thin nagnetic file (111?). The primary characteristic of the
TM? is short magnetization tine, which per-its canstruction of a high-speed
nenory with access tine to several tens of nanoseconds. Pills 0.05 to 0.15 .1ch
thick have found practical application in counter engineering. As a result of
their snall thickness, the Iaynetitation vector is in the planne of the file. The
TH? used in nenories are divided into planne and cylindrical.

Plane TH? Memories. knory elenents based on plane T3? are segnents of ngnetic
file rectangular in shape with a systen of control wires. The plane magnetic
film are nude by electrolytic depositian of mastic netal vapor in a vacan- on
heated glass or natal nonmagnetic plates (snbstrates). Iron and nickel fil-
(rezzoz; nuzaoz) have found the greatest application. The process of applying a
magnetic file is carried out in a strong magnetic field. The effect of the
magnetic field and the elonpted shape of the filn lead to the fact that the

magnetic properties of TM? in different directions turn out to be different, that
is, the file is anisotropic.

6.7. Read-Only Henory

Structural and Operating Principle. In young and eiddle generation nodels of the
unified system of counters, read-only nuories (800 are need to store the pro-
cessor control Iicroprogranl. The ROI is need only to store and output infatuation;
therefore it is significantly aimler, cheaper and mre reliable than the on-line
nemry, for it has no write circuit. and simpler and cheaper neeory elenents are
need to store the infatuation. The RD)! is constructed by the 21) structure on

diode natrices, lbs-transistors and ferrougnetic ale-ants.

Let us consider the structural and operating principles of the transformer type non.
Ferrite cores with nonrectangulsr hysteresis roots operating as line transforners
are used as nsnory elenents in this 3011. A number scale serves a the base for
constructing the trmsforner type RG1. Figure 6.11. a shows the meter scale .
ends of four transforners. It is designed to store three four-hit binary miners.
Here each ferronagnetic core (1'8) is used to store like hits of all storing meters.
The role of the priest-y (input) winding of the trmsforurs of the nunber scales

is played by a coordinate Inn. The wires are woven through the cores in accordmce
with the infornation content of the stored nulhers. If code 1 met be stored in

a given hit of the stored manner, then the wire passes through the core; if 0 is

to be stored in the given bit, the wire goes around the core. For reading
infatuation each core has :1 output (secondary) winding. The under is read by
sending an interrogation current pulse to the selected input hm. An elf is
induced in the output windings of the cores throudn whidn this bus is woven, and
there is no signal in the output windings in which the bus is not woven.

16
mmmmy
roe MAI. USE ONLY

0n the circuit diagram: the amber scales are depicted simply (Figure. 6.11, h).

The intersection of the buses and the core is indicated by a short sloping line.
If the bus bends around the core, the sloping line is absent.

In the transformer Rm, 0 or H type cores of split design are med, which permits
automation of the process of making the meter scales. The following advantages
are promoting widespread use of transformer RON: siqlicity of the structural
execution of the memory module; high vrite density permitting construction of large-
sise ROM (fron several hmdrech to several tens of thousnda of words); high
efficiency caused by low losses in the transformers; hid: read signal level; rel-
atively high speed (the access time can be several tenths of a Iicrosecond) and
reliability. The deficiencies of the transformer can include difficulty of making

them by the methods of integrated technology and the necessity for applying special
(nonstandard) control circuits.

Structure. The basic conponent parts of the km, for emle. the Yes-1020
(Figure 6.12) are the menory module (3?). address register (WP), address decoder
(DShA). read amplifier asselbly (US), nicroinstruction register (not). check ste-
tion (at) and local control mdule (8m).

 

Figure 6.11. Huber scale:
a -- structural principle: b — siqlified representation

1. Input . . .
2. Output . . .
3. Transfer-er

lS
MWWONLY
”(1) than

MWMWY

   
  
 

(2) [MM

 

 

  
    

   
  

  
   
   

Ills:
91‘!)

,ii' , diii.
imam?
$55.42!!"
$9.12!?
11122.!

  

 

Figure 6.12. Structural diegrel of mu

Addme register error 11. Fire decoder no 1
Hieromerruction register error 12. Hire decoder No 31

UK - check etetion 13. Gete 1

m - dcrotnetruction register 16. Gate 2

us - reed npnfter newly 15. M - local control mdule
2 reed e-pnfiere 16. ISM . address decoder

0 b1: 17. 08h! - wry nodule decoder
let bit 18. [APP - eddreee reﬁner

636 bit

18h? . wire decoder lo 0

l6

mammal!“
7M :m

ﬁe --
8 --

A
u

'H 'II In

       
      

 

“Stunner“ M
Figure 6.13. Henory mdule
Key:
1. Module 31 6. Even vord
2. Module 1 5. Odd word
3. )bdule 0

The RP [nenry nodule] (Figure 6.13) consists of 32 nuts: sceles. celled nenory
nodules. One nodule is desimed to store 128 north 128 bits long each, end it
conteins 128 vs [ferronmetic cores] woven by 128 input btnes in ecoordace with
the information content of the stored ntdaers. Bech vs stores 1 bit of e11 128
words and is equipped with e seperete reed winding. The reed windings of like
bits of all nenory nodules ere connected in psrellel. 0n referencing the non, e
128-hit word is reed fron s selected nodule. ‘nne 128-bit word is trnsnitted to
other units of the ooeemter in 68-bit words; therefore the reed word is broken down

into two nechine words - even end odd. The cspedty of the investigsted 8? is
128X32-6096 words.

The MP? is a 13-bit flip-flop eddress register desiped to receive, store end
output the addresses of the even end odd words.

The DShA reelites prelininsry decoding of the eddress of the reed nder (it
deter-nines the wire decoder nder - DshP). It consists of the decoders nsmu

end 5M2 end the nenory nodule decoder m. The decoders ere controlled by signels
coning fron the first to the fourth, fifth to the seventh ad eiﬂnth to the 12th
hits of the WP, respectively. The nsnn deternines the meter of the selected
nenory nodule (the decoder 13h?) end he: 32 outputs (with respect to ether of ROM
nodules). The DShAl and new decoders provide for selection of the input winding
in the selected node. The DShAl hes 16 outputs (fron 0 to 15). end the ISMZ hes

8 (free 0 to 7).

The DShPO, DShP1,. ..., DShP31 forn the second decoding stege end are designed for
shaping the interrogation current pulse in the selected input winding of the
selected nodule. Bech th hes 128 outputs.

17
summon“
MWCSEONLY

The us [read qnfier esseduy] is desigted for separating even and odd words,
mlifying and ehqiag the code pulses. The 13 consists of 66 like channels. eech
of which has two independent reed eqlifiers (USch). One of then receives a bit of

an even word, and the other, en odd word. The decision to trens-it on even word is
realised by e "gete 1" pulse, and an odd word. a "gate 2" pulse.

The m is the nicroinetruction register for receiving Iicroimtructions tron the
3P. storing then and outputting the. to the processor units. It has 6‘ bits, of

which 62 (Ira the 0 to the 61st bit inclusively) ere intonation bite, end mo bite
(the 62d end 63d) ere check bite.

The UK is the check station which checks for odd parity of the RAP? and M

registers. 0n detecting a error the u: shapes and outpute the RA error or as
error signal to the processor check etstion.

The m is the local cmtrol mdule deeiped to ehspe end feed control pulses to
the non usdliee and nodules at required points in tile.

The 30!! of the Yes-1022 chputer hes the one structure, but the 3? contains
24 modules.

18
lawman!
CHAPTER 7. PROCESSOR

Hired control is a cosprolise solution min: the positive qualities of synchronous
ad asynchronous processors. The practical ispleantation of this principle has
been achieved on the ”Minsk-36," Yes-1050 ad Yes-1060 coauters. All of the
operations perforad in the processor are broken down into several groups with
respect to conplexity ad duration. The eucution of the siwlest operations
included in one group is realised in the synchronom node. The last couple: opera-
tion. for sample. divisia ad nultiplication. are realised in the asynchronous
node. ‘l'hus, cosputers with mixed circuit control operate in the syndaronous-
asynchronoua node ad are econo-ical ad the mat widespread.

Hicroprogral-ing is receiving broad application ad is mad, for eagle, in the
"Mir," "Nair-i." Yes-1010. Yes-1020, Yes-1022. res-1030, Yes-1033 ad Yes-1040
counters.

7.2. Structure of a Processor with Hicroprogran Control

A standard processor structure has been developed for all coauters of the mified
systen. The distinguishing feature of processors of different coauters is that
in center adels of the mified systen the basic core storage (00?) and the input-
output channels are a part of the processor. ad in others, they are in separate
units. The processors are also distinguished by the athod of orgaisins the
couputation process.

Figure 7.2 shows the generalized structure of a processor min; the nicroprogra
athod of controlling the conutation process. The processor includes the follow-
ing: the 00? - baic core storage; ALI! - arithnetiologic unit; Tsw - central
control unit; BR - register nodule; SW — input-output systen.

The 00? [basic core storage] is an ordered series of nuaersd bytes. In one access
to the 00? in different nodels of the mified systen of counters. a different
nder of bytes is selected sinultaeously, called the access width. The access
width of the Yes-1M0 counter is 1 byte. the access width of Yes-1022 ad Yes-1033
is 6 bytes, ad for the Yes-1050 and Yes-1060, 8 bytes. The access tine to the
GOP fluctuates fron 0.8 (for the Yes-1033) to 2.‘ (for the Yes-1022) nieroseconds.

A characteristic feature of the logical organization of the 00? of the nodels of
unified systen of conputers is use of dynaic nemry distribution in which the
segregation of the nonory cells for the infatuation files is not dcne in advance.
but during the problen solution process. The dynaic principle is based on

19
“WNW?
M WOILMI. 03!. UNIJ

page organization of lemon by which physical blocks (pages) of fixed size
(usually 2008 bytes each) are isolated. In addition, segnentation of the Inory
is provided for consisting in dividing all the pages into groups (semnts) with
independent addressing of the words within each group. Therefore the address of
any word oust contain three conponent parts: the sealant nueber, page umber and
the address within the page.

The OOP can he segeented beginning uith the purpose of its different regions.
For exasple, the 001’ of the Ye8~1022 counter is divided into three logically

independent types of senory: basic (0P), nnltiplsx 00) and local (LP) (see Figure
7s2)e

 

Figure 7.2. Structure of processors with nicroprogral control

Key:

1. )ItOp - licrooperator 13. BR - register nodule

2. ALI] - arithutic-logic mit 16. mm - central control unit

3. as - output register 15. men - eicroprograe control mdule
4. ALB - arithestic-logic mdule 16. Pl!) - mitoring and control panel
5. RA - input register 11. SW - input-output syste-

6. RB - input register 18. um - dnannel control unit

7. RI - infatuation register 19. 8&1 - selector chml l

8. 001’ - basic core storage 20. $12 - selector daannel 2

9. RAD)! - cor-on address register 21. b1 - nultiplex channel
10. DP - basic aesory 22. Peripheral devices

11. LP - local nenory
12. HP - nultiplex “I"

The OP is used for storing the working program and operands. It is constructed
fron smll PS according to the structure of 2.51). A study is nde of three
versions of usury size: 128, 256 and 512 k/bytes. The usury cycle is divided -
read and write (regeneration) 1.2 nicroeecards each. The control infer-scion of
the eultiplex channel is put in the ll’. The usury sire is 2068 bytes (for all
three versions of or). The OP ud HP are physically ads as a single nary.

The LP is a rapid-acme neaory ($020). In the Yes-1022 cowuter. it is nade tron
integrated circuits in the forts of a separate ndule. It is called the working
bank of the central processor which is used to store operands used in the given
operation. i-ediate results, progran state vorde (SSP). under the control of which
the current progr-e is necuted, and so on.

20
mementos“
The capacity of the LP is 256 20-bit uords (2 working bytes, 2 reserve bits). The
speed is twice the speed of the central processor. The presence of this nenory
has node it possible to increase the speed of the processor.

The 0? and the NP are accessed through a coma address register men. lnfornation
exchange between the GOP and other mite of the computer is realized through the
infer-scion register RI. In the Yes-1022 conputer, the local nenory LP is assigned

its own registers. The word length of the registers is deternined by the access
width.

The ALI! of the processors execute all the arithnetic and logical operations, the

set of which is determined by the instruction systen of the mified system of
counters. All models of the cowuters of the mified systen are designed to

perforn a mique set of operations, including operations on the operands with fixed
point and floating point, on fields of variable length and on decinal ntﬁers. The
basic mits of the aw (see Figure 7.2) are as follows: RA and RV - input
registers; RS - output register: ALB — arithmetic logic mit. Basic characteristics
of the ALU: speed and carbination of possible operations perforeed by the ALU.

The BR stores and outputs various intonation participating in the program execution
process. The BR includes address registers, the come use registers and special
purpose registers. The address registers store the addresses of the instructions
in the operands and also any other information. The column me registers store
information participating in the execution of the nicroprograns. The special
(service) purpose registers store infornation reflecting the state of the mite

and assemblies of the counter when executing the program.

The TsUU is desiyaed for autonatic control of the mutation process. It provides
coordination of the operation of all mite of the conputer with the help of
synchronizing and controlling sigmls generated during the process of encuting
the progran. The TsUU performs the following basic fmctions: it organises auto-
natic input of the initial data and the progran, output of the results of solving
the problen and any other inforlation; it selects progra- instructions fron the
GOP in the required sequence and provides for execution of then; it selects the
required inforsation free the 00? and trans-its it froa certain types of nenory

to others; it nonitors die functioning of the coquter units. The TsUU includes
the nicroprogran control module mu. the check stations, the nonitoring and
control panel PRU. The men is designed to organize the oonpmation process in
the conputer. The LKU is used to identify the state, mnitor and assign the
operating conditions of the central processor. The comuter is started, the course
of the corputations are monitored, operator intervention in the conputation pro-
cess and program checkout are all realised fron the PRU.

The SW provides con-mications with the peripheral devices of the comuter and
contains the channel control mit um. two selector channels (8K1 and 3&2), and
one multiplex channel (#1) and the input-output interface.
I0“ W'Itlhl. use ONLY

7.3. Hicroprogran Control Module

The men [nicroprogran control mdule] includes the following (Figure 7.3):
read-only newly (non), address register (MP?) and nicroinstruction register
(M), address decoders (DShA) and nicroinstruction decoders (mm), the assembly
for forming the address of the next nicroinstruction (0PM) and the asseﬁly for
entering the codes in the address register of the ROD! (UZAN'RAPP).

The nicroprogran mtrol principle consists in successive reading of the micro-
instructions of the given Incroprogran free the non and converting then by nests
of the DShPX to control signals (nicrooperations -- map). Horizontal and vertical
nicroprograuing are distinguished by the method of- forning the control signals
(US). In the case of horizontal programming, the uicroprogran can be represented
in the fern of a ntrix (Figure 7.6), in vhich each row corresponds to one micro-
instruction, and a column corresponds to one nicrooperation (1 US). Code 1 at

the intersection of a row and a column corresponds to sending a US in the given
nicroinstruction, and code 0. absence of US.

The advantages of horizontal nicroprogranning are the possibility of sinultaneous
execution of several nicrooperations (if ones are placed in several bits of the
nicroinatruction) and simlicity of foruing the US (without decoding). A die-
advantage of horizontal nicroprograming is long nicroinstruction length, for
the nunber of US in the processor of the unified syste- of computers can reach
several hundreds. In order to store such Iicroinstructicns Ienory with long word
length YaP is required, which is econonically disadvantageous.

(WW,

   

p”
HIRED—HI
allan—nnn
l I I .7 O 0-) n
“(2)
Figure 7. 3. Microprogran control Figure 7.4. Microprogran for hori-
nodule contal prograsning
Key: Key:
1. From the BR 1. rucroinatructions
2. Address register RAP? 2. US - control siml-a
3. DShA
1.. P20 7. nicrooperation
5. R}! 8. UZAN RAP?
6. DShﬂt 9. WM

22
Newman!
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500060029-9

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 2 (3 a
ﬁmﬁﬂﬂﬂﬁlﬂ
. . _ "

(11o) [2.008HDBDHHDDDBEDEDEDEDEBEBIEE

 

    
  
  

 

  
  

 
  
 

“a; ' IE

(25 . . (5,. (31)
[33315351315155] EDEUWEE

(mm a: nu

Figure 7.5. Structure of a Iicroinstruction

Group 21. m

ZTR” 22. Organization of next nicrooperation
ALU operation control 23. Reserve

00? Operation control 26. Check

Purpose of bank 25. Setting flip-flops and registers
Reception of information fron RC to 0. 1

Information source in the RA 26. Setting MP? to 0 or 1
Microoperation of the am 27. Hethod of forming the D!
Information source in the In 28. KB

Method of sending information 29. Address of next nicroinstruction
to the ALB 1). Reserve bits

Information source in the RA 31. Check bite

00? node 32. Setting

Type of 00? 33. 1:51.

Bits 36. n

Bank designation 35. M

Function 36. 21.

Defamation 37. KB

Address

Mode *[entering in the flip-flops and

Type

registers ]

During vertical microprogralning, each nicrooperation is defined by a binary code.
The forlat of the vertical nicroinstruction is similar to the instruction format.
It contains the nicrooperation code and address part determining the source of

the operands participating in the nicrooperation and the destination of the result.
The different consists in the fact that a microoperation and not the operation

is performed by the microinstruction, and the address part in the majority of
cases defines not the memory cell, but the central processor register. In the
case of parallel nicroprogra-ing the formation of the address and reading of the
next instruction are carried out simultaneously with execution of the current
nicroinstruction.

23
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the unified system. of computers, vertical uicraptograuuing is used. A micro-
instruction (Figure 7.5) is a 64-bit binary word containing fields of a defined
length. Bach field is assigned its independent decoder 08h}! organising up to 2n
nicroopetations (2a is the amber of bits in the nicroinstruction field). The fields
by which the US are fotued have no late than 5 bits; therefore each field defines
up to 32 different nicroOperations. The uicroinstruction fields can be divided
into the following six groups: control of the ALU operation (bits 5-20) — field A,
function. 3, WNRMATION; control of the operation-of the basic care storage (bits
21-27) - Address, Mode, Type fields; entry in the flip-flops and registers (bits
0-4 and 28-32) — fields C, SETUP; organization of the address of the next uicra-
operation (bits 33-58) — fields 08]., 11, KB, Amt: check (hits 64, 62 and 63) -
field KB; reserve (bits 59-61) - field 2?.

ALB Operation Control. The fourhhit field A determines the source of infatuation
-- the process register - frou which infatuation is fed to the input register RA
of the ALI). For ample, in the Yes-1020 with a code value of 0001 of this field,
the infatuation source will be the 00? [basic care storage] reuster RN, 0010 -
R2. 0000 — information in the RA reauins unchanged, 1111 - zeroes are entered in
the RA and so on.

The four-bit field FUNCTION defines the Idcrooperation which the AL!) will perfotu.
For all values of the codes of this field. except 0001, one of 15 possible Incre-
operations is performed in the am. For ens-ale, for the code 0000, the micro-
operation ng‘ is executed, for code 0101, AA; 1100 is a right shift.

The five-bit field 3 defines the infatuation source for the input register of the
ALU. For emle, for a 00001 code of this field the infatuation source will be
the output register R8 of the 00?, and for the code 00010, Rz. For the code 00000
the information in the RB remains unchanged. and for the code 11010 zeroes are
entered in the R3.

The three-bit field IBPDRHATION defines the methods of feeding the infatuation
from the R3 to the ALB. Par exauple, for the code 001 ("Cross"), the high order
tetrad is transuitted to the low-order position. and the low-order tetrad to the
high-order position. For the code 011 ("high-order directly") zeroes are fed to
the location of the low-order tettad. and the bids-order tettad is transuitted
without changes.

00? Operation Control. The fields of this group control the operation of the 00?.
The three-bit field "address field" defines the infatuation source for the address
register RA of the 00?. The two-hit field "node" defines the operating mode of

the 00?: Ol - ChT (read); 10 -- 2?, RG (write. regeneration); ll - ST (erase):

00 - no access to the 00?. The two-bit TY?! field defines the type of uemry

which will be accessed: 00 - z (protection nodule ueuory); 01 - 0? [core storage];

Entering in the Flip-Flops and Registers (ZTR). The five-bit field SETUP includes
the nicrooperations which set the registers and control flip—ﬂ“ to 0 or 1, and
it also executes special nicrooperations. The five-bit field c defines the
infatuation receiver frou the R0 of the Am.

26
”OFFICIALUSEONLY
For example, for code 00010, the infomtion receiver from the RC will be the
register R2 of the 00?: for the code 10001, the register BR of the central
processor.

Organization of the Address of the Next liicrooperation. The fields of this group
are used to forn the address of the following nicrooperation. The nine-hit field
08!. defines the setting of the RAP? to 0 or 1. The two-bit field )1 defines the
method of forming the address of the next nicroinstruction (the nicroinstruction
forming procedure). The 18—bit field AH! directly for- the next nicroinstruction
which is trananitted to the RAP? and certain other registers.

Check. The RB fields of this group contain the check hits M, 62, 63. The bits
Mo and 63 are check bits for the M; 62 is the check bit for the RAPP.

Reserve. Bits 59-61 are reserve bits (2?).

Let us consider the purpose of the individual parts of the new and its operating
principle. The ROM is designed to store nicroprogre- that execute the progran
instructions in the 00?, the annual operations, diagnostic tests, and so on. The
decoders of the nicroinstruction fields are used for direct conversion of the
corresponding parts of the nicroinstructions to US. In the UZAN RAPP, the address
of the next nicroinstruction is for-ad. and the control of .the formation is
realized by the UPAHK.

The Operation of the nicmprogran control nodule takes place in the following
sequence. The for-ed address of the nicroinstruction is transnitted fra the

UZAN RAP? to the RAPP. The nicroinstruction selected fron the ROM by this address
is entered in the M. The fields of the nicroinstruction in the m: are decoded
by the 06h“! decoder, at the outputs of which the set of US exciting the assetlies
and nodules required to execute the given nicroinstructim is famed. Sinul-
taneously with decoding the nicroinstruction fields in the m. the address of the
next nicroinstruction is for-ed, and the 08L, H and All fields of the current
microinetruction. ALB, and so on. participate in the fornstion of this address.

The nicroprograllling facilities, in addition to other things, the Construction of the
processors with a broad set of perfoued instructions for introduction of

additional instructions requires only an increase in size of the ROM. In the
processors with "hard" logic, the introduction of new instructions increases the
expenditures on redoing then.

Henory Protection. In connection with the fact that the unified systen of
cowuters operates in the nultiprogran node, the 00? can have several 1’? [problen
progress - the program by leans of which the counter solves Qplied problem].
In order to avoid erroneom sending of the data of one 1’? to the nemry tone
occupied by another PP, protectia: is provided. For this purpose, each problen

is equipped with a "pass." that is, it has its own code, aid the 00? is divided
into "pages" of 2048 bytes each. Each page is assimd an order mater - the
protection key. The protection keys are stored in the nenory key storage (200).
When executing the current program in one of the registers of the central processor.
the SS? and the protection hey are entered corresponding to the region of the 00?

25
mmwzouu
I'UI “I'M“ use UNIJ

where the executed progra- is located. On each access to the 00?, the keys in

the SS? and the mm are cowered. Access to the 00? is pernitted only on caper-
ison of the 381’ and the unory protection key or when the 88? is equal to zero.

In the Yes-1022 counter. for sample, two nethods of nemry protection have been
provided: on ”read" end on "write." In order to assign the page protection
nethod in each protection hey there is an additional fifth bit in which the code 1
is entered if "read" protection is proposed or 0 if "write" protection is proposed.
If the protection keys in the SSP and the are do not conpere, a prom. interrupt

sipal is pnerated.

The sixth bit in the protection hey is the check bit. The 0t! protection scans
are ieplenented by a special protection nodule.

7.5. Characteristics of Processor ALU of Different Hodels of the Unified Syste-
of Gosputers

In- order to insure program conpatibility. all the models of the unified systen of
ccnputers are designed to execute a united universal set of operations. Therefore
the All] of the processors of different mdels differ little fron each other. The
structural diagran of the ALU (Figure 7.7) of the processors of ell models of the
unified systen of coqauters has four nain parts: the registers RA and RB serving
to receive and store opermds and ac, for receptim and storage of the operation
results; the arithnetirlogic nodule ALB perforning truefornations of the
operands according to the algorithm of the arithnetic, logical and other opera-
tions, for the execmion of which the AL!) is designed: the local control mdnle _
BHU coordinating the interaction of all the ALU nodules with each other and other
processor units; the check systel (0 providing for ccntinumn checking of the
operatim of the ALU.

Flexible control of the eucution of the operations is realized in the ALU of all
models. The operating sequence of the ALU nodules is determined by a specific
operation and the peculiarities of the operands, internediate and final results.
here, in different steps of execution of the ALB operations. an analysis of the
converted inforeaticn is ands. The results of the analysis in the fern of response
attribute signals SP go to the Bill. 0n the basis of these signals the Bill! shapes
the result attribute PR which in the fern of a two-bit condition code is entered

in the 88?. The Bull analyzes this code and generates the next 03 for the ALU.
After encution of the operation the ALU form the end of operation signal 8K0.

on which the m generates the beginning of next operation sisal 830. The
operands in the RA and RB registers are selected fron the BR register (see Fig 7.2)
where they re first entered iron the 00?. The results of operations are sent free
the RC to the BR, and then to the 00? (if they are not needed to emcute the next
operation).

The ntnber of registers in the ALU and their word length are different in differ-
ent models of the unified systen of coquters. The ALB of the ALU of the differ-
ent mdels also differ with respect to cowosition and stntctnte. For sample.

the ALB of the nodel Yes-1022 (Figure 7.8, a) is a miversal arithutic-logic
nodule (ALB). A peculiarity of it is that it does not have an explicitly expressed
adder. All of the arithnstic and logical operations in the ALB are executed

using a set of elenentary operations: Navy and decinel addition and subtrac-
tion. shift by one bit right and left. bit by bit operations of logical addition.
nultiplication and nod2 addition and also the operations of through trans-lesion
of operands through the nodule.

26
mmmmv
Figure 7s 70

Figure 7.8. Operation parts of the processors of the unified systsa

of cmnten

Opersnd 1 [0-17]
Opersnd 2 [0-17]
ALB

Result [0-17]
Opel-sud 1 [0-63]
Opersnd 2 [0-63]

 

Generalised structural disc:- of an ALB

,

 

7. W

8. MT.

9. Result [0-63]

10. Result [0-53] or [0-7]

27
MWUSIONLY
M ("I'ICIAL USE ONLY

In the nodel Yes-1050, the ALB consists of two nodules (Figure 7.8. b): the

MS is the arithmetic adder nodule, and the BAl's is the digital decimal arithutic
nodule with explicitly mressed adders. In the BAS. arithntic and logical
operationsare performd on the fixed-length operands. The basis for it is the
66-bit binary parallel-action adder. In the BA‘l's, only the byte by byte process-
ing of the operands is carried out. The basis for it is the 8-bit decinsl adder
mud logical countator (the latter is designed for execution of logical operations).
The registers BA, BB and B0 are Sly-bit registers. The result of the operation

can be output byte by byte from the RC on all 66 bits sinultaneously.

The differences in cowoaition aid operation principle of the ALU were the result
of different requirements on the output capacity of the nodels of the integrated
systen of coquters and the desired volume of their equipment iqosed by the
developer during their design. Characteristic features of the decisions made gave
rise to different structural principles of the All! and different algorithms for
executing individual operations.

7.6. Performance of Arithmtic Operations on Fined-Point Binary utters

Addition and Stbtrsction. "hen performing these operations. the operands with
respect to addresses indicated in the instruction are camed from the 00? and

are trasnitted to the registers RA and RB. In the 00?, the fixed-point binary
nunbers are represented in two formats: in the fore of a 32-bit word or 16-bit
halfword. The operations are performd on nmbers which are smoothed with respect
to the high-order bits. In positive nuﬁers the missing bits are filled with
zeroes to the halfword or word, and for negative nuﬁers. ones. For exanle. a
positive nuaber +llOOllOl in the helfword format has the fore 0.0000000 11001101,
and the negative mater ~lOl 101 101 is written 1.111 111 101 101 101. In the
different models of the unified systen of. coasters, the operand codes are

sent differently for addition and subtraction. For angle, in the Yes-1022
computer the Operands are nade up of halfwords. and in the Yes-1030 nd Yes-1050
which have 32 and 64-bit adders. respectively. they are nade q) of worﬁ and
double words. when executing the subtraction operation in the unified system of
computers. a couplementary code is used. In order to obtain the cowlenntary
code. the subtrahend of the second opeer going to the All). bit by bit (including
the sign bit) inversion takes place with stbsequent addition of one to the low-
order bit. On coupletion of the amnion process the B}!!! analyses the result
(equal to, less than or greater than 0 result and whether an overflow has occurred).
By the result of the analysis, the result tag (PR) is generated which is

a two-bit binary code. If the result of the operation is zero, then the code 00
is generated; if it is less than 0. the code 01; if greater than 0, the code 10;
if overflow has occurred, the code 11.

Accelerated multiplication circuits are used to reduce the multiplication time in
the corputers of the mified systen. For exasple, in the Yes-1030 nodel. mltipli-
cation takes place by two bits of the nultiplier sinultaneously. mad in the
Yes-1050. by four bits simultaneously.

In the unified systen of computers. the divisor, reaeinder and quotient with the
sign have 32-bit formats.

28
MWWMY
MWWMV

7.8. Monitoring and Control Panel

The mnitoring and control panel m1 is designed to nonitor the operation of the
counter units, mual control and operative intervention in the operation of the
counter. The P!!! of any of the unified systen of computers (Figure 7.11) con-
tains a control panel PU, a display planel PI and electronic circuits — control
circuits and registers - by name of whidn the pool operations are performed.

The control board has: ”operating node." “check,” "address cowerison." "type of
musty" switches designed to assip the operating ode of the counter and the
panel operations; the control buttons with lidat (the diepley buttons) "power on.”
"power off,” ."clear," "nenory address" and others designed for panel opera-
tions. In addition. the control panel has the display lights "systes state"
(LOADIIIG. HAITIUG, 0138. um 0PM“, SYSTEM).

The display panel has lights to indicate the contents of certain registers of the
computer and the state of individual control flip-flops.

Processor Start-Stop. The processor is switclud on and off by the ”power on.“
"power off" buttons, respectively. After pressing the "start" button. the
processor perforns operations in the nude selected by the "operating node" switch
(AUTOMATIC. IIXSTRIICTIO‘J. roommates positions). The transition of the pro-
cessor to the ”halt" state is realised either by the operator (by pressing on the
"halt” button) or auto-atically. An antenatic halt of the processor takes place
when the execution of the current instruction has been conpleted ad there are no
interrupt requests or when an error is detected in the processor and the encu-
tion of the current instruction or service nicroprogru is impossible.

Processor Operatian Check. The operating node of the check circuits is given by
the "check" switch (AUTOMTIC. RALT. W positions). If the "check" switch
is set to the martc position. then when a error occurs the processor processes
it. finds and elininates the cause of its occurrence. In the am position,
machine errors are not processed. the generator (81 is switched off. the error is
recorded in the error register R0. and the counter halts. If the "duck” switch
is set to the BLOCKING position. the processor continues to operate without
reacting to the error. The clearing of an error is produced in all cases by the
"clear error" button. In this cue the no is initialised and further operation

of the processor can be continued.

Checking: the Operation of misery Cells. The "type of misery" switch (0?. .“P. LP.
process registers. registers {‘33, 231. K53) selects the type of nenory which is
accessed from the PU. 'Jhen assigning the rust-nary address by the "nemry address".
buttons (gives the 001’ cell address. the processor register or input-output
channel address) and the "instruction eddress” (gives the address of the current
instruction. the non address, the address of the peripheral device on input of
the initial progren). the contents of the checked mmry cell light up on the
display pmel. The contents of the actor? cell and the processor registers are
changed by the address selected by the "rotary address" buttons by pressing on

the "write" button. The entered in‘ornstion is in this case given by the buttons
"instruction address."

29
summon“
nuanrnuuuaeunul

   
   
     
   
   
   
         
     
   
  

  

hut. annual In (2)
nnnnuunn—mnn’.

(3) huts; rhea manna scam mm

unnnunnnnnmmm

(3) um mum M

CEIIEEEEDEEDEIDDCI'DDD

(5) law "raw I m

DIEEEUIEICEDEEDDEIEIDCI

00000 [3000000

(6)1susrrunw2m
CEIIEIIL'DCEEIEEDDDDDD

UCIDDD D DDDDCI

(1) hams «dual!
W

(3) hum PA _ (9) dint-nu} pout-p Ml

mm: EEEUZEIII
(10) ”new M (1 hmMIM has ham! 1..
CEIIEUJII but?" ccﬁuznn'ﬁ
“W“ m m CI 0 C! a 0

A7351” W). 3%). (20) (21)
Q \

'MHM2-3

-"” (mm Illll lllll

AIIIA (I’ll

W CIDEJDIZJ
ﬂ, -‘.‘”’ 973- ﬂ‘

Figure 7.11. Computer authoring and control panel

     
    
       
  
 

    
 

 

(15)

       
  

 
     

Key:
1 — Display panel; 2 -- dcroinstructlon register MK; 3 - read-only nasory

address register RAPP; lo - sultiplax damsl Di: 5 - selector chamel 1 K81;

6 - selector channel 2 {82; 7 — display register; 8 .- ragtstar RA; 9 - address

register of the me; 10 — register RB; 11 - RR data register; 12 -- R2 dsta

register: 13 - register RC; 14 - error register In; 1.5 — control pnel;

16 — operating mode; 17 - check: 18 - address ooqsrtson; l9 - type of sasory;
[continued]

”WWW?
momentum“

[Key to Fig 7.11, continued]

20 - power on; 21 - power off; 22 -- neaory address; 23 - inetruction address;
zlo-oABCDB; 25— 2631.1; 26— clear; 27—liﬁlt check; 28—- tiner
blocking; 29 - entering in the WP; 1) — error clear; 31 — write: 32 - entering
the AK; 33 -halt; 36 - read; 35 — start; as .. systen state: 37 -— interrupt;

38 - loading

Initial Loading of the Progran and Clearing of the Systen. The system is cleared
by pressing the "clear" button. Here the nater clock ”(81 is shut off and the
hardware clear sipal is generated. This signal clears all the processor registers
end nullifies all of the interrwt requests.

The "load" button is mad for initial loading of the progran (PD). In order to
perforn this operation. the Z. 1, ad t instruction address buttons are ﬂed to
set the channel under ad the nder of the peripheral device fro. the progra-
nust be loaded. All of the control switches except the "type of anory" switch
are set to the WHO position. After pressing on the "load” button, the sys-
ten is cleared, and the Pt? nicroprogren is enented. as a result of which the
loader progran realizing further propa- input in the autoatic ade is read into
the 00? (non the peripheral device indicated on the control panel.

The indicated properties of the panel are sufficient to input the progra and the
initial data to the coauter, force its operation in the auto-atic or single-ade,
start the counter with any instruction in the our, print 01: codes fro- any of
the 00? cells, operate the coarser by loops and cycles when the counter out

be checked out.

Before proceedingwith the solving of a large problem, a preventive check is run on
the nodules and ale-ants of the coauter by a special test program The test
problem are selected so that on solution of then all eleants of the coauter will
be enooaassed. when solving the test proble- it is possible to set feed
voltages that are 100-151) different fro. the rated voltages fra the panel. If
under these conditions the coauter continues to operate staly. it is certain
that it is operating reliably.

Special "neaureaant fros channel" lines (Illa-K), "aaureant frne snbscriber"
(Ila—A) and "state shift" (Sis-K) lines are used to control the tile assurenata
and shift and states of the m.

The interface lineo are node of mun-frequency cable type tin-2 with wave iaedance
of 82 to 110 ohm. The cable length fro. the 16! to the mat relate 0W does not
exceed 100 eaters for the VIII-K and VIE-A lines ad 65 neters for all the rest.

All the lines were col-posed of two strads for the connection of which to the

m or the W0. rectangular coained “ll-contact plugs of the ”plug board” type

are used.

The input-output interface of the mified systen of coauters provides for
transition of infornation at a naximn speed of 1.3 agabytes/sec. New develop-
nents of the V0 have required irprovenent of the interface characteristics. In
the inroved input-output interface. the carrying capacity has been increased by
multiplexing the infornetion in the bmes ad enlarging the information base.

31
memuarmmr
M wnuau. I“ ml

11:: possibility of mating the output of a mutt-action by the m1 1:: can
of man- «to: dutcctlon or tenor-17 median of die mu to meat. the
instruction III also «heave charm; III-n unwary hm bun provtdcd.

32
”amazon“
MWMMY

mm: 9. mm. mm! WWI“. m

The hesic characteristics of mastic recording when it is need to store inform-
tioo ere the tailoring: hia recording density (60-!) hits/I): can-iced
informtion scorsa tim vithoot comming electric power. coasrstisely hid:
informtion orite ad reed speed; the possibility of erming previmly written
infatuation ad recording nee informtion.

All of the existing storsges ca he divided into too grows with -respsct
to informtion ootpot ad reception speed: test ad slot. The store. chants
of the first group has s speed of (l to ”#106 hits/sec ad sccsss rim of

10 to 20 sillinecads. They sre mooted a maetic drm ad discs. The slow
ones hove s speed of (1 to 5.)me hits/sec end a scoess tim (roe aits of
seconds to seversl stones. They ere esecoted on maetic taco ad cert.

he s rule, the aoat of informtion required for lsra motors is so greet thet
the V20 is mds op of sssersl fest storsges ad ssversl tas of stoo-

as» of the s- groop. During the opersting process of the coaoter. in order
to tedoce the sccess timtothem. en oftheinformtion froethesscond
grow storsa elsmots ass to s processor throoa the first group storege dent.

The informtion oritta on e mastic sorfsce mnelly is not med directly in the
coaotsr process. but it is first trudttsd to the 00! ad only tha goes to-the
All! for processing. u s resolt of lsra vol. of informal. ehich ca be stored
in s mary with maetic recording they see celled storas slemncs.

llsastic Informtion Centers. In mdsrn coaoters hrosd me is mds of mastic
tspe. drm. disc ad csrd store”. Ponder ad alvaic mastic costings
spplied to s nonmaetic has ere med a the storsgs mdlm in them devices.

maetic tspes ad maetic cards here. es s role. ponder maetic costings. he

s noomaetic has for thee. hrosd me is mds of lsvsa (polyethylastersphthelste)
25 to 33 eicroos thick or scetylcsllolose (triscetste) $0 to 120 eicrons thick.

The maetic costing - ferrolec 2-20 morons thick - is aplied to the aving
boss. The ferrolsc consists of fins pondered iron oxide ”203 ad nonmastic
hinder - lscqosr. The powder perticles ca he CO1: (or sphericsl) ad scicnlsr
in shepe. Individosl posder psrticlss hove dimnsiom on the order of 0.1 to

1.5 licrons.

33
summon“
"WWW?

The napetic coating ant be distinguished by enell enrtece rooghnaee. mifornity
of the nepetic puntere and high weer raeietence. The walnee of the negatic
paractere of the coating, depending on the type of powder. are within the linite
of lie-1200 to 24000 ”later, 3,-0.0! to 0.15 taela. The coercive force ac in

selected sufficiently large to exclude the poeeihility of ereeing infer-rim no
a result of the external metic fielb.

Hepatic drum and dieca are covered with femlac or net‘allic coetinge heead on
nickel, cobalt and taseten. The thickneee of the ate]. ooadnp in 2 to 10 nicrone.
They are applied galvanicelly. The advantage of the atel coatings in large weer
reeietace ad the poeeihility of obtaining thin apetic leyere. The noet fre-
quently med natal coatinge have the following apatic parentere: nickel-cobalt
8616000 to 20000 mluter.‘ 3,-0.0 to 0.6 toole; cohalt-tungpten II -20000 to

40000 moi-car; 3,-0.3 to 0.5 teele; cohelt-nichel-phoephorm. n¢-§sooo to 65000
equ/ater; 3,-0.3 to 0.5 taele.

The drun ie a carefully nechinad cylinder of hreee, eteinlaee steel or 81.1!"-
elloye. In order to decraaee the neon. the dieca ere nede of ell-inu- elloye.
The lepetic coatiu in applied to e copper taleyer.

Hepetic Bead. Uriting of the infatuation on the apatic carrier 10 (Figure 9.1)
ad reading are carried out by the agnetic head In. It ie a liniature electro-
eagnet. In order to reduce the loeeee fro- the eddy curate, the core 1 ie
annealed tron thin (0.02 to 0.15 -) cold-rolled platen of irmickel elloye
having call coercive force EC (1 to ‘ qe/ater) end reeidnal induction 3v
high eatnretion induction I. (1-1.6 teela) ad initial neaatic per-eaility
n1,“ (1'10 to 3.100. The core 1 hee two gae: working 3 ad additional pro-
ceee 2. The adorn lunatic heath have a working ga of w to 2 to 1! demo.

- The working ga ie filled with nun-patio material. for ma, for eque.
herylliu foil to used. The winding are included oppoeite to each other ad here
e coma grounded pain. he a reenlt. there in no naceeeity for chaging the
direction of the current when writing a “zero" ad ”one." In order to increeee
the service life, the working enrface of the head in carefully poliehed. ad ena-
tinee it ie coated with a layer of rhodiu- or palladiu.

 

lignre 9.1. lunatic head

mmmomx
”MANNY

At the present tine the following Ill. lunatic tape atoragea] are in operation:
Yes-5003, Yes-5010, Yes-501‘. Yes-5017. Yes-5021. res-5025 built in the IBSR;
res-5001, 1.3.5019 built in Poland; Yes-500‘, Yes-5015. res-$022 built in
Czechoalovakia: Yes-5012 built in Bulgaria: ad Yes-5016 built in the Ger-a
Deacratic Republic. The Yes-5017 etorage ia the haee atorage and correaponda to

the All-Union State Stadarde and Mine of the 180 (International
Standards Organization).

A etadard napetic tape 12.7 a wide, 750 atere long ad ‘8 microne thick wound
on a etandard holder with external diaater 267 a in used in all of the storage
eleaente. The infatuation in recorded during forward ation of the tapenaial-
taeonely on 9 trade with denaitiee of 63, 32 ad 8 bite/- (8 tracka are deeigned
to record data ad I ia a check track). ad read in in both forward ad reveree.
The Iagnetic heath have contact with the tape only in reading and writing infer-a-
tion, ad during rewind they are antaatically retracted.

M write nethoda are med in the etorage eleanta of the Initiad ayata of con-
putere: with respect to two levels with inveraion by "I" (WI-l) and with reepect
to two levels with phone aodnlation (ll-write). The res-sou, Ye8~$0l5 and Yes-$025
mite which note we of the Tlcwrite produce a.recording damity of 32 ad 63
bite/a. In the remaining storage elmnte, except the Yes-$006, the BVl-l write
nethod ia med. Data recording ad reading are reclined with daaitiea of 8 ad 32
bite/a. In the Yes-5006, the BTU-l ad n-write nethode are used which inenre a
recording deneity of 8. 32 ad 63 bite/a. In the Yes-5016 ad Yes-5021 unite,

the data it recorded only with a denaity of 32 bite/a. hot in than provision ie
ride for the poeeihility of reading intonation having a recording demity of

8 hits a.

The capacity of each auntie tape atorage, except the Yes-5004 and Yes-502$. ie
25 agaytea. The capacity of the atorage elenenta Yes-5006 ad Yes-$025 is

SO negaytea. The data traaniaaion apeed for the verione atorage eleanta ia
different ad fluctuatea within the linita- iron ‘8 hhytea/aec (for angle, for
the Yes-$016) to 315 khytea/aec (YaS-SN3). The working apeed of diaplaceaent of
the hepatic tae of the storage ale-ante Yes-5012 and Yes-5017 it 2 a/aec;
Yes-5019 is 3 a/eec; Yes-$022 in 6 alaec. The rewind apeed of the tape ia 5 I/aec
for the najority of mite.

In all of the atoragee, good ventilation of all of the mite ie insured. exceaa
preaaure it created which prevente penetration of dut into the work acne. For
cowpatihility of the varione typea of III, a mater of etrnctural ad production
require-ante have been iaoeed - the eiaee of the apetic tapaa ad the reele

for then, nethode of writing and locating intonation, recording denaity and nethode
of checking the data have been atandardiaed. An international atadard for the
above-enlarated ad other characteriatica ha been developed in connection with
the iaortat aignificace of coaatihility of twee.

35
summon“
"WMWLY

10.2. Arungennt of Intonation on magnetic Tape

Bach nodule has 140 bytes. 66 bytes of which are in the key field. and 96 bytes,
in the date field.

    
    
 

\I

“0.8 Q

63%“

8

Figure 10.5. mastic tape storage:
s — front View; b - back via (without door); 1 — control console;
2 - feed reel; 3 - bolts for fastening the rps plste; lo - frag;
5 - magnetic head nodule; 6 - upetic tape sensor; 7 - tine for
pressing the upetic tape; 8 - liniter; 9 - vacuu- ccluln lock;
10 - nsmetic tape loop; 11 —-photo pickws of the reel actor servo-
eysten; 12 and 13 - vecuz- colt-Le. right and left. respectively;
16 — vacuu- pw; 15 -~ twee for ligating the photo pickups of the
reel notor servoeysten; 16 — colt-a screen; 17 - lover inspection
hole; 18 — front door; 19 - blocking circuit; 20 - umtic tape;
21 - muting plate; 22 - wper inspection hole; 23 - photo senor
for disinished mount of th; 26 - tie-w reel; 25 - bcusins
system; 26 md 35 -- drive achanisls, take-up and feed reels.
respectively; 27 nd 33 — broke electro-egnet; 28 - nechaisn for
positioning the upetic head mdule m or of! the tepe; 29 - sensors
for limiting the mystic tepe loop; 1! - pnemtic sensor;

31 — vecuun ttbes; 32 - wetic tape drive nchenin; 3‘ — brake
shoe.

”MEMORY
I'OIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY

In order to insure the required vacui- in the cole there is a vacu- puq) 16
which guarantees a pressure in then of 3.64 to 6.0 kPa. The vacui- in the coll-w
is checked by the pneumatic sensor 2!) which blocks switching the storage on at a
pressure of 2.45 to 2.9!. kPa and switches it off if a pressure of 1.67 to 2.06 kPa
is recorded during operation. As a result of the pressure difference, the tape is
pulled into the columns, forning-a loop of defined dinensions. During the transient
processes connected, for eque, with starting and stopping the nagnetic tape, the
buffer md reel drive controlled by a phototh fro: the photo pickup prevent
inadnissible increase or decrease in tape tension. The vacuum tubes 31 forn part
of the cute. for cleaning dust off the Iegnetic tape. The exhamt sir free the
vacuu- pulp is used to cool the drive notor.

In the Yes-5017. the nos [ngxaetic erase head] operates on direct current of about
970 nillianps.

The material used to fill the working gap of the ngnetic head lust have a meter
of special properties, for the width of the gap frequently is only equal to a few
fractions of a sdcron. Gaps 5 to 10 nitrous wide usually are filled with Intel

in the form of berylliu bronze or platinu- foil. In order to obtain small gaps,
silicon oxide is used, the filling of the gq) with which is realized by spraying.

The Mic [magnetic head nodule] lust be located strictly perpendicular to the saving
tape. If the perpendiculerity is violated, the signals: read by different heads
will be output at different tine (maligned). This can occur also when recording
infatuation. If the direction of the dealigusent during recording and reading is
different. then the lieutch will be doubled in tine. The phenonenon of aisalign-
uent is iQossible to eliminate cowletely by nechanical mthods; ‘therefore special
electronic circuits that cowensate for it are used in the NHL.

BK: Lift Mechanism The enchsnien (Figure 10.10) is used for angular displace-ant
of the am from the operating position to the nonoperating position: A-7',

3-42" and back by control intructions fron the storage or sexually. There are
two cases when the ﬁll: is withdrawn fro. the operating position: on perfomnce
of the mo operation, by 7'. and when perforling the man operation, by 62'.

Operating Principle of the Electric Drive lbtor Control Systen. The electric
drive notor control systen provides for nave-ant of mastic tape with constant
working speed forward and in reverse and accelerated rewind (on the feed reel) at
a speed of S I/sec for the Yes-5014, Yes-5017. Yes-5019, Yes-5025 and 8.5 I/aec
for the Yes-5015 and Yes-5022.

when the magnetic tape is moved at working speed, the as pickup generates a
signal with 50 nillivolt amplitude and frequency of about 2 kiloherts. In the
case of accelerated rewind of the tape the 08 generates a signal with high ampli-
tude and a frequency of about 5.5 kilohertz. This simal goes to the UPI where
it is asplified and shaped into square pulses with steep front and cut, and it

is differentiated. The differentiated pulses have a duration of l licroeecond
and frequency proportional to the shaft we of the electric notor. If the speed
of the tape is equal to the rated speed, then the pulse repetition period is
equal to 512 microseconds. ad a defined meter of pulses recording this speed
are entered in the registers It. with a decrease or increase in the speed, a

37
”MUSEONLY
ms OPTION. USE ONLY

different mﬁer of pulses is entered in the registers k of the m, and this
nutter of pulses is coqared with the standard. 'Depending on the difference
obtained, s PHH [pulse-width modulated] signal is generated with defined duty
factor - for pulses with the largest repetition period, the M signal with .
maxi-u duty factor is generated, and for pulses with sasll repetition period.
with nininsl. The duty factor of the PHI! signal is deternined by the shaft rps of
the electric notor H. The run signal fro. the registers R goes to the control

logic nodule 3w, which acts on the electric motor through a powerful sqﬂifier
UUVD.

 

Figure 10.12. Drive electric Intor control systen

Key:
1. fron the UM 10. IN
2. 16 11. w
3. ND 12. WV!)
lo. vs 13. Integrator
5. WM 1‘. U?!
6. VP 15. sn
7. BLU 16. 88
8. R 17. IS
9' “1,2,3

Start, Movement of Magnetic Tape with Rated Speed and Halt. when starting the
tape from the III], RS (operating speed) and ND (directim of mvenent) signals
are fed to the aw. 0n the basis of these signals the 81.11 generates the signal I)!
(aovenent forward) or m (move bsdoIard). In this case the total feed voltage
is fed fro. the WV!) to the electric drive notor N in order to reach the required
nametic tape speed as fast as possible. When the electric motor has reached 902
of the rated speed, on instruction ftoa the 31.11. the 0WD organises the pause

n1, that is. stops the feed voltage for a tins of 0.12 milliseconds. The current
throng: the electric motor during this pame . decreases, ad the electric
motor picks 11) rated speed, upon which the NH signal with defined frequency
filling is fed to the ow fro. the registers 11.

If it is necessary to stop the nagnetic tape, then the 01] NHL picks up the eipel
RS and the 31.0 issues the . pause n2 lasting about 0.5 nilliseconds. The
thyristor: of the controlled rectifier (see Figure 10.11) opened before the

pause n2 are restored, after which the total feed voltage of opposite polarity
is fed to the notor (through the corresponding pair of thyristors). when the
electric notor reaches 101 of the rated speed the nu generates the pause

38
'0! OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
POIOFIIC‘IALISEONLY

n3 lasting about 0.9 milliseconds, during which the thyristore are restored,
insuring a countercurrent. The imtruction to generate the required pause is-

the VP signal (generate pause), which is fomd as follows. The UUVD checks the
shaft rpm of the electric motor it by the current flowing through it and constantly
feeds the current check signal SIT to the integrator. when the electric motor I!
reaches a speed that is 10 or 902 of the rated speed the integrator generates the
VP sigual.

Start, Movement of the Magnetic Tape at High Speed and Halt. If the signal VS
(high speed) reaches the 31.0 simultaneously with the signal RS, the tape acquires
the requirement speed in 0.5 second in the Yes-5012 and 5 milliseconds in the
Yes-5017 as a result of feeding the total feed voltap to the electric mtor.

After this, it is controlled by the corresponding M signal for this speed. If
the signal V5 is now picked us», then the electric motor rpm decreases independently
to 2 m/sec in the tile 0.5 second (or 5 milliseconds for the Yes-5017) without
supplying additional power. when picking up the sipal 38, the electric motor is
stopped by the countercurrent. An automatic halt of the maguetic tape is realised
in the following cases: in the automatic control mode on detection of the
"begnning of tape" marker, in the autonomous control mode on detection of the
aarkers of the beginning and end of tape; independently of the operating conditions
of the storage, when the tape loop from the vacuum column pea beyond the upper or
lower emergency photo pickups, the tape breaks, the vacuum disappears in the
vacuum calm-us, any of the phases of the primary network voltage drops, any of .the
feed potentials increases or decreases.

10.7. Electric Circuitry of the Tape Storage

The electric circui try includes the following: the electronics module, the auto-
netion nodule, the power pack, the control console and the external connections
panel (see Section 10.3). They are assailed from standard elements (see duapter 3)
and special-purpose elements. Let us consider the stmcture and the operating
principle of sale of the special elements mud asseﬁlies.

Reproduction Alplifier UV. The reproduction amplifier is designed for preliminary
mlification of signals picked up free the um, the shape of which is close to
sinusoidal. Basic characteristics of the anplifier: input signal aniitude

from -15 to -20 nillivolts; output signal sinusoidal. amlitude to -5 volts;
amplifier gain about 100; frequency range 0.2 to 100 kiloherts; frequency distorb
tions in the operating range no more than 3 dedibels. Nine identical UV are
mounted in the m. The basic W is the operation anplifier no.

Shaper Aaplifier UP. Signals from the reproduction mlifier p to the UP, they
are rectified and anplified by it.

The characteristics of the UP are as follows: input signal about 2.5 volts
amplitude, sinusoidal shape with repetition period of I) microsecmub; output
signal: high level +5 volts, low level 0 to 0.6 volts, repetition period 60 micro-
seconds, leading and trailing edge durations no mre than 0.15 microseconds.

39
“MANNY
“WWO!!!”

Three functionally independent 111' are muted in the T32. Each of the. (Pig 10.10
contains: differential enlifier executed fro. transistors Tl ad 1’2, two-period
rectifier based on diodes D1 and DZ and shaper based on transistors T3-T6.

In order to increue the noise i-nity- and reduce the distortions introduced by
the shaper to a Iinilul, the first step is needled as a differential circuit.

_-n (3) on

  

Figure 10.110. Shaper-qlifier

l. +12.6 volts

2. input

3. + 5 volts

6. output

Se -1206 ”It.

6. -6.6 (-7.5) volts

10.8. Characteristic Failures of lunatic Tape Storagee, Their Detection and
Elimination

The violation of nor-e1 operating conditions of the In. or failure of any easedly
of it is signalled by the 8! channel wing the "sense state" instruction. The
nature of the error is displayed on the display panel of the tape mit or the
cowuter.

The storage is muslly initially checked out in the autononmn ode. perforIlng
all nanipulations proposed by the operating instructions. By the results of this
test and on the basis of the operating logic of the storage. the me nd
location of the error or failure are established.

Further search for a failure is node using the nonitoring and neeeuring equip-eat

which is available in the oowuter mite. In particular. for the m the
following are med: the m - a device for checking out storms”. by leans of

mmusemv
which it is possible to check the basic par-eters of the m; rm: — a device
for checking out standard cleants for testing ad stunting their operating
conditions; type 81-18 electronic oaci‘lograph used to check electric paruters;
012-9 type digital frequency aster for ensuring frequency and calculating errors.
tones, rows; coained devices AVG-5K, Ta$6 or Te3lo. ad so on for checking
voltages ad deter-ining the napitndes of the resistances; dc bridge with preci-
sion class no less then 0.3 to manure null resistances; stop watch. set of
probes (and long strands. The para-stem are aasured. the elensnts. msealies

and system adjmted and tuned in accordance with the operating instructions and
tables attadaed to then.

It is possible to estinate the fitness of the storage after elininating a failure
only after the storage has executed a special teat progran correctly.

The sirplest, not frequently encomtered failures ca be deternined without
using special nesns of finding then. Let a consider so. of these failures.

Power not On. The came of this can be absence of voltage in as of the phases
of the prinary feed network, an meliahle electrical contact in one of the plugs.
burning or: of the fine in the power control unit (not) or in one of the power
nodules (31’).

The presence of phase voltages is checked by an a-ster-voltneter. A burned-out
fuse in the BU? can be caused by violation of nornel operation of the power pack
protection circuit: therefore it lust be carefully checked. By a continuity test

on the power on circuit, a mreliale contact is discovered in the plug or
relideility is certified.

The storage does not react to the energency position of the tape loop in the
vacmm calms. This failure ca be camed by failure .of the photodiodes or
having the vacuum sensor on: of adjmtnnt.

The nagnetic tape loop goes outside the vacuum calm or drops to its bottol. In
this case it is necessary to check for a failure of the lidnting twee ad the
reliability of the circuit for switching on the electric reel mtors.

In reverse the angnetic tae loop goes outside the working tone. This can be
caused by failure of one or several photodiodea in the photo pichw that nonitore
the nagnetic tape loop in the vacuum colt-a or poor adjmtnsnt of the braking
electronagnet of the reel.

The pressure in the vacutm systes is below the required pressure. It is necessary
to check the contact points of the air lines in the pressure brand: of the systen
and vacuum pm.

The mom: of rarefaction in the vacuum columns. pressure in the pneunstic syste-
are below the required levels. The probale came of this failure is weakening
of the tension in the drive belt of the vacuum pm.

lol
WWWONLY
“WWW?

The ”load" indicator is not on. It is necessary to check the bulb and the photo-
diode in the ”beguiling of tape" sensor.

If we analyse the investigated failures, it is possible to arrive at the conclusion
of the possibility of preventing the- by arrect and tialy preventive aintenance
of the storage elemt. Fail-safe operation of the-m. is deter-ined primarily

by skillful operation and good teanical Iaintenanca.

10.9. Preventive Control Operation

General Principles. Preventive control operations are intended to imure min-
terrupted operatia of the storage. They provide for periodic checking of the
paraneters of the elenents and assealies and neintenaca of cleannass of the entire
storage. The periodicity of the preventive anitoring operations for the storage

is estalished considering the reliability of its achanical aseealies and
electronic circuits. All types of operations are perforad strictly by the
instructions for tednnical neintenace of the storage.

After every 6 hours of operation of the storage. the surfaces of the eleants of

the tape drive channel in contact with the agnetic tape are cleaned with a soft
cotton cloth wet in alcohol. The working surface of the III: is wiped with a chaais.
ad the surface of the drive roller ad surface of the inspection holes, with a

dry cotton cloth.

Once a day the sea operations are perforad as after every 4 hours of operation
of the storage elesent. The entire storage is inspected externally ad the
attach-ant of the feed real is checked also.

Once a week all of the above-enmrsted operatias are perforled. In additia.
the perpendiculsrity of the agnetic head nodule with respect to the apatic tape
is checked, and if necessary. adjuted. when adjmting the all: it is necessary

to be very careful to see that the operating surface is not scratched.

Once a nonth all the operations perforad after ‘ hours, diurnally ad weekly are
perforned. In additia, the following operations are perforad: cleaning of the
fan air filter, adjustant of the umetic heads with respect to asinuth, nonitor
ing the level of the read signals ad voltages in the circuits controlling the
lisitation level in the reproduction channel. checking the "sun” cmensation
during inforation read ad write. The fan air filter is cleaned by achanical
vibration or a vacuum cleaer. All of the rensining parts are ads strictly by
the instructions.

Once or twice a south, in addition to the above-emanated operations. the follow-
ing are perforned: the vacum in the vacu- colt-is is checked ad the operation
of the pneuetic sensor is checked; the drive and real electric actors are

checked and cleaned: the In!) power swplies. sutoestion adnle, start and stop
tine of the mnetic tape and its speed are checked and sdjmted, and the function--
ing of the photo pickups for short tape. beginning ad ad of napetic tape
is checked out.

102
MMWMY
”WISCONLY

Once every 6 aontha, in addition to all of the above-enunted operations, the
mac and fane are lmricated, the write current buildw and quality of eraaing
inforaation off the neurotic tape are checked.

Once a year all for. of operations perforned after 6 hours. annually, weekly,

once every 2 aonthe ad every 6 nontha are perforaed. In additim. all of the
electric more of the atorase. the reduction para end coil sprinp are cleaned
and lubricated. the travel of the arnetnrea of the brake electronegneta and the
friction of the brie shoee are checked. The vol“ and periodicity of the
preventive control operationa will chum in one direction or another depending

on the load on the atorase. the adient conditions. and no on. llateriala med

when perforlin; preventive work are an follows: diatilled alcohol, bentine aolvent.
clock oil, 03 graphite ldaricnt, TsIATDI lwricat 201 or 221, turbine oil,

cotton genre. soft cotton cloth. technical diamis, fine wry paper lio 600 ad 600.

Procedure for Perforlins Certain lbnitoring and Preventive Operations. The
nonitoring and cleaning of the drive and reel electric ntors are carried out
after 500 to 700 hours of operation of the atoreae. Here the degreee of wear.
defornation and pollution of the collector brmhea and contact enrfaca. looeeniu
of bolts, clan and so on are deternined. During operation the electric mtora
are checked for the presence of noncharacterietic knocks and noiae and sparking
of the contact brushes. 0n detection of had-insible wear in the contact bruhee.
they are replaced by new ones. The new hruehea not be fitted to the collector.
For this purpoee, a strip of entry paper 2 lo ‘00 (Time 10.17) ia placed
between the collector 3 and the contact brmh.1. The width of this paper nuat be
equal. to the width of the contact eurface of the collector. The elery paper in
placed so that the abrasive side will be toward the contact brmh. The bruah ia
fitted by drains the enry paper baa and forth until the brush eeaueea the
shape of the collector. After fitting. the collector ia cleaned with a dry soft
rag, it is blown with air under preasm or the dust is renoved by e um
cleaner.

 

I t

Figure 10.17. Fitting of Figure 10.18. Vacut- pm ineller
collector bruhes

The contact surface of the collector is cleaned with enery paper No 600, for

which it is applied with the d>rasive aide to the contact surface of the collector,
the shaft of the electric actor is clawed and turned nenually. After cleaning.
the surface of the copper bare of the collector nuat be clean and have netallic
shine. 0n cowletion of grinding. the collector surface is cleaned of dust min;
a vacuun cleaner or it is h1oun with air.

63
MWMMY
meomanmouu

wen perforning all of the‘operationa it is necessary to reenter that there is
a powerful nagaetic field in the electric notor. therefore enall netallic objects
such as screws, springs. seals. and so on list not be placed close to it.

‘Ihe friction of the brake shoes is checked with the electroupetic brakes off.
using a filled test reel ad darn-outer.

After every 1000 hours of operation of the storage, preventive control operations
are perforad with a vacui- pq. First the belt tension and the align-ant of
the drive and driven pulleys are checked. "hen pushing on the belt with a force
of 20 a, it should deflect 1211 -, ad the malignant of the pulleys relative
to each other shOuld be no are then 0.2 -. Then the pm is switched on for

10 or 15 einutes and its heat is chedred by feeling it. Strong local heating of
the bearing covers to the point that one cannot hold one's hand on the cover
(above 70'C) can occur as a result of absence of anal clearance or in the case of
poor lubrication of the hearings. Strong heating of the housing anithe presence
of a dull setallic sound are the sign of the iaellers hitting together.

Hhen the pig) is taken off it is first «energised. then the belt is resend, the
vacuua ttbea are renoved.a|d the bolts unscrewed that fasten it to the plate. The
renoved pun is inspected ad checked for oil leas and chips in the homing. The
annual rotation of the pulley rotors ant be enooth. without seizure or Jerking,

the came of which ca be increased play or wear of the bearings. The inpeller
surfaces are exanined throng: opening in the pin housing. A characteristic
Intellic shine on the surfaces A (Figure 10.18) of the inpeller indicates that the'
iaellers are nting contact when they turn. and scratches on the surfaces ll
indicate that the inpellers are catching on the housing. A nonchsracteriatic
atallic bqing heard against the general background when the pan is in opera-
tion, jerking when the iaellera are turned without load and circular scratches

on the inside surfaces of the housing all ca be a sin of bearing weer. If the
eat-stated or other defects are detected when the pig) is inspected. the plq out
be dianatled. the worn parts replaced ad the pan out be reassedwled and adjusted.
All the operations are perforned in strict accordace with the technical neintenence
instructions. If there are no defects, than we proceed with Mricating the m.
for which the pulley ad bearing covers are reserved together with the blocks of
shia and the cover of the one. The old oil is drained out and all of the
aseealies are washed in benzine solyat. ad than they are carefully dried with a
rag. The presence of lint and traces of dirt on the parts is not pernitted.

After cleaing. all of the asaealies are carefully impected and, if there are no
defects in the pin asaealies. ease of naming of the iaellera when they are
turned by hand is checked with the bearing covers reared ad then with then
installed. If the iaellera are hard to turn when the covers are intelled. then
shia are added reader the covers. The pm is libricated in accordace with the
instructions.

POIOI'IIGAIJBIONIX
”WWWY

MR 11. name TAPE STOW mun
11.1. Purpoee and Technical Specification

The nametic toe atorage controller (W M) in deaiped for connecting the
eagletic tqe storage to the input-output chamele of the unified eyeten of con-
putere and aleo to control the operation of the etoraaee. It providea for

latched operation of high-epeed circnib of the SI and 1K channela with the elow
atoregee. The an Inn. in connected to the 8! and 1K damnele throud) the input-
output interface. and it operatee only in the exclueire ode.

The W m providee for the following: aeloction of the given etorap, reception
and execution of central proceeeor and channel co-nda. inforaation trnauieeion
between the no. and the channel; ducking the reliability of the intonation
traneeitted through the on. control of the wt of the hepatic tape in the
storage; shaping of the tine delaye required for proper execution of the inferna-
tion recording and reproduction; generation of informtion describing the etate of
the storage in detail; control of coqlation of a eeriee of operatione (rewindins
the tape. mloading, and ac on) without channel participation.

one no providee for eucceeaive eucution of all of the cannula with each of the
eight etoraaee connected to it. The co-mde executed by the W m are divided
into three growe: baaic. auxiliary and control ad node eettin; con-Ida.

The basic NHL co‘nda include the following: my. mes: BAD, warn. ma
mm-omm. SENSE. 0n the m mad the upetic tape in the eelected
storage aovee forward to the required intereonal interval and halta. The inforne-
tion recorded (II the tape ie read and tranalitted to the chamel. The mes:
READ cor-md ie executed jut ae the m co-and, but the tape rule in the
oppoeite directicn. 0n eucution of thin oo-nd. the eucceeeively reed bytes are
arranged in the 001’ in order of decreaeins addreaaea. 0n the co-nd WRITE. the
data caning fro- the channel are written on a tape mving in the forward direction.
This operation in coqleted by channel initiative. The co-nde can: NUT-OUTPUT
and SENSE are used to tranelit infatuation about the etate of the unit to the 00?.

The control can“ are mad to love the npetic toe to the required poeition.
These include: “WIND. BEHIND All) mm. rowan» T0 m, “GUARD To m.
FORWARD To me, BACKHARD T0 nu. BIAS! mm», mm M. 0n the neuron

couend the tape in the eelected etorap elennt ie rewoud to the "beginning of
th" nether, and on the am MID WAD come! the tape ie fully wound on the
feed reel. On the con-Id mum T0 aux: the tape ia rewomd in the forward

65
"WWWY
Formosan“

direction to the next interronal interval, ad on the and mm m m.
in the opposite direction to the next intertonel interval or to the ”beginning of
tape” nether.

The node netting ad auxiliary m-ade include the condo (DIRECTIOI, DIAMTIG,
SET DENSITY (8, 32 or 63 hits/a).

Onencutialofallcunndeexceptthem,mmm. theUUie
occwied with execution of the operations for the entire tine. 0n enacting the
WIND, mm AND IllLOAD connda, the control ait ie buy only to the

beginning of aveant of the toe in the etorap. After beginning of awe-ant, the
no is released and ca perform ay operation on another free atorage.

At this tine the 011 Ill. Yes-5511, Yes-5512, Yes-$515. Yes-5517, Yes-5519. Yes-5521
ad so on are in operation, which provide for connection of varioue types of m.
For euale, the etoragee Yes-5010 ad Yes-$012 ca be connected to the w m.
Yes-5511. The structure of the Yes-5517 providea for joint operation with the
Yes-5012. res-5017. Yes-5019 and .eS-5022 etoragee connected to the input-output
channels of the Yes-1020, Yes-1922. Yes-103). Yes-1033. Yes-1050. Yes-1060

nodel counters. The Yes-5525 unit pernita joint operatia with atoragea thing
the BW-l recording athod ad etoregee using two recording athode - avu-i ad
PK-write. In addition. this nit ca operate with the m having different tape
speech.

The najority of IJIJ m provide for writing ad reading intonation with a unity
of 8 ad 32 hits/I. The write and read deneity for each eerviced atorege in given
by co-ad fro. the channel. Infornetion in written with the tape ruining forwerd,
ad it ie read either loving forward or in reverae.

The data traaniaaia apeed between the DU loll. ad the chanel in deter-ined by

the m. nodel, the recording deneity need ad the type of I!!! In. For enale.

for the Yes-5517. the data traenieeion rate for a deneity of 32 bite/- will he

as follows: for the adele Yes-$012 and Yes-5017, 66 lthytee/eec; for the Yes-5019.
96 khytea/aec: for the Yes-5022. 128 khyteeleec. Hith a write density of 8 bite]..:
for the res-5012 ad Yes-5017 nodela, 16 khytea/eec: for the Yes-5019.26 hhytes/eec;
and for the Yes-5022, 32 khytea/aec.

All of the W m operate in two nodea .. autonoaue and coalex (jointly with the
mauter). The 00 it awitched fru the antononom ade to the coalea one fro.
its control panel.

Structurally all of the on m. are emanated in the forn of a inatrnnent hay. the
frame of which ia node of welded ateel freeing. The eidee of the hey are covered
with easily renovahle eheathinge, front and rear have double doors. The right

door of each double door has a lock for holding then in the cloned poaition. Both

doors have atopa which do not per-it then to be open are tha 90'. In the lower
part of the hey there ie a dut filter. At the top the hay in cloned with a

grid and upper sheathing. The hay in inetalled strictly vertically wing logo
that adjust with height. Inaide the hey are two franee, one aliding ad the other
stationary. Both franee are welded and nede of III-lln- aection. All of the

wonomauusrouu
“WWW?

equip-eat is placed on these fro-as: a control panel. the display panel. the
switching panel. the T32 mdules. standardized feed units and feed control wit
and fans. Plugs for connecting the inside and outside cd>le connections are
fastened to special brackets on the sliding and stationary trues.

Synchronization Circuits. Different Ddels of M can he distinguished by at

least two paraneters: the tape speed and recording density. Tdring this into
accomt in the DU m, synchronisation new are provided which are designed for
different coﬁinations of values of these par-eters. for synchronisation of all
of the operations perforlsd by the storage, in the 00 Ill. there are four synchroniz-
ing generators: the read synchronizing generator 66h: the write synchronising

generator 62; the Iicrosecond delay generator can; the aillisecond delsy
generator Gill.

Figure 11.2 shows the interrelation of the synchronization circuits nting up the
W NHL. In these circuits three clocks are used, each of whidl has a fixed
frequency. The read clock T60: for. the clock pulses for synchronizing the
circuits that operate when perforaing the read operation. and the write clock 1‘62.
for synchronising the write circuits. The operating frequency of these clocks is
given by the contents of the write density register BPZ lid the nodal alder

register m. The pulses fro. the clock TOG; start the clock 080:, and the pulses
free the T62 start the 682 and an: clocks.

The read synchronizing generator 680: services the read synchronizer $8. the
basis for which is a three-bit counter with scaling factor “count-8. During
operation of the read synchronizer, the counter counts fron 0 to 7, inclmively.
aid then it begins to count fron zero (cyclic Dds).

 

Key:
1 . T012 6. 1'00:
2 . W 7. M2
3. kn 8. (32
6 . DCh 9. (SO:
5. 1'62 10. m

The write synchronizing generator 682 services the write synchronirer 82. the
basis for which is a four-bit counter with scaling factor xcomt'16° The write

synchronizer also operates in the cyclic node. A data byte is written on the tape
in each operating cycle of the synchroniur.

4.7
“WWW?
mammary

The pulse repetition freeway of the (no: and 682 is selected in accordace with
the adel of the an. ad the write density. For angle, the adel Yes-5017 with
density of 32 hits/a. the pulse repetition frequency is equal to $00 kilohertr,
ad with density of 8 hits/a it is 125 kiloherte.

The nillisecond deley clock TM has an operating frequency of 5 kildaerte which
by the frequency divider no: (see Figwe 11.2) can be decreased by twofold or
fourfold depending on what type of DI. the on m is working with. The TM pulses
control the m pnerator. Bach synchronising generator has a controlled input.

as a result of which the mentors fore pulses only when this is necessary for
the on m.

The Gill and GK: generators service the control assealy of the write ad reed
circuits. The M2 generator is used to generate a delay for the tape start ad
stop tine, for the interval erase tin and also when writing zones in the
autonoatn node. The on generator is desigled for pnerating pulses used by the
control assealy of the write and read circuits to aaure the intervals between
rows on the tae when writing ad reading the 81's! and SP! check rows ad also
when processing the end of operatia. The basis for the write ad read circuit
control assealy is a 9-bit delay counter with scaling factor [cont-255. In the
nicrosecond node the delay coater is started by the on generator. the frequency
of which is selected as a faction of the 1011. nodal ad the recording density.

For the Yes-5017 with a density of 32 hits/-, it is 51.2 kilohertr. ad for a
density of 8 hits/- it is 128 kiloherts. In the lultiaecond ade, the delay
coater operates on one of three frequencies: 2.5 kilohert: when working with the
Yes-$012 and Yes-5017; 3. 7S kilohertr for the Yes-5019 ad 5 kilohertz for the
Yes-$022.

11.5. Electric Power Saply for the Controller

The electric power supply eyeten for the W m neurotic tape controller Yes-5517
(Figure 11.6) includes the following: the feed control unit SUP; the power pack
3P1 (Yes-0906) providing stailize voltap of +6 volts (ad-issihle load current
18 ans); the ”2 ad ”3 power packs (both Yes-090$) giving stabilized voltap
of +5 ad -5 volts, respectively (adssihle load current 3.6 can). In addition.
the electric power supply generates a three-phase ac voltage of 380/220 volts for
powering the m.

The feed voltage to the network filter 8? of the electric power supply and the
NHL is fed iron the ac. ﬁlm/220 volt network with 50 hertz frequency. The
adnissihle voltage deviations fro. the rated value lie within the linits fron +10
to -l$2. The network filters are designed to lower the level of pulse and high-
frequency interference of the feed network and the interference generated by
other mite. Pro- the network filters the three-phase voltage of the priary
network is fed to the Blip which distributes it to the power packs 3P1. R2. ”3
and the fans V1, V2 and V3.

"WWMY
”amazon“

   

Figure 11.6. Structural ~‘lia3r- of Figure 11.7. Structural diagra- of
the power apply for the Yes-5517 the feed control unit
controller Key:
Key: 1. on
1. DP]. 7. SP 2. off
2. BPZ 8. our 3. mo-I - power packs and first stage
3. 3P3 9. V1 assetliee
6. MIZZO volts 10. V2 b. sun-n - power packs ad second
5. $0 hertz 11. V3 stage usedliee
6. Electric power 5. sm

stpply interface 6. 830

7. 82 . . .

The control of the electric power sipply, warning ad protection are realized by
the power scpply interface. Three control ades are possible: local fron the
display pael of the Yes-5517, local fron the BOP and rents fro- the power supply
control pael of the counter.

"hen the 301’ is on. the feed voltage is fed to the 3P1, an ad ”3 ad the fans
in three stages: fans are canected to the first stage. than the service ac
voltage of 20 volts is fed. ad the prilary network voltage is fed after 20 to

I) nilliseconds. “hen the m to the first stage is off, the prinary network
voltage is off, the service voltage is disconnected after 20 to 3) silliseconds,
ad then the fans are switched off. In addition, the WP ontpnte a dc voltage of
26:0.3 volts. The 30? includes three trasfornere. electrifier, stabilizer and
control circuit.

The 30? control circuit (Pisa-e 11.7) contain the following basic elemts:
the power on button Vkl ad the power off button vylk. Switches K1 and K2 for
the prinsry network and service voltage; delay circuits sz-i ... 81-6.

when pressing on the power on button, the switch K1 is switched on, sending the
ac service voltage of 20 volts to the power packs and the first stage assesblies
(BPiU-I) and then the three-phase 3N/220-volt voltage. Sinultaneonely,
the delay circuits SZ-l ad 524 are started. After 200 to 300 nilliseconds the
signal fron the output of the 82-1 starts the 82-2 and switches the switch K2 on.
The latter sends the ac service voltage ad then the priary network voltage to
the power pack; and the second stage assealiee (mu-n). After 200 to 110
lillisecoods. the signal to switch on the power supply (sva) arrives at the

69
momanmmv
MWUSEONLY

output of the 82-2, ad after 2-3 seconds, the blocking signal of one of the
energency disconnect channels (830) arrives fro. the output of the SH. when
pressing on the power off button, the switch K2 is disconnected, and the delay
circuit 82-3 is started. After 200-2!” nilliseconds, a signal that disconnects
the switch K1 appears at its output.

In the electric power supply of the Yes-5517 provision is mde for protection fro-
disappearance and average of the atﬁilized voltages, fron overloads and short
circuits with respect to output voltages and disappearance of a phase of the pri-
mary network. In these cases a failure signal is generated which breaks the
emergency signal circuit, which leads to iwossibility of reclosure of the W am.
There is also blocking that excludes the possibility of switching on the electric
power supply in case of inroper installatim of it with respect to location and
in the absence of any nodule, fan or failure to connect critical parts of the
plug. 0n the face panel of the DU? and the display panel there is a light display
for the presence of the ac feed voltage of the priury network, switching the

trait on and off, energency conditions and preventive control. In addition, the
energency and preventive control signals are cowlsd out to the electric power
supply control panel of the cowater.

11.5. Checking the Fitness of the m m Tape Controller Equip-eat and Possible
Failures

The fitness and proper operation of the U!) m. are checked during its operation
under comlex and autononous conditions ming circuits specially provided in the
unit for this purpose and also using nonitoring and measuring equip-ant.

Checking Out the Controller Equip-ent Operating Under Couples Conditions. The
fitness and correctness of the operation of the basic asseﬁlies and mdules of the

W m tape controller are checked under these conditions by special circuitry of
the device. For examle, these include the state and some byte nodules, the
sequence of performed operations display, various chedt circuits and error forning

assewlies .

The basic state byte nodule is designed for shaping the basic state byte code
which is trmsnitted to the channel at the end of the initial access and on coqle-
tion of the executed instruction. The nodule includes the basic state flip-flops
which establish the end of operation of the channel, including the presence of

an error in the III) NHL and in any m.

The sense byte nodule is used to gather and output detailed inforlstion to the
channel about the state of the an NHL and the atorages, about a failure or error
appearing in the execution of the preceding input-output operation. The sense
byte is output to the channel on the "sense" imtruction. In the Yes-5517 there
are six sense bytes, in the bits of which the state of the controller and the
magnetic tape storage is depicted. For angle, in byte 0 the second bit inform
of an error in the channel buses, the third bit, a error in equipoent; in byte 3
the second bit commicates an extraordinary niaalignnent during check reading,
the third bit, an error in the amt register; in byte lo the 0 bit inforss that
none of the write flip-flops is operating in the NHL, and the second hit, an
error in the read synchronirer 38, the third bit indicates a: error in the write
synchroniser sz.

50
POIOFF'ICIALUSEONLY
M m1. USE ONLY

The sequence displays are 'desiped to check the sequence of the performance of

the operations causing nave-ant of the magnetic tape in the NHL. The sequence
display is a three-bit counter. During the execution of each operation it goes
through variom steps. The counter is switched at the end of each proper execution
of a step of the operation 0n proper execution of the operation the comtery can
reach the min md be c aared. One or several counters not cleared indicates
improper operation of the W [controller] or the llll. [nametic tape storage].

Since each step of the operation corresponds to a defined state of the counter.

it is possible to use the state of the counters to detenine the came of an
error in the U!) or the m.

The information check circuits are designed to check the transdssion of data
through the W me. These circuits include the following: the parity ched:
circuits in the R25, m, RP and Rh! registers. the skeu check circuit; inter»
ference detection circuit in the intervals when perfor-ing the write, read and
other operations.

The equip-set check circuits control the operation of defined circuits of the

1111 NHL. They include the following: the 82 and ss chedt circuits; the echo error
check circuit; the delay counter check circuit. 0n detecting an error each of the
check circuits sets the "error in the unit." "error in intonation," or "error in
equipmnt" display.

The error formation assedalies consist of a meter of circuits designed for shaping
ad recording errors discovered during operation of the W and m.

Checking the w Bquipsnnt in the Autonomm Mode. During checks, repair and
adjustnent of the W and the 1m. in the autonoIous node, their operation is con-
trolled fron the control panel of the 110. Using the panel, jointly with special
autonomous control circuits, it is possible to checll the najority of the system
and circuits of the W and the NIL. Visual checking of the operation of the mic
is realized in this case by scans of the display trbes located on the display
panel (the interface signal display, the w and m states; the write and read
synchronizers and the delay counter; errors deternined by the 00 system; inforna-
tion contained in the III] registers). -

The following manipulations car he perforned fra- the control panel of the W NHL:
checking inforastion contained in one of six registers of the III! (ER, 328, star,
RPK, RP, no); setting up the input-output instruction md address codes of the UH;
setting 14) and recording zones of l, 8, 16 and 128 bytes or of arbitrary length;
sinulation of parity errors in the write lines of the w and checking the operation
of the error detection system; checking the operation of the error correction
systen; assign-eat and enemtion of the diagnostic operating node of the OD and

the NH]...

In order to perform the enmerated operations, the required switches. keyboards
and display tubes equipped with inscriptions are available on the control panel.

51
MWMMY
POI! 0510M. USE ONLY

Bquiplent Checking Using the lbnitoring and Measuring Equip-ant. In order to
neasure the parameters, adjust and tune the circuits of the no NHL (Yes-5517)
the following are used: an eletronic oscillograph type 81-65; a codination
device type ‘l‘s-lo3lu; the digital frequency nter cnz-12; the dc volt-eter m09;
the stand for checking the special T32 — Yes-A1010; stand for checking logical
T87. - YeS-AlOZ. The para-stern, the adjust-ant and tuning of the circuits and
asselblies of the U11 Nil. using Ionitoring and measuring equip-eat and stands are
carried out according to operating imtructions.

After preventive, adjust-eat and checkout operations, a nandatory check is nude

on the technical condition of the an under autonomous conditions by perforaiag

all of the instructions provided for by the instruction mual and given by the
operator from the control panel. Then the unit is checked together with a computer
on a test progran specially written for this purpose.

Characteristic Failures. Let us consider some characteristic, frequently encoun-
tered failures of the 11: NHL, their probable causes and scans of elilinating then.

The device is not switched on. the "energency" display light burns on the SIP
panel. The cause is burnout of the liﬂut fuse in the BOP or in the fan.

The instruction is rejected. The "instruction reject" light burns on the display
panel of the unit. This can occur when it is proposed that the unit perform a
forbidden or inactive instruction or in case of failure of the "instruction
refused" signal fcmtion circuit. It is necessary to check the presence of

a data protection ring on the reel of the corresponding m, determine the type

of operation, check the ShIR-K reception circuit and the "instruction reject"
signal fornation circuit. If either of the latter has failed, it is necessary to
check the corresponding T82 on the bench. If when determining the instruction code
it turns out that the instruction code does not exist. it is necessary to bring

it in correspondence with the program.

The BUS-K error. The "parity BUS-K" display light burns. The reason for this cm
be ilproper operation of the Shm-K reception asaeﬁlies, the check circuit, the
"BUS-K error" simal fornation asseﬂuly or the channel itself. In order to estab-
lish the location of the error, it is prinarily necessary to check the infatuation
coming fron the channel, then check the operation of the BIB-K reception unit and
then the BUS-K error formation unit.

The "intervention required" and "error in the unit” display lights burn. This can
be caused when the channel accesses the U!) or mu. while it is off or it is not
ready. If it was discovered that the requested me. is off, then it must be
switched on. If one that does not exist or is not ready for operation is requested.
then a correction oust be trade to the progran or the NHL sust be node "ready."

The "parity error in the RP register" display lidut burns. The probable cause of
this is absence of write or read with respect to one of the hits. incorrect
operation of the RP or a magnetic tape defect. In the given situation, above all

it is necessary to check the presence of write signals fron the um 1m. to the NHL
and the presence of read sipuals with respect to all bits. Then proceed to check
out the Operation of the RP register. the read information reception nodule. the

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WISEONLY

m register check circuit and the error forntiaa circuit. A napetic tape
defect is discovered as follows: before executing the um instruction, the
BRASE INTERVAL instruction is executed, and then the write is done in the zone -
in one section of the tape. After deterlining the specific location of the error.
the corresponding T82 is checked on the stand.

The "parity error in the azs register" display light burns. This situation can be
caused by inroper operation of the register 328 or the 81's! line forning circuit
(Shh TsK). It is necessary to check the following: correctness of operation of
the 1123 register check circuits. the forastion of the "st error" signal and the
"duet. st" signal of the Shit line and also the correctness of entering and
clearing infomtion in the us. The T32 of the discovered failed assedaly is
bench tested.

Skew error. The "skew” display byte burns. This nem that the tine interval
between the first nd lest bits of the received byte exceea the adnissible value.
or the "stew" signal shaping circuit is not functioning. In this case it is
necessary to dxech the dispersim between the read hits and the "a " signal
shaping circuit.

NHL reject. The "m reject" indicator light burns. This state can be earned by
losses of the urite or read state or during the perforlance of an operation in the
NHL, a not ready state has occurred. In the latter case. the no. is ude ready.
and in other cases. its operation is checked out.

The "echo error" indicator light burns. This can occur when the infornation is

not written on magnetic tape or when the "echo error" siml circuit is operating
incorrectly. Therefore. first the presence of sipals on the write wires is
checked, and then the operation of the "echo error" signal shaping circuit. If it
is discovered that the echo signal does not cone fro. the 1011., then the failure is
looked for in the m.

In conclusion let us note that both of the presented failures are reported to us
by the indicator lidrts on the display panel of the W m, which is we of the
positive aspects of all of the units of the mified systes of coquters.

53
FOIOFHCIALLDSEMY
“WWMY

man 12. mam-1c DR!!! Sm
12.1. General Description

"emetic dn- atoragee (I!!!) ere along the etorage unite with cyclic acceee to the
intonation, for while the d“. in turning each cell periodically paaeeeundel' the
magnetic heads. For the loot pert the III are need as buffer “nee. and are
rarely ea extemel notoriee. The R! it very meful for a prop. generating a
large under of inter-adieu reenlte. It in also convenient to etore a copy of the
operating eyeten on the dru storage, for the etbroutinee of the operating eyaten
nut he ecoeeeed quickly, ad they are used frequently. In addition. the m it
convenient for me in collective-me counter eyeten (v3), in which my prop.
are executed nil-ultimately. Here during operation of the V8. copies of new pro-
gn- for replacing the proxree executed at the given tin not be quickly and Ere-e
quently input to the 00 . the no need a a buffer wry hendlee thie amble-
mt aucoeeefully.

negzetic dru) in not replaceable. In addition, it ie significantly lure expeneive
then eagetic diec etorage (mm).

At the present ti- three typee of II. have been developed ad eennfactored which
are designed for operation in the unified eyeteu of counter” Yes-5033 (088R).
Yes-5036 (Polnd), and Yes-$035 (Ger-en Denocratic Ieptblic).

Baeic Specifications

Yes-5033 Yes-5036 Yes-5035
Capacity. negahytee 5.6 2 2
"mt of vorking tracks ”0 - 532
Recording density. bits]. ‘2 - - 33
Average acceea ti... nillieeconb 20 20 20
Data trmenieeion epeed. usdyte/eec 1.2 0.1 0.8
Dru: rpe 1500 - 1500
Dru diaeeter. - ‘50 - 320

The m in a device with a napetic head for each nepetic track. The choice of
the required eemetic track in eede by electric evit‘dzing of the unetic heede.

“lemmas“
the m is turning of the hepatic du- uhich is sustained at content velocity.

Inasmuch as we are dealing vith a rotating carrier, sole tile is needed to find
the required block of data.

The tine required for access and trans-issim of data in the IIIB is ends up of
three cosponents: the mystic head access tine, the turning delay ti- (the tine
required for the carrier to turn) and the data transmission tins. The ametic
head access tile is stall by cowarisnn vith the other ooaonents. The turning
delay tile consists of the tine of angular rotatim of the )8 [auntie dru]
required to bring the required cone under the record-reproduction head. This ti-
on the average is equal to half the tics of a full turn of the drum. The data
transmission tine between storage ad the 00? is a function of the drun speed and
the recording density of the data on the carrier. The M are connected to the

SK through controllers. The axia- nder of dru- storages connected to a
selector channel is eiﬂat.

12.2. Structural Design and Basic Asssalies

The Yes-5033 drun storage is structurally executed on the basis of a standard bay
in which the following are located: aspetic dru, cross pieces with magnetic heads
control unit with control panel, electronic record. reproduction and hepatic head
switching circuits, snall standard interface, the feed control unit and the power
pack and also fans. In order to realise internal ad external connectrions, plugs
are med. In the storage a systea to protect against loss of power is also pro-
vided. when the feed voltage drops. the protection systea vithdrars the cross piece
are and instataneomly disconnects the aspetic drun. The vorhing surface of the
drill wed in the Yes-5033 is coated with cobalt—tungsten alloy.

The Yes-$015 emetic data storage incldes the sale fmctional nodules as the

Yes-5033. Distinguishing features of this device are a different structural
solution and the me of ferrolac as the aspetic coating for the drum

Magnetic Dru. The basic part of any me is the mastic drum - this is a care-
fully machined cylinder, the diaater of which ca fluctuate for different storages
within the limits free 100 to 1200 -. ad the length fro. 200 to 900 n. The

drum diameters of the Yes-5033 storage are 650 -, for the Yes-$035 they are 320 I.
The magnetic drun (ND) is made of Ietal by casting or cold working. The beat

material for asking the MB is stainless steel. It is resistant to external effects
and is well stbjected to nachining.

The drula is a hollow cylinder (Figure 12.1) (solid of revolution) 1. Inside the

drum is a built-in reversing type electric motor which contains a rotor S pressed
into the solid of revolution, and a stator 4 seated on a stationary shaft 3. The

feed voltage to the rotor and stator windings is fed over lines that rm inside
the shaft. The rotor turns in the bearings 2 and 6 seated on the stator shaft.

The drun is installed vertically. The dru- stator is attached to the cast base
using brackets.

55
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWWLY

 
  
 

   

ll/I/Illll!

     
 

H . fllllel

liq/4

  
 
  

(III/II/Illll/l

Figure 12.1. Structural diagren of a nsyretic dru-

‘lhe cross pieces with mtic heads are arrnged near the surface of the dru- on
the generstrix of the cylinder and are attadaed to the base using special brackets.
In the Yes-SO33 storage there are 60 cross pieces. at each of which 22 floating
nepetic heed nodules are installed. Bach nodule contains two hank in a single
housing. The cross pieces ca: be rotated on their ass. as a result of which it
is possible to bring then up to the metic d11- eurface end withdr-v then. The
cross piece is awed by electronsgnets. "hen the nemetic drt- reaches its rated
rpn, a start voltage is fed to the electromta. After the cross pieces take up
the working position, nicrowitches respond providing for feeding the working
voltage to the electmnaalete (3 to 5 tines less then the starting voltage). The
cross piece is withdraw by spring installed on the cores of the electronapets
after the feed voltage is shut off.

In order to protec the ascetic surface fra d-age by dot. the dru- ia placed in
a sealed homing which is reached by air throud: .1 oil filter. The homing ha
an organic glass window designed to inspect the working surface and two r-ovebla
sib covers. In sane cases the nagnetic dru is placed in a seeled homing filled
with heliua. use of which lowers the heating teqeratnre of the dru ud protects
its surface froa oxidation. There are sealed plus to connect the napetic dru-
to the electronic part of the storage end the control nit.

In all of the m designed for operation as part of the unified systen of counters,
floating nsgnetic heads are used. One of the nthods of creating the floating

heads is based on using the aerodyna-ic effect. In the case of fast turning of

the dull. the surromding air is entrained by its surface. creating an air cushion.
As a result of this effect. the napetic head is lifted. repelling it free the

dru- aurface. 0n the other hand. the floating elenent ia clawed against the
surface of the nemetic drun by a spring which equelisea the lift of the air cushion.
The floating elennt followe the surface of the dam by this effect. At the rated

56
”WWW?
drun we, a dynanic equilibrit- of forces created by the air cushion in the spring

is set up. A constant go of 5 to lo nicrons is neintained between the logistic
heads and the drt- suface.

In order to avoid spoiling the nsgietic coating and the heads during- acceleration
and braking of the dn- the heads not he withdr-n iron its surface.

The parallel-series cdaod of locating data is sued in the mgnetic drul storeges

of the mified systen of counters. For eagle, there are 800 intonation tracks
on the Yes-5033 nepotic drun. Bach tretﬁ is aimed its own emetic head. The
data are recorded and read sinnltneomly on eiuat channels.

The size of the nsgnetic heed greatly exceeds the track width; therefore the heads
are placed along a spiral aromd the dru. The spiral arrangement of the heads
per-its each of then to take w the required position vertically in spite of its

significant width. The sip of the beginning of the dru- is an index utter
recorded before the beginning of each intonation track.

 

Figure 12.2. Arrengennt of intonation Figure 12.3. Arrange-n: of inforlstion

on a drum by the series uthod on a drun by the parallel nthod
Key: Key:

1. m EV l. Trm

2. 02 2. no SI

3. UV 3. ﬂows

The drun surfece is mifornly distributed so that 800 working heads and so spare
heads can be placed on it. In order that each track he addressed. the espetic heads
are divided into several groups (Figure 12.6). hr this purpose the ll: ‘Inegnetic
heed] surface is divided into four equal sectors which are assigned the nuﬁers

0, I. 2 and 3. Each sector takes an arc of 90' and contains 220 napetic recording
and reproduction heads. The given sector includes only the neurotic tracks (heath),
the index nether of which is located in this sector.

In each sector there are 10 cross pieces. on each of which there are 20 working
numeric heads and two spare ones. 0n the cross pieces there are also an electronic
switching circuit for the nsmetic heads. The cross pieces with even nmrs are
located in the upper part of the dun. and with odd tide“. in the lower pert.

The head address (its position) is deternined by three nders: the sector nmer,
the cross piece mder on which it is located and its position on the cross piece.

57
Ml OFFICIAL IBEONLY
Figure 12.5. Arrngenent of hepatic heads in groups

1. Even ntﬂers of cross pieces
2. Dn- surface

3. Sector 0

5. Odd sector 1

If my head or track turns out to be unsuitable. the cable with this head is
switched to one ofthe spare tracks on the as. cross piece. llere the spare head
and track replace the msuitble head or defective track. '

The circuit diagra- of the Yes-SO33 storage is eucutsd fro. series 155 integrated
aicrocircuits. In addition, special 1'82 and several nonstandard circuits are used
in the storage (pulse shapers, converters of different types of sipsls to signals
with the par-tera of the series 155 licrodrcnits. reproduction and recording
amlifiers. electronic switching. filtering and protection circuits).

12.6. Characteristic Failures and Preventive Operations
Operating Characteristics of the mystic Dru: Storage

In order to ssintain fitness of the storage it is necessary to consider its
operating characteristics. All of the 108 not operate under conditions stipulated
in the operating instructions. During operation of the storage it is necessary to
observe the following order of switching on the odules: switch on the three-phase
220/380 volt. SO-herte voltage; switch on the fan: switda on the dc feed voltage;
switch on the mystic dun.

The storage elsnnt is shut down in the following sequence: switch off the dru
while pressing the "druI off" key; switch off the feed voltage by pressing the
"power off” key; switch off the In.

‘lhe negletic drm can operate only with the homing and side covers tidatly closed.
The screws of the homing and covers not be well tightened. It is pernissihle

SB
”WMONLY
to renove the housing and covers only vhen perforaing preventive control work.
The filler of the nature-absorbing cartridp and color of the stndard applied
to the cartridge glass amt be differelit colors. The direction of rotation of the
dru nut correspond to the direction of the arrow qplied to the trnsperency
with the inscription "dru turning direction.” On the qpearnce of drops of
noisture on the surface of the mastic dru- or on the iuide surface of the
inspection glass. it is necessary to replace the noistnre absorbing cartridge and
check the reliability of the futening of the dﬂ. haning and side cavern. For
eccelerstion of the absorption of the moisture, it is necessary to lift the cross
pieces, switch on the dri- and leave it operating Intil the drops of mieture
cowletely disqpear.

During the first tvo hours of operation of the storage it is necessary to check the
absence (presence) of scratches on the parting surface of the dn- every I) to 60
einutes of its operation through the inspection hole, and during sweequent opera-
tion of the dru. no less often than tvice a day. It is not perniasible to bring
the cross piece to the ﬂu surfece if it has not reached its rated speed. The
opening of the da- housing is pernitted only in a facility with dint ad noisture
content sddssible for the separation.

Preventive Control Bork. Preventive nintenance is perfor-d periodically on the
storage after every 500 hours of operation, but no nore rarely than once in 3 nonths.
The preventive neintenance operations on the storage include the following:

external inspection of the stores and checking the paraeters of the output signals
vith the rated voltages stepped up ad down by 10!. During external impaction.

the integralness and cleannese of the nagnetic coating, the state of the soldering
are checked. and the foreign objects. dmt and dirt are renoved. the futening of
the plugs, terninals, screws and nuts is checked. The surface of the nagnetic
coating in the insib cavity of the nagnetic dru is degreased by a cutie cloth
vet in distilled alcohol with sdueqnent drying with a dry cloth.

After every 2000 hours of operation of the storage. but no nore rarely than once
every 6 mnths. sdjutnents are ends as follows: inspection of fasteners and
visual inspection of the quality of the negnatic head solder; ranoval of contamina-
tion fron the usedalies and parts of the napetic drun; vuhing of the plug con-
tacts and the contacts of all the cells of the storage vith distilled alcohol;
washing of the napetic coating of the «in. ad floating ale-eta of the m;
lubrication of the hearings and working surfaces with TslATIli-ZZl ltbricnt; check-
ing the output signal paraneters at rated voltap stepped up and down by 102.

The field cells, napetic heads and other elements of the storage are replaced in
accordance with the results of the preventive tests. The noistnre disorbing
cartridge is replaced when the color of the filler (silica gel) becones identical
with the color of a standard placed on the protective glass. After performing the
preventive control operations. the fitness of the storage is checked during its
joint Operation with the 00 m drun controller under autonomi- conditions by a
special test progran.

Characteristic Failures, Methods of Detection and Blinination. Failures occurring
in various fmctional assenblies of the mystic storage disturb the nornal
operating conditions and cm lead to iwoeeibility of wing the storage for its

59
momenrseonu
MWMONLV

purpose. The presence of failures in the storage in the nejority of cases is
directly or indirectly depicted on the control panels of the ngnetic drun storage.
the napetic drus controller and the central processor. The failure is found. a

a rule. under surname conditions during joint operation of the m and the no In
controller. The nest duarecteristic md frequently encountered failures indicated
in the instructions for operation of the device and also discovered and recorded
during working with the dru storage are easily detected and elilineted. It is
possible to include the following mag such failures.

0:: pressing the "du- on" key. the logistic drt- does not one on. the "network”
indicator lights up on the panel. This is possible if one of the fuses is burned
out in the feed circuit for the electric mtor that drives the drnn or if a relay

has failed in the feed control unit. Possible cases of failure nest be checked
out.

The direction of rotation of the dre- does not correspond to the direction indicated
on the special transparency by the arrow. This case is observed in one of

inroper sequence of phase alternation of the prinary network. It is necessary to
change places with feed phases A ad 3 on the power pnel.

"hen the "drus on" key is pressed. the "phaing" indicator hints on the control
panel. This state is observed also in case of isproper phue sequence.

The drun turns. and the cross pieces do not love up to the drun. This failure car
be caused by the absence of feed voltage on the electronsgnets that withdraw the
cross pieces or failure of the electronegnets theuelves. It is necessary to check
for a failure in the fuses or windings of the electro-gnets and also the electro-
nagnet feed blocking circuit. The case of this state on also be incorrect posi-
tioning of the ”ode." "autontic-nnnal" flip-flops. In this one the flip-flop.
out be switched to the "autonatic" position.

with the cross piece noved q: to the drun. the ”cross pieces ready" display does

not lidnt up. This can be caused by failure in the light itself or the feed cir-
cuit.

There are no output signals when the read operation is perfomd. Probable cues
of this state of the storage can be as follows: absence of one of the feed
voltages in the reproduction channel; the cross pieces with the nagnetic heads are
not in contact with the neurotic dun surface; there is no signal pernitting repro-
duction of infornstion (fed free the coaputer). the septic head switch does not
operate. In the first case it is necessary to check the presence of feed voltages
in the reproduction channel using the nonitor jacks. If one or several feed
voltages are absent. it is necessary to discover the cause. In the second case.
the failure is discovered and elisinat'ed, as a result of which the cross pieces

do not Inks contact with the mystic dru- surface. In the third case the presence
of e simal pernitting infatuation reproduction is checked. If the auntie heed
swii 2h does not operate. then the failure of the head address decoder DShAG is
cheered.

summon"
The .plitude of the signal reproduced by the Ignetic heads of one of the groups
is low or less then the allowable. This situation can occur if one or aeseral
diodes in the napetic head circuit is punctured or the surfaces of the dru- or
floating elensnts are dirty. In the first case the forward and tenth resistance
of the diodes in the given grow is checked out, the nodule with the failed diode
is replaced. If the surfaces of the napetic head or-the floating elemts of
the napetic head nodule are dirty, then they are washed with distilled alcohol
or highly pure hydrolyzed alcohol.

There is no recording and reproduction by on or several of the napetic heads.
The cause for this can be a break in the nanetic head circuit or the presence of
a bad diode. In the first case the nagietic head nodule is replaced, and in the

second case. the diodes are checked, and if necessary, the nodule with the failed
diode is replaced.

There is no output signal in one of the co-mication chmels beaveen the storage
and the controller. The reason for this can be failure of the corresponding
nagnetic head, failure of one of the cells of the reproduction channel or a break-
down of the output circuit. A failure in the output circuit is checked out by a
continuity test. and the failed nagnstic head or cell is replaced by a good one.

"hen reproducing the infatuation on oscillograph screen. the interference simls
are seen. their asplitude is hidaer than the useful siml ad disappears when the
cross pieces are withdrawn fron the nagnetic drun surface. This is observed when
the winding insulation of one of the neurotic heads is punctured to its core

(a nagnetic circuit). The failure is discovered a follows. The cross piece is
brought up to the dru- surface. The oscillograph input is connected alternately

to the windims of the neurotic head of the given group. The head in which
insulation breakdown has occurred gives out the nanni- interference siual enli-
tude. On withdrawing the cross piece free the drun this signal decreases. The
failed head detected in this way is replaced.

0n the working surface of the napetic dn- there are but with the coating dis-
turbed. This can be caused by the presence of foreign particles in the gap
between the napetic head ad the drun surface or the presence of eﬁedded particles
in the organic glass of the floating elenent. If on ex-ination foreign particles
are detected. it is necessary to find the cause of then. For this purpose. the
seal of the nagnetic dru housing is checked. integralnees of the oil filter is
checked and all of the nechanical assenblies capable of beconing the came of the
appearance of foreign bodies are also exanined. The cmtact traces on the dun.
the floating elenents of the mystic head are wiped with a cawric cloth wet in
distilled alcohol with subsequent drying with a dry cain-ic cloth. The napetic
heads in which the presence of «bedded particles is usuud. is renewed ad care-
fully exanined to detect the wedded particles. In the absence of ‘such particles
the MC is put in place; in the presence of ewedded particles. it is replaced.
The nemetic heads are renoved and reinstalled strictly in accord-Ice with the
instructions for technical naintennce of the storage.

when finding failures and perforning preventive mnitoring operations, the nonitor-
ing md assuring equip-lent, tools and naterials reco-ended in the instructions
for technical naintenance of the storage are med. After detection and elinina-
tion of failures, the fitness of the storage is checked out during joint operation
of it with the controller in the autononous node using a special test progran.

61
FOR MI. IS! ONLY
M mun. one. URL!

CHAPTER 13. name DISC STORAQ
13.1. Basic Characteristics ad Structural Principle

The no on mastic discs ()0) are direct-access type storeys. They have hiﬂ!
infornation capacity and very hid! speed. They conhine the advantages of the 3!.
having high capacity and the us having short access tia. By coaarison with the
m, the caustic disc storage (I10) in the seas physical volt-s haa any tines
greater working surface of the carrier for storing the infer-nation. The capacity

of the nodern m reaches 100 or agaytes, ad the infer-scion exchange speed
reaches up to 106 hits/sec.

At the present tine III) (Yes-5050. Yes-$051, res-5052, Yes-$055, Yes-$056,
Yes-5068, Yes-5060) are an operation which were deaignsd to work as V20 in the
mified systen of coautera. The haic characteristics of anlthe enmrated
atorsgea, with the exception of the Yes-$051 are identical; therefore here ad
hereafter characteristics of aly the Yes-$056 and Ye8~5051 are presented:

Yes-5056 Yes-$051

Cascity, agaytea 7.25 100
Recording density, hits/- 29-“ 29-“
Average acceae tine, nicroseconda 90 420
Data traanission speed, khyteslsec 156 83

The Yes-$050. Yes-5052. Yes-$055. Yes-5056 and Yes-5058 atoragea operate with
replaceable discs. The package for each of these store’s includes six diets with
ten operating surfaces. The Yes-$051 storage is stationary. It has 5 per-anatly
attached disco separated into two suhadules of 18 discs each. The total nder
of working surfaces is 66.

The basic advantage of storages with replaceable disc packages is the possibility
of replacing one set with another. In order to preserve the infotation during
storage of the disc in the archive cad: package is placed in a dmtproof shielded
container nsde of input-resistant platic.

Magnetic discs are anally node of alt-inu- ad its alloys. They are subjected to
careful grinding and polishing. and then they are coated on both sides with ferro-

lac or atal coatings based on Iii. Co and H. The coating thickness is 1.0 to 2.0
Iicrona. The disc dis-eter is fro. 250 to 650 a, and the thickness is 2.0 to 2.5

62
”WNW?
The protective S, 7 ad napetic disc 6 are rigidly fastened to the drive shaft 6
(Figure 13.1). The spacing between-the mystic discs is 7 to 8 - fru each other.
Except for the top and hotton discs. both surfaces of the disc are working surfam.
In the cse of the top and hotton discs, only the inside surfaces are working
sm'fsces. Intonation is recorded and read by ﬂoating spastic heads 3 attached
to spring loaded am. The ar- are rigidly attadeed to a carriage 2 which can
we in the horizontal direction. "hen the carriage was the mystic heads love
along the radius of the disc. The disc rpn is 2W8.

 

Figure 13.1. Structural design of II) [somatic disc storage]

Hhen starting q) the no free the W m [mystic disc storage controller]. the
signal switching it on cones in, the start relay responds, and power goes to the
disc drive 8. When the discs reach 70! of the rated speed, the sipal is generated
for sechanical cleaning of the package of discs. During the cleaning cycle soft
brushes installed on opposite sides of the logistic heads pass over the entire
working surfaces of the disc, cleaning dot and dirt off then. After clearing a
waiting tin of 200 to ”0 nilliseconds is alloved. mm the discs reach rated
rpn, the carriage drive 1 of the napetic head nodule is switched on. and the
heads are brought up to the working surfaces. Only when this condition is satis-
fied are the floating mastic heads swported on an air cushion at the required
distance fro- the diac surface.

The botton protective disc 7 called a sectional disc, has 20 sectional cuts and
projections. when the disc turns the sectional sensor so (the speed and rpn gauge)
for each cut and each projection generates a pulse. These pulses are the input
pulses for the control circuit for turning the disc package. Each package of discs
has its sectional disc.

The investigated design of the m where each working surface has its own nagnetic
head loving along the disc radim is not mique. In the simpler m, there are
only two heads in the neurotic head nodule, one of which serves the upper sides of
the disc and the other, the lover.

Hhen selecting the required disc and the required ngnetic track a: the disc

the ”912th: head first we vertically to the disc indicated in the address and
then horizontally to the required track. In this case the track access tine
increases to 0.1 to 0.7 second.

63
me OFFICIAL 1.8! ONLY
summon“

The disc packages for the storages- Yes-5050, Yes-5052, res-504 ad Yes-$058 consist

of 203 cylinders of 10 tracks each. The capacity of a cylinder of the eat-aerated
storages is 36250 bytes.

On each working surface of a disc there is a group of nametic heads consisting of
the record-reproduction head nd the erase head. Each of the 203 positions of the
carriage with the wetic heads corresponds to the cylinder. address, and each
track on a cylinder corresponds to the head address (that is, the heed address per-
nits deternination of one of 10 cylinder tracks). By electronic switching. one of
10 record-reproduction heads is selected by cans of which the intonation is
recorded or read on one of the 10 tracks of the cylinder.

The longitudinal recording density of the mjority of ngnetic disc etorages now
in Operation is: for track ho 000, 29 bits/-; for track No 202, Mo bits/n.

Magnetic Heads. The disc cannot be nude absolutely flat. Ewen careful mufacture
does not per-it beating of their surface to be avoided. Therefore in the m. a
contactless recording is used with the application of floating heads perlitting the
gap between then and the surface of the carrier to reach 2-5 microns and be held
alaost constant. Bach head has a working "record-reproduction" go 5 microns wide,
1.13 III beyond which cones the "tmnel erase" gap 10 nicrons wide. There are 100
turns on the record-reproduction head, and $0 on the tunnel erase head. The wind-
ings are made of wire 0.06 I- in disaster.

The housing of the floating elenent (Figure 13.6) is rude of Tali-332 ceramic. The
magnetic heads 1 (one record-reproduction and a second erase head), the cap 3,
cover 2 and bushing 6 are glued to the grooves of the homing 5. The mgnetic
circuit of the record-reproduction head is nade of two per-alloy cores separated
by a nonnynetic insert nade of No 605 alloy 5 nicrons thick. The napetic circuit
of the tunnel erase head consists of two bronze plates to which pernalloy plates

are glued on both sides. The Ito-emetic insert 10 nicrons thick is also ads of
alloy No 605.

   

   

-- ::.\:~.-;;:” .3 . 1.;
”0333;355:313.

 
  

Figure 13.6. Floating element with emetic head nodule

The floating elenent 1 (Figure 13.7) is fastened by screws to the spring smpension
consisting of the are 3, the torsion spring 1nd ring. The era: 3 together with the
floating elenent. cleats 2 and b is attached by screws to the adjmtnent cleat 5.
When the carriage is in the withdan position, the end of the torsion spring is
between the bulge and the an 3 and the shoulder of the cleat lo. The working sur-
face of the floating element is in this one 10-15 nicrons from the disc surface,
and it is held by the spring of the ar- 3.

FOI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FORWUSEONLY

Hhen the lift of the air cushion becomes equal to the force of the torsional
spring, the working surface of the floating element with nagnetic head-is set at
a stable distance (2-2.5 sicrons) fro- the working surface of the disc.

In the Yes-5051, Yes-5055. Yes-5058 storages, a hydraulic drive is used, and in the
Yes-5050. Yes-5050. Yes-5052. Yes-566 storages, an electronagnetic drive.

 

Figure 13.7. Magnetic head nodule on spring suspension

The electrical part of the Yes-5052 and Yes-$056 storages is primarily made fra
series 155 integrated nicrocircuits. In addition, special T32 are used in the
storage and several nanstandard system. These are pulse shapers, pulse converters
to current signals, converters of various types of signals (for exaple, from photo
pickups) to signals with series 155 nicrocircuit paraleters, reproduction and record
amplifiers. electronic switching, filtering and protection circuits.

The paraneters of the input and output signals of the storage are standardized.

The logical "1" corresponds to the upper level of voltage froln 2.6 to lob. volts.
and the logical "0" corresponds to the lower voltage level fro. 0 to 0.6 volts.

The read pulse repetition period in the Yes-5056 storagss fro- !)0 to 550 nano-
seconds (the rated value is 600 nmosecands) for code "1" and from 620 to 1000 nano-
seconds (rated value 300 nanosecands) for code "0." The signals fron the storage
to the [:11 NH!) [nagnetic disc storage controller] arrive in the for: of voltage
levels. The signals coming fro. the 110 [controller] to the storage have the shape
of rectangular pulses or voltage levels with switching tins of no sore than $0 nano-
seconds. The average intake power from the ac network is no more than 1.5 kilovolt-
anperes.

Hagnetic Head Comtator. Selection of the required nagnetic head from the ten heads
used in the Yes-5056 storage is nade by the Iagnetic head co-utator DIG. It is
made froan three T52. two of then nmered 0101, one of then answered 0102. The

T82 0101 consists of four independent and identical HG [Ingnetic head] electronic
switching circuits. The T52 0102 contains two independent and identical electronic
switching circuits and a circuit for checking the correctness of the choice of
magnetic heads. The feed voltages of the conutator are +20, -20 and +60 volts.

The input and output signal levels correspond to the rigzal levels of the series 155
integrated aicrocircuits. The load of one electronic switching circuit is a
magnetic head with record current and erase current of 200 nillialps. The naadnnna
pulse repetition frequency of the input signal is 66 kilohertz, and the input sig-
nal duration is fron 15 to 20 microseconds.

65
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13.8. Characteristic Failures. Detection and Elimination of Then

The magnetic disc storage "MD is a device that contains coqilex mechanical, elec-
tric and electronic asseablies. Operating failure of even one of the nuerous ;

elements in these asseablies can lead to failure of the entire storage.

The search for a failure is not a airple problem. Successful solution of this
problem depends to a great extent on knowledge of the operating principle of
individual assewlies and their interaction. The experience in working with the

storage and also operating instructions offer the possibility of quickly detecting
and elininating the most characteristic failures.

when the power supplies are switched on, the disc package electric motor does not
turn. and the "automatic" indicator on the control panel (PU) lignts up. A failure
is caused by breakdown of the initial register clearing circuit when the power
supplies are switched on. The T32 of this system Inst be checked out.

The disc package electric motor does not come on. and the "automatic" display lights
up On the PU. This situation can occur if the electromagiet for locking the disc
package in place is not deenergized. It is necessary to check the relays that

control the operation of the disc package locking electrougnet ad the relay feed
circuits.

"hen the "autonatic-nanual" button is pushed, the storage does not convert from
"manual" to "autonstic," and the disc package stays in place with the covers closed.
This can occur if the nicroswitch of the static charge removal unit or one of the
microswitches bloating the operation of the storage element with one of the covers
open does not operate.

The electric motor of the disc package has readied the rated rpm, but the carriage
is stationary. This lens that the disc package speed analysis circuit is not
operating. It is necessary to check the T32 in the cards; electric drive system
that converts the simals from the photo pickup to signals with the parameters of
the series 155 circuits and display the sectional pulse duration.

After switching on the electric motor of the disc package drive, the carriage goes
forward beyond the No 202 track until it stops and does not return. This takes
place when the electromagiet of the head feed does not respond. The came of its
nonresponse can be that it is out of adjustment.

Oscillatory movements of the carriage are observed when searching for the cylinder
in the vicinity of cylinders 0-202. The reason for this malfunction can be a
failure of the difference counter SR or failure of the track position photo pickup.

The search for the cylinders and locking of the carriage take place with non-
characteristic "scraping'noise. The probable came of this failure is not follow-
ing the carriage novenent schedule. A cowlex adjustment out be performed and the
magnetic head drive positioning system checked out.

66
FOR m1. USE ONLY
MWWONLY

The error frequency in reproduction has increased, the anlitude of the pulses
iron the output of the counted pulse shaper is less than norml. This can be
caused by dirty disc or DIN or danage to the KN. In this case the aqlitude of

the signals picked up from the napetic head is call. The disc and the KN mt
be washed, and if necessary, the m. replaced.

Failure of the unit during reproduction, absence of a signal at the prealplifier
output. m1: is observed when one of the wires connecting the RN to the diode
matrix is broken. The break is found by continuity testing.

The number of errors on one of the mystic heacb has increased. The probable
causes of the errors are as follows: breaking of the ground wire of the mystic
head core; short circuiting of one of the wires cmnecting the ngnetic head to

the diode natrix to the housing of the as; failure of the asselbly for revving
static charge fron the disc package.

The frequency of errors in all of the Isgnetic heads has increased, especially
after nechmical loads or transportation. This condition can arise fron weakening
of the nechanical fastenings of the ground circuits, the Qpearmce of additional
electrical contacts between the nodules having electrical insulation relative to
the housing. The detection of this failure is realized as follows. Disconnecting
the wires on naking the connection between individual nodules, the resistance
between the bolts and the ground terninals of the nodules and the housing of the
wit is determined. The resistmce Inlet he no less than 100 kilohns.

A failure during perfornance of the reproduction operation, no intonation on write.

This is observed if the write qlifier has failed. It is necessary to check the
T32 0103.

Frequent errors in the device when perforning the reproduction operation. This
situation can be caused by poor quality of grounding the ngnetic heads. the

housing of the carriage with the m plate or exceeding the rated (0.5 ohn) transient
dynamic resistance of the static charge pickup unit by several tines. It is
necessary to tighten the ground screws, wash and dry the bushes and the contact
surface of the assewly for picking up static charge. In conclusion, it is
necessary to check the transient dynamic resistance with respect to the procedure
presented in the operating imtructions.

The BUP is switched on, and the "energency" display lights w. This can occur in
the absence of one of the prinary feed voltage phases or when pressing the "ener-
gency off" button. It is necessary to take the button out of the on position,
check md replace the A. B, C phase fmes on the control panel of the DUP.

Failures occurring in the storage are deter-iced during joint operation of the
storage with the control unit based on analysis of external signs and the operating
logic of the storage. In order to facilitate and accelerate finding the direct
cause of the storage failure, nonitoring and usuring equipunt is used.

when finding the failures and performing the Ionitoring and measuring operations
with the Yes-$056 storage, it is possible to use the following: the wit for

67
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
”WISEONLY

checking the Yes-A503 desiped to check the operation of the storage, the “3" ‘
control package Yes-A538 designed for adjusting the panic heads and the 80.

an oscillogrsph of the 81-17 type with preanifier nodules designed. to ermine
the signals and their tin relation, the Ch3-39 digital frequency nter designed
for exact neasureant of the tine intervals. a emanation T's-6312 device with

1.0 to 1.5 precision clue, the 8316 do bridge for exact name-ate of electri-
cal resistance. the 35-7 type dc voltage supply for adjusting the drive, the drive
control simulator for adjusting the drive; the T32 0140 is a linear converter of
the pulse repetition frequency proportional to the speed of the carriage drive

to dc voltage (it per-its ennination of the graph of the love-ant of the carriage
when adjusting the carriage drive on a oscillograph).

13.9. Preventive Control Operatims

Skinful operation and high-quality technical naintenance guarantee minterrwted
operation of the storage within the limits of the service life and the reliability
characteristics when designing ad eaufacturing the storey.

The work tine per failure of the Yes-5056 storage (To ) is no less tha 1000 hours;
the stunt of processed infatuation per error (Tame) is no less than 1010 hits;

the average reproduction tin (T3) is no less than 0.5 hours. the service life of
the storage is 12 years.

During operation of the storage it is necessary especially carefully to trace the
finish and integrity of the magnetic coating of the disc and also the mastic
heads. Dust and dirt on the discs ad heads are one of the principal caves of the
appearance of scratches at their surfaces. In the working storage the air in the
cavity of the disc packap is kept clean and the dmt does not accusulate. The
accmulation of dust basically takes place when the storage has not been in opera-
tion for a long tine. Therefore after conpletion of the operation of the storage
it is necessary to remove the diseased put then in a container.

The disc package container mat be cleaned to remve dint no less often than once
a day.

The preventive control operations are perforned daily for 20 names, every 2 weeks
for an hour, ncnthly for 2 hours ad 6 hours every 6 nonths. All of the operations
are perfomd with the power off.

The daily preventive control Operations are perfor-ed with the m nodule, nag-
netic heads and disc package. Here the m nodule is stbjected to external insper
tion and. if necessary, dirt is renoved by a cloth wet in alcohol. The H0 is

first inspected to deter-inc the cause of (image. Then the carriage is manually
withdraw to the rear positim. and the heads are cleaned as follows. A scale is
wrapped in two layers of percale cloth. it is wet in highly pure alcohol, intro-
duced between the heads and rubbed bats and forth. Then the scale is wrapped in

a dry piece of cloth and again the heads are ribbed.

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
The disc package is subjected to preventive neintenance after 26 hours of continu-
ous operation observing the nor- with respect to dust content in the envirnnnnt.
If these nor. are not observed. preventive neintanance is parfornsd on the disc
package three time a day. Several layers of percale cloth are woulu on a rule,
and this is wet in isopropyl alcohol. The scale with the cloth is put between the
discs and, by rotating the disc pedage annually, the surfaces of all the discs
are wiped of f, Qplying a slight smut of pressure to the disc. Then a dry cloth
is med to wipe the discs again. The lint free the cloth is also revved using a
scale wrapped in dry, clean technical chassis.

The disc package is replaced when strung beating occurs or in the presence of
scratches and ededded particles in the ngmtic layer which will not be revved
by clearing and lead to loss of recorded infer-tics;

The funnel is wiped with a cloth wet in alcohol. The cover of the disc package in
the storage cm be washed with water if it is not very dirty. A soft cloth, sponge
or chanois is used. If scratches are detected after washing the cover, they cm be
renewed by nanml polishing using a special polishing coqonnd.

After 2 weeks of operation of the storage unit, in addition to the above-animated
operations. a duck is nade. and if necessary,the electronspet assedly of the
latch is adjusted. the condition of the storage disc packs; cavity filter is

docked and the neurotic coating of all the disc packages med in operation during
this period is cleaned.

The nonthly preventive control operations include all of the above-enmrated ad
the following operations. External inspection of the condition of the solders,
fastening of the plugs and nechmical asseblies. the presence of oxides or foreign
inclusions on the surface of the floating eleunt, metic head and discs is
carried out. If cleaning of the disc or head package does not intone the surface
condition, than they not be replaced. After replace-nt of a nepetic head. it
is adjusted using the control disc package, and if necessary. it is also adjusted
according to the instructions.

The technical condition is checked ad the filters are cleaned in the following
sequence: the fan grillis .‘nspected and cleaned first by rough cleaning and then
wiping all of the fan grills with a wet cloth. The fdu'ic of the air filter for the
disc package cavity is replaced. and the filter elenent is wiped with a cloth wet

in alcohol. The filter fabric is replaced at least once a nonth. and the filter
elenent. no less often than once every 2 tenths.

The nonthly preventive naintensnce work also includes lmrication of the rack.
pinion and latch of the carriage drive, checking the clearances and adjusting the
carriage locking nechanisn, checking and cleaning the dawer. All the operations
are performed strictly by instructions.

The senisnnusl preventive control operations include all of the above-investigated
operations. In addition. they include ltbricstion of the carriage guides, the
torsion bar load pinions. checking the dynanic dierecteristics of the positioner.
neasuring the signals fro. the output of the preanifier. shaper. signals of all
photo read channels and the output signals of the storage. Before lubrication. the
canonical assesblias are first cleaned to remve the dust and spent lnbrication
wing a soft. clean cloth. The ltbrication points. type of oil and aunt of oil
are deter-ined by the operating instructions.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

14.1. General Description of the Yes-5551 lisgnetic Disc and Dri- Controller

The man and m storages (hereafter we shall refer to then as direct-access NPD-
storages) can be serviced by the same controller. This is possible as a result of
inle-enting the one principle of accessing then and also installation of couplers
in the controllers considering the specific type of storage.

The Yes-5551 controller is designed to control the-operation of the nsgneuc disc
storages Yes-5050, Yes-$051. Yes-5052 and Yes-5056. magnetic dru- storages Yes-5031,
Yes-SO33, Yes-5036 ans Yes-5035 and also mystic card storage Yes-5071. The
Yes-5551 controller can be connected to the SK or K or both channels sinultaneously.
It can be connected to any nodel of the mified syste- of counters or to other
commuters under the conditicu of conpatibility of the interface and information for-
nts adopted on the mified system of cowuters.

Up to 8 storages of different types can be connected to the controller. Data
exchange between the controller and the storages is realised by the series nethod
(by bits). and between the controller and the chmel, by bytes. During data
exchange with the storages, the controller uses cyclic control. ad when exchanging
data with a channel, odd parity control. The controller provides for selecting the
storage, reception and execution of central processor and chmel instructions.
data transmission between the storage and the channel, control of the operation of
the storage, and it also generates information describing the state of the storages
in detail.

The data transnission rate between the NPD storage controller is 156 kbyteslsec.
Autonatic and autonomous operating conditions are provided. The sutnonous operating
node per-its the fitness of the device and the storages connected to it to be
checked out with respect to diagnostic test progress.

Structurally, the Yes-5551 is node in the form of an individual instru-ent boy,

the franc of which is assembled fron welded francs joined by screws. The francs of
the nain fram are nade of U—section laterial. On the sides the bay is covered
with easily renovable panels, and on the front ad rear double doors are provided.
Both of the doors of the dorble doors have stops which prevent then fro. being
opened more than 90'. On the right door there is a lock for locking the doors
shut. The doors and panels are in the form of a frase node of alt-aim. angle and
protective sheet aluninu. Inside. the doors and panels are filled with foa-
plastic which creates a light, strong structu'e.

Inside the bay three fro-es are provided - one sliding and two stationary node of
special aluninun section. Bach franc is assigned its own index (A, B, C) which is
located in the taper lefthand corner on the T32 installation side. The frame has
six basic coantnents in which panels for the T32 and other nodules of the device
are installed. The rotating fro-es A and c are locked by locks. M engineering
panels are nomted on the franc C on the T32 installation side. On the axis of

rotation of the franc side (on the end) there are plugs for coupling the frame to
each other and to other devices. In order to cool the electronic mdules of the

device in the lower part of each frame two fans are installed. The air goes fro-
the facility to the bay through a special filter. it is picked up by the fans and
ejected through a lattice in the upper part of the bay.

The overall disensicns of the bay are lZOOﬂSOleOO -, and it weighs 500 kg. The
power supply has a three-phase zoo/220 volt, SO-herts network.

The intake power is no are than 1.5 kilowatts. The delivered-set includes the

following: the Yes-5551 controller. spare parts no matings. tools and one set
of operating instructions and form.

The 20!! [nicroinetruction nasty] is designed to store the controlling and
diagnostic progrs. and for rapid output of licroimtructions by the address for-ed
in the m [nicroprogran controller]. It is a trnsforur type Rat annotated fro-
U—type ferrite cores. The structural and operating principles of the u were
investigated in Gaapter 7. The cqacity of the me is $72 68-bit words (licro-
instructions). The 21!! is ”Jaunted as 12 replaceable nodules of 256 words each.
The access cycle is 500 nanoseconcb. and the access tine, 250 nanoseconds.

16.6. Controller Circuitry

The circuitry of the Yes-5551 controller is comtructed sing the series 155
integrated nicrocircuits, specialised and several taster T82. The latter are
designed to check the special T82. They are all structurally executed on a glass
textolite circuit board with two-sided printed circuitry and one-sided installation

of radio parts. Let us consider the purpose, the circuit discs-s and operating
principle of several special T32.

Hicroinstruction Read Amlifier (T32 of the Yes-555110511). The anlifier is
designed for anlification. uplitude and tin selection of mipolar pulse signals
read free the m and conversion of then to signals with parneters corresponding
to the parameters of the series 155 nicrocircuits. The T32 contains two identical
channels. The feed voltage of the anplifier is 12.6 volts. the bias voltage .is

+5 volts. The input signal has positive polarity with an anlitude free 60 to 115
nillivolts and duration fron 160 to 200 nanoseconds. The output sipal of negative
polarity is as follows: lower level (logical 0) no are than 0.6 volts. upper level
(logical 1) no less than 2.6 volts. The duration of the output pulse is within the
limits froe 160 to 270 nanoseconds, the pulse front is :53 nanoseconds. the
pulse decay tine tcsls nanoseconds. Each channel contains a line-awlifier,

power aplifier. awlitude and ties selectors and an inverter (Figure 16.7).

The line mlifier is executed by a differential circuit using the transistors T1
and T3 with current generator in the eeitter circuit. The current generator is
executed fron the transistor T2. It is designed to stabilise the operation of the
line amplifier. Negative feerback created by the resistor R7 stbilises the
operation of the current generator. The resistors R6. 39 jointly with the capaci-
tor CI forn negative feedback with respect to direct current designed to stabilise
the line mlifier. The power anlifier is executed frol a transistor T6 by the

eeitter repeater circuit. It is directly connected with the output of the line
anplifier and is desiped to decotple it fron the load.

71
mmmmv
FUN!‘IW1CM§LI£§£|INLY

The load of the line mlifier is en qlitude selector executed fr:- transistors
TS and T6 by the current switch systes. Its response threshold is sdjmted by a
variable resistor 316. The output signal fro- the qlitude selector is fed through
a latching inverter executed fro the transistor T7 to the Alb-NOT eleunt (series
155 sicrocircuit). The AND-NOT elmt realizes tine selection using the ”reed"
geting signal.

For elinination of spurious interstage couplings, filtrstion of the varible
cosponent by the capacitor CZ for a 12.6 volt power supply and capacitor c3 for
a +5 volt bias voltage apply is used.

Control Signal Shspers T22 Yes-7000. 0n the T22 card there are eight identical
shspers out of the 12 types wed in the wit. a couplets set of which provides for
shaping pulses of different duretia: within the limits fro- l.S Iicrosecond to
400 nilliseconds.

 

Figure 16.7. Hicroinstruction read qlifier
Key:

1. +12.6 volts

2. input 2

3. input 1

1.. "read" gate

5. output

6. +5 volts

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”MINOR“!

 

Figure 10.8. Control signal shsper
Key:
1. input
2. output

The shaper circuit (Figure 16.8) contains two AND-801' elelsnts (nicrocircmlts 01,
06). two OR-mt elements (nitrocircuita DZ. 03) and tine assigning stage exectted
fro. the transistor ‘1', capecitor Cl and resistors Ill-R6. (btsining the pulses of
given duration is possible as a result of the use in then of the capacitor Cl of

efined nominal (6m. 2200 and 6800 picofarads; 0.01; 0.033; 0.1; 0.33 and 0.3;
10.33 and 67 nicrofsrsds).

 

Figure 16.9. Till diagran of the operation of the shaper

The initial state of the shaper circuit is determined by the low signal level at
one of the two inputs (01, 02) of the licmcircuit DI and high level at the output
08 of the ucrocircuit Db. high signal level at the output 08 is insured by the
open transistor 1‘, low voltage fro- the collector ot which is fed to the input 09.
The high signal level at the inputs 04 and 05 of the nicrocircuit DZ determines
the low signal level at its output and, consequently. the his: level at the output
11 of the nicrocircuit D3 and the low level st the input 10 of the uicrocircuit 06

73
MWUSEONLY
M ovum one UNI-I

(Figure 14.9). Here the capacitor 01 is charged. On arrival of the high signal
level at the inputs 01 and 02, in the presence of a gating pulse at the input 13,
the signal levels change to the opposite at the outputs 03, 06 and 11. The nega-
tive voltage gradient fro. the output 11 is trmlitted throng: the capacitor (:1

to the base of the transistor ‘1' and closes it. The hid: level (to. the collector
of the closed transistor is fed to the input 09. As a result. the low level (we
the output 08 is transaitted to the input 05. This state is aainnained for the
pulse duration shaping tine by the tic-usiping stage. Pro- the tin of closure
of the transistor, the capacitor Cl is discharged thde the resistors 32, R3 ad
the elitter-collector junction of the open transistor in the aicrodrcuit 03. ~
As the capacitor discharges, the potential of the truistor base ‘1' increases. As
soon as it becoaes equal to the blocking threshold. the transistor opens, fixing
the end of the shaping of the pulse. The capacitor discharge stops. The low level
of the potential from the collector of the open transistor is fed to the input 09
of the nicrocircuit M, at the output 08 of vhich the low potential level dances
to high.

Before the arrival of the next pulse at the inputs 01 and 02 of the ulcrocircuit DZ.
the charge of the capacitor (:1 is restored. The charge of the capacitor is
realized through the output inednce of the aicrocirmit D3 (hid! Potential level
at the output 11). the resistor no. the baae—eaitter junction of the open
transistor T.

The output pulse duration is adjmted by the register I2. c2 is a decoupling capac-
itor. The shaping of the output pulse can be forbidden by taking the gating pulse,
that is. feeding a low level potential to the input 13.

Cycle Pulse Generators. For generation of pulses of cycle frequency lo aegaherts

and 2.5 negahert: in the Yes-5551 unit, the T32 YeS-SSSl/OSOl and Yes~555110502

are used. Each cycle generator contains a sinmoidal voltage generator (auto-
oscillator). the elitter repeater and shqer of the pulses (Figure 14.10). The
autooscillator is «sealed free the transistor T1 and is a sinuoidal voltage
generator with self excitation. In order to insure high generation freqmncy stabil-
ity, a quartz resonator S is used.

 

Figure 14.10. Clock

Key:
1. +12.6 volts
2. +5 volts
3. output

70

momcuiusconu
“WISEMY

The sinmoidal sipal fro. the output of the autooacillator is fed thmgh the
snitter repeater eucuted fro. the trosistor T2 to the shoer. The pulse shaper
is a quasiparallel connection of trosistoriaed switches executed fro. trosiators
of different conductivity T3 and Tb. This systen imurea additional sy-try of
the shaping stage pnsrating the output pulses vith off-duty factor of 2. The
resistors 36. BB. and ‘7. R9 for- the input voltap dividers. the diodes 01 and I):
protect the basevedtter junction of due transistors T3 and Th fron bretdoun. and
the capacitors c3. 0‘ are blocking capacitors.

”hes a positive halfvave of sinudsoidal voltage cones fron the enitter repeater.
the transistor T3 is in the cutoff ode. od the transistor T6 in the saturation
ode. The saturation of the transistor T‘ mm a lav level of output voltage.
The negative halfvavo T3 is saturated. and T6 is in the cutoff ode. Saturation of
the transistor T3 is insured by the divider RS. 310 with decoupling capacitor 05.
The capacitor C6 elitinates the voltap blips and soothe due output pulse fronts.

16 . S. Onaracteristic Failures

In the autonatic operating ode. the failure of the unit is detersined by the
displays of the check circuits and btlrning of the "halt" display on the engineering
panel or "energency" on the 3111’. In the autonoom ode a failure is indicated

by preoture holding of the unit while eocuting diamoatic nicroprograo, by the
error indicators coning on and also by the ”eorgsncy" indicator in the feed systen.

The search for failures reduces to discovering the failed T82 and replacenent of it
by an operating T32. The failure is detected on the Yes-A102 bend: designed to
check out logical T22, and the Ye8~A106 desipsd to ched out special T32. The

test is run according to the procedure in the test tole in the technical doct-snts
for each m. The average tile for detection and elinination of failures in the
Yes-5551 is 30 ninutes. Let a consider the nest frequently encountered and possible
failures in the device.

There is no priory netvork voltage in the WP. and the "network," "power off”
indicators do not ligat o. In this case it is necessary to check out the state

of repair and reliability of the foe contacts in the DU? ad the plup for connect-
ing the power circuit.

In the autonoous ode when pressing on the ”power on" button. the power does not
cone on. The "autmoous-coolex” flip-flop and the power on buttons are checked
by the continuity test.

The "emergency" display does not nan up. This can occur in the lumen of +21. volt
feed in the EU? or on breaking the light feed circuit. It is necessary to check

the presence of the Zé-volt voltage on the rectifier. If it is ﬂuent, it is
necessary to check the state of repair of the diodes by oasuring the forward and
return resistances. The diodes are first maoldered. If there is a voltage of
+26 volts, then the continuity test is run for the state of repair of the display
lignt and its feed circuit.

75

”WWMY
”WISEONLY

A bit of one of the ROI! registers was not set or is cleared. First of all. it is
necessary to check the T22 of the given bit register. This can be done by replae
ing the smpected T22 by a good one. he T32 is checked out on the bench ad the
came of the failure is elininated. It is also necessary 'to check the operation
of the register bits by setting and clearing then iron the panel or by a test pro-
gran. If the sane bit continues to fail. the searda for the failure proceeds out-
side the T32.

One or several bits fru one nodultn of the m panel with respect to all
addresses is not entered in the m register, ad iron the other nodules of this
panel the given bit (several bits) is read correctly. The probable came of this
failure can be breaking of the li-type core in are given bit of the nodule. For
detection of a broken core. the outer of the failed nodule is found by the connee»
tion table. the cover of the nodule is renoved. and the failed core is replaced.

One or several bits fron all mdules of one pixel of the zmn is entered in the
RH! register. ad the rest of the bits are entered correctly. The case of this
situation can be failure of the read anplifier in the given bit (bits) or breaks
of the circuit of the given bit fron nodules to read anlifiers. In this case, the
T52 YeS-SSSl/OSII are checked on the bench, then the nodule of the given 2!!!
panel and then the electric circuit of the given bit are checked. In the latter
case, the points of trans-lesion of the sips]. are deternined by the signal tile,
and a continuity test is rm on it. After elinination of the discovered failure.
the contents of the nodules of the given panel are entered in the m in order to
check their state of repair and correctness of their weaving.

All bits of a word of the 2M are not entered in the register m with respect to
one or several addresses. This can be caused by breaking of the address wire in
the nodule or failure of the diodes on the nodule circuit boards with respect to a
given address (wire). In order to check the suspected address wire it is necessary
to determine the address of the 20!! cell. by which a nicroinstruction is not

read. With respect to this address, the wiring on the circuit boards of the nodule
is fomd in the connection table, the nodule is revved, and the wires are tested
by the continuity test. The broken wire is replaced. During replacenent it is
necessary to go throng: the information corresponding to the given address and -
check its correctness on the m. If the address wire is in good shape, the diodes
on the circuit boards of the nodule are checked.

If darkening of the lanella on the printed circuit board of the 1'82 or contanina-
tion of the contact surfaces on the plugs is discovered when finding the failures.
it is necessary to clean these surfaces with alcohol. when finding the location

of the failure, nonitoring and neasuring instrunents recs-ended by the operating
instructions nust be mad. Connection of nonitoring and nasureunt instrunents
to a unit operating in the autonstic mode is not pernitted.

18.1. Display Principles

Depending on the type of displayed infomtion the mits are divided into alpha-
nuunric and graphical devices.

76
POROI'FICIALIISCWLY
The alphanueric units are designed to display syﬁolic infatuation and various
sywols, the configuration of which cut be deteruined in advance and is character-
ized by a set of syﬁols. the nder of positions and given foruat of the output
Issage. Devices have been developed which display frou 500 to 2000-6000 syltols
on a screen; they can be mad both as single pnels connected directly to the
counter channel and as coqlexes with a large ne‘er of semen panels and a group
control unit. Both types and uesns can also be used as teruinal panels or cou-
pleaes in the relate data processing systen.

‘lhe graphical displays perlit output of graphical inforntion almg with syﬁolic
infatuation: graphs, diagram. circuits. druiings. usps, lid so on. Jtut as the
alphanunric displays. they can be single and group. As a rule. these devices
have his: infatuation capacity. but in connection with the foruation of graphical
display on a screen. they are sipificntly uore couplicsted ad Dre espensive
than the alphanmric units.

with respect to suthad of foruing the iuage on the cathode-ray tube screen, the
display units are divided into two buic classes: the raster scanning (or tele-
vision) units and coordinate units. In the raster scanning devices. the display
is forued by successive (with respect to rows and in side rows) sssignsunt of
brigitness of the raster points. in the coordinate devices, the display is forued
fran segments of straiyxt lines (or second-order curves) given by the coordinates

of the beginning and end of the segnnt (the curvature or radii and center of a
circle in the case of curves). The usthod of foruation of the display on the

screen is essentially determined by the cowosition of the instructions, the tech-
nical solutions, software for the unit and its operating characteristics.

Hith high resolution the coordinate uethod per-its m to obtain higher quality
displays forued by continuous lines. The nthod of rater scanning realized. as a
rule by siupler circuits and structural eleusnts, for obtaining high resolution

in the graphical devices requires large volt. of the on-line nasty and also
couplicstion of the operations of quenching ad uoving the display eleuents. Accord-
ingly. the raster scanning devices are priuarily med in cues where high precision
of the display is not required.

with respect to functional possibilities granted the user when working with the
systen. it is possible to isolate passive and dialog displays.

The passive displays (annitors) permit the user only to observe the image on the
screen. Such displays are used, for exauple, in the centralised systen for dis-
tribution and sale of aircraft tickets, in the infatuation retrieval and other
system where the operator can only call for visual inspection of the required
infatuation. They are caerstivuly cheap, they have a sisple structural design
md law infatuation capacity (250 to 500 character positions on the screen).

Significantly greater possibilities are offered the user by dialog displays which

have on-line input devices and devices for altering the iusge on the screen:
slphanuueric and functional keyboards, light pencil. coordinate pen. plotting

board. and so on. The effectiveness of using such devices in the systeu depends
both on the technical solutions when creating their circuitry and building then,

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the software developed for then. The degree of perfection of the software
frequently has decisive significance. The use of dialog devices is especially

effective in design automation system, engineering research, and autonated con-
trol system.

Greater functional possibilities are granted the user by devices in which. along
with displaying the information on a screen and editing means there are also on-
line means of transferring the image to paper. (the devices for obtaining a "hard
copy"). During solution of the problen, the user carries on a dialog with the
computer. and the final or inter-ediate results displayed on the screen are trans-
ferred as the mer wishes to paper. An exaapls of the not widespread structure
of dialog displays is presented in Figure 18.1.

The dialog alphanuaeric display is connected to the computer by Ileana of a nodule
for cowling to a cn snnel. The codes of the displayed characters are stored in a
buffer manor-y. the word address of which usually is uniquely related to the posi-
tion of the character on the screen. Using a special converter, a character

generator. the character code is converted to control signals, by name of which
the character is formed on the screen.

The display has nans of editing (controlling) the information depicted on the
screen: an alphanumric keyboard and pointer control keys. Standard characters
and symbols are input wing the alphannmric keyboard. The funcdonal keyboard
per-its the position of the pointer on the screen to be controlled. the image
erased, operating conditions established. The operation of the device is
organized by the local control unit.

The graphical dialog display is connected to a computer through a module for
coupling to a channel. For regenerating the ilage, there is a buffer wry in
which the arrmgenent of the infatuation can be randon, inasauch as the image is
found by giving the coordinates of the points of the inage elements.

Feeding control signals to the bean deflection system canses displacement of the
been on the display screen. The conversion of the digital code to an analog signal
required to do this is provided by a converter, a symbol generator and sectional
generator.

The dialog between the operator and the counter is carried on by leans of alpha-
numeric and functional keyboards and a light pencil.

The standard display contains a cathode-ray tube (ELI). a character or vector
generator which affects the deflecting system of the cathode-ray tube and input
India. that is, a keyboard or a light pencil.

The characters on the screen of the cathode-ray tube are generated by various
methods. As a rule. paranetric methods are used which are based on controlling
the position of the electron ben on the cathode-ray tube screen. here the light
(displayed) point is shifted on the screen under the effect of two analogs of the
signals X(t) and Y(t). The third signal 2(t) is used to control the brightness

of the depicted point (modulation). The trajectory of the displayed point with
corresponding values of X. Y. 2, which are given functions of a com parameter t.
is also a reproducible character.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a: m: (1)

      
   
     

' Ml tﬂﬂn'lﬂml
C lﬂllﬂllh

,
0 rod enema _______
P rzmml .
-III -
unnatural than”:

(2)

lie-wink
ynpaumn

 
 
 

 
 

(5)

A tum-aw».
h- nun In

a: unupuauunuu: ~qu 10
._ cannot ynpclnuu 11

Figure 18.1 Structure of a dialog unit

 

Key:
1. from the cowuter 6. Display
2. Module for coupling to the dnmel 7. Alphant-eric keyboard
3. Buffer memory 8. Functional keyboard
1.. Signal converter 9. Light pencil
5. Controller 10. Information codes
11. Control signals
.5) ' o o o o o c)
o o o o o
o o 0 o o
o o o o o
u: o . . . o
52!“ . o o o .
(t)
Figure 18.2. Glaracter generator:
a -- structural diagram and principles of for-ation; b and c —
principles of formation of a character by s uatrix of points
and vector increments
Key:
1. from the computer
2. EU
3. PZL‘
4. CPF

The character generator based on the parmtric method can be provisionally repre-
sented as consisting of three functional parts: the parametric function generator

(GPF) Mt). Y(t), Z(t). the control nodule (BU) and read-only melon] (ROM)
(Figure 18.2, a).

79
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The parametric function generator mt have zuchar operating modes with respect
to number of reproducible characters (I! r is the amber of binary bits in the
character code). As is known, for estdi shing the required function generator
mode it is necessary to input some intonation in digital form to it. The volun
of this information significantly exceeds the value of information used in the
cosputer for coding the characters. This explains the presence of an RON in the
character generator. The control word containing from 66 to 128 and more binary
bits can be stored in one RON cell. Rigid requireunts are isposed on the km

with respect to data read tine, inasmuch as this tin directly deter-ines the
total tine spent on generating one character.

The operating principle of the paranetric function generator essentially depends on
the adopted method of drying the character. The highest quality inage is obtained
on uoving the inage point in the X. Y plane with constant linear velocity. In this
case the character is mde up of standard fragments which are in the general case
arcs of SOIL high-order curves. For practice it is possible to lilit ourselves to
segaents of straight lines, arcs of circles and ellipses. Here the configuration
of the character can be approximated to printed sydaols which are customary for nan.
The high image quality, as a rule. requires large volume of 9.01. In this respect
the methods based on using nasks which are applied to a constant base image are
more economical. The natrir of points 5*? or 7X9 (Figure 18.2, b) can be such an
image. Here the value of information which must be stored in the son is equal to
the mmber of base image elements, and the display time for all sywols for all
dnaracters is the same.

The image of a character is higher in quality, the larger the raster of elemts
making it up. However. with an. increase in the mater of elements. the inage
forming time increases, which, in turn, leads to a decrease in the mater of
characters sinultaneowly output on the screen.

The method bsed on forming the syiaol by growing increments which are segaents

of equal length of one of eight possible directions (Figure 18.2, c) is of practi-
cal interest. Although stylised characters are obtained in this case. their con-
figuration can be approximated quite well to printed type. In addition, the
value of the ROM is found to be cowaratively snall inasmuch as for one character
it is necessary to store a word 60 to so bits long. This method is inlelented on
the alphanumeric information display Yes-7906.

Graphs of the type of y-fi(x) can be represented on the cathode-ray tube screen
by lighting on the individual points or drawing continuous lines.

When napping graphs by lighting points in order to obtain continuous lines, it is
necessary to locate adjacent points on the line with step size corresponding to
the resolution of the cathode-ray tube so that the line will be visually perceived
as continuous. For a limited frane display tile and speeds of the buffered memory
and deflecting systea of the display which are attainable in practice, the mthod
of lighting the points permits II to obtain only cowaratively simple images.
Therefore all the devices which depict graphical information have a specialised
calculation mdule which interpolates (defines the coordinates of intermediate
points of the lines) - a vector generator.

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

18.2. Couposition of the Alphanumeric Information Display Yes-7906

This unit is designed for input-output and processing of alphanunric infatuation
when working in the unified system of cowuters. It can be connected to a
selector channel (55) or mltiplex chamel OK) and operate in the aultiplex or
exclusive mode. The coaplex can be used as a request or dialog system in auto-
mated control system, as an autonomou subscriber mit for data preparation and

processing, to check out and correct cowuter program, to correct the contents
of the information libraries, and so on.

Its composition (Pigm’e 18. 3) includes the group control unit Yes-7566, mp to

16 Yes-7066 renote screens and the "Konsul 260.1" typewriter (PM) (the Yes-7172
unit). The display screens are connected to the controller by four lines. On
connection of from two to ten remote display screens in series to one line, the
last screen is installed at a distmce of no aore than 110 nters from the
Yes-7566 unit. If one remote screen is connected to a line, the naxiaum distance
at which it is installed can be 600 mters. The "Konsul 260.1“ typewriter is
connected to the Yes-7566 unit by a special lead and can be removed up to 2 neters
from it. The Yes-7566 mic is connected to channels of the unified system of
conputers by a standard interface.

The asynchronous-action Yes-7566 can be used in a group of PR units with any
priority. It consists of a module for coupling to a channel, control nodule,
print nodule, buffer memory nodules, engineer panel. operator panel and autonomous
electric power supply systen (three-phase ﬁlm/220 volt ac network).

The Yes-7566 has two buffered memory modules to store the information of the remote
panels and typewriter. The buffer memory nodule of the renote panels, which is

an on-line magxetic core memory, has access tine of 2 microseconds, word length

of 9 binary bits (7 information bits, 1 check bit, 1 bit for storing tags), a
capacity of 10096 bytes. The tyepwriter buffer lemry module is executed from
registers in the integrated execution and has an operating frequency of 500 kilo-

hertz. a word length of 9 binary hits (7 information bits, 2 for storing read
and write tags). and a capacity of 1025 hits.

The remote Yes-7066 screens are desimed for napping alphanumric information on a
cathode-ray tube screen (6311111), for assembling and editing it by keyboard.

The display has the following parameters: screen operating field size 280x160 In,
color of screen glow green, average duration of screen after glow 10"2 second.
maximum nunber of characters reproduced on the screen 960 (determined by the outer
of connected panels). matter of lines on the screen 12 or S, nulber of characters
per line 80 or 40, size of character 3‘Sx2.5 III (with a 12x80 format) and 7"!) In
(with 6XA0 format), the information regeneration frequency on the screen is SO hertz,
the number of types of displayed characters 96, method of displaying the characters,
vector with the been running over the outline of the character.

81
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WISCONLV

 

Key:
1. unannel 6. Print module
2. Yes-7172 7. Yes-7066
3. Yes-7566

lo. Coupling module
5. Control mdule

The keyboard is equipped with two registers. 22 control keys and b9 alphanumeric
keys. The control keys for the pointer and the informtiaishift conditions operate
in the automatic repetition mode if they are held down. The information is picked
up from each alphanumric key independently of vhether the rest of the keys are
pressed or not. All of the keys are executed fron nagnetically controlled contacts.

The "Konsul 260.1" typewriter is used only as a print unchanisn (the keyboard of
the typavriter is not used).

The Yes-7906 (Figure 18.6) includes the following:

A nodule for coupling the couple: to the channel (35) designed for receiving
information. monitoring the intonation and transmitting requests to the computer;
the buffer memry mdule (BB?) desigied to store the displayed information of all
of the remote pmels; control mdule (BU) cor-Ion to all of the rents panels used
to generate synchronizing pulses for each of the control units of the mute panels
(U111 to W“), for entering information in the buffer memory, decoding of this
information, reading information out of the buffer memry and control of the
information transnission process to the remote panels, 3? and BS; the print

mdule (3?) used to obtain a copy of the information coming from the channel or any
remote panel: the control units for the remote panels (U01 to Wu);

The character generators (621 to (2“) designed for conversion and character genera-
tion of lnformaton on the cathode-ray tubes of the remte panel; rel-ate panel
displays “1 to In).

The remote pmel Yes-7066 (Figure 18.5) includes the cathode-ray tube. video
amplifier. focming and deflecting system. coordinate scanning units. character
scanning mits. character generator, unit for synchronizing and generating the
display address. receiving register. keyboard register, alplifier-receivers.
anifier-transmitters. power pack and keyboard.

82
PO. OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR 0510“. USE ONLY

By using the cathode-ray tube, the information is displayed on the screen in the
torn of characters lighted against a dark background. The video awlifier
excites a modulating electrode of the cathode-ray tube and mlifies the bean
illuminating signals.

The focusing and deflecting systems control the electron beam of the cathode-ray
tube. The coordinate deflecting systen deflects the bean horizontally and vet-
tically in the field of the entire screen. The character deflecting systen deflects
the bean in the syﬂml location field and creates a nametic field mensating

the line scanning field of the screen raster during the character display tin.

 

Figure 18.4. Structure of the Yes-7906

 
      

Key.
1. to the computer 5. BP
2. from the coIputer 6. 30
3. BS 7. W ...
6. BB? 8. 62
9. I .0.
(4)

(1) 05!

I .

(2) I059! d

"’73:;
{3)
Figure 18.5. Structure of a remote Yes-7066 display
Rev:

1. to the 8U 8. Keyboard register 1‘. Keyboard
2. from the BU—i 9. Unit for synchronizing lS. Cathode-ray
3. from the 80-2 and generating the address tube
4. Amplifier-trmsldtter 10. Character generator 16. Locking and
5. Amplifier-receiver ll. Video awlifier deflecting
6. Receiving register [2. Coordinate scanning unit system
7. Power pack 13. Character scanning unit

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”MUSEONLY

The coordinate scanning unit is designed to receive simla that control the

duration of the bean path of the cathode-ray tube, formation of currents exciting
the coordinate deflecting systea.

The character scanning mic for. voltages and currents of tringularbtrapezoidal
shape to excite the character deflecting cysts.

The diaracter generator converts infatuation fra the internal code of the Yes-7906

to a 32-cycle sequence of 5-bit simla controlling the character scanning unit and
the video Qlifier.

The unit for synchronizing and generating the display address generates signals
that control the operation of the Yes-7066 synchronously with operation of the
Yes-7566, generation of the display nui>er and inage format.

The receiving register is used for reception of infornaticn from the Yes-7566 in
series code and output of it to the display in parallel code. Using the keyboard
register. intonation is received fron the keyboard in parallel code and it is ont-
put synchronized in series code to the Yes-7566.

The amli fier-receivers and anplifier-transnitters receive, awlify and transmit
signals along the cor-mications cables of the Yes-7066 and Yes-7566.

By using the keyboard, the information and control signals are put together which
define the code of the corresponding characters or instructions.

Synchronous operation of all of the nits is insured by a single synchronisation
circuit placed in the Yes-7566. It includes the pulse generator. the frequency
synchronization unit, and the synchronization register.

The generator with quartz stabilization insures continuous generation of pulses with
repetition frequency of 6040 kilohertz. The frequency synchronisation unit is a
systen by means of which the period of the frae changing frequency of the image

is equated to the feed nework frequency period. The synchronization register
consisting of 18 counting triggers provides for generation of the operating fre-
quency of the couple: of 2020 kiloherta, cycle signals, the signals at the
beginning and end of lines and image francs.

0n the screens of the Yes-7066 units, the characters are forud under the effect of
myetic fields of special intensity and form on the electron bean. As a result
of the effect on these special fields of the mapetic scattering fields of the
power feed network. the power elements of the units (transformers. filter dtokes)
and also a number of standing units, the image is distorted. it because mstable
and shifts (rocks) vertically and horizontally with periodicity equal to the
scanning frequency and feed network frequency difference. In order to eliminate
this effect. the inertial nethod of synchrmizing the acmning frequency with the
power feed network frequency is used in the Yes-7906, consisting in equalizing

the periods of the network frequencies and the frequency of changing the image

frames by discrete variation of the duration of the line period.

I’OROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

The starting and synchronizing of the operation of all the devices of the Yes-7906
cowlex are realized using the synchronization register, which is a frequency
divider of the master. high-frequency quartz-stabilised oscillator.

The frequency of the master oscillator is selected by the synchronization register
as a function of the frequency of the acnetuork. Inasmuch as the network fre-

quency can fluctuate from ‘9 to 51 hertz, the frame changing period varies from
19608 to 20b08 microseconds.

For servicing one remote panel. that is, for reading infatuation from memory,
processing and transmitting it, 4.5 microseconds are sufficient. However. since
the time spent drying the syﬂnol on the screen is diout 16 microseconds. it is
possible to access the same remote pmel no more often than every 6 cycles (18
microseconds). Therefore simultaneous servicing of four rents panels with 12!”
image format is possible.

With 12x40 image formats the nnmber of panels must be donmled, inasmuch as there
are 40 characters per line. In this case the infatuation of the buffer meant-y
corresponding to even positions of the basic format line of so characters goes to
certain remote panels, and the intonation corresponding to odd positions, to
others. For formats containing 6 lines, the informtion of the buffer amply
corresponding to even and odd lines of basic format goes to different pannels.

It mat be noted that the total time for servicing all of the panels is constant
inasmuch as the total volume of the buffer memory and the information repetition
frequency on the screens of the panels are constant.

18.3. Yes-7061c Graphical Information Display

The Yes-7066 display consists of a screen and controller located in the standard
bay of the unified system of computers.

The graphical data are depicted on the screen of the unit in the form of a set of
points and vectors. Simultaneously with them alphanmric information and other
special characters can be output to the screen. Any nonstandard syinol can be
constructed graphically -- from segmnts of vectors.

The image is formed on the screen under the control of the program entered in the
buffer memory from the colputer to which the unit is connected through a standard
coupling channel of the unified system of colputers.

Any output information is addressed in the coordinate system having 1026 points

each with respect to the X and Y axes. Thus. any point has its own address. The
distance between any two adjacent points (both along the X-axis and along the Y-axis)
on the screen is defined as a raster unit. For output of graphical informtion
(vectors) the bytes of data determine the coordinate (final point) to which the
electron beam must be set. The beam always mves from the preceding address point

to the next addressed point. The vectors can have any length and be depicted at

any angle within the limits of the working field of the screen. In the initial

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFI'ICMLUSEONLY

position, the bean is set to the center of the screen by the attribute "beginning
of frame copying.” If the bean is "switched on" during the displacanent tin.
the vector is reproduced between the end points; if the bean is "switched on"
after displaceent, the point is reproduced.

Inasnuch as the regeneration process is syndlronized by the feed network frequency,
the image on the screen is for-ed in no Dre than 20 Iiuiseconds. Regeneration
is realized autontically under the control of the internal progran of the unit.

In order to obtain a copy of the inage. a aicrofilaling device can be used in which
the screen of the special cathode-ray til). has a coordinate nstrix with the points
4096x4096. In order to use the sane progra during nicrofilning and output of
infatuation. the coding of the images in the progran is done within the lilits of
the sane coordinate utrix. 0n output of infomtion in the Yes-7066 unit, two

low-order bits of the coordinate code are dropped. for the coordinate natrix of
the device is 10201026 points.

The graphical inage on the screen is for-ed from segmnts of straight lines and
points, the coordinates of which are given in the node of absolute values by
4 bytes or in the increnent node with respect to the preceding position of the

cathode-ray twe bean by 2 bytes. The speed of the bean in drying the vector is
3 to S Inn/microsecond. and the size of a raster unit is 0.25 In.

The number of vectors output without flickering is 3 follows: 3300 short ones

(to 64 raster units), 950 media ones (to 512 raster mite), and 600 long ones
(to 1024 raster units).

The characters are forned on the screen by the character generator. The characters
are formed from beans or segments. The nuﬁer of characters of basic size in a

line is 74, large size characters ’09. the nuﬁer of lines for basic size characters
is 52. and for large characters 35. The nazdnun nunber of characters on the screen

without flickering is 2100; with flickering it is 3848 (the basic size characters)
and 1715 (large size characters).

The control of the unit and intonation exchange with the conputer are realized by
an operator using an alphanuuric keyboard, functional keyboard having 32 keys and
replaceable covers (naxinun nunber 256). a lidtt pencil with flexible light guide.
a cooordinate mark control knob, display adjustnent elemnts and operator panel.

The Yes-7066 consists of a bay and a desk. In the bay are the basic control syste-
assemblies: buffer memory, nodule for connecting to the channel. control nodule.
vector and character generators. 0n the desk is a display with cathode-ray tube

and light pencil and also freely moving alphanumeric and functional keyboards and
rigidly fastened operator panel.

In the structural diagram of the Yes-7064 (Figure 18.6) it is possible to isolate
three functional parts: the controller, the input unit and the insge shaping unit.
The nodule for connecting to the channel. the buffer nemry of the 3211 and the
feed control nodule are independent.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the nodule for coupling to the channel (38K), 11]. operations are realized for
connecting the unit to the comuter, channel instructions are executed. and the
basic state and sense bytes are also fornd.

As a rule, the data bytes go to the 820 through the 38K; in this case the 38! con-
trols the ow. For exanple, the program is transnitted iron the central processor
to the buffer nenory of the unit just as data transnission.

‘Ihe buffer nenory contains two nodules just as the Yes-7906. The capacity of each
mdule is 6096 bytes. and the access time is 2 Iicroaecondo.

   

: n vet-Mwumlﬁ
I . C’s-«mm

  

Figure 18.6. Structure of the Yes-7065

1. Channel for commication with the counter
2. Channel coupler

3. Buffer nemry

lo. Feed control unit

5. Alphanumric and functional keyboard control unit
6. Control nodule of the unit

7. Information processing module

8. Engineer panel

9. Controller

10. Character generator nemry mdule

ll. Character generator module

12. Vector generator nodule

13. Image shaper 17. Functional keyboard
-’.. Display nodule l8. Alphantneric keyboard
15. Coordinate knob 19. Light pencil
[6. Input unit 20. Light pencil control
nodule
87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mamuszmu

The buffer nemry is designed for storing a huge file, copying (regenerating)

the inge, and it per-its editing and coailing of the text independently of the
central processor and also the perfornance of a miner of graphical operations.

The feed control unit (BU?) is designed to control switching the feed systeln on and
off (both in the autononom node and in the remte node), signalling in me of

the enrgacy ades in the standardized feed units, switching the preventive
control node on and off.

The control unit includes the control nodule of the unit, the control mdule of the

alphanmric and funcrional keyboards, the infor-tia processing unit ad the
engineer panel.

The controller nodule (8W) realizes connection of all the basic nodules ad
generates a set of control signals. In the nodule a parity analysis made of the
infer-nation read out of the 320, the instructions (orders) are separated fro. the
data, the operating conditions of the unit are generated, and in special cases
signals are generated for the BS! in order to call the dnannel.

The alphanumric and functional keyboard nodule realises coupling of these keyboards
to the anodes and the mm. in the keyboard control unit, on pressing a key, a
single signal is generated, the pointer control is realized, the code of the
pressed key of the functional keyboard is stored, ad the corresponding signals

are forud on pressing the keys of the alphan-eric keyboard.

In the data processing nodule (301), which is a awplcmt to the BUD, infomtion
is prepared for the vector and character generators and synchronization of their
operation. In the character ade the nodule automatically form the distance
between the characters and the lines.

The engineer panel (PI) is a device by leans of which adjnntnent ad preventive
operations of the unit are carried out, various operating ades are assigned
(single or multiple nodes, read or write, ad so on). Using the panel, nanual
input of the progran to the now [nagnetic core storage] is possible. The light
signal systen of the basic asselinlies of the various nodules is coupled out to
the engineer panel. It includes the drive system (analifiera for the display
tubes and signal shapers for the knobs and flip-flops.

The input device contains the following: alphannmric and functional keyboards,
the light pencil, the light pencil control nodule and the coordinate knob.

0n the functional keyboard (PK) there are two keys uith lignt display and eight
cover code keys. The corbination of the cover code vith the key code deter-nines
the function of the given keys. The function of the key, that is, the subroutine
called by it, is determined by the corresponding inscription on the cover. For
example, if coVer h'o 19 is set which generates the code 0001 0011 and key No 11
is pushed (the binary code 001011), then the key function is determined by the
code 001011 0001 0011. In all there can be 256 covers: therefore when wing the
Hi it is possible to call for the execution of 256-252-8192 snbroutines in the
computer.
ml OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The light pencil is connected througi a light guide to the light pencil control
nodule (BUS?) consisting of a photomltiplier with qlifier-shaper. high voltage
unit for feeding the photonultiplier and asplifier-shaper power pack. There is a
pointer control knob with switches.

The inage shaping unit contains vector and character generators. the character
generator nenory nodule and display.

The character generator nodule (BGZN) converts the sequence of digital control
signals to a sequence of analog sigzals required to draw the character on the
screen. The standard set of characters which can be reproduced consists of 88
alphabetic, numrical and special characters. Either of two sizes of characters —
basic or large (1.5 tines larger than basic) -- is selected during progra-ing.

The senor-y nodule of the character generator is an 30)! [read-only nemry] designed
to store infornation about the character configuration. By the character code and

by request fron the character generator, the nodule generates a defined set of
control signals which then go to the character generator.

The vector generator nodule is designed to shape analog signals providing for
displacement of the been on the screen of the cathode-ray tibe to a given point
along a given trajectory. A 20-bit code of the coordinate of a finite point is fed
to the nodule input to which the bean is shifted, and a 20-bit coordinate incremt
code with respect to the preceding position of the bean. The nodule insures
constant speed of the bean to the given point in the vector node.

The display is the output mdule of the enti unit, and through it a direct coupling
is realized between the operator and the cosputer. The mdule includes a cathode-
ray tube (ELT) with a locking-deflecting systen, coordinate and character deflee

tion amplifiers, hiQI-voltage and special power supplies. bean brigntness control
circuit (nodulator).

The comands of the wit can be provisionally divided into three groups:

Graphical commb (Figure 18.7) establishing the operating node of the display
(after then cone the data indicating the character code or the coordinate to which
the cathode-ray tube bean must be shifted); control contends for the order of execu-
tion of the progran written in the buffer nemry; cal-ands establishing the light

pencil nodes. They are initialized by the couand "beginning of copying of a
frame."

The light pencil is designed for input and correctionof graphical data.

It is a cylinder 15 m in diameter and 200 III long with conical tip. It consists
of a housing in which the noving objective and maetically controlled contact are
placed. In the homing a flexible light guide mde of fiberglass is installed
I to 1.5 meters long and 2 to 3 In in diauter; the lidut guide is nomted by

the other end in a light proof housing with photonultiplier (F311). For protection
against damage the light guide is placed in a metal hose.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 18.7. Classification of plotter co-ands

Key:
1. Graphical col-ands 6. Relative coordinate (incrennta)
2. Point mode 7. Protected zone
3. Vector mode 8. Unprotected zone
4. Character mode 9. Basic size

5. Absolute coordinate

"hen the light pencil is pointed at an element of the image on the cathode-ray
tube screen. the light flux emitted by the screen phosphor when it is excited by
the electron beam goes through the light guide to the photonultiplier in which it
is converted to an electric signal which goes to the electronic alplifier and then
to the control unit. Here, depending on the external illu-ination of the screen.
the image brigitness on the cathode-ray time can vary by several tens of tines.
The field of view of the light pencil is 3-6 In.

Pressing by the point of the light pencil on the surface of the screen. the
operator shifts the objective inside the housing. Iiere the permanent magnet
connected to the objective which closes the mmetically Controlled contact is
shifted. Thus. the operator commicates to the coaputer about the ilage element
which he is generating by the liﬁit pencil.

In order that the operator be able to determine at what image element to point the
light pencil. the device has a circuit whidi provides for flickering of the given
element with a frequency of 12.5 hertz. The address of the selected element is
stored in the buffer address register, and its coordinate is stored in the mark
registers. In the next regeneration cycle the stored address and coordinate are
cowared with the current address of the P021] and current coordinate. 0n output
of a mark to the screen, the flickering takes place only on cowarison of the
addresses. and the coordinates are not stored. 0n coincidence of the addresses
and the coordinates. the bean quenching signal is generated. The flicker trigger
is switched off.

Thus. the element. the address and coordinate (or only address) of which are
stored. that is. at which the light pencil is aimed. is Output to the screen with
quenched beam for two regeneration cycles out of four. 0n the third cycle the
flicker trigger is switched off. and on the fourth cycle. the inane element is

secondarily detected and the address and coordinates are stored.

90
”MUSEONLY

In order that detection be able to be accaaplished in any regeneration cycle
independently of flicker, on response of the contact in the light pencil, the
single pass circuit responds generating the 20-millisecond pulse which deter-lees
the regeneration cycle in vhich detection of the image element takes place and
this is reported to the counter.

20.3. Methods and Software for Oieckout and Technical Diagnostics

Special reliability requirements are iwosed on any model of the ratified syste-
of coaputers in the real-tie process control system and in the collective-use
system. The operating reliability of the medals is insured by a developed Ioni-
toring and diagiostic system containing software and hardvare which operate both
in the basic (working) mode and in the technical nintenance mde.

The hardware realizes operative mitoring of the fitness of the coaputar. detects
errors. and locates the failures. in the operating mode the haraare operates
under the control of the operating systen. including the program for processing
error signals. A set of technical maintenance program [PTO is used in the techni-
cal maintenance mode. This set of program prestpposes the me of control and
service program, monitoring and diagnostic hardcore.

The monitoring and diamostic module is used to control the procedures of the
"accomting" type by the DIAGOST‘IC cos-land. tests to locate failures TL“, mid
check out of the on-line memory. This nodule contains registers. counters ad
logical control circuits. The registers are med to receive analysed information.
write it in memory, and provide for the preservation of instructions on all levels.
The counters are used to count the nuaber of errors, synduonization and nonitoring

cycles.

The hardware monitoring of the processor provides for continuoim parity checking
of the data codained with a nuioer of special seats of contimuom checking of
individual asseublis md nodules. The operation of any assedaly or nodule of the
processors is checked during its operating process; therefore it has no influence
on the output capacity of the comuter.

The parity check when transmitting intonation is realized by special standard
circuits that check the transmission. storage and basic conversion of the data.
For any data conversion influencing parity. preliminary parity checking, conversion
and formation of new check bits for the converted information are carried out.

The addition of one check bit is provided for each byte of information: 1
corresponds to an even nuﬁer of ones in the byte. and 0 corresponds to m odd
number of ones in the byte. This representation of the check hit per-its any
number of odd errors to be checked for each byte md also discovery of couplete
loss of information. Direct parity checking. that is, cowarison of the parity of
the checked register with its checked bits is done only in the basic register;

the rest are checked at the tin of transmission of their contents to the checked

registers.

Parity checking of the processor memory module takes place in the nodules them-
selves. 0n detecting 8i error in the access address to the on-line tenor-y, the

contents of the selected cell are regenerated in order to prevent distortion of
the information.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'he checking of information parity conversion in the processor is done in the
counting operations in the binary counters of all modules, the operations of the
arithutiblogic unit, operations of the decimal arithmetic ndule, opeer
address nodification (calculation) nodule. during operation of certain information
conversion circuits, intonation decoding is the decontiners of all processor
modules.

in addition, operations are checked in the processor, the execution of time of
which exceeds 160 milliseconds. This check is made by the counters of the multi-
system timer fixing the beginning and end of performance of the operatims.

For processor diagnostics in some mdels, for exalple, the Yes-1050, a test mode
is provided which is analogous to the stock testing of a processor with failure
location.

Each test has a fixed format (112 bytes). the entire set of tests is on one mag-
netic tape. The control of the execution of the tests is realized by the monitor
ing and diagnostic mdule. For this purpose, two buffers are reserved in the
ready-access menoty: the first with the address $00 to 8:61", and the second with
address of 8080 to 80 8?.

20.4. Technical Maintenance Software

Adjustment. verification and diagnostic tests which make q: part of the technical
maintenance software ”To which includes also a nulber of control and service
program are used a the mnitoring and diagnostic software.

The adjustment tests are designed for correctness of operation of the minutes and
mdules of the cowuter, the verification tests are designed for periodic verifi-
cation of the operation of the units and the computer as a whole during the
normal operation process. When detecting a failure, the diamostic tests are
used to locate it.

with respect to organization, the tests are divided into basic tests performed
under the control of the test monitor MS and verification tests of the
peripheral devices operating under the control of the operating system of the
mified system.

The basic test is a set of adjustment tests, and it is designed for preliminary

adjustment and checking of the basic equipment of the processor, the on-line
union. the selector and multiplex channels, the napetic tape storage and type-
writer. Successful performance of it in the future insures loading md operation
of the test monitor. Further adjustnent and checking of the conputer are carried
out using the test sections.

The test monitor [HES is a control program designed for loading and controlling
the execution of the test section program.

92
FOR OFFICIAL L88 ONLY

The test section consists of the heading and a variable ntsdaer of exnples. The
test e'xample form a logically independent module and contains a prefix and the
check section itself. The titles of the section and the prefix of the emle
are regions of interaction of the section and the test examle of the test mnitor
respectively.

The test monitor performs the following functions: it is tuned to the possibility
and size of memry of the specific cowuter, it controls the readiness of the
input-output devices, it decodes the con-ands given by the operator and perform
the corresponding operations, it perform preliminary processing of interrupts. it
determines the test sequence for the mite, it loads the test sections into the
ready-access menory and also perform a master of functions which are cot-on to

all of the teat sections, for example, printing out messages. code conversion,
and so on.

For operation of the test monitor md test sections, an on-line memory of no less
than 16K is needed and also an operator cosmnd input unit (typewriter), a
message output unit (typewriter or alphanlnnric printer). a unit for loading the

test monitor and test sections, that is. nametic tape storage, magnetic disc stor-
age or a punch card input unit.

For checking the computer using test sections when perforning the standard procedure
of initial loading of the on-line memory, the test monitor is loaded. Then by
instruction from the operator, the test section is input to the region of the on-
line memory following the memory section with the test monitor and the test section
is executed. The anemory occupied by the test section usually nouns to less than
4K. After execution of one section, the next is loaded and executed until all of
the sections have been executed which were indicated in the operator's instruction.
Then the Operator calls the next group of test sections. The total size of the
KPTO program is about 300K.

The commications between the operator and the test monitor are by conmds given
from the typewriter or entered directly in a defined region of the test mnitor
(the operator panel buffer).

The test monitor is connected to the test section by its initial region, which is
the section heading. The test section can access the nonitor on the col-md SVC
(CALL SUPERVISOR) to call the standard service program.

The initial step in the operation of the test monitor is adjust-ant of it depend-
ing on the computer characteristics. For this adjustmt operation, the data on
the system configuration of the specific coputer punched on punch cards and placed
in the subject block of the test Ionitor or written on magnetic carrier in the
test mnitor program by means of service programs are used. By these data the
test monitor forms the reference table of test sections (831'), the channel table
(CHI), the test monitor input-output unit definition table (D1410) and the wit
definition table (UM).

The Ski contains information about the possibilities of the processor, the volume
of the on—line memory. the program switches of the test monitor used to control

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“MUSEMY

its operating nodes, the address of the an, M0 and UM tables. the waiting

factor for a ten-second delay, the panel buffer of the operator and certain other
data.

The test section can access this table only directly. If necessary it accesses
other twles.

The cut contains information about the presence of channels and their peculiarities.

The UDT describes the nits taking up the specific computer, their addresses and
characteristics. After loading the test section the test monitor transmits words
from the our table describing the mite required for operation of the given test
section to it if necessary.

The DHIO includes three words describing the test monitor loader and input-output
unit. Bach word characterizes the type of wit, the instruction code which is
used during operation of this unit (the instruction code is entered in the 08K)
and also its address. The input-output mits are assigned in the initialization
program and can be altered by operator Md.

The operating system OS of the unified systen of counters Yes-1050 provides for
the presence of a control program which permits testing of the peripheral devices
in parallel with solving the user problem in the nultiprogrsm node. The tested
units are not assisted for the operating system of the unified systen. As a rule,
this test mode is possible in the presence of several units of the same type in
the computer. Each unit is provided with a set of test sections which differ fron
the monitor test sections.

20. 5. Preventive Maintenance

Checking Operating Fitness Using Tests. Technical maintenance software (KPTO) is
available for checking the fitness and locating failures. The Km includes con-
plex tests for checking the model and tests for checking individual mits.

For storing the test the following are used: upetic tapes on which the service
and verification test program are written; decks of standard pmch cards med for
data input in the mltiplex channel Yes-6012 test, the test for the punch card
input unit Yes-6012 (or Yes-6013) and the test for plant operation of channels;
punch tapes used in the test for the Yes-6022 wit and the test for joint operation
of the channel; control tapes of the alphanumric printer for testing the Yes-7032;
punch cards with test programs duplicating the magnetic carrier infomtioa.

The KPTO consists of the following programs: control (test monitor), basic test
for cop-1'5"“. checkout of the mdel, test sections of individual units and the test
tape service program. The last program is prinarily used for making and checking
working copies of the nachine carrier and also copies of the machine carrier
prepared for the user.

The daily adjustment operations consist in single emecution of the base test and
test sections jointly with the operating systen. Only three mgnetic tape storages
(Yes-5010 or Yes-5017) and three magnetic storages (Yes-5056 or Yes-5050) are
checked. During the next daily adjust-eat Operations, the other three storages

are checked.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The order of execution of the test program written a: magnetic tape is indicated
in the mo operating manual.

During the biweekly adjustmnt operations, the basic test of the test sections of
all units is executed once, all of the magnetic tape and magnetic disc storages
are checked out. The service and verification tests on the mgnetic tape are used.

During the monthly adjustment operations, test programs are run for all the units
(including for all the storagea) just as for the biweekly operations. The programs
are run three times: with rated voltage of the electric power supply and with

51 deviations frou the rated value in both directions.

During the semiannual adjustment operations. test programs are executed for all
mits (including for all storages) just as for the biweekly adjustment operations.
The programs are run four times: for rated values of the frequency and voltage,
with deviation of the voltage :52 and at preventive frequency.

After output of an error message during operation of the test sections. the service
personnel refer to the operating manuals for the corresponding test sections, the
initial codes (print-outs in ease-bier language) of the program for more detailed
analysis of the check ccnditions, and they take the corresponding decision (con-
version to the autonomous mode of the test and location of failures, looping of the
check without printing out an error message and investigation by oscillograph.
perfomnce of various types of program halts using the control panel and other
action). In the case of an notable error it is possible to try to make it stable
by varying the voltage or frequency of power supply.

Punch cards are used as the mdnine carrier if the failure does not permit working
with magnetic tape. In this case the test monitor is loaded from the patch cards,
and the punch card version of the test sections of the process, the selector
dxannel and magnetic tape is used.

If the test mnitor cannot operate with the typewriter or the Al'sPU as a result of
failure (although the basic typewriter test is satisfied), input of assignments to
perform the test sections come from the computer control panel, and the test
sections of the multiplex channel md typewriter are executed. Using the control
switches of the test monitor, printout of messages is inhibited and an error halt
is permitted (or execution of the examle causing the error is looped).

Checking of Individual Units. The checking of the mite making up the model can
be done in the autonomous and coaplex nodes.

The multiplex channel Yes-4012 is checked as part of the model in the complex mode
(the "autonomous/system" switch on the monitor-adjustment panel of the unit is in

the "system" position) using the test sections of the multiplex channel. Autonmoua
checking of the Yes-4012 is done using autonomous means.

For conversion of the Yes-4012 from the complex mode to autonomom it is necessary

to open the doors of the first bay, frame A and switch to the "autonomous/oyster"
switch on the monitoring and adjust-ent panel to the "autonomous" position.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

For conversion of the wit fron autonomous mode to couples, the "autononom/
system" switch is set to the ”systen" position. In the couple: node the frau A
and the doors of the first bay of the mit amt be closed.

The sectional channel Yes-403$ is checked in the cowlex mde using the selector
channel test section. The switching is done wing the "autononmn/systen" switch
on the nonitoring and adjmtnent panel of the channel.

The switching can be done only on arrival of a signal permitting switching from
the processor. which is excited if the processor is in the waiting or halt state.

On switching the channel to the autonomous node, the signal is picked up on the
"channel ready" line fron the dnannel to the processor. This leads to setting of
the result tag "2," indicating that the channel is switched off. The tag is
generated directly in the processor on eucution of the input-output instructions.
During operation of the channel in the nodel the toggle switches on the nonitoring
and adjustment panels "IMP," "20! m” and "m PI" mt be off, and the "mast."
toggle switch Inst be on.

The on-line nemry Yes-3205 can be checked during operation with the processor
in the following nodes: automatic checking on the test section of the on-line
memory, write and read by a defined address: autoutic writing and reading with
respect to the entire menory bank.

The autonatic test node in the test sections is designed for couplets checking of
the operation, prevention and search for failures in the on-line memry. The test
sections are put together in such a way that they provide for the creation of
nodes that are the most serious for storing the nodules and the read cycles and
checking out the address cycle of the menory.

When executing the test sections, errors are recorded during operation of the unit.
and a nessagc is output containing information about the errors. In order to
obtain infomtion during error analysis it is necessary to use a description of
the test sections.

The Yes-2050 processor is designed to operate only in the cowlex mode. Therefore
checking the processor with the test prograns input to the on-line nenory is done
only in the model.

The search for a processor failure or error is node using the technical servicing
monitor program or the test for locating failures. which is designed for storing
the state of the basic registers and the control flip-flops of the processor in a
fixed region of mmory. This test offers the possibility of performing stbsequent
analysis of the filled information in order to locate the failures. When record-
ing the state of the processor, it is also possible to enter informtion in the
memory about the state of the memory nodule in which the error has appeared.

The tests to locate a failure are wed in the following cases: on appearance of
an unmasked error signal in the processor or nanory operating with the processor,
initialization of the DIAGNOSTICS instruction cycle commter, if the tag for the
"accounting" procedure is present in the control word of this instruction or the
"start accounting" button is pressed.

96
M OIITICIAL USE ONLY

If a processor failure cannot be automatically detected (no monitoring and adjust-
ment test program is run, no nonitoring and diagnostic mdule is in operation),
then the search for the error or failure is made annually. For this purpose,
first of all an error analysis is made on the basis of the operating logic of the
processor and the logic of execution of the given section of the program.

The processor in the preventive mode is checked out on putting it into operation,
after prolmged (mre than 1 month) idle tin or storage. in the presence of fre-
quent short-term errors when solving the problen, althouyu all of the verification
tests are performed correctly without errors or with errors in the test prograns
of the user, during the course of the performance of adjustment operations.

The checking in the preventive mode is done with voltage deviatim from rated by
52.

when searching for mstable failures (errors) of any processor assedly, it is
recommended that the voltage of the power pack of the given asserbly be lowered,
and the voltage of the remaining WP be raised by 52.

The preventive mode is also realized on variation of the master oscillator fre-
quency. For this purpose, on the control panel it is necessary to press the
"frequency" button and perform a single start of the verification test sections
of the processor.

Search for and Elimination of Failures. Variation of the parameters, adjustment
and repair of the standardized nodules are carried out using special equipment.

In addition to the service equipment, universal, monitoring and measuring devices
are used: the oscillograph 81-31 and 81-39. the generators 63-7a and 65-19,
the digital volt meter VK‘l-lOA/l, the millia-eter 11-256, and so on.

In connection with the variety of logic of the circuits and the instructions
executed in the processor it is difficult to reconend a single procedure for
finding any failure, for in each case it is deter-ined by the logic of the opera-
tion of the circuits and the nature of the failure. However, there are some
general methods which are correct for finding the majority of failures.

When searching for the failures primarily it is recur-ended that the operating
mode be set "on command" and the section of the program making the error he
executed in this node, carefully analyzing the result by the control panel display,
the result tag and the sequence of the instructions performed and prepares for
execution.

When detecting an incorrectly performed instruction it is necessary again in the
”on commd" mode to execute this section of the program to the incorrectly
executed instruction. Then, pressing on the "pulse" button. transfer to the
execution of this instruction by one sync pulse, observing the switching of the
flip-flops after each pulse on the display.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OIOFFICIALUSE ONLY

If in the "on col-land" and ”by pulses" modes it is not possible to detect the
inroperly executed section of the progr. on the display, it is possible to
cycle this section of the progral, successively setting q: the nders 1,2,3 and
so on on the instruction execution counter and analysing the execution of the pro-
gram to find the inroperly executed instruction. Purther search for the location

of the error in the executed instruction muslly is smde using the oscillograph
81-31 or 8-39 or the digital voltnter Vl‘l-lOA/l.

When searching for unstable errors:, preventive voltage is set up in the power pack
of the panels, the equipmnt of vhich is swposedly nking the error. and the
error section of the program is executed. After locating the error, checking the
feed voltage, inspecting the wiring and contacts, the failure is sure precisely
defined, and correspondence of the input aid output signals (their presence and
shape) is checked by the time diagrams for operating in the given node.

0n deviation of the voltages or the parameters of the signals, in the case of

reliable contactsor closure of them. it is primarily necessary to eliminate these
failures.

If the input signals satisfy all the requirements and correspond to the operating
time diagram, and the output signals are distorted, then the module is checked on
the bench.

The search for a failure in the electric power simply systen is Imde in the follow-
ing sequence. Using the voltmter of the electromagnetic systen of accuracy class
no less than 2.5 (for eque, Ts434), the voltage of the feed network of the
distributing bay is measured. to which the cables of the failed unit are connected.
The readings of the voltmeter nust be 187 to 242 volts. If the voltmeter readings
are smaller, it is necessary to check the circuit breakers through which the
voltage is fed. If the voltage at the 30? output does not correspond to the

rated value with proper readings of the volmter, than the B"? is changed.

20.6. Installation of the linifed System of Coquters and Safety Engineering Wen
Servicing Then

All nodels of the ratified system of comuters are designed for operation in
stationary, heated facilities wing ventilation and air cmditioning. The tewera-
ture mat be naintained at 20:5‘0, the relative humidity must stay at 65:15:.

All the computer units are placed in a nachine room in strict accordance with

the installation instructions. Variations of the installation layout for my
model are permitted only by agreement with the manufacturer. lhe counter units
are set up in zones (Figaro 20.3).

In the machine room provision mint be made for a process floor nomted on standard
metal structural elements at a heigtt of 20 to 40 cm above the main floor. The
space under the process floor is used for laying power cables. signal lines,
protective and grounding hues. This space is also used as the intake ventilation
channel. The temperature of the air fed to the cowuter must be 16 to 18'0, the
relative htnidity no more than 70 to not. aid the dust content. no more than

0.75 nillihenries/n3.

98
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“WISCONLY

The degree of cleaning of the air fed to the facilities ad the mite of the uni-
fied systen of cowuters mt be no less than 99.95: for particles of 5 .1ch
or are, 972 for particles is) to S nicrons. 901 for particles to 3 nicrone and
502 for particles to l nicron. The dust content in the air in the nohine roon
met not emced l sg/n3 with the particle size of no lure than 3 microns. In
order to remove the exhaust and dusty air fron the facilities, a suspended
perforated ceiling is used.

'(1

   

Figure 20.3. Layout of the Yes-1050

Key:
1. External sensory zone 6. Model processor
2. Yes- ... 7. Input-output channels
3. Central mit zone 8. Input-output unit zme

10. Processor power base
5. On-lim aesory

The structural material of the ceiling and wells not insure effective noise
absorption (noise level in the nachine roon should not emced 75 decibels).
For entry to the Inchine tool: it is necessary to provide a vestibule with door
height of no less than no cn and width of no less thn 110 cu. Access to the
machine roon lust be strictly uninhibited, end the service personnel not use
special clothing and replaceable footwear.

‘l‘he cowoters and process equip-cut are installed as follows: 1. Installation

of the ventilation systen. 2. Installation of the lidlting network and winding

up the prinary power feeder to the power swply distribution cdainet. 3. Installs-
tion of the protective and grounding buses. 4. Assedaly of the process ceiling
with connection of lignts to the ligating systen. 5. Lining the walls with

sound absorbing pmel. 6. Assenbly of the process floor, laying the pater amply
cables and signal circuit lines.

99
mmmmv
momunuseouu

Before installing the counters, the process floor is laid out, holes are cut for
the cables and lines to connect the coquter bays. The electric power distribution
panel is installed. Power instability not not exceed +101 or -151 with respect to
voltage and :11 with respect to frequency. The trnsient resistance of the pro-
tective "ground" hm lust not be Dre than 0.6 ohn.

The units are installed in accordance with the imtallstion instructions in the
following sequence: the processor hays, selected chnnel bays. ultiplex dI-mel
bays and the basic core nenory bays.

The central coquter units can be asseﬂwled with simultaneous installation of
peripheral devices.

The connections between units are lads neing standardised comectial nans. They
include the following: cables for switching the lines of the input-output inter-
faces, direct control. snall interface. electric power interface; boxes for connect-
ing logical circuits and electric power circuits; resistor mdules imtalled on

the mite to latch the line and also for switching the "access” lines; a plug for
switching the electric power control interface lines on switching off the wits

and also to insure electrical safety of the service personnel when disconnecting
the cable.

The cables have different lengths, which sakes it possible to install the motors
in a facility with different floor plus.

After spreading. they are ﬁtted on both sides.

The electric power supply units of the res-1050 counter are connected to a three-
phase, four-wire 380/220 volt network with grounded neutral.

In the nachins rose a protective grunding bus (ground wire) is laid with a tras-
verse cross sectional area of no less than 120 n2, which is connected to the
grounded neutral of the electrical installation. The resistance of the ground,

to which the neutral is connected mt he no lore than 0.6 ohs. The protective
grounding bus out be accessible for inspection. The openly laid ha is painted
black. Painting the bus another color is persitted to harnonize with-the color
of the facility, but at the connection ad branch points it out have no less than
two black stripes naming a distance of 150 - fro. each other.

The cases of all the conputer units are connected to the bus by ground wires which
forn part of the units. The hue sections are lap connected ad welded. The
length of the connection is no less than twice the bus width.

In order to observe the electrical safety rules when installing and operating the
coeputer, it is forbidden to perforn any installation operations. replace the
cells and parts, -.r to solder mder voltage. 0n connection the oscillographs and
measuring instru-nts to the equipnent for nonitoring or adjust-ant, it is
necessary to me wires with insulated holders. During the performce of these

operations a nan Inst stud on a tether eat. It is pernissible to use only low-
voltap soldering irons and 12, 25 or 35 volt lights.

100
"NEWLY
MOMIJSEONLY

The peripheral devices nut not be put into operation with the cues or protective
covers remved or with the panels off or open. All of the adjmtnent, cleaning
and lubrication operations are perforned with the power off. when it is necessary
to shut off the electric circuit quickly, the "emergency off” button are used.

In accordance with the fire safety requiremts, all of the water center facil-
ities lust be equipped with an automtic fire alarI based on standard equipmt
(sensors, the alarn signals and wiring). All the counter center personnel nust
be imtructed what to do in case of fire.

20.7. Use of the Unified Systen of Cowuters in ASUZh‘l‘ [Antonated Railroad
Transportation Control Systen]

The basic trend in the development of cosputer engimering is connected with the
creation and applicatim of autonoted control system (A30) in all branches of the
:ationnl econoly. In railroad transportation a great deal of work is being done to
introduce autonated control systens to control the shipping process. Individual
auto-sited control system are joined by the infornation coqmter center of the
Hinistry of Railways, and taken altogether they fora an sutonated railroad trans-
portation control systen (A8002!) which is part of the national autonsted data
gathering and processing systen (OGASU).

The structure of the actuated control systen in general fora is presented in
Figure 20.6. In railroad transportation there is a developed control structure
including the central appsratm of the Ministry of Railways, the railway adninistra-
tions, and the railroad divisions. ~ The mum is being introduced without re-
arranging this systen, retaining all of its links. However, application of a con-
puter per-its significant inprovenent of the quality of control. mloading of the
existing control systen from perforning the technical work of a coqautational,
infornation md analytical nature, and optinizing the solutions obtained.

For effective application of a coquter it is necessary to develop algorithm and
programs for the solved problens, coordinate the operation of the cowuter center
with the production process of the object of control ad with the require-eat of
the existing traffic control systen. In addition, it is necessary to introduce
an infornation gathering subsysten for gathering infornation tout the shipping
process and m organisational co-nication subsystsn for trmsnitting this
intonation. In railroad transportation the creation of the indicated subsystem
is a coaplicated technical problen.

(1)

    

Figure 20.4. Structure of the autoneted control systen

1. Existing control systen; 2. request; 3. processing results; 6. coqmter;
S. organisational cos-mication; 6. data gathering stbsystea; 7. object of

control
101

”WWWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ASUZh‘l‘ is characterized by a set of mathenatical economic methods, computer
engineering and organizational communications means which permit significant
improvement of the quality of the managemt of the transportation operation and
operative accounting for the activity of its subdivisions. The transport process
is a dynamic systen, the control of which within the framework of the BMW! is
connected with processing enornous flows of infomtian input to the counter
i-ediately as it is generated. 0n the basis of this infatuation an entire set
of problem can be solved. The nore data acctmnlated in the coQuter menu, the
note efficiently various accomting ad nsnagem-t problens can he solved.

Thus. in a computer operating as part of the ASUZhT, an infornation mdel of the
object of control, that is, the railroad, is created, and the corresponding infom-
tion is continuously corrected according to the course of the real shipping process.
The indicated infatuation nodel iwlenented on a conputer is the basis for the
ASUZhT.

when formulating the ASUZhT functions, it is necessary to isolate the following
types of problem as the noet urgent: prospective planning of shipping operations
and coordination of then with other types of transportation and also with the
work of industry and agriculture; operative control of the shipping process and
consideration of the operation of the railroad transport subdivisions; control of
material and technical supply, use and repair of the track, rolling stock and
other technical lens; automatic reserving and accounting for places on passenger
trains and accomting for passenger flows and ticketing operations; mitoring the
docunent circulation; accounting for persmnel and naterial goods.

The basic links of the ASUZhT are the conputer centers in the railroad administra-
tions (DV'l's) of which there are 32, and the nain cmuer center TVI's of the
Ministry of Railways (Figure 20.5). In the branch swsysten of the Me, a
railroad comications jmction is provided, mad in the GVTs RPS '[nain cowuter
center of the Ministry of Railways], a central co-Inications office.

As a rule, no less than two identical basic cowuters are installed in each can-
puter center which are capable of working with com mmories, with a standard
makeup in order to insure continuous operation of the ASUZhT in real tine.

The conputers operate in two data processing sodas: in real tine with input of the
information directly from the ca-mications channels to the conputer conplex for
implementation of the dynanic mdel of the shipping process; in the nultiprogran
package data processing node with input of the infornstion fron punch cards,

punch tapes, nagnetic tapes and discs. One conputer is specialized for regular
operation in real tin and the other backs it up and processes in the package
node. In necessary cases, with appropriate technical-economic stbstantiation,
further conputers can he installed.

As the basis for the Me HPS and the railroad computer centers. multiprogram
third-generation counters fron the mified systen (unified systen of conputers)
are med which have the following example technical paraneters matched by the
telporary operating group of the can with respect to application of computer
engineering in transportation: on-ling menory access time 1-2 nicroseconds for

6 bytes (average speed no less than 10 operations/second); on-line nenory no less
than 512 kbytes (with the possibility of adding a raid-access nemory); two types

102
”WISCONLY

(3) “(055195? (5) (lost-5m

Karyn“ uu O 0

N

     

 
   

(human
80!! f0“

     

(19

    
  

  
   

       

(6)
Hutu!
ft '1!“

 

. m: “-5
___:.mz: u- «33 (a)

Figure 20.5. Diagran of the basic assua- coqmtar center

Key:

1. Basic cowuter of the main cmuter center

2. 6!: Kbyte on-line unory

3. Konsul 260 typewriter

lo. Yes . ..

S. Al'sPU - alphanmric printer

6. Baden Yes-8006

7. [Wk ... [railroad administration cometer centers]

of radon-access nenories - on nagnetic discs (capacity of one replaceable
mdule 7.5 to 15 Iillion bytes) and nagnetic drum (no less than lo million bytes
each); "nenory" with series access on umetic tubes (no less than 8 reel type
mits,c capacity 7.5 nillion bytes for one reel).

Devices for direct comling in the data transmission network to 126-256 channels
operating at speeds from 50 to 21.00 band are mdatory.

Universal computer software includes dispatcher prograls, translators, the library
of standard program, and the set of check problems and diagnostic tests.

For the first phase of the ASUZh‘l'. the available second-generation capmera are
used in the standard nakeup for railroad transportation. Earner, when developing

the second phase of the asuzwr. conversion to the stbsequent generations of con-
putera lust be considered.

The data transtission networks not be autonated and noise i-tne vith trunsniasion
reliability of no less than 1 to 10-6. For the rm: phase of the sum, the

existing telephone and telegraph co-micationa are used.

103
I70! OFFICIAL IS! (”LY
FOIOFFICIALUSEMY

The basic principle for constructing the data trminssion netvork is the
radial-junction principle with switching centers at the an: ad Ms computer
centers and also using witching nits (con’ccntrators) at the large centcu. In
order to iaprove the system reliability, alternate meetings are provided to act
up connections bctvcen the switching centers.

In creating the data true-lesion network. a a rule, the eeriea-nnufacturcd
data trans-lesion equip-ant ia med.

‘10b
momentum“

APPENDIX

BASIC mrm. smncanoas or um um moan-ma or mar-0mm mars
0320 m m Yes-1020 and Yes-1033*

Yes-5017 Magnetic Tape Storage

later of Iagnetic tape storages in the oowuter layout 6
Capacity, megabytes 25
Recording density, bits]. 8 ad 32
Information: recording nethod I‘m-1
Tape speed for writing and reading. letars/sec 2
Data exchange rate (with density of 32 bits/III) kbytes/sec 66

Magnetic Tape Storage Controller

am: of connected storages to 8
Operating node with channel exclmive

Replaceable Disc Packet Storage Yes-5056

number of magnetic disc storms in the canister nakeup 6
Disc package capacity. megabytes 7.25
Recording density. bits/- 29-“
Rainer of working surfaces of the disc package 10
Average access tine to information, nilliseconda 60
Data transmission rate, kbytes/aac 156

Yes-$551!! Hayletic Disc Storage Controller

Nutcr of connected storages to 8
Operating conditions with channel exclmive

 

*l‘he minim- sac of UW [input-output mite] for the Yes-1022 and Yes-1033 is
the cane.

105
FOR OFFICIAL l5! ONLY
MW]. ESE ONLY

Yes-6012 Punch Card Input Unit

lead speed, cards/tin 600
Read method Photoelectric
Hopper size, cards:
feed 1000
receive 1000

Yes-6022 Punch Tape Input Unit

Input speed, lines/sec 1500
Punch tape type 5-8-trad:

Yes-7077 Console Typewriter with Coupler*

Print speed, character/sec 10
Character set 92
Dimer of copies 5
width of paper roll, III 280

YeS- 70 32 Printeﬂ

Printing speed, line/Iain 820
Character set 83
mm: of characters per line 128
Number of copies 5
Paper width, .1 33-1020

Yes-7010 Punch Card Data Output lhit

Output speed, card/min 100
Rapper size, cards:
feed 700
receive 2X700

Yes-7022 Punch Tape Output Unit

Output speed. line/sec 150
Type of patch tape ' S-8-track

Yes-9011 Punch Card Data Preparation Unit*

Manual pmch speed, calm/sec 15
Duplication speed, comm/sec 25
Hopper size, cards:
feed 500
receive 21600

Yes-9026 Punch Tape Data Preparation (hit

Pmch speed, line/sec 50
Punch tape type S-B-treck

____r.__
"the "Konsul-260 ' typalriter built in Czechoslovakia is used in this unit.

'106
momanusaouu
1.

2.

S.

6.

7.

8.

10 .

11.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Al'yanakh, I. N. VNBSHNIYE ZAPG‘INAYUSECBIYB USTIIOYSTVA YES BVH [External

Memories of the Unified System of Conputers], Moscow, Sovetskoye radio,
179, 208 pages.

Drozdov, Ye. A.; Konarnitskiy, V. A.; Pyatibratov, A. P. mm
VYCHISLITBL'NYYE MASHINY YEDINOY SISTER! [Counters of the [bified Systea],
Moscow, Hashinostroyeniye, 1976, 672 pages.

Regan, B. H. ELEK'IRONNYYB WWISLITEL'W MASHINY I SISTEHY [Counters
and Counter System], Noam, Energiya, 1979, 528 pages.

Kachkov, V. P.; Kondrat'yev, A. l’., et al. “MAYA wmnmt'mu
MASHINA YES-1022 [Yes-1022 Casputetlmoscow, Statistika, 1979, 208 pages.

Mayorov, S. A.; Krutovskikh, S. A.; Smirnov, A. A. 3mm
WCHISLITEL'NYYE HASHINY: SPRAWK P0 KONSTRUIROVANIYU [Conputerm
Design Handbook], Moscow, Sovetskoye radio, 1976, 506 pages.

Hitreykin, N. A.; anmkiy. A. I. KONSTRUIROVAIIIYE APPARATURY AVTOHATIKI I
TELEWIKI [Design of Automation and Remote Control Equip-eat], lbscov,
Hashinostroyeniye, 1975, 272 pages.

Neshmva, K. A. BLEKTRONNYYE TSIFROVYYE VYCIIISLI‘I‘EL'NYYB HASBINY
[Digital Computers], Moscow, Vysshaya shkola. 1975, 328 pages.

PRUISBSSOR EVH YES-1020 [Yes-1020 Colputer Processor], edited by A. H. Larionov,
Moscow, Statistika, 1975, 160 pages.

Ryzhkov. V. A.; Sergeyev, N. P.; Markov, B. H. mm 211 NA HAGN‘I‘I'NOH
NOSI‘I'BLE [External Hametic Nemries], Moscow. Buergiya, 1978, 224 pages.

SISTEMA WATS”: YBDINOY SISTBMY BVM [Docmt Systel for the Unified
Systea of Couputer], edited by A. H. Lar'ionov, Hosea", Statistilta, 1976,
328 pages.

SPRAVOCIINIK P0 TSIFROVOY warsum'mv Imus [Handbook on Digital
Commuter Engineering]. edited by Corresponding Heaber of the Ukrainian SSR
Acadeny of Sciences 3. N. Halinovskiy, Kiev, 'rekhnika, 1974, 512 pages.

Flores. A. WESENIYB USTKJYSTVA BVH [Peripheral Devices of Computers],
Moscow, Mir, 1977, 550 pages.

Shelikhov. A. A.; Selivanoy, Yu. P. WCRISLITEL‘NYYE NASHINY: SPRAVOWIK
[Couputersz Handbook], Moscow, Energiya, 1978. 224 pages.

Shigin, A. 0.; Detyugin, A. A. TSIFROVYYB VYCHISLITBL'NYYE MASHINY

(PAHYAT' TSVN) [Digital Couputers (Digital Counter Memory”, Macaw, mergiya,
1975, 5% pages.

107
M OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

15. WWYA VYCBISLITBL'NAYA HASBIIIA YES-1020 [Yes-1020 miter]. edited
by A. H. Larionov, Moscow. Stetietika. 1975, 128 pages.

16. ELMAYA WCMSLITEL'NAYA HASBIRA YES-101) [Yes-10!) Counter], edited
by A. H. Lerionov, Moscow, sanguine, 1977, 256 pages.

17. ELEKTRGINAYA WCIHSLITBL'NAYA IBERIA YES-1050 [Yes-1050 Coquter], edited
by A. H. Ledonnv, meow, Staletﬂu, 1976, 302 P8838.

108
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 01’ cows
Introduction

Section I. Arithnetic Logical Principles and System of Elements of
the Unified System of Counters

anapter 1. Arithmetic Principles of Counters

1.1. Nder Systems Used for Counter Calculations

1.2. Conversion of riders from One Mar System to Another

1.3. Form of Representing Uders in Couputers

1.10. Codes for Binary ﬁnders and Arithmetic Operations with Them

Chapter 2. Logical Principles of Counters

2.1. Basic Concepts of Mathematical Logic

2.2. Basic Logical chtims and Their IQIementation Using Logical
Elennts

2.3. Complex Logical Functions and Their Inleuntation
Chapter 3. System of Elements of the Unified System of Comuters

3.1. Physical Representation of Binary Hunters and Classification
of Computer-Blemnts

3.2. Integrated Circuits Used in the Unified System of Computers

3.3. Flip-Flop Elements

3.1:. Auxiliary Elements

Chapter lo. Assewlies of the Unified Systel of Computers

. Computer Cyles. Formation of Operating Sync Pulses
Registers

Decoders

Counters

Binary Adders

Decimal Adders

. Code Comarison Asseﬂalies

so.
0

&\L‘&~&D~ba~
.

NombuNr-i
0

Section II. Units of the Unified System of Coquters

Chapter 5. General Description of the Units of the Unified System of
Conputers .

S 1. General Information
5.2. Structure of Unified Systen of Counters _
S 3 Data and Instruction Formats. Operand Addressing
MWWWLY

Chapter 6. On-Line and Read-Only Henroies of the Unified System

of Coquters
6.1. Basic Characteristics of Rosaries 79
6.2. Memory Orgmiutim Principles of the Unified Systa of Conputers 81
6.3. Ferrite Core bury Ila-ant 83
6.4. Structural Principles of Ferrite Core On-Line lit-Dries 85
6.5. Panties Based on Selioonductor 1.81 89
6.6. Hennries Based on Thin lunatic Pills 91
6.7. Read-Only llenory 95

Chapter 7. Processor

7.1. Organization of Processor Operation 98
7.2. Structure of a Processor with Hicroprogran Control 102
7.3. Hicroprogran Control Module 104
7.4. Progran Execution in the Processor 107
7.5. Characteristics of the ArithneticHLogic Unit of Processors

of Different Models of the Ihified Syste- af Conpmers 1.11
7.6. Executim of Arithretic Operations on Fixed-Point Binary

Nuters 112
7.7. Structure of the Control Unit 119
7.8. Monitoring and Control Panel 121

Chapter 8. Data Input-Output

8.1. Principle of Organizing Data Input-Output 124
8.2. Operating Principles of the Multiplex and Selector anannels 126
8.3. Input-Output Interface 129

Section III. External lbnories of the Unified System of Coquters

Chapter 9. General Intonation about Infornstion Storages

9.1. Purpose. and Classification of Storages 132
9.2. writing, Storing and Beading Infornstion. Recording Density 134
9.3. Methods of Recording Infornation on Msgmtic Carriers ' 136

Chapter 10. Hepatic Tape Storages

10.1. Purpose and Technical Specifications 139
10.2. Arrangement of Intonation on a Magnetic Tape 141
10.3. Structural Diagram of the Storage 144
10.4. Tape Drive hchanisn 147
10.5. "auntic Ilead Module 152
10.6. Reel and Drive Motor Control 154
10.7. Electric Circuitry of the Storage Unit 1.58
10.8. marscteristic Failures of Magnetic Tape Storages, Their

Detection and Blinination 163
10.9. Preventive Control Operations 164

110
Chapter 11. Magnetic Tape Storage Controller

11. 1.
11.2.
n. 3.
11.6.
11.5.

Purpose and Technical Specifications

Structural Diagram

Operation of the Magnetic Tape Controller in the Coqlex Node
Electric Power annply for the Controller

Checking the Operating Pitness of the Magnetic Tape Controller
Bq'uipnsnt and Possible Pailures

Chapter 12. Hermetic DruI Storages

12010
12.2.
12.3.

12.6.
12.5.
12.6.

General Description

Structural Design and Basic Asseﬂnlies

Arrangement of Information and Magnetic leads on the
Surface of a Magnetic Drua

Structural Diagram of the Storage

Electrical Diagram of the Storage

anaracteristic Failures and Preventive Maintenance Work

Chapter 13. Magnetic Disc Storages

13.1.
13.2.
13.3.
13.10.
13. s.
13.6.
13. 7.
13.8.
13. 9.

Basic Description and Structural Principle

Arrangement of Intonation on t!. Surface of Magnetic Disc
Structural Design and Basic Assednlies of the Storages
Carriage Drive

Electromechanical Module

Structural Diagram

Electrical Diagram of the Storage

Characteristic Failures. Their Detection and Elimination
Preventive Control Operations

Chapter 14. Magnetic Disc and Drum Storage Controllers

110.1.
16.2.
16. 3.

16.4.
16.5.

General Description of the Yes-5551 Controller
Structural Diagram of a Controller

Operation of a Controller Jointly with the Cowuter and
NPD [magnetic Disc and Dru Storages]

Electrical Diagram of a Controller

Characteristic Failures

Section IV. Input-Output Units of the Unified System of Coquters

Chapter 15. Punch Carrier Data Preparation Units

15.1.
15.2.
15.3.
”0‘.

Information Carriers (Punch Cards and Punch Tapes)
Punch Card Data Preparation Unit

Punch Card Controller

Yes-9020 Punch Tape Data Preparation unit (UPDL)
mammosaonu

Chapter 16. Punch Carrier Data Input Unite

16.1. Yes-6012 Punch Card Input Unit
16.2. Read Control Ron Punch Cards

16.3. Preparation of the 30-600)! lechanian for Operation
16.6. Yes-6022 Pinch ‘rape Input Unit

16.5. 16-1501 Photo Reader

16.6. Yes-6022 lhintenance

Chapter 17. Yes-7032 Alphanmric Printer

17.1. Operatiu Principle
17.2. Structural Diagra-
17.3. Maintenance of the Printer

Chapter 18. Sylbolic and Graphical Data Dieplaya

18.1. Display Principlea
18.2. Coqoaition of the Yes-7906 Alphanmric Data Display Coqlex
18.3. Yes-7064 Graphical Data Display

Chapter 19. Organization of an Input-Output Interface

19.1. General Intonation
19.2. Interface Linea
19.3. Operationa in the Interface

Chapter 20. Technical ﬂaintenmce and Use of the Unified Syaten
of Coqutera

20.1. Organization of the Operation of a Cowuter Center

20.2. Reliability and Technical Diamoatica of a Conuter

20.3. Methods and Software for Gwcnng and Technical Diagnostica

20.10. Teclmical Maintenance Software

20.5. Preventive Maintenance

20.6. Installation of the Unified Syaten of Coqmtera 1nd Safety
anineering when Servicing Then

20.7. Using the Ihified Syaten of Conputera in the Automated Railroad
Transportation Control Syaten

Appendix
Bibliography
(DPYRIGB‘I: Irdatel'atvo "Tramport". 1981

10865
(380: 1% 3/7’0 m

112

mmusamv

251
257
265
267
270
274

275
281
289

292
296

307
3131

316
317
319
326
328

332
335-
331l