FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10381

I2 March 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 15/82)‘

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
ROTB

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infoxmation was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNBRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFfICIAL USE ONLY.
"Es: EUROPE REPORT

(POGO 15/82)

Comems
rm FORCE
UNITED KINGDOM

Discussions on Trident, Chemical Veepons
(Various sources; various dates) .......................

Pro-Trident up, by Julian Critchley

Anti-Trident Former Defense Chief. by Field Merehol Lord Carver

Nott Seeks Trident Perts Dead. by Henry Btmhope
lott, MP's on Chanicel Weapons

may monomcs
FEDERAL mac or. W

New Heating Systan Reduces Costs by 50 Percent
(ml-Heinz SW1“; CAPITAL, Feb 82) seeee ...... seeeaae

ITALY
Algerian Gas Pipeline Accord at Impasse
(Lorenzo Schesgi; IL IDIDO, 22 Jan 82) .................
monomc
FRANCE
Industry Minister, Credit Bank Chief Discuss Nationaliution
(Pierre Dreyfus. J sen Maine Leveque Interview; PARIS
Wu, ”J” 82) 0.00000COOOOIOOOOODOOOO...DOOOOODOOOOO
POLITICAL
ICELARD

Premier Thoroddsen Reetfinae Position on NATO
(Denis quor‘mﬂm. 17 Feb 82) OIOIOOIOOIO‘OCOOOO.

-a- [III-WE-ISO

POI? “MPH! "SF ONIV

10

13

16

P000
ITALY

SPAII

ITALY

['03 wuouu. UB5 URL!

USSR Accused of Having Supported PBIUP
(Filippo Ccccorolli; PAIOM, 1 I'c‘b 82) ...............

Reorganization of con. Sect-stunt ,
(n! m. 22 J“ 82) OQO¢OOOOl.0.0IOOIOOOOOIOOJOIOOOOOO

eon-mo Strongly Criticizes cpsu's Stance ma PCB, PcI
(amuse Carrillo Interview; 9mm. 15 tab 82).....

cm

Restricted White Papa" on P2 laconic Trial
(Gimni Routgnm’ 22c!“ 82) OOOOOOOCIIOOOOQOOOCO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES UNITED mm

0186088st on mmm. CHEMICAL ms
Pro-Trident HP
M61551 London m DAILY TELEGRAPH in ugliah 16 Feb 82 p 18

[Article by Julian Critchley: "Ia GiVing Brezhnev a Rocket the Beat Way to Uae
Trident?"]

[Text] Poor John Nott. lie in beeet with troublea. The treaaury won't let him
pay hie billa, hie backhenchera are beconing disenchanted and Trident nay coat
twice as much as he told Parliament it would lose than a year ago.

"I told you no" in the inevitable cement of thoee of us who are familiar with
the dynamism of American arme production. Once comaitted to "comality" with
the American nuclear eubnarine mieeile program, we cannot avoid being caught
up in the rhythm of its production linee.

What ie new the intention of the Ninietry of Deﬁner-though I believe the treaaury
is yet to be won overb-ie to go for the new, larger vereion of the Trident, the

DS. Thie ie becauee Preaident Reagan haa decided to deploy it in 1989 in place

of the 06, which waa to be the nodal for the new Britieh flotilla of four
eubnarinee, coating about 5,000 million pounde at 1980 prince, to replace our
aging Polarie veaeela.

As the production of the CA eieeile ie likely to be phaeed out before the new
Britieh submarinea are built, it would be eeneible to order or ear-ark now the
Royal Navy'e require-onto from the 05 production line. The eiae and capability
of the DS conend it to thoee who believe that the Soviet eilitary threat calla
for the neat formidable‘weapon of deterrence available. It will have a range of
6,000 nilee. double that of the ca. and the multiple warheade of its mieeilea are
eaid to be more accurate. '

The auburinee will have a dieplecement of 18,000 tonnea and 16 niaeile tubee.

I believe that the coat—whatever the preaent government line may be—ie likely
to be about 10,000 million pounds, docble the original eetinete. This would buy
us only three of theae great eubearinee, which would mean only one would be
likely to be on etation at a time.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is not only the size which sccomts for the greater cost; there is also the
fall in the exchange rate from $2.60 to the pond in 1980 to about $1.80. and the
bigger contribution (at least 12 percent) to research and development cornered
with the 5 percent charged for the Clo. Total expenditure would be spread over
15 years and would amomt to some 6 percent of the defence budget. Heat of the

cost would be incurred in the late '80s, and it is estimated that 70 percent of
it would be spent in Britain.

The problem of the extra expense, which is yet to be resolved in cabinet, is
complicated by the newa that we are to spend some hmdreds of millions on renewing
the motors of the Polaris missiles. If the life of Polaris is to be prolonged,
why not build four. new Polaris submarines? This view, which the Ministry of
Defence should consider, is reinforced by the news that the expensive atevaline
warheads, ordered by the Wilson government for the extirpation of the Hmcovites.
should need arise, have just been test fired from renown.

Another alternative could be cruise missiles, which would be cheaper and more
accurate. President Reagan's decision to momt a large umber of them in
submarines is evidence of American confidence in their sea-launched efficiency.

The cost in money is, of course. the one traditional aspect of national armaments
on which parliamentarians concentrate. But there are a lot of political, moral
and psychological considerations, belonging to quite a different order of ideas,
which this decision stmseone fron the deep: and I have a feeling that it is from
this source, as well as from the military and financial arguments, that British
Governments will encomter obstacles to the fulfillment of a new Trident program.

To begin with, the political consensus which has supported nuclear deterrence is
no more. Michael Foot and Tony Benn, who were members of the Labour cabinet which
1uthorised the Chevaline system for the purpose of penetrating the mti-ballistic
defences of Moscow, are now pillars of milateral disarmament.

The Labour Party would repudiate the Trident agreement with America were it to
win the election. That is not very probable, but we now learn that Dr Owen is
also in favour of dropping Trident, unless it was too far advanced financially
(which is mlikely to be the case), if the Alliance comes to power. That also
may now seem very unlikely, but the possibility of some kind of foreign policy
agreement Latween a numerically-reduced Conservative Party and the Alliance is not
unreal.

what is more, there are evidently a great many people who have no high regard for
the parties nowadays and for: their opinion independently, particularly on world
affairs. For them, television is probably the most formative influence.

Not long ago the nuclear disarmament caspaign held the centre of the stage, but
events in Poland have served to blunt its appeal and there has been recently a
reaction against the special pleading and emotional excess of CM). Yet is would
be a mistake to mderestimate the rational core of the campaign and the anxiety
about the rivalry in nuclear armaments which it has aroused in the minds of many
thoughtful people. If we cannot count on the consensus of the political party
leaders for a British deterrent, it is more than ever necessary to carry the
moderate centre.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is the target of the deterrent which sticks in the gullet of the moderates.
This may mean nothing to those concerned with the technical capability of a
strategic nuclear missile; but it is not without psychological importance.
According to NATO "the UK Government has stated that the Trident force will be
assigned to mm and dedicated to saceur targets." Yet throughout the eivdence
given on the stbject to the Defence (:0th of Parliament, one target and one
target only was mentioned, the Moscow conurbation. "Because of its symbolic value
to the Soviet [hion and to the world com-mist movement.

"It follows that to be able to hold Bbscow hostage may have a very powerful
deterrent effect and therefore that, on balance, the British deterrent should be
able to penetrate Soviet ABM defences"-which is, of course, the purpose of
Chevaline. Is that a target chosen by the supreme allied comander? In fact,

I believe it was the target always intended by the British Government ever since
we possessed a strategic nuclear missile, the threat to massacre the population
of Moscow being only contemplated, of course, in retaliation. It my be that
this "city bmting" abomination is the purpose of the Russian SSZOs, which the

Pershing 11s and Tomahawks are designed to center, but which it is the aim of
the Geneva negotiations to eliminate.

In the past 4 years the doctrine of both the super powers seems to have moved
away from the destruction of cities in favour of missile silos and other military
objectives. It is, at any rate, a more rational form of warfare.

The British mass destruction objective appears to be a relic of the early post-
liiroshima days. If British missiles, like the American, were known to be
primarily directed, for- instance, at some of the many targets in the great
military complex of the Soviet Union's "norhtern theatre of operations, of which
the Kola Peninsula is the centre, and which is the most concentrated source of
potential nuclear aggression, it would be much less difficult to "sell" Trident,
or any other system, to the British people today.

Anti-Trident Former Defense Chief
PMZ31123 London THE SUNDAY TIMES in English 21 Feb 82 p 16

[Article by Field Marshal Lord Carver, chief of Defense Staff 1973-1976: "why
Britain Should Reject Trident"]

[Text] The issue over Trident is whether or not the government should spend

a considerable sum of money--figures varying from 6 to 10 billion pounds at 1981
prices are bandied about-won replacing the existing force of four ballistic
missile submarines with a force of four or five new British-built nuclear-powered
submarines, equipped with either the current or the improved Trident missile,
for which Britain would design and produce new nuclear warheads. If not. should
Britain attempt to maintain an independent strategic nuclear deterrent strike
force with some other, cheaper system, or give up the struggle to keep up with
the nuclear Joneses?

There are three questions that need to be answered before one can approach the
answers. Should we continue to design and manufacture our own nuclear warheads?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whether or not we do, should we man nuclear delivery aystene? If the newer to
both those is yes, should we continue to maintain a force which is called inde-
pendent and strategic?

Let me answer the easiest question. the second, first. I have no doubt that, as
long as Ham's policy is that there should be nuclear delivery systems based in
Europe and its surrounding waters, we should play our part in manning delivery
system. The nore that European meters of NATO demonstrate that they accept

s policy of nuclear deterrence. the stronger the cohesion of the Alliance will
be. To refuse to do so, or to refuse to allow bases for delivery eyetens in
one's territory, seem to use to .be hypocritical and inconsfetent with membership
of the Alliance, although it can be explained away as helping nuclear deterrence
by defusing local objections.

how Many Bombs Here Needed?

As to whether or not we should continue to design and manufacture our own warheads.
That depends a good deal on no answer to the third question. now iaportant.
therefore, is it that we should have our own independent strategic systee. that
is one which can inflict such unacceptable damage on the Soviet Union that, by
itself, it deters her from doing something which we regard as maccepteble to us?
The criterion for this is generally thought to be the ability to inflict consi-
derable damage on Moscow, which is protected by an anti-ballistic missile system,
on the efficacy of which some people now cast doubt; and the ability to do this
when nobody else is attacking the Soviet Union. with the capacity to maintain
that threat 24 hours a day. 365 days a year, although the 11.8. established the
criterion of its "countervalue" deterrent as the destruction of 50 percent of the
Soviet Union's industrial capacity and 25 percent of her population.

The argtments for having an independent nuclear force have varied down the years,
the military ones invariably having been evolved to rationalise the political
decision already taken. The original decision. finally confirmed by Attlee's
administration in the bleak January of 1947, has been described by Professor
Margaret Sowing in her nesterly official history as emerging from a body of
general assuptions; not a response to an imadiate military threat but rather
something fmdamntalist and almost inatinctive...s symbol of independence.

When the air staff came to calculate how many boebs were needed for the deterrent
purposes they were neant to serve, she described the methodology as so ridiculous
that its conclusions seemed worthless. Ihings have not greatly changed since
then.

Churchill and later Hac-Hillan in the early 1950's justified the force, then the
W's V-bomberu, on the grounds that there were targets which were vital to us,
but which the 11.5. might not regard as such. and that our possession of nuclear
weapons enabled us to make certain that these targets were attacked, and also
gave us influence over u.s. policy generally. a claim that sounded hollow in the
Suez affair the year after Mac—Hillan had made it.

At the start of the sixties, when the strategic nuclear balance between the 0.5.
and the USSR was casting doubt as to whether the former would be prepared to
initiate the use of- nuclear weapons in the event of Russian invasion of Western

2.
son omcm. us: omiv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Europe, and the Kennedy administration, particularly its Defence Secretary Robert
chanara, became very concerned that nuclear war should not be sparked off for

causes or in conditions which did not warrant national suicide, other argtnsnts
were heard.

France had exploded her first device. and the 0.8. feared that the contagion
night even spread covertly to ﬂeet Gernany, McNanera described independent forces
of lesser powers as "dangerous, ineffective and prone to obsolescence." Henry
Kissinger, who in his 1957 book "Nuclear weapons and l'oreign Policy" had favoured
proliferation of this kind, as he had also the concept of limited nuclear war,
recanted on both 3 years later in necessity for choice, describing independent
retaliatory forces in Europe as "in danger of producing an illusory feeling of
security which in some respects nagnifies the danger."

The arguments put forward by Britain and France at that tine were sonewhst self-
contradictory: That their forces tied the Americans to one's side and conﬁned
then to engage their nulcear anroury, and that they were an insurance against
either the departure of the hericans from Europe or their unwillingness to
becone involved in a nuclear war on its account.

Proliferation and Blackmail

The French general, Andre Beaufre, produced the clearest concept of this. Be
argued that the ninor nuclear power'a force was protected by that of its najor
nuclear ally, because the opponent could not afford to strike it, for fear of
retaliation by the najor, unless it had the capability, and exercised it, to
destroy the major power's force at the sane tine. The Soviet Union would recognise
this and therefore be nuch none cautious about taking action which directly
threatened the ninor power, but night not be regarded as a stake worth risking
nuclear war by the major. The situation also had the advantage that the ninor
power was free to pursue an independent foreign policy, even one opposed to the
interests of its najor ally, because the inextricable linkage of their nuclear
forces in the overall nuclear equation compelled the najor power to consider the
interests of the ninor power as its own.

Beaufre, in con-son with Kissinger, nernan Kahn and others, ridiculed the idea of
a ninor nuclear power, particularly one whose population was concentrated in
cities. threatening nuclear retaliation on its own against a major nuclear power,
if it had been abandoned by its nejor nuclear ally. It would be tantanount to
suicide. He therefore favoured proliferation nations as strengthening the
alliance.

lie glossed over two aspects of his concept: The inplications of its application
to Heat Gernany and the possiblity that pursuit of such a course night drive the
major ally to abandon the alliance, which, by his definition, would undernine
the value of the independent force.

Britain had never been quite so blatantly cynical in its justification as that,

but it has used the sane argument in different forns. The pure and sinple
"trigger" argment has been employed, but to suggest that we or France should.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by firing off a nuclear weapon ourselves, which the Russians would not be able to
distinguish from an American one, plunge the alliance into nuclear war against
the wishes of the 0.8. is so patently irresponsible and clearly unpalatable to
our great ally that it has been suppressed.

The more subtle form that has been used, and is now the one on which the govern-
ment publicly relies, is that, although we have full confidence that the united
States will be prepared to initiate nuclear war if conventional aggression in
Europe could not be held, or to retaliate if the Warsaw Pact initiates their use.
the Russians might think that they would not be prepared to do so for fear of
escalation to retaliation against American cities; but they could have no doubt
that we (or France) would be prepared to take that risk because we are in Europe,
although the risk to us would be total and to than only partial.

There are two questions to be answered here. First, if the "second centre of
decision" argument is valid, the Beaufre's version of it seeas to me to have more
substance to it, is it in our interests to encourage the Americans to be prepared
to initiate nuclear war in Europe? Second, is it worth paying the price for it
at the expense of conventional forces, as, with a limit to defence expenditure,
it is bound to be?

My answer to both questions is no. My reason is that, as has been the case
ever since the nuclear arms race started in 1965, the West's thinking has
constantly lagged behind the realities of the race.

A concept based on nuclear superiority in one field has quickly been invalidated
by the Soviet Union following suit with a capability to retaliate in kind at
every level, producing a nuclear stalemate that has now descended from the
strategic to the tactical level. At the theatre of tactical level any nuclear
exchange, however limited it night be, is bound to leave RAID worse off in
comparison to the Warsaw Pact, in terms both of military and civilian casualties
and destruction. That is a factor of geography and of the overall balance of
conventional forces. The only exception would be if the Soviet Ihion were to
respond to NATO's use of nuclear weapons either with a much sore limited response
or not at all. To initiate the use of nuclear weapons on that assumption seems
to me to be criminally irresponsible.

This overall nuclear stalemate, which is not a matter of balancing exact numbers
of nuclear delivery systems at different levels, but of the ability to retaliate
in sufficient strength at the sane or a higher level, makes it inperative to
improve the strength and flexibility of NAIO's conventional forces. It also
makes a good deal of NATO's nuclear armoury not only superfluous but positively
dangerous, as encouraging its politicians and military staffs to think that the
use of nuclear weapons could redress the effect of a conventional defeat and
therefore that nuclear forces can compensate for inadequacy in conventional
ones; would actually be used for that purpose and are therefore, as the defence
secretary claims, good value for money.

A further argument for an independent strategic force is that, if a nuclear
exchange were to take place in Europe, our ability to retaliate would at least
ensure that targets in Britain were not attacked by nuclear weapons (some would

6
FIHICMHHCIAL US£2CMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even claim even by conventional weapons), one that cannot be flaunted in front of
our non-nuclear allies. More than one American critic has pointed out that that
concept means that Britain and France would be likely to hold back their nuclear
weapons, and perhaps not be as wholeheartad in their conventional efforts, if
NATO were attacked. Far from being a contribution to NATO's nuclear deterrent,

it tends to undermine it, and the logical application of the concept is to promote
proliferation.

I therefore believe that to spend money on Trident shows a wrong appreciation of
priorities. We should accept that our nuclear strike forces are part of NATO's
"forward based systems," and we should encourage the Americana to widen the
Geneva talks, as the Russians have demanded. to embrace all such systems in the
hope that they can be reduced on both sides.

An Addition to the Arsenal

If the result of that is that NATO continues to wish to maintain internediate
range (or long-range theatre) nuclear delivery systems, we should offer to man
all or_a proportion of those based in the UK or its surrounding waters. when
Polaris fades out, this could be the American cruise missiles, if they are part
of the armoury, or just aircraft as we do today. But it would not matter whose
the warheads were, and we could save a significant sun by shutting down our
capability to produce and maintain them. The knowledge of how to do so would
remain, if, for some curious reason, we wanted to resuscitate it.

however, cruise missiles would not be suitable as an independent strategic force.
If Britain insists on maintaining the latter, the only sensible form it can take
is a second-strike retaliatory force that is as invulnerable as possible, and
Trident is undoubtedly the best system for that. But I believe it to be an
unnecessary addition to the American nuclear arsenal, which is more than suffi-
cient to act as a deterrent to the only things that it is now-capable of covering:
war between the 0.8. and Russia, and if that fails, the use of nuclear weapons
by both sides. The essential feature which links that deterrent to Europe is
not Britain's independent deterrent, but the presence of adequate u.s. conven-
tional forces in Europe, to the maintenance of which the strengthening of the
conventional capability of her European allies is an essential contribution.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982
Nott Seeks Trident Parts Deal
PH221621 London THE TIMES in English 22 Feb 82 p 22
[Report by Henry Stanhope: "Jobs Deal Sought in Trident Talks"]

[Text] Britain is trying to negotiate a deal with the United States under which
firms in Britain might be able to make parts for the Trident-2 nuclear missile.

The implications for jobs of such an agreement would make it easier for Hr John
Nott, secretary of state for defence, to convince his government and party
colleages of the wisdom of replacing Polaris with Trident-2 as Britain's strategic
deterrent in the 1990's.

7
FOR 0FFKJA1.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most likely date for a cabinet decision on whether to change from the
Trident-l, or Clo, to the bigger, longer-range but more expensive Trident-2,

or 05, is now thought likely to be in the week after Sir Geoffrey Rowe's budget
on 9 March. That would enable Hr Nott to attend the next meeting of UATO'a
nuclear planning group with the decision behind him.

An arrangement under which British industry would be allowed to compete for
contracts in respect of those missiles, which are being made for the United
States Navy as well as for Britain, would pacify companies like British Aerospace
which has been complaining that it stands to get nothing out of the Trident
purchase.

Negotiations are not yet complete, but the latest reports largely confirm the
impression that the United States has been more agreeable to a Trident-2 deal
than government officials had feared.

The United States is also said to be agreeable to asking Britain for a fixed
payment towards the research and development costs instead of the more expensive
and more risky percentage deal worked out in the existing Trident-l contract,
which was announced in July 1980.

Sources are talking of a total package coating around 7,500 million pounds.

A shifting exchange rate makes it difficult to talk in terms of one fixed sun.
Although it will be more expensive than Trident-l, the treasury prefers the
prospect of Trident-2 because, being a later programme, it will cost less over
the next few years. The Ministry of Defence is also planning to spread the cost
over 20 years instead of 15, and making the present Polaris force serve for about
5 more years before being phased out.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982
Nott, HP's on Gtemical Weapons
P14241755 London THE TIMES in English 24 Feb 82 p lo

[Unattributed report of 23 February house of Campus session: "Chemicals From
Behind Closed Russian Doors"]

[Text] It was time for MP‘s to concentrate on the threat from Soviet chemical
weapons instead of criticizing Britain's American allies, Mr John Nott, secretary
of state for defence, said. Pressed by the opposition on deployment of chemical
weapons. he said there was no proposal to deploy them on British soil.

we have taken the lead (he said) in trying to get a ban on the manufacture of
chemical weapons but the Soviet Union, because it has a massive lead in these
weapons, deployed forward in Europe, and has 60,000 troops trained to use them
while NATO possesses none, refuses to agree to verification measures.

He was answering Mr Denzil Davies, an opposition spokesman on defence who had
accused him of prevaricating on chemical weapons.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hr Davies had said: He all know there is a Russian stockpile and there is going
to be an American stockpile, and I hope for negotiations to reduce them. Will _
he make clear that the government has no intention to manufacture chemical weapons
or to allow them to be located on British soil whether they are British or
American?

Mr Michael Mair-Wilson: Has any European member of NATO yet asked for chemical
weapons to be stationed in their country?

Mr Nott: There is no proposal at present to deploy the nu American binary
weapon forward in Europe and the Americans have agreed to consult their European
allies before any such forward deployment arises.

Mr Frank Haynes asked if the stationing of clwmical weapons in Europe was
discussed at the last meeting of NATO defence ministers.

Hr Nott: No.

Mr Haynes: Many people do not believe Mr Nott's statements on chemical weapons.
When will he come clean and let the people know what is going on behind closed
doors?

Hr Nott: Russia has 60,000 troops trained in and specially designated to fight
in chemical warfare. Their training is carried out in live chemical gromda and
we know there are fatal casualties among the soldiers involved in Russia.

Russia holds over 300,000 tons of chemical weapons and much of this is deployed
forward into Europe, with the means of delivering it. That is what is happening
behind closed Russian doors.

COPYRIGIT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

C50: 3120/ Mo

9

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
NEH HEATING svsrm REDUCES COSTS BY 50 PERCENT
Hamburg CAPITAL in Gernan Feb 82 pp 86. 88
[Article by Karl-Heinz Seyfried: ' "Storage in Concrete")

[Text] A newly developed technique offers amazingly low
heating costs. Heat is extracted from the envith and
used for domestic heating. Experts declare that the new
procedure, applicable in any new construction, has out-
standing features.

BAU—ZMTI‘T'waies ecstatic— oyer the n; heatiEgTyEtEn—Tlﬁfhe'ﬁff the heat—-
cones out ofnit's concrete." And the "Bamarkt Tip" infomtion service exhorts

its readers-prinarily construction entrepreneurs-4n bold type: "My urgent rec-
omendation: clinb aboard this train!" '

The cause of the enthusiasn of these two trade journals and of many others is a
new heating systen which helps to reduce energy costs by sore than 50 percent.

It was developed by the medium-sized Sesnann Concrete Works in Villingen
(Schwarzwald). In prefabricated exterior walls. balcony parapets or garden walls
concrete workers have laid in plastic pipes in which a heat-exchanging fluid cir-
culates. The trick: the fluid is always a few degrees colder than the concrete
walls and hence extracts heat fron then. The heated naterial flows into a heat
pump which cools it and uses the acquired energy to warn the heating water. This
procedure called by its Schwarzwald inventors a msive absorber systen has been
tested by the technicians of the reputable Pramhofer Society at its Institute of
Structural Physics in nolzkirchen and has been found to be good.‘ In the raw cli-
mate of the lower Alps the massive absorber has now for the third winter been

heating an experimental house nonovalently with the heat puup--that is. without
an additional heating boiler.

'0
Professor Bernhard Schwarz. chief of the Prsunhofer testing program. has estab-
lished that the nassive absorber systea yields for each kilowatt-hour of current
used 2.7-fold heat output-distinctly nore. for example. than energy roofs or
fences nade of natal which also extract heat from the air. The reason: concrete

stores more heat than does any other building material and is capable of exploit-
ing the daytime heat at night.

Traditional heat punps which extract energy directly fron the air provide in no-
novalent operation only 2.2 tines the consumed electric current as heat energy.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is true that the efficiency of installations which extract heat from groundwa-
ter or from the ground is greater than in the case of the massive absorber. but
their field of possible application is restricted: groundwater is not everywhere
accessible and heating from the ground requires extensive excavation. 0n the
other hand with the concrete system it is possible to heat the building even on
the coldest days with pipes in only half as Inch wall area as the square footage
of the dwelling.

For especially low exterior temperatures the inventors of the ayaten have intro-
duced a safety feature: the foundation plate of the house serves as energy stor-
age. Yet even in the cold winter of 1980/81 this reserve was not needed. Meas-
urenents made at the administrative offices of the Seemann firm (with 5,000

square meters of office space. the largest building thus far which has been

heated entirely from concrete) confirm the fact that even at 780 meters above sea
level the exterior walls were always able to store enough environmental heat for

heating the building.

Heat From Concrete

‘——_—-—. -0--.

   

Cold brine. a mixture of water and If the exterior wall is warmer than
antifreeze is warned at the exterior the foundation plate and if the do-
wall. It flows back to the heat pump mestic heating system requires no ad-
which extracts its absorbed energy ditional energy the brine flows fron
and uses it to heat the house. the wall into the foundation plate
and heats it.
11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Beat Fro. Concrete (continued)

 

0n especially cold days the heat pump extracts the stored environmental energy
not from the exterior wall but iron the foundation plate and uses it to provide
coafortable tenperaturas in the house.

As always in the case of new—systems there were skeptics who had their say.
Testing chief Sclnvarr was able to nest their objection that the use of environ-
mental heat would also pernit moisture to penetrate into the pipes. freeze there
and burst the concrete. The professor states that nassive absorbers nenutactured
industrially from high-quality concrete and laminated for optical and energetic
reasons so as to be water repellent have as long a working life as normal con-
crete elements: "Otherwise we could absolutely not give the systen the Praun-
hofer Inetitute'e endorsement.”

Also the heating expert of the technical University of Berlin Professor Horst
Bsdorn. who has tested new energy ideas for the German Federal Ministry of. Con-
struction has no doubts about the reliability of the massive absorber. He con-
siders it to be "certainly one of the cleverest solutions." In addition. the
system is already economically viable today. While for an individual house it
costs about 16.000 narks more than a conventional oil-heating system. neverthe-
less it saves about 1.600 marks in energy costs annually. because installations
of this type can be completely written off in 10 years the tax advantage even for
niddle-incone users is so great that it even outweighs the high interest rates.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 Co.

8008
C80: 3103/2510

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY BOOMCS ITALY

menus GAS 911mm acooan AT mass:
Milan 11. mm in Italian 22, Jan 82 pp l8. 19
[Article by Lorenzo Scheggi: mums: a Slow raw]

[Text] The last ones to try were Luciano Lama. Pierre Carniti and Giorgio
Benvenuto. On an official visit to Algiers as guests of the Algerian trade
unions, starting on 10 January, in fact they spent most of their tine talking

about methane and the Italy-Algerian methane pipeline, trying to overcome the
problems that may make a once-in-s-lifetime deal founder in red tape and regrets._
The tnbelical cord which links Italy to Africa, running below the Sicily canal
and the Straits of Hessina. has been ready for months. Hore than a thousand
kilometers of pipeline have already been laid from the BassiR'Hel nethane '
fields to Celebria. This pipeline is to be 2.500 kilometers long by 1984, ex-
tending to the Padana valley to connect-at Hinerbio. near Bologna—with the '
northern Italian methane network. The completed methane pipeline should carry
more than 12 billion cubic neterspf methane per year. About 4 billion cubic
meters of gas could be mped through it already. But the project has ground
to a halt, and so far all efforts to get it going again have been in vain, from
the official efforts of mi and the Italian Government to the acre discreet et-
tempts made by various Italian political leaders, including Enrico Berlinguer.
secretary of the Italian Columnist Party. And why has the deal been grounded?

What are the obstacles standing in the way of an agrenent?

The official reason, and certainly the most important one. is the price. The
agreement between Italy and Algeria was concluded in 1977. But, for over a
year, the Algerians have been saying that they want to revise it. Their objec-
tive is basically to equate the price of gas to that of petroleum and. above
all. to permanently link the two prices so that the price of gas will rise every
time the price of petroleum does. Snam [National Gas Pipeline Company]. the
branch of Eni which signed the agreement, disputes this reasoning because, as
the govern-eat has repeatedly explained as well, the price of transporting gas
is three to five times higher than that of transporting crude oil and because
the gas narket has' its own rules which can be ignored only at the risk of ran-
dering methane noncompetitive. "There ought to be some relationship between ‘
the two prices," Giacomo Luciani. director of research at the Institute of In-
ternational Affairs and one of Italy's most brillian experts on energy problas,
told II. HONDQ. "But Algeria's demand for an automatic link is unacceptable.
That policy could gradually make that country lose its entire market to other

sea-producing countries and to petroleum."

l3
”MINOR!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No exact figures are being mentioned by either the Italians or the Algerians.
But, according to information leaked to IL HDNDO, the Algerians seen to be ask-
ing about $6 per million B.t.u. (a special unit of nessurement equal to about
27 cubic meters); but, according to the calculations of Italian experts, gas
can be competitive on the Italian market only at a price under $5. It is a
fact that the Algerians are now billing Vrance $6.11, but France is only paying
$4.30, accumulating a dispute of gigantic proportions which was supposed to be
solved by the French president's recent trip to Algeria. -According to informa-
tion leaked about the latter, Francois Hitterrand squared the circle by giVing
the Algerians the difference in the form of special aid to development. Some
say this formula could find support in Italy, too. It is also a fact that, ac-
cording to experts close to Confindustria, Algerian gas priced as the Algerian
govern-eat wishes would cost consumers about 360/350 lire per cubic meter, as

opposed to 260 lire for the gas Italy is supposed to import from the Soviet
Union via the trans-Siberian gas pipeline. '

For the trade unions, however. this argument is only half valid. Donatella
Turtura, secretary of the CGIL, told IL HDNDO: "It's true that there are pric-
ing problems. But this is only because Italy has no meaningful policy towards
developing countries. The solution of the methane price should be found in the
context of broad cooperation agreements in the interests of both countries.
Obviously, without such a policy purely commercial considerations prevail."

But some people think there is a third reason which explains the halt in the
agreement with Algeria. According to this theory, Eni is not doing everything
in its power to bring the contract to a successful conclusion, "Because".-the
proponents of this theory say. "Italy is not really ready to use Algerian gas".

Industrialists admit this openly: "The hypothesis of a broad, large-scale in-
dustrialization of the South driven by the advent of methane doesn't seem to
have become a reality, at least for now." And not much has been done in the
area of nonindustrial consumption either. According to the methanirstion plan.
374 southern communities met the requirements for financial facilitationa de—
signed to help create urban distribution networks. But the deadline for sub-
mitting requests has passed and only one-third of them have done so. Says
Donatella Torture, “The goverdment is to blame because it did not implement the
necessary projects, so a big opportunity for development and economic renewal
that could have affected the whole South has been lost. But maybe we can still
catch this train if we run."

Walter Galbusera, secretary of the UIL [Italian Union of Labor], adds: "We are
probably thrown off balance because for once the time-table for the implementa-
tion of a large-scale public project has been adhered to." At Snam, however,
they say that "The truth is that it is madness to think of widespread and cap-
illary mechanization of the South within a year or two; mushrooms spring up
overnight, not industries. and not even the use of lethane by households-that
would take years and years for people to get used to."

But then, what would become of the b billion cubic meters of gas that could al-
ready be carried by the pipeline in 1982 if the agreement were to be finalized?

1h
FOIIOFFHJAI.UBBGIULY
1. Who uses natural gas in Italy
2. Thermal power plants

3. Households

4. Vehicles

5. Chanical

6. Industrial

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1982
INDUSTRY MINISTER. CREDIT m CRIB! DISCUSS NATIONALIZATIM
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 29 Jan 82 pp 36-37

[Interview with Minister of Industry Pierre Dreyfus and Jean Maxine leveque. president
of Co-ercial Credit of France. by Herc Ullnenn: "Nationalization? Yes. But [iby?"]

[Text] The constitutional council is asking the parlianent to review the neth

of coqensating stockholders in companies subject to nationalisation. but it bee
not challenged the principle of nationalisation. "Thus these actions will becoee
fact. They will be even more expensive. costing almost a dozen billion nore. asking
a total of 40. excluding interest. Are these nationalisation truly useful? The
following are the answers obtained fro. Pierre Dreyfus. minister of industry. a
defender of nationalisation. and Jean Maxine Leveque. president of the Credit Con-
nercial de France. an equally veins-saw opponent thereof.

Pierre Dreyfus

[Question] For more than 20 years. you headed the Renault athinistration. Today
you are minister of industry. In this capacity. you have something to say about
the way in which the new national enterprises will be nanapd and in the choice
of their chief adainistrstors. that are your hopes?

[Answer] I hope that the leaders of the new national enterprises will be capable
of a long-range view. A long-range view is very important. and the nistake made
by certain private enterprises-mot all of then. fortunatelyl—is Iyopia. keeping
their eyes riveted on this year's profits without realizing that the development
of a working tool is the only true gauge for the future. I was very surprised to
find that sole private enterprises—once again. not all of then—did not take the
trouble to foresee. several years in advance. the developnent of capacities and
the need for nodernization. as well as the effects of all of this on the personnel
and on costs.

[Question] men the situation is difficult. isn't long-tern forecasting particularly
risky?

[Answer] It is more difficult and less certain. but nonetheless indispensable.
And since you mention risk. I will tell you that a business manager. and in particular
an administrator of a national enterprise. should be capable of taking risks.

[Question] The president and the aenaging director of an enterprise has a simple
duty: he is supposed to make a profit for his stockholders. Might not the managing

16

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EV. URE‘ULM UI’E VMJ

director of a national enterprise be torn between what he regards as the interests
of the enterprise and what the government believes are those of the nation?

[Answer] The split should not occur. because each national enterprise will sign

a contract for several years with the state .in which it will can“; itself to certain
goals. These will obviously not be established without the agreement of the president
and managing director. Quite the contrary--it is he who will conpose them.

[Question] And who will pay?

[Answer] An enterprise. whether owned by the state or private. has its on self-
financing and loan capacity. The special aspect of national enterprises is that

the state is the only stockholder. It should act purposefully and mderwrite capital
increases if it believes that such are necessary for the development of the enter-
prise.

[Question] Did you yourself. at Renault. ever clash with the government?

[Answer] I do not recall having been in disagresaent on goals of a general nature.

I dealt with several governments. “they were all in agreement that Renault should
pursue an investnent policy capable of keeping it in the top rank of European pro-
ducers. The result of this policy was to bring about a substantial increase in

the value of that working tool known as Renault. It is true that the intensity

of the effort was such that not very great dividends were distributed to the state.
his is nor-a1. because the more investment there 's. the more liaited the obvious
profits. The fact nonetheless reasins that in the final accomt. you have a stronger
enterprise betwr able to survive a crisis.

[Question] Do you seen that a national enterprise can afford to sacrifice the present
for the future, or profit for investnent?

[Answer] I scan that certain enterprises have patrimonial manage-eat which leads
them to give priority to the dividends distributed. The fact is that this policy
works against invesnaent.

[Question] Wat is your nental picture of the ideal president and managing director?

[Answer] Re is a nan who knows how to accept his responsibilities. a sea of character
who does not hesitate to aake decisions. he is also a nan capable of choosing suitable
assistants and creating a tea. In some cases. as in the electronics sector. where
technological changes are extrenely frequent, such a nan must also have scientific
competence.

[Question] Hhat about bankers?

[Answer] Jacques Delors should answer that question. I will tell you only that

in France. the bankers have not always been able to keep up with the industrial

effort in terns of taking mediua- or long-tern teclnological risks. We have not

had bankers play as active a role as those in Ger-any. the United States and, naturally.
Japan. It is possible that things will change with the nationalisation. I as

not sure. there is a problem of customs and patterns of thinking in our country.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Hill the state behave. then. like an ordinary stockholder?

[Answer] Absolutely. The only difference is that it will be less greedy for i-ediate
dividends.

[Question] Hhat about the social level?

[Answer] Any technological change has consequences on the personal level. both
in terms of quantity and quality. The duty of a national enterprise is to foresee
these consequences long enough in advance to take the hunan factor into account.

I have always noticed that the trade union representatives want to be involved in
these future planning tasks. This increases their confidence in the enterprise
and its management. .

[Question] Is it easy to infer. wage camera that they say have to change employment
because of the development of techniques?

[Answer] No. it is not easy. However, it is less difficult to the extent that

it has been discussed in advance. I would add that I have never had any complaints
about the representatives of the wage earners on boards of directors. They are
always ready for discussions in depth on the strategy of the enterprise and they
have never been guilty of any leaks of conpany secrets.

[Question] Hhat is the relationship between a president and managing director of
a state enterprise with his board of directors?

[Answer] Wat is the relation in a private business?
[Question] That varies with the case.

[Answer] That is an excellent response! I would add in conclusion that the imple-
nentation ,of the nationalization. of which the principle has been accepted by the
constitutional council. should now proceed without a delay which would be harmful
to the enterprises themselves and to the economy of the country as a whole. It
should also be carried out at a cost which does not deprive the nation of a means
of getting the economy going again through the needed investments.

Jean-Maxine Leveque

[Question] .You have headed a private bank. the Credit Comercial de France. for

18 years. This bank is about to be nationalised. and you have never concealed your
hostility toward such a step. as well as toward nationalization in general. "hat
is it that you fear?

[Answer] I fear that the weight of the state may become too heavy in our country.
In France. the state already controls may activities: the army and the police.
that goes without saying. but also education. onerous counmnications nedia. the
najority of public services and a goodly number of enterprises in the coapetitivs
sector--Renau1t, ELF [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France]. Raves. etc. The
stage on which we are embarking will substantially aggravate this state of affairs
and raise the rial: of taking us from a free economy to a state economy.

1.8

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Do you think that state control will be imposed on the national enter-
prises in the sense that they will be deprived of any autonomy of management?

[Answer] In fact. I fear that nationalization will become state control.

[Question] my?

[Answer] Look at what is happening today where the appointment of the managers

of the enterprises to be nationalized is concerned. We are told that the president
of the republic himself will have the final say on the appointment of these managers.
Now. what is the president of the republic if not the head of the political authority?
Thus there is a danger of dependence. and this subordination will not stop in the
office of the managing director himself. It will spread throughout all of the
nationalized enterprises with all that scans in terns of conformity. acco-odation
and even obsequiousness.

[Question] Mr Dreyfus and his successors at Renault and Mr Chslandon at ELF never
needed to he obsequious. Why should that change?

[Answer] I do not question the competence of those men who are capable in fact.

to a certain extent. of resisting the wave inherent in the systen. But there is

at _the very least a contradiction between the very nationalization of enterprises

and the entirely theoretical statement that they should rennin independent and separated
from the state. My concern is that the state is increasingly taking charge of the
hench citizen. fron birth to death. that is to say from the school to the hospital.
including his professional life. Soon more than one out of every three wage earners
will have the state as his emloyer. In my view this is very dangerous. and sooner

or later. the political authority will tend to abuse its enormous power. Obviously.

I am not claiming that we are living under a coununist regine today. but I fear

that the merging of the political authority and the economic authority will inevitably
push- us in that direction.

[Question] Do you really believe that the socialists want to suppress freedom?

[Answer] I only believe that it is more fragile than they think. I also believe
that it is unhealthy to place too many powers in the heme hands: this leads to
temptation. I believe, finally, that the avowed purposes of the nationalisation.
those which have to do with industrial policy. could have been achieved without
this step. Nothing could have been easier for the government than to conclude con—
tracts with the private conpanies. The state can engage in activity without. how-
ever, having to become an owner. I would add that on the strictly economic and
financial levels. I am concerned at seeing so many investment programs dependent
on the state budget. It is absurd to deprive ourselves of capital contributions
the stockholders mi'ght nake. Right here. at the Credit Couercial de France. I
have seen that my stockholders have always gone along with me when I asked them
for nosey for develOpment programs.

[Question] Here the funds they entrusted to you greater than those you had distributed
to them in the form of share profits. i.e.. dividends?

[Answer] Yes.

19
YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] By much?

[Answer] I do not have the exact figures at hand but I would say approximately
twice as much. In any case. what does it matter? It was a continuous trend and
I never had difficulty persuading my stockholders of the need to move forward.

[Question] lhe fact nonetheless remains that in the past 10 years. the public sector
has invested much more than the private sector.

[Answer] That is a simplistic description of the situation. ‘ihe fact is that the
major infrastructure programs and funds are achinistered by the public enterprises.
The nuclear program, the telecommications program and the M necessarily require
heavy capital. But this means nothing. We are now entering into an era in which
more and more enterprises in the competitive sector will fall into the lap of the
state. You cannot persuade me that the management of these enterprises is not in
danger of becoming less rigorous. “men they will invest unwiser and in the wrong
directions and the weight of their extravagance will have to be borne by the tax-
payers.

[Question] And will there be such a difference in management? You yourself are
an inspector of f inance. have worked for the government, and your characteristics
do not seem to be basically different from those of a national enterprise manager.

[Answer] You forget that before becoming president of the Credit Conercial de
France. I worked in an organization for 12 years. and thus there was plenty of time
for me to be drawn in gradually. In addition. I am responsible to a board of direc-
tors and not to the government. This is. after all. different. I hope that my
successor will be no more tempted than I have been to court political power, and

I hope that he will show equal dedication to his business.

[Question] where the banks are concerned. the advocates of nationalization believe

that they have not done their job and have not shared sufficiently in industrial
risks. particularly where the young enterprises are concerned.

[Answer] It is true that in a country like France. risk capital is not abundant.
and a bank reflects the thinking of the majority of its depositors. To overcome
this handicap. we would not have needed nationalization. He could have utilized
flexible mechanisms involving guaranteed fmds as incentives for innovation.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse 8A

5157
080: 3100/312

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

POLITICAL ICELAND

MIR TMODDSKN mums POSITION 0“ No
311715105 London TEE mass in English 17 Feb 32 supplement on Iceland p 1
[Article by Denis Taylor: "A Big Little Country"l

[Excerpt] Icelandic politicians have developed the habit of being able to ride
out contradictory policies. This is not the first time the PA [People's Alliance]
has taken part in a govertnent not co-Iitted to closing down the NATO base at
Keflavik. near Reykjavik, which is operated by the United States.

Dr Thoroddsen told THE TIMES: "The People's Alliance has always been against our
subership of NATO and against the Keflavik base. But this goverrlent will follow
the sane foreign and defence policies as before. In Parliament the great majority
are for this policy. Our nei‘nobjectives in this govarnnent are fighting inflation
and ensuring full employment. We have had success with both these objectives."

The prime minister discussed his reasons for taking a rump of his party govern-cut
not just with the politically compatible progressives but with the previriusly un-
acceptable PA. Referring to the 2 nonths delay, he said that if Parliament was
unable to form a najority government, this could have led to the president appoint-
ing a non-parliamentary administration.

This would have been "a very great dishonour to Parliament. I thought it my duty
to for: this government so that the country could-have a parliamentary government,
but say party rejected my proposal." He said this had been a cause of great dis-
appointment to his. -

Outside. the cynical argument is heard that after'a lifetime in politics. Dr
Thoroddsen, an unsuccessful candidate for the presidency in 1968, was set on bacon-
ing prime ninister,_with this probably the last chnace. Nevertheless. the exper-

ience of the break with most of his colleagues for someone who has been in the
Independence Party for 50 years, seems to have saddened him.

oomrcur: Tiles Newspapers Limited. 1982
cso: ‘3120/43

-FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
MWLUSEONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

ussa accuses or 11mm: 311mm PSIUP
Milan PM in Italian 1 Feb 82 p ‘3
[Article by Filippo Ceccsrelli: "aoscow Sent Us the Rubles, and We..."]

[Text] And now? "Now I an afraid that a book written 6 months ago for the pur-
pose of making people think will. instead, give rise to controversy and exploi-
tationa on one side or the other. But I cannot do anything about it. I don't
like the fact that it is coming out while there is so much talk about interna-
tional interrelationships among terrorists. But let us_discuss it quietly, all
the sane." Silvano Hiniati, a Tuscan trade unionist who once was a sober of
the P810? [Italian Socialist Party of Proletarian Unity] and then of the PW?
[Proletarian Unity Party] and now is a nelher of the national executive body of
the UH. [Italian Union of Labor]. is worried about the effect the 272 pages of
his "Pam, 1966-1972, Vita e Horte di un Partito" [The PSIUP, 1966-1972, the
Life and Death of a Party] (published by Edi-ea) eight have. The book is a
stall history of the political group founded by'Lelio Basso and Vittorio Poe,
Tullio Vecchietti and Dario Valori (the last two are PCI neabers of Parlianent

now).

In his book, and not only in the chapter entitled "The Decisive Question of Pi-
nancing", Miniati wrote, in so many words, that the PSIUP--the socialist leftist
party which merged from the PSI of Pietro Nenni in 1966 in a dispute with the

center left—was assisted financially at first and then almost held prisoner by

Moscow.

Hiniati naintains that the experiment with a new party was also destined to fail
in an abrupt manner because, in his words, "Financing was of decisive importance
in influencing the fornation of the group of national leaders and determining
the relationship between tho and the rest of the 2810?, and especially those
on the periphery of the party. And then. at least starting with the spring of
1968, it was of decisive inportance in eeerting a great deal of influence on

the party's political line," he says.

PARORAHA said: "In short. Hr. Hiniati, you are saying that the USSR had a party
of its own in Italy for 8 years." _

Hiniati replied: "In 196k, the CPSUnthat is, the USSRuainply took note of the
fact that, whereas it had always had extraely close relations with the left

22
I
mmmmy
soaomaatmsomv

wing of the PSI, there was not going to be any left wing in Nenni's party. The
P811)? was born as an independent choice by the socialist left. But the new
party had such a need for financial aid that it alnost autonatically threw it-

self into the arms of those who provided it: the USSR and the satellite nations.
But it was not a case of unselfish political solidarity with than, as my peo-
ple thought."

"But where were you then?" he was asked.

"In the PSIUP," he answered, "as a leader in Tuscany, and then a ate-her of the
board of directors."

"And you didn't notice anything?" he was asked.

"Those were other times." he replied. "Struggles were increasing in the factor-
ies and there was a very strong drive against the center left. I was not against
the idea of international solidarity, perhaps because I was activated. like many

young people, by the naive idea that who gives you the money is not as important
as how you spend it."

"But was it talked about in the party?" he was asked.

"Especially in the corridors." he answered. "Right from the start,.in fact. the
group of national leaders of the PSIUP decided unanimously that problems of £1-
nancing should not be subjected to group discussion. While one group of leaders
was in power. an absolute fiduciary nandate was given to the secretary, Vecchi-
etti, for obtaining money. No genuine collective check was every Iade on who
was responsible for how it was used."

"Any nobody said anything?" he was asked.

"Pccasionally, some leader would show concern over the loss of independence
which night result for the PSIUP from international solidarity with the USSR
and its satellite nations." he said. "I recall that Lelio Basso often asserted
that some conrades were being eaneuvered by Moscow."

"But did the PSIUP cost a good deal?" he was asked.

"The new party began to function inediately. There were 120,000 members. 101
confederations, 2,900 sections and approximately 500 functionaries. The basic
expenses involved in getting started as a new party exceeded 500 million of the
ﬁre of that time. Between electoral canpaigns and contributions to people on
the periphery and to newspapers,- the PSIUP's expenses were more than 2 billion
lire in the first year of its existence. Funds the party raised itself did not
exceed 150 nillion lire," he replied.

"And was influence exerted?" he was asked.

"It was," he answered, "but the party retained a certain amount of independence
until 1968. Indeed. the PSIUP seamed critical positions toward the CPSO on
Chinese developments and on the various struggling memento in Africa and South
America."

23
”WNW?
FOR omau. USE ONLY

"And then?"

"The turning point, or the mouent when the infernal nechanisn which moved the
PSIUP toward the outright loss of its independence went off, arrived after the
invasion of Czechoslovakia. On that occasion, the to: leadership of the party
approved a resolution which was almost ridiculous. Fran that moment on, anyone
who took a critical attitude (almost 40 percent of the nabership) was inedi-
ately accused of antisovietisn and trying to wreck the party. In private, the
members of the secretariat were very harsh in their judgments of the USSR, but
they changed their tone radically in public usetings and official resolutions.
Not only that, but, in the following weeks. the PSIUP's position was used to
blackmail the PCI, which had condaaned Moscow's 'blitz."'

"Blachail in what sense?" he was asked.

"There was quiet but insistent talk of the possibility that a group consisting
of PCI cadres would join the PSIUP, to put pressure on the Col-mists in one
way or another. However, it is certain that the subjection of the P810? began

to assume a grotesque quality. beginning in 1968, and that situation continued
until 1972," he said.

"That is, until the P510? did not succeed in obtaining a ninim number of par-
liamentary deputies," PANORAHA relarked.

"Yes," he replied. "That spring a congress was convoked which confined the
end of the PSIUP experiment. Many people entered the PCI, some entered the ,PSI
and others, like me, were left behind. Enrico Berlinguer spoke at that con-
gress, and I still rel-saber a singular lapse which occurred in his speech.
'This breakup and this merger which we desired and you accepted.’ he said. A
few seconds passed, and then Berlinguer corrected hinself: 'Pardon ne,‘ he
said, 'which you desired and we accepted. '"

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnoldo Mondaclori Editors S.p.A. Milsno

9258
080 : 31010/ 112

2b
we omcm. [BE ONLY
MOMGALUSEONLY

pouncu. mu

mmlzurm or can. stcmnnr
1411“:me inltalian 22Jan82p23
(Article: "Geography Cuts the Carnations”]

[Test] There are 12 can. secretaries. but six .of then are lore so than the others.
For two of then. Luciano Lens and Agostino Harianetti. this is not news. Valued
shove the other directors of the confederation. they have always seen their actions
confined by the secretariat. The new elenent. therefore. lies elsewhere: these
two generals have been assigned troops and operational powers they have not hitherto
had. Consequently. they now exercise direct control over the confederation's inter—
national policies (previously entrusted to Giacinto liilitello). the mu center of
studies (formerly under the political direction of Bruno Trentin). the press office.
and the office of the secretariat. until the last congress the responsibility of
Confederal Secretary Aldo Giunti. The future investiture for the rensining four
supersecretaries has apparently not yet been decided. nevertheless the suspicions
they have been harboring are well founded: the con. secretariat's new structure

is separated into departments for the purpose of guaranteeing then. so it is being
said. minus participation in decisioneeking. There is no doubt. however. that.

to' take an mnple. in the depart-ant of ”negotiating and productive sectors."
entrusted to Sergio Garavini. Giacinto Militello. end Fausto Vigevani. no ieportant
decision can be taken without the approval of Garsvini. who thus becones virtually
its chief.

Silvano Verzelli is the nest prestigious unionist in the Depart-ant of the South
and Social Problems. which he leads together with Annalola Geirola and Donatelle
rurtura. Lastly. lnso Cerenigna cannot fail to validate his experience. which
surpasses that of nee-Secretary Gianfranco Rastrelli. with when he shares responsi-r
bility for the organizational sector.

But the nest conplicated problem is the matter of naning the executive co—ittee.
This is a new organist which is neent to stand above the secretariat but below the
cousittee of directors and the general council—4n short. a sort of political
office consisting of 40 persons selected fron among the outstanding exponents in
the categories and regional structures. who would. in effect. direct the confedera-
tion. But the question is this: since designations are made on the basis of
categories and territorial structures. the socialists would be under-represented in
ratio to their quota established in the congress (33 percent). giving the advantage
to the cos-mists. with a quota of 60 percent higher than their representation.

COPYRIGHT: 1!. mo _1982'
9653 25

680: 3104/100
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pouncu. SPAIN

CARRILID STRORGLY 03113101238 CPSU'S STANCE WARD P03, P01
Milan PAROBAHA in Italian 15 Feb 82 pp 36, 36

[Interview of Santiago Carrillo, secretary general of the Spanish Cot-mist Party,
by Bruno Crini. Date and place not specified]

[Text] It must he docile and tow the line. No letter if it is
very small. Thus, according to the secretary of the Spanish Con-
nunist Party. a Soviet-line splitoff in Italy is certain.

[Text] The Spanish Cos-mist Party. of all the Mist parties that have criti-
cized the Kremlin's political line. was the first to be counterattacked by the So-
viets; in concrete term, this brought about a secession by slenents smathetic to
the USSR. PANORAHA interviewed Santiago Carillo, secretary general of the Spanish
(Io-mist Party. . -

Question: What is your opinion about the reaction of PRAVDA to the position taken
on Poland by the PCI?

Answer: It appears that the USSR is trying to bring about in Italy what is has at-
teapted to bring about in Spainwthat ie, a splitup and the creation of a Soviet-
lins Communist Party.

Question: But why didn't the PCB take a stand on the Soviet attitude towards the
PCI?

Answer: I don't think that the PCB leadership needed to take an officially criti-
cal position. In this, we followed the lead of the PCI, which expressed its opin-
ions through the colms of L'UNITA. Our party organ, "Hundo Obrero." published an
editorial condemning the Soviet nethod. This editorial, which was widely discussed
by the party leadership. represents. in sale way, an official stand.

Question: Aside fro- the editorial in "blonds Obrero," what is your opinion on the
excousunication of the PCI?

Answer: I would like to make two observations: 1) PRAVDA linited itself to con-
demning the PCI without publishing the stand taken by this party concerning the
events in Poland. 2) .PRAVDA did not evaluate these events.

Question: Siaple observations on method?

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DORIOFIWCJAI.USEGDNLY

Answer: No, the substance is elsewhere. PRAVDA excommunicated the PCI because it
could not admit that a communist party would analyze the reasons that have brought
about a military coup in a country. like Poland, where power, at least theoretically.
is in the hands of a Marxist party.

Question: Aren't there other fundamental problems which brought about the Soviet
reaction?

Answer: Yes-the fact of having questioned the political and economic system of

the USSR and the countries which imitated it or on which its power structure was
imposed. The fact, moreover, of having brought to light the necessity for a demo-
cratic renewal of the structures in these cities. To say it clearly: the so-called

"democracy of and for the people" does not exist in the Soviet Union or in East
Europe.

Question: In your opinion, is PRAVDA's a real excommunication?

Answer: If you think that the international coammnist movement is considered by
the USSR as a sort of church, it seems to me that the position taken by PRAVDA can
be interpreted only as an irrevocable excommunication. Certainly. if the PCI back-
ed down, the excommunication would take on the significance of a warning.

Question: Do you think that the P01 is willing to back down?
Answer: I think not. I hope not.

Question: Is the position taken by the PCB on the Polish events, in your opinion,
very similar to that of the PCI?

Answer: The differences. in any case, are not significant. Perhaps we have placed
greater emphasis on the abyss existing between the hopes brought about by the Octo-
ber Revolution and the present reality in the Soviet Union and in the East European
countries.

Question: Do you think that the experience of 1917 was a positive one?

Answer: Yes, because it set off a phase of great changes in the capitalistic struc-
tures of the world.

Question: And what do you think about the behaviour of the French Communist Party?

Answer: Quite simply, I think that the PCP, on the ideological and political plane,
didn't want to follow to canclusion the obvious consequences that came about after
Jaruzelski's coup.

Question: All considered, very little is left of Burocommunism.

Answer: I believe that the so-called Eurocommunism was the logical evolution of
the ideas defended by some European Communist parties: autonomy, independence,
democracy, internal debate, unification of progressive forces, the necessity for a

2?
son omcm. use oniv
FOR1OFFﬂJAl.USEIONl¥

new international interrelationship. Certainly, few of us remain to defend this
type of ideology, at least in Europe. I think it is important to remenber, how-
ever, that other communist parties, in Japan, for example, and in some Latin Ameri-
can countries, have followed the lead marked out by the PCB and the PCI.

Question: "hat common elements do you see in the choices of these parties?
Answer: Essentially, the fact that they operate in developed countries.

Question: The PCB is going through a very serious crisis. “her are the reasons
for this situation?

Answer: At present, as far as the results are concerned, one sees, as I have al-
ready mentioned. the attempt to create, here, a Soviet-line communist party.

Question: And the origins of the crisis?

Answer: They lie in the 40 years of clsndeatineness of the PCB. In the image that
in these 40 years, Spanish culture has created of the USSR.

Question: But the party has also been abandoned by many intellectuals of the so-
called "renovadora" current, which up to the recent past have sustained the line
you represent.

Answer: I acknowledge that some of these "renovadores" have worked with me, have
elaborated upon the theoretical principles that now characterize the PCB. But this
does not justify their fractionalist behaviour.

Question: In any case, the "renovadores" are not the originators of the attempt to
create a Soviet-line PCB.

Answer: Their sympathies, rather, tend towards elements to the right of the PCB.

Question: At present, what are the possibilities for the USSR to promote the cre-
ation of a Soviet-line Columnist Party in Spain?

Answer: They're fairly realistic, if this attempt comes about in the sectors con-
ditioned, as stated, by ‘0 years of clandestineness, and which have not been able
to adapt to the new sociological and political realities. Perhaps because the PCB
has not been able to explain these new realities clearly enough.

Question: If the attempts by the USSR to create Soviet-line communist parties in
Spain, Italy and perhaps elsewhere actually take form, won't a situation comparable
to that of the Third Internationale be created, in which the PCUS dictated its law
to all the communist parties of the "church"?

Answer: The USSR cannot allow itself to return to a situation like that of the
Third Internationale, if only because the world situation is completely different
from those times. "hat the Soviet Union wants instead, is a situation comparable
to 1966-68, when the western communist parties were under its sphere of influence,
even if they were not part of a reel internationsle.

28
[WHICHHHCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

Question: Hith what sin?

Answer: These col-unist parties should in all cases and at all tines sustain Soviet
positions.

Question: But in countries like Spain and Italy, the ettelpts by the "88!! risk re-

sultins 'in the creation of col-unist parties which are certainly Soviet-line but
have little influence.

Answer: It's tine to understand that the Soviet Union doesn't care about strong

con-mist parties in the Western countries. Hoskov vents, shove all, the co-unist
parties to be docile and obedient.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Arnaldo Hondsdore lditore s‘.p.A. nilano

9941
080: 3105/122

29
m omcw. use ONLY
FOIOFI'ICIALMONLY

cm ITALY

RESTRICTD 'WHITB PAPER' 03 P2 “SONIC TRIAL
Milan n. nonno in Italian 22 Jan 82 p 20
[Article by Gianni Bossi: "Gelli Votes with a White Paper"]

[Text] It's Gelli's first white paper. It was sent, anonyaously and in a pack-
age narlted "personal", like a Christmas present, to the sheet 550 venerable
nasters. or lodge heads, of the Great Orient of Italy. It is a dossier on the
Masonic trial of Licio Gelli, head of the P2, held at Giustiniani Palace in none
on 31 October 1981. The verdict was expulsion from the Italian and international
Masonic order of the much sought-after venerable Master of Aresro. The white
paper contains lZpages and 2 photocopies, all nicely bound. One of the photo-
copies is of an article free the weekly nagszine n'waorm of 14 Decenber 1981
about a probable agre‘enent between Gelli's supporters and the head of the Masonic
tribunal. the republican Amanda Corona. The other is_ the low exhortation of
the brother writer Rudyard Kipling entitled "If. ..". The white paper was sent
by a phanto- "Coordination" of the constituent groups; "Alliance. Masonic re-
newal". Giustiniani Palace Defense Group". "Deaocratic Masonry". Most of the
packages were sent free the province of Rovers. iron the central railroad sta-
tion of Bologna, and iron Sicily.

But within the Masonic order. there are no doubts. Various historians opposed
to Gelli told u. muno that "The copies of the dossier were printed and nailed
by the friends Gelli still has within the order, so as to prepare the already
overheated atmosphere for the internal election canpaign." The maneuver resen-
blea Gelli's of the spring and winter of 1976/75, when his lodge was dissolved
and he was disgraced. But, at that time, Gelli and his "Coordination of ven-
erable aesters" (that is how he signed the dossier) had the support and enpli-i
fication of the 0p agency of Mine Pecorelli (who is also on the P2 lists).

What is in the white paper on the Masonic trial of brother Licio Gelli‘! n.
norm is in a position to reveal its contents. Basically. it is an accusation.
full of veiled threats, against the republican Arnando Corona and everyone who
"dared" judge and expell Gelli. Furthermore, for the first tine, it reveals
what went on behind the scenes of the trial and implicates people at the top of
Giustiniani Palace (including General Bnnio Battelli, presently great naster of
the Great Orient of Italy) as guilty along with Gelli. According to the anony-
nous author of the white paper, "Gelli was conduned to expulsion while the real
guilty parties went free. He lust agree, at least for the naent, on a funda-
mental point: this trial was and is too serious a sector, given its objectives

30
MWWONLY
MWUSIONLY

and content. to he dropped after hurridly expelling brother Licio Gelli. with-.

out considering and understanding the reasons for the acts he is accused of. if
he ever emitted the-HI".

The question is raised in the Gelli dossier as to why the great neeter Bnnio
Bettelli wee not accused by the Haeonic Order too. since Gelli continued with
his intrigues under Bettelli. After listing all the procedural objections made
by the defense on behalf of the head of the P2 (5. plus 17 failures to conply
with the proper procedure, to the detrinent of the defense). the author claims
the right to ”Enter the races of the Pelace to find out how Masonic authority
was adainietered". Before "the cont-poreriee of Gelli" prove themselves free
of all responsibility.

Finally, there is a plea to brother Arnando Corona. president of the Central
Masonic Court, "To have the juridical and lissonic courage to send the sentence ~
back to the court which conduned Gelli, asking it to carry out a suppleaentery
investigation end reopen the triel now. in Decuber 1981, not in April 1982".
when the new great pester at the 15,000 Italian Masons will have been elected.
The Gelli white paper has cone out at a delicate tile for the protagonists of
the internal election canpaisn (so far three slates of candidates have been
drawn up, heeded by Amado Corona. Augusto De Hesniue nell indietrialist
from Perugia with neo-faaciet ideas-and Giulio hereon. a socialist, secretary
general of Anpi, the association of Italian partisans). At Giustiniani Palace.
they are apprehensively further aweitins even nore alaning ions of hlschail
from the head of the 92. There is already talk of a second, nore explosive
dossier correlated with a list of 300 nsnss, so far kept secret.

COPYRIGHT: II. MNDO 1982

9855‘
cs0: 3104/103 END

MWMMY