ma OMCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1D509

12 May 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPIS publications contain infor-tion pri-rily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. asterials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and laterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the iirst line of each ita, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was su-srised or extracted.

Unhailiar nsnes rendered phonetically o: transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. ‘ri-es vithin ituss are as
given by source.

line contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COMIC?! HHS AND REGULATIONS mum; WHIP 0?
mmms REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE m1 DISSEKINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIO“ BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN "ERICA REPORT

comm sac'nm
INTER-AMIGA" AFFAIRS

Bolivian: Voice Protest Against 0.3. Position on Falklands
(Germo mate; Smn’ ”Apr 82) .OIOOOOOOOOOOOIOO

Bolivian Publication Cites 0.8. Pressure at 0A8
(8mm, 3” 82) O...0......0................OI....

ARGENTINA

Journalist on Early Press Prediction of Falkland Crisis
(Jesus 18193183 Roaco; m m, 27 Aw 82)....0000000

BERN]!

Briefs
Balanced Budget

BRAZIL

Imediate UN Intervention in Falklands Conflict Urged
(8mm, 1 H” 82,00...0.0.0.000...OOQOOOOOCOOOOOOOOO

Itanaraty Opposes 11.5. Sanctions on Argentina
(SMTI, 1 my 82)....0O..000000000000000.0.0.0000...

Foreign Hinister ‘l'o Brief Senate on Falklands
(s‘mn’ 3W 82)....0000000000000000000.000.000.00.

Briefs
Officer: on 0.5. Heasures

-a- [III-LA-144

mo “Fahd! I!“ (‘va
roe OFFICIAL USE WLY

CUBA

Effects of Falkland Crisis on Argentine Bconoqy Viewed
(Alberto Rabi-10th; m, 21 ‘pl' 82)....ooooooaooocooo

"maligned Cultural Meeting Set for 26 April
(Victoria ﬂ. 0051mm, 21; Apr 82)...................

Hontane Says llation Ready To Fight or Negotiate
(MIA, 29 Apr 82) .OOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.0.0.0...

DOENICA

Briefs
French Grant

GRENADA

33 Countries at Anniversary Pete; Hilitary Harbor Denied
(LATE mm MIG”. woman, 26 Har 82)..

NICARAGUA

Briefs
Radio, TV Agreement Hith Cuba

PM! OFFICIAL USE (NIX
”WISCONLY

COUNTRY SECTION mas-mm AFFAIRS

BOLIVIANS VOICE PROTEST AGAINST 0.8. POSITIW 0N Fm

1057 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 1951 GMT 30 Apr 82
[Article by Gerardo lrusta]

[Text] La Par. 30 Apr (SAPOIurIb-Voices of protest increased today in
Bolivia agath the United States for its position of alliance with Great
Britain and against the Argentine interests.

Ilarsh criticisa in this regard was issued by Bolivian politicians who closely
follow the events in the South Atlantic.

”Now we know that Latin Anerica neans nothing for the United States except
that we are only used to provide it with raw saterial and cheap nanpower.
Its position of alliance with Great Britain has put things in their place.
The Latin Aserican brotherhood is different fros the prenned Anerican
brotherhood which the United States has pretended so far," an outstanding
politician told this correspondent counting on the latest news coning
froa Washington.

This occasion is also appropriate to indicate that "the Latin American
countries have interests opposed to the interests of the United States."

Local co-entators added that "at the hour of truth, the United States stops
being our friend to ally itself with those who are its real brothers. the
nenbers of NATO."

They added that "what we oust see clearly now behind the ".8. position is
that the struggle of the Argentine people essentially leans the struggle
of the peoples who do not want to be subnitted to any degree of dependency
or slavery based on neocolonialiss. The United States is as imperialist
as Great Britain which does not hesitate to attack our Argentine brother.”

Columnist Gustavo Zubieta Castillo in an article published today states
that "Latin Anerica can no longer allow colonialisl in this century."

He predicts that "Great Britain will lose the battle and this encouragement
will unite all A-erics mking it a worthy. sovereign and respected continent."

“WWONLY
”MUSEONLY

‘l‘he Peruvian position expressed through its Foreign Minister Arias Stella
is also considered "correct.” and "that interpretation Inst have an i-ediate
echo with an answer of perpetrations for war on the whole continent in case

of aggression against Argentina.”

The columnist adds that "Darwin hinself would think that the only persons
who have not developed are his fellow British citizens.”

680: 3010/ 1397
BOLIVIAN PUBLICAIIOﬂ CITES 0.8. PRESSURE AT OAS
PYObObbl Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 2115 GMT 3 May 82

[Text] La Paz, 3 May (SAPORITI)-A publication today reported that 0.5.
ambassador to Bolivia Edwin Corr used pressure on the Bolivian Foreign
Ministry to prevent Bolivian support for its sister nation Argentina at
the OAS from becoming lore radical.

The publication SOBERANIA, the nost aggressive defender of Latin Aserican
Integrity, said in today's issue that "it is able to assure that the speech
of Foreign Minister Gonzalo Romero Alvarez Garcia had to be watered down
due to pressure from 0.8. Ambassador Edwin Corr."

The publication added that "although Bolivia sorally supported Argentina
at the start of the conflict. this support did not become more radical at
the OAS as it should have been after the British assault on the Georgias.
It is not yet possible to find out how nany other speeches were changed
due to 0.8. pressure.”

SOBERANIA is directed by journalist Andres 80112 Beds Y Copper and journa-
lists Roberto Cuevas, Eduardo Pa: and Guillerlo Hoscoso.

The publication also says that "there is now the conviction that Latin
America cannot expect extracontinental solutions to resolve its basic
problems and that. on the contrary, it will only find the source of its
nutononoue develop-en: in its growing economic and political integration."

It also says that "whatever the result of the Halvinas conflict. it is
obvious that Latin America will never be what it used to be. Overblown

propaganda will never again convince anyone of alleged 'colmon interests'
between North America and Central and South America."

C80: 3010/1397

IND! OIIICIAI.IEI!(N'LY
F0. OFﬂClAI. USE ONLY

COUNTRY SWIG)! momma

300mm on um mass mrcnou or PM cusrs
M71457 London m was in English 27 Apr 82 p 12

[Article by Jean Iglesias louco: "th Argentina's Generals heed the Falk-
lands")

[Text] Buenos Aims—Seldom can a "secret” military operation, such as Argen-
tina's invasion of the Falklands have been so repeatedly predicted in the press.
The Argentine Government's intentions, and the reasons behind them, first
appeared in my political con-I in the Buenos Airee newspaper u “SA in
January.

A few weeks later, when talks began in New York, the Argentine foreign nin-
ister. Hr Costa Render, expressly said that if Britain refmed to recognize
Argentine sovereignty, Argentina would resort to "other mthods”. This clear-
ly spelt out the possibility of nilitary intervention.

General Galtieri and other “are of the goveruent also privately warned
aelbers of the 0.8. Governnent, so. of whoa, we understand, were sensitive
to Argentina's activation.

As Hr Reagan admitted, the troxble was that nobody-not the Soviet Union.
least of all the British Foreign Office—believed that Argentina would fulfill
its stated intention.

This explains, in part, London's overrearztion to a nilitary action planned-
perhaps miquely in history-4n such a way as not to harm or danage the enemy's
nen and material in any way, a in fact happened, at a cost of several Argen-
tine lives. Hist do the_islands represent to Argentina?

Hhitehall claims that the recovery of the islands by Argentina is merely an
expression of the military government's wish to consolidate its an: position.
True enough, the govern-eat has been affected by social unrest and a collapsing

economy.

Perhaps certain sectors in govern-ant may have seen in this affair a way of
staying in power, but the government also knew that the possibilities of total
success, of obtaining scathing note than recognition of sovereignty, were a
few indeed, and that in consequence the operation would do little toward their
continued survival.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, if one wishes to explain their decision in term of sheer
egotism, perhaps one could say they tried to avoid something worse, like a
war with Chile over the southern territories, or a process of increasing ten-
sion with the Vatican, Chile and the United States over the Beagle Channel
issue, to an unbearable degree. Because such a war or such tensions would--

it is convenient to bear this in mind-not only endanger the generals' person-
al interests, but also endanger Argentina's territorial integrity to a greater
extent than the present conflict.

Because this is, in a nutshell, the basic objective behind the i-ediate re-
covery of the islands. This is also why the government decision is backed by
people who, like myself, have been for years openly and firmly critical of the
military government's performance, or lack of performance, particularly in
respect of human rights.

If Argentina, the connntry which together with South Africa owns the largest
South Atlantic coastline, cannot dispose right away of a strategic platform
enabling it to participate—we stress, participate—to a certain extent in
the region througn which nuch of the West's foodstuffs and power supplies have
to go, or to put it another way, a presence in the Buro-Anerican defence _
Inechanism against Soviet penetration—and just by the South Pole and Antarctica
-it would soon lose its southern territories.

For Argentina, this is irportant enough to justify its encounter with Britain.
The alternative would be a Inuch longer and much bloodier war with Chile, or
with Chile plus Brazil. This could happen before very long and could con-
ceivably mean the end of Argentina as an independent state, or at least its
definitive international isolation and its exclusion from an area which is
indispensdnle to the development of the human race in the next century.

If London doesn't see things that way, it will never be able to evaluate the
real significance of its conflict with Argentina, nor how ready this country
is to fight. Nor will it be able to evaluate the cost of beating Argentina,
even if it can do it, which is not at all certain.

Naturally, none of these considerations about Argentina's needs would be
valid without the backing of international law. However, the islands were
part of the Spanish ewire which Argentina inherited after its war of inde-
pendence. So much so that in 1833, when Britain occupied the territory by
force, there was a Buenos Aires-based administration operating there. From
that moment, and sore insistently after the beginning of this century,
Argentina has been demanding from Britain the return of this part of its
sovereignty.

The islands, only 1000 miles from Argentina's coastline, are a geographical
continuation of continental Argentina. Thus history and geography give
Argentina a right that can be third by no other nation, either South
American or European.

This is why in 1966 the United Natiom ordered London and Buenos Aires to
negotiate the "decolonization" of the islands. Great Britain, which can only

FOR omcnan. USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

invoke the obsolete rignt of conquest, claim, however, that the alleged
rights of the "Kelpers" or islanders, are predo-inant. ”ever, this is
against the letter and spirit of United Nations resolution 2065, as Britain
invokes not the ”interests" of those settlers but their "wishes." But the
resolution refers to ”interests."

Has in fact now even Britain recognized that without the loustic and econonic
support of Argentina the "Kelpers" would not be dnle to support tinnelves?

The solution to all this is easy to find in the frauvork of Argentine never-
eignty and the defence of the individual, cultural and econonic ridnts of
those 3003ritish families. There are 17,000 British nationals, plus about
100,000 of their descendants, living in Argentina. They are, in a sense, the
people best fitted to bear witness that this country is far nore than just a
transitory ailitary government.

Nor should unfortunate historical circn-tances hide the fact that this coun-
try is one of Latin America's nost outstanding nsnifestations of the best
European traditions and culture, including the British way of life.

We appeal to the practical and realistic sense of law and international
responsibility of the British people and their leaders, and their profound
comrehension of world events, for the. to halt a war which we consider to
be not only absurd but also unfair.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Linited, 1982

cso: 30201106

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W SWIG“ MA

was

mam amen-m gown-eat has announced a balanced budgat of US$155-

for this you. Finance lining: David Gibbons has said, however, that the fate
of the local scone-y will depend on a revival of toutin. The min: of visi-
tors to the island £011 by 12 per cent in 1981, when that. was a min of
strikes. [Iondon LATIN AMERICA mzom REPORTS-438nm in $391183) 26 Mar

82 p 3]
COPYRIGHT: LA?!“ MICK mom REPORTS, 1982

cso: 3025/236

7
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOI(lﬂﬂ(1Al.US£(HNlY

COUNTRY SECTION BRAZIL

tHHEDIAI! UN INTERVENTION IN PNLKLANDS CONFLICT UBGBD
PYOIZISS Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 1840 GMT 1 Nay 82

[Text] Brasilia, l Nay (SAPORITI)-Itanaraty spokes-an Bernardo Pericaa
has urgently suanoned the nedia to state that ”Brazil agrees with those who
have declared that the attack against the Nalvinas Islands, carried out

by England today, represents a violation of Resolution No 502 of the UN
Security Council and reiterated the Brazilian purpose to pursuing its
efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to the crisis," stating that "it

is urgent that the United Nations react without delay in order to achieve
the application of that resolution."

Therefore, the Brazilian Governnent today called for UN intervention to
secure peace in the South Atlantic, rejecting the unilateral adoption of
sanctions against Argentina, such as that by the United States.

The spokesman reported that Raniro Saraiva Guerreiro, Brazilian foreign
sinister, today sent a nessage to Javier Perez de Cuellar, UN secretary
general, requesting the intervention of that international organisation
in order to preserve peace in the South Atlantic.

He added that ”it is the UN'a responsibility to adopt urgent, effective
and even preventive measures," in order to secure decisions which will
lead to peace.

CSO: 3010/1066

FOI:OIINCJA1.IEI!(INL!
mammuaouur

COUNTRY SBC'I'IGI BRAZIL

ITAHARATY OPPOSBS 0.8. SANCTIONS on mm
PYOllth Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 11015 cm 1 May 82

[Text] Brasilia. l Hay (SAPORITI)-Brasilian Foreign Ministry spokes-an
Bernardo Pericas has said that Brazil is against the neasures adopted by
the United States against Argentina in the nilitary and econonic fields.

Pericas said: "Brazil has a clear, well-defined position on unilaterally
adopted econonic sanctions. It has already naintained this position at
the Latin Merican Integration Association (MIA) and at the suit of the
European Bcononic Cos-mity in Brussels."

He added: "We have again naintained the sane position at the OAS consulta-
tive neeting held in Hashington. On all these occasions Brazil has con-
demned the BBC econonic sanctions against Argentina."

Asked whether he believed the 0.8. position would lead to a north-south
confrontation. Pericas said: "Although that is a valid question. I will
not content on its now because canenting on it would not help at all at
this juncture."

Pericas said the latest events will not cause any changes to the agenda of
President Pigueiredo's 11 Hay visit to Washington.

CSO: 3010/ 1066

summon“
mmmduu

COUNTRY SBCTIW BRAZIL

FOREIGN MINISTER 1'0 BRIEF SENATE 0“ PM
PY032159 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 2045 Gift 3 May 82

[Text] Brasilia, 3 May (SAPORITI)-This week Brazilian Foreign Hinister
Ramiro Ssraiva Guerreiro should appear before the senate to disclose the
Brazilian stance regarding the crisis over the Kelvin“.

Jarhas Passarinho disclosed the information on the senste's request and
added that so far it has not been decided whether Minister Saraiva Guerreiro
will nake his statenents in an open or closed-door session.

Talking during a previous nesting of the Brazilian chalher of deputies
which is trying to establish as "the order of the day" discussions of the
"Halvinas var" Magnus Guinaraes, leader of the Workers Delocrstic Party
bloc of this chamber. did not hesitate in condening Great Britain.

Ile stated: ”Re are facing a typical colonialist attitude. of a country
which disregards the history of husanity and, what is even sadder still
closes its eyes to its own and visible senile decline."

He ended by stating that: "The truth is that the Halvinas war is a war
of the rich of the North against the poor of the South, a typical denou-
stration of the lack of ability, intelligence and dignity of colonialist."

680: 3010/1066

10 -
summon“
”WWW!”

CWN'I'IY src'non BRAZIL

BRIEFS

OFFICBRS on 0.5. HEASURI-d'ha 11.8. decision to iqoee sanctions on Argentina
has hit the nationalist feelinga of Brazilian nilitary officers. .vho had had
reservations about the procedure utilised by Artentina to recover the
Halvinna Islands. M generals repudiated the 0.8. neaaurae uhich they
regarded as being of an aninmtly political nature and expressed fears that
they light touch off e wave of anti-Aurican feelings throughout the conti-
nent. The Brazilian officers voiced their disappointlent over the white
house neasures hecauae the traditional Anerican friend and partner has used
an option and has nade it clear that Europe and NATO are far lore inportant
than the South Atlantic countries. [Text] (”011612 Buenos Airea 8003111:
in Spanish 1341 M 1 May 82]

080: 3010/ 1066

11
”MEMO!!!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

MOFFWDCRISISWANWWVM

PA220418 Havana PRELA in English 22‘9 GI! 21 Apr 82
[By Alberto labilotta]

[Text] liontreal. 22 Apr (PU—Apart fro. the ailitary threat. hondon and

ite allies are waging ecomnic. co-ercial and financial aggreeeion on Argen-
tine with the intention of obtaining oonceeeione fro. the military (mutant
of the South A-rican country.

While Britain eent ite flotilla to the South Atlantic and hardened ita poei-
tione to reduce the lamina for peaceful negotiations, it conducta naneuvera
aimed at ruining Argentina's eeonoq and finance with the evident ail of leav-
in; no way out for the Buenoe Airea Govern-ant.

BUSINESS um marine epeaka of the likelihood of e "Initial: blockade of the
Plate River” which already broudnt doubte on grain exporte, Argentina'e
Iain eource of foreign trade incone.

At the can tine a "climate of panic ha been created on the exchange narkete
which have not billione of peaoe into nearby Uruguay and increued intereet
rates to the akiee,” eaye BUSINESS ﬂux.

The 0.8. financiere. who to Judge true the repotta. appear ready to aupport
the economic aureaeion, say that Argentina'e budget deficit will be three
to four percent of the GNP beceuae of the llalvinaa criaia and the unitary

effort.

It is etreaaed at the eaae tine that the Argentine eeonouy ie ill prepared to
withetand such a heavy burden. “came of the tidlt policiea of the Iinieter

of econoey. induetry is running at Juet 55 percent of its capacity, the private
sector ie heavily in debt and why-eat tape 13 percent while mdereqloy-
nent ia about 1.0 percent.

In the financial upect the Argentine Govern-at luet neat, along with the
private eectore, obligation of $7.2 billion in 1982 in eervicing of the
foreign debt. placed at $32 billion. while the total value of exporte ie
placed at $9 billion for the year.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In that regard london is trying to prevent luenos Aires fro. obtaining the
suns to aeet its financial obligation with the threat of a blockade and
ailitary pressure.

The Ell: econonic ad trade dargo plus that of Wealth nstione such as
Canada, in [word indistinct] of course to cognate the encircle-eat and force
Argentina to accept conditions favorable to laden and Washington in the
South Atlantic.

Federal Ger-any, Argentina's Iain luropen cuetoaer, joined the marge there-
by effecting close to $700 aillion worth of [words indistinct] closes off the
entry in the South American comtry of ﬂeet Ger-n products.

The 0.8. financiers, to who. a third of the Argentine (piblic and private)
foreign debt is owed, are also bringing pressure to hear. according to finan-
cial quarters in North Antica.

080: 3120/ 107

13
l-‘OIOFI‘ICIALlSEONLV

CM! SEC?!“ CUBA

NORALIG’NED CULTURAL MEETING 831‘ m 26 APRIL
Ph251331 Ram Pm in ﬂuid: 231.5 (I! 2‘ Apr 82

[By Victorio ll. Oops]

[Text] Havana, 25 Apr (I'D-Port'y nations have confirnad their attendance in
the naeting of educational ad cultural experts ad senior officials of the
novenent of non-aligned contries that will be held here for four days fro-
tonorrow, )bndsy.

It is expected that eight international organization. smug then the

United Nations Educational. Scientific ad Cultural Organization (nelson),

and the Arab League Educational. scientific and Cultural Orgnisation (M).
will attend this conference.

The sinister of culture of Cuba, Arnando Bart, said that the Iain purpose
of the neeting is to discuss, for the first tins in the history cf the nove-
nent. a plan of action with a view to drain; up the policy of the non-
aliped novenent in the educational and culture fields.

That plan. once approved in Havana. will be present to the consideration of
the seventh su-it conference of the non-aligned countries convened for this
year, he declared in a press conference in the convention center in this
capital.

He added that this conference could facilitate an exchange of opinion with
another that will be held in lien-ice starting 26 July sponsored by the msco.
organization that has been holding regional neetings for a world cultural

policy.

Ilart said that it is not a question of taking non-alimed policy to Minion.
but of exchanging opinions to see in what essential aspects there are coin-
ciding points of view on such an inortant topic.

Ile explained that for this purpose the MSG) had distributed the progra- .
to be analysed in lIexieo City, and Cuba has drum up a series of viapoints on
it. that it has circulated suing the non-aligned countries with a via! to the
nations expressing their opinions.

I];
FOIOFFICIALIJSEONLY
MOFHCIALUSEONLY

"Therefore they have a neterial that is going to be useful to then as starting
point for analyzing profoundly a Ouhan paper that contain special proposals
that have been nde previously by the non-aligned amt.” underlined the
sinister.

lie said that Cuba gives particular iqortance to the UNESCO general conferb
ence that will take place in lhxico fro: 26 July to 5 August.

"It is wing to take place in a oomtry of the Heaters henisphere that has a
very well defined serious. intelligent and courageous political stand. and
powerful, strong cultural develop-ant and perspectives," he underlined.

he added that Mexico has artistic and cultural wealth of a very powerful popu-
lar character and in this meeting, he said, will be analyzed proble- of art
and culture in a country that does not have "a culture of elites."

"therefore Mexico is going to he venue of a event that will take place in a
country vith strong. popular cultural roots," underlined the Cuban ninister.

Ila stressed that it is of najor iqortanoe that this nesting is to he held in

a nation that has a political stand in favour of seeking solutions to the
noble. and couple: situations that the world is facing.

CSO: ”20/107

1
FOR OFFICIASI. USE. ONLY
summon“

comm! SECHW CUBA

mm SAYS “TIN 8W 1'0 FIGHT OR WAT!
PA290905 Havana Pm in English 0000 M 29 Apr 82

[Text] Havana. 29 Apr (PD—Cuba is prepared to fight or to negotiate,
reiterated Jesus Hontane. alternate neaber of the political bureau of the
Mist Party of Cuba in speaking of the United States' aggressive policy
toward the Cuban revolution.

He added that the Cubans are prepared "both to stand up to the nest violent
of aggressions and to seek negotiated political solutions to probleas."

In speaking here at the neeting 0M international theoretical conference
on the characteristics of the revolutionary processes in Latin Ansrics and
the Caribbean, liontane stated. "a. are faced with a powerful easy and
although we do not fear his. we lust not underesti-ats his either. The
situation in our countries is not exaspt fron the dangers and problem that
are unfolding on the world scene."

After denouncing the aggressive United States policy toward the revolutionary
countries and sovenents in the region, the Cuban official spoke of the prep-
stations to "upgrade to the lazin- our country's nilitary power in view of
the existing threats."

Montana said that those preparations will "oblige the inerialists to think
very carefully before they decide to launch any kind of action against our
country."

"The nost elesentary sense of responsibility for the future of our peoples
and of all husnity means that our steadfastness, our undeniable solidarity
with the popular revolutionary novensnts nust be accowanied by a readiness
to negotiate, to ease tensions and to seek denocretic, peaceful solutions
to the situations of crisis that affect our area today.

In principle we neither went nor seek war. Quite the contrary, we favor
peace as the only sensible solution to love in the direct direction of a
solution to the proble-s affecting our peoples and which are a cause of
justified alarn for all responsible persons in the world.

”Our willingness to seek political solutions is a sign of responsibility,

serenity and strength. because we will never bargain over the revolution
nor the right of the people to lake revolution." declared Montana.

080: 3020/ 109

teammates“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000nm: seams WCA

rm Glam—Prune is doneting "2n (Md. - 0881) to help exploration to:
energy teemoee. me donation cane after who meter Mgenle can» vie-
1ted Penn end tendon. trence 1e eleo ooneideung em in other men, includ-
ing homing. In tendon, the print: mister. together vtth Vincent Honda. the
agriculture minute: of St Vincent, damned anew. dd to: the benene tn-
duetry. she eeid on he: retutn that the British, for the first the, 'under-
stood the prob)... that we have end the tnportence of the benene industry’.
[London mm men REGION mm in mush 26 ﬂu: 82 p 3]

0092mm: LATIN AMIGA REGIONAL W: 1982

CSO: 3025/236

1
FOIOFFIOILISBONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

COUNTRY SWIG"

33 courrmms M ANNIVERSARY em; unmet mason mm

Lonebn LATIN ”RICA REIGN BMW in biglilh 26 liar 82 pp 2-3

[Text]

The Grenada government's commitment
to Caribbean unity and regional insti-
tution was powerfully stated by prime
minister Maurice Bishop at the 13 March
celebrations marking the third anniver-
sary of the 1979 revolution. Addressing
the bunt-ever crowd at the Queen's
Park stadium in St George‘s, Bishop
brolre a silence of several weeks to de-
nounce President Reagan’s Caribbean
Basin Initiative as the ‘con me otthe
century‘ and a ‘prostltution' of the
original aid plan dhcussed last year by
Canada, Mexico. Veresuela and the
United States.

Reagan's biateral' private sector ap
proach. excluding Grenada, Cuba and
Nicaragua. would help to destroy
Caribbean unity. Bishop warned. By
the time of last October’s Santa Do-
mingo meeting of the four originatim
countries. the US attitude meant that
the plan was ‘not only wounded and
dying. but stone cold dead.‘ Bishop
added that the ‘ridiculous' emphasis
on private sector development. down-
playinz infrastructural requirements.
would in itself guarantee that private
investment would not come.

With Reagan scheduled to visit Bar-
bados next month. Bishop iassred a
timely and serious reminder of the 18
principles laid down by the Caricom
foreign ministers' meeting in Jamaica
last September. every one of which he
said had been ‘knored, violated and
broken' by the CB]. These included the
principles of ‘no exclusiorrs’ and ‘no
military component'. Ata press confer.

ence the following day. Bishop gave a

warm welcome to 'a regional journalist‘s
suggestion that a way should be round
{or the principal Caribbean nongovern-
mental orumisations - the Caribbean
Amociation of industry and Commerce
(CAlC). Caribbean Congress of Labour
(00L) and Caribbean Conference of
Churches (0(2) - to attend the nest
Caricorn foreign ministers‘ meeting it
Belize.attheendolthhmonth,as
observers. so as to cause that reciornl
opinion wm properly represented.
Bishop indicated that he would discuss
with foreign minister Unison Whiternan
the pomibillty of a Grenadian initiative
to this end. The suggestion followed an
announcement by the CAIC that itop-
posed the eschrsion of Grenada or any
government from the CBI.

Describiru the otter o! US$360m as
‘hypocritical mnsense'. Bishop empha-
sised that it wm 67 times smaller than
the US$20bn attached to Kennedy's
'Alllance (or Progrem' two decades ago.
Cuban politburo memberJorue Risquet.
speakim at the opening olanewCuban-
built 60kw medhm wave radio trans-
mitter. had described the CBI m a
‘ridiculous version' of the previous
plan, which had ‘died at the moment of
its birth'. with ‘no alliance and even less
progress'. The CBI. he said was ‘a trick
and a joke'.

Grenada’s increadnc importance ass
pole of attraction for left-wincersin and
beyond the Caribbean was underlined
by the presence of more than 500 to-
reign participants in the celebrations;33
countries were represented at govern.
ment and ambamadorial level. with poh~

MOMCIALUSEONLY
COPYRIGHT t

FOROFIICIALUSBONLY

tical delegations coming from all ovEr
the Caribbean. Friendship societies and
solidarity groups from the United States,
Canada. Britain and other European
countries were also prominent. Two
Democrat co en from the USA.
John Conyers and George Crockette.
attended.

With an estimated 16.000 people in-
side theparlrandanoverflowofaeveral
thousand more outside. more than 20
per cent of the island’s population was
present. a powerful tribute to the mass
support enjoyed by the People's Revol-
utionary Government (PEG). Finance
minister Bernard Coard rubbed the
pointiiome when hesaid: ‘lhopetheir
spy satellites get very good pictures of
today’s rally. and in case their techno-
logy is notuptoscratch.wewillaend
them a few photographs.’

Nor could anyone doubt the genuine
enthusiasm of the crowds. either at the
rally or in the street dancing and other
festivities during the weelr. Thth
the celebratioru, an evident pride in the
last three years' achievements in eco-
nomic construction. education. health
care and the involvement of the people
in decision-making has gone together
with a strong emphasis on hard worlr
and self-reliance in the years to come.

One of themost remarkable exmnples
of the new style has been the formul-
ation of the 1982 budget. presented by
Coard at a mass ceremony on 9 March,
after two months of discussions involv-
ing thousands of Grenadians in ' rl'iSh
councils and many other organisations.
following a 1.000-strong conference on
the economy held in January. The 308
215m budget (3082.7 - Ussll devoted
BC$l34m to capital expenditure. of
which agricultun‘ got the largest share
(Ecsiltirn). Education will receive 23
nor cent of the total of scsssm in
current expenditure. and health 14 per
cent.

To help the new aunriudustrics. duty
has been intimated on imported soft
«Irinlts. fruits. jams and clothes of non-

C50: 3025/236

Caricom origin. while modest tax in-
creases were announced on alcohol and
cigarettes. Company taxation will go up
from 50 to 56 per cent. but companies
investing in productive areas will get a
15 per cent reduction. The tax changes.
Coard said. were based on mggestions
from the public.

Although the state sector is clearly
taking the lead ineoonomic construction
(last year. more than 90 per cent of
new investment was in the state sector).
the private sector is under no pressure:
local companies and the foreign-owned
banlrs (Barclays, Royal Bank of Canada
and Scotiabank) placed prominent greet
mp advertisements in the weekly hes
West Indian congratulating the PRC on
the anniversary.

I At his press conference. Bishop des«
cribed as ‘total rubbish' a report in the
London Daily Telegraph of 22 February.
meditating that the Calivigny inlet on
the south coast was being developed as
a military harbour. naval base or even
submarine base. The paper had claimed
that the area was ‘off limits to all hut
Cuban technical advisers and some
Grenadian military personnel'. A cor-
reqiondent from LAN who visited the
area found that all parts of the inlet
were visible from the unrestricted pub-
lic roads running on both sides of it
and from villas overlooking it. A few
small wooden rowing boats were
moored on one of its beaches, and
there was no shipping or construction
activity whatsoever taking place. The
only restricted zone in the area is on
the west side of Egrnont Harbour. into
which the inlet runs; this zone surrounds
the hilltop Camp Pedon. from which
ﬁring practice is sometimes conducted
at Gary Island. a srnnll islet near the
mouth of Egrnont Harbour. The firing
is always announced on the local radio
as a warning to sailors. CaliViitny inlet
is too shallow to admit boats larger
than small schooners, but the govern-
ment may develop it as a yacht marina. u

LATIN AMERICA REGIONAL REPORTS. 1982

19
FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
BRIEFS

RADIO. TV AGREE!!!“ um CUM—Managua. Apr 7 (PL)-Cuba and Nicaragua signed
here collaboration agree-ents in the fielda of radio and television. The
agreenents were signed by the president of the Cuban Radio and Television

Institute, Rivaldo Herrera. and the nanaging directors of the People's Radio
Broadcasting Corporation and the Sandiniota Television Network, Edwin Zablah

and Ivan Garcia, respectively. The exchange of program. facilities for
journalistic and technical delegations and a broadening of mtual collabora-

tion are mentioned in the docunents. llerrera returned to Cuba accompanied
by the delegation that accompanied hill in the discussion of the agreeaents.

[Text] [PA061952 Havana PRBLA in hglieh 1939 cm 6 Apr 82]

050: 5500/2190 sun

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY