FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10209
23 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 66/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HEST EUROPE REPORT
(P000 66/81)

Cameras
THEATER FORCES
PRANCE

Bri cfa
More Accurate Missile

UNITE}? KINGDCM

Former Defense Chief Carver on Nuclear Deterrence
(Field Marshal Lord Carver; THE GUARDIAN, 110 Dec 81) ....... ... ..

ENERGY EGOIMICS
ITALY

Delays in Completion of Hydroelectric Plant at Porto Tone
(Mame magnet; III SOLE-2h ORE, 2° lav 81) oeooseooeoeoonoooooe

MOIOMIC
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMAN!

Briefs
Food Exports to USSR

FRANCE-2

Hriefa
Changes Concerning Nationalization

-a- [III-WE-lSOFt

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLH'IGAL

mm'musuc OF 6mm

Allenabach Polls Show Popularity of Parties, Politicians
(ALLENSBAGIBR BERICXTE, 198131312 WM. 6 Nov 81)

SPD Popularity Declines
Genacher Most Popular Leader

FRANCE

Rocard Review Pleas for nationalised. Private Sector.
(Michel Rocud Intervi"; mum m. h Dec 8]) eeoeoeoeoeee-

ITALY

Labor Union Bureaucracy Analyzed
(mtenzo schew; IL mm 13 “CV 81) .OIOOOOOOIIOIOOOI00.00.00...

SPAI N

Columnist Analyzes Causes of Diearray in UC'D
(Jose o"et°;cm1016. 9'0v 81) OOOOOOCOOIOIOGIIOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOO

SWEDEN

Sociologiat Korpi Interviewed on BPD, labor
(Halter Korpi Interviev; MOIDOPERAIO, luv 81) ....................

0mm
ITALY

CNR'a Development Plans for the Antarctic
(Gianni Migliorino; CORRIERE DELLA SERA, 10 Oct 81)

.. b ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

MORE ACCURATE MISSILE-~The new H6 multiple-heed missiles that ere to equip France's
strategic submarines after July 1985 will be of renetkeble eccureey; they will have
a CEP of 200 meters efter traveling 4.000 kilometers. 0f 5 test €iringe carried
out at the prototype missile test center et Lendee. é were complete successes. The
(President's office at the] Elysee expressed its eetisfection vith these results.

(Textl [Paris VALEURS ACTUBLLBS in French 7 Dec 81 p 18] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Veleurs
ectuelles“)

CSO: 3100/168

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES UNITED KINGDOM

manta DEFENSE cmsr canvas on uncnm norms
pm41329 London nu: GUARDIAN in English 15 Dec 81 p 7

[Article by Field Marshal Lord Carver, former UK chief of defense staff:
"In a Conventional War, Nuclear Weapons Must Never Be Used To Steve Off
Defeat in Europe"]

[Text] After the recent antinuclear demonstrations, there can be little doubt
in anyone's mind that the public attitude to defence in this country, and in
European NATO nations-Hmost significantly in Germany—-is overshadowed by the
nuclear issue. Some might say distorted, but, if we rely on the fear of
nuclear war to deter wer--as we have done for a long tine-we must be prepared
to admit it, and must take into account the effect of that fear on our own

people.

It is remarkable that, for about 20 years at least, 8430 governments have

got away with hiding the issue under the carpet of an almost incomprehensible
and certainly illogical concept, called flexible response. The illogicality
of that concept has recently been starkly revealed by President Reagan, who
clearly also found it hard to understand. If, instead of luplying that the
use of tactical or theatre nuclear weapons would not automatically and
inevitably escalate to a strategic intercontinental exchange--which is the
essence of the flexible response concept--he had said that it would, he would
have been in equal, if not greater trouble, certainly with the American
public. Not long after that Casper Heinherger, in his long interview with
Michael Charlton on BBC Radio 4, stated categorically that the USA would

never engage in a first strike, a blow to NATO's nuclear strategy, which
depends on the threat of a first strike to deter conventional aggression.

When President Kennedy made the same statement in the early stages of his
administration, the cries of outrage from his NATO allies forced him to modify
it by stating that, although the USA would never execute a first strike on the
territory of the Soviet Union, it might do as against its forces involved in
aggression outside it. Kissinger's remarks in Brussels a few years ago caused
similar excitement, and President Reagan's second statement could be interpreted
as following in Kennedy's second footstep.

At the heart of the problem is the dilemma that, if you wish to deter war by

the fear that nuclear weapons will be used, you have to appear to be prepared
to use them in certain circumstances. But if you do so, and the enemy answer

2

IYHICHHNCJAI.USEIMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

back—-as he has the capability to do and has clearly said he would-you are

very much worse off than if you had not done so, if indeed you can be said

to be there at all. To pose an unacceptable risk to the enemy automatically
poses the same risk, or perhaps an even greater one, to yourself; but to attempt
to reduce the risk, in order to make the threat of use more credible, by some
form of limiting nuclear war—-territorially or by types of targets or means of
delivery--begins to make the risk more acceptable and therefore less of a
deterrent. The uore acceptable nuclear war may appear to be to the governments
and military men of the nuclear powers, the more likely it is that it will
actually come about, and, even if it is limited in some way, the effects on
those who live in the countries in or over which the nuclear weapons of both sides

are exploded will be catastrophic. To call the results defence or security
makes a mockery of the terns.

What is happening in the public attitude to this issue is that a number of very
intelligent people. principally university professors, but supported by many
others, notably in the teaching profession, have detected the weaknesses in
deterrent philosophy and have followed the line of argument I have just
described. They tend to differ about what should be done about it and almost
all tend to exaggerate the danger of mutual deterrence failing to prevent war
between the USA and the USSR, as Mountbatten did in his much quoted speech in
Strasbourg in May 1979, when he described as as being on the brink of the

final abyss. These professors, many of whom have become much more expert in the
subject than most sailors, soldiers or airmen, have exploited the emotion that
can easily be aroused in their students, in the young generally, among the old
and in the churches.

Their opportunity was created by a concentration of circumstances. Events in
Iran and Afghanistan made it look as if an armed clash between the USA and the
Soviet Union was a real possibility. The Republican administration, headed by
Reagan (who had made extremely hawkish statements in the presidential campaign),
came to power with a clear intention of acting tough with the Russians, promoting
a rearmament programme, in the nuclear as well as the conventional field, and

no apparent interest in reviving SALT talks or in arms control generally; the
American demand to station cruise missiles and Pershing 11s in Europe as a
response to the Russian SS-20s; the neutron bomb; and the British decision to
welcome cruise missiles and to replace Polaris with Trident, with apparently

no deep consideration of the pros and cons of either. Finally the puritannical,
radical. middle—class urge to have some cause to protest about was rather short
of themes. Only South Africa and some remote and unpopular issues in Central

and South America were available, once the Rhodesian settlement had been achieved.

The anxieties, which this combination of reason and emotion have raised, have
spread beyond the circles of the type of people who participated in the recent
marches and wear lapel buttons supporting CND, END or other anti-war groups. Many
parents, grandparents and children, even some service officers, express their
concern. They are genuinely worried and perplexed; and it is not surprising
that they are, when they hear the statements made by some menbers of the
government on the issue. Whether they have been defending the Trident decision,
the cruise missile, the neutron boob or their rival defence policy. they have
often given the unpression that we have to be prepared to accept nuclear attack
on this country, as if it were something not all that different in scale from
the blitz of the second world war.

3
IN3I|0F1NC1AI.IHNE(NVLY
That is the view of one extreme. They paint a picture of Russia as bent on
world conquest, constantly piling up arms. nuclear and conventional, on land.
at sea and in the air, so that she can either overwhelm the quest by military
action or by nuclear blackmail. The latter is based on a superiority in
nuclear weapons, either within Europe, or strategically by the ability so to
cripple America's strategic nuclear capability by a first strike that the
Jatter's only retaliatory threat would be to Russia's cities, which would
provoke a Russian second strike against American cities. Rather than make

that threat, the Americans would have to give way to Russia's demands, whatever
they were. Not only must the USA prevent this situation arising, by having

a force which is invulnerable to a Russian first strike and which threatens
Russian strike forces as well as her cities, but there must be a balance

of nuclear forces within Europe at every level. The critics of that attitude
see it, with some justification as they look at what has happened since 1945.
as leading to a never-ending nuclear arms race, in which the numbers of
warheads on both sides will escalate to even more grotesque figures than the
50,000 or so which exist today, as well as to proliferation among other countries.

The other extreme maintain that it is the nuclear arms race itself which is the
principal potential cause of war. If it were eliminated. and the USA and the
USSR separated from direct contact, especially in Europe, there would be no

C8305 belli. We would all live together in anity. solving our differences by
nego t is t ions .

Nuclear weapons should be abolished altogether; but, as a first step, they
should be removed from Europe, as should all the forces of both the USA and the
USSR--Europe for the latter being deemed to start at its western frontiers.
Those who are not pacifists or total disarmers go on to propose that the

armed forces of the countries of Europe should consist of partisan or homeguard
forces. which, they assume, would have no offensive capability, not therefore
provoking their neighbours, but which they happily suppose will have considerable
defensive and deterrent capability—-a view of very doubtful validity. They
contend that Europe would be more secure at less expense, both in terms of money
and of the need to have standing forces (based either on conscript or voluntary
services) than it is at present with forces and equipment that place a heavy
burden on countries' economies, forcing NATO nations, because they are not
prepared to carry the burden that balancing Russian conventional forces would
involve. to fall back on a nuclear deterrent strategy, with all the consequences
they believe it to involve. They have no faith in progress being achieved by
negotiations between the two power blocs. and insist that the only way to get
results is for the peoples of Europe to insist that nuclear weapons are removed
from their countries, and their defence burdens reduced. This may or may not
force the Russians and Americans to reduce and eventually abolish their
respective nuclear arsenals. but at least it will ensure that they do not

use Europe as the battlefield on which to fight out their differences.

'nle dialogue between those two extreme views is a dialogue of the deaf.
Fortunately there is a wide spectrum of intermediate opinion. held by many
sensible people; but they have difficulty in making their voice heard. and,
when they do, getting their position understood. Moving across the spectrum
from left to right. one finds those who would like to abolish nuclear weapons

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USElDNLY

altogether--and believe that a unilateral renunciation by this country would
help to get the process going--through those who believe in multilateral
negotiations to achieve the same aim, to those who do not wish to see them
abolished altogether, believing that they do deter the great powers from

fighting each other, but wish to see the numbers greatly reduced and the
nuclear threshold raised.

Some of those who hold these views accept the logic that it sould mean that
NATO should put a greater effort into conventional forces, although many of
them hope that this can be done without increasing the real burden of

finance and manpower--alternative strategies is the in-word for this. Further
to the right are those who see no need for any fundamental change in RATO's
strategy, apart from the recognition that one cannot actually fight a nuclear
war; and there are those who believe wholly in NAIO's current concepts. but
think that there is no need for us to have an independent strategic nuclear
force; and further to the right again those who think we should, but believe
we could do it in a cheaper way than with trident.

None of these attitudes between the extremes of the spectrum can escape the
fundamental dilemma to which I drew attention at the start. They are vulnerable
to the criticism that. if you wish your nuclear weapons to deter wars, you have
to appear to be prepared to use them. Once you try to define the circumstances
under which you would do so, you get into the tangle which President Reagan

and his defence secretary have found themselves. But to fall back on the argument
of uncertainty lands you in equal trouble. It is little wonder that the public
find it difficult to make up their minds on the issue. and find it easier to
drift to one extreme or the other. In spite of recent developments, my guess
would be that the majority of the electorate is probably in favour of RAID
continuing to rely on nuclear deterrence to war. some of it based on the simple
view that, if any potential enemies have them, so should we.

But we should not be complacent about that. The dangers seem to me to be

that, first: if there were a serious rise in tension, which made war in Europe
look a possibility, NATO itself, and its constituent members, would be torn
apart by having to face up to the possibility of nuclear weapons actually

being used; second, that dislike of reliance on nuclear weapons affects defence
generally, and antinuclear feelings can and do become anti-defence and anti—
military feelings; leading to the third: that popular support for NATO's defence
and its members' defence policies will be eroded; and, fourth, that this could
undermine America's willingness to continue its support of European defence.

If that were to be seriously called into question, and indicators of their
intention to withdraw appeared, no amount of nuclear weapons, independent or

not, would, in my opinion, prevent a general slide of western European nations
into NATO an accommodation with the Soviet Union.

80 what should we dc? I have no doubt that the possession of nuclear weapons

by the United States and the USSR deters them both from going to war with each
other, and that it is the commitment of both to the security of Europe, one

to the Heat, the other to the East, that has kept and continues to keep the
peace in Europe: that stops the kaleidoscope from being re-shsken.

5
FOR OFFKJAJ.IEHE(N¢LY
But if that deterrence were to fail. and then failed in its secondary purpose--
to stop both sides Eton using nuclear weapons against each other-~the nuclear
war that followed, even if only a tiny fraction of the weapons available to
both sides were actually used, would destroy European civilisation. It is
only keeping the risks of war high that diasuadea nations from embarking upon
it; but there are far too many nuclear weapons and delivery systems than are
needed to achieve the aim of deterring war in the first place and then
deterring ~he use of nuclear weapons if that fails. We must find some way of
reducing then, and of ensuring that, if deterrence were, tragically. to fail,
we do not inevitably slide into a nuclear war. perhaps following the mistaken
idea that the use of nuclear weapons can stave off a conventional defeat and
result in something better than that would involve.

It is of great importance that we should propose practical measures to bring
this about. and practical measures to inprovs our conventional defences so that
NATO can confidently and [word indistinct] rid itself of the delusion form which
it has suffered for over 20 years. that the possessior of nuclear weapons at
every level compensates for an inadequate conventional defence. Only when

we can do that. shall we be able to defeat the threat from the extreme left

and right. which are in danger of undermining Europe's security.

COPYRIGHT: Guardian Newspapers Limited. 16 December 1981

C80: 3120/27

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DELAYS IN COMPLETION OF HYDRDELECTRIC PLANT AT PORTO TOLLE
Milan IL SOLE-20 ORE in Italian 20 Nov 81 p 7
[Article by Marco Houssanet: "There Is a Power Plant at Porto Tolle"]

[Text] Bureaucratic and political problems are preventing the ENEL
[National Electric Power Agency] from activating two groups of 660 Hw
on which the necessary tests have been run while estimates on inter-
ruptions in electric energy supply are getting worse.

Porto Toile. Winter is drawing near and all Italy is wondering: Will there be
any interruptions in our electric energy supply? And, if yes, will they be greater
or lesser than estimated? Conferences, gatherings, meetings of experts, civil
servants, and politicians have followed each other in rapid sequence, drawing a
picture which leaves little room for hope and none for reliability and certainty.
In the meantime, in the middle of the Po Delta at Polesine Camerini, 800 inhabi-
tants, a small portion of Porto Tolle, 10 km from the county seat, a thermoelectric
power plant, brand-new, capable of putting out trillions, is waiting to go into
operation.

With its four sections of 660 Hw, each, it could, at full speed, turn out 15

billion kw per year, 8 percent of the country's total energy needs. It is not

easy to explain its forced inactivity. It all began in 1971, when preliminary

work was started for the construction of the power plant as such, with the necessary
research, surveys, land surveying, and geological prospecting.

Those were the years when people began to talk widely about energy problems and
when the ENEL started looking for sites for coal-powered, nuclear, and thermo-
electric power plants, looking into the regions, provinces, and communities, a
search which was later on stepped up considerably. In the Lower Polesine section,
20 years after the flood and with all of the problens which that tragic event
brought and which are as yet unresolved, the first approvals were obtained. And
Pnlesine Camerini was picked; the real construction work began in 1973.

Now people are thinking of how to supply fuel oil to the plants: With a pipeline
starting from Ravenna, going through the Comacchio valleys. going all the way to
Porto Tolle. The first blueprints were drawn up, prepared by SONE, the Northeast
Oil Pipeline Company, charged by ENEL with building and managing the entire plant,
said undertakings to be studied by the local governments so as to introduce any
possible modifications.

7
FOR 0F1ﬂ€lAl.USEGDNLY
FORiOFFKJAl.USE(MVLY

Amid red tape and policy delays, the years passed while the power plant grew. That
brings us down to our time: The tests have already been completed at Porto Tolle
with gas-oil (which is more expensive and less efficient than fuel oil): these
tests were made on two sections and test runs for the third section. are being
completed; the estimates tell us that the fourth group should also be ready to
function in June 1982. All of this was done under the supervision of the plant
manager, a man by the name of Fasolo, who was appointed by BNBL some time ago.

But Porto Tolle will not be started up that year either. The work on the oil pipe-
line has not yet been started and the supply of the power plant with the help of
lighters is not yet possible because the responsible cor-unity government has not
yet given its go-ahead for the boats to tie up and for the operation of the line
from the government electric power facility on.

"To release the necessary authorizations." said communist mayor of Porto Tolle,
Danilo Stoppa, "we are waiting for the BNBL and the Ministry of Industry to follow
through on their commitments; Unemployment fund for the 1,000 workers who are
facing the risk of losing their jobs after work on the power plant has been com~
pleted; reimbursement of damages caused to fishermen during the construction of the
plant; and start of work on the construction of the oil pipeline."

Out of the 2,000 workers employed on the construction of the power plant, about
1,000 are employed by the contractor company and are not facing any risks. The
others, hired specifically for this type of work, could be laid off. The documents
requesting the special unemployment fund, submitted by the labor union federation
of the province of Rovigo, is currently at the regional labor office in Venice,
awaiting the report from the provincial inspector. It will then be forwarded to
the Labor Ministry which in turn will submit it to the CI?! [Interministerial Com-
mittee for Industrial Policy Coordination].

The problem thus looks as if it could be solved easily. "Last 8 Jul " says Giorgio
Nonnato, president of the province of Riwogo, "we signed an agreement in Rome in
which the minister of industry pledges to speed up the processing of the unemploy-
ment fund. we believe that, once the bureaucratic problems have been solved,
everything else will have been resolved."

But the mayor of Porto Tolle is not of the same opinion: "If we once again were to
be faced with 1,000 unemployed: continued Danilo Stoppa, "we would be facing the un-
expected deterioration of a job crisis which for quite some time has been leading to
the forced emigration of people from Polesine and which registers a figure of 10,000
without work out of a district population of 250,000 inhabitants. And then there are
the commitments which were made at the time for the development and upgrading of the
area's characteristic activities, such as fishing, tourism, and agriculture, which
could absorb 500 or 600 workers."

Another unresolved problem is the problem of compensation. According to the agree-
ment signed by ENEL and the Province of Rovigo, which is authorised to handle the
issue as the holder of the fishing rights, the electric power outfit should turn
over to the provincial funds 3 billions. 2 of which are already due. This is a
figure which the ENEL obviously is not prepared to turn over until it gets all of
the licenses and authorisations it needs to start the power plant.

8
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Once again we get back to Porto Tolle where the lighters should he tieing up with
1,350 L. of fuel oil, coming from Venice. Although it has discharged all of its
comitments and although it is now facing a situation which it cannot change, the
ENEL has already made provision for restoring the major roads in Lower Polesine to
build a bridge, to construct basins. moorings, and everything else it was able to
do in this regard.

"After all that," says Giancarlo Lizzeri, the agency's administrator adviser, "the
community could not possibly prevent the supply of the power plant with fuel oil.
This situation is no longer tolerable."

But everything is closed down and Porte Tolle is loudly asking for the start of work
on the oil pipeline which has been suspended because of conflicts over the actual
line layout which arose between SON: and the community of Comacchio.

"The initial line layout submitted to us by SONE." said Cesare Luciani, Comacchio
deputy mayor, "called for running the eel ponds under the eel fishing installations.
Apart from the hydrogeological disturbance which would have derived from'zthe con—
struction of the plant, we were thinking of what might happen in case of a leak.
That would have been the end of Valli di Comacchio. we therefore initially asked
for shifting the trace to the west of the fishing installations and, after receiving
a negative reply from the company charged with the construction work, we confined
ourselves to asking for shift of the line by 1 Inn to the cast of the Romea federal
highway toward the sea. On that point we got approval from the SONB engineers and
we are now waiting to see the final blueprints before releasing the authorizations.
In the meantime, SONE could start work."

But the contractor company working with the Em will certainly not give the go-ahead
for construction work until it is certain that it has the necessary approval for the
project (and that requires a new ministerial decree to cancel the one issued earlier).
The people at the ENEL recall that the initial line layout was accepted at the time
by the communities involved and by the Region of Bmilia-Romagna and that only there—
after first Ravenna and then Comacchio asked for modifications in the line layout.

This is the story of Porto Tolle, full of questions, misunderstandings, and indecision.
A power plant with 2,600 ﬂu is idle.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editors I1 Sole-21o Ore s.r.1.

5058
C80: 3100/66

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

BRI EFS

FOOD EXPORTS T0 USSR--Uest Germany will export m 13!! (233“ pounds) worth of
agricultural products this year to the Soviet Union. a 50 percent increase over
1980. The West German Agricultural Marketing Board said the record sales resulted
from greatly increased purchases by the Soviet Union of beef, sugar, flour and
groats (crushed grain). According to Herr Claus Boecking, head of the board's
foreign department. the Soviet Union is now "buying food on the basis of political
decisions wherever they can get it." West German butter exports to Moscow had
collapsed this year, he said, and were replaced by sales from other European
countries. [Excerpts] [London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 24 Nov 81 p 6 PH—
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY) COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1981

cso: 3120/23

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

CHANGES CONCERNING NATIONAL! ZATIONS--1'he goverrnent is admitting that it will
have to amend the law on nationalizations at the remest of the Constitutional
Council. There is a readiness to mine sons concessions on the dividend psynent
in 1981 and in the manner in which indennification is handled. In business
circles there is hope of going still farther-without going too far, for a brutal
political conflict is to be avoided. Thus. the Constitutional Council could
consider the Delors plan calling for establishing the bank nationalization floor
at 3.5 billion [francs] in deposits (rather than at 1 billion) so that foreign
badts would automatically be unaffected by the law and not unite the French banks
feel discriminated against. This would keep a certain number of French banks
within the private sector (such as the Banque llervet, the BIHP and the Honod-
Francaise de Basque). On this latter point. the goverment is quite reluctant
to go along but the Constitutional Council doubts that Mitterrand will unleash
a big political offensive (by resorting to a referendum) for so little. The
necessity for it would not be understood by the public, it is believed. [A
couuent included with this article esserted:] Decreasing the washer of banks

to be nationalized may constitute, in the eyes of some of the more moderate
elements of the ruling majority. the "signal" that would bring about a detente
with the business cmunity. [Text] [Paris LA 1.31”ar DB L"EXPANSION in French

23 Nov 81 p 2] COPYRIGHT: 1981. Groups Expansion S. A.

CSO: 3100/1523

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ALLBNSBACH POLLS SHOW POPULARITY 0F PARTIES. POLITICIANS

SPD Popularity Declines

Allensbach ALLBNSBACHBR BBRICHTE in German No 22. 1981 pp 1-2

[Institute Report: "Movement in the Party Scene-CDU/CSU Above 50 Percent-SPD
Reaches New Low-—"creens' at 5.8 Percent]

[Text] Allensbach/Lake Constance. Middle of October 1981-0n its downhill slide
since the last Bundestag election the SPD has reached a new low: with a share of
the votes of 33 percent it now ranks about 10 percent below its showing of

5 October 1980. In other words: within the period of one year about 25 percent
of SPD voters have abandoned the party. The Social Denocrats have not dane this
badly even during the final phase of the Brandt regime. At that time. Allenabach
found the low point of the SPD at 36 percent (Hatch/April 1976). Two parties
have profited from the vote upheaval during the last few months. The CDU/CSU
showed an improvement of just about 6 percent during that period. At 50.3 percent
it now commands an absolute majority of the voters. The "Greens" have climbed
from 1.5 percent in the Bundeatag election to 5.8 percent, their best showing

to date. The Free Democrats were unable to profit from the SPD's decline. A 9.7
percent share of the votes equals less than the 10.6 percent they received in

the Bundestag election and corresponds with the average for the last few months.

Number of people interviewed: about 2,000
Polling period: 19 September - 2 October 1981.

COPYRIGHT: INSTITUT FUBR DEMOSKOPIB ALLBNSBACH 1981

Genscher Most Popular Leader
Bonn DIE HELT in German 6 Nov 81 p 1
[Article: "Genscher Is Considered The Most Popular Politician"]
[Text] Bonn--PRG Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genacher (FDP) is considered to
be the most popular politician; 65 percent of the population over 16 years of age
have "the highest opinion" of hin. Second to him in popularity in PRC Chancellor

Schmidt (62 percent), followed by con Chairman Kohl and Berlin's Governing Mayor
von Heizsaecker (58 percent each). Those are the results of a poll conducted

IIHICHﬂHCJA1.USEINVLY
lNﬂlOFFKJALlﬂﬂEONLV

by the Allenebecher Institut fuer Denoekopie. High esteem in further enjoyed by
Hane-Jochen Vogel (66 percent) and by Lower Saxony Minister President Albrecht
(64 percent). The are followed by Schlesuig-Eolstein'e Minister President
Stoltenberg end by Deputy CDU/CSU Parliamentary Group Chairunn Leieler Kiep, with
43 percent each. Hilly Brandt, who led the popularity scale in 1972 with 66
percent, has dropped to 40 percent Strauss and Behr have for many years brought
up the rear.

9273
C80: 3103/130

13
FINICMWNCIAI.USECHVLY
ROCARD REVIEWS PLANS FOR NATIONALIZED, PRIVATE SECTORS
PMOblS23 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 4 Dec 81 p 2

[Interview with Michel Rocard, minister of planning, by David Mousego and
Terry Dodsworth: "Rocard Quietly Rebuilds Influence"]

[Excerpts] Paris—~"I don't know if it will be possible," says Michel Rocard,
France's minister of planning. 'but I would be prepared to write into the
five year plan (1983-88) an economic growth target for France twice that of
Heat Germany's."

He reacts strongly against public statements by his ninisterial colleagues
implying that the Planning Ministry--M Rocard was put there partly to keep
him out of the front line of executive authority-will have a subordinate
role in deciding and implementing the policies of the much enlarged
nationalised sector.

”In the spring," he says, "a bill will be put to the national assembly setting

out the procedures for drawing up the plan. At that nonent we could have some

difficult decisions on allocating responsibilities. Until those have been taken
there Is uncertainty. But I shall see there is no uncertainty after that.

I may win or lose but I won't let the uncertainty continue."

M Rocard believes that the Ministry of Planning will have a substantial role to
play. His idea is that the nationalised sector should be divided into two-public
services, such as railways and utilities, on the one hand, and companies exposed
to international competition on the other.

An inter-ministerial committee would translate the government's priorities in the
plan into contracts applicable to different state enterprises. The task of
actually negotiating the contracts and seeing that they are carried out would

lie with the ministers concerned. For exanple, the transport minister would deal
with railways and the minister of industry would handle the manufacturing sector.

"But there will also be a record of these negotiations and a staff to prepare it.
That will be the job of my ministry," M Rocard pointedly adds.

The Planning Ministry would also ensure that state enterprises followed common
methods. Thus, the Planning Ministry would be concerned with the external

IN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

balance of payments of each group; its exports and overseas requirements for
patents and research licences; with the "social" policies it pursued; with its
research policy; and with the decentralisation of investment. H Rocsrd adds
that he has a front-line function in the latter area because of his shared
responsibilities for decentralisation.

H Rocsrd stresses that state enterprises must be run on a competitive basis.
If the state asks than to perform public services, like running uneconomic
branch lines for the railways, then it must compensate them.

“I gave a long standing friendly respect for Tony Benn," he says. "But I don't
share his economic philosophy. Our philosophy is strongly coapetitive....

Each time the state asks a company to do more than sound competition would
require of it. then the state must compensate it.... A company that is

run at a permanent loss adopts a mentality of security that is no longer produc-
tive."

In spite of his tongue in cheek ambition that the French economy should run at
twice the pace of West Germany, H Rocard has not much faith in planning bases on
macro-economic forecasts. H Rocard's two-year intermediary plan (1982-83) has
been criticised by enployera' organisations and trade unions for its lack of

an economic framework to help companies sake decisions. More cynically, they
believe it reflects some of H locard's possible doubts about the two years ahead.

H Rocard says that his decision to omit a micro-economic franswork was deliberate
and carefully weighed. He believes that macro-economic forecasts amid the present
uncertainties of the world econony do not have such value and that, inevitably,
the change of government in France has added an uncertainty of its own.

Rather than face the risk that such forecasts become untenable, he prefers to
try to accustom French public opinion to the broad goals of 3 per cent growth
a year over the next two years, a hoped for reduction in the rate of inflation
and stabilising unemployment next year before bringing it down in 1983.

For M Rocard, the "great gamble" of the imediate future is whether private
manufacturing investment will recover. 'The strategy of the two-year plan."
he said. "is based on private investment taking off. So is the government's

1982 budget. One of the areas in which planned expenditure is to rise fastest
is in the value of aid to industry."

H Rocard believes that the private sector's reluctance to invest is a "temporary
psychological problem. " reflecting employers' distrust of a socialist government.

M Rocsrd is concerned that the higher growth will worsen France's import bill
and hence its balance of payments.

He points out that France imports 26 per cent of what it consumes. In the long
run the only answers, as he sees it, to this structural weakness are to make

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
savings in the nation's energy bill and to develop French industry where
imports are abnormally high--he mentions wood. leather and machine tools.

He believes the government should take a strongly interventionist line over
machine tools, slimming the industry to companies which can compete abroad
or hold their own in the dramatic market and abandon the rest.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd. 1981

C80: 3120/25

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LABOR UNION BUREAUCRACY ANALYZBD
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 13 Nov 81 pp 28-33
[Article by Lorenzo Scheggi]

[Text] The union agent‘s trade: strike manager. With his bat-
tered-lunchpail gathering dust, today's union official
has become a technocrat. But he's frustrated, fair game
for countless critics, and ill-paid to boot. Has he
picked a career with a future? If so, what kind of fu-
ture awaits him?

On the rim of a pond, a frog is getting nowhere in his wooing of a
lady frog. "Why won't you have me?” he asks in desperation, when he
sees the futility of his endeavors. "Because," replies the lady
frog, haughtily, I’actually, I'm a princess. A wicked witch cast a
spell on me, and turned me into what you see. ”well," replies the
frog, glinpsing a ray of hope, ”if that's all that's bothering you,

I am really a metalworker." "Honestly?" inquires the lady frog,

with avid curiosity. "How did it happen?“ "Well,“ replies the frog,
"that I really couldn't say. The guys from the union took care of
the whole business."

That story has been making the rounds in labor circles for some time.
Even now, though, anybody who dredges it up and serves it at a meet-
ing of the local or even at a congress knows it's going to make a
hit. The reason is that the irony of the joke cloaks a painfully
deep-seated malaise. The fact is that the union cadres right now are
the targets of venenous challenge, mainly -- though not exclusively
~- from the rank and file. Luciano Lana, addressing the congress of
the Rome Chanber of Labor, hurled blazing thunderbolts at union ap-
paratchiks: "In Lazio," he charged, to deafening applause, "we have
600 union officials. There are far too many of then, and the fruits
of their labor are not commensurate with their numbers." Just a few
days previously, in his report to his union's congress. CISL leader
Pierre Carniti was no gentler: "The crisis in union representation,"
he argued, "can be attributed primarily to the unchecked growth of

a bloated full-time apparatus built up during the years of struggle,
but increasingly beyond the reacﬂ of checks and controls."

17
FOR(NWKJAL[BE(nﬂX
FOR(NWKJALIEHEONLY

Why are the union agents in the eye of the whirlwind? Why are they
under simultaneous attack from the membership in the plants and from
their national summits? Why do we suddenly see this burgeoning of
books, articles, magazines (the latest of these was the entire fourth
issue of LABORATORIO POLITICO, the magazine of the communist gadflies,
run by Mario Tronti) devoted to them, to their history, their jargon,
their problems?

The one-word answer to all these questions is, once again: crisis.
The economic crisis. The reason why the union agent today is no
longer the man who hands out the goodies, but the guy who is often
forced to agree to layoffs, restructuring, retreat from long-secure
positions, surrenders. The political crisis, in a labor organiza-
tion that has been torn for years between the lure of a voice in
management, recrudescent maximalist demands, the remnants of soli-
darity, and ceilings on the cost-of-living adjustment, in an unend-
ing April alternation of clouds and sunshine; between irreparable
splits and wholly unforeseen outbreaks of peace. The consequence is
an unavoidable identity crisis for those who live and work in this
climate, for the people in organized labor and outside of it who are
all asking the same question: just who is a union agent? Is he
still the lord-high executioner of the hot autumn? Or has he already
turned into an icy bureaucrat who manipulates the rank and file for
his own purposes? 0r again is he, or is he on the way to becoming
something quite different from any of these things?

The odd thing is that this identity crisis has hit the union agents
at what is apparently a favorable juncture.

There are so many of them. Almost a small army of them, more than
there have ever been. For the CGIL (see Table 1) there are more than
5,000 full-time political officials (the leaders, those who actually
do the negotiating, the men in the survey and research offices, right
down to the rank-and—file activists who hand out leaflets in the
plants), scattered through the country (in the regions and districts)
and in the various categories. In the CISL, though, there are 3,500
professional union agents (in the CISL they are called agents, rather
than officials, as in the CGIL and the UIL). And then there are the
2,700 in the UIL. That makes a grand total of 11,000 full-time

union agents, who are backed up, however, by another 7,000 people in
the technical staff and in the various agencies of the national or-
ganizations. The growth since the late Sixties has been dizzying:
keepin pace with the upsurge in paid membership (up from 4,700,000
in 196% to 8,900,000 in 1980) and the consequent growth in revenues
from proxies, but a disproportionate share of the increment was due
to the spiralling numbers of full-time agents. Peogle who quit thei
jobs to work full-time for the union (in the CGIL 3 percent of the
political staff has signed on since 1968), plus a lot more who moved
into organized labor out of cynicism and greed. Everybody, to hear
them talk, deplores such abuses, but everybody -- in the CGIL, CISL,
and UIL alike -- finds their presence rewarding from at least the
economic point of view, because it means that they have that many

18
FOItﬂﬁﬂﬂALIIHIONLY
agents working for them but getting paid by somebody else (see
Tables 5, 6, and 7)-

They are young, and they are educated. About 70 percent of the people
(see Table 2) in the political apparatus of the three federations are
between 25 and 45 years old. And between 40 and 60 percent of them
have high school diplomas or university degrees.

They are famous. Television shows us the more familiar faces among
them every evening. The newspapers write about them. In the na-
tional media, only Lama, Carniti, and Benvenuro get the full treat-
ment, but there are hundreds of union agents written up every day

in their local papers who have leapt featly across the threshold of
anonymity. Debates, roundtables, conventions, and interviewsam-no
matter what the subject, somebody speaking for organized labor isla
sine qua non these days. His presence is a guarantee of high ratings.

They are powerful. At Christmastime they get cards from members of
parliament, captains of industry, bishops, and prefects. Of course
there are still some union agents who do unheralded welfare and sup-
port work without any compensation at all. Far more numerous, though,
are those in the public eye who talk about macroeconomics, who are
consulted on every labor issue, but consulted as well -~ and perhaps
primarily, these days -- on issues that have nothing to do with or-
ganized labor.

And yet it is in these same figures, which look so encouraging, that
the crisis lurks. Are there just a lot of them, or are there too
many of them? True, some of them have been drOpping out lately. At
the CGIL, for instance, the turnover rate is close to 5 percent.
"That's very high," say CGIL officials. “The turnover problem," they
say at the CISL, too, "is beginning to concern us." For the time
being, though, the problem is not a lack of people: according to
Lama and Carniti, the problem is quite the opposite. Even as late

as 1976, the CGIL was still holding the line on the ratio at one to
1,011. It was higher, actually, in the CISL, at one to 1,20“. Only
the UlL was below one to 800. Today, though (see Table 1) even the
CGIL and the CISL have swollen staffs, even though the edema is less
pronounced than in the UIL, which, in order to man all the available
slots, must make up for its thinner membership ranks with a massive
official presence. There is one datum, though, that applies to all
of them: the apparatus is spread unevenly, both with respect to geo-
graphical areas (high-density zones and others with nobody there),
and with respect to labor categories.

Are they really educated people? Or have they, like everybody else,
gone to school some? "We read so many newspapers," admits the UIL's
top organizer in Lazio, Pietro Larissa, "that it is hard for us to
find time to read a book, to go to the theater, or to studyﬂI There
is a plethora of literature on the subject. The union agent is de-
scribed as an omnivorous skimmer of the printed page. He walks around
with fat bundles of magazines and newspapers under his arm, among

19
FOR(NWNJALINHEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is bound to be the Confindustria's peach-colored SOLE-24 ORE,
plus, under the tap leadership's elbow, LE MONDB. He has no time

to study, to store up information, because his whole job consists of
communications to the outside world. UL messages only he can send.
And so he Spins through his days like a top, parcelling out his time
among local meetings, conventions, conferences, rallies, picket lines,
processions, slogans, fliers, telephone calls, telex messages, radio
and TV broadcasts, raffles, and photo opportunities. He must keep

on talking, screaming, or chanting words: words are his badge of of-
fice.

Are they really famous and powerful, or are they poor misled dolts,
with a predisposition to frustration? The union agent's life is

not a happy one. "Physical endurance," admits CISL secretary Nine
Pagani, "is not the least of the endowments a union agent must have."
Those who work among the rank and file have to get up at 0500, so as
to be at the plant gates when the first morning shift comes on.
Stress, how.ver, does not spare the higher echelons: negotiating
sessions often last 20 to 30 hours without a break, meetings can run
right into one another, not to mention forays from the Ministry of
Industry to the Ministry for State Participation to the Ministry for
Labor. All in the same day. And then there may be three, four, or
even five crises at a time: "The upshot," an FLM secretary told IL
MONDO, "is that we often sit down at the bargaining table without even
knowing exactly what the issue is." Clearly, that means less time
for the family. Not very much time for sports. Or for hobbies.

Idolo Marcone, former CISL secretary, used to play the violin as a
boy. He had to give it up before long. Ottaviano Del Turco, deputy
secretary at FIOM, takes lessons in guitar and drawing. Bruno
Trentin jogs through the quiet streets of Villa Doria Panphili in
Rome. But they are exceptions, and you can count them on the fingers
of your hands. For the rest of them, there is only the union.

The other side of the coin, though, is that they haven't got what
might be styled glowing career prospects. For the majority of them,
the outlook inside the union runs something like this: you start in
the plant, you get into the local executive, and then you're faced
with a choice: if you're going to get ahead, you're going to have

to quit your job. Dcvote yOurself full-time to the union. And then
you start taking training courses (see box, page 30). You move up

in the hierarchy through the local executive bodies into the national
industrial groups. Up and up, until you hit the regional executive.
Beyond that, no more than 300 or 400 of you will ever go. For every-
body, though, the road is a long one, except for the occasional bril-
liant career, which will be the lot of only a very few and will be
the result of factional chemistry, of bonuses for minorities, or of
local and industry quotas. The prospects outside the union are Just
as bleak. Particularly now that there is a perceived conflict of in-
terest between political party positions and those in the union, the
avenue for advancement in politics is no longer open. Not many can
fall back on a profession to make a living. That leaves the govern-
ment agencies: the National Work Accident Insurance Institute (INAIL),

20
FOR(”WK]ALlBIONLY
the National Social Security Institute (INPS), and the hundreds and
thousands of commissions to which the labor unions belong. But as
for jobs, as for salaries, there is room for a few dozen people at
most.

The career is not exactly tempting, any more than the salary. Union
officials, on the whole, don't make very such money. So little do
they make, in fact, that there are a lot of them who are opting to
leave the union and go back to the production line. Salaries for
national officials (see Table 3) are fairly low (for technical staf-
fers, add on family subsidies, which even politicians get, and se-
niority increases, which the politicians don't get). All in all, for
a high-middle-level union official, the paycheck will come to a net
of 1 million a month. Of course, those not quite so high up will get
less. The story is somewhat different for the top echelons in the
national federations and for industry-union secretaries general or
for the really big local organizations, where there are occasionally
bonuses that don't show up on the payroll. At the national federa-
tion level, insofar as IL MONDO could determine, the only ones who
get such bonuses are the top leaders of the OIL, who round out their
pay checks with a bonus from the factions (reportedly amounting to
200,000 to 300,000 lire per month). In the CISL, too, according to
some reports, there are some extra unofficial goodies. And then,
too, there are the fringe benefits. Lama, Carniti, Benvenuto, Ma-
rianetti, and Marini all have personal care with drivers. Every

3 years, CISL secretaries get from the organization a third of what
it will cost them to buy a FIAT 131/1600cc. The UIL pays its secre-
taries 75,000 lire a month to cover the cost of newspaper and maga-
zine subscriptions, while the CGIL and CISL provide them directly.
For all of them, though, there is the bottom line of the expense ec-
count. Counting it all, the richest can get as much as 1.5 million
lire net per month.

When you add to all these problems and frustrations the fact that, in
our time, the labor union is an organization where only the men at
the summit make decisions (according to some experts in the field,
the union officials who really count for something in the chess-
game of high politics number somewhere between 200 and 300); that
the rank and file is increasingly inclined to challenge its leader-
ship; that the representative essence of the union (witness the
case of the FIAT strike) is open to question since the emergence of
new union and professional groups like middle managers and since the
startling growth of unafiliated unionism, you begin to see the roots
of the identity crisis that besets most union officials. The past
is far behind them. So are the heroic postwar years, when union
officials knew exactly who they were. You could pin the ancient-
history label on the Sixties, the glory years when the union offi-
cials could sail into the plants and learn to bargain over working
hours, assembly—line speeds, piecework, and overtime. Long gone are
the years of the hot falls, when the downhill road looked as if it
would never end. Just as distant, though, are the Seventies, when
organized labor was carving out ever-roomier spaces for itself in

2]
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE10NLV
FOI!0FFK1AL.USE¢DNLY

the councils of government, when membership was climbing at a stupev
fying rate and the unions apparatus was proliferating out of all
proportion, simply to provide enough bodies to fill all the new pla-
ces that were opening up before them, blissfully unaware that they
were themselves laying the foundations for the crisis.

Trading in his lunchbox for his copy of 24 ORB, the union official
became part of the misty world of politics, and thereby lost his old
identity. This, though, is not a recital of individual sins, or of
individual ambition, nor yet of cynical abuse of a rank and file
that counts for less and less. No, say scholars close to the CISL,
men like Tiziano Treu and Ugo Romagnoli: it's the union that has
changed. It has changed so much that it can no longer be described
as merely an organization that safeguards the economic and vocational
well-being of its members, nor yet as an organization subordinate to'
the political parties: it has become an independent entity that
Operates inside the institutions, inside society, and inside the
state. The consequence of that, according to Aris Accornero, who
heads the PCI's political economy study center, is nthat the union
official nowadays is a politician, not in the party, but in the in-
stitutional sense: he is a political protagonist, quite apart from
the union card he may not even have or want. His involvement in
power relationships and his assumption of behavior patterns increas-
ingly alien to the union make him part of a professional political
class for a post-bargaining era." In short, being a union official
today means, as Bruno Manghi says (see interview), entering upon an
entirely new vocation, a career in which the job descriptions have
yet to be written.

Bruno Magli: "Union Official? A Deputy Manager“

Is he a lay missionary? Or maybe an industrial relations expert?
Dr again a politician, just like a mayor, a member of Parliament,

or a cabinet minister? Just what is a union official in the Eight-
ies? IL MONDO put that question to Bruno Manghi, sociologist, as-
leader of Milan's metalworkers, now head of the CISL's Taranto la-
bor school, one of the top-rated scholars in Italian labor problems,
and the author of numerous works as the book "Fail As You Grow,‘l
(Mulino, 1977) which set the whole of organized labor by the ears

when it appeared, triggering endeless polemics.

Question: How do you, as one who helped bring them up, define the
union officials?

Answer: The union official's job is a trade, which makes it some—
thing different from a job you do just to stay alive. And, like
every trade, it is a compromise, a blend of the requisite technical
skills and identification with the ideal goals of the job itself.
Let me make that clearer: the ideal objective of the union official
is to succeed in translating and conveying the demands of those who
have delegated that function to him. That ideal, however, can Pr
achieved only through professional competence. It is a trade that

22
F0!(MW“JALL$I(”HN
changes with the changing times, but even so it remains a trade. So
what it amounts to is a blend of idealism and professionalism.

Question: What is the professional profile of today's ideal union
official?

Answer: That's something I'd have to think about for some time. It
seems to me, though, that one might safely say that there is no sin-
gle ideal professional profile. There is, for instance, a certain
kind of union official at the base who handles such matters as find-
ing jobs, acts as mediator, provides help to those who need it. And
then you have the union official who is also a political leader, who
issues the marching orders, who stirs up emotion, who decides whether
or not a particular government shall fall.or stay in office. But as
the central role, there is still that of the organizer and negotiator,
the man who maintains relations both with the workers and with the

employers. That, though, is a role played .these days by a small mi—
nority of union officials.

Question: Why is that?

Answer: The union official of the Forties was an arbiter of indivi—
dual quarrels or a fomenter of social rebellion. Then he became an
organizer of the people to win specific fights. Then he changed
again, to become a manager of the professional staff, an indispen-
sable too]. for command. Now people are asking the union official to
concern himself with the major issues of general concern.

Question: In other words, you're saying that the union official has
wound up as an ordinary politician?

Answer: The union official has been lured by the fascination of the
spotlight, of power, of the state. There are 200 or 300 union offi-
cials today who have become part of the political elitel And this
in turn fascinates all the rest, who perceive -.- through them - the
labor union as a tool for success, as a tool for playing politics,
rather than for making contact with people.

Question: 50 the union has even become a tool for the social advance-
ment ol.‘ the individual? A way to get ahead? I

Answer: I said earlier that there is no one description of the union
official. Even today there are union officials who are barely hang-
ing on, especially in the south, who are not sure they are going to
be paid, and who may even run afoul of the Mafia. Then there are the
old breed, in the north, for whom personal achievement counts more
than the career. And yet there is no question that, in the south as
well as in the north, there are a lot of union officials who have won
some degree of social status through the union. They are aware, es-
pecially out in the provinces, of what Lama, Carniti, and Benvenuto
stand for in‘ Rome, and consequently they are attracted, at all levels,
to the big game, the high stakes. It will be interesting to see, over

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the next 4 or 5 years, whether or not the union official will become
an integral part of the power elite.

Question: Don‘t you think that, starting now, because of this grads
ual integration into the political power circle, organized labor may
turn into a springboard for the ambitious?

Answer: A union official can turn into an opportunist. But I don't
think it‘s very likely that anybody who starts out as an opportunist
is going to last long as a union official. IThe selection process is
pretty stringent. The work is hard. Advancement is slow. Even the
prima donnas, the top leaders, do not lead what could be called an
enviable life.

Question: The ideal union official, as you reminded us, is the one
who successfully represents the workers. Yet union officials are
increasingly under fire from the rank and file who fail to see their
demands getting anywhere through what reps do. There is, in short,
a very real crisis in the representative relationship. Why is that?

Answer: The union apparatus has long since become a class with inte-
rests of its own distinct from those of the people it represents.

Of course this may be perceived among the rank and file as an abuse
by comparison with their idealized view of themselves. And yet the
fact of the matter is that people are eager to delegate. And they
favor the idea of having somebody act as a union official profession-
ally. It was the super-buildup of the workers' councils, the myths
that occasionally grew up around them, that led to this replacement
of reality with wish. In the name of this assumed starring role,
people have tended to forget that in our society we have learned to
handle a lot of problems all by ourselves, without the bosses and
without the union. And therefore we have become willing to delegate
certain functions to a professional class.

Question: Provided, though, that these professionals actually do the
jobs the delegates expect of them. Today, however, it doesn't look
as if the professionals are delivering.

Answer: That's true: there can sometimes be a dichotomy, as a re-
sult of which the things the official does are not what the member-
ship expected. When this happens, it happens because the problems
of the professional representatives become a filter in relation to
those of the rank and file. It is no scandal. Because, as I said,
union officials today have become a professional class. What might
be done is to try to hold the dichotomy to a minimum. What actually
scandalizes me is that the majority of those involved are not aware
of it. They have become professionals, but they think they are still
just working stiffs.

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Strike Universities

CISL: 750 million lire; CGIL: $50 million; UIL: over 200 million.
In all, 1,400,000,000 the three national federations spent in 1981
to train their cadres. But that figure is only a small part of the
total, it is only that portion of the outlay that devolves directly
upon the three national federations. The industrial unions train
their own cadres. So do the regional, district, and local bodies.
In all, according to expert estimates, the total comes to as much

as 4 to 5 billion lire a year. Where does all the money go? Main-
ly in three directions.

1. The lion's share of these funds goes to pay for courses for the
rank-and-file membership, lasting anywhere from 2 or 3 days to a
week. They are designed mainly to fire up the troops, are short on
professional content, and aimed primarily at working members from
the plants, or to provide a smattering of background to those mak-
ing their first contact with organized labor.

2. Another fat slice goes to middle management cadres, who work in
the industrial unions or in the regional or local structures. Cour-
ses for them are somewhat longer. There are handbook courses that
last a week, and deal, for example, with job structuring or with
some special reform, such as housing, health, or taxes. And there
are some courses that last 2 or 3 months, whose purpose is to give
junior officials some professional grounding. They study the his-
tory of the labor movement, a little economics, a little law. Most
of these courses are sponsored by the CISL and the CGIL, while the
UIL, which has a very brief history of training, has thus far tend-
ed to favor rank-and-file courses. The CISL in particular offers
specialized 34month classes according to the particular activity in
which the officials are engaged.

3. And then there is training for high-level union cadres, the peo-
ple in whom their respective organizations have decided to invest.
By all odds the most venerable of these types of training is that
offered by the CISL which from its very founding has made something
of a fetish of training. Almost all the current leaders of the
CISL, both federation and industrial, have gone through the school
in Florence (Pierre Carniti top among them): that school is noth-
ing less than a university for union organizers and officials.

"The CGIL," they will tell you at CISL headquarters, "could count on
the [Communist] Party to handle the training. Not us: so we had to
do it ourselves." A year of study, combined with experience out in
the field thus became the price aspiring union leaders have had to
pay to be launched in their careers. Since the mid-Sixties, after

a decade of easy riding on the "hot autumns" (the annual contract
negotiating rounds) this kind of course had fallen into disuse.

"But then," explains Michelangelo Ciancaglini, the CISL's director
for training, "we realized that we had cadres who had got their
training solely through activity in the movement, people who knew
everything there was to know about tax loopholes, but had no idea
how to reckon the tax bite out of a worker's wages. Hence the de-
cision to go back to the lengthy courses and to open a new school

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Taranto (a brand-new building, garishly colored, and dubious func-
tionality just a step from Italsider, with a 4-billion-lire prieetag).
The objective: to turn out 70 to 80 leadership cadres each year,

each with a specialty tailored to his destined assignment. The CGIL
followed suit last year at its school in Ariecia, with a year-long
course for leaders, although it is based on less specialized train-
ing.

Apparently even the UIL wants to do likewise, with its Lavinia school,
where it will offer courses lasting 6 to 7 months. The subject mat-
ter will be the same as is offered in the shorter courses: economics,
history, contract negotiation. But the depth of the studies is equal
to any in the universities.

Wm pumice 3) 7°“ W“

CGII. _ CISL - Ull. - mmuowmmm

TOTALE 11.404
TOTALS 17.87!

$1
3
5
a
3
i
5
5

 

ALL ORGANIZED LABOR'S CADRES

Key:

1. How many union officials per national federation

2. Political apparatus CGIL - CISL - UIL
3. Total apparatus (political, technical, and federation bodies)

Source: IL MONDO, from data received from the CGIL, CISL, and UIL

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 1. HOW MANY PEOPLE BACK UP THE MEMBERSHIP?

The apparatus/membership ratio
CGIL CISL UIL Combined
Numb" °f “We” 4, 600, 000' 'u3, 000, 000 1, 200, 000 8, 700, 000

M

Members of horizontal and

vertical apparatus 5’095 3’583 2’276 11’404
Apparatus/membership ratio 1/902 1/837 1/476 1/780
Members of horizontal and

vertical technical and po- 6,329 4,376 3,973 (2) 14,718
litical apparatus

Apparatus/membership ratio 1/722 1/685 1/327 1/604
Members of horizontal and

vertical technical and po-

litical apparatus plus 7’859 5’400 4’615 17’847
staffs of union agencies

Apparatus/membership ratio 1/585 1/555 3/281 1/548

—__-___——_———-_———————_—-——

Source: 11 Mondo from data obtained from CGIL-CISL-UIL

(1) The figures were elaborated on the basis of €181 research on
full-time cadres, submitted to the organizational assembly
of 23 January 1980.

(2) There are no data on the horizontal technical apparatus.

—__——————u————_——"
M

27
FOR(”WﬂJALlﬁﬂEONLY
FOR(NTKJALUBE(NHN

TABLE 2 - BREAKDOWN BY SEX, AGE, AND EDUCATION

(figures in percentages)

 

CGIL

 

SEX

Male...00..00000000000000.0000.0.00.00.00.000093
Female-00.0000000000000000o00000.0.0000.000. 7

Total: C0.0...OOOOOOOICOUOOOCOO0.0.0.0000... 100

AGE

25 or less 00.00.0000...000.0000.0.00.0...0 703
26 to 25 00.000000000000000...0.000.000... 4001
36 to 45 .‘C................O............. 26.6
46 to 55 0.0000000000000000000.000.000.000 1703
Over 55 000000000.0.000..00.00.00.00.0000 8.7
Total: 000.000.000.000....0000000000000 199.0

EDUCATIONAL LEVEL

Elementary school 00.00000.00.0000000000000018.8
Junior high school 0000.00.00.000000oo0000. 3902
High sch0010000000000000000.00000000000000. 32.9
University0u0000....000...0.0.00.00.00.000. 7.7
Unreported 000000000000000000000.0000000000 1.4
Total: .‘U...................C............ 100.0

 

28
F0!(ﬁFK1ALUBE(NﬂM

CISL

94
6
100

H09“)
OC’OW»‘JU\
0 0 00 0 0

ODOCDGHD00

H
O

UIL

100

12
35
36
15

100

32
46
16

100
:us. They were dc
run, and averaging
:he actual duties
raises nor family
L1, of which there

:puty secretary-g:
uationel secretari
H3!OPTICDH.USB(MEX

 

A<HOB

QOdOGOHa
uoan: HIGOﬁv

9.1m OoOOH

 

 

m.H m.n led us vwda
aduluuwand do
ﬂown-nonaoo
. . thuanloo oou0d u.vv o.ooa A<aoa
Ina w>wuoa do u m.v vouhonouaa
H.m~ «.0m uoaaanaoo
5051 uosoauov :30 udoaa
m.u e.¢a uoaanaon 0.5a n.om aowu: can
IIOOIhudquo nauahaana
III: II. 5 a: unwed». amwow u a naogo
o.m~ o.oou a<aoa 0 ma ¢ moununawwnwwwnm u a on:
H.ma we hum“ ”um“ hose «.mv o.oo~ a<aca
Ianaoo osa Uosoaoou n.e «.0 couponchdb
o.nd n.0u vuaaaacmloo «.mu N.om unoudnsn
m.w on Haﬁa: 0:9 IOGOIdho>OU ova>whm
msoauamma usauhomnw 6050 when on: a: amhwwa H.vm ocoaaho>ou
a o 30:» Have» «loam 0:00 a a o Baum 0300
H v a R mung 0:3 uo u R mono 090:3 H a a R bozo cues:
mo u no u
AH: amuo AHUO
? 1
20Ha<mzmmxoo no HUMDOW 92¢ azzmxonmm< mo mdbs<z mm
?
0.00H q<aos 0.00H a<aoa .o.ooa u<aoa m
o.nu venoaooa o.dm unsouooa u.v¢ vonoavoa m
«.55 Uo:oauoun:oz H.mv venomvovluoz m.mm vosoaooulcoz 1
I
QHD amHo AHUU

Am :a .haqo «use» daoaaaaomv

>mnz<ﬁm 20 MO wBDa QUIU<BNO 20 mA<HUHmmO ZOHZD Q mdﬂ<a

COPYRIGHT:
6182

153 max
COLUMNIS'r mamzss CAUSES OF DIBARRAY In DC!)
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 9 Nov 81 pp 24-27
[Article by Jose Oneto: “The Only Way Out For the Centrists Is Through Calvo aotelo']

[Text] 'It is not possible to govern seriously when we are written up every day in
the news columns.‘ This statement, a cross between irony and sarcass. uttered by
Calvo Sotelo on Monday. 2 November, in one of the official meeting rooms of hotel
Monterreal located at the outskirts of Madrid, perfectly suuarises the tumultuous
nesting of the Executive Comittee of the DC!) [Democratic Center Union] md,
especially. the spirit in which the government party has been meeting since the
Congress of Palms de Majorca held after the resignation of Adolfo Suarez.

As if it were a torecast, 24 hours later the 0CD situation went from simple news
colunns to the covers of nagasines: “The DC!) Is Crunbling, Fernandez Ordones Is
Battlishing the Democratic Action Party [PACIJ'

It seemed like the natural consequence at the unfortunate statemnts of Party Chairman
Agustin Rodriguez Sahagun who. with his characteristic volunteerias and lack of
political vision. had declared at the end of the Executive Comittee's stormy session
that whoever wanted to leave could leave.

As if the signal for departure had sounded. a few hours later the grasp disbanded.

On Tuesday. 3 November, amidst disorder, fear and astonishment, the teletypes of news
agencies installed in the palace of the Congress of Deputies were giving. minute by
minute, the gradual desertions from the goverment party as though they were

speaking of deaths from rape seed oil. Barly in the morning it was known that the
Disciplinary Committee had expelled Segovian Deputy Carlos Gila. A few minutes later.
public announcement was made of the suspension Era militancy of Modesto Praile,
another Segovian deputy and vice president of the Catgress of Deputies. Early in the
afternoon, and to avoid disciplinary sanction. torler Minister Ricardo de la Cierva
announced his withdrawal from the party. A law minutes later, a list was published
of the social democrats who. under the influence of former Justice Minister ternandes
Ordoner, decided, in agreement with the unfortunate proposal of Rodriguez Sahagun, to
withdraw. The list included: Carmen Solano. Carmela Garcia Moreno, Maria Dolores
Garcia Pelayo, Luis Berenguer, Javier Moscoso. Eduardo Moreno, Antonio Alonso Ouiros,
Luis Gonzales. Sears, Pedro Valdecantos. Carmen Pinedo, Ricardo Rodriguez Canstanon.
Jose Merrero, Jose Gonzalez Mmterroso. Manuel Carca, Carmelo Fernandez...

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In principle, and despite promises of support by the government of Calvo Botelo, Ito‘s
parliulentary group, in one single afternoon, in an ill-fated and sad afternoon, was
reduced to 151 seats after the withdrawal a few months ago of former Culture Minister
Manuel Clavero and Deputies Garcia Peres, Jesus Esperabe and Joaquin holins; to only
30 seats away from the other majority, the socialist.

The Great Escape

What had happened in those few hours? How, in one single day, was it possible to go
from news columns to the covers of magazines and give rise to a mass escape?

In the opinion of more impartial observers, the break was inevitable inasmuch as the
UCD, especially since the last election. had already become a conservative party,
losing its more progressive profile in the past few months. In the opinion of others,
the flight of the social democrats was a natural consequence of the rightest trend
observed in the political panorama and whose ultimate exponent was the electoral
results of Galicia with the irresistible victory of conservative Praga. In the
opinion of men close to Christian democracy, the departure of Fernandez Ordones was
the second part of an exodus which began with the departure of the justice minister
at the end of August and will very likely end in a closely related party or in a
party close to the PSL'B [Spanish Socialist workers Party]. In the opinion of men
close to Ordonez, it was an irresistible decision after months of harassment by so-
called critics. In short, in the opinion of the pro-Suarez factim, the entire pro-
cedure is simply a psychological consequence of a complete operation set up by the
UCD’s parliamentary group, which ended on 29 January with the forced resignation of
Adolfo Suarez. That is to say, with the death of the father.

The Death of the Father

The death of Suarez, which, in reality, became a long, slow and dramatic agony, was
not fantasies, set up after the disappearance of the old regime.

Adolfo Suarez resigned on 29 January, a few days after the frustrated coup d'etat,

but he resisted disappearing completely from the political scene. Allied first with
the pro-Ordonez people. then using the apparatus group (men placed within the complex
UCD apparatus), Adolfo Suarez, a man made by and for politics, becae the guardian of
the alleged progressive essentials of the party in power. with errors by Calvo

Sotelo, whose obsession was to become an anti-Suarez. and with errors by Suares himself,
who was not able to pursue a path of moral grandeur which he initiated with his
resignation, the DC!) entered an inevitable period of extinction after the Cmgress of
Palma de Majorca.

For months. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, who had succeeded Adolfo Suares. despite pressures
by one of his right-hand men, former Justice Minister Pio Cabanillas, did not want to
enter into the arduous, difficult and exhausting task of recaaposing the party. raking
refuge in the task of governing and, especially, of aministering, Calvo Sotelo, whose
most serious opponents were Suarez and his men (Rodriguez Bahagun and Rafael Calvo
Ortega), ignored the party until the party crumbled. he went frat controlled explosion
designed by Pio Cabanillas before miner and paralysed by the social democrats to
unforeseen explosion originated by an apparatus increasingly remote from the president
of the government.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On Tuesday, 3 November, with the festivity of the Dead [All Saints Day] still fresh
in mind, Adolfo Suarez, the father who resists dying politically and who is destroying
his subsequent resurrection, appeared in Parliament more pale aid sad than usual.
While the teletypes of the news agencies were broadcasting the list of those affected
by the centrist syndrome, his only answer was a laconic “I am sad, very sad.“

It was only a few hours before that he had had a new dialectic confrontation with the
president of the government during the meeting of the party's Bxecutive Cmittee.
Suarez had pointed out that this was not good and that his alleged confrontations

with the president were being magnified. Calvo Sotelo had quickly retorted that it
was very difficult to govern "without having the rearguard in one's own party covered."
The Duke of Suarez had again spoken emphasizing that he was accepting the admonition
or censure deduced from the words of the president of the government. Calvo Sotelo
had finally settled the dialectic confrontation with a peremptory statement: "My

words contained neither censure nor admonition: therefore, it is not possible to
accept what was not given.‘

This had been one more confrontation in the long list of offensive remarks they had
hurled at eacl. other. Suarez repeats that Calvo Sotelo does not consult him on
important matters (especially military) on which he has first-hand knowledge. Calvo
reproaches Suarez on his lack of support and continuous intrigues through Agustin
Rodriguez Sahagun. Last week, Calvo Sotelo, who succeeded in getting over the hump

of Spain's entry into NATO, was hoping for sue advice, some encouraging word, some
help from Suarez. The help did not arrive despite the fact that Suarez knew the diffi-
culties and danger of one of the most important discussions of the past 5 years.

In any case, the Suarez-Calvo confrontation. a Confrontation which the collaborators
of the two took it upon themselves to encourage, is just another indication of UCD's
internal situation, which has lost all the regional or partial electoral debates held
in Spain in the past year and a half.

The Situation

In this regard, almost all analysts agree in pointing out the political leaders,
especially of the center, as the major causes of the present situation.

At present, all indicators are satisfactory, or almost satisfactory, when compared
with those existing before the resignation of Adolfo Suarez. The subject of regional
autonany has been re-introduced, although difficulties persist. The eoonay is not
worse, and there are obvious signs of improvement in the next few months. In the
struggle against terrorism the situation is better than before the political transition
began. The plaguing problem of the flags, one of the explosive elements of the coup
d'etat movement of 23 February, has not only passed but has also been considerably
reduced. Social peace being enjoyed by the country is perhaps the most serene in
the last 10 years. Insecurity felt by the citizenry has decreased appreciably. In
short, the only indicator of real concern is the military, particularly the admin-
istration facing Defense Minister Alberto Oliart. The 01th phase, full of good
will and lacking in disciplinary decisions, has contributed to a gradual growth of
factional powers whose last decisions were the astonishing trial of Captain Milans
and the awarding of a medal for suffering for the fatherland bestowed on Lt Gen
Hilans del Bosch, pending the trial for his part in the coup d'etat of 23 February.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within this relatively serene panorama, what caused the crisis, according to sue
observers, is the governing party's absolute lack of leadership.

Up to now, Calvo Sotelo, who showed signs of indecision in not resolving a ministerial
crisis, as planned since before manner, with the outbreak of the scandal over the
massive poisoning by rape seed oil and in not restoring order in his own party, did
not want to lose his strength in UCD's internal struggle. Calvo Sotelo, a politician
who does not belong to any of the families who make up the governnent party, who, as
a human being, is a goverment man rather than a party nan, showed himself for months
to be too lazy to disembark from a ship which, piloted by Agustin Rodriguez Bahagun
and Rafael Calvo Ortega, was bound to be shipwrecked.

Moreover, the confrontations between Calvo Sotelo and Rodriguez Sahagun, with Suarez
in the middle, have also not contributed to the centrist party's stability.

Now, when the party has found him thrust in its midst, Calvo Sotelo will have no other
remedy than to descend into the political arena aid try to recs-pose what is left of
that great coalition which, according to Rodriguez Sahagun, was going to rule for

107 years.

In view of the serious situation created by the party's breakdown, on ll'uesday, 3
November, President Calvo Sotelo called his right-hard men together at Mmolca Palace:
Foreign Affairs Minister Jose Pedro Perez Llorca, Territorial ministration Minister
Rodolfo Martin villa, Interior Minister Juan Jose lbson, choay and Ccsmerce
Minister Juan Antonio Garcia Dies and Justice Hinister Pio Cabanillas.

The Alternatives

According to well-informed sources, four possibilities were studied at the meeting.

The first was to accept the present situation, particularly seaming that the operation
of the Social Democratic Party and other dissidents did not mean a loss of parliaentary
sumort for the Calvo Sotelo government.

The second covered the possible dissolution of the two parliuentary houses and the
holding of general electicms within 2 or 3 months.

The third, not even studied but suggested by a few deputies in view of the difficult
situation, included the possible resignation of Calvo Sotelo as president of the
government. And the fourth, finally adcpted unanimously, called for Calvo Sotelo to
step down from the chairmanship of the Dnocratic Center Union.

For Calvo Sotelo to step dam from the party's chairmanship it was alsonecessary to
arrange for the disappearance of Augstin Rodriguez Sahagun. ally of Adolfo Suarez
and one of the principal causes of the latest events which led to the 060's breakdown.

At a time of real problems, Rodriguez Sahagun, a strmge mixture of volunteerism,
good will and inefficiency, is, together with Rafael Calvo Ortega, secretary general,
one of the principal peons introduced by Adolfo Suarez to keep tied and well tied to
his mocessor.

3’:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this manner. the party's secretariat--discarding Rodolfo Martin villa in the very
beginning-would take on Jaime Lane, one (i Calvo Sotelo's men but who maintains good
relations with Suarez, or Marcelino Oreja, present delegate of the Euskadi Gmerment.
who wanted to remain aloof from the party's internal intrigues and squabbles.

As part of an unbitious plan to revamp the present situation, Calvo Sotelo would try
to recover sane of the collaborators of Adolfo Suarez for the government, such as Luis
Gamir, uncoupled from the pro-Ordonez social de-ocratic car, femando Abril or

Rafael A ri as-Salgado.

In short, the last phase of the Calvo plan would pass through the agreed withdrawal
of Adolfo Suarez, the party's current honorary chairman. Although he still maintains
certain political clout, Suarez has allegedly been subjected to various insinuatims
and a trial balloon suggesting that he accept an important diplomatic post abroad.

Thus, according to an malysis made by those who are mpposedly well-acquainted with
the present structure of the centrist power apparatus, the absence of the duke would
relieve much tension. The Duke of Suarez, in turn, far treat the corridors of power

'for a few years, would have a historical opportunity to return via a hypothetical
electoral campaign in 1987. For what is revealing is Calvo Sotelo's statanent, a cross
between irony and sarcasm. very much in tune with his Galicim roots: ”It is not
possible to govern seriously when we are written up every day in the news columns."

COPYRIGHT: 1981, lnfomacion y Revistas, 8.8.

8568
C80: 3110/35

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SOCIOLOGIST KORPI INTERVIEWBD 0N SPO, LABOR
Rome MONDOPBRAIO in Italian Nov 81 pp 83-85

[Interview with Swedish sociologist Walter Korpi, author of the essay
entitled "Class Conflict and the Swedish Social Democratic Party "
(Stockholm, 1981), conducted by Mario Bacoianini, Original title:
"The Planet Sweden. ll]

[Text] During their years in the opposition, Sweden's social democrats
found time for a redefinition of the terms of the "historic compromise"
with capitalism, which they intend to renegotiate when and if they get
back into power. We talked about it with Swedish sociologist and au-
thor, Walter Korpi.

[Question] Don't you think that the elements of political radicalism
in the Meidner plan contributed significantly to the defeat of the
Swedish social democrats in the 1976 elections?

[Answer] There were a lot of post—election opinion surveys taken, on
the basis of the tactical moves of political spokesmen, their popula-
rity, and the coverage devoted to them by the media. There were also
a lot of polls on the structural changes in Swedish society. Both
types of surveys show that the crucial factors in the social democrats'
losses at the polls were varied in nature.

[Question] Well, then, in this context of disparity, how much did the
Meidner plan account for?

[Answer] It certainly played a considerable, though not a preeminent
role. Unfortunately, the Swedish trade union congress, which proposed
the plan, met in June 1976, just as the electoral campaign was getting
started. Maybe it was premature to launch it then. There wasn't time
to talk it over, to digest it, inside the Social Democratic Party. The
decisive issue, though, was nuclear energy. A secondary one was the
centralization of political and organized labor power.

[Question] What form does this centralization take in a country as
small as Sweden?

[Answerl The reform of local government, which began during the Six-
ties with the approval of all political parties, has led over time to

36
F0l(l$RJALIEIGMNBY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the disappearance of three out of every four independent communes, along
with a drascic reduction in local political representation: of the 150
to 200,000 units we had in 1962, only around 42,000 were left by 1974.
The same thing happened with labor representation. Three of every four
L0 sections disappeared between 1960 and 1975.

[Question] In snort, a situation arose in which the unions took over
all power from the workers.

[Answer] More as an image accepted by the media and by public opinion
generally than in actuality. Although there has unquestionably been
some dwindling in that stratum of citizens who used to act as interme-
diaries between the public and labor leaders : most of them; today are
full-time officials.

[Question] Don't you find that the rejection of the Social Democratic
Party at the polls, for the first time in 40 years, is evidence of a
determination to protect the Swedish social compromise against its
replacement by the Meidner plan -- at least in its early version?

[Answer] As I said before, the Meidner plan, because it was introduced
too hastily, played an important but not a decisive role. Far more im-
portant was the restrictive policy pursued by the social democratic
finance minister early in 1976, which deepened unemployment in Sweden,
albeit to a minor degree by comparison with jobless rates on the conti-
nent, as in Italy or England. A decline in job opportunities, coupled
with fast-rising inflation, sapped the credibility of the social demo-
cratic government. By the early Seventies the welfare rate had grown,
and in some cases reached the level of the immediate postwar years,
when there was still widespread poverty.

[Question] Doesn't it seem a bit paradoxical to you that the liberal-
conservative coalition was perceived as a better guarantee for social
policies?

[Answer] It may well seem a paradox. But it is a fact that the social
democratic government was perceived in some quarters as being to blame
for the dire impact of an international recession whose consequences
Sweden was feeling, along with everybody else. And until the new
coalition got into office, there were those who gave it credit for bet-
ter intentions, although they bitterly rue it today.

[Question] How do you explain the fact that thus far, in Sweden, there
has been no taxpayers' revolt, despite a welfare burden that accounts
for some 60 percent of your GNP?

[Answer] The issue of taxes has been a central one throughout the post-
war period. Por the _...st 30 years, taxes have been rising at a stead-
ily increasing rate. The Social Democratic Party, however, managed to
convince the people that optinum distribution of social services car-
ries a pricetag. And they won an undeniable consensus on that proposi-
tion. Our tax system, furthermore, is relatively fair. And the

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
distribution of the benefits of our welfare state, too, are fairly and
equitably distributed throughout the population.

[Question] And yet Sweden has experienced no aggressive rightist ra—
dicalism. Hasn't the free-trade economic philosophy caught on in
Sweden?

[Answer] Just recently, there have been signs of such trends emerging
within the Conservative Party and the SAP, the Swedish Federation of
£mployers.;. They are publishing translations of books by Lepage,
Friedman, and Hayek. There is, in short, a strong ideological offen-
sive under way, but it is hitherto confined to the Conservative Party
and is merely lapping at the fringes of the center parties and the Li-
beral Party.

[Question] What, just briefly, were the special features of the Swed-
ish social compromise that began during the Thirties?

[Answer] The background of that compromise was the installation of a
stable Social Democratic government, supported by more than 50 percent
of the electorate. Political power was sharply severed from economic
power, and this fact forces all the protagonists on the Swedish social
scene -— organized labor as well as business and industry, to take a
close look at their old antagonistic strategies. The compromise had
its positive aspects, among them full employment and the Indlding of
the welfare state. It had its bad points, too, such as the fact that
a rapidly growing economic role devolved on management and on business
and industry.

[Question] Could you give me a clearer explanation for what you call
the "political tradeoff"?

[Answer] The labor movement had everything to gain by seeking an under-
standing with the industrial enployers, rather than shifting the fight
over income distribution over onto the political battleground. Mean-
while the employers, fearing possible political interference in the
economy, perceived that it was to their advantage to redefine their own
strategy and tactics. During the Teens and Twenties Sweden had what
may well have been the highest incidence of labor strife in Europe.

In 1909 there was a general strike that lasted a whole month, setting

a world record. The historic compromise between capital and labor,
reached during the Thirties, put an end to that state of affairs. With
the social democrats in power, strikes declined to practically zero.
The labor movement understood quite clearly that it could rely on poli-
tical tools, rather than costly strikes, to redistribute the profits of
production and to strengthen the position of the wage-earner. The new
strategy did not mean, however, that the movement was scrapping its
longer-term political objectives, which called for the ripening of the
capitalist society according to the developmental pattern of political
democracy, social democracy, and economic democracy typical of Swedish
social democratic policy.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(HTKJAL|E§EONLY

[Question] Sweden has been called a laboratory for social change.
Don't you think, though, that here in your country there are histori-
cal and geographical peculiarities at work, such as the homogeneity
of your country, the manageable dimensions of your population, which
might explain the stability of your social system?

[Answer] These factors have been of considerable importance. Along
with our historical development, of course. Sweden, for instance, has
never had a strong movement on the extreme right. And our labor move-
ment has never been split along religious lines, as has been the case
in other protestant countries. Nor do we have any problems with ethnic
minorities. Having said that, though, we have to give policy its due.
Our stability can be partially explained on the basis of our political
decisions, as we saw in connection with the conflicts between capital
and labor. Our parties have been shaped and molded not so much by
historical accident as by policy choices, by grand political plans.
This has made our political choices simpler. And these choices, too,
have played a preponderant role.

[Question] What has become of the Meidner plan lately? Ironically
enough, it would seem that it can't even be called that any more, with
all the sea-changes it has suffered.

[Answer] Here in Sweden we never did call it the Meidner plan. Meid-
ner was chairman of the committee that drafted the proposal. It was
generally perceived as closely tied in with organized labor. The plan
was subsequently modified, with the active collaboration of the Social
Democratic Party. Its basic thrust, however, remained the same: the
labor movement wants to establish some form of control over the econo-
mic power structure, which until now has been heavily concentrated in
the hands of some 15 or so great families.

[Question] But how did the plan change, with regard to the sources of
financing for the workers' funds?

[Answer] Initially, the idea was to finance the wage-earners' funds
set up under the plan solely out of shares of business and industry
profits. Today we have two sources of financing: profit-sharing,
higher taxes on pensions (taken out of paychecks). This increase is
under consideration now among the unions as matter for wage negotia-
tions. That means that the unions will agree to a policy of wage re-
strictions to constitute funds out of which they can buy shares in
the corporations. About two thirds‘ofthese funds are to come from
payroll deductions.

[Question] Don't you think that the Meidner plan would give the unions
excessive power, at a time when they are already beginning to lose some
of their effective representative character?

[Answer] There is another element that has changed in this plan. The
administration of the funds will not be entrusted solely to union re-
presentatives. There will, instead, be direct elections held for seats

39
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE¢DNLY
on the board of directors for each fund, and they will be open to all
citizens. The original proposal called for the representatives to be
elected by the L0 congress. But then the national leaders of the un-
ion, Gunnar Nilson first among them, voiced concern over this con-
flict of interest for the unions, which would be called upon to repre-
sent both the workers and the spokesmen for capital.

[Question] Do you think that the present situation will permit such
a leap forward for the Swedish labor movement as that called for under
the Meidner plan?

[Answer] Politically, the situation is rather difficult. A lot will
depend on the fact that the Social Democratic Party is able to map
out a policy that will be perceived as reliable by the voters as a
way out of the recession. One thing, though, is certain: Swedish
workers will never accept a highly restrictive economic policy, like
the one Mrs Thatcher is pursuing in England.

[Question] Perhaps that is true of the labor movement: but what about
the middle class?

[Answer] In Sweden, 75 to 80 percent of white-collar workers are or-
ganized, and they have worked together for the past decade with the
labor unions. We have a situation, as you can see, that is quite dif-
ferent, for example, from that of the German Angestellten, and even
from Genmany in general, where only 30 percent of the working popula-
tion is unionized.

[Question] What are the terms of the new historic compromise which
Swedish social democrats plan to bring to the negotiating table if and
when they get back into power?

[Answer] The labor movement in Sweden is stronger today than it was in
1932, when only 50 percent of the working population was employed in
industry. Women were not organized, nor were white-collar workers.

The incidence of union membership in Sweden today is perhaps the high-
est anywhere in the west. Given these power ratios, it can demand
more of a voice in the workplace. More control over economic power,
and not merely through contract negotiations.

[Question] Just what, though, is the political program of Sweden's
social democrats? A more advanced form of industrial democracy? Or
an attempt to go beyond the present capitalist stance, as some quar-
ters in the European radical left would have it?

[Answer] It's a new tradeoff, a new political swap. In the Twenties
we got political democracy, with universal suffrage. In the postwar
period, we won social democracy, with the establishment of the great
social welfare services and full employment. The third phase, which

is what we are going through now, is a striving for economic democracy.
The Meidner plan calls for the establishment of 24 regional wage-earn-
ers' funds, which will give the wage-earner the same access to owner-
ship of shares in private corporations as private capital has today.

no
FOR(”WKJALIEE(NHJ
FOR(N$KJALI£HEONLY

But in ways that are better and to a degree far higher than those you
find today in some EuroPean countries. In other words, to buy stock
in percentages that will carry real muscle. This is the compromise
the Swedish labor movement seeks. It does not want to nationalize
corporations. Nor does it want to expropriate them under law. The
public sector in Sweden is far smaller than in Italy or in England.

[Question] The idea, then, is new forms and avenues of control, rather
than worker management?

[Answer] The main idea is to see that the funds controlled by the
workers are not used for the same ends as those sought by private capi-
tal. Even though the pursuit of profit cannot be neglected, since we
must go on competing in the export markets. Workers' control will be
directed more toward improving working conditions, and things like that.

[Question] Just where does this forward thrust in Sweden come from?
From the unions, from the party, or from society as a whole?

[Answer] Clearly, it comes from organized labor. And it is a contin-
uation of the process begun in the Seventies with the Codetermination
Act, the law providing for joint decisions, the Employment Security
Act, freedom of information act, etc.

[Question] Aren't there other processes for reconciling the general
interests of society with private interests? In short, to be blunt
about it, don't you believe that the market economy ought still to
have a role to play in the future?

[Answer] Here we run into massive misunderstandings, thanks to dis-
torted interpretations of the Heidner plan. The LO's proposals aim

at bringing demo racy into the market. Centralized planning is alien
toiﬂu=Swedish social democratic tradition, just as much as the road

of nationalization is. Today we have a situation in which a third of
the upper class, around 10,000 families, control all corporate capital.

We want to correct this distribution of wealth. It is unthinkable to
achieve a reconciliation between the general interests of society and
private interests without workable patterns for redistribution of eco-
nomic power. This line of action unquestionably involves some risk.

But there is risk inherent in leaving the situation unchanged. Sweden's
enduring social peace has been a historic achievement.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Mondoperaio Bdizioni Avantil
6182
C50: 3104/58

hl
FORCWFKJALI£NEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

GENERAL ITALY

CNR'S DEVELOPMENT PLANS FOR THE ANTARCTIC
Milan CDRRIERE DELLA SBRA in Italian 10 Oct 81 p 13
[Article by Gianni Higliorino: "Isn't Italy Sending Researchers?"]

[Text] Under the ice is Bl Dorado: petroleum, gas and coal, uraniua. and other
valuable metals such as copper and nickle; and. in the 35 million square kilometers
>of the surrounding seas, an immense patrimony of biological resources.

This is the picture of the Antarctic today after 20 years of research made in the
name of science. but with an eye to the economy. In the preeninently inhospitable
region there are A7 permanent bases that are active throughout the year. It is
possible to live and work there and two facts now make it evident that the race to
exploitation is about to begin. Many technologies are already in place and the
aoaent of economic expediency is approaching at a great pace.

Therefore the Antarctic can now be likened to an innense sports track. Twenty-two
countries are already at the starting line, ready to dash in a big race that is not
devoid of difficulties, including political ones. The starting signal could indeed
be given right after the expiration of the Antarctic Treaty, in 1991. Will Italy
be there, too? Until a few months ago the Iatter could not even be proposed. The
coaplete indifference of the Italian political class to the matter of the Antarctic
for 20 years prevented our country from participating in the big international
.prograns that all the najor European and non-European countriee.carried out on the
frozen continent within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty. The Italian scholars,
under the sponsorship of the CNR [National Research Council], have had to be content
with carrying out four small expeditions with the logistical support of other coun-
tries. such as the United States and New Zealand.

Then. atthe beginning of this year. sonathing changed; and in the month of March,
without any vociferous announcements, the Italian parliament finally ratified the
Antarctic Treaty; 3 basic step. but not a resolvable one. The recovery of lost

tine is now impossible. Only a race against time can let us establish a dignified
presence in Antartica through the installation of a permanent base, which is the

condition for participation in the SCAR (Scientific Committee on Artarctic Research)
which coordinates the scientific programs.

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Italy has only 9 years in which to do this, a very orief period, if we consider that
the length of the season in which it is suitable to conduct expeditions and to work
on the base installation is reduced to a few months, from Novenber to February. At
the beginning of March, the last ships and the last planes leave the continent.. The
men who spend the winter in Antarctica have no possibility of physical contact

with the rest of the world until the end of the following October.

Therefore the next few weeks will bs absolutely decisive and in a certain sense will
reveal the actual desire to be present in the Antarctic. "The CNR has already been
at work for some tine," says Carlo Stocchino of the Atmospheric Physics Institute
(who.havingalready participated in four expeditions in addition to a reconnaissance
trip from 1968 to 1976. may be considered the most experienced Italian Antarctic
scholar),"but if funds and the chartering of a ship are not granted soon, we risk
having to postpone everything to the 1982/83 season. thereby losing a whole year."

ideas and suggestions for the establishment of an Italian organization that will be
capable of managing the Antarctic operation. The organisation must be equipped with
an autonomous and very active technical,sdsinistrative.and logistical structure.

According to Stocchinc, the building of a ship is basic to Italy's installing a

base and thus a real presence in the Antarctic. Since the main technical consi~
deration of any expedition is the transportation of sea and materiel, the ship aust
be a compromise between a scans of transport. an icebreaker, and a laboratory ship.
Basic require-ants: great stability (the Antarctic seas are beaten by very violent
stores during which the superstructures of ships are fearfully laden with ice) and
great strength. A flight deck for a helicopter with an appropriate hangar is indis-
pensable. It is thought that the largest of the five ships being planned by the

CNR could be conceived with these characteristics.

The broad aspects of the possible Italian Antarctic program have already been
studied. After a small expedition that should leave by the end of this year for the

programs, a second stage (1982/83) should open with theequipping of a ship and the
establishnent of a base. Only beginning with 1984 can the actual research program
start.

Several reasons suggest that the Italian base be located near the existing Hcﬂurdo
(U.S.A.) base on the Ross Ice Shelf, or also near the German base located on the
Ronne Ice Shelf. Proximity to heHurdo would make it possible to utilize the landing
strips of william Field and its “port." The base aoreover would be near the
Transantsrctic Range and the Dry Valleys, with their considerable facilities for

the displacement of helicopters. Further-ore. a base on Ross island would make it
possible to carry out operations as far the oppositeﬂhddeISaa by plane. or as far
as the Aaundsen and Bellingshausen seas by ship.

“3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The choice of the Ronne Ice Shelf would be important chiefly because of its nearness
to the Pensacola mountain range and the Derek massif that offer promising possi-
biiities for the exploitation of mineral resources. But precisely for this reason

there have been controversies for some time among the countries that are Operating
in the area.

The discovery of the resources and the growing possibility that they may become
economically accessible obviously have accentuated the significance of these
controversies and have caused new ones to emerge. Projects like the "Drilling
Project" carried out in the Dry Valleys and that of the Ross Ice Shelf in the Ross
Sea carried out by the Japanese. Americans, and New Zealanders, or the "Biomass"
project (Biological investigations of marine systems and stocks) begun this year
did not fail to cause suspicions and slight disagreements in the countries of the
Third World, which fear being excluded in the future from the possibility of
obtaining the Antarctic resources that they tend to consider to be a joint patri-
mony. 0n the other hand, many countries that operate in the Antarctic claim the
right of exploitation, citing the,point that the discovery of ore deposits is the
fruit of huge investments made over many years.

The entry of Italy into the Antarctic continent is thus occurring within an already
anxious context and with the weakness that alvays characterizes the position of the
latest arrival. For this reason, too. the participation should immediately receive
necessary financial support, currently estimated at about a yearly cost of 10
billion, at present costs, apart from the cost of the installation of the base and
the building of the ship. But political and diplomatic support will also be very
important as a contribution to an effort that must be a Joint one in order to

prevent the race to the exploitation of the Antarctic from becoming the cause of
dangerous conflicts.

8255 END
C80: 3106/55

hh
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY