FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10559
2 June 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omen. [BE ONLY
.ms publicationa contain intonation priearily iroe ioreign
nevapapere. periodicala and booke, but alao tron neva agency
tranaliaaiona and broadcaata. Materiala tron foreign-language
eourcea are tranalated; those (to. Bngliah-languege aourcee
are tranacribed or reprinted. with the original phraaing and
odaer characteriatice retained.

laadlinea, editorial reporta, and naterial ancloaed in bracketa
[] are aupplied by m. Proceaaing indicatora auch aa [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the tint line of each item, or tolloving the
laat line of a brief. indicate how the original infatuation uaa
procaaaed. were no proceaaing indicator ia given, the inter.
ution wee amrired or extracted.

Unfeeiliar naeea rendered phonetically or tranaliterated are
entloaed in parentheaea. Horde or nanea preceded by a quea-
tion nark and encloaed in parentheaea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplied an appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notea within the body of an
iten originate with the aource. Thee within iteaa are ae
given by aource.

the contenta of thia publication in no way repreaent the poli-
ciea, vieva or attitudea of the 0.8. Govern-ant.

COPYRIGT IANS AND RBGIM‘IIONS GWBRNING WNKRSIIIP OP
“TRIALS ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINA‘I‘ION
OF THIS PURICATION 3! RESTRICTED PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EURCPE REPORT
Science mo Temowcv

(rooo 10/92)
CONTEﬂTs

man-weight Plastic sum-y Muted by French
(muter‘ 8cm“.m.m&) COCOOOUOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.. 1

Brief:
00d Quincetiom Che-10d hebtocke 5

EMT!!!“ mower

Mann-Mn 'l'o Construct molten-Mac Robots
(c11wrhm£.‘um. 7»: &) OOOOODOODDO0.000000000000 6

SCIEICB POLICY

Government To Acquire 51 Percent of W
(“R ‘ mm. 3 Apr &) 00.0.0.0.00000.00.00...OOOOOOOCOOOOOOO 8

TMPOM'A'I'IG

Bub-PurcMId-3h0 Project mun Pause Three
(m‘cww. 3": &) 00.00....'QOO'OOOOOCCCCCCCOCOCCOI'OQ‘ 10

ProJect Deecriptlon. Schedule. by Red- lore
Cockpit, Avionics

llev Appllcntion com»: Rabat, “new” Outur
(un‘mm’ a», &) 0000000...OOOOOODOOOOOOIOOOOOOO0.0oooe 15

First mm of Airbue A310 Conlete aucceu
(Jecquee Ibriuet; unnmm. 10 Apr 82) . 1?

Volkswagen Autombne madne- for Alcohol Nels
(Ger-d Decker. lolaer lured; m monument: run-3mm.

M 82) eeeeeeeeeeeeenee.eeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeetoeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeee 21

-.- [In-n-lnscrm
momwslomv '
near-mm PLASTIC ”WY PAW BY rm
mu scmc: e m: in Yrench ept'ez pp 13-77. 151
[Article by Anne Alter: "Long-Life Pleetic Betteriee"]

[Excerpte] um: plaetic etorege betteriee. the techniQue of battery annuiec-
ture hae juet nede e leap forwerd. Creeted eimlteneouely in hence end in
the United 8tetee. they are five tinee ee dureble ee their predeceeeore end
lighter. lut et firet no one believed in the...”

In March 1981 a petent for etoreee bettery wee epplied for in the nene of the
cams [Notional Scientific leeeerch Center] by leniere. Franco end houboutin.
An hour eerlier, univereel tine. American ecientiete at the Univereity of
Penneylvanie had eleo applied for e etorege bettery potent. The letter wee
received by the north American preee ee e greet innovation in the eree of
electroche-icel generetore. or cello end etorege betteriee. The French in-
vention. which in eiailer. only creeted a few echoe.

It in true thet each yeer there are dozene of patent epplicatione for cello
end etorage betteriee. they range iron the ieprovnent of e technical deteil
to the deecription of enhitioue eeneretore. none of which would prohe'bly heve
difficulty producing the elishteet current. And it ie true thet none of theee
inventions hee yet eupplanted the inventione eede over e century ego by Plente
(lend etorege bettery in 1859) end Leclanche (dry cell in 1870) which cover
elnoet the entire world nerket for electrochenicel eeneretore.

‘l'hie ie enother latter. The invention nentioned above. French ee well no
Aeerican, is truly en invention. It ie a coqletely plaetic generetor.

Prance-Anerice: Bx Aequo

Theee two etorege betteriee have en ordinery eppeerence. Yet they have e
cherecterietic thet ien't: their electrodee are pleetic (lore precieely.
polyecetylene). which ehould guerentee the. e lifetine five tinee longer then
that of their predeceeeore.

MOMCIALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Key: .
(e) Motor (e) Liquid electrolyte (1.10104)
(b) Generstor (f) Polyscetylene electrode
(c) Switch (3) Solid silver iodide electrolyte

(d) Polyecetylene electrodes (h) Polyecetylene electrode

The first (1). which we shell cell Anericen beceuee of its origin, operstes
sccording to Volte's principle: two electrodes ere inersed in e liquid
electrolyte (lithiun perchlorate in propylene cerbonete). when the switch
is off, the direct electricel current tron the generator pssees into the
electrolyte which produces its electrolysis, thet is, the migration of posi-
tive ions (in pink here) through the electrolyte towerds the negative elec-
trode (in blue) end vice verse. Thus the two electrodes ere "doped" end the
cell is recherged. 8y turning the switch, the enter cen then be supplied by
the current produced by the cell.

The second (2). nnufectured in trence. operstee on the ssne principle. Bov-
ever, it hes so edditionel chsteeteristic. This tine. the electrolyte is no
longer liquid. but tether solid. It is s silver iodide crystsl (sheded bells
in the inset). The nechenisll of ion conduction csn operste in this cese be-
ceuse of the "defects" in the network fornsd by the ions. despite its greeter
rigidity. In feet. in every crystel there ere defects celled vscsncies end
interstitiels (see erticle). Thet is why the ions csn nove by going in suc-
cessive lesps from vsosnoy tovecency or iron interstitisl to interstitiel
end, inthisnvey. slip through (blue srrov). Since only the positive ions
crests the ion current in this system (in the first. e 4- end - exchenge ves
necessery). the sterege bettery cen operste (block srrovs).

2
2 MW“. USE ONLY
These "all solid" generators have the advantage of being absolutely leak-
proof and can also operate in all positions. which is not the case with the
Aaerican generators where the liquid electrolyte can spill. trancois Deniers.
one of the coinventors of the storage battery. explains to us: "The Ansricano
have applied for a patent for cells with liquid electrolyte. which is o handi-
cap in ny opinion. at least at the oonont. since there is a risk of spontane-
ous reactions of the active notorials A and B in the electrodes. For exenplo.
A can diffuse into the liquid and react without producing a current. That is
what is called the phenonenon oi self-discharge. which aoans that the cell
wears out. even it it is not used (1...). 0n the other hand. our solid elec-
trolyte keeps the stone of the electrodes tron airing with each other and

lets only the positive ions pass. This guarantee against self-discharge con-
stitutes the real innovation of our cell. since ell the cells sold comer-
cially have a sales expiration data. like yogurt.... If you buy a call today.
you have to use it within a given tine. since there is a phone-anon of slow
degradation due to self-discharge. The cell iron the Leclanche patent is a
cell that wears out. even if it is not used. which is not the case with ours.

"The longevity of our cell." P. Deniers goes on to say, "will be 10 years fro-
the date of Ianufacture. The longevity of dry cells is 2 years. The only.
for eunple. is a great consuner of cells because, during nanouvors. cells are
needed to operate transmitters. receivers. etc. Now, currently. it renews its
stocks every 2 years. independently of use considerations."

Francois Deniers is proud to have ignored the shepticisn that he encountered
at first when he proposed to study a plastic storage battery. Subsequent
events show that he was right. In addition to the Japanese. eternal rivals
in all front-line research. a German conpany has assigned 60_spocielists to
work on this storage battery and. in the United States. 8 large firms are
also interested in it.

The reasons for this lively interest are obvious. First of all. the price.
which should be lowered because of sinplor aanufacturing processes and also
because the polymer selected is cheap and easy to work. It can also be pour-
ed in sheets or compressed without notable problens. and the cells can be
manufactured practically at ordinary temperature. while netals require high
temperatures and a note conplox. therefore costly. technology.

Then. there is convenience: the French storage batteries operate nor-ally
tron -90‘C to +120'c which makes than capable of 'operating at the poles as
well as at the equator.

Finally there is its lightness. an obvious advantage that appears to be re-
viving the possibility of an electric car. at least in the long tern. Sodiu-
sulfurbbeta alumina storage batteries. by which it was once envisaged that
lead batteries. which are infinitely too heavy for cars. could be replaced.
require the nelting of tens of kilos of sodium at 300“: which has attenuated
the interest of industrial companies. to say the least. But there. 1". Beniere
is reserved.

For quart: watches. cameras. alarm clocks. cells capable of lasting 10 years
(with recharging every 2 years and 20 nillianporea of current). plastic

3.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

etorage batteriee ecen coapetitive. vith their lifetime and their quality
lore then conpeneating for a price higher than that of traditional cella.

0n the other hand. for operating an average car. P. Beniera eatinatee that

a 20.000-anere (A) battery would be required for e range of only 100 kn.
"Then.” he eaye coolly. "you would have to provide a tavern, eincc recharging
tine at a current dietrihutor ie no leee than 1 hour.”

Given the fact that plaetic etorage hetteriea for vatchea. for ere-pie. heve
a current inteneity of 0.1 A/hr. their perronencee met be increeeed by a
factor of 100,000. "l'het ie coneiderable.” heniere oheervee. "and I do not
think that our 'all~eolid' cello will get the electric car induetry loving.
He do not have the right electrolyte." he for the Anericane' liquid electro-
lyte. it doee not prevent eel! diacharge. even if the battery in lighter.
Nevertheleee. the way eeeee leee difficult. And we have probably not heard
the loot fro- the pleetic etorage battery.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Science et Vie"

9969
080: 3102/ 250

MWUSEONLY
ENERGY MC!

COAL GASIFICATIG: CBDIICAL ”mm-Tho Quentin council of Cd? Gainio

natural goo which can be fed into the GD! (Roach Cu Cmny) diotribution
linen or used no induatrial fuel. For thin reason. tha otudiu nlroady
undaway ara being conducted Jointly vith GDP. EDP [Punch Electric Powar
Company]. tho Lon-lino Baain Coal lining Oonpany. and with financial aupport
fro- th. Kiniatty of lnduotty. luginaaring conoultant lino arc cuttontly
anointing in (emulating plans for this project. A dacioion could bo Inda by
late 1982 or early 1983. Piano Maud will alao Ionitor fmibility atudico
for an monia plant uoing gaaifiad coal and to ba built in Blazingarba.

Thou two projacto conotituto on. of tho Iain court. of action in tho Cd?
Chinie'o ottatngy. Thait ilpl-ontntion would oontributa to option. on of

polyethelcnc. Smitouo. a Japanese firn, m rocontly granted a liconoo to
non thin procau. Piano Dar-Id in 63 and a nining ongincat (Saint-Etienne

School of Mining). [Tout] [Pari- 3mm DB L'BIBRGIB in Frcnch 16 liar 82
p 12] 80141

680: 3102/257
”WWW?

mama. W

mm 1’0 WC? mum-um ROMS
Paria LB KAT!!! in French 7 Apr 82 p 6

[Articla by Olivar Paratia: "Robotica: Ihnurhin To Sign Agraanant Hith
Pujitm-Fanuc"!

[Text] A waak batora Prancoia Hittarrnd'a official viait to Tokyo.

Fuj itay-Panucua ananaaa fir- nnd tha world'a nubar-two nanufacturar of
induatrial robota attar Unination. an Anarican coqanynhaa annomcad it will
soon aign an agraanant with Hanurhin. ona of Pranca'a najor nachina-tool
nanufacturara. Initially. Hanurhin will aall tanuc robota. ‘l'han in January
1903. it will atart building than udar licanaa.

For aona tina now. Fujitau-Ianuc haa atirrad tha imagination of Ranch
raaaarchara and induatrialiata. "any of than hava hard about tha plant it

had opanad at tha baaa of tha Mount Fuji, a plant in which robota produca

nora robota. rujitau. tha ginnt conputar and talaco-unicationa corporation.
holda a SO—parcant intaraat in Pujitau-hnuc. In juat 6 yaara tina. tba lattar

haa banana the wotld'a laading producar of nunarical control ayataa. thoaa
"black boxaa" that aarva aa autonomic-control unita for nachina toola. It
nlona (urniahaa half of tha world output 0! auch mtana.

111a firn'a vary anrly intaraazz in "anart" robota—thoaa nachinaa capabla of
guiding thanalvaauwaa a very logical davalopnant. Daapita ita doninant
poaition in thia advancad tachnoloc aactor. robotica atill accounta for
naraly 2 parcant of tha firn'a total annual aalaa of 2.6 billion tranca.

but thia figura ia quita taqoraty bacauaa Pujitau-Panuc'a annual rata of
growth haa baan nora than 50 parcant ainca 1978. And tha ananaaa narkat for
robota is growing at an avan (aatar‘rata.

This than ia the alnoat aythical partnar that Hanurhin'a Ianaganant aought
and found. ‘l‘ha Hulhouaa coqbany ia one of Iranca'a leading nachina-tool
nanufacturara. It alao balonga to Hatra. 'l'bat nabuloua corporation. haadad
by Joan-Lac Lagardara. actually owna 3S parcant of Hanurhin'a capital atock.

Son: 12 nontha ago. Paul Calpball-l'iagh. ganaral nanagar of Hanurhin-Autonatic.
tha Alaatian (in'a aubaidiary and producar of ita nunarical control ayatana.
opanad nagotiationa with Fujitay-Yanuc. Thaaa talka ware rccantly brought to
a auccaaaful noncluaion. 0n 2 Jma. Saiuanon Inaba, praaidant of tha Tokyo

mmumv
fire. will arrive in Parie to eign the formal agreement.

As of this owner. Hanurhin-Autonatic will. therefore. begin selling the entire
line of Fujiteu-Panuc robota in France and than in Europe. As of January 1983.
it will etart aanufacturing theee robota under licenae. Ita initial output
will be quite aodeat inaemch as the new production facility will e-ploy only
about ‘0 peraona, or 10 percent of the coqeny'a preaent work force. Even
though Paul Canphell-‘I‘iegh declined to lake the alighteet forecast. it ie

alaoat certain that hie coupany'e nulber of uployeea and annual aalee--l$0
Iillion trance in l981-will increaae rapidly.

A few daya prior to Francois Hitterrend'a wiait to Japan. Pujitau-Panuc haa
thue eat a good emle for well-designed Japaneae-European cooperation. The
Japaneae fir- haa likewiee found a graceful way of penetrating the European
market without fear of protectioniat repriaale. Nevertheleea. thia agree-eat
could upaet executives of Sieaena. a Gerun firm which ia alao a large aupplier
of numerical control ayateu. In addition. Sielena haa hueineea tiea with
Fujitsu in the large coeputer field.

Hanurhin obvioualy did not deal with the Japaneae without prior approval of the
Hinietry of Induetry. Furthermore. Hanurhin'a action conform to the wiahee

of 0131.! (Electronice Induetriee Directorate) officiale. Theee officiala are
convinced that France must move very quickly into robotics, becauae the
technology will not wait for us to catch up. For thie reaaon. the Alantiena
quite eiaply nought that technology where it exiata, na-ely in Japan.

8061
C80: 3102/257

mammal“
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

some: POLICY

WWTOACQUIBB 51 Pm ormu
Parie AIR 8 com in French 3 Apr 82 p 9
[Article: "Draft Agreenent between the Coven-eat and MIRA”)

[Text] The draft agree-ent aigned on 18 March 1982 between the prelier,
Pierre limroy. en! Jean-Inc Lagardere, cheiraen of the board of DIANA [General
Mechanical Aaronautice Conpany. Propulsion Section]. and settling the nethode
of etate participation in the conpany'e capital etoch wae approved by HAIBA'e
board of directore on 26 March 1982.

M dietinct operatione are coveted by thie draft agree-ant under whoee terne
the etate will acquire 51 percent of HAIRA'e capital.

Public Exchange Offer by man

(IBM [Rational Office for Aaroepace Studiee and Reeearch] will ate a public
exchange offer involving 622,000 WA eharee (that to. 25.5 percent of the
group'e etock). It will propoee that etockholdere exchange one ehare againet
a 15-year debentune with a face value of 1.800 france (with intereet payable
iron 1 January 1982).“ it being underetood that there will be e proportionate
reduction in the ratio of the amber of eheree nentioned above with reference
to the total umber of eharee exchanged in accordance with the regulations of
the Stockbrokere Aeeocietion. The offer will open on 13 April 1982 and cloee
on 1‘ May 1982. The nejority group indicated ite decieion to preeent all the
etock that it controle in the no [public exchange offer]. the neceuary etepe
will be taken eo that HAl'RA etock nay again be quoted on the etock exchange on
5 April 1982, a few daye before the offer opene.

lncreeee in Capital Reeerved for the State

An increaee in capital reaerved for the etate involving 422,000 new eharea
with face value of 100 france and ieeued at the price of 1,625 trance with
intereet payable ae of 1 January 1982 ie to be fully paid up et the tile of
eubecription. Thie increaee in capital will be eubnitted to the etockholdere
at the gencelneetilu called for 29 April 1982. It will be available for

Fl'ﬁe repurcﬁaee price initielly propoeed by the govern-en: wee 1.215 france
per ehare.

MWWMY
subscription i-ediately following the closing of the 1’20. The resolutions to
be subaitted to the general aseting also include the following:

—m: the board of directors be us. up of 12 mu, 6 representing the
government and 6 representing the relaining shareholders;

-'1'hat the bylaws conferring the right to two votes for each share noninally
held by the seas stockholder for more then 5 years be canceled.

The designation of the new board of directors will take place at the end of
June 1982 but the special general Ieeting of stockholders called for 1500 hours
at the notel George V in Paris will bring the present board of directors up to
12 tubers by noainating I; persons put up by the goveruent and whose nandate
will take effect as soon as the increased capital is subscribed.

Results of Fiscal 1981

W's board of directors, which let on 26 lurch 1982 under the chainsnship
of Jean-Luc Lagardere, closed the consoy's accounts relating to fiscal 1981.
The total sales (before taxes) cans to 6.501 million francs (co-pared to 2,903
million in fiscal 1980). Net profit after taxes was 157.3 nillion francs
after the creation ofa special reserve fund to provide for the aployees‘
profit-sharing plan (18.6 aillion francs). the assqtion of the entire lia-
bility of the contingency fund for losses and expenses shown in the balance
sheet as of 31 December 1980 (100 aillion francs). the write-off of losses
sustained at the branches-oautonobile construction. electronics, clock-skins
and watchnaking--both as regards funded allocations (161 aillion francs) and
credits (185 aillion francs). At the regular ;eneral stockholders' nesting
the board of directors will prOpose distribution of a 57-franc dividend (50
francs in fiscal 1980) plus capital gains of 28.50 francs. Estimates for
total sales in 1982 cone to 5.5 billion francs (before taxes). up by 22.2
percent over the previous fiscal year.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

2662
080: 3102/ 222

l-‘OIOI'l-TCIALUSEONLY

a
FOR OFFICIAL USE OilLY

TRANSPORTATION

SMBoFAIRCHILD-IMO realm ENTERS PHASB mu
Project Description, Schedule
Paris AIR s. 009108 in French 3 Apr 82 pp 15, 17, 610
[Article by Regis Noye: "Saab-Pairchild: An Effective COOperation“)

[Text] Eight nonths after the prototype left the shop, the progran of the
American-Swedish sr-aao "co-Inter" plane, developed jointly by Saab-Scania

and Fairchild Industries, has now calls to naturity. Phase three of the con-
struction, properly speaking. has been underway since Member. at which tine
all the characteristics of the apparatus were established and its principal
systel" and equip-en: chosen. Thus. the sr-aao is the most advanced of the
five prograns of co-uter planes with seating capacity for nore than 30 per-
sons presently under development throughout the world, inediately followed

by the Dash-8 of de Havilland Canada and the Brasilia of new [Brazilian
Aeronautics (ﬂu-Pony] (the other two beta the Ark-62 and the Cass—Nurtanio-ZSS).
0n the col-ercial level. despite a nsrked slowdown in sales felt for sole nontha
by Saab-Pairehild (as, noreover, by the conpetition) and attributed to the
worldwide economic recession, the total nulber of orders has reached 116. of
which 6 are options, or. according to the nanufacturers, nearly 30 percent of
the total sales obtained up to now by the S coapetitors (7). [Sentence as
published]

In order to show the detailed progress of the work on both sides of the Atlantic,
as well as the facilities developed in Sweden, Saab-Scania invited about 20
journalists of the international aeronautical press to Linkoping at the begin-
ning of the week.

Let us first recall that the first agree-eat ained at jointly developing a
twin-propeller regional transport plane was signed by the two firm in June
1979 at the Bourget Exposition. The first phase of the progrn, consisting of
the overall definition of the project during which the choice of actors was
made, was conpleted in Septenber 1980. The two parties had quickly agreed in
their thinking and, a short tine after a narket study indicating that between
now and 1991. there would be a worldwide need for 1,600 to 2,000 units of the
chosen category, they decided on the official launching of the “-360. Since
then, the second phase, consisting of a detailed study of the equip-ent and
necessary tooling. took a little nore than a year. being coqleted last
Hove-her when the first prototypes of the wings and fuselage nade their

10
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
appearance. Meanwhile. two important developments were made in June 1981:

the choice of an entirely numerical standard form of avionics and rounding

the bend on 100 orders. Since that time, the engineering mockup, constructed
in wood at a scale of 1 to 1, has been serving only to finalize certain systems.
It is to be noted that more than 60 percent of the general engineering of the
equipment is attributed to Saab-Scanaaand that the two manufacturers are making
considerable use of computer assisted techniques: 20 percent of the airframe
and systems and 60 percent of the tooling were thus conceived.

The Saab-Fairchild-340 is noted for the importance attached to the economy
factor resulting from the application of advanced techniques: modern General
Electric CT7-S motors (1,675 hp),; three-bladed Dowty Botol propellers made
of composite materials; assemblage of parts by gluing (aluminum on aluminum
for subassemblies of the airfoil and fuselage; aluainua on honeycomb for the
fins and stabilizers); the use of composite materials of sandwich construction
(kevlar-kevlar for the motor shafts, the airfoil karmans, the ailerons. the
mobile tall stabilizers; glass on glass for the radoms. air inlets and cabin
floorboard); numerical avionics (see page 19 of this edition) comprising five
Collins cathode visualization instruments and a fuel control system. The
economy factor is not only apparent in fuel consumption (65 seats per nautical
mile per 0.5. gallon* for 34 passengers, or at least 20 percent better than
the old generation aircraft like the Fokker F-27-500), but also in maintenance.
Thus, the SF-360 will be a craft which offers an extremely low DOC (direct
operational cost), estimated, for example, to be less than 70 percent of that
of the Gulf Stream 1, its principal competitor in the United States at present.

Let us recall at this time that the SF-340 is planned to appear in two versions:
one called an "airliner" for the transport of 36 passengers (11 rows of 3 seats
in front plus 1 row of 4 seats in the back at a distance of 30 inches); the
other called an "executive" for business trips and having a capacity of 12 or

16 seats according to the chosen arrangement. Other versions are now being
studied: for cargo or military use and with stretch-body configuration. Al-
though Saab-Pairchild is not yet giving out any details on the latter, it
nevertheless admits that its capacity will be limited to 50 passengers due to
the chosen width of the fuselage (2.16 meters inside), permitting only 3 seats
in front.

The performance and characteristics of the SP-340 have naturally changed since
the beginning of the studies. Among the latter we note the following: a cer-
tain increase in weight (7,194 kg empty compared with 6,668 formerly; 11,794

kg on takeoff compared with 11,340), which means a slight decrease in the pay-
load (3,239 kg compared with 3,311), and an increase in the length of the run-
way required for takeoff (1,175 meters compared with 1,082) and a lowering of

the ceiling on one motor. 0n the other hand, the maximum cruising speed went

from 480 km per hour to 507 km per hour and the distance which can be cleared

with 34 passengers and IFR reserve went from 1,520 km to 1,670 km.

*0: 22 seats per kilometer per liter of fuel.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

Distribution of Kanufacture

0n the production side. the distribution of workloads is 50 percent for each,
value-wise. Pairchild Industries is responsible for manufacturing the airfoil
and motor shafts as well as the teilfins; the Insrican firm is also responsible
for the fuel circuit and all that part of the hydraulic systea which is inte-
gral to it, so that the fuel cyst-s can come completely equipped from Long
Island (New York). horeover. they have assigned to their affiliate, Swearingen
(Texas) the manufacture of the entire cabin arrangement and its coqonsnts as
well as their installation on the planes. which will be delivered to the United
States. 8eeb-8cania, in turn, is building the fuselage assedwly (divided in
three sections) as well as the airfoil her-ans. The final assembly will also
take place in Linhoping. In this connection. the Swedish fire has invested
200 million Swedish krona in the construction of new installations with a
surface area of 25,000 square esters, including a hanger 185 meters long by

35 meters wide by 12 esters high to house the assembly line coqrising 12 work
stations. Horeover, the new buildings house a machine shop. a surface-treatment
shOp and a gluing shop, the latter two having been operational since August.
They have a large group of machine tools. representing 52 percent of the total
invest-ant. and many of which have nuerical control. however, these new facil-
ities night prove to be too narrow to house the preasseﬁly bays (presently
installed next to the Vari-Viggen asseﬂaly line) and the paint shop (not yet
located). The first fuselage parts were manufactured in the underground facil-
ities usually reserved for military program...

Pirst Flidxt in 10 Honths

An initial series of 15 units has been under construction since War on one
or the other side of the Atlantic. Although the upper and lower panels of the
two initial fusslages are already waiting for final assedaly, the side panels
are in preassemly, while those of the following two (reserved respectively for
static and fatigue tests) are being fastened together. The first tail fin will
arrive in Linkoping in May and the first airfoil in August, when the final
assembly of prototype he 1 will begin; this prototype is scheduled to leave

the shop in November, and the first flight will be at the beginning of next
year. followed shortly thereafter by No 2. Moreover, the CT'I-SA motor is to
begin its trials in flight. with the Dowty propeller, in August at General
Electric's flight-testing facility (a Gulf Stream 1). The construction of a
series of 10 motors is already underway with 6 units to be delivered this It.-
ner (6 for the two prototypes and 2 spare units), the first sale of the
series not to be sent to Saab-Scania until 1983.

certification of the SP-360 calls for 1,000 flight hours, which will be com-
pleted on the two prototypes by the end of 1984. Swedish confirmation will
first be granted by the m [Swedish Rational Civil Aviation Administration]
European [JAR 25 norms). then the American-(TAD. 25). At this point we may note
that the total investment in the Saab-Peirchild 360 program is estimated at
$100 million and that the total nuber of people eqloyed in the program comes
to 1,500, divided equally between the two firms.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
Half of the Break-Even Point

0n the camaercial side, the 116 orders now on the books represent more than half
of the program's break-even point, estimated at 200 units sold. The prime
objective is to reach this figure before the first delivery. To do this, the
organisation put together by Saab-Pairchild is the following: responsibility
for the North American continent (United States, Canada, Mexico) is assigned

to Pairchild Swearingen (58 planes ordered, half of which are of the executive
version); for Australia end Southeast Asia to the distributor, Stillwell Avia-
tion (Sydney); for the rest of the world to the joint Saab-Pairchild BB
affiliate, whose administration is in Linkoping with headquarters in Paris

(58 planes sold, 6 being optional). One lest word on the subject of the unit's
price: $4.75 million for the airliner version, $5.5 million for the executive
version (according to ecanonic conditions of November 1981).

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

Cockpit, Avionics

Paris AIR a COSMOS in French 3 Apr 82 p 19
[Article by c.c.: "SP-340: Only m1 Hith Cathode 1nstruments"]

[Text] Elsewhere in this edition we have given a detailed picture of the
8F-360's cockpit and avionics system.

Obviously, the cockpit is designed for two pilots without a third man. It has
five color cathode visualizations (Collins); two in the pilot and copilot
areas (electronic ADI [Attitude Director Indicator] and 881 [Horizontal Situ-
ation Indicator]) and a fifth (optional in a central panel; the latter serves
for the general presentation of navigational information, checklists and so on.

It will be noted that Saab-Pairchild is no longer proposing an "electromechani-
cal" version for the principal flight instruments: the advantages of the '
cathode system in terms of reliability and maintenance costs (cost of ownership)
appear to be attractive enough to make all users renounce conventional instru-

ments. This simplifies the task of the engineering departments of the aircraft
manufacturers.

With regard to the avionics system, the four principal cathode visualizations
are fed by two conventional generators. These receive information from ane-
mouetric and cinematic collectors, particularly the behavioral power station,
which is of the connected-components type, also Collins.

The upper panel is in conformance with the generally accepted principle: "if
everything is extinguished, all is well."

Pilot visibility is good, in fact better than that recommended by document
SABSSOB.

With regard to suppliers, we note that Collins has the lion's share in this
plane, particularly with the cathode visualizations, the automatic pilot

l3
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(NNLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sue-my end the flight controlunI-ericeluend thehesd end verticel power
stetion with connected couponente.

Finally, it should he noted that Sub end Feirchild have retained certsin
French equip-eat suppliers for this plane:

«Set-e, which has just received e contrect for cehle tension regulators for
the first 50 units with en option on the next 150.

«Jeefer: first order of nore then 10 million frence for penel instruente
(sltineter, enenoneter. verioneteruprincipel end standby).

«stenn: 3-inch horizon stendhy syroecopes.
«Soft, en order for 30 hstteries in connection with this progra.
COPYRIGRI: A. 8 C. 1982

8568
080: 3102/ 221

1':

”MUSEMY
m APPLICATION mm m, umm amen

Paris All s 008108 in French 3 Apr 82 p 35

(Article: ”Systen of Robotised Hater-Jet cutter for Fiberglass. Charged
Plastics and Conceite Iaterials")

[text] Plow 8ystsns,_ Mall. Darnetadt, is introducing on the narket a new
application for industrial robots. The oodinstion of an industrial robot with
a water-jet cutter device results in s'"ilsternife” (patented), a flexible cut-
ting tool of special attraction to the plastics industry. the utouobile indus-
try. the aerospace industry and defense industries. The cutting instruent is
an extrenely thin, steady water-jet, sinilar to a laser bean, nade up of clear
water at very high pressure (6,000 bars) and released at speeds reaching

1.000 Ieters per second. The jet is for-ed when water area through an inex-
pensive synthetic sapphire. lonetallic natsriale such as plastics reinforced
by fiberglass. charged plastics, especially conceits naterials with an era-
nids fiber base. even colposite naterials with a graphite base. nay thus be
cut at great speed without producing dust and with a good quality of out
surfaces.

The high-pressure water-jet raised to 6.000 hers is driven to the extremity of
the robot through a codination of turning Joints and spiral tubing.

The water pressure is intensified by a Waternife" generator able to serve six
robotired working stations.

The start-and—stop co-snd of the water-Jet is effected directly at the entren-
ity of the robot by a single "lnstajet" (patented) high-pressure start-snd-stop
vent asking possible an instantaneous increase of pressure fron 0 to 6.000 bars
for piercing and the possibility of punching openings at any point in the sister5
ial. All the co-snd functions of the jet are integrated in the robot's co-snd

program.

As a general rule, the industrial robot is an integral part of the "Haternife"
water-jet aystsn. This arrangement is designed to cut openings in the inter-
nsl psnels of autonobiles in the plant of an ilportant autonobile unufacturer
in the United States. Similar systeIs are now being tested for definitive

evaluation in large European. inerican. and Japanese firms of the aerospace
and auto-obile industries.

"WWWLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Want-nit." cutting dcvicc may be fitted into the following industrial

robots: Ana, Cincimuti-Itilacron, Jobs. Kuhn. Niko, Remult-Sybotoch (Acu
Cribiet), and Unintion.

 

Robot equipped with a "Hatemifc" water-jet
device, hot. sun cutting the interior panel
of an automobile.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

2662
650: 3102/222

16

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIRST FLIGHT OF AIRBUS A310 mm 81100388
Paris AIR ET WW3 in Punch 10 Apr 82 pp 2b-26

[Article by Jacques Horisset: "Airbus A310's First Flight Complete Success"]

[Text] The In 1 Airbus A310 made its first flight from Ioulouse-Blagnac Airport
on 3 April exactly as planned. The aircraft took off at 0633 our, i.e. 0833
local time. and landed 93 ninutes later. lernerd Ziegler. Airbus Industria's
flight test and support director. told us that this initial flight had "met

all of the preplanned test goals and even a bit more." Ziegler piloted

the A310 with Pierre Baud as copilot. Three flight test engineers-4unter
Scherer, Gerard Guyot, and Jean-Pierre Fluent-also were on board to handle
the test instruentation and data monitoring duties. The aircraft's test
equip-ant simltaneously measures 1,330 paraseters. This equipment includes an
airborne real-tine conputer. A telemetry system also enables ground personnel
to evaluate some 10 structural paraneters continuously and monitor traffic on
the aircraft's intercom.

Takeoff weight was 122 tons. In addition to a partial load of fuel (34 tons),
the aircraft carried 10 tons of flight test instrmentation plus water used
as ballast because of the variations in the aircraft's center of gravity
position (average of 25 percent in this first flight). Approxinately 15. tons
of fuel were burned during the flight which had been limited to an area
bounded by Narbonne, Cahors. and the Pyrenees, thus remaining relatively close
to Toulouse and within telemetry range.

Complete Success

The flightcrew considered this initial flight a complete success. Pierre baud
assured us that during the entire flight the 'PCC [forward-facing crew cockpit]
and its new systems "had functioned to perfection. living up to all our
expectations. In other words. it made the crew's task easier and enhanced

the aircraft's overall performance. There is no doubt that this is the

result of the careful and neticulous preparatory work done earlier in a
simulator and in actual flight in our own A300."

The new cockpit is optimized for use by a crew all of whose nembers are facing
forward. Its equipment includes: push-button multifunction systems panels;
electronic flight instrusant system (2318) with cathode ray tube (on) displays;

1?
"WWW?
anemones“

an electronic centralized aircraft monitoring systee (BCAH) with CRT displays
of the status of aircraft systees during every phase of flight. Ilence the
me is definitely the cockpit of tonorrow's generation of aircraft becone
reality.

Also noteworthy is the use of such new advanced technology systeas as: status
lights for control of spoilers. brakes, slate. and flaps: digital monitoring
equipeent for all systeas, including the inertial navigation systen; thrust
controls; an auto-stic flight control systee (CAVD) which includes a Category
3 auto-atic landing capability. All of the above are linked to a flight
Ianageeent systel (PUB).

Bernard Ziegler told us that free the very first ainutes of the flight "the

crew had felt perfectly coefortable in this new environ-cut. The sale will

certainly be true for all the crews that will soon be flying this aircraft.

Never in all In previous experience have I found it so easy to open the gate
to the future. I believe this is because of an insginetive but progressive

policy of applying techniques designed to produce. without any risks to our

custolers. the constantly improved perforeance they require."

Ziegler also quickly listed what had been achieved during this first flight.
He eust say that this list is quite iepressivs considering the fact that this
is a coepletely new aircraft naking its Iaiden flight:

a. Evaluations of the flight envelope ranged fron slow flight at a speed 1.1
tines the stall speed to a naxieun speed of 360 knots/Mach 0.77. and at a top
altitude of 31,000 feet.

b. Flaps. slats. and landing gear were first tested in five configurations:
lS-degree flaps and slate on takeoff, than landing gear retracted. then flaps
retracted, then slats retracted. The crew then tested takeoff configurations
with 20-degree flaps and lS-degree slats; holding pattern with (solely)
15-degree slats; landing with 30-degree slate and 60-degree flaps. Lastly.
large angles of attack were tested up to l7-degree effective angle of attack
(stalling should occur at about 21 to 22 degrees).

c. All aircraft "systens" perforeed well, including, of course, the Pratt and
Uhitney JT9D-7R‘ engines and all flight control aids (autothrottle. yaw

deeper. etc.). the brakes (fully set). etc. No significant problees were
encountered. but this first flight did indicate the advisability of aodifying

the coordination (roll-pitch) "gains" and reducing the artificial feel

systee about 20 percent. This will be done for the second test flight. In fact.
the A310's overall perforeance is already nearly perfect.

d. Perforeance evaluations were aade at two flight levels: 25,000 feet and
31.000 feet. The initial findings are that the aircraft perforeed as

predicted.

e. The on-board Garrett APU [auxiliary power unit] was put into operation on
the ground to start the aircraft engines. It ran during the entire flight.
In fact. "it was forgotten.“ The landing gear and brakes were conpletely

18

IOI4UIIIJAI.UII(I!LY
satisfactory. and so were the thrust reversers (employed at full capacity for
this first landing). In fact. only one system problem was encountered: one

of the two computer channels in the fuel quantity indicator system
malfunctioned.

f. Special mention must be made of Sfena's automatic flight control system
(CADV). Its two digital autopilots were used quite extensively during, for
example. perfornance evaluation in cruise. All modes were employed, including

new modes such as the "change of level." The first approach wee a CADV-coupled
approach to an altitude of 700 feet.

Lastly. the crew reported they had felt they were flying in "an already
familiar aircraft." This "familiarity" is the result of 10 years of work and
close cooperation not only between the various participants in the Airbus
program but also between design offices and the test pilots and flight test
engineers. It will be recalled. in this connection. that the test pilots and
flight test engineers participated in the developnent of the new aircraft and
its cockpit. thereby giving the A310 benefit of experience gained not only in
developing the A300 but also in placing the aircraft in service in each
customer airline. Aitbue test pilots and flight test engineers do not merely
work at Toulouse. In fact. when new aircraft are delivered to an airline.
they regularly assist that cuetoner in entering the aircraft into service on
its route network. Of course. the work done earlier in the simulator and on

- No 3 Airbus [testbed aircraft]--systems. digital eutopilot-were especially
beneficial.

As of early this week, the A310's second test flight is scheduled for 8 April.
It will be used to open the flight envelope even more, thanks to the first
flutter measurements (by means of "flutter vanes"). Other planned test goals
include flying with asymmetric thrust, evaluating the aircraft's manual
handling qualities. and making the first in-flight engine restarting tests.

The test program will focus on three principal tasks during several dozen
hours of flying over the next few weeks: conplete performance evaluation in

cruise and on takeoff. and stall tests. Bernard Ziegler hopes to be able to
accomplish the major part of this work in only 1 month.

The second A310 is expected to begin flying on 6 Hey. Then in late July or
early August, a third A310--fitted with General Electric CP6-80A engines-will
participate in the basic flight progran. It is already apparent, however,
that the A310 is a successful aircraft. Its first flight had an exceptional
number of test goals and the A310 lived up to the expectations of all

European Ianufacturers involved in the program. It also further enhanced

the Airbus consortium's credibility with respect to its development of the
future A320 transport.

A310 Sales

Airbus Industrie has officially received a total of 180 A310 orders to date:
90 fire orders and 90 options. Following is an alphabetical list of the

15 airline customers (the selected engine manufacturer is shown in
parentheses): Air France, 5 fire orders plus 10 options (08); Austrian

l9
IOI‘DUIICIAL|UII10NIN
summon“

Airlines. 2 plus 2 (PH); British Caledonian. 3 plus 3 (GB); Mrus Airways.
2 (0!); m. 10 plus 10 (0!); Kuwait Airways. 8 (W); Lybisn Arab. 6;
Lufthansa. 25 plus 25 (GB): Hertinair. 3 plus 1 (GB): Hiddle Best, 5 plus
16 (PH); ligsria Airways, 6 plus 6 (W); Sabena, 3 plus 3 (PH): Singapore
Airlines, 20 options (6!): Swissair. 10 plus 10 (PH); and Rardair. 6 plus 6.

These 15 custoaers will be joined by the Brazilian airline VASP which has
already ordered thrss A300B2-200 transports powered by General Electric engines
and has decided to purchase at least six ”10's. When this Brazilian order is
officially amouncsd. Airbus Industris will have 186 A310 orders free 16
airlines.

Readousrtsrs Bxpansion

Although Airbus Industrie's nuaber of enployess-oapproxinately 1.000 persons--
is only slowly increasing-«the goal is to reaein a "light" organisation—the
growing nunber of airline custouers has. nevertheless, cowelled the
cansortius to sugasnt its technical support teams to ensure their continuous
availability to each Airbus user. An extensive construction progrsa is
mdsrway at Toulouse. It is desinsd to triple the headquarters' working area
(an expansion of 13,500 square asters). hence there will eventually be sane
rearrangensnt of certain departasnts. ‘l'hs consortiun partners currently

have about 20,000 employees working on Airbus transports. By 1985, they will
nu-ber 40.000 to (05.000.

OOPYRIGKI': A. b C. 1982

8061
050: ”02/256

summon“
vommcn imam mum M awonm. runs

Stuttgart 1417. W808! mrscaurr in Germ 1hr 82 pp 91-95
[Article by Gerd Decker and Bolper Konrad]

[Mental 8u-ary

baeed on earlier reaeerch vorh different concepte for the uae of alcohol

fuala. eapecially nethanol fuel I! 100. were developed in the Raeearch Diviaion
of W.

lore than 150 W vehicloa for it 100 fuel are joining differut teat prograna
in Ger-any and California; technical inforaation about the vehicle concepte
ia givon in Table 2.

The anginea of theae vehiclee differ iron atendard gaaoline anginea Iainly by
higher cmrmion ratio. nodified coduetion chanber and intaka nanifold.
adapted carburetor or injection oyaten and naterial changee for alcohol
cowatibility.

‘l'he Ili... power output of the netbanol enginae ie about 20 percent higher
than that of conparable gaeoline enginee. energy conauption ia 10 to 15
percent leee. Problena of preinition and high-epeod knocking at full-load
operation require throttling of nonin- pover output. khauat eniaeiona are
louar than the actual atandarda. Table 6. drivability end cold starting down
to -2o’c ia aatiafactory.

The 0.8. concepta. conaiating of Iathanol and ethanol fueled vehiclea. are

equipped with a fuel injection ayaten calibrated for alcohol operation with
feedback control and a three-way catalyat. l‘heae concepta conforl alao to

exiating aniaaion and econony atandarda, Table 5..

“The not]: one in part supported by the hiniatry for aaaeerch and Technology.
‘lhanhe ia hereby expreeaed for that aupport. the authore are grateful to
the etaff vorhera in hergy ‘recluology leaearch and Ian l‘eclnologiea for
their valuable aaaiatancc.

POROII'ICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Previoua rooting Prograae

Several yoaro ago prototypeo and individual «perinatal vehiclea. roopec-
tively. to operate on alcohol fuele, eepecially acthanol. were produced. The
vohiclee were eubjected to oatenaivo otudiea and toeta. (l. 2. 3] tron
thoeo experiencoa a nothanol fuel waa developed which conaieto of up to

over 90 percent noth 04 100). In contraat to thia there are the nothanol-
gaeolino fuel nixturoa. ee for angle "M 15" which have only 15 percent
nethenol. Being the eaperiencea of previoue prototypoa aa a haeia. I! 100
vehiclea were nnufacturod under eerioa production conditiona in the W
factory.

Mufacturing vehiclee under oorioa production conditione providee additional
experiencea about the kinda of production to be expected in actual practice.
The vohicloa produced in the W factory inUolfeburg are being utilized in the
no and Heat Berlin within tho franowork of tho denonotration and reoearch
progra- “Alternativo horgiea for Road ‘I‘raffic. Alcohol Fuele Project Group.“
which io being eupportod by the Minietry for neeearch and Technology [ml'
those are in addition to othere which are intended for nethanol-gaeoline
fuel'nixturoa "I! 15" or alcohol-diesel fuel nixturee. [4] In the neantine
additional vehicloe were delivered to aevoral European and ovoraeaa countriee
for further toata.

In au-er 1981. in tho Heetnoroland factory of Volkawagen of Anorica. tho
firet vohiclea were nenufactured in a nodal eeriea. likawiae under conditione
of aoriee production. Thoae vehiclea are deatined for a California Energy
Co-iaaion teat progran which will run for 2 yeere in California in tho

United Statea.

The vohicloa which are produced in the m and the United Statoe end which
are the aubject of the following report are intended to operate on nethanol
fuel and conform to today’e high teclnical otandard of autonobilo technology
which in nor-a1 in thoae comtriee. Vehicloa which have been in production
for a rather long tine in Brazil are doaignod to operate on ethanol fuel.

2. Characterietic Values of mole

‘Ihe vehiclee are adjuatod to uae nethanol fuel (I! 100) in accordance with
Table 1. reprinted free [5]. 'I'hie fuel conaiata prinrily of nethanol. to
which ioopontano io added ae a low-boiling cowonant. With that, the vapor
tenoion of the nothanol fuel ie epecified to the upper linit of correaponding
gaeolino engine fuole according to DIN [Ger-an induatrial etendard] 51 600
for n-or and winter operation. roepectivoly. With theae vapor tenoion
valuee and the aaaociated raieing of the lower boiling range it ia pooaiblo
to have problonfroe cold atarting in the vehiclea with winter fuel at
teqeraturoe aa low to ~20'c without additional conponenta in the vehicle
engine deeign. the fuel of thia epecification ia oatiofactory not only to
aoot tho denando for cold otarting. but aloo for perfect driving behavior in
the engino'a hot running phaeo. ‘I'hia ie true both of injection enginee and
of carburetor enginoa which are sure difficult to control in thia phaae.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The isopentane which is added to the methanol can. if need be. be replaced by
other easily volatilised cowonente. as for example dimethyl ether. Of
course. for this fuel a new adjustment of the fuel mixing equipnent is neces-
sary both in the air requirements and in the hot running equipment. Since we
have had the most experience so far with isopentane and working with it is
relatively simple. this additive component was uniformly scheduled for test
projects presently in progress.

Cowared with gasoline engine fuel which is standard in the trade the methanol
fuel utilised here has lower air requirements and a clearly lower calorific
value. This requires complete modification and readjustment of the fuel
mixing equipment both in the carburetor and the injection systems. Even the
substantially higher heat of evaporation is a contributing factor in laying
out the design.

Pure methanol does. of course. have the prerequisites for a fuel which is
suitable for gasoline engines. but only after suitable components have been
added does it produce a methanol fuel which satisfies the requirements of a
modern engine fuel. In addition to the easily volatilised coqonent. which
was already mentioned. the fuel should contain further additives to avoid
corrosion in the fuel mixing system and to avoid deposits in the intake
systes.

This means that a methanol fuel wet be adapted in the same way to the
requirements of the vehicle engine design that we take to be a given in the
case of today's gasoline engine fuels with the appropriate additives.

3. Design Development

For the development of the W design vehicles it was possible to build on
the development of basics from previous years. This produced the following
essential aspects for designing the engine:

“In adjusting the fuel mixture considerable value was placed on minimum
consumption. Thismesne that in the partial load range air values up to 1.2
were sought. 0n the basis of the favorable ignition range. in driving
behavior the engine can be operated leaner than comparable gasoline
engines. without misfires and defects. For maximum full load power air
values between 0.9 and 0.95 are required.

-In the case of highly compressed alcohol engines the necessary preignition
values are lower than in the cowarable series produced gasoline engine with
normal compression.

-The high octane numbers of methanol fuel perm‘c cospression ratios between
12 and 13 which promises favorable partial load consumption and high mean
effective pressure with full load operation.

--‘l'he high sensitivity of the fuel (difference between R02 [research octane

number] and noz [engine octane numberl) results in a strong temperature
influence on the knock limit. Hith consideration of high external

23
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tenperatures the safety distance free the knock limit must be greater than is
necessary in noraal engines for gasoline engine fuel. '

"Since nathanol engines with high cowression easily tend toward unwanted
preignition (prenature ignition). this must be taken into consideration in
appropriate coabustion chamber design and careful adjustnent of spark plug
construction type and spark plug thernal value.

«The high heat of evaporation of the fuel requires careful adjust-mt of the
fuel mixing equip-eat and regulation of cold starting and hot running.

"Moreover. the enission behavior nust be taken into consideration. because
of the high comression. higher ac enissions must be figured on whereas by
the choice of the ignition point the NOx emissions can be kept roughly on the
scale of conparable low-conpreasion gasoline engines without consumtion
losses.

The engine designs for these vehicles were done in such a way that the nest
favorable partial load consunption had the highest priority. In adjusting
full-load operation. high-speed knocking and preignition of the nixture
produced linits. Since the tenperature level of the engine has a strong
influence on this liait, careful adjust-ant was necessary. [3]

However. this neans that the naxi-ua achievable highest power with the neces-
sary operation safety cannot be guaranteed in all cases. Thus. the engines
are throttlsd at full load.

The nixture fomtion calls for intensified nixture heating for carburetor
engines by neans of a newly designed nanifold inlet and increased preheating
of the air.

The cowression ratio and the shape of the conbustion chader were designed
according to the criteria nentioned here. partial load consunption. power

and enission behavior. [6] Moreover. it becane apparent that the cold

start behavior had to be taken into consideration in designing the conbustion
chanber since alcohol engines easily. because of their relatively high pro-
portion of fuel in the mixture. tend to get the spark plugs wet. This proble-
vas a contributing factor in the design of the coﬁustion chaaber and the
positioning of the spark plugs.

All parts of the vehicle engine design which cone into contact with the fuel
were reworked in respect to the choice of neterial in order to avoid danage
through the inpsct of nethanol in the case of elastoners and plastic parts
and to prevent corrosion in the case of natal naterials.

Pro. available “I Audi nodels three vehicle types were selected for the
research and daonstration progra- nentioned and were adapted to operate on
alcohol fuel. Series-like units were the point of departure in developing
these design. Table 2 gives the tectnical data of the three designs.

2|:

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo. Selected Vehicle ﬁnes
6.1 The W Golf with Hater-Cooled l.6-I.iter Carburetor Engine

Figure 2 shows the cod>ustion chanber design which was selected according to
the above-“timed criteria. “ma four-cylinder in-line engine has a
coqression of 12.5.

The reworked fuel airing systea includes the new design of a water-heated
nanifold inlet with intensive heating of the fuel-air ninture behind the
carburetor. In addition. in contrast to the series produced version. the
water jacket was enlarged to the extent space peraitted. Hith this design
higher nenifold inlet teneratures and thus good nix preparation and distribu-
tion were achieved in the partial load range. as was rapid warning of the
nixture after a cold start.

Adjustaents on the 34 PIC(I‘)S—carburetor fro- the Pierburg Co were inpressive
in scope. In contrast to the basic carburetor for gasoline operation.
numerous changes were required; the min ones concerned the jet equip-mt.
the use of aethanol-reaistant uteriala (gaskets, floats). including surface
protection of the carburetor housing and the adjustnent of the starter (hand
choke). -

To guraantee driving behavior with critical operating conditions and an
engine not hot fro. tuning. the engine was equipped with electronic high-
power ignition (1‘82). This ignition systea alao contains digital idle
stabilisation (01.8) for sure idling. even with a lean engine setting.

All these neasures proved to be' advantageous in achieving faultless driving
behavior and favorable partial load consumtion; of course. in the full load
range there are liaita because of knocking.

All Golf vehicles were equipped with a_ larger tank so that there is roughly
the sane range as in the case of gasoline vehicles.

10.2 W Golf with Hater-Cooled 'l.6-I.iter Fuel-Injection Engine

In respect to the codmstion chaﬁer and ignition. the injection design
corresponds to the carburetor design. Additional measures for heating the
intake air or nixture were. nevertheless. not undertaken in this design.

The K-Jetronic was likewise adapted to the altered fuel characteristics;
special inportance was also given here to cold start and hot ruining behavior.

In this version of the design with increased power, the naximn possible
nean effective pressure with full-load high speeds is linited not by high-
speed knocking. but by unwanted preipition.

Since the engine with injection shows higher power than the carburetor ver-
sion used here. the tenperatura level of the cooling water was lowered
because of the high sensitivity of the fuel in order to avoid high-speed
knocking and undesired preignition.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.3 The W Transporter with Air-Cooled 2.0-Liter Carburetor mgine

because of its unusually low stroke-bore ratio of 0.75. with consideration of
the coduation chader design. the sir-cooled 6-cylinder opposed cylinder
type angina per-its a contusion of only 10.5.

The design was carried out in a aanner analogous to the Golf carburetor
design. For this type new nsnifold inlets with electric heating by m
elensnts were developed. Thus. with a cold engine it was possible to achieve
clear inrovanant in driving behavior.

5. Results of the Bxperinants

5.1 Power

Experiaants on prototypes have shown that with optiaizad nethanol engines
increases in power of over 20 percent are achievable in respect to conparable
gasoline engines. There are reports in [7] on studies of the taqerature
curve on pistons as an angle of conponent stress; the results show that no
critical ther-l conditions are present.

5.2 Partial Load Fuel Consu-ption

In contrast to the conparable gasoline engine the aethanol engine shows
roughly 10 to 15 percent sore favorable consuwtion values with full load.
when conared on the basis of the energy. with consideration of the different
calorific values of the fuels.

Por the designs previously described the values cited in Table 3 cans tron
constwtion naasurenente aade according to DIN 70030; when cowared to
gasoline vehicles these values are about 10 percent lower.

5.3 hission of Pollutants

It was a precondition for all designs that the emission liaits according to
act regulations are net. For the carburetor desip previously described the
values shown in Table 5 were seasures in the ICE test.

Analyses of tests show that with a hot engine the enission values are note
favorable than those of the gasoline engine. while in the warn-up phase the
values are roughly cowareble.

There are only isolated values so far for the increased anission of aldehyde
in the case of pure alcohol engines. however, an extensive uperinsntal
progran is in progress in this area.

Several of the vehicles utilised in the m progren were equipped with
special exhaust gas catalysts to reduce the emission values: at regular
intervals naasura-ents were nade.

”WISEONLY
5.15 Practical Drive Testing

With winter tests sure starting up to -20'C was achieved with the designs
previously described. [8] Su-er teats produced no problens in hot starting
and hot drive behavior since in the fuel systee lower teqeratures occur than
with gasoline or K 15 operation.

The 80 W vehicles provided for in the m progra- have since been delivered
to the operators. Sons 25 vehicles were put into service by the ADM: [Gen-
eral Ger-an Autonobile Club] for road ssintanance service; acne of these
vehicles have gone aore than 50.000 10 to date without any breakdowns worth
nsntioning.

5. Alcohol Vehicles in the United States

In California at present an extensive aperinantal progran is being carried
out with alcohol vehicles. Operator of the fleet is the California Margy
Co-ission. the vehicles are naintained by Alcohol Energy Systesa Inc. Santa
Clare.

In all. in July 1981 in the Hesteorsland W factory. a first series of loo
vehicles of the Rabbit type (0.8. version of the Golf) and Rabbit Pickup were
built under series-production conditions. The vehicles were delivered to
the operators in Septeder 1981. One-half of the vehicles is operated on
nethanol fuel corresponding to the specification in the Ger-an prograa. the
other half with ethanol to which was added 5 percent by weight leadfree
gasoline. With the ethanol design cold starting requires extra gasoline

that has been injected into the nanifold inlet.

The basis of both designs was the previously described fuel-injection design.
The nost substantial change consists in the use of the K-Jetronic adjusted

to nethanol and ethanol operation. respectively. with a 1aabda sensor and the
use of a selective catalyst in the exhaust systan. All vehicles are equipped
with series-produced autonatic transaissions.

The neasurenants on the prototypes produced the enission and consmtion
values which are shown in Table 5.

3131.1th

1. Hanrad. IL. Lee. U. and Bernhardt. 9.. "Develop-ant of s Pure ”ethanol
m1 Car.” SA! 770790.

2. mlaenderJu Abthoff. J. and legal. 3.. "Methanol as an Alternative
Fuel for Gasoline Engines." 1m. Vol 78. lilo 3. 1976. pp 113-117.

3. Hanrsd. IL. ”Vehicle Prototype for Methanol Drive. Lines of Develop-en:
in Vehicle technology." in tourth Status Saninar "Vehicle and Road
Traffic racinology" fro. the an. 10-12 Mvednr 1979. Berlin.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b.

5.

6.

7.

8.

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monrod. 8.. ”Tho Port of Volkmunvcrk A6 in tho Got-non Progra- for
loooorch on Alcohol Paolo.” in"7$th International Autonotivo Progroooion

Syotono Symoiu." “-18 April 1980. Doorborn. Hichison.

loin. I. a. ond honor. 3.. "Hothonol Pool 1! loo-obovolopnont ond
Ioclnology." in 8th Statuo Soninor "Vehicloo ond Rood Troffic" of tho
m. 11-13 Mot 1980. Holonto.

Honrod. ll. ond booct. 3.. "looulto froo looic march on Alcohol Povorod

Vohicloo.” in ”Fourth Intornotionol Won. on Alcohol Nolo homology."
5-8 Octobor 1980. Guorujo. Brazil.

Lotusko. Lingonboolin. ”Thor-o1 Struo of tho Pioton with Uoo of
Alcohol and blind molo.” 1m. Vol 63. 30 3. 1982. p .

liorhouvo. 3.. Honrod. ll. ond Doctor. 6.. ”looting of Hothonol Paolo ot
Low Toqoroturoo.” A‘l'z. Vol 82. lo 11. 1980. PP 579-583.

Anthoro' Addrooooo:

cord Doctor. Groduotc lnﬂnoor
Alto Bromochvoigor Stroooo 10
D-3180 Boltobor; lb

nolgor Mud. Groduoto hginoor
noldonoloborotroooo 5
0-3180 ﬂoltobnrg 1b

roblo 1. Spocificotion of llothonol Pool H 100 in tho Lotte-Soon um

Bxporinont

.111

iiasasgzags

co.
CO.
CO.
co
co.
non.
”I.
no;
m
m
”I.
to.
CI-

 

1 . Spocificotion lo . Hothonol
2 . "inter S. Ioopontono
3. Swan 6. (115

[Key continua on follovin; pogo]

“WISEONLY
7. linen effective preeeure 16. Total acid

8. Calorific value 15. Turbidity point

9. Water content 16. neeearcb octane nuer
10. leeidue iron evaporation l7. hgine octene mﬂnr
11. "ethyl (ornate 18. t) with 10 percent by
12. Panic ecid weight 320 added

13. Alkalinity 19. Percentage by weight

‘l’eble 2. Data of the W Deeigne Deed in the m Progrel

3mm
(19) m . nus

 

Key:
1. Cerburetor 12. Mixture for-tion
2. Injector 13. 6 in-line
3. “er of cylindere 16. Water
6. Cooling 15. nigh-power inition +
s. Dieplacenent ce3 digital idle munmm
6. stroke - 16. Carburetor
7. Bore _ 4 17. lo cylinder opposed arrange-
8. Cowreeeion ratio ' nent
9. Engine pover W (hp) at - 18. Air
litere/nin -‘ 19. High-power ignition +
10. Ignition digital idle atabilization
11. Pluge 20. Carburetor

Table 3. Fuel Conauption Valuea According to DIN 70 030

 

Key: .
1. City 5. 1| loo-Golf injector
2. lured value* 6. ”used value coneieting of
3. Geeoline equivalent* 1/3 city. 1/3 90 Ice/h.

6. ll loo-Colt carburetor 113 120 III/h

29
MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

Tabla lo. 'rsst Rasults of tha I! 100-601! with a Carburstor buns in tho
”I lost

 

l. I! 100-601! cathurstot 2. laquirsd linita
l‘ahls 5. Emission and cousuntioo Iasulta of 11.8. Daaiuns

 

Roy:
1. hissiooa (0.3. 75-foot) 3. m1 coumtiou (gasolins
2. Muirsd limits aquivalant)

Illustration 2. Coshustioo chads: assign of alcohol angina

 

00mm: 1982. hanckh'schs Vsrlagahandlm. U. Kallar G 00.. Stuttgart

1212‘
cso: 31021251 '9

MOMCIALIRONLY