FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10442

9 April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 21/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

Jpas publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/104‘
9 Apin 19:
JAPAN REPORT
(P000 21/82)
(Iowans
POLITICAL AND SOCIOINICAL

Conﬂicting Opinions on Trade Friction

(Tsuneo Kite; THE JAPAN mane JOUIDIAL, 9 Mar 82) .... l
mpact of Electoral District Apportionment on Trade Dispute

(Hideo mtauou‘ MIC!“ MIX NEWS, 213 w 82)....9000 3
Komoto's Political Future

(Takuo “8’33“; MINICHIMLI m, 21 "81‘ 82) 0.000000 6
Suzuki's Reeleotion Hove

(Kemji Kitahara; THE DAILY IMURI, 19 Mar 92).......... 8
Editorial on Suzuld's Popularity

(Editorial; ABAI-II MING um, 19 Her 82) ............. 9
Editorial on Administrative Reform

(mm-1313145131031 DAILY HEB, 18 liar 82) ............ ll
Tanaka Showing Signs of Fatigue

(Takehiko Takahashi; HAIRICHI DAILY REVS, 10 liar 82) ... 1h
Political Impact of Sato Verdict ’

(Takehiko Takahaahi; MAINIGHI DAILY N808, 17 Mar 82) ... _ 13
Editorial: ﬂame of Military Skill

(WICHI DAILY NM, 15“” 82)-oeeleeeeeeeeeeee-eveeee 18
Editorial on Tax Cut Tangle

(m “I!!! Ym’ emaz) 0.00.0.0...OOOOOOIOOOOOOOI 21

ECONGIIC

Automobile Parts Industry's Struggle for Metence Reported

(“Im SANGIO m, varioua aha) ..IIIOOOOCOOOOIOO 23

- a - [III - ASIA - 11]. P000]

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBlCB AND TECHNOINI

Recent Ih'ade Activities ﬁlth Soviet Union Reported

(Various sources, various dates) ......................

Special Steel Exports
Synthetic Fiber Payment

Large-Diameter Pipe

Agricultural Bquipen’o Drive V Belt
IIC Lethe Order

Difficulties in Pipelsyer kport
Pipelayer Exports Underway

Crude Oil Recovery Agent

Recent Robot Sales Activities Reported

(“88° Tum; m T030 KBIZAI, 13 Feb 82) oesooeeeee

Develop-mt in Robot MD Activities Reported

(NH-[m KEIZAI 33mm, 31 Dec 81, HIM KOGYO SHIMBUN,
11‘, 15 Jan 82) 0......O...CO..O...OOCDOOCOOUOOOOOOOIOOCC

Intelligent Assembly Robot
IO Assembly Robot
Coal Mining Robot

Semiconductor MD of NTT's Mussshino Laboratory Described

(Keniohi Konsbsshi; 51mm mo mm, 30 Jan 82) '

FORWLIJSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL MID SOCIOINICAL

CONFLICTING OPINIORS ON TRADE FRICTION

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 9 MI! 82 p 10

[Article by Tsuneo Kite]

[Text]

While signs that the Japan-US. trade trie-
tion is going further to eecalete now coniront
the Government and its party with urgency
to wort onitedly tor its eohtion. mmhllro d
a decent already have beaun to m
within the Government on how to handle the
problem ot further widening Japan's market.

Theoovernment lest weekhelda needs;
of cabinet ministers concerned with eco-
nomic problemstolietentoereportonthe
sinntlwin thells. madebyaspecialmb
sion at the ruling Liberal Democratic Party
wta‘ch just returned from a visit to that
country.

Esaki reported that theUS._ructionwes
extremely severe and critical. and the cabi-
net minister-r meeting was devoted only to
hearing Beald's reportivhetheritwasbe
came its rnture was tar more bitter tiln ex-
pected or whether administrative oaldsls
had done s in advance. the only
one who opened his mouth when ‘l‘oelao
Komoto, director-general ol the Economic
Planning Annoy and chairman oi the meet-
ins. asked whether anyone had any remarks
wee Foreign Minister Yoeilo Sakuraueid.

At a press cadet-once alter this meeting.
Agriculture Poreetry & ﬁsheries liable:
Tarawa whoee late is hen; concerned con»
sunily with the connoversial term
import problem. declared firmly. “l tool that
the preeent mane on auto exports is still
go mild. and somethm‘ more dnnmic mint

lie advocated curtailing the lumber oi
Japanse cars to be exported to the US. in
thesecondyeer-llz-olthevohmtery
export cub by a ne'er margin ﬁle View
was tint the blame lorJapan's hi3 trade RIF
plus arising (tom earner! oi manniacmred

prothicushouldnotbestditedtoiocuonto
lamprorhtcts.

Garment qtnrters felt that 'i‘asawa's
remerkwaeiMendedtocmntertheoptuon
madeknwnearllerbyintermtioul'l‘rede
drlnthntry MlnhterSldnteroAbetotheet-
feet that he levnred a review oi Japan's
reeldnalimport reed-lotions andleltthatthe

Wéﬁaumiomioto anemone
US. onthetarmproductsimpoitlssue '
Tasewawae nottheoniy cabinetmlnisler
withaworry. F‘inartcehtlrdsterulrhloWata-
tube had to stick up tor theJapen Tobacco &
Salt Public Corporation which comes under
his )urlsdiction and is the W oi American
criticism overits hendlinsot loreicn tobacco.
"lhavenolntentlonhnthertoredneethe
tariltreteonciaaretteeendtoheocnllecl
thetthetobaocoendseitcorporationendthe
American tobaccointhistrysimldsolvetids
problem by ands-taking motiotione on a
commercial basis." he said
'11seGorernmentattheendoilastmonti'
held a meadm oi ministries and aceticies
comernedtostndytheproblemoideconnnl-
Weaviceindtntriu-aneaslnawhichls
slated to lollow the Government's earlier
relasatiu «I import inspection mien The
Foreignmnistryieealdtobetheonewhidi
nreedholdinadsnchameem
One Wt irdorment had this tosay:
"You see. theEconomlcPlanninaApncy
became the channel for sun; import in-
speedonndeeﬂbtmeentlhetthehreicn
Ministrytinstimejut hadtograh the Initia-
tlve.liowever.itremaiutobeseenwhether
aiioltheotherssmoothiywilltallinlinewlth
ltissaidthettnttdsoese.too.an"under-
Mace"stru¢leiemmon

1
F03 0m USE ONLY
Even vim: Ills. there are tumbles
enough In mm mm pollen. In
further “health; Japan's market And
thereisalsotheume-ﬂmndodysliwly
mmmnlhreemombummheholdimd
menuISummitmeedn‘inmmee.

mangrove. “In! W My that
viththeapwmhdtheSummJepuna
onlywinhepmedlommmuby
mmwnywm nua- humble
Window“

umwmmnuw
vious MIMMImemw
caneupwithobjecm. '

thuneo Kim is a Nikon Kauai economic
correspondent.’

COPYRIGHT: Weld. Daily News 1982
(:80: 6120/202'
Riggs—3824.
=t83§8=5¢RE§
.v. 332:»: 52.933. >
33on .53: =§_§.x§
2: 885 2.- ..338. :2
$3.5" :39 28.3 S
.3338 :8 .53. 3...... .3
23 8 53a :58 :32. 5»:
=8 33.. 933%. v.85 8
2:8: :35 3.. :3...
53:5. «Saga .8 333. 2
So 328.8 82.98... 8::
E .538 a 92.. 583 2
3352.23”.

ﬂ nil’. n". {l
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l

-u mm»

W W...
mmmMmm

\- .

MN.“ MW.

“mm

mm,”

Hainichi Dlily News 1982

COPYRIGHT :

4120/2010

CSO:

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600060018-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050018.2

I’UI Ul’l’lLU‘L vat. UNLI

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

KOMO'S POLITICAL FUTURE

Tokyo Human DAILY news in English 21 run- 82 p 2

[Article by Takuo Bayashi]

' [Tat]

"manta-m watched"
mus-mu
politics this year I:
hummus»
“bandwidth”
lamenting/thawed—
Democratic Party pram
“Katha/{mum
m than be t In

éaéi

. WMI'WII

mmuammvmu-
‘l'ulk lemon). now no;
altcctnouncyal a! ﬂu

mum.
. Under pun/Ila; ctr.

g:
i

E
5
$3:

3;;
E:
éi

ii
is:
a?
3%

nus/«momma
1 ma! cmﬂdate against
www.mm
Wit. _ -
~1'hoprmtdenuum

6

iii?
iEEE

‘3

EEE

became - pm!
Mm Kc
(action have 1
hence their
mm
“II ova-Mm
the mum
me Mn the

W and
mm."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2
domeattcdenaaoaodsumnate
m 0o theothethaod.
Prime um Sanity-ho
gaveomchlnpottahoatonacal
reconstnnttoahasahovoonly
passiveleapoooetolotaoto'o

lhthls comcttoo.
speculations have been rile
tn the Nittcal arena that
”Kothotowill servetheptime
mintstetaletterotrestmﬂoo
ataoopportuoenomeot‘oothe-

become m at late both to
the government and the
Ltheral-Democntic Party.
including even Prlme mm
Suzuld. A: tar as this matter is.
concerned. it to a welcome sign
to: Komoto. But. to the ﬁnal

analysis Komoto is looihg a just
cause to chatteou Prime
ummmt. ,

(The writer I: jwnallsb
let-Met 0! MW University
In Toma)
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOImICAL

SUZUKI 'S REELECTION WE

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 19 lint 82 p 3

[Article by Kenji Kitnhsrs]

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

mmmumme‘

Pdmelﬂnictersiuunhssbegunhlsbid
m reelection ss szrsl-Demoersﬁwl’srty
(LDPlpIesldonten premierw sre
postsiormerprcmler‘i‘sheomkudsssys
hsobtsinedthroughmerechsnce.
This ilrstevidence oithlsbidls the
mmmmcmemmmu
untillsynurdsmkilsespeeted

The Daily Yoniuri 1982

6120/ 20k

8

ing the summit. Sarah's psrtlelpstion in
the UN Genera Assembly meeting on dis-
nrmnment end his visit to Brull which
he only recently sdded to his diplomstic
schedule.

Grimm’s pledge to stoke his political lite
on odminlstrstive reiorm hos begun to be
an embarrassment for him.

In s recent meeting between Suzuki end
Yeruhiro Neurone. director-genera of the
Administrstive Management Agency, the
two agreed thst streemllning oi the min-
lstries snd sgencies would be omltied
from recommendations scheduled to he
submitted in July. This spporently reﬂects
his response to strong moments union
the reiorm progrsm from within the LB?
with the LDP election in mind.

Susan ls inking s neutive. defensive
position on lmportsnt issues to svold
stirring up the polltlcsl world beiore the
LDP presidenhsl election. Former premier
Kskuei Toners ls employing tactics in
collusion with Susan to delay the ver-
diet in his lockheed trlsl. the lovemment
is backing swsy irom sdminlstrstlve re-
ibrmsndthewpissnbmlttlngnoim-
pol-tent bills to the extrsordlnsry Diet

As this writer sold in his column lost
week. the tenure in oiilce for s Japanese
prime minister ls too short. And as emply
illnetrsied by 81mm. his Bret year in or-
iice is token up with studying foreign and
domestic problems end his second yesr

I! this Is not ﬂanged. the duty of
governing will continue to be neglected by
the premier.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UHMKEML

MI '8 POPUIARITY

mac NEWS in English 19 Mar 82 p s

MMMMMMMMMMMMM MMMMM MMMM M MMMM
Mm mwmumwmmmmwmm MMMW.M (“wumm .mw mmmmmwmmm
wM MMMMMMMM.MMMMM..MMMMMMMM MMMMM MMMMMMMMMMM
.MMMM. MMMMMMMMMMM MMMMMMMMMMMMMWMM . MMMMMM.
MmmMMMMMMMMMMMMM.WMMMMMWMMMM MMM WMMMWMMMW
MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM.MMMMMMMMMMMMM M.M_..MMM
M.MMM MMMM MM .MMMM MMMMMMMMMMMMMMM.MM WM
.MMMM MMMMMMMMMWMWMMMWMWM.MMMM WMMMM Mwm.m
bu Ihh 6: I am
“WMMMM Mwmmmmmmmm “MWM ”MMWMMM Mmmmmm %M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W . WW WW -WW WW.WWWWW.WWWWWWW
WWWWWWW WW W WWWW WW WWWWWWW WWWW WWWWWW
WWW WWWW WWWW_W WW .WW WWWW WWWW “WWW. WWWW
WWW WWWW. WWWWWWWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW WWWWWW
WWW WWWM WWWMWWWWM W WWCWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW.
WW WWW... WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW WWWWWW_.W WWWWWW WW
WW WW. WWW WWWWW WWWW... WWWWWWWWWWWW W
W WWWWWWWWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWW
umm» a a a
WWWWWWWWNWWWWW WWWWWWWWWW WWWWWWWWW WW

Asthi Evening News 1982

4120/2010

COPYRICBT:

CSO :
3 The Second Kd lloc Council on Administrative
iReiorm which was inaugurated a year ago has
:alother year to goto finalize its recommendation to
.the government. it is now rushing in order to submit a.
ghaslc recommendation around July.
‘7: Making back on the achievements oi the council.
we are placing high expectations on it. while at the
”same time calling on the government to meet the
fe'nthusiasm oi the council to pave the way ior creating
jan eliective and rational administration.
,I , The council was established ior the purpose of
.tfcontributing toward the realization oi a rational
administration to match our changing economic and
‘hocial circumstances." We cast serious doubts.
however. on whether the basic policies oi the council
have been put into practice during the past one year.
{Elie responsibility rests not with the council but with
the government.

. immediately after it was inaugurated, the council
was commissioned with the task to map out a plan lor
'reduclng expenditures. aside irom its basic target oi

realizing administrative reiorm to create a simple
.hut eiiective government. The iirstphase recom-
mendation submitted to the government last July was
poles apart iron the ideal oi administrative reiorm.
Even this recommendation was watered down in the
course oi legislation in the Diet.
. . in other words. the recommendation was simply
ignored by the government. Hence criticism ran high
that the Second Ad Hoc Council had downgraded itseli
to tile roleot maidservant to the government.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fUR Ul‘ FlLlAL vat ONLY

ltlastillfreahinourmemorylhatwhenthe
government was obiiged to float deficitcovering
national bonds for fiscal 193i. Chairman Toahiwo
.Doho of the Council bitterly criticized 42': government
saying: "Things would not have come to such a pass if
'the government had observed the council 3 recom.
mendation to the letter. "

The recommendation submitted this February
calling for rationalization and simplification of the
government's licensing and approval systems was
insufficient because it was mapped out under heavy
pressure of various government ministries and
agencies. in short, the council was thrown into a
whirlpool of politics from the very start. and the
government only selected those items in the
recommendation which served its purpose. When the
situation turned unfavorable to the government. it
tried to hide behind the council. it is not too much to
say that the interests of the government and the
Liberal-Democratic Party have always prevailed
over the recommendations oi the council.

The resistance of certain ministries and agencies
as well as special corporations also became all the
more complex when the council began delving into
their particular sectors. The cotmcd’s tentative plan
contained in the basic recommendation mapped out
by the secretariat was lukewarm In content as it‘
avoided including difficult items. it was reported that
Chairman Doha turned down the tentative plan and.
asked the secretariat to scrutinize it. Thus. there is a
lurking suspicion that the bureaucrats have not been
cooperating with thecouncil. .-,

The council should not listen to any political
huhhuh. ltisoursincere wish thatitmap outa reform
plan with a broad and profound vision to fulfill its
original ideal. it is now immaterial whether or not.
reform is plausible. it should submit a dynamic and
bold blueprint that is most comprehensible to the
nation.

The most important question now is the attitude
of the government in dealing with the work of the
council. The government should refrain from med-
dling with the council while the latte is deliberating
on the reform plan. Prime Minister Zenho Suzuki
himself earlier pledged that his government would
honorthereformplanandwecalloahimtokeepthat
promise.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it must be made crystal-clear that administrative
Mom is not aimed at liscai reconstruction. it may
contribute toward nacal reconstruction a an end.
mnlthutheroiomia, tnitaoumqnuttontobo
discussed in a ditiorent dimension tron: lineal
roconatmctton. .

ChaimanDokodoclarodthatttiaPi-unoliniatet
Sunkivbohaatotannomomtotnnhououb

anhyﬂomthopﬂnonhiataﬂommhat

nichi Daily New 1982

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TANAKA SEWING SIGNS OF FATIGUE
Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 10 Mar 82 p 2
[Article by Inkehiko 'i'aiuhanhi]

[Text] Criticisms have surfaced

overthetactthattornieri’ritne
um Kaine! ‘l'snaka con-
times to possess great in.
tiuence In JQanese politics
he is a Want in a
criminal trial over the
Wendel.
Oneisthestaiaoaenttnsdeby
(nether Prime Ilhister Taken
Niki at a caierona o( the
Liberal-Democratic Party's
W advises. Another is
the statement by Seiichi

Tags". tive ot the
New Chub. at the party
convention.

In his strong criticism. (or-
nier Prime. litntster iliixi
declared that the way h which
the'i‘anakaisctionlsespandhg
its tactional Istinenee 3 tan-
tamount to creating “a party
withinaparty."

‘l'sgawasald that “ii a verdict
‘gaiity'ishsntieodowninthe

itikiand‘i‘agavaeststnot

by
not the oppositio
wings?» witllnthewi:

Thattheaecrlicisllshavanot.

been made openly npto now
testiﬁes to the o(
Tanaita and at the anala
(actionsutetnentsoithislind
havenotbesnnadeevenbylhe
Fukuda (action. which con-

ihesmpostot the
minimum

is lost. the Suzuki ad-
ministration will at once (one
the danger oi collapsing. in

viiibeaeceuary.‘i‘biswnvhy

Susutnn Niksido (Tsnaha .

(action). who has been
criticlud as “a gray otiicial."
has been placed it the lll'l-
portant post o( 1.0? secretary
general.

Special Attention

Both Yasnhin Nakssone and
10st Konsotomhoatehopins
to succeed amid as prime
minister.- are giving special
attention and in
the hush (action. This is
especially so in Nakasooe's
case. Nahasone's electoral
district is the same as that o(
(ornier Prime Itolster Taboo
Fuluda. Possibly partly
because o( that. Nahasooe was

m oer-1015. USE ONLY

ministration" appearing to
succeed the ontra ad-
ministration.

Because oi such a Founda-
Nakasose relationship.
Nskaeone believes that it will

.be impossible to obtain
-Fuknds's cooperation to

assume the reins ot ad-
miniﬂraﬂmfhnsuakasoseis

. aetiol'lllitliemenlthlto

obtainthecooperatlonotihe

~‘i'anaka(actionistheoniyvay

olobtainhgtheprelniersbb.
0n the other band. Fonda
has a (cello; oi We
WiltmmlltosnotoJahis
ease.too.Koniotthhatlt
will no diitiwit to gain the
premiership it the Tanaka
(action takes the lead it op-
posing a ”Remote ad-
ministration" and he is thus
endeavoringtevintheuvoroi
thernakstoction.
Aiithisisniakhgtheposition

'oiihe'l'anakatactioonsoreand

maﬁvaﬂawwithinthe
LDP. .ii the Tannin taction
oven to decide to (tie a can»
didatetrnni theiaction hthe
nextpartypseaidentialelectlw.
the situathn ma W a
big change. But the Tanska
(action is smart and instead at
doing that. it is endeavoring to
grasp the leadership throua
the strength oi numbers

It the Tanaka laction were to
lose this strength. it would be
when Tanatta is judged guilty in
the Lockheed trial and the unity
of the Tanalta faction crumbles.
M present. the Tanaka lactlon
asserts that even in the
lorcgoing contingency. the
solidarity oi the [action will not
be :ilicctcd. There is a con-
srdcrnltlc number 0! people in
other notions who share a
htlllllltr opinion. Is this correct
«if not? Only time can tell.

Not so long ago an individual
who IS close to Tanaka visited
the Tanaka residence and loud
Tamika alone in a room. This
vmlor said. “When he is alone.
Tnnnita looks extremely tired.
One could say that his ap-

COPYRIGHT:

tzso; 4120/202

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pearanceisalmostahnortnal.”

This Wildly Indicates
how tattooed Tanaka is won
lacingthedltllculllescauaedby
being a delendant in the
toettheed trial. "not people
consider that the trial is
proceeding mlavorahly lor
Tanaha. When the verdict is
handed down and it it is
“guilty." there is a possibility
that the View expressed by
Tagava ol the New metal
Club will spread among the
people. lttsalsoboundtohave
some effect on the Lateral-
DemocraticParty.

in such a case. changes are
likely to occur involving not
only the stnuhl admlnlsu'atlon
but also the "pea-Suzuki ad-
ministration.”

(the writer I: an adviser to
the Mainichl Newspapers and
Ionnerclileledltoﬂalivrlteﬂ.

Mainichi Daily News 1982

.-
ion omcth. use: ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00850R00050006001 8-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500050018-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

POLITICAL AND socmwc ICAL

POLITICAL IMPACT OF SATO VERDICT

Tokyo MUNICH! MILY NEWS in English 17 Mar 82 p 2

[Article by Tnkehiko Takahashi]

{Text}

Theverdictinthellrsttrlalot

detendants ‘l'omisabnro‘

Hashimoto and Takayldd Sato
inoomectionwlththeiackheed
scandal will be handed down
shortly. It was tmm the
relationship oi these two that
the expression “gray oiliclais"
emerged. Among those celled
“gray ofﬁcials” are Shanna
leaido. timid Kain. liideo
Sasalinndltaznnmit’tlhmaga.

Among them. Suaki and
F‘tlltlnnga retired (mm the
political world alter being
labeled "gray otliciels."
Neverthelas. Nihaido is at
presaltthesecrletarygeneralot
the Liberal-Democratic Party
and Soto holds the important
post oi chairman of the party's
national organization com
mittee.

Having lost In the last else
tion. Hashimoto is not a Diet
membermwbutSatolsaDlet
member. llaverdictotmiityis
handed down tor Satn in the
ﬁrst trial. how will hecope with
this? This is the locus oi at-
tention in the political world
This is because the action that
Sato takes will have a close
relation with lormer Prime
Ministeritakuei'l'anahn.

16

The iollolvhg
can beennsidercd

thejudgmentiorSa
I. Notglillty.
in this can. the

will most likely

verdict hutSato tell

he a Diet member a
2. Guilty.

Thiscanulneih
prison sentence or
exectlion.‘l'heopin
thereisastayoiexc
need not raga
member. there i
stronger viewihat
prison sentence,
mastheaDietmel

What Actil

The problem is
verdict is gnlity i
suspended sentei
action will the
parties take? Andi
LDPcopewithsuch

l!
resign? it he doe:
advice is given tha
resign. the Kermit
wpportsuchndvice‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500050010-2
ﬁl‘111¢ ‘ I

22.226 .3922... .25
553.6583...“ 12.2 a...
.x. 2.53. 58 .52.. 85%....
.= 2.3 a 8.8. 1:50
5.38.. seas 9.2:. 3

v. 226 San
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500050018-2

POLITICAL AND SOCIOINICAL

EDITORIAL: ADVANCE OF MILITARY SKILL

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 15 Mar 82 p 2

- [Ten] The national Diet is apparently trying to reach a
conclusion on the “experimental remodeling" oi the
Air Self-Defense Force F4 lighter. The explanation
given by Deiense Agency Director General Soichiro
ito during last Tuesday's meeting oi the House oi
Representatives Budget Committee was un-
satistactory.

[to said that the restoration oi the bombing
iacility oi the F4 Phantoms would not he misun-
derstood by other countries as an aggressive move it
recent developments in military technology are taken
into account. “We have no plan to revise our basic
policy oi not possessing arms regarded as a threat to
other countries. Within this iramework. our military
equipment might undergo changes in accordance
with the advance oi military technology. . he said.

in other words. Ito‘s explanation indicated that
Japan may develop and improve its capability in the
future based on an obscure yardstick — the advance
oi military technology. By taking advantage oi the
recent dispute over the F-i's bombing iunctions. the
government has removed an obstacle standing in the
way oi improving its military equipment.

We would like to pose two questions. The iirst is:
"What are the other countries' that the Japanese
government has in mind? Everybody knows about the
wide qualitative and quantitative diiierence in
military strength between the Soviet Union and other
Asian nations. so these countries will test diiierently
about the “threat” by Japanese sameness Forces.

We believe that the government explanation
concerning “other countries” is mere aophlstry. We
do not support its claim that the remodeled 9-“
would not be a “threat” toother nations.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500050010-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500050018-2

FOR OFF“ 1:“. USE". ONLY

The second question is about lto's way of thinking
on the ”advance of military technology.” it is true
that weapons are becoming more and more
sophisticated every day. in short. the arms race has
no end but the Self-Defense Forces should not follow
this trend. We wonder if this situation can be termed
"an advance."

lto's statement implies that a country must
improve its military capability in proportion to the
improvement of the same capability of other coun-
tries. lto is giving top priority to military affairs.
While the duty of professional soldiers may be to worlt
out survival plans on the assumption of war.
politicians must deal with the matter differently.

Amid the mounting calls for disarmament both at
home and abroad the world is keenly watching
Japan on this specific matter. Some may say that the
I-‘-4 issue and disarmament are two different things

but we do not agree.

ito would have made a different statement if he
really understood Japan's position as one of the
leaders calling for disarmament at the United
Nations. The government has appropriated funds for
the remodeling but if it was aware of Japan'sposition.
it would have talten a different path.

The F4 issue discloses the drawback of the
civ than control system in Japan. The plan to remodel
the P4 was approved behind Prime minister Zenko
Suzuki's back. clearly showing the unsound func-
tioning of civilian control. Professional officers will
claim that the remodeling was not of sufficient im-
portance to require Prime Minister Suzuki's ap-
proval. but this way of thinking might be the downfall
of the civilian control system.

The government should have established a policy
in contain the system immediately after clarifying
«no real cause of the dispute. but instead it merely
cmifirmed a fait accompli. Moreover. the government
imprudently established a rule that the remodeling of
F- l Phantoms would he handled solely by the Defense
Agency.

We are also dissatisfied with the attitude of the
opposition parties. and must inform the Japan
Socialist Party. which ignited the dispute. that lto's
statement did not settle the matter while the govern-
ntuni seems to have justified many questionable
points.

1 .
FOR OFFICIRL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R000500050010-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2

I or“ we 0 es one. vuo. \Inul

The opposith parties did little to clarity the
matter during Diet sessions. For instance. we do not
know the reason why the budget was temporarily
suspended in connection with the E4 remodeling. We
urge the opposition parties not to support the

government and the government party by allowing
these questions to remain unanswered.

COPYRIGHT: liainichi Daily News 1982

cso: 4120/ 202

. 20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600050018-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2

|‘(il.l'|‘ICAL AND 3001 OImICAL

EDITORIAL 0N TAX CUT TANGLE
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 8 list 82 p 2

[Text] With a compromise reached between the Liberal-
Dcmoerstlc Party (LDP) and live opposition parties
onthetaxcutissue.theDietwillresumeitsde-
liberation Monday for the iirst time in seven days.
The agreement calls for establishing a subcommittee
of the House of Representatives Financial Affairs
Committee to study a revision of the taxation sys-
tem and ways to raise revenue to oifset a tax cut.

As is true with conventional compromises between
the ruling and opposition parties. the compromise
agreement is ambiguous. not referring to the date
and the scale of the tax cut.

The opposition parties have not given up hope for
ataxcutinhscalleutifoneiscsrriedouton
a small scale. it would be meaningleu. In ﬁscal 1983.
a tax cut totaling Y1 trillion. as demanded jointly by
the live opposition parties, should be carried out.

Administrative Reform

Both the nilingandoppoeltlonpsrtles.basedon
the compromise agreement. must try very hard to
achieve the Y1 trillion tax cut. Revenue for a tax
out should be mainly sought in carrying out ad-
ministrative reform. The goverummt is asked to
make special efforts toward this goal.

Prime Minister Suzuki declared last month at the
lower house's budget committee that the issue of
deﬁcit-covering bonds will be aero in iiscal 1984 and _
he will take political responsibility if it is not achieved.
M the same time. he pledged that the government
will not introduce a large-scale indirect tax even if it
carries out an income tax cut. The only alternative
ln misc revenue to offset the tax cut is to carry
out administrative reform thoroughly.

Toshlwo Doko. chairman of the second ad hoc Ad-
ministrative Reform Council. has emphasised that a
tax cut will be possible only if administrative reform

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060018-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500050018-2

H”! Ol'l‘lt Ml. USE ONLY

is i-nml‘ally punued. Voices are growing in the coun-
cil that about Y2 trillion could be aaved only if the
Japanese National Railwaya (JNR) la streamlined.

‘Natural Tax lnaeaaea'

Behind thla recent lineup is the public’a irritation
and diaaatiafaction with the “natural tax inmaaea"
over the past ﬁve years and the Suzuki cabinet'a un-
determined atance toward administrative reform. The
ongoing administrative reform has not had favorable
effects on the people'a livelihood so far.

in deﬁance of the council's first recommendation
to withhold a pay raiae for public aervanta, the gov-
ernment approved the pay hlke as recommended by
the National Peraonnel Authority. The government
has increased the inue of deﬁcit-covering bonds in
the ﬁscal 1981 supplementary budget due to a drop
in tax revenues, though the amount of deﬁcit-ﬁnanc-
ing bonds had been reduced. The government aald
that it had alaahed spending drastically in the ﬁscal
1982 budget. But We have not heard any government

office. cry that it cannot carry out its work with the
money allocated to it.

The ruling and oppoaition parties must feel re-
sponsible for the week-long auapenaion of Diet busi-
ness and make atrenuoua cﬂorts to economize public

spending and reform the Diet to achieve a large-
scalc tax cut.

(March 8)

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Youduri 1982

(350: 6120/202

2
FOR OFFIC§AL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0W09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050018-2
AUTOMOBILE PARTS INDUSTRY'S STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCB REPOKI'ED

Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese lo, 5, 12, 19, 20, 27 Jan, 2 Feb 82
[10 Jan 82 p 7]

[Text] Automobile Foundry Company

It seems this year will be a rough one for the automobile parts makers. In a
period of declining demand, the requests from makers of complete automobiles
to cut costs will only grow stronger. To get through this difficult period,
the parts makers will have to move further ahead with decisive rationaliza-
tion and radical reform as well as with diversifioation in the operation of
their businesses. Up to now it has been all right for them to act at the
direction of the makers of complete automobiles, but from now on they must
find new directions on their own. Now, it seems, we must take a look at what
the automobile parts makers are thinking and what they might be planning.

On 1 November last year, the Automobile Foundry Company, a subsidiary of Isuzu
MoLors, established its own subsidiary, Jichuseiko (headquarters, Yokohama;
president, Kiyoshi Miyashita; capital, 20 million yen), by making a separate
and independent entity of its steel casting division, the profits of which
were not satisfactory. Ostensibly the reason for the move was to "strengthen
the steel casting division fundamentally," but it was really intended as part
of a tactic to reduce volume by cutting off unprofitable sectors in order to
concentrate investment in strategic sectors. It is safe to say that this is
a tinal effort to avoid being washed away by the wave that will soon come

crashing in.

The Automobile Foundry Company is a parts manufacturer which has strong ties
to the U.S. General Motors through Isuzu. It supplies ductile from parts
called [2differentia1] box for the "J Car," which GM has presented to the
world as the world car. The volume of deliveries to GM has reached 30,000
per month. And it appears that the amber of the [7differential] box to be
supplied will increase still further, as the Automobile Foundry Company cal-
culates that it will be forced to make a new response if the idea of a GM-
Isuzu world truck gets started. So the company moved to strengthen its stra-
tegic divisions, with a response to GH in mind. .

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAL Uht UNLY

Furthermore, Isuzu, the parent company, has been trying to take a hand in the
reorganization ofits affiliated parts makers. The makers have to establish
their own defenses by making the first move sothat they will not be swallo d
up in this wave. The separation of the new company was hastened by the fact
that two subsidiaries of Isuzu, Jidosha Bubin Seizo and Jidosha Neji Kogyo
(main office, Yokohama; president, Hisao Okutsu; capital, 250 million yen),
suddenly signed a merger agreement in order to rationalize management.

Yoshizo Yuki, president of the Automobile Foundry Company, is a second genera-
tion owner-president. Although Isuzu, a under stockholder, is looking for an
escape route in the world strategy which it is promoting with GM, Hr Yuki cer-
tainly considered that he must protect his own castle on his own. He probably
decided that the quickest way would be to establish efficient operation by
separating the weak divisions from those with a high earning potential.

The mainstay of the strategic divisions is the one that makes the lightweight
high-strength ductile cast steel which is supplied to CH. The firm has al-
ready moved the entire capability of the ductile steel casting division to its
plant at Tsuchiura, in Ibaraki Prefecture, and has begun production in earnest.
Furthermore, getting a headstart on the concept of a GH-Isuzu world truck, the
finnis going ahead with setting up a line for large-scale ductile steel cast-
ing for trucks at its Tsuchiura plant. The company sold part of its main
plant at Tsurumi, in Yokohama city, and has allocated nearly 1 billion yen,

the earnings from this sale. as capital for facilities. In this way the com-
pany is steadily strengthening its strategic divisions.

0n the other hand, there are many difficulties ahead for the steel casting
division which was separated from the company. Although it received all of
its land, buildings, machinery and equipment from the Automobile Foundry
Company, it must be said that it will be difficult for it to enlarge its
operations. Since it appears that the percentage of the Automobile Foundry
Company's sales accounted for by the steel casting division will continue to
decline in the future, that division will need to search for other work.
Furthermore, the majority of the 165 employees of Jichuseko are older people.

This company served as a "receiver" for the older employees from the Automo-
bile Foundry Compsny. In short, it was a subsidiary company whose purpose
was to perform a supporting function in order to facilitate expansion of the
Automobile Foundry Company's business.

Beginning this year, the global strategy of CH and Isuzu will finally be put
into practice. Together with Suzuki Motor works, Ltd, they will begin action
on the strategy for the minicar which is to follow the J-car. Furthermore, at
the end of last year they confirmed a basic policy on the concept of a world
truck, and they can be expected to give substance to this concept in due
course. The time the Automobile Foundry Company has been waiting for has

con .

Hill the preparations it has made bear fruit and enable it to make great
progress? Or will this decisive rationalization cause problems in personnel
management and not be effective as anticipated? For this firm, this promises
to be an important year which will be the key to growth in the future.

Pb
ma omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[5 Jan 82 p 8]
[Text] Akebono Drake Industries

A great wave of internationalization of automobiles is about to break. How-
cvut, if the automobile parts makers do not catch it right, they may not be
able to keep from being thrown. Akebono Brake Industries, a very large manu-
facturer of brakes for passenger cars, agreed last year-wiulthe American Ben-
dix (irm, its partner in technical cooperation. to build a jointly managed
plant in the United States. As it comes to the critical stage of internation—
alization, Akebono is trying to begin the new era with efforts to strengthen
its entire group by providing fully for subsidiaries and subcontracting manu-
lecturers.

Reportedly, some kind of "conclusions" on the plan for a factory to be jointly
managed by the top Japanese and American manufacturers of brake equipment will
he made public by this summer. Yasutada Nobumoto, president of the Akebono
Brake Company, cautiously remarked: "How will we get past the American anti-
trust restrictions? We are assuming a joint management in which the automo—
liVV machine industries division of Bendix will be a "separate" entity; what
will the other side decide about this? These two points remain from last

year as problems to be solved."

The situation in France is, of course, different from that in the United
States. but Yssutada Nobumoto seems to be "confident of success" because anti-
trust laws were cleared and low-cost production was realized by assembling
small-scale plants with the French Bendix Company. So far, there are six
unirrprlses to which Akebono Brake has supplied technology: in Australia,
xnxico, Spain, Chile, Brazil and Taiwan. Since "even chairman Eigi attests

to the fact that, particularly in disc brakes, the technology is the best in
the world," the company's primary objective this year is to improve the sys-
er of technical cooperation with these firms and to make every effort toward
diffusion and penetration of the Akebono trademark.

atthunu Brake's provision of technology overseas generally takes the form of
Euiuzly supplying technology with the 0.5. Bendix Company; however. Bendix
.tides no support at all in marketing. The question is how to build an over-
-u marketing network along with the production bases. Last autumn. Akebono
,..p-<ud lo Bendix the deletion of the restrictions on marketing areas (terri—
Iur: sinuses) in the technical cooperation contract. These clauses had been
an obstacle to penetration of overseas markets. Regarding realization of this
prunesal a matter of course, Akebono will start a new global strategy which
.umJ.nc5 manufacturing and marketing.

"n the other hand, while the company gradually takes action to extend its
- % verseas, it must also take a close look at the separate task of putting
u.vle Into Its own essential parts. Akebono Brake is supported by more than
!u ,nbsidiary companies and a group of some 60 subcontracting or cooperating
‘. tnlled the Seiwa Association. The situation makes it clear that
"-Inunnlng off" these companies will determine the possibilities for the
group as {1 whole.

25
roe omcuu, use ONLY
INJR OFFTCJAL USthNNLV

President Nobumoto said: "Theoretically, our policy is to provide for growth
without cutting off or reducing subcontracting." However, he emphasized a
stringent policy by saying: "Within the Akebono Brake group we will intro-
duce a pattern similar to that of strengthening and readjustment which was
steadily implemented over the past year in relations between the car makers
and the parts makers." This policy says: "The parts makers have gotten
better by being thrashed every year by the automobile makers. Putting this
formula to use to some extent in our own back yard will be for the good of
the group as a whole."

Once every 2 years the Seiwa Association organizes a tour for about 20 people
to inspect firms in ﬂuaﬁuropean and American automobile industry such as Bendix
in America. Recently many young managers have been participating. President
Nobumoto's assessment is that "they seem to get the feel of the toughness of
overseas markets and they are eager to respond to duznew era." However, re-
portedly President Nobumoto also says that "they will go to other places be-
sides those enterprises which have salable technology and cost capability;

the parts and materials can only come from them."

Three new major objectives were presented to the managerial corps of Akebono
Brake at the end of last year. They were:

1. Raise the principal products such as disc brakes to the highest level of
efficiency and production technology in the world.

2. Gradually build up production efficiency by thoroughly improving the
work rate.

3. Improve the operational divisions that are the furthest behind in ration-
alization. Subsidiaries such as Akebono Machine Industry (headquarters in
Tatebayashi in Guam Prefecture) were told that even though they had avoided
deficit operation. "in comparison with other makers in the industry there is
still room for effort." Through a formula for diagonals of individual firms,
orders were given for looking into the merits of those operational sectors
which individually showed a profit.

Akebono Machine Industry has expanded its plant for making cast steel parts
and later will begin preparations to handle aluminum casting. For those
subsidiaries such as Akebono Soft Engineering Gmain office in Tokyo) whose
work has nearly all been directed toward the automobile industry, the task
is to expand operations to general production. Akebono Drake's policy has
been that "while its mainstay will always be products for the automobile, it
will build up its defenses with new, nonautomotive lines." This policy will
involve such moves as a drive for new products in processed aluminum materials
for use as housing materials. when Akebono Brake Industries has made clear
its separatioa from Bendix in the field of production technology, how far
will it be able to adjust its position? This is the question which will
probably decide its future.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Companies Related to Akebono Brake Industries (Units of 1 million yen)

Japan Systems Safety
Research Institute

Akebono Kosan

Akebono International

Akebono America

Akebono Soft Engineering

Akebono S.A.

Akebono Machine Industry

Sanyo Brake Industry

Toyou Brake Industries

Sanyo Hydraulic Industry

Akehai [phoneticJIndustries]

Takami Manufacturing Co

Hntawa Industries

AK Packaging Research

Akebono Engineering

Sciwa Transport

Capital

100

10

30

$50,000

35

32

15

60

400

10

40

20

10

20

20

Main Operation

Research and development of
automotive parts

Rental and sale of gas stations
Exports related to brakes

Marketing, collecting informa-
tion on development of new
products

Designing information systems;
consigned data processing

Manufacture and marketing of
brake shoes

Manufacture and marketing of
cast products

Marketing and manufacture of
brake drums and shoes

Marketing and manufacture of
brake drums and shoes

Manufacture and marketing of
pistons for brake parts

Manufacture and marketing of
wheel cylinders for brakes -

Manufacture and marketing of
brake parts and shoes

Brake maintenance; brakes for
industrial machines

Marketing packaging materials,
packaging software

Manufacture and marketing of
automation machinery

Overland transport

27
FOR!0FFHJAI.USE(MVLY
I'VE Ufl‘lblﬂl— ‘13-. Ul‘hl

[12 Jan 82 p 9]
[Text] Abugi Automobile Parts

The Nissangtors group is proceeding with a spectacular overseas strategy and
is converting to FF cars (front engine, front wheel drive). Within the group,
Atsugi Motors will be placed in a very difficult and trying position. Produc-
tion of the company's strongest product, drive shafts for PR cars (front
engine, rear wheel drive), will certainly drop off sharply, and the company
must plan to "maintain" the scale by adding new products to its lineup.

It is estimated that in 2 years the loss in production of drive shafts by
Atsugi Parts will reach a scale of roughly 10 billion yen a year. The presi-
dent of the company, Shigeru Kitamura, even said that this will be "the great-
est trial the company has experienced since the war." For this reason, since
last year Atsugi Parts has been making every effort to incorporate new pro-
ducts. According to another parts dealer connected with Nissan: "Because the
areas of various companies' resonsibility within the Nissan group are fixed.
even though a given company may develop a good product, it may not necessarily
be able to handle the production by itself." Because of this situation, the
leaders of Atsugi Parts have been moving around the Nissan network quite a bit.

As a result, they have finally been able to insure that they can expand produc-
tion of a power steering pump for PP cars and begin production of a compressor
for air conditioners for automobiles. Among business people it is rumored that
competition with Nippon Radiator, which has responsibility for completed auto-
mobile air conditioners, was especially sharp over the compressor. Neverthe-
less, Atsugi Parts managed to arrange to begin production of 20,000 of these
items per month at its Iiyama plant, which it will complete this month (at
Atsugi city, Kanagawa Prefecture; plant investment, about 1.6 billion yen).

With such investment in new products, "Atcvgi Psrts' sales for the 2-month
period this year are about 1.6 billion yen higher than in the previous period,
and since 100 billion yen is assured, it seems that at least the future
shrinkage in the scale of the company's sales can be avoided" (President
Kitamura). Nevertheless, President Kitamurs's expression has still not
brightened. A rapid decline in the percentage of profits has begun to pene-
trate throughout the company.

Three years ago, in 1978. Atsugi Parts' profit ratio (ordinary percentage of
profit on total sales) was h.7 percent. In the following year, this dropped
slightly, to 4.6 percent, and last year it dropped to 4 percent. Moreover,
estimates for this year are that ordinary profits will be 30 billion yen, a
decline of 9.5 billion from the previous year. and that the profit ratio will
drop precipitiously to a mere 3 percent. Having been forced to insure quanti-
ty, the company has developed serious problems of quality in its work.

In his New Year's greeting this year, President Kitamura announced: "we will
put into practice the proverb, 'Enjoy fine food with a small group.’ This
means that the company will develop a strategy to shape up the firm in response
to reduced and declining profits. At this stage, specific policies are being

28
INDR 051iC1Al.USEiMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

worked out; the program will be made known when it is initiated in the begin-
ning of fiscal 1982. The basic idea. however. is 'readjustment to an optimum
balance on three points—investment, labor expenses and the use of orders from
overseas ' " (President Kitamura) .

The move to rationalize processing has been going on continuously for several
years and has been concentrated in the mamfacturing division. This movement
will be expanded to a companywide TQC development which will include the sec-
tors not directly involved in manufacturing. furthermore, as a policy for
dealing with swelling labor expenses, the company began last year to refrain
from replacing the regular retirment personnel by making every effort to

cut back on the 200 to 300 seasonal or temporary workers it hired at peak
periods. The company says it will review the relationship between improving
operations and introducing automated machinery and the size of the work force.
Prospects seem to be fairly strong that as a result it will settle on a stra-
tegy which will essentially call for decisive reduction.

0n the other hand. when it comes to policy for strengthening the group of sub-
contracting firms, President Kitsmura says that "the makers of conplete cars
demand that the parts makers lower costs, and it is difficult for the parts
makers to carry this demand directly to the subcontractors."

There is an association of firms which subcontract with Atsugi Parts called
the Kohokai. Some 100 firms belong to this association. but most of them still
have not built up strength to withstand a "frigid blast." They have decided
on a policy in which buyers from Atsugi Parts will go into the various firms
and take them in hand and give them on-the-spot guidance on improving opera-
tions.

President Kitamura subtly says: "We cannot say that in the future there will
be no cases in which we will change over to internal manufacturing of items
which in the past were let out to subcontractors." lie said this by way of a
slap on the wrist to improve the insufficient capacity of some of the subcon-
tractors; at present, Atsugi Parts has to rationalize its own processing and
prubabiy could not undertake to increase greatly the percentage of its inter-
nally manufactured items. The company will diversify even similar parts and
will "urgently make changes in production policy" (President Kitamura). If the
('nlnpnny were to increase the use of its superior subcontractors and make ef-
furts to improve the poorer subcontractors. it would be using "natural selec—
tion." It appears that this is the sort of tactic the company will follow.

Lax: fall, Atsugi Parts greatly increased the capacity of Atsugi—ﬂexicana, its
production base in Mexico, to cast alminm. It also greatly expanded produc-
tion by Taiwan-Atsugi Industries. Atsugi Parts overseas strategy finally got
lt-a motor running. It will be some time, however, before these activities
show their strength in terms of profits. Por Atsugi Parts, which is faced with
.1 reduction in its profit margin and which has been considered "to have the
character of a branch factory for Nissan Motors and to be somewhat lacking in
mind of its own" (another firm in the industry), the next 2 or 3 years will
he the crucial test.

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAI. cal. UNLV

[19 Jan 82 p 8]
[Text] Kanto Seiki Company, Ltd

At this point, the large manufacturer of electronic equipment Kanto Keiki is
sweating heavily as it tries to play the ball sent its way by the parent com-
pany, Nissan Motors. Riding the wave of automotive electronics, Nissan is
placing orders for new electronic machinery in quick succession. Increased
orders are a happy thought, but Kanto Seiki's capacity is small and the or-
ders are coming with short delivery times. The methods used up to now will
yield no profit at all. In distress, the company has begun to work on a
policy for the serious struggle ahead.

In an automotive industry which has entered a period of deceleration, automo-
tive electronics has continued to grow steadily. The technological strength

of this field became the raw material of expanded automobile sales and, in turn,
this led to heightened international competition. Nissan, which has carried

on a sharp competition with Toyota Automotive Industries. steadily developed
new electronic equipment for automobiles and placed orders with Kanto Seiki

to make the marketable products. In recent times, when the demand for elec-
tronic equipment in general has peaked, these orders are a help but, says com-
pany President Kazuhiko Ono with a wry smile, "unless we get started on ration—
alization, it will be hard to make a profit."

Basically making various kinds of measuring devices for automobiles, this com-
pany manufactures clocks, resin products and many items of electronic equip-
ment such as microcomputers and electronic parts. Consequently, cost manage-
ment was difficult even before, but the frequency of orders for new electronic
firms at this time has lent impetus to cost management. The first step in
this direction is the rationalization strategy of putting the inspection
process in the factory on line by using computers.

The automotive electronics items lately being ordered by Nissan include many
items which liberally use microcomputers and LSI (large scale integrated cir-
cuits), so there are many items for inspection. It would take too much time

to inspect item by item in the various production processes, as was done in the
past. The idea is that the inspection process can be greatly simplified if it
is carried out through integrated computer control. According to the plan,

the company will change over to an arrangement in which it will set up compu-
ter terminals for each production or assembly and complete the inspection sim-
ply by continuous monitoring of the product at these points. It is an arrange-
ment for immediate inspection in which the items to be checked for individual
products will be stored in the central computer and the product will be moni-
tored at the terminal. In this way, even if the items to be inspected in-
crease, they can be handled without increasing personnel.

Up to now, the company's capital investment has been applied to increasing
capacity; the policy for some time to some will be to direct almost all capi-
tal investment toward rationalization. The company says that "it will continue
investment at about 1 billion yen a year" and it wants to have an on-line in-
spection system based on computers in operation as quickly as possible.

30
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Al the same time, the company is trying to unitize its assembly processes.
This means building a production system in which it will be possible to assem-
ble various products simply by putting together work done in blocks. It would
do no good to go to the trouble of simplifying the inspection process if
assembly were inefficient. In any case, it is critical that there be cost

management at the work site along with simplification of the inspection
process.

In short. the company would have little potential for development if it were
to handle the orders from Nissan through sheer effort. Hhatever may have been
the case a decade ago, it now has an electronic technology division within the
company. Since thick-film [C are to be manufactured and microcomputers for
automobiles are to be assembled, it would be a waste simply to handle orders
from Nissan as they come.

in preparing for the battle in automotive electronics, the firm is letting

its hopes rise for fostering its own independent capability to develop elec-
tronic equipment and is increasing its expectations of a challenge to high—
lvvhnology semiconductors. Therefore, it considers that technical exchange

with Nissan is indispensable and has started closer technical exchanges with
N Lthﬂ.

Kanto Soiki's dream is that in return for handling low-profit orders, it will
gain impetus in improving its own technical capability.

Since its founding in 1956, Kanto Seiki has grown as the Nissan group's
specialist in manufacturing measurement devices. Hill it be able to ride the

wavw of automotive electronics to serious participation in the field of semi-
.nuduutors?

Will it be able to take the "wild pitches" and ”poor throws" from Nissan
gracefully and direct them toward added capability in new fields? Or will it
weaken under the pressure of successive pitches. Kanto Seiki is now being

It: itz‘d.

.L’ll Jun 82 p 8]

TsXL; Keihin Seiki Manufacturing Company
”hr are already making large cuts in subcontracting." These are the words
n! Shiro Natabiki, the president of Keihin Seiki Seisakujo, a manufacturer
of carburetors affiliated with Honda Motor Company, Ltd. With this statement
hv is emphasizing that he has gotten an early start on the new era of sharp
rumpvlllion. the company has a cooperative organization called the Keihin
uxurrukukai which is currently made up of 32 companies involved with carbure-
qus Jud 50 companies involved with valves. "The year before last there were
1|J tumpanies involved with values, but adjustments were made on decisive
vriLv“lJ such as ability to compete" (President Natabiki). As a result the
-mpn;\ has created a systeutofabout half that number which will get through
Ins :NLgh times of being efficient.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR()FFKJAL.Ubt;0NLN

Specifically, at that time, the company conducted a sorting-out process based
on such criteria as quality, cost of manufacture and rate of deliveries met,
and at the same time it took care to foster the outstanding subcontractors

by raising the terms for cash payment to subcontractors from the earlier 10
percent to 30 percent beginning in November of the year before last. Further-
more, since July of last year, the company has thoroughly adopted the idea
that "a subcontractor is part of the manufacturing division of the firm"
(President Watabiki) by holding top—level seminars for subcontractors. In
addition, it has begun to try gradually to raise the capacity and strengthen
the solidarity of the Kehin Seiki group by increasing the frequency of round-
table discussions for exchange of views with the subcontractors.

Strengthening such essential sectors as these advanced the preparatory work of
transforming the company into a consolidated maker of automotive fuel systems.
Keikin Seiki's best products have always been mechanical products. Mikuni
Corporation, which is its greatest rival, is associated with Mitsubishi Automo—
tive Industries and is well known for electronic fuel injection equipment. It
could not honestly be denied that Keikin Seiki had been behind in the most
advanced electronic technology.

However, last summer, the firm finally advanced into automotive electronics
by beginning delivery of electronic carburetors to Honda. In addition, it has
also received payment from the American motorcycle maker, Harley Davidson, for
delivery of test production of similar machinery. Prior to this, in May of
last year, at its Tsunoda Plant (at Tsunoda city in Hiyagi Prefecture) at a
cost of about 1.3 billion yen including testing and production facilities,

the company completed an electronics specialty area covering 2,000 square
meters (the area of the building) and created an entity which fully employs
about 100 electronic technicians.

Furthermore, 2 years ago the company began to plan seriously for conversion
from the manufacture of metal carburetors to manufacture using resin in order
to satisfy the move toward lighter weight. The prospects are that the results
of this planning will soon be applied to the manufactured product. President
Hatsbiki says that "the goal is that the leap from simple carburetor shop to
integrated maker of fuel systems will be accomplished before 1985." Supported
by a rapid growth in demand for motorcycles, he appears to have made a smooth
start toward the goal.

Since near the end of last year, the firm has done a lot of "shopping." It
bought a site for a 29,800—square meter plant in Harumori-cho, which is a
neighboring village to Tsunoda city where the Tsunoda plant is located.
Furthermore, purchase of land adjacent to the plant together with a site for
use by an affiliated company is included in the firm's projected-budget.
When existing sites in Hiyagi Prefecture are included, Kehin Seiki plans a
total of about 100,000 square meters of plant development.

Thus, Keihin Shiki, by starting to move toward electronics, by taking the
initiative regarding resin materials and by insuring sites for new plants,
is steadily working out the "moves in its domestic operating strategy, which
is looking unthe decade beginning in 1985." Reportedly, Hiyagi Honda Sales

ce2
FOR OFFI Al. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(main office in Sendai city), into which the firm put capital the year before
last in order to get a direct feel of the users' wishes, began to provide
market information which was as valuable as originally expected. In an 11-
month period last year, the company's sales were about 21 billion yen, l bil-
lion yen over original estimates. This year the company sales goal is 25 bil-
lion yen in the 11-month period. President Hatabiki is fully confident that

in the next 2 years he will couplete domestic preparations to enter the new
era."

however, the task to be accomplished is to build up the company's overseas
strategy, which seems to mark the firm as having come late to the field as

an important maker of automotive parts. Last year, progress was made toward
opening a true overseas era by providing technology to South Korea and decid-
ing upon a joint production program in Taiwan. Still, the firm's only conspicu-
ous achievement in the American and European markets is exporting carburetors
for was: Germany's Volkswagen. In view of the fact that the parent company,
Honda Motor Company, is anxious to complete an overseas production system,
Keihin Seiki will have to concentrate its attention on the manufacture of
complete automobiles in looking to orders for and local production of ass-bly
parts in North America or Europe and South America.

When volume in the industry generally seems to have peaked, it is a great ad-
vantage to be able to predict that for the present the volune of work will
continue to expand as always because of Honda Motor Company's increasing pro-
duction of motorcycles and cars. By accelerating its shift to mechanical
electronics and increasing its overseas aspirations with a favorable wind at

its back. the firm is making a critical attempt to change itself into a survi-
vor.

[27 Jan 82 p 8]
[Text] Nippon Denso

'nw Toyota group is trying to get through the era of deceleration with a pend-
ing consolidation of manufacturing and sales. The largest parts maker in the
group. Nippon Denso, thinks that "maintaining a growth of 10 percent or more

a year is in itself the best policy for surviving the era of slow growth in
the automotive industry" (vice president of the company, Kengo Toda). The

Elm has decided that its growth as an enterprise must not fail as it re-
Sponds to increasilgly more severe demands from the auto makers for reduced
costs and as it deals with the development of products which require high
technology. Therefore, little by little, the company will disperse the burden
of Investment in research and development, which will get heavier and heavier.
To do this it will try to improve the technical capability of the group as a
whole by providing some of its accumulated technology in electronics and elec-
tronic equipment to other firms in the Toyota group such as Tokai Rika. It has
also begun to study the idea of working outa resolute policy to foster cooperat-
ing Elms by which it would transfer some of its own divisions in toto to

those firms.

FOR OFT-161321. USE ONLY
FOR Ul-‘I-ICIAL Uhtl ONLY

The company's ambition for expansion of its business is symbolized by the con-
struction program at the Daian works in Hie Prefecture. After plant number
one, which will be completed in March this year, the company will begin as
early as this August to build plant number two on the same scale as the first
plant, about 50,000 square meters.

The company is concentrating production of ignition systems products such as
distributors, spark plugs and magnetos for motorcycles in the Daian works and
is studying the idea of thereby increasing production of alternators, Ic (inte-
grated circuits) and LS! (large scale integrated circuits) in its empty exist-
ing plant.

Nearly 80 percent of Nippon Denso sales go to Toyota Automotive Industries,
but Toyota's production plans for this year are for 3.38 million vehicles
(apart from KD sets). a 5 percent increase over the previous year. Moreover,
the majority of people connected with Toyota regard even this as a "goal to
strive for." It is highly possible that the growth will actually be less.
The reason the company is aiming at double digit growth and has been making
projections at this rate for the past 2 years under these circumstances is
that it is experiencing a sense of crisis that "it will be crushed by the
heavy pressure of rising personnel costs and development investment if it
merely prepares its defense to match the low growth of the industry in
general."

The basis for the process of the company's future growth will be its long-term
management plan, "Outline of a Response for the 1980's,“ which sets a final
target of 1 trillion yen in sales in fiscal 1987. In looking toward realiza-
tion of this plan, the company has first begun to work to strengthen the unity
of electronic parts makers within the Toyota group. Specifically, it has
expanded cooperation in essential technology with Tokai Rika and it has trans-
ferred management of production of some products to Aisan Kogyo.

Tokai Rika is J manufacturer of automotive switches, but "the majority of

its products are closely related to electronics" (president of the company
Takao Oiwa). Therefore, beginning in November last year it set up a new elec-
tronic operations division. This was backed up by Nippon Denso, which has
cooperated in technology with this company since 1970. Nippon Denso's hope is
that "if it sows the seed, perhaps someday the seed will grow on its own and
reverse the situation by giving support in some way."

Nippon Denso had a similar intention in transferring production of throttle
bodies for EFI (electronic fuel injection) to Aisan Kogyo. Nippon Denso
researches, develops and produces a wide variety of products ranging from ba-
sic electronic parts such as IC and LSI to spark plugs. It will not be a
great loss to Nippon Denso if it entrusts production of throttle bodies for
B?! to Aisan Kogyo. Rather, Nippon Denso will be able to direct the extra
capacity gained in this move to development of new products and, in effect,
will be able to make development and production efficient for both sides.

One of the central mechanisms of the policy to improve the basic character of

the group of cooperating companies is the"Nippon Denso Quality and Management
Award." This award was inaugurated in 1959 and is open to the 43 cooperating

FOR omcﬁ'l. USE ONLY
firms which are members of the Denso Cooperative Association. It is a commen-
dation to firms which produce outstanding results in improving the quality of
their product and in cutting costs. The company reportedly puts efforts into
this by sending guidance teams led by the chief of the quality assurance divi-
sion of its management affairs division to firms which apply.

Another thing the company is trying to do as another step forward in the
policy of fostering cooperating firms is to actively exchange personnel. With
the development of automotive electronics, the accunulation and application of
the most advanced technology has become an important task even for the members
of the Denso Cooperative Association which are, from the automobile manufac-
turers' standpoint, secondary cooperating firms. The company's policy is to
transfer a comprehensive capability in electronics by taking in technicians
from c00perating firms and putting them to work in its own organization.

Moreover, it is said that in the near future, in cases where firms do not have
the capacity to establish a design division, Nippon Denso will transfer to them,
intact, the divisions which are doing the designing of those firms' products
within Nippon Denso. An example of such a case is the relationship between
Asumo (main office in Kosai city, Shizuoda Prefecture; president Fujisaburo
Saga; capital, 600 million yen), which delivers small motors to Nippon Denso.
and the motor technology division of Nippon Denso's functional parts operations
division, which is in charge of designing these products.

12 Feb 82 p a]

[Text] Nihon Denshi Kiki

If you visit Nihon Denshi Kiki,'in Isesaki city inlhumna Prefecture (company
president, Hajime Hizutsi; capital, 2.4 billion yen) you will hear the sound
of hammering. Construction of equipment and facilities to build up the re-
search and development system further are advancing at a rapid pace. Presi-
dent Mizutsu says: "In any case, it is critical that we improve our techno-
logical capability." The firm is driven by the thought that, being in the
position of holding up one end of Nissan Hotors' automotive electronics stra-
tegy, it will fall behind if it does not further refine its electronic tech-

uo logy now .

Nihon Denshi Kiki is a manufacturer which specializes in microcomputer con-
trolled electronic fuel injection equipment. It holds the position of sole
supplier of electronic fuel injection equipment installed in Nissan cars, and
up to now it has been safe for the company to respond to Nissan's requirements
with volume. Recently. however, a heavy buildup of the firm's research and
development system has become urgent, because experimental development work on

new electronic systems from Nissan has been pouring into the company contin-
uously, as though to test its talents completely.

Current research and experimental development processes are sporadic, as

though incidental to the various manufacturing processes in the plant. What-
ever may have been the ease up to now, when it was all right for the company

FOR omcaa. USE ONLY
FUR UI‘HCIAL USE ONLY

to work as Nissan directed, the company is not able to respond sufficiently
with this method now that orders for new test products are increasing rapidly.
The plan is to construct a new research and development unit directly opposite
the main building and to concentrate the research and experimental development
divisions there. The intention is to concentrate the staff which will work on
research and experimental development in one place and have them work inten-
sively in modern facilities. Since the time from research to testing will be
considerably reduced and the capability of the experimental production line
will be raised 50 percent, the plan will serve to enhance cost management.

Moreover, beside the research and experimental development facility, the com-
pany is constructing a testing facility where electronic equipment and engines
will be adjusted and test driven. When this is completed it will be possible
for the company to take over the engine testing for the firms to which its pro-
ducts are delivered. Since the company will consistently be able to handle
everything from research and experimental testing to final testing, its ability
to exchange information with the recipient firms will be enhanced, and this,

it believes, will serve to considerably raise its technological capability.
These plant investments, including investment to increase capabilities, total
about 1.1 billion yen and are expected to be complete by sometime this spring.

Looking at the construction site from his office, company President Hizutsu
explains: "If we complete that research and experimental development building
and the testing building beside it, we will have completed the foundation for
improving our technology. For parts makers such as us, technological capa-
bility is vital."

Nissan Motors, the parent company, is at this time building up impetus in its
automotive electronics strategy to compete with Toyota Motors in Japan and
General Motors and Ford overseas. It is generously pouring money and elec-
tronic technicians into its central research institute and has begun experi-
mental development of LSI (large scale integrated circuits) exclusively for
use in automobiles. It has, of course, placed various orders with makers of
electronic equipment.

Nihon Denshi Kiki was originally established by Nissan to introduce electronic
fuel injection technology from the West German firm Robert Bosch [phonetic].
Therefore, it has been all right up to now for the company to make electronic
fuel injection equipment as such, but since experimental development of new
electronic control systems, particularly engine peripheral systems, has come
to the company, it has had a lot of headaches and it is safe to say that

this is what triggered the improvement of its research and experimental devel-

opment system.

The firm could be left behind unless it established a capability and a system
equal to Nissan's in the field of engine controls. It could have problems if
it were unable to respondto Nissan's demands in the area of most advanced
technology and were not able to make a single technical proposal. The firm's
talent is being tested. Will it remain merely a maker of electronic fuel in-
jection equipment or can it become a maker capable of creating new electronic
equipment? It now stands at the crossroads.

FOR OFFICIRE USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the demand for electronic fuel injection equipment has not declined as
much as demand for other automotive parts, Nihon Denshi Kiki is in a favor-
able environment. Nevertheless, its profit margin has been shrinking year by
year. In this situation, it would not appear desirable for Nihon Denshi Kiki
to build up its research and experimental development division which is not
directly tied to profits. However, if it neglects to make the effort at this
time, it will be difficult to have the company grow in the long term. Rather,

there is greater danger that if the company does nothing, it will be swallowed
up in the wave of retrenchment which is coming upon it.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kelzai Shinbunsha 1982

9111
C50: 1. 105/55

FOR omc‘al. USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

RECENT TRADE ACTIVITIES WITH SOVIET UNION REPORTEI
Special Steel Exports
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 8 Jan 82 p 13

[Text] Agreement Near for 36,500 Tons; Five Companies Specializing in Special
Steel Conduct Negotiations with Soviets for January to March Shipments

0n 7 January, informed sources reported that the export negotiations conducted
by five special steel companies (Daido Special Steel, Sanyo Special Steel, Aichi
Steel Works, Mitsubishi Steel Manufacturing, and Nippon Koshuha Steel) with the
Soviet Union for January-March shipments have been concluded. The total con-
tract amount for the five companies will be about 36,500 tons. an increase over
the 23,000 tons shipped in the previous period.

These negotiations are held every quarter. This time, each company sent a rep-
resentative to Moscow at the end of last year and made arrangements independent-
ly. The contract amount for alloy steel rods was 23,000 tons. This was ar-
ranged in one package by Daido Special Steel and then allocated among four com-
panies, excluding Nippon Koshuhs Steel. The price ended up on the same level
as the last period's shipments because of foreign currency shortages in the
Soviet Union and the low-price offensive of the European mills. Seventy per-
cent of the alloy steel rods will be supplied by Daido, and the remaining 30
percent will be divided among the other three companies. The demand from the
Toglatti automobile plant seems to have increased; there is a substantial in-
crease over the 13,000 tons shipped in the last period.

Sanyo Special Steel was able to conclude negotiations very quickly for 9,000
tons of bearing steel rods, 3 much larger amount than the 5,000 tons shipped in
the last period. In addition, contracts were concluded for 1,000 tons of hear-
ing steel cold-drawn tube and 1,000 tons of alloy tube and other types of steel.
In both cases, the amount is about the same as that of the previous period.

Aichi Steel contracted for a total of 2,500 tons of alloy steel plate, bearing
steel plate, and stainless steel plate, about 500 tons more than last period.
Most of this appears to be alloy steel plate. Mitsubishi Steel did not make
any contracts in addition to its share of the alloy steel rods.

Separate negotiations by both Daido and Koshuha are continuing. Daido is nego-
tiating for the alloy steel wire, of which 2,200 tons were ordered in the last
period. Koshuha is negotiating for bearing steel wire, for which it had a 600-
ton contract in the last period.

8
FOR OFFICIRL USE ONLY
The Japanese want to hold the negotiations for the next period shipments (April
to June) as soon as March in Tokyo. However, there is no sign of an upturn in
the unfavorable foreign currency situation in the Soviet Union. Therefore:
"This increase is a reaction to the fact that they hit bottom in the last peri-
od. There will be no improvement in any of these materials from now on."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunshs Tokyo Honsha

Synthetic Fiber Payment
Tokyo “IRON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 8 Feb 82 p 7
Text] "hat Is the Soviet Aim?
Toned Down Request for Deferment of Fiber Payment

Difficult Decision for the Trading Companies; Possibility of Settlement on Con-
dition

After the request by the Soviet Government corporation for fiber export and in-
port (V/O Khoz. EKsportlen) for a deferment of payment on imports of synthetic
fiber and long fiber textiles met with a tough response from the Japanese, the
Soviets last week greatly reduced the requested deferment period to 60 days.

On 8 February, the trading companies involved will meet again and decide to
search for "a consensus policy for the entire industry." However, the ideas of
the various trading companies and the Soviet Union are in conflict and there is
no telling what will happen.

The Soviet Union asked for a deferment of payment in the middle of January. At
first. it appealed to five companies which have a great deal of fiber trade with
the Soviet Union, including c. Itoh, Harubeni, and Sumitomo Shoji, and gradually
made further requests of other companies. The deferred payment is being re-
quested on shipments from January to June, for which negotiations are already
proceeding. The Soviet Union began with a request for a "180-day deferment."

This kind of thing has rarely occurred in the fiber trade with the Soviet Union.
The first impression of the trading companies was: "It seems that funds have
gotten tight, possibly because of the problem in Poland." Since then, the So-

viot Union has not clearly explained the reason for the deferment request, so
this impression has not changed.

The major trading companies which received the Soviet request for a large defer-
ment at first refused immediately. "It is impossible to agree to a deferred
payment after an agreement has been concluded." Then the Soviet Union asked

"Would it be possible under certain conditions?" So 10 related companies ex-
changed information and decided again on an industry basis to "refuse complete-
ly." That was on 25 January.

In response. the Soviet's second request reached the major trading companies at
the end of last week. The content of this was: "We request a 60-day settlement

for the shipments scheduled for the period up to 10 June which are under nego-
tiation and for which agreements have not been signed (shipments under negotia-

tion since December of last year)." This specific request was greatly toned
down from the original request.

39
FOR 0f1ﬂ€1Al.UGi:(NVLY
rvn urruanl. vat. UNLI

The negotiations with the Soviet Government corporation for fiber export and
import takes a form in which the Japanese side sells thread and textiles at
about the same price at which raw cotton is purchased from the Soviet Union.
The payments are made separately, but in reality, this is a barter transaction.
An important reason for importing Soviet cotton is that the Japanese want to
export synthetic long fiber textiles. Therefore, there are reasons that make

it impossible to simply cancel when changes in conditions are requested after
negotiations are completed.

Even while continuing to hold to the principle of "refusing the request for
deferment," some of the trading companies have begun to point to "the possibil-
ity of solving the problem by negotiating conditions." They have begun to take
the approach of narrowing down the negotiations to the transactions for which

the Soviets are requesting deferment and actively negotiating for payment of
interest on the deferred payment.

The problem is whether a way can be found to settle the problem. Since the
position of each trading company differs slightly from the others in taking a
hard or soft line, the situation remains fluid. In any case, why did the So-
viet Government corporation for fiber exports and imports make such a big
change from its original request? Some are wondering: "What if what the Rus-
sians are really after is not fiber?" In this request for deferment, it is
difficult to know exactly what the Soviets' true intentions are.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

Large-Diameter Pipe
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 12 Jan 82 p 5

[Text] Four Steel Companies Agree on an Increase of 95,000 Tons for Next Year's

Shipment of Large-Diameter Pipe Exports to the Soviet Union; Loans Under 01d
Conditions

On 12 January, steel industry sources announced that the volume of 1982 ship-
ments of large-diameter pipe exports to the Soviet Union had been finally agreed
upon at 795.000 tons, and a contract has been signed. Originally, agreement was
reached last fall for 700,000 tons through December of this year. The Soviet
side asked for an increase in volume for the January to March shipments next
year. As a result of continued discussions between the two parties, the deal was
concluded with an extra shipment of 95,000 tons. A loan from the Export-Import
Bank of Japan will be applied to this addition at the same terms as for the orig-
inal transaction. an interest rate of 8 percent and a term of 5 years.

The negotiations for export of large-diameter pipe to the Soviet Union were car-
ried out by the four major steel companies-Nippon Steel Corp, Nippon Kokan,
Kawasaki Steel, and Sumitomo Metal Industries-with the Soviet trade corporation
for import and export of mineral and industrial products on the basis of a loan
to be provided by the Ex-Im Bank. In 1981 the shipment was 700,000 tons and the
deal was made on the basis of suppliers credit. This was because the pipe was

ho
FOR OFFICIAL use onu
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USEZONLN

requested by the Soviet Union for use in the Yamburg pipeline to carry natural
gas to Western nations. Because of pressure from the United States, the agree-
ment broke down over the issue of interest for the bank loan. However, the
Soviet Union has made a strong demand for application of a conventional bank
loan to the 1982 shipments; First Deputy Minister Brezhnev of the Ministry of
Foreign Trade came to Japan in the latter part of November last year and enter-
ed into negotiations with the Export-Import Bank. This was exceptionally early
in comparison to the pace of negotiations in previous years. After 16 November,
the OBCD export credit provision guidelines were proposed as conditions, so it
appears that there was a previous plan aimed at application of the old loan
terms to this same transaction when it was under preliminary negotiation by the
steel industry.

In any case, the discussions over the bank loan went smoothly. Agreement was
concluded at the end of November under the old guidelines of 5 years at 8 per-
cent. Agreement was also reached between the four steel companies and the So-
viet trade corporation for minerals and industrial products for a volume of
700,000 tons in the April to December shipments.

however, the Soviets subsequently asked the companies for an additional 300,000
tons at the old conditions. Even though the four companies have sufficient pro-
duction capacity to comply with the request, they appear to have agreed on an
upper limit of 700,000 tons since the general agreement was initially made at
700,000 tons under the old loan conditions.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Agricultural Equipment Drive V Belt
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 Jan 82 p 7

[Text] Large Orders from the Soviet Union to Mitsuboshi Belting and Bando Chel-
icsl; Over 1.9 Billion Yen, First Such Order in 16 Years

Kobe--Mitsuboshi Belting Ltd (Kinao Oda, president) and Bando Chemical Indus-
tries (Shigeo Kunugi, president) announced on 15 January that they have received
an order for 2,976,000 drive V belts for agricultural equipment at a total price
ol 1.95 billion yen from the Soviet trade corporation handling tractors. The
belts will he eXported from this month to September. These two companies are
large manufacturers which roughly split the domestic drive belt market between
them. However, the achievement of this large an export contract at one time is
extremely rare.

The exports will break down as follows. Hitsuboshi will export 1.1 million
belts at 700 million yen to the Soviet Government tractor corporation and other
organizations in the Soviet Union, 600,000 belts at 600 million yen to countries
in Eastern Europe, and 500,000 belts at 300 million yen to countries in Hestern
EurOpe, for a total of 2.2 million belts at 1.4 billion yen. Bando will export
776,000 belts at 550 million yen to the Soviet Government tractor corporation.

1
FOR OFHCII‘AI. USE ONLY
I ‘1“ VI I ILIRA. UV". \II‘I— I

Host of the belts for the Soviet Union will be V belts for agricultural com-
bines. Both companies have exported belts for agricultural equipment in the
past, but this is reported to be the first order of such a large size in 16
years. Several hundred thousand tractors and combines are produced annually in
the Soviet Union. However, because of the severe climatic conditions, the de-
mand for belts runs to 50 million a year. and continuing business is expected.

The 1.1 million belts for Eastern and Western Europe will be exported by Mitsu-
boshi through an affiliate, the Semprit [phonetic] Company (an Austrian maker
of rubber tires and belts). Local production of the drive belts will begin
this May under the technical guidance of Hitsuboshi. Until then, the gap will
be filled by exports. The products will be supplied to the European countries
under the Semprit brand.

The Japanese drive belt industry has reached the same level as such large 0.8.
firms as Dayco [phonetic] and Gates. Annual production is more than 100,000
belts. and 10-13 percent of that is exported.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

NC Lathe Order
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 18 Jan 82 p 1
[Text] 700-Hillion-Yen Lathe Order From the Soviet Union

Dainichi Metal Industries (headquarters in Osaka; Shozo Koyama, chairman; 304
million yen in capital) is a large manufacturer of large NC (numerically con-
trolled) lathes and large specialized lathes. Recently it confirmed a 730-
million-yen order from the Soviet Union for large specialized lathes. It will
make two shipments, one in July and one in November. Delivery should be com-
pleted by February of next year. It has also received inquiries for 2.5 bil-
lion yen worth of lathes for equipment to be used in the yakutsk natural gas
plant.

The shipment in July will include 21 large specialized lathes and 2 large NC
lathes. for a total of 350 million yen. They are intended for use in ordinary
plants. The products to be exported in November--all specialized lathes for
use in automobile plants--will consist of 60 lathes at about 380 million yen.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Difficulties in Pipelayer Export
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SUIMBUN in Japanese 19 Jan 82 p 8
[Text] Pipelaying Equipment Exports Disturbed by "Anti-Soviet Sanctions"
Exports to Yamburg-Urengoy; Shrewd Haneuvering Because of Hugh Volume

Exports of pipelayers to the Soviet Union are undergoing difficulties. As every-
one knows, the Reagan administration has adopted a policy banning exports of

oil and natural gas-related equipment and materials to the Soviet Union as part
of the anti-Soviet sanctions connected with the Polish crisis. And it is re-
ported that Japan has been called upon to cooperate as a member of the Western

camp.

The pipelayer is simply a machine used to lay pipe. The pipeline construction
is needed for oil and natural gas development and this machine is essential for
this. It is little more than a bulldozer with the blade removed and a crane
added in its place.

Therefore, people tend to think that it is an ordinary machine that could be
found anywhere. Actually, however, there are only two major manufacturers of
the pipelayer in the world--Komatsu Ltd of Japan and Caterpillar Tractor of the
United States. Since these two companies have built up the largest capacity
for manufacturing the bulldozer, the fundamental part of this machine, there is
no room for other companies to get into the market.

However, the pipelayer is often buffeted by the waves of world politics. This
is especially true in the case of exports to the Soviet Union. A request to
stop shipment of this pipelayer was made to Japan. It was one of the machines
which President Reagan asked the Hestern nations, including West Germany, not
to supply to the Soviet Union at last year's summit meeting of the advanced
nations. "It is to be used for development of the Yamburg gas fields and may
have an effect on the security of the Western nations."

Subsequently, the Soviet Union stated that it was going to promote the develop-
ment of the nearby Urengoy gas fields rather than Yamburg, and the uncertain
unity of the Hestern nations on this issue came apart completely. In fact, the
U.S. Covernment itself approved the export of pipelayers and bulldozers from
Lhe Caterpillar Company to the Soviet Union. So business related to Yamburg
and Urengoy was completely opened up.

However, President Reagan once again announced specific measures as sanctions
against the Soviet Union at the end of last year because of the Polish crisis.
Included in these was suspension of exports of equipment and materials related
to oil and natural gas. The approval given to Caterpillar for exports to the
Soviet Union was rescinded, and a request for cooperation was made to Japan as
well.

The reply of Komatsu Ltd to this was "no comment". In fact, it was impossible

to answer the question of whether the U.S. Government's suspension of pipelayer
exports to the Soviet Union was effective or not.

3
FOR OFFIéAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPMLIAL USE ONLY

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs says with regard to this U.S. request that the
anti-Soviet sanctions of the end of last year were proposed to Japan. Along
with the policy of suspending the approval given to Caterpillar for exports to
the Soviet Union, the U.S. Government requested our cooperation with its anti-
Soviet sanctions. It did not directly refer to the Komatsu pipelayer exports,
but we can assume that this was indirectly included in the request.

Komatsu has given no indication of its attitude or policy on this matter. Since
the U.S. Government has itself made complete turnarounds with respect to Cater-
pillar's exports of equipment to Yamburg and Urengoy, asking for self-restraint,
then giving approval, and then rescinding the approval, this time it is impos-
sible to simply believe what it says.

Furthermore, Komatsu Ltd and Caterpillar have recently been clashing in various
locations throughout the world. Caterpillar has three times the amount of an-
nual sales Komatsu has, but Komatsu has increased its capacity recently, and
even Caterpillar, the king of world construction equipment, is said to be con-
scious of this.

Therefore, there is a terrific, if hidden, battle between the two companies in
the collection of information. In keeping with the national character in a
matter related to the Soviet Union, this is shrouded in secrecy. Neither com-
pany wants to show its hand. And because the pipelayer export problem is mixed
up with politics, it is impossible to know the real situation.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Pipelayer Exports Underway
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Feb 82 p 7

[Text] Komatsu Ltd Shipments to Soviet Union Begin for Previously Contracted
Pipelaying Equipment

As a part of its economic sanctions against the Soviet Union, the U.S. Govern-
ment is asking for a suspension of exports of pipelaying equipment ordered

from Komatsu Ltd last fall for use in western Siberia. However, Konstsu an-
nounced on 1 February that it had begun shipments of the pipelaying equipment.
This transaction is being carried out with a loan from the Export-Import Bank
of Japan, and the Japanese Government has taken the attitude that "it is diffi-

cult to stop exports for which agreements have already been made." So it seems
that this transaction will receive "tacit approval."

The transaction includes the export of 36 billion yen ($160 million) in pipe-
layers and bulldozers for use in the western Siberian natural gas pipeline pro-
ject being promoted by the Soviet Government.

When discussions of this project began last summer, it was singled out for
criticism by the U.S. Government as being connected to the Yamburg project.
However, the Soviet Government made a change in the appearance of the Yamburg
project, and in October of last year Komatsu signed a contract with the Soviet
trade corporation for equipment.

hh
[NOR OF1ﬂCJAL USEICHNLY
Afterward, because of the problem in Poland, the Reagan government announced
economic sanctions against the Soviet Union. Caterpillar Tractor and GB (Gen-
eral Electric), which had also concluded agreements for the west Siberian nat-
ural gas pipeline project, suspended exports.

The request for the suspension of exports of the Komatsu pipelayers was made to
coincide with these measures, and Komatsu awaited the outcome of discussions
between the 0.8. and Japanese Governments. However, the government took the
position that "this export contract has already been concluded. The contract
was accompanied by a loan from the Export-Import Bank of Japan and received of-
ficial government approval." This view was stated to the U.S. Government by
HiniSter of International Trade and Industry Abe. It appears that Kamatsu judg-
ed from this government attitude that it would be all right to begin shipments
for products already contracted. The shipments have been carried out success-
ively since the end of last year. Several more are scheduled to take place in
the next few months.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

Crude Oil Recovery Agent
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 21 Jan 82 p 14

[Text] Crude Oil Recovery Agent for the Soviet Union; 800 Tons at 500 Million
Yen Ordered from Nitto chemical

Nitto Chemical Industries, together with Mitsubishi Corp, announced on 20 Janu-
ary that it had received orders for 800 tons of chemicals at 500 million yen
from the Soviet trade corporation for export and import of chemicals, for use
in tertiary recovery of crude oil. The delivery date is June of this year.
Nitto Chemical has exported 500 tons of crude oil recovery agents to the Soviet
Union each year for the last 3 years. However, this is the first time it has
contracted for such a large volume. The company plans to hold a symposium on
agents for tertiary recovery of crude oil in the Soviet Union in the middle of
February. Next it would like to make exports on the basis of a long-term con-
tract.

With the rise in oil prices, there has been a growing movement throughout the
world to recover the crude oil left after drilling in oil-bearing strata. The
method of injecting water or gas to extract the oil is known as secondary re-
covery.

Tertiary recovery is a method in which special chemicals are used to further
increase the recovery rate. Nitto Chemical's recovery agent is made from poly-
acryloamide and is used for tertiary recovery.

According to Nitto Chemical, the Soviet Union has been purchasing 1,000 tons of
tertiary recovery agent from Japan annually. Nitto Chemical concluded two con-
tracts beginning 4 years ago and has exported a total of 500 tons each year.
This time, it received a request for 1,000 tons annually for the January to
June shipment. Based on Nitto's production capacity, a contract was concluded
for 800 tons.

FOR OFFICk§I.USEIONLM
I‘Ul WI’ILII‘I. UJL UNI-I

Nitto Chelical believes that the Soviets recognized the effectiveness of its
product and expanded the volume of purchases. There is also the view that the
Soviet Union is moving from the testing stage to the application of tertiary
recovery technology, and therefore there is a prospect of even greater Soviet
purchases. Taking this opportunity, Nitto Chemical and Mitsubishi Corp are
loving ahead with plans to jointly sponsor a synposiun in the Soviet Union in
the Iiddle of February on the theme of tertiary recovery technology. Nitto
Chemical has not yet exported its recovery agent to any countries other than
the Soviet Union, but in the future it plans to work anhitiously toward export-
ing to the United States.

COFYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

9651
CSO: 4106/51

h6
FOR OFI1C1AI.U881MNLY
ascm Rom sates Acuvruss mom
Tokyo sum roro smut in Japanese 13 Feb 82 pp 32-36

[Article by Fusao Tanaka]

[Text] The coapleted robots love their arms all around while asking low, aetal-
lic sounds. The motion is repeated again and again for 100 hours. In the
tightly sealed, adjoining room, an aging test (longevity test) has been per-
formed under 50 degree telperature conditions. The robots which passed the

test will be sent to their employers and will perform the tasks assigned to

then in their plants.

Their skill is certified. Once they are taught a task, they perform thoroughly
skilled labor. The quality of their work is high. and they continue night and
day. And they are highly reliable.

The mean time between failures (HTS?) of Kawasaki Heavy Industries' Unimate is
2,500 hours--on1y one malfunction every 2,500 hours. That's one time in half
a year, which is twice as good as the Uninate made by America's Unimation Corp.

The robots from the main factory of Toyo Kogyo Co have an amazing 99.97% rate
of utilization, experiencing only 3 hours down tine (tine of malfunction) in
10,000 hours of operation. More and sore plants are beginning to use these
superior Japanese robots.

It has not been long since the robot boom began. It case to be known by the
general public only when the Japan Industrial Robot Association declared 1980

"the beginning of the robot era."

Robots were introduced in Japan in 1967, but no headway could be made for a
long time. Kawasaki Heavy Industries, which was the trailblazer of Japan's
robot industry, concluded a technical cooperation agreement with the Unimation
Corp of the 0.8. in 1968, and began dosestic production of robots in 1970.
Prior to the oil shock, however, they merely sold several dozens a year, and
the company was hard pressed by accumulated deficit.

But Kawasaki resumed the road to recovery when spot welding robots, which have
become the company's mainstay robots, began to be used. The automobile manu-
facturers (and related companies), which use 902 of the spot welding robots.
began to use the: on a full scale in 1975.

FOR OFIWC%RE.UBII(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nissan Motor Co., which was most enthusiastic about the introduction of robots
into factories, began introducing them in 1968-69 in the very limited role of
moving metal between presses; it continued to feel its way until 1971 when it
finally succeeded in using robots for spot welding. But even with that, only
4 units were purchased in 1971 and 10 in 1972. "We didn't start introducing
them into the plants on a full scale before 1975." (2nd Technical Division
Director Nobuya Konishi)

Then, in 1975, 100 units were installed. The total number installed before
that time was about 100 units, so it is clear that the number of units for 1975
was large and marked a turning point for robots. By the end of 1981 Nissan

had 730 robots, from playback on up. Some 901 of these were spot welding ro-
bots.

However, the classic example illustrating the full acceptance of robots by in-
dustry is the policy shift to massive introduction of robots by Toyota Motor
Co. Toyota had originally taken a severe view of costs, and had not been in-
terested in introduction of robots because the use of cheap human labor was
judged to be more profitable.

But Toyota made a l80-degree turn to the massive introduction of robots. Be-
hind this shift was, of course. the increasing necessity of production flexi-
bility in response to diversification of user tastes and more frequent model
changes. "We couldn't respond using the old single-purpose machinery. We had
to introduce general-purpose robots to do it." (Production Technology Develop-
ment Division Deputy Director Tadashi Ito) But the fact that "it now pays
economically" (Ito) should not be overlooked.

Personnel costs increase each year and material costs have also been rising,
but prices of robots are at or below earlier levels. The relative price de-
crease had it impact on the massive introduction of robots. This was the trig-
ger for the robot boom in manufacturing industry in general. Toyota's big
policy change came in 1979: it had brought in 630 units by the end of 1981.

If units on order are included, the total becomes 700 robots.

The market for arc welding robots is expanding rapidly--annua1 growth of about
352 is expected to continue--and the price is now less than 10 million yen per
unit. Assuming a six year lease, total payments would be 13.3 nillion yen.
The monthly cost would be about 180,000 yen, which is well below the high
wages of a skilled welder.

Because the robot works day and night. savings in personnel costs pay for it in
about two years. It is an undreamed of help to smaller companies which have
been unable to attract workers because of the shortage of skilled labor. As
well as improved quality. moreover, it yields doubled or tripled productivity.

Smaller companies use arc welding robots, which weld long seams, more than the
spot welding robots which are used by large manufacturers. There are between
300,000 and 600,000 welders in Japan at present, but it is said that there is

a shortage of some 30,000. The smaller companies find it particularly diffi-
cult to attract welders, so they are active in the introduction of robots. The
more motivated managers are, the more pronounced this trend becomes. They know
that the faster robots are introduced, the greater the advantage to the company
is.

he
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Reflecting this positive attitude among the users, the robot makers have also
entered an era of production increases. In the second half of last year, Yas-
kawa Electric Mfg. Co. started to receive orders of more than 100 units per
month, and Hitachi Ltd. will pass the 100 units production per month mark
around April of 1982.

Fujitsu Fanuc has a monthly production of 50 units now, and aims at 100 during
this year. Kawasaki has already gone into painting robots and arc welding
robots in addition to spot welding robots, and in the spring of 1982 it plans
to sell 30 assembly robots per month, for a total monthly production in excess
of 100 units.

Osaka Transformer Co. started making arc welding robots in 1979; it is now at
the 50 units per month level. Kobe Steel Ltd. has a monthly production of 25
units, primarily painting robots. It delivered 100 units through 1979; this
total rose to 200 in 1980 and to 300 (orders) in 1981. Production increases
are also planned by Hatsushita Electric Industrial 60., Mitsubishi Heavy Indus-
tries Ltd.. Mitsubishi Electric Industrial Co. and the Toshiba Group.

Of course sales competition among robot manufacturers is fierce. In the high-
growth field of arc welding robots, especially, there are numerous manufactur-
ers and competition for market shares is correspondingly fierce. The companies
all place priority on market share and are relying on economies of scale, so
much so that price cuts of 20 to 301 have become general.

At present it is said that only Kawasaki has shown a profit after subtracting
investment in development and facilities. It is questionable whether or not
even Yaskswa, which has shown rapid growth in recent years and has been motiv-
ated by recovering profits has shown a profit when early development costs are
taken into account. That is why the companies are all eager to take advantage
of economies of scale.

Robots are not sold as isolated items; it is important that they be integrated
with the production line. That is, because production system know-how is in-
cluded in the sale, the first sale to a large user is the most important. That
is why there was such fierce competition to sell robots to Toyota.

The sales competition involves not only the manufacturers, but also the trading
companies responsible for sales. Kawasaki monopolizes the field of spot weld-
ing, which accounts for more than half the robot market; its sales are now
handled by Nissho Iwai Co. Ltd. rather than Tsubakimoto Machinery a Engineering
Co., which had obtained the Nissan account. The loss of the sale to Toyota,
Japan's largest automobile manufacturer had great impact. It appears that
Toyota's subcontractors will be increasingly eager to use robots; competition
for those sales will also be fierce.

Robot sales campaigns are now aimed at the smaller companies. A "human wave"
sales strategy is necessary for that reason. The use of the function of trad-
ing companies in robot sales has accordingly become prominent recently. The
trading companies involved are the ones which have an engineering function.

1;
FOR OFl-‘ICIA9I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Large users have their own production control knowhhow, and it is enough to
sell them the robots themselves. That is increasingly the trend among auto-
mobile manufacturers. But companies which lack that capability have no choice
but to rely on those trading companies with an engineering function.

Fujitsu Fanuc is one manufacturer which has made use of these trading companies.
It has used Yuasa Corp. and 12 other agents. Recently it has tried to expand
and strengthen cooperation with influential machinery trading companies in or-
der to handle a monthly production of 100 units.

In 1979 Yaskawa Electric Mfg. Co., the leading producer of arc welding robots,
established Yaskawa Trading Corp. to concentrate on sales of robots. Actual
sales have been made through distributors of welding supplies, but it now plans
to expand distribution channels by taking advantage of the sales network of
Yuasa Corp. And as a result, in September 1981 Yuasa Corp. tried to strengthen
its sales force by carefully picking 30 men to serve as machinery salesmen in
its national-wide offices.

Kawasaki Heavy Industries has also taken up the attack and strengthened Kawa-
saki Steel Trading Co. and Kawasaki Heavy Industries Trading Co., its trading
companies and agents. This was regarded as necessary for a thorough sales can-
paign when the users were smaller companies.

Hitachi Ltd. has used Keiyo Engineering Co., which is responsible for software,
Hitachi Product Engineering East and Hitachi Product Engineering West to deal
with the small users, and has handled the large users itself. It is also using
the sales network of Iwata Air Coupressor Mfg. Co., with which it has a cooper-
ative relationship, and is building a sales network of its own.

The competition for market shares has begun to spread abroad. Yaskawa, which
has long since penetrated the overseas market, has working relationships with
performance leader Torsteknik A8 of Sweden, and also with GEN-Lincoln of Britain,
Arcos SPA. of Italy and Hobart Co. of the U.S. In 1981 it went on to establish
cooperative relations with companies like America's PARAD [phonetic] Robot Sys-
tems .

Hitachi started with the Automatix Inc. of the U.S. in 1980, and entered a tech-
nicnl agreement with CE in 1981 and sales agreements with Zeppelin, the West
German machinery manufacturer, and Hartine, the French machinery trading com-
pany at the end of that year. Hithin Europe, it had already formed ties with
Lansing Ltd. of England, and is steadily intensifying its strategy of exports

to the U.S. and Europe. It exports 100 units per year to Automatix of the U.S.
and expects major exports of 400 units for GB in two or three years. Exports
to Europe will also expand sharply with new technical cooperation agreements
with European companies.

It appears that 1982 will be the year to put full effort into the robot war for
Fujitsu Fanuc, too. While continuing to expand its dolestic sales network, it
has concluded a sales cooperation agreement with Britain's 600 Group, and it is
said to be about to sign an agreement with Hanurhin s.A. in France. It sells
in other parts of Europe through Siemens of West Germany. And in the U.S., an
agreement is being negotiated with GH. So far there has been "no comment," but
there is a good chance that a joint venture will be established for local pro-
duction in the U.S.

50
won omcm use on“
When the technical cooperation between Kawasaki and Unimation was renegotiated
in 1978. it was changed so that Kawasaki could also participate in the 0.8.
and European territory which had been monopolized by Unimation. One story is
that it purchased sales rights with three times the amount that had been paid
out for royalties. With that contract in the background, Kawasaki directors
flew to Unimation in January 1982 for a strategy session on how the Unimates
produced by Kawasaki should be sold in the 0.8. and Europe. It will not be
long before Japanese-built Unimate robots will make a big push into the U.S.
and Europe.

One after another, 0.8. and European manufacturers are entering the robot mar-
ket. as though to resist the Japanese. American electrical machinery and com-
puter companies like IBM, Texas Instruments and GE are expected to t ake part,
and European companies like Renault and Volkswagen also plan to engage in for-
eign sales. Thus, the robot war threatens to escalate outside Japan too.

Competition in development of intelligent robots, which is said to be the next
area of concentration, has also become increasingly fierce. Intelligent robots
have optical or tactile sensors, and are able to discriminate individual cir-
cumstances in performing their work. Accordingly, the work of intelligent ro-

bots ls complex, and they are being introduced into difficult assembly proces-
RPS.

The use of intelligent robots will probably increase rapidly. The Japanese
robot market will total 290 billion yen in 1985 and 520 billion yen in 1990;
the shares held by intelligent robots will increase from 1A percent in 1985 to
23 percent in 1990.

Sensors are the bottleneck in the development of intelligent robots. Research
on intelligent robots has been carried out at the Production Technology Labora-
tory of Hitachi's Yokohama plant. and Matsushita, Mitsubishi Electric and NBC
have also begun development. Moreover, Fujitsu has formed a joint development
agreement with West Germany's Siemens for the intelligent robot I Series; de-
velopment is to be completed by 1986. Kawasaki sent technicians to the Connect-
icut headquarters of Unimation, where joint development of sensors is being
pursued.

This competition in development may result in the appearance of a series of as-
sembly robots in the market beginning in 1982. It appears that Hitachi will'
emphasize robots for its own use, but "because there is external demand, there
may be some external sales during 1982." (Managing Director Hiroshi Sonoyama)

Because assembly processes do not involve hazardous conditions like those for
welding and painting, robots cannot be introduced easily unless they are quite
cheap; the price range will be four or five million yen per unit. At that, the
sensors will come as options.

Matsushita, Yaskawa, NBC and others are also interested in research on intelli-
gent robots.

51
ton ommL use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Robots are only one tool of the coming FMS (flexible manufacturing systems and
FA (factory automation). PMS and FA will be powerful weapons for victory in
enterprise competition. and companies that respond slowly will certainly lose
out; this is an area into which each of the industrial groups is putting great
effort.

The Hatsushita Group started up a Robot Council and Robot Committee in 1981.
Fifteen laboratories and 40 working groups take part; they aim at sales of 10
trillion yen after 10 years, at which time 100,000 robots are to be produced.

Hitachi has also brought together 500 people from 5 laboratories and 17 plants
to study the introduction of intelligent robots within the Hitachi Group. And
within the Toshiba Group, companies like Toshiba Precision Products and Toshiba
Machine Co. are developing intelligent robots and promoting PA within the group.
Mitsubishi Electric is also creating a system to concentrate that group's
strength for development of robots and promotion of PA.

Fujitsu Fanuc has formed a group with Fujitsu Limited and Fujitsu Electric Co.
Ltd. and has made up its mind to switch from a concentration on the machine pro-
cessing field to a broad range which includes fields like production machinery.

Factory Automation, with robots at the center, will concentrate the full energy
of groups on large-scale strategy. There are some 150 or 200 companies which
make robots: a harsh period which only the fittest will survive has begun.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

. 9601
cso: 6106/59

52
FOR.OF1WC]AL.USE!0NLY
FOR(NHWCJAI.USE(NVLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DEVEIDPHENT IN ROBOT RhD ACTIVITIES REPORTBD

Intelligent Assembly Robot
Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 Dec 81 p 7

[Text] Every industrial robot company has begun to concentrate its energies on
the development of intelligent robots that can make decisions by seeing and
touching objects. Already, welding robots with seeing and touching functions
are being produced and put into practical use. In the latter half of 1982, in-
fluential makers such as Hitachi, Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Fujitsu Fanuc
one after another will put on the market an intelligent assembly robot, a pro-
spective winner. The trend in the industrial world to pursue the further auto-
mation of factories and labor-saving through the mass introduction of such
robots indicates that the developmental competition in connection with intelli-
gent robots will be further intensified.

Hitachi has recently set up a companywide "robot sectional committee." Robot
related engineers from the Central Research Institute of the Production Tech-
nology Research Institute and from each plant will participate and promote the
development of intelligent robots, etc. First, these robots will be introduced
to the production lines within the company: than, they will be sold to other
companies after they are fully mastered and standardized. By the and of 1982,
Hitachi plans to announce the first presentation of intelligent assembly robots
and to solicit orders widely.

Fujitsu Fanuc is developing an "1 series" intelligent robot jointly with its
business affiliate, West German Siemens. At first, the practical implementation
was scheduled for the spring of 1983. However, pressured by the speedup of the
development by rival companies, Fujitsu has suddenly pushed up the schedule and
wil.l exhibit the first model at the Osaka International Machine Tool Show set
for November 1982 and start soliciting orders.

Kawasaki Heavy Industries is affiliated with the world's largest robot maker,
Unimation, and is jointly engaged in the development of intelligent robots.
Already, the company has produced a practical welding robot which uses a new
semiconductor element CCD (charge coupled device), called an electronic eye,
but in addition, its strategy is to put on the market an assembly robot with a

sense of vision and touch before the end of 1982.

53
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other leading companies are also in competition to speed up the development of
Intelligent robots; for example, Hatsushita Electric Industrial Company, Mitsu-
bishi Electric Corporation, Nippon Electric Company, Romatsu, and robot spe-
ciality maker Dainichi Kiko (main office: Kosai, Yamanashi; president: Toshio
Keno; capital: 60 million yes). In 1982, almost all these companies planned
to be in the initial stage of development, but several of them are predicted

to advance the schedule and put on the market the product which claims to be
the forerunner of the intelligent robot.

In Japanese industry, led by the machinery and electronic-electric product in-
dustries, there is a broadening move to introduce FMS (flexible manufacturing
systems), which produce various products in small quantities efficiently almost
without man. The pivot of this system is the intelligent assembly robot, and

so demand for it is expected to shoot up in the future. The relative importance
of electronic technology increases with the improvement of the intelligence of
robots. That allows a wide margin for the large electronic-electric product
makers to carry out the developmental competition to advantage, and the oppor-
tunity for them to take the initiative in the robot industry in 1982, replacing
the machinery makers, is becoming more evident.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

10 Assembly Robot
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 14 Jan 82 p 11

[Text] Idea (2-5, Takaida Nishi, Higashi Osaka, Osaka, president: Ko Demura,
TEL: 06 (781) 6361) has succeeded in developing a semiconductor assembly robot
which can unman four processes—-lead soldering, washing, drying and palette in-
sertion--for the manufacture of memory integrated circuits (DIP IC). This in-
vention will become a new manufacturing system, replacing the IC lead soldering
process, for which semiconductor plants rely upon outside facilities. In par-
ticular, since the American military parts standard MIL will be revised in part,
and IC lead soldering will become a requirement starting this fall, inquiries
about the robot have already arrived from five large Japanese and American semi-
conductor makers.

In general, aemiconductor production consists of the wafer process and the as-
sembly process. The system developed by Idea realizes the unmanned operation
of the latter half of the assembly process, which includes IC lead soldering,
washing, drying and palette insertion, using one controller (a built-in 8 bit
microcomputer) and two robots.

The present semiconductor assembly entails wire bonding (IC implantation), mold
press (resin sealing) and final surface treatment of the IC lead wire. In the
present assembly method, the lead is plated in an outside cooperating factory,
then the assembled semiconductor is brought back and sent to the final product
quality inspection process.

However, this outside consignment of the plating treatment poses problems: 1)
difficulty in having a flexible production plan which can acco-Odate produc-
tion increases and production adjustment, 2) difficulty in obtaining stable

Sh
roa OFFICIAL use ONLY
product quality, 3) the electric properties of the 10 may be damaged due to
the growth of whisker-like crystals on the lead wire. It is said that the num-
ber of semiconductor makers converting to the IC lead soldering method is on
the rise.

Already, a partial lead soldering method is being adopted for transistors,
glass diodes, resin mold diodes, and SIP-IC (1c for amplification) among semi-
conductors. However, the memory integrated circuit suitable for computers such
as the DIP-Ic developed by Idea at this time still relies upon the plating
treatment because of the difficulty in automating the soldering process due to
the L-shaped leads.

The above system is comprised of a turntable type automatic solder dip (satur-
ation) robot and a rotary type (patent pending) wash-dry robot. The controller
is built into the lower part of the automatic solder dip robot. The production
capacity is 15,000 hr in terms of a 16 pin 16. After washing and drying the
system automatically supplies and inserts Ic's into stainless palettes. The
company is thinking of charging under 30 million yen as the price of one system,
and it plans to produce five systems a month in the plant of the main office
starting in February.

In particular, because the MIL standard, which is renowned as the most strict
international standard for electronic components, is set for revision to approve
only Ic's with soldered leads effective next 1 October, every Japanese semi-
conductor company is hastening to complete the reexamination of the assembly
process. Domestic and foreign interest appears to be focusing on the unmanned
DIP-IC system completed by Idea.

Incidentally, the company will open the system to the public at the "Internep-
con [phonetic] Japan Semiconductor Show '82" to be held at the International
Trade Center, Harumi, Tokyo for 6 days starting on the 20th.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Coal Mining Robot
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 Jan 82 p 3

[Text] The Ministry of International Trade and Industry has decided to embark
upon research and development of mining robots aimed at all-out labor-saving
for domestic coal production facilities. In line with this policy, the staff
of the Coal Division, the Agency of Natural Resources and Energy, MITI and
engineers of the Coal Technology Research Institute and domestic coal-producing
companies will hold the first meeting on the 18th to discuss basic administra-
tive and managerial matters in this connection, hoping to initiate concrete
activities starting in the next fiscal year. The Japan Industrial Robot Indus-
try Association is also proceeding with a conceptual design for robots to work
in a pit. Initiation of serious research on coal mining robots by MITI rein-

forces a forecast that this conceptual design will be put into practical use
in the future.

55
won omcm. use ONLY
Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEl)NLY

With the incidence of gas explosions occurring at the Hokutan Yubari Nine as a
turning point, research for unmanning of the coal mining pit face has been re-
evaluated and taken seriously. At present, domestic coal-producing companies
are actively involved in promoting remote-controlled machines in order to mini-
mize the number of workers in the coal pits which use automatically running
frames and drum cutters for the heavy equipment coal mining construction method,
as a measure of labor-saving at the coal mining pit face. Automation of machin-
ery and labor-saving have reached a considerably advanced stage; however, tech-
nology to forecast phenomena which might be related to serious accidents, such
as gas explosions and mine explosions, is not adequate. Therefore, HIT! decid-
ed to commence full-scale research starting in the next fiscal year to eliminate
mining casualties by realizing the automation of coal mining sites by robots.

For labor-saving at coal production facilities, a labor-saving meeting is cur-
rently scheduled, led by the Coal Mine Hechanization Standardization Committee
(chairman Shoji Iki, honorary professor of the University of Tokyo), which is
an advisory coumﬂxtee for the Agency of Natural Resources and Energy, consist-
ing of 16 members from the Coal Technology Research Institute and coal mining
companies. The meeting, which is to be held on the 18th, will focus on asses-
sing the feasible level of robot automation at Japanese coal production sites
and is intended as a technical discussion by about 10 engineers related to coal
production. The investigation will be continued until the end of this year,
and they are hoping for official research to start in the next fiscal year.

The contents of the research include the pursuit of automation not only at the
pit face, but also extensively in the pit, under the priority theme of "Automa-
tion and Labor-Saving at Coal Mining Sites." HITI is planning to take the next
few years carrying out research on specific development: "For the time being,
our task is to automate the machines at the coal pita, but our ultimate goal

is the use of robots." For this purpose, first there will be investigation of
the applicability to the coal mine of the type of automation presently adopted
in automobile and machinery plants. Meanwhile, the research group will be ac-
tivated as a working group under the Coal Mine Hachanization Standardization
Committee.

Speaking of robots in the mine, the Robot Industry Association established a
special coal mining pit face safety and automation system evaluation committee
last year, and has already been working to formulate a conceptual design. The
committee plans to enter into designing coal mining robots for coal mines in
the next fiscal year. In the near future, the committee is hoping to receive
financial support from HITI and finally to engage in the development of speci-
fic robots for the pit. The parties concerned are hopeful that the new working
group of MIT! will link up with this special committee and move ahead with the
development of a more ideal coal mining robot.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

8940
CSO: 4106/52

56
ron omcuu. use ONLY
SEMICONDUCTOR RSI) 0F “IT'S HUSASHINO LABORATORY 03803.13.

Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 30 Jan 82 pp 810—87
[Article by Kenichi Komabashi: "Semiconductor Industry's Star in the Shadows]

[Text] The world's first 66! RM (read-in/read-out memory), which is said to
be the entry ticket into super-L51 and whose mass production all the computer
manufacturers are seeking, was first developed by 1111's [Nihon Telephone and
Telegraph Public Corporation] Huaashino Teleconunications Research Laboratory
(hereafter referred to as Hussshino TCRL). Musashino TCRL also beat the rest
of the world in test production of the 2561! RAM for the next period. which hes
four times the memory capacity of the 6“.

of course, these were the fruits of Hussshino TCRL'a independent research. But
in the course of its development, joint research with not only the semiconduc-
tor makers -- Nichiden, Hitachi and so on -- but original equipment manufactur-
ers as well were conducted; and this cooperative research served as the founda-
tion from which Husashino TCRL's world foremost technology has greatly in-

f luenced many ecu-purer manufacturers.

Previous articles have dealt with original equipment manufacturers (co-aercial
firms), but in relation to the Japanese seniconductor industry, Musashino T63].

is the leading figure in advanced technology. It is the behind the scenes
"star" in the true sense of the word.

anic Goal of Musashino TCRL is "Practical Application"

Husashino mm. was founded in 1968. The (prewar) Conunications Ministry, Elec-
tric Testing Section, weak-current Division, in existence since the Meiji Bra,
branched off and was placed under the Telephone and Telegraph Public Corporation
when it was formed in 1952. Prior to that, in 1950, the subsections were gath-
ered at the former site of the Nakashima Aircraft Husashino plant-wthe present
location. In 1971 the Ibaragi Telecomunicetions Research Laboratory became
independent of the substation, and in 1972 the Yokosuka Laboratory was started.

[barngi TCRL mainly conducts optical conunications RED; Yokosuka handles data

communications, satellite communications and telephones; and Husashino TORI. is
in charge of basic research, switchboards and 1.51.

57
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The employees of the three laboratories number 3,100 (including 600 office
workers). Of this number, approximately 300 are PhD's. The annual budget is
currently about 80 billion yen -- 2 percent of the NTT Public Corporation's
annual income is guaranteed as the TCRL budget.

In telecommunications, the Bell Research Laboratories (United States)--a subsid-
iary of ATdT, is the largest in the world, with employees numbering 16,000, and
it possesses the foremost technological capability in the world. TCRL from its
inception has always considered Bell Laboratories as its model.

But now TCRL has caught up. "In terms of communications technology, we are at
the same level." (RLD headquarters chief Yasuo Takahara) In the field of op-
tical communications, TCRL is the world leader. Since about 1976, the tables
have been turned, and the number of visitors to TCRL from Bell Research Labora-
tories has exceeded the number from TCRL visiting the Bell-Research facility.

The objective of TCRL from its inception has not been academic research alone,
but "application" which would benefit commercial undertakings. 0n the stone
monument near the front gate of Husashino TCRL are inscribed the words that ex-
press very well the facility's objective: "Let our goal be to draw from the
fount of wisdom and research, and through practical application, offer concrete
benefits to the world."

The Japanese telecommunications network was virtually destroyed by the war.
After the war, the expedition of reconstruction and development was sought. In
the process, Japan learned to live by the creed of utilizing the foremost tech-
nology to effect rationalization. when old, established technology is used,
the continually moving technological revolution will make the system obsolete
in 5 years.

At the point of practical application, the foremost technology must be employed,
and in order to prolong the life of that technology, a long-range perspective
that affords a clear forecast of the future, and at the same time, accompanying
research development focused on practical utilization is needed.

Since NTT is a public corporation/communications research organ which does not
have its own manufacturing section, it tackles projects which the manufacturers
will not or cannot handle for economic reasons. The technologies thus developed
are communicated to the manufacturers through joint research and similar formats,
and the desired product is created. That is the TCRL's primary function.

LSl is no exception. TCRL developed LSI for use in the public corporation's
telecommunications network -- such as electronic switchboard, data communica—
tions, computer and so on.

Number One Position in the World Captured by Super-LSI Project

The occasion which propelled TCRL's technological capability to the world's
highest standard was the "Basic Priority Item Designation" initiated under Pres-
ident Yonezawa in 1974. At the time, the technologies believed to have a great
impact in the communications field of the future were: digital communications
network, optical communications and super-LSI. These were given priority status

in research development.

CFB
FOR OFI-‘l AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The starting point for selection of super-L81 as a priority project was the
rumor that IBM was developing a future system using the epoch-making LSI. It
was also rumored that the Bell Research Laboratories were also engaged in super-
LSI research. (Both of these rumors, however, were later proven to be false.)
In order to keep up with these "supposed" developments, the internal structure
of the TCRL organization was strengthened.

The semiconductor research by TCRL dates all the way back to the transistor era
(1951). At that time, research on the manufacturing process for mass circuitry
was expensive and not very seriously pursued. But being cognizant of the fact
that comprehensive research was needed in order to come to grips with super-LSI,
the production facility research was initiated, and a test production line was
set up within Husashino TCRL.

The objective of the TCRL project for the first period, which began in 1975,

was the 64K RAH. At that time the ﬁx was just beginning to be employed. In the
ordinary course of events, the goal should have been the 16K. The circuitry
pattern, too, had to be modified from 5-10 micron technology to 2 micron for

the 66K. That is to say, it was a bold plan which disregarded the rules of log-
ical progression.

Once started, however, it went smoothly and the electronic beam exposure facil-
ity which imprints 2 micron circuitry was completed. In 1977, the world's first
6AK RAM was developed.

In 1978, the second stage research began. One of its objectives was the 256K
RAM, and the circuitry pattern this time was 1 micron. This was accomplished in
1980. NEG/Toshiba Data Systems Research Laboratory developed it simultaneously.
However, none of the overseas manufacturers has published its development offi-
cially as yet.

Another goal for the second period was super-LS! logic. In October 1981, devel-
opment of a super-LS! processor which mounted 20,000 gates, 32 bits, on a 12
millimeter square chip was announced. The same kind of super-LSI had already
been announced by Bell Laboratories, Intel and Hewlett-Packard at the Interna—
tinnal Solid Circuitry Institute meeting in February 1981. Husashino TCRL was
chagrined because "the thing itself was ready but we were very cautious and thus
the announcement was delayed." (38D headquarters vice chief Hakoto Watanabe)

headquarters chief Takahara sums up the reason for the remarkable success of the
project in the following words: "We just happened to be on target with regard
to organization and aim." That is, because of the largeness of the scale of
super-LS! and digital communications research, organizations consisting of 500
persons each were formed following a "top down" format, and that worked well.
(In the case of optical communications, the "bottom up" format was used because
ur the need to assemble individual technologies.) That format matched up well
with forward-looking objectives such as the 66K.

The researchers' enthusiasm, too, was high. After the successful development of
the 64K RAM, the knowledge that they were at the world's top level reinforced
the high morale and acted as the generating force for successively producing the
most advanced technologies.

59
me OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basic Directional Pocus Resulted Prom Joint Research

Shortly after the start of Musashino TCRL's project, the super-L81 Technology
Research Union was initiated (1976). Led by MITI (Ministry of International
Trade and Industry), which felt a sense of urgency due to the IBM future system
rumor, the union was formed around the Industrial Technology Agency's Comprehen—
sive Electronics Technology Research Laboratory, with Hitachi, Fujitsu, Toshiba,
and Mitsubishi Electric participating.

Seventy billion yen, extending over a 6 year period, was expended on the super~
LSI union. This figure included MITI aid of 30 billion yen. Although this move
was later criticized by the 0.8. semiconductor industry as a "government and
civilian joint effort," NTT Public Corporation supplied a director to the super-
LSI union to coordinate the projects in order to avoid overlapping expenditure
with the TCRL projects.

The super-L51 union, which was an organization of competing manufacturers, re-
stricted its goals to development of super-LSI manufacturing facilities such as
electronic beam exposure equipment and so on in order to produce positive joint
research results, and the outcome was highly successful.

In the meantime, the situation was different with TCRL projects. Although Nich-
iden, Fujitsu and Mitachi were participants (Oki Electric and Mitsubishi Elec-
tric strongly desired to be included but were rejected on the ground of differ-
ence in technological levels) the main constituent was TCRL, and the three

firms were allowed to cooperate in various portions of the project.

For instance, in the case of the 66K RAM, the manufacture of oxidized film of
varying degrees of thickness - 300-100 angstrom range (1 sngstrom - l
millimeter) -- to see which thickness was appropriate was allotted 10,000,000
to the three manufacturers. But now that the test production line has been
perfected at the TCRL, the ties with the participating commercial firms have
been comparatively weakened.

After all, the respective manufacturer's production lines and knowhow do differ
in fine points. They are "similar, yet different." 50 to force them into uni-
formity is impossible.

But this does not mean that the TCRL's joint research projects are meaningless.

The fact that the manufacturers are willing to participate in joint research is

rooted in the possibility that there is a chance to sell, for example, an elec-

tronic switchboard using the super-LS! to NTT in the future. In such an event,

NTT's mission -- to maintain a reliable electronic communications network -- is

given priority. What is needed in order to effect this? The discussion involv-
ed in joint research provides the direction that the development will take.

‘That is the important thing.

The Joint Research Liaison Council, at which TCRL and the three aforementioned
firms came together, discussed the direction of the development and the basic
processing technology. In terms of actual manufacturing method, however, each
firm had different aims. and there was no point in debating them; thus, TCRL
and the respective manufacturers threw out their individual thinking, and the
research was conducted through mutual stimulation and a give-and-take approach.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As a result. "while the super-L31 union benefited the manufacturers in terms
of facilities, TCRL's contribution was the processing technology. (headquar-
ters chief Takahara)

Meanwhile, with regard to individual processes, joint research is being carried
on with equipment manufacturers as well. For instance, photo register research
was conducted with Toyo Soda Manufacturing Co, Ltd. The LSI tester was jointly
developed with the Takeda Scientific Research Laboratory. The world's fastest
super-L51 tester was created through this cooperation.

Pioneering Role for Translating Possibility into Reality

Semiconductor manufacturers are a proud group. "If there were no TCRL, we could
do it on our own". In terms of research funds, the only thing they have re-
ceived has been test production funds, and there is some thinking that NTT is
merely a single element in the market place.

of course, just because TCRL indicates the direction, there is no assurance that
the manufacturers will follow suit. But if TCRL takes the initiative and de-
velops the 66K and the 256! on itw own, it has great impact on the manufacturers
that possess a certain degree of LSI technology.

That is to say, even if TCRL'a unique technology is of no practical use, if it
focuses on the advanced technology as a feasibility study, the objective has
been reached almost in full. "Its primary mission is to corroborate the possi-
bility as a pioneer." (headquarters vice chief Watanabe)

Of course, from the perspective of a researcher, in order to pursue advanced
technology, he needs to make and test the thing he is developing. This, too, is
the backdrop of "TCRL which makes its own..."

Musnshino TCRL makes other significant contributions to the semiconductor indus—
try. Aside from the usual academic activities, it has played a great role in
joining the electronic communications sector with the semiconductor field. And
through joint research, the strength of the semiconductor manufacturers was con-
centrated and research results that represent Japan as a whole were attained.

Since the 2K, 4K RAH phase, the manufacturers have applied these research re—
sults to electronic switchboards en masse, and the technologies have been appli-
ed in other sectors as well. Above all, "NTT's strict standards have upgraded
the scmiconductor's reliability." (Nippon Electric Vice President Junki Ouchi)

Besides joint research. there are other avenues for relaying TCRL's technology
to the civilian sector. Nihon Communications Technology (capital: 70 million
yen. of which NTT financed 20 million yen). which was established with the ob-
jcvtivc of transferring TCRL's technology, is the agent handling this transfer.

This firm offers all kinds of technologies developed by TCRL. In the semiconduc-
tor field. it has transferred super—L51 mask pattern defect inspection equipment,
silicon wafer lifetime measurement method and so on to a certain major manufac-
turer. It also conducts LSI wafer processing technology education and "three or
four firms interested in internal production are taking advantage of the avail-
able educational package." (President Yoshikazu Ito)

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘HLIAL USE. ONLY

In the meantime, the formation of a custom order (special order) L51 manufactur-
ing subsidiary (temporarily designated as Nihon Electronic Technology) is being
studied. As there is a demand for applying LSI for rather specialized purposes,
the idea is to offer TCRL's accumulated software and manufacturing knowhow in
readily available, inexpensive packages. The United States already has venture
businesses of this kind. TCRL's plan is to respond to both internal and ex-
ternal demand along this line, but there is a problem with funding and there

are no concrete plans for starting such an undertaking.

Creative Planning Anticipated in the Future

In order to further strengthen semiconductor RED, NTT is currently constructing
the "Fourth Electronic Communications Research Laboratory" (temporary designa-
tion) at Atsugi at a cost of 22.6 billion yen. It is scheduled to open during
1983. The intention is to shift Husashino TCRL's associate sections to a new

location. There will be no basic change in scope, but the plan is to emphasize
development of such new spheres as the post-silicon, chemical semiconductor and
so forth.

with regard to chemical semiconductors, a request for joint research has been
made to the Bell Research Laboratories. The next goal in silicon development

is s 1H Omega - 10 million) bit RAH. Already, X-ray exposure equipment which
constructs an 0.5 micron pattern has been completed. The outlook is that in the
future, "16“ bit memory maximum can be attained with 0.2 micron circuitry on 1
centimeter square." (Husashino TCRL Mass Circuitry Research Section Chief Tosh-
imasa Suzukki)

Although TCRL holds the world lead in memory, and although in LSI logic, it is
domestically the most advanced, it is still a step behind the rest of the world
in the latter sector. Memory design is easy for TCRL and processing technology
is its specialty. But the design requirement of logic circuitry increases pro-
portionately with the doubling and tripling of gate numbers, and testability
must also be considered. Such design difficulties are obstacles. Generally
speaking, it is said that "the Japanese lack creativity and thus are inferior
in the logical element field."

But headquarters vice chief Hatanabe asserts: "In the United States, the semi-
conductor makers and users are completely separate. The fate depends on the
maker planning and manufacturing a salable commudity on the open market. But
the growth of Japanese semiconductors was based essentially on a firm‘s internal
need -- from the transistor age to radio, television, Tc for pocket-size elec-
tric calculator and so on. Therefore the capacity to create innovative products
was dulled. It is not a case of inherent lack of ability." "The plan for 32
bits is traveling along the right road."

A certain manufacturing source, too, very enthusiastically claims: "Up to now,
our total energy has been focused on catching up, and there was no room for cre-
ativity. From now on we will create."

In the meantime, overseas opinion is becoming convinced that open discussion
such as the method used in TCRL joint research is better than an independent
effort. They are now reflecting that the Japanese formula is superior after all.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TCRL, which possesses world-class brains, will most likely lead the semiconduc-
tor industry in the future. But the manufacturers are acquiring considerable
real strength and the discrepancy between the two is narrowing. Against this
backdrop, TCRL's role in conducting feasibility studies will probably be euphe-

sized and its direct influence will be somewhat eclipsed.

wPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

11460
CSO: 4106/68 END

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY