NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10583
14 June 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 37/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or bellowing the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 37/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL
FRANCE

PSP Executive on Covenant, Party Plans. Delays
(Jean Poperen Interviw; PARIS MTG, 23 Apr 82).........

Varied 061', cm, 1'0 Policies. Alliances levieved
(FIJICOIS Rule; PmJET. my &)ooooooooooooooooooooooooo

Relationships in International Common Examined

(Michel Tutu; POWOIIS, No 21, 1982).....................
SPAIN
Eminent-en's Association mend Politics-11y Powerful
(J. Batefania Horeira; BL PAIS, 11 my 82)...............
MILITARY
. FRANCE

86! Fighter Hing Training Piloca (:1 Alpha Jet
(AIR BI cosmos, 30 Apr 82)..

Epsilon, Xingu Training Planes 1b Gradually Go Into Use
(AIR ET mms. w AP! 82)OOIIOOOOOOOoooooooooooooooooooo

Epsilon Prototype hated
Xingu at Avord in 1983

-a- [III-WB-ISO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

19

210

28

FOUC
PSF EXECUTIVE ON GOVERNMENT, PARTY PLANS, DELAYS
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 23 Apr 82 pp 74-76

[Interview by Florence Portes with Jean Poperen: "'Customs and Laws Must Pro-
gress on a Common Basis'"--Jean Poperen, the No 2 of the PS, Replies to the

Question 'Haa the Government Retreated in the Face of the Repeal of the “Secur-
ity and Liberty" Law?'"]

[Text] While the government was delaying the repeal of the
"nefarious" "Security and Liberty" law and was applying the
brakes on regionalization, the chiefs of the Socialist Party,
meeting in a seminar in Bougival, were taking counsel togeth-
er. Jesn Poperen, No 2 of thePS, explains how the Socialists
must act after the cantonsl-election defeat so as to regain
an electoral majority and a popular base similar to that of
the Gaullist party of recent years.

[Question] The government is coming up in the rear as regards the reforms.
And people "aren't listening to" the PS, that gadfly of the government, any-
more. Has the Socialist Party, as people say, taken sleeping pills?

[Answer] I have indeed read that accusation somewhere. In LIBERATION, and
here and there elsewhere, in one form or another. It is the latest fashionable
campaign. One day in Valence, we are accused of taking amphetamines; today, it
is sleeping pills. I leave these judgments to the cognoscenti of artificial
parsdises. The truth is that we have never worked so hard, or with so much
confidence. The French will have at least 7 years in which to realize this.

[Question] Nevertheless, in the recent cantonsl elections, according to your
own estimates, 5 to 6 percent of the Socialists--the hard core of your elector-
ate-~sbstained. They were thus considering that the fruits did not live up to
the promise of the flowers and that the government and you are sleeping.

[Answer] Even before the victory of the left, when we were reflecting on what
the first 2 years would be like, we thought that they would be very tough. It
is rather less tough thsnwe had imagined. It is not surprising that at the most
difficult moment of the effort, some of those who came to us last Spring are
drifting off. This is not at all unforeseen. It is not tragic, but it does
not, of caurse, leave us indifferent.

FOI:OFFKJA1.USB!HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] And yet, after the last PS seminar, the question may be asked: are
there still two factions in the PS, the msximalists and the minimalists? Or
have the maximalists gone away?

[Answer] There are always some temperaments inclined to accelerate and others
inclined to be more prudent. But the problems are not posed in terms of maxim-
alism or minimalism. The debate does not lie there. After the series of dis-
cussions that we had last week, one thing is clear: there is no difference
among us as regards the pace of the reforms. The important thing at present is
to establish the order of priorities. And in this regard, considering all the
tendencies together, we have come to agreement on the priority objectives: the
success of the economic revival, and beating back the social injustices in a
tangible way. And that policy holds good for all the Socialists, including
those who have tasks in the government.

[Question] Do you mean to say that it is urgent to put some order into this
all-around reform policy that makes the government's course resemble certain
dances: one step forward, one step back?

[Answer] Do you mean to say that there has been some impression. of disorder?
[Question] Not disorder-~rather, incoherence of governmental action.

[Answer] We have indeed been aware of this reproach. That is why the Steering
Comittee, then the seminar of the PS secretariat, have stressed the necessity
of real planning of governmental action and therefore also of the action of our
party in the course of next year. This also implies real coordination between
the principal party of the majority and the government. Certain of the
"batches" that we blame ourselves for could have been avoided if relations had
been closer and if the transmission of what we felt as being priorities had
been faster.

[Question] What botchea do you blame yourselves for"

[Answer] I am thinking mainly of the 39-hour affair, the price of gasoline and
fuel oil, the Ralite decrees on internship, etc.

[Question] There are also other promises from the left that have ended up with
a black eye from the problems posed by their application. The repeal of the
"Security and Liberty" law, for exmsple, in which the government retreated in
the face of the realities.

[Answer] The government needed a delay. But here too, things are clear: that
law will be removed. The Socialists have been given a mandate to broaden the
spaces of liberty. They will not fail in this, but liberty does indeed need to
be protected: for example, there is the necessity of retaining the identity
controls.

[Question] Are you temporizing in a way?

[Answer] History has taught us that reform of customs necessarily takes time.
People's attitudes should not lag behind the law; otherwise, the law will be
poorly understood by the very persons who have to live by it: the citizens.

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
[Question] "hat you are saying--would you have said it 10 months ago?

[Answer] By my background, I have always thought that customs and lifestyles
and modes of thought evolved more slowly than the laws and political decisions.
I was therefore a little surprised when I saw that the government was giving
priority to initiatives taken in the realm of customs. But I said to nyself
that certain Socialist officials whose optimism was greater than mine were per-
haps right.

[Question] Your analysis, today, is therefore this: that we do not have 10
months or 2 years in which to change the laws, but 7 years in which to change

[Answer] More precisely, it is necessary for customs and laws to progress on a
common basis. The cart should not be put before the horse. Nor should change
be braked. "Calm strength" is not just an advertising slogan. The expression
corresponds to the determination of the Socialists, who have set themselves the
long-term goal of both democratizing the nation and making the citizens re-
sponsible.

[Question] Nevertheless, is it so certain today that the FrencL no elected
Hitterrand have chosen socialism? The results of the recent cantonal elections
show a shift back to the right by those who voted for him out of anti-ciscard-
ism.

[Answer] It would be an insult to those citizens who expressed themselves last
Spring to say that they did so without knowing what they were doing. "hat we
are in the process of setting up is indeed what we announced. Mitterrand was
elected on 110 proposals that are only a part of the Socialist program, and the
contract that binds us to the nation for the coming years concerns these 110
proposals. Not that that is not a considerable matter in itself. But I would
agree with you when you tell me that there is misunderstanding as to method:
"calm" means that one is counting on have time available. But we are not even
halfway down the road. We are only just entering the period during which
change is decided on, organized, written into the law, but is not yet felt in
everyone's everyday life.

[Question] The time available--it is a matter of keeping to it. Between now
and 1988, there is going to be an election per year. Isn't your problem to win
back, while not deceiving your electorate, a part of the center which, in the
cantonal elections, has got away from you?

[Answer] That is why I told you that in the coming years we must take a number
of measures by which the people will feel concretely that on the everyday lev-
el, their life is changing. It is those measures that we are thinking about
when we say that the social inequalities have to be beaten back. He will have
an opportunity for them with the reform of taxation and the Social Security re-
form. We think that a more harmonious society will also be more effective eco-
nomically. And to illustrate this more completely, I believe that the higher-
level people in the enterprises, the ones with the medium and big salaries,

EKIICIHHCJA1.USE¢NVLY
FOI¢DFFKJAI.USEGHNLY

will also derive advantage from a France in which the social injustices and the
antagonisms are attenuated--s France that is less tense, more fraternal.

[Question] The fact remains nonetheless that some concessions to the center,
if not to the right, are necessary. Hitterrand is in a situation of imbalance
with a party on his left (the PCP, part of whose electorate is dropping it) and
nothing on his right.

[Answer] One should distrust false synmntries. In the heyday of Gaullism,
there was one distinctly predominant popular party and another, less important
formation, the Independent Republicans, whose presence, though, was necessary
to the existence of that majority. We, from the point of View of the left, are
entering into a quite comparable period. But this implies that the PS should
consolidate its own popular foundations.

[Question] You mean that the PS's base should be broadened. In what direc-
tion?

[Answer] The answer is not political in the narrow sense of the term. Indeed,
we think that some important social forces interested in change--in the first
place, the wage-earning masses--have not yet been won over to the Socialist
Party, and that they can and should be. In the same way that Gaullism would
not have been a majority formation without winning over some forces that tradi-
tionally were not of the right, the left will not be a solidly majority forma-
tion if the Socialist Party does not win over some forces who up to now have
not been on the left.

[Question] Is that why you speak of "social compromise"?

[Answer] No--social compromise is an entirely different thing. Insofar as our
program, as important as it is, does not presume to change everything in this
country, this means that we intend to establish a compromise with the forces
that up to now have been socially dominant--that is, they have held the econom-
ic power. And naturally, this compromise will create a situation more favor-
able to the world of labor.

[Question] Compromise implies concessions.

[Answer] Naturally; on both sides. Our concession will be not to carry out

the whole of the socialist program right off. But on the other side, our in-
terlocutors must be persuaded that we are not going to fall back to the rear.

[Question] Does the Ps have the strength to make such a policy prevail?

[Answer] I think it does. In any case, one should work to have it, together
with the other formations of the left (the PCP and the other organisations of
the union of the left).

[Question] Yes; but the cantonsl elections have shown that a new relationship
of forces has been established within the union of the left.

IOI‘OFIICIAI.IEHECHVLY
[Answer] That is why I say that today, the future of French-style social-

ism depends essentially on the Socialist Party, on its capacity to do things,
to persuade in order to win over. And believe me, in this regard, even if our
discussion in recent days appears lesa inpaaaioned, that does not nean that on

our part there is any pause on the ideological level.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipreaae SA

11267
650: 3100/608

INJI¢0IIICIAI.IEHE(M'LY'
I'UK Ufl‘lLIAL Q'M UNIJ

POLITICAL FRANCE

VARIBD CGT, CFDT, P0 POLICIES, ALLIANCES REVIEWED
Paris PROJET in French May 82 pp 653-639
[Article by Francois Emile]

[Text] "I don't love you, tool" The celebrated sally, in a way, sums
up the relationships that have prevailed between the left's labor and
political wings since 10 May. One might alnost say that the heady
brew of victory touched off a sort of honeymoon, interrupted from time
to time by serious misunderstandings which were not such as to lead to
a breakup in the marriage (of convenience?). One cannot say as much of
relations among the labor organizations: rivalries and schisms seem to
run deeper than ever, and there is no indication of the hoped-for birth
in the next few months of the broad labor front in support of government
policy which t_he_government__(di§greetly) and the Socialist Party (open-
ly) have been pleading for.

The CGT and the Changeover

After months on the offensive against the socialists in general and M
Mitterrand in particular, in which the General Confederation of Labor
(CGT) was by no means laggard, despite stormy internal criticism, the
communists finally got "their“ ministers into the cabinet. That move
lent itself to interpretation as a tactical ploy to keep the peace on
the labor front and to implement the heralded reforms, thanks to the
support or at least the benevolent neutrality of the giant organization.
There was even reason to believe that the 06! would be put under some
degree of gag rule in case of major disagreement over policy. For its
part, even though the nation's choice at the polls was not the one it
wanted, even if the Pc's falling-off in the elections affected it di-
rectly, the CGT could count on the govern-ent's taking its goals into
serious account -- particularly in that its "political philosophy" re-
lies largely on the government to “impose the change,’ willy-hilly, on
the class enemy: the employers.

Though the objective of labor peace has at last been largely reached,
relations between the socialist government and the C6? are not, even
so, all sunshine and roses. The differences have to do in large part
with conflicts and troubles inside the CG? itself. First of all, the
tack taken by the CGT prior to May 1981, damned as sectarian both by

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
outsiders and by its own dissidents, has yet to be visibly altered.
Even as its leaders claim to be hewing to the line of the landmark
congress of Grenoble (1978), indications of a totally different trend
have been piling up since early 1981. In September of that year, it
has officially announced that H Krasucki, who rejoices in his reputa-
tion as a hard-liner, would succeed M Séguy, who was tired; the hard
line turned even steelier toward the “dissidents" in the executive
office and the national office, who were members of the PCP or the So-
cialist Party; the PSP actually had reason to fear that the effect of
retirements and replacements would totally eliminate them from a struc-
ture they had joined in 1972. And events in Poland revealed how stub-
bornly some of the rank and file, as well as some important union
cadres, balked or flatly refused to accept the leadership's analyses
of the countries in the East -- seeing that leadership once again
slavishly following the PC. Despite its disclaimers, the CGT was per-
ceived as more or less supportive of eastern-style socialism, which
was precisely the thing the socialists wanted to keep their distance
from. As often happens in these cases, the hot-and-heavy media can-
paign against the CGT and the PCP led the latter to even more emphatic
reassertion of its "class" positions and, logically, to point out how
all-out support for Solidarity played into the hands of the right.

0n the union action ground, the CGT is running into difficulties, some
of which are not altogether unrelated to those just cited. 0n the one
hand, the CGT claims it is the entering wedge for change: there, as
in the PC, that word has become a shibboleth. And so it has struck
out along a difficult path, dodging from oneupmanship -- both to force
the socialist government to go further and to stay alive as a proposal-
making force -- to unalloyed support -- which may well make it look
soft by comparison with a feisty and combative rank and file. We have
seen examples of both: the CGT was euchred into denouncing CDPT—led
strikes against the railroad or in hospitals -- where communist cabinet
ministers are in power -- and to give its blessing to settlements its
rank and file had rejected -- as in the case of the city of Lille. 0n
the other side of the coin, the CGT has been adamant on the question
of shorter work-weeks -- with no cutback in wages -- by appealing to
the government rather than entering into direct negotiations at the
company level or at the industry level. Generally speaking, one might
feel that the CGT's demands were reasonable at the practical level;
theoretically, though} it has been charged with behaving dare than
ever like the hard-line mouthpiece for the PC, whose men in the cabi-
net oblige it to practice prudence. To back up this allegation there
are repeated charges from the right, and even more from Force Ouvriere
(F0) to the effect that the CGT is out to take over the state-owned
corporations through infiltration of their shop councils. Host cogent,
though, are H Krasucki's public remarks ,which seemed to hint at an
increasingly hard line in the CGT if the government strayed too far
from the goals or views held by the CGT's central bureau (as happened
at the time of the coup d'etat in Poland).

7

F0!‘0FFK]AL.USE‘DNLY
rUK UH'ILIAL U89. UNLI’

The CFDT: Between a Rock and a Hard Place

We used to think that the CFDT, many of whose members were and are also
Socialist Party members, and many of whose members are now in staff
positions to cabinet members, would live in natural -- if not over-
close -- symbitsis with the socialist government: that has not been
the case at all. The main office on the Rue Cadet has several times
taken its distance, in no uncertain terms, from the government. The
“mouthing-off fits" to which M Maire is prone have indeed become a
CPDT specialty, culminating with his outrage at Mr Mitterrand's "mis-
take" on the issue of the 39th hour: when the head of state declared
that no wage-earner should see his purchasing power curtailed because
of that one hour less, M Maire accused him of betraying the priority
of jobs -- citing the sacrifices it must entail. The negotiations by
branches of industry, the CFDT's favorite bargaining approach and well
under way in several sectors, were thereby cut adrift and emptied of
meaning, never mind the fact that the negotiations centered on the
specific issue of lower wages in exchange for creating new jobs.

Commentators regularly make much of the affinities between Messers
Maire and Rocard to explain the differences between the CFDT and the
socialist government. This is perhaps true, provided the alliance or
opposition is not confined to issues or individuals, but centers on
basic issues. It is obvious that the government has not made its
choice -- and cannot make one - between the CG! and the CFDT, and
that it has given grounds for satisfaction and disappointment to both
organizations. On the nuclear question, on the minimum wage, on the
39th hour -- it did not go along with the CFDT. Bound to the social-
ists in any case by countless objective and subjective ties, the CFDT
has tried to mark its boundaries or rather to define specifically

the confines of responsibility: let the government govern and lay
down the broad guidelines for a labor policy, and leave the unions to
do the negotiating.in the plants and in the various sectors of industry.
More than ever, the CFDT rejects changes in labor relations imposed
from on high, anything that even looks like state-ism, any policy that
ignores the protagonists in the labor-management drama. It rejects
automatic reliance on the state to arbitrate in disputes, and it
believes increasingly in a return to the old union ways, giving top
priority to thrashing out issues on the spot. To hear its leaders
talk, at least, the CPDT also seems ready for sharing the jobs, or

for a kind of solidarity that would inperil some gains already made.

That road is a challenging one at a time when de-unionization, despite
some signs of recovery, is still a worry. Even more clearly, though,
we see how neatly it falls in with the views or afterthoughts of the
voters, by not immediately withdrawing from the labor battle, by turn-
ing down the mouth-watering prospects of a program to implement, by
making a clearcut distinction between union action and political ac-
tion (the CFDT sternly bars its political section from the shop, which
may be a hindrance to union activity and welcome primarily to the PC
and the RPR). In the end, the CFDT winds up in a position the inverse
of the CGT's: its theoretical differences with the government are real,
I

FOR1DFFKJAI.USEiNﬂLY
but not fundamental; in everyday practice, though, the way of bring-
ing change to pass leads to some major slippages, most notable of
which is the fact that in case of labor strife, the government could
hardly count on the CFDT to defuse it.

On the basic issues, the government has some arguments to get across:
in addition to the attrition in union ranks already cited, it can
cite the complications of bringing about labor change in small com-
panies, where the union side is often non-existent physically if not
morally, and the weakness of unionism in France, both in numbers and
by reason of its divisions. More generally, the CFDT's position on
the fringes of "policy” is not quite so clear as it claims, any more
than are its claims as to the clout of organized labOr. Finally, it
is by no means certain that its rank and file goes along with the
leadership all the way, especially on the more qualitative issues
(such as the idea of "spreading the jobs around" for one).

It is nevertheless likely that the real quarrel between the CFDT and
the socialists stems from the different perceptions of the nature of
socialism. The "Polish business" has brought out that disparity. It
was there first of all in reaction time to the coup d’etat: we all
remember how the socialists hemmed and hawed, while the CFDT came out
immediately in the vanguard in blistering denunciation of the coup
d'etat. The discrepancy appeared again over what position to take
vis-é-vis the Soviets and their satellites: the CFDT condemned the
Soviet gas pipeline agreement, and more generally it called for some
hard thinking as to the real means available for bringing pressure to
bear on the Soviet Union. And then there was the rift over their to-
tal theoretical divergence as between the Soviet model of socialism
and citizen-managed socialism, socialism with a human face, the so-
cialism of freedom, or whatever you want to call it: M Maire put.his
finger right on that fundamental dichotomy between the CFDT and the
CGT at a press conference on 24 February 1982, when he said: "There
is nothing in common between the CPDT and CGT concepts of the pattern
for society.“ For its part, the PS confined itself to questions posed
to M Marchais and the government goes right on as it did before with
its communist ministers -- who did, however, manage to find some more
cogent terms than the Party did to castigate the coup d'etat.

The F0 as Counterweight

On the Polish business, Force Ouvriére (F0) was only half a step behind
the CFDT: once again, its views on communism were proved right. But
most of all F0 found itself with an unexpected chance to win back a
touch of initiative visbé-vis the new government. Everybody remembers
the beaming smile on M Bergerod’s face as he walked down the steps at
the Elysee after his interview with the President: we hadn't seen its
like since... the days of M Giscard d'Estaing. We knew that M Bergeron
was a member of the Socialist Party and M Mitterrand's friend, but we
were by no means unaware of the FO's good relations with the late gov-
ernment and, in some sectors, its conciliatory attitude towards the
employers. Relations between F0 and the government, with the left in
office, looked unpromising, at best. As it turns out, F0 has become

9

FOR(WFK1ALUS£OWLY
C \II‘ \II I 0‘ CHI. Ugh Ul‘lal

Without opposition from the left, this labor‘organization was no longer
capital's pet partner in negotiations; vis-a-vis the CG? and the CFDT,
it even had reason to fear that it would have very little clout in the
"change," an issue upon which it had never spoken out clearly. As the
last bitter drop in its cup of woes, M Mitterrand announced his choice
to head Po‘s longtime fiefdom -- the civil service: a communist min-
ister! Two more cabinet seats ~- transport and public health, where

PO had sunk deep roots ~~ also went to communists!

In view of all this, we see why P0 has taken a prudent -- not to say de-
fensive -- stance: the prime objective was to stay alive in government

takeover of the civil service, with the complicity of its minister.
Another perceived and publicized peril is that of stepped-up CGT infil-
tration in industry, using the shop councils to that end: M Bergeron's
national staff already sees them as "potential soviets" (and that fear
is shared for other reasons by the CPDT and others, all of whom warn
against the dubious quality of socialist candor on this point). The
Lucet scandal crystallized this radical opposition and, in the FO's
view, demonstrated the CGT's hidden power in its capacity "to make and
unmake appointments from now on." Looking at the other side of the
coin, we must in all honesty point out the dazzling amount of light ’
this affair shed on some FO-based alliances with the political right.

As G. Adam predicted in this same space (PROJBT, no 159, p 1055), the
new turn matters have taken in no way favors any fence-mending with

the CFDT. F0 was not slow to complain about the presence of danger-
out CFDT "dreamers" on ministerial staffs. Quite apart from such

minor flesh-wounds, though, the differences between these two national
labor organizations run too deep to permit them to overcome long-stand-
ing mistrust at every level: turf claims staked out, connections, con-
cept of the labor struggle, ideology... The Fo's ideology has tradi-
tionally been not to have one at all, and to stand resolutely against
any politicalization, fiercely to defend the trade or craft interests
of those it represents in dispute or dialogue with the government and

face of the society waiting to be built. There is a certain pleasing
consistency in all this, what L. Jospin calls a "stability factor,"
and F0 quite probably does touch a deep chord of response in present~
day France ~- witness its apparently rising membership. Militating
against this, though, is an apparent immobility in union thinking and
action: the concepts of solidarity and of job-sharing, aired in some
government quarters and in the CFDT, find little echo here -- let alone
any responsive mobilization. In the battle over the 39-hour workweek,
F0 sided with the CGT in demanding total compensation for the unworked
hour and, as of now, M Bergeron has sworn to repeat the whole opera-
tion should the workweek be further curtailed to 35 hours.

In short, the schisms that divide organized labor‘s ranks have not shown
any signs of healing since 10 May. Could it have been otherwise? In
a situation where the socialist government is tempted to perceive a

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Practically speaking, for all the reasons cited here, the unions do not
seem called upon to play so much a relief role as one of "critical sup-
port," an expression in which the two words carry very different conno-
tations in the several organizations. The 06?, as a result of its tra-

and fragile ~~ ally for the Socialist Party; the CFDT, closd to the

PS, at the same time performs a critical function of its own which the
politicians would happily do without. F0, for the moment, has opted
to wait and see, but it is likely that its rank and file, to a greater

the economic and political objectives of the present government. More
than ever, for that matter, organized labor's rank and file is unpre-
dictable: in the many labor disputes that have marked recent months
(33 percent more strike days in January 1982 than in January 1981!),

any broader reach of opinion. Considering the narrowness of the PS‘s
electoral su port, one must perforce conclude that the "explanation of
the change“ read: understandable and favorable presentation] so ar-
dently called for in so many official speeches, may be a longbterm
undertaking. M Delors has resorted to threats: "If the unions want to
see the right back in power, they have only to keep on as they are do-
ing" (LE PELERIN, 15-22 April 1982). The Socialists will have no choice
but to count on all their tame professors.

COPYRIGHT: CBRAS, 15 Rue R.~Marcheron, 92170 Vanves, April 1982
6182

cso : 3100/643 11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VE \Il'flblﬂh wr. Ul‘lu‘

POLITICAL FRANCE

RELATIONSHIPS IN INTERNAIIONAL COHMUNISH-KXAHINED
Paris POUVOIRS in French No 21. 1982

[Article by Michel Tatu: "Institutions in the lnternational.Conmunist Hove-
ment"]

[Text] "The phase of socialism that begins with the October Revolution has ex-
hausted its driving force" (resolution of the leadership of the Italian Com-
nunist Party,-29 December 1981);

"The organization of the revolutionary workers movement around the USSR is

dead forever" (Santiago Carrillo, secretary general of the Spanish Communist
Party. 11 January 1982. in Madrid).

In view of these statements by the champions of "Eurocommunism," one might
believe that everything has changed in the coumunist movement, that something
different will have to be found to try to rebuild a budding international
structure, unless it is purely and simply given up. Seen from Rome or Madrid,
this is true: Burocommunism is not as dead as is sometimes claimed. 0n the
contrary, it is being called upon to develop as crises are foreseen in the
"camp" of "real socialism" and as the image of that camp abroad deteriorates.
But it will be something other than colmunism. probably a kind of "Euroleft"
reconciled with the social democrats, a new deviation rejected by the Soviet
party, even if with less of a row than was once the case, and cast into
darkness.

Seen from Moscow. in fact. things have.not changed; on the contrary, one ob-
serves a remarkable constancy. Even the evolutions that seem new to us, such
as the emphasis placed on the role of the Red Army in the expansion of "social-
ism." were already present -- and expressed even more blatantly than they are
today -- in the heyday of the "driving phase" of which Berlinguer spoke.

"The people's democracy." said Bierut, head of the Polish Colmunist Party in
1969, "is not the result of an armed uprising.... It did not emerge like

the power of the Soviets in October 1917 in Russia. It is the fruit of the
victory of the Soviet Union over the armed forces of German fancies." The
organ of the Cominform, "For a Lasting Peace, for a People's Democracy," was
just as clear when it wrote, on 15 December 1968: ”The presence of the Red
Army in Europe was the guarantee of the free development of democratic forces
in the liberated countries."1

12

FOR OIIICIAI.USEIMNLY
The constant factor is in fact the primacy of force in relations between par-
ties. with force conceived as an instrument (not necessarily the only one) for
achieving the ideal result. which changes eVen less than.all the rest: an -
essentially bilateral relationship between the "father.party" and the "son
party," as the Chinese said in the 1960's, agreement on all major questions.
but mainly on what Moscow deems to be its main interests in foreign policy and
even more. on the image of the USSR.itself, of which there must be no criticism.

If this result can be obtained through ideological attraction alone, so much
the better. But that is rarely adequate. especially since the maximum support,
even adulation. is demanded. The great Soviet party not only wants to be
supported, but loved. in the way of the ineantations that it addresses to
itself daily in PRAVDA. Between sincere support, but a support freely dis-
cussed and consequently. contingent and revocable. and fawning. the Soviet
leadership since Stalin has always chosen the latter. Now then, the latter is
assured all the more solidly when it is based on relations of dependency.

when it is maintained by pressure. whether financial, police or military. and
when the "f::end" turns into an "agent."

That is why relations of partnership. eqrality and free discussion have never

actually been possible in the communist world. even with a party as powerful

as the Chinese party. which learned the consequences in the 1960's. That is
also why the "touchstone of proletarian internationalism." as was recently
stated and is still thought today. could only be loyalty to the Soviet Union.
approval of the Kremlin's decisions even when the most difficult one (from

the German-Soviet pact of 1939 to the invasion of Afghanistan in 1979) were

not the subject of consultations between "friends." The equation "anti-Soviet—
ism - anticommunism - fascism" is just as valid today, in'the real thoughts of
the Soviet leaders. as it was'in the 1930's.

These multilateral forms given to the movement have always been secondary
compared with this fundamental link of each party with Moscow. In the 1930's,
the Komintern was no more than a chamber that gave its stamp of approval to
Stalin's decisions. like all other Soviet institutions. The great communist
conferences of the 1960's were interesting. for the Soviets, only insofar as
they produced the greatest possible alignment of.brother parties on the posi-
tions. already drawn up in advance. of Moscow.

This constant concern of the Kremlin has always,transcended the disagreements
or rivalries between 1eaders.- All accounts subsequently gathered have always
confirmed that the "line" did not truly change -- at least with regard to
intentions -- from Molotov to Khrushchev. Brezhnev to Sualov: It was always

a question of gaining the most for "us." vs for "them." the foreigners.

Having said this much. the approach is not the same depending on whether it

is a question of the progress of the empire, the nearby area or the periphery
and therefore, the communist movement in the-broader sense. As General Gallois
emphasizes, the USSR does not back up when it has a foothold in a neighboring

country with its own army (as in Afghanistan). It may be more flexible, on
the other hand, when it is a matter of defending its "interests" in Africa or
Asia. even a rather costly investment in a remote region. What is true of

13

ROR‘OFTHCJAI.IHNE(NVLY
I“ UPDILIAL vb: UNL'

the military strategy is also true of the general attitude. Even Fidel Castro,
who is "building socialise“ in Cuba and whose fall would therefore constitute
a very painful setback for the "wheel of history," does not represent such a
vital investment for the Soviet leadership as Poland or even Bulgaria. 0n

the other hand, he can allow himself sone.freedons that would be poorly toler-

ated elsewhere. Based on geographical distance, two major spheres must
be distinguished:

1) the nearby sphere: It does not totally follow the lines of what is now
called the "socialist coemmnity" (the term replaces that of "socialist camp."
with its distasteful connotations) and which. according to the official enum-
eration given at the Congress of the CPSU in February 1981, includes ten coun-
tries in addition to the USSR: Bulgaria. Hungary. the GDR, Poland, Romania and
Czechoslovakia in Europe, and Vietnam, Mongolia. Cuba and Laos. for the remain-
der.2 The Europeans enjoy privileged treatment. if it can be called that:

They will be defended at all costs. even at the price of atomic war. if the
Nest intervenes, and in any case. at the price of direct "fraternal" interven-

tions against internal subversion.astheGDR,Bungary. Czechoslovakia and, to
a certain extent. Poland have seen.

here again, the bilateral tie is nore important than membership in the multi-
lateral institutions set up since.the war. Both the Council for Mutual Eco-
nomic Assistance (CEHA, or COHEOON for westerners) and the warsaw Pact were
formed much more for the purpose of responding, on the propaganda level, to
Western evolutions than for that of meeting real needs: CEHA, set up in 1949,
was supposed to checkmate the organization of West Europe under the Marshall
Plan and in 1955, the Warsaw Pact was aimed at responding to the consolidation

of the Atlantic Alliance and the recent entry into it by Heat Germany for the
sake of rearning.

The Kremlin had previously viewed attempts at multilateral organization.of the
new "Eastern bloc" with reticence, fearing that the "people's democracies"

night develop a suspicious solidarity with respect to Soviet tutelage. (Right
after the war, Stalin had rejected the idea of Balkan federation proposed by

Dinitrov.) Moreover. these organisations contributed nothing that had not al—

ready been obtained much more satisfactorily by bilateral arrangements and
treaties.

That is why CEHA and the Warsaw Pact remained ghost organizations for many ”

years. Even today, the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact would not put an end to
the different bonds established over the years between the USSR and each of

its satellites according to treaties of friendship and mutual assistance con-
cluded in the 1940's: The presence of the Red Army in all those countries
(except in Romania and, only in principle, in Bulgaria) and also that of Soviet
advisers at different levels in the ministries of defense and interior in each
country are the surest guarantee of keeping their governments orthodox.

The fact that very few elenents are known about the organisation and operation

of the machinery of the Harsaw Pact is rather.a sign of their effacement rather

than of their power. More is known about the organisation of the Soviet
Armed Forces. It would appear that the level of integration of the forces is

14

F0.‘leﬂﬂhl.USECIULY
not as great as in NATO, but this has little importance, to the extent that
the governments involved have no other choice, in case of war, than to put
all their forces at the disposal of the Soviet command. Purthermore,.their
equipment and munitions, nearly_all of Soviet origin, are much more standard—
ized and uniform than in the Heat.

As for CEHA, it has gained in influence since the end of the 1960's because
of a double evolution: .The Soviet leaders, beginning with Khrushchev, have
Viewed it as a means of further integrating the economies of their allies and
of adjusting them to their own designs after the liquidation of the exces-
sively leonine ties of yore (particularly of the joint companies set up after
the war) gave more autonomy to the planning of each country and encouraged a
certain “nationalism of heaVy industry.” Second, the growing complexity of
economic problems and the solidarity that naturally emerged between economies
performing too poorly to face international markets on a large scale, could
only tighten the bonds between all nations in the system.

The fact remains that CEHA is much more an organization of “coordination," a
place for an exchange of'views and information. than it is an autonomous insti-
tution with its own power. Not only does it not have even limited powers of
the European Commission. but it can in no way be compared with a "common
market," first of all, because there is no "market" in the economies of "real
socialism" and second, because there is no currency that is freely transfer-
able, even within the bloc.

Nevertheless, the organization of the countries of East Europe remains an
important problem that will have to be taken up one day, even and especially
after the Soviet tutelage over those countries is relaxed. Conditions would
already be ripe for the establishment of a community of countries of Central
Europe, countries with over 100 million inhabitants, too weak to expose a
production apparatus modeled by 35 years of "socialism“ to Uestern competition
and at the same time, the bearers cf specific interests vis-a-vis the USSR,
whose needs are complementary, butwhich mat always be kept at a distance
because of its hegemonic tendencies. While remaining more highly developed
than the Russian "big brother" in many fields by virtue of their own historical
traditions and their level of education (this is the whole paradox of Soviet
colonization, which takes after peoples more advanced than it is itself), the
satellites have already ceased being a zone of exploitation and have become

a burden. Under penalty of having to face crises, Russia must meet their
needs for energy and often, despite its own difficulties, for food products.

2) the distant sphere: Here things are much more flexible, on the one hand,
because Soviet interests are not as obvious or vital and on the other hand,
because nothing is set and tactics hust be adapted to the circumstances.
Nevertheless, the strategy is the same; serving the same goal: recruiting and
conserving the most friends possible and try to have them remain as loyal as
possible.

However, one must admit that the."idaological" dimension of these friendships
has suffered the same ideological erosion that has been noted in the USSR it-
self. The "communist" and "workers" parties are no longer and will never again

15

IND! 0Eﬂﬂ€lhl.|l§ll€ﬂ'l~
llNICJEEUtJAl.lR§I.(ﬂNLY

be the big ”family" they once were. as shown by the constant deterioration in
multilateral ties and the forms they have taken over the years.

Already. in vocabulary if not yet in fact. the Cominform, the organ of informa-
tion between parties set up in 1967. presented itself as a watered down version
of the Comintern. the real center of coordination which the avant-garde Commun-
ist International had intended to be and which Stalin had dissolved in order to
please his Anglo-Saxon allies in 1943. After the liquidation of the Cominform
in 1956, the main common institution became the Horld Conference of Communist
and Workers Parties. which met in Moscow in 1957 and 1960. However. the enter-
prise was already off to a shaky start due to the aggressiveness of Mao who.

not content to have broken up the "socialist camp." now attacked the sovement
as a whole.

The Soviets, who as early as 1963 failed to obtain a condemnation of China.
succeeded in holding another conference of that type in Moscow in 1969. but,
the result was very disappointing compared-with the sum of efforts made.

What was worse, such attempts worsened conflicts instead of helping to settle
them. Consequently. a more geographically limited formula was chosen: the
pan-European conferences. the first of which was held in Karlovy-Vary (Czecho-
slovakia) in 1967 and the second in East Berlin in 1976.

Another attempt, this time'by the French and Polish parties in April 1980 in
Paris. again worsened difficulties by exposing the considerable number of
absentees: the Italian. Spanish. British. Romanian and Yugoslav parties. to
name only the main ones.‘ In addition, these conferences. whose level of
representation is small (first secretaries in 1967 and 1976; less important
leaders in 1980). are less and less "communist" and more and more concentrated
on themes appealing to a broader audience. such as peace and disarmament. will
the communist movement end up as an appendage of the Warsaw Pact?

Today, at any rate, especially after the “Italian schism" which. although it
did not take the now impossible form-of a Yugoslav- or Albanian-type excommun-
ication. nevertheless signifies an aggravation of the conflict between Moscow
and the largest party not in power. the Soviet leaders face a choice: either
act as if they did_not notice their growing disagreements with a series of
parties and try to rally them to a vague platform of support for their diplo-
macy, as they did almost throughout the 1970's, or fall back on the "hard core"
of their truly loyal followers, reinforcing the pro-Soviet feelings of small
peripheral parties (Portuguese. Latin American. and so on) and, regarding

the others. create splits wherever the anti-Soviet wave has become far too
aggressive.

Although it is still too early to say to what extent this tactic will be ap-
plied to the Italian Communist Party. it is clear that the Kremlin will lean

and is already leaning toward the second choice.

Its own traditions point in that direction. but there is a triple observation:
In Hest Europe in particular, the anti-Soviet deviation comes up against part
of the traditional communist clientele marked by memories of the antifascist -
struggle and the exultation of the "fatherland of socialism." It poses a prob-
lem of identity for leaders-who fear having to choose between the-old communist

l6

FOIIOFIICIAI.IENE(H'LY
family and the hated social democrats. Finally, the spectacle of the growing
military might of the USSR and the use it makes of that might in coming to the
aid of dependents either in an extreme minority or in difficulty, as in the
case of Afghanistan, Angola and Ethiopia, are enough to make communist leaders
in the world think a bit: "Hhat if, instead of selling our souls to win
elusive voters, we were to double our loyalty to Moscow in order to benefit,
when the time comes, from the 'change in the ratio of forces' imposed by the
USSR on the international level? would 'panser communism" not be. after all,
a better springboard to power than a debilitating Burocommuhism?"

From the wait-and-aee attitude of the Toudeh in Iran to the seal of a cunhal.

in Portugal, it is clear that this calculation explains the attitude of many
parties. Nor could it be foreign to the unnatural evolution of a party such

as the French party, which supported the_invusion of Afghanistan and the
crackdown in Poland, while it criticized the intervention in Czechoslovakia.

At least. one cannot otherwise explain such a change, a change that is all the
more paradoxical because it coincides with the decline in the image of the USSR
in the opinion of the country to be convinced. That was the judgment of Jean
Poperen, whose statement caused Charles Piterman. the first communist minister

to do so, to abandon his reserve.3 .

This decline in ideology to the benefit of'force -- and the attraction of

force -- is also found in the approach to problems of the Third-World. Without
a doubt. on the extreme periphery, as in the jungles of El Salvador, communist
support still takes on the guise of the traditional anticapitaliat, anti- .
imperialist revolution. But everywhere else, especially where it is a question
of consolidating a friendly government, friendship is measured by the degree

of support given to Soviet policy. The consolidation is obtained through '
military- police manipulations based on essentially "technical" concepts of

power held in Moscow. The friend becomes a "dependent" which a Soviet, Cuban
or East German guard will protect from the hostility of its opponents and

this indefinitely, even when opponents are recruited from within the same
"revolutionary" party as the friend to be defended. ’

That it why the debacles suffered in Egypt, Somalia and the Sudan can no '
longer be put forth as proof of the erratic, fragile nature of the Soviet
engagement in the Third Horld. Without a doubt, withdrawals are still possi-
ble, but they will be much more difficult than before, insofar as the Soviets
have perfected their methods of establishing themselves in the key seats of
power. mainly the army and the police. There has even been talk of a "colonial
lobby" set up over the years in Moscow, with the thousands of military. politi-
cal and police advisers who have traveled in the countries of Asia and Africa
and who have developed an experience unknown at the beginning of the movement
20 years ago.

These observations lead one to conclude that while the international couuunist
movement has profoundly changed since the Comintern, it would be premature to
bury it. Not only have the objectives assigned to it by the Soviet leaders
not changed, but the new methods -- less ideological. and more "technical"-

used to achieve them are not without effectiveness. It is most likely exper-
iencing and will experience difficulty in maintaining its "internal front" --

17

FOI1OFIKJAL.USI(NVLV
EDI 0"“.th 08!. ONLY

that is. in preserving its conquests, particularly in East Europe. The ulti-
lateral institutions destined to give it a sore official existence also leave
sonething. to be desired. But the bilateral tie with Moscow remains as power-

ful as ever, at least for those parties and "friendly" forces' that choose it.
Nor are they lacking in reasons for doing so.

1.

2.

3.

POMNMBS
Quoted by Lilly harcou in LB HONDE DIPIDHATIQUE of October 1980.

Despite the inclusion of Laos. a new recruit in Southeast Aiss (one will
note that "liberated" Canbodia still does not enjoy that honor), the list
remains less impressive than'that of the 1950's, when one saw Chins. Al-
bania. Korea and .‘ in certain cases, Yugoslavia. -Today. these last coun-
tries are listed as "socialist countries that are not numbers of the

Harsaw Pact or the Council for Mutual Bconoaic Assistance (WW
(PRAVDA, 24 February 1981). - '

Noting, in an interview with LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR (9 Jamary 1982). that
the new determination of the PCP "not to distinguish itself. on essential
matters. from the USSR" coincides with a' "strategy of withdrawal that is
disastrous politically or in elections," the No 2 nan in the PS continued:
"We come to wonder whether the sole justification of such a policy would
not. in the final analysis. be the idea that in one way or another, a
series of shifts will finally_ give the USSR an increasingly doninant posi-
tion in Europe and that Europe will finally topple'." '

COPYRIGHT: Presses Univetsitaires de France. 19.82

11,666

CSO:

3100/686

l8

monuaussotmr
BUSINESSHEN'S ASSOCIATION DEEMED POLITICALEY POHERFUL
Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 11 May 82 pp 22, 23
[Article by J. Estefania Moreira: "The Accounts of the Great Captain“]

[Text] The latest opinion surveys conducted by businessmen
point to a severe decline of the socialists compared to the
initial figures and a major recovery of the UCD [Democratic
Center Union and AP [Popular Alliance]. The business-en's
association feels that this change in the voting trend among
Andalusians is due to its institutional campaign. This cam-
paign involves an official economic budget of 117 sillion
pesetas, several unofficial accounts of 600 million, and a
technical apparatus of almost 500 men. These are the accounts
of the great captain.

Seville-The latest field opinion surveys in the hands of the businessmen's
association give us approximately the following percentages: PSOE [Spanish
Socialist Workers Party] 43 percent; 06D, 18.5 percent; PSA [Socialist Party
of Andalusia], 16 percent; AP, 10 percent; and PCA [Communist Party of
Andalusia], 7 percent. These data are accompanied by an asterisk indicating
that the great unknown nay be the Andalusian Socialist Party but that the
surprise always somehow boils down to a higher figure. The surveys, which
were released early in March, gave the PSOE_an absolute majority with 51 per—
cent while the PSA got 10 percent, the UCD 8 percent, the AP 8 percent, and
the PCA 6 percent. In terms of the trend, this signifies a major drop for
the socialists, a very big rise for the 0CD, a clear upswing for the PSA, and
an increase for the AP and the PCA.

The interpretation of the statistics is being viewed in different ways by the
businessmen's association (Confederation of Businessmen of Andalusia), on the
one hand, and by the socialists, on the other hand. For the CEA [Confedera-
tion of Businessmen of Andalusia], the drop of the P503 and the rise of the
UCD and AP are to a great extent due to its institutional publicity campaign
in the media as well as the events staged by the businessmen during which
they explained the two readings of the Autonomy Charter. The P802, however,
feels that the first statistics and perhaps the last ones also were deliber-
ately inflated in order, first of all, to produce an effect of fear and,
later on, to achieve that sensation of influence which the businessman are
trying to create.

19

FOInOFFKJAJ.l£HE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In any case, without discussing the level of influence. one thing that is cer-
tain is that the active presence of the businessmen's association during the
Andalusian campaign did signify an obstacle to the socialists who had not
expected so much resistance to their foreseeable victory in the campaigns of
the AP and the UCD. To achieve that, the CEA began to plan its actions from
the very first quarter of last year onward, according to its vice chairman
Juan Salas Tornero, "when we became aware of the confusion springing fromths

postures of the YSOB which, on the other hand, made the historical mistake of
the UCD in the Andalusian referendun perfectly profitable."

Yesterday, the CBA began the third phase of its institutional campaign after
a meeting of its executive conittee last Saturday during which the situation
was reviewed and the best way to multiply the outside effects of the presence
of Carlos FerrerandJose Maria Cuevas in Andalusia was distussed. Ferret and
Cuevas covered the eight provinces, attending various businessmen's events
and holding a daily press conference, reaching their high point in their trip
to Seville on Friday which, it is hoped, will be attended by twice the number

of businessmen who attended the speech of Alfredo Molinas and Juan Salas
Tornero last Thursday.

Increasing the Attendance

During this third phase of the campaign, according to a study which BL PAIS
had learned about, the businessmen's activities will be continued, publicity
inlhe media will be made more aggressive and "an in-house (four-pegs) periodi-
cal will be published; its name might very well be ANDALUCIA EMPRBSA, which
would be inserted into the region's most widely distributed newspaper. This
periodical would contain editorials, interviews, reports, publicity, etc.,
which would deal with the development of the campaign. Plans call for the
publication of special issues for the magazinesGBSTION EMPRBSARIAL (Helsga),
FBDERACION ONUBENSE DB BHPRESARIOS FOB (Huelva), ASOCIACION NACIONAL DEL
PROFESORADO BSTATAL (regional), and NEUVA EMPRBSA (Madrid). This action means
using the information material which is being put together by the CBA as well
as the specific production of other articles and interviews as a suitable
vehicle for giving very specific sectors of Andalusian society the informa-
tion and publicity which will promote the development of our campaign."

This in-houae CEA study evaluates the presentation of the institutional cam-
paign in the media, it explains the information coverage by the businessmen's
association and its organization, as well as some of the techniques to be
used by its men during the elections (by way of example, it is said that "on
radio, with effective advice, we will not enter into any dialectical confron-
tation with representatives of the political parties").

The campaign's official cost was estimated at the time at 117 million, "which,
when compared to what the political parties usually invest, is an extremely
reasonable figure, as the cost of an operation intended to increase the know-
ledge of the Andalusian people on the features that their own future might
assume. This figure is approximately correct as of this date," explained
Salas Tornero. However, that is not the opinion of the rest of the forces
competing in Andalusia. "The cost of the businessmen's campaign is far

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
greater than what they have admitted," said a socialist leader. "The business-
men have not invested that much money in a long time," he concluded. The first
part of the statement is accepted almost unanimously. Some businessmen's
sources admitted to BL PAIS that the real budget of the CEA will come to 600
million pesetas. And a good part of that money will come out of Madrid.

Madrid's Contribution

Specifically, in the planning for the institutional campaign among the leaders
of the CBA and those of the CEO! [Confederation of Spanish Business-en‘s
Organizations], a figure of around 600 million pesetas was given, taking into
account the experience of Labor Development during the elections to the
Generalidad and the Galician Businessmen's Association in the recent elections
for the autonomous parliament as well as the "forward jump" which the Andalu-
sian campaign will reveal as compared the two past elections. About 150
million pesetas will he collected in Andalusia, according to the various
methods adopted for each of the associations making up the CEA; there will be
a fixed amount per worker, a very tiny percentage of the contribution from the
tax on companies, voluntary contributions, etc. The rest, 250 million, is to
be gotten from Madrid, first of all making the rounds among powerful organi-
zations, with a second round among big enterprises, multinationals, and banks.
The persons who are directly responsible for this additional financing opera-
tion were Ferret and Cuevas. and the man in charge of collecting the money,

a man from the CEO: apparatus, holding the post of assistant to the president,
is called Miguel Angel Lopez Quesada.

After an initial moment of confusion, the budgeted amount is being collected
in Andalusia; similarly, there are major difficulties in Madrid in getting
financing for the Andalusian campaign which turns out to be very distant for
the businessmen operating on a nationwide scale.

The campaign of the Andalusian businessmen is backed up by two parallel appara-
tuses which revolve around the same person: Jose Maria Cuevas, the 6203
secretary-general. Martin Almsndros says that "At first we went to Madrid

to ask for advice and to find out what the Galician and Catalan businessmen
had done; however, after that the campaign became almost totally autonomous."
The person who coordinated these initial contacts was Cuevas.

The apparatus which runs the campaign in the light of public observation is
made up of the CEA leadership team, its president Martin Almendros; the two
vice presidents, Juan Salas Tornero and Jose Bohorquez Mora Figueroa; and
the president of the sixth territorial organizations and the six sector
organizations. However, there is another apparatus which almost never shows
up but which really runs the campaign by telephone. That outfit consists of
the general secretary and the advisors of CEA, most of whom belonging to the
old verticalunion, trusted advisors to Jose Maria Cuevas. while some of them
are real Martinvillistas. One can say the environment of the apparatchiksis
the old union organization. There they learned almost all about their jobs
and directors of economic affairs for the businessmen's council. That is true
of Antonio Carrillo, CEA secretary general, or Santiago Herrera, political
advisor to the businessmen's association and confidant of Ferrer Salat.

21
FOR O?FICIAL USE ONLY
FGR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NNLY

and even Antonio Fernandez PalaciOs, secretary of the Confederation of Sevillan
businessmen. These men are the ones who really coordinate the larger team of
CEA collaborators in its campaign.

Among these collaborators, we must distinguish the following categories.

The coordinators. These are persons who promote and organize events, who go
looking for the necessary documentation and the meeting places, etc. Accord-
ing to Jose Bohorquez, they number around 200 throughout Andalusia. In general,
they are college graduates and professional men, such as lawyers, economists,
and secretaries. The money they will get for participating in the two months
of the campaign varies between 300,000 pesetss for those who command the highest
price on the market and 100,000 pesetas for those who are going to be secre-
taries.

The instructors. These are businessmen who attend events during which the
meaning of the campaign is explained. Around 150 of them get nothing for
their work, “not even gasoline for their travels." This is a category of
militant businessmen who want to make sure that the P808 will be slowed down
to prevent bigger trouble in the future.

The network of fund-raisers in each sector of territorial organization. These
are the men responsible for preventing a deficit in the campaign. They are
leading businessmen. Juan Salas thinks that "there have been many businessmen
who contributed 5,000 pesetas. Many more than those who gave large amounts.
The reason is the greater awareness which has developed among small business-
men during 3 years of city management by the leftdwing forces and the rise in
city taxes, an experience which however neither the Galicians, nor the Catalans
have had."

To all of these groups we must add the press offices which have their head—
quarters in Seville; the usual apparatuses of the confederations, not speci-
fically created for the campaign but supporting it, and the two coordinators
of western and eastern Andalusia. "One cannot say that all of these are cam-
paign expenditures," explained Antonio Carrillo, CBA secretary general. "The
most important thing is what is left after it; an entire infrastructure which
will help provide a strong impetus for the Confederation and which, once
established, will work always."

Image Encountered

In addition to the costs connected with publicity, infrastructure, and pay for
persons released from work, the businessmen's association will have to contri-
bute a large sum of money-~which BL PAIS has not managed to estimate-—to the
public relations consulting agency which has conducted a public opinion survey
and which has generated the entire businessmen'a campaign image. This is the
Task agency, Technical Consultants Associated, whose general manager, Gabriel
Castro Villalba (a friend of Cuevas, Fabian Marquez, and other persons in the
OBOE apparatus) has already taken on the same job for the Calician busin semen
with such good results. Task is an enterprise that sprang from the old europ

22

ETHICHWNCIAL USIZCNNLY
05 33" [Splnilh Quiver-ity Union] leader Aparicio Bernal, specializing above
all in energy topics. Some of its competitors explained to this periodical
that a good portion of the persona running Task comes also from the old
vertical union and from Spanish Television and National Radio during the
early 1970's.

Neither CEA as such. nor CEOB will however pay any amount of money directly to
the specific political parties. "We do not give moral or economic support to
any party," declared Jose Bohorquer emphatically; he denies that CEA had with-
drawn financing from the Andalusian Unity the party of Clavero Arevalo, be-
cause it believed that the party would not have any importance in elections
unless it fell in with Frags Iriberne. "He did not withdraw any financing
from them, nor did we give them any," said nohorquez. "That is not our job;
besides, the parties must depend on membership dues and on the solvency of
their militants, not on outside institutions."

In the opinion a very representative member of the CBOE top leadership, we

must draw a distinction between direct financing given by 6302 to the political
parties, which does not exist ("the budgets of the 0303 are known and are not
taken out of thin air; they provide for nothing more than the daily activi-
ties of the top businessmen association's leadership"), on the one hand, and
the attitude of the 6808, on the other hand, when it acts as a broker, that

is to say, as a middleman between the conventional financing outfits and the
political parties.

This representative middleman role is what some political formations will be
seeking with the utmost care during the coming general elections, realizing
the influence which the 0203 has gained in the Spanish economic world. In
second place, there is the hope that the businessman'a association would in
the most explicit fashion possible clarify its voting preference since minimum
election discipline on the part of the organized businessmen (more than a
million, according to the 6208), sweeping the family vote with them. would
accumulate energy behind the elected party which would be very difficult to
overcome. This hope has been denied time and again by all businessmen's
leaders: "We will never divide the vote of the sociological right because
that would mean dividing ourselves." It will thus be difficult to find out
how Martin Almendros, Jose Bohorquez, Juan Salas or Juan Jimenez Aguilar will
vote. None of them wanted to answer that question for this paper, not

even on a personal basis.

5058
080: 3110/135

23

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USB(N§LY
8TH FIGHTER WING TRAINING PILOTS ON ALPHA JET
Paris AIR ET COSHOS in French 30 Apr 82 pp 28-29
[Article: "In the 8th Fighter Ring, the Alpha Jet Is Succeeding the HystereIV"]

[Text] The "experiment" which AIR ET COSMOS announced, in its issue No 861 of
23 Hay 1981 (p 39), that it would be interesting to follow really began at Ca-
zaux on 19 April 1982: on that day there began within the 8th Fighter Wing,
previously equipped solely with Hystere IV's, the first-stage "flight instruc-
tion" phase on Alpha Jets for the 12 cadet pilots constituting 3T0 (Operational
Transformation Wing) class 82/0. who a few days earlier had graduated from the
Fighter School of Tours, where all their instruction as future combat pilots
had also been done on Alpha Jets. 0n 9 July, these 12 pilots will report to
their first assigned operational unit; the will be the first in the Air Force
to have been trained, in a progressive and continuous manner, on Alpha Jets,
after an introductory phase on CAP-10's and then on Pougas: at Tours first of
all, in the Fighter School; then at Cazaux, within the 8th EC [Fighter wing],
which constitutes the last link in the chain of schools before the young fight-
er pilots go off to units that come directly under the Tactical Air Force of
Air Defense.

It will be interesting to learn, in a few months, the first judgments that the
unit commanders will make about their new "recruits" trained almost entirely on
Alpha Jets--that is, about the interest and advantages of the approach based on
the same high-performance airplane for preparing the cadets in the two-seater
planes that train them for their future weapons-carrying planes: the Hiragelll,
Jaguar, Mirage F-l, Mirage 2000.

But the preparations for the experiment began, as planned, last year-first of
all with the "transformation" of the nechanica, then with transformation of the
first pilot-instructors of the "Saintonge" lst Squadron of the 8th Hing. At
the end of last year. some 50 mechanics at Cazaux had been transformed to the
Alpha Jet; and others will be until next November. The technological instruc-
tion is given at the ETIS (Specialized Technical Instruction Group) of Tours.
In December 1981. the lat Squadron of the 8th EC had five Alpha Jets; the other
10--the rest of its fleet--arrived at Cazaux between January and April of this

year.

24
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOI:OIHHCJAI.USIZ(HVLY

The transformation of the 1/8 squadron was carried out between December 1981
and “arch 1982. Last December, two pilots of the 8th EC went to Tours to
transform the monitor system practiced by the Fighter School. "ith the trans-
formed pilots already assigned, including the wing col-sander and the chief of
operations, they constituted the nucleus responsible for the transformation of
the pilots of the two squadrons. The transformation of the Nice squadron 2/8
will be done from next September to November, at the sane time that the 15 Al-
pha Jets assigned to it are delivered. Before their flight instruction at Ca-
zaux, all the pilots to be transformed are also taking the airplane-technology
course at the ETIS of Tours. The pilot-transformation program comprises 20
missions. It is designed to give the pilot-instructor the best knowledge of
use of the Alpha Jet, both in the area of flight and as regards the principal
exercises that will be done in flight with the trainees-«in particular, air-to-
air and air-to-ground firing, both simulated and real.

Next November, the 8th Fighter wing will be entirely transformed to Alpha Jets;
the last Mystere IV's that it has, and on which another four classes will be
trained in 1982, will then be withdrawn from service.

Last January, a fixed—cabin simulator mounted on a trailer was set up at Ca-
zaux. It differs from those set up at Tours in the following respects: no
movement of the cabin; presence of a graphic screen on the monitor's panel;
possibility of adding a system for synthetic visualisation in night or dusk
flight.

Except for the external pylons, the armaments-cannon pods, internal pylons,
LFR4 rocket launchers--have been set up at Casaux for instruction of the cadres
and the young pilots of the lat Squadron of the 8th EC. The 8th'Hing will have
all of its armament by March 1983, on condition that the present schedule is
kept to.

Four Main Principles

“we have departed,“ stresses General Gimbert, "from the fundamental idea that
the Tours-Cazaux program forms a whole and that the instruction has to be made
to produce maximum output, taking into account for Cazaux everything that has
been done at Tours. The program of Training Group 316, which is well-adapted
to the level of qualification required for the fighter-pilot certification,
does not make it possible to take maximum advantage of the operational possi-
bilities of the Alpha Jet as regards air-to-air and air-to-ground firing. This
will be done at Cazaux. Use of the same type of plane by the Fighter School
and by the 8th Hing will definitely facilitate the effectiveness of the in-
struction, making it regular and homogeneous in the school and in the wing.

"For the instruction of the future fighter pilots within the Operational Trans-
formation Hing," General cimbert continues, "four main principles have been
adopted.

"We have not wanted to either increase or decrease the average duration of in-
struction, which will remain some 50 hours per pilot. There is indeed no reas-

25

FORtlﬂﬂC1A1.USE(N€LY
on for an increase, since the Alpha Jet is a very demonstrative and pedagogical
weapons plane. Decrease? This could doubtlessly have been done, but we have
in the last analysis preferred to distribute over all of the disciplines taught
the flying hours which until now have been devoted to familiarization with the
Hystere IV. At Tours, 25 percent of flights were done solo; at Casaux, the
percentage of solo flights will reach 35 percent, so as to free the trainee
from the presence of the monitor in the rear seat and get him used to getting
along by himself. The qualification level at the end of the training course
should thereby be improved.

"He have also wanted to get the maximum advantage from the two-seater configur-
ation of the Alpha Jet, particularly in maneuvering and in firing exercise; ev-
erything that the trainee will have to do solo will have been systematically
demonstrated to him beforehand in the dual-control mode.

"The third principle is that the recording cameras will be used systematically
for restitution of firing, simulated or real.

"Finally, the rear-seat flying hours done, as the case may be, by a pilot in
training in the 610 will not be counted as instruction.

"The main objectives sought," General Gilbert concludes, "are of two kinds. On
the technical level, the trainee will have to be instructed in the work of the
crewman, within the framework of the operational missions and the use of the
Alpha Jet's weapons system; for any maneuver, the trainee willhave tobe.able to
hold up his end as an indissociable crew-member. He will also have to be given
very solid basic training in air-to-ground firing (cannon, rockets, bombs) and
air-to-air firing (cannon). Finally, the instructors will place emphasis on
the sky-surveillance missions"

0n the level of personality, there is a dOuble objective: at the same time as
responsibility and initiative are developed, the motivation, aggressiveness and
endurance of the future combat pilots will have to be verified.

"The pilots arriving from Taurs will spend about 4 months in the ETO. The
training course which is presently planned, but the program of which has not
yet been ratified definitively--and this will doubtlessly not happen before
mid-1983, so as to take into account the experience acquired with the first
classes--will last 14 weeks, broken down as follows: 1 week at Mont-de-Harsan,
for study of survival problems; 1 week of ground school at Cazaux; 1 week of
training on the ground and flight instruction (introduction to night flying,
partly on Fougas); and ll weeks of flight instruction on Alpha Jets.

"During the ground sessions, the simulator will be used to keep up the train-
ee's knowledge of normal and emergency procedures as well as his reflex actions
in case of emergency, so as to maintain and verify the VSV [expansion unknown]
qualification and the trainee's skill in radionavigation. It will also be used
to enable the trainee to have perfect knowledge of the procedures in force on
Cazaux's diversion fields. Finally, it will also be used for English-language
instruction.

26

IND! OIIIC1A1.lEﬂE(N'LY
ltﬂllﬂﬂﬂI1Al.USE(NNLY

"In any case, the Cazaux program will be validated only after knowledge and ex-
ploitation of the observations and remarks formulated by the commanding offic-
ers of operational units. Any modification of the Caraux program will logical-
ly have immediate repercussions at Tours, since, once again, the program of in-
struction forms a whole. At the present time, therefore, the Tours program
cannot be considered 'fixed'."

We note in this regard that this remark addresses concern that the command-
ing officers of the Air Force schools have always had: to dispense training
that should evolve constantly.

By the end of this year, the 8th Hing should have had 6,300 hours of flying ac-
tivity on Alpha Jets. The total should rise to some 12,000 hours for 1983
alone (two squadrons--30 planes--entirely activated).

Renovated Infrastructure

The arrival at Cazaux of the Alpha Jets replacing the Hystere IV's has not had
the effect of fundamentally upsetting the infrastructure of air base 120. Nev-
ertheless, certain operations of adaptation and, on the same occasion, renova-
tion of old installations have been carried out.

In particular, it has been necessary to install a test bench for the Lsrzac
turbojet as well an a liquid~oxygen distribution station (in the case of the
Hystera IV, gaseous oxygen is required). we mention again the recent setting-
up of the trailer housing the fixed-cabin simulator.

The “engine" shops of the base have been refitted to handle the modularity
characteristic of the Larsac. The 8th EC, of course, already has an Alpha Jet
GERMAS [expansion unknown], presently autonomous. for all the material whose
reliability has been proven. The necessary provisions have been made for the
Alpha Jets in service in the arc not to have to be overhauled before 1983.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

1126?
C80: 3100/664

27

Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USl(ﬂVLY
BPSILON. XINGU TRAINING PLANES T0 GRADUALLY CO INTO USE
Epsilon Prototype Tested
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 30 Apr 82 p 43

[Article by J.G.: ”'The Epsilon: a Very Good Demonstrator Fighter,‘ the Com-
manding Officer of the Schools Considers"]

[Text] Air Force General Henri Gilbert. commanding officer of the Air Force
Schools, flew for the first time, on 13 April 1982, in the 02 prototype of the
Epsilon, the future single-engine training plane (with an economical 300-HP Ly-
coming) of the Air Force, which has made a first order for 30 of these planes
within the framework of a total fleet of about 150.

This informational flight, lasting about an hour. took place at Istres, where
the plane was under the responsibility of the Flight-Testing Center. At the
conclusion of the interview on the Alpha Jet that General Gimbert had kindly
granted us (see pages 23 to 29 of this issue), we asked him his impressions of
this new product of Aerospatiale's "Airplanes" division, built by the SOCAIA
[expansion unknown] at Tarbes and designed to meet the Air force's training
needs.

Here, in a very direct style, is a summary of his comments: "The informational
flight that I made in the Epsilon with a pilot of the CBV [Flight-Testing Cen-
ter] was concentrated essentially on the plane's stall behavior. I therefore
did a series of stalls (a good 10 of them) in all possible configurations. I
did two deliberate tailspins. I did a bit of acrobatics. I did a normal GCA
[Ground-Controlled Approach System] approach, then an “all-reduced" approach.
All this in about 60 minutes. This first flight obviously falls within the
framework of the pilot-progression study that the Air Force Schools Command is
presently carrying out, with the information at its disposal.

“From this first flight I have the impression that the Epsilon has been de-
signed very well. Past and very easy to handle. it is a small fighter that is
a good demonstrator. The cadet trained on the Epsilon will easily and rapidly
fathom the mysteries of side-slipping and skipping.

"Actually, the Epsilon's real capacities are not yet known, and in this regard
I quite obviously expect a great deal from the experimentation with the plane

28

FOI‘OIIICIAI.IEIB(HULY
FOIioFFKJAI.USE(HNLY

being conducted by the CEAM [Military Air-Bxperinentation Center] of Mont-de-
Harsan."

In the present state of knowledge of the Schools Commend, the Epsilon is in a
very good position for taking over completely fro. the Pouga Magisters in the
first part of the training given at Cognac by Training Group 315, which is re-
sponsible for the training of the pilots who are ultinately to serve in the op-
erational units (fighter and transport) of the Air Force, the Navy Air force
and certain foreign countries.

Currently, for the pilot cadets who do not go through the Air School or the
Military Air School (being trained at Salon-de-Provence), the progression is as
follows: 17 hours of preselection at Aulnat on the CAP-lo; 80 hours of basic
pilot training at Cognac (20 hours in CAP-10's, then 60 hours in Pougas, in a
cannon training section); then, for those who are not oriented toward fighter
planes, 135 hours at Avord for the future Transall pilots or 150 hours at Chan-
bery for the future helicopter pilots.

For those who can go through the fighter-pilot sequence, there has recently
been added an additional segment of 65 flying hours at Cognac in Pougas, before
going on to the Fighter School of Tours (85 hours in the Alpha Jet) and then
the 8th Fighter Hing (some 50 hours in the Alpha Jet is planned).

At Cognac, where the first assenbly-line lpsilons will be delivered in Fall
1983, this new single-engine two-seater could very well be used for the "common
section" phase: something on the order of 70 hours of flying tine, until the
point of no return is reached for the pilots not going into the fighter-pilot
sequence. Thus, only the future fighter pilots would henceforth fly Fougas at
Cognac. These 70 hours would break down as follows: 2h hours of piloting, in-
cluding aerobatics; 12 hours of formation flying; 18 hours of flying without
visibility; 8 hours of low-altitude flying; 8 hours of night flying. Again, as
of right now these are only estimations, since the progran envisioned for this
machine whose aerodynamic qualities General Gimbert has praised can still
evolve.

Xingu at Avord in 1983
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 30 Apr 82 p 43
[Article: "The First Xingu at Avord in May 1983"]

[Text] In principle, the first of the 25 Xingu twin turbojets ordered by the
French government from Embraer are to arrive at the Avord base. for Training
Group 319, Air Force Propeller-Driven Airplane Specialization School, in March
1983. These planes are gradually to replace the MD-312 twin-engine planes pre-
viously used for the initial training of the future transport pilots of the
COTAM (Military Air Transport Command) before they go on to the CIET (Trans-
port-Plane Crew-Training Center) at Toulouse.

How, then, will the progression be handled for the first trainees arriving fro-
Salon-de-Provence or from Cognac, where they will first have been trained on

29

FOR10FHKJAI.UBI(NULY
CAP-10's and Pougas (while the arrival of the first Bpsilons at Cognac is
awaited)? This question is currently the subject of studies being conducted
jointly by the CEAA [expansion unknown] and by the COGAH. In principle, Gener-
al Giabert considers, the duration of the training with the Xingu at GE [Train-
ing Group] 319 should not be nodified much in relation to what it presently is
in the HD-312: 8 months, or absut 130 hours of flying tine. what could change
is the respective distribution of activity and disciplines as between the Avord
school and the Toulouse center. In particular. it is possible that the aspects
relative to general air traffic (GAG), heretofore dealt with at Toulouse be-
cause the perfornance characteristics of the HD-le did not permit it, will be
entirely or partly taken in charge by the instructors of CE 319.

what is certain as of now is that at Avord, very intensive use will be made of
the LET-350 two-seater flight trainers, two of which have already been deliv-

ered. The low-altitude tactical-flying instruction and the group-flying train-
ing will quite naturally be done at the 013?.

COPYRIGHT: A. h C. 1982

11267
cso: 3100/664 3“”

FOR OFFICIAI.UEI2(NULY