FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10016
28 September 1981

Near East/North Africa Report

(FOUO 33/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

(POUO 33/81)

CONTENTS

BAHRAIN

lbdernting Role in Persian Gulf Region Outlined
(AL-“AW MF’MI. 31 Jul-6 Aug 81)....oooooooocooooe'oooooo

IRAN
Incipient 'Civil Har' Seen merging
(Hagan Dabdd); m3 MIDDLE EAST, Sep 81).......................
lbvolution Said To Be Confiscated by '(bscurmtist Clergy'
(Hedi momar; APRIQUB'ASIB, 17‘30 Aug 81)....0000000000000000
Security Council Holds lbeting During Bomb Attack
(Tony “my; me TIMES, 2 Sep 81)....0ooaooooooooooooooooooo
Interview With Bani-Sadr on Nation's Situation
(“MI Emma “ms, asep 81)....C......OOOOCOCCOCOOOOQOIOIOO
IRAQ
'AL-IHAHRAH' Editor Interviewed on Role of Iraqi Media
(Bani Hahib Interview; AL-WATAN AIr'AMBI, 31 Jul-
6 Aug 81)....0.DOC...OOOOOOCCOUOOOOOOUDOOIIOOCOIIOIOOOOOOODOOO
ISRAEL
Bbm: 'Interin Agreement' Needed on Middle East Issue
(”be Ebm; mums, asap 81)....0000000.0.0.0...COOOOOCCOC
MOROCCO

Role of Islam in lbroccan Politics Analyzed
(Penny leveau; 1m: HAGiREB REVIEW, Jan-Apr 81).................
FOR OFFICIAL [SB MLY

Casablanca To Be Divided Into Five Districts
(M3013 TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANBENS, 31 Jul 81)...............

TLNIS IA

Conflict Among Opposition Grows in Wake of Per legalization
(Hedi momt; Walla-ASE, 3 m8 81)....OOOOOOUOIIOODOO0.0...

Poreiy Trade for 1930 Show: Increasing Deficit
(“AEGIS TROPICAUX ET HEDIERRARBENS, 31 Jul 81)...............

-b—

FOR OFFICIAL [BB (NIX
IN)Ri0FFIC1Al.lISE CﬂﬂLV

BAHRAIN

WBRATING ”LE IN PERSIAN GULF REGION OUTLINBD
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 233, 31 Jul-6 Aug 81 pp 24, 25

[Article: “Sectarian Tensions Ease with Decline oi Iranian Threat; Bahrain
Washes its Worries in the Troubled Waters of the Guii"]

{Text} The problems oi the small Arabian island which leans heavily on
the Saudi coast are numerous and diverse. But coniidence and a sense oi
assurance about the present and the luture are greater. The inclination

to cooperate with the Guli states and to coordinate eilorts with them is
increasing and growing day by day in a country that is distinguished by an
atmosphere oi relative liberal openness.

The island is a small semi-desert island, but it is iull oi vitality and
activity. it one were to look from the window oi a high-rise building in
al-Manamah, one can see the features oi iast progress and the rapid pace
ol daily life: the modern buildings, the banks. the dry dock and the ships
and tankers coming and going. One can use the most modern telephone and
telex system not only in the area, but also in the world. Bahrain Airport
has turned into an important crossroad between Europe, the Middle East,
Asia an' the Far East.

The island's unique geographic location in the upper course oi the Gull.
leaning strongly on the coast oi the Arabian Peninsula is what qualitied
the small island to play its historical, distinctive role as a trade center
ioi several centuries. Geography too makes the island a sensitive indicator
whose nwvement and iiuctuations rellect any events or developments in the
area.

in the last quarter century a new iactor has come onto the scene that is no
less signiiiCant than the geographical [actor in determining the social
climate and delining Bahrain's policy. That iactur is oil. Oil in Bahrain
is not new. it was discovered and exploited ior the iirst time in the Cull
51 years ago.

But because oi hahrain's meager oil reserves and because ol its limited
production, oil did not provide the country and its citizens with the rela—
tive prosperity that is being enjoyed by the people oi other Arab Gull
countries which are wealthier and more productive [than Bahrain].

FOR OFFKJAI.US£13NLY
FOIlOFTHCIAL USE13NLY

Bahrainis nevertheless knew how to take advantage oi the oil prosperity
oi neighboring iraternal countries. They adapted their island so as to
turn it into a crossroad; a commercial. financial and maritime location;
and an industrial center [or joint development Gull projects, beginning
with the iishing industry. all the way to petrochemicals and iron and
aluminum iactories. This also ihcludes the surlacc road project that will
Connect the island with the Saudi coast.

This ability to adapt to the prosperous oil and economic conditions in
the area has created a unique social climate in Bahrain. making it the
most socially developed and advanced Gull state.

Thus the Cull iortune. the need ior export markets ior a prosperous
industry and the historical ties [Bahrain has in the area] compelled it to
turn towards its Gull sisters. Even beiore the establishment this year oi
the Gull Cooperation Council. Bahrain had altered the citizens oi the other
Gull states major beneiits in residence. working. trading. purchasing land
and transierring and investing iunds.

Bahrain realizes that it is a small Arab country with limited capabilities
and resources. Thereiore. it ilnds a sense ol peace. security and stability
in cooperating and coordinating [its eiiorts} with its Guli sisters. and
especially Saudi Arabia, iraq and Kuwait. This orientation toward the
Arabian Gull is the basic cornerstone in the policy oi the Khalifa govern—
ment which goes back to the 18th century and which coincided with the
island‘s prominent riﬂe in the evolution oi political. social and commer-
cial liie in the area.

A Relatively Open Liberal Atmosphere

The rapid social and economic development in Bahrain has created an atmos—
phere oi relatively open liberalism that we may not perhaps iind in other
Gull societies and policies. Education here is deep-rooted; political aware-
ness is acute and in step with the developments [that are taking place];
women are more liberated: and workers are more politicized.

Out oi a sense oi this liberal openness. there are Bahrainis who express
their concern over the current trend toward cooperation and coordination
with the other Guli states because the liberal climate in hahrain will he
aliected by the southern and conservative climate in those countries. host
hahrainis. however. support this trend. in their opinion it is the only
guarantee ior the independence and Arab character oi Bahrain and the sur-
vival oi its distinctive role which protects it lrom traditional lranian
ambitions.

The ruling iamily here. like any ruling iamily in the Cull states. has its
method in governing the tltizens and dealing with them through traditional
Arab customs. But at any rate these are less apparent and less prominent in
the area ol government administration. The number oi ministers Is not more
than a third the number oi government members. and the public administra-
tions and most oi the higher oiiices in the government agency are held

by hahraini citizens.

2

FOI¢ﬂﬂﬂCﬂAl.UEEZONLY
FOR‘OFFHHA1.US£(MVLY

The ruler al—Shaykh 'lsa bin Salman Al Khalila is an amiable personality
who is popular with everyone who knows him personally. he enjoys a good
reputation among his citizens. and till today he still holds public
audiences to receive average citizens and to hear their demands and
complaints.

However, this does not do away with the ieeling that an observer visiting
Bahrain gets from Bahrainis who ieel that it is necessary to go back to the
parliamentary experiment which was started in the iirst half of the seven-
ties and which ended suddenly in l975. There is no doubt that the resump-
tion oi parliamentary liie in Kuwait will make its resumption in Bahrain
likely and merely a matter oi time.

The economic and commercial prosperity and the political stability [in
Bahrain] do not prevent one irom saying that Bahrain is suiiering irom
numerous problems. Bahraini oiiicials themselves speak about these problems
without any embarrassment. But they say that these problems are a general
phenomenon. common throughout the Gull. The dilierence is that Bahrainis
speak about these problems openly. but in the other areas they are men-
tioned secretly or inrtively.

The principal problem in Bahrain is the lact that the government cannot
provide its citizens with the privileges. the facilities and the services
that other fraternal countries provide ior their citizens. The reason ior
that is evident: on the one hand. oil resources in Bahrain are meager. and.
on the other hand. the number at people in Bahrain is relatively high.

The standard oi living rose; housing. health and education projects were
expanded; and the middle class grew. At the same time. however. the prob-
lems that usually accompany this rapid shiit irom a traditional society to
a modern society emerged. and they were accompanied by negative phenomena
imported from the advanced societies.

Bahrain today has problems that have to do with inilation, unemployment.
foreign labor. the high cost oi rent and the need ior new housing. These
problems go even iurther so that it may also be said that there is a
divorce problem. a television problem and an alcoholism problem.

Labor is Aware and Politicized

Labor in Bahrain is vital. energetic, aware and somewhat politicized.
Because ol its growth and the extreme sensitivity [it has acquired]. labor
is worried about the present and the future. it is trying to obtain rights
and gains. At the same time it wants the new industrialization projecrs to
provide it with security and salety.

Labor laws and regulations in Bahrain do not allow workers to iorm labor
unions. nor do they give them the right to strike. But they do provide ior
some kind oi labor participation in the management oi production. There is
a call among labor ior increasing Bahraini participation .n the loreign
projects operating in Bahrain.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINICNWNCTAL,USE|DNLY

it is estimated that the number oi unemployed persons in the country is a
little over 5,000 workers. however. oilicials say that the real ligure is
no more than a low hundred. They reluse to consider those who reiuse to
work unemployed. Employment opportunities in the country ale available to
those who want to work. ii there is a need to have Bahrainis in those
positions, young Bahraini people must endure the arduous nature of difii-
cult work and vocational training to prepare themselves to assume profes-
sional. technical and management positions that are assumed by ioreigners.
In iact officials would tell one that the government is pressuring and
requiring foreign companies and private sector companies to encourage them
to employ, train and quality Bahrainis.

The government intends to conduct a new population census--thc lirst one
was carried out 40 years ago. Semi-olficial figures indicate that the num-
ber of people in Bahrain today is 350,000 persons and that 70 percent oi
them are Bahraini citizens. The ratio oi Arabs and foreigners [to the
native population] had risen in the last lew years from 18 to 30 percent.

There are 20,000 government employees and about 70.000 civil servants.
workers and employees in the private sector. Only about 20.000 oi those are
Bahrainis, and the rest are iorelgners. Salaries in the government sector
in general are lower than salaries in the private sector. But oiiicial
working hours do not exrecd 6 per day. This allows the civil servant the
opportunity to pursue his commercial and private business outside the
oiiicial hours oi work.

The Sectarian Problem Disappeared and its Tension Has Been Reduced

The impact or the sectarian problem was Considerably reduced lollowing the
Shi'ite citizens' disillusionment with the ialse steps that the lranian
Revolution is sulicring lrom and the chaos. the disputes and the divisions
[that are taking place} between its commanders and leaders and as a result
oi its military deieat in iront oi lraq. The impact oi the emotional out-
burst that accompanied the early days of the lranian Revolution diminished;
Khomeyni's pictures giadually disappeared; and the voices that were calling
lor tomentlng social unrest and sectarian tensions became taint.

Shi'ite citizens who labor and toil to improve the standards oi their
incomes and their conditions do not want what beieil the iranians to happen
to them. The economic and social conditions oi the Iranians declined
because oi the lactors ol neglect and destruction that the regime in power
spread there. Shi'ite citizens in Bahrain no longer accept the recalcitrant
appeals that used to he made by Ayatollah Sadiq Rohani lrom Tehran calling
[or annexing Bahrain to lran.

ll this state oi calm inspires the government and security agencies with
reassurance and comiort. oliicials share with citizens oi limited income
[the realization] that a great deal has to be done in the areas ol housing.
wages and social services in general.

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE|3NLY
FORiDFFNJAl.USEZONLY

The other phenomenon that attracts the attention ol everyone who visits
Bahrain is Bahraini women. Women in Bahrain are educated either in local
schools or in the universities of Cairo and Beirut. They are advancing in
positions. In some government administrations one hardly iinds men [sit-
ting] behind desks.

The other phenomenon is unlortunately a negative one. It is the television
phenomenon. Recreational western programs which are popular with adoles-
cents nnd young people convey to them some at the features that are preva-
lent in youthlul societies in the Nest and especially in the United States.
There is no doubt that censorship which deletes the sexual scenes irom
these programs is compelled to impose stricter censorship so that these
programs would be lree oi scenes ol violence. crime. drugs and alcoholism.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL-NATAN AL-ARABI

8592
cso: «304/129

FORi0FFﬂ]Al.USEIONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050066-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INCIPIEN'I' 'CIVIL WAR' SEEN MRGING
London THE MIDDLE EAST in English Sep -. 81 pp 18,20

[Article by Hasan Dabdub]

Text I it 1:00 am mid Tehran it quiet. ”‘3' 'Pst'e"
I I lsmm the aim is broken by I dull W'- “ﬁrm“,
explosion and mundx of automatic nﬂe ﬁre. :81“: ed . he ,
Simmmamasmolutionarygtnrds. Ht sehda;
ambularmandﬁreengineemshtothe me_ u
spot “use have heoome the familiar lm‘uls'duwue‘
ni t-time munch ofthe Islamic Republic. :3" l . and
. ﬁ'agile than ever. Ayatollah the
Khomeuu's republic struggles on. Early “augusmh' W

nttemptstoreestablish a central onlerhave

iongsiuubtvnammawamm 5“; m-u:
henmademtofthenvolutionarydm - M.
The questiui of what the Iranian lslunic William. to 01:
Republic imam-hm it will become. remains W a dwh
as hm] t: unmet as ever. '
Althmyh the words 'avil war” havebeen ”nil: W
over-med 6» mlalinn in Iran. the events of m . 8"”
the put three months mainly ment this “3m 3'
term lnnismwaunmtrywlmlllmn Mi “‘1“
fornnnoeuwebyfotmdiaentingﬁwnthe “Y‘m'l
regime he: diuppeamd. end when: the m
numberoi’octivennmddimdenurunomto MW M
tens of W "Pd ’9" S“ S
Iran's civil war n being fought out in slow ﬁn mm“
motion. ll hogan in earnest on Saturday. 20 M .
June. The dav began quietly enough. with a d°".‘°'m.m°“
rather suitl pnrluunetzury debate to mummmm
impeach Wt Mini-Hum Bani-Sadr. . . I:
As a» nationally: «the ammo; enfon-ing W F'WI‘
Wuhan at street level) were W02?”-
nlmdy outside dam-tiring for Bani-Sadie y ' ,
atmﬁm. the molt «'1: a fuegone W‘
mlusion. '0'"- "W' 1‘
By the late them. the Mqiahedin-e- M “kg:
Khdq (People's Warriors: had mobilised W1};
thnuka or their and taken W W1.
over (111;?! Tehran. . (lined by out? MAT“: pub I
um i qahudm mums: my 31 M“
numbered half a mum. they began on ”w "°“‘ W“ ’
an of a mm «mm,- dm no. the #3:? “ﬁg
revolutionary guards that left 30 dud and ' "‘3 . ‘
hundreds waded and under urn-st June. “1‘“ th
One doctor said H-WT‘I'OM'IW guards had m3;
found him It gunw...tuiletthemtnlie MI I 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00050R000400060066-0
members of the Islamic RI. Party
leadership. Ayatollah Wain"

jumoewasbeingand a

vengeance.
Atthis point..itw.ez 'wartotheﬁnish'.”
the oﬂ‘idal radio I It The hellnllnhr

aquads were equip; red with new motor-
cycles. and manual the tum-tr looking in
anything suIthcious III-amh- armed revolu-
tionary moved in to unuwer the
meeting pleas of Mtaahtdrn members and
other Ieltista

Thosear tinthemIddIcswnIi srgot
whichside dfuwdthelirstshot. and
started learning to live with the situation.
'MhsideaangtemﬁstswehuI-eonly to
chum' wasthefeclingofthemanintlu-
s1rwt.

The clarh bettttm‘n the Mojahtlin ml
Khorneini's regime runs far deeper'
than diil‘erencea over day today polioes
Ever since the revolution began. the
Wmtalista have reserved thIIr
greats! hatred for the MthIhedin. the only
other organised Shiite Islamic group. The
Moiahedin boasted the longest list of
manyraduring theanti-Shnh arstrnd Its
cunbination of tolerance radicahsrn

boththepoorandthemrddle
ﬂ“

Formadin 1965. the Mojahalin-e
preach a of Shiite Islam
aodalisrn.the Manet mixture dependine
upon whidr member one talks to. Their
Inder ia 33-year-old Marmud Bayavr. who
mntmanyyeaninprisonundertheShah
Raja vi. the only survivrng member of the
IZ-man n-ntr-nl committee which the
organisation established In I97I. esmpedto
ﬁance with BaniSadr in July
The regimes ﬁght against the Mojahcdin
ispartlyawnaciousattempttonditaell‘of
an embamming reminder ol‘ the out.
Manyol'theclarwandlslanuelayrnen
went to jail under the Srah not for any
asaociatim with Khomeini. but for
aaodation withor membershrp ol' the
Mq'ahedin. “roar-0' included the new
Resident Muhammad Ali Rajai. Par-
liamentary Speaker Hashmi Martini
andmmany others.
Onquiahedin- mrember describes the
mmmmggle as 'ironieally between the
Mg'aherlinandthose 'rightista' thathadleﬂ
litglln mm?“ "in while we were
trng pae tetturttendency'.
Themggle between the Muslim
auctions ofthe Mq'ahcdin and was to
bewme the Maoist. orgarrintion kar In

COPYRIGHT: 1981 LC. Magazines Ltd

080: 6600/184-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

REVOLUTION SAID TO BF. CONFISCATED BY 'OBSCURANTIST CLERGY'
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 246, 17-30 Aug 81 pp 55-56
[Article by Hedi Dhoukar—-passages enclosed in slantlines printed in italics]

[Text] Iran's revolution has been disastrously confiscated by the
obscurantist clergy in a way that sweeps away the myth of the
so-cslled Islamic road.

During the long reign of the shah, the overwhelming majority of Western media and
governments passed over his crimes in silence. When he was forced on a March day
in 1980 to take the road to the Mahabad airport, with tears in his eyes, to go into
exile that ended with his death in Cairo, a majority of Western governments
lamented his passing. Today, it is lamentable to see Paris imposing silence on
former President Bani Sadr and the leader of the Peorﬂe's Hojahedin, Messaoud
Rajavi, who is presently taking refuge in France.

The objective of the Iranian people, to bring down the Pahlavi dynasty, has cer-
tainly been achieved. But the least one can say is that we are far from seeing the
new Iranian regime outline even the smallest positive steps, or lay the foundations
for any kind of social renewal. All its actions are limited to repressing its
nationalist and revolutionary opponents, grouped around the leader of the Mojahedin,
Nessaoud Rajavi, who has been joined by ex-president Bani Sadr, both of whom are
today accused of practicing "blind terrorism,"—-to be contrasted, no doubt, with
the legal and "enlightened" terrorism of the PR1 [Islamic Republican Party].

After all. in less than a month. following the ousting of Bani Sadr, it has
brought about the execution of more than 300 peorie (nationalists and Hojahedin)
after kangaroo courts behind closed doors with no lawyers in attendance. Nothing
could be more natural, Tehran retorts: Islam, while it recognizes the judicial
function. does not accept the idea of an advocate. This latter function is in

fact assumed by...the judge himself! This is why the lawyer's guild was dissolved.
And this is the logic--which is Islamic in name only--which makes Khomeyni both

the representative and the judge of the people. Some time back, in his book
"Toward an Islamic Government," the imam from Qom wrote that the function of guide
is comparable to that of /"tutor for children who have not yet reached the age of
majority."/ And, in his speech disavowing Bani Sadr, he did not hesitate to assert
that /"even if all the people are in agreement with him, 1 will oppose him."/

/"He who scorns mnktabi"/ (that which is Islamic, according to Khomeyni) /"scorns
Islam. If he is doing it on purpose, he is excommunicated and he will be deprived

of his wife. His property must be distributed among his heirs and he must be
killed."/

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In effect. things happen in Iran now as if murder were a minor sin compared to

the "heresy" of which all those who are opposed to the actions of the PRI--the
only authorized representative of God and Islam in Iran-aare accused. This ex-
plains why deputy Salamatian was seriously wounded in a knife attack following his
exit from parliament where he had spoken in the defense of the first president of
the republic. This is why the ayatollah from Hashad, Ali Teherani, is obliged

to go on u hunger strike in his prison cell, in order to continue to denounce the
inquisition which is convulsing the country.

The nature of the catastrophe can be better understood when one discovers that the
report of the Iranian interior ministry on the last elections, which brought
Mohamed Ali Rajai to power, estimated the number of voters at about 2 million, out
of a population of 35 million!

One should also reflect on these statements by Hessaoud Rajavi, who maintains that
/"a man who stole $250 worth of food and clothing had his hand cut off with a saw.
At the same time, the ayatollahs were filling their pockets. The present minister
of the interior can be cited as an example: he stole $1 million in antiques which
he sent out to Europe."/ The Iranians also recall that, during the shah's time,
Rajavi's organisation, the Mojahedin, mounted suicide operations in 1973, 1975 and
1976, for example, during which some American officers perished. Now Hessaoud
Rajavi, whose sympathizers are fighting on the Iranian-Iraqi front, did not hesi-
rate to assert that he holds /"proof, recorded on tape cassettes, of actions de-
signed to provoke the Iraqis that were ordered by the religious dignitaries."/

Why then should it be unthinkable that this war was wanted by the PM to keep the
army occupied while Beheshti's organization was busy consolidating its power?
Apparently, that objective has been completely attained. The exile of the /"enemy
president"/, Bani Sadr, on 29 July, and espcially the sudden exile of Messaoud
Rajavi in France, leave the political arena in Tehran completely to the PR1, except
perhaps for Noureddine Kianouri's 'l‘udeh party, which has chosen to support Khomeyni.

The exdpresident's collaborators have for the most part been arrested or gone into
hiding. In prison currently are Hrs Soudabeh Sadifi: Antezarioun; Bani Sadr's own
brother, Fathoullah; Mohamed Djaffari, and numerous other personalities close to
the former president, or quite simply nationalists such as the Iran Party's leader.
Nasser Homayun.

In hiding in Iran are men like Karin Sandjabi (National Front) and other nation-
alist notables (Tariudeh, Moussevi, Nobari) as well as Ghotbzabeh and Yazdi,
former ministers, and ayatollaha Achouri and Alani.

According to Hesaaoud Rajavi, more than 7,000 other members of his organization are
in prison. Six of them, held since the time of the shah, have reportedly been
executed in their cells recently. This merciless repression. nevertheless, does
not prevent Iran from being the site of an increasing number of terrorist attacks,
aimed particularly at members of the ruling clique and the pasdarans. The creation
of a national resistance council headed by Messaoud Rajavi, whose Organization of
the People's Mojahedin (OHPI) constitutes the armed wing in Iran, and which con-
prises nationalist forces-u-the Mossadeghist groups around Bani Sadr--remains the
only possible alternative. The OMPI, which relies heavily on the Vietnamese

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revolution in its theoretical texts, offers profound social reforms based on an
Islamic identity and on anti-imperialism. Its greatest ally, however, reaains the
government in power in Tehran, incapable of promoting concrete reforms, hostile to
any redistribution of land out of respect for private property, committed to eco-
nonic dependence on the Nest, especially in the food sector, even more so than at
the time of the shah, and, finally, preaching a /"dialogue between the various
classes"/ to use Khoneyni's exact words. An old myth, the principal virtue of
which is that it changes nothing in the existing order or in the conditions of

the oppressed masses. Thus doomed to better down in the wind because of its
ideological incompetence, and destitute of any coherent political program, the
regime established by Khoneyni appears in the last analysis to be even more fragile
and diseased than that of the former shah.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9516
C80: 4619/33

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

SECURITY COUNCIL WLDS HEETIM DURING W3 ATTACK
mozino London ms was in English 2 Sep 81 p 6
[Dispatch by Tony Allaway: "Tehran's Security Chief's 'Attaided' Fatal Meeting"]

[Excerpt] Tehran, l Sep--Hojjat Ol-Eslam Mohamed Reta Mahdavi-Kania, the Iranian
interior minister, who was named today to fill the country's vacant prime '
minister's seat, was himself almost a victim of the bomb that killed the president
and prime minister on Sunday, according to usually well-informed sources.

Official reports on the circumstances of the bombing have been extramly sparse
and conflicting, and it has never been said what was the purpose of the meeting
in the room in the prime minister's offices where the explosion happened.

But according to the sources, President Rajai was chairing a meeting of the

shadow national security council, comprising the heads of counter intelligence
services in the military and revolutionary guards, the head of police and the

chief of intelligence. They were discussing the current wave of violence in the
country launched by the leftist, Islamic Hojahedin Khalq guerrilla group and others.

The sources said the bomb was hidden either in a cooler or an electricl junction
box near the head of the table where the presidmt and prime minister were sitting.
Next to them, the sources said, was a third anpty chair.

It was meant for Hojjat Ol-Eslam Mahdavi Kania, but he was late. The clergyman
himself told television viewers on Monday night that he was on his way to the
building from his ministry when he was told of the explosion by radio telephone.

The sources added that they believed some of Lne others at the meeting. possibly
three, also died, but they were unable to name them. Nor was it clear who was
wounded.

The sources said three members of internal security at the prime minister's office
had been arrested after the explosion.

They also claimed that the official silence on the incident was the result of acute
embarrassment over the fact that it occurred during the council meeting.

Despite the resilient face being put on the explosion by the authorities. the source
said the circumstances of the blast had shocked Iran's leaders to the core.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hojjat Ol-Eslam Hahdavi-Xania was named in parliament today is the choice to
become interim prime minister following the death of ﬂojjat Ol-Eslam Bahonar.
Parliament will vote on the suggestion tomorrow and is expected to ratify it.
It will mean that he will also sit on the threedman presidential council.

His choice is somewhat surprising in the wake of hardline statanents from many
top officials at yesterday's massive funeral scrawny in Tehran. The minister
is regarded as a moderate on the terrorist question and has been publicly
criticized for his handling of the police.

But his choice, and a speech by Ayatollah Khomeyni this morning, indicated that
those seeking to sweep all restraint aside in the terrorist war are still being
held in check.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited 1981

CSO: («600/179

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

INTERVIEW WITH BANI-SADR 0N NATION'S SITUATION
0H091426 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 8 Sep 81 p 1

[Text] Paris (ASAHI SHIMBUN)-Former Iranian president Abolhassan Bani-Sadr Monday
ruled out a compromise with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeyni and said he was daily in
touch with an anti-government organization in Iran.

He indicated in an interview with the Paris bureau, ASAHI SHIHBUN, that he is more
confident of returning to Tehran than when he arrived here in late July.

Asked of the people's resistance council, the anti-government organization which is
said to have been set up in Iran, had anything to do with the assassinations of
President Mohammad 'Ali Rajai, Prime Minister Hojato-Leslam Mohammad Javad Bahonar
and prosecutor General Rabbani Amlashi, Bani-Sadr avoided making a direct reply
and said all responsibilities rest with Khomeyni.

He said he guarantees that if Khomeyni stops the executions and closes the revolu-
tionary courts, assassinations will immediately cone to an end.

Asked whether his statement that he will return to Iran as soon as possible was
more than an expression of resolve, Bani—Sadr pointed out that he had said on his
arrival here that the Khomeyni regime had ended.

But the world, he said, did not believe it, and thought instead that the existing
Iranian regime is strongly entrenched. He said that all the people now know a
government does not exist in Iran.

Bani~Sadr disclosed that he is the top leader of the people's resistance council.
He indicated that his instructions and reports from Iran are exchanged by various
means.

He also said the memoirs he is writing. including sections on the future of the
revolution, will be published within half a month.

During the interview at his residence in the suburbs of Paris. Bani-Sadr did not
use honorifics in referring to Khomeyni. At one time, he said Khomeyni has become
a devil. He described the religious leader as a dictator.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The former Iranian president, who issued a call to the anti-government forces in
Iran Monday to bring down the Khoneyni regime, appeared to be resolved to wage an
all-out war against the religious forces in Iran.

Bani-Sadr emphasized that although he will join hands with those who had fouyut
to topple the old imperial system, he will keep distance from the supporters

of the shah and the mullahs. He denounced the pro-Soviet Tudeh Iranian Comunist
Party as always opposed to moves to liberate the people.

COPYRIGHI': Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honsha, 1981

080: 4600/179

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAl.USEiDNLY

IRAQ

'AL-THAHRAW EDITOR INTERVIEHED 0N ROLE OF IRAQI MEDIA
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic No 233. 31 Jul-6 Aug 81 pp 76-77

[Interview with Mr Hani Hahib. general manager and deputy editor-in-chief
of AL-THAHRAH by Kamal Hasan Bikhayth; in Baghdad; date not specified:
”General Manager of AL-THAHRAH Says, 'The Battle Prepared a Generation of
War Correspondents in the Field; Islamic Values Have Been Revived Again
on Iraqi Territory' "]

[Text] The media played a role in the Iraqi—Iranian war. The Iraqi media
were able to keep up with the battle confidently. knowledgeably and with
quiet objectivity inside the country and abroad. They were also able to
contribute to the psychological mobilization [of the people] without
letting this mobilization assume the character of mindless blabber as some
agencies of the Arab media did in the fifties and the sixties. Hr Hani
Hahib. general manager and deputy editor-in-chief of the Iraqi newspaper,
AL—THAHRAH has served as officer in the Iraqi army. he played a prominent
guidance role in explaining the dimensions of the battle. The importance of
this interview with him is twofold: it is informative and strategic.

[Question] How did the Iraqi media handle the battle which you are waging
against Iran?

[Answer] The media in Iraq are an effective and vital part oi the course

oi the July Revolution. They have been keeping up with this course since it
began, contributing effectively and seriously to spreading the ideas and

the notions of the Socialist Arab Ba'th party and explaining the accomplish-
ments oi the revolution which are manifested in putting the principles oi
the party into practice.

Despite being a response to aggression, Saddam's Qadisiyah battle was a
qualitative development in the course of the revolution with its introduc-
tion oi positive changes in the sacrifices an Iraqi would make. The battle
was also a significant indicator of the general victory that the national
socialist i7 July Revolution achieved.

The media have been able to stay earnestly in step with the battle ever
since the first days of its outbreak. This became evident in the distinc-
tive media work that was presented on radio, television and in the press

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USEIONLY

and in the cultural movement in the country in general. There were unconven-
tional presentations of the same battle that continued day and night in
non-rigid formulas. Newspapers in particular were able to give a bright
picture of the battle, and they dramatized the importance of the morale
factor in deciding victory in favor of the revolution in Iraq and in favor
of the Iraqi people and the Arab nation against the Persian enemy.

The media had the honor of uncovering the facts about the battle with
extreme detail and clarity. They did not focus on the rousing, emotional
aspect of the battle to arouse people's emotions, despite the importance of
that aspect [oi their work]. Instead, they appealed to the intellect of the
Iraqi citizen, the Arab citizen and the citizen of the world. They
eruditely and objectively clarified the dimensions of the Persian aggres-
sion on Iraq and on the Arab nation. They explained how we reluctantly had'
to choose war. They were also able to portray a bright picture oi the rare
heroics that were demonstrated by the fighters of the Iraqi army and the
popular army and by all Iraqi citizens as well as the citizens of the Arab
nation who fought alongside their brothers, the Arab people of Iraq. They
were able to explain with logical arguments the value of a person in
achieving victory quite apart from conventional military balances. The
Iraqi army fought an army that is three times its superior in materiel and
number. It is equipped with the most advanced U.S. weapons, and, for almost
30 years. it was being prepared specifically for missions that go beyond
the purposes of defending the Shah's Iran. It is an army that has military
bases on the Iraqi borders and is psychologically prepared for aggression
against Iraq. This was being done in the age oi the Shah or in the age of
the racist Khomeyni junta by means of stirring up Persian resentment oi the
Arab nation and of Iraq especially.

Those who are lighting in the ranks of the Persian army or in Khomeyni's
guard are also fighting for specific misguided motives. Their spirits are
high despite the erroneous convictions which they draw upon. However, those
spirits faded in front of the spiritual strengths of the Iraqi army as the
battle incidents scored new modes of facts in military science that have
not been familiar in past conventional wars. The purge of al-Muhamnmrah was
unfamiliar in urban warfare due to the fact that regular armies often fail
to occupy and liberate cities because of the population's resistance and
because of the difficulty armored vehicles have in moving about in cities.
There are numerous examples [of such battles], even though they differ in
significance and content. such as the Stalingrad experience and others.
Despite the qualitative difference in the nature of the military confron-
tation and its national, pan-Arab and ideological motives. one may cite as
examples this and other incidents as far as pure military interaction is
concerned. The Iraqi army was able to purge al-Muhammarah and to fight inch
by inch to defend the honor of the Iraqi citizen despite the fact that it
was not fully familiar with the topography of the area. This is what mili-
tary commanders in the country have affirmed.

The case was the same in repelling the counterofiensive in al-Khaiajiyah
which took place in 36 hours, hall the usual time determined by military
science. Repelling any attack takes 72 hours. The case was the same in

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

repelling the other counteroiiensive in Sirbil zihab and Sayf Sa'd) and
all along the front that extends over 1,200 kilometers. The Persian enemy
had counted on creating a breach in this front. but they did not succeed.

[Question] For the first time in Iraq media people have the experience
of being war correspondents. what was the outcome of the experience?

[Answer] Many years before the battle numerous preparations had been made
for the war correspondent experience. He can say that the outbreak of the blt'
tle of Saddam's Qndiaiysh provided a serious opportunity for iraqi jour-
nalists to become involved in the practical aspects of the experience
without prior theoretical and academic preparation. in doing so they scored
unprecedented success and were able to provide the newspapers and the
agencies of the media with the latest developments in the battle from the
iront lines and irom the contact lines with the enemy all along the battle
lronts. They did a good job in a manner that ensured the accuracy of infor-
mation and [adherence to] the standards oi military security in publishing
the iniormation.

The Iraqi media correspondent who prepared himself in the battle was able
to comprehend all the standards that would ultimately serve the outcome of
his battle against his enemy. This experience was truly the best school of
warfare from which a successful war correspondent would graduate.

The First Lessons

[Question] Uhat were the first media. economic, social and cultural les-
sons learned from the war with Iran?

[Answer] In my judgment one of the most important lessons to be learned
from the lraqi-lranian war on all these levels is that the 17 July Revolu-
tion is so firmly established that the enemy camp was not able to undermine
its power, regardless of the powers and new tools it used to strike at it.
This is because the lraqi-lranian war in my judgment is the product of a
new tactical and qualitative attack carried out by the enemies of the 17
July Revolution who come in all races and colors. This time they used their
tactical tool to carry it out: Khomeyni's Persian junta. They did so on the
basis of historical. strategic, racist [and] ethnic considerations as well
as carefully calculated strategic and tactical considerations that count on
lran's conditions. the characteristics of those conditions and the charac-
teristics of the Khomoyni phenomenon. They also counted erroneously on the
characteristics 0! the Iraqi people and their national and sectarian makeup
as well. They based their considerations on erroneous considerations
derived from the social reality that prevailed in Iraq beiore the July
Revolution. This is the extremely important lesson which affirms that
Iraq's revolution has become an invulnerable wall to all forms oi attacks
which‘iail‘regardless of the iormulas used.

The lessons oi the battle have also affirmed that the authentic values
oi the Arab nation. and chiei among them is the lslamic message in par-

ticular, have been revived again in Iraq through the events of the battle of
Saddam's Qadisiyah, through the competition to win the honor of dying in

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OFFTCJAL USE§CMVLY

battle, through lighting with the spirit of a freedom fighter and through
the fact that all the people have been awakened and drawn to the battle
despite the fact that ll months have gone by since its outbreak. There is

an ability to continue the war regardless of its duration. This is the
spirit of the earliest Muslim Arabs in fighting for what is right, in defen-
ding the right of the Arab nation, in raising its status and strengthening
its contribution to spreading Islamic thought.

The Role of the Revolution

[Question] what did AL—THAHRAH, the newspaper of the Socialist Arab Ba'th
party oifer the Arab masses in general and the iraqi masses in particular
during the time of war?

[Answer] In my judgement, and not because i am one of the employees of

the party's newspaper. the newspaper has been a iormidable platform oi
information on the battle. it was a strong counterpart for the combat
fronts in explaining the facts of the battle locally, nationally and world—
wide. lt was a shining beacon of information, carrying out its activity
diligently. Hork in the newspaper went on all night and parts of the day.
It was always vital and non-conventional by always keeping up with all the
data of the battle and making adjustments in the newspaper to serve the
battle. in addition, a balance was achieved so that the political. economic
and social activities of the leadership of the party and the revolution
would be covered. There was also coverage of the significant political
events in the Arab homeland and in the world. AL-THANRAH published many
special issues to serve the interests of the battle. Among them was its
special issue of 6 January, the 60th anniversary of the creation of the
lraqi army. That special issue was truly a document that registered the
profuse activity of the iraqi army in our local and national battles ever
since it was established. The newspaper underscored the army's role in
Saddam's Qadiaiyah.

The newspaper receives many letters from lraqi citizens. from Arabs and
from citizens of the world. They all indicate the readers' reactions to
the facts which were presented by the newspaper about the war. Many news—
papers and world news agencies have cited the subjects that AL-THAHRAH
published and underscored about the battle. They also cited the political
commentaries and the editorials that were written to explain the propor-
tions of the battle from the point of view of the revolution in lraq.

The Future of lran

[Question] As a media person. a writer and a politician, how do you see
the future of the regime in lran?

[Answer] The luture oi the regime in lran has become clear, especially
following recent developments in the makeup of this regime and the inten-
sifying struggle between its leaders. The most recent such struggle was

the one in which Bani Sadr was removed irom oiiice, the headquarters of the
party were bombed and many party leaders were killed. in addition, the
regime has been pursuing dead end roads in all economic, political and

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social areas. and it is now experiencing a deadly and stiiling crisis
because of deteriorating conditions in general. The regime failed in the
war with lraq. and this contributed to a large extent in informing the
world about the actual nature oi the makeup of the iranian regime. its
curious practices and its poor dealings with the outside world. especially
with the Islamic countries which experienced a considerable share of this
regime's hostile practices before and after the al-Ta'if conference was
convened. There is now general agreement over the predicament from which
this regime is suffering and over the iailure oi Khomeynism as a racist.
backward phenomenon of the past. This is not only true with regard to intel-
lectual and media circles in the Arab homeland. but also with regard to
all the circles in the whole world.

[Question] ﬂow would you evaluate the position of the Arab media on the
Iraqi-Iranian war?

[Answer] There is discrepancy in this subject. it is linked to a large
extent to the nature of the existing regimes in the Arab homeland. However.
1 notice that free newspapers and free writers played a memorable role

in this war. especially the Kuwaiti press and the AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI maga-
zine which played an honorable and a good role. in addition. the Jordanian
press and numerous Arab newspapers and magazines that are published inside
and outside the Arab homeland also played an important role. Many Arab
writers with an authentic nationalist orientation became prominent. They
expressed in their works a profound affiliation with the soil of the Arab
homeland and their sensitivity to the facts of the Arab-israeli struggle
throughout history and to the renewal oi those facts under the situation
that we are experiencing.

By way of emotional loyalty to the writers who write with the glow of
authentic nationalistic conscience. I find myself compelled to commend the
contributions of Mr 'Abdallah Ahmad Husayn. the Kuwaiti writer who also
wrote numerous articles that accurately expressed the nationalist nature of
the battle which we are waging. The value of these writings is manifest

in their nationalistic character and in the fact that they are not exclu-
sive to the regional circle. [Their value is manifest in] the gleam of
faith they have in the authenticity and unity of the Arab nation against
any aggressive foreigner regardless of his nationality.

Books about the War

[Question] You published two books in the past about the war. What did
you want to say in these two books?

[Answer] The first was entitled. "Some of the implications 0! Saddam's
Qadisiyah." The second is entitled, "Saddam's Qadisiyah and the Spirit of
Victory." Part oi [the latter] is a collection oi essays that were written
in AL-THAHRAH [as part ol the effort] to stay in step with the battle. But
despite the journalistic nature of some of these essays. their intellectual
aspect focused on the realities of the battle and on its human and moral

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dimensions and on the relationship that military facts and military opera-
tions have with the course of revolutionary struggle that was led by the
revolution in lraq.

These two books were a natural contribution for me as a writer comitted to
serve the battle within a freedom fighting framework.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 AL HATAN AL ARAB!

8592
C50: 6304/] 26

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISRAEL

EBAN: 'INTERIH AGREEMENT' NEEDED 0N MIDDLE EAST ISSUE
PH061328 London THE TIMES in English 6 Sep 81 p 12
[Article by Abba Eben: 'WMy America Holds the Middle East Key")

{Text} In his article on this page on August 24, Mr U'Har al-Hasan London repre-
sentative of the Arab league, called on European statesmsnship to extricate the
Middle East from the attentions of a "floundering America."

This kind of language will appeal to the traditional sentiment with which Europe
has regarded the United States for most of the past two centuries.

According to this stereotype, European diplomacy overflows with talent, realism,
sobriety and experience, while American diplomacy, if it exists at all, is held

to be crude, boisterous simple-minded gullible and out of touch with international
complexities. It follows that the wisdom of the old world should march forth to
rescue us from the follies of the new.

If this fantasy were ever true, it has surely lost its validity in recent decades.
Responsibility and experience have sharpened American skills, while many Europeans,
looking back over the tragedies of recent generations. might conclude that there

is more reason for humanity than for pride.

That is certainly true of the recent phases of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Since
the 1973 war there has been an arduous but constant move towards greater stability.
The American airlift of October 1973 created a military balance in which negotia-
tion became possible. The ceasefire itself marked an end to the military phase

of the conflict with Egypt and Syria. One after the other came the Geneva peace
conference. Israel's disengagement agreements with Egypt and then Syria. the

Sinai interim agreement of 1975. the Camp David accords and the Egyptian-Israeli

peace treaty.

The conflict had entered a contractual phase. To say that the process is still
incomplete does not change the fact that this has been a fruitful period for con-
ciliation. Europe was totally absent from each and every one of these achieve—
ments. American mediation was assiduous and indispensable.

More important than the distribution of credit is the need to understand the reasons
for relative success in a process in which America, Egypt and Israel have all
played a part. The United States, under four presidents. made its mediatory

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

services available. There were no bombastic incantations like the Venice declara-
tion, no detailed blueprints such as those formulated in furtive concealment at
Brussels. when violence erupted again in the Israeli—Lebanese PLO triangle,
American mediation registered another success in consolidating a ceasefire.

Neither Israelis nor Arabis had reason to feel that the United States was
involving its own energy problens in confused association with its role as a
conciliator. And there was a commonsense understanding that peace is most likely
to be promoted by those who have a fundamental commitment to its realization.

That means that there is no rationality in the obsequious pursuit of an unrepentant
PLO.

European leaders reacted with sceptical envy to the Camp David agreement. Their
attitude towards the American role was competitive not cooperative. That would
have been understandable had the agreement really been negligent of Palestinian
interests. But if the text is really honored it can give those interests a large
measure of satisfaction. The agreement envisages an interim period after which
the permanent status of the Rest Bank and Gaza is to be determined. It cannot
be determined unilaterally by Israel, but only by "negotiation and agreement
between Israel and Egypt, Jordan and the elected representatives of the inhabi-

tants."

The agreement thus reached must conform with "the legitimate rights of the
Palestine people and its just requirements." It must be subject to their ratifi-
cation. In the interim period the Israeli military administration must be "with-
drawn and replaced" by an Arab authority in conformity with the principle of
"self-government." The Palestinians would have "full autonomy" for some years
together with the full rights to press their claim for secession from Israeli
jurisdiction after the interim period.

It is only in the somewhat crazy world of Middle Eastern diplomatic history that

a text such as this could be presented as anti-Arab or anti-Palestinian. But

the diplomatic history of the Palestine Arabs is full of instances in which they

have vehemently rejected proposals conceived largely in their interest, and which
they have nostalgically tried to revive after they had passed from sight.

European leaders would have done sore kindness to the Palestinians had they
focused their attention more seriously on the ideological and operative advantages
of the Camp David text. The PLO opposes the Camp David agreement not because it
denies Palestinian interests but because it minimally safe-guards Israeli rights
to security and peace. Europe has no reason to follow the PLO into this paradox.

Men and nations sometimes not wisely once they have exhausted all the other
alternatives. If the BBC has the courage to admit that its "initiative" has
failed, the way could be open for a more constructive role. The first decision
should be to work with those whose sin is stability and balance. not revolutionary
violence. The second decision should be to recognize that a "permanent solution"
is not ilmediately available.

The desire to see problems integrally "solved" is the heroic fantasy-wish of
statesmen. A settlement with final acceptance of permanent boundaries embracing

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the entire Middle East is a dream of perfection outside the bounds of early
reality. It would be possible only in two contingencies; that an Arab signatory
would accept boundaries that any large section of Israeli opinion would regard
as secure. which means boundaries different from the armistice demarcation lines
of 1969-1967; or that an Israeli government would agree to return to the previous
lines. including a territorial or juridical division of Jerusalem.

I believe the first condition to be unrealistic, and I know from absolute convic—
tion ti-at the second is not feasible. The only course, apart from deadlock, is
to work for an interim agreement that would take each party some way towards
legitimate goals without precluding any final option. If Egypt and Israel had
not concluded and carried out two interim agreements in 19710 and 1975 they would
not have signed a peace treaty in 1979. Interim agreements allow antagonisms to
cool. create confidence in contractural processes, develop habits of contact and
generate an atmosphere in which ideas that seem inconceivable at the beginning
appear feasible after the lapse of a little time.

The Israeli-Palestinian equation would not follow the same lines as the Egyptian-
Isrneli settlement. since Israeli memories and vulnerabilities are more sensitive
here. but the psychological evolution that carried the Egyptian-Israeli relation-
ship so far is not out of the question if we resist the lure of perfection in
favour of that which is possible and real.

If this logic is accepted, the question is not how the Israeli-Palestinian problem
is "solved" but how we can live together without violence or deadlock in the next
few years. On the Israeli side this would involve a reduction and eventual
easing-nut of the military administration, a policy of administrative non-inter-
vention and a willingness to limit the Israeli role to the needs of security. 0n
the Arab side the need would be for the renunciation of terrorism, the establish-
ment of representative institutions not obsessed by the radical ideologies of the
PLO covenant and a willingness to leave the final constitutional future. including
the boundary settlement. in abeyance for a few years.

A joint comittee implementing the interim agreement would be the forerunner of
the broader dialogue that will have to be enacted one day or another. Since the
Palestinians have a massive physical presence on their side they would not lose
anything by accepting the evolutionary approach--except the non-existent prospect

of a Middle East without Israel. All that I have recomnded here is inherent
in the Camp David agreement, but "a rose by any other name would smell as sweet."

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1981

(:50: «300/113

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

ROLE OF ISLAM IN MOROCCAN POLITICS ANALYZED
London THE MACHREB REVIEW in French Jan-Apr 81 Vol 6 Nos 1-2 pp 10-18

[Article by Remy Leveau of the Paris Institute for Political Studies: "Islam and
Political Control in Morocco"]

[Text] Oddly enough. an examination of this topic seems to take us back to the

time of the protectorate and the quarrels between reformists and traditionaliats.
Independent Morocco put an end to such opposition by establishing Islam as the state
religion. Reformism triumphed officially and religion helped to legitimize the
sovereign's government. The constitution of 1962, appointing him commander of the
faithful and defender of Islam. only sanctioned a situation which was already largely
accepted by all political groups. But beyond such formal observations. the triumph
of Islam poorly concealed a much more profound and rapid secularization of Moroccan
society than that attempted under the protectorate. Public works engineers have

far fewer qualms and problems today in routing roads thrOugh the middle of cemeteries

than they did prior to 1956.1

The relationships between reformist Islam and Moroccan nationalism are too well
known for there to be any need to recall them.2 They parallel the manipulation
of religious confraternities by the colonial government and the clumsy attempt of
the Berber decree. considered an attack against Islam and Moroccan unity. The
struggle against the protectorate greatly helped to confuse the two notions for

a long time, but there is no separation between recent history and the development
of a more ancient past which greatly increased the status of the monarchy as the
defender of Islam and the nation for more than 300 years. Schoolboys were brought
up on the history of the Alawite dynasty. the battle of the three kings. the sultans'
long resistance to the Spanish. Portuguese and then the French. Moulay Ismael and
Moulay Hassan (I) are depicted as strong and pious men who strengthened the state
to better defend the country against the Christians; loyal in that respect to its
lineage dating back to the prophet, the monarchy is also portrayed as continuing
the work of the first Moroccan dynasties, as supporting the calipha of Damascus
and Cordova and resisting the control of the Ottoman Empire. WithOut having to
rely heavily on historical references. the sovereign has clearly capitalized on
an Islamic legitimacy of which the Hashemites or Saudis could well be envious.

Thus independence naturally took on the appearance of triumphant Islam and national-
ism, personified by the king-imam and popular hero who Mohamed V was after returning
from exile. Hith extreme skill. the sovereign used Islam to assure his power over

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the other nationalistic factions and even to wisely initiate a policy aimed at
broadening the bases of his legitimacy through controlled economic development and
some limited attempts to democratize the political system.

But in reality. the end of the colonial period also put an end to the myth according
to which Islam and the modern world were in conflict only because of French domina-
tion. To build their state, the Moroccan nationalists accepted the legacy of the
protectorate without really making a critical inventory of it. In an area as sensi—
tive as education. the need to quickly train cadres justified the full continuation.
in the beginning. of a system copied from the French model. Independent Morocco
very quickly took on the external aspects of a modern secular state while striving
to maintain the theoretical unity between religion and politics and to preserve

its Islamic cultural heritage. To conceal this secularization, in fact. the problem
was circumvented by more or less putting the modern state in the service of develop-
ing the institutional and social base of Islam. But the actual progress made could
not really conceal the rise of secularization.

In the long term. however, Islam has apparently reestablished itself as an unpredict-
able factor in the political process. It has exceeded its role of legitimizing

the government, to which it had supposedly been confined. External factors were
certainly involved. Nasserism was not a formidable competitor of the Moroccan
monarchy. Beginning in 1970, Qadhdhafi violently opposed the Moroccan sovereign

by attacking him specifically for not observing Islam. The conspiracies of 1971

and 1972, even if their interpretation remains ambiguous, also demonstrate that

it was possible to find in the army a certain number of commissioned and noncmmmis-
sioned officers who were ready to condemn the regime in the name of a stern Islam
which strongly resembled that of the Libyan leaders.

Legitimation of the Government by Islam

As an opposition force. following independence Islam became the main source of the
government's legitimation. Mohamed V focused on it that feeling which the Istiq1a13
Party expressed with more clarity than any other political force, but without any
opponent contradicting it on this issue. Much to the contrary, the Moroccan
Communist Party took advantage of its trial before the Tribunal of Casablanca in
1960 to demonstrate its loyalty to the principles of Islam and to monarchicsl insti-
tutions. That did not prevent the Court of Rabat from dissolving the party by its
decree of 9 February 1960: "Whereas the Moroccan state is a theocratic monarchy

in which the sovereign. the lieutenant of the prophet, is both the temporal king

and spiritual leader of the Moslem community; whereas the Moroccan state is Moslem
not only because of the fact that it practices the Moslem religion, but also because
it identifies with the corpus itself of Islam, which constitutes its reason for
being; whereas it follows that in Morocco. by virtue of the political community's
total identification with the doctrine from which it derives its essence, any attack
on the Moslem religion is simultaneously an attack on Moroccan public order ...
Whereas His Majesty Mohamed V has on several occasions proclaimed that any ideology
based on materialism was contrary to the religious precepts of which he is the spiri-
tual guardian. as in particular in the speech which he delivered on the occasion

of the 32nd anniversary of his accession to the throne ...."

This decision of the Court of Rabat deserves some examination, inasmuch as it is
much more precise and detailed than Articles 6 and 19 of the constitution. which
are generally cited as references in this connection.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1AI.USE1DNLY

The decision gave a very broad positive content in advance to the function of
defender of Islam and in a way put the Islam-monarchy relationship above any other
institution--above any other source of positive law, including the constitution,
since it was a question of the king. as commander of the faithful. thus being able
to neutralize the effect of a law concerning public freedoms merely by means of

a speech. The system could not be more overtly theocratic and in this respect the
constitution became rather secondary in relation to jurisprudence.

It will be noted that the first version of the constitutional text of 1962 did not
include the term "coanmnder of the faithful," which was apparently included in the
discussion at the request of Dr Khatib with the support of Allal El Passi to demon-
strate that the government was of divine origin and did not derive solely from a
referendum or party struggles. It is striking to note that when the king became
concerned about giving the monarchy a legitimacy based on votes, it was party repre-
sentatives who reintroduced divine right as one of the government's instruments.

In reality, the sovereign had probably never renounced it, but in utilizing the
referendum and elections, he was instead thinking of beating the Moroccan left on

its own turf in order to preempt part of its modernization program. The entire
conduct of Hassan II since his accession to the throne also lends significance to
this interpretation. The crown prince was not considered a pious man. The first
public appearance by the new king going to pray in traditional dress showed the
extent to which the estate was vested in the heir following the death of the pre-
vious owner. Hassan II was careful to capitalize on the image of an Islamic sovereign.
which Mohamed V had personified so well. In Morocco, Islam took the place of a
typical single-party "political religion." The commander of the faithful wasactually
the leading ulama. If Islam does not have a religious hierarchy, there has neverthe-
less been a diffusely encouraged development toward a structuring of institutions.

The League of Moroccan Ulamas was established in Tangier in 1961 with the purpose
of reviving Islam in the country and spreading it to African nations. The Ministry
of Habous, later the Ministry of Islamic Affairs, occupied shortly afterwards by
Allal El Passi, followed a policy of religious institutional support with the result
of strengthening a veritable network of ecclesiastical authorities whose political
homogeneity was not uniform but whose doctrinal unity was almost assured. At the
top was the Karaouyne University of Fez. whose students became qadis. notaries and
imams in charge of mosques in the main centers in the north of Morocco. The univer-
sity was almost entirely of Istiqlal allegiance since the time of the protectorate,
but it was not in a monopolistic position. since more recent and less prestigious
educational centers sprang up, such as Ben Yoassef University of Marrakesh, schools
in northern Morocco and even at Tarudant. The UNFP and the popular movement were
rivals of the Istiqlal in the 1960's.

It is difficult to estimate the annual output of students educated by these institu-
tions. but it is far from negligible. Today there is probably a total of more than
30,000 persons. ranging from the most prestigious to the most modest figures. who
are totally or partially involved with religious functions (muezzins, preachers

or readers of the Koran ...) with various titles and generally enjoying a popular
trust that is not commensurate with their modest incomes. Construction of public
and private mosques has more than doubled since the end of the protectorate. The
division between the limited number of religious "officials" and those whom institu-
tions and authorities tolerate and allow to collect alms from the faithful is very
loose.“ but in general it is reasonable to assure that their number and influence
in rural areas rival those of elementary schoolteachers and other minor officials

of the modern state.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

of 1962 and accused of both heresy and conspiring against the government. Allsl
El Fassi played a leading role in this affair. followed by the Tribunal of Nader,
which sentenced the Bahais to death in December 1962. The emotions aroused by this
judgment caused reactions both inside and outside Morocco. The trial for heresy
shocked Allied Reds Guedira, then general director of the royal staff, as such as
the left. Pressures mounted from outside, particularly in the United States. where
it was feared that the repression might subsequently affect Moroccan Jews accused
of supporting Israel. The king pardoned the sentenced Bahais.

In this confused affair, there was clearly the impression of an ever increasing
rivalry between the king and the Istiqlal, in which each tried to embarrass the
other. By entrusting the Ministries of Islamic Affairs and Justice to the Istiqlal,
the sovereign knew that he could rely on men who were capable of mobilizing the
religious community to his advantage. But the feeling quickly developed that the

to its modest following of men of law and religion. Their anxiety derived from
the feeling of being left behind by an emerging new Morocco that would threaten
their positions in the long run. Their infatuation with elementary education made
them afraid that children and families wOuld prefer the teaching of mathematics
to that of the Koran.5

By embracing such views. by demanding a reduction in the number of Christian churches
and advocating stricter measures for emigrating Moroccan Jews who supported Israel,
the Istiqlal satisfied this faction and embarrassed the king, who would have liked

to maintain traditions while seeking the support of young technocrats, whose sympa-
thies were originally more favorable to the left.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The government responded to such implicit criticism by hardening its attitude toward
breaches of religious practices. Hith parliament during the month of Ramadan. the
police stepped up arrests of those not observing the fast. The king officially in-
augurated mosques and for the first time openly linked the development of modern
education to the need to preserve the role of the Koranic school in moral and re-
ligious upbringing.

It seems obvious that the monarchy did not want to let it be possible for any other
figure in political life to outshine it in the matter of Islam. If the ulamas were
worried and felt threatened by modernization, Eassan II preferred to slow progress
rather than incur their criticism. It was relatively easy for him to again find

a common ground of understanding with them. inasmuch as official Islam in Morocco
was still rich enough to maintain religious buildings and a good number of ecclesi-
astical officials. Even if such opulence did not permit the expansion which Allal
Bl Fassi would have liked, the religious leaders were conscious of their favored
status in comparison to their colleagues in Algeria and Tunisia.

Immediately following the 1963 conflict, the government learned how to subtly utilize
this difference. In the eyes of the ulamas. the Moroccan monarchy constituted a

more reliable support than the secular regimes of neighboring countries. The begin-
ning and ending dates of the fast of Ramadan even became a symbol of national identity
in practice. with Moroccans tending to fast an extra day so as to be considered better
Moslems than their neighbors.

Thus it is impossible to speak of the legitimation of the government by Islam as

a simple and uniform process affecting all figures in Moroccan public life. We have
seen that the monarchy sought other sources of legitimacy at certain times, such

as nationalism, certain forms of democracy and modernization of the country. Among
the figures most involved in the government’s legiti:ation by Islam, the Istiqlal
Party sometimes seemed strangely prepared to dissociate Islam from the monarch --
or at least to compete with it to promote the principles of an authentic Islam in
political life. The situation was complicated insofar as the institutional apparatus
of Islam, that of the mosques, traditional universities and the League of Ulsmas.
was devoted to the party as much as to the monarchy. when the Istiqlal was part

of the opposition, tensions between the two sides risked becoming dangerous, since
the qadis and fquihs could not remain hostile to the government for long, no more
than the government could do without them. They therefore had to pretend to dis-
tinguish between the sovereign, whom they never openly challenged. and his advisers.

The most serious tensions therefore seemed to derive from a secular development of
Moroccan society. which the monarchy encouraged in the name of structural moderniza-
tion while denying its disruptive effects.

The Secularization of Society

In the eyes of traditionalists, Islam's influence had only declined since Moroccan
independence. If the number of mosques and Koranic schools had increased considerably,
they were no longer the only ones dispensing knowledge. But above all. the religious
leaders no longer held in the new society the position which they had occupied in

the past or even under the protectorate. in which they constituted the majority of

the makhzen cadres. After the recently organized nationalists took the place of the

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protectorate's officials. the importance of the traditionalists‘ role was reduced.
this time by their fellow countrymen and with the collective suspicion that they

had collaborated with the colonists. Through the years and despite official Arabiza-
tion campaigns. graduates of traditional universities or of Arabic language depart-
ments of modern universities have not been well respected and rather unsure of them-
selves when they did not know French.

In this regard. the development of the educational system is revealing of the re-
duced role of Arabic language graduates. Even in the beginning, the Korsnic schools
were in competition with kindergartens. This was the necessary transition for middle
class children whose parents wanted to enroll them in the establishments of the French
Cultural Mission. The development of Moroccan public education (more than 2 million
students) reduced private Moslem education to symbolic status (60,000 students).

which had formerly played an important role under the protectorate (such as the
Balafrej school in Rabat). The phenomenon was even more evident in secondary than

in elementary schools; at the secondary level, there were no longer any protest move-
ments of Karaouyina students and Arabicized sections to be treated on an equal footing
with their French-educated schoolmates.

If the educational system was of the French type, the press, radio and television,
including their broadcasts in Arabic. propagated Western-type cultural models. Except
for the reading of passages from the Koran at prayer times and the broadcasts in

the month of Ramadan, television had rather few programs of Islamic character.

It was in fact the entire scope of modern Moroccan life which seemed to be slipping
from Islam's grasp. At the highest level, trends in thinking. the press and published
works reinforced a general tendency similar to the one provided by television at

the middle class level. Urban life, whose style now borrowed more from that of the
former European middle class of North Africa (including the lottery and the tierce
[Trench system of forecast betting on horses]) than from that of the traditional
middle class, was also a factor restricting religious conduct. The education of
women. their growing numbers in educational and office jobs and the striking changes
that were noticeable in their behavior within a few years were perhaps an even greater
attack on the traditional Islamic model.

In the broad sense. economic factors also favored secularization. but their effects
must be evaluated with discretion. In comparison to Algeria. the transformations

in Morocco had only a limited influence. The monarchy reestablished its base in
rural areas in the years following independence by blocking the industrialization
and agriarian reform projects which the Moroccan left was then advocating. But it
could not be satisfied with a status quo program in the modern sector. Exercising
restraint in the beginning. reserving its efforts for sectors in which it would be
possible to substitute national production for imports, employing a great amount

of manpower and upgrading the country's raw materials if possible, Morocco moved
forward with a policy of industrial growth. This development became more pronounced
in the 1970's with the rise of phosphate prices reaching 6 percent annually. providing
an equivalent net growth in view of a population growth of approximately 3 percent.

Industrialization. which increased for about 10 years. led to a rural exodus and
urban development. in particular along the coastline from El Jadida to Kenitra. The

rural population, which represented nearly 80 percent of the total population follow-
ing independence and even almost 70 percent in 1965. today constitutes only 61 percent.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In rural areas. small population centers have also expanded in comparison to the
countryside.

These movements have also been accompanied by a profound change in the age pyramid.
even more pronounced in urban than in rural areas (56 percent of residents are less
than 20 years old and only 6.5 percent are older than 60). Based on the decline

of the average age of the population and its urbanization, it would be simplistic
to automatically conclude that there has been a change in attitude toward religious
practices. In urban areas, however, there is a higher concentration of people in
the national average age bracket of 15-29, which alone represents as many people

as everyone over the age of 30. Their personal experience is different from that
of the previous generation. They did not experience the protectorate. They have
had less exposure to religious instruction via the Koranic school or the family unit.
The family is also tending to disintegrate, as demonstrated by Fatima Hernissi's
surveys on divorce. which in particular point to the weakening of the value system
linked to the related family.

According to the qadi quoted by Fatima Hernissi,7 divorce used to represent an un-
common practice with stern sanctions imposed by the community, while families settled
the marriage problems. The married couple is a victim of industrialization, employ-
ment and compulsory education "enabling women and youth to free themselves from the
patriarchal yoke." But nothing has been planned either by religious or civil law

to replace the family's power of control. Social and economic tensions have affected
married couples, increasing the number of women and children abandoned by husbands
who are no longer able to assume the economic burden of a family. Moroccan radio

has significantly devoted a regular program to families abandoned by the father.

Alcoholism represents another sign of the deteriorating system of Islamic values
in urban areas. Beer and wine consumption has increased among the middle class.
Significantly and inexplicably. it has dropped by 30 percent during the month of
Ramadan;8 the middle class indulges instead in whiskey.

A final factor. emigration to Europe, continues to influence Moroccan Islam. At
first glance. it has the same effect as urbanization and industrialization. It breaks
up families and drives workers to alcoholism and to adopt an implicit value system
which complicates their rehabilitation. The phenomenon is even more pronounced in
the case of children born outside the country or who have lived abroad for a long
time. They have not been subjected, especially girls, to social pressures and re-
ligious indoctrination. They are marked even more by western education, since the
society in which they live rejects them and since they can no longer really be an
integral part of their native country because of their poor knowledge of Arabic.
There are now nearly 2 million Moroccans living abroad. Nevertheless, emigration

is an ambiguous factor. The worker's rejection by European society forces him to
make an effort to preserve his own identity. This often means keeping up religious
practices and observing the fast of Ramadan. Upon returning to the country, workers
hope to again find a social behavior and religious practice which were abandoned
abroad. At the family level. emigration may be a means of preserving the extended
family in rural areas, since it alone is apt to preserve the virtues of wives who
have remained at home and to provide for the education of children.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The penetration of Moroccan society since independence by a dominant value system,
of which Islam is a smaller part, certainly seems to be an obvious factor. An edu-
cational system in which Arabic is secondary to French, rapid urbanization and emi-
gration are the most striking factors. But if the process of transformation seems
too rapid to those experiencing or observing it, it is nevertheless much less trau-
matic than in other neighboring countries. such as Algeria in particular. It may
also be noted. as in the case of emigration, that a reaction against this process
of accelerated modernization may take place in the name of Islam, whether it is

a matter of challenging the established government or its skillful efforts at
adaptation.

Toward a Revival of Islam?

Actually, the alert concerning Islam dates back much earlier. It was Qadhdhafi9
who began as early as 1970 to first challenge the government of Hassan II in the

name of purity of Islamic principles. For the Libyan Government, Morocco is above
all an obstacle to the Arab unity which it wants to achieve. Neither its Islamic

At the time of the Skhirat conspiracy in 1971, Qadhdhafi expressed his immediate

and outspoken support for the rebel Moroccan soldiers; he continued to do so after
their defeat. There was a long-lasting war of the airwaves between Morocco and
Libya. The Moroccan opposition found a way to publicize in detail the system's
failings and improprieties. The accuracy of the accusations was a very consistent
source of information at a time when the monarchy controlled the press and removed
parties from the government. The Libyans focused their criticism on the gap between
the practices of government leaders, including the sovereign and his associates,

and the Islamic ideal. Allegiance to Libya hardly increased, but the accusations
gained ground.

The Libyan free officers could certainly feel some kinship between their movement
and that of the cadets of Ahcrmoumou. As soon as they reached the site of the feast
in Skhirat, they attacked all of the symbols of wealth and consumption contrary

to Islam: alcohol, pork, food in abundance, expensive watches which they crushed,
etc., but the king regained control of the situation by reacting in Islamic fashion,
in particular by reciting the fatiha with the cadets, whom he rallied. Then he
stated in his self-critical speech of 4 August 1971: "... The poor have not grown
any richer. The wealthy have increased their fortunes. The gap between the two
classes has widened. The situation is intolerable in a country like Morocco, whose
real constitution is the Koran. The Koran in fact instructs us to practice equality

and equity” ....

The sovereign'a good intentions to reform matters did not last very long, but the
crises of 1971 and 1972 constituted a serious warning which led both political lead-
ers and observers to wonder about the system's ability to withstand such tensions,
their causes and the role of Islam. An initial simplistic reaction consisted of
using the failure of the conspiracy as an argument to conclude that the royal "good
fortune" had strengthened the government. But it was not so much fervor as fear and

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

passivity which characterized relations between the government and the masses at the
time of the Skhirat and Boeing affairs.

Practically nothing serious has been done to open up the political system with re—
gard to the Western Sahara. At first glance, this conflict between Hoslem powers
is not a war of religion. The matter is not as simle as it appears. The tensions
with Spain and then with Algeria enabled the Moroccan monarchy to regain control

of the political system and to reintegrate the main opposition forces into that
system. Hassan II had dreamed of the operation since the conspiracies of 1971-72.
He was not prepared to really pay the price by sharing power with parties and trade
unions as long as he was afraid that such a relinquisIInent of power constituted

a danger equivalent to that represented by the military. The other figures of
political life were in turn wondering what a new compromise with a weakened monarch—
ical government could hold for then. They therefore set the stakes high, at least
while waiting to see what would happen next.

The king had also scored points by siding with Syria and Egypt in the 1973 conflict.
Not having the army as a power base, he had to mobilise Islam and Arabian. Circul-
stances were favorable and the survivors of the battle of Mount Hermon, after parad—
ing through the streets of Rabat. left immediately. with the aid of caution and
symbolism, for the Saharan front. The political parties could not allow the king
to pursue such a course of action alone for too long without running the risk of
being edged out of the picture. With the Saharan affair creating a new consensus
of public opinion and the fear of a military coup d'etat preventing the parties
from pressing their demands. a new compromise with the monarchy seemed possible.
Under these conditions. it was in the king's interest to strengthen the Islamic
features of his government to increase his autonomy.

The king's position in relation to the other figures in political life was quite
strong in this regard. By fighting Spain and indirectly Algeria to recover the
Sahara, Rassan II preempted a propaganda issue dear to the Istiqlal and to Allal

El Faasi. Sensitive nationalism and loyalty to Islam are issues constantly found

in the party's doctrine since 1958. but with even more insistence in 1962 when im—
pending Algerian independence tlvarted Moroccan hopes concerning the Sahara. The
UNFP and the communist party (which became the PLS [Party of Liberation and Socialisml)
could not be outdone after the many statements which they had made about this issue.
The objective features of a compromise between the king and the parties thus con-
verged and it was to some extent a result of the recognition of his role as contender
of the faithful that the sovereign emitted himself . with their support. to the
Green March, a "pilgrimage to recover that ancient Moroccan territory." The entry
into the recovered Saharan territory began with a solemn prayer. The marchers waved
Moroccan flags. portraits of the king as well as verses from the Koran. The Green
March took on the appearance of a jihad, even though the main adversary was a brother.
Arab and Moslem country.10 But using a classical approach, Algeria was accused of
lacking Arab solidarity and the materialistic character of its socialism was stressed.
Actually, a new political consensus was formed on the basis of the unity established
at the time of the Green March, which made possible Horocco‘s commitment to the
series of elections beginning in November 1976 and ending with the Istiqlal‘s reentry
into the government in late 1977.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The collapse of the Iranian monarchy and the attack on the mosque in Mecca thus
occurred in a context of reestablished national unity. The events caused a reaction
of anxiety and tension in political circles. but without apparent dramatic effects.
When the king decided to receive the shah in Marrakesh. public opinion and political

Oudja congress in May 1979. whereas it did talk about Palestine, Eritrea, the
Philippines. Pakistan and Afghanistan. The ulamas' support of official views con-
cerning the Sahara was total and was acconpanied by stern judgments of Algerian

measures which Qadhdhafi and lateneyni would not repudiate, as well as certain syn-
bolic gestures such as banning Christian feast days and Sundays as holidays.

The Istiqlal's position was not so remote from that of the ulamas. Al-Alam was
amazed and contented on Europeans' anazenent at the revival of Islam, but did
not condemn Iranian Islam; at most. he nentioned the comunist threat which could

circles educated in traditional universities. They are found instead among students
and professors of the hulanities in modern universities, who fornerly would have
been couitted to Marxist-based groups. The movement's leaders are some elementary
school inspectors. such as Abdesselam Yassine. who publishes the AL JAMA ("The
Community") journal in Marrakesh. The first issue of this journal deserves special
attention inasmuch as it presents a contrasting view with respect to official policy.
without openly opposing it. however. The judgment on Shi'ism is not in the same
vein as that of the king. The author talks of differences, not heresygl1 Khomeyni
is described as a holy man who "has renounced the possessions of this world and

has risen above its pleasures and false glories. He directs his people and is lead-
ing them to a rare ideal ...." All attempts to secularize Hoslen society are con-
demned. including those of both Ataturk and the shah. Egypt is vaguely mentioned.
with Sadat as the prime target: "The bloodthirsty tyrant of this century. as well
as Nasser." 0n the other hand. Bourguiba is not nentioned.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The condemnation of modernization. which accompanies this criticism of aecularity,
goes further: "The present system of unrestrained and disorderly development, which
knows no bounds. threatens to plunge the world into chaos. Humanity‘a heritage

is being squandered to satisfy the extravagant tastes of the wealthy at the expense
of the world's underprivileged. The role of reemerging Islam is to oppose and to
quash the tendencies of some to monopolize wealth and to construct a fraternal
Islamic economic system capable of satisfying the needs of man, of every man, in
adequate proportions and not in excess."

The author appeals to the ulamas12 and to students to support this revolution. He
urges young people to free themselves from the hold of the false Marxist shepherds,
whom he also fears for the Iranian revolution, which he cites. however. as an example
to be followed by the entire Hoslem world: "A new face of Islam is emerging among
the Iranian people, a face which enlightened leaders are gradually illuminating

and which will in turn illuminate, God willing, all peoples of the Islamic nation.
Wake up, learn how to distinguish between what is true and what is false. Do not
put your faith in the opportunism of the communists who, creeping in Khomeyni's
shadow ... only fish in troubled waters .... Those people will learn a hard lesson
from the faithful Hojahedin in Afghanistan and in Yemen ...."

Issue no 4 returns to the theoretical aspects of the divisions between Sunnites

and Shi'ites with an outlook of unity, and Khomeyni's appeal to the Moslem world

is situated in this context. Moving from theory to an analysis of symbolic acts,
the journal extols the ulamas of Tangier. who publicly broke their fast 1 day before
the rest of Morocco in a spirit of unity with the entire Hoslem world and were
arrested by the police.

Beyond this legalistic appearance. the group nevertheless seems to have a more dis-
turbing, hidden face. Issue no 4 of AL JAHAA echoes a statement of the National
Bureau of Islamic Youth, dated 29 September 1979, protesting the conspiracy against
the "brothers": Abdelkim Mouti and Brahim Kamal, who were implicated by the police
in the assassination of USFP leader Omar Benjelloum in December 1975. The two
accused men are president and vice president of Moroccan Islamic Youth. Mouti,

an elementary school inspector with a modern education. like Abdesselam Yasine,
began by militating in the teaching union and in the UNFP.13 Suspected of having
organized the assassination of Omar Benjelloun, he fled to Saudi Arabia, protesting
his innocence. But strangely enough, he was among the foreigners who attacked the
mosque in Mecca. It would no doubt be a bit hasty to conclude that Moroccan Islam
is involved in a conspiracy which is both reactionary and revolutionary and affect-
ing the entire Hoslem world. But a response and ties may exist or be formed, par-
ticularly during the pilgrimage, while following the age-old roads which have carried
ideas. men and goods since the beginning of Islam.

This explains the anxiety of all political factions in regard to the reactionary
movement. The left views it in more or less the same way as the military and in
any case prefers to make a compromise with the monarchy. The Istiqlal is being
careful not to allow itself to be outdone and is relying on official Islam. While
remaining in the government. it will insist on accelerating Arabization of education
and on personal status which is not too liberal.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ability to lead the country, even among the resctionsries there are few who do not
accept the king as religious leader. In the final analysis, it is probably the
country's modernization since 1960 which is the most controversial factor, but the

In the long term. it is difficult to say whether the Moroccan monarchy (will emerge
stronger from these trials and tensions. Algeria's recent development, which has

this vision is exclusively religious and Islamic; the categories deriving from any
secularity are totally irrelevant.” The ancient systen. in which religious repre-
sentation and the concept of government were closely related. has continued even

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the growth of central government. The Moroccan monarchy's strength lies in

its having learned to manipulate this representation, although without being able

to prevent a certain concept of secularity from infiltrating the system with a large
degree of complicity by political officials in the beginning. But modernization
has crushed a part of society that will no longer accept this sacrifice in silence
and, if pushed, would prefer to challenge changes which they do not consider legiti-
mate. A new group of rather lucid and educated Moslems is emerging in opposition

to a modernization which they reject and from which they do not really benefit.

In comparison to the monarchy, they offer a social and intellectual plan that is
acceptable to the masses.

An important factor has remained outside the field of observation for lack of infor-
mation.15 This is the Islam of religious confraternities, holy men and local sanc-
tuaries. Two contradictory views can be cited in this regard. On one hand, there
is the hostility of reformist Islam toward it, which dates back to the protectorate
and has never stopped; in this respect. the reactionaries are just as reproachful
as the ulamas or the Moroccan left. On the other hand, local government officials
have often shown great kindness toward the confraternities. That may be interpreted
as a new version of the politics of prominent figures, inasmuch as the families

of local holy men and the chiouk of confraternities are to be found in circles close
to the Popular Movement or Independents, and sometimes even in the USFP, which does
not exclude the possibility of good relations with local government. Another more
prosaic reason for the interest of officials is to be found in the "folkloric" events
and festivals (moussems) associated with such organizations, which increase trade
with city residents and foreigners and provide a market for local products.

But the possibility must not be ruled out of one day finding in this repressed Islam
a source of protest for a regional movement in the Rif. Souss or Middle Atlas moun-
tains, or even a form of opposition to industrialization and modernization, which
could then be combined with the protest of reactionaries. 7

Thus it is difficult to draw conclusions today concerning the nature of the control
exercised in the name of Islam over society and the political system. An impression
of continuity prevails, of course, but it specifically reminds us that in Moroccan
tradition dynasties have been challenged in the name of a revival of Islam.

For centuries, that tradition has been closer to puritanism and doctrinal austerity
than to the religious liberalism of the Ottoman Empire, for example. Since Moroccan
independence, the state has actually intervened very little in regulating the social
conduct of individuals, except with regard to observance of the feat of Ramadan.

The result has been a real secularization of daily life that is more pronounced

than in Algeria, where the process of re-Islamization is progressing, particularly
concerning the place of Arab culture and language in education. This has led to

a weakening of the government, despite the skill demonstrated by Hassan II in
establishing a broad political consensus after the conspiracies of 1971-72. The
various reactionary factions, whose following is difficult to assess, are certainly
not in a position to bring about a change by themselves. But if other forces, such
as the military, were to succeed in bringing about such a change, puritanical Islam
would immediately provide them with an alternative doctrine that would offer an
exceptional range of means of extending control over society as a whole.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

"The body of the faithful must remain in the same place until the time that
the angel lsrafil somds the trumpet of resurrection" (Andre Adam, "Casablanca,"
CNRS [National Center for Scientific Research], Paris, 1968. p 606).

See in particular: Clifford Geertz, "Islaa Observed" (New Raven, 1968); Jacques
Berque. "Maghreb. histoire et societe" [Maghreb. History and Society] (Duculot,
Cembboux, [9710). pp 162 and 55; E. I. J. Roaenthal, "Islam and the Modern National
State" (Ca-bridge University Press, 1965); Stuart Schaar, "Rebellion. Revolution
and Religious Intermediaries in Some Nineteenth Century Islamic States." in
Kalman H. Silvert, "church and States" (AUP. N.Y., 1967); L. C. Brown, "The

Role of Islam in Modern North Africa," in L. C. Brown, "State and Society in
Independent North Africa," Middle East Institute, washington, D.C., 1966), pp

97 and 55.

See the program of the 1960 congress, cited in Claude Palazolli, "Le Maroc Poli-
tique" [Political Morocco] (Editions Sindbad. Paris, 1974), p 146; "The Istiqlal
Party remains loyal to Islam, which was the central factor in the formation

of the Moroccan nation, the unification of our country and the flowering of

our civilization. Islam has effectively contributed to maintaining the fighting
spirit, which the Moroccan people have demonstrated to achieve their freedom ..."
See also Michel Rousset, "Le Royaume du Maroc" [The Kingdom of Morocco] (Berger
Levrault. Paris, 1978).

The dualism between a bureaucratized Islam and an Islam maintained by the popu-
lation is not without some similarity to the structure of local government--
see Remy leveau, "Le Fellah marocain defanseur du Trone" [The Moroccan Pellah,
Defender of the Throne], FNSP [National Political Sciences Foundation] (Paris.
1976).

And yet the nunber of Koranic schools, like that of the mosques, has doubled
in 10 years. They are probably far beyond 100.000. But Morocco, which does
not have acre than 300,000 students in the entire educational system, has more
than 2 million in the public elementary school system alone and nearly 100,000
teachers at all levels.

See MAGHREB. No 8, March-April l965--"Religious Ideology and Political Tactics
in Morocco," pp 210-27.

Fatima Merniasi, "Divorce," AL ASSAS. Nos 15-16-17, December 79, January and
February 80.

Andre Adam, "Casablanca." p. 595, op. cit.
Ruth First, "Libya-«The Elusive Revolution" (Penguin Books, Harmondworth. 1974).
But in his speech to parliament on 12 October 1979. the king put the sacrifice of

Moroccan chouhadas on the same level as the Golan Heights, the Sinai and the
Sahara (LB MATIN DU SAHARA, 13 October 1979).

37—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.
17.

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The uprising of the Islamic people in Iran is only a partial illustration of
Islam's exemplary revolt. in which Selmane (The Persian) formerly participated
under the banner of the prophet." '

"And you, the ulanas of Islam, the salt of the earth, you who slaep‘, you hold
the truth: Speak! Your Iranian brothers have given the turban back its full

glory."
JEUNE AFRIQUE, Nos 990-991, 21 December 1979. p 38.

The two countries organized the first conferences of Islamic chiefs of state
as early as 1969.

Edmond Amran El Haleh. "La notion d'Btat et l'experience du Tiers-Honde"

[The Concept of the State and the Experience of the Third World], PEUPLB
HEDITBRRANEEN. No 6, January-March 1979.

Ernest Gellner, "Saints of the Atlas" (Ueidenteld and Nicholson, London 1969).

See REVUB POUVOIRS, No 12, 1980, "Islamic Regimes."

COPYRIGHT: The Maghreb Review 1981

11915

CSO:

4519/44

38 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY

MOROCCO

strative measures would quickly be taken to completely restore order. In fact.
following a meeting on 20 July to study the matter. over which King ﬂasaan II pre-
sided. the decision was announced to divide Casablanca into five prefectures.

The decision which resulted from the meeting of 22 July. over which the prime mini-
ster and Minister of Justice Haati Bouabid presided with the assistance of Minister
of Interior Drisa Basri in the presence of parliamentary representatives, local
elected officials and representatives of some of the city's professional associa-
tions. is justified by the fact that the city's population has more than tripled

in 25 years. from 1.050 million residents in 1955 to more than 3.5 million today,
or one-sixth of the kingdom's population. Casablanca. which has grown constantly
from the rural exodus, which has increased even more as a result of this year's
drought, accounts for 60 percent of all available jobs. 53 percent of national
industry. 40 percent of energy consumption. 60 percent of cosmercial operations
and 70 percent of imports-exports. The government press has pointed out that the

one after the other. resulting in a continuous process of population growth without
regard for social. educational. commercial and transportation services for then.
This has favored speculation to the advantage of the private sector and to the
detriment of the public interest and public services.

According to authorities, the quest for a new administrative framework for the
prefecture, which actually has only one administrative center. that of Casablanca.
must obviously be oriented toward: eliminating the situation of having only one
center; a better conception of facilities for outlying areas; slowing growth from
the population exodus by decentralizing economic activities; establishing new cen-
ters of attraction in suburban areas; developing the centers of satellite cities
such as Berrechid. Settat. etc.. within the economic region in accordance with

the king's guidelines; developing a guide plan as quickly as possible to thus de-
termine the options and guidelines for developing greater Casablanca; systematically
including recreation at the housing level, thus the importance of playgrounds and
sports fields; working out a clearly defined policy for urban development and con-
struction supervision; establishing a balance between urban transportation and
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

individual automobiles; creating jobs in the secondary and tertiary sectors through
a policy of industrial and commercial decentralization.

As Mr Haati Bouabid pointed out, the five prefectures must have all the resources
necessary for then to play their legally established role. At the royal palace

of Casablanca on 28 July. King Easssn II received the five new governors appointed
in the economic capital: Hr Ahmed Pizazi. appointed governor of the prefecture

of Casablanca-Anfa; Hr Ahmad Chaouki. appointed governor of ﬂay Mohammedi-Ain Sebaa;
Hr Hustapha Alami. governor of Ben HaikrSidi 0thman; Hr Larbi Bl Ouazzani. governor
of Bay 31 Hassani-Ain chok; Mr Abdellah 31 Ouaszani. governor of Hohammadia-Zenata.

Hr Dries Basri, in installing Mr Ahmed Fizazi as governor of the prefecture of
Casablanca-Anfs and of the social and economic region of greater Casablanca on

28 July in United Nations Square in front of the prefecture headquarters in Casablanca.
stated the reasons for the new division of Casablanca: to balance the housing situa-
tion in Casablanca-Anfa; to reorganize the industrial zone and to solve the economic,
social and administrative problems of the prefecture of Ray Hohammedi-Ain Sebaa;

to consider urbanization, industrialization and antipollution measures and to en-
courage amall and medium-size businesses in the prefecture of Ain Chok-Hay hassani;
to encourage industry in the prefecture of Ben Hsik-Sidi Othmen, starting with the
Tit Hellil area. and to continue the efforts for industrial. tourist and urban de-
velopment in the prefecture of Hohammedia-Zenata.

Hr Driss Basri pointed out that King Hassan II, in appointing the five new governors
on 28 July, had urged them to work not only on the economic and social plans in

the interest of the city's population. but had also asked them to make Casablanca
one of the most important and most envied aetropoles in the world.

King Hassan II presided over the religious vigil of the Night of Destiny on
28 July at the Hohanmadi mosque in Casablanca.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

11915
CSO: 4519/41

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

“MCI MG OPPOSITION cmws IN WAKE 01’ PCT LEGALIZATION

Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 245, 3 Aug 81 p 17
[Article by Hedi Dhoukar: "Liberalization with Pitfalls")

[Text] 0n the night of 18 July, a few hours after the announcement that the ban on
the Tunisian Communist Party [PCT] since 1963 had been lifted, following an inter-
view between PCT General Secretary Mohamed Harmel and President Bourguiba, the police
arrested, in their homes, more than 40 leaders of the Islamic Hay Movement (MTI)

and the Progressive Islamic Movement (HIP).

Among the leaders arrested were MTI President Rached Ghanouchi and General Secretary
Abdelfattah Mourou. If no official cmmmunique reported that police operation, the
press of the ruling Destourian Socialist Party (PSD) devoted several articles to

it, questioning the responsibility of religious reactionaries in "disorders" noted
in mosques, disorders which were. in reality, probably due to the action of agents
provocateurs in the pay of the PSD.

"ReligiOus Unrest"

In any case, the government is hardly in a position to denounce the “medieval inquisi-
tion" and the "political-religious fanaticism of Islamic reactionaries" (L'ACTION)
today. when it was the government itself which provided fundamentalists with their
first organized structure: the Association for the Reading and Promotion of the
Koran. That was in 1970, when it was difficult-~to say the least--for the opposition
to organize within the country in complete safety. The government's purpose was

to counterbalance, or even to indirectly repress. leftist forces, which were becoming
particularly outspoken in university circles. And actually, as a result of their
"dirty work" tactics. the henchmen of the religious right have been able to impose
their will in student and university circles.

The government's responsibility in this matter is twofold. Not only has it created
what it wants to destroy today-and by what meansl--but quite obviously. the reli-
gious phenomenon cannot be understood only in its political context. The socio-
cultural situation which made possible the emergence of such Islamic-based groups
actually still has not changed. It is the result of a more than 25-year-old rule
which has never really been able to reconcile its liberal and tolerant aims in the
case of religion and its elite nature. thus if the affluent classes have adjusted
to these features withOut difficulty, the vast majority have had to put up with

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reformism mixed with the PSD's overall policy, the effects of which are disastrous
from the standpoints of culture. information and the economy (tourism, subcontract-

ing, etc.).

The solution chosen by the government, always tempted to use repression. may well
produce the opposite result and cause the reactionary religious organizations to
look like victims and martyrs. In any case, it will not make it possible for the
underlying causes of "religious unrest" to be attacked. Only real democratization
would be capable of bringing the religious movements out of hiding, which consti-
tutes their strength, and to reveal their views in a broad and healthy debate which

coald only put those who advocate religious fanaticism in their proper place and
even expose their ideology and baclnaard methods.

But such considerations did not serve as the government's motivation. Its action
has apparently been determined by motives of an entirely different nature. The Pcr's
legalization. as positive as it may be. was nevertheless actually used to conceal
the repression of Islamic factions, which immediately followed such legalization.

The fact that Mohamed Harmel has refrained from taking a position on this serious
matter is significant in itself.

Thus differences have increased among the various opposition factions. which had
been united in rejecting and denouncing the government's actions in connection with
its so-called "liberalization." The PCT. let's make no mistake about it. is the
first victim of "Bourguiba's clemency" toward it. From now on. it will actually
look like the government's "democratic security."

Opinions were quickly expressed in Tunisian political circles to the effect that

Mohamed Harmel's party had been rewarded for its policy of "critical support" of
the government—a policy which in particular led to its denunciation of the "wildcat"

strikes of 1977 and to its dissociation from the general strike of 1978. which re-
sulted in the massacres of 26 January, a grim memento. The PCT may also be viewed
as a hostage of Bourguiba. who would not fail to recall at the first opportunity,

as he usually does. that Tunisian communists were against the national movement at
the time of the "fight for liberation" and are today among the few Arabs to recognize
the existence of Israel.

These are some of the factors which have sown discord among the opposition, whereas
the government can now boast that the PCT's legalization has put an end to single-
party rule. From a logical standpoint, at least. this means that Tunisia has become

a "democracy . "

"Final Examination"

It is nothing of the kind. of course, since in Bourguiba's opinion, the Popular Unity
Movement [HUP] of Aimed ben Salah, Prof Hestiri's Socialist Democratic Movement [HDS]
and the Tunisian National Opposition Movement of Ibrahim Tobal, in addition to the
Islamic movements. should also undergo a "final examination"! To be recognized.

they should obtain at least or more than 5 percent of the votes in the upcoming per-
liamentary elections which have been moved forward to 1 November 1981. Among other
conditions. that would represent nothing less than a practically insurmountable
handicap. since these movements would have to be legally recognized in order to
conduct a campaign and have the time and means necessary to circulate their ideas.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is why Mined ben Salah's MU? has requested. as minin- guarantees, the dissolu-
tion of special courts. the reduction of police custody. full restoration of freedom
of expression and freedom of association and the right to strike.

Ibrahim Tobal has in turn refused to "play the gene according to the rules established
by the govern-ant," while the HDS. which already applied for recognition long ago,
has expressed the same reservations.

Only the MU? faction opposed to Abned hen Salah accepted the "game rules" when
Bourguiha personally agreed to receive some of its representatives. who have been
authorized to publish a newspaper. This was another divisive have aimed at weakening
or even disrupting the reformist rally which has for-ed around Ben Salah.

The outcome of a process of democratization. which the government has cleverly turned
into a test of strength, indeed into an obstacle course, now depends on the conduct
of the various opposition factions and in particular on the degree of solidarity
which they will demonstrate.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

11915
080: 4519/61

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

' FORBIGI TRAN FOR 19m $3078 INCIBASING DEFICIT
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French 31 Jul 81 pp 1987-1988

[Text] The provisional Tunisian foreign trade statistics for 1980 show a deficit

of 500.3 million dinars (MD; 1 dinar - approximately 10.30 French francs in average
1980 value), an increase of 16.5 percent over the preceding year. The rate at which
imports were covered by exports nevertheless rose by 1.3 percentage points, to 64.1
percent from 62.8 percent in 1979.

The increase in the trade balance deficit was thus sharply higher than economic
budget forecasts. which estimated only 466 million diners.

The development of trad; in 1979-80 shows the following variations (in millions
of dinars):

1980/1979 Variations

 

1978 1979 1980 Absolute In 2
Imports 899.7 1,156.8 1,391.7 +234.9 +20.3
Exports 468.4 726.7 891.4 +164.7 +22.7
Deficit ' 431.3 430.1 500.3 + 70.2 +16.3
Rate of Coverage 52.1 62.8 64.1 + 1.3 + 2.1

This table shows that the trade deficit rose by 70 ND despite the increase in exports.
The rate of this increase was not the same as in 1979, of course: only +22.7 percent
instead of +60 percent. but we know that the jump in 1979 was rather unusual in
nature, due mainly to petroleum revenues. as a result of which the increase in the
deficit was able to be limited to 0.4 percent.

Imports: 20.3 Percent Increase

The value of Tunisian imports last year rose 20.3 percent over the previous year,
totaling nearly 1.4 billion diners, as opposed to slightly less than 1.2 billion

in 1979. All product groups showed an increase over their previous levels. Energy
products accounted for 20 percent of all Tunisian imports and capital goods accounted

for 23 percent. The structure of product groups remained essentially the same as
in 1979.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following observations can be derived from an examination of Tunisian imports:

Imports of foodstuffs continued to grow at a rate of 12 percent (+17.7 MD). Pur-
chases rose to 167.6 MD in 1980 from 149.8 MD in 1979. The increase included the
purchase of grain (69.8 MD) and sugar (30.5 MD) in particular. These two products
alone represent two-thirds of food imports. Grain purchases (40 percent of the
total) rose 13.5 percent despite a reduction of the snounts imported. This develop-
ment originated with the rise of import prices. whose average rose from 69 dinars
per ton in 1979 to 91 diners per ton in 1980. This price effect is even more pro-
nounced in the case of sugar. whose imports rose by 75 percent in value and declined
by 15 percent in quantity. 0n the other hand. the price of soybean oil fell. which
softened the impact of this product's purchases on the balance of trade: expendi-
tures dropped by 6.4 MD (-27.4 percent) for almost the same quantities imported
(80.000 tons).

Sustaining the operations of manufacturing industries and unavoidably suffering
the increase in prices. purchases of raw materials and semifinished goods rose by
32.6 percent. totaling expenditures of 691.8 MD. or nearly one-half of all imports.

Energy products showed the most noticeable increase. since expenditures to purchase
these products amounted to 278.4 MD. including 112 MD for crude oil purchases.
Petroleum purchases in 1979 amounted to only about 80 MD. The recorded increase
was 40.3 percent. In the case of gas oil. the increase amounted to 28.3 percent
and to 212 percent in the case of heavy fuel oil (18.4 MD. as opposed to 5.9 MD

in 1979).

With regard to raw materials and semifinished goods of animal or vegetable origin.
their share of total imports remained relatively low (5 percent). They rose by
30 percent. causing additional expenditures of approximately 16 MD.

Imports of products of mineral origin more than doubled. rising from 23.6 MD to

52.8 MD (+123.5 percent), due to the purchase of large quantities of unrefined sulfur
(705,000 tons as compared uith 580,000 tons in 1979). for a total of 40.4 MD (+143.2
percent in comparison to 1979).

Purchases of other intermediate goods also increased. These included textile pro-
ducts (122.6 MD or +20 percent). plastics (44.6 MD or +86 percent). timber (31.5
MD or +42 percent) and metallurgical products (38.6 MD or +40 percent).

Finished products' share of total imports did not increase in 1980 and amounted

to only 38.3 percent as opposed to 41.9 percent in 1979. The rate of increase of
purchases was higher in the case of capital goods (+14.2 percent) than in the case
of consumer goods (+3.6 percent). These proportions were reversed in 1979 (1.7
percent for capital goods and 13.4 percent for consuner goods). Appliances.
machinery. pumps. engines and transportation equipment represent most of this
category.

Exports: 22.7 Percent Increase

Tunisian exports in 1980 increased at a much slower rate than that recorded for
1979. At the end of the year in question. they did not amount to the 928 MD

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF"JA1.USE‘0NLN

estimated by the economic budget. Anounting to 891.4 ND. they rose by 22.7 percent
(+164.7 MD).

Energy products accounted for more than one-half of all Tunisian sales in 1980 (53
percent as opposed to 48.6 percent in 1979). As a result of the increase in prices,
petroleum revenues rose by 34 percent and amounted to 472.7 Mb (+119.7 MD over 1979).
totaling revenues of 891.4 Mb. Crude oil alone accounted for 450 HD.

Revenues from the sale of phosphate products also increased. amounted to 104.4 MD
as opposed to 82 MD in 1979. Exports of calcium phosphates amounted to 22 HD in
1980 as opposed to 17.9 MD in 1979; phosphoric acid exports came to 42 MD compared
with 32.1 MD in 1979; exports of superphosphates amounted to 40.4 MD as opposed

to 32.1 MD in 1979.

In the case of textile products, exports also grew, particularly as a result of

the increase in quantities exported (clothing and accessories). In the case of
cotton fabrics. they amounted to 10.8 MD in 1980 as opposed to 9.1 MD in 1979; to

26 MD as opposed to 19.9 MD in the case of hosiery; to 100.9 MD as opposed to 89

MD in the case of clothing; to 4.3 MD as opposed to 3.8 HD in the case of accessories.

Exports of foodstuffs were unfavorable overall, inasmuch as the revenues recorded
for 1980 were below their 1979 level. The decline was caused by a very sharp drop
in olive oil sales, which tunbled from 80,400 tons in 1979 (45.8 MD) to 37,700 tons
in 1980 (22.7 MD). This was a loss of approximately 50 percent (-23.1 MD). This
situation was due to the reduction of available quantities. Exports of live plants.
vegetables and dates also declined in comparison to the previous year. Cube sugar
exports showed a drop of 72 percent. declining from 5.4 MD to 1.5 HD. 0n the other
hand, exports of certain commodities rose, such as oranges (46.1 percent) and shell-
fish (+20 percent).

Geographic Distribution of Trade: Greece. Leading Customer; France, Leading Supplier

with regard to the geographic distribution of Tunisian foreign trade, it will be
-observed, first of all. that trade with the EEC accounted for 58.9 percent of imports
and 53.4 percent of Tunisian exports.

Trade With EEC

(in millions of diners)

1979 1980 1980/1979 Variation
Imports 652.9 (56.52) 819 (58.92) +25.“
Exports 425.3 (58.41) 475.6 (53.42) +11.81
Deficit 227.6 (52.92) 343.4 (68.62) +50.”

The trade deficit in the case of EEC countries amounted to 343.4 Mb, an increase of
50.9 percent over 1979 (+115.7 MD); it represented 68.6 percent of the total deficit
of the Tunisian balance of trade. In the case of imports, Tunisia's main European
customers were Greece (163.1 MD). Italy (142.6 MD), France (136.1 HD) and the PEG
(114.4 MD). The main suppliers continued to be France (349.6 MD). Italy (219.4 MD)

46

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the PRC (162 ND). The rate of coverage in the case of EEC countries dropped by
7 percentage points, tron 65.1 to 58.1 percent.

The decline in olive oil exports and the increase in petroleul prices affected
the balance of trade with Tunisia‘a traditional trade partners. Thus the deficit
increased in the case of France and Italy. large purchasers of olive oil. This
was also the case with Saudi Arabia. the Iain supplier of Tunisian crude oil.

0n the other hand, the situation was somewhat rectified in the case of trade part-
ners other than those of the EEC. Exports to those countries increased in value
by 13.7 percent and imports by 38 percent.

The deficit with countries other than those of the EEC was reduced by 22.5 percent
(or 65.5 MD).

Main Tunisian Trade Partners in 1980

(in millions of dinars)

Igports E_xpgrts 1979 Balance 1980 Balance
Africa: 30.6 69.8 + 27.2 + 39.2
Algeria 2.9 15.7 + 11.6 + 12.8
Libya 3.9 7.6 + 18.7 + 3.5
America: 131.8 151.5 - 27.3 - 80.3
United States 79.8 260.2 - 5.7 + 50.3
Canada 26.3 0.1 - 13.6 - 26.2
Asia: 152.9 33.5 - 88.3 -119.6
Saudi Arabia 108.2 0.5 - 50.5 -107.7
Japan 15.9 0.6 - 7.7 - 15.5
Europe: 1.076 676.6 -316. 9 ~397.6
France 369.6 136.1 -162. 9 -213.5
Greece 77.5 163.9 + 65.7 + 86.6
Italy 219.6 162.6 - 6.8 - 76.8
PRC 162 116.6 - 38 - 27.6
Spain 66.6 3.9 - 62.3 - 62.7
Netherlands 36.3 39.9 + 0.8 + 5.6
United Kingdom 27.7 12.8 - 11.6 - 16.9

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

11915
C30: 6519/61 3ND

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY