FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10428
I April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 20/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Hateriels from foreign-language
sources are translat-zd; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Goverment.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP 0P
mmms REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHMTION
OF THIS WEICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

JPRS L,

l Apri:

JAPAN REPORT

(rouo 20/82)

Couraurs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

Factors Affecting Susuke Reelection As LnP President Analyzed
(Two 1w; WHO, m 82)..OIOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOCO.

MI LITARY

LDP Eyeing Military Satelite
(MIQISHIHBUN.10HBI'82 )0OOOOOOOOOCOOOOIIIOIOCCOOI

ECONOMIC

'ASAHI'On U.S. Call For Opening Japan's Markets
(ASAHI WING RM, 12% 82) eeeoooeeeoeeoeeeeooeoeeo

Automobile Parts Industry Activities Reported
(Various sources; various dates)...................... ..

Dull Business, Pierce Competition
Manufacturers 'Survival Strategy Detailed
Waba Industry 00., Ltd.

U.S. Japan Trade Conflict

Industry to Diversity

Nissan Motor 00., Ltd.

Steelmkers Plan to Expand Facilities
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUI, 9 Mar 82)........................

Country Must Find Ferment U.S. Trade Measures
(Konoe Kavagishi; THE DAILY YOMIURI, 9 Mar 82) ..........

SCIEﬂCE AND TRHNOLOGY

'MAINICHI'CXA Crisis Facing Law of Sea Cmference
(Editorial; “AIMCHI mm, 9 m 82)eeeeooooosoeoeeoo

-a- [III-ASIA-lll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE mu

'ASAHI'Lauds Revised Japan—Australia nuclear Pact
(ASAHI MING m. 13m82)....OODIOIOIOOOIOOOOOOOOIO

Delays in 57 Power Generation ProJects Reported
(MAIHICRI MIL! ms, 10 Mar 82)

Milton Develops 8,000 Gate Array For Semiconductors
(DERPA sum, 10 Feb 82)

Japan To Develop 5th Generation Computer
(rum swam SBIMBUI, u Jan 82)

Test Stage of High Speed Linear Motorcar Described
(sauna TOYO KEIZAI, 6 Feb 82)

Trend Toward Widespread Factory Use of HS Described
(NIKIEI SAIGIO SRIMBUR, 1,6 Jan 82)......................

Entire Machine Industry
Mi, FuJ itsu Group Joint Venture

Relaxation of Recombinant DNA Guidelines Recomended
(mm KOGYO sum, 1h Jan 62)

Recent Biotechnology RAD Reported
(Various sources, various dates).......................

Artificial nu.
STA's Holonic Motion Research
Interferon Mass Production

Briers
New Meteorological Satellite

.. b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE (JULY
FACTORS AFFECTING SEIZURE REELECTION AS LDP PRESIDM ANALYZED

Tokyo USHIO in Japanese Mar 82 pp 26b-69

[Article by Takao Iwami, MAINICII samus reporter: "Suzuki Regine Agonizas
Over Financial Reconstruction without Tax Increase") '

[Text] Reports of Current Policies

Eventually Komoto will leave the cabinet due to disagreement
with Suzuki over econoeic management policy. which will lead
to a political upheaval.

Fukuda Predicts a Major Upheaval

In contrast to last year. which passed peacefully without any mjor dispute,
the forecast of "cloudiness folloxaed by a rainstorn" seems more appropriate
for 1982. Since early this year, oninous rumors of a "najor upheaval" have
been circulating here and there in political circles. which is unusual.

One of the Liberal Democratic Party's (LDP) top leaders. former Prime Minister
Fukuda, referring to the upheaval theory said (on 13 January at a general
meeting of the Fukuda faction): "A storm is brewing this year. There are
rumbles in the skies and we should refrain from rash and impulsive actions.
Rather, we should carefully watch the movements in the skies and act accord-
ingly." Meanwhile. the leaders of the various opposition parties are also
predicting a major political upheaval. The lineup of sides has gradually
become clear. It is safe to say that forces critical of Suzuki within the
LDP (the Fukuda. Komoto and Nakasone factions are still observing the situa-
tion) and the majority of the opposition parties are anticipating a major
turmoil. while the Suzuki-Tenaka coalition hopes to pacify any runblings.

The outlook among Pukuda faction cadres is that "a major upheaval appears
likely, but so far no one is personally trying to ignite a fire. The reason
is that there are so many uncertain factors. Nevertheless, conditions are
such that, once a fire is lit, it could lead to a major conflagration." And.
despite refutations by the Tanaka faction cadres that "although a major
upheaval would be unavoidable if the prime minister were to stuwle over
administrative reform or financial and political policy issues. the prime
minister is an old campaigner who would probably ride out the storm;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

historically, there has never been a major upheaval during the Year of the
Dog," there appear signs of uncertainty. Both sides recognize that the
political situation is not lacking in disruptive factors. Moreover, the
complexity of the political scene in 1982 probably is due to the fact that
a policy confrontation has been joined by a political struggle. It is not
merely a factional strife over the power of rule: an issue of policy choice
centering on economic managenent is also closely involved.

First. a look at the nmkeup of the political struggle shows a gradually
developing split into two forces within the LDP over Prime Minister Suzuki's
reelection. Suzuki's term of office will expire in late Novenber and he is
of course seeking reelection with support from the Tanaka faction.

Prior to the party and cabinet reshuffle at the end of Novewer last year.
the relationship between the Tanaka faction. led by former Prime Minister
Tanaka, and Suzuki was not exactly smooth. The reason was that in order to
keep a balance with the Tanaka-Pukuda forces and mintain equilibrium between
Suzuki. Tanaka and Pukuda forces, Suzuki tried to stay neither too close nor
too distant from Tanaka. Nor was Tsnaka very energetic in his support of
Suzuki's reelection.

However, Tanaka needs a stable government and party leadership structure
under his control in order to overcome the crisis he faces in the Lockheed
trials. 0n the other hand. Suzuki believes that the full support of the
Tanaka faction--the largest LDP faction—is indispensable for his own
reelection. As a result. the interests of Suzuki and Tanaka are in complete
agreement and the outcome was the appointment of Nikaido as secretary general,
as well as the appointments to the party's top positions in favor of the
Tanaka faction under Nikaido's leadership. The lineup in preparation for the
reelection centeringon the Suzuki-Tanaka forces has thus been boldly
consolidated.

Of course, the balance between the Suzuki, Tanaka and Pukuda factions has been
eroding. The critical posture of the Fukuda faction toward Suzuki has inten-

sified since the Novenber cabinet reshuffle and portends trouble to the point
where Pukuda has predicted "a major upheaval." However. the Fukuda forces
are clearly no match for the Suzuki-Tanaka coalition from the standpoint of
nusbers. While the competitive strength of the Tanaka faction in political
struggles has already been proven and Suzuki's reelection appears to be on
track. it is not that simple. There are several factors which my impede his
reelections.

Suzuki Reelectinn Not On Track

First, the direction of the Nakasone and Konoto factions and the Nakagawa
group which follow the three major factions—the Suzuki, Tsnaka and Fukuda
factions--remains to be seen. Nakasone (Administrative Control Agency direc-
tor). Komoto (Economic Planning Agency director) and Nakagawa (Science and
Technology Agency director) were all reappointed in the Move-her reshuffle and
they are thus tied down to the cabinet. Especially Nakasone. who is in charge
of promoting administrative reform, has been rendered immobile. If Nakasone

2
FOR omcw. USE ONLY
and Komoto pass up the party presidential election late this year, they
might have to forfeit their chances in the presidential race for good.

Already a group of new leaders, around 60 years of age, have their sights
set on the "second nest presidential race," and the view is that after next
year there will inevitably be an increasing tendency to shelve Nakagawa.

Especially for Komoto (70 years old), this is the last chance in terms of his
age, and a challenge of Suzuki by hi:- this year is considered to be a strong
possibility. Koaoto's greatest strength lies in his outstanding party support.
The breakdown of the approximately 1.1 million registered party matters is
reported to be as follows: Komoto faction. £00,000; Tsnaka faction, 300,000;
Suzuki faction, 200,000; Pukuda faction, 100,000; and Nskasone faction,
100,000. The party presidential primary, in which the entire party nesbership
participates, has been weakened by the recent structural reform which stipu-
lates that: l) a full election will not be held if there are less than three
candidates, in which case the party president will be elected by party Diet
members; 2) a candidate requires endorsement by 50 or more Diet medaers. The
Konoto faction thus has few opportunities to utilize its superiority in
numbers, because at present it is difficult to hypothesize a case where four
or more candidates endorsed by 50 or note Diet were can be fielded.

However, hypothetically speaking, if Suzuki, Pukuda, Nakaeone and [tomato were
to run, Komoto would cospete with Suzuki for supremacy in the prinary. It

is certain that the Komoto faction by its sheer nunbers would exert no snall
influence on a presidential election limited to Diet masters. If a unified
candidate is fielded by forces seeking to prevent Suzuki's reelection and it
results in a "Suzuki versus Konoto" race, Suzuki could not afford to be

optimistic, depending on the circumstances surrounding the presidential
election.

Second, there is the shadow cast on a Suzuki reelection by the Lockheed case.
Of course, Suzuki’s reelection is planned "without Tanaka," and Tanaka is
gradually being driven to the wall by the Lockheed affair. There is strong
conjecture that the ruling on Tanaka in the first trial (Marubeni conduit case)
will be delayed until after the party presidential election, but the decision
on the bribery recipients through the All-Japan Airways pipeline (Tomizaburo
ﬂashimto and Takayuki Sato) is scheduled for this spring, while the prosecu-
tor's case against Tanaka will be started around this summer. In each case,
political circles will no doubt be agog with excitement concerning "Tanaka's

role in the Lockheed scandal," and Suzuki, who is supported by Tanaka, will
suffer a decline in his image. It should cast a considerable burden on his
preparations for reelection.

The third factor is Suzuki's faux pas regarding policy matters, and this is
inevitable as we will explain later, albeit a letter of difference in degree.
While there have sometimes been severe years both externally and domestically
Suzuki's inflexible "politics of peace" will probably show various signs of
unravelling. This will provide opportunities for attack by forces seeking

to stop Suzuki.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. this doesn't mean that the "Suzuki-Tanaka" forces, who are adroit
fighters, will observe this situation from the sidelines. Late last year,
they made an initial attempt to contain the situation by spreading news of

"a cabinet dissolution within the year, plus a general election." Ordinarily,
a so-cslled "dissolution threat" is used by a prime minister as his strongest
weapon in manipulating the political situation. but on this occasion the news
was spread by the Tanaka faction. which is unusual.

The opposition camp was the first to react to the news. The Japan Socialist
Party (J8?) and other parties commenced election preparations. albeit from a
prone position. One opposition cadre (secretary general of the Yamaguchi
branch of the New Liberal Club) even revised the slogan of "a decisive
political showdown in 1983" to publicly proclaim ”a decisive political show-
down in 1982." The view was seriously expressed that "the election will be
disadvantageous to the LDP after Tanaka is indicted in the first trial. A
cabinet dissolution will therefore not be possible for ease tine. For this
reason. chances are strong for a dissolution within the year-that is. immedi-
ately before or after the LDP presidential election in November."

Meanwhile. an opposing view has been expressed: "Chances are extremely small
for a dissolution within the year There are some in the Pukuda faction who
say they will not permit a dissolution and will force a change in government.
The possibility of a government change is greater.”

In any case, memories are still fresh of the nightmarish joint Upper and Lower
House elections the year before last. The spectacular feat of the 1D? in
turning disaster (intraparty strife and Ohira' s sudden demise) into fortune by
tripping up the opposition was reportedly ache-ed by Tanaka. and the political
world is wrapped in a kind of fear that "one can never tell what Tanaka might
be up to." Therefore. the threat of a cabinet dissolution did have an

effect. Moreover. in addition to the reason that a Tanaka conviction would be
disadvantageous to the LDP, it is inferred that, if the stop-Suzuki forces
should start to move, they would be crushed by a cabinet dissolution. There-
fore, the dissolution threat has added realistic significance.

Regarding the dissolution theory, Pukuda stated during his Manila visit (on
17 January): “I believe there will not be any dissolution. There will be
various changes in the political situation during the latter half of this
year. I don't know exactly how it will change, but there won't be any disso-
lution. regardless of the nature of the Tanaka court case. It will not be

necessary. The L0? holds the power of dissolution. As far as an L0? victory
in the election is concerned. it is not clear at this point." He appears

resolute in ruling out any dissolution, but his statement that "the LDP holds
the power of dissolution" is interesting. Perhaps he meant that he will not
leave any dissolution up to the Tanaka faction.

Three days later. on 20 January, Secretary General Nikaido addressed a joint
national convention of the LDP's women and youth divisions. Be tentatively
denied the dissolution theory. saying: "The newspapers are writing about a
dissolution in the fall, but the LDP's mission is rather to rack its brains
to fulfill its responsibility (to cope with such difficult issues as the

FORtNﬂﬁC1A1.USE(MVLV
removal of trade frictions)." This probably steamed from a sense of caution
that if the Tanake faction persists in its forceful tactics at this time. then
intrsparty elements might be pushed into the anti-Tanaka can). In any case.
the statements by Pukuda and hikaido on the cabinet dissolution could be
interpreted as "light jabs made in the first round."

There is no doubt that with each successive round the exchanges between the
two sides will heat up. Unforsseen situations could appear in succession and,
while the party presidential prinry might be sidetracked. it would be

increasingly difficult to hypothesize a saooth Suzuki reelection without a
rival candidate.

It is difficult to predict whether the rival candidate will be Koloto. Rakasone
or Fukuda himself. It is unlikely that a new leader will suddenly appear, but
is cannot be entirely ruled out. In any case, after next spring when the next
fiscal budget is established, the tension in political circles will rise.

centering on the fate of the Suzuki reelection. One can also expect two or
three rubles of a cabinet dissolution.

Resignations by Komoto and Nakasone Possible

The major reason for the Pukuda faction's view that a Suzuki reelection is in
jeopardy is that it sees Suzuki with his back to the wall regarding policy
matters. In a speech in Tokyo on 13 January, Pukuda made the following fore-
cast: "If the ”-81 budget should show a broad revenue shortfall. it will
directly become a political issue on the basis of economic mismanagment.
This will develop into an issue of political concern."

Chairman Takeiiri of Komeito also stated (at the party Central Executive
Comittee meeting on 11 January): "This year will heacrucial year with a huge
load of issues, including trade friction, administrative reform, the treat-
ment of an unbalanced budget and the direction of the Lockheed case.
Particularly regarding economic policy. there is concern that there may be a
revenue shortfall between May and July, and a potential political upheaval."

As the first example of Suzuki's mismanagement. the revenue shortfall problem
has already been pointed out by opposition parties. It is a serious problem
which Suzuki cannot consider lightly.

That is. the tax revenue in “-81 slowed down because of the business
recession--especially the stagnation in domestic demand. Even when taking
into consideration a future business recovery and full corporate tax revenues
. in the March accounting settlement. there is a strong possibility that an
annual revenue shortfall of some 1 trillion yen is unavoidable. The supple-
mentary issuance of 375 billion yen worth of deficit national bonds late last
year as an emergency measure for the supplemental budget has just been
subjected to severe criticism as a violation of Suzuki's public comitment.
An additional shortfall of approximately 600 billion yes is said to be likely.
If this is true. his political responsibility for a "misjudged forecast" will
immediately become an issue.

‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are rumors that the crisis will be overcome through the resignation of
Finance Minister Hatanabe. but that will certainly not resolve the issue.

Moreover. there is a strong possibility that the tax revenue for “-82 will
fall considerably short of the government's forecast. If the forecasts for
both fiscal budgets prove to be in error. the distrust of Suzuki's economic

manage-eat will surface and the formation of his "financial reconstruction
without a tax increase." on which he has staked his political life, will be

shak- 2n .

There was a strong prenonition of such a turn of events on 20 January during
the debate on tax reduction at the government-opposition liaison conference.
Excerpts are given here as follows:

Political and Financial Research Council Chairman Heshinoto: "the lowering

of income taxes has recently become a hot topic and the question is beginning
to be raised among those involved in administrative reform whether administra-
tive reform should be considered 'secondary' or whether more emphasis should
be given to the inprovenent of the economy. The inference here is perhaps to
anticipate moves by the opposition."

Prime Minister Suzuki: "No matter how difficult they may be. administrative
reform and financial reconstruction are national tasks. If we lose this
opportunity. they will become impossible to handle. He cannot afford to pass
up this opportunity. In such a situation, it makes sense to consider how we
can create an atmosphere conducive to tax reduction. but it would not do to
let tax reduction slow down administrative reform."

Economic Planning Agency Director Konoto: "At his press conference in Isa.
the prime minister used the apt phrase (regarding tax cuts): 'when prospects
for administrative reform and financial reconstruction become definite.’ I
believe it is better to say 'when their prospects become certsin' rather than
to say 'we will not reduce taxes until administrative reform is completed.”

Suzuki: "In any case. the “-82 budget draft is a joint compilation resulting
from coordinated efforts by the government and the oppostion. Therefore. any
tampering (revisions for tax reduction purposes) is absolutely out of the
question."

Konoto: "If so. ways to increase annual revenues can be found."

In a speech on the ease day. Komoto said: "In Japan's tax structure. there is
a lack of balance between direct taxes and indirect taxes. The time has come
to inprove the balance between the two." lie thus clarified his stand that a
tax increase through indirect taxes should be considered as quickly as possible
in order to build a base for income tax reduction. In other words. Konoto's
target is an expanded economy fro. the standpoint of improving business con-
ditions, and he advocates a tax reduction policy in conjunction eith large-scale
indirect taxes. If this is difficult. he says. there is no alternative except
further the period of financial reconstruction.

0n the other hand, Suzuki has made a public constituent for "a financial
reconstruction without a tax increase," and he puts a time limit on the

6
son omcm. use ontv
reconstruction period "until ”-84." He has thus adopted the line of a tight
econonic policy. If he accepts Komoto's contention, Suzuki must be prepared
to renege on his public pledge thus putting himself in. a dilem.

Horeover. the five opposition parties and four labor organizations have aerged
in a joint struggle this year for the first time regarding a l—trillion-yen
tax cut, and they are taking an unprecedentedly strong stand. They appear
likely to present an ultimatum. «needing the proeise of a drastic tax cut in
”-83, if not in “-82. As far as the Konoto line is concerned. there is
room for adjustment with the opposition's demnd, but is is unacceptable to
Suzuki. who gives top priority to administrative reforn. The opposition would
probably attack this intracabinet confrontation as soon as the Diet reopens.
and Suzuki night find hinself in a quandary.

There is also spreading specualtion within the LDP regarding the Konoto
statement that "although they may not innsdiately conence anti-Suzuki moves.
there are people who are so inclined. If the budget for the next fiscal year
is accepted. the political situation will also change drastically. The
statement was therefore intended to clarify the divergence in the policy line
in preparation for such a change." There are not a few who believe that
Konoto will eventually leave the cabinet. citing the disunity over econonic
management as the reason. and that this will serve to ignite the political
situtation. It might be said that Komoto holds an important key which could
sway the political trend.

The annual revenue shortfall, the policy confrontation between Susuki and
Komoto over a tax cut and the extraordinary adainistrative investigation
hearings are weighing heavily on Suzuki's shoulders. The extraordinary
hearings comittee, in its reply last aux-er. appeared ready to demnd that
Suzuki "reduce taxes. using cuts in annual expenditures as the base, instead
of raising taxes and extending the period of financial reconstruction."

From the comittee's standpoint. such a reply would be consistent with the
funadnental concept of essential administrative reforn. But to Suzuki it would
be close to an impossible task. It is clearly beyond Suzuki's political power.
Thus his conﬁrmation with Chairmn Doko will becone further aggravated. At
the same time. the worst possible situation. Doko's resignation as well as
Nakasone's resignation. could arise.

There is more. How to cope with trade friction and the issue of rising
defense spending. Japan-U.s. relations could becone stormy with a single
faux pas. Does Suzuki's diplomacy have the ability to overcome these issues?
Literally, "a year of tribulation" awaits Suzuki. who has somehow adroitly
managed to survive through his "politics of peace," and Tanaka, who has
supported him from behind the scenes.

COPYRIGHT: USHIO SHUPPANSHA 1982

5881.
C80: 4105/61;

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

LDP EYBINC MILITARY SATELLITE
0H121355 Tokyo HAINICHI SHIPBIN in Japanese 10 Mar 82 Homing Edition p 2
["Reporter's Box" column: “Reconnaissance Satellite' Plan Lamched"]

[Text] A plan to launch a reconnaissance satellite of Japan's own for
military use is under debate in the Liberal Democratic Party. In his
so-called theory of national defense at sea, Prime Minister Suzuki calls for
arming the comtry with spines like a hedgehog and repelling external enemies
at the water's edge. The satellite plan is, so to speak, to serve as the
hedgehog's eye and help discern the accurate military situation from space.

The plan was advocated by Taro Nakayama, who recently assumed the post of
chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party's Special Oomittee on Space
Development. Nakayama, formerly director general of the prime minister's
office, who touched off a criticism of the Japanese Academic Council, appears
to aspire to take the lead of scientists in having a crack at space develop-
ment.

If the satellite launching plan materializes, Japan will become the third
country to possess a "security satellite" after the United States and the
Soviet Union. The photo reconnaissance satellite is designed to monitor the
Soviet military situation in the Far East by photography. Japan is getting
information on Soviet military deployment to the four northern islands from
1? ~. satellites: But, in case of emergency, borrowed data will not do.

If Japan possesses its on satellite, it will be possible to see the develop-
ment of the situation moment by moment, and even identify the license plates
of cars. Hence, Nakayama stresses, "to Japan which arms itself solely for
self-defense, the satellite is quite appropriate, in that it will help
prevent a war."

The question is: Whether to build it using Japanese technology or to seek
U.S. teamology? Recently Nakayama visited the United States as a member
of the Bzaki mission. During this visit, he consulted with U.S. officials
concerned, who rather asked Japan to provide more of its technology for
space development in the United States.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY

It costs about 20 billion yen to launch a satellite, equivalent to the price
of two P—lS'a. At a tine when Diet proceedings get entangled over funding
for requipping a 17-4 phantom on a trial basis, one wonders how this idea of
launching a security satellite can possibly materialize. However, Naksyama
himself was dead serious when he said, "If we can get U.S. technical coopera-
tion. it will help reduce Japan's trade surplus." lie is scheduled to leave
for Europe on 12 March as a neuter of a Japanese mission to find ways of
easing trade friction. Hill the Diet approve this scientific Dietnan's
proposal, busy as he is with data control, using personal computers installed
in the Dietnen's hall? (Hiroshi)

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shinbtnsha 1982

(50: «120/199

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UA Uraahsnu van vnua

ECONOMIC

'ASAHI' 0N U.S. CALL FOR OPUING JAPAN'S MARKETS
OHl3lll9 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 12 Mar 82 p 5
[ASAHI SHIHBUN 11 March Editorial: "U.S.-Japan Trade"]

[Text] The position of the U.S. Government on the "opening of the Japanese
market" has been made very much clearer in the hearings that have been held
since the beginning of this month in the 11.8. Congress and in the meetings
of the U.S.-Japan Trade Subcommittee in Tokyo on 9 and 10 March.

The U.S. mdersecretary of comerce, Lionel Olmer, told the public hearings
in Washington that the closed nature of the Japanese market is a natural
consequence of the relationship between Japanese Government and industry, a
relationship that results in non-tariff barriers that encourage and protect
domestic industries.

The deputy trade representative, David HacDonald, said in the Tokyo meetings
that the world believes that the Japanese Government acts to.restrict imports.
He said that the U.S. expects to see imports of soda ash, paper and pulp,

and medical equipment to Japan increase. He went on to say that definite
policies should be presented by Japan.

Both the United States and Japan are usheppy about the growing differences
in their economic relations. The solution of these differences requires a
calm response. Japan should begin to review, as soon as possible, its
restrictions on iuports and those aspects of its economic system that are
perceived as resistant to foreign penetration. Though it may be possible
to create an environment more conducive to the activities of foreign enter-
prises here and to imports, it will be quite difficult to take the "dramatic
steps" that the U.S. side expects.

'lhc Trade Subcommittee has decided to hold working level discussions on the
issue of import restrictions on 22 agricultural products from next month.

In October, consultations will be opened to decide import levels for beef
and orange juice. Japan must put its energies into developing a competitive
agricultural sector and should try to eliminate inort restrictions as far
as is possible.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But it must be said that all the restrictions cannot be removed at a stroke,
in the manner hoped for by the United States. Agriculture in every country,
including the United States, is to some extent protected by governmental
policies, and it cannot be treated in the same way as other sectors. 50 it
is important that there should be a place where the experts of each side
can thrash these matters out. If the United States is to be made to under-
stand the situation of Japanese agriculture and the efforts that are being
made to open the door in this sector, frank explanations have to be given.

The U.S. Commerce Department regards a variety of matters as falling in the
category of nth-tariff barriers, extending from government monopolies such as
that on tobacco to government-assisted projects, activities resedaling
cartels and even preconceptions of the inferiority of foreign products.

These complaints are not all off the mark. For example, Japan should re-
examine its government monopoly on tobacco so that imports of foreign tobacco
products can grow. Policies for depressed industries and the distribution
sector should be pursued in a manner that does not encourage allegations that
foreign products are being kept out. Abuses of administrative guidance should

be scrupulously controlled in the supervision of the financial, securities
and insurance industries.

However, several assertions have been made during the hearings in the U.S.
Congress that are based on the mistaken assmption that American standards
are standards for other nations as well. Japan must respond to the U.S.
demands, but inasmuch as our societies differ in ways that cannot be changed,
it is reasonable that certain demands should be rejected.

A domineering attitude toward Japan can be seen in the U.S. Congress, and
one-sided pressure on Japan risks arousing anti-American sentiments here.
We hope that the U.S. Government recopizes this and acts accordingly.

Arthus Dmkel, director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT). criticized in a recent speech the tendency in Europe and the United
States to blame the economic recession on Japan. Dmkel said that "the only
permanent solution to the so-called 'Japanese problem' is for the Western
economies to raise their productivity to Japanese levels, to accept the
challenge." we hope that the Reagan administration listens to these argu-
ments and shows itself more willing to check the reciprocity legislation

that is before the U.S. Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

C50: 4120/195

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

AUTOMOBILE PARTS INDUSTRY ACTIVITIES REPORTED
Dull Business, Pierce Competition

Tokyo NIKKAR KOGYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 1 Jan 82 p 12

[Text] The auto parts industry predicts that the 1982 domestic and overseas
automobile sales will be about the level of 1981. This forecast is based on
the likelihood that the self-imposed export restrictions to the United States
will continue in effect into 1982 and that pressure from the BC countries for
similar “self-control" will increase. The domestic sales outlook is bleak as
well. If there is growth in automobile sales, there will be no increase in
orders from finished car manufacturers to the parts makers. It is expected
that 1982 will be even more severe than 1981. "When the auto industry was in
a high-growth stage, cutting costs by increasing production was possible; in a
low-growth phase, effecting cost reductions is quite difficult. In 1982, a
business climate even sore stringent than 1981 is anticipated, and the parts
makers must follow a policy of further belt tightening." (Japan Autonobile
Parts Industry Association Chairman Shogo Tsuru) The industry, therefore. is
calling for extraordinary entrepreneurial efforts.

The biggest reason is that when the finished car manufacturers' production
volume is decreased, unless there is efficient production, the merchandise
produced will be expensive and the profit base will be lost. It is also fully
anticipated that the cost of materials will rise in 1982, and there is a good
possibility that, sandwiched in between the cost-down demand from the finished
car manufacturers and the rise in the cost of materials, the parts makers'
anticipated profits will be lost altogether. Thus, nany auto parts makers

are considering replacing their machines even though amortization is many

years away, if there is efficient equipment to be had. It appears, therefore,
that investment will exceed the 1981 figure.

Overseas expansion in the sense of new market development is also likely to be
emphasized. This is in response to the southeast Asian countries; move to in-
crease their domestic auto produetion, as well as an attempt to expand auto
parts sales to the United States and developed countries of Europe. "The
current state of Japanese business—-especia11y the auto parts business-is
characterized by a relatively low ratio of export. This must be given a new
turn." (Kinugawa Rubber Industry President: Shojiro Pujita) This view re-
flects the parts companies' plans to put their overseas strategies into action

12
FOR OFFICIAL Us: ONLY
in 1982. Speaking of overseas expansion, subsidiary production in the United
States is likely to grow in 1982. Overseas production programs by Bonds
Motor Co., Ltd. and Nissan Motor 00., Ltd. are about to col-ence. The parts
makers that had been shying away from e decision must seriously consider this
alternative.

There are many auto parts makers that cannot establish an overseas base be-
cause of their business scale and they will most likely try to cultivate either
new areas of operation or new products. Of course, the major research and
development sectors capable of overseas expansion are planning considerable
investment input. Needless to say, they will seek to develop new products

that conform to the requirement of less weight put forth by the automobile
manufactur°rs.

Parts makers will try to survive a tougher 1982 with (1) operational rational-
ization, (2) overseas strategy, and (3) new products development. It is quite
probable that as one way to ride through this tough phase, some parts makers
would opt to merge.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1982
Manufacturers' Survival Strategy Detailed

Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 1 Jan p 8

[Text] As a result of curbs on exports and decreased
domestic demand, the automobile industry which has had con-
tinuous high growth is leveling off. Increased production
was the source of growth for the auto parts makers and thus,
the new year's outlook is not a rosy one. Moving free

"the era of competitive high growth to a race for survival
era (Japan Automobile Parts Industry Association Chair-

man: Shogo Tsuru)," the major parts manufacturers are
uniformly starting to strengthen their business structures.
Review of secondary subcontractors who provide basic
strength to the group, strenghtening subsidiary and overseas
based operations, re-consolidstion of the company's internal
labor force and production process, and cultivation of new
business by launching other industries are some avenues

being explored. In another words, a shape-up strategy for
a slower paced era is under way.

Number of Auto Parts Makers to be Hhittled Down to Two-Thirds

Last year, the major automobile manufacturers significantly changed their

thinking. They clearly set forth a reorganization policy for the auto parts
industry which had been left to grow and expand in an unchecked fashion. The
representative view set forth was that "in terms of the future, there are too

many auto parts makers (finished car manufacturers' primary subcontractors)
and that the number would eventually have to be cut to two-thirds." (Toyota

Motor Co., Ltd.)

13
FOR OFFICIAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mitsubishi Auto Industry, Honda Motor Company and others struck with a "one-
third cut back of cooperating parts makers." In the name of "requests" for
lower costs, increased technological skills and stronger business structures,
the finished car manufacturers are applying pressure on the parts makers daily.

The brunt of the pressure from the auto makers is being borne by the major
parts manufacturers. ﬂow will they relay the message to their sub-contrac-
tors? The reorganization of auto industry's pyramidal structure actually
refers to the reorganization of the subsidiary and sub-contracting system by
the major auto parts manufacturers.

"The finished car manufacturers will pass their losses on to us parts makers
on a scale unprecedented heretofore. How will the major parts makers absorb
it? A great hurdle has been placed before us-a hurdle that has to be sur-
mounted by secondary sub-contractors as well.” (“HR Spring Co., Ltd Chair-
man: Seishun Pujioka) Leading businesses have begun reviewing their respec-
tive operating structures.

The most severely affected are parts makers supplying tuucks. Tokyo Parts
Industry Chaiman Karo Shimada says that, "Our firm's outside order ratio is
low, but we must reconsolidate sub-contracting procedures and re-examine
internal manufacturing and outside order categories.“ An executive of a
certain parts manufacturer said with honesty that, "Almost all those below the
secondary sub-contractor level are town factories. Under the small business
protection law, they are protected and we cannot press them too hard; but if
we ourselves are backed into a corner, we have to shift the loss on to our
subordinate partners."

The signs of decline in auto parts manufacturing growth actually became evident
a little over a year ago during the latter half of 1980 (October 1980 - March
1981). The Japan Automotive parts Industry Association gathers and tabulates
production volume data from approximately 310 member businesses. Since the
method of classification was changed in 1980, the operation is behind schedule.
But a provisional tabulation of the Kanto and Chubu regions' auto parts
manufacturers (equivalent to 95 percent of the total) for 1980 shows that the
production total would almost certainly exceed the 5 trillion yen mark. Never-
theless, the production is leveling off trend during the latter half of the
year.

That is to say, the trend for the last several years had been a S to 10 per-
cent production increase during the latter half of the year, compared to the
first half. But in 1980, the Kanto/Chubu regions' tally showed a 0.7 percent
decline during the latter half of the year in comparison with the first half.
(Automotive Parts Industry Association) Moreover, this survey focused mainly
on the primary sub-contractors (from the perspective of finished car manufac-
turers), and the shifts in production volume of these firms have a high de-
gree of correlation to the domestic four-wheel vehicle production trend. A
production increase in 1981 is highly unlikely.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Streamlining Plants

Among the leading parts manufacturers. many have subsidiaries that are really
sub-contractors. Akebono Brake Industry has many such subsidiaries, so it
cannot simply "cut" its sub-contractors.

In such instances, the firm's own curtailment must be all-out. Atsugi Auto
Parts has adopted a policy of dropping seasonal and temporary workers. Auto-
mobile Casting, Keihin Precision Machinery, and Riken are building new high
efficiency factories or are centralizing work at high efficiency plants in an
effort to achieve more efficient production.

Countering the donestic automakers' declining demand, the parts manufacturers
are starting to emphasise overseas export of their products. As shown in the
attached diagram, auto parts exports increased by a wide margin last year.
Though the increase ratio dropped somewhat during the latter half of the year.
this trend will undoubtedly continue into 1982. ”For a business to exist as
an enterprise, growth. either by increased sales or increased profits must be
maintained continuously." (Nichitan Bulb President: Sadahide Nagano)

In the meantime. a desire to expand into fields other than automobiles (the
so-called non-auto sectors) is also becoming evident. Starting this year, m
Spring will initiate full-saale production of goods based on the application

of urethane synthetic technology to air conditioning related equipment at a
specialized plant being constructed in Nagano Prefecture. Teikoku Piston Ring
this spring will begin marketing industrial. ceranic covered dessication equip-
ment which employs piston ring technology. Akabono Brake is hoping to exten-
sively market sluninummaterials for home interior decoration. Kyowa Alloy is
working to develop heat-resistant appliances by recycling enission parts' scrap.
As these activities attest, expansion into non-auto sectors is remarkable. In
terms of cost factors, the automotive parts manufacturers are seasoned veterans.
Thus, these new ventures are beginning to raise cries of a "cost revolution"

in non-auto industries.

Even the largest automotive parts laker Nihon Denso expresses its future out-
look as follows: "For the next several years, all our energy will be devoted
to establishing a SO-percent self-sufficiency ratio in 16's. Then we will
develop an electronic equipment business slated for non-auto sectors with the
goal of becoming a consolidated electronic equipment manufacturer." (President
Fubito Hirano) Making inroads into other industries a tactic begun by

"general automtive parts" manufacturers--such as Japan Oil Seal Industry's
electronic. chemical operations development plan—is a comaon formula being
followed by many private car parts manufacturers.

(Reporter: Kawabe)

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

 

Figure 1 (second colum): Japanese Autonotive Parts Production in Transition

Key

1. Trillion yen
2. 1971, 1973, 1975, 1977, 1979
3. (Automotive Parts Industry Association Survey, letter half

of 1980 represents a partial figure estimate)

lo. 1979 first half
5. 1979 latter half
6. 1980 first half
7. 1980 latter half

Figure 2 (third

COPY RIGHT :

      
    
 
     
     
     
     

  

'.‘ vﬁ-Z?

.‘W '

as
.'.'5’ 5 1 .

(mulls-6.0a" Foe r».
- Mannemumesun
6 t-n-Jet-s-oeu

(2

and fourth coluln): Automotive Parts Export in Transition

Export amount, 100,000,000 dollars

1980/1981 monthly average January. March, May. July, September
Monthly comparison—growth rate relative to previous year

sane month

Export amount
Monthly comparisonu-growth rate relative to previous year

sane nonth percentage
(Note) from Custons Survey, The export figure is in terns of

F03 dollars.
Growth ratio relative to equivalent month/previous year

expressed in percent
Export figure repreoents total for finished car Ianufacturers

and parts makers.

Nihon Keizsi Shilbunsha 1982

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kaysba Industry Co., Ltd.
Tokyo WI SANGYO saunas in Japanese 7 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] Kayaba Industry 60., Ltd. intends to solidify the relative strength of
its non-automotive section by direct esport of its oil pressure equipment to
the United States. There is increased demand froa the industrial machinery
sector and there is thinking that enlargement of the automotive sector is not
appropriate in the light of frictiOn between the United States and Japan over
auto exportation. The plan is to increase the current ratio of non-autonotive
direct eeport to the Usited States (30 percent) to about 60 percent.

Kayaba is anajor nsnufacturer of automotive oil pressure shock absorbers. Its
chief direct export item to the United States is this product. The product

is sold in the U.S. open market and its sale has been growing at a considerable
pace. The sale is expected to increase at approximately 30 percent per some
and the outlook is that the sales will reach the 10 aillion dollar base for

the first time this year. The company resolved, however, that it was not
advisable to rely exclusively on the automotive section.

COPYRIGBT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha, 1981
U.S.-Japan Trade Conflict
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SUMO“ in Japanese 10 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] Japan-U.S. Trade Facilitation Omission (TPC) will redeliberate the
question of inportation of U.S. nade automotive parts at an executive level
session this week. It was disclosed on 9 December that the United States is
very dissatisfied with the "Japanese finished car nanufacturars' parts
procurement stance which is the chief inhibitor in expanding importation of
U.S.-aade parts." The Ministry of International Trade and Industry's response
was that "a concrete instance ought to be cited to illustrate this accusation.
Otherwise, it is difficult to judge if indeed the fault is the Japanese car
nanufacturers'." The latter will be attended to at the executive session.

Importation of U.S.-node automotive parts totaled 1‘0 million dollars in 1979.
In 1980, the contractual snount was 200 nillion dollars and the prediction is
that the actual import figure will be around 170 nillion dollars. However,
the "Automotive Parts Purchasing Mission" indicated to the 0.8. side, when

it visited the said country in September of last year, that if possible, Japan
would like to iaport 300 million dollars worth in 1981.

The NITI assesses the lack of growth in U.S.-made automotive parts iaportation
to be the result of: (1) strong dollar trend during the year seen as a whole;
(2) reduction in the relative purchase ratio of parts for private cars slated
for the U.S. market as a result of automobile export restriction to the United
States; and (3) decrease in autonobile sales in Japan.

Meanwhile, the Japanese automobile industry's argument is that, "in terms of
quality. price and delivery schedule, there is absolutely no reason why we

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOItOFTWCIAl,USEIMVLY

have to buy American products.” and that it is unfair to have the responsibility
for lack of import growth shifted onto the Japanese automobile manufacturers'
shoulders under the pretext of the latter's uncooperative purchasing stance."

According to HITI, the United States is seeking increased importation of the
following automotive parts: turbo-charger. catalytic agent. lights and so on.
The (Automobile Section) would "like to hear in concrete terms as to which of
the acquisition policies of the Japanese manufacturers (finished car makers)-
that is, which American automotive parts--that the United States is dissatisfied
with; and then work out a counter-measure."

HITI. however, would like to avoid being pinned down to concrete figures such
as the 1981 target amount (300 million dollars).

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shilbunsha 1981

Industry to Diversify
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 12 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Automotive parts makers are engaged in a flurry of activities in an
effort to "get out of automotive ties." In response to the rapid decrease in
automobile sales, the parts makers are beginning to modify their total
dependence on automobiles and armed with their strongest weapon-their cost
management know-howb-they are recharting their course to electronics, industrial
machinery and/or precision instrument sectors. The automotive parts industry

is a 4 trillion yen business concern and the industry's dash toward other fields
will cause formation of new multiplex markets as well as create competition and
friction in the existing sectors.

The largest member of the outsmotive parts industry-Nihon Dense (Toyota Motor
Company Group)-hss just initiated a plan for a significantly increased pro-
duction of automotive LSI (Large Scale Integration circuits). This is seen
by some as the cornerstone upon which the company is planning an entry into
the semi-conductor field in the future. This move is already regarded by
semi-conductor manufacturers as well as automotive parts makers as a threat.

Koito works, an automotive lamp maker (Toyota Group) and Japan Oil Seal (Inde-
pendent), a seal maker. have set out to manufacture and distribute print

wiring boards [haisen kibsn]. Koito is already producing komaku [transliter-
ation] IC (Integration Circuitry) and has begun preparing for production of
electronic parts in the United States in cooperation with the heller Corporation
of West Germany. Through its subaidiary-Japan Hectron-Japan Oil Seal is
scheduled to enter a joint venture with the 0.8. and West German parts manu-
facturers in the print wiring board field. ﬁnite and Japan Oil Seal both

intend to sell print wiring boards not only to auto manufacturers but to

camera. watch and other precision instrument businesses as well.

The top manufacturer of automotive fasteners-Niccolo (Independent)-is
emphasizing fasteners for electronic machines and is scheduled to begin taking
orders in the United States in the near future. Aside from the electronics

18

ltHl(ﬂﬂﬁ(JAl.USE‘0NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

field. Kayaba Industry (Nissan Motors Group)»a major oil pressure shock
absorber maker—is concentrating on oil pressure equipment for industrial
machines. It will formalize its export to the United States, and in con-
junction with this operation, the firm will invest substantially in the
firm's facilities. Tokyo welding Factory (Isuzu Motors Group)--a medium size
welding plant—has begun producing ashimswari [transliteration] parts for
construction machines and has signed a long-term contract to supply the
world's largest construction machinery maker—Catepillar Tractors of the
United States. Bustling activities such as described above are beginning to
surface everywhere.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kaizai Shimbunsha 1981

Nissan Motor Co. , Ltd.
Tokyo NIHON [BIZAI snmuu in Japanese 15 Dec 81 p 8

[Text] In order to streamline parts production format, the Nissan Motor
Company began reviewing the division of tasks set up among its affiliated parts
manufacturers. This is because the company had concluded that in order to
meet the intensified new model automobile development and cost-reduction
competition, efficient grouping among the vast number of parts makers and
restructuring of manufacturing processes of major auto parts are needed. In
promoting the PF (frontal engine, front wheel drive) for compact vehicles,
Nissan has first of all demanded that Nokusan Metal Industry and Tachikswa
Spring Company create a new parts assembly line. Heanwhile, Atsugi Automotive
Parts which may lose work volume as a result; of installation of FF is hastening
to select new parts that it can manufacture.

Nissan disclosed that it had dispatched new emissions to Kohnsan Metal and
Tachikawa Spring and ordered items which neither of the firms had handled
heretofore. Nissan cosmissioned Kohlsan Netal to produce a finished lock
mechanism for car handles. Komsan Metal is a specialty maker which manufac-
tures door handles and automobile keys. Up to now, Kohsan Metal msnufscttred
the key portion and the structural components of related lock mechanisms.
These then were sent to Kanto Precision Instruments and assembled into
finished parts. The transport cost between the two firms was one cause of the
high cost. The gist of the current order was to let Kolnnsan Hetal handle the
entire process from parts manufacture to assembly of the completed merchandise
so as to reduce the merchandise flow coat.

Nissan also requested Tachikawa Spring to deliver completed automobile seats.
Traditionally, Tschikawa manufactured spring and the seat's structural frame-
work; these then were purchased by the completed seat maker-duds Bussan
(Hsin Office: Yokohama) and finished, then delivered to various Nissan auto
plants. But automobile seats are bulky items and their transport is one of
the most costly among automotive parts.

Having decided to carry the manufacturing process all the way to completed
seats, all of Tachiltawa Spring's finished seats will be applied to Nissan's
Hurayama Plant (Husashi Nursysma City, Tokyo) which is located relatively near

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI Y

Tachikawa Paotory. Meanwhile. Ikeda Bunsen will "specialize" for Nissan's
Suwama (Suwnma, Kanagawa Prefecture) and Oihama (Yokosuka, Kanagawa Prefecture)

Plants. In this fashion, a new division of labor assignments among manufacturers
delivering to Rissan has been forlulated.

Nissan is rapidly switching from PR (frontal engine, rear drive) format to P?
format. In this type of switch-over. the most damage is sustained by the
manufacturer whose propeller shaft production volume would decline drastically.
In the case of the Nissan Group, Atsusi Automotive Parts is the fin most
adversely affected. Atsugi Parts is anticipating approximately 99 billion yen

in sales this year. The reduced propeller shaft production in 3 years will
amount to 10 billion yen per year.

In order to "cover lease)" this drastic decline, Nissan assigned the manufacture
of compressors for automobile air conditioning units to Ataugi Parts. It is
said that Nissan has also entered the final selection process with the View

to adding the FF running gear parts to Atsugi's list of manufacture items.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Knlzai Ski-banana 1981

11460
CSO: 4105/60

20

l-‘OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STEWRS PLAN TO EXPAND FACILITIES
0H120623 Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIPBIN in Japanese 9 Mar 82 Morning Edition p 7

[Excerpts] Despite signs of a slowdown in the export of seamless steel
pipes, Nippon Kokan and other major steel pipe cowanies have set about
expanding their facilities. Nippon Kokan, Nippon Steel Corp and Kawaskai
Steel Corp are planning to move up completion dates for their expansion
projects now underway while Suitomo Metal Industries, Ltd, a top seamless
steel pipe manufacturer, is to further extend its expansion program. The
steelmakers believe that the oversupply-forecast for the second half of this
year and next year-will only be a temporary phenomenon and that the steel
pipes trade-mainly in high-class products for oil wellsnwill become a
seller's market by around 1985. This race for seamless steel pipe facilities
is likely to continue for some time both at home and abroad.

Against the background of an oil developmnt boom in the United States,
seamless steel pipes used for such development projects have been in short
supply in recent years, and this situation has served as a treasure chest for
Japan's four major steel pipe companies. The facilities expansion projects
now underway by the four companies are aimed at coping with the future
situation, the four companies plan to build facilities with an annual combined
capacity of more than 1.3 million tons with investments of about 250 billion
yen. when completed, Japan's seamless steel pipe production capacity will
increase from the present 4.2 million tons a year to 5.5 million tons.

Nippon Kokan, which is building a seamless steel pipe plant with an annual
capacity of 600,000 tone at its Keihin ironworks, plans to move up the date
for its completion by about 3 months from the original Septedaer 1983.
Nippon Steel Corp, which is adding a plant with an annual capacity of 420,000
tons to its Yahata ironworks, wants to advance its completion, set for
March 1983, by a month. Kawasaki Steel Corp, which has nearly comleted the
second reinforcement plan on its (hits works, wants to begin the third plan
in February, instead of the originally scheduled March 1983. lbsnwhile,
Sumitomo Netal Industries, which had originally planned to reinforce its
Kainan steel piple plant with an annual rolling capacity of 600,000 tons

and a refining capacity of 240,000 tons, appears to have modified its plan
and will increase the refining capacity to a level close to the rolling
capacity.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Against the background of these bullish plans are the following factors:

1. Conditions for oil development have become increasingly severe making
it inevitable to drill for oil in deep soil, remote areas, seabeds and in

corrosive gas environments; therefore, there is strong demand for high-class
oil well pipes that can withstand such conditions.

2. Before oversupply becomes a serious problem, companies must expand their
markets by boosting their capacities.

3. If the Reagan administration decontrols the gas price. the oil develop-
ment fever will be rekindled resulting in the scarcity of steel pipes by
around 1985.

mPYRIGl‘l‘: Nihon Keizai shiﬂmnsha 1982

(30: 4120/19!)

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COUNTRY MUST FIND PERMANENT U.S. TRADE MEASURES
0U101221 Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 9 Mar 82 p 6
[Article by Washington correspondent Konoe Kawagishi]

[Text] Japan is now facing its third big wave of American pressure, the first
being by four American battleships to open its ports more than a century ago
and the second being the Pacific War. This time, Japan is requested to
whether to open its market to American gooch totally and moonditionahly.
[Sentence as published]. What the 0.8. actually wants Japan to do seems to
have been unveiled at the Senate Banking Comittee meeting on Io February.
Considering what was discussed at the Senate Coumittee meeting and what had
been said by U.S. Government leaders since the beginning of this year, the
trade friction this time is completely different from the previous trade
disputes between Japan and the U.S. in terms of its nature and scale.

Firstly, the dispute today is not over certain items such as textiles, color
television sets or automobiles as was in the past. '

Secondly, the v.3. is now not only defending its market by limiting Japan's
exports to it, but is in on the offense in demanding that Japan open its
market totally to foreign goods, including service industries and investment.

'l'hirdly, the most important demand is for a drastic change in Japanese
traditional customs and practices, such as the Liberal Democratic Party's
lLDPl heavy dependence upon farmers' votes as well as of Japanese business
practices.

1119 [1.8. knows that the major obstacle to the import of more American agri-
cultural products to Japan is the opposition from Japanese farmers.

Hasumi Esaki, chairman of the 1.0? Special External Economic Comittee and the
head of a recent Japanese mission to the 0.5. said that the Japanese market
is now as open as that of other Western nations after Japan had advanced

by 2 years the planned tariff cuts and decided to remove nontariff barriers
on 67 items. Esaki also asserted that what was left now is only the differ-
ence in custom and social setup between the two countries, including language
barriers.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hhat the U.S. is demanding is just what Bsaki asserted, however.

U.S. Secretary of Con-acres Malcolm Baldrige said that the problems pending
today were Japanese customs, traditional market systems and psychological
barriers.

The U.S. side is fully aware of the tendency among the Japanese to live and
love foreign goods. The problem is the system of Japanese distribution that
keeps the prices of foreign goods higher, by taking advantage of this tendency.
Officials of the U.S. Government agencies concerned with trade and commerce
said that for exasple, the prices of American automobiles and cosmetics are
twice as high in Japan as in the U.S.

The practice of strong combination among industrial groups in Japan, such

as buying goods. even at higher prices, from makers within the same industrial
group, is another target of American criticism. In a sense, the U.S. is

now demanding a change within Japanese business society, or change in the
mind of individual Japanese people who tend to close the door to the world
outside.

'Ihe innediate reason for the U.S. to make such a strong demand on Japan is
its trade deficit with Japan of $18 billion last year. Baldrige said that
the deficit could be improved by $8 billion to $5 billion within 5 years if
the Japanese market was totally opened to U.S. goods.

Also behind the scenes of the U. S. demand is the economic depression in the
U.S. as shown in the record number of unemployed-40 million people--and a
move to make Japan a scapegoat among U.S. congressional and labor groups.

Also seen in the strong criticism against Japan by the entire American
establishment. including the government, industry and the congress, is an
apparent plan to threaten and weaken Japanese strategy in the "future
industries" such as computers, communications, industrial robots and
biotechnology.

The U.S. appeared to have determined not to repeat the same mistake it made

in the case of automobile industry in which Japan closed its market to foreign
cars until it was full of domestically made cars. The Japanese auto industry
took the strategy of exporting its products to foreign markets only after

its own market was completely dominated by Japanese cars. In this sense,

the U.S. demand on Japan today matches President Reagan's economic strategy,
that is to rehabilitate the U.S. economy by revitalizing private industries.

Japan should be fully aware that patch-up measures or minor remedies case-
hy-case are no longer good to overcome today's trade friction between the two
countries, as had been the case in past economic disputes. Without a bold
determination to break through the "closeness" of the economic, political
and social setup within the country, Japan will never be able to overcome
today's pressure to open its market to both U.S. and other foreign products.
And Japan would also probably be unable to find the positive aspects of
opening itself to foreign trade this time, as it found twice in the past-
the four American battleships a century ago and world War II.

COPYRIGIT: DAILY YWIURI 1982

C80: 4120/195

2’;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'MAINICHI' GI CRISIS FACE“; LAW 01’ SEA COHERENCE
M41105 Tokyo HAINIGiI SHIHBIN in Japanese 9 Mar 82 Morning Edition p 5
(Editorial: "Is It All Ridlt to Break Up the Lot of the Sea Conference?"]

[Text] Is a new international constitution of the sea, "treaty on the new
law of the sea,“ only a dream after all? The third 111 Conference on the La:
of the Sea, which has been debating for more than 8 years, was to hold its
11th meeting in New York on 8 March. but the 0.5. Reagan administration's
"policy" concerning seabed development, which was submitted to the conference,
prompts our pessimism.

The U.S. Government's attitude toward the question of seabed development
since the Reagan administration's inauguration shows a big departure from
that of the preceding administrations—the attitude of seeking a cowromise
with developing nations. The United States now puts its national interest
above anything else. One of its expressions is found in moves to conclude
monopolistic mutual treaties with the United Kingdom, France and West Germany,
which came to light last month. A "policy concerning major problem of the
draft law of the sea," reportedly distributed to all countries this time,
stipulates this attitude taken by the Reagan administration.

The U.S. policy calls for guaranteeing the participation of the United
States and other advanced industrial nations in the composition of the
highest executive body for development, the International Seabed Agency
Comcil. with the United States serving as a permanent comcil member.
Regarding decisionmaking, it also calls for the introduction of the method
used at general meetings of the International Monetary Paid (IMP), where a
weighted voting method in proportion to the amount of funds contributed is
used. In addition, it alleges that development technologies reportedly
possessed by only the United States at present should not be forcibly
transferred to the proposed International Development Corporation. All
this constitutes a grave challenge to the consensus in the informal draft
at the law of the sea conference that had been formed step by step since
its inauguration in December 1973.

Certainly, manganese nodules, the reason for seabed development, contain large
quantities of manganese, nickel, copper, cobalt and other precious mineral
resources of strategic value: therefore, their mining is an important matter

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tun Urtabuu. was van-L

of national interest to the United States. Furthermore, since the United
States has both the money and technology needed for seabed development, it

is possible for the united States to carry out development independently if
its demand is not met.

The new policy spelled out by the Reagan administration even shows a little
of this intimidation to the conference. However, if the 11.3. Governnent
persists in this attitude, the law of the sea conference will undoubtedly
cone to a breaking point, with its serious effect rebounding not only on
order on the seas but on the North-South issue as well. The conference is
faced with a dire crisis.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shinbunsha 1982

C50: 6120/197

26

p03 OFFICIAL use ONLY
'ASAHI' LAUDS REVISED JAPAN-AUSTRALIA NUCLEAR PACT
OH151253 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NM in English 13 Mar 82 p 5
[Editorial of ASAIII SHIHBW 12 March: "Japan-Australia Nuclear Acoord"]

[Text] The revised agreement on nuclear energy, on which Japan and Australia
had been negotiating since 1978, has been signed. It is valid for 30 years,
with provision for its extension after that period. The government intends
to ask the current Diet to ratify the agreement.

"hm the agreement is implemented, not only will the pipeline of energy
resource cooperation between Japan and Australia be considerably widened,
but the already very stable Japan-Australia relations will be further
strengthened by yet another governmental agreement.

1he revised agreement includes a "comprehensive prior approval formula"

under which post-notification is adequate with the transfer and reprocessing
of Australian uraninmn are carried out in Japanese facilities of previously
designated scope. Through the adoption of this clause, the revised agreement
can be said to provide an important diplomatic foothold for the nuclear energy
policy of Japan. which is trying to make nuclear energy a semi-domestic energy.

me central problem in revising the agreement lay in how to reconcile, on
the one hand, the Australian demand for followup restrictions on the use of
its uranium aimed at preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and
on the other hand, the Japanese demand for the rationalization of restrie

tions on the transfer and reprocessing of uranium and the simplification of
procedures.

In the current nuclear energy agreements that Japan has signed with the
United States and with Canada, an individual approval system is in effect.
According to this system approval must be obtained from the source country
each time uranium is transferred or reprocessed. Not only are the negotia-
tions and procedures complicated, but Japan's use of nuclear energy can have
major restrictions imposed on it as a result of changes in the policies of
the source country or in the international situation.

During the Carter administration, the United States adopted the policy of
indefinitely postponing reprocessing by other countries and innosing restric-
tions on the development and counercialization of the fast breeder reactor.
It refused to agree to reprocessing by Japan.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urrauuu. vor- vauu

Japan presently depends on Australia for about 11 percent of its uranim.
The Ranger nine. being mined by a joint venture in which Japanese electric
power companies have invested, began production in the fall of 1981. when
the revised agreement with its more liberal transfer and processing clause
is implemented. dependence on Australian uranium is expected to increase.

We sincerely hope that such circmtances will strengthen Japan's position
in the current negotiations with the United States and Canada which are
seeking long-tern agreements based on the Japan-Amtralia formula.

Currently, Japan purchases natural uranium (yellow cake) and has it converted
and enriched in Canada, the United States and France. Reprocessing is
entrusted in most part to Britain and France. Eventually, however, Japan
intends to do most of the converting and enrichuent, and all of the
reprocessing, domestically.

Consequently, all the various facilities in operation within Japan as well

as the facilities which Japan is utilizing in other countries are included

in the list of designated facilities. The second reprocessing plant, which
aims at starting operations in 1990, is also included in the list of
designated facilities, but further discussions are to be held when operations
are scheduled to begin.

A time will eventually arrive when the nuclear energy industry of Japan will
be developed as an export industry. When Japan signs nuclear energy agree-
ments with South Korea, China, Southeast Asian countries, Mexico and other
Central and South American countries, what restrictions should Japan impose

as a technology supplier comitted to the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons?
Serious consideration of the question should begin immediately.

in deliberating the agreement in the Diet, these points should be studied
from diverse, long-term viewpoints. Thorough discmsions are essential.

After aiming the agreement, Foreign Minister Yoshio Sakurauchi issued a
statement saying the agreement is a constructive contribution to international
cooperation, and will serve to maintain and strengthen the nonproliferation
treaty and the safeguards set down by the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Japan, whose dependence on nuclear energy is high, must take the lead in the
research of systematic and teclmical safeguards based on international
cooperation. The world's future depends on our ability to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Japan must utilize the revised Japan-
Australia nuclear energy agreement to work toward this goal.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shillbll‘l Tokyo Eonsha 1982

080: 4120/198

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DELAYS IN 57 POUER GENERATIGI PROJECTS REPORTED
0H1211/08 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 10 Her 82 p 6

[Text] The government has decided to postpone the construction of 57 nonoil
power develop-est projects, such as nuclear and hydroelectric power-stations,
for up to more than 4 years. it was learned Tuesday. 'i'he decision is expected
to have considerable inpact on the nation's economic activities, as the power
industry is one of the largest investors in this country.

The postponement has been necessitated by the worldwide recession and a
decline in energy consmtion. Consequently, only a slow increase is expected
in the demand for power, forcing a downward revision of the government's
earlier program of power development.

According to the government's new plan, almost all development projects will
be delayed in comarison with the old program.

Industrial observers said the same day that the postponement thcision will
further dampen the national economy, already hovering at a low level.

The electric power industry envisages plant and equipment invest-eats
amounting to 3.5 trillion yen for the current fiscal year, the observers
pointed out. The sum is equivalent to roughly 10 percent of the nation's
total private investments.

A slowdown in investment activities by the industry will not only affect
the economies of the local conunities chosen for the development projects,
but also might lead to an unfavorable influence on the world eoonony, they
reasoned.

(ZOPYRI'CRT: Helnlchi Daily News, 1982

080: “20/198

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND WIN!

FUJITSU DEVELOPS 8,000 GATE ARRAY FOR SMCONDUCTORS
Tokyo DENIM SEMI” in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] Fujitsu Limited announced on the 9th that it has developed and will
begin taking orders for 8,000 gate arrays using 0108 lcomplenentary aetal
oxide semiconductor] technology. A gate array allows the large-scale integra-
tion of circuits required by the user within a short period; this is a promis-
ing product which is expected to find a large market within the semiconductor
industry. Both Hitachi Ltd and Toshiba Corp are expected to announce large
gate arrays at the International Solid State Circuit Conference (ISSCC) which
is to begin on the 10th in the United States; these announce-eats are likely
to further stimulate development of the gate array market fron now on.

The 8,000 gate arrays developed by Fujitsu are called the 14366000 series, and
are characterized by the world's highest level of integration and high-speed

operation, comparable to that of BCL [emitter coupled logic] chips-4.5 as per
gate delay ties. The series was developed over 14 weeks at a cost of 13 ail-
lion yen. The sample price is 65,000 yen, and the uinimun order is 200 units.

Because they have 8,000 gates, these arrays will have capabilities comparable
to those of a general purpose aicroprocessor. Fujitsu anticipates deaand for
use as small computer CPU's (central processing units) or control circuits for
peripheral equipment, and is prepared to accept orders from both the Japanese
and 0.8. markets.

Gate arrays can be configured with digital circuits or other frequently used
circuit blocks as ordered by the user, and can be put to use in cmuters
quickly with only the final wiring. Short delivery times and response to
diversified demand for slall quantities will facilitate the design of non-
standard electronic devices with specialized characteristics. This is a pro—
nising product of a type which is expected to constitute over half of all
seniconductors in 5 or 6 years.

Fujitsu is the first Japanese conpany to announce an array of 8,000 gates,
but Oki Electric Industry 00, Toshiba, Hitachi and Nippon Electric Corp all
entered the gate array market last year, and foreign ventures like Inter-
design (agent: Hicrotech), AMI Japan and Japan Texas Instrutents have also
put their effort into developing this market.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the manufacturers involved, gate arrays can be applied in a
broad range of consumer and production equipment, including computer equip-

ment. office computers, personal computers, m [videotape recorder] cameras.
stereos, and m sets.

Gate arrays can be used not only to replace standard IC's [integrated cir-
cuits), but also to replace microprocessors; they have also been used recently
to partially revise and improve the capabilities of office and personal con-
puters almost as soon as they have cone onto the market.

Rapid growth is expected in the market for gate arrays, and the expansion of
their functions seen in Fujitsu's announcement of a product vith 8,000 gates
is expected to have an impact which will change the design concepts of exist-
ing electronic equipment. This will be a great tool in responding to the
demands of the new era of small quantities, diverse Emotions and short deli-
very times.

It can be noted that Japanese semiconductor companies have put more effort
into gate arrays than have 0.5. manufacturers, and for that reason it is
generally predicted that Japan will have a larger market than the United
States. And because intricate operations are required for gate arrays. It
has been called a product for the Jspnese; those involved hope that the use
of gate arrays will give rise to many creative new electronic devices.

COPYRIGHT: Denps Shimbunsha 1982

9601
cso: 6106/71

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAPAN TO DEVELOP 51'}! GENERATION comma
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHMUN in Japanese 6 Jan 82 p 13

[Text] A project to develop "thinking computers" that can see. hear and talk will
finally conence this year. In the ”-82 budget proposal, the government allocated
development expenses of 1.26 million yen for a "5th Generation Comuter" to the Min--
istry of International Trade and Industry. MIT! decided to promote research by

the joint efforts of universities and private corporations under the leadership of
the General Electronic Technology Research Institute of the Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology, and has started a study for the promotion of the project.
Corporate participants are likely to establish a technology research association
or a research foundation to take part in research and developnent. Also, KIT! is
speeding up its efforts to include foreip coqmter makers in the project to avoid
the unnecessary troable of rekindling the "Japan, Inc." theory overseas since the
aethod of development takes the fora of a public-private joint venture.

The first generation coaputer which performed calculations and data processing
used vacuum tubes. The second generation used transistors, the third generation
adopted 10‘s and the fourth generation employed super LSI's as progress was made.
Currently top is the 3.5th generation computer which uses a 66 kilobit element,
the first of the super LSI’s, as a part in the memry cell.

Conventionally, larger capacity and higher speed have been achieved by improving
performance of the elements, but the basic computer architecture, in which a job
was handled in order of the programs given by man, remained the sane. However, in
the nineties. a "thinking computer" is expected to be introduced which will be im-
mensely different from the past history of the progress of the computers. Research
and development of this 5th generation counter has begun in various nations.

Nonetheless, the development targets for a 5th generation "thinking conputer" have
not been definitely formulated even in foreign countries. Japan must set a target
and proceed with development independently. Since the importance of infomtion
machinery and equipment such as conputers will certainly increase in the future,
Japan should not he left behind in developnent in order to facilitate the continu-
ous growth of Japanese industries internationally. However, the developmt of s
5th generation computer involves large risks because it is a challenge in an un-
known realm. Therefore, HIT! decided to pronote development entirely by "research
cosmisaion fees" paid by the government.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Presently in the computer field, research on elements such as the Josephson ele-
ment and the ﬂemto [phonetic] eluent from gallium arsenic that can work 10—100
times faster than conventional ones is being undertaken in Japan and other nations.
Some may call a computer which incorporates this super high-speed element a fifth
generation cosputer, however, the fifth generation counter that HITI is pursuing
is not simply faster in speed but is capable of parallel computation. a computation
system called "data flow." Peripheral equipment includes a voice recognition de-
vice that correctly recognises the hmn voice, an association and memory device,
a reasoning device and a sentence recognition device. The coaputsr is also equip-
ped with learning ability. In short, the more the computer does the work, the
higher the throughput rises.

According to HITI. what is inportant to a "thinking cowuter" is architecture and
software and elements which can be in the form of conventional silicon, galliu-
arsenic or Josephson types. Based upon this conviction, XIII is not going to in-
clude the development of elements in the 5th Generation Computer Development
Project.

The blueprint drawn by HITI allows 10 years for the total project, allocating 3
years for the first term, lo years for the second and 3 years for the 3rd. Since
it is absolutely a shot in the dark, a budget of 10 billion yen is estimated for
the initial 3 years. MI'II is planning to decide on the site of budget for the
second and the third terms after reviewing progress in the first term.

It is said that the cosmuter, after completion of the "thinking computer," will
change from a conventional "cold blooded" machine which can only be handled by
professionals to a ”warm-hearted" computer which will show compassion to amateurs.
This change will be feasible because fifth generation cowuters think and reason
by themselves without elaborate instructions from an operator, and instructions
can be given in the form of "natural language" as in conversation. Amteurs need
not strive to learn computer program language. Also, they say that computers will
contain remarkably extensive knowledge from law to even dwarf-tree culture and
will be helpful in any subject. Development of cosputers such as thus will
broaden the scope of the market dramatically and open an era when computers will
be popularly used in industry and society.

Consentary: Goverth Takes Initiative in Allocation of "emission Fees"

The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry reach-
cd an agreement to allocate research expenses to private corporations as "camis-
sion fees." Research and development will be carried out under the budget of the
Machinery and Information Industry Bureau of HITI. The same bureau handled the
super [.51 development, a national project, in the past, and it is currently under-
taking the development of a 4th-generation computer. Until now, research has been
conducted under the "subsidy" system under which the Government subsidizes two-
thirds to three-quarters of the research expenses. however, it has been decided
that the project at this time will be placed under "conission fees" which will be
paid 100 percent by the Government.

At first glance, "comission fees" may sound very convenient to corporations, but
"comission fees" implies that the Government contracts out projects that it should

33

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

do by itself, to the private sector. The resulting patent rights and copyrights

(circuit diagrams) will naturally be snapped up as national property. In con-
trast. "subsidies" allow the private sector to take the initiative and the com-

panies which achieved development to hold the patent rights. The view is that
HIT! strategically adopted these "commission fees" that the Government can hold
the leadership in the project, and promptly act to meet circumstance when foreign
corporations not in the project pressure the Government to disclose fifth genera-

tion computer patents and thus avoid international friction.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shilbunsha 1982

89100
CSO: I0106/40

3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TEST STAGE OF HIGH SPEED LINEAR MORCAR NSCRIBBD
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 6 Feb 82 pp 76-81
[Article: "500 Kn/Bour Very High Speed Express Targeted"]

[Excerpt] Test runs on the drean very high speed ground transport locomotive
"the magnetic levitation linear notorcar" are being conducted at the b-kilo-
meter test track at the National Railway Levitation Railroad Test Center at
Biaukai-shi in Hiyazaki Prefecture. The targeted speed is 500 Ins/hour. A
major change in transport systen is expected if this project becomes prac-
tical. If rail travel between Tokyo and Osaka is reduced to 1 hour, air
travel between these two cities will probably be reduced to zero.

The targeted speed of 500 Ins/hour has already been attained on the 7-kiloneter
overall length experimental line, where a run of 50‘ Inn/hour was attained on
12 Decesber 1979 and also a run of 517 Inn/hour on 22 Decemberpf the sane
year, and both runs were stable. The experinental vehige ’vhill recorded
these runs was the ML-SOO.

Now, speaking from an extrese viewpoint, there are no limits to the speed
which can be attained by a linear motorcar. 0n the other hand, the horsepower
has to be increased tremdously to reach the faster speeds. This is because
the resistance of air to this vehicle increases roughly in proportion to the
square of the speed. Assigning the arbitrary value of l to the air resistance
at a speed of 500 Inn/hour, this value will increase sharply to ’0 at 1,000
Inn/hour and to 25 at 5,000 Ina/hour. This is why the National Railway arrived
at a tentative figure of 500 kit/hour fro: the standpoint of economics and the
actual distances involved.

If it were possible to operate the linear notorcar within a vacuum, air re-
sistance effects would be eliminated, and speeds of 20,000 kin/hour would be
possible. An idea is being spawned in the United States to develop a trans-
continental railroad that would span the oountry from Los Angelea to New York
in 21 minutes. This would involve the construction of an underground vacuum
tube through which a linear notorcar would travel at speeds greater than 10,000
Ian/hour.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Speed of 10,000 Km/ﬂour Possible

As the next step, the National Railway developed manned type connected experi-
mental motorcara and initiated test runs last fall. Already the following
conclusions have been drawn: 1) the basic technological problems have been
resolved, 2) there is little away, and the riding comfort is better than that
of the Shinkansen [present fast express], and 3) energy consumption is inter-
mediate between that of a regular passenger train and the Shinkansen, a
passenger load three tines that of a jumbo jet is possible, and a speed twice
that of the Shinkansen can be attained.

what should be pointed out here is that the Shinkansen does not require energy
to be supported on the rails over which it travels, while airplanes and levi-
tation mode linear motorcars require energy to sustain their lift off the
ground as they travel.

There are three require-ants that need to be fulfilled for the vehicle to
travel over this "railroad": l) the vehicle must be supported vertically,

2) the vehicle must be guided over the track, and 3) the vehicle has to be
propelled and stopped. The usual railway has the rails taking over all three
functions. Now, as the speed exceeds 350 km/hour, friction between the wheels
and the rails diminishes, and the force which the power wheels apply against
the tracks becomes weaker.

As shown in the illustration, the linear motorcar uses the repelling force or
attractive force of the magnets installed along the guideway to put functions
1), 2), and 3) or functions 2) and 3) (when magnetic levitation is not employed)
into effect, so that there are no limits to its speed or its hill clinbing
ability.

When traveling in a state of levitation, energy is consumed to support the
motorcar above ground, but noise is limited to the sound of the vehicle cut-
ting through the air and is no serious problem. There is no frictional wear
on the wheels or the guideway, maintenance is minimal, and life is prolonged.
These are major merits.

The National Railway initiated studies on the linear motorcsr 2 years before
the inauguration of the Shinkansen runs, and has accumulated developmental
results for more than 10 years with its single-minded effort on the levitation
railroad; its technological level in this particular area is tops in the world.

The levitation mode can be of two types: repulsion or attraction. The
National Railway has adopted the repulsion type, and in particular the main-
stream type of inductive repulsion. In addition, the feature here is the use
of superconducting magnets.

The development of small, light, and high-performance adiabatic containers was
needed in order to assemble compact and highly efficient superconducting mag-

nets. The targeted goal was successfully realized with the cooperative ef-
forst of Toshiba, Hitachi, and Hitsubishi Electric. The spinoff effects of

36

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this development are very large. This is because superconducting magnets are
very useful in the area of advanced technologies: to advance the cause of
mm power generation, nuclear fusion, superconducting power generators, power
storage, and superconducting ships.

Stabilized Levitation Travel

There are the flat section and the side wall sections on both sides of the
U-shaped cross-section guideway. Two series of independent levitation coils

are arrayed to the left and right of the flat section at fixed intervals in
the direction of travel.

When the superconducting magnet attached to the chassis glides over these
levitation coils at high speed, inductive current is generated in the levita-
tion coils, and the levitation coils themselves become electromagnets in the
mode that is employed. The magnetic force of the coils which have become
magnetized and the superconducting magnets mutually repel each other to force
the superconducting magnet upward, as a result of which the chassis of the
motorcar is levitated about 10 cm.

Now, this levitation force is small at a speed of 50-100 kilometers/hour, so
that it is necessary to lower auxiliary wheels in order for the motorcar to
run. The merit of the levitation mode is that when the height of the levi-
tated chassis is too low, the repulsion force between magnets becomes ex-
tremely large and forces the chassis upward while, conversely, when the
chassis rises too high, the repulsive force weakens and gravity lowers the
chassis. In other words, a stabilized levitation state is realized without
the need for a special device to control the height of levitation.

Because an induction current proportional to the speed of the superconducting
magnets which pass over the levitation coils is generated in these coils, the
height of levitation increases the greater the speed and decreases the slower
the speed. At the same time, the adjustment of the position and strength of
the magnets on the chassis can be used to vary the levitation height.

The National Railway has established 10 centimeters as the average height of
the levitation coils from the ground. This height allows a margin by which

there is essentially no effect of minor discrepancies in height and align-
ment, and maintenance is also minimized.

The coils consist of numerous windings of alunimn wire coated with synthetic
resin which are affixed to the ground side.

Strengthened Reutilization of Energy

What is called a superconducting magnet here refers to a magnet made of
material such as niobium-tantalum alloy which has electrical resistance from
zero down close to -273°C (absolute zero) which is formed into coils to com-
prise magnets. Because these coils have no electrical resistance, once a
current is introduced, it will flow forever, and no electrical power is con-

sumed. It is just as though a super-high-strength permanent magnet were
employed.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liquid helium is used in order to maintain these coils at very low temperatures,
and a system has been developed in which the helium, which gasifies once it has
performed its cooling function, is once again liquefied and reused, and this

is one of the National Railway'a successful developments. This system was uti-
lized to develop a light, small cooling unit whose development was announced
about 6 years ago.

There are some test calculations which estimate the demand of the high-cost
"superconducting magnets" which are the crux of the levitation railroad
targeted for 500 km/hour operation.

Assuming that an express of 16 vehicles plies the route between Tokyo and
Osaka, taking 1 hour to traverse the distance, and that trains are dispatched
at 5 minute intervals, at any given time there will be a total of 26 express
trains on the tracks for s total of 384 vehicles. Further assuming that each
vehicle is equipped with eight superconducting magnets, the total will be
3,072 magnets. This nudier will be even greater taking into account standby
vehicles and vehicles under inspection or repair. '

The Approaching Linear Notorcar Age

The National Railway Levitation Railroad Test Center at Himukai city receives
many foreign visitors who are railway specialists; this site is presently the
Mecca of levitation railroad experts from all over the world. It is only very
recently that the advantages of the superconducting magnet for a levitation
railroad has been recognized.

It is possible that the United States and the United Kingdom, with strong
leanings toward the levitation railroad, and west Germany, which is conduct-
ing its on experiments along this line, will import this superconducting
magnet once the National Railway is able to enter mass production and lower
the cost.

The linear motor is the prime moving force which propels the vehicles with
the superconducting magnets. An AC motor is provided with a rotating section
(rotor) and a fixed section (stator) where current is supplied from outside
to create the rotating magnetic field. The outer circmferential surface of
the rotor supported by a shaft maintains a fixed distance from the inner
circumferential surface of the stator.

The linear motor maintains these cylindrical outer and inner surfaces in
parallel array while extracting force in a straight line (linear) direction.
1111s motor is arrayed so that the two parallel planes maintain a fixed dis-
tance from each other while they mutually work together to produce linear
movement. Now, by placing one member on the ground and the other on the
vehicle, a starting force is created to propel the vehicle. The gears and
wheels used in trains of the past are no longer necessary.

Linear motors can be grossly classified into linear synchronous motors (1.811)
and linear induction motors (1.1M).

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The levitation mode railway systems which are being researched and developed
throughout the world include two types: a combination of induction repulsion
(ED) levitation and L5H propulsion and magnetic attraction (EM) levitation
combined with LIH propulsion. The former is the type in which the National
Railway is leading the way with the use of superconducting magnets. The make-
up of this L8" is as follows.

Cooling Facility Is the Key

Driving coils are installed on the inside of the two side walls of the guide-
way at a height corresponding to the height of the pole faces of the super-
conducting magnets installed on the vehicle. These driving coils are linked
together and play the role of the stator of an L8H. The stator is on the
primary side, which is the side from which current is supplied from the out—
side. The superconducting magnets on the vehicle are placed on both sides so
that the N pole and S pole are arrayed in an alternate nanner corresponding
to the driving coils on the inner walls of the guideway. It is clear from
this that the superconducting magnets placed on the vehicle are used for the
two functions of levitating the vehicle and guiding and driving the vehicle.

How are these vehicles driven? First of all, the position and speed of the
express are automatically detected at a central command center, and the center
is in full command of operating the express just as though it were in the
driver's seat. It uses this information to control the supply of current and
its frequency to the drive coils placed on the walls on both sides of the
guideway.

This then generates the power to propel the express at a given speed by ope-
rating the N and S poles of the superconducting magnets on the express. The
current supplied is limited to the number of coils proportional to the length
of the express, and there is no wasted current.

This LSM system also has the advantage that when the brakes are applied, there
is a power generation control by which the kinetic energy of the express is
conversely converted to electrical energy and recovered. In addition, there
is no limit to the speed of a ground-based primary type system.

The operational tests which the National Railway has been conducting at
Hinukai city since last fall using a two-car system has achieved a measure
of success, and these tests will be continued. An item of note in this pre-
sent series of tests is the new type cooling and liquefaction unit for liquid
helium that is carried aboard the HlUOOl-3 for cooling the superconducting
magnets.

Liquid helium vaporizes at -269’C. In other words, the liquid helium vaporizes
immediately after it cools the superconducting magnet to -270°C. In the case
of the Hl-SOO, which has posted a speed of 517 kn/hour, the helium which
vaporized was allowed to escape into the atmosphere, but this vaporized helium
must be recovered and reliquefied when the economics of the system and the
practical utility are considered.

39

FOR OFF1C1AI.USIZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is why the HLUOOI-l was provided with a specially developed small,
light-weight cooling and liquefying facility. The HLDOOl-l was provided with
one cooling and liquefaction facility and one compressor for the four super-
conducting magnets, but the Hl0001-3 has been provided with four very light,
small cooling and liquefaction units and one compressor for its four super-
conducting magnets.

Economics To Hatch That of the Shinkansen

The efficiency of equipment improves with increasing size, but the losses in-
crease in an ultracold equipment system as the distribution lines become
longer. The use of four cooling and liquefaction units has the merit of faci-
litating placement design and cutting down on the use of distribution lines.

The final decision as to what distribution mode will be adopted will be

decided after actual tests. The fact that these tests have come to the present
stage is an indication that the experiments are approaching the final stage.

It appears that unless lightweight, miniaturized. and high-efficiency equip-
ment for vehicle board use is developed, a high performance and economic linear
motor cannot be developed.

Test runs with three cars in series are under way this year, and the guideway
is now a 7-kilometer-long U-shaped affair.

Now, a separate 60-kilometer-long experimental line is needed in order to test
the practical aspects of a 500 kilometer train. When one travels at 500 km/
hour, he covers 17 kilometers in 2 minutes. Once the operating characteris-
tics. safety, reliability, riding feel, and wear of the express on this
experimental line have been established, the decision as to its practicability
should be possible.

In any event, it will be at least in the 1990 decade when a Tokyo to Osaka line
will become a reality. 0n the other hand, there seems to be some data avail-
able on the economics of this new line based on the data accumulated to date
on the Shinkansen and the experience and results accumulated at the experi-
mental center. That is to say, comparison of economies with the Shinkansen
show that construction costs including the cost of vehicles will be roughly 20
percent more than for the Shinkansen, but when the overall cost including
operating costs are considered. the two systems are roughly equal.

What can be stated with assurance is that the "ED'LSH" is suitable only to runs
such as the Tbkyo-Nagoya-Osaka interval where there is great need for fast
travel requiring not more than 30 minutes, because the high construction costs
would not warrant the construction otherwise.

no

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Construction of Linear Motor

 

Key to Figure:

1. Vehicle body 6. Superconducting magnet

2. Air spring 7. Thrust and guide use driving coil
3. Leak coaxial cable 8. Emergency landing shoe

4 Auxiliary guide aheel 9. Auxiliary support wheel

5. Differential induction line 10. Invitation coil

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

9923
650: “06/61

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFEKJAI.USE(MVLV

SCIENCE AID TECHNOLOGY

TREND TORARD RIDESPREAD FACTOR! USE OF PMS DESCRIBED
Entire Machine Industry
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 1 Jan 82 p 6

[Text] Plans to construct advanced factories having FMS (flexible
manufacturing systems). which is being called the trump card of the production
revolution in the machine industry of the 1980's. have spread suddenly like
wildfire. As responses to the increasing tendency for industry to automate

the process for producing limited quantitites of a diverse number of items.
these plans represent the effort on the part of machine tool manufacturers to
make production more rational and economical and also tosellthe developed
systems to industry. A tendency also has appeared to construct PMS factories
not only domestically. but overeeas as well. The machine industry has moved
into the "FMS age" in earnest.

Medium and Small Enterprises Also "ant Them

Industry attention is being focused on PMS. a system which combines computer-
driven NC (numerically controlled) machine tools and industrial robots.
because it will achieve high productivity through its reciprocal capabilities--
flexibility and automation. These capabilities will permit the production of
many items on the same line of a multiple-item. limited-quantity production
process, which has been the goal of rationalisation. '

Toshiba Corporation launched a 3oyear FMS plan in FY—Sl. The plan calls for
the investment of 50 billion yen over the 3~year period. the introduction of
PMS on 35 production lines. including the company's main divisions--home
appliances. heavy electrical machinery. semiconductors. and computers--and the
reduction of the work force on these lines from 2.500 to 500 people. Hatsushita
Electric Industrial Co Ltd. htorder to further the automation of factories
under its 10-year plan. has begun to introduce FMS which can produce efficient-
ly a limited quantity of a number of itens without human hands. The aim is

to create a system which will produce a profit even after the production volume
of a certain item has dropped 60 percent; as Hatsushita President Yamashita

says. the company "is moving quickly to establish an all-weather production
system."

NTN Toyo Bearing Co Ltd. which produces some 3.000 kinds of bearing products
per month. ranging from those with an internal diameter of 5 mm to those with

h2

FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
an external diameter of 6.000 In. is planning to introduce FMS to its Yawana
factory in Mie Prefecture. Tokyo Keiki Co Ltd is planning to invest around
500 million yen per annum to introduce FMS into its hydraulic machines
division. and Kobe Steel Ltd has decided to introduce FMS into its compressor
factory.

This activity is not limited only to the major manufacturers, for the wave of
change involving FMS has spread to medium and sull manufacturers as well.
Such firms as Kenseisha (home office: Tokyo; president: Gunji Mizutani;
capitalization: 65 million yen). which manufactures precision parts for video
tape recorders and the like. and Takai Precision Tools (home office: Fujisawa

city in Kanagawa Prefecture; president: Kansho Takai; capitalisation: 50
million yen). which manufactures miniature hearings. are also burning with

the dc: ire to change their production processes over to FMS.

Because the FMS wave has begun to spread throughout industry. the machine
industry. which is the source of PMS machinery. is prepared to take the lead
in changing to FMS. declaring that "after 0A (office automation) comes FA
(factory automation)." and that "this year is the takeoff year for FMS."

A Succession of FMS Factories Make Their Appearance

It was Fujitsu Fanuc Ltd which began the trend toward FMS factories in Japan's
machine tool industry. At the beginning of last year. it built its Fuji
factory, a true PMS factory where "robots build robots." at the foot of Mt
Fuji with an investment of 8 billion yen. Yamasaki Machinery Horks Ltd. the
leading manufacturer of nchine tools. completed last autum. at an investment
of 3 billion yen. an FMS factory at its main factory. which became the world's
most advanced automsted factory. As if in hot pursuit of these two companies.
all the other machine tool manufacturers have set out to construct FMS factor-
ies. too. This year. the curtain on the FMS factory age seems to have been
raised all at once.

The first off the line is the leading manufacturer of MC lathes. Mori
Precision Tool Co. This company is in the process of building a second
factory at the site of its main Iga factory in Mie Prefecture which will
contain a large-scale FMS. The factory will consist of an automated warehouse.
automated conveyor system. and computers centering around MC (machine centers);
the automated warehouse alone will be on the scale of 3.300 square meters.

The company's executive director. Kcnan Mori. boasts that "when this is
completed in the spring. it will be the largest FMS factory in Japan."

The Amada group is also enthusiastic about FMS. Planning to invest 10 billion
yen over a 3-year period. it has set out to rationalize the production system
of its subsidiary companies. Hasino Machine Co Ltd and Sonoke Manufacturing
Co Ltd. Furthermore. Okamoto Machine Tool Works Ltd has also introduced FMS

into its new factory in Annaka city. Gums Prefecture. which will begin
operations in the spring of this year. Also. Tsugami Corporation Ltd has

developed a plan to change its Shinshu factory in Saku city. Magano Prefecture.
over to FMS. The following all have plans to construct FMS factories: Makino

Milling Machine Co Ltd. Kitamra Machiner; Co Ltd (home office: Takaoka City.

2.3

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Toyama Prefecture; president: Konosuke Kitamra; capitalization 130 million
yen); Yasuda Industry Co Ltd (home office: Satosho town, Okayama Prefecture;
president: Korehiko Yasuda; capitalization: 45 million yen); Nakamra-tome
Precision Industry Co Ltd (home office: Tsurugimachi. Ishikawa Prefecture;
president: Tomeo Nakamura; capitalization: 150 million yen). Hitachi Seiki
Co Ltd. as well. is hurrying to change its njor Abiko factory (Abiko city.
Chiba Prefecture) over to FMS.

Of those mentioned above. Nakamra—tome Precision Industry Co has put 500
million yen into the construction of "Japan's first" user-oriented FMS factory
by Septewer of this year. Specifically. this factory will not manufacture
parts for the company's own NC lathes; rather. the company has come up with

a unique strategy of manufacturing over 270 types of machine tools. offering
the acquired production knowhow and other production system data to tool
manufacturers. and then hoping that this will lead to increased sales of its
own NC lathes and MC.

The pioneering companies. Panuc and Yamazaki Hechinery Works. are. of course.
not about to be left behind. In order to outdietence the late-starting manu-
facturers. these two companies are building ms factories abroad in an effort
to solidify their positions as ms manufacturers. Fujitsu Fanuc is building
an automated factory in Luxembourg which will produce 50 NC tape automatic
manufacturing devices per month with a work force. including the president. of
only three people. This factory will begin operations this spring.

Yamazaki Machinery Works. on the other hand. has revealed a plan to build the
first FMS factory in the United States. At present. the company is producing
NC lathes in Florence. Kentucky. but it will also build an FMS factory by the
end of this year. Yamazaki'a president. Shoko Yamazake, said that "with an
investment of around 3 billion yen. we will build an automated factory on the
same scale as the FMS factory which has begun operating within our headquarters
factory."

"Min i-FHS" Also Active

Under these circumstances. the movement to push the sales of "mini-ms." which
are meant for medium and small enterpirses. has grown lively as well. Hasino
Machine Co has developed a mini-FMS factory, called "PAP." which can efficient-
ly produce machine parts. and the company has begun to accept orders. Because
this machine manufacturing system is equipped with some 10 machine tools. 7
robots. conveyors, parts supply devices. and the like. it is said that this
system by itself will be a small machine-manufacturing factory. Also. Fanuc
plans to exhibit for the first time. at the International Machine Tool Exhibi-
tion in Osaka this autumn. a "mini-FMS" which combines NC machine tools and
robots with an automated conveyor and an automated warehouse and which is run
by computers.

The concept of PMS originaed in Great Britain. but in terms of putting the

concept into actual use. Japan leads the United States and Europe by several
steps. For this reason. Japan's exports of ms should begin in earnest this
this year. Just recently. Hitachi Seiki struck up a deal with Bulgaria for

M4

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
I-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an FHS plant consisting of 30 It’s at a total cost of 3 billion yen. In
addition. Yamszski Machinery Works. which received an order from the American
press manufacturer Cincinnati Inc for a l-billion yen system, is now negotia-
ting with Westinghouse Electric for the export of a large-scale FMS. As the
president of Yamazaki said: "This year. Japan is loving out to become the
world's supplier of FMS."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shiﬂmnsha 1982.
Fuji. Fujitsu Group Joint Venture
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Three companies from the former Furukawa group—Fuji Electric Co Ltd.
Fujitsu. and Fujitsu Fanuc--have agreed to establish a system for the joint
production and sale of PMS (flexible manufacturing system). which is said to
represent the production revolution of the 1980's. An FMS. which cod>ines

computer-driven industrial robots and NC (numerically controlled) machine
tools, such as MC (mchining centers). is an autouted system which can

efficiently produce limited quantities of diverse items without the use of
human hands. For this reason. it is attracting considerable attention as the
cutting edge of FA (factory automation). It is the aim of these three com-
panies to cosbine their special machines and knowhow in order to respond to
the "FMS age" which is spreading throughout industry.

"Three Generations" Reunite

These three companies represent three generations—Fuji Electric. an old firm
of the former Furukawa group. is the father. Fujitsu the son. and Fujitsu
Fanuc the grandson. Of these. however. both Fujitsu and Fujitsu Fanuc are
leading growth firns with a strong sense of independence. the former in con-
puters and the latter in NC devices. It is very unusual for three generations
of companies to reunite and collaborate like this on the advanced technology
FMS.

At a summit meeting held late last year. Fuji Electric Vice President
Terahisa Kiyonizu. Fujitsu President Tskushin Yaumoto. and Fujitsu Panuc
President Seiuemon Inaba agreed in principle to form an "FA alliance."

The essentials of the cooperative agreement were: (1) Fujitsu Fanuc would
handle sales. and the alliance would utilize the cosbined structure of the

three companies to respond actively to the movement toward FA which had begun
to spread throughout industry both at hone and abroad. mainly in the machine.
electronic. and electrical appliance sectors. and to develop strategic products
for the 1980's; and (2) Fuji Electric would take charge of monitoring devices.
including automated conveyor and warehouse systems and display devices;

Fujitsu Fanuc would handle industrial robots and NC machine tools; and Fujitsu
would be responsible for the computers controlling the entire system.

For this reason. by the end of March. Fujitsu Fanuc. which is responsible for
the engineering sector. will establish a Systems Engineering Office within the

the Technology Research Institute being constructed at its Fuji factory in
Yamnashi Prefecture. In addition to setting up a sales system for the FMS.

1:5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fujitsu Panuc. with the cooperation of Fujitsu and Fuji Electric. is going to
exhibit and demonstrate an PMS model at the International Machine Tool
Exhibition which will be held in Osaka this autu-I.

Along with the pioneer group of Panuc and its allies. major electronics and
electrical appliance manufacturers. such as Mitsubishi Electric and Hatsushita

Electric Industrial Co. and machine tool manufacturers. such as Amada and
Yamazaki Machinery works (home office: Aichi Prefecture; president: Shoko
Yamazaki; capitalization: 1 billion yen) are entering the ms field one after
another. As a result of this trend. the forecast is for the sales war to grow
even more intense. Therefore. the struggle for leadership in the field of PMS
will grow white hot with the formation of this united front among the three
Fuji companies of the former Furukswa group.

was Have Spreading

Fujitsu Fanuc President Inaba has said that "this year is the first year in
the spread of ms." he based his statement on the fact that automated factor-
ies with FMS are about to appear in large austere in the advanced production
sites of industry.

Toshibe Corporation. for example. launched a 3-year FMS project in “-81.
This plan calls for the investment of 50 billion yen over the 3-year period:
the introduction of PMS on at least 35 production lines in the company's
leading divisions. such as household appliances. heavy electric machinery.
semiconductors. and computers; and the reduction of the work force on these

lines from 2.500 to 500 people. In addition to leaders of the machine tool
industry. such as Kori Precision Tool Co. Okamoto Machine Tool Works. Yasuda

Industry Co. and Nakamra-tome Precision Industry. other companies like
Nikkiso Co Ltd. Nihon Seiko. Toyo Kogyo. and Yamaha Motor Co also are moving
to erect FMS factories.

It is not only the major companies which are doing this. The FMS wave has
begun to spread to medium and small enterprises as well. Behind this develop-
ment is the fact that industry. with its call for strengthening international

competitiveness. has entered headlong into the race to rationalize production
so as to reduce costs and raise productivity. With the passing of the 0A

(office autoution) revolution. which swept through the office management
sector. the PA (factory automation) revolution now seems to be overtaking the
production site. Fujitsu President Yamamoto has said that "PMS will be the
new market for computers.

Under these circumstances. the "three former Purukawa companies" had this
market in mind when they joined forces. Thus, Fujitsu Panuc President Inaba.
whose company will play a central role in this collaboration. is enthusiastic
about "selling FMS. which will be the carrier of PA to the industry of the
world." It looks like the struggle for leadership in the ms market—the
growth market of the l980's--will center around these "three former Purukawa

companies. "

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9866
cso: 4106/42 h6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RELAXATION 0P RECONEINANT DNA GUIDELINES WED
Tokyo NIKKAN K0610 SBINEUN in Japanese 16 Jan 82 p ’0

[Text] Toward Drastic Relaxation of Recodinant DNA Guidelines To Equal the
Euro-American Level--Interin Report of the Science Council

"The subconittee to evaluate experimental guidelines for recodinant DNA"
(chief investigator: Professor T. lino. Faculty of Science. Tokyo University)
of the Science Council of the Ministry of Education has been working on a
revision of the Japanese reconbinant DNA (demribonucleic acid) experimtal
guidelines. which are said to be the most stringent regulations in the world.
It conpiled a revision proposal (interin report) and released its contents to
the general public on the 13th. 0n the preaise of the current state of DNA
experiments that virtually no unforeseeable risks exist in recoubinant DNA
experiments. the contents of the revision proposal ain at allowing experiaents
at ordinary microbiology experimental facilities (P1 level). with the excep-
tion of cases using DNA from Pasteurella pestis. pathogenic dysentery
bacteria. 'pathogenic viruses from Lhasa fever. yellow fever. Korean hemorrha-
gic fever. etc. the dissenination of organises with recodined DNA in nature.
or the innoculation of animals or plants. It will revise the current
guidelines in all aspects which are based on the apprehension that recodinant
DNA experiments hold unforeseeahle great danger. This revision proposal will
now seek opinions fron specialists. and following final revision in the Science
Council. it will be enforced following a public announcement by the Hinister of
Education. The Council for Science and Technology (prime minister's advisory
organ). which decides on the "guidelines" for the Japanese recodinant DNA
experiments. is also expected to go along with the revision. and the prospect
is to enforce it as early as the beginning of 1982.

Recombinant DNA experiments not only enable mass production of beneficial
pharmaceuticals such as interferon and insulin. they can be applied even in
areas of foods and energy. and this technology is awaited as ushering in the
let century. However. it was suspected that it night create unforeseeable
organisms and bring danger to mankind.

For this reason. the necessity for self-discipline and voluntary regulations

for recoabinant DNA experiments were proposed. The United States fomlated
experimental guidelines (NIH guidelines. the 0.8. National Institutes of

health) in 1976 which emphasized experimental regulations and an assurance

in
ma omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of safety and began research. followed by various European countries that
established experimental guidelines one after another.

The current Japanese guidelines were fornulated in April 1979 through
Ministry of Education involvement referring to the experimental guidelines
of the United States. and the guidelines for Japan as a whole have been in
force since August 1979.

however. subsequently. the expectation of the hazards of recowinant DNA
experiments has been greatly diminished from what was initially expected:
e.g.. E. coli in which carcinogenic poliou viral DNA was spliced showed no
carcinogenicity; recodainant DNA experiments between heterogenous organisms
(shotgun experiments) did not show unexpected. unkow risks; and reconbinant
DNA experiments using genes of higher animals demonstrated virtually no
unexpected risk.

For this reason. revisions to relax the regulations have been made several
times in European countries and the United States. and three times in Japan.
In comparison with the European and American guidelines that reflected the
current state of these DNA experiments. the Japanese revisions consisted
nerely of the addition of yeast and Bacillus subtilis to the host-vector
system or an increase in the water of nicroorganisms whose DNA's can he used
to 284 strains, and they remained the nest stringent guidelines in the world.

This revision aim at updating the guidelines to the equivalent of the European
and American level. Due to the fact that most recombinant DNA experiments are
safe. it will become possible to conduct the majority of recombinant DNA exper-
iments in Japan also by using P1 level experimental facility and organisms
having low viability in nature. that is. a 31 biological containment level.
In other words. regarding the DNA donors to be used. P1 level will suffice for
practically all cells from primates. manuals. birds. poikilothermal verte-

brates. invertebrates. and plant cells. and a special experimental facility
of P2 level is necessary for only some of them. Compared to the current

guidelines that require Pa and P3 facilities in using primate cells. the
revision will relax the rules two or three steps. In addition. the plan
includes: 1) elucidation of the definition of recosbinant DNA experiments.
2) revision of procedures for assuring experimental safety. 3) revision of
the purpose of biological containment. and 4) handling regulations for recom-
bined organisms and clarification of the responsibilities of those engaged in
experiments in health management.

However. when the culture scale of the recodined organisms is more than 20

liters. or when conducting experiments with pathogenic microorganisms. infec-
tious materials. etc. individual inquiry is to be made. as before. to determine
the safety. Also. when developing a new host-vector system. the regulations
are the same as before. requiring a safety check in the facility with a high
degree of safety.

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proposed Revision of Containment Hethods

DNA Donors Current Guidelines Proposed Revision
Primates PI. 81, P3 32 P2 81, P1 32
Manuals other than primates, P B P 8
birds. poikilotheml vertebrates 3 l’ 2 2
Invertebrates.

Plants P2 31’ P1 32 P1 31’ P1 82

Individual certification Individual certification

Lover eukaryotes. P3 31, P2 82
prokaryotes. P1 31’ P1 32 P B P B
bacteriophage 2 B1’ 1 2

P1 1' P1 B2

P1, P2. P3. Pl. (physical containment levels: P1 level is an ordinary
biological experimental facility; P4 level is a special

experimental facility that completely contains the
experinsnter and the recodinant organisls)

1, 32 (biological contain-ant levels: 31 level uses a host-vector
systen with low viability in nature; 32 level uses a
hostdvector systen with lower viability than that of 81
level)

Host is a microorganism that mass produces the DNA. and vector is a carrier
of DNA.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shiﬂmnsha 1982

7722
C80: («106/47

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(HNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDG’Y

RECENT BIOTECHNOLOGY RAD REPORTED
Artificial DNA
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SNIHBUN in Japanese 5 Jan 82 p 1

[Article: "A Five-Firm Joint Venture for Domestic Production of 'Artificial DNA';
2-Year Plan for Development of Basic Technology”]

[Text] Five firms, Ajinonoto, Hakinaga Yakuhin, Yanasa Shoyu, Yuki Gosei Yakuhin
Kogyo, and Toyo Soda Manufacturing Co, Ltd, will jointly embark on the development
of "artificial DNA" which is indispensable for research and can also be used as a
substitute for recombinant DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), a technology that will
open the 21st century. As a research team of MITI, they will participate in a
large-scale project "DNA extraction, analysis, and synthesis technology develop-
ment" started by the Council for Science and Technology. For the time being,
their goal in the 2-year plan is to work for the establishment of necessary basic
manufacturing technology. They will develop four kinds of artificial DNA's [com-
ponents] (nucleotides - chemical substances), adenine, cytosine, guanine and
thymine, as well as trimers (trimers of artificial DNA [components]). In the
scheme of technological development, Yamasa and Yuki Gosei Yakuhin will commer-
cially distribute developed artificial DNA, and AJinomoto will use it in the mass
production of amino acids, while Nakinaga Yakuhin will use it for pharmaceutical
development. In Japan, artificial DNA's are produced only on an experimental
basis, and, thus, currently foreign products are being used for domestic consump-
tion. Consequently, if the five firms succeed in developing artificial DNA, Japa-
nese genetic engineering and its industrial applications will make rapid progress.

Natural DNA comprises four kinds of DNA [components], adenine, cytosine, guanine,
and thymine, and these four kinds of DNA [components] are linked in chain form in
the genes. On the other hand, artificial DNA has a structure similar to the natu—

ral DNA and is manufactured artificially by means of synthetic chemistry. For
example, useful substances such as interferon and insulin are also derived from'

these four kinds of DNA [components].

For this reason, when it becomes possible to manufacture these four kinds of DNA
[components] artificially, useful substances can be made by combining them.

The five firms will try to develop manufacturing technology that can produce these
basic four kinds of DNA [components] efficiently and in high purity by means of
synthetic chenistry. In addition, they are also aiming to develop manufacturing

50
FOR OFHKJAI.lHﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

techniques for trimers, combinations of three artificial DNA [components]. For
example, a trimer consisting of cytosine, adenine and thymine can constitute an
amino acid called valine. Sixty-four kinds of trimers can be made from these

a basic DNA's, and 61 of them constitute 20 different amino acids.

According to the plan, Ajinomoto will develop trimers to produce amino acids such
as leicine, isoleicine, and alanine; Hakinaga Yakuhin, serine and glutamine;
Yamasa, tyrosine, lysine, and srginine; Yuki Gosei Yakuhin, threonine, glycine,
and cysteine; and Toyo Soda, phenylalanine, histidine, and aspartic acid.

After the manufacturing techniques for these trimers are established, the DNA's
for producing interferon and insulin can be readily manufactured, and various re-
combinant DNA research will be possible. Consequently, theartificial DNA's to be
developed by the five firms will also become the material for recombinant DNA.

Currently, the artificial DNA's used in Japan as material are mostly imported

from the United States and Europe. The four kinds of DNA [components] cost as
much as 100,000 yen per 1 unit (milligram unit). Trimers cost 200.000 yen to
300,000 yen, and a substance with 18 artificial DNA's [components] linked together
cost as much as 500,000 yen. To make useful DNA's consisting of these materials
will cost several million yen, and in the case of a small research laboratory, the
annual research budget will disappear just by purchasing these materials.

Costliness of materials has been a big obstacle in Japanese recombinant DNA re-
search and commercialization.

If the five firms are successful in research and large-scale production, a supply
structure for artificial DNA will be in order also in Japan at the same level as
in the United States and Europe. The project of the Council for Science and Tech-
nology will begin its full-scale activities beginning in FY 1982, and the first
plan will be completed in FY 1983.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982
STA's holonic Function Research
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 7 Jan 82 p 13

(Article: "Creating Artificial Biological Function as One of the Series of STA's
Creative Technology Systems; New Information Processing Techniques Also Sought")

[Text] The Science and Technology Agency (STA) has decided to embark on research
to artificially create a biologically unique function called "holonic function"
as one of the series of projects in the creative science and technology promotion
program. The object of the research is to analyze such biologically unique high
level functions as those of nodes that convert chemical energy directly into
mechanical energy, or those of nerves that transmit stimuli to the brain, and to
combine the individual elements into an artificial system. Focus is also on the
biological exchange of information between cells and organs in order to look into
the possibility of new information processing. According to STA, details of this

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

research project and the selection of leaders will be confirmed by this summer and
research will begin in the fall and continue for 5 years till 1986.

The "holonic function" consists of the mutual cooperation of constituent elements
(holons) such as protein molecules or cells. In the case of a living body, numer-
ous cells that constitute various organs cooperate and demonstrate the unique func-
tions of respective organs. The research to be undertaken in the creative science
and technology promotion program attempts to create an artificial function resem-
bling a living body by simulating such biological characteristics and arranging
individual elements in sequence and harmony. Specifically, they are attempting

to create a mechanism resembling muscles, weak signal transmission systems similar
to nerves, etc. For example, from this research one can expect to create a new
type of engine with less energy consumption or a new communication circuit with
low noise and high efficiency, etc. In addition, while pursuing such artificial

biological functions, the possibility of applications in other fields or industry
will also be sought.

According to STA, at the stage of the preliminary budget request, research on
"biological information" aiming at elucidation and application of the mechanism

of various types of biological information exchange was also included, in addition
to "research on holonic functions" as a new project in the creative science and
technology promotion program. However, in the government budget proposal, only
the "holonic function" was approved in the end. However, STA regards research on
biological information exchange just as important as "research on holonic func-
tions," and is studying the possibility of undertaking biological information ex-
changes as well within the research project on holonic function.

STA plans to decide on the research goals and details of the project by about
July-August and to work on the selection of research leaders along the way. The
plan is to place three research groups of "energy exchange," "stimuli transmis-
sion," and "functional control" comprised of researchers invited from various
fields of biology, physics, chemistry, engineering, etc., under the project lead-
ers. They plan to start research in October.

In the FY 1982 government budget proposal, "research on holonic functions" has an
appropriation of about 100 million yen, and the total budget for 5 years is ex—

pected to be approximately 2 billion yen. The creative science and technology
promotion program started in FY 1981, and research on four projects, including

"superfine particles," has already begun. With the addition of "research on
holonic functions" beginning in 1982. there will be five projects in progress.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

Interferon Mass Production
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Jan 82 p 8
[Text] Takeda Chemical Industries, Ltd. and Nippon Roche (Tokyo main office) have

respectively completed their facilities which will enable them to produce 1 tril-
lion units of a (alpha) interferon (virus-inhibiting factor) per month. This has

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

made it possible for 5,000 cancer patients to receive a mass dosage treatment at
the Japanese standard. Samples have been sent to the 0.8. Roche for the final
test and there have been no problems so far. They plan to use domestic inter-
feron in the second clinical trial which begins in the fall.

Supply for 5,000 Patients Between the Two Firms

The supply volume of the two firms is distinctly greater than that of other domes-
tic producers, and it is almost equal to the 0.8. level. The mass production
capability of the gene splicing technique has been demonstrated anew. It is good
news for clinicians who would not try the drug as much as they wished because of
the absolute quantity available in the past.

Japan, the United States and European countries are promoting the development of
interferon because of the expectation that interferons may be effective against
intractable viral diseases such as influenza, hepatitis B, as well as various can-
cers. In the past, the absolute quantity obtained through the method of extract-
ing interferon from body cells such as lymphocytes, fibroblasts, etc. was too
small to carry out clinical trials to the fullest, and, therefore, not much prog-
ress was made.

The Takeda-Roche group completed its plans, respectively, after importing the
technology from the 0.8. Roche. Takeda invested 500 million yen and Nippon Roche
1 billion yen into their plants. Each has the capacity to manufacture 1 trillion
units per month, and a supply of 2 trillion units is possible between the two
firms.

The two firms have sent the extracted interferon to 0.8. Roche, which is speeding
up animal experiments in order to confirm safety as well as pharmacological, bene-
ficial effects. So far, the animal experiments conducted in Japan have'gone suc-
cessfully, and no problems have been reported by 0.8. Roche, either. Consequently,
they are expecting to use it in the second round of clinical trials in Japan.

It is said that 300 to 400 million units of interferon are necessary per one can-
cer patient, and at this dosage, 5,000 patients per month will be able to receive
it. Even by adopting the mass dosage technique of administering 1.5 billion units
per person, which is showing a high success rate in the United States, the drug is
still available for more than 1,300 patients. Thus, a way to expand clinical ex-
periments is now open.

In Japan, Sumitomo Chemical Co, Ltd., the Green Cross Corporation and Toray Indus-
tries, Inc. are already conducting clinical trials. However, production seems to
be limited to several hundred billion units per month in each case, and the supply
volume cannot be enlarged at will because of the body cell-derived technique.
Using the gene splicing technique, 0.8. Roche began clinical trials last year and
leads the world. It is also reported that they are already equipped with a system
to supply 4 trillion units per month.

The volume of production by Takeda-Roche group is comparable to that of the United
States in view of the 0.8.-Japan population ratio, and it will undoubtedly add

momentum to interferon research and development.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

7722
cso: 4106/63 53

FOR‘OFFKHA1.USEGJNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENG AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

NEH METEOROLOGICAL SATELLIn—Toltyo, 17 Mar (JIJI PRESS—Japan will launch
a new geostationary meteorological satellite. called CNS-3, by N-ll rocket

in fiscal 1986 to replace the present "llinawari (Sunflower) II," the Space
Development Council decided wednesday. The com. :11 also decided that Japanese
space engineers will start in fiscal 1983 preliminary designing of the
nation's third telecommunications satellite, dI-bbod 03-3, to be lofted by the
next-generation large rocket H-l. The comcil, chaired by Director-General
Ichiro Nakagaua of the Science and Technology Agency, works out Japan's
space development program every year, taking into account the domestic and
international situation. [Text] [0411711065 Tokyo JIJI in English 1433 GMT
17 Mar 82]

(:80: I0120/198 END

5‘»
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY