FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS- L/1o7.o'9

4 August 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS
(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING CHEERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
Puvsxcs mo Mmemncs

(I’OUO 6/82)

CONTENTS
LASERS MID M8335

Kinetics of Ch-icol Procoom in Plano of Molecular
Gumhrse usua'OOIOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00'COOIOOOOOOOOOOOCOI

Abstracts of Popcro on Quantu- Bloctronico......................

Chaicol-Goodynnic 002 Lou: lining co + 0 + H
mmimt1°n “action ”met...0.0.0.0...DOOOOOOOIODDOOOVOOO

OP'I‘OBLBCI'RMICS

Theory of Dynamic Inge Selection Effect in Plotorofroctivc

“at...0099.0coo-o000000000000000000000oooooooooootboolooooooo

".108 opt1ca1 D.t‘ Proce..1nsotoooo00.000.000.000.oolooooooooooo

W PHYSICS

Nomuilibriu lowlaperoture Plum metico..................

Dyna-ice and Radiation of Open (Vacuun) Plom-Dyunic
Discharges of 'Plono Pocuo' mo: Survey....................

18

29

90

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MSHSMDMSERS

UDC 537.525
KINETICS or CHDIICAL PWSSBS III PLASMA 0? mm GAS-DIME LASERS

Moscow KBDIIYA wsom runner? in Rusian Vol 16, No 3, Hay-Jun 82 (manu-
script received 5 May 81) pp 267-272

[Article by V. I. Volchenok, V. II. Romarov, V. N. Ochkin and N. I. Sobolsv,
Scientific Research Physicochemical Institute imeni 1.. Ya. Karpov]

[Text] Holecular plasma systems are classified within the
framework of siwlified three-component plasmochemical kin-
etics from the viewpoint of their operating life. The class-
ification is made according to the ratio of the rates of re-
versible and irreversible (homogeneous and heterogeneous)
interactions. It is shown that the active media of molecular
lasers (002, 00 and 820) investigated earlier can be described
by this scheme. The role of catalysts in extending the life-
time of the systems is determined.

A low-temperature molecular plasma is now used to implement a wide range of
processes. All the devices in which these processes are realized can be di-
vided from the viewpoint of application into two main groups: 1) devices that
utilize the plasma as an active nedium of a chemical reactor, in which the in-
itial materials are reprocessed: it is desirable that these devices guarantee
high rates and degree of transformation of the initial materials to the required
reaction products: and 2) devices that utilize the plasma as an object with re-
tained properties. for example. in light sources or active media of electric-
discharge lasers. In this case. unlike the first case. it is necessary that
the concentration of initial (working) molecules be maintained at a level that
exceeds some minim. concentration required for operation of the devices for as
long a time as possible. We will consider the second case in the given paper.
The most detailed investigations of chemical processes in a molecular plasma
have now apparently been conducted for active media of continuous infrade
electric-discharge lasers (see. for example, survey [1]). It is feasible in
this regard to attempt to classify the main types of these systems from the

viewpoint of the chemical kinetics of the gas-phase and heterogeneous processes
occurring in them.

If laser transitions occur on} molecules A present in the initial working mix-
ture of gases. then the dependence of their concentration on time (t) can be
represented in the general case as

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[A] m -m (tumm). ‘1’

The for: of function f(t) can be found from solving a system of nonlinear dif-
ferential equations of the type of Pauli equations that describe the total
kinetics of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical processes with participation
of all particles fouled in the discharge at different energy states. ”ever.
solution or analysis of this system in general fora is impossible. Therefore,

the problan can he sisplified for qualitative analysis and clasgi\fication of the
main cases. "a will consider a plane in which chemically different coeponente A.
B and C undergo mutual conversion and interect with the surface.

Let us also suggest that the presence of particles of other kinds in the plas’
ea. including diarged and excited particles, is taken into account by effective
rate constants of reactions A. B and C and therefore the kinetics is for-ally
described by first-order equations.

 

$0 ¢,fV

Figure 1. First Case of Classification of ten (a-c) (see text):
aura - o, k: - o; Ir-rA - o. k: - o, x‘ > x“ e—«rA - o, k“ - o.
The dependence (d) of the concentration of “:0. N2. 02 and no nole-
culee on the tine the mixture is in the discharge, the initial "20-30
mixture (1:4) at pressure of 0.532 kPa. current density of 31.8 Mn:
and sass spectrosetric neasurenents: r-NzO. 0-412. x—oz and 0-40

If molecules A further break down in the plasna into particles 3 and c:
|.\| -1[|I||;$|(Z](a+|$-—l): then

m -- —I.-.L\|Hail"H-k-fl‘ll-h'l/‘l m (2.)

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[u] —lr..llil+ak4[A]--kn‘lliI—kn“'[|£]-lr.. (2m

[0] = -k.-. [C] mum nominate) +r.;. ""

where k5 is the rate constant of breakdown of A into B and C, kg and kc are
the rate constants of breakdown of s and C into subsequent fragments. kﬁ and
RA are the rate constants of reversible processes 8 + A and C - A. kg, kg and
k are the rate constants of irreversible heterogeneous binding processes of
molecules A, B and C and r3, r; and rc are the rates of appearance of mole-
cules A, B and C tron external sources (separation of solecules from the sur-
face of the discharge elements, from special getters, from a ballast tank and
so on).

By combining equations (2a)-(2c), let us write

w ks‘(aki[AI—[i3]+r.)
A -— k + ‘ A +——-—-———.____..+
I I _(‘ k H ] k.+knA+Ir.‘V (3)

+ kc‘wkall‘l- [C] +fc) + r‘
kc+kc‘+kcw

and let us consider typical limiting cases, having first noted the obvious
circumstance that the cases when [A] (t" t) - [A], where [A]‘ is the density
of the working molecules similar to the optima with regard to laser param-
eters and t' is the desirable operating time of the system. are of practical
interest along them

1. The working molecules A break down in a plasma at_considerable rate. while
the reversible reactions are hardly effective: k,(A]>'k.‘-:B] and k¢‘[C] .
Solution of equations (2) and (3) yields

[A]-[A].cxp(—k.t){exp(—ki't) [1+‘mx (4)

><(exp(k.z+k."x)-1) l},

where [AL—[Al (1-0) . Equation (4) can be represented in the form [A] -

' ll‘loMlNU). where 'l'(‘)'¢XP(-k.t) describes the gas-phase process of di-
rect breakdown of molecules A in the plasma. In the simplest case of the ab-
sence of external sources (r3 . 0) . function ﬁl)—cxp(-—k.“'l) describes the ab-
sorption of the working molecules by surfaces. If r; f 0. then separation
into two functional dependencies for homogeneous and heterogeneous processes
is unjustified. V (t) (the expression in brackets) becomes dependent on the
rates of. the gas-phase processes and with long times [A]. '-‘r.(k,‘+k,."') '.

The relationship between kn, kx and rA determines the process that limits the
presence of molecules A in the system. No limiting cases are possible in
this case.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l-a. me gas-phase process of breakdown of working molecules is faster than
heterogeneous processes. Some samples are presented in figure la, b. If
ra - 0, then on the time scale corresponding to figure la, 0 - const I l and
elimination of A is determined by gas-phase breakdown f . e. If r“ f 0 (Pig-
ure lb) , then I" is an increasing function and P > e, reaching an asymptotic
value of [al.llhlo. The situation corresponding to Figure la is typical, for
example, for an N20 laser [2]. The corresponding data of mass spectroueter
neasurenents are presented on Figure 1d. showing how the densities of N20,
N2. 0 and N0 molecules (in 2 with respect to N20 in the initial nixture)
depe on the time that the discharge (with current density of 31.8 All2

and pressure of 95.32 kPa) acts on the initial “go-He mixture (1.6). The
working N2 molecules are transfornsd (with fulfillment of the nitrogen and
oxygen balance in the gaseous phase) to 02 and 112 with fornation of NO at the
intermediate stage. If the active nediu of an N20 laser is connected to the
ballast gas tank containing “:0, then this corresponds to the situation shown
in Figure lb.

l-b. Irreversible heterogeneous binding processes of working nolecules are
faster than the gas-phase process of their breakdown, f - o, and e - const - 1.
An exaaple is presented in Figure lc. This situation is typical, let us say,
for 002 or ":0 lasers cooled by liquid nitrogen. where the rate of elimination
of working molecules is determined by diffusion with subsequent concentration
on the walls and k: . o/n’ (o is the diffusion coefficient and n is the radius
of the tube).

2. Irreversible heterogeneous processes occur with high rate for transforma-
tion products of working molecules witth affecting the working molecules
themselves. Thus, k..">k..‘: k_\"<k_\ and kc"<k.-,‘ . Let us assume for certainty
that this occurs with regard to solecules 3. Also let r3 - r3 - rc - 0 (con-
sideration of the effect of external sources leads to results similar to those
illustrated by Figure lb) . The particles C are internediete in the cycle

A .. C + A and at sufficiently large value of he >> It“, according to the princi-
ple of quasi-stdoility,1 [c] - 0.

With regard to these relations, integration of equation (3) yields

 

["I-I'AIOCKP{-kA( "91.:ka 1}. (5)

If k3 >> kc. then the typical tine of the exponential loss of working molecules
is ‘l’ - (It‘d-1 (Figure 2a). In the given case the separation f(t) - 0(t)e(t)
is unfeasible since gas-phase decomposition A is a limiting stage of the heter-
ogeneous reaction 3.

 

l"l'his is a rather general principle of chemical kinetics [3], easily fulfilled
for the systems being investigated. It follows from mass spectrometer measure-
ments [4] that the density of oxygen atoms is constant over the entire investi-

gated time interval ([0] I 0) .

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UH

   

0,5 1,7 {,6 ‘0

Figure 2. _fecond Case of classification (a) (see text): t - ‘A‘rl
and TA - k . The dependence (b) of variation of the density of co
nolecules the initial co-uo mixture (1:10) on the time of the ef-
fective disgharge; pressure of the aixture is 0.798 kPa: j - 95 (1)
and 130 All (2)

Key :
l . Seconds

An example that illustrates the given case my be a nitrogen cooled co laser.
One of the products of decanposition of carbon monoxide is C02 mlewles that
condense rapidly on the walls. With regard to the fact that decomposition of.
carbon monoxide occurs nainly through two channels [5] (C0 + e -t C + O + e and
(I) + (20' + C0; + C) and taking the ratio of the rates of the processes into
account. we assure that a - B - 1/2. 'l'hus, the typical title of loss of work-
ing molecules 1' in the given case is approximately twice as high as the typical
time T5 of honogeneous transformations of carbon monoxide. meples of the
experimental dependence of variation of density of 00 molecules in the initial
m-He mixture on the time of efiective discharge with cooling by liquid nitro-
gen is shown in Figure 2b. The data were found by the infrared absorption
method [6). It is obvious that the loss of working CO molecules occurs by a
law close to exponential and the typical time of this process, although depen-
dent on the discharge conditions, is short. on the order of seconds.

3. The rate of expenditure of initial and intermediate products in irreversi-
ble heterogeneous processes is less than the rate of reactions of the reversi-
ble cycle. It is obvious that in this case, due to the difference of typical
times. the separation Ht) . HUNt) is feasible.

In this case the system initially arrives at a state of dynuic quasi-equilib-
rium and the kinetics of this process is described by the function Ht). By
analogy with the case of dynamic eguilibriua considered in [S] in a water-
cooled co laser. this dependence can be written in the form

q.(t)-1-C,(l-ow(--C:l)). (5)

where C; and C2 are constants that are combinations of the rate constants of
gas-phase processes. At long times t " t1. where t1 >> 631, Mt) 't O. - l - c1.
To find Ht), it is sufficient to consider equation (3) at times t > t1, taking
the initial suggestion on slow variation of Mt) into account, i.e., H0) -
- #(tl) << M0). On this assumtion kg » v: and in view or the principle of

5

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quasi-stability khlhl >> [3], [C]. Let us denote [3109. 3 [A]. and solution of
equation (3) at t > t1 can be written in the form

[A] -4[A].cxp(-k'!) l (u./'l.-‘)(l—Mp(-k‘l)). (7)

{—7‘tu-p’0 F-'s+'s‘s+’r3cq :u-ks‘("s‘+’~'u+k.')".

where k°.-.-].-‘,,+k.‘v. 3-
: —-kr*(k.‘+k.-+k.. ')

Running for denonstration that breakdown of B and C into subsequent fragments
does not occur (ks, kc - 0) and that there are no external sources, for t > t1,
disregarding the ter- of second order of snailness. we find: [MEI/“4(1).

1:: )1 '-*~“"}- (8)

one can note that the expression in brackets in (8) is close to zero, but, if
It“ - 0, then this expression also determines the tile of displacusnt of equi-
librius. This case is illustrated by Figure 3 and. unlike the two previous
figures. is of practical interest in creation of sealed systems. It is ob-
vious fros figure 3 that at short tines t « t1, the loss of working solecules
is deter-ined mainly by gas-phase processes and f = e. an the contrary, the
loss is determined nainly in the range t; < t ~ t' by irreversible heterogen-
eous interactions.

I'

“Hum-{r/.-,‘[1—q(|__’;i"_‘. ..p(' .

u

 

 

figure 3. Third Case of Classification of System (see text)

Despite a nulber of simlifications related to finding it, expression (8) per-
nits one to make sate practically inportant conclusions. To extend the service
life of sealed systm, one should bear in nind two possibilities. l. A de-
crease of the initial “quasi-stable" (t ‘ t1) dissociation of working molecules.
This can be achieved either by reducing the rates of decaposition reactions of
solecules (for ample, due to operation at lesser values of BIN with introduc-
tion of easily ionized Xe, Hg and other additives) or by acceleration of re-
versible reduction reactions, for exasple. by neane of catalysts. 2. Reduc-
tion of the rates of irreversible heterogeneous processes by selection of the
corresponding naterials during design of active components and the technology
of treating then. impression (8) also permits one to sake the not-too-cbvious
conclusion that the use of catalysts that accelerate reversible reactions
effects not only the initial deco-position (t 1 t1) described by the value of
0,, but alsa the rate of irreversible heterogeneous processes, since the values

of ratios 5“}! and kglkg are included in expression (8) for Mt) . This means

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with respect to physics that acceleration of reversible processes reduces the
density of the reaction-capable particles of internediate products. which are
neat active in interactions with surfaces. Apparently the true aechanisu of
the effect of catalysts of reversible processes on extension of the service
life of sealed systea is included in this (rather than in a decrease of the
initial dissociation of working nlewles) .

[athl'LVL‘Pn—u-LI‘

II

n uu- 19%."
10

2' J 5

l

002 in initial sixture) of sons products of deco-position in coz-ﬂe
aixture (1:6) on pressure pg: of hydrogen additive: pressure of the
initial nixturs is 0.266 ”a: density of discharge current is 64 All-2;
1"”, 2 - 0. 3.-”

Key:
1. Pa

The dependence of the densities of 002 aolecules and oxygen atone on the
anount of hydrogen additive is presented in figure 4 in percent with respect
to 002 content in the initial c02-ae sixture (1:6). The pressure of the in-
itial aixture is 0.266 Us and the density of discharge current is 64 m2.
The data were found by the ease spectrometer nethod. More detailed data on
investigation of the effect of hydrogen additives on the amnion oonposition
of a plassa under conditions typical for_ a co; laser are contained in [7].
The density of hydroxyl radicals (in absolute units). found by the linear ab-
sorption sethod described in [8, 9]. is presented in Figure 4 as well. A sharp
decrease of the density of oxygen atus when hydrogen is added is noteworthy.
since the process that liaits the service life of sealed co; lasers is one of
binding the oxygen to surfaces [10. ll]. the effect of hydrogen additives or
water vapor on the service life of the systea is explained in a natural nan-
ner [l0, 12]. The role of hydroxyl radicals is reduced in this case to cm-
pensation for the decrease of the effectiveness of C02 regeneration upon re-
conbinationofoo+o+602duetothereactionco+Oil-tea;ea.

Thus, the simple schene of chalical transformations which we considered and
that takes into account only a limited nuber of conponents (three in the
given case) in explicit form, per-its one to describe in sufficient detail

the nature of variation of the working substance in a plasma according to pres-
ently available experimental data, at least with regard to laser systole.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.

I.

s.

6.

1.

8.

9.

10.

u.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.Y

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Volchcnok. V. 1., V. N. mm, 8. Yo. Kupriyanov and V. I. Stukanog,
1n 'mhiya pluny' [Plum Qua-10ml. adieu! by B. H. atmov. No 7,
Moscow, account, 1980.

Volchonok, V. 1.. N. P. Yegom. V. N. W, 3. Yo. mpriyanov, V. N.
Ochkin And N. N. Sobolov, WWW!!! MIY, Vol 11, No 4, 1977.

annual}, N. u. and D. G. motto. "Run khmwoskoy “noun" [A Course
in Chemical Kinetics] . Hosea, Vyuhaya shkola. 197‘.

Volchonok, V. 1., V. II. New and 8. Yo. Kupriynnov, nzm Pm,
Vol I. No 4, 1978.

Volchemk, V. 1.. N. P. Yogorov. V. N. Kunrov, 8. Y0. nuptiyanov, V. n.
Ochktn, II. N. Sobolcv and B. A. Trubachcyw, 2mm MINORS“)?
nzm, Vol 42, No 12. 1976.

mud", A. A" V. II. Ochktn and II. N. SdDOleV, 2W WICW
212m, V01 42, No 7, 1972.

Banana, 0. 0., V. I. Voldunok, V. N. mom, 5. Yo. mpnyanov and
A. It. Wl'tuv. Iowan WW mu, Vol 13, No 4, 1979.

Ochkin. V. II. and II. A. Sabina, HIM“ VYSOKIKII my, Vol 6, No 1,
1972.

Ochkin, V. N" S. Yu. SOVUIOV and N. N. swolov. 230mm MWY
P121“, Vol 47. No 6. 1977.

mm. V. u., in ”Trudy tizichukogo institute {uni P. N. W: An
5553' Instructions of the Physics Inatltuto 1-0111 P. N. WV. USSR
head-y of Sciencul. V01 78. locum. 1974-

Aloynlkov. V. S. and V. V. Wtﬂdy, WM“ MIA, V01 12.
lb 1, 1969.

Hit”, N. 3., 1m TRANSACTIONS. w-‘, No 11, 1968.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatol'stvo "Nauka'. ”mt-lye vy-oktkh energiy'. 1982

6521
050:

1862/195

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLV

[DC 621
“SM 0? PAPERS (I! WANT]!!! W108

Leningrad ﬂARTOVAYA mum (TEDDY LENINGADSKOOO MIMICEBSKOGO
INSTITUTA) in Russian lo 366. 1979 (signed to press 27 Dec 79) pp Illa-119

UDC 621.373.826
SINGLE-FREQUENCY NszAc LASER WITH MATEO m
[Abstract of article by Zaytsev. G. L. Kruzhalov. s. V. and Pakhoaov. 1.. IL]

[Text] The paper gives the results of a theoretical and experimental study of
a single-frequency Nd:YAc laser optiaized with respect to output power. The
output power attained in the onacfrequency steady state was 800 all. Figures 3.
references 6.

UDC 621.373.826

SOLID-STATE RING LASER HITII LOGGITUDINAL HOD! LOCKING
[Abstract of article by Astakhov. A. V.. Galkin. S. L. and Nikolayev. V. “.1

[Text] Experimental results are given on a YAG laser with longitudinal node
locking. A nonreciprocal phase-shifting device based on the Faraday effect
was used to get beats of opposed waves. The lock-in band of opposed waves
was neasured at abOut 200-300 is. This low value is attributed to spatial
separation of opposed waves in the phase-synchronous nultinode state. Figures
3. references to.

UDC 621 .373.826

BEAT FREQUENCY OF OPPOSED WAVES OP HULTHDDB GAS LASER IR WGI‘fUDINAL MDB-
LOCKED STATES

[Abstract of article by Galkin. S. I... L'vov. B. V.. Nikolayev. V. H. and
Sanusev. K. 3.]

[Text] A method of successive approxiaations is proposed for calculating

the characteristics of ring gas lasers. This technique is used for calculating
the way that the beat frequency of opposed waves in a heliuI-neon ring laser

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depends on small alterations in cavity length in self-mode locking and forced
longitudinal node locking. It is shown that forced longitudinal mode locking
reduces the dependence of beat frequency on cavity length compared with self-
node locking. Calculated results are confirmed by experilent. Figures 2,
references 6.

UDC 621. 373.826:535.bl7

MATRIX METHOD OF CAMULATING SPHERICAI. CAVITIES NIT}! INHOHOGENEOUS POLARIZATION
ANISOTROPY OVER THE CROSS SECTION

[Abstract of article by Patrun'kin. V. Yu. and Koshevnikov. N. N.]

[Text] A natrix method is proposed for analyzing optical cavities with cross
sectionally inhomogeneous polarization anisotropy generalizing the Jones method
and the method of calculating isotropic spherical cavities. This method is
used to calculate a confocal cavity with weak axisylnetric anisotropy.

Figures 4. references 8.

UDC 621.373.826
MODE INTERACTION IN HEAKLY ANISOTROPIC GAS LASER
[Abstract of article by L'vov. B. V. and Hel'tsin, A. l..]

[Text] An analysis is made of node interaction in a weakly anisotropic two-
node helim-neon laser with wavelength of 0.63 All in the realistic range of
pressures. intermode distances and cavity Q differences for orthogonal pola-
rizations. The width of the zone of competition of generated nodes is studied
along with the addition to the frequency of intermode beats as a function

of the lasing frequency mismatch relative to the center of the line of the
equi-isotopic mixture in the working pressure range for different inter-node
intervals. Figures 3. references 12.

UN 621.373.826
FREQUENCY SPLITTING OF OPPOSKD HAVE LASING IN HELIUN-NEON RING LASER

[Abstract of article by Okunev. R. I. and Stepanyants, A. l..]

[Text] The paper gives the results of an experimental study of additional
splitting of the frequencies of opposed waves when the bean is irised in a
ring laser cavity and the active element is misaligned. It is shown that
frequency splitting of opposed waves is due to deviation of the laser tube
capillary from the cavity axis. Figures 3. references 6.

UDC 621.373.826
PHASE RELATIONS BETWEEN HOBBS IN TYPE-2 SELF-HODE LOCKED LINEAR GAS LASERS

[Abstract of article by Kotov. 0. I. and Nikolayev, V. IL]

[Text] A spectral-time model is used to analyze phase distribution in multi-
node laser operation. A relation is established between steady-state phases

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of longitudinal modes and the characteristics of both the optical spectrum
and the emission pulses. The results of calculation agree with experimental
data on a linear helium—neon laser. Figures 6. references 7.

"DC 621.373.826

SOME OPERATING FEATURES OF CATAPBORETIC HBLIUM-CADHIUH LASER

[Abstract of article by Andreyevs. Ye. Yu.. Yelagin, V. V., Terekhin, D. K.
(deceased), Fotiadi, A. F. and Fridrikhov. S. A.)

[Text] By simultaneous measurement of lasing power and discharge plasma param-
eters of a cataphoretic He-Cd laser it is established that as the discharge
current changes. the cadmium vapor pressure in the working part of the tube
does not remain constant despite the fact that the temperature of the cadmium
vapor source is held constant within 10.5'0. Superposition of an axial magnetic
field on the active medium in the single-frequency lasing mode leads to an
increase in lasing power. Figures 3. references 9.

lDC 621.373.826

INVESTIGATING PARTICULARS OF OPPOSED NAN! COMPETITION IN RING LASER ON 3.39 an
LINE

[Abstract of article by Andreyeva. Ye. Yu.. Kirina, H. Yu.. Terekhin, D. K.
(deceased)]

[Text] An experimental study is done on the influence that gas mixture pressure
and an external axial magnetic field have on conditions of competition of
opposed waves. It is established that a reduction in pressure with consider-
ation of coupling through scattering narrows the region of competition of
opposed waves. The longitudinal nagnetic field removes the competition of
opposed waves. The results enable us to calculate the coefficient of coupling
through scattering between opposed waves, and can be used in selecting modes

of operation of laser gyroscopes. Figure l.

UDC 621.373.826
COMBINED LASER DISCHARGE RITE HICROHAVE PREIONIZATION

[Abstract of article by Golovitskiy. A. P.. Krushaolv. V. A., Ferchanok. T. H.,
Terekhin. D. K. (deceased) and Fridrikhov. S. A.]

[Text] It is proposed that a microwave discharge be used to preionise the
medium of a CO; laser. The microwave discharge is excited in a slit cut in
the narrow wall of a waveguide. Opposite the slit is an electrode to which
pulsed voltage is applied. The gain of the active medium on a wavelength

of l0.6 um is studied as a function of pumping parameters. It is established
that the microwave discharge sets up inversion in the medium only in direct
proximity to the slit. but is conducive to development of discharge in the
main volume. High gain that is uniform throughout the volume can be obtained
by appropriate selection of pumping parameters. Figures 2. references 5.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.853
ACOUS‘l’O-OP'I'IC SPECTROGRAPH FOR RADIO ASTRONWICAL STUDIES

[Abstract of article by Yesepkina. N. A.. Kotov. B. A.. Hikhaylov. A. V..
Petrun'kin. V. Yu.. Pruss-Zhukovskiy. S. V.. Ryzhkov. N. F. and Shishkin. A. 1.]

[Text] An examination is made of the principle of action. and results of

an experimental study are given on a model of a radio astronomical spectrograph
based on an acousto-optical spectrum analyzer. a CCD bit line and the Blek-
tronika-loo computer. The authors deter-ine the parameters (frequency band.
resolution and radiometric gain) of such a spectrograph when operated in the
modulation mode. Figures 3. references [3.

UDC 621.385.832.S
OPTICAL-TO-ELECTRICAL DATA CONVERSION BASED on CHARGE-TRANSFER DEVICES
[Abstract of article by Karinskiy. s. 8.. Kotov. B. A. and Kotov. Yu. A.]

[Text] The paper presents the working principles of new semiconductor devices
with charge transfer. It is shown that this class of new photoelectric con-
verters has a group of parameters enabling optimum realization of the caps-
bility of optical computer systems. and development of optico-digital hybrid
data processing systems with flexible structure and extensive capabilities.
Limiting values are given for errors. noises and speed of these devices. and
major characteristics of CTD's are compared with those of analogous devices
(vidicons. dissectors. etc.). Figures 3, references 7.

UDC 621.327.8

DEVICE FOR INTERPACING OPTICAL AND DIGITAL DATA PROCESSING SYSTEMS USING LINEAR
AND MATRIX CHARGE-TRANSFER DEVICES

[Abstract of article by Kotov. Yu. A.. Hikhaylov. A. V. and Novitskiy. A. P.[
[Text] An examination is made of the principles of design of an interface
for programmed control of linear and matrix charge-transfer devices (CTD's)
for data input to the Blektronika-loo computer. Estimates are made of the
data input time for various interface design structures using off-the-shelf
peripheral equipment. Figures 2. references 5.

UDC 535.241.13:SJb
HUL‘I‘ICHANNEL MGR-FREQUENCY ACOUS‘m-OPTICAL WANTS

[Abstract of article by Aksenov. Ye. T.. Bukharin. N. A.. Rogov. S. A. and
Sayenko. I. 1.]

[Text] The authors consider problems of making solid-state multichannel
acousto-optical modulators (Ann's) for frequencies of 100-300 MHz. The paper

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
gives a description of the technology of manufacturing the modulators and
methods of matching input impedances of channels. Results of an experimental
study of multichannel Aﬂﬂ'a are presented. Figures 6. references 13.

UDC 535.241.13353ﬁ

INVESTIGATION OF ACOUSTO-OPTICAL SPECTRUM ANALYZERS OP RADIO SIGNALS BASED
ON BRAGG NULTIPHASE LIGHT SCATTERING

[Abstract of article by Yesepkina. N. A.. Lipovskiy. A. A.. Chkalova. V. V.
and shcherbakov. A. 8.]

[Text] An investigation is made of the feasibility of increasing resolution

of an scousto-optical spectrum analyzer of radio signals by using multiphase
scattering of light in crystals with a large coefficient of acousto-optic
quality. It is experimentally shown that selection of the scattering geometry
can remove the forbidenness of multiphase processes in the Bragg mode and

give effective scattering of light to the second and third orders. The authors
describe working models of acousto-optical spectrum analysers based on the

TeO; crystal that have double or triple the frequency resolution of analogous
devices based on single-phase scattering for the same dimensions of the acous-
tic line. Figures 3, references 8.

UDC 53S.241.l3:536

CALCULATING PARAMETERS OF ACOUSTObOPTIC INTERACTION IN CRYSTALS BY PERTURBATION
METHOD

[Abstract of article by Shcherbakov. A. 8.]

[Text] An examination is made of one of the possible methods of determining
parameters of acousto-optic interaction in crystals for arbitrary scattering
configuration. Covariant relations are found for the band of acousto-optic
interaction. the index of phase modulation and effective photoelastic constants
in the case of an anisotropic medium. and expressions are derived that describe
the efficiency of Bragg multiphase light scattering. The author uses the
method of expanding a single-frequency wave function in an infinite series

of the theory of perturbations and calculating sample sums of this series
using elements of the Feynman diagram method. Figures 2, rezerences 16.

UDC 621.396.67:535.24|.l3.536-8
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF OPTICAL SIGNAL PROCESSING SYSTEM IN ANNULAR ARRAYS

[Abstract of article by Vodovatov. I. A.. Vysotskiy. H. 6.. Yesapkina. N. A.
and Rogov. s. A.]

[Text] An experimental investigation is done on an optical signal processing
system in annular antenna arrays. Operation of the processing system is con-

sidered both in the static mode (with static transparency as input signal)
and in real time with the use of an ultrasonic light modulator. The paper

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘0FFK]A[.USE‘ONLY

gives results on signal processing with amplitude weighting. A discrete multi-
channel reference raster is used for recording the holographic filter. Figures
b. references 4. '

UDC 621.396.67:522.598535
OPTICAL SIMULATION OF ANTENNA APIRTURB FIELDS

[Abstract of article by Vinogradov. G. K.. Vodovatov. I. A.. Vysotskiy. H. G.
and Zubkova. T. 1.]

[Text] Similarity conditions of fields in optical and radio systems are con-
sidered for some specific optical modeling arrangements. 0n the basis of
these conditions. estimates are made of the accuracy of placing individual
components in optical simulation schemes. Figure 1. references 6.

UDC 621.372.82:621.383.8
DIFFUSION OPTICAL UAVEGUIDBS IN LITHIUM NIOBATZ
[Abstract of article by Aksenov. Ye. T. and Lipovskiy. A. A.]

[Text] An experimental study is done on the feasibility of making optical
waveguides in Y4-36' and X-cut LinO, plates by exodiffusion in atmosphere
and diffusion of Na+ ions. It is shown that the characteristics of the resul-
tant optical waveguides are close to the characteristics of waveguides formed
by exodiffusion in vacuum and diffusion of Ag+ ions. The investigated methods
of optical waveguide formation are technologically simple and economic.

Figure 1, references 6.

UDC 621.373.826:621.397.22
USING HIDE-BAND ACOUSTO-OPTIC COMPONENTS IN LASER VISUALIZAIION 0? TV IMAGE

[Abstract of article by Aksenov. Ye. 1.. Bukharin. N. A.. Ignatov. A. 3.,
Kiseleva. N. V.. Heron. N. P.. Seysysn. R. P.. Uman. s. D. Shapiro. L. P.
and Shustarev. D. Yu.]

[Text] The paper gives experimental results of investigation of a system

for laser visualisation of TV images in which the laser beam is controlled

by an acousto-optical modulator and deflector with complex sectionalized piezo-
electric converters that enable scanning of an acoustic beam. It is shown

that such systems can be used to get television images with better quality

than in conventional electronic television systems. Figures 3. references 10.

UDC 535.42]
LIGHT DIPFRACTION BY RELIEF GRAIINGS IN TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION REGION

[Abstract of article by lobrov. S. T., Butusov. H. N.. OVchinnikov. V. A.,
Turkevich. Yu. 6. and Udoyev, Yu. P.]

[Text] The authors study angular dependences of diffraction efficiency of
relief gratings with spatial frequencies of 900-1700 lines/mm and relief depth

16

FON‘OFFNHAI.USE(MVLV
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NHLY

of 0.02-0.1o um. The measurements were done on l-0.6 ‘- vith the grating
illuminated from the backing side. It was established that near the critical
angle of total internal reflection the angular dependences contain a structure
with form that depends on the polarization of the incident wave. period and
depth of grating relief. Possible mechanisms that give rise to this structure
are discussed. Figures 3. table 1. references 15.

UDC 778.38
METHODS OF GETTING RICH-RESOLUTION BOLOGRAPEIC IMAGES OF ﬁICROSCOPIC OBJECTS
[Abstract of article by Sokolov. A. V. and Byhov. V. N.]

[Text] An investigation is made of the feasibility of using methods of optical
holography for direct registration of microscopic objects. their microstructure
and spatial placement are studied. and also the dynamics of processes in systems
of microscopic objects. Hicroscopic objects are classified on the basis of
their light-scattering properties. conditions of image formation in Lippmann
holography and Fraunhofer lensless holography are considered. and recamsenda-
tions are made on choosing the holographing arrangement as a function of types
of microscopic objects and their placement in the investigated voluse.

Figure l.

UDC 533.9
THE 'SLOH BURNINC' OPTICAL DISCHARGE MODE

[Abstract of article by Pakhonov. L. N.. Petrun'kin. V. Yu. and Podlevskiy.
vs As]

[Text] The versions are suggested for maintaining plasma combustion of an
extended optical discharge. based on the particulars of cavity design and
Q-suitch. Experimental results are given. Figures 3. references 2.

UPC 681.121:539.lb3.b3
AMPLITUDE-TAGGBD NHR FLOHMETBR
[Abstract of article by Dudkin. V. I.. Senenov. V. V. and Uspenskiy. L. 1.]

[Text] The paper describes an amplitude-tagged NHR flowmeter using the effect
of parametric resonance in a flowing liquid. It is shown that introducing
modulation of the magnetic field in the sensor of the notation magnet charac-
teristically changes the shape of the nutation line and extends the func-
tional capabilities of the device. Figures 2, references 6.

UDC 621.373. 823:621.3l7.6bh
NUCLEAR HAGNETONETER HITN AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT BASED ON HASER HIT“ PDOUING FLUID
[Abstract of article by Dudkin. V. 1.. Kravtsov. I. A. and Filinonov. V. 1.]

[Text] The authors consider problems of designing an automatic magnetometer
by using the effect of nuclear magnetic resonance in a running fluid. An

15

ETHICHNWCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimental study is done on a laser-based self-generating nagnetoneter model.
The model device was used for measuring variations in a magnetic field with
intensity of 600: 30 oersteds [6.8010522387 Aim]. Relative measurement error
is no more than 10" for the case of magnetic field variation with frequency
w)! rad/s and amplitude of I) oersteds [2387 Ala]. Figures 2. references 8.

000 539.184:535.21
60131830 “CITATIW OP SPIN P83638810“ III A GROUP 0? OPTICAILY 0am arms
[Abstract of article by Semenov. V. V. and Sergeyeva. I. v.]

[Text] A theoretical and experimental study is done on excitation of spin
precession in a group of optically oriented cesium atoms in nagnetic resonance
under conditions of intensitynmodulated resonant detecting radiation. Observa-
ble signals are calculated for combined action of an intensity-modulated de-
tecting light beam snd rf field on the system of optically oriented atoms.

The results are experimentally evaluated. Figures 3. references 3.

"DC 62!.373.8
ABSORBED POWER OF OPTICAL RADIATION IN QUANTUM FREQUENCY STANDARDS
[Abstract of article by Hatisov. B. c. and Toptygin. I. N.)

[Text] Constant populations of a three-level systen interacting with resonant
rf and optical pming fields are calculated in the first nonvanishing approxi-
mation with respect to the small parameter ulv. This extends the previously
developed theory of absorption by an optical power system in the presence

of an rf field to vanishingly small amplitudes of the rf field. Figure 1.
references 6.

“DC 539.183.186

CALCULATING ADIABAIIC AND NONuDIABAIIC COLLISIONAL BROADBNINC 0P RPS LINES
FOR ALKALI AIOHS IN BUTFBR GAS

[Abstract of article by Batygin. V1. 7.. Gornyy. H. 3.. Gurevich. B. H. and
Sokolov. I. H.)

[Text] The authors calculate adiabatic broadening of hfs lines of stone of
hydrogen. Rb and Cs due to collisions with He. Ne. Ar. Kr and Se. New formulas
for matrix elements of transition with and without spin flip are derived on

the basis of the mechanism of nonadiabatic rpin relaxation suggested by Hermann.
considering angular dependence. The relation between the computed cross sec-
tions and experimentally measured values is discussed. Tables 2. references 15.

16

FOI‘DFFHJAI.US£1DNLY
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE10NLV

UDC 539.183.184

HYPERFINE TRANSITION LINE OOLLISIONAL SHIFTS AND DIFFUSION COEFFICIENTS 0F
ALKALI AIOHS IN BUFFER GAS

[Abstract of article by Batygin. Vit. V.. Batygin. Vl. V.. Gornyy. H. B. and
Gurevich. B. “.1

[Text] The frequency shift is plotted as a function of the ratio of ionization
potentials (lb/Ia) from results of measurements of shifts of the hyperfine
transition line of alkali atoms (A) in buffer gas (3). The values of the
shifts do not differ strongly from experimental measurements. Based on the
correlation theory of line shape. an estimation formula is derived for calcu-
lating shifts in the frequency of the hyperfine transition. The dependence

of shifts on the ionization potential ratio as calculated by this formula
gives a good description of the experimental curves. The calculated values

of the shifts agree satisfactorily with the experimental data. Shifts are
predicted for some A-B pairs. An approximate formula is suggested for the
potential of interatomic interaction of A-B pairs. The diffusion coefficients
for an extensive set of A-B pairs calculated by this potential are approximately
half the experimental values. Figures 3. tables 3. references 18.

UDC 778.38
RECORDING NOLOGEAHS IN BICHROHATED GELATIN LASERS HITH LATENT IMAGE MONITORING
[Abstract of article by Yerko, A. I. and Halov. A. N.]

[Text] The authors study the characteristics of latent image formation in
bichromated gelatin layers as a function of the energy of exposure and the
intensity of radiation during recording. Experiments demonstrate the presence
of a mechanism of charged ion diffusion from the exposed region. which is

a cause of decay of the latent image. An experimental curve is found for

the diffraction efficiency of the developed bichromated gelatin layer as a
function of the diffraction efficiency of the latent image. Figures 2. refer-
ences 5 .

UDC 621.373.826
MINIATURE NELIUN-NEON LASER FOR OPTICAL DATA PROCESSING SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Prusa-Zhukovskiy. S. V.. Senyukov. A. I. and Shishkin.
A. 1.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of calculations and an experimental study
of characteristics of a miniature helium-neon laser for optical data processing
systems. Tests of the laser as part of the acousto-opticsl spectrograph on

the RATAN-600 radio telescope showed that the proposed laser satisfies major
requirements for output power. stability and reliability. References 6.

COPYRIGHT: Leningradskiy politekhnicheskiy instirut imeni H. I. Kalinina. 1979

6610
C80: [862/174

17

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"DC 621.378.3
Cﬂnﬁw-GASWC 002 LASER USING CO+0+H REMIRAIION REACTION PRODUCTS

Novosibirsk PIZIKA WIYA I VZRYVA in Russian Vol 18. No l. Jan-Feb 82
(manuscript received 15 Sep 81) pp 88-96

[Article by v. v. mrun. s. s. Novikov and 1. s. Svetlichnyy. Moscow]

[Text] According to Ref. 1. there may be considerable excitation of vibra-
tional degrees of freedom of 00; molecules formed in the emothermal reaction
(AB: 125 heal/mole) of 00+ 0+}! recombination. In the calculation done in
Ref. 2. an ex-ination is made of the feasibility of realizing inverse popu-
lations in the system of levels of 00; molecules that are products of the
recombination reaction taking place under conditions of gasdynamic laser (60L)
operation. The author assumes that all reaction energy A! is released to
~vibrational degrees of freedom. and that this energy is distributed uniformly
with respect to the vibrational modes of the (:0; molecules. This assmption
about the dynamics of the reaction and the process of vibrational energy ex-
change in the system of levels of 002 molecules corresponds to most favorable
conditions for realization of chemical pumping ‘in the course of the 00+ 0+!
recombination reaction.

In Ref. 3 in spectroscopic studies of a steady-state c0+02 flmae (at pressure
p I 1.0 II as). nonequilibriu distribution of 002 molecules is observed with
respect to vibrational degrees of freedom (with preferred population of the
collective mode of 002). The complexity of calculations of dynamics of the
three-particle 00+ 0+)! reaction. absence of experimental data on the distri-
bution of reaction energy with respect to internal degrees-of freedom of CO:
molecules require determination and substantiation of conditions under which
recombination would lead to realisation of population inversion of laser levels
of CO; molecules.

To realize chemical pumping of laser levels of 003 molecules (XI-10.6 um). the
conditions of the experiment must on the one hand ensure a sufficient rate

of formation of vibrationally excited CO; molecules in the course of the three-
particle co+o+n recombination reaction. and on the other hand prevent their
rapid deactivation during relaxation processes. Chemical pmping is possible
if ratio Tchen/‘rel S! can be met. where Tcha'(klco1[u])-‘ is the character-
istic time of the reaction 00+ 04-11. ‘rel is the characteristic time of relaxa-
ation of vibrationally excited CO; molecules. The value of ‘chem in the reac-
tion zone is 'chem'OJ us at p: 15 atm and 1'3 2000 1!. Estimates of 1,“ under

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the same experimental conditions are made by using Anderson's relaxation scheme
lRef. 6]: tapas/eon = 2.3 us. where n is the characteristic time of relaxa-
tion of the collective mode of (:0; molecules. AB is the energy released to
vibrational degrees of freedom of (:02 in the course of an elementary act of
recombination of 00+0+H, 0 is the sagnitude of a quantum of the defamation
mode of 002.

The dependence of the rate of the three-particle recombinszion reaction on
particle density in the reaction zone is determined by the relation k~ p’ .l
and the relaxation rate is krel‘ p2° ,therefore the relation ‘c

is met. It is clear from the given estimates that the rstlo oPharacteristic
times ‘ches’lrel 51 will be satisfied if the pressure in t1e reaction zone

is 215 atm. To retain vibrational excitation of the reaction products (CO;
molecules). the drop in temperature and density must be made sufficiently
rapid that deactivation processes in the system are "frozen".

The mixer GD]. technique enables us to bring about thermodynamic conditions
necessary for chenical pulping in the reaction zone, and in the flow of reac-
tion products cooled during expansion through the nozzle. This technique
also gives us the capability of monitoring the extent of the reaction zone.
and hence the completeness of chemical and relaxation processes in the system.

In our research. we did experiments on a facility of pulsed cm. type based
on a shock tube with flat nozzle on the end face (Fig. l). The principal
structural components of the facility: fast-
action electromagnetic valve ’0 similar to that
used in Ref. 5. and nozzle-plug injector 3 of
cylindrical shape with axis parallel to the
nozzle slit. Atomic oxygen 0 was produced in
region 2 behind the reflected shock wave by
partial dissociation of O: molecules in a mix-
ture of initial composition o.aoz+o.6 Ar. The
change of pressure in region 2 was monitored
by piezoelectric sensor 21 installed close to
the end face of the shock tube. After diaphragm
l in front of the nozzlewas broken. an equi-
libriul flow of 0+ 02+Ar entered the mixing
zone. where it was mixed with the other resgent

Fig. l (CO-Hie mixture) discharged from the cavity

of valve 10 through injector 3. The configuration

of the zone in which flow intermixing and chemical

reactions occurred in the system was determined , - ///I '1
by the profile of the lateral surface of the cylin- or) m / / " /'"
drical injector and the geometry of the subsonic 7

.ennv

part of the nozzle (Pig. 2). The configuration f-g

of the mixing zone and the positions of the injector \“"
orifices determined the duration of flow intersixing o~u¢u.-’
and the length of time that the gas stayed in this / ,/ /

zone 0

 

Shaped nozzle 19 with profile described in Ref. 6 Fig. 2
was used in the experiments. Nozzle parameters:

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

height of critical cross section '1‘? I.o -. vertex half-angle «'42‘. degree
of expansion of the flow AI“: 23. It is shown in Ref. 5 that the time during
which the gas discharge from the nozzle is steady-state is ~0.2 s. The dura—
tion of existence of steady-state conditions in the ”hot" plug behind the
shock wave in the 02+Ar aixture is considerably shorter: to a OAS-0.!) ms.
Therefore triggering of the electromagnetic valve was synchronized with the
arrival of the shock wave at the end face of the shock tube in such a way

that the flow injected from the channel cavity was formed with a lead of
200-300 us before the instant when the diaphragm in front of the nozzle burst.

The physicochenical processes in our research were diagnosed on the basis

of registration of intensities of spontaneous (l- 4.3 m) and stimulated

(l- 10.6 um) infrared radiation in the working cross section of the gas flow.
and also spontaneous recombination esission accompanying the reactions
0+0+02+hv (Schmnn-Ilunge band. x- 601.0 nm) and 0+ C0+00¢+hv (continu-
280-700 rel. X- 688 nm). A diagr- of the optical channels of the system is
shown on rig. l. The course of the recombination reaction coma was monitored
by measuring the concentration of oxygen atoms in the hot plug (see Fig. l. 2)
and in the supersonic flow of reaction products in the cross section situated

at a distance of x- 50 I- from the plane of the critical cross section of
the nozzle.

The concentrations of oxygen atoms in the hot plug were determined from measure-
ments of intensity I." of radiation of 0: molecules on wavelength A- 601.0 on.
Radiation from the pre-nozzle region 2 was coupled to photomultiplier 22
(FED-39A) through fiber-optics guide 20. quartz lens 18 and monochromator

l7. Luainescence intensity I“; is related to the concentration of oxygen
atoms in the hot plug by the expression [Ref. 7]

[m ” le'... (T3) [0". (I)

where Ibo1(’) is the magnitude of the signal registered on the oscilloscope
screen corresponding to radiation on wavelength x- 601.0 III. Cu: is the cali-
bration factor of the registration system in v-K-sr/(ﬂ-cm"). l‘uﬂ‘l‘l) in
wet" oce’)/(x-eo1e’) is the value of function mm) that describes the
distribution of radiation intensity in the Schnann-Runge band at 1-6013 m.
1% is the temperature in kelvins in the hot plug after equilibrit- dissociation
of Oz nolecules is established in the mixture of initial composition 0.1.0”
0.6“. and [01 is the density in mole/cm’ of oxygen atoms in the hot plug.

The intensity of visible radiation in the supersonic flow of reaction products
(at a distance of 50 II from the plane of the critical cross section of the
nozzle) is determined mainly by the cross section in the chemiluminescent
reaction 0+C0+coz+hv. and hence depends on the concentration of oxygen
atoms. In this paper measurements were made of the radiation intensity in
the spectral range of A- 1.88: 7.5 in by using fiber-optics guide 9. inter-
ference filter 8 and photomultiplier 7 (nu-39A). According to Ref. 8. the
intensity of radiation in the given spectral interval is related the concen-
tration of oxygen atoms by expression

Ins " le‘mﬂ') [0] [C0]. (2)

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Calibration factors Cs”. C... were experimentally determined. The values
of r...('r) at T- 293 K are given in Ref. 8. To extrapolate function l'u.(‘l')
to other values of T we used the taperature dependence of the rate constant
of chemiluinescent reaction oo+o+coz+hv on temperature [sic] [Ref. 9].

At 15- 3500-3850 r in the hot plug. molecules of 02(3’23. v' -o.n make the
principal contribution to radiation ”-601.01 7.0 m. Schmnn-Runge band) of
02(B’£;)+01(X’2§)) (Ref. 7]. In accordance with the Pranzk-Condon principle
this corresponds to excitation of vibrational levels v">18 of the lower elec-
tron state of 02 (x’:;) (Ref. 101. The equilibrium population of vibrational
levels v">18 of molecules 02(X 2;) does not exceed 10" of the number of
molecules of 02(X’t'. v"-0). Analogously in the course of chemiluninescent
reaction CO+0+ (:02 +ghv (x- 1.88.0: 7.0 am) we et excitation of vibrational
levels of the ground electron state of C02(1 8) that are situated ~48 Real/mole
higher than the ground vibrational level V1W2'V3'0 of the CO;(‘ ) molecule
[Ref. 9]. These levels are also practically unpopulated under cond tions

of supersonic flow with translational temperature 'I- 150-300 ll. Because of
low population, the given levels of the 02 and CO; molecules make no contri-
bution to radiation transfer. and therefore in recording recombination radia-
tion of 0+0+02 +hv and 0+00+COz+hv in the given system there is no need
to account for reabsorption of radiation. This enables us to use relations
(I) and (2) that are valid for conditions of an optically thin layer.

The systematic error in measuring oxygen atom concentration £6 in the

hot plug is due to the error in determination of the quantity I'uoi('l') given
in Ref. 7. and also to the error in measurements of the calibration factor
cul. The overall error of measurements of the quantity £8 in the hot plug
did not exceed 201.

In the case of optical measurements in the supersonic flow (in 50 am). an

error associated with the uncertainty of values of translational temperature

is added to the above-mentioned sources of errors. Deviation of the actual
values of 1‘ in the flow from those calculated in the approximation of uniform
steady-state discharge through the nozzle is related to the possible increase

in ’1‘ due to V-‘l‘ relaxation of excited reaction products in the flow. Without
consideration of this factor. the calculated values of temperature 1‘ in the
expression are understated. and consequently the measured values of concentration
of oxygen atoms :8 are overstated. Therefore the systematic error in deter-
mination of £8 in the flow was from +30 to -701.

Infrared diagnosis of the state of the nonequilibrium flow of reaction products
in cross section x- 50 am was based on measurements of intensity of spontaneous
radiation 13,, of co, molecules in the 6.3 pm band. as well as measurements

of the small-signal gain (or absorption) Ko of the probing CO; laser radiation
(A - [0.6 pm). The vibrational temperatures of asy-Ietric (1'3) and collective
(1'2) modes of the CO; molecules that are reaction products were determined
from the measured values of 1“,; and K9. The method of determining vibrational
temperatures from characteristics of spontaneous and stimulated emission is
given in detail in Ref. II. In the given experiments. a beam from an 1.0-23
C02 electric-discharge laser (x- 10.6 um) (see Fig. l. 5) after reflection
from flat mirror 6 passed through Isl-‘2 windows IO located in cross section

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x = '30 ms and dispersion filter l5. and was incident on photoresistor llo (rsc-
Z'M). From the same cross section of the flow by means of spherical mirrors
II and 16 and narrow-band filter [2 (A-b.‘l:0.05 um) spontaneous radiation
was measured in the band of the CO; molecules with center XI L3 11! (Photo-
resistor 13).

Calibration of the system for registration of infrared radiation is described
in Ref. 11. according to which the accuracy of measurements of vibrational

temperatures T; and T2 is determined mainly by the randas error and amounts
to 101.

The parameters of the gas behind the reflected shock wave in the mixture of
initial composition 0.60¢+0.6Ar were: p.-15: 2.0 atm. Tg- 3800-6820 1:.
Results of calculation of the relative concentration

of oxygen atoms in the hot plug (assuming establishent
of equilibriu dissociation of 0 molecules) are shown
on Fig. 3. Characteristic time of establishing condi-
tions of equilibriul dissociation under the conditions
of the experiment was ~12 us. After establishment of
equilibrium dissociation of 0: molecules. the temperature
in the hot plug according to theoretical calculation
dropped to T8- 3650-3850 K. The experimentally measured
concentrations of oxygen in the hot plug are shown on
Fig. 3. The relative concentrations of oxygen atoms
under the conditions of the given experiments were
£8-0.06-0.l$ depending on the equilibrium temperature
behind the reflected shock wave T8. The measured values
of £5 average 15! less than the calculated values.

 

0n the basis of results of Ref. [2, estimates were made of the duration of

the process of intermixing flows as a jet of cone is injected in a direction
close to the normal with respect to the direction of the flow of 0+02+Ar

in the cross section where the Hach number of this flow is 1480.2. These
estimates showed that intermixing of flows is completed at distance r. ~2.5 -
from the injection point. The time of inter-mixing of flows (r.~ 5 us) is
0.7tz, where t: is the time interval from the instant of injection of gas
CO+lIe into the mixing zone to the instant of arrival of the mixed flow in
the critical cross section of the nozzle. Comparison of the characteristic
time of the recombination reaction CO+O+H (rd...) and mixing time t. shows
that these quantities are of the same order cf magnitude.

For efficient chemical pumping (rem/r,“ ‘1) under conditions of a mixing
GDL. conditions must be favorable for the chemical reaction. This requires
organization of rapid mixing of flows (‘m' ‘chem’ to produce a reaction mixture
that is uniform with respect to component makeup.

The composition of the mixture in the mixing zone was calculated in the approxi-
mation of a model of instantaneous mixing of flows under initial conditions

in the hot plug of p.13 15 atm. T. 34820 K. The relative content of principal
components in the mixing zone was: 0.0704»0.2102+0.1‘CO+0.37Ar+0.2llle.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The kinetic scheme of processes that take place in the mixing zone is described
by the following principal reactions:

o+co+ M»C0,+ M, (3)
o+o+M_.o,+M. (4)

0+0,+M_.0,+M, ' (5)
0+ O,»20,. (6)

CD + 0,..co, + o, (7)

“here "-0. 02. co. C02. Ar. he

Calculation of the relative contribution 7 made by side reactions (lo-(7)

to the consulption of atomic oxygen showed that 1 comprises about 201 of the
overall consumption of atomic oxygen. The calculation used rate constants
given in Ref. 13. 14. Thus it has been demonstrated that recombination reaction
CO+O+M under the conditions of the xperiment nakes the principal contribution
to consumption of atomic oxygen formed in the ho: plug.

As a consequence of the strong dependence of the rate of three-particle recom-
bination on particle density in the flow k-v’. the chemical reactions in

the f law are practically frozen after passing a single diameter downstream
from the critical cross section of the nozzle. Therefore. comparison of rela-
tive concentrations of oxygen atoms in the hot plug and in the supersonic

flow (x- 50 In) gives intonation on the completeness of chemical processes
with participation of atomic oxygen. It has been experimentally shown that
the relative concentration of oxygen atoms in the supersonic flow is

{.8- 0.005-0.008. which is considerably less than the concentration of these
atoms in the mixing zone :8 (5830.07 at Ti 36820 K). This result shows the
almost total completion of chemical processes with participation of atomic
oxygen in the mixing zone.

Pig. lo shove the way that radiation intensity in

the 4.3 um band of C02 molecules as recorded in

a supersonic flov (x3 50 III) of reaction products

depends on relative concentration of oxygen atoms

{8 in the hot plug. The quantity 1...; increases

linearly with increasing 58 in the range from 0.08

to 0.13. The increase in relative concentration

- £13 in the given experiments was achieved by increas-

Pig. 6 ing the initial temperature behind the reflected
shock wave in the mixture of 0.402+0.6Ar. This

led correspondingly to an increase in translational temperature T in the super-

sonic flov; however. as shown in Ref. l5. changing T has little effect on the

intensity of radiation in the 4.3 um band of CO; molecules.

 

.-',. . ur

Probing the flow of reaction products with electric-discharge CO; laser radia-
tion in cross section at - 50 - revealed absorption of laser radiation (A-

lO.6 us) with absorption coefficient Ko-0.0-0.03 m”. Vibrational temperatures
that describe the populations of levels of asymetric (T3) and collective (T7)
modes of the 002 molecules that are reaction products were determined from the

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measured values of Ko and the intensity of spontaneous radiation in the 10.3 un
hand of co; nolecules.

Vibrational tenperatures were calculated for experinental conditions with
maxi-um (in the given experinents) content of atomic oxygen in the nixing

zone (,8: 0.07 (at ‘1'. a 10820 K). The amount of energy stored in a unit wine

of gas during reconbination reaction co+o+u is proportional to the nunber

of CO; nolecules that are formed. and consequently to the initial concentration
of atomic oxygen {8. ‘mus the conditions of calculation correspond to the
naxinua contribution of energy fron reconbination reaction CO+O+H

to the total anount of energy of the gas. and consequently to the vibrational
degrees of freedon of CO; nolecules.

The state of the gas in the cross section of the flow (XI-50 II) to which
the calculated values of vibrational temperatures T; and T3 are referred cor-
responds to: 0.0600:+0.2302 +0.09 CO+0.39Ar+0.23ae. 13190 K. p32.5-10'2
atn. The values of the vibrational tenperatures of C02 nolecules were:

T3 3 2080 K. T: 31100 K.

The experinentally obtained high values of '1‘; evidence appreciable excitation
of vibrational levels of CD: as a result of reactions that occur in the mixing
zone. We will show that excitation of the say-Ietric node of CO; molecules
is due to the reconbination reaction co+o+n. and that the contribution of
other chenical processes is minor. Consider the kinetic ache-e of chemical
processes with participation of hydrogen-containing inpurities Hz (320) . Ac-
cording to the technical specifications of the degree of purity for the gases
used in the experiments (02, CO. Ar. lie) the content of inpurities 330120)
does not exceed 6-10'5 mole fraction. Additional purification of 02 and CO
was done by fractional distillation of the gases. Argon was dried in a trap
with liquid nitrogen (1‘3 77 K). Hith low content of inpurities a, (8:0). the
kinetic act-ens of the reactions in the system 60+ 02+ll2(l120) in addition

to reactions (3)-(7) includes the following processes:

I
own—1011+“, (g)
n.
H + oaﬁ 0" + 0. (9)
“no
0 + ",0 3:: 20". (10)
'10
‘II
II HLOr—‘ll: s on, (11)
'II
‘12
(204-01131! C0,-|- ll, (12)
-l!
h
0 .1. It won—'1 on I. M. (as)
I
o, +11.|-M-'1|Io,+ M. (M)
24

FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The values of reaction constants (8)-(llo) are given in Ref. 13. ‘4. Under
the conditions of the experiment we have the ratio of concentrations [0].

[021>>[Hzl(19201)o

Analysis of kinetic reaction scheme (8)-(llo) can be conveniently divided into
two cases: a) hydrogen Hz is the predominant impurity in the initial mixture;
b) the principal hydrogen-containing impurity is from 1120 molecules.

In case a). calculation in the approximation of rapid establisbent of quasi-
".eady concentrations of atoms H and radicals on (dull/dc ::d[08]/dt :0) with
consideration of conservation of the number of atoms 11 in a unit value of
the reacting mixture written as

llll+101l|+2lllll - 2|I|=|., (15)
leads to the relation

. IOIII _ h. a
5 “NJ. ”23,—, k.l6|'?k_,-l-l I.~.!b_.' (‘6)

With variation of the parameters in the mixing zone ‘l‘c- 1660-1820 K, (8-0.06—
0.07. the value of 2 ranges from 0.16 to 0.18. Thus the content of Oil radicals
is practically constant in the formulated experiments (assuming the same ini-
tial content of II: impurities in the investigated mixtures).

Consideration of the other mechanism of formation of 011 radicals with partici-
pation of water vapor impurities (case b) leads to the relation [on] = Zlﬂzol
since chemical equilibrium in the main reaction (10) of this mechanism is
strongly shifted to the right. Analysis of both mechnisms of formation of

0H radicals shows that the OH content in the mixing zone remains constant
with an appreciable change in conditions in the hot plug: To- 4000-10820 K.
55-0.o7~o.13.

If the vibrationally excited molecules of co; (v3) were formed in reaction

(12). the rate of formation of co; molecules would be determined by the re-
lation

d|C0:(V,)| -_; Ir..lCOll0|ll _|CO, (”an -l°°.("a)l' (17)

l“ ‘|

where 11 is the characteristic time of relaxation of molecules of 0020);)

in the reaction zone. (0020:,” is the equilibrium content of 001(v3) in the
reaction zone at Tc- 1820 K. pc= 15 atm. Under conditions of dynamic equilib-
rium between processes of chemical pumping and deactivation of levels of
C02(V3) (at dlc02(V3)]/dt :0) we have the condition

l(‘.0,(\-,)I - [(2();(v,)l + kurJCOl [01”. (18)

The time of establishing this mode is -0.02 us. From an examination of the
quantities appearing in the right member of equation (18) we see that the
values of 1). R12. [C02 (vs)] very weakly over a range of Tc- 1660-1820 K.
5.8- 0.07-0.13. The concentration of 0B radicals. as shown by analysis of
kinetic reaction scheme (8)-(llo) with participation of impurities of II; (or
ll ,0) and co molecules, remained almost constant in all experiments.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expression ([8) shows that the content of vibrationally excited molecules
of 002 (v3) should be unchanged in the mixing zone in the supersonic flow.
The experiments showed linear dependence of MAGS) (see Fig. 6) at £8-
0.07-0.13. Since I..;~ [00;(v3)l. comparison of the experimental plot of
t~.3(€5) and expression (18) demonstrates the validity of the sssmption of
the insignificant contribution of reactions (8)411.) with participation of
112 (1120) to formation of 002(v3).

The concentration of molecules of 002 (v3) under conditions of quasi-steadiness
of reaction C0+ 0+ 11-» 0039-11 and processes of vibrational relaxation satisfies

the relation

Equation (19) shows that I.,,~ [002093)] ~ 56 (or £8). Thus the sssuption
of chemical pining of 0020).) during recodinstion reaction CO+O+H¢003+H
is in agreement with the experimentally obtained plot of I.,3(£5).

1n the given analysis of the dependence Is,3(€ﬁ). we used results of infrared
diagnosis of vibrationally excited molecules of 00201;); therefore the question
of the possible contribution of reaction (12) to formation of CO; molecules

in the ground vibrational state requires separate consideration. "hen the
value of 1:12 from [Rah] 16 is used, it is shown that the maxim content

of 002 molecules formed in reaction (12) does not exceed 0.3: of the total
concentration of particles in the reaction zone. Thus the given analysis

of the kinetics of chemical processes in the system of reagents using equations
(ID-(16) and analysis of the experimental dependence l.,.(€8) indicate that

the main reaction leading to formation of CO; molecules is recombination reac-
tion 00+ 0+ 11.

The values of '1': 3 2080 K found in the experiments correspond to a such greater
population of levels of the say-etric mode of 00; molecules that are the
reaction products of recombination (by a factor of 1.6) than when the levels

of this mode are populated in the mixing 001. based on inert mixtures of
coz+nz+ne at initial temperature in the hot plug of T. I 3850 K. The con-
siderable population (1‘; a 1100 K) of levels of the collective node of co; mole-
cules is the reason for absorption of probing radiation (1- 10.6 um). despite
the high values of vibrational temperature of the asynetric mode T3. Reali-
zation of conditions that favor relaxation of levels of the collective mode

of (:0: molecules that are reaction products should lead to population inversion
in the system of vibrational levels of these molecules.

Experiments were done with displacement of the probing region downstrema to
the flow cross section situated at distance x- 95 II from the plane of the
critical cross section of the nozzle. In this case. amplification of the

(:0; probe laser radiation was observed in the stream of 002 molecules. The

measured gains were 31.3 m'1 (Fig. 5). ,5‘
in this research. experiments were done with '3 ,0 ‘
partial replacement of the helium in the CO+11e to '

mixture by carbon dioxide injected from the M
valve cavity. These experiments enable esti- "
nation of the influence that CO: molecules

 

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formed in the initial stage of mixing of streams of 0+ 02+Ar and 00+ He.
and possibly having lost a considerable part of the vibrational excitation.
have on the gain in the expanding flow. The action of this mechanism was
simulated by introducing "cool" CO; molecules into the 00+lle mixture.

The measured values of gain K. = 1.3 In"1 showed little change as 560 ranged
iron 0 to 0.03 (see Fig. 5) (51:02 is the relative concentration of 602 mole-
cules introduced into the tent nixture as calculated in the approximation
of the instantaneous nixing model for streams of 0+02+Ar and CO+COz+ae).

A further increase in concentration in a range of 5&02-0. 03-0. 08 led to a
reduction in gain from I. 3 to 0.6 a' . Since the rate of reaction 0+002+
CO+02 is small. introducing "cool" molecules of 002 into :he mixture injected
from the valve cavity has little effect on chemical equilibrium in the system.
The observed reduction in K. with increasing 560, is thus due to the partici-
pation of co; molecules introduced into the CO+he mixture in relaxational
V-‘l' and V—V' processes.

Thus in this research we have realized chemical pumping of levels of the asym-
metric mode of (:0: molecules populated in the course of re:ombination reaction
00+ 0+ H. Population inveision was achieved in the system of levels (00°1-
10°0) of (:0: molecules formed in the course of this reaction under mixing
cm. conditions.

REFERENCES

I. Biryukov. A. 8.. TRUDY FIZICHESKOGO INS'l'I'l'U‘l‘A lHENI P. N. LBBEDEVA.
Vol 83. Moscow. Nauka. 1975.

2. Carrington. T.. Garvin. 0.. in "Voabuzhdennyye chastitsy v khimicheskoy
kinetike" [Excited Particles in chemical Kinetics]. Noscov. Mir. 1973.

3. Koopmann.k. K.. Saunders.A.R.. J. QUART. SPEC“. RAD. ‘l'RANS.. Vol 10.
1970. P #03.

lo. Anderson. J. D.. PHYS. FLUIDS. Vol 13. 1970. p 1983.

S. Kroshko. V. N.. Soloukhin. R. 1.. Pomin. N. A.. in: "Gazovyye lasery"
[Gas Lasers). Moscow. Nauka. 1977.

6. Ktalkherman. a. c.. Hal'kov. v. M. et al.. rum conannm I vzmm.
Vol IS. 1979. p 6.

7. Nyers. B. P.. Burtle. E. R.. J. CHEM. PHYS” Vol 48. No 9. 1968. p 3935.

8. Pravilov. A. P.. ZNURNAL PIZICHBSKOY Klill‘lll. Vol 52. No 8. I978. p 1863.

9. Clyne. H. A.. Thrush. B. A.. PROC. ROY. SOC. LONDON. V01 A269. [962, p 1005.

[0. Cilmoure. F” J. QUART. SPEC’l‘R. RAD. TRANS.. Vol 5. 1965. p 369.

ll. Kudryavtsev. N. N.. Novikov. S. S.. Svetlichnyy. I. 3.. KVAN'I‘OVAYA
ELEKTRONIXA. Vol 6. No A. 1979. p 6%.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

I3.

110.

ls.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Konpantyeto. V. 2.. Ovsyanntkov. A. A” Polak, L. 5.. "nuntcheoktye
reaktsu v turbulentnykh potokakh gnu 1 plat-y" [Che-teal Reactions
in Turbulent Flow: of Gas and Plum]. Moscow. Ranks, 1979.

londrat'yev. V. IL. "Konstanty akorostey gasofazuykh reaktsly" [Rate
Constants of Gas-Phase nations]. Moscow. Nauka, 197‘.

Baulch. D. I... Dryulale. D. D.. Boron. 0. 0.. "Bvdmted Kinetic Data
for ugh-Taverna“ Reactions". Vol 1. 2, luttcnvortho. 1972.

Kudryavtm. N. IL. Novikov. s. 8.. 1n: "Material, vcoroy Vuooyuznoy
konferentau po utodu acroftztchesktkh iasledovanly" [Materials of the
Second All-Union Cantu-once on Hathods of Aerophyucal Research], Novo-
sibirsk. 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "Nam". "nub goronlya 1 vzryva". 1982

6610

CSO:

[862/186

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPTOBLECTRDNICS

THEORY OF DYNAHIC IMAGE SELECTION EFFECT IN PROTOREPRACTIVE MEDIA

Leningrad FIZIXA TVBRDOGO TBLA in Russian Vol 24. No 2. Feb 82 (manuscript
received 16 Jul 81) pp 337-363

[Article by V. V. Bryksin. L. l. Korovin, H. P. Petrov and A. V. Khomenko,
Physicotechnical Institute imeni A. F. Ioffe. USSR Academy of Sciences, Lenin-
grad]

[Text] A model of a photorefractive median is proposed

that leads to the phenomenon of dynamic selection of images
--flashing of images in the recording light after it is
switched off in the geometry of a PRIZ optical electro-
modulator. The results of the theory for diffraction ef-
ficiency of the medium as a function of the time of exposure
of the recording beam and the frequency of its spatial modu-
lation agree qualitatively with experiments done on 31.25102.
crystals.

Inca-tigerion of processes of optical data recording in nhotorefractive crys-
tals has led to the detection of an unusual ettect -— suppression of stationary
parts of images being recorded. and isolation of the nonstationary parts [Ref.
II. This phenomenon. which has been termed the effect of dynamic selection

of images. may be treated under certain conditions as time differentiation

of an unsteady pattern presented to the crystal. whereas the response of light-
sensitive media is usually proportional to the integrated action of an optical
input signal. Experimentally. the effect of dynamic selection of images has
been observed in image recording on a thin (30.5 I.) 31281029 single crystal
plate cut in plane [111] or [110] when an electric field of 1440‘ Won 1.
applied to this plate by transparent electrodes applied to the faces of the
plate parallel to the given planes. If an image in blue or green light is
presented under these conditions to the given structure (which is called a
PRIZ light modulator). with readout at the same time in polarized red light.
the readout light will show mainly the nonstationary parts of the recording
isage. The principal characteristics of this experiment are readout light
intensity of 310‘5-10‘“ H. rate of change in input information 31-0.! a.

degree of suppression of stationary part of the image 10-20 dB.

Experiments done with the PRIZ modulator show that image recording arises
due to excitation of photocarriers by the recording light. the charge

29

FOR 0FFHJA1.USE(HNLY
FIMICHNHCIAL USIZCNNLV

redistribution being proportional to the distribution of intensity of the
recording light. The resultant charge distribution causes electric fields

to appear in the crystal. giving rise to spatial modulation of birefringence.
The polarised readout light undergoes a change in the state of polarization
due to the transverse electro-optic effect. It has been experimentally estab-
lished that with slow changes of input signal intensity J(x. y. t). the phase
difference A¢(a. y. t) between the ordinary and extraordinary readout beans

at the output of the device is proportional to dJ/dt (Ref. 2]. Although at
present the relation between the electro-optical characteristics of the crystal
and the condition of image recording has been fairly well established both
experimentally and theoretically [Ref. 3]. and we also have some idea of the
nature of charge distribution under steady-state conditions [Ref. 2]. nonethe-
less the dynamic behavior of the system leading up to the effect of dynamic
selection of images has not been studied. and there are not even any reliable
qualitative ideas about the nature of this effect.

This paper is the first to present a theoretical analysis of a model picture
that allows us to establish the major causes leading to the effect of dynamic
selection of images.

I. Qualitative Picture of the Phenomenon

when the transverse electro-optic effect is used. the phase difference A§(x.
y, t) is proportional to the integral characteristic 1(x. y. t) of the trans-
verse field 31 that is set up in the specimen [lef. 6]

‘a
H:- v. n= § E. (x. v. .. mu. m
C

where the z-axis is opposite to the direction of the external field 30 applied
to the specimen. and do is the thickness of the specimen. An important charac-
teristic of the photorefractive medium is diffraction efficiency n. In the
case where M< 1. it can be considered with fair accuracy that n~ (A02. and
consequently n is proportional to the square of the amplitude of modulation

of the quantity I(x. y. t).

 

Fig. 1. Schematic picture of the change in direction of

transverse fields By in time. Solid arrows in regions 3

and 4 indicate the direction of By under lighting. and the

broken arrows indicate the direction of B, after lighting

is switched off. The direction of the light beam is shown

to the left of the y—axis. It is assumed that light is
completely absorbed at distance 0".

30

lN)!‘0F1WC1Al.lI§EI(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The qualitative picture of dependence of I on time t. which is what deternines
the effect of dynamic selection of images. can be explained in the following
way. To simplify the discussion. let us assume that there are illuminated

and unilluninated sections of the plate surface. In an illuminated section
(region 1). after the light is switched on. photoelectrons and ionization
donors appear (see Fig. 1). Charge separation begins in an external field

2.. If diffusion processes are disregarded. the space charge will extend

over the illuminated regions along the z-axis (region 2). Assuming that dif-
fusion takes place slowly compared with motion in the external field. the
entire process of establishment of the steady state in the systen can be broken
down into two stages: establishment of a quasisteady state in regions 1 and

2. and spreading of the charge in direction y on the second stage (into regions
3 and 4). 0n the first stage the negative charge is balanced that consists
of the electrons in the band and those captured by traps in regions 1 and 2.
This balancing under conditions of electroneutrality of the specimen leads

to charge separation. In the process of charge separation. region I is posi-
tively charged with respect to region I; the transverse field is directed

from 1 toward 3 (solid arrows on Fig. 1). In region 2. which is negatively
charged. 3, takes the opposite direction. Conditions in an experiment are
usually such that oda> l (o is the coefficient of absorption). and therefore
region 1 is smaller than region 2. is a result. the shielding action of the
metal electrodes (shielding length of the order of a period of spatial modula-
tion 30) reduces the total field E" more strongly in region 1 than in region 2.
Thus on the first stage the main contribution to l(t) is from the field between
regions 2 and b. This stage is characterized by an increase in image bright-
ness.

0n the second stage. the negative charge of electrons in the band and on traps
is equalized by diffusion along y. In such equalization the contribution

to I(t) from the negative charge gradually disappears. The quantity I(t)
begins to decrease in absolute value. vanishes. and after sufficiently long
tines reaches a steady-state positive value that is determined by the contri-
bution to field E, from nonuniformly distributed positively charged donors.
As we can see from the following. image storage takes place on this stage.

After lighting is switched off. the system arrives at the initial equilibriua
state. and free electrons in region 1 recombine on donors. Recombination
will continue due to electrons from region 2 that enter region 1 through the
external circuit. And if diffusion in the transverse direction is the slowest
process. no negative charge will remain in regions I and 2. whereas a positive
charge will remain in region 1 since some of the electrons are distributed

in regions 3 and 6. On this stage. a transverse field arises between regions
2 and 4 (broken arrows on Fig. I) so that the directions of the field coincide
between regions 2. 4 and l. 3. This leads to a further increase in I(t) as
conpared with the steady-state value. Diffusion from regions 3. 6 into 1. 2
begins to reduce the field 2,. and the electrons entering region I recombine
on donors. As a result this leads to total disappearance of the local charge
and the internal field.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Description of Model and Principal Equations

Let us consider a dielectric (photoconductor) with two systems of discrete
levels: donor levels with concentration nd and trap levels with concentration
nt. Of all possible transitions between levels and the conduction band. in
future we will consider transitions from donors in the conduction band under
the action of light and recombinations from the conduction band on donors,

and also capture of band electrons by traps and thermal ejection of electrons
from trap levels into the bend. with consideration of this. the systen of
equations studied below for determining electron concentration n in the band.
the concentration of ionized donors n+ and charged traps n- can be written as

“9+L_MM-¢uwa+Mmuw. m
and“ -r¢ (‘s - 0'“. y) I; - My. (3)
0a.!“ - '"HI‘I - "-I‘t- N)

here e is the modulus of the electronic charge. u is carrier mobility in the
conduction band. gF(z. y) is the rate of generation of electrons from donor
levels under conditions of nonuniforn illumination. 6(to- t) is the Heaviside
function (step) that switches off the light at time to; light is switched

on at time t-IO. It is assumed that the light is modulated along the y-axis.

Processes of recombination and capture in equations (3) and (A) that are non-
linear in nature are approxinated by linear processes: recombination on donors
is described by term n+/14. and capture on traps is described by term nnt/et
(rd is the effective tine of recombination on donors. 0; is the constant of
capture on traps). This approach disregards depletion of donor levels and

the nonlinear term that limits filling of traps. These approximations are
valid when conditions n+<<nd. n-<<nt are met (n- is the concentration of
charged traps). which corresponds to illumination levels that are not too
high. After switching off the recording light. the system can be returned

to the initial state only if the electr ns are moving in a direction perpen-
dicular to the external electric field 9. In this connection. equation (2)
takes consideration of electron diffusion along the y-axis. Accounting for
diffusion processes along the external field should not cause any qualitative
change in the results. The right-hand part of equation (2) is the divergence
of current density in which the term nVo is omitted, i. e. the influence of
internal fields on electron motion is disregarded. Here 0 is the potential

of the internal fields. 1. e. the field that arise as a result of charge
redistribution after discOunting field 0- The distribution of electric fields
is determined from Poisson's equation

V1 - (suit) (a -2- a- — 13.), (5)

where c is the permittivity of the crystal. Let us note that equations (2)-
(b) are a linearized version of the general system of nonlinear equations
that describe the way that internal fields in the crystal depend on time and
coordinates in the presence of spatially modulated illumination and under
conditions of current passing through the specimen (Ref. 5].

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For further analysis it is convenient to convert to dinensionless variables

Nan/n‘. N‘undn‘. {-u, snug.
ﬂ :- uEm‘. t - ukfe‘r‘le. 0 - and... (6)
a ‘- ‘ll‘lo ‘ - ‘l‘l- . - u"“‘"")v

in which equations (2)-(S) take the for-

0(N + N- - NJI‘k -WNIK + WNIOE’.
dwelt-“(‘0 "’ ‘D “p (Q 0 -‘ Ne-
alv_m-sN—.N-. u-ldu.
[(J’IK') + (WW)! 0 - N + N- - N.-
It is assued below that lighting intensity is nodulated by a cosine law.
and dasps out exponentially into the plate. so that NC. 5) is equal to

FK- E) = GIN-O [1 +bcos(l. ()1. I-Nklalo (8)
3. Integral Characteristic of Transverse Field

In virtue of the linearity of equations (6) and the selected form of light
nodulation, all unknown quantities (concentrations of electrons. ionized donors
and charged traps. and also the internal field potential) are representable

as Aa-Bcosre. where A and 3 do not depend on 5. Since a contribution pro-
portional to A does not lead to a transverse field. we consider below only

the contribution proportional to B. i. e. the first (and in this sense the
only) Fourier conponent of the internal field. Therefore only the first har-
nonics of the concentrations and potential are considered below (without chan-

ging the symbols) .

(7)

In the internal transverse electro-optic effect. the diffraction efficiency n
of the light-sensitive medium is deter-ined by modulation of the phase dif-
ference M. Therefore we investigate below the first harmonic of the dimen-
sionless characteristic of the transverse field (see formula (1))

‘
I(1)-a§§((.t)ﬁ. a=.a.. (a)
0

The solution of system of equations (7) is given in the Appendix. 1(1) takes
the form

I! («Macon = 8 mm. - o -_- [WM — W h - u) 0 h - an. ('0)

where U is the sun of the exponentials and of the oscillating part

Wm -W m + c (mum—pm + c (m “IN-rm + 6. up (4) (M)

(analogously for "(1'- r.)). 3(1) (see ll. 6)_ corresponds to the steady-state
value of I. i. e. when ro+- and 1+ on. and H is the sun of the oscillating
terms

0
w mm“ M :Lplzﬂ
‘V(*l=-72“°{‘_F‘—‘Tu-mw+ )[ mm + Hrs) ]} m)

hul

I(P)=p(1—r)l'+9~(~-r)"|- .s-Mld- I ('3)
0 — |1 — exp (—d)| lh (Id/2).

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

The period of oscillations and da-ping of exponentials in (12) is detenined

O

by quantities pg

n-r'(o+-+a~+m.um=wwmr m)

The nature of the oscillations of 1(r) is analogous to that described in
Ref. 5. Coefficients C and C1 are equal to

cm-Hmm-m —up(—amr'm. (15)
C. - (I - cr' «0 on- (cam - u a - up (-am Is + mm lc‘ - I'l" +
+(1+t"m5(1))| m)

where q- q(-l) is given in the Appendix (II. 1). Curves of the tine dependence
of I calculated by fornulas (lO)-(l6) are given on Fig. 2 and 3.

 

Pig. 2. “fine dependence of integral
characteristic of transverse field

at different values of the external
field 3.. Valuer-B: 1-40“. 2-
540“, 3--.;¢u-10's. 0-10". al.-
100, a- 10. 5- 5-10". bg :d- 10".
Curve 3 increases free 0 to the extre-
nm value in tine 142" at the se-
lected values of psraneters in tine

1' ~ loo

 

Pig. 3. The dependence of integral
characteristic of transverse field
at different tines of switching off
the lighting. Values of to: 1—
0.6-10 . 2—1.5o10’. 3--3.o-lo’.
Solid curve corresponds to true.
19-10". 9-10'2. 013-10. deco.
5-10“, s--10' . bg up 10"

A. Discussion of Results and Conparison With Experiment

As can be seen from Fig. 2 and 3. the proposed nodal leads to a tine dependence
[(1') that in general features coincides with that found in section 1 fro-
qualitative considerations. lf conditions are net that preclude oscillations
of the quantity 1. i. e. for the interval of fairly veal: and fairly strong
fields (Pig. 2). then the tine dependence of I2 behaves as follows. I2 passes

through a anti-u. vanishes. and then settles to a steady value. The vanishing
of the I2 should show up in the experieent as a single flicker of the image.
A rather significant property of this eodel is the appearance of a marina in

36

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the response of the media to switching off illusination. i. e. one of the
manifestations of dynamic selection of images. The maximun of the intensity
of the flash in the readout light after switching off the Lighting depends
strongly on the switch-off time. and for small switch-off times practically
disappears. For example the ratio of the maximu- of I2 for curve 3 to the
maxim. for curve 1 (shown by broken lines on Pig. 3) is I).

Let us now turn to analysis of the dependence of I3 on the frequency of spatial
modulation of light K/ZI (let us recall that 1’.2 determines the diffraction
efficiency n of the medium). Since the function 1(a) is parsmetrically depen-
dent on time. it is convenient to study the dependence on n: at mall r. where
1(1) depends linearly on time. If we assune that and}, 6<<l. than at suf-
ficiently small times in formula (ll) we can omit terms proportional to

exp (-1), exp (-pﬁr) and exp (-ptr). Besides. if we disregard diffusion at

small times. then term exp (-pﬁt) is very weakly dependent on 1. Finally.

if we assume that m>>pi (i. e. musk). then foraula (10) is simplified,

worse 0:
"""—75‘_§ ( + H- +')' (m

Smiling the series. we finally get for I2

l’ (1) — (bf—g). {WP th {- — u. ﬂ’. (18)»

 

110245,! 1102' 50
131. lines/III

Fig. lo. Diffraction efficiency in relative units as a function of spatial

frequency of lighting modulation. The crosses denote experimental values.

The arros shows the point of coincidence of the experimental and theoretical
curves; d-0.72 (do-1000 um. (:0 18 cm")

He see fro. (18) that at mllx, 1’ --<, and then 12 passes through a maxim-

(at Kuxid), and as x-ND. Iz-r" (Fig. lo). The dependence of n on n: has
been experimentally observed on a PRIZ modulator in which the active element

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

was a 31.28103. single crystal plate 1.00 so thick. The recording was done in
AC laser light (in A76 ya. a- 18 cu”). The experimental points are shown

on Pig. 6. At slall values of spatial frequencies (131<l line/.). the linear
section of the dependence 5“) was not experimentally observed. which pre-
cludes neasurelent of n(-<) in this frequency region. however. the experiaental
curve for dependence of n on the {spatial frequency neasured in the region

of nonlinear tine dependence of n has a naxilmn at 1'." of about 1 line/-
[Ref. 6]. which agrees with the conclusions of the theory.

Conparison of the results of the theory presented in this paper with the avail-
able experiaantal data [Ref. [-6] shows that the proposed nodal qualitatively
explains the principal observed effects: the presence of dynamic selection

of inges. the presence of a maximal in '10:). dependence not) ~x'2 as n+0.
However. quantitative conparison on the given-stage is extrenely difficult

in view of the absence of reliable experinental values of the relaxation char-
acteristics of photostinulated centers and charges (rd. 6‘, ‘t)' Therefore.
the proposed aechanisa at present cannot be considered the only possible or
predo-inant aechanisn for the specific conditions under which the experiaental
studies were done (31128102. crystal. type of contacts. range of applied fields
and lighting intensities and so on).

Appendix

After Laplace transforaation of equations (7) with respect to tine under zero
initial conditions for all concentrations. and elilination of 8:. we get an
equation for electron concentration

m o 0 -ul— (- .) .
Emu)!” " "(UL "" ”'=-0. (0.!)

m) - —(I'M) - (P/B) II -I- 9 (P + ~)"l
(p is the Laplace variable. “I to/rd). Equation (II. I) was solved under
the condition of electroncutrality of the speciaen

‘
S«(N+N--~.)-o. mm
0

Setting up the conbination N+N--N+. we get the Poisson equation for the
first harmonic of the potential

:09
I; — I" - I’. arm—st) + V.srp(—{). (fl. 3)

V: = 54m luv (—4) — II I! - OIP(-rn)lr"(r-I-1)"(q -- I)".
V-=-6m(| - will) If - elm-m)! r' l..- + i)" (a —1;".

Solving equation (n. 3) with boundary conditions 0(0) - O(d)-0. we get the
potential in the Laplace representation

9- V.0(o)+r.0(1). (l1. 0
0 (v) - («1’ - I’)" (an M)" Ir“ an (a) — a-« sh M, — sh . (a — OI.

Integrating O with respect to c free 0 to d. and nultiplying by It. we get Hp)

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’(P)-—V15(9)- V35“)- (“-5)
3-(0 = (1' — I’)" 1‘ + “IN—1‘"IUI(id/2)-(III)U|(¢4I2)I-' (ﬂ. 6)

Inverse Leplece transformation of quantity I(p) leads to f omula (10). which
gives the exact expression for 1(1) in the given nodel.

I.

2.

3.

4.

5.

REFERENCES

Petrov. H. P.. Hmonko. A. V.. Herekhonov. V. l.. Shlyegin. H. 0., ”8'!“
V ZBURRAL MWICIIBSKDY PIZIH. Vol 6. 1980, p 385.

Petrov. H. P.. "Prineneniye netodov opticheekoy obrebotki infoneteii
v gologrefii" [Using Methods of Optical Data Processing in Holography].
collection edited by S. B. Gurevich V. I. Sokolov. Leningrad. Physica-
technical Institute. 1980. p 203.

PetrOV. H. P.. Khomenko, A. V., FIZIKA 'rvmnoco rm. Vol 23. 1981. p 1350.

Petrov. H. P., Ibo-calm, A. V.. Shlyagin. H. 0.. Herekhonov. V. 1..
Kraoin'kove. H. V.. 231mm. mmmuzsxov PIZIKI. Vol 51. 1981, p 1422.

Bryksin. V. V., Korovin. L. 1.. Petrov, H. P.. Khoeenko. A. V.. FIZIKA
TVBRDOGO Tm. Vol 21:, No l, 1982.

COPYRIGHT: lad-tel'otvo ”Neuka". "Pizike tverdogo tela", 1982

6610

(280:

[862/162

37

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1100 537.533.001
USIﬂG OPTICAL DATA PROCESSING

Moscow OPTIMSKAYA I omnzxmmu osunom WHATS“ in Russian 1976
(signed to press 30 Aug 76) pp 155-2110

[Chapter 6 from book "Optical and Optoelectronic Data Processing". by Valeriy
Konstantinovich Ablekov. Petr Ivanovich Zubltov and Aleksandr Viktorovich
Prolov. Izdatel'stvo 'Mashinostroyeniye". 6000 copies. 235 pages]

[Text] The field of optical data processing includes variOus methods of measur-
ing and transaitting optical signals. The purpose of optical processing is

to separate the signal from noise. to measure its individual parameters. to
filter the spatial frequencies of the signal. and also to synthesize indi-
vidual optical systems.

6.1. Optical Systems for l'iltering and Isolating Signals Against a Noise
Background

One of the inportant jobs of filtration is that of producing an optical system
vith transfer function B(u)-l [Ref. 66. 166]. Let us assure that there are

n linear systems connected in series. The spectrum of the signal at the output
of the last system is defined by the expression

Fonde)— H.(u)H,(u)...H.(u)F1n(u).

where Hn(u) is the transfer function of the n-th system. Theoretically. we
can create such a system in which

D—Il

hum-I’ll I] H,(u). (as. I)

I 0+!

in this case. the overall transfer function is equal to 1. In practice. con-

dition (6.1) cannot be satisfied since any optical system has a limited en-
l—l a

trance pupil. If n I] lid”) has a series of zeros or approaches zero for high
u in

spatial frequencies. then transfer function 8km) must have a large value

for frequencies corresponding to these zeros. This cannot be done for passive

filters. However, for a limited frequency band in a stall region near the

optical axis condition (6.1) can be satisfied.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The problem of determining the transfer function can be approached from another
standpoint. viz. as a problem in reconstructing the initial function when

it is transmitted by a discrete set of arbitrarily shaped pulses [Ref. 66].

Let us isolate a function f(x) that is limited with respect to spectrum (-uo.
N.) from a sequence of equidistant pulses (Fig. 6.1):

mun-=2 rams—w.

where the readout interval is x.<r/u..

 

Fig. 6.1. On determining the ideal optical system

If F1(u)- O{f1(x)}. then

3-} o In. Cc.

”Aide's [(nale-‘u-zng F .+.2;‘:_)-“2 F(‘+9ML

Passing such a signal thrOugh a filter with transfer function
I. I'll <3.
u(.)=.[ (8.2)
QM>% -

we get a signal at the output in the form of the Fourier spectrum P;(u)ﬂ(u)-
P(u) of initial function f(x).

Now let us assume that to reconstruct the distribution of f(x), rather than
taking the sequence of pulses f1(x). we use the signal

tum-2'; mam—u.»

where h.(x) is an arbitrary function selected from considerations of simplicity
in obtaining it. Obviously fo(x) can be treated as the output signal of a
hypothetical filter with input signal f.(x) and response function ho(x). If

H (‘)=. ”a“, ”i (u) (6' 3)

is a function defined by expression (6.2). then the system will be ideal.
This method appreciably improves optical imaging systems.

Another iaportsnt job of filtration is signal detection against a noise back-
ground. If the useful signal at the input to the systen is f(x). and noise
or interference is n(x). then to maximize the signal/noise power ratio. the

39

INJR‘OFTWCJAL USEZ(NNLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transfer function of the optima system is lief. I9. 181.]

I-gptah '71? . (s. 4)

where N(u) is the noise spectrun.

For the case of white noise. where the sputum is constant. the resultant
expression takes the for. “opt .. F*(u).

Thus for the simplest cases the systen is a matched or coqlex-conjugate filter.

The matched filtration technique also enables solution of the pattern recog-
nition problem. Let a signal f- f‘+fz+f,+ ...+fn go to the input of a
systen. and let the systee perform the operation of latched filtration. we
pass the signal ainultaneously or sequentially through n filters with transfer
functions ll;*(u). B:*(u)...., lln*(u).

The corresponding response functions of these filters are normalized relative
to the energy contained in each component of the input signal. Under this
condition. the signal at the output of the systaa is naxiau for the channel
where the corresponding component is filtered by its own matched filter.

The intensity for the k-th conponent is defined as

. 13"“?4 mm
[mm -.

Using the Solver: inequality. we get
I; Hf; arc} [HJ‘dsi [FA-u.

which implies that I.<5 [Hide-1..

If the signals are different in scale. we can write ln-Clk. where C< l, i. e.
slight differences in scale lead only to a reduction of signal intensity.
Thus natched filters can be used to detect any signal of a set that is known
beforehand.

Optical filtration of a signal is most easily accomplished in coherent systens
of sequential Fourier transfornation (Fig. 6.2).

40

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 6.2. Diagram of optical filtration

Having the spectrum of spatial frequencies of input signal f(x. y) in plane P2.
we acquire the capability of changing the amplitude and phase of each com-
ponent F(u. v) individually. i. e. we can perform the operation of filtration.
Let us assume that a transparency is placed in plane P2 with complex amplitude
of transmission H(u. v)- 0{h(x. y)}. Field distribution immediately behind

the transparency is U+(u. v)-F(u v)a(u. v). As a result of secondary Fourier
transformation by lens L2, we get signal g(x. y) in plane P3. which is equal to

((x. 958C 5] F (u. v) H (m. v)e‘""*:'”dudv-

-—jj/(z.m(x-e. y—nMEd‘I.
Thus a correlation signal is observed at the output.

In an analogous way we can perform the operation of filtration in all other

systems of optical convolution. For example. for imaging systems with inco-
herent illumination that are linear relative to the input signal intensity.

the operation of filtration is performed by placing the filter in the plane

of the exit pupil since intensity distribution in this plane and the distri—
bution in the image plane are related by a Fourier transform. Such a method
(apodization) is used to reduce aberrations and for a posteriori correction

of a photographic image [Ref. 57. 156].

Limitation of the spatial frequency band takes place in optical systems. For
example in the arrangement represented in Fig. 6.2 the pupil of lens L1 is

such a limitation. The range of frequencies transmitted is increased if trans-
parency f(x. y) is placed immediately in front of lens L1. In this case.

a quadratic phase coefficient will appear in the formula for Fourier trans-
formation of the input signal. As a rule. this coefficient has no appreciable
effect on the course of filtration. It should be recalled that the ratio
between the product of Fourier transforms and the convolution formula is real
only for spatially invariant systems. This fact imposes a condition of input

41

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£‘DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and observation of the signal in isoplanatic regions (paraxial region). Since
we have explained the influence of these factors previously. we will assume
for the sake of simplicity that the system is free of aberrations. spatially
invariant and transmits all frequencies characterizing the input signal. As
has alreadybeenpointedout.there are two mathematically equivalent approaches
for analyzing optical systems. This fact dictates two methods as well for
synthesizing the required filters.

For synthesis in the frequency region. a filter with a certain transfer charac-
teristic 8(u. v) is introduced in the Fourier transform plane of the signal.
and acts directly on its spectral makeup. For synthesis in the spatial region.
a filter with response function h(x. y) (reference mask) is placed in the
image plane and changes the signal at the input to the system. Both methods
give the same result; however. the display of the output signal is different.
In the case of transformations in the frequency region. the resultant signal

is detected in the form of intensity distribution in the plane of observation.
For transformation in the spatial region. the signal manifests itself in a
single point.

 

Fig. 6.3. Diagram of optical filtration in spatial region
Fig. 6.3 depicts an optical system using filtration in the spatial region.

A plane monochromatic wave from a point scurce illuminates the transparency
with function of transmission f(x. y) located in plane P1. Lens L; forms

an image of the transparency in plane P3 while forming spectrum F(u. v) simul-
taneously in plane P2. Reference filter mask h(x. y) is located in plane P3.
Thanks to signal transformation by lens L2. field distribution corresponding
to the POurier transform of the product f(x. y)h(x. y) is observed in plane P..
If the transparency at the input is shifted in the x and y directions. the
signal at the output of the system takes the form

unmanacifu—trmnamndmwwwm

Thus. in order to get the transformation of convolution. it is necessary to
have u-v-O. In this case

wan-C} Mar—z. u—wz. mm

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The technique of spatial transformations requires the operation of scanning.
which is not needed for the technique of filtration in the frequency region.

In most cases. the filter introduced into the optical system is recorded on
photographic film as some transmission function. In the frequency regi

the filter tranniseion function has the form B(u. v)- IB(u. v) e ¢(u.v .
Spatial filters are usually passive elements. and consequently u(u. v)l< l,

i. e. the possible values of complex filters are in the liaits of a unit circle
with center at the coordinate origin of the complex plane (Fig. 6.6).

 

Let us now go on to examine some problems of
synthesizing spatial filters. the simplest
optical filter is a binary filter that has values
equal to zero or unity. Such filters are simple
to make as they are merely different limiting
diaphragme. Despite the relative simplicity.
They are used to handle some important jobs
in optical filtration. Abbe was one of the
first to describe the use of binary filters
for filtering the spectral components of an
Fig. 6.6. On defining the optical image in his theory of imrge formation
parameters of a spatial in the microscope [Ref. 96].

filter

 

If an object of the grating type is placed in
plane P1 (see [Pig.| 6.2). the distribution of the spectrum in the rear focal
plane of lens L1 is a set of functions ainu/u localised in the vicinity of
points corresponding to the principal spatial frequency of the grating and
its multiple harmonics. Besides. a focused signal of the reference beam
will be observed. By placing different binary filters in plane P2 (holes.
slits. limiting diaphragms) we can get different images at the output of the
system. For example if we introduce a limiting diaphragm so that spatial
harmonica u are transmitted. the image of a one-dimensional grating with rec-
tangular line shape is transformed to a sine-wave grating with doubled spatial
frequency [Ref. 166. 187].

Binary filters are used to increase the contrast of an ordinary photograph
with partial or complete suppression of the spectral component of zero fre-
quency. To do this. an opaque or partly transparent circle of definite sire
is placed on the axis in plane P2 (Ref. 166. [87].

Binary filters have found extensive use for visualizing phase inhomogeneities
in shadow methods [Ref. 20].

Binary filters are also used to solve the problem of optimum filtration in
isolating a periodic signal against a noise background. It is known from
communication theory that an ideal method for isolating a periodic signal

in the presence of noise is formation of the function of cross-correlation

of the input signal with a function that is a series of 6-functiona with inter-
vsl in space corresponding to the fundamental frequency of the signal. The
optical equivalent of construction of the cross-correlation function is in-
sertion of an opaque mask in spectral plane P2 (see Fig. 6.2) with apertures

63

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FIHI(JFFIC]AI.IJS£ (”NLY

that filter the spectral orders of the periodic input signal. The transfer
characteristic of such a filter is

H01)— 2"! - Ins.)

' Let the signal f(x) at the input be equal to the sun of the useful periodic
signal f;(x) [and] noise n(x)

f(x)=/.(x)+s(x).

m. Ian-ZCJ-H.

As s result of filtration and double Fourier transfornation. we get a distri-
bution at the output equal to

emu-9.11m as gux— m].

where x. is the spatial period of the useful signal. Obviously the function
of cross—correlation of the periodic signal with the sun of 6-functions of

the sane period is the sought signal except for a constant coefficient. The
convolution of the function that describes the noise with the sun of 6-functio
is equal to a constant quantity that is related to the average value of the
spectrun of noise power. Consequently. the distribution of intensity at the
output is

[(3) ‘=ICJ.(x)+CJ'-

Binary filters are used for optinun filtration of optical signals that have

a sufficiently uniforn spectrua. In this case. the filtration process is
done with sons approxination since couple: filters are necessary in the genera
case. However. the problen is siaplifiad by the fact that the binary filter
can be calculated on a conputer. Let the Fourier transforn A(u)e“(“) of

the sought simal f(x) -a(x)e“(") be known. The approximate notched filter
for such a signal has the transfer characteristic [Bef. 150]

-L _|_ Aga)cos]g+v(ln_ '
Il(u) 2 + 2 lMﬂlmlud'ﬂill ECI(0.m)cos|mu+m9(sll.

where C(o.,,.)=__-L_T_
. "('-?)'('+?)
I. also
‘2‘: 2. Ill-l.2...3
l‘(l -- %), l'(I+.;—) are game functions; a is the frequency of the spatial
carrier.
Substituting the values of coefficients. we get

”(“)’—;'+2 “—1.54“ OOSIMM+MQ(D)|. (6.5]
I'M

 

lob

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
if the filter is installed in the optical system shown in Fig. 6.2. we have

a series of images at the output that are localized in orders of the spectrum.
Under condition a) 2b (2b is the maxim linear dimension of the input signal).
the m-image is shifted relative to the axis by distance >Zab. and consequently
the resultant images do not overlap and do not interfere. Let us rewrite
expression (6.5) in the form

H a)- meow-m...
( 2-
. tug! .

From this we see that for a signal with spectrum A(u)e19(“). the filter is
phase-matched at m- -l. A pulse code signal is detected by such a filter.

The next class of filters are amplitude and phase filters with transfer charac-
teristics that can take on any values between 0 and l on the real axis (see
Fig. 6.4). These filters are usually recorded on photographic emulsions.

the transmission function of the processed film also varying in a range of

0 to l. Amplitude filters are quite useful for detecting or isolating a signal
in the presence of noises with respect to the criterion of mean square error.
This criterion postulates the minim- value of c [Ref. 93]:

"If“. 10'- f5 In. 'l)h(x-£. y—nmwnr.

Let us assume that signal f(x, y) with known autocorrelation function Rf(x. y)
is distorted by noise n(x. y) whose autocorrelation function Rn(x, y) is also
known. To carry out the operation of optimum filtration with respect to the
criterion of the least mean square error. it is necessary that the transfer
function of the filter have the form

5U(s;o)
s,(., o)+3.(-. v) '

 

H (a. o)-
where sf(u. v) and Sn(u. v) are spectral densities of signal and noise

8,..(11. o): II R” (x. y)e""“"’dxdy.

Here u(u. v) is a real positive function. and therefore an amplitude filter
can be used.

Amplitude filters are also used instead of binary filters if the presence
of an abrupt transition at a boundary leads to undesirable interference ef-
fects.

The effect of phase spatial filtration consists in delaying individual spatial
components without changing their amplitude. Phase filters take on a value
between -i and +i on the imaginary axis of the complex plane. Such filters
are made by applying a thin film on a plane-parallel plate. or in the form

of specially shaped glass plates (cylindrical. conical lenses and so on).
Phase filters have found wide application in phase-contrast microscopy [Ref. 3]

b5

INJR‘OFF1C1AL USEZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and for processing radar intonation [Bat [19]. For example. a reflected

radar signal obtained by a synthesized grating is recorded as a one-dimensional
Fresnel diffraction structure (one-dimensional zone plate) with focus that
depends on range coordinate. The corresponding range-matched filter for each
channel is a combination of lenses. The filter includes conical lenses for
compensating the change in focus and a set of cylindrical-spherical lenses

for Fourier transformation of the signal with respect to azimuth. and construc-
tion of an image from the range coordinate. The effectiveness of such process-
ing lies in the nature of the light signal and the matched filters that transmit
light almost without losses.

Combined use of maplitude and phase filters enables image correction. Ampli-
tude-phase control is realized directly on the entrance pupil of the optical
system. This method is like apodiration in that it utilizes control at the
input (or output) of the system and incoherent lighting. The thing that es-
sentially distinguishes it from apodiration is correction in phase and ampli-
tude. Amplitude and phase filters are also used for filtration in the fre-
quency region (double diffraction method) with the system shown on Fig. 6.2.

If wavefront distortions on the exit pupil in the imaging system are equal
to "(0). the compensation fiéter mask installed on the pupil must have trans-
mission function "(9) - e'u‘" 9).

Obviously such a filter is complicated to make. Therefore most frequently
a mask is made with transmission function

Hi«)-ﬁ%¢r:'+‘coswv(o)+mi

where C is a parameter associated with the aberrations introduced by the sys-
tem; 6 is the coefficient of reduction of aberrations. If e) l. the mask
simply attenuates radiation. If C< l. amplitude and phase filtration are
accomplished with change in phase [by] 0 or s. For the case 0-0 we get the
most favorable conditions.

The next important stage in development of the technique of optical data pro-
cessing was the use of filters realized on the basis of methods of holography.
The principle of optical filtration in combination with holography enables
registration and processing of a wide class of complex optical signals.

Let us consider the procedure of realizing a filter for optimum isolation

of a known signal against a noise background. The tranmsission function of
the filter is described by expression (6A). The denominator of Hopﬁu) is

a positive function and is realized by conventional methods of photography.
The function F*(u) in the general case is complex. and the technique of holog-
raphy is used for recording it. Optical arrangements for formation of ”(u)
are given on Fig. 6.5 Ref. 188. 189]. They are modified versions of systems
for recording Fourier holograms. The resultant function takes the form

TM=IU.(ul'+.F(Il'-F2W.(~MF(-lcosv(~)-‘(I)L

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H
g l: L t. L, I. 3
vi " >
0 H
U 0
8 3’
O h
a) C'
2 u
o. "0 .2
:-

Fig. 6.5. Optical ache-es of
spatial filter fornation: L'-
lens; 3—.irror; 91—plane of
«ﬁgment of function f (x);
Pz—plane of registration of
holographic filter

photorece iver

where Uo(u)-10t(p)lexp i¢(u) is the field distribution in the reference bean;
Nu) - IP(u)Ie 9 " is the spectn- of the sought signal. He can get the neces-
sary value of "(m by varying the value of IUo(u)I and 6(u). By conbining
the resultant hologran with a positive that has tranaaiasion l/N(u). we con-

struct the filter

m_umm£+£+m,
N N

N (s) N (I)
If |U.(s]-C and o(s)=ba. then
ﬁt- A (a) + nu.) e‘"" + me”.
"he" A(.)_W; ;I(.)__C£EL;
- N (a) N (s)

c and b are constant coefficients. The third tern of this expression corre-
sponds to the transfer function of the sought filter. The filter is set in
plane 92 of the coherent optical ayaten (see Fig. 6.2). the signal to be ana-
lyzed being for-ed at the input of this systen (plane P1). In observation
plane P; the field distribution g(x) is equal to the Fourier transform of

the product of spectrum F1(u) of input signal f1(x) and the filter T(u)/h(u).
i. e.

(rm-”i [F.(a)A(u)e.“'+§§ F,(s)lﬂ(¢)e“"”'¢lu-l:

+5:- SFI“) HI“) e“"”'dll. ' (5' 5)

The first tern of expression (6.6) characterizes distribution localized near
the optical axis of the systen. and in the given analysis is of no interest.
The second tern characterizes the filtered signal. the field distribution
being localized near a point that is displaced relative to the optical axis
by an amount x- b. It will have the naxinm value when the spectra F; (u) and

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nu) coincide. The field distribution characterized by the third tern will

be shifted relative to the axis by an anount XI-b. Hith appropriate selection
of the values of b. all three patterns are separated in space relative to

one another. In the sinplest case of steady-state white noise 8(u) - const

we observe the function of cross-correlation and the function of convolution
of the useful input signal with the signal recorded on the filter si-ultane-
oust in plane P3:

ihmruu-ma-InuH)*mxwk ' (6.1;

I/.(0/(x-o-oaz=u.tx—»*10:70». - (6.8)

if f1(x) contains a series of signals that are separated in space. then the
minus value is observed for the signal that is detereined by the autocorre-
lation part of expression (6.7). In this way the problem of recognition and
detection of the sought object is solved. When several filters are recorded
on the one light-sensitive nediu. several signals can be recognized sinul-
teneously without using the operation of nechanical seaming or change of
filters [Ref. 87].

Note should be taken of sons peculiarities inherent in the given nethod.
Translational displace-ent of the input signal leads to the same displacuent
of the signal of convolution or correlation in the observation plane. A change
in scale of the signal without altering overall intensity leads to signal
attenuation. In an analogous way. filtration is sensitive to rotations of

the initial signal. The penissible displacuents and rotations of filters
depend to a considerable extent on the nature of the sought signal [Ref. 190].
Most often. the problen of optinun filter placenent is resolved by changing
the scale and angular orientation to naxinize the signal at the output of

the system. Unfortunately. such an operation consunes considerable tine.

The given aethod has been used to recognize a known shape or part of a text
against a background of a conplicated transparency [Ref. 187]. It has been
suggested that the nethod can be used with appropriate updating for high-
speed recognition (reading) of printed sylbols Ref. 126. 131].

An interesting possibility has opened up with the use of matched optical fil-
tration for correcting the direction of flight of an aircraft lief. 191].

In this technique. the signal caning fro. the radar screen of an aircraft
flying at a certain altitude (radar nap of the region) is conpared with the
signal recorded on a hologran filter (nether inside the given territory).

The sane nethod has been used for recognition of markers in spaceflight [Ref.
162]. An advantage of the nethod is simplicity of recognition. It is only
required that the object to be recognized fall within the field of view of

a telescope carried on the spacecraft.

The input optical inage can be aade in the forn of an ordinary transparency

that provides anplitude nodulation of the radiation passing through it. An

optoelectronic holographic device can be used in the ease way with deforeation
of a reflecting surface. which enables phase nodulation of the incident light.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The experiment used photographs taken on missions of the Gemini-4 and Gemini-5
spacecraft. The setup of the experiment was similar to that diagrammed on
Fig. 6.2. The light source was a helium-neon laser.

Landmarks were recognized in eight regions characterized by different dimen-
sions and terrain from photographs of the northeastern part of the Arabian
Desert. In every case. recognition was successful. The signal/noise ratio
was in a range of 100-250. It was established that high contrast of objects
is not a mandatory requirement for reliable recognition.

Recognition of individual valleys and even sections of desert was completely
satisfactory.

Recognition was possible even with photographs of poor quality. It was suc-
cessful even when drawings and maps were used for making the spatial filters.
It was established that recognition of an object is possible even with cloud
cover of 902 of its surface area. This effect can be attributed to the fact
that the intensity of luminescence of points in the plane of recognition de-
pends nonlinearly on the area of the given object.

The dimensions of the optical image and the spatial filter nay differ by 151
without destroying reliability of recognition. There are methods that can
ensure recognition even if the dimensions of the corresponding images differ
by a factor of ten. The same methods can be used for determining such naviga-
tional parameters as altitude and slant range. Spatial filters have been

used for recognizing stellar objects. which are ideally suited for this purpose.
In this case. the signal/noise ratio reached 600.

To guarantee a predetermined error. the focal length must be increased with
increasing distance of the vehicle above the surface of the planet. For the
described system. the error did not exceed 10". A source of error is the
limited resolution of the vidicon; the magnitude depends directly on the dimen-
sions of the field of view of the telescope. and can be reduced by a correspond-
ing increase in focal length. In the case of flight at an altitude of 160 km.
the focal length can be taken as equal to 15.2 cm. Then the angle of view

of the telescope is 6'. and the magnitude of the error in measuring the position
of a landmark does not exceed 15 m. At higher altitudes. the same precision
can be achieved by increasing the focal length.

Methods of optical filtration and holography are used to solve the problem

of posterior correction of photographic images. which in principle is analogous
to construction of an ideal linear system [Ref. 166]. To do this. it is neces-
sary to know the scattering function of the forming system in the presence

of distortions. It has been possible in practical cases to improve the images
of objects such that each point has undergone aberrations that are the same

in the statistical sense. This means that the distortions should not disrupt
the spatial invariance of the forming system. From the expression character-
izing the structure of the image on the photographic plate as recorded in

the spatial region.

8 (X)= I (X) * I’ll (*l' (5- 9)

49

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the corresponding expression for the frequency region

OU)=I(s)L(s). ' .- (5.10)
where

uu)='6 slum.

we see that to isolate the sought image it is necessary to have a latched
mu: with trans-ission function r-LallLI’, since 61- 1. here 1(1) is the
distribution of intensity of the undistorted inge; Ih(x)|2 is the scattering
function of the shaping systen. The cosponent I.* of the filter is nade by
recording the spectru- of a point source (positive) obtained in a system with
aberrations on s Fourier hologran. Caponent [M2 is forned by recording
the power spectra: of this inage on a photographic plate placed in the focal
plane of the corresponding lens. By installing filter 1' in plane P2 (see
Fig. 6.2). and the positive to be corrected in plane P2. we get an inproved
inage in one of the diffraction orders in plane P3. It should be emphasized
that the given nethod corrects insges only within the li-its of those spatial

frequencies that have passed through the systen. Thus at the output one ob-
serves a signal of the form

r.(x)='.- I (k) * Ihm‘. ' ' (a. II)

where Ih1(x)l2 is the scattering function (intensity-response function) of

the corrected steu. The difference between a system with transfer function
L1(u) - ﬁlm (1312} and a systen with transfer function l.(u) - 0{Ih(x)|2) con-
sists in the fact that in the latter systen the spatial frequencies are shifted
in phase and have lower amplitude than those of systen MN). The existence

of a finite nunber of zeros in function L(u) has no significant influence
on the effect of filtration.

If the photographic inage has been obtained in the presence of a steady-state
turbulent nediun and the exposure tine is much greater than the time of f luc-

tuations, the photographic elulsion fixes the average intensity distribution
[Ref. 166]:

(an) -I(x) * (mm.

The scattering function of the systea. assuming quasinonochroeatic illuaination,
is written as

(WM?) - (YWNMXD‘.

where <y> is the averaged function of mutual intensity in the plane of the

entrance pupil of the forming system as deter-ined by the point source in
the object plane; ho(x) is the response function of the forning systes. In
the frequency region we have

(0 (3)) - [(11) “WNW“?

50

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or. assuming that all spatial frequencies characterizing the object are re-
corded.

(0(a)) =1“) (PM).

It is clear from this that to realize the operation of matched filtration
we must have a filter of the form

T(u)=C/(l‘(u)).

In the general case. its realization necessitates the use of holograms; how-
ever. for most cases. such as inhomogeneous steady-state media, y(x) is a
real and even function. Consequently, conventional photography can be used
for recording <r(u)>.

The effectiveness of this method has been experimentally studied [Ref. 162].

A turbulent steady-state medium was modeled by heating air in the region
situated between the object and the shaping lens. The image of the object.
and also an image of a point source located in the center of the object plane
were fixed on photographic emulsion. The matched filter was made by photo-
graphing the spatial spectrum of the image of the point source and processing
the photographic emulsion with contrast coefficient equal to unity. The image
was corrected in the system diagrammed in Fig. 6.2. The experiments showed
that the quality of the photographic images is considerably improved if the
blurred scattering function is gaussian.

The idea of posterior correction of images was further developed in Ref. 178.
Let the blurred image of an object be defined by expression (6.11). If signal
g(x) passes through a system with response function h1*(x). where

lhm'x- him-F Imzrrumaaun. '(6. l2)

then we get a deblurred image characterized by function I(x). Condition (6.12)
for the frequency region is written as LB:*- 1.

Realization of the proposed method is optically accomplished by two techniques.
In the first case, the function g(x) is recorded on a Fourier hologram. As
a result. we get a transparency with transmission function

'(u)= I ~l~l0P+0-i-0’=-l-Hor-HL-H‘L'. (s. :3)

Placing this hologram in the original position and illuminating it with wave

“1. we isolate the field distribution characterized by the last term of equa-
tion (6.13): I*L*H1- 1*.

   
   
 

posijive observation

Fig. 6.6. Diagram of image 91‘“?

deblurring using a positive

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

As a result. an improved image is reconstructed (Fig. 6.6). Have ll; (u) is
formed by illminating the (positive of) image of the function h;(x) placed
at the location of the point source.

In the second case. a Fourier hologram of the inage is recorded with an extended
reference source h1(x). The transmission function of the holograms is

rtu)=t0+H.)(a+'Hm-Iar+IH.|‘+ILH:+I'-L°H..

If LH*- l, the corrected ilage is formed in a beam of light characterised
by the tern IW- 1.

For this purpose, the resultant hologran is placed in the original position
and illusinated by a wave from a point source situated in the location of
the extended source h1(x) (Fig. 6.7).

observation The given technique has been used to
reconstruct lensless Fourier holograms.
which were produced by using an extended
object in the fan of a frosted plate
and a set of point sources (a two-
dinensional grating of 9000 point
diaphraps [Ref. [79]). Reconstruction
Fig. 6.7. Diagr- of reconstructing was done by the arrangement diagraIIIed
deblurred image from a hologram in Fig. 6.7 using the sane reference
sources. Since condition (6.12) was
satisfied by using extended reference sources of the indicated type. an image
of good quality was observed. The experiments showed that the setup is quite
critical to exact placement of the h1(x) transparency. With a mismatch of
~8 us. the reconstructed image was completely suppressed by noises (Ref. 719].

 

It should be emphasized that the effectiveness of the proposed techniques

for image deblurring depends in large measure on the accuracy of measuring

the scattering function of the systes. Only in the case where |h1(x)|z is
known and does not vary from experiment to experiment (steady-state system)

can a natched filter be formed or the function h1(x) be selected. In principle,
the scattering function is calculated on the basis of certain assumptions
relative to the statistical characteristics of introduced distortions. How-
ever. such an approach has so far had little success in practice [Ref. 163].

The methods considered above have applied to classical methods of optical
filtration. The technique of holography has only appreciably simplified the
formation of optimum filters. The principles lying at the basis of holography
have led to the development of new methods of optical filtration that had

not existed before. let us consider a relatively simple method of compensating
phase distortions based on the property of holograms to reconstruct both a
real image and a complex-conjugate virtual i-age [Ref. 21. 168. 153].

An inhomogeneous optically transparent nediul is described by the spatial
variation of the index of refraction n(r). For inhomogeneities with geometric
dimensions much greater than a wavelength. the scalar eouation of propagation

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

takes the form

V'a+t’a'(z)s=0. (6. l4)

where k-IZI/A. u is complex field amplitude. For waves propagating at a small
angle to the z-axis. the solution of equation (6.15) is written as

u=-/(z)e""- (s. 15)

Here f(z) is a slowly varying function. 8- const. The families of rays charac-
terized by solution (6.15) and by the complex-conjugate solution have the

same optical path, but propagate in opposite directions. Therefore if a wave
front that has been scattered and distorted by the inhomogeneous medium is
fixed on the hologram. and then during reconstruction a ccapler-conjugate

wave front is passed through a system that introduces the same distortions.

the phase aberrations of the wave front are compensated.

This property is extensively used for eliminating lens aberrations [Ref. 182].
and for suppressing noise in interference studies [Ref. 132].

Investigations have been made of the effectiveness of using this method
to compensate atmospheric distortions [Ref. 109].

An optical diagram of the facility is
shown on Fig. 6.8. The reference
beam was formed by objective lens
0 and collimator C, and directed
by mirror Hz to hologram r. The
working beam bassed through beam
splitters B; and 32, through a
glass plate with thickness of 2 cm
with inhomogeneous air pockets.
and was incident on target T. A
flat mirror was used as the target.
Part of the radiation reflected by
the target passed a second time

 

through the distorting medium and Fig. 6.8. Diagram of experimental
beam splitter 33 and was incident setup for studying the method of com-
on hologram r. In this way, the pensating atmospheric distortions:
actual conditions of observation 0--objective lens; C--collimator; “-
of objects through the atmosphere mirror; B--beam splitter; D—-inhomo-
were simulated for illumination geneous glass plate; T--target; r-
by a coherent light wave scattered hologram; F--plane of interference
by inhomogeneities. 0n the recon- pattern observation

struction stage. the hologram was

illuminated by the wave reflected by mirror H1. The complex-conjugate image

of the distorting medium was projected in plate D. As a result. phase aberra-
tions were compensated. and an image of the target illuminated by the scattered
light wave was observed. To bring the directions of propagation of the working
and reconstructing beams into register. a cyclic interferometer was used (the
Hari-Haran interferometer [Ref. 127]). Alignment accuracy was checked by the
interference pattern in plane P.

53

F1)! 0$YNC1Al.lﬂSEZ(NHLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

An advantage of this method is that it is not necessary to precalculate or
measure the distortions that are introduced - compensation for them is rea-
lized automatically. Among its disadvantages are the necessity of bringing the
directions of propagation of the reference and reconstructing be-s into exact
registration. and also the need for good collimation. The slightest deviation
from these conditions negates the effect of interference suppression. Let

us also point cut that practical implementation of the given scheme necessitates
fast-acting light-sensitive media. The entire procedure of recording and recon-
struction must be carried out in a shorter time than the characteristic period
of oscillation of fluctuations.

To distinguish an optical signal against a background of steady-state noise.
the technique of subtraction of optical signals has been suggested lief. 133.
105]. The operation of subtraction is accomplished by means of interference
between the reconstructed signal recorded on the hologram and the signal arriv-
ing at the input of the system.

Let there be a hologrma with transmission function

l(x)=-C+1ch(x)+y1‘u.n(x) law-“m-i-Emwm'll, (o. to

on which signal u(x) is recorded. Here 1.‘ is exposure time; 7 is the coefficient
of contrast; no is the field of the reference wave. By reconstructing the

holo ram with wave uﬁeu‘“, and simultaneously illuminating it with wave

ue“ x). we observe in one of the diffraction orders distributions of the field
of form

[Cs' (xH- yTe’ (x) u‘(x)| em" - vTuSu (x) e' ""' "'. (6, I7)

Considering
'- —C/Tu'.

we find from (6.17) that complete suppression of the signal in the given dif-
fraction order requires satisfaction of the condition

" =._'9__'LEL
a'w um I. '

and since usually u§>>[u(x) 1.“. it is sufficient that u‘lu'bt) iuo/u(x).

 

Thus if there are two optical signals with certain differences in a small re-
gion of space. we can distinguish their difference. e. g. the image of an 1-b-
jcct or part of it included in this region.

This method was used for analyzing ordinary photographic images in Ref. 105.
Hologrmas of different types were taken from a positive image (Fresnel. Fourier
and focused-image holograms). After processing, they were placed in the origi-
nal position in the corresponding optical system. and were then exposed with

a reference wave and with a wave that had been diffracted by a transparency
installed at the input of the system. Appearing in the plane of observation
was an image of the part of the transparency recorded on the hologrml.

510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Just as the preceding methods. this technique requires exact placement of the
filter hologram in the proper position. and location of the intensity in the
linear region of the characteristic curve of the light-sensitive media.

One of the effective ways to deal with random interference is signal averaging.
in this case. the repeated addition of the regular useful signal intensifies

it. and at the same time the random sign-alternating random signal is attenuated
and suppressed .

It has been suggested that the averaging procedure be done by recording a defi-
nite number of uncorrelated realizations of the wave front and adding them

on the reconstruction phase (Ref. 36]. To do this. the holograms are trans-
illuminated sequentially so that the k-th wave front corresponding to the real
image is the reconstructing wave for the (k4-l)-th hologram. As a result of
such a process and isolation of the component with the summary phase. we form

a field distribution

0
a 21m»
u.‘ =u:c [CI .

where u. is the field distribution in the plane of the hologram in the absence
of a distorting medium; ¢k(x) is the phase distortion distribution function.

Using a calculator. we extract the n-th root and get the value of the field
averaged with respect to n realizations

n—L— I v48)
(”—13.13 E' ' .

The corresponding average value of intensity in the sought image under con-
dition of isotropism of the random medium is determinedby the correlation func-
tion of the entrance pupil of the system K?(x). the correLation function of
field distribution without distortions K“. x) and the correlation function

f
of distortions K.(x):

Utx» CK~(X)K.(£)K;(x)~ (6- I 3
For pure phase distortions distributed by normal law.
, . K

Kum-e""+—ﬂ-'; . - (0. l9)
where o2 is the dispersion of phase distribution function 9(x);

K«:)'=9(x) * !'(-X)-
Expressions (6.18) and (6.19) imply that for sufficiently large n the influence
of aberration can be considerably reduced. It has been shown by mnerical
calculation that distortions are practically totally suppressed by averaging
100 times [Ref. 37]. The averaging procedure can be modified if individual

realizations of the wave front are accumulated on the stage of formation of
the hologram. Technically. this is done by sequentially recording n exposures

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on photographic emulsion or on a photoelectronic medium. Upon reconstruction
of such a complex hologram. an image appears in the plane of observation with
intensity determined by the average over the set of realizations of the wave
front. For sufficiently large n. the fluctuations of intensity introduced
by the inhomogeneous medium become insignificant [Ref. 27].

The given nethod of interference suppression has a serious disadvantage. This
is due to the fact that it is necessary to record a certain nmber of statisti-
cally independent realizations of wave fronts. Practical implementation of
such recording is complicated when observing moving objects through inhomogene-
ous media.

This flaw is eliminated by using a method proposed in Ref. I38. The hologram
recording arrangement is shown in Fig. 6.9. The object is illminated by a
coherent light source (not shown on the
diagru), and may be either tvo- or three-
.' dimensional [Ref. 179]. Next to the object
is a mall reflector that forms a reference
wave. If the reflector and object are
sufficiently close together. the aberrations
of the working and reference waves will
be approximately equal. Distortions are
compensated on the reconstruction stage
as a result of interference of the rays
in the plane of the photographic plate.

1

‘....n))))))))»)

 

Fig. 6.9. Diagram of holography

through a distorting medial: l-- Let us evaluate the resolution of the re-

object; 2—reference object; 3-- constructed image. Let .0 be phase distor-

distorting medium; lo--photogrsphic tions in the reference hens, and let 9(x)
plate be the phase distortions of the nave re-

flected by some point of the object. In
reconstruction. the field distribution in the light beam that constructs the
real image takes the form

«dawn—m. (6.20)

where u and no are the field distributions on the hologram produced by a point
of the object and by the point reference source. We can see from expression
(6.20) that compensation of phase distortions takes place with satisfaction
of the equality exp is rexp 10.. or according to the Rayleigh criterion. the
condition .- 00 < 1/2.

This circustance imposes a restriction onthe dimensions of observable objects
for a certain strength of perturbations.

Ref. 136 gives a detailed analysis of imaging of two-dimensional objects based
on this method. Let us limit ourselves to consideration of media such that
the logaritl. of amplitude and phase fluctuations of the wave front incident
on the entrance pupil can be considered a locally steady process describable
by a Gauss statistic. Atmospheric fluctuations conform to such conditions
[Ref. [26].

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The long-exposure case is analyzed. where intensity on the hologram is averaged
over all values of the random function that characterizes fluctuations of the
atmosphere. and also the short-exposure case. where inhomogeneity of the atmos-
phere leads to shifting (blurring) of the diffraction pattern in the plane

of the hologram. and intensity averaging takes place over the field of the

set of reconstructed images.

It is found for a long exposure that the influence of the inhomogeneous medium
boils down to a reduction in brightness of the reconstructed image with in-
creasing distance between the object and the reference source. As long as

the brightness of the reconstructed image exceeds the noise threshold of the
detector. the sought object is observed with good resolution.

In the second case. there is a loss of resolution over the entire field of
the image. If the distance between object and reference source is small. the
reconstructed pattern contains the sought image with superimposed noise that
depends only on the amplitude of variations of the incident wave front.

Experimental results on determining the possibilities of the method are given
in Ref. 139. Lensless Fourier holograms were formed in the presence of atmos-
pheric interference. A Q-switched ruby laser was used as the emission source.
Beam divergence was 3200 rad. An object was imaged that consisted of a set

of reflecting plates fastened on a board. A corner reflector was mounted on
the edge of the board to form the reference background. The scattered radiation
was collected by a newtonian telescope system with mirror diameter of 1.2 m
and focused on a photographic emulsion. The size of the holograms was 37.5 mm
and the distance between the object and the reception part was [2 km. Distance
between the axis of propagation of the beam and ground terrain ranged from

35 to 800 m. Quality of the reconstructed images depended considerably on

the nature of atmospheric perturbations. In particular, under conditions of
good visibility a hologram was obtained for mirror objects situated at a dis-
tance of 100 and 12 cm from the corner reflector. Resolution of the recon-
structed images was 30.5'. which was approximately 1/5 of the diffraction limit
of the telescope. Imaging was also done on more complicated objects. The
reconstructed images were of poor quality. One of the most important factors
leading to image distortion was the presence of a large range of reference
wave intensity fluctuations. Because of this. some regions of the hologram
had long exposure. while in other regions the exposure was below the limits

of sensitivity of the photographic emulsion. Thus only a part of the working
aperture of the hologram participated in image formation. It is proposed that
an alternative solution to this problem would be to use electronic detectors
such as orthicons or multilayered photographic emulsions.

Let us take up the advantages and disadvantages of the given holographic
methods.

The method of optical matched filtration enables differentiation of the sought
signal against a noise background. To do this. it is necessary to know the
parameters of the signal itself or of the interference. Depending on the prob-
lem. the coordinates of an object are sought or its image is reconstructed.

The method has been most extensively used for posterior processing of optical

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

images. These may be compound transparencies with a set of patterns. images
taken fron radar screens. photographs of objects in the presence of atmospheric
distortions or aberrations of forming systems. On the current stage of devel-
opment. the technique of making holographic filters is complicated. and the
operation of installing then is tine-consuming. This situation impedes the
practical introduction of the nethod for high-speed signal processing. Fur-
thermore. it cannot be used to detect unknown targets or to suppress unknown
interference.

The technique of subtracting optical signals has the same disadvantages. The
nethod of conpensation when a reconstructed complex-conjugate wave front passes
through an inhonogeneous nedium has been successfully used for suppressing
phase interference. Knowledge of interference parameters is not nandatory

for its realisation. It has been put to extensive use in elininating lens
aberrations and diffraction distortions.

A peculiarity of this method is that on the stage of hologram reconstruction

the wave front passes through an inhomogeneity that causes distortion of the
sought signal during recording. Thus the speed of the system must be at least
the same as the characteristic time of fluctuations of parameters of the inhomo-
geneity.

From this standpoint. s more promising method is averaging of optical signals
by fixing statistically independent realizations of wave fronts on different
detectors or with accumulation of holograms on the same light-sensitive medium.

When an object that sets up a reference perturbation is close to the sought
target. the process of suppressing distortions is relatively simple. It is
sufficient to fix one realization of the wave front and to use the technique

of optical Fourier transformation on the reconstruction stage. Imaging with
long and short exposures is possible during recording. This fact is of particu-
lar importance for observing noving objects.

These properties determine the tremendous outlook of this nethod for detecting
and recognizing objects through the atmosphere.

The most important advantage of optical systems over electronic analogs is
their capability for handling enormous amounts of infornation over a short

tine interval -— at the limit. over the time of light propagation in the system.
Operating in terms of connunication theory. we can state that optical systems
have a large value of the product of input signal area nultiplied by the square
of the maxinun linear frequency included in the signal.

For example. consider the linear operation of filtration (see Fig. 6.2). Let
the input signal have area S and liniting resolution R. and let the filter
have area S' and resolution R. For every element at the input. the optical
systen performs S'R’ operations of multiplication. and 8'32 operations of sub-
traction. These operations are done ss’ times simultaneously. 0n the whole.
SS'R‘ operations are needed to get the necessary signal at the output. If

we assue that S- 10" -’. 8' - lo 1-2 and R- 100 lineal. (values that are
easily attainable at present). then the number of operations is 6-10‘2. Let

58

INJI OFFICIAL USE2CHVLY
us assume that it is necessary to process a signal in this way in 1/30 s (the
usual scanning time in television systems) by an electronic system. Its pass-
bnnd must be at least 12°10‘2Hz. and this is for the case of processing only

a single signal. In optical systems. several filters can be placed simultane-
ously in the filtration plane. 1. e. a large number of two-dimensional signals
can be processed at the same time. Thus with a data input-output time of 1/30 s
in optical systems. we get an operator speed much greater than in electronics.

At the same time, optical data processing systems have a number of peculiarities
that prevent extensive application in place of electronic systems. To handle
radio signals, an electrical signal must be preconverted to optical form. and

so far we have not developed any adequately convenient and rapid methods for
doing such operations. Light-sensitive media that are used for recording op-
tical signals require considerable time for processing or have low resolution.

Nonetheless. even considering these specifics. the field of application of
optical data processing methods is quite extensive. Optical systems are used
for high-resolution spectral analysis, correlation analysis of functions and
fields in space and time. distinguishing signals on a background of noise and
interference. the operation of matched filtration and for handling other jobs
in radio astronomy. engineering, medicine. geophysics and acoustics.

6.2. Using Holography Without a Reference Beam

Methods of holography in which a coherent reference bean is used have found
wide application in various kinds of research [Ref. 33. 26. 71, 65, 127].

However. the conditions that ensure the necessary requirements impose limita-
tions on the class of solvable problems. Among these is rigidity of the geom-
etry of recording holograms. coherence of sources of radiation and high resolu-
tion of light-sensitive materials. These difficulties can be eliminated by
using the technique of holography without a reference beam [Ref. 2. b].

Image reconstruction is realized if a wave scattered by part of the object
is used as a reference wave [Ref. 80, 82, 175].

Having a known part of the signal in form

u.(x) = .4.(x)exp|l,,(x)|,
we define the amplitude transmission of the hologram t(x) as
an ~ lam e"'"’ + A.(x)e"""l'=lu.(xw-I-lu.(x1r-I-
- + u: (x) a. (x) + a. (X) aux).

where u1(x) - A1(x)e19(x) is the unknown wave perturbation.

The deficient information on the object is contained in the last two terms

of the given expression. To reconstruct it, the spectral component correspond-
ing to one of these terms is isolated and divided by the signal uo(x)[uo*(x)].
This is done by forming an additional hologram and transparency with amplitude
transmissions t1(x) and tz(x) respectively:

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r.(x)-Ie"t'+u.(x)l‘-t+|u.(xr+u.u)e"”‘+u3tx)e‘”:
. . . . ,

 

The coefficient v. - Znu/A detenines the phase distribution of the field

in the plane of the hologrn. which sets up a reference wave with wavelength

x that propagates at angle a to the optical axis. transparency t; (x) is nade
by recording signal no (at) on a photographic plate and processing to coeffi-
cient of contrast 7- 2. After adding the three transparencies t(x). t1(x)

and t2(x). they are illminated with a plane nonochronatic wave. In the direc-
tion of light bean propagation ~e, we get the field distribution in the for-

‘ W by. M . .._
um=e [n.(x)+ m), utx)+~.(x)+ MW am),

The last two terns of this expression give the sought inage and its conjugate.
The spurious effect of their superposition is elininated by special selection
of the geonetry of recording hologrm t(x). To do this. the part of the object
that scatters wave uo (x) is situated to the side or at a different depth fro-
the object of observation u.(x). Then the reconstructed inages are localized
in different regions of space (Ref. 67].

The procedure of reconstructing a hologram without a reference bean is silpli-
fied if it is illuminated by a wave that coincides in localization and phase
with a wave scattered by part of the object Ref. 50]. Let there be a hologra-
on which an object is fixed that consists of a discrete set of N points. Its
transnission at some fixed point is written as

N N e
2.2.». ﬂu»,
'r 'r

where As. A, are the complex anplitudes of the sources that are points of the
object; r . r, are distances fron points of the object to a point on the holo-
gran; h- ‘l/X; g. p- l. 2..... N are the subscripts of points of the object.
0n the reconstruction stage, the hologram is illuainated by a spherical wave
of for: ~45- c‘.‘ emitted by a point source. If it coincides in localisation

f
with one of the points of the object. the following set of images is reproduced:

an i-age corresponding to the initial object (p- n):
N

% [M ﬁe—IH'. - 16.”)
’s ’l '
its conjugate image (g- n)
a use " A'
_ “I!“ It
2 . e C 7:. '.
60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and N- I more pairs of images (3, piN)

O . N
_n_ M. {avg-m it. “'1 +
2 If, r"
N s
A.A, Mfr.) 5;qu .
+3“ r
g D

with an increase in the number of point sources coinciding with points of the
object. there is an increase in the number of reconstructed images. In this
connection. images (6.20) that correspond to the object are superimposed with
respect to localization and phase.whersas such superposition does not occur
for the other images. Thus when a hologram is reconstructed by a wave from
some part of the object, the useful image stands out in intensity. and all
other images form a comparatively faint background. Unfortunately. it should
be noted that reconstruction of the missing part of the object necessitates
availability of considerable a priori information about it. For example in
experiments done by the authors on reconstructing an object consisting of four
points. it was necessary to illuminate the hologram with a wave formed by three
points of the object.

Reconstruction of unknown information about the object is realized by using
Fourier holograms [Ref. 161]. To do this. the wave scattered by the object

is focused in the plane of the light-sensitive medium. If t.(x) is the trans-
mission function of the unknown part of the object. and tb(x) is the trans-
mission function of the known part. then the recorded intensity distribution
is written as

l (V) -l° (1.0)) +0 WNW-VJ") +7.83%.
where OI ) denotes the operation of Fourier transformation.

When such a hologram is reconstructed by a wave of form Tb(v), we get the field
distribution

U(v)-T.(v)lT.(v)+T.(b)l[Titv)+1‘3(o)l-

Let us note that Tb(v) is the spatial spectrum of perturbation tb(x). Thus

for reconstruction we can use a wave diffracted from the corresponding part

of the object. By optical realization of inverse Fourier transformation. we
get the following field distribution in the plane of observation:

~(x)-I't.(x)+t. (x)! * I. (x) as [mu-mm -x)l.
where *-denotes convolution.

when the condition .
l.(x) * [no-n+1“ —x)] aux) (0.21)

is net. we get the reconstructed image ta(x)+-tb(x). The condition (6.21)
is realized if the field of perturbation from the object has random phase

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution in space. The other case of image reconstruction is realized
if distribution tb(x) has sufficiently large amplitude. i. e. an object is
holographed with an exceptionally bright point [Ref. 6, 5, 6].

One variety of holography without a reference beam is holography with a local
reference wave Ref. 112]. which has found wide application in interference
studies. Part of the radiation scattered by the object is used on the stage
of forming the hologram. This radiation is passed through a spatial filter
to form a reference wave with-a simple wave front —- spherical or planar [Ref.
no. Ill]. The procedure of reconstructing the image from such a hologrn

is no different free that of reconstructing conventional holograms with side
(oblique) reference beam.

It is well known that holography of a focused image is insensitive to the shape
of the reconstruction wave front [Ref. 173]. Therefore. by using part of the
radiation not diffracted by the object. we can get an insge with rather good
resolution [Ref. 69. [Ole].

Extensive possibilities are opened up by using three-dimensional light-sensitive
media for making holograms without a reference beam. Three-dimensional holo-
grams can be treated as a set of two-dimensional holograms. In reconstruction.
each of them will form the above-mentioned inages. with the useful images being
added in phase and intensified. In this case, we can get by with fewer "read-
ing points." And in fact reconstruction of a two-dinensional object from a
three-dimensional hologram is realized by using a single point source (Ref.

5. 7].

If during recording the entire holographic scene is focused in a given volt-e
of the light-sensitive medial. then in reconstructing one of the rays emanating
froa the object. we reconstruct the entire system of rays that,produce its
image. A three-dimensional focused inage of the object can be observed behind
the hologram in the region that is free of the direct beam [Ref. 7. 65].

An interesting possibility opens up for studying variOus processes associated
with change in phase of the light wave when diffractogrmss are formed by dif-
fracting elements and reconstructed as holograms without a reference beam
[Ref. 2].

Consider the optical arrangement diagramed
on Fig. 6.10. A ray from coherent light
source I (Fig. 6.10s) is shaped by lenses
2 into a parallel beam that passes through
the investigated object 3 and diffaction
grating 6 and is incident on plate 5. The
intensity pattern formed by diffraction

of the plane wave by the grating. and the
pattern distorted by the object are sequen-
tially fixed on the photographic emulsion.
0n the reconstruction stage (see Fig. 6.10b)

 

the diffractogram 5 is illuinated by a Fig. 6.10. Diagram of record-

parallel monochromatic light beam passing ing with diffraction grating:

through lens 6. Several diffraction orders aurecording; b--reconstruction
62

POI! OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY
with intensity thst decressss with increesing distance free the optical one
are focused in the focel plsne of lens 6. The reconstructed issge is observed
in one of the orders by supplementsl lens 8. slit disphrsp 7 isolstes the
corresponding diffraction order end suppresses the spurious beckground.

The operation of the srrsnaenent is described ss follows. 1: ImaXsu—u.)
. .

is intensity distribution in the plsne of the photographic plste ss deter-ined
by s srsting with period an. snd for) is_ s function thst chsrscterizes the
intensity redistribution introduced by the object. then for case f (x)<x the
distribution of blsckening on the photogrsphic mlsion tskes the for. I(x)+
f(x) - I(x)+ I'(x)f(x).

The trsnenission of the photogrsphic plste is written so
I.-11.x)—mum-C—”Jo—norm

When such s hologrsn is reconstructed in the focal plsne of lens 6. the upli-
tude distribution that depends on x will be

i m) ,.(x)‘.nn4x-zﬁ(;_;a.rx r (”qr“— m).
-o 5 ‘
where P(v) is the Fourier trsnsforn of function f'(x).

He can see iron the resultant expression thst in reconstruction of hologrsss
by Fourier trsnsfornstion. there is s Fourier spectra: of the first derivstive
of function Hz) in esch interference order.

Let us note thst inforsetion with predetersined field intensity in the plsne
of the diffrsction ole-eat can be trsnsdtted by such s nethod. Let us sssune
thst the trsn-ission function of the gating tekes the for-

;(x‘)- 2 8(x-uJ.

If s plene sonochrolstic wave is norsslly incident on the grating. then st

s distance z-zxsn/A. n- 1. 2. 3.... swey from the grsting. the field is equal
except for s constsnt coefficient to the field distribution i-edistely behind
the grsting:

w: x)— 2 sin-w

Using the relation
0 l 2 '(lx-‘Wl-%2. |(v-M.)-o. Eur—um).

we write the recorded intensity distribution ss

(.0. duo‘s: 2. sub-ho.) * 2N9 - on)“.

Q“. I‘-

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”MUSEOMN

where * denotes the operation of autocorrelation.

In filtration plane 7 we have

\ U.(o)=d[: 2 message” 2 3(9— —ae.) .1: 2 ”9-an

p.-.

Isolating the first diffraction ordar v.6(v-vo). we get the following field
distribution in observation plane 9:

'elv'.(o)|-'Co"". (5.22)

when the object is inserted i-ediately in front of the grating. the field
distribution behind it talus the fora

«(kg-1m 2 «at-v.1

ﬂ...

The corresponding intensity distribution fixed on the diffractogran is

I42: ”-010: l 2 I'(n—se.)-)(- 2P(e-se.)]},'
where ‘ F(;)—O(/(x)). '

If the spatial spectra of the investigated object fits into the gap between
diffraction orders of the grating spectra. than a signal can be isolated
in the filtration plane characterized by autocorralstion function ”‘1‘.

Then for the filtered first order. we get

U:(o)-d|P(a—9.)*F‘(w—9JI-
-%(I’M*P(°)l*‘('-9o)’
This implies that the field in plane (9) takes the for:

O‘idtvn-mxre'".

Pig. 6.11s [photo not reproduced] shows a diffractogr- and reconstructed

iaage (Fig. 6.11h [photo not reproduced]) of a candle flsne taken by the neth
described above. The reconstructed picture is a shsdowgran of an inhosogsneity.
An Moll laser source was used in the apart-ant. The object was placed
inediately in front of the grating. and the diffractogr- was recorded in

the plane where a clear inege of the line structure of the grating was observed.
The diffraction grating was aade by winding natal wire on a fr-e with pitch

of 0.5 u and disaster of 0.6 In.

One of the possible alsnsnts that introduces the phase nodulstion necessary
for for-ing diffractograns is space itself.

As an empla. consider an arrange-ant for recording the diffractogr- of
a phase object (fig. 6.12). A parallel nonochroaatic light be- illuinates

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the object placed in plane so. The diffraction
5 ;. pattern is fixed on the photographic plate in
plane X}.

Let us write the transmission function of an
object that has phase characteristic 0(xg).

o——-— -| ‘(xd-c-Mfs’.

Fig. 6.12. Diagram of re- Let us denote the field immediately behind the
cording phase objects: l- object by uo(xo). The field distribution in
object; 2--photographic plane x; is defined as

plate
t.(x.)=u.(x.) * Ma).

The spatial spectrul of the field u1(x) is

. (”1‘31” =0: [0 “ski” up “9.1“"- . [6- 23)

here b- k/2z. 01 are constant coefficients. 1- l. 2..... n. Since for real
objects there is an interval of spatial frequencies (-vo. vo) in which most
of the energy of signal u;(x1) is concentrated, we can select the condition
of observation

4 ' V3“ - .
3-7«1. 16. 24)

Performing the operation of inverse Fourier transforaation in expression
(6.23) and taking (6.26) into consideration, we have

I '1“!)~u0(xl,-% #331

Substituting the value of the field ao(xo). we get

u.(x.)= cr'“‘°’[l+:—; w x.)r——- Hum].

The corresponding intensity distribution is written as

I (3:) ="I (3|, ul(‘|)'c: [' “ —,.(xl)+ ”I—“lf (x0).-

—,—,‘,,Iv «rm—0:] I — -‘— rm]

Thus when condition (6.26) is met. the recorded diffraction pattern contains
information on the second derivative of the phase distribution function on
the object.

Decoding (reconstruction) of such a diffractogram is done in the optical sys-
ten presented on Fig. 6.13. A parallel monochromatic light bean shaped by
collimator 2 illu-inates diffractogra- 3 located in the rear focal plane of

6S

F(”l(lﬂﬂC1AL USE‘DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 6.13. Diagrn of phase
object visualization: 1-—
laser; 2--collimator; Jh,
ﬂzufocuaing lenses; W-filter;
6—viaualization plane

 

lens 11;. Lenses 11, and n, are for filtration of spatial frequencies. Filter
0 is located in the plane of conjugation and foci. The field distribution
in the filter plane takes the fore

N l -!'(XII-Cl3(")+"°h(3))l-

If a transparency is placed here that suppresses the zero order of radiation
component 6(v) and has a transmission function inversely proportional to the
square of the distance from the optical axis in the remaining region It 3 UV 1.
then as a result of the operation of secondary Fourier transformation realised
by lens 112. a field is reconstructed in the plane of observation that is de-
termined by real function ¢(x). By observing the condition of linear recording
of intensity 00:) on the photographic emulsion and then bleaching it. we get

a transparency with transmission

’1 (x)-e"""_

Coefficient 8 describes the relation between phase shift and intensity of the
wave incident on the photographic emulsion. when the transparency is 1111111.
nated by a plane monochromatic wave. a field is reconstructed that reproduces
the wave front scattered by the investigated object.

In order to solve some problems. it is sufficient to have information on the
object in the form of an autocorrelation function of scattering (trsnasission)
of the investigated object. In this case. holography without a reference
beam is a simple means of isolating optical signals against a noise background.
Fig. 6.16. Diagram of holography 8
through an inhomogeneous nedium:
l--object; 2--inhomogeneous me- _.
dim; 3—focusing lens; (cupbo-
tographic plate —-

'—.'.'

 

Fig. 6.14 shows one of the arrangements of recording holograms that is used
for observing objects through an inhomogeneous medium. Object l is illuminated
by nonochronatic coherent radiation. The wave front distorted by inhomogeneity
2 is focused by lens 3. The hologram is recorded on photographic plate I:

in the focal plane of the lens. Subsequent reconstruction is accomplished

by the method of optical Fourier transformation.

The hologram in this case is in fact a difractogram that contains information
on the observed object.

The process of recording and reconstructing such holograms (diffractograms)
is described as follows. Let u1(x. y) be the distribution of the field on

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the object; u2(x. y) -- the field distribution on the entrance pupil of the
lens. Field u1(x. y) is related to field U(u. v) in the focal plane of the
lens by Fourier transformation

U (a. v)=C;0 («(x- v».

where M ) denotes Fourier transformation with respect to spatial frequencies
u- tut/f; v-ky/f: f is focal length; c is a constant coefficient.

Intensity 1(u, v) - czU(u, v)U*(u. v) is recorded on a photographic plate in
the rear focal plane.

In reconstruction. inverse Fourier transformation is realized with respect
to the same spatial frequencies as in recording. We have the following field
distribution in the observation plane:

“(3. v)=-0"(l(u. v))-u.(x. v) *u§(-x. -v).

If there is no inhomogeneous medium on the stage of hologram formation, the
response function of free space Bohr. y) is determined by the relation

H.'(x. u)=Cexp[I,-‘;(x-+w]. (5.2;)

where z is the distance from the object to the entrance pupil of the lens. We
have uz(x. y) -u1(x. y)*ho(x, y). From this and expression (6.25) we get

“(In y)-=¢.(x. sneak—x. my). ,
“1““ MI- y)*h;(—x. -—v)='(x. 0)-

Thus the field distribution in the plane of observation is determined by the
autocorrelation function of the field distribution on the object.

In the presence of a distorting medium. field u2(x, y) is written as integral

“J‘s: 90"” “(‘9 yIHJ‘a- Um 3» yl)dxld'l'

For an isotropic medium. the response function h1(xz. ya, x1. y1) depends
only on coordinate difference Kg-Xg; yz-yl. In this case, field uz (x;. y;)
is written as

“0" v1=vu(x. leuN—x. -u)*t.'(xo v)**‘.(-‘o rill

and the reconstructed pattern takes the form

«(xv ads-vow y.) *- mm 9.).

If the spatial spectra of object and inhomogeneity differ from one another,
then the distortions introduced will be insignificant. In the special case

67

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of white noise h1(x. y)*h1(-x. -y)-v 60:, y). the autocorrelation function
of the field distribution function on the object is observed just as in the
absence of interference.

1n the experiment. the object was a transparency of the letter "H" with spec-
tra: in the region of low spatial frequencies. The object was illuminated

by a plane wave. The light source was a helium-neon laser operating in the
mltimode state. For effective resolution of low spatial frequencies. the
focus of the lens was taken as ~l.5 m. and the hologram was recorded on MINIAT-
300 photographic emulsion. A frosted plate was used as the inhomogeneous
medium. The frosted screen was rotated during exposure to simulate fluctua-
tions of the elements of inhomogeneity. The same optical system was used

on the reconstruction stage as in recording. In this case the frosted screen
was removed.

Fig. 6.15. 6.16 show photographs [not reproduced] of holograms and reconstructed
images for objects taken through stationary and rotating frosted screens.

For comparison. Fig. 6.17 [photo not reproduced] shows a hologram and recon-
structed image of the same object produced in the absence of an inhomogeneous
medium. We can see from the given photographs that distortions introduced

by the medium completely change the nature of the spatial spectrum recorded

on the hologram. However. the general form of the reconstructed outline deter-
mined by the autocorrelation function of field distribution on the object

is the same.

When the above described method is used for recognizing objects against a
noise background. the problem arises of uniqueness of the signal representation
at the output of the optical system in the form of an autocorrelation function
[Ref. 2. 172].

it is known that a single autocorrelation function may correspond to a broad
set of signals with the same duration constraint [Ref. 39. 161]. However.

only one signal out of this whole set is formed by a system with limited trans-
mission spectrum. Any optical system is just such a system. Therefore the
autocorrelation pattern will correspond to a unique object that can be recorded
by the given optical device.

Regarding the method of holography. it should be noted that it is one of the
possible versions of solution of a more general phase problem. i. e. the prob-
lem of finding the signal phase from its maplitude [Ref. 39. 2].

The necessity for mandatory introduction of a reference beam has usually been
justified by the fact that in registering a signal

«(x)=A(.r)e‘“"

on a square-law detector. we get a distribution equal to

u (x) u‘ (x) =- A'(x).

in which there is no function that characterizes phase. However. even in
the first research on holography it was noted that the scattered wave is formed

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in accordance with the Huygens-Fresnel principle. i. e. the amplitude at each
observation point is determined by the sum of aaplitudes taken with their
phase from each point of the object. Therefore the problem has been reduced
to methods of recording both infatuation components in explicit form. The

same goal is pursued by the so-called methods of holography without reference
bema.

The general formulation of the problem is correct if signal u(x) is defined
as a signal of arbitrary nature. However. we are dealing with electromagnetic
radiation. and are treating the object as some boundary condition that influ-
ences the nature of distribution of the scattered field. In the far zone

that realises Fourier transformation of a spatially limited function. we have
a distribution that is described by analytical functions. Thanks to this
circumstance. an additional equation arises that relates the amplitude and
phase of the sought distribution and is defined by the theory of functions

of a complex variable. And this means that a single-beam hologram (diffracto-
gram) carries complete information on the amplitude and phase of the light
wave scattered from the object.

6.3. Reconstruction of Object Image From Modulus of Autocorrelation Function

The problem of finding the image of an object from the modulus of the auto-
correlation function consists in the following. Knowing the modulus of the
autocorrelation function. it is necessary to find its phase. and then by
using the resultant amplitude-phase information to determine the function
corresponding to this autocorrelation function.

This problem arose for the first time in connection with finding the intensity
distribution of an incoherent light source.

It is known that the image of a remote incoherent light source can be recon-
structed if the second-order optical correlation function is known [Ref. 159.
160]. The correlation function is usually determined from interferometric
measurements. for example by using a Michelson stellar interferometer. The
phase of the correlation function is related to the position of the inter-
ference bands, and its modulus is related to the luminosity function.

Since technical difficulties preclude sufficient accuracy in determining the
displacement and position of the bands. experimenters frequently run up against
the problem of reconstructing the unknown function from its modulus.

An analogous problem arises in x-ray crystallography. where the phase of the
wave signal is usually unknown. in the theory of particle scattering when
determining the scattering cross section. and in other problems [Ref. 89. 136].

Some scientists have discussed the loss of phase information from the stand-
point of the limitations stemming from the analytical properties of the corre-
lation function [Ref. 39, 122, 123. 161. 165. 195]. Superposition of the
reference light beam with the field carrying information on the source of
radiation has been suggested [Ref. l57]. This method is analogous in nature
to the holographic method of recording amplitude-phase information [Ref. 137].

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anuthcr method of finding the phase was suggested in Ref. 156. In this case.
exponential filters are used for analytical continuation of the correlation
function into the complex region. If the modulus of the complex correlation
function is known outisds the real axis. then its phase is determined from
the modulus by integrating Cauchy-Riemann differential equations.

The last two netth of finding phase infatuation have been experinentally
studied (Ref. 149]. The correlation function l‘(x) in the far zone of dif-
fraction. which is related to intensity distribution of the light source by
the fornula

Nib-C I 8 (a)erp( —lt.xis) du. [6- '15)

was measured by a prisn interferometer (Fig. 6.18). am I is the distance
from the source to the plane of registration. at is the displacement of the
interfering rays. C is a constant coefficient. ko-Zs/Ao. A. is mean wavelength.

frosted screen

   
    
  
  

denodulator

chart
recorder {11 ter

photo-
multiplier

anplif ier

Fig. 6.18. Diagran of facility for making correlation nea-
surenents

The interference pattern is described by the relation
II‘ (3] cos [ox 4- am I‘.(x)| +cocnt.
where v is the average spatial frequency.

A scanning photoelectric detector was used in recording the interference pat-
tern. ‘l'he x-coordinate is proportional to scanning time t. i. e. the signal
at the detector output is

. ll‘(Plll¢°3lW+u¢l‘(ﬂ)l+céii

70
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The signal from the detector output went to an .plifier and filter that did
not pass the constant component. A chart recorder was used for registration
of the interference pattern. The recorded pattern contained information on
the modulus and phase of 1‘(x). A helium-neon laser and rotating frosted glass
were used to simulate an incoherent source.

The first method of finding phase information is analogous to the use of a
reference beam in holography.

Using the formula of inverse Fourier transformation. we write

A(a)-§ 3(u')3(u'gra)w—w2£om ] lnxrexpuxwkm.

(a. 21)

Let us asst-e that the unknown source s(u) has limited dimensions a<u<b.

and C(u) is a reference source situated at distance b-a from source 8(a).
Then we have

0(u)_S(a)+C.i(u—e.).

where C; is a constant corresponding to the intensity of the reference source.
Now expression (6.27) takes the form

(macs) f 'Irurexpaxwmaxascmun

+§ 8(w)s(u'+é)d~'+c.8(a,+.~.)+C.ss.--). ' (6.23)

The third and fourth terms of this expression correspond to the real and imagi-
nary (mirror) images of the source. The uniqueness of the reconstruction

is determined from the a priori infatuation on the position of the reference
source relative to the object.

In principle. there is no need for the reference source to be situated at
distance b-a from the object. but in this case. two measurements are required:
one with the reference source and one without it. The interferometric device
shown on Fig. 6.18 was used to form the interference bands. The measuraent
source was modified as shown in Fig. 6.19.

Fig. 6.20 shows the reconstructed image obtained by Fourier transformation

of function [1‘00]2 in accordance with expression (6.28). The object was

a 95 Ill Slit.

Reconstructed images of more complicated objects are shown on Fig. 6.21.

Let us consider the method of determining phase by exponential filters. Fol-
lowing Ref. 156. we get the analytical continuation of the correlation function
by replacing the real variable with the complex variable 2- x+ iy. where x

and y are real quantities. We have

I‘(.r +ly)-C i S (u)exp(k.uy/R) cxp( --ik,a.r;'R)nlu. (ti. :9)

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/eoving screen

   
  

 

/trensperency

be t at
lea;K
bean

reconstructed image of slit

Fig. 6.20. Reconstructed issue of 95 :-

alit. The central peak corresponds to

the first two terns of equation (6.28).

The isage is situated sy-etrically rela-
tive to the central peak

Fig. 6.19. Diagram of for-etion
of source inase

sawtooth
'1“ aperture

LAAE

Fig. 6.21. Reconstructed images: a--95 un slit; b—sevtooth

radiation source 95 m wide; c-tvo disks with diasetere of

58 end 116 II; d—test pattern of three lines of 19 III size
spaced 38 um apart

If NIH-1y) is treated as a function of the real variable x. then (6.29) has
the sane fore as fornula (6.26) when S(u) is replaced by S(u) exp (hwy/l).
The nev source can be constructed by placing the filter close to source S(u).
the filter transnission varying according to an exponential lav relative to y
In cases where it is physically possible to locate such a filter directly
behind source S(u). seasuresents of l‘(x+ iy) with and without the filter will
give infatuation on analytical continuation of the correlation function into
the coupler plane. Such seasuressnts enable us to determine the derivative
9|r(x+ 1y)|/dy-

it is known that correlation function l‘(:) is regular in the lover half-plane
of conplex plane :. Therefore the sodulus and argument of Hz) are related
by Cauchy-Menu relations:

qummmauu; (a. 3m
-J—*—'—.‘ ’ 3;“ " -—-mx+tyn 3—1—"5‘ ’ .
72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where l‘(x+ ly)-ll‘(x+ lylrxpllﬂx-i-ly”. lntegrat ing expression (6 . 1)) . we have

9(X-l-ly)-l(v)= {W ———L"'”‘;;+' )' 4x.
0

where f(y) is some function of y. From this we get

:35 , . 5.3.
on) “SI-annual“, .' ( )

Thus in principle we have a procedure for determining the phase of the corre-
lation function from measurement of its aodulus. if we need to know r(x4-iy)
only in the neighborhood of y-O. the exponential function can be approximated

by a straight line. i. e. the exponential filter can be replaced by a linear
filter.

I a
a b -c

Fig. 6.22. Shapes of sources
used for method of reconstruc-
tion with exponential filters:
a—initial source; b--source
modified by exponential func-
tion with damping duration of
1232 um; c--source modified by
exponential function with damp-
ing duration of 616 um

 

Fig. 6.23. Machine recording of interfero-

grams: a--typical interfere ram fixed on

chart recorder; b-graph of Tr(x)l produced

by using the given interferogran. The source
was the transparency of Fig. 6.22s

JfUN
The experiment used the interferometer shown Egigﬁgid
on Fig. 6.18. The function of source 8(u) a

  

was simulated by a slit mask with height cor-
responding to the selected function. The
exponential modification was realized by
changing the shape of the mask {see Fig.
6.22). Fig. 6.23 shows interferograma re-

phase
I’L/
corded on a strip chart. and a graph of the .....

modulus of the autocorrelation function calcu- Fig. 6.2b. Correlation

 
   

lated by computer. Fig. 6.26 shows the same function obtained by fil-
autocorrelation function obtained after fil- tration: a--modulus of r(x);
tration. and the phase calculated by equation b-phase of r(x)

(6.3). The source was reconstructed by calcu-

lating the Fourier transform of function r(:) and the phase obtained from
equation (6.31).

73

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

sawtooth source [sic]

     

. , - ' step source

Fig. 6.25. Reconstructed issues of sources: a-398 u.
slit reconstructed fro. .easureunt of function Hz); 5-
reconetructed fro. function Ir(x)l with (broken line) and
without (solid line) exponential filter; casewtooth source
398 u. wide reconstructed fro. .easureoent of function r(x);
dwreconstructed fro. .easurelent of [NIH with (broken
line) and without (solid line) exponential filter; e-source
in the for. of a double step 616 in wide reconstructed fro.
.eaeurenent of function Nan); fwreconstructed fro. .easure-
.ent of function ll‘(x)| with (broken line) and without (solid
line) exponential filter

The reconstructed inges for three shapes of sources are shown on Fig. 6.25.

The resultant experimental data effectively deaonstrate the feasibility of
detersining the shape of a source and the phase of the correlation function
fro. its .odulus.

It should he noted that the given .ethods of finding the phase of an optical
signal fro. its .odulus are not the only solutions of the phase prohle.. As
has already been pointed out (see chapter I). all optical signals belong to
the class of signals with finite spectra. Therefore (see section 1.5). the
phase can he represented as

9(t)-—;-P§ Welt-i- 20:83-34.

s'—s
.

where Ms) is the uplitude of the optical signal analytically continued into
the co.plex plane. and :1 is the value of zeros in the co.plex plane. By

7‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.sng
.o¢_ .on.

.0“. .oe__

.oa wan .~_

:2—

     

   
      

 

    

.b—naumouoz .0332
.9« can _<_ 60252.
0000000000300 000:3-..6

.0" 0:0 _<_ 3253
0000000000300 000:0»:000

. £08830: 30.708
.9» an: _<_ =oo:»on
02—03—0000qu“. econounoco

.unoau 000
00k: no n50... Awash—m

.. a. _<_
0.252. 00.330» 03093.1(

.. van _<_
=02;qu 00.330... 26.6.3.2

 

  

.AnIIaNE 80 x5: 8530+
+ 53.1.3.3 Elﬁn. R.

.z w this.
Amummum . _

    

d

3£+3<158.

~l.~

0 ”an.

 

 

     

      

Axve<
26’ 0338 on

alg-zl:
:lé ale

333333032—

30? ~02. :0 nouns
.o 0 A33 009.30-

2.0553 3.323 30.300 .330
Icahn u!!— .0l0uoho 003-30.“:

 

33+ Eclﬁ:
333332

£03033 30732.3
. :53

0330030.:—

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

isposing an additional condition on the optical signals. namely the Fernat
principle “(n-0. we get

p(z)--:'-PS '-'-°f'_‘—“','ldz. (6. 32)

Thus. optical signals that are formed by passive optical systels (systens
without sources) contain zeros only on the real axis. Therefore the phase
of the optical signal is uniquely determined by its modulus.

The diffraction pattern obtained in coherent light contains complete nplitude-
phase infatuation on the optical signal. and in this sense we can speak of
holography without a reference beam (one-be- holography).

Let us note that phase reconstruction from such a hologrn is possible not only
analytically in accordance with expression (6.32). but also in a coherent
optical systes that realises Hilbert transforastion. The nethod proposed in
lief. 160 can be used to get a transparency with transmission that varies ac-
cording to a logarithmic law.

In conclusion. the-methods of solving the phase problem are su-arized '.n
Table 6.1.

6.6. Phase Problem in Radio Astronomy

The phase problen as initially forlulated in optics has analogous treatment

in other regions of the spectrun. and particularly in the x-ray and radio
bands. The problen is closely related to use of the luinosity function first
introduced by Michelson in optical interferometry. end subsequently generalized
by wolf. who am: it as a "coqlex function of sutual coherence." Let us look
sore closely at the formulation of the problem and some possible ways of solv-
ing it as applied to radio astronomical research.

It is known that one of the najor problems of radio astronony is detersinetion
of the distribution of radio brightness over a source of space radiation.

The distribution of radio brightness B is related via inverse Fourier trans-
foreation to the complex luminosity function U of the lobe structure of the
radio interferometer as measured on different bases. which in the one-dimen-
sional case is represented as

86):} U (s,)e":‘ds,. '. ' (6.33)

where ux- anxll is spatial frequency; bx is the base of the interferometer
with respect to coordinate x; l is working frequency. The conplex luinosity
function can be represented as

Uta.)-n1(u.ne"""’. (6.34)

In principle. experiment can give us the modulus and phase of luinosity:

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P —P ',
"’"J'ﬁﬂ'.
9(1.)=2nullu

where P..x. Pmin are the maximum and minimum values of the nain lobe of the
interferometer relative to the zero value; At is the time of delay of the
maximum of the envelope relative to the calculated interference maximum; to
is the time interval between adjacent maxims. i. e. the period of the inter-
ferogram lief. 68].

While it is easy to measure the modulus (see for example Ref. 26). there are
slumber of difficulties in determining the phase. Nonetheless, knowledge

of the phase of the luminosity function is considered necessary for determining
the distribution of radio brightness.

Thus the formulated problem reduces to determination of the phase of the com-
plex luminosity function followed by substitution in (6.33) and (6.34).

The key to solving the phase problem is use of the analytical properties of
the investigated functions. enabling reciprocally single-valued determination
of their real and imaginary parts on the basis of Hilbert transforms.

In application to our problem. we note that functions "(ux)
|~U(v.3-InU(-,)—:,(u,) (6.35)
are analytical in the lower half-plane J- of the complex plane. Expression

(6.35) gives the possibility of determining phase 6(ux)- which in general
form is written as [Ref. 181]

 

"ua)-'m (‘1‘) +,b(ua,0 (6- 36,

where --l- . “0(4) ' ' 6 37
?m(‘:,- ' S a; _ h d". 1 . )
‘ Yo“:)"2"8:—:EE§L - (6.33)

The first term ¢.(ux) is the value of the minimum phase that in the absence
of zeros in J- uniquely relates the phase and modulus 0(ux) through Hilbert
transformation.

The second tern ob(ux) is the Blaschke factor that evaluates the contribution
of zeros of "xi 1n 3-. Summation extends to all zeros of the function U(ux)
in J_.

Thus phase 0(u‘) is determined from knowledge of the modulus of function

”(ux) and the position of its zeros in J-. He should take note of the impor-
tance of this statement. as until recently it had been assumed according to
Rayleigh that the amplitude (modulus) and position of interference lobes
(phase) are mutually independent quantities. and that both meanurenents (space
and time) have to be made separately to reconstruct the spectra [Ref. 25].

77

FIN!(HNﬂ(lAl.USE(HVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem of the influence that the Blaschke factor has on reconstruction
was considered by wolf [Ref. 195]. who concluded that in the case of consider-
ation of the function of time coherence "(1') the differences in the curves

of the reconstructed spectra in the "miniphase" solution (with consideration
of 0. alone) and in the couplets solution (5-05) do not exceed a few percent
with respect to major parameters.

Bxasples can be given of spectra that do not have zeros in J- [Ref. 122].

Furthermore. for the two extras cases that are of interest for radio astronon.
nasely ideal blackbody radiation and nonochrouatic emission. the phase problas
has been considered and a solution has been found in the research.

Thus we can sake a general reco-endation that the simple and elegant sini-
phase solution in fora (6.35) be used to get intonation on the phase in the
first approximation. and that the question of sufficiency of the resultant
solution that is associated with the presence and influence of zeros be de-
termined separately in each individual case.

In accordance with this. we arrive at the following "skeleton" of a solution
for the promo. of reconstructing radio brightness from experinental recordings
of H:

e
W(!)-lU(u.)Ir-v(~.)—oU(U.).-:Bu). (6.39)
where the synbols H and 0 denote the Hilbert and Faurier transforms respectively.

As has been noted. detenination of the sodulus 0 free H presents no diffi-
culties. and therefore. writing out (6.33) we get

. 83)::Uts,)e'“'~"°"'t”ds,. (6.40)
where 6-. '
a ’ Tum-2) . ' we.) .
h 1.31;. s,—a, d“+§N '1'“ ‘ 4's] (54"

is the principal value of the Cauchy integrs1._

As we can see. analytical Fourier transform (6.1;0) differs from conventional
Fourier transfora (6.33) in the change of limits of integration and the inclu-
sion of Hilbert transformation as an internal operation.

Denoting the analytical Fourier operator by syabol 3. we can write (6.60) as

a . . .
8(0==U(~.1 (o. 42)

Let us note that expressions (mam-(6.1.2) are the fundamental solution of
the probleu for a sy-Ietric interferometer withOut consideration of issues
of practical realization relating to the influence of the inhomogeneous sodium.
seoothing effects of antennas. inequality of interferometer arms. etc. The

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
solution has been obtained for asylmsetric inhomogeneous distributions 3(6).
for symmetric [distributions] relative to the center of gravity (0 of the
source. expression (6.40) is simplified:

tam-jaweosnwr ' (6.42»

A solution of form (6.63) can be extended to time frequencies as well. thus
giving time spectra of the radiation sources.

In this case we have

0 (43‘: up). . (6. 44)

where operator 3. being extended to time frequencies. has the above-mentioned
meaning. and 1 is time delay introduced into the arms of the interferometer.

Radio astronomical interferometry experimentally realizes both kinds of co-
herence: spatial (SC) and temporal (TC). The former is realized due to a
change in base of the interferometer. and the latter is due to rotation of
the earth. In this sense. we have an analog of the Hichelson and Young op-
tical interferometers [Ref. 18]. Thus we find that the complex luinosity
function reflects the concepts of SC and TC and completely determines the
characteristics of radiation from cosmic sources arriving at the earth. which
in the final analysis gives information about the morphology of the sources.
and about the nature of processes occurring in them. This is reflected in
the following transcription of the solution found in the most general form:

3
E(t. -):=U(u,. v). . (6. «5)

where E(£. w) denotes the distribution of radiation energy of the source with
respect to spatial coordinates E and temporal frequencies up.

Assuming in (6.ﬁ5) 1- const. 1. e. singling out the spatial frequencies. we
get the spatial spectrum of the source ("static one-dimensional portrait"
of the source) that reveals its morphological features.

Setting¢n~ const in (6.65). the interferometer is contracted to a point. which
is equivalent to recording on an isolated antenna. i. e. by isolating the

time frequencies we get the time spectrum of the source. This gives infor-
mation on the dynamics of processes that take place in the source and on the
nature of its radiation. 1. e. we get a "dynamic portrait" of the source.

It should be noted that in the general case. spatial and temporal coherence
are not independent. conforming to the two-wave equations [Ref. 18]:

ﬂat/(an 0- 543043;]. ' (6. 46)

where V§.2 is the laplacian with respect to coordinates of the end points
of the base in predetermined direction x; c is the velocity of light in vacuum.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In essence. solution (6.66) is the well-known Van Zittert-Zernike theorem
which in the most general form is represented by expression (6.65). Thus
even from (6.66) we get in case U(ux. To) the spatial spectrtm: corresponding
to SC. and in case U(u.. r) -- the teeporal spectrum of the source correspond-
ing to It. if no. To are constant parameters.

For spectrally pure processes. the so-called "reduction formula" is applicable
(Ref. 24]:

U(s',. n-Uo... guy... (—1.).

where the first factor in the right-hand member denotes spatial coherence.
and the second denotes temporal coherence.

Let us note that the resultant solution of the phase problem is applicable
not only in interferometry where the informer is the function of coherence
as the correlation of emission at two points of the wave front. but also in
the case of signal registration at one point on an isolated antenna (here
the meaning of "point" is arbitrary).

In the latter case the signal can be considered as the resultant of elementary
interferometers with different bases fitting in the aperture of the antenna.

In principle. any point of the wave front contains information abOut all de-
tails of the emitting object.

A certain analog in classical holography is the well-known fact of reconstruc-
tion of the wave image of an object from a fragment of a hologram.

Aperture synthesis. which has come into extensive use in radio astronomy.

can be considered as a spatial radio hologram. and with appropriate recording
and processing. e. g. for the radiation of cosmic sources - "space masers"
(spectral atomic and molecular lines of H. OH. NH3. E20 and so on) -- we can
reconstruct a "portrait" of the emitting regions.

Correlation processing of signals recorded by elements of aperture synthesis
can he done both with respect to high frequency and with respect to the enve-
lope. In the latter case we get the analog of the so-called "intensity inter-
ferometer". where the informer is the square of the modulus of the luninosity
function. Even in this case. after elementary conversion. the phase of the
complex luminosity function is reconstructen from the known modulus. i. e.
there are no losses of information on phases of high-frequency signals.

6.5. Systems Approach to the Optical Cavity Problem

The use of systems theory gives new possibilities for analyzing and synthesizing
open cavities [Ref. 1. 11.].

The essence of the systems approach to the optical cavity problem consists
in the following. Some distribution of the electromagnetic field is taken

as the input signal simulating the open cavity. and the field distribution
in the same plane produced by the input action as a result of its repeated

80

FINICMHWCJAI.USIZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

propagation from one grain to another is taken as the output signal. Such

:n system is completely described by the space-frequency characteristic. Be-
sides. the inverse Fourier transfers of the frequency response gives the re-
sponse of the system to the input signal described by a delta function. or
else gives the Green's function of the optical cavity problem. Knowledge

of the Green's function enables us to find the modes of the open cavity, since
it is the sum of the eigenfunctions (modes) of the given problem.

In most solutions of electrodynamic problems, finding the Green's functions
presents serious difficulties. The simplicity of the elements that comprise
the optical cavity (mirrors or generators of frequency-modulated waveforms.
space as a linear phase filter [Ref. [6]). enable us to construct a model

of the optical cavity as a linear system with feedback [Ref. 11.]. to determine
the space-frequency characteristic of such a system. and by carrying out its
Fourier transformation to get a pulse response, 1. e. the Green's function

of the optical cavity problem.

The general space-frequency characteristic of the open cavity is found in
the following way. Let H(u) be the space-frequency characteristic of the
system that describes one circuit of the cavity by an electromagnetic pertur-
bation.

After each circuit of the cavity, the electronagnetic perturbation of a certain
plane is again incident on this plane. in virtue of which the cavity is a

system with feedback. and its general space-frequency characteristic has the
form

P (a)
53.4——
H'“’ I—ma)‘

l.for lu|<u.
0,for “>11.

of transmitted space frequencies. Here use is made of the property of the
pupil function

where P,.(u)-=l is the pupil function that determines the band

Within the framework of idealization that uses the Huygens-Fresnel principle:

H.(u)='—————-fb£)—————- . (a. 41)

I I
""”""['(m.-v.)+4m—m)""" + ””1

where n. r; are the mirror reflectivities. o-k/ZL; k-Zn/x is the wave mn-
ber; L is the distance between mirrors; B-k/Zf; f is the focal length of
the mirror.

 

 

inverse transformation of the Fourier characteristic gives the pulse response
of the system

It.(x)=-2':S H.(u) e"'du.

‘—-

Let us rerresent this integral in the form of the convolution of Fourier trans-

l—lﬂe)

 

forms of the cofactors P..(u) and of function Ho(u)

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

tan-owns» 9% o L L“) . .5. 48)

that defines the Green's function of the cavity problem. (llere X dnotes con-
volution of the two functions.) The first function in convolution (6.68)

is sin ugx/wx. end accounts for finiteness of the mirror di-ensions. The
second function defines the solutioniof the problem of nodes with infinite
eirrors. and is expressed in for. is “'x. where

______________.
.,- 1/ -me—JM HWW"-...,,,,,
“-OH-h) “-(hi’h)

Thus the general solution is written as integral

h.(3)~ 2 S s"" 4—H“. ‘2': 0 (K.

As an exaqale we consider a cavity with identical infinite mirrors (R1 -31- R)
and we find the set of eigenfunctions that correspond to subscript I-O. He
restrict ourselves to the approximation of real mirrors. 1. e. we set r1- r;- l.
we have

“=:x%yr—m_ . v=BI«-LIR.

3s
- rm .
iwlyins 9.(x)=eI-_o-=e n '.

Under these conditions. in the case of infinite plane-parallel nirrors (81" 32'
L/ZR-O) the optical cavity is a spatially invariant system and its general
space-frequency characteristic will be in accordance with (6.67)

l - .
,’°w-I—cm(-wp '

 

The pulse response of such'a systen will be equal to

Mr) - —'-j ' emu. . (o. 49)

 

The integrand has first-order poles at points
u.= :V m.

and a second-order pole at point u- 0. The residue at point u- 0 is zero.
The residue at point on is e'l'ﬂ—t- ll, Thus the pulse response of the cavity
will take the for- of the sun

' I "cos (s )
..(X)- L ﬁ .

82

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For a planar cavity we get a solution in the form of cosines with argument that
includes the distance between mirrors. The latter circumstance enables us

to find the solution of a cavity with a mirror that has periodically spaced
apertures.

Let us consider a cavity in which one of the plane-parallel mirrors has a
periodic structure that consists of alternating reflecting and transparent

strips of identical width xo/Z.

The space frequency characteristic of the system that describes the process
of propagation between two planes separated by distance a takes the form

[Ref. 33]

 

”Amanda’s—:- I/ 1—(%)’} (6.50)

Let us limit ourselves to consideration of the case of two spatial harmonics
(m-vo. 1). Then the output signal of the system will have a spectrum defined
by the expression

F... (u): 1-1.0.) 2 H (mas/gm + m2n/x.)=n
m-OJ
-F. (0)" (01+ F .42:li H (2am.

[Russian subscripts aux - output; as - input]

In the case of optical systems, the function Vsum(u) is equal to the amplitude
of the field in the exit pupil. In the given case it is equal to the ampli-
tude of the field in plane 2. The intensity of this field is

F..(u)F:..tu)=L‘.(0r+IF.(2a/x.r+
+ 9 IF. (0] IF. (WM 093 l9 (0) - «rm/3.)].
where 9(u) is the phase of frequency response (6.50).

With consideration of expression (6.50). the intensity in plane a is represented
in the following fora:

. F_(a)P..@;=IF.(0r+IF.(2s/x.r+
+ 2 IF. (0» Inns/x.» cos hulk- 2M W].

This implies that the intensity of bands formed in plane 2 is maximum if the
distance to this plane is

z.-= I "a . Ad==l.2pu
l- -x

If period xo>>l, we get the relation

z.==ﬂMxﬂl

The resultant relations coincide with the known Rayleigh relations [Ref. 74].
It was Rayleigh who called attention to this effect of lattice reproduction

83

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢DFFK1Al.USE(MULY

In coherent light. Subsequently. the effect was experimentally verified and
a nunber of papers were devoted to it. e. 3. Ref. 38. 125. Space-frequency
analysis of an open optical cavity gave the capability of deter-ining the
for. of the natural oscillations of the resonant cavity - periodic nodes -
a phenoaenon sieilar in nature to the lattice reproduction described by Ray-
leigh.

In the general case for a cavity with nirrora having radii of curvature R1
and R2. we get the condition of existence of periodic modes fro. the expres-
sion that defines the Green's function:

[-— a':+..i1=-

"here “I l, 29 30..
Fresnel Sandwich as Optical Cavity

The Fresnel sandwich is a device in which the distribution of the field of
electromagnetic radiation repeats itself.

Finding the conditions of self-reproduction of the field is the problem of
mode determination.

Consequently. if we make the reflectivity of one of the nirrors very like

a Fresnel function (which is reproduced in the sandwith). then under certain
conditions the distribution of the field
reflected from this mirror will reproduce

ll,aw itself after each pass through the cavity.

I’ and the Fresnel sandwich can be used as an

I
| I
P optical cavity. According to Ref. 58. a
I
" """"—T—_|". Fresnel sandwich lede up of three Fresnel
| | [ zone plates (Fig. 6.26 realizes Fourier trans-
iF r.. ,14 ’,/4‘ formation at certain paraneters so that its
I fone plates “ action is described by the following equation:

—-L——*—..L——.l
F (~)=z:(x) (If (1)230) 96 2.00”“). (6. 5|)
Fig. 6.26. Fresnel sandwich
where f(x) is the initial function to be

transformed by the Fresnel sandwich. This function may be the amplitude dis-
tribution of the electronagnetic field in plane z-IO. i. e. in direct proximity

to the first Fresnel zone plate (see Fig. 6.26):

zo(*)='“oV§¢XPUI:£') is the Fresnel function.
Here we are considering one-dimensional distribution of the electromagnetic
field f(x). The results of such consideration are easily extended to the
case of real two-dimensional distribution f(x. y).

Transformation of the image f(x) via the Fresnel sandwich leads to the Fourier
transform of the initial function. For this purpose it is necessary that the

84

FOR<OFFN3AI.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

zone plate in plane 2- I; be reduced with respect to zone plates in planes
z-O and z- 114,12 by a factor of l1lll+lz. and that the parameter of the
Fresnel function 20*(x) satisfy equality uz- 1/2. The Fourier image of the
initial function is formed in the plane directly behind tle third zone plate.
1. e. in plane 2- (11+l2).

Now let the surfaces of the plane-parallel mirrors that comprise the open
optical cavity have reflectivity that varies as the transmission function

of the Fresnel zone plate. and let the corresponding zone plate be placed
between such mirrors in plane :1 - 1;. The action of such a cavity. like the
Fresnel sandwich. is described by equation (6.51). i. e. at certain parameters
such a cavity realizes Fourier transformation of the electromagnetic field
distribution after one pass from one mirror to another.

The first multiplication f(x)zo*(z) in the right-hand part of equation (6.51)
takes place upon reflection of the electromagnetic wave from the first mirror
in plane z-IO. The operation of convolution is also realized just as in the
Fresnel sandwich as a result of light transmission through the zone plate
located in plane 2- £1. The last multiplication is realized upon reflection
of light from the second mirror located in plane z-(l1+ 1;). The Fourier
image of function f(x) is formed in plane z- (11+ lg) -- in direct proximity
to the surface of the second mirror.

ln virtue of symmetry. its eigenfunctions will be defined by the equation

wn-j hue-Wt, (o. 52)

where ‘k are eigenvalues corresponding to eigenfunction ¢k(x). and a is the
transverse dimension of the mirror.

Equation (6.52) for the modes of the described cavity coincides with the equa-
tion that defines the eigenfunctions of a confocal cavity. These functions
are proportional to spheroidal wave functions. and they have a number of prop-
erties that are useful for a plications. For example 6(x) has the maximum
possible energy on interval x|<¢2. which dictates minimum possible diffrac-
tion losses in the optical cavity. In addition to this property of the eigen-
functions of the Fresnel sandwich. the feasibility of using it as the optical
cavity in a laser is due to the capability of coupling electromagnetic energy
out through apertures in the zone-plate mirrors. the influence on output beam
parameters (reduction of divergence as a consequence of an increase in spot
diameter on the mirror). and more complete utilization of the active substance
of the laser due to diffraction by the zone structures of such a cavity.

6.6. Holographic and Integrated Optics

A certain number of optical devices are used to transform the amplitudes.
phases and polarization characteristics of light beams: mirrors. prisms.
lenses. birefringent and phase plates. polarizers. various kinds of gyrators

and diffraction gratings. Optical components of this type are usually cumber-
some and expensive. and their capabilities for handling light beams are limited.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This has given rise to the problem of developing compact optical equivalents
of known optical components and devices that have new properties. These prob-
lems have been studied in a number of papers [Ref. 22. 36. 61, 62. 113. 114.
165].

Holographic methods enable us to produce holograms that are analogs of con-
ventional optical components and that in addition have a number of interesting
peculiarities [Ref. 62]. The capability of superimposed holograms to act
independently allows the development of complex combinations of such components
and even creation of new devices that have no analogs in classical optics.

The new field of application of holographic methods of producing and prolifer-
ating both elementary and complex optical components is developing rapidly.

Hologram-Mirrors. The simplest optical component is a flat mirror (total
internal reflection prism) - an optical device that changes the direction
of a light beam. Its principal characteristic is reflectivity; multilayered
dielectric coatings are used to increase this parameter. Such mirrors are
essentially artificial holograms adapted for operation in monochromatic light.
With appropriate production they can alter the nature of polarization of re-
flected light beams in a predetermined way. Extensive use is made of multi-
layered coatings that do not change the nature of polarization of light that
is incident on them at a certain angle. Sometimes such hologram-mirrors can
be used as light filters and polarizers. Such components are characterized
by less irregular scattering of light than conventional optical mirrors.

Hologram-Lenses and Holographic Objectives. The diffraction analog of a lens
is the zone plate. A zone plate forms an image of an extended object in the
same manner as a conventional lens. and its resolution at the focus is equal
to that of an ideal lens of the same aperture. The main disadvantage of the
zone plate (both phase and amplitude plates) is the presence of a series of
focal lengths corresponding to real and imaginary foci that depend on the
wavelength of light. In contrast to an ideal lens. the zone plate is not
tautochromic. In imaging objects that are a finite distance away or off the
optical axis. the light reaches the end zones and the center at different
times. leading to dephasing of waves in the focal plane.

An important advantage of zone plates is their two-dimensionality and their
capability for focusing infrared. ultraviolet and soft x-rays. This property
is used in making compact light equipment for space research [Ref. ll3. ll].

Zone plates are made most precisely and simply by a holographic method. Zone
plates can be recorded on both sides of a thick photographic emulsion by

Yu. N. Denisyuk's technique (Ref. 36] with subsequent reconstruction by white
light with selection of one wavelength. Such zone plates give only the real
image. when a zone plate is recorded in the light of three lasers operating
on different wavelengths. it can be used to get a color image.

Holographic recording of zone plates in the off-axis arrangements gives plates
with spatial separation of the principal real and imaginary foci from each

other and from the zero diffraction order. Such a recording scheme almost
completely eliminates background and considerably improves image quality.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the classical zone plate. a hologram-lens can be made that

is formed by two point sources producing diverging spherical waves. High-
quality objective lenses have been recorded on holograms in this arrangement.
The resultant holograms are the analogs of the objective Lenses. The use

of a hologram-lens for recording an image to produce focused-image holograms
enables simultaneous production of both the focused image and a reference
beam in the form of undiffracted light.

Computers can be used to improve the diffraction efficiency of hologram-lenses
made on photographic emulsions. In this case. the calculated relief is applied
to a large surface. then reproduced by precision optics. The diffraction
efficiency of such hologram-lenses (kinoforms) reaches 902 [Ref. 1&5].

The strong chromatic aberration of the hologram-lens can he used in spectral
instruments. The hologram-lens can serve as a dispersing component. replacing
expensive concave diffraction gratings.

An important advantage of diffraction optics is the capability of producing
complex optical components. One of these is the holographic image multiplier
on which the Fourier transform of a set of point sources is recorded. Such

a device produces multiplied images with resolution of 6 um on a SarS cm field.

Holographic Diffraction Gratings. These are made in sizes up to ISO mm. band
frequency 3000 lines/Inn resolution of the order of l K. The holographic
method produces gratings that give forward diffraction of a wave of given
shape. enabling correction of aberrations of optical systems of spectral in-
struments.

Holograms as independent optical elements produce a real image of an object
without using additional lenses and objectives. Holographic methods that
permit recording of several holograms on a single photographic plate open
up new possibilities for making light and compact optical devices capable
of performing the functions of several components simultaneously [Ref. 22].

One of the important jobs on the road to development of holographic optics

is to work out a method of getting holograms that have high diffraction ef-
ficiency. i. e. low losses [Ref. 107. 108]. Obviously these must be phase
holograms since amplitude holograms inevitably absorb part of the energy passing
through them.

The development. standardization and classification of artificial optical
components enables us to make optical devices in accordance with principles
analogous to those in electronic systems.

Optical effects in thin-film waveguides can be used for optical and optoelec-
tronic data processing. Thin-film dielectric waveguides can be used as a
basis for miniature laser devices. optical modulators, filters. parametric
generators and other components for communication systems with large informa-
tion capacity. high-speed computers and for optical data processing systems.
The production of thin-film optical components on a flat dielectric backing
opens up the serious possibility of integrated optical circuits [Ref. 145].

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integrated optics sprang up as a result of studying the principal properties
of optical waveguides on a dielectric backing. development of the method of
input and extraction of light through a waveguide surface based on the optical
tunnel effect. and accoqzlisllaent of laser frequency conversion in a nonlinear
thin-film waveguide.

One of the problems of integrated optics is creation of passive optical compo-
nents (lenses. prisms. diffraction gratings) in film. Just as prisms and
lenses are formed in conventional optics by appropriately shaping the surfaces
of transparent dielectrics. so components that act as prisms or lenses can

be formed in thin films by appropriately shaping the baundaries of a region

of change in the index of refraction. For practical purposes. this can be
done by a local change in thickness of the film. In another technique. prisms
and lenses are formed by introducing a suitably shaped layer with high index
of refraction into a waveguide film or substrate. Film prisms can be used

to analyze the frequency spectrum of a waveguide light beam in any mode. or
for spatial separation of the light of different modes on the sane frequency.
Thin-fihm lenses for a surface wave are formed by shaping a curved boundary

of the region with changed film thickness.

An important part in making prisms and lenses in thin-film optics is played

by dispersion of the index of refraction. which is readily altered over a

wide range by selecting film thickness. It should be noted that we can have
refraction on the boundary of two regions without dispersion. which is important
for making achromatic prisms and lenses.

In addition to prisms and lenses. diffraction gratings can be made in two-
dimensional optics by applying closely spaced depressions on film surfaces.

or by applying dielectric strips with low index of refraction. The constant

of propagation of the surface wave in such a structure undergoes periodic
variations. leading to diffraction effects similar to light scattering on

a standing acoustic wave in a volumetric medium. These phenomena can be used

in a number of thin-film devices of the spectral filter and mode selector

type. Material with high aaborption applied instead of a dielectric on the
film surface causes rapid attenuation of the optical surface wave. This effect
can be used to create thin-film equivalents of amplitude masks. spatial filters.
gratings and lenses of the Fresnel zone plate type.

Dielectric films with thickness of the order of a wavelength of light or less
are important in integrated optics. Critical film thicknesses corresponding
to low-order surface waves lie in this range. At the minimum effective thick-
ness of the waveguide. the maximum gradient of the effective index of refrac-
tion is reached. The optical tunnel effect based on a prism is used for
coupling the radiation into and out of thin-film waveguides. It is a compli-
cated job to get the optimum profiles of the film and gap that ensure total
input of a given light beam into a predetermined mode of a thin-film waveguide.

In addition to tunnel input of radiation. it is highly effective to excite
surface waves by a phase diffraction grating applied on the surface of the
waveguide film. The input devices use both planar and volumetric diffraction
gratings that are applied directly on the wavetuide film. Radiation can be
coupled in and out through a tapering edge of waveguide film.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The waveguide film may consist of dielectric layers of optically nonlinear
saterial. The properties of nonlinear optical waveguides can be used to excite

radiation on combination frequencies of the initial waves. and also to get

the second harmonic. Thin-film optical waveguides can be used for spatial
scanning of surface waves. 0f greatest pronise here is an acoustic method--
interaction of light with elastic waves propagating in the film. The capa-
bility for getting high concentrations of optical and acoustic energy in thin
films allows creation of efficient thin-film spatial modulators. The acoustic
nethod of converting surface wave modes is not unique. It is possible to
convert optical modes in films with anisotropic and gyrotropic backinga and
boundary interfaces.

At the present time. a number of active conponents have been suggested and
realized in thin-film waveguides. An investigation has been made of stinu-
lated emission of gelatin files of different thicknesses and under different
pumping conditions. In addition to the capability for single-frequency lasing
in a fins la us thick. the possibility has been noted of nultifrequency lasing
with strong pumping and in thicker films. The nultifrequency nature of the
radiation is associated with stimulated emission of different modes of the
gelatin film. A change in the period of spatial nodulation of the index of
refraction or gain gives the capability of tuning laser wavelength with dis-
tributed feedback. For these purposes we can use the property of an organic
dye solution to change gain and index of refraction upon absorption of intense
optical radiation. Creation of a thin-filn ring laser in which strong feedback
is set up by the simplest method enables expansion of the class of thin-film
lasers by using media with moderate gain. The thin-film ring laser can be
quite shaply joined to a flat file on a backing. and is used for coupling
radiation into the film.

Electroluminescent and aeniconductor lasers can be used as thin-film active
elements. and have a fine outlook in integrated optics in view of their small
size. high efficiency and other advantages over lasers of different types.

In recent years. integrated optics has reached a level of development where
its capabilities revealed in laboratory studies are finding ever wider appli-
cation for optical and optoelectronic data processing.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". 1976

66l0
CSO: 1862/163

89

FOR OFFNJAI.USEZONL¥
NI OFFICIAL [.88 ONLY

PLASMA PHYSICS

one 533.9.01
mwuznrm Low-mm W KINETICS

Hoscow rnmm mmsuor smmmmor rum in Russian 1982 (signed
to press 10 Dec 81) pp 2-5. 373475

[Annotatiom preface and table of contents from book "lonequilibriu Low-
Teeperaturs Plasna Kinetics". by Leon Hikhaylovich libernan. Vladinir
Sergeyevich Vorob'yev and Igor' ‘l'evfikovich Yakubov. Institute of Low Te-pera-
ture Physics. 0881! Acadeny of Sciences. Isdatel'stvo "llauka". 2350 copies.

376 pages]

[Text] This book is the first to cover s wide class of problems in nonequi-
libriun low-tseperature plea-a kinetics. Data are given on collisional and
radiative elenentsry processes. Radiative transfer of excitation is con-
sidered. Criteria of equilibrium under a variety of experinental conditions
are discussed. Nonequilibrius distributions of stone by levels are described
as well as electron energy distributions. Hethods are outlined for calculating
coefficients of ionization and recoubination. Unsteady processes are discussed.
Sons questions of kinetics in s noleculsr plans are considered.

The book is intended for scientists and engineers working in the fields of
plssns physics and plans cheeistry. electric discharge in gases. physical
electronics. and also for graduate students and upperclassesn majoring in
physical and technical fields. Figures 128. tables Mo. references 490.

Preface

The first plasna research was done in connection with studying electric dis-
charge in gases. Physicists had been concentrating on partly ionized plans
with kinetics detar-ined by various collisional and radiative processes. This
trend of research was deternined to a considerable extent by practical probless
that were urgent at the ties: developing gas-discharge light sources. recti-

f iers. inverters .

Since the early fifties. interest in plssns physics has taken a sharp upturn.
This applies prinsrily to the investigation of coupletely ionized plasna with
its various collective phenoeena. instabilities. interesting and at tines
unexpected effects associated with propagation of electronegnetic waves in
such a plllll and the action of external electric and magnetic fields on the
plasaa. Interest in hot plane has been stimlated not only by the variety
and novelty of physical processes and effects. but also by probleans that have
arisen in connection with controlled nuclear fusion.

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The appearance of new technical fields in the early sixties. such as gas-
dischsrge lasers. magnetohydrodynamic generators. thermoemission converters.
pleas chemistry. plasma engines. various methods of plasma technology and
the like. rekindled interest in weakly ionized low-temperature plans. This
applies priesrily to nonequilibrim plasns that is distinguished by extra-
ordinary diversity of states and properties. It is in a weakly ionized non-
equilibrium plans that population inversion of excited states of atoms and
ions is realized. high electrical conductivity of low-enthalpy gas flows is
attained that is necessary for installations of direct energy conversion.

and selective excitation of individual states of atoms is realized that ensures
efficiency of plasma-chemical reactions. Specific oscillations and instabili-
ties that originate in nonequilibrium low-temperature plasma are of consider-
able physical interest.

Low-temperature plasma kinetics is determined by a combination of a large
number of elementary processes. among which we mention inelastic collisions
of electrons with excited and unsxcited atoms. inelastic collisions of atoms
and ions. processes of associative ionization and dissociative recombination
and many others that are absent or of little significance in a hot plasma.
Processes of radiative excitation transfer play an appreciable part. As a
result. the kinetics of low-temperature plans is in some sense also more
complicated and varied than the kinetics of a completely ionized plans.
largely due to the presence of atoms and molecules with their nuserous excited
states.

Despite the considerable advances that have been made in recent decades. low-
temperature please kinetics has not yet been duly reflected in monographs
devoted to plasma physics. The widely known series "Problems of Plasma Theory"
edited by ll. A. Leontovich. and books by L. A. Artsimovich and R. Z. Ssgdeyev
"Plasma Physics for Physicists". l. Shksrovskiy. ‘l'. Johnston and :4. Bachinskiy
"Kinetics of Plasma Particles", N. Kroll and A. Trayvelpis "Pundnuntals of
Plasma Physics" and others have dealt primarily with other problems. In this
book the authors have attempted to fill this gap. Major emphasis has been
given to kinetics of ionization. excitation. recombination, energy distribution
among plasma components and individual degrees of freedom of these components.
energy exchange between plasma and ambient medium. The plasma is treated

as an interrelated system of electrons. ions and atoms in different energy
states. Interaction among particles in the presence of external perturbations
gives rise to compromised nonequilibrium states. A more detailed exposition
of some problems can be found in other publications. The state of a plasma

in nagnetic fields is described in the series "Problems of Plasma Theory".

The ‘book by A. V. Yeletskiy. L. A. Palkina and B. H. Smirnov "Transport Phe-
nomena in weekly Ionized Plasma" contains a fairly complete exposition of
the physics of transport phenomena in low-temperature plasma. Instability
problens are covered in a series of surveys by Ye. P. Velikhov et al.. and
also in the book by A. V. Nedospasov and V. D. Khait ”Oscillations and Insta-
bilities of Low-Temperature Plasma". There is a series of monographs dealing
with problems of kinetics that arise in connection with development of specific
applied devices: Hill) generators. lasers and the like. In our monograph we
cover problems that are in some measure canon to all these applied studies.
Nonequilibrium plasma theory is presented simltsneously with numerous experi-
mental results.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter I outlines the region of paraneters corresponding to low-temperature
plasna. giving the aajor concepts of plasna physics necessary for further
exposition.

Chapter 2 is devoted to eleaentary collisional and radiative processes. It

is a reference chapter that provides the aininm required intonation on proba-
bilities of elastic and inelastic collisions and radiative transitions. Con-
siderable attention is given to approxisate and selieqirical relations for
probabilities of various elenentary processes.

Radiative excitation transfer plays a rather inortant part in nonequilibriu-
plea-a kinetics. This question is treated in Chapter 3.

The authors have de-ed it necessary to set forth the criteria of arisal of
various kinds of nonequilibria individually in the fourth chapter. Research
results given in this chapter are presented on the basis of physical consider-
ations. and can be used without studying the subsequent chapters vhere they
are more rigorously substantiated.

Chapter 5 exasines the distribution of stone with respect to excited states.
This topic is of interest not only fro. the standpoint of the optical proper-
ties of plasna and its diagnosis. Excited atone play a quite inportant part
in the kinetics of ionization and recombination. being as it were the rungs
of a ladder over which the electron passes fro. the bound to the free state
and back.

Chapter 6 outlines the kinetics of ionization and reconbination. VariOus
nechanisns of imitation and recod>ination are discussed. methods are given

for calculating coefficients of ionization and reconbination. and also reference
data. Nonequilibriun ionization in a plea is considered.

Chapter 7 is devoted to the velocity distribution of electrons. and to the
energy balance of an electron gas. Considerable attention is given to the
influence of inelastic collisions on energy distribution of electrons. and
to the relation between nonequilibriun electron energy distribution and the
distribution of atoas by excited states.

In chapter 8 we consider soae questions of an unsteady nonequilibriul plea-a;
primarily the rather important criteria of quasisteadiness. problems of ionisa-
tion relaxation. distribution of atons by excited states and the electron
energy distribution function. Also discussed are sole problas of low-tes-
perature plasna instability that are closely related to the kinetics presented
above.

Molecular plaena kinetics is nuch nore conplicated. and at the present tine
has been less developed than the kinetics of atonic plasna. Sooe questions
of molecular plaslsa kinetics are discussed in chapter 9. Hith a view nsinly
to gas lasers. we briefly consider the kinetics of population of vibrational
states of nolecules. This section of chapter 9 was written by A. A.
Likal'ter. who has the authors' sincere gratitude.

Abbreviated notation is used in tables: e. g. 6.37’2 leans 6.37010".

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
ROI 0i1ﬂC16l.USIE(N§LY

Contents

Preface

Chapter 1

Lou-Temperature Plasma. General Information

1.1. Quaaineutrality. nebye shielding

1.2. Ideal plasma

1.3. Equilibrium plasma

1.6. Local thermodynamic equilibrium. Elementary processes

1.5. Particulars of transport phenomena

1.6. Nonequilibrium low-temperature and high-temperature plasmas

Chapter 2

Elementary Processes in Lou-Temperature Plasma

2.1. Elastic collisions

2.2. Inelastic collisions of electrons with atoms. ions and molecules

2.3. Inelastic collisions with heavy particles

2.6. Elementary radiative processes

2.5. Average energy transferred to atom in collisions

Chapter 3

Radiative Excitation Transfer

3.1. Major peculiarities of radiative excitation transfer

3.2. Equation of radiative excitation transfer

3.3. Approximate method of effective lifetime

3.6. Radiative transfer of excitation in inhomogeneous medium

3.5. Limits of applicability of the theory

Chapter 6

Criterion of Arisal of Nonequilibriun States

6.1. Criterion of electron temperature separation

6.2. Criterion of equilibrium ionization and equilibrium distribution of
atoms by levels

6.3, Criterion of violation of maxuellian distribution

Chapter 5

Kinetics of population of excited states

5.1. Qualitative pattern of population distribution in nonequilibrium

plasma

5.2. System of kinetic balance equations for populations of excited
states

5.3. Numerical methods of solving kinetic system of equations for
populations

6. Diffusion approximation

.5. Discrete methods and modified diffusion approximation

6. Comparison of analytically found populations with data of computer
calculations and experiments

5.7. Influence of atom-atom collisions on population distribution

5.8. Accounting for sources of excited atoms in system of balance

equations

5.9. Peculiarities of shock-radiative kinetics in rarefied plasma

5.10. Some applications of the theory

Chapter 6

Kinetics of Ionization and Recombination

6.1. Elementary kinetics of ionization and recombination

93

F1NR()FFIC1AI.IJSEZ(NULY

page

@0050 U

11
l6

l9
19
22
66
59
66

76
76
77

86
89

91

92
109
116
116
118
122
125
132

161
165

167
153
157

166
165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.2. Principal equations of ionization and recombination kinetics and
results of numerical solution

6.3. Coefficients of shock-radiative recombination in diffusion and
modified diffusion approximations

6.6. Electron concentration in nonequilibriua steady-state conditions

Chapter 7

Electron Energy Distribution and Electron Energy Balance

7.]. Kinetic equation and electron energy balance

7.2. Inelastic collisions. Their effect on electron energy balance,
frequency of excitation and ionization

7.3. Self-consistent electron energy distributions and distributions of
atoms by excited states

7.4. Electron energy distribution in strong electric field

Chapter 8

Unsteady Nonequilibrium Plasma

8.1. Criteria of quasistesdiness

8.2. Ionization relaxation

8.3. Radiation of unsteady plasma

8.0. Relaxation of distribution function

8.5. Instabilities of nonequilibrium plasma in external electric field

Chapter 9

Some Problems of Molecular Plasla Kinetics

9.1. Electron energy balance

9.2. Electron energy distribution function

9.3. Distribution of molecules by vibrational levels

9.4. Electron-ion recombination in molecular gases

9.5. Some problems of kinetics of stomicqmoleculsr plasma

Appendices

References

COPYRIGBT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1982

6610
'C50: 1862/166

96

FOR 0FTIC]AI.USE10NLN

17‘

183
205

209
210

222

239
265

255 '
255
263
273
276
282

293
293
299
30k
315
324
330
352
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 533.92

DYNAMICS AND RADIATION 0? OPEN (VACUUM) RAMA-DYNAMIC DISCHARGBS 0F 'PLASHA
POCUS' TYPE: SURVEY

Moscow ﬂPLOFIZIKA VYSCKIKH TEMPERATUR in Russian Vol 20, No 2. Mar-Apr 82
(manuscript received 25 Feb 80) pp 359-375

[Article by A. s. Kamrukov. N. P. Korlov and Yu. S. Protasov. Moscow Higher
Technical Academy imeni N. 2. Batman)

[Text] The paper gives the results of an experimental study
and analysis of the dynamics. space-time structure and
emission properties in the range of energies of quanta of
2-350 eV for open (vacuu) intense plasma-dynamic discharges
of the "plans focus" type. A method is described for com-
prehensive investigation of the radiation properties of
intense emitting discharges in the spectral region from

the visible to the extreme ultraviolet (KIN). It is shown
that the emission spectra of a plane focus is sharply
different from planckian. and is due mainly to the recom-
bination continuum of typical groups of ions that determine
the properties of plasma at a given temperature and density.
70-902 of the emitted energy belonging to the XI”) region

of the spectrum.

The authors consider possibilities of effective control

of the emission spectrum over a wide range of energies of
quanta (influence of macrostructure of hypersonic flow.
chemical composition. etc.) and attainment of high bright-
nesses in the XUV. Brightness temperatures exceeding 5 eV
have been reached for the first time in the region beyond
the bent. ionization potential.

Recent years have seen a considerable upsurge of interest in development of
powerful sources of radiation with high brightness temperature in the extreme
ultraviolet region. This is due to expansion of the sphere of scientific

and applied problems whose solution in large measure depends on development
of such sources. In the first rank among such problems are promising develop-
ments in design of powerful lasers for the visible and near ultraviolet region
for which the absorption bands of working media are in the XUV region (lasers
that use allowed electron transitions of molecules [Ref. 1]. excimer

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

photodisaociation lasers (Ref. 2]). and also research on the possibilities
of developing new types of coherent radiators (photoionization lasers [Ref.

3]). Furthermore. such sources can be used for other purposes as well. e. g.
for studying photochemical reactions, processes of interaction of radiant
high-density fluxes with condensed media. etc.

The out look for developing high-intensity plans sources in the XUV region

is determined in large measure by the capabilities of getting sufficiently
large values of dense ("43- 1017-10" cm") plasma with temperature 1‘;-

2-l0 eV. for which a considerable pert of the radiation may be in the extras
ultraviolet and associated with photorecombination of electrons to the ground
states of double. triple and higher-multiple ions. High selectivity of the
emission spectra- of such a plane. which is important for example for exci-
tation of active laser media. can be attained at fairly small optical thickness
of the plasma, where recombination maxilla show up in the emission spectra

and have appreciable intensity.

Attracting the most attention among methods of getting a dense radiating plans
is an electric-discharge method with plasma contain-eat by the magnetic self-
field of the discharge current. However. in developing XUV radiation sources
based on intense self-compressed discharges of the z-pinch type. funduentsl
difficulties arise that are associated with shielding of short-wave radiation
by layers of cool plans expanding at thermal velocity (vacuum discharges

in metal vapor [Ref. 5]), or with srisal of an ionization wave that stabilizes
the brightness temperature of the radiating surface on a level of 2-3 eV (dis-
charges in inert gases [Ref. 6]). In contrast to the mentioned sources of
radiation. conditions may be realized in the intense plasma-dynamic discharges
of a magnetoplasma compressor of the "plasma focus" type Ref. 7] under which
shielding of short-wave radiation of the hot plasma is excluded in principle
Ref. 8]. As is known [Ref. 7]. a characteristic feature of self-compressed
discharges of magnetoplssma compressors is the high average mass velocities
of the radiating plasma (v|~50 km/s), considerably exceeding its thermal
velocities (Mach nuaber in the flow H~S-lo [Ref. 9]). Thus even in a quasi-
steady state of flow. an optically dense shielding layer is not formed due

to satisfaction of the condition vl>>vl~ ”cherm (v1 is the velocity component
perpendicular to the axis of flow).

Of interest in connection with this is a detailed study of the space-time
structure and peculiarities of spectral distribution of emission of open
plasma-dynamic discharges for the purpose of determining capabilities for ef-
fective control of the -ission spectrum over a wide range of quantum energies
hv~ 5-100 eV. and attainment of high brightness characteristics in the extreme
ultraviolet.

1. Experimental Conditions and Research Method. Studies of dynanic and radia-
tion properties of open (vacuum) intense plans-dynamic discharges were done
on a facility consisting of a steel discharge chamber 0.8 m in diameter and

3 m long pumped out by a high-capacity vacuua system to a pressure of 10" Pa.
a capacitive energy storage device. a charging module with initiation unit.

and also measurement and diagnostic instrumentation.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of experiment: l—‘vacuu section; 2-

magnetoplasma compressor; 3--quartz (glass) calorimeter;

aunts-29 diffraction spectrometer; S—differential high-

vacuum pulping units; 6-open ionisation ch-ber; 7-vacuum

standard based on KRIS; 8--bolometric section; 9--photo-

electric sensor with H-foils; lO-scintillation spectrometer;
ll-Xr-Co thermocouples

The plasma sources in the described experiments were magnetoplasma compressors
of erosion type comprising a coaxial system of cylindrical or specially shaped
electrodes separated by a dielectric sleeve. The plasma-forling substances
were products of erosion of the electrodes and/or products of ablation of

the separating sleeve. The chemical composition of the electric-discharge
plasma was controlled by appropriate choice of the construction materials

of the magnatoplasma compressor. For example. to get a discharge in matal
vapor, heat-resistant dielectrics were used as the material for the separating
sleeve (boron carbonitride 38C, zirconium dioxide 2:02 or alundum A1203),

and the electrodes of the magnetoplasma compressor were made of the appropriate
metal (Cu. Cd. Al, Ho). The main yield of metal in the discharge came from

the central electrode (cathode); the partial fraction of erosion of the outer
electrode was less than 101. and did not significantly change the chemical
composition of the plasma. "hen a separating sleeve of ablatable material

was used (fluorocarbon plastic (CzP~)n. polyformaldehyde (cuzo)n. cesium iodide
Csl. etc.) with electrodes of erosion-resistant metals (Mo, U. Cu). the plasma
composition was determined mainly by the products of dissociation and ablation
of the dielectric.

Hagnetoplasma compressors were used in the experiments with geometry of the
electrode system similar to that described in Ref. 10: diameters of the outer
electrode were varied over a range of 30-80 mm. The magnetoplasma compressor
models were installed on the dielectric end flanges of the discharge chamber.
and the investigated discharges were observed and diagnosed through optical
side windows in the chamber. All experiments were done with negative polarity
of the central electrode in the first half-period of the discharge current.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

The electric energy accumulator was a bank of low-inductance nib6-150 capaci-
tors connected in parallel. Hexhuun capacitance of the bank in the described
experiments was c- 750 uP. maximum charging voltage was 09- 5 av.

The electrotechnical parameters of the discharge were measured by a standard
technique. using calibrated Rogowski loops and compensated RC voltage dividers.
The discharge was periodic in nature with strong damping. As a rule. a current
pulse contained two or three half-periods with duration varying over a range
of 17-20 us for different models. Hazin- current was reached in 6-8 us of
the discharge. and in operation on a fluorocarbon plasma at C03 750 u? was
420-460 u (at a rise time dI/dt up to 0.3.10" A/s). Current dampingfactor
was ~7.7-10~ s". The total inductance and impedance of the discharge circuit
together with the magnetoplasma compressor as calculated from the electrical
engineering equation for the current in the RLC tank were ~50 nﬂ and
~(3-5)'|0‘ 9 respectively.

The energy input to the discharge was determined in each specific experiment
from oscillograms of the current and voltage. and at c.- 750 u? was ~7S-851

of the energy stored in the capacitor bank. about 90-952 of the invested energy
being introduced during the first half-period of the discharge. Typical values
of peak electric powers were ~0.8 GB.

The space-time development of open plasma-dynamic discharges was studied by
SFR-ZH high-speed cameras operating in single-frame and slit-scan modes.

The density of flows and the time-integrated radiation output in individual
spectral intervals of the optical hand were determined by light-filtered photo-
cells calibrated by the EV-bs reference source. Recording of the time-scanned
radiation spectrum was done with an TSP-30 quart: spectrograph equipped with
disk slit chronograph. The space-time distribution of brightness temperature
T r of the radiation in the visible region was studied by methods of mono-
chromic photometric comparison of densities of blackening of negatives of

the slit scans of the discharge and the EV-bs reference source. and the spec-
tral distribution of Tbr was determined by the method of photoelectric compari-
son of radiation intensities.

The brightness temperatures of discharges in the XUV range were measured by
double open ionization chambers. the integrated energy output of short-wave
radiation was determined from heating of a quartz calorimeter and by bolometric
methods. the relative distribution of radiation over the spectrum was studied
by a photoemission-scintillation spectrum. the XUV spectrum was recorded by

the DPS-29 vacuum spectrograph. Fig. I shows a diagram of an experimental
setup for studying the emission characteristics of plasma-dynamic discharges
in the extreme ultraviolet.

2. Dynamics of Open Self-Compressed Plasma-Dynamic Dischlrges. Fig. 2 [photos
not reproduced] shows typical photochronograms that illustrate the dynamics

of development of an open plasma-dynamic discharge. The discharge was ignited
by a high-voltage (20-50 RV) ignition pulse to the third auxiliary electrode
installed in the dielectric sleeve in the middle of the discharge gap in the
central electrodes of the magnetoplasma compressor.

98

FOR OWTWCJAI.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plasma of the ignition discharge initiates a powerful streamer discharge
over the surface of the dielectric. leading to intense vaporization and ioni-
zation of the working substance. Streamer formation as a contracted current
channel (Fig. 2) causes amplitude inhomogeneity of the plasma flow on the
initial stage of the discharge (1- 2-6 us).

The plans in the interelectrode gap gives rise to volmetric electric current
whose radial component jr upon interaction with the azimuthal magnetic self-
field 3. sets up a longitudinal component of ampere force 15- 11-39 that ac-
celerates the plasma. The process of plasma acceleration is accompanied by
electromagnetic emulation of flow along the axis of the system and formation
of a compressed zone - the plasma focus - beyond the tip of the magnetoplasma
compressor (Fig. 2a). The mechanism of electromagnetic emulation reduces

to a two-stage process that shows up as Hall compression of the flow toward
the central electrode (cathode) in the interelectrode gap. and collapsing

of the plasma due to the pinch effect in the entrained streams beyond the

tip of the magnetoplasna compressor [Ref. 7].

The region of compression is localized in space. and is a macroscopically
stable formation, 1. e. a fairly clear outline of a quiescent jet is observed
over nearly the entire first half-period of the discharge. Heximum compression
occurs 1-2 us after attainment of the maximum current in cross sections

1.5-3 cm away from the tip of the magnetoplssma compressor. The transverse
size of the flow in this case is a few In. length of the compression zone

is 7-15 cm. divergence of the jet is 12-16’.

The plasma flow in the compression zone is contained by the magnetic field
of the discharge. Estimates of the ratio of magnetic pressure p" and gas-
dynasic pressure p,

1-. u .II‘IZ 2»IO"I:I:nF

___. ———.-.-,.,

N (N, h 2”: )l-T N(I+i)kT

show that for typical plasma parameters (see below) the concentration of
heavy particles N ~10” cm". average charge of ions zSNe/mi- 2, temperature
kT- 5 eV. diameter of the plasma colmn d~0.6 cm. magnetic forces predominate
over gasdynamic forces even at currents greater than ~40 M.

An important characteristic of the magnetoplasma compressor as a device for
producing dense high-velocity plasma flows is the coefficient of utilization
of the working substance "w.s- which is the ratio of the amount of material
flowing through the zone of the plasma focus to the total consumption of mass
over the discharge pulse. In its physical sense. this parameter characterizes
the macroscopic structure of the plasma flow discharged from the aagnetoplasma
compressor. At high values of n..,~ (0.9-0.95) (Fig. 3a. c [photos not repro-
ducedl) the flow is a dense magnetohydrodynamically formed plasma jet with
small angular divergence. A reduction of “w.a (Fig. 3b [photo not reproduced])
results in a considerable part of the erosion mass not flowing through the
focus zone. and being discharged from the magnetoplesma compressor as a super-
sonic jet that is practically not contained by the magnetic field of the dis-
charge and expands freely into the vacuum. Capabilities for controlling nu..

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and consequently the nacrostructure of the flow in discharge systens based

on nagnetoplasna conpressors of erosion type involve appropriate choice of
energy conditions. the geonetry of the discharge gap, theraophysical properties
and the nethod of introducing the plesna-forning substances into the discharge.
As vill be demonstrated below. the macroscopic structure of the flow has a
considerable effect on the radiation properties and spectral distribution

of enission energy of an open plans-dynamic discharge.

The microscopic structure of the plans jet escaping free the nagnetoplana
coepressor is revealed on photochronograns of the discharge taken with high
space-tine resolution. Fig. 2c [photo not reproduced] shows a slit scan of

a discharge across a fluorocarbon plasea obtained with orientation of the

slit along the axis of the flow. The formed nagnetoplaas conpressor flow

is characterised by a discrete structure observed on the photochronogrsns

in the fare of alternating dark “d light bands. The characteristic dimension
of inhonogsnsities in the direcran of the axis of flow and the recurrence
rate were deter-lined by photometry of the negatives of the scans. and are
0.2-0.5 CI and 5-10 HR: respectively. It is known that the interrupted flow
structure observed in a nunber of papers (Ref. [1-17] in the investigation

of pulsed accelerators of gas-discharge and erosion plasna is due to the exis-
tence of individual nicroplaaaoids lief. 1?]. Investigation of the nature

of erosion destruction of the surface of electrodes and dielectric inserts

of nagnetoplaaaa conpressors and conpsrison with the results obtained on other
erosion plasna systsns lief. 17] shows that the fornation of individual nicro-
plaseoids is due to the discrete nature of arrival of the mass of plssna-
forning material in the discharge. which is caused by space-tine inhonogeneity
of energy release on the surface of the electrodes and dielectric inserts.

V' “/3 If the inhoaogeneities are detached plas-
noids, the velocity of their propagation
(which can be deternined fro- slit scans
that are x-t diagrans) will be the velocity
of the flow. The results of processing

 

 

/\ slit scans obtained at different initial
-'-'~' voltages U. of the discharge are shown
l/ on Fig. A. Typical of the initial dis- .
w k; .V—‘w “—r— —u3 charge stage is considerable tine inhono-
’ geneity of velocities. with increasing
Fig. lo. Velocity of plane in 0., inhonogeneity increases rapidly. The
free jet at distance L- 10 cu average lass velocities of the plane
fron the tip of the nagnetoplasna flow are 40-50 Ira/s. The resultant dis-
cospressor (C- 750 ul’. car. tribution of velocities agrees with the
plasma) at Us: l--3 W; 2—6 Irv; results of neasure-ents of the dynamic
3—5 W characteristics of the discharge by using

double electrostatic probes [Ref. 18].

The transverse structure of the flow in the conpression zone vas studied by
slit scans obtained with the slit of the streak canera nornal to the dis-
charge axis. Fig. 2d [photo not reproduced] shows a typical photochronogran
corresponding to the cross section at distance L- 2.5 can from the tip of the
eagnetoplaua conpressor. It can be seen that the plasna colt-l preserves

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its dimensions and position in space practically throughout the first half-
period of the discharge. 1. e. force instabilities of the type of pinches.
kinks and the like that are typical of intense self-compressed discharges

are absent (Ref. 4. [9]. At the same time, the initial stage of the discharge
shows azimuthal inhomogeneity due to streamer formation and subsequent propa-
gation of the ionization front over the surface of the dielectric leads to
development of a helical instability with characteristic frequencies of oscil-
lat ions that vary over a range of 200-300 kHz. Pour microseconds after supply
of the initiating pulse the corkscrew instability becomes small-scale. A
peculiarity of the structure of the plasma flow in the compression cone is
also the presence of transverse small-scale high-frequency oscillations
("noises") with characteristic frequencies of ~10 Has. Let us note that
small-scale structures of this kind are also observed in the region of com-
pression of a gas-discharge magnetoplamla compressor (Ref. 20].

3. Space-Time and Spectral Characteristics of open Plasma~Dynamic Discharges
in the Quantum Energy Region of hv~2-350 eV. Ref. 7. 21. 22 devoted to the
investigation of radiation properties of a dense plasma focus give data that
reflect the integrated emission characteristics of open plasma-chemical dis-
charges. 1. e. that characterize the spectral distributions of energy densities
and radiated power averaged over the entire emitting surface of the discharge.
At the same time. knowledge of the local parameters of the radiation. their
space-time and spectral distributions. is necessary for a more complete idea
of the potential capabilities of the discharge as a source of radiation. as
well as to determine the mechanism of radiation and the nature of the emission
spectrum of the plasma.

The space-time distribution of brightness temperature (spectral brightness

of radiation) of an open plasma-dynamic discharge was studied by the method

of photometric comparison of the blackening densities of photographic film
vith time scanning of luminescence of a plasma focus and a reference light
source on the SEE-2H high-speed camera. Photometry was done on films of the
slit scans of the plasma focus taken with orientation of the camera slit both
along and across the discharge axis. The measurements were made in the blue
region of the spectrum on an effective wavelength of A“ - 1030: 20 nm isolated
by a set of light filters (886+ SZS-ZZ+Zhs-ll). An BV-loS pulsed light source
was used as the reference. In photographins the reference source. a nine-step
neutral optical wedge (Ref. 23. 26] was installed on the focal arc of the
SFR-ZH; this enabled coverage of the entire optical range of photographic den-
sities of the film anticipated in photographing the plasma focus. The position
of the rotating mirror of the camera was synchronized with the flash of the
sv-as source in such a way as to expose the photographic film behind the opti-
cal step wedge in the time period when the brightness of the reference standard
was constant.

Identity of exposure conditions in photographing the marks of the reference
standard and the investigated effect does not require the use of reciprocity
law in determining temperature [Ref . 23-26]. thus eliminating possible con-
comitant errors. The films of each series of experiments and the photographs
of the reference sources were developed concurrently to eliminate the effect
of photochemical processing on measurement results.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of a source with brightness temperature close to that being measured
(see below) as the comparison standard reduces the error of the method. The
error in relative measurement of energy brightness does not exceed :52 (error
of the method). and the error in absolute measurenent of energy brightness
(error of the method and reference) does not exceed :15: for the visible region

(Ref. 23]. The corresponding accuracy of brightness temperature measurement
is 25-10:.

        

1m

0___L__L_L__1____L__L___I m. m 5001,,u

5 m /.s 20 z: .10 t,us 1 z —aL—‘o"—;ﬁv

 

Pig. 5. Results of photographic measurements ((2ng plasma.
C.- 750 u?) in the center of a please focus (L- 25 In):
a—typical densitometer plot of the discharge ("9 - 9.6 U);
b-tims dependence of brightness temperature of the discharge:
l--llo- 5 W; 2—2 Irv; c—dependence of maximum brightness
temperature on the electrotechnical permeters of the discharge

Fig. 5a shows a typical densitometer plot of the discharge obtained by micro-
photometry along the time axis of a slit scan of the central zone of the plasma
focus in the cross section at a distance L- 25 I free the tip of the magneto-
plesna compressor (slit oriented across the flow). and Fig. 5b shows the re-
sults of measurement processing. At stored energy 90- 9.6 In] the maximum
brightness temperature in the zone of the plasma focus is ~3 eV (~35.000 K).
Maxim- temperature is reached on the 6-8th microsecond of the discharge.

and corresponds in brightness to the instant of maxi-rm compression of the

f low. Dependence of the marina: brightness temperature on electrotechnical
parameters of the discharge is shoes in Fig. Be. With increasing discharge
energy the brightness temperature of the zone of maximal compression of the
flow shows a tendency to stabilize. Comparison of this result with the power--
law dependence of spectral brightness 3‘, av averaged over the lateral surface
(spectral density of radiation energy Evi. 3v, "~Bv-03" [Ref. 10] shows
an increase in effective radiating surface of the discharge with increasing
energy input.

The space-time distribution of brightness temperature of an open plasma-
dynuic discharge is shown in Fig. 6a. b. The region of plasma compression
with radiation brightness temperature greater than 20.000 K has average dimen-
sions of ~50 II in the axial direction. and ~6 - in the radial direction.
Maximu- brightness temperatures are reached on the axis of the flow at dis-
tances of 20-30 :- from the tip of the magnetoplasma compressor.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

. ....._;...._;. .: ..-. L..__l._
l H u r101...-

 

Pig. 6. Distribution of brightness temperature along the

discharge axis at different times (a) and in different cross

sections of the jet at the instant of maxim- current (b)
(CzPe plasma. “0.9.6 U. “0' 5 IV)

The spectral dependence of brightness of radiation and brightness temperature
of the plasma in the zone of maxim:- flow compression was determined by the
method of photoelectric comparison of the emission intensity of the plasma
focus and the BV-AS reference source in the visible and near-ultraviolet re-
gions of the spectrum [Ref. 27]. Measurements were made both on individual
wavelengths by using an Flu-39A photomultiplier crossed with a M-lo double
quartz monochromator as the radiation receiver. and over a fairly broad spec-
tral range Ahv~l eV by using photocells with optical filters: Pl photocell
with ZhS-3 filter. 1’1 with UPS-2 filter. and P7 with UFS-l. Both the photocells
and photomultiplier were equipped with cathode followers to preserve the neces-
sary time resolution (A1~l us).

’00 559 550 I
;’ 6 150 ‘ I r-m-w
9“ “3%
T— r I
L -
8

7
- ..f,” F3175 ' I '
DZ ' 1'16
to 88-2

Pig. 7. Diagru of optical measurements: I-dmagnetoplamaa

compressor; 2--rv-bs; 3. 7. lO--diaphrsgms; Io, 5--achromatic

objective lenses; 6--mirror; sum-I. monochromator; 9--
PEU-39A; ll--photocell; lZ—slignment laser

A diagram of the optical measurements is shown on Fig. 7. An optical system
made up of quartz achromatic objectives lo and 5 projects a triply magnified
image of capillary 2 (or of the central zone of the plasma focus) on diaphragm
7 or through rotating aluminized mirror 6 onto diaphragm 10.

Diaphraps 7 and 10 isolate the central part of the capillary and determine
the size of the area on the surface of the plasma focus from which light is

incident on the photocell. Diaphragm 3 limits the solid angle in which radia-
tion is registered.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-“(1“. USE ONLY

Measurements on each wavelength or in a separate spectral interval were made
in two stages. 0n the first stage. a reference source was used to calibrate
the optical channel. the axis of the capillary being aligned by a reference
laser bems with coordinates corresponding to the coordinates of the zone of
maximum compression of the plasma flow. 0n the second stage. after setting
up the magnetoplasma compressor model and evacuating the dischar chamber.
measurmsents were made. To reduce statistical scatter (oi- £(x- it) n n- 1))
the measurements on each wavelength were repeated at least 5-6 times. The ad-
vantage of this method of measuring the spectral brightness of radiation is
that the ratio of the signals from the reference and the investigated sources
depends only on their brightness temperatures. while the influence of geometry
and transmission of the optical system is completely eliminated. The absolute
accuracy of the given method of measuring brightness temperature is determined
mainly by the accuracy of calibrating the reference source. and is equal to
:7 in the visible region of the spectral and 2102 in the ultraviolet [Ref. 27].

3w 90cm" ~sr"(cm")'1

l 5/

i
ll '
'1

     
 

0 2 o 5 a to It by, eV

—-—--;. _.--'.___———_________L——'
500 .70 200 I50 1le I00 11. nm

Fig. 8. Spectral brightness of central zone of plasma focus

(L- 25 cm. Czh plasma. "0- 9.1. kJ. U.- 5 eV): l--measure-

ments by photomultiplier; 2--measurements by photocells; 3-

photographic measurements; (cu-theoretical emission spectrum;
S--ideal blackbody isotherm with 1'- lo.S eV

Results of optical measurements are shown on Fig. 8. Photoelectric measurements
made by photocells and by a photomultiplier crossed with a monochromator give
similar values of spectral brightnesses. and agree well (~10!) with the results
of photometric measurements of the brightness temperature on effective wave-'-
length of lef- 1.30 nm (hvef z 2.9 eV). The results show that as quantu energy
increases. the brightness temperature of plasma focus emission drops off.

In the visible region. the brightness temperature is 3-3.5 eV. and in the

near ultraviolet ~2.3 eV. The reduction in brightness temperature is due

to spectral dependence of the coefficient of continuous absorption of the
plasma. To confirm this. and also to determine the nature of the observed

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! 0mm“. USE ONLY

radiation spectrum. the authors calculated the coefficients of continuous
absorption and the emission spectrum of a fluorocarbon plasma.

in the general case. calculation of the coefficient of absorption is an ex-
tremely difficult problem since it requires accounting for different kinds

of transitions. including free-bound and bound-bound transitions. whose calcu-
lation requires knowledge of exact wave functions of atoms and ions. However.
under conditions of high densities and temperatures (and it is just such con-
ditions that are of interest in developing high-intensity light sources. and
that are realized in high-current radiating discharges). due to the strong
interaction of plasma particles with each other and with radiation it is suf-
ficient to consider only continuous emission either in the hydrogen-like ap-
proximation of atoms and ions [Ref. 6. 28]. or with consideration of the indi-
vidual structure of terms. by introducing additional correcting functions

or coefficients [Ref. 29].

Coefficients of decelerating and photoionisation absorption were calculated

by the approximate theory of Ref. 29 based on the quantum defect method [Ref.
30. 31]. in this case. the photoionization cross sections for upper excited
states were determined by integrating the Burgess-Seaton equation (Ref. 32-
35]. while calculation of the coefficients of decelerating absorption utilized
matrix elements obtained by extrapolating the matrix elements of bound-free
transitions with consideration of the specifics of free-free transitions to
the field of multiply charged ions [Ref. 36. 37].

The overall coefficient of bound-free absorption by z-tuple ions and free-
free absorption in the field of til-ions takes the form

t... ‘-I. .\ ,
r.._. C—{-—‘1’cap(\—+L)(;+l)‘i.(vyv 5‘... (U
'3

where C-l6t’c"/3/§ch- const. U: and 02+. is the statistical sum of the initial
and final ion. 1; is the potential in eV of the z-tuple ion. Av is the displace-
ment of the photoicnization potential due to interaction of particles in the
plasma in ev. N2 is the concentration of the s-tuple ion in cm". €;(v) is

a function that accounts for the specific structure of terms of the z-ion

(i. e. the deviation from the hydrogen-like approximation).

Formulas for calculating 52(v) are given in Ref. 29. 32. For most elements
the function 52(V) is weakly dependent on plasma temperature (or completely
independent) and has a value of the order of unity. Values of the function
((v) for atoms and ions of carbon and fluorine are giVen in Ref. 38. Formula
(I) is valid for frequencies less than the cutoff frequency ”8 equal to the
maximum threshold frequency of the photoelectric effect for excited states
that are acc0unted for integrally. For frequencies v>v8 the coefficient

of continuous absorption is calculated by the formula

K(‘-) ‘- a
x... no.7) ' -(—‘-) +2: x..(v.n. (2)
UV.) \'

 

where on.z is the coefficient of photoionization absorption from a single
level with quantum nunbers n and l.

105

FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Using the Saha fornula. the coefficient of continuous absorption can be written
as

(J)

 

 

.-\\'.-AI. expulr)
xv 2.4540 "’NcNm(M')‘01l’( ) ‘

For a plane of couples coeposition that contains ions of various multiplicity.
the absorption coefficient takes the fore

XvJ ‘ 2 “(‘3 r). I '

 

a
(4)
_ ‘ (mph/T) Avl-I‘AIU‘
». gin-In ”A, - "K'— 2cm( 1' ' ) {,..(v2N,a:.=.
a r

where k is the index of the che-ical ole-eat. and urination is done with re-
spect to I: and :. Quantities 1". v8 and £(v) depend on k and 2. while Av and
A1 are assueed to depend only on s.

The coefficient of absorption with consideration of stieulated eeission is
determined by the experession

x.r'~~xal1-HI'('VI m. ‘5’

By using foreulas for the coefficient of decelerating and photoioniaation
absorption. we can evaluate the concentration of the electronic conponent
in the zone of eagnetohydrodynuic coepression of the flow fron the experi-
nentally neasured density of continuous radiation and plasma te-perature.

The eagnitude of the factor for deviation froe the hydrogen-like approxination
C(v). as already pointed out above. differs insignificantly froe unity‘; esti-
Iates of the factor up[(AVz-1'AI;-1)/ T] show that over a wide range of
plesrl para-store in the conpression tone its value changes only slightly.
being ~l.l-l.25. Therefore in a first approximation these cofactora can be
disregarded in the formula for the coefficient of absorption. Then the ex-
pression for the coefficient of overall absorption with consideration of stimu-
lated eeission can be represented as

, 2.55. w 4w; v , N...
- -. ._ ____.. .__ 2 - ._ : x.
4.1 T"? I ( I ) ( N. ) a (6)

LI
4:) 2(—’::=)=~'-s-

where i is the effective ato-ic nmber of the ions. The quantity i was deter-
eined froe calculating the composition of the fluorocarbon pies-a [Ref. 39].

 

 

1For ions of fluorine and carbon, ((v) at v- 3 eV varies over a range
of 0.8-1.0 [Ref. 39].

106

' 1’0! OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

—_L__..L.._L__——I__L.T_- ‘
0 I t I 6 I0 s 2V

Pig. 9. Coefficient of continuous absorption of a fluoro-
carbon plasna as a function of temperature (a) and electron
concentration (b); cnbrightness temperature of a plane
layer of fluorocarbon plasaa with thickness of 6-0.5 ca;
d—region of plasma parmters that ensure a brightness
teaperarure of the layer equal to 3 eV at thickness 6-0.5 on

Results of calculations of the coefficients of continuous absorption for quan-

tum energy Mn 3 ev in the temperature range of 1-10 eV and electron concen-
tration of lo”-2.lo" c." are shown on Fig. 9a and b.

The spectral density of radiation intensity (or brightness) for a plane hono-
geneous plaana layer in the direction along the actual to its surface is

I:. -R.,[l I'X||( x.’l)l. (7)

'_‘l:\" l ".(iL’iv’
1;". ._ ._.._..._ .

2, , -z
u-\p(\-IT)-l .-\-,.(.-/r)—I' [EV/(ca er en )1 0‘)

whe re

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Is the equilibrium intensity of radiation (u and 'l' are expressed in eV). 1 is
the thickness of the layer. For cylindrical plasma formations. the equivalent
thickness of a plane layer is determined by the formula 1- 10/6.

Fig. 9c shows the results of calculation of the brightness temperature of
emission of a plane layer of fluorocarbon plasma of thickness l-IO.S cm cor-
responding to the average thickness of the discharge in the co-pression zone.
where v- 3 eV at different plasma telperatures and electron concentrations.
The temperatures of the plasma focus experimentally observed on these frequen-
cies are -3 eV and at the anticipated plasma temperatures in the compression
zone (T<110 eV) can be realized only at electron concentrations of greater
than 10” cm". The region of plasma parameters Ne and T. that ensure a bright-
nes temperature of radiation greater than 3 eV at the given thickness of the
plasma formation (1-0.5 cm) and on the given frequency (v- 3 av) lies above
the curve shown on Fig. 9d. Experimental data on the plasma temperature in
the compression of a magnetoplaama compressor operating on a fluorocarbon
plasma are given in Ref. 7, 40. The electron temperature determined by the
method of self-inversion of spectral lines (Ref. 60] is Te' 3.5-5 eV. and

it is noted that with increasing energy input to the discharge this tempera-
ture is stabilized at a level of 6.5-5 eV due to intense radiation cooling

of the plasma. Measurement of ion teaperature by Doppler broadening of lines
(Ref. 60] and by registration of Mach reflection on a thin plate (Ref. 9]

as well as estimation of relaxation times have shown that maxwellization of
the plasma occurs in the zone of the focus along with equalization of the
electron-ion temperature. Existence of local thermodynamic equilibrium in
the vicinity of the plaesa focus was established in Ref. 60.

Taking the plasma temperature in the zone of the focus as T3- 3.5-5 eV, we

get (Fig. 9c) the electron concentration in the plasma: (1.2-2)'101’ cs".
Let us note that this is a lower estimate since consideration was not taken
of the radial distribution of electron density and temperature in the focus
zone.

The emission spectrum of a fluorocarbon plasma in the quantum energy range

of Av-IO-GO eV was calculated at typical parameters of the compression zone
TeI-6.S ev and Ne- 1.5-101’ ca". The plasma composition was determined from
solution of a system of Saha equations for sequential stages of ionization
together with equations of quasineutrality and constancy of composition [Ref.
39). Reduction of ionization energy in the plasma was accounted for in accor-
dance with the Debye-uuckel theory [Ref. 42]. The values of statistical sums
and ionization energies necessary for the calculation were taken from Ref. 62.
and the missing data were calculated by the approximate method of Ref. ‘3.
Displacement of the photoionization threshold was accounted for by the ap-
proximate Ingliss-Teller theory (Ref. ‘4, 45]

_\.,. mom 1:. . I)“.V."“'. eV. (9)

The photoionization cross sections for individually considered levels were
calculated by the Kramers formula (Ref. 28]

- 3
m,.mnndh—F.T(") um
“‘4’. ‘.

108

FOR‘OFIICIAL USE‘ONLV
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500090006-1

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where n is the principal quanta nuke: of the level. vn
of a quantu capable of ionizing an aton or ion that in i

The coefficient of absorption in detenined by the expree

x..(\-)- .v, V a, ..., my.
1—:

Here “am in the relative concentration of ions of mltip
with nulber n determined in the case of boltnennian diet

(In: ln"ln.r )
p‘ I. .__—..._px|. —_.—. .
mum.) ( T

where Emu 1“,; are the statistical weight and ionizatic
ion fro- level n. 0;“. A12) in the atatietical sun of ti

 

 

Fig. 10.
tinuoue 4
retical 1
ionizatir
photon-i:
spectro-
tre of
2 Ar fl!
f'FTﬂ—————1
o _-L__1— A v
£.re1.lmits 2” J” ’0 5” 50 .e
d .
g
0 w 10 .10 w 50 50 by, eV
109
POI! OFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000600090006-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of calculation of coefficients of continuous absorption and the
resultant radiation spectrum of a fluorocarbon plasma are shown on Fig. 10a.
The partial fraction of ions of different multiplicity in the overall coef-
ficient of continuous absorption varies depending on the spectral range being
considered. In the infrared. visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the
spectra the maximum contribution is from singly charged ions of fluorine

and carbon (-60 and ~36: respectively). In the far ultraviolet. an sppreciablc
role is played by double ions. The radiation spectrum of a fluorocarbon plasma
with characteristic dimension of the plasma formation 2-0.5 cm is considerably
different fromplanckian at a temperature equal to that of the plasma. which

is due to optical transparency of the plasma in the region of quantum energies
2.7< v< 31 eV (optical thickness ‘v' «31(1).

The theoretical radiation spectrum is compared with the results of optical
measurements in the visible and near-ultraviolet region on Fig. 8. Values

of spectral brightness of the plasma focus measured both on individual wave-
lengths and in wide spectral intervals agree fairly well (about 201) with
calculated radiative characteristics. The reduction in brightness temperature
of emission of the focus with transition from the visible to the near-ultra-
violet region is due to reduction in the optical thickness of the plans.

In the region of quantum energies v~T. continuous radiation of the plasua

is due to decelerating and photorecombination mechanisms. The contribution
of decelerating processes for the given plasma parameters in the resultant
radiation spectrum is shown on Fig. 10b. Even in the near-ultraviolet region
of the spectra: the recombination mechanisms predominate. and the plans radi-
ation spectrum is determined mainly by photorecombination of electrons to

the upper excited states of singly ionized ions.

In the quantum energy region of 5< v< [0 eV. the distribution of radiation

is measured by a photographic method using the DPS-29 parallel-incidence vacun-
spectrograph. To eliminate the influence of self-sensitivity of the photo-
graphic material to hard photons. the XUV spectra of plasma focus radiation
were registed on type ML-Z photographic film sensitized with sodim salicylate.
which has a constant quantum yield (in a range of 10-152) in the spectral
region of 360-40 In [Ref. (.6. 107]. The sensitivity of the spectrograph-
photomaterial system in relative units was determined by a pulsed continuous-
spectrm source made in exact accordance with the recouendationa of Ref.

68 and calibrated with respect to brightness in the extreme ultraviolet. The
reference source is based on a pulsed electric discharge through a capillary
in vacuu. In this case, the source of the continuous spectrum in the XUV

is a Lyman continuum produced by radiation of a high-pressure plasma formed
from the material of the capillary walls (polyformaldehyde) when an intense
discharge current pulse passes through the capillary. Upon satisfaction of
conditions with respect to current (I. -10 M. ‘pulse‘ 5 us) and capillary
geometry (diameter dc- 3.5 II. length 2::- 30 II). according to the results

of Ref. 48 the central zone of the capillary 2.5 I. in diameter is homogeneous
(with accuracy of 102) as a light source that emits in the XUV region of the
spectruzup to A- 120 In as an ideal blackbody with teqerature T- 37.000:
3.000 K.

 

’Using the BV-39 standard. we predetermined the brightness temperature of
the capillary in the region 1- 250 2 20 nm: 13' 37.000: 101 K. which agrees
well with data of Ref. (.8.

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In determining the relative spectral distribution of plasma focus emission

in the XUV from the known (as a result of calibrating the reference source)
sensitivity of the optical system of registration. deviation from reciprocity
law was disregarded since the difference in the duration of the emission pulse
of the light sources being compared is small. For example. the calibrated
source had an effective duration of continuous radiation of ~5 us. while the
investigated discharges had r- 15-20 us. It is known (Ref. 69-51] that in
this exposure time range the iso-opaque line of the photographic material

has a constant section. and deviations from reciprocity law are practically
unobserved.

Absolute calibration of spectral distribution was done with respect to the
emission brightness of the central zone of the plasma focus in the region

Av- mas-5.0 all registered by photoelectric methods. Pig. ll [photo not re-
produced] shows typical XUV spectrograms of the plasma focus for various ex-
perimental conditions.3 and Pig. 8 shows the distribution of emission brightness
in the near vacuum ultraviolet obtained by spectral measurmaents for a plasma-
dynamic discharge on a fluorocarbon plasma. The spectra of the pleas focus
in the XUV region consist of intense cw emission and radiation lines that
belong mainly to single. double or triple ions of the material of the dielec-
tric washer of the magnetoplamaa compressor; lines of elements of the electrode
materials are weakly represented in the resultant spectra. When processing
the densitomstric plots of the spectra. consideration was taken of only the
continuous radiation of the place since the contribution to the total emitted
energy by lines in region x> 120 nm is small. The experimental spectrum in
the quanta energy range Av- 5-10 eV obtained by the photographic method cor-
relates well with the calculated spectrum; the brightness temperature of the
central zone of the plasma focus in region A- 150 nm is ~27.000 K. The drop
in intensity of radiation in the short-wave region is due to the reduction
in'optical density of the plasma, which is also confirmed by the increase

in the relative fraction of line mission in the overall discharge emission
spectrum.

The spectral density of radiation intensity of the plasma focus in the extreme
ultraviolet region was measured by open double ionization chambers filled

with spectrally pure inert gases [Ref. 22]. The region of spectral sensitivity
of the ionization chamber is determined on the long-wave boundary by the ioni-
sation potential. and on the short-wave boundary by a fall-off in the photo-
ionization cross section of the filler gas. By using inert gases. the spectral
region from [2 to 65 eV was broken down into four partly overlapping inter-
vals: 12.1-22 eV (Xe). 15.8-28 eV (Ar). 21.6-40 eV (he) and 25.6-65 eV (is).
Results of measurements of the spectral brightness of the central zone of

the plasma focus in the extreme ultraviolet are shown on Fig. 10c. The ex-
perimental conditions are similar to those used for optical measurements in

the visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the spectrum (Fig. 8).

To compare experimental results with the calculated emission spectrum of a
fluorocarbon plasma. the authors calculated the average values of brightness

 

3The emission spectra of discharges in the XUV region were taken by
s. c. Shashkovskiy and A. c. Opeksn.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

in spectral intervals corresponding to regions of sensitivity of the chuber
with different fillers

‘D

0w, .. —— IL d\'.
\‘7—\'.

Values of brightness averaged over the calculated spectrum are shown on Fig. lOb.

Comparison of the calculated uission spectrum of the fluorocarbon plans (Pig.
10b) with that measured by ionization chambers (Pig. 10c) shows fairly good
qualitative agreement between calculation and experiment.

In contrast to measurements in the visible and near-ultraviolet regions. the
experimental values of spectral brightnesses in the extreme ultraviolet were
lower than the calculated levels. This is due to the difference in spatial
resolution of the ionization chamber used (Ax-6 us) from that of the arrange-
ment for optical measurements in the visible and near-ultraviolet regions

(Ax 3' LS Ila). resulting in averaging of brightness in the extreme ultraviolet
over a larger area of the radiating surface of the plasma focus.

Measurements by ionization chambers showed an increase in the brightness tem-
perature in the short-wave region of the spectrum. which may be evidence of
the presence of recombination maxims in the emission spectrum of the plans
focus. however. the width of regions of spectral sensitivity of the chamber
does not permit registration of the position of individual emission maxima.

or determination of the specific form of spectral distribution of emission
energy in the extreme ultraviolet. For this purpose. a photoemisaion-
scintillation spectrometer was used to measure the relative distribution of
radiation of the plasma focus in the range of quantum energies from 10 to

350 eV. The method used was based on registration and analysis of the spec-
trum of photoelectrons knocked out of the photocathode by direct radiation

of the plasma [Ref. 52. S3]. The method of measurements and the experimental
facility are described in detail in Ref. 5‘. The form of the spectral distri-
bution of radiation obtained by the photoemission-scintillation spectrometer
is shown on Fig. 10d. The nature of the measured spectrum, the amplitude

of maxima and their shape (with consideration of the spectral resolution of
the instrument Av~ 5 eV) correspond fairly well to the calculated recombination
continual. and also to the distribution of emission brightness measured by io-
nisation chnbers.

A maximum of focus emission in the region of 30-35 eV is due mainly to photo-
recombination to the ground state ’1’ and to the lower excited state 1I) of
the first fluorine ion FII; a second maxim;- in the region of 20-25 eV is
due to recombination to the groand level 2P° and to a group of lower mixed
terms ~P. 2D. 2S of the carbon ion CII. Recombination maxima of the second
ions C111 and in the region v~ 65 and 60 eV did not show up in the measured
spectra which may be due to the appreciable optical thickness of the plasma
in this range of quantum energies. The increase in optical density of
the plasma in the short-wave region of the spectrum is also associated with
the increase in brightness temperature registered by the ionization chambers
in the absorption bands of neon (Tg:~ 3.9 eV) and helium “ﬁg-6.2 eV). A

112

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

distinguishing feature of the emission spectrum of the plasma focus is the
presence of a hard radiation component in the region of [00-350 eV ("super-
planckian" for T¢-S eV) registered in measurements by spectrometer [Ref. 5b]
and bismuth bolometers [Ref. 7]. The nature of this radiation is possibly asso-
ciated with microinhomogeneities that are typical of the initial unsteady

stage of discharge in the magnetoplasma compressor.

Thus these studies show that radiation of the plasma focus is due mainly to
the recombination continuum of characteristic groups of icns that determine
the properties of the plasma. the percentage of xuv emission in the overall
spectrum of the plasma-dynamic discharge being ~70-901 as evaluated from the
results of integrated measurements by a quartz calorimeter and bolometers
[Ref. 21. 55]. by appropriately altering the chemical and ionizational compo-
sitions and parameters of the plasma in the son: of MED compression. we can
realize fairly effective control of the radiation spectrum of a plasma focus.
which enables creation of selective sources of radiation in the far ultra-
violet.

The spectral distribution of plasma-dynamic discharge radiation energy may

be profoundly influenced by the macroscopic structure of the plasma flow ema-
nating from the magnetoplasma compressor. This flow structure depends on

the configuration of the discharge gap, the energy conditions of operation

and the conditions of introducing the plasma-forming substance into the dis-
charge. The structural influence shows up in varying degrees of shielding

of the short-wave radiation of the plasma focus by peripheral layers of cool
erosion products that are not captured by the magnetic field of the discharge
current. Depending on the chemical composition and particle density in the
peripheral annular layer that surrounds the hot zone of the discharge. the
shielding may be in the nature of either filtration of short-wave radiation

in individual spectral intervals that as a rule are fairly narrow. or in lines.
or else an abrupt reduction (by a factor of several tens) in the magnitude of
emission intensity of the plasma focus. beginning at some cutoff wavelength.
with a simultaneous increase in the luminous output of the discharge in the
visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the spectra. The latter is due to
rapid heating. ionization and radiation of the products of erosion as a result
of their broad-band absorption of high-energy XUV radiation of the plasma
focus. Since the radiating surface of the peripheral layer is larger than

the surface of the focus. the balance of the radiation and the absorption

in it sets in at a lower temperature. 1. e. conditions are realized for trans-
formation of short-wave radiation to emission in the visible and near-UV bands.

The XUV spectrograms of the plasma focus shown on Fig. 11 [photo not reproduced]
that were obtained under different experimental conditions. illustrate the
influence that macrostructure of the plasma-dynamic discharge has on spectral
distribution of radiation energy in the short-wave region. Hicrophotometric
analysis of spectra shows that discharges on fluorocarbon and polyformaldehyde
plasmas (Pig. 11b and c [photos not reproduced]) characterized by approximately
the same coefficient of utilization of material (“v.s' 0.94) have similar
emission characteristics in the XUV region. but differ considerably with re-
spect to the nature of spectral distribution of radiation from discharge in

Cal vapor (Pig. lld). in which the coefficient of utilization of working

113

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

substance for the given magnetoplasma compressor model and the selected energy
conditions are considerably lower than in discharges on (cnzo)n and (02P.)n
plasmas (Pig. llb. c).

According to spectroscopic measurements in the region of quantum energies

Av- 6-8 eV, the Cal discharge is characterized by higher (by -6-5 times)
energy yield of radiation than discharges on fluorocarbon and polyformaldehyde
plasmas; however. in the region of v>8 eV (x< 150 m) the intensity of continu-
ous emission of the cesium iodide plasma is insufficient for exposure of the
photographic emulsion during a single discharge pulse. These data agree well
with the results of photoelectric measurements of the integrated energy yield
of radiation of open discharges in the near ultraviolet region (Av- 6.35-5 eV)
[Ref. [0] and also with measurements in the range of Av- 12-65 eV made by
ionization chambers. according to which the spectral brightness of the CSI
discharge decreases in the indicated region by 30-50 times compared with the
discharge on fluoroplastic [Bef. 22].

Thus the assurance of high coefficients of utilization of working substance

is a necessary condition for eliminating effects of shielding short-wave radia-
tion and attainment of high brightness temperatures of the plasma focus in

the XUV region of the spectrum. when this condition is met. the brightness
temperature of the discharge is limited from above only by the true temperature
of the plasma in the zone of the focus. which can be increased by increasing
the degree of magnetohydrodynamic compression of the plasma flow as the density
of electromagnetic energy in the interelectrode gap and the zone of entrained
currents of the magnetoplasma compressor is increased. Thus. as a result

of optimizing the geometry of the discharge gap in the magnetoplasma compressor.
the energy conditions of operation and the conditions of introducing the plasma-
forming substance in the discharge. it has been possible for the first time

to reach brightness temperatures of radiation exceeding 60,000 K (Ref. 56]

in the spectral region beyond the helium ionization potential (Av- 24.6-65 eV).
Let us also note that such flux densities in the far XUV region have so far
been reached only on facilities of synchrotron type (Ref. bl]. Pig. lla shows
the emission spectrum of an optimized plasma-dynamic discharge. The steep

drop in the intensity of continuous radiation on the short-wave boundary

(X< 90 nm) recorded on the spectrogram is apparently due to an abrupt increase
in the coefficient of reflection of the aluminua coating of the diffraction
grating of the spectrograph [Ref. #6].

let us point out one more possibility for controlling the spectral properties
of open plasma-dynamic discharges. which consists in producing plasma layers
of a given chemical composition surrounding the zone of MED compression (in
the general case. a chemical composition differing from that of the radiating
plasma of the focus). and with given density. and hence having certain prede-
termined optical characteristics. These layers may act as plasma filters
that have "transparency windows" in individual (defined for the specific prob-
lem) spectral intervals. or totally blocking the hard radiation of the plasma
focus beginning at some quantum energy that is undesirable or even harmful
for the selected application. Technically. the realization of such layers
may be accomplished by using ablating separative sleeves in the magnetoplasma
compressor with chemical composition profiled along the radius in the zone

of the deflagration current layer.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors thank P. A. Ovchinnikov and A. G. Opeksn for assisting with the
research.

HERMES

l. Borovich. B. I... "Feasibility of Making Optically amped Gas Lasers Using
Alloved Electronic Transitions of Molecules". MAI. EKSPERIPIENTAL'NOY
I TEMICHBSKOY PIZIRI. Vol 61. 1971. p 2293.

2. Hikheyev, L. 0., "Gas Lasers with Hide-Band Optical Pumping". KVANTOVAYA
BLEKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1973. P 1189.

3. Rozanov. V. 3.. "Feasibility of Producing Inverse Medium by Photoionizing
Inner-Shell Electrons in Atoms", PIS'HA V ZHURNAL msrnmzum'nor I
TEORE‘I'ICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 12. 1970. p l086.

14. Aleksandrov. A. P.. Rukhadze. A. A.. "Pirika sil'notochnykh
elektrorszrysdnykh istochnikov aveta" [Physics of Intense Electric-Discharge
Light Sources). Hoscov, Atonizdat. 1976.

S. Pukhov. A. H” "Exploding Hire Vapor shielding of Pulse Discharge XUV
Radiation". 2W PRIKLADNOY SPBKTROSKDPII. Vol 22. 1975. p 922.

6. Zvorykin. V. D.. Klementov. A. D.. Rozanov. V. 3.. “Characteristics of
Intense Discharge in Neon at lligh Pressure". KVAN‘IOVAYA REKTRONIKA. Vol lo.
1973. p 63.

7. Kozlov. N. P.. Leskov. 1.. V.. Protaaov. Yu. 8.. Khvesyuk. V. I.. "Experi-
mental Investigation of Plasma Focus in Erosion Plus-a Accelerators: I".
ZHURNAL TWICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 43. 1973. p 73); ”11: Energy Character-
istics of Dense Plasma Focus". ZIIURRAL MICﬂBMY PIZIKI. Vol #6, 1974,
p 2519.

8. Kanrukov. A. 5., Kashnikov. G. 8.. Koslov. N. P. et s1.. "Pessibility
of Making High-Brightness Sources in the For Ultraviolet Based on liyper-
sonic Flows of Dense Plans". PIS'HA V ZBURNAL TWICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 2.
1976. p 61.7.

9. Kozlov. N. P., Leskov, L. V.. Protssov. Yu. s. et a1.. "measurement of
Mach Ember in Plasua Jets". TBPIDPIZIKA VYSIKIKH TEMPERATUR. Vol 12,
I976. P 697.

to. Kanrukov. A. 5., Kozlov. N. P.. Halashchenko, V. A.. Protasov, Yu. 8..
"Experimental Investigation of Plasma Focus in Erosion Plasua Accelerators:
III. Radiation Properties of Dense Plasma Focus". ZHURNAL TEKIDIICHBSKOY
PIZIKI, Vol 67. I977. p 1673.

ll. Kvartskhava. I. P.. Heladze. R. 17., Suladre. K. V.. "Experiments on Elec-
troo'inc Plasma Acceleration". ZHURNAL TWICIIBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 30.
1960. p 289.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

l3.

[6.

IS.

l6.

17.

18.

I9.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Skvortsov. Yu. V.. Konel'kov. V. 5.. Tserevitinov. s. 8.. "Structure of
Magnetic Fields in Plane Jet with Self-Currents". 23mm. MICE!“
PIZIKI. Vol 36. 1966. p 965.

Grigor'yev. V. 8.. "Plasmid Structure in Blectrodynnic Accelerator",
ZHUIIAL PRIKLANOY man: I TWICEESKOY PIZIII. Vol 2. 1965. p 35;
"'Pinches' Observed in Rail Plea-a Accelerators". MAL PRMOY
mm I ”101!!st FIZIKI. Vol 6. 1965. P 166.

Osadin. V. A.. "Energy Release in Intense Plasea Discharge". ZHURNAL
WNICRSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 35. 1965. p 1230: "Probles of Clot Pornation
in Pulsed Plaaua Accelerators". ZEURNAL TBKHNICHZSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 35.

1965. p 1327.

Derevshchikov, V. A.. "Heasuring Velocities of Plea-a Components by High-
Speed Photography in Monochro-atic Light". IRMA]. TWICBSKOY PIZIKI.
Vol 37. 1967. p 315.

Rushaylo, A. H.. “Plow lnhooogeneitiee in Pulsed Blectro-agnetic Accel-
erator". MAL PRIKLAMOY mm I WIW 1’1an. Vol ’0.
1970. p 165.

Hin'ko. 1.. Ya.. ”Polucheniye i issledovaniye inpul'snykh plazaennykh
potokov" [Producing end Studying Pulsed Plasua Flows]. Minsk. Nauka i
tekhnika. 1970.

Gubarev. V. 7a.. Kozlov. N. P.. beakov. L. V. et al.. "Experimental Deter-
mination of Velocity Characteristics of Pulsed Erosion Accelerator" in:
"Planennyye uskoriteli" [Plasma Accelerators]. Moscow. Hashimstroyeniye.
1973.

Aleksandrov. A. 7.. Zosinov. V. V.. Rukhadze. A. A. et el.. "Study of
Equilibriu and Stability of Self-Cupreased Discharges in Optically Dense
Plasma". ZEURNAL EKSPBRIHEN'IAL'NOY I TBORBTICHBSKDY nznu. Vol 6‘. 1973.
p 1568.

Kovrov. P. Ye.. ﬂorozov. A. 1.. "Structure of Compression Region in Magneto-
plaena Coepressor". ZWAL TWICBBSKO‘I FIZIKI. Vol 1.6. 1976. p 2508.

Zvorykin V. 1).. Kashnikov. 6. IL. Kleeentov. A. D. et al.. "Radiation
of Places Pocus of Nagnetoplana Cowressor in Visible and Ultraviolet
Regions of the Spectrum". KVANTOVAYA MROMKA. Vol 2. 1975. p 24.16.

2vorykin. V. 0.. Kaarukov. A. 8.. Kleuentov. A. D. et a1.. "Investigation
of Plane Focus hission in the KIN Region by Ionization Obs-bets".
KVAN'NVAYA manna, Vol 6. 1977, p 2”.

Zatscpin. Yu. A.. Popov. Ye. 6.. Taikulin. H. A.. "Brightness of Shock
Have Front in Sale Gases". ZHMAL IKSPERIHBN‘IAL'NOY I TBORETICBSKOY
PIZIKI. Vol 56. 1968. p 112.

Tsikulin. H. A.. Popov. Ye. 6.. ”ltluchatel'nyye svoystva udarnykh voln

v garakh" [Radiative Properties of shock Haves in Gases). Hoscou. Nsuka.
1977.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

31a.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Model' . 1. sh.. "Heamring high Temperatures in Intense Shock Haves in
Gases". 2W EKSPBRIHEN’IAL'NOY I TBORB'IICHBSKGY PIZIKI. Vol 32. 1957.
p 711..

Dubovik. A. 5.. "Potograficheakaya registratsiya bystroprotekayushchikh
protsessov" [Photographic Recording of nigh-Speed Processes]. Hoscov.
Nauka. 1967.

Basav. ﬂ. 0., Dorovich. B. 1... Zuyev. V. S. et al.. "Intense Discharge

in Cases: 1. Experimental Study of Luminosity and Energy Characteristics
of Poverful Discharge in Air". W TWICESKDY FIZIKI. Vol 1.0. 1970.
p 516.

Zel'dovidh. Ya. 3.. Rsyzer. Yu. P.. "Fizika udarnykh voln i
vysokoteqeraturnykh gidrodinanichaskikh yavleniy" [Physics of Shock Waves
and High-Temperature hydrodynamic Phenonena]. Moscow. Nauka. 1966.

Bibernan. 1.. 11.. Roman. c. 2.. "Continuous Spectra of Atomic Gases and
Plasma". 08PM! PIZICHESKIKB NAUK. Vol 91. 1967. p 193.

Seaton. H. J.. "Method of Quanta Defect". non. NOT. ROY. ASTRON. 8°C..
Vol 118. 1958. p 501..

Norman. C. 8.. "Substantiating the Quantum Defect Method". OPTIKA I
SPEKTROSKOPIYA. Vol 12. 1962. p 333.

Burgess. A.. Seaton. H. J.. "Cross Sections for Photoionization Pron
Valence Electron States". REV. non. PHYS.. Vol 30. 1958. p 992.

Biberman. 1.. 11.. Norman. C. 2.. "Plans Recombination Emission and Brena-
strshlung". J. QUART. SPECTROSC. RAD. TRANSFER. Vol 3. 1963. p 221.

Diber'man. I... 11.. Norman. C. 2.. "Calculating Photoionization Absorption".
OPTIKA I SPECTROSKOPIYA. Vol 8. 1960. p 533.

Bibernan. L. 11.. Norman. C. 8.. Ul'yanov. K. IL. "Photoionization of
Excited Many-Electron Atoms and Ions". ASTRORNICEBSKIY 23mm. Vol 39.
1962. p 107.

Roman. G. 2.. "Free-Free Electron Transitions in Ion Field". OPTIXA I
SPETROSKOPIYA. Vol No. 1963. P 521.

Norman. C. 8.. 'Thotoionization Cross Sections of Lower Excited States.

and Oscillator Strengths of Some Lines of Carbon 32d Nitrogen Atoms".
OPTIKA I SPECTROSKOPIYA. Vol 16. No 5. 1963. P 593.

Bondar'. V. A.. Kiselevskiy. 1.. 1.. Truk‘nan. Ye. P.. "Using Pulse Discharge
With Restricted Channel Cross Section in zirperinental Spectroscopy".
ZHU'RNAL “m0? SPEK‘I'ROSKOPII. V01 9. 1968. p 792; Vol 9. 1968. p 928.

Ablekov. V. K.. Kashnikov. C. 11.. Kozlov. N. P. et .11.. "Raschet sostava
plotnykh mogokomponentnykh plaza" [Calculating Composition of Dense

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
D.

)0

l.

2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONtY

Hulticoqonent Plea-es] in: ”Teplofiricheskiye svoystva niskotaperaturnoy
plat-y" [Thermophysical Properties of wreqerature Plasea]. Hoscou.
Nauka. 1976.

Korlov. 1!. P.. Halashchenloo. V. A.. Protasov. Yu. 5.. "lnterferoeetry
of Dense Plans Plans". ZIIURIIAI. rumor SPERTROSKOPII. Vol 22. 1975.
p 210.

"Sinkhrotronnoye izlucheniye" [Synchrotron Radiation]. ‘l'RUDY FIZICHISRDGO
INSTITUTA IHENI P. N. LHIDZVA. Moscow. Ranks. Vol 80. 1980.

Darwin. 11. 11.. Pelenbok. P.. ”Data for Planes in 1.12". Paris. 1965.

'l‘raving. 6.. :achec. 3.. Bolveger. IL. "Zur lerechnung von zugtand Stu-en".
Abhandl. Bit-burger Stern-tarts. 1966.

Ingliss. D. R.. ‘i'eller. 3.. "Ionic Depression of Series Limits in One-
Blectron Spectra". ASTROPHYS. J .. Vol 90. 1939. p 639.

Gris. 6.. "Spektroskopiye plaaly" [Plane Spectroscopy]. Moscow. Atoeizdet.
1969.

Zaydel'. A. 11.. Shreyder. Ye. Ys.. "Spektroskopiye vakuusnogo ul'tra-
fioleta" [Extras Ultraviolet Spectroscopy]. Hoscou. Neuka. 1967.

Samson. J. A. R.. ”techniques of Vscuu Ultraviolet Spectroscopy". New
York. London. 1967.

Podeoshenskiy. I. V.. Pukhov. A. 11.. Yakovleva. A. 1].. "Pulse Continuous-
Spectrm Sources Calibrated Uith Respect to Brightness in the threlse
Ultraviolet". ZBURNAL rumor SPEK‘I‘ROSROPII. Vol 16. 1972. p 615.

Kartushenskiy. A. 1... "Violation of Photochemical Reciprocity Law for
Photographic Layers". USPEKHI FIZICIBSKIRH NAIR. Vol 51. 1953. p 161.

Rysbtsev. A. 11.. Sukhodrev. II. R.. "Investigation of Deviations Pros:
Reciprocity Lav in Photographic Layers in the threne Ultraviolet Region
of the Spectral". ZHURRAL NAUCHNOY I PRIKLADNOY WI I
“WWII. Vol 15. 1970. p 167.

Zetsepin. Yu. A.. "Investigation of Deviations From Reciprocity Law at
Exposure fines of 10-5-10- a" ZHURNAL WOW I PRIKLADNOY W11
I KIWRAPII. Vol 5. 1960. p 60.

Vekhov. A. A.. Nikolayev. P. A.. Rounov. V. 3.. "Photoesission-Scintillation

Spectra-eter for Studying Plans Emission in the Extrelse Ultraviolet".
PRIBORY I 13mm EKSPWA. Vol 6. 1974. p 198.

Vekhov. A. A.. Nikolayev. F. A.. Roesnov. V. 3.. "Investigating Radiation
of Intense Pulsed Discharges in 14etal Vapor in the Vacuus Ultraviolet".

PIS'HA V ZIIURNAI. MPMWAL'NOY I TBORITICIIBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 17. 1973.
p 750.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

56. Vokhov. A. A.. mum. A. 8.. Koslov. N. P. et 31.. "Emission Spectm

of nuns vocu. 1!: 10-350 0V legion". 21mm. rmrcuzsxov nun. Vol 3,
1977. p 661.

55. Kozlov. N. P., Protaaov. Yu. 8.. "Radiation Propane: of Dense Plans
Yocus". 791.0712le wsoxm momma. Vol 10. 1972. p 1319.

S6. Kumkov. A. 8.. lozlov. R. P., Protaoov, Yu. 8.. "3.133101: Spectra: of

Plum Focus 1n Quanti- Energy 203101: of 0.66-350 eV". 90mm AKADEHII
UAUK 8881!. Vol 237. 1977. p 1336.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'stvo "ﬂanks". "replanting vyuokikh tupoutur". 1982

6610
C30: [862/183 - END -

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY