FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10225
30 December 1981

USSR Report

CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND
AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 26/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli—
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CYBERNETICS, COMPUTERS AND Auromuwow TECHNOLOGY
(rouo 26/81)

CONTENTS
GENERAL

Survey of Developments in Cybernetics by Editorial Board . . . . . .

Computer Servicing and Repair Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . .

HARWARE

Possibility of Using “IR-2 Digital Computer in Hybrid Computer

syStemsouooooooooooooooeooooooocooooo

Principles of Hardware Diagnosttcs o o o o o u a a e o o o o o o o 0

Interface for Programable Instruments in Experiment Automation

systemSooeoolooo.0.000000000000000...

Macroconveyor Computations of Functions on Data Structures . . . . .

Computers With Structural Realization of High-Level Languages. . . .

Some Questions of Problem-Solving on Computers With Parallel

Organization of Computations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Prospects and Problems of Developing Automated Process Control

Systems Based on Microprocessor Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Prospects for Developing Technology of Printed Circuit Board
Production in Building Instrments . o o o o o o o o c o o o o e 0

Experience of Assimilation of Base Technology for Printed Circuit

Board Manufacture at Leningrad Electromechanical Plant Production
Association. . . . . . . .

23

35
39

63
47
69

66

80

82

86

- a - [m - ussa - 21c SGT 3000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOF'IWARE

List of Soviet Articles Dealing With Software . . . . . . . . . .

Modeling Program Development and Maintenance at Computer Centers.

Creation of Softaare Based on Use of Packages of Applied Programs

Multilevel Structural Design of Programs: Formalization of. the
Method -- Sphere of Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Investigation of Methods of Solving Optimization Problems and
TheirApplicationS....o....o....o....n.

Review of New Book on Multiple Programing Techniques _.
APPLICATIONS

Computer Networks in Control of Systems Development . .

Automated Data Processing in Ferrous Metallurgy . . . .

Ferrous Metallurgy Automated Data Processing. . . . . .

CONFERENCES AND EXHIBITIONS
Computer Design Automation Conference Held. . . . . . .

8th All-Union Conference on Control Problems. . . . . .

Modeling Developing Systems: Work of Conference Reported

0

4th All-Union Seminar 'Parallel Programing and High-Productivity

scrucrurcs'oaooaoso-oaoaoaoaooaoooooo

3rd Seminar 'Interactive Systems' . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

International Exhibition 'Coununications-81' in Moscow. . . .

PUBLICATIONS

Table of Contents of Journal 'KIBERNETIKA' , July-August 1981.

Table of Contents From Journal 'ELECTRONIC MODELING' ,

September-October 1981. a o o o o O o s o 0 o o o o o o o 0

Problems of Cybernetics: Control of Systems Development. . .

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

94
9S 4-

100

195
111

114
123

127

143
147.
152

161
166

168

171

173

175
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL

SURVEY OF DEVELOPMENTS IN CYBBRNETICS BY EDITORIAL BOARD
Kiev KIBERNETIKA in Russian No b, Jul-Aug 81 pp 1-12
[Series of comments by members of editorial board]

[Text] This anniversary issue of the journal KIBERNETIKA. issue No 100, is dedi-
catcd to the 26th Congress of the CPSU, a great event in the life of our country.
In the short comments below. members of the editorial board discuss plans for
carrying out the tasks given to cybernetics scientists by the Congress for the
11th Five-Year Plan.

V. M. Glushkov. academician and editor-in-chief of the journal.

Ukrainian cybernetics scientists are directing all their efforts to carrying out
the program of action adopted at the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union. The concern for preservation of the peace obligates us to make
every effort to see that peace on earth is preserved.

Workers in science face enormous tasks in the llth Five-Year Plan: Improving
computer hardware and control systems, constructing new cybernetics systems
capable of efficiently aiding human beings in many spheres of activity, in con-
trolling highly complex instruments and mechanisms. production of output, and
planning and designing large systems. The most important challenges facing
researchers were reflected in the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress. They are,
first of all. the construction and employment of systems of different levels and
purposes. in particular the OGAS (State Automated Systel for Data Collection and
Processing), which is expected to serve as a tool for decision-making in manage-
ment. The development of promising types of hardware, especially recursive
computers constructed on entirely new principles for organisation of computations
and computer components, is one of the central challenges in building highly
productive computer hardware. Other very important tasks are the building and
practical introduction of robot-manipulators and other cybernetics systems with
artificial intellect and setting up automated design systems for various tech-
nical objects and structures such as airplanes. atomic reactors, construction
elements, and the like.

The sphere of application of computers is expanding enormously. For this reason
it is important to standardize computer hardware. improve human interaction with

FOR OWWHCJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

computers. and develop domestic appliances with built-in microcomputers and mini-
computers.

Without theory practice is blind. Soviet scientists today are ahead of foreign
scientists in many aspects of theoretical cybernetics. The latest advances of
theoretical science. along with the development of means to automate the process-
ing of results from scientific investigations and experiments, should give rise
to a new stage in creative scientific thought and accelerated introduction of the
results of scientific research in practice.

Yu. V. Kapitonova, doctor of physicomathematical sciences.

Raising the efficiency of use of computers and computer software depends on the
quality of personnel training. The production of computing machinery is develop—
ing very swiftly today. but the training of skilled computer users is still
plainly inadequate. Work to improve the qualifications of computer users is one
of the most important ways to raise labor productivity. At the same time we

must raise the "intellectual" level of the computers themselves. It seems to me
that computer-based artificial intellect systems that provide more comfortable
conditions for human beings when they are given jobs now done by human beings can
also be a means to raising the productivity of both physical and mental labor.

Information plays a very important part in the contemporary world. Artificial
intellect systems as means of producing, processing. and transmitting informa-
tion should become as necessary to people as the telephone, radio. and television.

Raising the "intellectual“ level of computers inevitably involves making their
functions. and therefore also their design, more complex. This requires that we
set up industrial lines for automated production of computer components. that is.
circuitry and program equipment. This presupposes. in turn, the development of
the theory and systems for designing computers. The division of digital auto-
mata theory at the Institute of Cybernetics or the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences is working on the development of such resources. He hope that the re-
sults of our research will be of benefit to the economy of the country before
the 11th Five-Year Plan is over.

A. A. Letichevskiy. doctor of physicomathematlcal sciences.

Cybernetics science is developing in close interaction with applied problems.
helping accomplish key national economic tasks related to the development and
introduction of compu:ers. Meeting the great challenges set down by the 26th
Congress of the CPSU for Soviet society demands further improvement in computer
hardware and creating new structures of computers and new methods of organizing
computing processes to make maximum use of the potential of contemporary tech-
nology for manufacturing computer hardware.

The development and use of multiprocessor systems revived the theory of parallel
computations. stimulating a transition from the study of abstract models far re-
moved from any real systems to solving practical problems. The principle of

macroconveyor organization of computations in multiprocessor systems. discovered

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by V. H. Glnshkov. led to a fundamentally new solution to the problem of effi-
cient use of general-purpose systems with large numbers of processors. Further
study and application of this principle is opening new prospects for the de-
velopment of the theory ofcomputingprocessee and drawing in related fields such
as methods of numerical analysis, artificial intellect, and the like.

While working on applied problems, we must keep the prospects for development of
fundamental knowledge in view. The algebra of algorithms, the theory of data
structures. recursive computations. and other branches of the applied theory of
algorithms constitute the theoretical basis for the developing field of mathe-
matical science. which must work out and refine the general method of solving

the problems of analyzing, synthesizing. and optimizing algorithms. identifying
special classes of algorithms by putting abstract mathematical models in concrete
form. As a specific example of such development we may point to the transition
from studying flow charts of free data algebras to studying flow charts of
algebras of data defined by systems of identities (abstract types of data).

The principal source of the problems of the applied theory of algorithms is ex-
perience constructing a system for automated design of the hardware and software
of computers based on high-level languages that approximate the languages of
mathematical definitiions and problem formulation. One of the promising lines of
work in this field is the development of means and methods of theoretical set
programming based on the formalized language of practical mathematics and includ-
ing deductive means among the instruments used to design algorithms.

Yu. M. Yermol'yev. corresponding member of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The changes that have taken place in stochastic programming in the last five years
are remarkable. This relates above all to further development of direct sto-
chastic methods of solving complex problems of investigating large-dimensionality
operations. Efficient procedures have been developed to solve a broad range of
problems of planning stocks, network optimization, agricultural production, two-
stage problems of stochastic programming. and various other problems that have
special structures of constraints. Solving practical problems necessitated a
further expansion of the class of optimizsble functions. Techniques of minimiz-
ing slightly convex. generalized differentiable, and Lipshits functions were in-

vestigated. A very general methodology of proofs was worked out to investigate
the convergence of nonmonotonic optimization procedures.

Broad investigation of c-quasigradient optimization techniques was done, and
methods were constructed for solving minimax problems which did not require
precise computation of the generalized gradient of the function of the maximum.

The applied problems of controlling industrial processes and dynamic and organi-
zational systems where the structure of the object being optimized develops
gradually led to working out numerical methods of nonstationary optimisation.

Numerical techniques of solving stochastic problems of optimization by distri-
bution functions that satisfy all common constraints were worked out.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ MI. USE ONLY

Thu-owns intensive development of algorithms for solving stochastic minimax
problems and problems with complex regression functions.

In connection with the development of packages of applied program, great sig-
nificance was given to investigating the effectiveness of numerical methods of
nondifferentiable and stochastic optimization. The ae'ylptotic behavior of
stochastic optimization procedures in the class of convex large-dimensionality
problems and resistance to random error in raw data were studied.

Numerical methods of nondifferentiahle and stochastic optimization without compu—
tation of subgradients were developed. It was shown that in many practically
important cases it is possible to substitute computation of stochastic finite
differences for conputation of generalized gradients. Finite difference proce-
dures were developed which to a significant degree generalize known techniques

of stochastic approximation and are applicable to solve complex stochastic
minimax problems.

The Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences has now
developed a package of applied programs for stochastic and nondifferentiable
optimization which is designed to solve rough extremal problems of nonlinear and
stochastic programming. The package functions under control of the Yes [Unified
Systcml operating system and permits work in the automatic (batch), interactive,

and multiprocess modes. Plans envision a second version of the package, oriented
to solving conditional extremal problems, by 1985.

L. A. Kaluzhinin. doctor of physicoaathematical sciences.

The development of computers and the broad opportunities for their application
are especially important today. in the age of the scientific—technical revolution.
The decrees of the 26th CPSU Congress envision concentrating efforts on solving
such important problems as the development of mathemtical theory, increasing its
use for applied purposes. and improving computer technology, its basic elements

and software, and means and systems for data collection, processing, and trans-
mission.

‘l‘he second half of the 20th century has seen the ever-expanding intrusion of
mathematics into science and technology. whereas in an earlier day the principal
users of the results of mathematical theories were almost exclusively mechanics,
physics, and the branches of engineering related to them, today mathematics finds
application in chemistry, biologlh economics, linguistics, and in the branches of
cybernetic engineering — in the vork of designing automatic and using automatic
devices. This change and the expansion of its area of application have led to the
formulation of a number of new problems in mathematics itself. The greatest
change in focus within mathematics. we feel, is the increase in the importance of
the fields of discrete mathematics. Whereas in the 19th Century and early 20th
Century the analytic disciplines — differential and integral equations, varia-
tion calculus, and the others ~ were paramount for practical application, today
algebra, combinatorial analysis, number theory, mathematical logic, and others

play an equal role. The growth in the significance of these disciplines can be
observed by the number of projects and publications.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A great deal of attention today is being given to solving problems of algebra and
combinatorial analysis on computers. The problems that are arising are of great
theoretical and practical interest.

I. N. Kovalenko.

With the development of cybernetics systems it becomes increasingly important to
analyze and synthesize their efficiency and reliability with due regard for ran-
dom factors. The theory of random processes. adapted to describing the action of
real systems. and development of the analytic apparatus for investigating them‘
are timely for solving these problems. Significant results have been obtained in
these areas in recent years. Many concrete mass-service schemes have been
studied, in particular those that take account of the specific characteristics

of the operation of computers in computer systems. Attempts are underway to
compose algorithms for calculating the characteristics of mass-servic systems
within the framework of generalized mathematical schemes. The static modeling
technique has acquired a large role and become the basic calculation method in
systems research. Software systems for static system modeling have been devised.

The special significance of asymptotic techniques of calculating systems char-
acteristics for systems research has been recognized in the last decade, chiefly
thanks to the work of Soviet mathematicians. Thus. the theory of calculating
highly reliable systems has been worked out and significant results have been
obtained in the theory of consolidating the states of tandem processes. But all
of these techniques require elaborate software for practical introduction. At
the present time the corresponding packages of applied programs are being de—
veloped at the institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

Use of the capabilities of contemporary multiprocessor systems is a promising
direction for systems research. Specifically, it is very convenient to realize
static modeling algorithms on recursive—type computers because the organization
of data exchange in such machines corresponds to the real processes being
modeled.

Finally. we should note one more interesting area. the development of algorithms
for deriving formulas for the characteristics of mass-service systems using com—
puters based on the ANALITIK algorithmic language. The introduction of such
techniques can save an enormous amount of "manual " work on formal conversions.
which still take a great deal of time.

Our cyberneticsscientists are studying many aspects of the theory of mass service
and reliability and are making their contribution to the overall process of em-
ploying mathematics and cybernetics in our country's science and technology.

V. s. Korolyuk, academician of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

At the present time mathematical models that use the theory of random processes

play a significant part in many diverse areas of cybernetic research. Therefore,
the problems that arise in the theory of random processes and their applications
will continue to be timely. Delimitation and development of the theory of those

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

classes of random processes that are most adequately applicable to analysis of
complex stochastic systems is especially promising. The desire for an ade-
quately complete mathematical description of the functioning of stochastic
systems necessitates the use of increasingly complex mathematical models, and
therefore also of more complex medical apparatus. In this way a two-sided
situation arises: the more accurate the mathematical model is, the less possi-
bility there will be of receiving practically efficient conclusions; at the same
time, the simpler the mathematical model. the less reliable conclusions based
on analyzing it will be. One of the effective ways to overcome this contradic-
tion is to construct fairly precise mathematical models that take into account
all significant aspects of the processes under consideration. with subsequent
simplification oi the model substantiated by mathematical theorems. Develop—
ment of the method of phase consolidation of stochastic systems is an illustrao
tion of this approach. One of the timely problems of contemporary systems
analysis is the development of similar methods of simplified analysis based on
profound mathematical ideas.

0. S. Kulagina. candidate of physicomathematical sciences.

The problem of automating various types of processing of texts in natural language
is one of the timely scientific problems involved in broadening the use of com-
puter machinery. Among the diverse types of automatic text processing systems
(for example. question-answer systems. systems to translate from certain
languages to others. and the like) are language processors that analyze and syn—
thesize texts. Language processors usually have three types of software:
linguistic (vocabularies and grammars), mathematical-algorithm (algorithms and
formalized representations of data and algorithms). and programs. The develop-
ment of different types of software should proceed in a coordinated manner witbir
the framework of a single mathematical model that describes the structure of the
natural languages and their functioning. The models developed at this point em-
brace chiefly morphology and syntax. but only partially the semantics of natural
languages. Further progress requires fairly complete models of natural languages
that take account of :heir specific features such as complexity because of the
large number of objeccs with individual properties. indeterminacy of branches
(transfers), the lack of precision with respect to many sets and relationships
(including norms of correctness), the inequality of similar phenomena and con-
structions which is felt as a preference for certain ones over others and is
difficult to express in authorize/prohibit terms. and so forth. Experience with
the construction of systems for automatic text processing has shown quite clearly
that the formal grammars proposed by N. Chomsky are not an adequate means of
modl'llng natural languages and the external similarity between KS languages and
quLurll languages only made a prompt understanding of this inadquacy more diffi-
cult. In the text analysis algorithms formulated on the basis of Chomsky grammars
and constructed to recognize the affiliation of a phrase with a language gener-
ated by the formal grammar. syntactical structure occurs as a by-product of
recognition. Such algorithms are unsatisfactory because of their instability with
respect to deviations from grammatical norms. They do not give syntactical
structure for phrases that do not correspond to their grammar. but in view of the
above-mentioned properties of natural languages. the existence of phrases that do
not correspond to the grammar is inevitable in a text. unless it is specially
selected. with any grammar and they cannot be too infrequent.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In view of the above it would seem desirable for the journal KIdERNETIKA to pub-
lish articles on construction of mathematical models of the structure and
functioning of natural languages, discussion of various approaches to this prob-
lem, discussion of more general or particular models. and description of various
systems of automatic text processing and the functioning algorithms obtained

using their results. Such work fits naturally in the journal's topic headings
of mathenmtical models in linguistics and artificial intellect.

A. I. Kukhtenko.

It has long since become common knowledge that the ideas and methods of cyber—
netics are being applied not only to develop control systems for industrial

facilities, but also that they are being used successfully in economics, biology
and medicine, linguistics, ecology, and elsewhere.

The pure sciences (physics, chemistry, and theoretical biology) are a new arena
which is being taken over somewhat slowly. but steadily by cybernetics. we are
not speaking here of cybernetization of the experimental base, but rather of
formulating and solving particular purely theoretical problems whose considera-
tion requires the use of the ideas and methods of control theory (for example.
investigating the stability of the process of controlling thermonuclear installa-

tions or elementary particle accelerators and development of quantum mechanics
control systems).

The study of controlled objects and processes in these fields of knowledge leads
naturally to the necessity of using mathematical means that are adequate to
these objects and processes and this, in turn. requires uniformity (standardiza-
tion) of the mathematical apparatus with which it is possible to describe both
the object of control or process and the control system for it at the same time.
All this requires the creation of new branches of control theory and leads to

an expansion of the sphere of application of cybernetic methods and enriches the
scientific basis of cybernetics itself.

As experience demonstrates, among the most promising areas of investigation that
are fully adequate to the problems under consideration are thespperatus of Lee
groups and algebras. differentiable manifolds. and externally differential forms
as well as such branches of mathematical knowledge as the theory of layered
spaces, the theory of special characteristics and accidents, the theory of jets,
the theory of ambiguous images. and so on.

It must be recognized here that this is not simply a matter of substituting cer-
tain mathematical means for others; it is something more significant. As spe-
cialists in the field of scientific methodology say. it is a substitution of
"paradigms.” a replacement of the scientific basis. It occurred first in mathe-
matics itself, and then effected a radical reorganization of such scientific
disciplines as analytical mechanics and continuous medium mechanics as well as
many branches of theoretical and mathematical physics, and nor is gradually en-
compassing chemistry, theoretical biology, and also control theory. A great
deal has already been done in this direction. but it also offers very broad
prospects for further research on both the theoretical and applied levels.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIFMI. liSl-I ONLY

8. N. thenichnyy. doctor of physicomathematical sciences.

The 26th CPSU Congress defined intensification as the principal line of develop-
ment for our economy and industry. But intensification means maximal use of
each process and each technology, and it is inconceivable without optimization
of the use of all available resources. Therefore, development of optimization

theory and fundamentally new computing techniques for optimization is becoming
a pressing problem.

In the area of theory. I believe, it is very important to continue studying the
problems which include nondifferentiable functions. There has been a trend in
recent years to identify special classes of such functions. describe their
properties. and construct the essential extremum conditions. This has made it
possible to obtain essential conditions of a fundamentally new type which allow

a very detailed characterization of extremum points in even the roughest problems.
This is extremely significant for formulating optimization algorithms, even though

it appears that narrower classes of functions must be identified when working out
effective algorithms.

In connection with the problems of mathematical economics, the investigation of
multiform representations. which can be used to describe economic processes,
plays a large part. The steadily growing stream of publications in this field
confirms this opinion. I also want to note that the problem of mathematical
description of price formation in economic models is an important and extremely
interesting matter. We are still far from an adequately complete solution to
this problem.

The ultimate goal of the development of any theory is practice. and for optimiza-
tion theory the practical outcome is effective new algorithms and packages of
programs. Significant advances have been made in "his in recent years. There has
been further development of the techniques of sec ;ntial analysis of alternatives
applicable to combinatorial problems and systemization, and new methods of non-

differentiable optimization have been worked out in addition to methods of solving
general nonlinear programs of mathematical programming.

V. M. Clushkov's formulation of new principles and approaches to optimization
problems relying on systems analysis was a major contribution to this problem
area. These principles allow a different look at the methods by which problems
are solved and make new demands of the developers of algorithms.

[ will note in conclusion that, unfortunately. we still have not developed many
tested program modules that can be used extensively by algorithm developers.
Even for the basic problems such as linear programming and quadratic programming
each organization uses its own programs, which other organizations do not have.
Standardization of modules and universal distribution of them is one of the im-
portant practical challenges.

I. V. Sergiyenko. corresponding member of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The materials of the 26th CPSU Congress devote a significant place to the prob-
lems of scientific and technical development. specifically the questions of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development of automated data processing systems, automated control systems, and
computer hardware.

The important role that mathematical methods of solving optimization problems of
different types and computer and systems software are playing in the development
of science and technology is cannon knowledge. Research in the field of develop-
ment of the contemporary theory of optimization continues to be very timely.
It is precisely rational use of mathematical methods of solving optimization
problem that often makes possible significant inrovements in the efficiency of
automated control systems, computer-based automated data processing systems,

automated design systems for coupler objects. and the like when they are being
set up.

In recent times there has been intensive development of discrete software and its
varied applications. This is because many problems of control, planning, and
design are described by discrete programing models. In the near future effective
techniques are to be worked out for solving large-dimensionality problems of this
type and the software of packages of programs that will permit solving problems
of this class in the interactive mode will be developed. It is interesting here
to work out both precise and approximate methods of solving these problems, and
it is equally important to develop software for realizing them on computers
which will allow dynamic changes in the mathematical models of the problems being
solved and the parameters of the algorithms used during this in different modes
when necessary.

Several other questions continue to be timely: evaluating the quality of op-
timization methods and mathematical means of realizing them in the development
stage; working Out new approaches to formal description of ilportant national
economic problems; and. building automated means that allow efficient investiga-
tiona of complex systems.

5. L. Sobolev, academician.

In recent years I have been working on the theory of cubic and quadrature formu-
las. This work relates to a field bordering on classical mathematical analysis.
I am interested in questions of optimizing such formulas for various classes of
differentiable functions and in the asymptotics of optimal formulas and norms
of the functional of error in different situations. To the present time these
problems have been formulated in classical Banach and even Gilbert space.

It seems to me that it would be extremely interesting if one were to succeed in
giving an analytic interpretation of variation problem of the minimum norm of
error with complementary constraints on permissible formlas. For example, to
find a convenient solution to the problem of optimal formulas with moduli of
coefficients constrained in advance.

A simpler problem, but also one that needs to be worked out, is the asyqatotics
of optimal (but not just asymptotically) cubic formulas.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IM. USE ONLY

E. F. Skorokhod'kn. doctor of philoiogicai sciences.

The second half of the 1970's in our country saw widespread use of document in-
formation retrieval systems based on program packages such as AS?ID, ASOD. and
POISK-l. Despite the obvious advantages of these systems - standardization of
software. a high level of technological suitability, well-developed service
facilities. and so on — they are not withOut a number of shortcomings (many of
which, strange as it may seem, were not found in the experimental systems of the
1960's). Thus, the generally laudable desire for maximum simplification of
linguistic facilities led to a situation where the volume of nonautomated opera-
tions in processing input data was unjustifiably large. Indexing queries is

a particular burden. It is this operation in the systems under consideration
that permits partial compensation for the weakness of linguistic facilities, in
particular the lack of a well-developed system of paradigm relationships and,

as a consequence. a diminution of the completeness of the search and a low level
of adaptability to user interests. In addition to the fact that it requires
highly qualified service personnel and takes a great deal of time. in many cases

Indexing documents and compiling information retrieval thesauruses are also very
labor-intensive operations, despite the fact that contemporary packages of ap-
plied programs for document systems to some extent ease this job by permitting

problems. that is. to setting up efficient systems for automatic text reference
and indexing queries and documents. In addition they should work to set up
automated systems to design thesauruses for information retrieval systems and
data banks which can select words. on the one hand, and establish paradigm re~
lationships among descriptors and structure the thesaurus, on the other.

Ye. L. Yushchenko, corresponding member of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The 26th CPSU Congress outlined the impressive prospects for development of our
domestic science and technology. Cybernetics, in particular. was given the
challenges of further raising the productivity of computers, improving their
material support. and expanding the sphere of practical application in industry
and the national economy. It is essential to intensify research on development
of programming languages, translating, interpreting. and operating systems.
packages of applied programs, data bases. and other components of the software of
contemporary and future computers. Within the framework of the further develop-
ment of means of human interaction with the computer, the problem orientation of
languages using contemporary programming technology. the apparatus of macro-
generation. standardized base languages, and control systems for data bases is
becoming particularly timely. Interesting results have been received in this
area for the language CJBOL. It is also very timely to develop parametric pro-
granmung systems, to put together sets of packages of applied programs, and to

10

FOR OFFliIIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

set up systems to teach languages and programming techniques. In connection

with the appearance of multiprocessor computing systems it becomes interesting to
develop parallel programming languages and systems, means of organizing the com—
puting process in multimachine computing systems, and so on.

Shaping the mathematical foundations of programming technology, including parallel
programing. is an important line of study in theoretical and system programing.

Interesting results have been obtained in the schematology of structural pro-
gramming, the theory of parametric models of languages. and formal methods of
structural program design. Work is underway to devise structural programming
hardware and use it to solve various practical problems. Within the framework of
the further development of this area there may be progress in research on the
analysis and synthesis of structured programs, their verification, transformation,

and documentation. organizing the labor of the collective of developers, and the
like.

It should be emphasized that solving the problems of program compatibility among
computers, storing libraries of programs, and preparing users at different levels
of qualifications by means of well-developed teaching systems w‘ll promote a
qualitative advance in the development of the "intellect" of coming generations of
computers.

A. P. Yershov, corresponding member of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The lasting significance of the 26th CPSU Congress lies in the fact that it
marked a radical turning point in our national economy, from the extensive way of
development to the intensive task. In a historically short period of time our
country has resolved the great problem of developing its natural resources, cre-
sting up—to-date productive forces, shaping the essential educational and cul-
tural potential of the population, and insuring full participation by the popula-
tion in public production. Further growth in production is no longer possible by
simply bringing in new natural and human resources. It requires rapid incorpor-
ation of scientific-technical advances. fuller use of creative potential, and
efficient management.

One of the conditions of meeting this new historic challenge is bolstering the
scientific principle in the organization of public production and management.

This finds specific expression in the need for more thorough knowledge and com-
prehensive consideration of the objective fundamental laws of developed socialism.
The complexity of production relationships and the limited character of re-
sources intensify the interdependence of the different parts of the economic
mechanism and the impact of particular decisions on the final results. Intuitive,
approximate, or local knowledge of these laws will no longer provide the necessary
efficiency. It must be replaced by deep, broad, and advanced knowledge and the
ability to apply it in the interests of achieving the final objective at the proper
time.

It is deeply impressive, how much the goals of the 26th Congress reflect the
challenges facing our computer science. Right from the start and until just re-
cently programming has developed extensively, embracing new areas of computer

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

application, formulating new methods, and multiplying essential features. Re
have all kinds of programming: theoretical, applied, systems, recursive.
structural, parallel, functional, systematic, and applicative. We distinguish
operational, mathematical, denotationai, transformational, logical, and reduc~
tion semantics. By itself the number of such terms, and there is a whole field

of study behind each one, illustrates the diversity of the directions of growth
in programming.

in recent years, however, it has become clear that sinply adding accumulated
knowledge will never be sufficient to overcome the steadily growing barrier of
complexity raised by the practical problems of programming. Indeed, in science
itself the division into new fields is increasingly moving to the classical
spiral of development where essential similarities reveal themselves in the
most unexpected places and things that were new are already obsolete.

The accumulation of phenomena such as this forces us to think that the problem of
bolstering the scientific principle in programming, making the transition from
extensive development of computer science to intensive, and learning and using
the deep relationships between programming and other sciences and types of human
activity is a problem that not only should, but also can be made the focus of
further progress in computer affairs. With a view to supporting this statement

I will give three examples of the recently recognized relationship between cer-
tain fundamental concepts of mathematics and programming.

Example 1. Church-Rosser systems and program processors [1]. In the 1930's the
so-ralledlambdacalculus of Church played a large part in the formation of the
theory of computability. The fact that this calculus was equivalent in capacity
with the concept of the recursive determination according to Erbran and Goedel
enabled Church to formulate his famous thesis and give the first example of a
concrete, algorithmically insoluble mass problem. Lambda computations proved very
inconvenient in use, so further development of the theory of computability used
other models of computations. At the same timelambdacomputations have a number
of remarkable characteristics. One of them, which has come to be called the
Church-Rosser property. consists in the following. The lambdacalculus may be
viewed as a system of text transformations. Individual transformations are
called reductions (in classical calculus there is just one transformation,

of the substitution type: le(x), x =C‘rf(c)). Among the different forms of
text the so-called normal form, which is a fixed point for all reductions,
stands out syntactically.

The Church-Rosser property consists in the fact that if we transform initial
text t into normal form tn, it will be one and any intermediate form of text t is

also reduced to tn. The systems of transformations that satisfy this property
camv to be called Church-Rosser transforms. These transforms are the ideal means

for describing the nondeterministic processes of manipulations with different
constructional objects. it is regrettable that with a straight-line approach
conventional processors were very far from possessing the Church-Rosser property.

Programming traditionally considered representations of the type P x D + D
(computations of programs from P on data from D) or P + P program transformations.

12

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Study of the former was the subject of semantics, while the latter was studied by
the theory of flowcharts. It took a great deal of time (some of it to ovecome

the preferential bias for considering computer models with invariable programs) to
discover the usefulness of studying representations of the type P x D + P x D
(program processing, mixed computations, and the like). One of the most inter-
esting results of this approach is that the semantics of simple programming
languages described in a system of base transformations of the type P x D + P x D
can be adequately represented in the form of a Church-Russet transform.

This was established first for recursive programs, and then a little later for
structured operator programs with memory as well. This observation rehabili-
tates the operational approach to describing semantics, liberating it from the
over-definitiveness of the purely deterministic approach, and makes it possible
in the context of representations P X D + P X D to develop a general theory of
very different program processors, which formerly had been considered separately.

Example 2. Mixed computations and the s-m-n-theorem [2]. Suppose program

p(X. Y) computes function f(X. Y). It is possible to formulate the problem of
the search for a systematic procedure of type P x D e P x D which, from program
p(X. Y) and the assigned value of one of the independent variables (suppose

X - a), would construct its projection, that is. program pa(Y), which computes
function o(Y) - f(a, Y). Such a procedure "(P, x, Y): H(p. a. Y) -pa(Y) in
programming language L - (P, D), DE'X x Y. distinct from the conventional com-
puter V(P, X, Y): M(p. a, b) - p(a, b), is naturally called a mixed computer for
language L.

In the course of the 1970's several programmers independently made an important
observation which greatly influenced ideas of the nature of translation in com-
parison with the previous 20 years of development of this important branch of
programming. Suppose that in processing language L mixed computer mix(P, X, Y)
for this language and interpreter int(n, E) of a certain input language L are
programmed. In the mixed computation mode we will apply int to the input program
I, mix to the interpreter int and then mix to itself. It turns out then that
the projection of the interpreter on the input program gives its object code in
language L, while the projection of the mixed computer on the interpreter of the
input language gives a translator from this language and the projection of the
mixed computer on itself gives a translator of translators in the processing
language. It is difficult to ignore such a fundamental and meaningful determi-
nation of the basic objects of translation theory.

Another interesting feature of this story is the fact that logicians knew the
concept of the mixed computation and its role in translation at a time when pro-
gramming was just getting on its feet. Already in the 1940's 8. K. Klini knew
the so-cnlled s-mpn theorem (given below in a formulation for m - n - 1):

there is a numeration G of partially recursive functions with universal functions
U‘(p, x) and U2(p, x, y) for one-place and twOvplace functions respectively as
well as the primitively recursive function s(p. x) such that for any two~place
function 0(x, y) with number 6‘. The following is correct.

on. y) - We... x. y) - who“... x). y).

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It Is apparent that the s-m—nsfunction corresponds exactly with the mixed
computer for the programming language in terms of partially recursive functions.
In the 1950's V. A. Uspenskiy worked on the theory of numeratious, which was
presented in his well-known "Lectures on Computable Functions." A numeration is
called a main nuaeration if any other computable numeration is translated in a
generally recursive manner within it. V. A. Uspenskiy proved the theorem in
which he actually related the property of a computable numeration being a main
numeration with the feasibility of the s-m—n-theorem for it.

It is interesting to observe that some logicians consider the s-m-n theorem one

of the most powerful tools of the theory of computability, comparable in
productivity to the Church thesis.

Exauple 3. Computable functions and automatic determinants [3]. The period of
development of the foundations of mathematics from the early 1930's until the
end of the 1960's was characterized by a large number of different definitions
of the computable function and the algorithm. We will mention only the best-
known ones: representability according to Goedel, recursive definability of
Erbran and Goedel. lambda definability according to Church. computability accord—
ing to Turing, partial recursiveness according to Klini, canonical deducibility
according to Post, normal algorithms according to Markov. discrete transforms
according to Glushkov.l operator algorithms according to Yershov, recursive pro-
grams according to HacCarthy, and Diophantine computability according to
Matiyasevich. Behind this apparent diversity of conceptions and premises there
is In fact one of the most immutable and absolute, as specialists put it. con-
cepts of mathematics - the concept of the effectively computable functions.

The absoluteness of this concept finds expression in the fact that each of the
above definitions describes precisely one and the same class of arithmetic
functions. 0n the other side from this mutual reducibility of the different
definitions of computability is the unsettling circumstance that each of these
definitions is developing. so to speak, its own theory. A basic question
arises: is it possible to give an abstract definition of computability which
would have the same status in relation to all the concrete theories. making them
in some sense models of this abstract definition.

The first cycle of research in this direction showed that the initial step of
abstraction should be a search for a definition of computability for random
subject areas D with fixed sets of elementary operations 0 -{¢1,...,§n} and
predicates n - {I}.....nm}, that is, for abstract algebraic systems‘u . 0.0, ﬂ.

.———-_——______— .-

1The author apparently does not consider certain aspects of the theory of discrete
transforms from which it should better be classified with the abstract theories
of computability considered in the third example than with the concrete. refine—
ments of the concept of the computable function (from the editors).

'14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further searching for an abstract definition of coaputability, however,

bogged down in the stage of formally relating the abstract theory to comput-
ability in a natural series or in the stage of constructing axiomatic theories
that postulate the strongest properties of the class of computable functions,
in conventional theories obtained, so to speak, at the very end. The weakness
of the first approach was that the abstract theory is not in the same position
in relation to the concrete theory, but rather is constructed on the basis of
one of them. With the second approach, the description of a concrete theory as

a model for the abstract one proved conceptually comparable to direct develop-
ment of a concrete theory.

A new approach to defining abstract computability took shape on the basis of
knowledge accumulated in work on theoretical programming. One of the funda-
mental concepts of programming and the theory of computability is the concept
of the protocol. that is, the set of operations performed and decisions made
in receiving a result corresponding to an assigned independent variable. The
protocol is naturally represented in the form of a certain text in the alphabet
of the symbols of input variables, elementary operations 0 , and predicates n
together with their truth values. The set of protocols corresponding to real
computations is not very interesting. It is an enumerable set that is adequate
to the graph of the function. It is a different matter if we consider flow-
charts or abstract programs, that is. if we do not resort to interpreting the
abstract algebraic system H. Instead of the process of computations, in these
charts it is possible to give a generating process of a very simple nature
which constructs a certain set of formal protocols. that is, a language in the
above-mentioned alphabet. This set has the following properties: (a) each
protocol for a given interpretation is either contradictory or gives a value
that belongs to the graph of the function; (b) two programs with identical

sets of formal protocols complete the same function with any interpretation.

These properties enable us to call the set of formal protocols the determinants
of computable functions. The most important property of the determinants for
flowcharts is that these determinants are very simple automatic sets: the de—
terminants for YanOv charts are interpreted as finite automate. while for random
statement charts they are two-band finite automate and for recursive charts they
are context-free languages (a nonfinite result).

These properties of the determinants lead us to take the determinants as the
basis of the definition instead of detecting them in concrete counting models.

The definition. A function is cosputahle in the algebraic system 7.1- D, O, n ,
if there exists for it a certain automst set of formal protocols (determinants)
such that any significant protocol from the determinants is a certain value of

the function and, conversely, for any value of the functions there is at least
one significant protocol that gives this value.

Work to develop the theory of computability on the basis of this type of defini-
tion is just beginning, but already its abstract character can be seen: abstrac-

tions from the syntax of the program and from the concrete generalopurpose
algorithms; reliance on the concept of the sutomat set, an object of

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFN‘MI USP 0N! \‘

 

l6

FOR<0FFKJAL.USEIMVLY

It is, incidentally,
contradiction .
Yu. M. Yermol'yev,
corresponding neu-
ber of the Ukréinian
SSR Academy of
Sciences
I. N. Knvalenko,
corresponding
member of the
Ukrainian 59R

Academy of
Sciences
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010023-0

FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

T. P. Mar'yanovich,
candidate of phys-
1comathemat1cal
sciences

 

B. N. Pshenichnyy,
doctor of physica-
mathematical
sciences

 

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010023-0
«a. H . NSC"
nonnon 0n n
abnrmamnwnm
mnnmsnom
D. A. Suprunenko,
doctor of physico-
mathematical
sciences

N. 2. Shot, doctor
of physicomthe-
matical sciences

 

V. L. Volkovlch,
doctor of techni-
cal sciences

   

21

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010023—0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82~00850R000500010023-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. V. Ronanovskiy. doctor
of physiconathenntical science

 

N. S. Furs, deputy
chief editor

 

ICOPYRICHT: IZDA'I'EL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUMKA", "KIBERNETIKA". 1981

11,176
CSO: 1863/16 22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500010023-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 68l.3.005(075. 3)

COMPUTER SERVICING AND REPAIR FUNDAMENTALS

Moscow OSNOVY EKSPLUATATSII I REMTA EVH in Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Feb 81)
pp 2-5, 229. 232-235, 248-252. 278-279

[From book "Computer Servicing and Repair Fundamentals", by Igor' Alekseyevich
Orlov, Valeriy Fedorovich Kornyushko, Valeriy Viktorovich Burlyayev and Vladislav
Nikolnycvich Avdeyev, Energoizdat, 40,000 copies, 280 pages]

[Excerpts] Questions relating to testing and diagnosis are discussed, as wall as
the general principles of the organization of preventive and repair work in the
process of the equipment servicing of computers. The general structure of a system
for testing the operation of computers is presented along with the most widely used
codes for detecting errors and a description is given of the organization of hard-
ware. test and software-hardware inspection of computers. A technical and economic
evaluation is made of measures for the servicing of computers.

Intended for students at secondary special educational institutions. Can be help-
[u] to a broad range of engineers and technicians interested in questions relating
to the maintenance and repair of computers.

Foreword

This textbook is oriented toward the course "Fundamentals of Computer Servicing
and Repair" for students at secondary special educational institutions majoring in
"Computers, Electronic. Instruments and Equipment."

The extensive introduction of computer technology in various sectors of the national
economy has necessitated the organization of the correct and efficient servicing
of computers.

By the servicing of such a complex dynamic system as a modern computer is must be
understood the process of using a computer for its purpose while maintaining the
computer in good working order. This continuous process consists of various mea-
sures: scheduled maintenance. restoration of serviceability after failure, period-
ic preventive work, etc. The accomplishment of these measures requires considerable
expenditures. and these expenditures depend to a considerable extent on how effi-
ciently these measures have been organized.

As the range of application of digital computers expands, the job of guaranteeing
reliability of their performance takes on ever more importance. Meanwhile the

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICTAL USE ONLY

complication of computers, the increase in the number of operating modes for them
and the use of a new element hase--integrated circuits-~have made it difficult to

when working with modern computers. In addition, the difficulty of hardware diag-
nosis is intensified by the fact that it is impossible to observe signals directly
in internal points of the circuit in integrated circuits and the addition of num-
erous check points is clearly inefficient.

In connection with this software and hat-.. e-software methods of testing the ser—
viceability of a computer are under intense development at the present time and are
taking on ever greater importance.

Taking into account the complexity of the question presented and the general direc-
tion of the course. the authors did not set themselves the goal of writing a manual
with a detailed description of all methods and approaches for automatic testing,
servicing and repair of computers. The goal of this book is to discuss the basic
nmthods of testing and servicing computers in general, and in sufficiently complete
a form as possible using as an example modern third-generation computers included
among Yes [Unified Series] computers. In discussing specific examples of procedures
for'tcsting individual units and pieces of computer equipment. tests for a program
check and recommendations on the servicing and repair of computers, the authors

for the majority of these computers). In cases when this is impossible. examples
haVe been presented for one of the most advanced and widely used medium-capacity
Yes computers--the Yes-1022. Since this textbook is intended for students who in
the future are to take part directly in solving problems and servicing computers

in this book. since the methods for the technical diagnosis and repair of various

The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the reviewers-the team at

the computer and software department of Moscow Institute of Railway Transportation
Hngincers--as well as to Candidate of Technical Sciences v.6. Persheyev, an assis-
tant professor in this department. and to Moscow Radio Engineering Technical School
imenl A.A. Raspletin Teacher K.A. Neshumova and to the science editor of this book,

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Candidate of Technical Sciences B.N. Sevryukov, who helped to improve the manuscript
with their comments and helpful advice.

A promising form of equipment servicing is the centralized servicing (TsTO) network,
which makes it possible to solve the problem of spare parts and the shortage of
technical personnel. The organization of complete centralized servicing (warranty
repairs, periodic work and the like) makes it possible to solve many problems re-
lating to the servicing of computers, to accumulate statistics on the failures of

various pieces of computing equipment and units, and to improve the reliability of
computers as a whole.

The performance of TsTO work is carried out on the basis of business contracts. The
approximate cost of a TsTO preventive inspection for various computers is given in

table 9-1. In the future the cost of TsTO services will be lowered and their list
will be expanded.

Table 9-1. Cost of TsTO Preventive Inspection

Txpe of Wholesale price of preventive inspection for a single Cost of ovcg;

 

compute! cogputer depending on the number of them in the orp- hauling a sip:
anizationI rubles gle eggputerI
.1. Z 3 ﬂ 2 rubles

"Minsk-32" 5510 4460 3840 3630 3510 7730

“-220,

H-222 7800 6290 5790 5550 5400 7730

”Ural-11,"

"Ural-14,"

"Ural-l6" 12100 10100 9420 9090 8890 11500

BESM-6 18200 15100 14100 - - 22000

Yes-1020 13300 10700 9850 9400 9200 11500

Yes-1030 18500 15000 13800 13200 12800 22000

"Nairl-Z,

S" 1360 880 710 600 580 1640

An example of the weekly schedule for four magnetic disks, one of which is a spare,
is given in table 9-3.

Table 9-3. Weekly Schedule of Preventive Maintenance for Magnetic Disk Storage

 

 

Units
Unit Plant Daz of week
what 1229.221
5056 PR
5056 PR
5056 PR
5056 R R R PR

Note: PR--preventive maintenance; R--spare

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Network planning and control methods are often used for drawing up a schedule of
preventive work with the presence at a computing center of a great number of com-
puters and other hardware.

9—3. Quantitative Evaluations of Preventive Measures

One key characteristic of preventive maintenance is the duration of computer pre-
ventive maintenance:

n - a .
.- ‘nm'zlal'l'z‘sl‘i'hnr
. r-n pun
where n
24-!
an

is the total time for the performance of k preventive measures performed in
succession;
a
.2 I“

1-!
is the time for the restoration of n malfunctions during the preventive mainten-
ance period; and tf k is the functional testing time.

It must he mentioned that the level of skills of service personnel influences to a
great extent the duration of preventive maintenance. It is possible to reduce con-
siderably the total time of failures and the total expenditure of time for carrying
out preventive work by raising the level of technical training and by generalities
and introducing advanced know-how relating to servicing.

Values of the key performance indicators of a Yes-1030 computer during three years
of use are presented in table 9-4. As is obvious from this table, in the third

year of use. on account of the accumulation of know-how and improvement of the qual-
ity of servicing. it was possible to reduce considerably the total time for pre-
ventive maintenance while increasing all remaining indicators of the computer's per-
formance. It can be seen in table 9-5 how the total time for failures of individual
units of this computer changed year by year. Some increase in the time for failures
of peripheral units of the Yes-1030 in the third year of use testifies to the rapid
wear of these units and their low reliability.

An analysis of statistical data on the use of a specific computer makes it possible
to give recommendations relating to substituting frequent preventive maintenance
with less frequent preventive maintenance (e.g., daily with weekly). This makes it
possible to increase the time for using a computer directly for computing work.

The degree or influence of preventive maintenance on the reliability characteristics

of a computer can be expressed in terms of the increase in mean time between fail-
lll’l‘S:

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ATo - To.pr - To ’

where T is the mean time between failures for the computer 01th preventive

naintenagégtand T is the mean time between failures for a computer which has not
been given preventive maintenance.

Table 9-4. Key Performance Indicators of Yes-1030 Computer

 

 

 

Performance indicators of Value of indicators bz gear of use, hours
computer First Second Third
"On" time 3976 6865 7251
Effective time 3220 5560 6223
Preventive maintenance 363 602 582
Failures and malfunctions 390 500 353
Mean time between failures 21.3 65.7 97.3
Mean restoration time 2.8 1.6 1.0
Mean-Zb-h effective time 8.5 15.2 17.1
Hean-Zé-h utilization 11.0 18.9 19.8
Mean time of uninterrupted

operation 6.8 7.8 9.7

Efficiency without taking into
account preventive maintenance
(percent) 92.2 92.8 96.6

Table 9-5. Failures of Yes-1030 Computer Units

 

 

 

 

 

Unit sze of Failure time b! zear of use: percent
unit First Second Third

Processor Yes-2030 11.7 8.1 6. 2

Channels Yes-6430 11.4 10.8 9. 8

working

storage Yes-3203 7.5 2.0 2.0

Disk storage Yes-5052 17.0 20.2 33.8

Tape storage Yes—5010 9.5 7.2 12.2

Control units Yes-5551 3 1 3.0 6.1
Yes-5511

Alphanumeric

printer Yes-7030 9. 6 8. 3 5.2

Input unit Yes-6012 10. 4 11. 6 7.8

Operator's

console Yes-7077 13.3 17.2 6.1

Ouput punch Yes-7010 5.5 11.3 10.5

Power supply

racks - 1.0 0.5 -

The relative value of the increase in mean time between failures equals

6T0 I ATOITO - To.pr/To e 1 .

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ratio w - To PrITo represents the effectiveness of preventive maintenance.
Another important quantitative characteristic is the preventive maintenance effec-
tiveness factor, k rof . which characterizes the degree of failure-free performance
of a computer on agcount of the prevention of failures at the moment of preventive
maintenance.

Let us introduce the following symbols: n rot is the number of failures discovered
during preventive maintenance: no is thepnumber of failures which originate in
the process of operation of the computer; is the total number

n be ch - no n rof
of failures of the computer during the periog 0? use. p

Then

kprof ‘ nprof/"obshch ’

and on the assumption that the flows of failures in the computer are the most simple,

" I nobshch/no ’
or

w - 1/(1-k ) .

prof

Thus, these expressions make it possible to give a quantitative evaluation of the

degree of improvement of the reliability of a computer on account of preventive
maintenance.

Now let us discuss the organization of preventive maintenance of units for controll-
ing magnetic tape storages, Yes—5517's. and magnetic disk storages, YeS-SSSlM's.

The kinds of preventive maintenance for Yes-5517's are: l) 26-hour (duration of
35 min), 4) biweekly (1 h). J) monthly (4 h) and 6) semiannually (8 h).

Only semiannual preventive maintenance for a period of 2 h is called for for a
Yes—5551M unit.

In 25-h maintenance of a Yes-5517 unit an external inspection is made and external
parts are dusted, and a check is made of powC“ supply unit voltages.

In weekly preventive maintenance a check is made of the operation of the storage,
and in monthly of all storages according to the Yes-5517 test program while changing
the voltage of i S-V power supplies in steps over the range of 4.75 to 5.25 V.

In addition, a check is made of the power supply overload protection system.

Seminnnunl preventive maintenance includes all monthly preventive maintenance steps,
as well as a check of the time parameters of write and read synchronizing generators,
the delay counter and stable signal conditioners. Time intervals are measured at
check points specified by the servicing instructions, by means of a type Ch3-12

digital frequency meter. These measurements are made while altering the power sup-
ply voltage by five percent.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Practically all measures provided in the semiannual preventive maintenance of a
Yes-5517 are carried out in performing semiannual testing and preventive maintenance
work for the YeSvSSSIH unit.

The maintenance of Yes computers has made it possible to reveal the most typical
reasons for failures of key units and to give recommendations on eliminating them:

Processor and channels--breaking of wiring connections, failure of contacts and
dcmountable standard replacement elements, poor-quality wiring in racks. Elimina-
tion--complete cleaning of wiring. regular washing of T32 [standard replacement
element] connector assemblies with alcohol.

Main storage—«tiring errors, poor debugging of memory matrix units (BZH'a). failures
of TEZ's in heavy—use circuits. Elimination--cleaning of wiring, debugging of
BZH's, bench testing of TBz's.

Magnetic disks--short service life of magnetic heads, power supply failures, po-
sitioner failures, infringement of write and read compatibility. Elimination-
thorough maintenance of airtightness, cleanliness and humidity with complete
shielding from the influence of electromagnetic radiation; careful adjustment and
fitting of parts.

Punched card input unit--poor reliability of illumination lamps in readout unit,
high sensitivity to quality of punched cards. Blimination-—careful control of
quality of punched cards, obligatory output of information onto the display's
screen for monitoring purposes.

Yes-7030, Yes—7010 and Yes-7022 data output units-poor quality of inked ribbon,
low reliability of punch. Elimination--use only nylon-base tape, replace punch
with another type.

Chapter 11.
Technical-Economic Evaluation of Measures for Computer Servicing

ll-l. Selection and Justification of Criteria for the Effectiveness of the
Utilization of Computers

Keeping computers in good working condition and their effective utilization at
minimum cost require intelligent organization of maintenance of the entire computing
system.

The need for a detailed economic analysis of the utilization of computers is dic-
tated by rapid advances in computer technology accompanied by enormous financial
input and rapid changes in the structure of this input (the percentage of input

for electronic components, software, storage and peripheral units, terminals,
communications lines, etc.).

The most important technical and economic characteristic of a computing system is
the productivity of the computer. The productivity of a computer reflects not only
the technical characteristics of the central part of the computer (the speed of
response of the processor. storage units and input/output channels), but also the

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics of external units and operating systems and even the efficiency of
the specific configuration of the computing system in solving various problems.

The productivity of computing systems depends to a great extent on the technical
principles of their implementation, i.e., the principles of the structural organiza-
tion and functioning of hardware and the operating system of the computer.

of great importance for improving the economic efficiency of a computer is improve-
ment of the labor productivity of the programmer. The labor productivity of a
programmer depends not only on his or her skills and the complexity of the problem,
but also on the mode in which the computer is used.

The mode of use in this case determines the principle of the interaction of the
programmer with the computer in the process of debugging the program.

The quantitative expression of the indicator of the productivity of a computer
causes certain difficulties. This is due to a great number of factors influencing
the total productivity of the computing system and to their complex interaction.
In evaluating the productivity of a computer usually a quantitative analysis is
made of the influence of various factors on the total productivity of the system.

In connection with the difficulty of estimating an absolute indicator of productivi-
ty it is more convenient to use an indicator of the relative productivity of a
given i-th computer in relation to a base j-th model:

111 I P1]?j ,

where P is the productivity of the computer.

A distinction is made between the nominal, complex and combined productivity of
a computer.

By nominal productivity, Pn . is meant the productivity of the processor, measured
by the amount of operations per unit of time for a typical mix of procedures (cf.
ch 2).

The complex productivity. P . is the productivity of the computer taking into
account the work of the input/output units. storage units and other additional
equipment.

Indicators of combined productivity are determined as follovs:

P P k

s.n [combined nominal] I n k

t.i ; Ps.k [combined complex] - Pk t.i ’

where kt is the coefficient of equipment utilization for the computer, deter-
mined by the equation in ch 2.

In calculating nominal productivity part of the parameters which exert a consider-
able infiuence on the computer's operation are left out of consideration (capacity
of working storage and external storage units, operating speed of peripherals, etc.).

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nominal productivity is calculated under ideal conditions of the computer's opera-
tion. In actuality it is impossible to achieve this productivity since in the
single-program mode time is lost on idle time in the input/output of inforlltiom and
in the multiprogram mode and time-sharing mode system time losses exist.

The change in indexes of the nominal and complex productivity of a Yes-1020 and
"Minsk—32“ computer in relation to a "Minsk—22“ computer as a function of p -
the percentage of economic problems in the computer's total load-is illustrated
in fig 11-1. It is obvious from this figure that the efficiency of a Yes-1020
computer is considerably better than that of the "Minsk-32" second-generation com-
puter.

 

Figure 11-1. For Calculation of Productivity Indexes of Computers

Key:
1. Complex 3. Yes-1020
2. Nominal 4. 'Tﬂnsk-32"

Comparative estimates of indexes of nominal productivity for these computers in
solving scientific and economic problems are given in table 11-1.

Table 11-1.

Index. imam; £29939.th _ IZL'_°E._“.°_'P_° user.
"Minsk-22" ”Hinsk-32 Yes-1020

 

 

In solving scientific prob-

lems 1 2.6 6.6
In solving economic prob-

lems 1 3.7 11.3
Average 1 3.1 6.1

Calculation of complex productivity is rather complicated since many parameters of
a computer and their influence on one another are not subject to an analytical dee
scription. Basically in Pk the influence of the capacity or the storage and

3!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

channel parameters are taken into account. Comparative estimates of indexes of
complex productivity are presented in table 11-2 similarly to table 11’1.

 

 

Table 11-2.

Index of complex productivity gype of cgmputer
"Minsk—22" insk-32 Yes-1020

In solving scientific problems 1 11.2 10.7

In solving economic problems 1 9.9 19.0

Average 1 10.1 15.9

Differences in the standard set of external storage units for the Yes—1020 computer
for solving scientific and economic problems were taken into account in calculating
the indexes in table 11-2. In particular, lowering of index P for the Yes-1020
computer in solving scientific problems as compared with a "Hingk-JZ" computer

is caused by the small number of magnetic disk storages in the typical structure

of a Yes-1020 computer.

Computer productivity indicators themselves cannot serve as criteria for their
efficiency. Those computers which have a minimum cost/productivity ratio are eco-
nomically more efficient. Comparative estimates of the cost of a unit of product-
ivity for various computers are presented in table 11-3.

 

Table 11-3.

Cost of unit of productivity Izpe of computer
"Minsk-22" "Minsk-32" Yes-1020

Nominal 1 0.44 0.35

Complex 1 0.13 0.2

The rise in cost of a P unit for the Yes-1020 computer as compared with a
"Minsk-32" computer is caused by the high cost of external equipment for Yes-series
machines. For the purpose of making fuller allowance for the efficiency of each
unit included in the structure of a computer it is necessary to use the "cost-
utilizatiou" and dishslance factors which are discussed below.

CONTENTS Page

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Computer Servicing 6
1-1. General concepts 6
I-2. Key servicing characteristics 9
1—3. Principles of organization of servicing 16
Chapter 2. Testing the Operation of a Computer 19
2-l. Classification of computer errors and malfunctions 19
2-2. Key objectives of testing and diagnosing computers 22
2-3. Structure of a computer testing and diagnosis system 25
Chapter 3. General Principles of Error Detection and Repairing Computers 28
3-1. Automatic testing and diagnosis systems and their interaction 28

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3-2. Key requirements for an automatic testing and diagnosis system
A. General requirements for the system

B. Means of checking testing systems

c. Evaluation of testing effectiveness

3-3. General approach to repairing a computer

A. Kinds of repair work

B. Basic kinds of errors and principle of approaching them
C. Testing special circuits

D. Halt because of an error

E. Mark on a malfunctioning computer

F. Reconfiguration as a means of achieving high reliability
Chapter 4. Fundamentals of the Structure of Circuit Tasting
4-1. Codes for detecting and correcting errors

A. General information on codes

8. Testing transfer of information

C. Testing arithmetic and logic operations

D. Comparative characteristics of redundant codes

4-2. Redundancy as a method of eliminating errors

Chapter 5. Built-In-Check Methods and Their Implementation
5-1. Checking parity

5-2. Checking by means of Manning's code

5-3. Checking by means of balanced codes

5-4. Threshold circuits

5-5. Modulo check circuits

5-6. Detection of errors by the built-in-check method
Chapter 6. Checking (Monitoring) Tests

6-1. Program-logic check

6-2. Test check

6-3. Forming a system of tests

6-6. The TYeST-monitor test system for a unified system of computers
6-5. Work of the operator with the TYeSTqmonitor system
6-6. Test check of the processor

6-7. Tests in the TYeST-monitor system for checking the processor
6-8. Checking the RAM
6-9. Test check of a magnetic core storage in the TYeST-monitor system
6-10. Check of external storages
Chapter 7. Diagnosis of Computer Malfunctions
7-1. Diagnosis of malfunctions of computer elements
7-2. Method of activating a unidimensional route
7-3. Tabular methods of synthesizing a minimum set of tests
7-4. Dictionaries of malfunctions
7-5. Diagnostic test of magnetic tape in the TYeSTamonitor system
7-6. Construction of a system for automatic diagnosis of a computer
by the unraveling method
Chapter 8. Software-Hardware Methods of Testing and Diagnosing Computers
8-1. Comparative characterization of hardware and software methods of
checking and diagnosing computers
8-2. Key concepts of software-hardware methods of checking and diagnosing
computers

8-3. Detection of errors of a computer's central processor by microprogram
methods

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY

33
33
37

39
62
45
66
66
‘67
49
69
69
53
63
67
69
71
71
,
81
83
85
88
115
115
118
121
123
126
131
161
169
156
159
183
183
185
190
195
197

203
207

207
208
211
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8-4. Microprogral tests of storages and input/output channels 218
Chapter 9. Fundamentals of Organization and Planning of Computer Servicing 227
9-1. Goals and objectives of computer servicing 227
9-2. Planning servicing work 229
9-3. Quantitative Evaluations of Preventive Measures 233
Chapter 10. Automation of Preventive Work 235
10-1. Preventive testing methods and approaches 235
10-2. Organization of preventive testing in Yes computers 24b
Chapter 11. Technical-Economic Evaluation of Measures for Computer

Servicing 249
11-1. Selection and justification of criteria for the effectiveness of the
utilization of computers 269
11-2. Economic efficiency of a computer servicing system 260
Appendix 263
Bibliography 274
Alphabetical Index 276

COP!RICHT: Energoizdat. 1981

883]
CSO: 1863/24

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HARDWARE

UDC 621.311.001.57

POSSIBILITY OF USING MIR-2 DIGITAL COMPUTER IN HYBRID COMPUTER
SYSTEHS

Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE HODELIROVANIYE in Russian No 5, Sep—Oct 81 (manuscript received
10 Sep 79) PP 101-103

[Article by Tamara Nikolayevna Malakhova, group leader, Siberian Scientific
Research Institute of Power Engineering, Novosibirsk, and Yakov Hironovich
Shlemenzon, senior engineer, Siberian Scientific Research Institute of Power
Engineering, Novosibirsk]

[Text] To develop the majority of algorithms for digital control of complex elec-
tric power industrial facilities, it is most expedient to make use of hybrid
(analog-digital) computer systems (GVS). In the process, the problem is solved the
natural way: The object of control is modeled on an analog computer or physical
analog, and the apparatus for data acquisition and transmission, channels for
remote information and indication, and the digital complex proper are modeled on
an electronic computer.

The researcher must have a tool that permits easy debugging and correction of pro-
grams, observing the graphic process of solving the problem and operating in the
interactive mode. To this end, it is convenient to include the MIR-2 computer in
the hybrid computer system. This machine has a convenient language; it allows easy
detection and correction of errors in a program; it has a display that permits fol-
lowing the course of solving the problem both in digital form and in the form of a
graph. The cost of a MIR-2 computer is not high.

Methods of including the MIR-2 computer in the hybrid computer system are based on
extending the external language of the computer through introduction of micropro-
gram control of a push broach that provides for execution of the additional state-
ments needed for operation of the hybrid computer system. Using this method, the
capability of the machine is fully utilized, the speed of the computer is not re-
duced practically and it is possible to construct a hybrid computer system with
rather good technical characteristics [1]. However, this requires thorough knowb
ledge of the computer design, high skill of thk researcher and a large amount of
time for development and aoderniration.

For many problems, a more convenient method of including the MIR-2 computer in a
hybrid computer system is to extend the capabilities of the computer by introduc-
ing additional numbers for the information input/output devices; this requires no
modernization of the computer itself and allows exchanging analog information at
the expense of insignificant complication of the scheme for conversion devices.

35

FOR 0FT1CJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This method was implemented at the SIBNIIE [Siberian Scientific Research Institute
of Power Engineering] on a hybrid computer complex (GVK) that includes the HN-l7ﬂ
and MN-lﬂH analog machines, the UP-6 converter and an electrodynamic model [2].

in the process, the additional external devices were assigned the following numbers:

"VYVOD" 31 -- ATsP [analog-to-digital converter] channel address output
"VYVOD" 35 -- TsAP [digital-to-analog converter] channel address output

"VYVOD" 36 -- output of information from the digital computer to the digital-to-
analog converter

"VVOD" 37 -- input of information from the analog-to-digital converter to the
digital computer.

Since it is possible to input digital information into the MIR-2 computer only in
the form of a word-formula clause, a device was developed in the hybrid computer
complex that forms from thk digital information a clause of the form:

PUST um - -6123, + 2024, KON 0.

where T is the number of channels for analog-to-digital conversion.

Analog information in the UP-6 is converted into lZ-place code with the point fixed
after the sign bit; in thk process, the initial 12-place code is divided into triads
and a sequence of binary-octal numbers is input into the computer.

The structure of the commands for exchange has the following form:
a) for input of multichannel analog information into the computer:
VYV 31 [AB]; VVO 37;
b) for output of multichannel digital information from the digital computer:
VYV 35 [AB]; VYV 3N S, D, Ye;

where A and B are the numbers of the initial and final channels for conversion; 5,
n and Ye is information to be output to the digital-to-analog converters.

The block diagram of the device for forming the clause (UP?) for the hybrid computer
system is shown in thk figure.

Organization of information exchange in thk hybrid computer system occurs the fol-
lowing way. The channel connector (UVK) for the MIR-2 computer shapes the channel
connection signal, by which the numbers of the initial and final channels for con-
version arc put into the UP-6 converter address registers. Then, as a function of
the form of the next statement (VVOD 37 or VYV 3N), either analog information is
input through the UP? [clause forming device], or information processed by the com-
puter is output through the digital-to-analog converter.

Basic Technical Data for the Hybrid Computer System:

Number of channels for analog-to-digital conversion 2h
Number of channels for digital-to-analog conversion 24
Number of amplifiers for sampling and storage in channels for analog-to-
digital conversion 15
36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. Clause forming device (UFP) for the GVS [hybrid computer system]

Key:
1. lZ-place code from UP-6 converter 3. connection 1
2. code N 9. distributor of digital information
3. IVKN 10. connection 2
lo. 1WD 11. RON
5. UVK [channel connector] 12. code
6. connection signal 13. digital computer buffer register

7. PUST UIT] '

[Continuation of] Basic Technical Data for the Hybrid Computer System:
Number of amplifiers for sampling and storage in channels for digital-to—

annlog conversion 26
Range of variation of analog signals, V 150
Number of discrete signals, input into hybrid computer system 512
Number of one—place comands, output from hybrid computer system 256

The hybrid computer system code is lz-place, parallel, normal and inverse with the
point fixed after the sign bit. Let us note that the hybrid computer system is con-
nected to the electrodynamic model by 20 independent channels; it allows upon col-land
from the computer connecting to the measuring bus any block of racks of analog
machines, effecting PUSK [start], OSTANOV [stop] and ISKRODNOYE POLOZHBNIYE [initial
position] of the computer, performing the function of a time delay element within
the range of 0.1 to 3700 ms, synchronizing the operation of the digital and analog
parts and varying the place-length of transmission of information from the computer
to the digital-to-analog converter while simulating remote control channels. Addi-

tional apparatus (four printed circuit boards) is placed in the free spaces in the
UP-6 rack. 37

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main shortcoming of this hybrid computer system is its low speed caused by the
considerable time [or operation of the subroutine for syntax checking prior to each
input of analog information into the computer. However, the time relationships in
the hybrid computer system implemented allow handling the majority of problems of
digital control of complex power industrial facilities with a considerable number
of switching apparatus and extended channels of comunieation. In particular, this
hybrid computer system has made it possible to work out the main algorithms for
data acquisition and processing for the A51) '1'? [process control systan] for one of
the actual 500 kV substations, perform analysis of normal conditions and static and
dynamic stability with simulation of various devices and actions of supervisory
personnel and modeling of the sequence of actions of various devices for relay pro-

tection and emergency relay controls, and to compute information indicators of the
quality of operation of various units in the modeled system [3].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Pukhov, G. Ye.; Samoylov, v. D.; and Aristov, V. V., “Analogo-tsifrovyye
ustroystva modelirovaniya" [Analog-to-Digital Devices for Modeling], Kiev,
Tekhnika, 1974, 326 pages.

2. Shlemenzon, Ya. M. and Kostrzhitskiy, V. 1)., “Hybrid Computer System Based on
MIR-2 Digital Computer with Hicroprogram Control," in "Gibridnyye vychislitel'

nyyc mnshiny i knnpleksy“ [Hybrid Computers and Complexes], Kiev, 1976,
pp 115-116.

3. Bushuycv, V. V.. "Hybrid Modeling of Electric Power Industrial Systems,"
ELEKTRONNOYE MODELIROVANIYE, No 6, 1980, pp 72-78.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Haukova dunks", Elektronnoye modelirovaniye, 1981

8545
C80: 1863/10

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

UDC 681.518.54

PRINCIPLES OF HARDHARB DIAGNOSTICS

Moscow OSNOVY TEKHNICRBSKOY DIAGNOSTIKI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 11 Ha: 81)
pp 4-6. 317-319

[Annutntion, preface and table of contents fron book "Principles of Hardware Diag-
nostics: Optimization of Diagnostic Algorithns. Hardware" by Pavel Pavlovich
Porkhomenko, Yegor Sergcyevich Sogononyan, Yu. L. Tolfel'd and A. A. Odintsov,
edited by P. P. Parkhonenko; editorial staff: acadenician V. A. Trapeznikov,
academician A. A. Voronov, doctors of engineering science A. G. Hanikonov and 0. 1.
Avon, and candidate of engineering science D. M. Berkovich; fro. the series on
"Application of Computers to Research and Management of Production", Energoizdat,
9000 copies, 320 pages]

[Text] Methods are presented for obtaining optimal and optimized unconditional
diagnostic algorithms; principles of the theory of questionnaires are presented.
General structural approach is considered for the problel of building systems and

means of functional diagnosing of the technical order of continuous and discrete
objects.

Authors discuss principles of building external general purpose diagnostic leans
and the basic assemblies and units for then.

For engineers and scientific associates engaged in design, development and research
of systems for diagnosing the technical order of complex objects.

Preface

This book is a continuation of the book published in 1976 [1-5] in which the prin-
ciples of organization of diagnostic support of couple: objects were presented,

the main problems of technical diagnostics were discussed, and methods of selecting
check points in building systems for diagnosis of the technical order of continuous
objects by the tolerance method and methods of building tests for discrete conbina-
tion and sequential devices were described.

In this book, we present the problens of optinization of diagnostic algorithns, the
principles of organization of functional diagnosing of the technical order of con-

plex continuous and discrete objects, the Iethods of synthesis of built-in monitor-
ing circuits for discrete devices. the questions of organization of self-diagnosis

and self-repair of discrete objects. and the principles of building external means

of test diagnosing.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it msu be noted that since the publication of the first book. terminology in the
field of hardware diagnostics has changed somewhat. Thus, for example, while in
[1-5], the process of determining the technical order of an object was called
diagnosis. and the results of this process, the results of diagnosis, now in this
book in accordance with COST [State Standard] 20911-75, "Technical Diagnostics.
Basic Terms and Definitions," the process of determining the technical order of an
object is called diagnosing [diagnostirovaniye] and its results the diagnosis
[diagnoz]. Accordingly, the terms "object or system of diagnosing" are used in
place of "object or system of diagnosis" etc. Also, a fault [neispravnost'] as a
physical phenomenon is called a defect [defekt] in accordance with the standard,
and the term "fault" is used either as a name of a type of defect (for example,
logic or constant fault) or in the sense of an object or component of it being out
of order. The term "failure" [otkaz] is used in the generally accepted sense of
an occurrence that consists in the disruption of the proper functioning of an ob-
ject or a component of it, while the term "error" [oshibka] means the appearance,
caused by a defect (fault), of incorrect values of signals at the outputs of an
object or component of it. The tenn "algorithm" is used in the ordinary sense

as a formal procedure, the execution of which leads to obtaining a solution to a

certain problem. Algorithms that solve\prob1ems of determining the technical
order of objects (diagnostic problems) are called diagnostic algorithms.

The authors wish to express their’thanks to I. H. Sindeyev and V. N. Zakharov for
their thorough review and editing of the manuscript. The authors are especially
grateful to their colleagues. associates of the laboratory of technical diagnos-
tics at the Institute of Control Problems, for their active participation in
discussing the material presented in this book.

Chapters 1 and 2 were written by P. P. Parkhomenko, 3 to 7 by Ye. s. Sogomonyan,
chapter 8 by Yu. L. Tomfel'd and section 8.3 by Yu. L. Tomfel'd together with
A. A. Odintsov.

The Authors

Tnhlc of Contents Page
1%eface 5
Chapter 1. Methods of Optimization of Unconditional Diagnostic Algorithms 7
I-l. Table of Prime Implicants 7
Building the Table of Prime Implicants 10
Simplifying the Table of Prime Implicants 14

1-2. Construction of Optimal Prime Implicants 19
Deriving All Optimal Prime Implicants 20

Deriving One Optimal Prime Implicant by the Branch-Bound Method 23

Deriving the Minimal Prime Implicant 26

Deriving Optimal Prime lmplicant by Cost 31

Deriving Prime Implicants by Method of Tracing Tree of Solutions 33

Deriving Prime Implicants by Target Method 37
Combinatorial Processing of Table of Prime Implicants 39

On Prime Implicants of Minimal Cost 43
Additional Remarks on Deriving Prime Implicants 44

l-3. Construction of Optimized Prime Implicants 46
Use of Preference Functions in Processing Tables of Prime Implicants 47
Construction of Prime Implicants by Table of Functions of Faults 50

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On Construction of Optimized Algorithms for Diagnosing by
Implicit Models

Sample of Algorithm for Deriving Irredundant Prime Implicants

Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 2. Methods of Optimization of Conditional Diagnostic Algorithms
2-1. Principles of Theory of Questionnaires
Concept of Questionnaire
Representation of Questionnaire by Graph
OperatiOns on Questionnaire
Algorithm for Transforming Given Questionnaire into Optimal
2-2. Methods of Building Optimal and Optimized Realizable Questionnaires
Recurrence Computation of Cost of Tracing Questionnaire
Building Questionnaires by Dynamic Programming Method
Building Questionnaires by Branch-Bound Method
Questionnaires and Diagnostic Algorithms
Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 3. Principles of Organization of Systems for Functional Diagnosis
of Technical Order of Complex Objects
3-1. General Information
3-2. Structure of Diagnostic System
Isolating Faulty Interchangeable Unit
Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 4. Synthesis of Built-In Facilities of Local Systems for Functional
Diagnosis for Discrete Objects
4-1. Synthesis of Circuits for Built-In Monitoring for Combination Units
Construction of Generalized Graph
Construction of General Truth Table
4-2. Synthesis of Built-In Monitoring Circuits for SynchrOnous Units
with Storage '
Construction of Generalized Graph
Construction of Partial State Tables
Derivation of Task for Synthesis
Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 5. Methods of Building Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits
for Discrete Devices
5—1. Building Self-Checking Built-1n Monitoring Circuits for
Combination Devices
Derivation of Task for Synthesis
Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuit Realized by Irredundant
Disjunctive Normal Form in Parenthetic l’orla
Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuit with Tree-Like Structure
5-2. Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits for Codes I of n
Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits for Codes k of 2k
Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits for Codes 1 of n
Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits for Codes m of n
Self-Checking Compression Circuits for Codes 2 of 4
5-3. Structural Method of Building Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring
Circuits Module 2 for Combination Devices
Defining Group of Independent Outputs
Building a Complementary Discrete Device

41

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY

so
63

65
65
66
69
73
s2
84
as
89
96
104
111

112
112
115
119
123

123
123
127
130

135
136
138
168
157

158

158
159

162
166
171
172
177
178
179

181
182
189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5-4. Structural Method of Building Self-Checking Built-In Menitoring
Circuits Module 2 for Synchronous Automate with Storage
Defining Group of Independent Outputs
Building a Complementary Discrete Device
5-5. Typical RealizatiOn of Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits
for Codes m of n
5-6. Building Self-Checking Built-In Monitoring Circuits That Afford
Partial Checkability of Combination Devices
Comments On Bibliography

Chapter 6. Organization of Systems for Functional Diagnosis of

Discrete Objects

6-1. Construction and Analysis of Graph of Cause-Effect Relationships
of Modular Circuit of Discrete Object

6-2. Structure of General System for Functional Diagnosis of Technical
Order of Discrete Objects

6-3. Building Devices for Analysis and Indication for Synchronous
Discrete Objects

6-4. Building Devices for Analysis and Indication for Asynchronous
Discrete Objects

Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 7. Self-Diagnosis and Self—Recovery of Discrete Objects
7-]. Principles of Organization of Self-Diagnosis of Discrete Objects
7-2. Organization of Self-Diagnosis by the Principle of Expanding Regions
7-3. 0n Organization of Self-Diagnosis by Principle of Distributed Kernel
7-4. Application of Methods and Means of Functional Diagnosis in
Building Self-Recoverable Discrete Objects
7—5. Comparative Analysis of Structures of Self-Recoverable
Discrete Objects
7~6. Comparative Analysis of Reliability Characteristics of Self-Checking
Redundant Structures
Analysis of Validity of Self-Checking Redundant Structures
Estimating Probability of Faultiess Operation of Self-Checking
Redundant Structures
Comments on Bibliography

Chapter 8. External Diagnostic Hardware
8-l . On Specialized and General-Purpose Diagnostic Facilities
8-2. Principles of Building General-Purpose External Test Diagnostic
Facilities without a Computer
8—3. Principles of Building General-Purpose External Test Diagnostic
Facilities with a Computer
Comments on Bibliography

Bibliography
Index

COPYRIGHT: Encrgoizdat 198]
8545
CSO: 1863/267
42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

192
193
194

197

202
207

209
209
216
220
226

230

231
231
234
241

250
255

261
261

271
27k
275
275
277
293
308

309
315
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moscow INTERFEYS DLYA PRGJWRUYMH mm] V SISTDMKH AVTQMTIZATSII Km-
ma in Russian 1981 (signed to press 19 Mar 81) pp 2-3. 5. 261-262

[Annotatiom introduction and table of contents from the book by Nikolay Ivanovich
Gorelikov. Aleksandr Nikolayevich Domaratdtiy. Sergey Nikolayevich Domaratdtiy,
Vitaliy Alekseyevich Liskin. Nikolay Vasil'erich Popenko and Leonid Semenovich
Sitnikov. Iadatel'stvo 'Nauka". #250 copies. 263 pages]

[Text] The monograph is devoted to interfaces usable to assure orderly echnnge
of information between autonomous measuring instruments. peripherals and a com-
puter. The interface IEC BUS is described. the basis of which is the Hewlett-
Packard interface HP-lB for program-able measuring instruments. The interface
functions and control sequences are described in a high-level language. Algorithms
for informticn exchange between instruments over the main line 1m BUS are de-
scribed. Examples of the practical realization of interface cards for various
instruments. computers and peripherals are examined. as well as questions of the
construction of measuring information systems based on the described interface.

Introduction

The intensification and increase in cost of scientific investigations are causing
an urgent need for the creation of systems for the automtion of experimts. The
principal tasks of such systems are the automated collection. registration. pro-
cessing and presentation of infornation. and when necessary the management of ex-
periments, which the unification of measuring. registering and cmtrolling instru-
ments into a single complex. Very effective is the creation of systems of experi-
ment automation based on the combination of instruments of a single standard in-
formation main line. which assures a nodular structure of the system and use of
the principle of program control. Recently considerable efforts have been under-
taken in this direction and a number of standards have been proposed, the best
known of which is the GAMG standard. The GAHAG standard has found its widest
application both in the automation of scientific investigations and in industry in
cases where a need arises for the creation of automation systems. including com-
puters and having a variable set of measuring transformers and sensors, devices
for input and output of experimental intonation, measuring instruments and peri-
pherals. However, experience in the use of the GANG standard aocumlated by the
present time permits also noting a number of limitations intrinsic to it. the most
important of which is considerable hardware redundancy, at times mystified in
applications where maxim speed is not required. Very suitable for construction
of automation systems with a limited set of measuring and control equipment is a

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

neither time nor resources for special developments for that system. The ISO stan-
dard coupler permits in that case readily uniting in any combination measuring.

registering and controlling instruments. computers and peripherals with one another
into a desired system.

ling in their articles. It can be asserted with confidence that the IEC interface
will find wide distribution in our country as well. However. its distribution is

and scientific workers directly engaged in experiment in very different regions of
science (physics, chemistry. geophysics and oceanology. biology and medicine, etc)
and students of the corresponding VUZ specialties. Figure 3.1 presents a reading

algorithm which will help in work with the book and will enable time to be saved
in studying the IRC interface.

Work in the writing of the book was divided among the authors in the following man-
ner: Chapter 1 was written by N. I. Corelikov. A. N. Domratskiy and L. 8. Sitni-
kov. Chapter 2 by A. N. Domaratskiy. S. N. Domaratskiy and N. V. Popenko, Chapter 3
by V. A. Liskin and N. V. Popenko, Chapter lb by A. N. Douaratskiy. S. N. Domrat-
skiy and 1.. s. Sitnikov. Chapter 5 by s. N. Donaratskiy. and Chapter 6 by N. I.

Gorelikov, V. A. Liskin and N. V. Popenko. Chapters 1 and h were edited by N. V.
Popenko.

The authors would like to thank A. G. Blagodarev. M. H. Borkovskiy, K. V. Grinberg.
V. A. Merzlyak and P. V. Shcherbakov for participating in the development of a
number of devices described in the monograph, and L. I. Lyubomudrov and G. I.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GONI‘ENTS Page

Intrductione-e'ecue-eon.octave.-eeeeeeoeeeeOuoeelacetone-eoneeoeeoeeeeeeeeeeg 3

Chapter 1. Principles of an Interface fOrPr'oaamble Instmnents. . . . . ... .... 6

1.1. Standard Interface in Experiment Automaticm Systems................... 6
1.2. Interface of the International Electrotechnical Omission

for Wble InstmtSOOI.0..O.||0.00-0.00...IOCOOOOUIOIOUOI.I m

1.3. Logical Organisation of an Interface for Programme Instruments. .. .. 24

1.“- Electrmechnical “Hecmml (“meters-stiﬂe»...eoeneeeeoeeeeeeeee ”

Chapter 2. Algorithms for Interaction of Interface hinctions................. 50
2.1. IDELA Language for Describing the Logical Organisation ~

of an Interfaces-ooe-oaeeoeoooceneeoeeeeeeeaeoeeoeeeeoeeoeeteneonate w

2.2. Algorithllﬁfot'woﬁt of a Receiver Instrument........................... ﬁ

2 3. Algorithmsforlork of a Source Instrument............................. 68
2.1+. Expansion of the Possibilities of Interface Functions L0 and T0

in Receiver-Source Instruments and Controllers...................... 81

2.5. Algorithms for “01* of 3. Controller Instmateeeegees-eeeeeoeoeeoeeee 81

2.6. Algorithms for Informtion Excrange Over a Main Line.................. 93

Chapter 3. Programmable Instruments for Experiment Automtion Systems. . . . . . . .101
3.1 . Distinctive Features of the Construction of Instruments With

Consideration of the Requirements of System Application. . . . . . . . . . . . .101

3.2. Selection of Interface Functions for Series-Produced Instruments. . . . . .112

3. 3. Universal Set of Interface Functions for ReceiVer-Source Instruments. .11?

3.1;. Large-scale Integrated Hicrocircuits for Realization of

Interface FunctionSIlooDOD...OI...DDOOOOIOOOOQOOOOOI.IIGOOOOOIOOIOO.1%

3 5. Interface Cards of Voltmeters and hultineters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..l31

3.6. Interface Cards of Calibrators and Programmable Power Sources. . . . . . . . .137

3 7. Interface Cards Intermediate Informatim Carrier Stores. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .lbl

3.8. Interface Cards of Photoelectric Counters” ..................... .. ....llb5

Cmpteru. controllers..ICO.IU.0.DU.O.I.‘D‘....'.............‘...".'.........1w
13.1. General CMracterization and Types of Controllers.....................1h8

“.2. Set of Controller Interface mnct1m5e0.000coco-oeeeeeeeoeueeleueeaouelsa
.3. Univerw imal Controller Instmnt.CI.I.....'........0....'....'..1y

1}. Controllers Based on Stores “1th an Iﬁtemte merceoeeeeoeeeeeelm
.5. Controllers in Table Computers...”...................................19+
6. Controllers in Hinicomputers..........................................170

Chapter 5. Distinctive Features of Software..................................1%
.1. Purpose and Composition of Software...................................19+

5

5 2. Main-Line Control by Means of a Programmable Calculator...............186
5.3. controller-software1nHinlconpuurs...II.II'OIDCU...’...O'.I..I....C.1%
5h

. Software of Microprocessor Instruments................................218

Chapter 6. Experiment Automation Systems Based on Programmable Instruments. . .229
.1. Autonomous Experiment Automation Systems..............................229

2. Sounding Hydrophysical Complex With Programlable Calculator. . . . . . . . ...233
.3. Multipurpose Data Collection System With Programme Calculator... ...235
6.1». System for Determining Nonlinearity of Frequency Deviation

of Tangential Frequency Generators..................................238

6 5. Industrial Testing Systens Based on Calculators.......................2161
6.6. Ship Experiment Automtion Systelﬁa...”.............................-.2‘8?

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conclusion..............................

BiblimpwﬂtoIIOOIOIOCOIOOOIIOOOIOOCO.
COPYRIGHI‘: Iadatel'stvo 'Nauka'. 1981

2171;
0303 1863/30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1106 51:621.”).
HACROCONVEYOR COMPUTATIONS 0P FUNCTIONS 0“ DATA STRUCTURES
Kiev KIBBRNBTIKA in Russian No 4, Jul—Aug 81 pp 13-21

[Article by V. H. Glushkov. Yu. V. Kapitonova, A. A. Letichevskiy and S. P.
Gorlach]

[Excerpts] The basic principles of macroconvsyor organization of computations,

a promising reserve for raising the productivity of multiprocessor computer sys-
tems, were finally formulated in 1978 and are reviewed in work [1]. The realiza-
tion of macroconveyor computations in the structure of multiprocessor systems and
their software make it necessary to develop a corresponding theory. Work [2]
proposed an apparatus which permits a quantitative evaluation of the

of macroconveyor organization of the work of a system of processors when con-
put ing the values of functions on data structures. This article presents all

the essential constructions and proves the statements that comprise the content
of this apparatus. In addition it reviews a number of examples that show the
possibility of using macroconveyor organization to solve problems of computer
mathematics.

In conclusion. we will note certain possibilities of iaproving evaluations of
efficiency. In the first place, synchronous realization is by no means always
the best way from the standpoint of efficiency. The time spent in a system for
exchange among modules can be reduced if we consider so—called asynchronous
realization where computations in some processes coincide in time with exchange
processes in others. In the second place. in some problems a significant inrove-
ment in the evaluation of efficiency can be achieved by a more couple: distribu-
tion of data among processors. Thus. in addition to the partitioning Q1(p, n) it
is possible to consider the covering P1(p, n) of domain Q(n), where
01(p, n); P1(p, n). The sets P1(p, n) for different values of i may intersect. but
0. P103. n) - Q(n).
..
in this case processor H1 stores the values of all initial data structures (that
is, those which have values before problem-solving is begun) at points of domain
P1(p, n) and computes the values of all data structures at points of domin
Q(p, n). The covering of domain 0(a) makes it possible to reduce the number of
exchanges in the modules by precluding exchanges of raw data. For angle, in
the case of multiplication of matrixes (the first variation of partitioning),

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all exchanges are indeed done uith ran data. Therefore, if the covering is
constructed so that there are corresponding to the quadratic block of
partitions the block of quantity A from the same line as the partition block and
the blocks of quantities B from the same calm. then exchange among processes
does not take place. In this case efficiency is equal to one.

In sol-e problems it seems vise to construct the covering not only for raw data but
also for certain other types of data structure. The duplication of computations

that occurs in this case may be advantageous because it reduces the nude: of ex-
changes.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. M. Glushkov, Yu. V. Kapitonova, and A. A. Letichevskiy, "One Approach
to Realization of Parallel Computations in multiprocessor Computer Systems,"
in "Parallel'noye Programirovaniye i Vychislitel'nyye Sisteuy” [Parallel
Programing and Computer Systeas]. Novosibirsk, 1980, 1, pp 23.25.

2. V. H. Glushkov. Yu. V. Kapitonova, and A. A. Letichevskiy,‘ "The Efficiency

of Parallel Conputation with Lilited Resources,” DOKL. AN SSSR, 1980, 254
No 3. pp 527-530.

3. V. H. Clushkov, Yu. V. Kapitonova, and A. A. Letichevskiy, "Theory of Data
Structures and Synchronous Parallel Couputations," RISERNE‘I‘IKA, 1976, No 6,
p 215.

lo. V. H. Glushkov, Yu. V. Kapitonova, and A. A. Letichevskiy, "Toward a Theory
of Designing the Hardware and Software of Multiprocessor Couputers,"
KIBERNETIKA, 1978, No 6. pp 1-15.

5. Lanport, L., "The Parallel Execution of DOLOOPS."COMUNICATIONS ACH, 1974, 17,
No 2, pp 83-93.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUHKA", "KIBERNBTIKA", 1981

11.176
cso: 1863/16

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 631.31
courums um smucrumu. muzanon or arcs-Lam mwacas
Kiev KIBERNETIKA in Russian No a, “1.1m; 81 pp 73-81
[Article by v. H. clushkov, s. n. Hikhnovskiy and z. 1.. Rabinovich]
[Text] 1. Introduction

Structural realization of high-level languages (m'a) in computers involves, in
the first place, recording the working (directly run) prograns in m's close to ‘
the programing language and, in the second place, interpretation of this

language by structural means (hardware and microprograms). The first circum-
stance makes it possible to insure a correspondence that can be understood by the
user between his program and the operations performed by the nachine and provides
a rather simple translation of this program into the working program. The

second circumstance nakes it possible to insure efficient interpretation of work-
ing prograns even if they are recorded in a cleex language. It is unnecessary
to list the advantages which these circumstances give. They have already been
treated in the literature [1, 4] and a discussion of the advisability of realizing
HLL's is unnecessary, particularly because in practice this advisability for small
machines was first confirmed by building the domestic Mir computer (later, to some
degree. by the Nairi also), while for large machines it was confirmed by develop-
sent of the Burroughs family of computers in the United States and the domestic
El'brus mltiprocessor complex [5]. however, the idea of building large machines
that realize HLL's was being worked out in the USSR as early as the 1960's. One
of the first (if not the first) attempts in this area was development of the de-
sign of the Ukraine computer. based on original structures and principles of
realizing HLL's. the control unit, and the operations unit [6. S and 11]. This
machine was not produced, simply because of the lack of basic technological ele-
meats. which is a very important factor for efficient construction of machines
that realize HLL's. At the present time the material-technical conditions of
building such machines (on a contemrary scale even snail machines would tend to
be classified this way) have been fully prepared, and this applies also to com-
puters that realize significantly elaborate BLL's and families of them. These
conditions were used in building new computers, and not one of the development
projects of this sort has been able to get by without solving the problem of
realizing ELL's in one degree or another. Because interest in available experi-
ence in this respect has increased significantly. the authors consider it useful
to publish an article that illuminates the basic concepts which were envisioned

49

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the design of the Ukraine machine and relate to its input language, internal
language. interpretation system, and system for dynamic distribution of memory.

The article as a whole is historical. so it contains terminology which the
authors usedduring the process of these development projects.

2. Input Language

The machine's input language was based on the algorithmic language ALGOL-60,
supplemented by the following:

1. Means to simplify the programming of nonarithmetic problems
(processing letter data in economic problems, formal conver—
sions. and the like);

2. Means for more efficient use of internal machine capacities
(performance of by-bit operations. filling memory densely

using data units shorter than the length of a machine word,
and so on);

3. Means for performing computations with enlarged bit configur-
ations.

The input language of the machine differs from ALGOL-60 in that it has the follow-
ing additional features:

1. Line quantities (of the STRING type) and line expressions;
2. Code quantities (of the CODE type) and code expressions;

3. Means for access to particular parts or fields of values
of variables of the STRING and CODE types;

4. Means for assigning computations with enlarged bit config-
urations.

3. Internal Language

The internal language of the Ukraina machine is a multipurpose system of machine
statements that is expected to provide the following:

1. Internal representation of initial programs written in a
high—level algorithmic language, keeping the simple
mutually unique correspondence between elements of the
two forms of writing the programs (external and internal);

2. Efficient realization (interpretation) of statements by
machine hardware and by the microoperations realized
in it;

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The possibility of translating initial progress into the
machine's internal language without preserving the above-
mentioned simple correspondence Between elements of the
external and internal records of the program, but using
program optimization procedures in the machine's internal
language;

A. The possibility of running programs at the level of the micro-
operations of individual. rarely used algorithms for inter-
preting the machine's internal language;

5. Conventional. traditional control over the machine's
peripheral units.

The program in internal language is recorded in the form of a sequence of ele-
mentary operations of the type

(Operator) :: - (Sign of Operation)
(Sign of Operation) (Index of Operand)
(Sign of Operation) (List of Operands)

In the general case the content of the action assigned by the sign of the opera-
tion depends on context. One or several operands may be assigned directly in
the notation of the statement. One operand may be assigned by an index. The
remaining operands, if there are such. are determined by the interpretation
system.

A distinction is made between the problem-oriented and system-oriented parts of
internal language based on the correspondence of the statements of internal
language to elements of the input language.

The sign of the operation in each problem-oriented statement corresponds to a cer-
tain separator (not necessarily to the sign of an operation or a service word of
the input language). In the system-oriented part of the internal language opera-
tion signs designate actions performed on elements of the hardware. The state-
ments of the problem—oriented part of internal language are interpreted directly
by machine hardware, and by procedures compiled in the system-oriented statements
of this language. In addition, the statements of the system-oriented language are
used to describe the machine's supervisory programs.

The internal language insures the possibility of keeping the block structure of the
initial program. which is used as one of the mechanisms of dynamic distribution of
memory.

The order of performance of statements of the internal language in the general
case differs from the order of their arrangement in the text of the program.

A "sector" is a segment of the program within which the order of performance of
statements is determined by a priority relationship adopted for them that is
analogous to the priority relationship for arithmetic operations. Outside of a -
sector statements are executed in the order of their arrangement in the program
notation.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The declaration of sectors is coordinated with the block structure of the program.
A sector may be included in program Blocks and include Blocks in itself . without
intersecting them, but it cannot include other sectors. The Boundaries of sectors

are marked off in the program notation by SECTOR BEGINNING and SECTOR END stats-
menta that switch the work mode of the interpretation systan.

The internal language has an expanded composition of categories of objects which
may serve as operands in the statements of this language. In addition to
constants, simple variables, and arrays in the statements of the internal language,
the operands may be arrays. markers, names of decision boxes, names of procedures,
absolute addresses of points in the program. and addresses of memory cells.

The permissible types of values for constants, simple variables, and array ele—

ments and the possibilities of coordinating them in the internal language are the
same as in the input language.

The construction of the problem-oriented part of the internal language is based
on the principle of dividing the entire aggregate of actions to interpret programs
written in the input language into groups of actions comparable to the particular
separators of that language. As a result of this, the composition of internal
language statements is very similar to the composition of separators of the input

language and their classification reflects the semantics of the separators in
the interpretation system adopted here.

When programs in the input language are being converted into machine notation,
the delimiters of the input language are represented in the signs of the state—
ments corresponding to them and the identifiers and markers that follow them are
expressed in the indexers of the operands of these statements. Notations with
service information that make the process of program interpretation easier are
also included in the text of the program, in additicn to constants, as operands
of the statements of the internal language. This s: rvice information may be, for
example, addresses that link blocks that are included in one another and the spe-
cifying markers contained in them.

The statements of the first group of the problem-oriented part of the internal
language, which have an obvious relationship to the elements of the input language.
are the following:

1. Statements that fix the boundaries of memory loading (BEGIN.
END):

2. Arithmetic statements (use a +, -,

3. Logical statements (A,V (3.5.1):

lo. Statements of relationship (< .5 . -, ¢,> . 3);

5. Switch statements (60 T0, SWITCH. ELSE, and COMMENT skipping

of the segments of the program segments corresponding to
these constructions, and the conditional switch statement THEN);

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H“! (‘IIIC1H I'Sl- "\l‘

6. The "marker" statement, which corresponds to the marker
of the initial program and corrects memory distribution
in connection with the execution of switches;

7. Description statements. This group of statements, vbich
insures memory redundancy for the values of variables
and arrays includes variable description statements (REAL,
INTEGER, CODE, COMPLEX, BOOLEAN, SYMBOL, and STRING and
statements with the character "." in the list of variables).
array description statements (ARRAY, statement with the char-
acter "," in the list of array identifiers, the statement
I for the beginning of a segment, the statement : for a
boundary pair, and the statement ] for the end of a segment),
the statues: ' to indicate line length, and the statement
of statistical distribution of memory own);

8. Statements that indicate an element of the array (I, ",", l);
9. The assignment statement :-;

10. Cycle statements (FOR, STEP, UNTIL, WHILE, DO, and the
statement ml) which closes the body of the cycle);

11. Procedure statements (PROCIURE, statements of formal and
factual parameters «,m), the statement; for entry to
the body of a proce ure, and the statement END which
closes the body of the procedure).

Including these statements in the internal machine language makes it possible to
preserve structural similarity between the text of the program written in the
input language and the notation of this program in machine form.

The second group of problem-oriented statements of the input language cowrises
the statements which are expected to insure efficient realisation of a broad
range of cowuting and noncomuting procedures. They do not have such an obvious
and direct relationship with elements of the input language. Some of these
statements are very close in meaning or actually coincide with statements of the
first group. The purpose of including this group of statements in the internal
machine language is to insure the possibility that it can carry on the computing
process not only on the level of practically direct interpretation of the input

language received, but also use optimizing translation of the initial program and
other high—level input languages.

The statements of this group are the following:

1. The statements of addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division, which differ by concluding operations to
normalize and round the results;

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

10.

ll.

nmcwﬂrullNrcml\

Special statements to divide by numbers that define the
structure of the machine word (48 and 6);

The statements of addition and subtraction of number
moduli and to change their signs;

Statements of transformation of the type of values of
quantities and the form of their machine representation;

Statements of logical shifts (cyclical and linear) in
the notations of operands of the types CODE and STEING;

Statements of an arithmetic shift (linear and cyclical)

in the internal machine representation of operands of
the types REAL, INTEGER with a fixed decimal point;

Statements to count the total number and determine the
place of assigned symbols 0 or 1 in operands of type
CODE;

Statements for access (read/write) to parts (fields) of
operands of types CODE and STRING;

Statements for by-character line processing (statements
to replace and compare characters, to assemble and sort
lines by mask);

Statements of unconditional switch with operation of the
next return and/or authorizing or prohibiting an inter-
rupt;

Statements of conditional switch according to the sign
or zero value of the result.

Three groups of statements are identified in the system-oriented part of the
internal language: (1) Hicrostatements for programming elementary opera-
tions on registers and control triggers of the interpretation system;

(2) Statements of the system for dynamic distribution of memory; (3) Systems
statements of the macroinstruction type designed to control equipment that

is external to the processor.

The microstatements are divided as follows according to operations performed:

1.

Hicrostatements for exchange of codes between any as-
signed memory cell and the primary full- Sit position
registers of the central control unit;

Hicrostatements executed on codes in registers of the cen-
tral control unit (writing a zero code. adding or sub—

tracting units. adding or subtracting codes into registers.
writing an assigned code in the registers);

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()H-‘li‘lkl INF 0N] \'

1. Microulatements that set the state of control triggers;

6. Logical microstatements (statements of logical opera-
tions on the states of control triggers and the state
of the so—cslled "operations" trigger which stores the
result of the preceding logical operation, statements
of logical operations on results of comparing the con-
tent of the assigned register with an assigned code as
a boolean variable and the state of the "operations”
trigger);

S. Microststements of program branching (conditional switch
based on the state of the "operations” trigger with

possible preparation to return to the next micro-
statement).

The group of statements of the system for dynamic distribution of memory was spe-
cially introduced to simplify program realization of the algorithms of this
system, which are used somewhat infrequently.

6. Principles of Interpretation of the Statements of the Internal Language

The most important aspects of the organization of interpretation of the internal
language in the Ukraine machine are: dynamic control of the order of execution
of program statements; determination of the semantics of statements depending on
the context of the program by forming and registering in the machine a certain
code called the interpretation mode; broad use of non-addressed storage of inter-
mediate results and access to them as operands of the statements being inter-
preted; use of an integrated system of dynamic distribution of stepped memory
(non-addressed storage of integrated results is one of the elements of the
general system of dynamic distribution of memory).

In order to simplify the form of fixing the correspondence between program note-
tions in the input and internal languages, the separators of the input language
are also indicated as the signs of operations in statements of the internal

language.

The separators of the input language by themselves do not insure unambiguous iden-
tification of the statements because their meaning depends on context. In a
strict sense, the statement in internal language is defined by the sign of the
operation and the mode established by the interpretation system at the moment

that this statement is executed.

The mode of execution of statements of the internal language is represented by a
control code formed in a dynamic complementary manner to the code of the sign of
the operation. As a control code the mode has multiple components. One coupon-
eat, as pointed out, determines the place of the statement in the context of the
program, while the others fix the conditions of execution of the current state-
ment in connection with the mechanism operating in the system for scanning the
text of the program within the limits of the segments declared by the sectors.

55

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FUR UI-Hi‘l'“ ILNF "NI \

within the limits of a sector the order of execution of statements is determined
by a seniority relationship established for them. A reciprocating circuit oper-
ates for scanning the text of the program, and in connection with this three

types of execution of statements are distinguished: direct. preparatory, and
inverse.

Direct execution of a statement is execution of the statement from start to

finish in its full volume. "here other conditions uhich will be mentioned below
are observed, direct execution of a statement is possible if the sign of the oper-
stion in it is not junior to the sign of the operation of the following statement.
Thus, in a certain fragment of the program...*3**c***n..., direct execution of the
statement ‘8 can take place if the operation * is not junior to the operation **.
with direct execution of the statement *8 where * is the sign of a certain two-
place operation, the left operand (we will designate it A) at the moment of
execution of operation * is stored in a certain register of the machine as the
result of the preceding operation. while the right operand B is determined by

the index corresponding to it in the notation of this statement. The result of
the operation is stored in the intermediate result register.

If the operation * is junior to the operation **. preparatory execution of
statement *3 takes place. In the process of preparatory execution of the
statement the current intermediate result is copied from the register into main
memory, the sign of the operation (in this case *) is stored as an unexecuted
sign, and the value of the operand (in the given case the operand B) is selected
from memory and put in the intermediate result register. After this the possi-
bility of direct execution of the following statement **c is tested.

After direct execution of statement **C, just as after direct execution of *B
if it has taken place. the possibility of execution of the last sign of an oper-
ation that has not been executed and is stored in the interpretation system is

tested. This kind of execution of a statement not executed earlier is called
inverse.

With inverse execution operation * is performed on operand A as the left operand
already stored in main memory and extracted without special indication of the
address and on the result of execution of statements after **C as the right
operand stored in the intermediate result register.

Inverse execution of an operation is possible if its level of seniority is not
lower than the level of seniority of the operation in the next program statement.
After inverse execution of the last unexecuted statement an attempt is made to
execute the next unexecuted statement, and only if it cannot be executed or
there is no such statement is the possibility of executing the next statement

in the program notation tested.

5. The System of Dynamic Distribution of Memory

The memory units of the machine are classified in two groups according to type

and manner of use: the units that make up internal memory, and the external mem-
ory units.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W "l OFF" 1 \I NSF (WI \

The internal memory. which for the most part is distributed dynamically, consista
of the main ferrite memory unit, the fast ferrite memory unit. and a magnetic
drum store. Parts of the fast and main memory units may, if desired. be ex—
cluded from the dynamic distribution system or, on the other hand. be
transferred under this system. The magnetic drum store and dynamically dis-
tributed part of the main ferrite memory unit are covered by the general athe-
matical page numbering of the cells. The physical memory represented by this
memory unit is broken down into pages vhich contain 1,024 cells apiece, while the
range of mathematical addresses used is subdivided into intervals or segments
coamensurate with them.

The number of segments of mathematical addresses is selected to be larger than

the number of pages of physical memory, so that the space of the Imthematical
addresses operates as a distinct distributed machine resource, the mathematical
memory.

The pages of physical memory are dynamically assigned to segments of mathematical
memory. A segment of mathematical addresses receives a certain assigned page
only after actual access to it. In order to reduce the length of the mathematical
addresses put in the indexes of operands of the internal language. the mathe-
matical memory is subdivided into 28 blocks and certain (given below) agreements
relative to the placement of information in these blocks are adopted. This makes
it possible for the program to use chiefly "tnmcated" 16-bit addresses, relating
them to a block of mathematical memory that is known at each particular moment.

The system of dynamic distributed memory in the Ukraina machine is based on:

— Generalized magazine organization of memory for storage
of intermediate results registered by the interpreta-
tion system;

— Explicit representation in the machine program of the
block structure and description of variables of the
initial program as a nechanism of occupying and freeing
main memory:

— Uniform mathematical addressing of the main and dynamically
distributed parts of internal memory (so-called pseudo-
main memory) on magnetic drums;

— Page organisation of memory distributed not only on the
primary main memory, the ferrite memory unit. and the
pseudomain memory, but also the fast min memory based
on the small-volume ferrite memory unit;

-— Distribution between the problem being solved of the
mathematical- addresses and the real. pquical memory.
as two independent resources.

1 .

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"I“! l"'|l"| U". -‘\|‘

He give below a description of the subsystems particular aspects of the or-
ganization of the general system of dynamic distributed memory.

Distribution of memory as a whole is achieved by distribution of memory (mathe-
matical and physical) among problems being solved and mathematical memory within
the framework of each individual problem and distribution of information among
steps of physical memory.

5.1. Distribution of Memory Among Problems Being Solved

The distribution of memory among problems being solved is based on the use of an
expanded range of mathematical numbers of cells and dynamic assignment of pages
of physical memory to them. The mathematical memory is distributed among prob-
lems a priori (statically) based on maximum need for them. A certain range of
mathematical addresses is assigned to each problem. The physical memory is dis-
tributed among problems dynamically because its pages are assigned to segments
of mathematical memory only in connection with their actual use.

5.2. Distribution of Mathematical Memory of an Individual Problem

The range of mathematical addresses allocated for a problem is distributed by

the actions of: (l) The "reversive" circuit for occupying and freeing addresses;
(2) The circuit for addressing variables and arrays; (3) The system for ad-
dressing links between statements of the program.

The occupying and freeing of mathematical addresses in the range allocated to each
particular problem is done by a so-called reversive circuit which is a general-
ized form of the well-known magazine circuit.

Mathematical addresses can only be occupied and freed sequentially from the two
ends of the assigned range so that composite addresses always form a single
interval with boundaries m and H. At each step of distribution of mathematical
memory either one address or a group of consecutive addresses can be occupied
(freed) from either end of this interval. In the interpretation system the
possibility of access is provided not only for the last occupied (from either
side) mathematical address, but also for any address counted from values of m and
H known to it.

The reversive scheme of dynamic distribution of mathematical memory is accom-
plished by a selected order of registering and using intermediate results that
arise during scanning of the program text, storing the block structure of the
initial program in the machine program, and distributing the circuit for occu-
pying and freeing mathematical addresses when feeding to the block and outputting
from it to all the language constructions put into one another, including the
recursively requested procedures.

The mathematical addresses may be occupied either for quantities put into the
computing process explicity by means of special descriptions or by quantities
which do not have such descriptions, as well as by intermediate results and
service information envisioned by the interpretation system adopted.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "Fl-R1“ “SF 0"" \

The storage of the current node and setting of the new mode when executing
statements that correspond to the beginning of such segments of the program
as the list of boundary pairs or list of forlal parameters and the restoration
of a former mode when executing statements that correspond to the end of these

segments may serve as examples of the distribution of the block principle for
occupying and freeing mathematical addresses.

In order to increase the efficiency of dynamic distribution of information
among steps of memory, the occupying of mathematical addresses for various
categories of quantities is regulated by additional conditions that facilitate

arrangement of information in different pages of memory depending on the fre-
quency of its use.

Addresses for the values of simple variables. quantities that are not
described, the service information of the interpretation system. and the inter-
mediate results occupy the free mathematical addresses (from the address m)
from the left edge of the range. The addresses for elements of arrays occupy
addresses from the opposite, right edge of the range (from the address H).

but the service information necessary for access to these arrays (minimum and
maximum values of indexes. lengths of arrays for each measurement, and ad-

dresses of the first elements of arrays) occupy addresses in the left part of
the range in the form of so-called "reference uords."

The addresses for the user's own variables and arrays are occupied based on the
results of a special scan of the program before it begins to be run.

The program is arranged in a separate block of mathematical memory from the
data.

The addressing of variables and arrays in the program notation. With the scheme
described above for occupying the mathematical addresses, for each simple vari-
able and array of the basic program there is a completely definite mathematical
address that does not depend on the course of execution of this program and the
actual dimensions of the arrays. For the simple variable this is the address
of its value, while for an array it is the address of its "reference word.”

In order to preserve this status with respect to procedures also, including
procedures executed recursively, the indexes of the operands for simple vari-
ables and arrays indicate not absolute but relative mathematical addresses
counted from the address a at the moment of initiation of execution of the pro.
cedure in which these quantities are described. This value m' is registered

by the interpretation system in special index registers to which access is

made in conformity with the so-called static rank of the procedure.

The static rank of a procedure is a parameter that determines the static inclu-
sion of procedure descriptions in one another. The program is viewed as a
O-rank procedure. The procedures describeddirectly in the program have a
static rank equal to one, and so on.

At each moment in time index register 1 contains address m' which corresponds

to a procedure with static rank i currently being executed (including a procedure
being executed recursively).

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INK a‘llh ltl l 'J. a'\l \

The address linkages among statements of the program. There are three types of
address linkages among elements of a machine program: (1) Between markers in
the co T0 statements and descriptions of switches, and also among specifying
markers which mark statements that accept control; (2) Between the initial and
terminal points of segments of programs that are omitted for some reason or
other in the process of interpretation (for example, segments corresponding

to procedure descriptions and parts of a conditional statement); (3) Among
blocks included in one another.

The need for linkages of the first type is dictated by the semantics of the cor-
responding statements. Linkages of the second type are included in the program
to skip sectors of the program that are unnecessary in particular concrete situ-
ations. Linkages of the third type are used to solve the problem of rejecting
preoccupied mathematical addresses in connection with departure from the block
either through its end or based on a switch statement.

At each moment in time the registers of the Interpretation system register

the address m' and H' which occurred at the moment the program being executed
at this moment was fed to this block. Upon departure from the block the values
of the addresses are restored.

If entry to the next block is made before departure from the particular block,
following the BEGIN statement the registered values of the addresses m' and H'
are copied from the registers into memory as service information that is stored
by the interpretation system. These addresses are written according to the
current mathematical address m as part of the machine word which acts as the
operand of the BEGIN statement.

Thus. in any system of blocks, for example, the set of blocks shown below

 

 

"MN atom cm) BEGIN END mo

the addresses m'and M', which must be set for block A upon departure from block I
or C. are taken from the word. the operand of the BEGIN statement of block A.

To support this operation the END statements of blocks 3 and C indicate the
address of the BEGIN statement for block A, which directly encompasses them.

To solve this problem when departing from the block on the co T0 statement, the
address of the BEGIN statement of each block is also indicated in the statements
which correspond to thc specifying markers localized immediately in this block.

5.3. Distribution of Information Among Steps of Memory
The system for dynamic page distribution of information encompasses three steps
of memory: the basic ferrite memory unit. the magnetic drum store, and the

fast ferrite memory unit. Taken together they make up the machine's internal
memory.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu "FF“ 1:“ use HNI.\

I‘ﬂ-

The page structure of memory and correspondence table. The information arranged
in memory is broken down simultaneously into large and small segments in such a
way that each small segment belongs entirely to a certain large one and each
large segment consists of the same whole number of mll segments. The c55~
plete number of a small segment is made up of its number in the large segment and
the number of this large segment.

Each large segment of information must be located entirely on a certain page of
either the basic memory unit or the magnetic drum store. Parts, small segments of
large segments located in the basic memry, may be copied into the fast memory
unit; in this case the places of the small segments in the basic memory unit are
preserved. A constraint operates when segments are exchanged between the primary
memory and the magnetic drum store: a large segment cannot be discarded from the
basic memory and magnetic drum store if even one of its small segments is located
in the fast memory unit.

Thus, the exchange of information among steps of memory, between the magnetic
drum store and primary memory and between primary memory and fast memory, is

done in segments of different size. It was necessary to use this kind of mined
page organization in the system for dynamic distribution of memory because of

the significant difference in volume between the basic memory and the fast memory
unit.

A two—step registration of the correspondence between the numbers of the informa-
tion segments and the numbers of the pages in memory they occupy occurs. The
first step is represented by the basic correspondence table, which covers all
information segments and is stored in the main memory. The second step is the so-
called active correspondence table. which is realized on trigger registers. A
"line" in the active correspondence table is represented by a pair of registers
that register the number of the infomtion segment and the number of the page in
memory that it occupies.

The active correspondence table is an abbreviated active step of the corre-
spondence table in the sense that the number of lines it has is less than the
number of pages in the main memory. It provides fast access to the physical
addresses of only a limited number of the most actively used segments of in-
formation. There is a dynamic allocation of entries from the basic correspondence
table to the active correspondence table with replacement of those that are not
used so actively.

Each reference to the active correspondence table involves a reorganization of
the lines contained in it. and as a result they are ordered by frequency of use.
If the required information is located in a segment whose notation is located on
line i (i f 0) of the table, this line changes place with lines (1-1). If the
active correspondence table does not have the required segment the lines are
shifted linearly in the direction of their higher~order nuabers, and as a result
the lines with the highest-order numbers are pushed out of the table and the
entry with the required segment. located in the main corresponding table, is
added on the first line of the active correspondence table.

.61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu ()FFli'l \l INF UNIX

The use of the abbreviated active correspondence table makes it possible to
reduce hardware expenditures for its realization when using large main memory
volumes and provides the possibility, if necessary, of building it up later.
The fact that arrays of data are localized in mathematical memory separately

from the more actively used information promotes efficient use of the abbre-
viated active correspondence table and also of the fast memory unit.

The active correspondence table provides access both to the large segments lo-
cated in main memory and to parts of them, to the small segments put into the
fast memory unit.

Requesting segments by groups. To accelerate the process of solving problems
that deal with large arrays of data by reducing relative time expenditures in
them to locate the necessary page in magnetic drum storage, segments of arrays
from drum storage and main memory are requested in the system of dynamic distri-
bution of memory by groups, not individually. In this the system takes ad-
vantage of the fact that the processing of actually used arrays of data with the
selected size of large pages basically results in a cyclical sorting of segments
within the limits of each particular array, that is, reference to the array con-
sisting of segments K0. K1, ..., KJ ..., Kp-;, following the reference to segment
Kj relates either to this very segment or to segment K(j+h)mod p, where
parameter h - t 1 determines the direction of sorting. The essential feature of
a group request of assigned number n segments in connection with reference to

segment Kj which is located in the magnetic drum store is that segments
K5, K(j+h)mod p, K(j+2h)mod p, ... are put in main memory, if not already there.

The direction of sorting of array segments is not known to the interpretation sys-
tem; it is set before each new group of segments is called based on the results

of a comparison of the number of segments from the series K(j+h)mod p,

K(j+2h)mod p, ---» K(j+nh)mod p; k(j-h)mod p. K(j-2h)mod p. oo-o K(j-nh)mod po
which are located in main memory at the given moment. .

Each group request for segments is accompanied by actions to correct the size n
or the requested group so that the time interval between two successive exchanges
is maximal. The size of the group at each step of regulation changes by :1

only after a definite number of consecutive instructions that such a change is
useful. To limit the sphere of action of the mechanism for requesting segments
by groups, in those cases where the assumption of cyclical sorting of segments

is not correct in the specific array, a mechanism operates in the system to dy-
namically reduce the size of the requested group in those cases where the ex-
change between the main memory axd magnetic drum storage involves segments which,
having been requested in the main memory, return to the magnetic drum store with-
Out being used in the computing process.

Criteria for replacement of information segments in the operational steps of
memory. The criteria for replacement of information in the operational steps

of memory, the main memory and fast memory, rely on a set of possibilities pro-
vided by the use of a high-level language and its interpretation system as

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu ibft'li'lAI. USE ONLY

veil as features of the realization of the particular system of dynamically dis-
trihuted memory:

- There is the possibility of considering the type of in-
formation contained in the segments and dividing them

into operational segments, program segments, and segments
of arrays;

—- the presence in the program of special statements for ac-
cess to elements of an array makes it possible to separate

this group of references fron references to other types of
infatuation;

- The use of an abbreviated active correspondence table al-
lows the ranking of segments in the main melory according
to the frequency of reference to them.

Operational segments. program segments. and segments of arrays form as the re-
sult of the system adopted for occupying mathematical addresses in the machine.
Notes on the type of segment are put in the general correspondence table and
are always accessible to the interpretation system.

Beginning from the fact that the average frequency of reference to the opera.
tional segments and program segments during the period of their active use in
the general case is an order greater than the frequency of reference to the
segments of live (consisting of more than one sepent) arrays, the fact that
such segments are pushed out of the active correspondence table is interpreted
as an indication of the possibility of pushing them out of the main memory.
The fast memory holds only small segments from operational segments contained
in the active correspondence table. Pushing an operational segnent out of the
active correspondence table causes its small segments, if there are any, to be
copied out of fast memory and main memory.

Because the sorting of elements of arrays in the computing process is regular in
character and usually accompanied by cyclical sorting of their segrents, the
replacement of segments of arrays is accomplished on the Basis of a prediction of
the time of the next access to the segment. Segment replacement is done in con-
formity with an algorithm [12] that insures a minimum number of replacements

with an appropriate modification for the case of segments requested by groups.

In each step of the segment replacement process (if there are no operational or
program segments pushed out of the active correspondence table), the sement re-
moved from main memory is the one to which the next reference sill come later than
to the others.

The time until the next reference to a segment of the array is estimated by the
dynamic distribution of memory system based on knowledge of the composition of
the segments occupied by each of the arrays, the direction of their sorting, and
the average time of processing a segment of each of these arrays, which is com-
puted during the work process.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu UFFN'I u. I'SII ()Nl.‘

The use of such an algorithm for group replacement of segments with a stable
computing process leads to stabilization of the section of pages of opera-
tional memory between arrays. In connection vith this the replacement of
segments of arrays in main memory is actually accomplished by performing two
processes: (1) Internal replacement of sepents in arrays with a fixed
division of pages of main memory between them, when new segments of arrays re-
quested from the magnetic drum store are placed in min memory in the place
of the segments of those same arrays; (2) Replacement of sepents leading to
a change in the number of segments occupied by the arrays in main meanry,
which may occur in connection with placement of an operational or program seg-
ment in main memory or a change in the composition of arrays being processed,
the number of segments requested at one time, or the time of their processing.

Internal replacement of segments of an array consists in the following: when
n segments K3. Rum)“ p. ..., Kg+(n.1)h)md p are requested from msg-
netic drum storage for main memory in connection with a reference to segment
K1, they are placed in main memory in the place of segments liq-h)“ p, ...,
K(j-nh)mod p. This kind of replacement is very simple to realize and under
the given condition results in the minimum number of replacements of segments
in main memory.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. M. Glushkov, A. A. Barsbanov, L. A. Kalinichenko, S. D. Mikhaovskiy,‘ and
Z. L. Rabinovich, "Vychislitel'nyye Hashiny s Razvitymi Sistemami '
Interpretatsii" [Computers with Developed Interpretation Systems], Kiev,
"Naukova Dunks", 1970, 258 pages.

2. V. H. Glushkov, and Z. L. Rabinovich, "Some Lines of Development of Algo-
rithmic Structures of Computers," in "Kibernetiku —- na Sluzhbu
Komunizmu" [Put Cybernetics to Work for Conunism], Moscow, 1967,

pp 173-183.

3. V. M. Glushkov, S. B. Pogrebinskiy, Z. L. Ravinovich, and A. A. Stogniy,
"Questions of the Development of Digital Computer Structures in Relation
to Their Software Systems." KIBERNE‘I'IKA 1967, No 5, pp 15-28.

’0. L. N. Korolev, "Srruktura EVH i Ikh Hatematichcskoye Obespecheniye" [Com-
puter Structure and Software], Moscow, "Nauka", 1974, 256 pages.

5. Burtsev, V. 5. "Principles of Construction of 'El'brus' Macroprocessor
Computing Complexes." Moscow, 1977, 53 pages (Preprint 1m and W AN SSSR,
No 1).

6. V. H. Glushkov (topic director). "Scientific-Technical Report," 83. REF.
NIR/IK AN USSR, Series 13, No S, Inv. No A008718, Moscow, 1969.

7. V. H. Glushkov, G. M. Mikhaylov. S. D. Hikhnovskiy, Z. L. Rabinovich,
A. A. Stogniy, V. Ye. Shamanskiy, K. I. Podkolzins, and V. P. Gladun,

"Author's Certificate 219291 (USSR). Ditigal Computer," published in
BYULLETEN' INFORMTSII 1968, N0 18, 118 pages.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

HI“ (WI-It IAI IISI- UNI.\

A. A. Bnrabnnov, L. A. Kalinichenko, S. D. Hiklmovskiy, and Z. L.
Rabinovich, "Author's Certificate 209640 (USSR). Control Unit for

Digital Computers," published in BYULLETEN' INPORHATSII 1968, No 6,
121 pages.

S. D. Hikhnovskiy, "Author's Certificate 18139 (USSR). Technique of
Dynamic Page Distribution of the Memory of a Digital Computer,"
published in BYULLETEN' INFORMATSII 1966, No 9, 106 pages.

S. D. Hikhnovskiy, "Author's Certificate 18562 (USSR). Technique of
Dynamic Page Distribution of the Memory of a Digital Computer,"
published in BYULLE‘IEN' INFORMATSII 1965, No 17, 93 pages.

3.0. Mikhnovskiy. "Author's Certificate 193578 (USSR). Technique of
Dynamic Distribution of Information," published in BYULLBTEN'
INFORMATSII 1967, No 7, 54 pages.

8. D. Mikhnovskiy, and N. 2. Shot, "Estimate of the Minimum Number of

Copying Operations in Dynamic Distribution of Page lbmory," mmm
1965. No 5, pp 18-20.

COPYRIGH:IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA 0m", "KIBERNETIKA", 1981

11,176

C50:

1863/16

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISF. ONLY

UDC 519.6:681.3.06

some QUESTIONS or PROBLBH-SOLVING 0N comm-ms wml PARALLEL ORGANIZATION
or commmous '

Kiev KIBBRNETIKA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 pp 82-88
[Article by V. H. Glushkov and I. N. Molchanov]

[Text] 1. Analysis of scientific-technical problems allovs us to draw the
conclusion that the problems which require the largest volume of computer re-
sources are questions of nczlear and thermonuclear energy that come up in

the process of designing reactors. performing strength calculations for

the structures of atomic power plants and for aerodynamics and hydrodynamics,
performing static and dynamic strength calculations of contemporary engin-
eering projects as a whole, problems of the theory of climate and circula-
tion of Ike atmosphere and ocean, calculations of the regimes of the USSR

energy system, computing the transmission of vibrations in the Earth, and
similar matters.

The nature of the problems that must he studied in the 1980's is changing.

The need is arising to perform integrated investigations of objects and
phenomena as a whole (for example, investigating the statically stressed state
of a model of an entire aircraft), whereas in earlier times models of the
elements and assemblies of the design or some particular aspect of the
phemoncnon were studied. The objects of study today are large in terms of
geometric dimensions. For example. the hydrodynamic model of the circula-
tion or the atmosphere and ocean is investigated for the entire surface of

the earth. It is becoming very important to solve spatial problems. For
example, in one of the stages of the problem of transmission of vibration
within the earth it becones necessary to solve a dynamic spatial problem of
elasticity theory which cannot be reduced to a planar problem. More and more
often the object of investigation is not merely the static state of the ob-
ject undér'lnvestlgation, but also its dynamics (when designing atomic power
plants, for example. strength is considered not only in a static state, but
also under earthquake conditions, in the case of an airplane crashing directly
into the power plant building, and so forth). Hhereas in earlier times the
models investigated were chiefly linearized models, it is now becoming
necessary to study nonlinear models.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UR ﬂl'l-II I“ I'SF "\l \

The problems of optimal control and operations research are changing quali-
tatively and quantitatively. The problems of optimal distribution of orders for
production of pipe among enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy
lead to the problem of linear programming with more than 500,000 variables and
up to 50.000 constraints. The problems of future planning are reduced either

to dynamic models of linear programming or mixed discrete-continuous models.

In both cases the number of machine operations is at least an order greater

than in problems of current planning.

The problems of siting production, arranging and standardizing technical equip-
ment. and synthesizing networks (in communications, pipelines, computers. and
elsewhere) involve multicriteria discrete~continuous models with a large number
of variables. For example. for problems of synthesizing networks with concave
functions of expenditures with one source and n users, the dimensionality of
the evaluation problem of linear programming is roughly 103 variables and
constraints. Significant computer resources are required to solve multi-
product and continual dynamic models that generalize known macromodels for a
formalized description of complexly developing systems.

The problems of automated control systems that require large expenditures of
machine time are focused around solving the problems of the OGAS (State Auto-
mated System for Collection and Processing of Information for Accounting,
Planning, and Management in the National Economy), the RASU's [Republic Auto-
mated Control Systems], and calculations for operational control of the
optimal loading of industrial equipment at enterprises of the republic
ministries. Interesting problems from this point of view are the problems of
operational accounting and monitoring of the production of output by the

basic facilities of a combine, compiling drafts of quarterly and annual plans
for truck shipments and determining optimal freight loads for a territorial
motor vehicle transportation administration, predicting the route of travel of
passengers with selection of a scheme for a system of air connections, com-
piling a central schedule of aircraft traffic, formulating a system for opera-
tional control of the shipment process in railroad transportation, and other
similar questions.

2. with the introduction of simplifying hypotheses, scientific-technical
problems are reduced to physical models which can be described by mathematical
language. In this way mathematical models of applied problems arise. Host

of the scientific-technical problems considered above amount to solving
standard classes of mathematical problems that require significant volumes of
arithmetic operations for solution.

There is already a need to solve systems of linear algebraic equations with
tape matrixes (their order reaches 105 and the width of the tape is more than

1,000) with thinned symmetrical matrixes (their order reaches 1 million).
Solving a generalized problem of characteristic (own) values with tape and
symmetrical matrixes A and B, whose order reaches 10“ while the width of the
tape is 600-800 elements. requires computing several minimal characteriatlc
values and the characteristic vectors belonging to them.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘ﬂR "Fl-1"!“ UNI- OVI \

uhcn nonlinear differential equations are solved by the finite elements tech-
nique, large systems of nonlinear algebraic equations occur, numbering into
the thousands. when the finite differences technique is used several thousand
such equations arise. Such large systems occur in the description of some
applied problems (on the order of several thousand), but the number of re-
lated unknowns in each equation is not more than five percent.

Hith numerical integration of Cauchy problems it is necessary to solve systems
of standard differential equations whose number reaches 10“, or 103 in the case

of rigid systems. When describing various applied problems, boundary problems
arise for systems of standard differential equations whose number may reach
several hundred.

In many applied problems it is necessary to find numerical solutions to three-
dimensional elliptical. parabolic, and hyperbolic differential equations, both
linear and nonlinear.

It is essential to find certain minimal characteristic values and the charac-
teristic functions of differential operators corresponding to then, both of
the second and of higher orders in partial derivatives.

The finite elements technique, the finite differences technique, the integral
ratios technique, the straightline method, different variation techniques,
and other methods may be used as means to discretize boundary problems for
standard differential equations and equations in partial derivatives.

In some applied problems there occur linear integral Fredholm equations of the
first and second types, the second type of convolution, and homogeneous inte-
gral Fredholm—type equations (the problem of characteristic values), Volterra
linear integral equations of the first and second types, and systems of certain
integral equations.

Numerical solutions to differential and integral equations must be obtained
with a relative error of no more than three percent.

In problems of mathematical programming there is a need to solve problems of
distribution-type linear programming with up to several hundreds of thousands
of variables and several tens of thousands of constraints, to solve non-
linear problems of unconditional optimization with up to thousands of vari-
ables, to solve applied problems of discrete and discrete-continuous pro-
-gramming with up to thousands of variables, and to solve combinatorial optimi-
zation problems defined in reordering (relocation) space with up to several
hundred generating elements.

In the course of solving applied problems, in addition to the above-enumerated
classes of mathematical problems it is necessary to solve problems of sta—
tistical and probability analysis, numerical differentiation and integration,
interpolation and approximation of functions, and computation of elementary
and special functions.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Host scientific-technical problems are solved mainly in the main memory of
coaputers. with only the subsidiary Information necessary for the solutions
stored in the second step of memory.

In a number of cases, however, the main memory is not adequate to solve the
problems and during the solution process the second-step memory is used
actively. It usually takes dozens of hours to calculate such problems.

There are also problems which are broken down at the level of the physical
model into several sub-probless. and each of them uses the second-step memory
during machine solution. The solution time for such a general problem may take

hundreds of hours, and preparation of the raw data may take several worker-
years.

The applied problems listed above are mainly problems of the third type.

The complexity of solving such problems lies in the significant volume of data
processed,the trouble of preparing raw data. the development of special computing
schemes that consider both the volume of data and the organisation of second-
step memory, and the inadequate precision of the machine result obtained (for

some problems the best that can be done is to determine just the correct order
of solution).

4. One means of accelerating the solution of scientific-technical problems that

require large volumes of computation and a way to inprove the accuracy of com-
putations is parallel data processing.

In principle paralleling can be done at these levels: construction of physical
models, objects. or processes of the phenomena under investigation, the solution
method, algorithm, or program: exchange of data in the machine; inputting and
outputting data.

Let us review a few of the existing ways of paralleling. Suppose it is necessary
to make a study of the statically stressed state of a certain design element

[1). Considering the geometry of the object under investigation we mentally
divide the element into several subelements which can be described fairly well
by elasticity theory equations written in different systems of coordinates (see
Figure 1 below). Additional boundary conditions must be formulated at the points
where the mental division of the element is done. The eight subelements that re-
sult can be divided mentally into new ones or the calculation for the eight sub-
elements can be organized simultaneously on computers. This is how paralleling
is accomplished at the level of the construction of physical models.

The development of numerical methods of problem-solving on multiprocessor com-
putcrs with parallel organization of computations requires new thinking and a

new approach to the formulation of techniques. We will illustrate this with the
theoretical example considered in [2].

Suppose that it is necessary to compute y - 1“. To solve this problem in the
sequential computations mode several techniques can be worked out.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure l.

 

The method of parallel computations of y - x“ can be based on the correlation

‘ n

r
2 —f;=x'—I .

l-l

 

r
where r, is roots of the equation xn :- 1. S1 - —1. i . 1. 2. ..., n is calcu-

lated. Then for n processors simultaneously it nis possible to compute
a‘EI—II, .i=l' 2, ....n.

“31:4. i-l,2,....m.

0‘ Ml
CI: 2b].
I I

i.
=-— = ' I.
d c. y d!-

‘l‘hc development of new numerical methods of solving problem on multiprocessor
computers with parallel organization of computations and limited computing re-
sources (certain number of processors. limited volume of memory in each
processor. limited number of channels for comunication amng processors and
rate of exchange on these channels, finite number of channels for communication
with second-step memory and definite speed of exchange on these channels, fixed
length of the machine word. and so on) requires great theoretical (construction
of the method. testing its stability. convergence. and so on) and experimental
(investigating the efficiency of its realization in various models and applied
problems) work. which may run into years.

A way to formulate algorithms that organize parallel computations fairly quickly
is to work out new algorithms on the basis of already-known nethods. It is

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H m "FF“ 'IAI. “SI-l ONLY

apparent that most algorithms that realize sequential camputations permit.
in principle, multivariant paralleling. The question is how to construct an

algorithm of parallel computations that would be highly efficient. Several
criteria can be used to comsre and evaluate algorithm: coefficient of
accelleration K, and efficiency coefficient lg. which are defined as follows:

T K
Kygﬁs K’s” .

In this case p is the number of arithmetic processes used to solve the problems;
T1 is the time to solve a problem on a single-processor colputsr with a high- '
speed arithmetic processor and the total nemory of p processors given the avail-
ability of the necessary number of peripheral units with exchange speeds as in

a multiprocessor conputer; T9 is the time required to solve a problem of the same
volume on a p-processor computer.

As an example let us consider an algorithm for parallel couputation to solve the
Cauchy problem for a system of n standard differential equations of the first
order

g‘é- = F(X. Y). Y(X‘) -Y.n

where x€lxo, xk], Y. Yo. F are vectors of dimensionality n [3]. As is cus-
tomary, for a numerical solution we introduce the different network

m={x.=”l. (=50. l....,N.h-=x.j:’il.

To solve the problem we will use implicit block methods [4, 5]. Let us review
a variation of this method that provides the fourth order of precision. The
algorithm of this method for parallel computations can be realized by the
formulas

Y3: =';_(Yl—Z+Y‘—l + yi) + %(3F‘-3—
—4F1—|+13F|).

' II
m, =31 0/. .2 + Y.-. + Y.) + 75mm —
— 72Fl—I + 79F:).

var." = v. + 1’;- (SF. + am. — rm).

YW:"=Y. + g“): +4511: + F112)

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ (DH-1i 'Hl. USE UNIX

In this i is the number of the point; s - 0. l, ... is the number of the itera-
tion; and. h is the step of integration.

If there are two processes, the solution is found at point i + l in one
process and at point i + 2 in the second. Let us note that in this case
paralleling is expedient if computation of one right hand part on the average
takes less than five operations.

If n is sufficiently large and it is possible to use 2. processors in the multi-
processing machine to solve the Cauchy problem, n12. equations are placed in

each processor.

Table 1 below gives K,= ;‘— and K.-=-I2£"n- depending on the number.of processors
Ill

and number of arithmetic operations required to compute the right hand part.
This example illustrates the possibility of paralleling computations at the algo-
rithm level.

 

 

Parnlleling computations at the program level is organized to some degree when

working with vectors, even on machines with mainline organization of computa-
tions. for example the CDC STAR-100, the CDC-7600 CRAY-l. and some others.

Paralleling at the level of data exchange among processors and between
processors and second-step memory is determined by the fact that arithmetic
operations are executed more rapidly than exchange operations. Therefore,

based on the volume of each processor's main memory, processor speed. and speed
of exchange. it is necessary LO balance the number of communications channels

so that processors do not stand idle because of exchanges while solving problems
with large volumes of data to process.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘HR "MRI“ I SI- ﬂ\| \

Significant volumes of input and output data require parallel data input/output
with monitoring of the reliability of the data fed.

5. In the last 10 years electronic computers with partial and cmlete assau-
zation of parallel computations have been built and put into use. One of the
principles by which computers are classified is based on the classification of
programs and data processed by the machine. From this standpoint electronic
couputers can be provisionally subdivided into machines with pipeline organi-
zation of coaputations and multiprocessor comuters [6]. A distinction is
made among three classes of cowuters: HIS!) (pipeline-multiple contraction.

single data), SIHD (single instruction, multiple data), and limb (multiple
instructions. multiple data).

It is possible to realize parallel coqutation of vectors by program means in
some computers with pipeline organization. Among these comuters is the STAR-100
from the CDC firm. Its speed in performance of vector operations is 100 million
ops/sec (6-20 million ops/sec with a floating point). The basic progra-ing
language is FORTRAN (the expanded version for work with vectors). The CRAY-l
machine from the Cray Research firm belongs to this class. This machine is de-
signed to solve hydrodynamic problems and forecast the weather. It has eight
registers that contain 610 words of 66 bits apiece. and is characterised as a
so-called "chain," which makes it possible to use functional units in a given
sequence of operations. The speed of the machine is 80 million ops/sec.

Another machine that can be included here is the Texas Instruaents TI ASC.

which is a specialized multiprocessor machine (up to four processors with a
speed of 25 million ops/sec). The TI Asc operates with matrix columns and

lines and can produce three included cycles with unitary vectors and have four
vector channels. The basic programing language is FORTRAN. We should note
that computers of class MISD solve fairly complex scientific-technical problems,
including several of those mentioned above.

The Burroughs PEPE belongs to the SIM!) class of electronic computers.1 It is a
specialized computer consisting of 288 associative processors. each of which
has its own memory while data is transmitted through the control processor.
The speed of the one central processor is 1-5 million ops/sec. The total
productivity is 300—400 million ops/sec. The PEPE can solve high-order systems
of linear algebraic equations. Its basic programing language is FORTRAN.

The Burroughs ILLIAC-IV also fits with this class of machines.2 This computer
has 6!. processors that work simultaneously. The maximum speed of this machine is
200 million ops/sec. The capacity of the laser memory archive is 1012 bits.

 

1 Bell Telephone Laboratories, System Development Corporation, Honeywell and
Burroughs participated in work on the PEPE (Parallel Element Processing
Ensemble) program.

2 The University of Illinois participated in development of this machine.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um ﬂH-li I“ USE UNI \

By 1979 the Burroughs firs planned to complete development of the BSP multi-
processor computer, in the SIHD class, for making scientific-technical calcu-
lations. This machine is supposed to have 16 processor elements and, in

order to avoid conflicts, 17 memory cubes. The DAP computer of the ICL

company also belongs to the SIHD class of computers. The DA? is a matrix

of 32 x 32 slow elementary processors, each with a memory capacity of 1,000 hits.

Among Soviet electronic computers, the PS-2000 computing complex belongs to the
SIMD class. The PSI—2000 complex includes an SUI-2 small computer and a Ps-2000
multiprocessor. The Ps-ZOOO multiprocessor consists of 8-64 processor ele-
ments, each of which has its own main memory (from 6,000 to 16,000 26-bit words).
The general control unit exercises control over all the processor elements.

The ASC TI can be conditionally classified with the MIND computers because its
four channels can be used for independent data feeding and processing. It is
thought that the Siemens sns laboratory model, which has 128 processors and is
now under development, will belong to this class. Each processor has its own
memory and can work independently of the others. The processors are joined into
one ensemble by the control processor.

Table 2 below shows certain characteristics of these electronic computers.
A more complete review of multiprocessor machines and descriptions of them can
be found in [8-9].

Despite the fact that umltiprocessor computing machines have existed for some
10 years, they have a small share of production. For example, in the United
States in 1976 248 models of electronic computing machines were produced, but
no more than 10 of them were multiprocessor machines with parallel organiza-
tion of computations, and half of them were for special applications. They
make up an even smaller proportion of world capitalist production of com-
puters. It appears that the most characteristic trend in the production of
multiprocessor computers at the present time is to build machines with a
large number of processors and limited memory volume for each processor. This
structure and architecture complicates problem programming and creates addi-
tional difficulties in working out the methods and algorithms for solving
applied problems which require a large volume of varied computations.

There is another possible approach to building multiprocessor computers with
parallel computations based on the macroconveyor principle developed at the
Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. This prin-
ciple of organization takes it possible to solve most of the above-listed
scientific-technical problems in a reasonable time.

Theoretical analysis of the different structures and architectures of multi-
processor machines will parallel organization of computations depending on
the classes of problems, methods of solution, and volumes of data processed,
in addition to work to formulate parallel computation algorithms for

 

3 We considered here multiprocessor computers with floating points that are

known from the literature.

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1e 2.

on Hair Memory Average W
11- Capacity Sorting L

(Thousands or Cycle 3
sec of Words) Time,uaec

___________________________________
Inited States)

E 500-1.000 1.28+

u 131-1,068 bits 0.16+
integrated micro-
circuits, 131- 1+
1,058 hits
HOS structure

.25 8,000 0.068+
FOR "mm-u I‘SF "NI \

”nosauunoo N ounce.

nauouaa

taco oalguuuo
imam .ou«H
nomua coaaoo
.uuoaouooun om

ocadonum
:oaioo vac

"uuoaaoooua usou

new nauauaa
.300 uasu .uuoo
Icoooum unwuo

auouauuoua
ca a co
muonzmao: anew

an“: nomcasuxo
sown: no £000

.nuonouuoua anon

-aoaouo «o x eo
\Nn u an no
auxuuuaa .Hovoa
aaucosuuoauo

uo-um
0 one haw

noon"
0H «:0 new
inc
.3)

Addition
(Multipli-
cation)
Iime, usec

C
Full "FF“ HI I'NF "NI \

hypothetical structures and architectures, permit us to draw some conclu-
sions:

- Paralleling algorithms are defined by solution methods and
depend greatly on the structure and architecture of the
multiprocessor computer (volumes of main memory of each
processor. number of communications channels among proces-
sors and between processors and second-step memory, the
availability of damper memory. the volume of second-step
memory, the ratio of the speed of an individual processor
and the volume of its main memory. the length of a machine
word. and so on);

- The very same structure and architecture of a multiprocessor
machine may give rise to many different versions of parallel
algorithms;

- The ease of paralleling an algorithm with sequential compu-
tations does not always mean that it is wise to use it as
the basis for formulating parallel computation algorithms
on a multiprocessor computer, especially for problems with
large volumes of computation;

- The critical resources for solving problems with large volumes
of data processing are the number of communications channels
and speed of exchange in them, the volume of the main memory

of each processor (at a given speed) and of damper memory,
and the number of input and output units;

- The problem is not so much paralleling arithmetic and
logical operations as it is organizing the calculation of
problems that require processing large volumes of data,
that is, organizing parallel operations at all levels;

- At the present time there is a critical need to work out new
theoretically substantiated numerical methods of solving
different classes of mathematical problems, techniques
whose essential features take account of the parallelism of
computations at all levels;

- For each of the classes of mathematical problems considered
there is an optimal (with s maximmmacceleration coefficient
and a maximum efficiency coefficient) configuration of the
structure and architecture of the multiprocessor computer
depending on the solution algorithm and volume of data
processed. Increasing the number of processors beyond the
optimal number leads to a certain acceleration of calcula-
tion time. but the efficiency coefficient-drops.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iii"! (WI-1i "I \I I ISI- HNI \

The necessary configuration of the multiprocessor machine should be shaped, the
machine solution algorithm constructed in an automatic mode, the problem
solved. and the reliability of the solution obtained evaluated according to
the problem, the solution method, and the required volume of data processing,
which can be estimated a priori.

This approach to solving applied problems on electronic computers of rearrange-
able structure and architecture makes it possible not only to evaluate the

quality of . Jlutions, but also to raise the efficiency of the machinery being
used.

POOTNO'I'ES

l. v. D. llichev, "Matrix Methods of Synthesizing the Dynamic and Elastic
Characteristics of Linear and Conservative Design Elements," "CHEN. ZAP.
TSACI, 1975, lo, No 2, pp 93-108.

2. J. Hiklosko. "Synteza a analyze efektivnych numerickyeh algorimv" [Synthesis
and Analysis of Efficient Numerical Algorithms], Bratislava, VEDA. 1979, 220
pages (in Czech).

3. M. A. Franklin. "Parallel Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations,"
IEEE TRANS. comma, 1978, 27, No 5. pp 1.13-1.20.

k. B. A. Rosser. "A Runge-Kutta for All Seasons," SIAM REVIEH, 1967, 9, No 3,
pp 417-1052.

5. L. I". Shaapine. and H. A. watts, "Block Implicit Oantep Methods," HATE.
COMPUT., 1969, No 23, pp 731-760.

6. T. 1.. Jorden. "A Performance Evaluation of Linear Algebra Software in
Parallel Architectures," in "Performance Evaluation of Nmrical Software,"
edited by L. D. Foadick, Amsterdam, 1979, pp 56-76.

7. F. (2. l-Znslou (editor), "Hul'tiportsessornyye Siotemy i Parallel'nyye
Vychisleniya" [Multiprocessor Systems and Parallel Computations], Moscow,
"Mir". 1976, 383 pages.

8. V. K. Zeyzcnberg (editor). "Vychislitel'naya Tekhnika za Rubezhom v 1976 3."
[Computer Technology Abroad in 1976), Moacow, "m4 1 VT AN SSSR“, 1977,
210 pages.

9. V. K. Zaydenberg (editor). "Osnovnyye Kharakteriatiki Taifrovykh
Vychislitel'nykh Hashin" [Basic Characteristics of Digital Computers],
Moscow. “In! 1 Vi‘ AN SSSR", 1977, 63 pages.

COPYRIGHT: [ZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUHKA", "KIBERNETIKA", 1981

11.376
(250: 1861/16

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ("1-1le “SF 05"."

UDC 62-52.001"313"

PROSPECTS AND PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPING AUTMATED PROCESS CONTROL SYSTBHS BASED ON
MICROPROCBSSOR EQUIPMENT

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTER UPRAVLKIIIYA in Russian NO 8, Aug 81 pp 1-2

[Article by B. B. Timofeyev, academician of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences, in the
section "Autanated Control Systems"]

[Excerpts] Using microprocessors in the traditional areas of application of compu-
ters in automated process control systems is tied intimately to the process of de-
centralization of control that began long before the appearance of microprocessors.
It is characteristic not only of automated process control systems and has two
interrelated aspects: territorial distribution and hierarchical control.

The necessity of territorial distribution of control hardware in automated process
control systems is dictated to a considerable extent by the deficit in cable pro-
duction. Remoting of information processing equipment directly to receivers-sources
and transmission of compressed, preliminarily processed information are required.
implementation of hierarchical systems under the conditions of continuously growing
complexity of control problems allows raising reliability and improving control dy-
namirs, simplifying software. and affording the possibility of putting control sys-
tems into operation piecemeal.

Unfortunately. our microprocessor hardware developers are repeating the traditional
architecture. of computers too literally in their developments when the need for
developing multimicroprocessor systms is so obvious. The fact is that transducers
make up a large percentage of the hardware of modern automated process control sys-
tems and their outputs signals require processing by complex algorithms. These in-
clude various frequency, phase (including synchros and inductosyns) and other trans-
ducers. The question of connecting up these transducers is tied closely to the
problem of developing an efficient architecture of modular microprocessor components
The connection problem for these transducers can be solved by incorporating special-
pnrpose passive functional elements in the composition of microprocessor hardware.
i.u. by expanding the nomenclature, which is not always justified economically
because batch production declines.

More promising are isolation in automated process control systems and standardiza-
tion of some simple autonomous regulators implemented by using active programable
modules of modular complexes. These modules must be built on the basis of special-
purpose single-board microcomputers that include facilities for input/output of
analog and discrete signals.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-N1". NSF 0V! \'

°‘ SIC"?

Progress in this direction depends entirely on progress in [.51 and VLSI engineering
and technology. This, in turn. requires the joint efforts of the instrument-building
and electronics industry to develop a unified modular system of Iicroprocessor con-

trol hardware, without in any way reducing the efforts on finishing the develop-ant
and adjustment of production of existing microprocessor complexes. This unified aya-

ten is to contain a set of specialized single-board microcomputers, means of nonal-
ization and galvanic separation and a ramified set of designs and panel instruments.
And this unified systaa is to allov, by the design route without substantial outlays
for engineering labor, developing flexible and highly reliable nultinicroprocessor
control systems and instrumental process conplexes for automating the design of_§_uch
systems, including highly efficient facilities for progr-aing and debugging.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Mashinostroyeniye".
"Pribory i sisteny upravleniya", 1981

8545
cso: 1863/256

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu I'll“ I“ IN! i'\l\

UDC 681.2:621.38:776:"313"

PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPING TECHNOLOGY OF PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD PRODUCTION IN BUILDING
INSTRUMENTS

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEMY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 pp 29-30

[Article by engineers V. R. Truntsevskiy and I. P Belikov, in the section "Tech-
nology of Building Instruments“: "Printed Circuit Board Production" (beginning of

a topical series)]

[Text] Existing technology for manufacturing printed circuit boards [203a] and any
of its varieties on methods of manufacture are based on the so-called subtractive
technology, i.e. the technology of obtaining copper conductors by removing (etching)
from blank areas the copper layer covering the substrate. This technology no longer
meets the high requirements associated with miniaturization and first of all with
broad integration in the field of electronic elements since it does not per-it
manufacturing minute and precise tracks for conductors [1].

In addition, the subtractive technology of manufacturing PCBs requires naking more
efficient use of metal because of the growing demand for it. Therefore. process
engineers are faced with the problem of finding new engineering solutions that must
provide for saving materials and meeting the increased requirements of designers

of microelectronic apparatus.

One such engineering solution is the multilayer printed circuit assembly which,
being a subsequent qualitative evolution of conventional PCBs and preserving all
their properties, have their own merits that promote an ever broader application of
them in solving the problems of complex miniaturization of microelectronic apparatus.
According to foreign data, as early as in 1973. almost half of all PCBs used in com-
puters were multilayer PCBs (HPP).

Multilayer Pcns now have limited application in the Hinpribor [Ministry of Instru-
mcnt Making, Automation Equipment and Control Systems]. The increased technological
requirements that occur in the production of multilayer PCBa, the lack of mobility
of the technological process, the extremely long production cycle in manufacture,
the labor-intensive monitoring of the internal layers and limited repairability are
largely restraining the application of multilayer PCBs in the products of instrument
manufacture. However, computer hardware developers are now tasking process engi-
users with assimilation in the Minpribor of the technology of manufacturing multi-
layer PCBs in connection with the need of applying them in new products.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the 11th FIVe-chr Plan in the plants of the Hinpribor, the main development
will be on the combined positive method with advance plating of holes and a pro-
tective technological tin—lead alloy coating. Dry alkaline-water-developed film
photoresists of the types TFPK, SPFV and SPFVShch, as well as SPF-2 film photo-
resists processed in organic solutions, will find extensive application in-tha pro-
cess of photochemical printing to obtain the printed circuit pattern. This method
will permit manufacturing printed circuit boards with a density of placement of
150-300 holes per dmz.

Since in the early years of the ll-th Five-Year Plan the demand by Hinpribor plants
for dry film photoresists cannot be fully met. it is planned to use the PPP type
liquid photoresist which will be applied to blank boards with advance plated holes
on U861H type rolling units. In the process, the necessary thickness of the photo-
resist layer is achieved.

Efforts are now underway to improve this technology. Thus, it is planned to elimi-
nate the operation of chemical metallization of holes from the process which will
not only eliminate the use of a critical metal (palladium dichloride), but also
reduce the manufacturing cycle and raise quality.

The semiadditive method of manufacturing PCBs has been developed in the sector to
produce PCBs with a density of placement of 400 holes per dm2 and higher (with a
C.l-0.2-mm width of printed conductors).

This technology differs from the existing subtractive in the application of the non-
foil dielectric STEK-l.5 TU.;H0.50.9.09l-78 and in the considerable reduction in the
volume and time of etching, which makes it possible to obtain substantial savings in
copper, reduce the width of printed conductors (having eliminated etchings of them)
and reduce costs for purification structures. 0n the whole. there will be a 5 to

20 percent gain in value compared to the subtractive technology [1].

This technology will be developed along the path of mastering the so-called photo-
form method and making use of dielectrics with ultrathin foil (to S micrometers).

It is assumed that when the photoform method is used to manufacture boards. produc-
tion costs will be 25 to 30 percent lower than when photoresist is used. This
method allows obtaining a higher density of circuitry with the same board technolog-
ical characteristics.

An advantage of semiadditive technology is the capability of reusing laminates when
defects occur in manufacture by stripping the circuit and reapplying the conductors.

The firm Photcircuits eStimates that 0.5-0.8 million m2 of boards per year are now
produced in the United States by the method of semiadditive technology [2]; major
American manufacturers of ultrathin foil estimate that boards in which ultrathin
foil is applied now account for 5 to 10 percent of the total PCBs produced in the
United States {2].

Efforts are also underway in our country to develop a dielectric with ultrathin foil.
It is planned to start series production of it in the 11th Five-Year Plan [3].
Assimilation by Minprihor plants of the combined positive method and semiadditive
technology of PCB manufacture will allow shifting subsequently to the assimilation

of new types of these technological processes without any restructuring of production.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHOM. I'Sl-f ONLY

Th0 rVrt increasing complexity and continuing improvement of instruments and compu-
ter hardware is leading to the necessity of making various adjustments to wiring
layouts even under the conditions of series production. But making changes to a
printed circuit is a lengthy process. According to the data of foreign specialists.
the share of expenses for developing a board designed for wiring of 80 integrated
circuits (15) is about $7.000 [a]. This sum of fixed expenses is due to the pattie-
ipation in the implementation of a considerable number of skilled associates and the
lengthy duration of the manufacturing cycle. Therefore, for small-scale series pro-
duction of high-density wired boards and accelerated development of prototype instru-
ments and computer hardware. application of fundamentally new manufacturing methods
is called for: thin-conductor wiring (of the multiwire type) or K-6 technology

but the main thing is that the production cycle is shorter and they are more
suitable for automation of design and manufacture.

printing and etching.

Multiwire circuitry allows Successfully replacing multilayer PCB’s when circuitry
is highly complex.

Foreign data indicate that the design cycle is 10 weeks for multilayer P683, 8 weeks
for double-sided plated boards. but just 1 week for multiwire; manufacture of the
boards takes 4, 2 and l week(s) respectively [6]. Approved designs of boards manu-
iactured hy the method of conducting wiring. when series production is necessary,
can easily be switched to the traditional technology of printed wiring and in a
shorter time. According to data of foreign specialists, fixed costs in manufac*
turing boards with 80 integrated circuits by one of the methods of conducting wiring
(solder-wrap) are 5700—31070 {4]. Thus, it is advantageous to employ methods of
conducting wiring with small-scale series production (especially experimental)

where the capability of making changes without additional outlays is exceptionally
important.

The technology or thin-wire circuitry will be developed with the solution of the
following problems:
improvement of the method for obtaining contact connections;

determination of the optimal technological conditions of layout of conductors,
limitation and features for achieving maximal productivity of automated manufacture
of conducting wire hoards;

development of algorithms for the process of automated layout of conductors for
numeric controlled machine tools equipped with special layout devices; and

development of special machine tools with ChPU [numerically programmed control]

for (pistnnirovaniye) and layout of wires.

81.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All lhr cllurts planned to be purtorned in the 11th Five—Year Plan have been

incorporated in a comprehensive program for raising the level of the technology

for producing Pcn's; its implementation by the end of the five-year period will

allow obtaining an econonic effect of 25.2 Iillion rubles and conventionally

releasing cver 2,900 personnel.

In subsequent articles the authors will go into lore detail on specific questions

associated with the technological processes of Ianufacturing PCB's and the

special technological equipment provided for by the colprehensive program.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kaganov, Ye. A.; Kochetov, Ye. P.; Kravchenkn, A. S. and Haksakov, B. P.,
"Additive Methods of Manufacturing Printed Circuit Boards," ZARDBBZHNAYA
RADIOELEKTRONIKA, No 6, 19710.

2. RADIOEI.P.KTRONIKA ZA RUBEZHOM, No 18, 1978.

3. iNPORHATSIONNYY LISTOK No 235-79. LHTs.

6. RADIOELEKTRONIKA ZA RUBEZHOH, No 9, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mashinostroyeniye". ”Pribory i sisteny upravleniya", 1981

8555
650: 1863/256

85

FOR’OFYNC1AI.US£10NLY
I'Hll (ll-'I II I“ I'NF "VI \

UDC 621.38:776

0

EXPERIENCE OF ASSIMILATION 0F BASE TECHNOLOGY FOR PRINTED CIRCUIT BOARD MANUFACTURE
AT LENINGRAD ELECTROMECHANICAL PLANT PRODUCTION ASSOCIATION

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 30-31
[Article by engineer 6. H. Tsetkov]

[Text] The problem of asshailating production of automation equipment and fourth
generation computers with the application of LSI, VLSI and microprocessors is in-
extricably entwined with the broad introduction of the positive combined method of
manufacture that COST 23751-79 recommended as the base technological process for
production of printed circuit boards [PCB's].

Discussed in this article are the features of the new technology for PCB manufacture
by the combined method with advance drilling of holes and use of film photoresist
and positivescreen printing.as well as the experience of assimilating and imple-
menting this technology in series production on domestic equipment at the enterprise
that was one of the first in the sector to practically resolve this problem, the

P0 LEHZ [Leningrad Electromechanical Plant Production Association].

The progressiveness of the new technology is generally recognized and stems from the
capability of manufacturing PCB's with increased density of wiring, improved quality
and reliability, less manual labor, and broader application of equipment for
automation and mechanization of production. But, as is well known, this process is
being introduced into series production slowly.

The base method for PCB manufacture was introduced in the Leningrad Electromechan-
ical Plant Production Association in 1977. The necessary prerequisites for its
introduction were created thanks to the large amount of laboratory work and engi-
neering preparation of this process. Thus, PCB's were standardized and their type
sizes reduced to two main ones: 1.5 x 110 x 1‘0 mm (type A boards) and 1.5 x 140 x
235 mm (type B boards); photomasks of the manual layout were processed and manufac-
tured by the more precise machine method on the "Hinsk~2004" and "Minsk-2005"
coordinatographs.

The V~479 type domestic machine tools with program control were modified and are
now used to drill the PCB's. The boards are d-illed in batches of three to four

units, and the last board is not drilled, but placed first in the next batch to re.
ducc burrs at the drill entry and exit. Drill bits are hard alloy twist with a
durability of no less than 2,500 holes. Holes are not counterbored. If the size
of burrs exceeds 0.04 mm. then smoothing is necessary, which is done on a unit for

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hydroabrasive trimming of the holes. Chemical preparation of the surface in a com-
plex with mechanical smoothing is performed on the domestic U759H type jet-module
line.

In chemical metallization, a combined solution of activation containing 0.2-0.& g/l
of PdCl2 is used. The stability of operation of the combined solution is 5-6 months.

The solution is analyzed and adjusted twice a week.
After activation. the boards stand in a solution of accelerator (250 g/l HCl).

The solution of chemical copper plating is prepared on the basis of Seignette salt
with a low-concentrated content of the main components with a stabilizing additive
of thiosulfate of sodium. Twice a day the solution is analysed and adjusted for
the basic components, and filtered once a shift. The stability of operation of the
solution of chemical metallization is 1.5 months.

Sulfuric acid electrolyte of copper plating is used for preparatory electroplating
by 5-7 micrometers. Bonding strength of the chemical copper to the foil is
600-500 gs/cm (as defined by OST 460.054.223).

Prior to application of the film photoresist. preparation of the surface of the
copper layer is required; this consists in mechanical conditioning of it by wire
brushes node of 0.15-mm diameter stainless steel, cleaning in a two-percent alkaline
solution, washing and drying in a special unit.

A dry film water-developed photoresist, brand SPPV (OAYu.504.022TU),is applied with
a KP6346 type laminator and the 0862 type unit with 110° c temperature of the heat-
ing elements. The blank boards are fed without preheating. The effective time of
exposu:e to the LUF-Bo lamps is 3-k minutes, and to the DRST-lOOO lamps is 1.5
minutes. The photolayer is developed in the jet-modular unit by a one-percent

soda ash solution.

The coating of copper and tin-lead is applied in standard electrolytes in automatic
electroplating machines. A Kh606 type ampere-hour meter is installed in one of
the tanks.

The photoresist is removed in a ten-percent alkaline solution at normal temperature
within 3-5 minutes. The problem of salvaging the spent solution and scraps of film
completely has not yet been solved. Etching is done in an ammonium peroxysulfate
solution.

Palladium plating of the thin strip leads is done directly on the copper printed
conductor by the grOup method in a special unit in standard aminochloride electrolyte.
For the palladium coat, the surface is prepared by chemical and mechanical methods.
The copper conductors are polished in a special 66-228 type unit.

A method of positive screen printing has been assimilated with 15 board positions.
Used for screen printing is a single-component. alkali-washable, STZ.12-Sl brand, *
yellow ink that after drying at 90-100'C (within 20-30 minutes) acquires resistance
to acid electrolytes and cures the action of etching solutions based on cupric
chloride, ammonium persulfate and ferric chloride. The ink has fine print

*
(TU 29-02-740-77) 87

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Inn OI-I'Ii I\l I'SF "\H

plum-ll 1m: :qu ls .nppllul with mun-ml masking machines and with FTP-3 type semi-
automatic machines using polyurethane squeegees. Blue ST3.l3 brand ink (TU 29-02-
689-44) was also tried for positive screen printing. The ink is resistant to acid
and alkaline electrolytes and dries in 8-10 minutes with a hot-air (60°C) blower or
infrared dryer within 1.5-2 minutes at 100-110°c in the operating zone. However,
this ink has an important shortcoming: Only organic solutions can wash it off.

To preclude conductor peeling in the PCB production process, before applying ink,
the surface has to be treated with quartz to improve ink adhesion to it or electro-
polishing of the boards has to be introduced during chalical copper plating.

lnk layer thickness is 30-40 micrometers. In detersining the effect of the basic
factors of the printing process on the graphic characteristics of the image, the
optimal conditions of pressure, rate of. printing and slope of the squeegee lust
be established.

Screen masks are made by the direct method using the liquid photopolymerized
composition "Potoset-Zh" (TU 6-15-01-138—77).

The technological process of making mask print forms is as follows: a form frame
with the screen tight on it is placed on glass coated with lavsan [Soviet equiva-
lent of Dacron], "Fotoset-zh" is poured on center of screen, it is covered with the
photomask (previously coated with a five-percent solution of paraffin in white
spirit), smoothed out in thickness using a squeegee. and the access solution is re-
moved with a pad. The layer on the screen must be even, without bubbles or wrink-
les. Then the form is exposed by LIT-80 lnps for 15-20 minutes.

The time for making forms is reduced considerably with this technology. This
method allows regulating the "mess of the copy layer. The photopolymerized
composition ensures obtaimw,‘ forms with clear edge of the printing elanent.

Repeated use of screen masks is anticipated because they are made on screens of
stainless steel No. 0010. The precision of screen printing ensures obtaining a
pattern with width of conductors and distance between the of 0.3-0.4 Ila.

On the whole, implementation of the base technological process for PCB manufacture
has made it possible to:

improve the quality of drilling of holes and chanical metallization of the boards
since the operations are performed on blanks not coated with protective lacquer; in
the process, cOntrolling the Quality of performance of these operations is eased
considerably;

extend the working life of the solutions for chemical metallizatiOn;

accelerate the manufacturing cycle by removing a number of operations for photo-
printing processes (coloring, chemical hardening. thermal hardening) and applica-
tion and removal of the protective lacquer;

reduce manual labor thanks to mechanization and automation of the operations of
appl ica:ion, development and removal of film phottresistr and reducing to the mini-
mum the necessity of performing the retouching opetation;

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
almost completely eliminate technological losses in photoprinting operations,
vhich accounted for about 30 percent of the total losses vhen a light-sensitive
emulsion based on polyvinyl alcohol was used; loreover, the capability of effi-

ciently repairing rejects has emerged with full recovery of the labor spent on
hale drilling;

increase production efficiency and reduce the labor-intensiveness of PCB manufac-
ture by 25-30 percent; and

increase the density of wiring of the printed elements to 0.2-0.3 In with improve-
ment of the quality of the finished boards, which is confirmed by the objective
test made on the special automatic machine for checking the circuitry of printed
boards developed at the Leningrad Electromechanical Plant Production Association.

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye". "Pribory i sisteny upravleniya", 1981

8565
C50: 1863/256

89

IW3R(JNHK]AL USEIJNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOFTWARE

LIST OF SOVIET ARTICLES DEALING WITH SOFTWARE
Moscow ALOORITHY I PROGRAM in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 1-126

[Following is a listing of Soviet entries from ALGORITHY I PROGRAM ("Algorithms
and Programs"). a bibliographic publication of the USSR State Comittee for Science
and Technology. This listing is from No 6. 1981]

[Excerpts]

2297. "Teoreticheskiye osnovy kompilyatsii" [Theoretical Fundamentals of Compila-
tion]: collection of scientific works, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk,
1980, 171 pages, bibliography at end o§ articles.

Study of the theoretical fundamentals and applied aspects of the formal description
and effective implementation of programing languages.

Key words: method, PASCAL, MEDIPOR-Z knowledge display language, RBLYAP relational
programing language, LISP, ALGOL, "-5030, Yes computer, R6060 miniconputer, macro-
generatora. KAHAK [CAMC], physical oceanographer's package of applied protrams,

single-variabl‘gpolynouais, program correctness, language processors. compilation.

2302. Sychev, A.I. "One Method of Automatically Controlling an Archive of Meteor-
nloglcal Information," TRUDY ZAPADNO-SIBIRSKOG) REGIONAL'NOGO NII, WP. 109. VOPROSY
RECIONAL'NOY KLIMATOLOCII I HEKHANIZATSII OBRABO‘I'KI METEOROLOGICHESKOY INFORMATSII
[Works of the West Siberian Regional Scientific Research Institute, No 109. Questions
Re lacing to Regional. Climatology and Hechanization of the Processing of Meteorolo-
Meal Information]. pp 115-117. references 7.

(Irvnl Inn of a filter for detecting gross errors based on taking into account the
change in meteorological elements during adjacent observation periods, detecting
n-rtnln maximum deviations and the dates corresponding to them, and impiementing
this; in ALGOL.

2313. Zlobin, V.A.. Sverdlov. l..Z. and Shadrin. A.D. "Use of a Computer in Per-
rorl'nance of Work on the International Certification System." KLEKTRONNAYA TEKHNIKA,
SER. 8. UPRAVLENIYE KACHESTVOM, HETROLOGIYA, STANDARTIZATSIYA [Electronic Engineer-

ing, Series 8, Quality Control, Metrology, Standardization]. No 6 (84), pp 66-68,
references 6.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR mun“. "SF "NI V

Three groups of statistical problems are described which originate in preparing
for certification ferrite products. in confornity with the requirements of the
International Certification System ("88). The software of problems of the first
and second groups is implemented in ML. The third group of problems concerns
the simulation of plans for statistical acceptance testing and the establishment
of an optimum plan for introduction into specifications for the ES.

2379. Bahayev, 'r.A. "Algorithm for Optima Distribution of Territorial Centers
for Complete Centralized Servicing," VOPROSY RADIOBLEKTIONIKI, SIR. m [Questions
Relating to Radio Electronics, Computer Technology Series], 1980, No 6, pp 77-86.
references 1.

An algorithm in FORTRAN can he used in planning and in expanding the existing
complete servicing system.

2403. Zor'yan, L.B. and Hishchenko. Ye.P. "Determination of the Rate of Scanning
of a Specific Sector by a Tracking Radar." VOPROSY RADIOWIKI, sax. 01', 1980.
No lo, pp 73-78. references 1.

An algorithm in FORTRAN for determining the rate of notion of the electrical axis

of an antenna in terms of azimuth as a function of the dimensions of the scanning

area. the time an aircraft appears in this area. the width of the directional pat-
tern, the size of its rake angle and the scanning rate for tracking radars.

.
2658. Gorskiy. LR. and Colev, V.P. "Control of Complicated Process Organization
Systems Based on Imitative Simulation," VOI’ROSY RADIOELBKTRONIKI, SEE. m. 1980,
No 6, pp 8-19, references 2.

A description is given of FORTRAN programs subdivided in terms of purpose into four
groups: preprocessing of source data and discovery of logical errors; imitative
on-line control; processing of results of simulation by methods of mathematical
statistics and production of output docu-ents; service programs for carrying out a
dialogue with the computer.

2491. Kukharenko. 3.6. and Chironov. V.V. "Simlation of a Complete Centralized
Servicing System," VOPROSY RADIOELBKTRONIKI, SEE. m, 1980. No 6, pp 61-66,

references 3.

A program in GPSS is presented for the imitative simulation of a regional service
center which receives information on computer failures.

249k. Volkov. N.V. and Nuzykin. 8.“. "Study of Nonlinear Systens in the Normal
Functioning Mode" in "Algoritnicheskiye metody i programirovaniye v radioelektro-
nike" [Algorithmic Methods and Programing in Radio Electronics], inter-W2 collec-
tion of scientific works. Ryazan' Radio Engineering Institute. Ryazan', 1980.

pp 27-35, references 2.

A method of identifying nonlinear system by adding white noise to the legitimate

signal. A description is given of expansion of the output signal into a series of
orthogonal Hiener functionals.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu arm 1AI. USE UNI."

_' .
I

Key wards: method. POKAL, Elektronika-lOO/I, nonlinear systems, Wiener method,
identification, output signals.

2573. Drovozyuk, V.S. "Centralized Introduction of 'OKA' and 'KAHA' Packages
of Applied Programs," VOPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKA, SER. EVT, 1980, No 6, pp 67-71.

2580. Khasanov, I.A. "The 'Controller' Program--a Heans of Dialogue Debugging
of Programs Written in Assembly Language," VOPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKI, SER. EVT,
1980, No 6. pp 120-126. references 2.

The program is implemented in the ASSEMBLER language and its capacity is about
20 K bytes. The program's input language is described.

2581. Tsenilov, G.A. ":echnological Aspects of Applied Programming for the 'KAMA'
System," VOPROSY RADIOELEKTRONIKI, SBR. EVT, 1980, No 6, pp 20-34, references 11.

Questions relating to the technology of applied programming based on the operation
approach to designing and developing automated real-time information systems based
on the RAMA package of applied programs.

2582. "Tsifrovyye ustroystva i mikroprotsessory" [Digital Equipment and Micro-
processors]. Latvian SSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Electronics and Computer
Technology, No A, Riga, Zinatne, 1980, 172 pages. Bibliography at end of articles,
ISSN 0137-0480.

Questions relating to the design of microprocessor systems and methods of inter-
facing them with real entities in subsystems for controlling electric trains and
motor vehicles. individual units of microprocessor equipment and digital automation
systems. the development of software by means of cross software, and simulation of
operation.

?590. Bober. L.N., Bober, T.N. and Horev, V.N. "Procedure for Training Specialists
in YcS [Unified Series] Computers by Using Educational Television," VOPROSY RADIO-
ELHKTRONIKI, SER. EVT, 1990, No 6, pp 95-100, references 5.

2656. Vlktnrov, L.P. "HIN--Monitor dlya Interaktivnogo Hodelirovaniys" [The NIH--
Monitor for Interactive Simulation], preprint, Moscow. 1980, 71 pages, on superhead-
ing: All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Research Systems. references 5.

The HIM dialogue system is used on a PDP 11/70 computer when working with models
or global development and other complicated imitative models. The system's in-
structlnn language assigns various scenarios. controls the simulation process and
outputs the results in graph and table form. The size of any problem is less than
or equal to 66 K bytes.

2664. Dul'kn, Ye.N.. Dyad'kin. 1.6., Kalugin, V.A. et a1. "Complex of Software
and Constants for Problems in Nuclear Geophysics on the "-222" in 'lhtematicheskoye
modelirovanlye v yadernoy geofizike" [Mathematical Modeling in Nuclear Geophysics],
USSR Academy of Sciences Bashkir Branch, Ufa, 1979, pp 157-173, references 13.

General software programs and programs for simulating the propagation of neutrons
and gamma quanta in matter in BH-4/220 autocode; standard programs [or the draw game

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()H-‘II'IAI. USE ONLY

for the range of the path of particles in a systm of media with cylindrical inter-
faces are written in FORTRAN in view of the branched logic.

2666. Luzgin. v.s. and Sushkov. 0.6. "One Method of Calculating the Automated
Control System Which Is Optimum in Terms of Efficiency." TEKHNIKA SREDSTV SWAZI.
SER. TEKHNIKA RADIOSVYAZI [Comunicatians Equipment Engineering, Radio Com-mica-
tions Equipment Series]. 1979. No 9 (26), pp 103-109. references 2.

An example is given of the use of a method for calculating on a Yes-1033 compute:
an antenna matching unit which operates at a fixed frequency. Calculation time is
about 2 h.

2669. Savel'yev. P.V., Zhrz'avlev, V.Ye. and Dubonos, S.V. "Program for Statistical
Analysis and Estimation of the Reliability of the Results of Parametric Optimization
of Integrated Circuits" in "Pizicheskiye osnovy mikroelektronilti" [Physical Funda-
mentals of Microelectronics], collection of scientific works, Moscow Institute of
Electronic Engineering, Moscow, 1979. PP 148-157, references 3.

A description is given of the algorithl and structure of the STANAL program which.

based on a statistical analysis, simulates the process of the fabrication of inte-

grated circuits and predicts the yield of suitable ones and estimates the reliabil-
ity of the results of parametric optimization of components. The STANAL program

is written in FORTRAN for the "Dubna" simulation system of MESH-6 computers and

the disk operating system of Yes computers.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennaya publichnaya nauchno-tekhnicheskaya biblioteka SSSR
(GPN‘I‘B SSSR), 1981

8831
(:80: 1863/22

93

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
FOR (WE-1ft“. IISF ()Nl.\~

UDC 681.3.06.001.57
MODELING PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE AT COMPUTER CENTERS

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8. Aug 81 pp 3-5

[Article by A. P. Ivanov, doctor of economic science, and N. V. Tychina, engineer,
in the section "Automated Control Systems"]

[Excerpt] The widespread use of third-generation computers has led to the emergence
of a qualitatively new type of A80 software: application program packages (PPP).
The industrial approach to the development of programs means that the process of
creating them assumes the nature of manufacture of an industrial product. and dis-
seminatlon--the nature of industrial services. The scale of PPP development in our
country and the universal use of Yes computers in control systems have led to the
need of establishing a specialized organization-the NPO [Scientific Production

Association] "Tsentrprogrammsistem" (in Kalinin) whose main task is software
maintenance.

The term "maintenance" implies a broad range of work and services that the NPO
"Tscntrprogrammsistem" performs on economic contract bases for enterprises and or-
ganizations that are implementing ASU'a. By mid 1979, the central stock of algo-
rithms and programs for automated control systems (TsPAP ASU) at the NPO "Tsentr-
programmsistem" was about 150 applica:ion program packages with a total size of
over 5.92 million machine instructions. In 1978 alone, about 2,200 PPP's from over

600 organizations and enterprises in the country were turned over for maintenance
by the specialists of the TsPAP ASU.

By maintenance of application program packages, the following work and services
are generally understood: rendering assistance to users and consultation on
choosing design solutions during operation of programs; obtaining working programs
with adjustment for user parameters, finding and eliminating errors in the text of
programs, creating new versions of :he latter, modification of their functioaal
capabilities; adaptation to the comp .er hardware and software used; changing and
reissuing user documentation for operation of systems.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'srvo "Mashinostroyeniye".
"Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

8545
C50: 1863/256

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma 0'11"" “5" "NI \'

unc 658.51.012.011.56s[681.3.062519.256
cannon or sormas BASED on use or PACKAGE or mum momma

Moscow HEZHOI‘RASLEVYYE VOPROSY NAUKI I TECHNIKI. OBZORNAYA WTSIYAI SOZDANIYE
PRCERAHHNCXEO OBESPMHENIYA NA BAZE ISPOL'ZOVANIYA PAKBI‘OV PRIKIADNYKH PRWRAHH in
Russian No 7. 1981 (signed to press 7 May 81) pp 5-9. 18

[Book entitled ”Creation of Software Based on Use of Packages of Applied Prograls"

by Vladinir Sergeyevich Rumyantsev and Nataliya Yakovlevna Lopatkova. 60813111, 3160
copies, 1&1 pages]

[Excerpts] In the last decade a large number of programs. packages and progra-
systens have been developed in this country. 'Organiaing the acculmlated store of
software is one of the most acute problems in the ontenporary stage. Bach enter-
prise. in developing ASU [auto-ated control cysts-i software had to independently
determine for itself the only correct variant of use of the A80 software fund
available in the country.

F :r example. in the development of the software of the branch ASU of the USSR Illin-
.stry of Construction Industry such packages of applied ograns (PPP) are used as:
PPP-GW [generator woda-vyvoda--in t-output generator 3 PPP-IPZ [lineynogo pro-
granirovaniyaulinear programing 3 PPP-bukhalterskiy uchet [accounting]; PP?-
konvertor [converter]. and for accoaplishllent of control functimsnprograns of
original development. At the sane tine, at the Main Computer Center of the USSR
Ministry of Construction Industry a branch fund of algorithls and programs has been
created which includes programs developed at enterprises of the branch which are of
interest to software developers at related enterprises.

At the ”Energopribor“ experimental plant (Moscow) the software developersnthe
state Scientific Research Planning Institute for Introduction of Colputer Techno-

logy into the Natioml Economy (GRIP! VT. Kazan') and the 'fl‘eentrprogramsisten"
Scientific Production Association (Kalinin)--were oriented toward use of an infor-

mation systea for production control. As a result of emination of the enterprise
and the execution of work on the attachment of packages of the information syste-
for production control. at the plant they gave up use of the PPP-UZ [upravleniye
zapasaliustores control) and the PPP-PH [planirovaniye noshchnostincapacity plan-
ning] is used partially. In addition. many progress of the usable padtsges of the

system were modernized (for example, in part of the orange of the horizon of plan-
ning) and supplemented by progress of original development.

For the “Groanefteorgsintez” (Groznyy) software the software of the A50? [avtomti-
zirovannaya sistena upravleniya predpriyatiyani-autoeated enterprise Imagelent

9S

MOMMUSIMV
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.2y::l.--Iln) rt|::u mu: uln-vnlupml nu Um NHL-I 01° LII” ISUI’ system. but here they gave up
use of the package or the SIOD Lsistema informatsionnoy obrabotki dannykhnintegra-

ted data processing system] as a result of complete change of the package printing
of the output forms.

At one of the ship-maintenance plants the PPP-PHGJ [planirovaniye moshchnosti 1

operativnoye upravleniye--capacity planning and operative control] was selected for
execution of the function.

The "Lenelektronmash" Scientific Production Association (Leningrad) is developing

software or the basis of the I'Zapros" system for the undertaking of basic taSts
implementing the automted enterprise management system.

Thus. some enterprises develop soft-tare using individual standard modules and pro-
grams. others. packages of applied programs; still others-~b0th: others use program
systems (completely or partially, selecting packages or individual programs from
the PPP); still other-slink scattered packages into a single program system and sup-
plenent original developments, etc. As practice shows. in the process of attaching
standard software they are modernized. modified and corrected. and this expands the
circle of potential users of these means of automtion.

The use of standard software in ASU planning assures a reduction of the time. cost
and labor-intensivcncss of ASU creatim for each specific purchaser. a high degree
of reliability of the software. a systematic nature and efficiency of introduction
of changes in the ASUP software to meet requirements of the purchase. and also cre-
ates possibilities of exchange of experience for the purpose of teaching the per-
sonnel the work under the conditions of functioning of the ASU. exchange of programs.
for the solution of problems of control and data processing. the cooperation of user

organizations to create general classifiers of information files and methodical
materials.

The results of investigating ”directions of standardimtion of ASU special software
L12.13-I permit the conclusion that the subsystem method has a higher degree of in-
tegration of elements than the elementary method and therefore the process of cre—
atlng ASUP software on the basis of them is more effective. In recent time an in-

crease ir. the use of packages of applied programs is noted. and this is explained
by:

--consta.nt increase of the software fund (Table 1). and in particular of the PPP in

the Ta“? [tsentral'nyy fond algoritmov i programn--central fund of algorithm and
programs]--—in the last 3 years alone the number of PP? for Yes colputers has become
3.3 times as large:

--low cost of acquiring packages as compared with financial and labor expenditures
on developing them. Usually the specific cost of a mchine instruction of an indi-
vidually developed program is h-S rubles. The “Tsentrprogmlmsistem” Scientific
and Production Association sells programs of the fund at a price of 3 kopecks.
which together with expenditures on the organization and introductim of pr

is reduced to a third or a half of expenditures on individual development C9_ . In
addition. in the USSR the cost of PP? acquisition is 1 percent of expenditures on
its development (in foreign countries. about 10 percent) [16']. The labor-intensive-
ness of the development of ASUP software with the use of I80? PPP. for example. is
reduced by about 30 percent on the whole;

96

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1 Volume of fund I! I of

Number Number organisations

Y of of mchine using ASU TsFAP

4.5-1.- programs instructions
{items} {1000 items}

1974 ll 1‘08 #2

1975 3b 205? 228

1976 6“ 2909 35“

19?? 10a 11300 516

1978 150 5600 600

1979 180 6300 700

1980 200 9000 1000

--a shortage of qualiﬁed specialists in the area of programming.

The use of PP? permits ASUP developers to have a set of working programs which ser—
vice specific needs; to shorten the time taken to obtain working programs from the
start of planning and reduce the cost of work on programing (if the P has already
been organized); to exclude the step of posing most problems in the development of
a technical plan. to vary the programing and debugging of prograls by selecting
parameters of generation in the corresponding language of the package and the gen-
eration of working programs.

PPP users are attracted by simplicity of operation. flexibility (the possibility of
introducing changes without substantial expenditures), reduction of the number of

specialists. who for: the intermediate link between personnel management and the
data processing system.

The saving from introduction of software of the centralised fund of the 'Tsentrpro-
grammsistem" Scientific Production Association in 1979 was more ttnn 20 million
rubles, but in that year the association was able to satisfy only; half the demands
of organisations and enterprises of the country for the delivery of programs. This
is a result of limited production capacities of the association and an inadequate
quantity of software in the ASU TsFAP.

To further develop the industry of production of A811 software. in the Tenth Five-

Year Plan organizations of various ministries and departments of the country. under
the leadership of the USSR State Committee for Science and Technolog. carried out

a complex program of work on the creation of over 100 A50 programs for use appli-
cation. and in the Eleventh Five-Year Plan a hu-ther expansion of the fund of al-
gorithms and programs is proposed. In connection with that a need arises in ASth

users and developers for i-provement of the forms and methods of control and dis-
semination of the created software.

The successful solution of that problem ought to inprove the quality of the soft-

ware developed, to contribute to the standardization of work on the use of hardware
to create conditions for software interchangeability. to assure the interest of

software developers in repeated use of their product to supplement the fund of ap-
plied programs. and also to further modernize the existing software and to increase

97

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ristics of hardware a

SUP SPO -P1

'al-purpose 1 genera
information) P!

ional-pur- 8 ﬂan-ti
P's pose PH
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the efﬁciency of ASU by standardizing woﬁ'. on the planning and technolOgy of soft-
ware creation.

At present work is being done in that directim t1 the "reentrprogrannsisteu" Soi-
cntific Production Association (Kalinin). the "Lenslektronnash" Scientific Produc-

tion Association (Leningrad). the can: vr (Kazan'). the Scientific Research Plan-

ning Institute of Automted Control Systels (um ASH. Volgograd) and other omni-
nations.

then. as a rule. the variant of software develop-ent is repeated. Therefore il-
provement of the organization of control of the fund of algorithm and progress
and, in particular. the development of a system of estimtes of the readiness of

all standard software (privarily PPP) will permit deter-hing the rational variant
of software creation under the specific ASUP conditions.

tion, the operating s star. the interactive facilities, the counter node of opera-
tion. the stores. etc‘. Each PPP assures the presence at the enterprise of defin-
ite ferns and methods of intonation organisation and its collectiai. preparation
and perforation; in addition. as a rule. the intonation carriers. the file fornts
and characteristics, the operational and flow technology of proeseing, etc, are
fixed. The entire aggregate of software of a given package he a strictly deter-
mined architecture reflecting the informtional and functicnal relations of the
programs in the PP (programs mnction. oforganination and serving without data.
input-output, of data monitoring and trans-lesion, organizing. etc). In the dis-
sellnation of packaging. besides transmission of the pmgzu texts (print-outs of
then on mchine eedia) a large volume of won‘t is done in connection with improve-

the standard it is necessary to develop lethodicel guides on the attach-eat and use

of the package). maintenance. instruction of users in work with the package and
other types of work.

COPYRIGHT: Gosudarstvennyy nauchno-issledovatel'ekiy institut nauclmoy i
tekhnicheskoy informtsii (cosnrri). 1981

217“
cso: 1863/33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

030 51:681.3:007

HULTILEVEL STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF PROGRAMS: FORMALIZATION OF THE. METHOD - SP!!!“
OF APPLICATIONS

Kiev KIBERNETIKA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 pp 42-65

[Article by V. H. Glushkov, G. Ye. Taeytlin and Ye. L. Yushchenko]

[Excerpts] Intensive studies on programming technology are underway today.1

Work [11] gives a thorough analysis of the basic problems that arise in this
field and notes the significant contribution to its development made by the
Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences: the method of
formalized technical specifications [18. 19], R-technology [5, 6], and structural
programing based on systems of algorithmic algebras (SM) [10. 22]. The ap-
paratus of SM proposed in 1965 is adequate to the conception of structural pro.-
grsming which has received universal recOgnition and broad distribution in
recent times [27, 28. 35. 52]. The distinguishing characteristics of the SAA
apparatus in comparisonuith other sell-known algorithmic systems (for exasple
[32]) lies in I': possibility. owing to its programming orientation. of solving
the problem of a uniform formal description of the structures of the algorithms
am] the programs associated with them in the process of their joint development.
It should be noted that this problem is comparable in significance to the problem
of joint designing of the hardware and software of contemorary comutars [15].

Further development of the mathematical foundations of structural programing was
embodied in the method of multilevel structural designing of programs [56, 23],
which combines modified SM [54, 22] with formal models of languages [9. 20].

The development of programs using the multilevel structural program design
method consists in a formal description of them in terms of regular 3AA charts
at each level of design and formalization of the process and level-by-level
transfers by constructing an outlet in the corresponding grammatical model. An-
other important advantage of the multilevel structural program design technique

 

lSee "Tr. I. Vsevoyuz, Konf. po Tekhnologii Programirovsniya. Kiev-J9"
[works of the let All-Union Conference on Programing Technology. Kiev-79];
KIBERNETIKA, 1980, No 2; PROGRAmIROVANIYE, 1980, No 2; UPRAVLYAYUSRCIIIYE

SISTBHY I HASHINY. 1980. No 2.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is that it is coordinated with other well-known programming technologies [5, 19,
SO, 34]. This makes it possible to use this technique in the highest stages of

development of algorithms and programs, which makes it possible later to use
the developed apparatus for formalization of data structures and the language and
program means available in the well-known technologies.

The present article is a survey or results obtained within the framework of
structural programming using the multilevel structural program design technique,
an important direction in theoretical and system programming. In particular we
will present results that were given at the all-Union seminar "Structural
Programming in Systems of Algorithmic Algebras - Kiev-81."2 (works [56, 69, 23]
were also devoted to development of the mathematical foundations of this line of
study.)

Section 1 presents the conception of structural design grammars, which is the
basis of the multilevel structural program design method. The article proposes

a classification of methods of program development according to ascending,
descending, and mixed strategies. The problem of multilevel partial verification
of programs, their transformation, and documentation in the process of develop-
ment and further accompaniment is formulated on the basis of the structural
design grammars apparatus. The multilevel structural level program design method
is illustrated with a series of programs being designed.

Section 2 is devoted to development of the tools of structural programming by
the multilevel structural level design technique. The linguistic and program
means which are its foundation are presented. We review the problem of multi—
level optimizing translation within which the HUL'TIPROTSESSIST system is being
developed. This system is oriented to automation of structural parallel pro-

gramming by the multilevel structural program design technique.

Results from application of the multilevel structural program design technique

to problems of symbolic processing are given in section 3. There is a description
of the process of structural design of the PARTBAN (multilevel parallel conveyor-
type translator) system and components of minicomputer and microcomputer software.

Section 4 gives an abstract model of a homogeneous computing system [29, 30, 39].
Formal means of structural design of parallel programs based on the apparatus of
modified 8AA are developed. The article gives results from designing components
of homogeneous computing systems software and multimachine complexes. The problem
of automating the develcpment of simulation modeling systems for communications
networks is reviewed.

Section 5 is devoted to results of structural designing in automated control sys-
tem problems. The architecture of the TEKHNOLOG system is reviewed. This system
is oriented to automating the process of technological preparation for production

applying the multilevel structural program design technique. There is a formal
description of the process of structural design of programs to process large files
within the framework of a typical automated control system problem. Prospects

 

 

28cc "Scientific Information" section of this issue of the journal.

101

FOR 0FTWC]A[.USE1NVLY
F0“ (DI-1"" IAI. NSF. "NI."

Iut lurllwt ulvvvlnlnumll m applied structural programing by the multilevel
structural program design method are outlined. Figure 1 below illustrates the
interrelationship of the theoretical and applied aspects of structural pro-
graming by the multilevel structural program design method.

The results presented in sections 1-3 and 5 were obtained under direction of the
authors of this survey.

 

Figure 1. Multilevel Structural Program Design and Its
Applications.

Key: (1) Abstract Models of Hultiprocessors;
(2) Theory of Modified SM;
(3) Theory of Formal Languages;
(lo) Multilevel Structural Program Design Method;

(5) ANALIST;
(6) HUL'TIPROTSESSIST;
(7) PARTRAN;

(8) Hinicomputer Software;
(9) Software of Homogeneous Computing Systems;
(10) TEKHNOLOC.

 

This approach to setting up subsystems for operational accounting for production
was successfully used in setting up a subsystem of the automated control system
of the Hikhaylovsk Mining and Concentrating Combine. The subsystem was formu-
lated independently by the structural and nonstructural approaches (see Table 3
below). In addition, it should be noted that the structural approach made it

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-HUM. USE ONLY

Table 3.
Feature of Development Structural Approach Nonstructural Approach
Total Development Time 91 Days 142 Days
Development of Algorithms and Programs 24 Days 52 Days
Full-Scale Debugging 5 Hours 12 Hours
Volume of Complex 560 Operations 753 Operations

 

possible to obtain understandable programs that are easily modified and convenient
to accompany .

In conclusion we will observe that as applied structural programming by the multi-

level structural program design technique develops further it is contemplated that
the following will be worked out:

- apparatus for context control of output to structural de-
sign grammars to insure a flexible interface between the
program modules under develop-eat and to see that efficient
decisions are made in the process of their structural design;

- system of multilevel parallel verification and transformation
of the circuits of the structured programs on the basis of
further development of the ANALIST package;

- multilevel interactive optimizing translation-type systen
from the family of SAA-chart languages based on further
development of the HUL'TIPROTSESSIST system;

- the PARTRAN system, components of homogeneous computing systems,
minicomputers and microcomputers, and the TBKHNOLOG system in
which the HUL'TIPROTSESSIST system will be used as a tool;

- formal apparatus for describing the functioning of a collective

of developers in the process of compiling large program com-
plexes by the multilevel structural program design method;

- course of programd teaching in the multilevel structural
program design method based on the STOK system.

FOOTNOTES

23. V. H. Clushkov, G. Ye. Tseytlin, and Ye. L. Yushchenko, "Problems of Analysis
and Synthesis of Structured Parallel Programs," KIBBRNETIKA, 1981, No 3,
pp 1-16.

54. G. Ye. Tseytlin, "The Probles of Identity Transformations of the Circuits of
Structured Programs with Closed Logical Conditions. parts 1-3," KISSINETIKA,
1978, No 3, pp 50-57; No 4, pp 10-18; 1979. No 5, pp 4b-Sl.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H"! ('l-TN'I \l I'Sl UNI \

ml. u. Yr. 'l‘ucytlln. "Am-Inmates at Structural Parallel Programming and Its
Applicatlons." LECTURE NOTES ON COHPUTBR SCIENCE, 1979, No 74, pp 676-481.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKDVA 0mm". mm", 1981

11,176
cso: 1863/16

1010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill OFF“ 1.“ IISF "NI \'

000 519.8
INVESTIGATION OP METRODS OF SOLVING OPTIMIZATION PROBLEIS AND ram APPLICATIGIS
Kiev KIBERNETIKA in Russian No 6, Jul-Aug 81 pp 89-113
[Article by V. S. Hikhalevich, I. V. Sergiyenko and N. 2. Shot]

[Excerpts] Making the east economical and sound decisions in an essential re-
quire-eat of practical planning and magenent in the national econony. The
broad introduction of corputer hardware in recent years has denountrated that
it is not possible to achieve high efficiency and raise labor productivity if
we liait ourselves to solving infatuation problem only, without optinizing the
production of output or the indicators of its economic efficiency. For this
reason, the role of neth and algorithm for solving optimisation problems is
growing in the software of autonated systeas at different levels and for dif-
ferent purposes.

The problea area related to the methodology of asking optinal decisions, inves-
tigating the properties of coupler extrenal problens, constructing efficient
conputing algorithms for optimization and appropriate software. and using these
facilities to solve coaplex planning, design. and nanagenent problens has been
developed at the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Acadely of
Sciences froa the first days of its existence [50. 58]. In recent years signifi—
cant results have been obtained in the fields of sequential netth of decision-
naking in the investigation of necessary and sufficient extrenun conditions in
complex optinization problems, constructing efficient algorithm for solving
problens of nonlinear programing and rough optiairation problens, the develop-
nent of decomposition schemes, stochastic progra-ing, and solving discrete and
discrete-continuous optiaization problem and mlticriterion problem. This
article briefly presents the principal results received by the research collec-
tive of the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR in these fields of
study, including the main applications and develop-eat of packages of applied
programs.

Theoretical research in the area of construction of automted progran facilities,
including packages of applied prograns, began at the Institute of Cybernetics of
the Ukrainian SSR Acadeny of Sciences in the late 1950's, after the publication
of work [11]. In a number of subsequent works V. H. Glushkov and his students
elaborated the basic ideas presented in [11], including their application to

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'l-‘li‘l.\l I'SF ()Vl.\'

ilw Iurnmlatlun ol packages oi programs designed for solving various classes of
optimization problems. This led to the development of a number of elaborate
interactive packages of applied programs, for example DISPRO. t should be
noted that in some cases the interactive facilities of the packages of applied
programs become very effective tools for solving and investigating optimization
problems [12]. especially when it is necessary beforehand t study mathematical
models of the problems and trace the impact of change in particular parameters
in the model of the problem and the solution method being used on the optimiza-
tion process. The interactive mode of solving complex optimization problems
makes it possible. in a certain sense, not only to save time searching for the
solution, but also to take a new approach to the procedure for finding it.

Projects on optimization methods that have been done at the Institute of Cyber-
netics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences have been highly praised in our
country and abroad. However. a great deal remains to be done in order that the
apparatus for selecting optimal decisions which has been developed may become
an effective means for solving complex economic planning and design problems.

V. M. Glushkov's article [15] points out a new line of work in systems optimiza-
tion, related to overcoming the limitations of the statements of the optimization
problems and means of solving them. This approach envisions a hierarchy of op-
timization models and active participation by specialists who during the

process of reaching optimal decisions adjust both the relative importance of the
various criteria and the boundaries of the permissible domain of solutions.

The classical statements of extremal problems occur as local sub-problems in
different stages of systems optimization. The ideas expressed by V. M. Glushkov
were carried out. specifically, in the DISPLAN system [12].

We hope that the scientific and program background work of the Institute of
Cybernetics \f the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences in solving various classes
of optimization problems will make it possible to formulate new software for
solving important new practical problems of optimal planning, management, and
design quickly on the basis of the systems approach to decision—making.

One of the versions of the OGSRP [Generalized Gradient Release with Elongation of
Space in the Direction of the Gradient], which was independently worked out in
works [107] and [110] has become widely known under the name "ellipsoids method."
This method can be considered a particular case of a gradient-type algorithm with
elongation of space in the direction of the gradient. 0n the other hand, it has
the following geometric interpretation: suppose the minimum of concave function
[(x). xiEn is localized in an n-dimensional sphere of radius R with center at
point x0. He will compute the subgradient 8f(xo) and construct the hyperplane

P = [x:(gf)xo). x-xo) = 01. This hyperplane severs the hemisphere

[x:||x—r,|| <R; (”(30), 1..“ <0}. in which the minimum is localized. We will
describe the ellipsoid of minimum volume arOund the hemisphere. Based on con-
slderations of symmetry it is easy to see that its center 2] is located on are
xo—hgf(xo). h = 0 and the ellipsoid is flattened (oblate) in the direction
gffxo). A siuple calculation shows that

i‘ ‘ "° — n“+'T Timiifu '

and the coefficient of "flatness" is equal to l//-R-l . . After employing the

 

 

[06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"H" “I III l\l I'\l c'\‘l \

a: _n+l i
operation of elongating the space with elongation coefficient n—T . in
the elongated space we obtain a sphﬂe with center at point y], an image of
point :1. and with a radius R.= z- I . in which the image of the minimum

function f (x) is localized. The r'bc-e—ss in subsequent iterations goes exactly
the same as in the first iteration.

 

 

In this interpretation the algorithm of ellipsoids can be viewed as a modifica-
tion of the center of gravity method [110] in which the ellipsoid described is
used to make the area obtained after severing ayanetrical. The algorithm is
easily generalized to solve the general problem of concave programming.

The ellipsoids method converges according to the functional at the rate of a geo-
metric progression whose denominator I

In z ' _ 2—01
depends only on the dimensionality of the space. This remarkable property was
employed in works [92. 1.3] in the construction of very interesting, from the
standpoint of complexity theory, algorithm for exact solutions to problems of
linear and quadratic programing with whole-number coefficients that work for
a polynomial time in relation to the bit volume of the problem's raw data.
These works caused a sensation abroad and the situation was exacerbated by on-

founded hopes that the ellipsoids method in its primitive form would be com-

petitive with the simplex method. However, elementary analysis of the formla
l

‘- z | — 5!
shows that even where n - 100 it takes 46,000 iterations to improve precision by
one decimal order.

After the publication of work [92] between September 1979 and Hay 1980 66 ar-
ticles appeared devoted to different refinements of the ellipsoids method (see
bibliographic work [119]). It should be observed that most of these refine-
ments were contained in works done earlier at the Institute of Cybernetics of
the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences [10, 109]. As shown in [110. 62], the
beat algorithm for the class of n-dimensional problems of concave programming
insures an error by the functional and constraints on the order of t and should
make 0(n log llc) iterations connected with cowputing the functions and sub-
gradients at one point. The center of gravity method [110] which requires the
same number of iterations by order is practically inapplicable because the com-
plexity of one iteration increases very rapidly with a muster of iterations
where n z 3. To receive the same level of precision the ellipsoids method re-
quires 0(n2 log l/s) iterations. Unfortunately, at the present time there is
no algorithm which. while requiring o(n2) supplementary operations (in addition
to calculation of the function and gradient) at each iteration, can guarantee
in a theoretically substantiated manner the relative error of the order s

for 0(n° log llc) iterations where o<2. However, as long ago as 1970 a method
was proposed [105, 108] which in complexity is close to the OGSRP method and in-
sures in practice a relative error on the order of e for 0(n log 1/e) steps,
which was confirmed by the results of solving a large number of test and prac-
tical problems [108. 61]. although no theoretical substantiation of the rate of
convergence of this method has been done yet. we are speaking of the class of

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFN'MI. ['SF "NIX

gradient-type algorithms with elongation of space in the direction of the dif—
ference of two consecutive gradients (in short form, r-algorithms). An intera-
tion of an r—algorithm has the following form. After k steps we obtain: ah is
approximation k, the k approximation; hk, the symmetrical, positively defined
matrix of transformation of the metric of the space; and, gf(xk_4), the sub-
gradient at the preceding point.

In iteration (k+1) we compute:

U 2'10“];
2) ’n = 8101—1) — R! (In);

1 Ha'n'zﬂa .
3) H.+I=H.—(l —5-) iii—«773'

H g (In)
_ ————.———l—————_‘ '
4) In}! — XI + h‘ V (H‘s (x0. 2(xh»

In this case. as in the OGSRP algorithm, Bk. 0< 8k < 1 is a coefficient inverse
to the coefficient up of elongation of the space at step k; hk is the step multi-
plier. The different modifications of the r-algorithm are linked to a concrete
choice of sequence {up} and the method of regulation {ht} [38, 105, 108]. The
family of roalgorithms proved a very effective means of solving problems of
ravine-type smooth and rough optimization. The very first experiments, con—
ducted with test problems [105], showed that the r-algorithm is practically as
good as the well-known quasinewtonian and conjugated direction algorithms for
minimizing smooth ravine—type functions. This algorithm demonstrated high
efficiency in solving minimax problems [108]. Combined with the methods of de-
composition and rough penalty functions it was used successfully to solve prob-
lens of large dimensionality for sectorial current and medium-range planning in
civil aviation [108], the gas industry [61], ferrous metallurgy, the radio in-
dustry, material-technical supply, and for optimization of design elements and
determining parameters of location by processing geophysical data [108]. Thus,
when planning the loading of USSR pipe rolling mills and the distribution of
customer orders (the work was done by the Institute of Cybernetics of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences together with the All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of the Pipe Industry of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Hetale
lurgy) the r-algorithm was used with a decomposition scheme to solve linear
programming problems with 300,000 variables and 20,000 constraints; with a num-
ber of iterations on the order of 600 a relative precision based on the functional
of lO'Gwasachieved. The advantage of this algorithm over other methods for
solving complex problems of rough optimization was also confirmed by studies made
at the International Institute of Applied System Analysis (IIASA) [116]. It
should be noted that r-algorithms are used to find the local minimum of non-
concavc linear programming problems, in finding estimates of the functional

by the "branches and boundaries" method, and in other places. At the present
time there is lively debate on the question of the practical competitiveness

of the new iterative algorithms compared to procedures based on the simplex
method for solving large-dimensionality linear programming problems. In our
opinion, algorithms of the r-algorithm type have a great future in this respect,
especially for solving structured linear programming problems.

)08

rOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

15.

43.

50.

58.

61.

62.

92.

105.

107.

108.

110.

FUR 00-1111“ I‘SF “NI \

FOOTNOTES

V. I. Gerahovich, "A Method of Truncation That Uses Linear Transforma-
tions of Space," in "Teoriya 0ptina1'nykh neaheniy" [Optimal Decision
Theory], Kiev, 1979, pp 15-23.

V. M. Gluahkov, "One Method of Automating Programing," in "Probleny
Kibernetiki" [Problems of Cybernetics], Moscow, 1959. pp 181-184.

V. M. Glushkov, and G. B. Oleyarsh, "The DISPLAN Interactive Planning
System," UPRAVLYAYUSHCHIYB SISTEM! I MASEINY 1976, No 6, pp 123-124.

V. M. Glushkov, “Systen Optimization," KIBERNETIKA 1980, No 5, pp 89-90.

M. K. Kozlov, S. P. Tarasov, and L. G. Khachiyan, "Polynonial Solubility
of Concaae Quadratic Programing," DOKL. Ali SSSR, 1979, 268, No 5,
pp 1049-1051.

V. S. Mikhalevich, "Operations Research and Solving Multivariant Prob-
lems," in "‘l‘r. Elton. Mat. Seminara/ Lab. Bkon.-Mat. Metodov AN 885]!"
[Works of the Mathematical Economics Seminar] Laboratory of Mathemtical
Economic Methods of the USSR Acadely of Sciences], Moscow, 1962,

Vyp 1, pp 1-14.

V. S. Hikhalevich, Yu. M. Yermol'yev, V. V. Shkurba, and N. Z. Shor,
"Complex Systems and Solving Extremal Problem," RIDERNETIKA 1967,
No 5, pp 29-39.

V. S. Mikhalevich, I. V. Sergiyenko, A. I. Kuksa, and others,
”Vychialitel'nyye Metody Vybora Optimal'nykh Proyektnykh Resheniy" [Com-
puting Methods of Selecting Optimal Planning Decisions], Kiev, "Maukova
mm", 1979, 118 pages.

A. S. Nemirovakiy, and D. B. Yudin, "Slozhnost' Zadach i Bffiktivnost'
Metodov Optinizatsii" [Problen Complexity and the Effectiveness of Optini-
zation Methods], Moscow, ”Nauka", 1979, 386 pages.

L. G. Khachiyan, "Polynomial Algorithn of Linear Programing," non. AN
SSSR, 244, No 5, pp 1093-1096.

N. z. Shor, and N. G. Zhurbenko, "Mininization Technique Using the Opera-
tion of Spatial Elongation in the Direction of the Difference of Two
Sequential Gradients," KIBBRNBTIKA 1971, No 3, pp 51-59.

N. 2. Shot, "The Cut-Off Method with Spatial Elongation," KBBWIKA
1977, No 1, pp 94-95.

N. Z. Shor, "Metody Mininizatsii Nedifferentsiruyemykh Punktsii i Ikh
Prilozheniye" [Methods of Mininizing Nondifferentiable Functions and Their
Application], Kiev, "Naukova Dunka", 1979, 200 pages.

D. B. Yudin, and A. S. Neairovskiy, "Infornation Complexity and Efficient
Methods of Solving Concave Extremal Problems," EKONOMIKA I MAT. MBTODY
1976, 12, Vyp 2, pp 357-369.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UR "HI! 3“ I'\I-' ﬂ-u'l \

116. C. Lenarechul, and P. Nifflin (editors). "Nonsuooth Optimization," PROC.
INT. INST. APPL. SYSTEMS ANALYS. HORKSHOP, New York, Pergamon Press,
1977, 186 pages.

119. Ph. Wolfe, "A Bibliography for Ellipsoid Algorithm. Res. Rep.,"
RC 8237, New York. IBM Thomas J. Watson Res. Center, 1980, 6 pages.

WPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUHKA", "KIBERNETIKA", 1981

11 , 176
C50: 1863/16

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-3 ONLY

REVIEW 0? NE" BOOK ON MULTIPLE PROGRAMMING TECHNIQUES
Kiev KIBBRNETIKA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 p 160

[Review by H. R. shura-Bura of book "Hetody Simvol'noy Hul'tiobrabotki" (Methods
of Symbolic Multiple Processing) by V. H. Glushkov, G. Ye. Tseytlin and Ye. L.
Yushchenko, "Naukova Dunks", Kiev, 1980. 262 pages]

[Text] Contemporary computer technology is entering the age of highly produc-
tive multiprocessor computing systems. It can be expected that highly productive
multiprocessor systems will greatly intensify the development of the machine
intellect just as collective labor promoted the shaping of human reason. The
level of the machine intellect is largely determined by the structure and
quality of computer system software.

The monograph under review, by prominent Soviet scientists V. H. Glushkov, G. Ye.
Tseytlin. and Ye. L. Yushchenko, is devoted to timely problems of theoretical
and systems parallel programming that are arising in connection with the design-
ing of language processors for multiprocessor computing systems. The overall
structure of the book comprises an introduction, six chapters arranged in two
sections, and an extensive bibliography.

The introduction is methodological in nature and contains a dialectical

analysis of research on the hardware and software of computer systems. It em-
phasizes the necessity of formalizing the process of designing programs on the
basis of a synthesis of algebraic apparatus and theoretical linguistic apparatus
in connection with solving timely problems of theoretical and systems pro-
gramming.

Section 1 consists of three chapters. It is devoted to the use of formal

models of language multiprocessora. Significant attention is given to the
systems of algorithnic algebra proposed as far back as 1965 by V. H. Glushkov
which anticipated the conception of structural programming. which has become
widespread recently. The section presents basic results on the schematology of
structural parallel programming, which is based on the theory of modified sys-
tems of algorithmic algebras oriented to formalization of the multiple processing

process.

111

INJR OFFICIAL USIICNULY
PM! "FF" I“ l SF "VI \

There is an Investigation of gramnatical and automat models of languages.
within the framework of these models the mechanisms of parallel removability
of three types, descending. ascending, and mixed, are developed. An apparatus
is developed for synchronous parallel matrix grammars, in whose terms the con-
trolled parallel descending removal is carried out.

Section 2, which contains chapters 4-6, is devoted to the problems of analysis
and synthesis of language multiprocessors. It investigates the problem of
parallel analysis on the basis of the grammatical and automst language models
considered in Section 1. The section proposes two-dimensional and three-
dimensional parallel matrix algorithms by means of which the linearity of the
upper estimate of the time complexity of parallel syntactical analysis of con-
text-less languages on homogeneous structures is established. These algorithms
are formalized interns of multidimensional periodically determined transforma-
tions that carry out the strategy of synchronous multiple processing.

A separate chapter is devoted to the theory of parametric models of language
multiprocessors oriented to bilateral analysis, which combines descending and
ascending symbolic multiple processing of programs from opposite ends. The
mechanisms of context control of non-impasse bilateral analysis, on which the
functioning of the corresponding parallel analyzers is based, are developed.
The Ginsburg problem, consisting of a characterization of the class of unique
context-free languages. is solved in terms of parametric grammars. Parametric
models of language multiprocessors oriented to multilevel analysis, which is a
natural generalization of bilateral multiple processing, are developed.

The authors do not restrict themselves to purely mathematical investigations.
They devote adequate attention to applications of these results in connection
with the designing of parallel programming systems for highly productive multi-
processor computing systems. They formulate the basic principles of the
structural and program organization of such systems and give a general
description of the well-known domestic projects: homogeneous computing systems,
recursive machines, and the MARS [Intersectorial Automated Republic Scientific-
chhnicai Information System] system. The book proposes an architecture for

a multilayer parallel conveyor-type translator and gives structural definitions
in terms of modified systems of algorithmic algebras and particular blocks.

The apparatus of modified systems of algorithmic algebras is the basis of the
MUL'TIPROTSESSIST system. which is an instrument for structural parallel pro-
gramming.

An unquestioned strongpoint of the monograph is the completeness of the presenta-
tion. which is achieved by consistently detailing material using analogies with
the conception of descending program design. The linking elements here are
circuits for bilateral conveyor and carousel multiple processing whose concrete
forms lead to systems processes that arise during parallel translation, super-
vision, designing parallel programs, and solving various other important problems
of contemporary programming.

It should be noted that the authors sometimes are too brief in pointing to
possible generalizations from the concepts they have introduced. In their

[[2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consideration of certain abstract concepts it would have been timely to point
out the constraints that are essential for practical realization. In the
process of describing multilayer analysis [Section 5.3] they do not explicitly
point out the parenthetical character of the structure of constraints which in-

sure decoQosition of the progras under analysis into corponents that can he
put through multiple processing.

This monograph by V. H. Glushkov. G. Ye. 'l‘seytlin, and Ye. 1.. Yushchenko is

one of the first in world literature devoted to timely problem of theoretical and
systems parallel programing. It gives a full treatment to the authors' original
results in the theory of language nultiprocessors and its applications and to
donestic and foreign research touching this area (this work is dispersed in may
journals and anthologies). The book is written in understandable language and
has a great deal of illustrative naterial. There is no question that it will be
useful to a broad range of ruthenaticians and engineers working in the field of
theoretical and systens programing, in particular on designing the structure and
program software of highly productive sultiproceasor coquting systems. It will
also be useful to graduate and upper division college students specializing in
the corresponding field.

oornucm: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUMKA", "KIBERNETIKA". 1981

11, 176
680: 1863/16

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPLICATIONS

COMPUTER mm IN CONTROL OF SYSTEMS nmmrm

Moscow vopnosr nasnmxn; upmmzyz RAZVITIYEH SISTBH in Russian 1979 pp 67-65

[Article by s. I. Samoylenko, Moscow]

[Excerpts] The phases of development of cosplex systems are con-
sidered and the main functions of control cosputer netvoxks are
determined. noun methods of switching are analyzed. The need
to use automatically rearranged switching methods is substanti-
ated. The principle of adaptive switching is suggested. Opti-
nization problems that arise at individual phases of control of
systems development are analyzed and some approaches to finding
solutions of these problems are presented.

It follows from the results found in [l]:

1. In the case of continuous messages, the packet switching method with constant
virtual channel provides better results with relatively short messages in the range
of approximately BOO-1,000 bits.

with longer messages, the channel switching method provides better results provided
that an optimum part of the capacity of the total channel (from 2 to 8 channels
with speed of. 2,400 bits/s) is allocated to transmit signal intonation related to

channel organization .

A
9-:
v

  

rm. schism. m
ﬂ
-.

 

0.
cm lune m, Ian (6)

Figure 4. Dependence of Delay on Message length with channel utilization
Factor of 50 Percent

[Key on following page]

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I-‘If‘IAI. USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page]:

1. Average delay, seconds

2. Alternate message (channel switching)

3. Nutter of channels for transmission of service information
4. Switched virtual channel

5. Constant virtual channel

6. Average message length, bits

2. The packet switching method provides better results at practically the entire
range of message lengths with composite messages.

3. The packet switching method with constant virtual channels provides better re-
sults over the entire range of message lengths under consideration (from approxi-
nately 500 to 40,000 hits) both for continuous and for caposits messages with
channel utilization factor of 75 percent.

Approximately the same results were also found for channels with long propagation
time, specifically for satellite lines with channel utilization factor of 50 per-
cent and above in the range of message length from approximately 200 to 20,000 hits.
It follows from the given consideration that the range of effective use of differ-
ent switching methods depends both on the average length of the messages to be
transmitted and on a number of other factors, specifically, on the load of the net-
work at a given moment, propagation time in the channel and so on.

An estimate of the cost of transmission with different switching methods shows that
the nest eomomical method of transmission is achieved in packet-switching networks
for short messages and in channel-switching networks for long messages. The most
economical method of transmission under real conditions with mixed traffic is the
integrated method in which channel switching and packet switching are combined
[8-11].

Thus, specifically, the method of combining channel and packet switching on the
basis of using information frames consisting of N packets of fixed length in the
transmission channel was proposed in [10]. Part of the frame, consisting of N1
packets, is used in the channel switching mode to form N1 channels with time pack-
ing while the remaining part of length N - N1 packets is used in the packet switch-
ing mode. The value of N], can be varied.

This system permits one to costine channel and packet switching but specific de-
ficiencies are inherent to it. (he can include the following along them:

1. Assignment of packets for an entire system of fixed length leads to underutil-
ization of the channel capacity if the packets actually transmitted have a length
shorter than that given.

2. The intervals free of transmission are not utilized within the messages upon

transmission in the channel switching mode of corposite ressages, which reduces
the utilization factor of capacity.

115

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Adaptive Switching

It follows from the given consideration that the effectiveness of using channel ca-
pacity with different methods of comunication switching and consequently the cost
of transmission are considerably dependent on the nature of the messages to be
transmitted.

However, the precise value of the message parameters on which depends the effective-
ness of the switching method is unknown not only during design of the network but
during operation of it as well and because of this, clear selection of the optimum
switching method for the system being design is an essentially unsolvable problu.

The only possibility of providing high efficiency of the network is to use adaptive
principles of switching in which different switching methods can be used in thenet-
work and distribution of the capacities among them is adaptive, depending on the
state of the network at a given moment.

let us consider some possible approaches to construction of computer networks with
adaptive switching. An adaptive switching method is outlined below that combines
the principles of packet and channel switching and that permits distribution of
channel capacity for use in the channel or packet switching mode as a function of
the needs occurring at a given moment. This method permits one to utilise pauses
in composite messages.

The essence of the method is as follows.

Let us assume that there is a wideband channel with capacity of Rr characters per
second, which can be subdivided into N channels made available to users with trans-
mission rate of Rp : Rim/N between two adjacent switching terminals. we provide
adaptive switching, transmission through the channel is carried out by synchronous
cycles by N characters in each, which we shall call frames. Bach positial of the
frame can be regarded as an individual channel with rate Rp with time packing in
the cannon channel.

The problem consists in using the frame in which the following capabilities would
be provided:

1. Combination of channel and packet switching.

2. Adaptive redistribution of the total channel capacity between channels with
packet and channel switching.

3. Use of transmission-free intervals in composite messages transmitted in switdad
channels for mssage transmission.

4. Transmission of packets of arbitrary length (within established limits).

5. Provision of the capability of transmitting all types of information: opera-
tional, dialogue and background.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

p‘ ,6.
not we assume that it is sufficient to realize transmission in the n [m1
switching] and KP [Packet switching] mode with two levels of priority to provide
the capability of transmitting all the types of intonation enumerated in paragraph
5. Thus, specifically. operational information with very rigid requirements on de-
lay can be transmitted over switched channels secured to users for the entire per-
iod of their interaction. The remaining part of the operational information can be
transmitted at a higher level of priorities in the xx or KP mode depending on mes-
sage length: long messages are transmitted in the xx rude and short messages are
transmitted in the KP nude.

Dialogue information can usually be transmitted in the RP mode at higher or lower
level of priority depending on the restrictions on delay time and also for some
conditions with very rigid allowances for delay in the 10: mode with the channel se-
cured for the time of the comunications session.

Background intonation consisting of messages of long length is transmitted in the
channel switching mode with lower level of priority. mesquently, the switching
terminal should provide the following capabilities:

1. Make available channels in the I0: mode with two levels of priority. At the
higher level, the available channel cannot be disconnected by another request and
at the lower level the channel can be disconnected with preliminary notification
of the information source.

2. rake available capabilities of transmission in the RP mode with two levels of
priority. The difference of the levels of priority consists in different values of
the permissible delay.

3. Load the free intervals in composite messages transmitted in the xx mode by
transmission of messages in the RP mode.

4. Operationally redistribute the capacity of the transmission channel between
messages transmitted in the KK and KP modes.

The overall principle of designing a switching system that realizes the indicated
problems is shown in Figure 5. As already noted, the com-on transmission channel
is used to combine N channels in the time packing mode. The switchboards K on the
receiving and transmitting sides operate synchronously with the timing frequency
equal to the rate of transmission in the channel. The inputs and outputs l, 2, ...,
, N are used to transmit messages in the RR mode. 'ihe input and output N + l
are used to transmit messages in the RP mode.

- 1, 2, ..., N switched synchronously on the transmitting and receiving sides. If
switches P1 are located in the upper position, then the i-th channel is used in
the Kit mde, i.e., it is secured in a given section for organization of coummica-
tions between users. If P1 is in the lower position, then the i-th channel is used
to transmit messages coming from mm; in the 0 mode. Thus, by changing the
position of P1, one can redistribute the channel capacity between messages trans-
mitted in the xx and KP modes. As many characters as switches that were in the
lower position at a given moment can be transmitted in the KP mode from the message
source during a single operating cycle of the switch K.

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PO! 00-1-1! 1“ US? ON! \‘

(3)

3".
(2 ) In
.33.. ’

   

Figure 5. Principle of Adaptive witching

Kay:
1. Input 3. Output
2. Transmission channel

The following data are required to control the operation of the switching terminal: .

l. The nunber of channels which is required at a given moment of time to ensure
transmission of packets with delay not exceeding that permissible. Int us denote
this value by Np. This value depends on filling the buffers on a given time
interval.

2. Data on requests for channels for transmission in the 10: mode with higher
priority. Let us denote this value by xv.

3. Data on requests for channels to transmit background information. The nuber
of requested channels is denoted by Kg.

4. Data on the appearance of pauses in each of the channels used in the to: node.
These data can be obtained if the intonation is transmitted in blocks in the )0:
mods with known boundaries as, for era-pie, with use of flags provided by the non:
protocol.

5. The maximum nunber of channels used in the lat node of higher priority in case
of complete load with requests for transmission of messages of higher priority in
the xx and KP modes. This value is denoted by K...”

6. The minimum nunber of channels used in the KP mode which are required to trans-
mit service information related to organization of the switched channels thin.

The control procedure in the switching terminal may then appear as follows depend-
ing on the schedule:

cl. There are no requests for xx. In this case all N channels are used in the KP
mode.

c2. A large nunber of requests for xx in the absence of messages in the KP mode.
The number of channels used in the xx node is equal to N - min,

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c3. A large number of requests for higher priority RR and transmission in the KP
mode. In this case lg.” channels are used in the lat mode and N - I.“ channels
are used in the KP mode. Moreover, mssages in the RP mode fill the pauses in
messages transmitted by ICP.

ed. A large volume of messages in the ICP mode with amber of loaded channels in
the XX mode less than KI“, i.e., xv < “mar In this case xv channels are used in
the KKmodeandthe remainingN- chhannelsareused inthe KPmode. The inter-
vals in messages are filled by packets.

CS. The number of required channels in the RR mode is xv < K...“ the volume of
messagesintheKPmodeissuchthath<N-Kv. InthiscaseN-Kv-Npchan-
nels can be used to transmit background information in the xx mode. The intenals
in composite messages transmitted in the ICK mode are filled by packets.

If the situation changes, the channels are redistributed (provided that the re-
strictions indicated above are fulfilled). The use of the principle of adaptive
switching outlined above promises high efficiency of utilizing channels in the
most diverse situations with different requirements for transmission of various
types of messages. Its advantage is also that precise knowledge about the distri-

bution of various types of messages is not required during system design.
Problems of Computer Network Design

The process of controlling systems development essentially consists of a nonspe-
cific search for solutions of optimization problems.

Some of these problems are relatively simple, have clear resolving algorithms and
can be solved automatically without human participation.

however, a considerable number of problems related to development and modification
of conplex systems, selection of control strategy in the operational phase of these
systems and so on, are creative problems in solution of which man or collectives of
people participate in one or another form. The methods of solving these problems
are investigated within the problem of artificial intelligence.

The complexity of the system and the incomplete definiteness of the external medit-
leads to the fact that known methods of strict optimization are inapplicable for
many problems both in the design and modification phases and in the operational
phase of the system. Under these conditions suboptimum heuristic procedures of
finding solutions that provide a saving of search time by refusing the obligatory
finding of the optimum solution and going on to searching for “good“ permissible
solutions play the main role. Suboptiml methods of finding solutions are based in
most cases on one or another form of using human experience in the search algorithm
in solving problems of a given class.

The possibilities of formalizing human experience determine the degree of machine
participation in finding the solution.

“9

FOR OFFICI \I. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US". "NIX

if man can only say ”what is to be done" in a given situation, but cannot describe
the rules for selecting the solutions, the main method of finding solutions is the
use of a man-machine system. In these systems a man evaluates the given situation
and formalizes the hypothetical solution. A machine is used to calculate the esti-
mate of this solution and also to assist man in construction and analysis of other
solutions close to that recomended by one or another criteria.

If the experience of finding solutions by man can be formalized, heuristic machine
search procedures are constructed which ensure that acceptable, but not obligatory
optimtn solutions will be found.

It is impossible in the given article to outline in detail the principles of con-
structing heuristic search procedures. In this regard we limit ourselves only to
references for publication where some program-realized methods of heuristic search
are outlined and the results of their experimental investigation are presented.

Several approaches to construction of heuristic search algorithms, including man-
machine procedures, are proposed in [12]. One of the approaches outlined in this
paper, called the heuristic branching method, was realized on the example of the
problem of distribution of a complex algorithm in a computer network [13, 14].

Known heuristic search procedures usually lead to a single solution which may dif-
fer significantly from the optimum solution in some cases. It is not yet poasible
to improve this solution with an ordinary heuristic search.

A method of eliminating this deficiency by introducing controlled ambiguity and
diffusion into the search procedure was proposed in [15]. This method was program-
realized and investigated on a number of problems, specifically, that of construct-
ing a circular transmission line of the shortest length, i.e., in the travelling
salesman problem [16] , the problem of designing computer networks with multitermin-
al communications lines [17] and so on. The investigations showed that the open
heuristics method permits one to improve the results found with ordinary heuristic
search and leads to an optimum solution in the absence of restrictions on search
time. Practical realization of this method is adequately simple.

Control of complex systems development is a cemplex, creative problem during solu-
tionof which large volumes of information coming from territorially dispersed
sources must be gathered and processed. Many collectives of people, specifically,
research centers, can be included in the control process at individual phases of
systems development. These collectives should have the opportunity of operational
exchange of information and also joint use of territorially dispersed computer re-
wurces and software to ensure their effective interaction during solution of the
common problem. Moreover, the research centers should have operational access to
the data bases in the corresponding field of scientific and technical information
which can also be territorially dispersed.

The most efficient means for solving many problems of this class is a computer net-
work with adaptive switching, providing high flexibility, viability, the possibil-

ity of sequential buildup without changing the functional principles and a lumber
of other positive characteristics.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The process of development control includes a continuous sequence of solutions of
complex optimization problems, many of which are creative in nature. The main
means of solving problems of this type are heuristic methods of finding solutions
developed within the problem of artificial intelligence.

1.

5.

6.

8.

9.

10.

11.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kunmerle, K. and H. Rodin, ”Packet and Circuit Switching: Cost/Performance
Boundaries,“ COMPUTER mm, V01 2, No 1, Feb 1978.

Close, F., “Message Delays and Trunk Utilization in Line-Switched and Message-
Switched Data Networks," Proceedings of the First USA-Japan Computer Confer-
ence, Tokyo, 1972.

Esterling, R. and P. Hahn, ”A Comparison of Digital Data Network Switching,"

Proceedings of National Telecommunications Conference, MC 75, New Orleans,
1975.

Itoh, K., T. Kato, O. Hashida and Y. Yoshida, "An Analysis of Traffic-Handling
Capacity of Packet-Switched and circuit-Switched Networks,“ Proceedings of
Datacom 73. Third Data Comunications Symposium, St. Petershurg, Florida,
1973.

Miyahara, H., T. Haaegawa and Y. Tsshigara, "A Comparative valuation of
Switching Hethods in Computer Cmunication Networks," Proceedings of the
International Communication Conference, San Francisco, 1975.

Rosner, R. 0., "Packet Switching and Circuit Switching: A Comparison,” Pro-
ceedings of the National Telecommunication Conference, "TC 75, New Orleans,
1975.

Rosner, R. D. and B. Springer, ”Circuit and Packet Switching. A Cost and
Performance Tradeoff Study,” COMPUTER mus, Vol 1, 1976.

Jenny, c., K. Kumrle and H. Buerge, "Network Node with Integrated circuit/
Packet-Switching Capabilities," Proceedings of the European Calputing Congress
on Comunications Networks, London, 1975.

Jenny, C. and K. Kumerle, "Distributed Processing within an Integrated Cir-
cuit/Packet-Switching Node," IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WICATIONS, 614-24, 1976.

Romnerle, K., "Multiplexer Performance for Integrated Line-and-Packet Switched
Traffic," Proceedings of ICCC'74, Stockholm, 1974.

Port, 2., x. Kun'nerle, H. Rodin, C. Jenny and P. ZaEiropulo, “A Network Arch-
itecture for the Integration of Circuit and Packet switching," Proceedings of
ICCC'76, Toronto, 1976.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Samoylenko, S. 1., "Algorithms for Purposeful Stochastic Search," Reporf 1t
Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford, United
States, No 111-74, VINITI, 1973.

13. Pashayev, I. 8., "Some Applications of the Heuristic Branching Algorithm,"
VINITI, No 7758-73.

14. Anbarov, Ye. V., "Approaches to Vector Optimization in a Computer Netwrk,"
in 'Kodirovaniye i peredacha infomtsii v vychialitel'nykh aetyakh" [Coding
and Transmission of Information in Computer Networks], Moscow, 1977.

15. Samoylenko, S. I., ”Diffusion Heuristics," Report at Fourth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Tbilisi, No 18-77, VINI‘I‘, 1975.

16. Samoylenko, S. I., 'Suboptimm Programing,‘ in "Semiotika i infomtika"
[Semiotics and Informatics], no 8, Ibscow, 1977.

17. Samoylenkc, S. 1., ”Applications of Fuzzy Heuristic Techniques to Calputer
Network Design," Proceedings of Fifth International Joint Cmference on
Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, USA, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Nauchnyy sovet po koapleksnoy problem "Kibernetika' AN SSSR, 1979

6521
C50: 1863/5

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICMHHCJAL USEZ(NQLY

UDC 669.1 : 658.65.011.56
AUTOMATED DATA PROCESSING IN PERROUS METALLURGY

Moscow AVTOHATIZIROVANNAYA OBRABOTKA INFORMATSII V CHBRNOY HBTALLURGII in Russian
1981 (signed to press 18 Mar 81) pp 2-5, 198-199

[Annotation, foreword and table of contents from book "Automated Data Processing
in Ferrous Metallurgy", by Engel's Yakovlevich Aganson and Georgiy Prokhorovich
Drigval', Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", 1630 copies. 200 pages]

[Text] The functions and structure of automated data processing systems (SAOI's)
are discussed. including the OASU Chermet [Industrial Automated Control System for
Ferrous Metallurgy] and its relationship to ASU's [automated control systems] of
other control levels. as well as the methodology of the organization of the develop-
ment, entry into service and use of SAOI's. Examples are given of advanced knowh
how in the creation and use of SAOI's at enterprises and in organizations of the
industry.

This book is intended for engineering and technical personnel in the ferrous metal-
lurgy industry. It can be helpful to students in the system for improving skills
and to specialists involved in creating and using various autonation systems. as
well as to VUZ students.

Foreword

Ferrous metallurgy is one of the country's leading industrial sectors. In the major
machine building industries the percentage of ferrous metals equals more than 96
percent of the total consumption of metal products.

Ferrous metallurgy's share of industrial production fixed capital has reached 11
percent of the country's industrial capital. The industry's enterprises consume
more than 15 percent of the fuel produced by the country and about 10 percent of
the electric power. The organization of the best utilization of this capital. fuel
and electric power is one of the major national economic problems whose solution
will aake it possible to strengthen considerably the country's economic power.

Ferrous metallurgy is a complex industry which mines iron ore and other minerals and
produces pig iron and steel (more than 1800 types) and rolled products. Also.
every year the production of new more economical types of steel and rolled shapes

(as many as 200) is mastered and specifications for the quality and delivery dead-
lines for metal are heightened.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Satisfaction of the ever heightened requirements for product quality and the in-
dustry's work with an increase in total output and strengthening of the specializa-
tion of enterprises and their cooperation have urgently necessitated improvement

of control in the industry [1]. The 2kth, 25th and 26th CPSU congresses specified
the creation of automated data processing systems (SAOI's) as an important direction
for this improvement.

At the industry's enterprises much attention has always been paid to the improve-
ment of production control. The first centralized supervisory control system
appeared in the 30's and in the 50's systems which automate the performance of
individual technological operations (location and spacing of sheet metal blanks,
control of melting and the like). The creation of ASU's for technological pro-
cesses, shops, metallurgical production processes, enterprises and the industry
was begun in the Eighth Five-Year Plan period, and in the Ninth Five-Year Plan
period the development of integrated control systems which make it possible to im-
prove considerably the effectiveness of control.

In the industry ASU's for various purposes have been created and are functioning
successfully. questions relating to the theory and practical application of which
are discussed systematically at all-Union conferences, seminars and meetings, as
well as at international conferences on the automation of production processes and
control in ferrous metallurgy.

An analysis of the functioning of ASU's which have been introduced and of progress
and the organization of work in the industry relating to the creation and use of
automated data processing systems has demonstrated that favorable conditions for
the creation of highly effective ASU's exist in a number of enterprises and organ-
izations. 0n the other hand these enterprises and organizations have experienced
certain difficulties resulting from the newness and complexity of many questions
of a theoretical nature, an insufficient amount of experience in using ASU's and
the lack of a series of methodological materials on solving specific problems in
the development. introduction and functioning of various ASU's.

Of course the development of questions relating to the theory of ASU's has been
lagging behind the need for it. This makes it possible to explain the urgency of
work in which the advanced know-how of enterprises and organizations in this area

is analyzed and generalized and questions are discussed relating to theory and

their practical application and their being put to use. This is all the more im-
yortant for ferrous metallurgy. whose enterprises are characterized by large scales
and output of a random nature. by the complex structure and organization of control,
by a long list of products for mass consumption, by the many varieties of alterna-
tive solutions for producing the same product from different kinds of raw material
and materials with different equipment, etc.

with this book the authors hope to fill the existing gap to a certain extent. In
this hook some aspects of control of the industry are discussed and a demonstra-
tion is given of the need to create and of the structure of automated data pro-
cessing systems at various levels of control from the viewpoint of the solution of
national economic problems by the industry. Using as an example the Industrial
Automated Control System for Ferrous Metallurgy (the OASU Chermet), a demonstration
is given of the performance of certain functions for control of the industry's

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORl0FF“1AI.USFIONIN

automation systems and of the relationship between the OASU Chermet and outside
systems and various ASU' 3 included in its structure. The methodology for organiz-
ing the development. entry into service and use of automated data processing sys-
tems in ferrous metallurgy is discussed.

The authors believe that this material will be of help to developers and users of
these systems in improving the organization and performance of their jobs and to
the administrative management personnel of enterprises and organizations of the
industry, in enabling them to understand better the features and specifics of the
work of computing subdivisions. This book will acquaint personnel managers who do
not have special training in this area with questions relating to the creation of
automated data processing systems.

The authors wish to express their appreciation to USSR Minchermet [Ministry of
Ferrous Metallurgy] PEU [Economic Planning Administration] Deputy Director Candidate
of Economic Sciences V.S. Olefir, USSR Minchermet Computing and Data Processing
Center Chief Mathematician G.I. Kleynerman and Chermetenergo [expansion unknown]
Administration Director v.1. Petrikeyev for the valuable advice and comments ex-
pressed by them in the preparation of this book.

CONTENTS Page
Foreword 3
Chapter I. Automated Data Processing System in Ferrous Metallurgy 6
1. Some aspects of control in ferrous metallurgy 7
2. Automated data processing system 11
3. Functional structure of SAOI 15
a. Structure of support part of SAOI 22
5. Industry system of computing centers 43
6. Questions relating to reliability and effectiveness of SAOI 50
7. Standardization of design solutions in SAOI 56
8. Status and direction of development of automation systems in ferrous
metallurgy 61
Chapter II. Industrial ASU for Ferrous Metallurgy and Questions of Its
Relationship to Other Systems 67
1. Structure of OASU Chermet 67
2. Systemwide hardware and software of OASU Chermet 72
3. Interaction of OASU Chermet with outside ASU's 83
4. Interaction of OASU Chermet with industrial ASU's 87
5. Automation of planning the industry's operations 91
6. Automation of analysis of operations of the industry's enterprises 105
7. Automation of on-line control of the industry's operations 109
8. Automation of control of transportation in the industry 115
9. Questions relating to further development and improvement of the OASU
Chermet 125
Chapter III. Organization of Development of Automated Data Processing Systems
in Ferrous Metallurgy 129
1. Methodology of organization of development of systems in the industry 130
2. Organization of formulation of problems of industry control 137
3. Questions relating to formation of special software 146
4. Requirements for the SAOI hardware complex 152
125

FOR 0511C1AL.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

5. Methodology of development of organization support for the industry's

SAOI

6. Organization of the retraining of personnel in the industry for partici-

pation in development of the SAOI

Chapter IV. Organization of the Introduction and Use of the SAOI in Ferrous
Metallurgy

1. Methodology of the introduction of the SAOI in the industry's enterprises

and organizations

2. Methodology of preparation of an enterprise or organization for intro-

duction of the SAOI

3. Methodology of organization of experimental and industrial operation of
the SAOI

4. Organization of introduction of the support part of the system

5. Methodology of organization or the use of SAOI hardware in the industry
6. Methodology of organization of industrial utilization of the SAOI

7. Organization of retraining of the industry's personnel for enabling
operation of the system

Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya". 1981

8831
C80: 1863/27

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

156
165
167
168
170
172
175
182
185

188
196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

UDC 669.1 : 658.65.011.56
PERROUS METALLURGY AUTWATED DATA PROCESSING

Moscow AVTOHATIZIROVANNAYA OBRABOTKA INFORMATSII V CHEMOY METALLURGII in Russian
1981 (signed to press 18 Mar 81) PP 43-50, 61-66, 75-78, 125-129

[Ch I secs 5 and 8, ch II sec 9 and excerpt froa book "Automated Data Processing in
Ferrous Metallurgy", by Bngel's Yakovlevich Aganson and Georgiy Prokhorovich
Drigval', Izdatel'stvo "Hetellurgiya", 1630 copies. 200 pages]

[Excerpts] 5. Industry System of Computing Centers

The industry system of computing centers (OSVTs) and the country's unified automated
communications system employed represent the technical base of the industry's SAOI
[automated data processing system]. Since the industry's SAOI is included in the
Statewide Automated System (OGAS) as one of its subsystems, then the OSVTs is also
part of the State System of Computing Centers (GSVTs), which together with the
Statewide Data Transmission System (OGSPD) are governed by the technical base of
the OGAS. This is in conformity with the departmental-industrial principle of

the introduction of computer technology and of the creation of ASU's [automated
control systems] for various purposes and of computing centers in the country.

The organizational structure of the GSVTs is hierarchical and has four levels.

The highest level of the GSVTs is the foundation of the ASU's of statewide organi-
zations (the USSR Gosplan, USSR Cossnab, etc.) and of industries of the national
economy (including ferrous metallurgy), and its technical base is the main computing
center of the OGAS. The second level of the GSVTs is the foundation of ASU's of
Union republics. To the third level belong territorial computing centers (TVTs's)
located in the capitals of autonomous republics and krsy and oblast centers and
representing the base for ASU's of these republics, krays and oblasts. The fourth
level is the foundation of ASUP's [automated control systems for enterprises],
ASUNII's [automated control systems for scientific research institutes], etc., and
their technical base is the automation service.

The OSVTs is being created by taking into account the GSVTs struct-- "s‘ri‘~’

The main objectives of creating the OSVTs are the following: the most intelligent
introduction and use of computing and communications equipment in the industry;

the furnishing with computing capacities of practically all enterprises and organi-
zations of the industry by connecting them to the OSVTs as users; the creation'of
the needed information comfort for managers and scientific, engineering and techni-
cal and control personnel of any enterprise and organization by means of a capacity
for information and reference services and for the performance of various kinds of

127

FOR OFFICIAI.lHiB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

runpullun wnrk; impruvvmvnl of the dynnmlr chnrnctcrlstlcu of pructlcally all

control systems in the industry on account of the rapid transfer of any informa-
tion and the ability to employ ideal mathematical methods in solving control prob-
lems of any complexity; and the reduction of costs and time for improving computing
practices in enterprises and organizations of the industry.

The OSVTs is intended to make possible the gathering, storage, processing and trans-
fer of any infcrmation in the interests of all of the network's users; to enable the
interaction of various ASU's and computing centers in solving control problems;

and for the performance of computing work on collective-use principles in the in-
terests of all enterprises and organizations and of any worker in the industry.

From the main objectives and purpose of the OSVTs presented above it follows that

it represents the base of the industry's SAOI and must make possible the performance
of computing work with the presentation of various kinds of information to all en-
terprises and organizations of the industry, including the all-Union production
associations of Vtorchermet [State Trust for the Procurement and Processing of
Secondary Ferrous Metals], Soyuzogneupor [All-Union Association for the Production
of Refractory Materials], Soyuzremont [expansion unknown], etc., which have little
computing equipment of their own. The consolidated structure of the OSVTs is illus-
trated in fig 6.

 

Figure 6. Consolidated Structure of Industry System of Computing Centers
(The figures designate levels of the OSVTs)

Key:
1. OVTs [industrial computing cen- 4. 51A [automation service]
ter] of the USSR Ministry of 5. KVTs [multiple-user computing
Ferrous Metallurgy center]
2. VTsKP [collective-use comput- 6. AP [user station]

ing center]
3. VTs [computing center]

The structure of the OSVTs is four-leveled and hierarchical. At the fourth level
is the industrial computing center (OVTa) of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous

128

FOR 0F11C1A1.U5E10NLY
FfﬂlCHﬂﬂf1Al.USE‘DNlN

Metallurgy. which coordinates and manages work relating to the creation and use
of SAOI's for the highest level of control of the industry-—the USSR Ministry of
Ferrous Metallurgy and VPo's [all-Union production associations]. The computing
center has a link with the main computing center of the GSVTs, which is used for
exchanging information between the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy and other
departments and industries of the national economy.

To the third level of the OSVTs belong collective-use computing centers (VTsKP's)
and multiple-user computing centers (KVTs's), which do computing work for enter-
prises and organizations situated nearby as well as for computing centers and
automation systems. The head computing and data processing center of the Ukrainian
SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy performs the functions of a large—capacity
VTsKP, which does work relating to the creation and use of an SAOI for the Ukrain-
ian 85R Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy and coordinates the creation of a computing
center network for enterprises and organizations under the jurisdiction of this
ministry. The computing centers belong to enterprises and organizations in which
there are no SAOI's nor even 80 [economic organization] ASU's. Some of them are
used as multiple-user computing centers. An automation service (51A) is created
in enterprises and organizations in case of the introduction of an SAOI or,-as a
minimum, an 80 ASU. Some of them also perform the functions of a KVTs.

KVTs's, VTsKP's and also computing centers of GIVTs'a [main computing and data pro-
cessing centers], computing centers and user stations performing the functions of

a KVTs must enable the access of enterprises and organizations to the information
assets and hardware of the OSVTs, including the receipt of information from com-
puting centers, automation services and user stations and the checking, shaping

and storage of this information, the transfer of economic and other information to
the OVTs and the receipt from the OVTs of directive instructions and other informa-
tion for enterprises and organizations of the industry.

A multiple-user computing center (KVTs) is a computing subdivision of an enter-
prise or organization which systematically does a specific amount of computing

work for a certain fee for a number of enterprises or organizations situated at

a short distance from the KVTs. Sometimes a KVTs is created as an independent
enterprise which does specific computing work for specific enterprises according to
a schedule approved in advance by a superior organization. For example, in Krivoy
Rog a KVTs has been created as an enterprise included in the head computing and

data processing center of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy. for the
purpose of solving problems of enterprises and organizations belonging to the Krivoy
Rog region.

A collective—use computing center (VTsKP) is created as a high-output computing
center with a high level of automation of the performance of all computing work.

It is furnished with high-productivity computers and is designed for serving a
great number of users, who transmit and obtain information through communications
lines, through the mail or by special messenger. Users can be enterprises, organ-
izations, their subdivisions or individual people who pay for the services of the
VTsKP. The following services can be offered to users: the right to use the
packages of applied programs belonging to the VTakrz consultations for users relat—
ing to algorithms and programs; the formulation and development of tasks; the ser-
vicing of hardware and software at their user station; the storage of their own

129

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘MI I'SF 0N|.\'

files and programs on the VTsKP's magnetic media and the opportunity for access to
the general-access data files of the VTsKP.

Lying at the second level of the OSVTs are KVTs's, computing centers and automation
services included in the computing center network of enterprises of the Ukrainian
SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy. as well as user stations (AP's) installed at
small enterprises and in organizations under Union jurisdiction. In 1979 KVTs's
were functioning in Krivoy Rog. Donetsk and Zhdsnov. AP's make possible the
performance of computing work by the facilities of the OSVTs.

By a user station is meant a subdivision of an enterprise or organization which
enables the performance of their computing work by means of the OSVTs. These
user stations can be small computing centers furnished with one or more computers
or a subdivision equipped with various terminal equipment which enables the input/
output of data on machine and other media.

An OSVTs achieves high economic efficiency if information from any point in the
network is transmitted without distortion to any other point in the network, making
possible the solution of control problems. In order to achieve this it is necessary
to fulfill the following conditions.

1. The structure of the OSVTs and the territorial distribution of points in the
network must make it possible for each user--an enterprise or organization of the
industry--to perform the required computing work and to exchange information with
superior control agencies.

2. The software of all users of an OSVTs must be unified and compatible in order
to accomplish the one-time entry of data into the system, but the repeated use of
it, to minimize the information supplied and to have 10- to lS-percent redundancy
of information in order to make it possible to arrange for checking the correctness
of data processing and of the restoration of data after distortions during transfer
of it.

3. All users of the OSVTs must have the ability to use constantly communications
cLanncls suitable for the reliable transfer of required amounts of information
over short periods of time.

4. All OSVTs users must be furnished with hardware which is compatible with each
other, making possible a high level of automation of the performance of technical
operations and the ability of the prolonged storage of the required amounts of
information, convenience and simplicity of access to the OSVTs. and high reliabili-
tv and economic efficiency in operation.

a. The OSVTs's machine processing must create a high level of automation of the
performance of all technological operations of the process of processing informa-
tion, controlling all hardware of the OSVTs and checking the correctness of the
processing and transfer of information. as well as have high efficiency and simpli—
city in the utilization of all information, software and hardware resources of the
OSVTs and the rapid and reliable processing of large arrays of data.

6. Users must thoroughly and precisely perform all operations and fulfill all re-
quirements of higher levels of the OSVTa and be very disciplined and organized.

130

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The creation of a reliable and efficient OSVTs is a very labor-intensive task
requiring the completion of great amounts of research, planning, construction and
other work. In particular, it is necessary to study and select the optimum struc-
ture of the OSVTs and of the territorial distribution of its elements in relation
to criteria taking into account the labor intensiveness and cost of achieving the
goals set, the ability to increase the number of problems which can be solved, as
well as the level and extent of the automation of technological operations of the
process of processing data, the enabling of reliable and efficient functioning of
the OSVTs, the maximum unification of hardware employed, the required resources of
the OSVTs and the like.

Let us note that cretion of the OSVTs does not assume the obligatory furnishing

of all enterprises and organizations of the industry with modern computing equip-
ment (chiefly computers) and the existence of computing subdivisions (VP's).

In addition. in creating an OSVTs an endeavor is made to furnish information com-
fort to all personnel of enterprises and organizations on account of the redistri-
bution of the computing capacities of enterprises and organizations for the time
of the performance of computing work for them, and access to the industry data

and software supply for the greatest possible number of industry personnel without

izations of the industry has demonstrated that a great number of VP's and much com-
puting and other equipment are required for the purpose of performing this work.

On the other hand the mean 24-hour utilization of computers and other computing
equipment is clearly inadequate-~at best it has reached 18 instead of 22 hours per
24-hour period. In addition. the cost of creating user stations, multiple-user
computing centers and collective-use computing centers can be reduced considerably
if they are designed according to standard plans and KVTs’s and VTsKP's are fur-
nished with high-productivity computing and other equipment.

It is obvious that large and medium enterprises of the industry-metallurgical,
pipe, mining and metalware-which produce large amounts of products for the national
economy should have (and in part they already do) their own SAOI's and automation
services. However, these enterprises. too, in addition to the ability to transfer
part of their excess computing capacity. and. consequently, to compensate in part
the capital expenditures, at "peak" hours can themselves enlist the additional com-
puting capacity of other enterprises and organizations of the industry.

Hork on creation of an OSVTs in the industry was begun in the 70's. A: the present
time the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy on-line telegraph and telephone com-
munications network is functioning reliably and efficiently in practically all
enterprises and organizations of the industry. Every 26 hours information arrives
from enterprises, chiefly through telegraph channels, on their work during the 24-
hour period, on the presence of raw materials, fuel and energy resources, on the
operation of major units and the like. This information is entered on punched tape
of cards and is processed by computers.

work is under way on the direct entry of information into Yes [Unified Series] com-
puters. which will make it possible to reduce considerably the labor intensiveness

I31

INJR 0F1ﬂC]AI.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of and the time required for processing it. Development is under way on a process
for the exchange of information between computers installed at the USSR Ministry
of Ferrous Metallurgy Industry Computing Center and a number of large enterprises
of the industry. Various kinds of methodological materials making it possible to
create an OSVTs are being developed.

The proposal is to finish the basic outlines of the OSVTs in the 11th Five—Year
Plan period and to complete creation of the OSVTs in the 12th.

8. Status and Direction of Development of Automation Systems in Ferrous Metallurgy

Work in the industry on the creation of SAOI's and the development of automation
systems for various purposes is being performed along many lines and is pursuing
the goal of the achievement of high quality and efficiency of control both by
enterprises and organizations of the industry and by interindustrial associations.

This work was begun in the 30's, when keyboard and punched-card computers were used
for the first time for solving very simple production problems, chiefly bookkeeping
problems; the first systems for centralized supervisory control in complicated pro-
duction sections and independent automatic controls for maintaining a single spe-
cific parameter (temperature. pressure and the like) at a steady level appeared.
Then on the basis of analog and then analog-digital computing equipment very simple
systems were created for automating the control of technological operations (most
often in blast furnace production) and equipment in the adviser-expert mode. These
systems were effective and contributed to the improvement of labor productivity and
the quality of control, but were insufficiently reliable and convenient under chang-
ing production conditions.

work was begun on the creation of automation systems for various purposes in the
industry with the appearance of computers. The beginning of this work is associated
with 1956, when for the first time in world practice the remote control by means of
a computer in the adviser-expert mode of the operating cycle of a blast furnace
located in Dneprodzerzhinsk was accomplished from Kiev. This experiment demonstra-
ted the high effectiveness of digital control. Starting in 1959, at the Magneto-
gnrsk Metallurgical Combine (HMK) and other metallurgical plants. the "Stal'"
lSteel] control computer began to be used. developed by the Stal'proyekt [State
All-Union Institute for the Planning of Units for Steel Foundry and Rolling Mill
Production in Ferrous Metallurgy] SBVT [Special Bureau for Computer Technology] for
the optimum location and spacing of sheet metal blanks and for keeping records of
the production of rolled products on continuous billet mills and sheet mills.

At the end of the 50's. at HMK and then at the Nizhniy Tagil Metallurgical Combine
(NTHK) the development of systems for automating the on-line control of the flow

of metal from steelmaking plants was begun by the Central Scientific Research In-
stitute of Total Automation (TsNiIKA). In 1965 was assembled the first system in
the USSR for controlling a section for supplying metal to the No 3 blooming mill

at HKK. the "impul's" [Pulse] system. Then systems were created for controlling
the operating cycle of a blast furnace. for on-line control of steel wire produc-
tion, etc. By the end of the Eighth Five-Year Plan period 37 ASU's for technologi-
cal processes and production centers were introduced, about 560 different economic
problems (50 percent of them accounting) and about 240 engineering problems were
solved by means of computers at a number of enterprises, and the first phase of an

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFF" 1A1. USE UNI."

ASUP Innlcmuﬂsnlsyslrm fur cuntrolllng an enterprise] (ll functional subsystems)

was introduced at the Dnepropetrovsk Tube Rolling Plant imeni Lenin and the In-
gulets GOK [Mining and Concentration Combine]. and 38 functional subsystems at

other enterprises of the industry. This period represented the first stage in the
creation of ASUP's, including the solution of particular, as a rule, relatively
uncomplicated problems, which can be regarded as a preparatory stage having made

it possible to gain definite know-how and, what is perhaps most important, to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of solving individual problems by means of an ASUP.

Capital expenditures for the creation of automation systems grew considerably in
the industry since the Eighth Five—Year Plan period and they have increased in

each five-year plan period (table 3).

Table 3. Approximate Proportion of Capital Expenditures in the Industry for the
Periods Given, Percent

Item of expenditure 1966-1970 1971-1975 1976-1980

Total capital investment
for development of the

industry 100.0 150.0 195.0
ASUTP's 1.8 2.33 4.46
ASUP's 0.19 0.33 1.33

The increase in capital expenditures for automation made it possible to increase
the inventory of computers, including electronic computers, and to create computing
subdivisions in many enterprises and organizations by means of which the front of
work relating to the study and creation of automation systems for various purposes
was widened (table 4).

Table 4. Growth of Number of Computers and Computing Subdivisions in Ferrous
Metallurgy by Year, Number of Units

 

Item 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980
Computers 2 14 91 249 497
Including at enter—

prises l 11 71 201 407

Computing subdivisions
(computing centers,
computing and data
processing centers,

etc.) 2 12 35 80 90
Including at enter-
prises 1 6 22 42 53

The second phase of the ASUP at the Dnepropetrovsk Tube Rolling Plant imeni Lenin
and the Ingulets 60K. the first phase of an OASU in the USSR Ministry of Ferrous
Metallurgy and Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy, 29 ASUP's and ASUPI's
[automated systems for controlling a design institute], 70 ASUTP's and 45 computing
subdivisions were put into service in the Ninth Five-Year Plan period. In 1975

108 functional subsystems were in operation and 2476 problems were solved by means

133

FOR OIINCJAI.US£10NLY
FOR (WI-1H AI. NSF 0Nl.\'

of computers, including 72 optimization, 450 production operation analysis, 800
accounting and about 300 engineering. An industry algorithm and program bank

and the notification of enterprises and organizations regarding the existence of
algorithms and programs in the bank. Exchanging them between enterprises and organ-
izations of the industry has helped to reduce the cost of their repeated develop-
ment. Hbrk is under way at scientific research institutes and design institutes

improves their skills and refrains them in the area of creating ASU’s. A number of
metallurgical VUZ's have begun to train and turn out engineer-economists in automa-

ted data processing, and have been training production process engineers to work
under conditions of the functioning of an ASU.

At the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan period the process of the consolidation
of enterprises in the industry was basically completed, along with the changeover
to a three-component control system. which to an even greater extent has occasioned
the need to introduce an SAOI and ASU's for various purposes and has created the
best prerequisites for the development of efficient SAOI's. The second phase of
the OASU and ASUP's will be put into service at a number of enterprises in the 10th

department ASU's, 5 ASUPI's and ASUNII's [automated control systems for scientific
research institutes], and SANTI's. several SAPR's and SANI's, 120 ASUTP's, more
than 20 computing subdivisions. several KVT's and VTsKP’s. The first phase of an

for the steel — rolled products complex was put into service for the first time in
the industry at the Novolipetsk Metallurgical Plant (NLMZ).

As we see. work is under way in the industry along a broad front. on the creation of
various ASU's for various control systems for practically all levels of control.

1. Research and development on questions relating to the theory and methodology
or the creation and functioning of ASU's for various purposes are being carried
out to an insufficient extent in the industry and work has not at all begun on

the creation of an SAC! and OSVTs and there is practically no system for controlling
the process of creating an SAOI and OSV'I's.

to one anorher than differences. However, their use at other enterprises or in
other organizations is difficult and necessitates serious revisions because of the

134

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE20NLY
various procedures employed for organizing and forming software and organizational
and other kinds of support.

3. ASU's for various purposes and even individual control tasks are being de-
veloped at a number of enterprises by several organizations. Poor coordination of
their work and the absence of unified methodological handbook materials on the
creation of SAOI's and OSVTs's which regulate sufficiently completely the perform-
ance of each technological operation of research and development processes and
which make it possible to standardize design solutions and to unify and standardize
all kinds of support do not make possible a saving of resources either in the de-
velopment or in the use of these systems.

1:. In the ASU's and subsystems now functioning control problems have not been
coordinated with one another in terms of data, in order to make possible the one-
time entry of source data and its repeated use in solving various problems, which
has resulted in the expenditure of labor and time for the repeated preparation of
this data for input and output, in making the problems which are solved more expen-
sive and in reducing their effectiveness.

5. The data bank is still used practically but slightly in existing ASU's and
dialogue systems are lacking. which does not make it possible for administrative
management and other personnel to reduce considerably the time for and labor in-
tensiveness of developing control solutions and retrieving the required data,
which reduces the dynamic characteristics of ASU's and therefore their efficiency,
etc.

The shortcomings of existing ASU's and those under development could be enumerated
further. They are objective in nature since practical needs have outstripped the
development of theory and therefore errors and non-optimum solutions are inevit-
able. There are, of course, also subjective factors which depend on the level of
training of and understanding on the part of managers of the value of automation
systems in improving the control of an enterprise or organization.

The authors believe that a serious base has been created in the industry as well

as scientific and technical potential in the field of automation. that there are
many highly skilled organizers and specialists in the development of ASU's and that
the level of knowledge of administrative management and other personnel in the field
of ASC's and their role in the creation and use of ASU's have grown. Therefore it
is apropos to formulate the following guidelines for work in the industry which

are to make possible the creation of high-efficiency SAOI's in the next few years
with the expenditure of a minimum of resources.

1. To create an A80 for any purpose as a component of an SAOI for an enterprise,
organization, all-Union production association or industry. In order to make this
possible the following must be done: It is necessary to develop and introduce

for strict execution by all enterprises and organizations detailed methodological
handbook materials on the creation of SAOI's regulating and guaranteeing uniformity
in the performance of technological operations of research and development pro-
cesses; to develop standard organizational, functional, software and hardware
structures for SAOI's and specifications for various kinds of support for all

ASU's which are to make possible their efficient functioning in SAOI'a for an

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprise and industry; and to unify and standardize the greatest possible number
of elements of each kind of support.

2. In order to improve considerably the efficiency of the operations of an in-
dustry. all-Union production association, enterprise and organization it is
necessary to create information comfort for each of their workers and to make
possible the rapid retrieval of necessary information, its processing and output
in a form convenient for this. For this purpose it is necessary to create an
OSVTs to cover all enterprises and organizations of the industry, to furnish

personnel with terminals connected to the OSVTs and to develop and employ data
retrieval and dialogue systems.

3. It is necessary to make it possible for practically all enterprises and
organizations of the industry to perform various kinds of computing work. For
this it is necessary to organize KVTs's and VTsKP's, supplying them with high-
productivity computers and other hardware, to make it possible for these KVTs's
and VTsKP's to communicate with the OSVTs, to connect to them as users small
nearby enterprises and organizations which do not have their own computing sub-
divisions, and to outfit KVTs's and VTsKP's with developers for the purpose of
completing projects relating to users' problems.

4. The following are necessary in order to save money and time for the develop-
ment and introduction of SAOI's: to organize the planning of ASU's for any purpose
on the basis of standard design solutions; to develop standard modules on the

basis of successfully functioning tasks, subsystems and ASU's; to exclude the
development of ASU's and SAOI's for individual projects; to provide incentives for
enterprises and organizations to use standard designing; and to create in the in-

dustry an industry bank of standard modules based on the industry bank of algo-
rithms and programs.

The data facilities of the OASU Chermet [Industry Automated Control System for

Ferrous Metallurgy] include a data bank, data media, a system of classifiers and
data flows.

The data bank (fig 8) contains the following economic organization information.

1. Repurting--for enterprises and organizations of the industry--in which statis-
tical and bookkeeping information over the course of a year comprises about
300-10“ characters (50 percent of the total amount) and production operation in-
formation (5000 types) 60-10“ characters (8 percent of the total amount).

2. Planning (variants of plans and approved quotas for production, transport,
deliveries and the like)--for enterprises, organizations and all-Union production

associations. Its annual volume equals 260-106 characters (40 percent of the total
amount).

3. General-system dictionaries--Eor enterprises and organizations--units of mea-

surement, of production, etc.--and loca1--types of equipment, allied supplies,
etc.--comprising 2-10“ characters.

136

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
A. Norm-setting (norms for consumption and supplies, equipment performance indi-
cators, etc. )-for enterprises, organizations and all-Union production associa-

tions. comprising 5- ~106 characters (2 percent of the total amount).

5. Information-reference bank.

  

 

1) "WW om (n0)

 

l2 fluemuuuunounamuux

 

l l3)ﬂuuuun16ua1umnn#|
____L___.__‘—h
)&
Cauzgn Chumnur
| LLJommﬂ¢aul

Structure of OASU Chermet Data Bank

     

 

 

 

*

Figure 8.

Key:
1 Data bank (IF)
2. General-system data bdse
3. Local data base
4. Reporting figures

mane-us
nuantuu

 

__E

 

  
 

5. Plan figures

6. Norms

7. Dictionaries
8. Information-reference bank

The distribution of the annual amount of information (millions of characters) pro-
cessed in functional subsystems of the OASU Chernet in 1978 is presented in table

6.

Table 6.
Million Characters

Short name of subsystem

"longterm Planning“
"Current Planning"
"On-Line Control"
"Accounting"

"Analysis"
"Transportation"
"Supply of Materials and
Equipment"

"Science and Design"
"Finances"

[Continued on followina page]

Conventionallz
permanent in-

formation

2.85
6.10
16.05
2.10
0.02
0.30

0.05
0.40
0.01

Variable in-
formation

0.3
260.5
39.5
249.0
6.2
0.6

Amount of Information Processed in Subsystems of the QASU Chermet,

Total

 

3.15
246.60
55.55
251.10
6.22
0.90

0.10
19.90
8.61
I-‘(IR (II-1"“ 'IAI. USE ONI.\'

'i'ci‘snunel" 0.02 3.5 3.52

TTI [scientific and technical

information] 0.05 0.4 0.45
27.95 567.95 595.90

Total

puts about 1000-106 characters and stores about 500-106 charac—

The OASU Chermet out
as of a year.

ters of information in the cour

OASU Chermet is documents, on which about 95 percent
The primary documentation is represented by a set
--statiatical (67) and bookkeeping (lO)-—and intra-
operations (39), norm-information (66) and

is entered into the OASU Cheraet from 306

The basic data medium in the
of the information arrives.

of government reporting forms
departmental reporting--production
planning (126). Thus, information

forms of documents.

In the OASU Chermet documentation has been unified by means of the "Dokument"

system and the structure of reports on production operation information arriving
from enterprises and organizations through communications lines in the form of
de it possible to reduce the kinds of messages

teleprinter messages. This has ma
from 49 to 3. which has improved considerably the reliability and efficiency of

functioning of the on—line control subsystem.

The following have been made standard in the "Dokument" system: unified presenta—
a unified data base, a unified technology for go—

tion of the forms of documents,
ing through tasks (cf. fig A [not reproducedl). and the standard representation of

information on magnetic tape.

Eleven all—Union. five industrial and 89 local classifiers are used in the OASU

Chermet. 0f the all-Union. classifiers are used for products; enterprises; mine—

rals; water power resources; management documentation; sectors of the national

economy; services in machine building. transportation and industry; administrative—
lndustry classifiers are used

management division and government control agencies.
and local for solving indivi-

for transferring production operations information.
dual problems of specific subsystems of the OASU Chermet. A great number of local

Classifiers hampers both the functioning of the OASU Chcrmet and its interfacing
with other ASU's. Therefore. at the present time a gradual transition is being

made to all-Union and industry classifiers.

Information flows supp ms of the OASU Charmet with the required
hine media are used information is transferred according to

information. When mac
the pattern: USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy Industry Computing Center -
Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy Main Computing and Data Processing

Center — enterprise computing subdivision. Thereby the industry computing center
receives a considerable part of its information directly from the computing sub—
divisions of enterprises. in individual cases the reception-transmission centers
of enterprises are used for the transfer of data. This system of exchanging in—
formation with the utilization of computing subdivisions is promising since there
is the possibility of arranging for exchange in the automatic mode directly between
computers. In the transfer of information on document media a minority of it is
transferred according to this system and the majority according to the following
pattern: USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy — Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Ferrous

ly functional subsyste

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Metallurgy - enterprise. Thus, documents from enterprises first arrive at the
all-Union production association or ministry and after a certain period at the
industry computing center or main computing and data processing center, which re-
sults in a great delay in processing them.

The technical facilities of the OASU Chermet include the hardware complex, the data
processing technology and the organizational structure of computing subdivisions
which is accomplishing the creation and operation of the OASU Chermet.

The hardware complex of the OASU Chermet consists of two computing complexes (VK's):
a main complex and one for processing real-time infatuation and machine media pre-
paration, communications and office mechanization facilities. The main VK con-
sists of two computers. a Yes-1033 and Yes-1065, and is used for solving planning,
accounting and analysis problems. The VK for processing real-time information con-
sists of two Yes-1022 computers which are connected to communications lines by
means of data transmission multiplexers.

The machine media preparation facilities are used for the transfer of information
from documents. This transfer is accomplished chiefly onto magnetic tape by means
of an SPD-9000 [automated data preparation system] which has made it possible to
improve conditions for and to increase the labor productivity of operators.

The communications facilities include the use of leased telephone and telegraph
communications channels and equipment making it possible to transfer information
between the OASU Chermet and OASU Ukrchermet [OASU for Ukrainian Ferrous Metallurgy]
and ASUP's. Data transmission equipment with a speed of 200 and 600-1200 bauds is
being introduced. The office mechanization equipment includes duplicating equip-
ment, equipment for forming documents. etc.

9. Questions Relating to Further Development and Improvement of the OASU Chermet

The engineering assignment for the development of the OASU Chermet and the organ-
ization of work relating to creation of its first phase was approved by decree of
the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy in 1972. The engineering assignment stipu-
lated that the OASU Chermet will consist of 1? functional subsystems presented in
table 5 [not reproduced].

This decree established the development procedure and designated the managers re~
sponsible for the creation of subsystems and hardware and software for the DASH
Chermet and leading development organizations and cofulfillment organizations, and
also stipulated their functions. For example, those responsible for the develop-
ment of a specific control subsystem for the ministry, in addition to general
management and supervision of development progress, organize introduction of the
subsystem and must take direct part in the development of plans.

The leading development organization is obliged to define precisely the purpose and
objectives of the subsystem. to produce an interesting formulation of objectives.
to develop a methodology for functioning of the subsystem, along with plans, and to
direct the work of coperformers. Such organizations have been the TsNIIChM [Cen-
tral Scientific Research Institute of Perrous Metallurgy imeni I.P. Bardin] Insti-
tute of Economics (IEChM), VNIIOchermet [All-Union Scientific Research Institute

of the Organization of Production and Labor in Ferrous Metallurgy], NIIAchermet

139

FOR 0F11C1AI.USE10NLY
l-“R m-‘nrlu Iva: OVI \

IScientific Research institute of Automation of Ferrous Metallurgy]. DonNIIchermet
[Don Basin Scientific Research Institute of Ferrous Metallurgy] and the USSR
Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy OVTs [Industry Computing Center].

Coperformer organizations are obliged to complete a specific job by a prescribed
deadline by assignment from the leading organization. Many industry scientific
research institutes and planning institutes as well as institutes of the USSR
Academy of Sciences and USSR Ministry of Instrument Making, Automation Equipment
and Control Systems have been enlisted as coperformers.

The first phase of the OASU Chermet includes seven subsystems: "Longterm Planning,"
"Current Planning." "On-Line Control." "Accounting," “Analysis," "Supply of Mater-
ials and Equipment" and "Transportation."

The engineering project was completed and approved in 1973 and in 1974 a working
project was developed for creation of phase one of the OASU Chermet, which was in-
troduced in 1975 with 11 functional subsystems (222 tasks). The subsystems "Labor
and Personnel," "Control of Financial Operations," "Control of Planning and Research
work," etc., were put into industrial service in addition to those called for by
the plan. Tasks were introduced as their development was completed, which was con-
ducive to improvement of control of the industry and to the revelation of short-
comings in the solution technique, formulation of the problem, the organization of
operations, etc. The annual savings equaled 3.6 million rubles. basically on
account of solving planning optimization problems. The capital invested was re-
covered in 1.8 years.

Along with this a number of shortcomings were found in organization of creation of
and in plans for the OASU Chermet.

The large number of organizations which took part in the development of the OASU
Chermet required great effort on the part of the industry computing center (OVTs)
with regard to scientific methodological guidance and coordination of their acti-
vities. The main effort was concentrated on the development of control tasks

w: hour the prior solution of general-system problems-~the harduare complex, soft-
ware and other kinds of support, functional structure and especially the relation-
ship of the OASU Chermet to ASU's of other control levels and the like. Not all
organizations fulfilled their obligations; some of them presented development work
not completed at the proper scientific and technical level. In addition, develop-
ment directors, exhibiting caution in determining the structure of phase-one tasks,
emphasized accounting problems. All this did not make possible a high level of the
automation of data processing and obtainment of a large savings.

In spite of these and other shortcomings, as a result of the development of phase
one of the OASU Chermet experience was acquired, a team of developers was formed
at the industry computing center and within the structure of IEChM, VNIIOchermet,
NliAchermet and DoanIchermet. relations were developed between the client for the

OASU Chermet (the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy) and developers and trust
in the solutions offered was increased on both sides.

The results of the development and industrial utilization of phase one of the OASU
Chermet were analyzed intensely in functional administrations of the USSR Ministry

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I13R‘0FFI(1AI.IMSF3(NNLY

of Ferrous Metallurgy and were discussed by the USSR Ministry of ferrous Metallurgy
NTs [Scientific and Technical Council] and decisions were made relating to the
further development of the OACU Chermet on a modern basis with the employment of
the latest achievements of science and technology.

The engineering assignment for further development and improvement of the OASU
Chermet with the employment of standard design solutions and third-generation com-
puters was approved by decree of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy in 1977.
This assignment specifies the key objectives and trends of further work relating to
creation of the OASU Chermet.

In order to be able to create an OASU Chermet which has a high level of automatic
data processing it is advisable first to create its longterm physical base-the
hardware of the OASU Chermet--to formulate an industry information base with high
technical and economic characteristics and to employ modern software. And then on
this basis to create a highly effective OASU Chermet and an industrial SAOI.

The hardware of the industry SAOI takes the form of a hierarchical automated data
processing system the organizational and technical basis of which is KVTs's,
VTsKP's. enterprise IVTs's, the computing centers of organizations. the USSR Mini-
stry of Ferrous Metallurgy GIVTs and the OVTs. These computing subdivisions must
be furnished with third- and fourth-generation computers and peripheral equipment
and be interconnected by means of high-speed communications lines.

The technical and other forms of support of the OASU Chermet are discussed above

in sec 2 of this chapter. It is necessary to mention that for the purpose of re-
ducing the labor intensiveness of developing and operating the OASU Chermet and for
making it possible to create an industry SAOI extensive use is made of the employ-
ment of type designs and unification and standardization facilities, e.g.. the
"Dokument" system, unification of communications, all-Union classifiers, equipment
of the same type and the like.

These and other facilities make it possible to employ a standard data processing
technology, which reduces the labor intensiveness of preparing data on account of
the elimination of unnecessary redundancy and improves the reliability of informa-
tion.

Compatibility of the tasks of functional subsystems is accomplished by means of the
software of the OAS" Chermet. which is developed by taking into account a system

of rules regulating the processes of the creation of programs and the composition
of the description of tasks in keeping with the engineering assignment for pro-
gramming (cf. ch III). This should make possible control of a unified industry
program bank and of the complex of interfaces of the industry computer network

and data processing complexes using any computer in the network.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan period work was completed on further development and
improvement of seven subsystems of the OASU Chermet: "Longterm Planning of De-
velopment of the Industry," "Technical and Economic Planning," "On-Line Control

of Production," "Control of Transportation Hort." "Statistical Reporting and
Accounting," "Control of Supply of Materials and Equipment" and "Personnel Planning,
Accounting and Analysis." The development of these subsystems is being carried out

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR l)l""('l.". “SF 0‘" \'

by means of complexes of tasks taking into account their relationships to other
tasks of this and other subsystems. This will make it possible to eliminate many
shortcomings of subsystems developed earlier and to proceed to a more ideal develop-
ment methodology making it possible to create ASU's with a high level of automation.

The structure of the tasks of practically all subsystems besides the last two was
discussed above. The consolidated structure of the complex of tasks of these sub-
systems is presented below. In the "Supply of Materials and Equipment" subsystem
complexes of tasks are developed relating to forecasting norms for consumption and
demand in the industry of material and fuel resources and for planning of this
demand (in keeping with Chermetsnab's [Ferrous Metallurgy Supply Administration]
list); to the distribution and development of assets for material and fuel resources
in keeping with the listing groups of Chermetsnab; to constructing balances for
materials and fuel; to drawing up a combined quota for the yield of scrap and non-
ferrous metal waste per enterprise for all-Union production associations and the
industry; to acc0unting for resources and controlling their realization and the
flow of supplies for individual kinds of material resources (rolled metal products);
and to controlling and regulating stock and controlling the flow of resources.

In the subsystem "Personnel Planning, Accounting and Analysis" complexes of tasks
are being developed relating to current planning for improving the skills of
managerial personnel and specialists in the industry; to keeping records of mana-
gerial and engineering and technical personnel in the industry and to analyzing
their makeup and mobility; to creating an information system making it possible to
form responses to requests; and to reporting on the added demand for diploma-holding
specialists in the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy.

in the llth Five-Year Plan period it is planned to continue work on the creation of
the OASU Chermet for the purpose of including to a fuller extent the personnel of
the ministry and all-Union production associations in the automated data processing
system. which is necessary to them for the effective performance of their functions.
and for the purpose of improving the efficiency and efficacy of control of the in-
dustry's enterprises on account of presentation of the necessary production opera-
tinns information.

COPYRIHHT: lzdntel'stvo "Mctallurgiya", 1981

8831
C50: 1863/27

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu 1‘" It I“ “5} "VI \

CONFERENCES AND EXHIBITIONS

CGIPUTER DESIGN AWATION CONFERENCE HELD
Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE MODELIROVANIYE in Russian No S. Sep-Oct 81 pp 106-107

[Report by D. I, Batishchev and V. A. Gulyayev on 9th All-Union Conference-Seminar
on "Current Problems in Computer Design Automation" held in Simferopol', 6-13 May
1981]

[Text] In accordance with the plan of the Ministry of Higher and Secondary Special-
ized Education of the USSR and the RSFSR, the 9th All-Union Conference-Seminar on
"Current Problens in Computer Design Automation" was held in Simferopol' from lo
through 13 Hay 1981. The conference was organized by the Hoscow Institute of Elec-
tronic Machine Building. the Leningrad Institute of Electrical Engineering imeni V.
I. Dl'yanov (Lenin) and the Simferopol' State University. Nine plenary sessions
were conducted: "Circuit Engineering Design," "Questions of Optimization in Prob-
las of Design," “Engineering Design," "Diagnosis of Digital Devices," "Micropro-
cessor Systems," "Conputer Network Architecture," "Computer Network Analysis," and
"Automation of Design of Analog-to-Digital Converters."

The following sections were active in the conference: Computer Element Base, Mathe-
matical Models of Transistors and Transistor Structures, Logical Design, Packages of
Programs for Circuit Engineering Design, Computer Design Automation, Electronic Cir-
cuit Analysis Methods, Engineering Design of Printed and Large-Scale Integrated Cir-
cuits, Structural Synthesis, Construction of Diagnostic Tests, Design of L81 Topolo-
gy, Organization of SAPR [Computer-Aided Design Systems [CAN], Software for_Hicro-
processor Systems. Computer Network Implementation and Modeling, Design of Micropro-
cessor Systems, Software for CAD and Computer Networks. Mathematical Questions of

Computer Design and Autonated Design and Monitoring of Analog-to-Digital Converters.

In his paper, "Status and Prospects for Computer Design," P. P. Sypchuk generalized
the major information on the main problems faced by developers of CAD and computers.
In particular, he noted the problens of development of microprocessor systems, for
example, the need for joint modeling of hardware and software, the difficulties in
developing micronodels of the functional assemblies of computers, etc.

The paper, “Comunications in Microprocessor Systems," was delivered in a plenary
session by Ya. A. Khetagurov; in it he conpsred the merits of unibua and radial
organizations of com-unication as applied to the problem of raising the throughput
of microprocessor systems. Ya. A. Khetagurov is from Moscow. The paper, "Composi-
tion and Prospects for Development of the Element Base of Processors for Computers
of the Next Generations," by B. N. Payzulayev (Moscow) was also delivered in a

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

plenary session; in it, based on a mathematical model for forecasting, he showed
the trends in reduction of delay and operation of processor base element switching,
of the number of LS! circuits and printed circuit boards, the machine cycle and
processor power consumption with the simultaneous sharp increase in scale of inte-
gration of the base elements and throughput. It was noted that matrix LSI circuits
and microprocessors form the basis of this element base.

The paper by A. T. Yeremin (Moscow), "Problems of Automation of Design of Hardware
for CAD Systems," covered the main characteristics of the sector system of design of
the YeSAP [Unified System of Design Automation], implemented on the base of the

Yes EVM [Unified System of Electronic Computers] hardware and intended for CAD of
computer control units and logic circuits, microprogram automate and printed and
modular units in the form of panels and TEZ's [standard exchange cards].

In his paper, "Modeling Malfunctions in Electronic Analog and Hybrid Circuits," A.

I. Petrenko (Kiev) discussed the capabilities of circuit engineering design programs
for detecting and localizing malfunctioning circuit components based on external
measurements on a limited number of external leads.

K. K. Perkov (Leningrad), in his pape., "Structure and Organization of an Educa-
tional CAD System for Design of Electronic Devices," presented the main features of
implementation of an educational CAD system based on the Unified System of Electron-
to Computers and the SM EVM [System of Small Computers] which allows easy modifica-
tion of the set of application program packages in use.

The paper by B. N. Bormakov (Moscow), "Comparative Study of Domestic Programs for
Circuit Engineering Design," covered the results of solving a set of test problems
for the programs AROPS [Automatic Calculation of Optimal Circuit Parameters], SPROS
[expansion unknown] (Moscow Aviation Institute), SPARS [expansion unknown] (Kiev
Polytechnical Institute), PAUM 2 [expansion unknown] (Moscow Institute of Electronic
Machine Building), PARM [expansion unknown] (Moscow Higher Engineering School imeni
N. E. Bauman), ELAIS [expansion unknown] (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute);

the good functional capabilities of the SPARS and SPROS programs regarding complex-
ity of problems solved and speed were pointed out.

The ensuing discussion touched on questions of the technique of selecting and com-
paring programs for circuit engineering design. degree of their universality and
specialization, questions of the technique of making use of CAD systems in the
training process while training CAD system users, and the importance of problems of
diagnosing malfunctions in complex electronic systems.

The paper by I. P. Norenkov, "Multilevel Optimization of LSI Circuits," dealt with
a sequential procedure for obtaining well-grounded engineering requirements for the
individual stages of parametric synthesis of devices built with LSI circuits.

In his paper, "Representation of Binary Relationships by Vector Criteria," V. V.

Federov presented the decomposition approach to organization of the process of de-

sign of a complex engineering object described by differential equations and based
on making use of aggregated criteria.

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his paper, ”Multicriteria Problems of Topological Design of Printed circuit
Boards and Hybrid Integrated Circuits," D. I. Batishchev presented an approach to
solving multicriteria problems of the design of the topology of electronic devices,
and gave the results of practical studies, in particular, the results of calcula-
tions made by various algorithms for a certain class of devices.

3. A. Selyutin dealt with the problems of computer-aided design of the topology for
custom LSI circuits applicable to the various technologies for manufacturing them.

In his paper, "Basic Algorithm for Tests of a Digital System and Diagnostics of Its
Malfunction," V. P. Panferov proposed making use of the apparatus of tensor calculus
for describing the behavior of discrete devices and extended it to solving the prob-
1cm of constructing tests for checking working order.

The paper "Intelligent CAD Systems," delivered by V. A. Mishchenko, referred to the
problem of automating the early stages of designing computers. The author suggested
methods of constructing multifunctional automate and gave examples of hardware
developed.

An approach to organizing suitable software (in particular, cross systems) for con-
structing control systems was presented in the paper by P. P. Sypchuk and A. D.
Ivanikov, "Automation of Development of Software for Microprocessor Control Units."

In his paper. "Current Problems of Design of LSI Circuits for Digital-to-Analog and
Analog-to-Digital Converters," B. G. Pedorkov presented the status of research in
this field here and abroad. noted promising directions and briefly covered

specific developments.

Other papers included "Architecture of Network Terminal Complexes and Automating
Design of Them," by V. V. Pirogov and s. P. Gaysterov; "Adaptive Switching in Compu-
ter Networks," by S. I. Samoylenko; "Design of Specialized Program Modules for
Analysis of Information Computing Networks," by S. D. Pashkevich; "Mathematical
Modeling of Computer Networks with Adaptive Control," by Yu. D. Umrikhin; "Using
Microprocessors in Biomedical Systems." by Ye. P. Dalashov; and "Design of Algo-
rithms for Arrangement and Layout for Design of Matrix LSI Circuits," by 2h. N.
Zaytseva and V. I. Bodryagin.

Delivered in the concluding plenary session were the papers "Aspects of Development
of CAD Systems for Analog-to-Digital Converters of Angular Translations" by V. G.
Domrachev, and "System for Study and Monitoring of Analog-to-Digitsl Converters" by
V. K. Shmidt.

Progress reports made in the sections were devoted to current questions of design of
digital computers, in particular to design of discrete devices with the use of PLM
[programmable logic arrays] and microprocessors, constructiOu 4f self-synchronizing
circuits, construction of application program packages; theory and technique of de-
sign of specialized digital computers for control systems, problems of achieving re-
liability by constructing diagnostic systems, methods of constructing tests and
simulation modeling of electronic devices, principles of organisation of a CAD sys-
tem and its elements, algorithms and programs for engineering design. development
of software for microprocessor systems and others.

[45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKIAL USE ONLY

The conference summed up the results of research on the problems of CAD systems for
computers, resolved to further develop the most promising scientific and applied
research, and promoted strengthening creative ties between representatives of VUZ
science and specialists in industrial enterprises.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Naukovs dunks", Blektronnoye nodelirovsniye, 1981

85/45
680: 1863/10

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DFFIl‘IAI. US): ONLY

8‘11! ALL-UNION CONFERENCE 0" 00mm. PROBLﬂiS
Kiev KIBBRNETIKA in Russian No lo, Jul-Aug 81 pp 1101-le
[Article by S. P. Koeubovakiy]

[Text] The 8th All-Union Conference on Control Prohlems was held in Tallinn
between 6 and 10 October 1980. The organizers of the conference were the Instio
tute of Control Problems of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences, the USSR National
Conittee on Automatic Control, the Institute of Cybernetics of the Estonian SSR
Acadeny of Sciences, and the Tallinn Polytechnic Institute.

In recent years the USSR National Co-Iittee on Autonstic Control and leading
scientific organizations in the country have held all-Union conferences on control
problems every three years. These neetings promte exchange of scientific in-
fomtion in the field of control theory, its applications, and control hardware.
The conferences usually precede international congresses of the International

Federation of Automatic Control (IPAC) so that the most interesting reports
given at the conference can be selected for the IPAC congress.

The 1st All-Union Conference on Autonotic Regulation was held in bacon in 191.0.
Sons 100 representatives fron six organizations took part in it. In 1953 the
2nd All-Union Conference on Automatic Regulation was convoked in Moscow. This
conference was attended by 700 persons and 76 reports were given. The 3rd All-
Union Conference on Automatic Control (Engineering Cybernetics) opened in 1965
in Odessa with 1,100 participants. At this conference, which was held on board

the steanship Admiral Nskhinov, 196 reports were given. The 4th All-Union
Conference (Tbilisi, 1968) had 1,200 participants and the nuﬂber of reports and
window given reached 330. The 5th All-Union Conference on Control
Problems was held in Moscow in 1971. Its statistics were: more than 1,000 par-
ticipants fron 68 cities. and 254 reports and conunications. The sixth con-
ference (Hoscow, 1971:) had more than 1,000 participants from 76 cities and heard
268 reports and commnications. The 7th All-Union Conference (Minsk, 1977)
had sore than 1,000 participants froe 65 cities and heard 505 reports and conu-
nications.

The 8th All-Union Conference on Control Problem was attended by more than 1,000
scientists and specialists from 70 cities in all the republics of the Soviet Union.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

About 40 percent of the participants represented the USSR Academy of Sciences,
the academies of sciences of the Union republics, and the higher educational
institutions of the country, while about 60 percent came from sectorial scien-
tific research institutes and production associations and enterprises. More
than 2,000 reports were submitted in advance. Abstracts of 255 reports were
included in the three-volume collection "8th All-Union Conference on Control
Problems. Tallinn, October 1980. Abstracts of reports. nooks 1-3. USSR
Academy of Sciences, Estonian 833 Academy of Sciences, 1980," which was pub-
lished before the conference opened. The remaining reports were published as
an appendix to the collection.

The conference was opened by Academician V. A. Trapeznikov, director of the
Institute of Control Problems of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Participants
at the meeting devoted a minute of silence to the memory of Academician Boris
Nikolayevich Petrov, vice president of the USSR Academy of Sciences and promi-
nent Soviet scientist in the field of automatic control who died on 23
September 1980.

In his short introductory talk Academician V. A. Trapeznikov noted that the 8th
All-Union Conference on Control Problems was meeting during the concluding days
of the 10th Five-Year Plan and preparation of the law on the new, llth Five-Year
Plan, as well as just before the 26th CPSU Congress. The 8th All-Union
Conference. he pointed out, would be an examination of scientific advances in
the field of automatic control in the preceding three years.

Of the more than 2,000 reports submitted for the conference, 637 were selected
for presentation. These were the reports judged to best promote scientific-
technlcal progress and penetration into promising new fields of technology.

The attention and efforts of scientific collectives today are concentrated on
solving these problems and shortening the time required to put scientific ad-
vances to practical use. This necessitates a continued broadening of scientific
ties with production and broad dissemination of promising new developments.

B. E. Saul', deputy chairman of the Estonian SSR Council of Ministers, gave a
welcoming talk to participants at the congress on behalf of the Central Com-
mittee of the Estonian Communist Party and the Estonian SSR Council of Ministers.
B. G. Tamm, scademician of the Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences, rector of
Tallinn Polytechnic Institute. chairman of the Estonian territorial group of
the USSR National Committee on Automatic Control, and a member of the Presidium
of the Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences greeted the conference on behalf of the
Presidium of the Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences. the Estonian SSE Ministry of
Higher and Specialized Education, the Estonian territorial group of the USSR
National Committee on Automatic Control, the Institute of Cybernetics of the
Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences, and Tallinn Polytechnic Institute.

The following plenary reports were given: V. A. Trapeznikov - "Some Prospects
for the Development of Control Systems"; 3. N. Petrov (now deceased), "Some
Problems of Controlling Spacecraft"; E. A. Yakubaytis, "The Architecture of
Computer Networks"; 0. M. Belotserkovskiy, "The Computer Experiment and Problems
of Training Personnel in the Field of Control"; H. A. Ayzerman. "Issues of

Voting Theory."

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (DI-Ht IAI. USE ONLY

In connection with the limited time (150 working hours) the section meetings
were not conducted in the traditional manner. Abstracts of reports were

not presented, but instead were included in a general survey report which
discussed the current state and prospects for projects included in the pro-
gram of the section. The remaining time was given over for discussion. This

type of organization promoted Broader and more vigorous exchange of informa—
tion among participants at the meetings.

The conference had the following sections:

1.

2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.
15.

16.

The Dynamics of Control Systems;

Methods of Functional and Structural Optimization;

Data Processing and Control in Stochastic Systems;
Machine Modeling of Control System;

Identification of Complex Systems;

Adaptive Control;

Methodological Questions of Constructing Automted Control
System (Industrial Processes. Production Facilities, and
Sectors of the Economy). and the Economic Efficiency of
Automated Control Systems;

Methods of Processing and Representing Data Arrays in
Control Systems (Image Recognition, classification,
Image Processing, Allocating Data Parameters, Pre-
liminary Processing, and Compressing Data);

Control of Economic and Organizational Systems;

Control in Biology and Medicine;

Control of Moving Objects;

Problems of Constructing Han—Machine Complexes;

Control of Robots and Robot Engineering Systems, the Artie
ficial Intellect;

Automating the Designing of Control Systems and Equipment;
Automating Scientific Research;

Problems of Constructing Systems and Networks for Data
Processing and Control;

149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ill-1‘“ 'IAI. USE ONLY

17. Principles of Constructing Control Hardware and
Software;

18. Control of Ecological Systems;

19. Theoretical Issues of Insuring Reliability, Technical
Diagnosis of Control Systems;

20. Logical Control Systems.

A total of 68 section sessions were held. In addition, the following problem
reports were given: corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Science: B. P.
Lomov, "The Active Person in the Control System"; Academician of the Estonian
SSR Academy of Sciences 6. I. Naan, "Global Demographic Processes and Problems
of Self-Regulation"; A. A. Visenkov, "Prospects for the Development of Radio

Electronics"; and, P. H. Katsura, "Problems of Controlling a Large Industrial
Association."

The program of the conference also included round table debates on three topics:
"The Goals, Problems. and Prospects of the Science of Control" (led by academi—
cian of the Estonian SSR Academy of Sciences 3. G. Tamm); "Robot Engineering in

Control Problems" (led by l. H. Hakarov); and, "The Role of Microelectronics
in Control Systems" (led by I. V. Prangishvili).

In addition to the scientific reports and discussions. participants at the con-
ference visited the Kokhtla-Yarve Slate Chemical Combine and were familiarized
with three automated systenm for control of industrial processes:

1. The slate gas generator based on a URI computer
(automatic monitoring of processes and automatic
control of the heat regime of the gas generators);

2. The process of amnonia production based on an 31-6000
computer (monitoring production, automatic control

of the work regime based on three—dimensional opera—
tion with human participation);

3. The process of carbamide production based on a
Yes—1010 machine (monitoring production, automatic

control of regulator assignments. optimization, and
industrial reporting).

At the closing session the paths of future research in the field of control
problems were outlined. The conference noted that the efforts of engineers

and scientists should be directed to seeing that control problems in our country
continue in the future to be resolved through a harmonious combination of work
on fundamental problems of control theory and building new. highly efficient

control hardware and progressive new technology with work to control complex
organizational, economic production. and social systems.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The conference called on all specialists working in the control field to con-
centrate their efforts on fulfilling the tasks set down by the 26th CPSU
Congress, bolstering the practical orientation of research, and doing everything
possible to promote faster utilization of scientific results in the national
economy and dissenination of results received on the broadest possible scale.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DNA". "KISKRNETIKA", 1981

11 , 1 76
650: 1863/16

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H"! 00-1qu l'NF 0N. \

MODELING DEVELOPING SYSTEMS: WORK 0? CONFERENCE REPORTED
Kiev KIBERNBTIKA in Russian No 4, Jul-Aug 81 pp 1‘2-145
[Article by V. V. Ivanov, A. A. Letichevskiy, and V. H. Yanenko]

[Text] The scientific councils on the problems "Cybernetics" and ”Biological
Physics" of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. the L'vov department of the
Institute of Biochemistry of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, the Computer
Center of the Institute of Applied Problems of Mechanics and Mathematics of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Cybernetics of the

Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, and the Institute of Physiology imeni A..A.
Bogomolets of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences conducted the second consoli-
dated conference of seminars on issues of modeling developing systems in the
urban-type community of Slavskoye, L'vovskaya Oblast on 12-18 February 1981.

The objectives of the conference were exchange of experience and raising the
scientific level of the associates at large computer centers, scientific re-
search institutes, and higher educational institutions. Participants at the
conference presented reports and discussed timely topics at the rannd table.
Sessions were held in four sections: general theory. numerical methods,
applications in biology, and applications in economics.

The section "General Theory"

In the report "Fundamentals of Modeling Developing Systems" academician V. M.
Glushkov, doctor of physicomathemacgca1 sciences V. V. Ivanov, and candidate
of technical sciences V. M. Yanenko (Kiev. Institute of Mathematics of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) reviewed the new generalizations and
theoretical investigations of oneclass of dynamic models proposed in work [1].
The authors presented types of functions of the productivities of reproduction
of deve10ping systems for different statements of the problems. They propose
evaluating the efficiency of the development of systems by the rate of change

in their productivity and establish a number of patterns for the dynamics of
system development.

Doctor of biological sciences In. G. Antomonov (Kiev, Institute of Cybernetics

of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) spoke in his report, "Modeling
Developing Systems," about certain indicators (number, growth, change in

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma (‘I'I‘N‘IU l'kl- I\\I \

reaction). causes (environmental influence. adequacy of a system to its environ-
ment). and mechanisms of development (in ontogenesis and philogenesis, beha.
vioral development). He named the complexity and level of organization of the
system as the criterion of development. The speaker presented an evaluation of
simple models of the course of development and discussed the simplicity and com-
plexity of models of developing systems.

In his work “Investigation of the Behavior of Systems with Models of Probablistic
Automate," candidate of physicomathematical sciences V. Ya. Valakh (Kiev, Insti-
tute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) considered the
theory of modelingtwobabilistic dynamic systems by means of automat models and
presented mechanisms for formation of the so-called withdrawal "reflex" from
"unpleasant" situations and drawing closer to "enticements."

The problems of describing the origin of biological information, the evolution

of biosystems against a background of already existing information, the evolution
of the individual, the optimality of development, and the existence of systems
were treated in the report "Fundamental Problems of Theoretical Biophysics” by
doctor of physicomathematical sciences D. S. Chernavsky (Moscow, Physics Insti-
tute imeni P. M. Lebedev of the USSR Academy of Sciences).

The report "Investigation of Stability and Oscillating Regimes in a New Class of
Dynamic Models" by candidates of technical sciences V. M. Yanenko, Yu. P.
Yatsenko, and 0. V. Gorda (Kiev, Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR
Academy of Sciences) reviewed the conditions of the current suboscillatory
regimes in systems described within the framework of two, three. and five product
dynamic models as proposed in [1-3]. In the case of singularly disturbed equa-
tions that describe a dynamic system, the possible behavior of oscillatory
decisions of dynamic models was studied based on Tikhonov's theorem [#1. The
report discussed the adequacy of the model and efficiency of its use to describe
the ontogenesis of groundling embryos and to describe various types of inter-
actions of lymphopoiesis and myelopoiesis in the organism.

The report "Spatial Self-Organization as the Result of Effectively Nonlocal
Interactions in Dissipative Systems" by candidates of physicomathematical sci-
ences D. N. Belintsev and M. A. Livshits and corresponding member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences M. V. Vol'kenshteyn (Moscow, Institute of Molecular

Biology of the USSR Academy of Sciences) presented an analytic study of the
question of the mechanisms that provide the capability for spontaneous occur-
rence of spatial structures in unbalanced systems. It showed that relatively
long—range negative cooperation alongside short-range positive cooperation are
such mechanisms. Diffusion can play the role of the short-range mechanisms.

By contrast, negative cooperation is associated with effectively nonlocal inter-

actions.

Candidates of physicomathematical sciences M. A. Livshits, B. M. Delintsev, and
G. T. Guriya. and corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences M. V.
Vol'kenshteyn (Moscow, Institute of Molecular Biology of the USSR Academy of
Sciences), in their report "Spatial Differentiation in a Single-Component
Dynamic System," identified two stages of differentiation: 1. the occurrence
of the intitial spatial asymmetry, described as the appearance of the source

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR ()I’FII I“. I SF UNI \

and confluence of the morphogene; (2) actual spatial differentiation in the
cell ensemble. The authors proposeda reaction-diffusion model for the second
stage and studied the nature of its stationary states, stability. and bifurca-
tions.

In the report "Formal Description of the Evolution of Systems by Means of
Structural-Functional Horphisms." candidate of physicomathematical sciences

Ya. A. Dubrov,(L'vov, IPPHM [expansion unknown] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences) proposed a formal definition of developing systems using the concept
of structural—functional morphism. He showed that the given definition agrees
with those available at the present time and demonstrated the possibility of
describing the evolution of systems. The report outlined and investigated ap-
proaches to the study of the category of systems.

Candidate of technical sciences A. D. Krisilov (Odessa. DEE MD MG! [expansion
unknown] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences), in the report "Interaction
of Developing Systems." reviewed the questions of formalizing the interaction
of ecological and economic systems and the application of systems analysis to
this problem. He proposed the use of an n-product dynamic model as a mathe-
matical model of the systems "economy" and "natural environment" [2].

Roundtable Discussion — "General Theory"

The issues raised were the feasibility of "major" jumps in the evolution of dy-
namic systems and the development and investigation of optimal forms of dynamic
models. The first set of questions was devoted to the evolutionary dynamics of
change in certain properties of developing systems, in particular the need to
accumulate excess "unneeded." but "not harmful" information for efficient system
evolution (0. S. Chernavskiy). certain patterns of developing systems related to
the dynamics of change in the reproductive productivity of developing systems
(V. V. Ivanov). and some effective ways of utilizing energy in the abiotic

stage of evolution (S. I. Kusen').

The Section "Numerical Methods"

The report by V. V. Ivanov and candidates of mathematical sciences P. N.
Bessrab and V. A. Lyudvinchenko (Kiev. Institute of Cybernetics of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) "Package of Applied Programs for Numerical
Realization of a Two-Product Model of Developing Systems" was devoted to the
package. now under development. which consists of three groups of program
modules: decision. nonstandard (with a right hand part) and system modules.

The report analyzed the precision of some of the computing algorithms included
in the package.

In their report "Numerical Solution of Certain Optimization Problems Based on
a New class of Dynamic Models," V. N. Denisyuk. V. H. stenko, and Yu. P.

Yatsenko reviewed the problems of modeling competing interrelationships within
the framework of a three-product model and identifying the parameters of a
dynamic model.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. N. Grnhovskiy, P. N. Nosnrah, and candidate of physicomathematical sciences
0. N.0dnrichdevotvd their report. "Analytic and Numerical Solution of One Class
of Mixed-Type Integral Equations," to the timely problem of modeling the
processes of dispersion of streams of electrons in the nuclear structure of
emulsions that occurs in the manufacture of nicrominiature models of printed
plates and chips for highly productive computers.

P. A. Zhuk (L'vov, IPPHH Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences), in his report.

"The UNIHDD Package of Applied Programs and Possibilities for Using It To Model
Complex Biological Systems" presented a method of constructing a package of pro-
grams that effectively fits the model of the object to the parameters of the
original. The algorithm is based on an oriented graph whose apexes are blocks
whose functions are dictated by the user.

The Roundtable Discussion "Numerical Methods"

The issues discussed were preserving the graphic quality and convenience of work
with models when they are made more complicated. dividing technical, program,
and personnel resources for modeling systems, and the development of modeling
facilities as developing systems (V. v. Ivanov). A critical review of trends

in the development of mathematical modeling in foreign countries was given
(candidate of technical sciences Yu. A. Savostikskiy - Moscow, All-Union
Scientific Research Institute of Systems Research, State Cmmmittee for Science
and Technology of the USSR Council of Ministers) and a method was proposed for
evaluating the efficiency of systems being introduced.

The Section "Applications in Biology"

Doctor of medical sciences L. S. Aleyev and candidate of technical sciences S. I.
Carkusha made an analysis of the therapeutic process as a stochastic process in
their report "Control of the Process of Patient Rehabilitation in Neurology."
They proposed an adaptive rule for making a decision that is one of the modifica-
tions of a composite decision.

The report of candidate of biological sciences T. H. Yeroshenko (Moscow, Moscow
State university imeni H. V. Lomonosov) "Characteristics of the System of Body
Height Regulation in Growing Animals" was devoted to the conception of "setting
animal weight." The report took note of approaches that consider the relation-
ship between reproduction of the live weight of the organism and the total
weight of the body, evaluted the role of growth hormones, and proposed a corre-
sponding mathematical model.

In their report "Modeling a Developing Neuron Structure," candidates of bio-
logical sciences I. A. Ryhak and V. N. Yefimov (Roatov~naoDonu, NIINK [possibly
Scientific Research Institute of Neurocyberneticsl) showed the interaction of
the neuron structure with the environment. In the process of interaction with
the environment the system. by rearrangements of the structure of linkages.

arrives at a type of reaction that insures receiving the essential (maximum)
amount of substrate.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H») "I I It I“ Isl "\l \

The report by A. I Bogntyr' (Kiev. NII NKh [possibly Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Neurosurgery] of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Health). "Rhythms of
nomeokinetic Regulation and Adaption," was devoted to a quantitative evaluation
of the relationship between biorhythms (period of eight hours) and moments when
organism adaptation is disrupted. This is very important for planning operations
in neurosurgery.

The report "Theoretical Aspects of Adaptation" by H. Yu. Antomonov (Kiev, KNII
GKKh [expansion unknown] of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Health) gave a
critical analysis of approaches to defining the concept of adaptation in living
systems. The report reviewed an existing system for automating scientific re-

search that makes it possible to evaluate the degree of organism adaptation to
harmful environmental factors.

V. V. Ivanov. candidate of biological sciences N. I. Lysenko, and V. H. Yanenko
(Kiev, Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian ssn of the Academy of Sciences
and [NBC (possibly Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics] of the
Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences). in the report "Application of a New Class

of Dynamic Models in Genetics and Plant Breeding (with the Example of Sugar
Beets)," considered five variations of models of the process of sugar accumula~
tion in inbred sugar beet lines. Averaged estimates of the parameters of yield
and sugar content were used for modeling and preliminary recommendations were
presented for predicting optimal hybrid vigor in sugar beets. The report
"Identifying the Latent Characteristics of Developing Systems by Spectral
Analysis" by D. I. Sanagurskiy, R. I. Gnat'yev, candidate of biological sciences
Ye. A. Coyda, and T. I. Hurskaya (L'vov, L0 IBKh imeni A. V. Palladin [expansion
unknown] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) gave an assessment of the
correlation between parameters (rate of oxygen consumption, transmembrane po-
tential. and overoxidation of the lipids of the groundling embryo) with dif-
ferent stages of its morphogenesis and the role of calcium ions in the

precess of fertilization and development of the embryo.

In their report "Complex of Initial Biophysical Parameters for Modeling the
Regulatory Systems of Early Development of Animals," Ye. A. Goyda, I. 0.
Mukalov, D. l. Sanagurskiy. and N. S. Stel'makh (L'vov, L0 IBKh imeni A. V.
Palladin of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences) gave an evaluation of the
process of registration of different biophysical parameters of groundling
embryos in real time by means of computer and assessed the influence of
colchicine in the mitotic cycle.

The report of candidate of physicomathematical sciences V. G. Levadnyy (Moscow,
Scientific Council on Cybernetics of the USSR Academy of Sciences), "Optimal
Functional Parameters of Respiration." was devoted to a consideration of dif—
ferent optimization problems, among which the problem of minimum full energy
expenditures in the regime of stationary functioning of the external respiratory
system of the organism is adequate.

Candidates of physicomathematical sciences A. L. Asachenkov. L. N. Belykh,
S. M. Zuyev. and A. A. Romanyukha (Novosibirsk. Computer Center of the Siberian
Department of the USSR Academy of Sciences) presented a report entitled

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N"! "I l ll'l“ I'S} "\I \

“Mathematical Modeling of Infectious Diseases and Methods of Processing
Clinical and Laboratory Data." The report was based on a base model proposed
earlier by academician G. I. Marchuk [6]. One of the interesting results that
has been applied in the clinic is the therapeutic tactic of aggravating the
condition of the patient.

The report "Regulation of the Humoral Immune Response" by candidate of bio-
logical sciences R. N. Stepanenko (Moscow, 2nd Moscow State Order of Lenin
Medical Institute imeni M. I. Pirogov of the RSPSR Ministry of Health) dis.
cussed the principal types of intercellular interactions of the nmmune system.
The speaker proposed a block diagram of the immune system and identified the
"channels" that regulate the humoral immune response.

The report"Theory of the Immune Network" by candidate of biological sciences

V. c. Nesterenko (Moscow. Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology imeni

M. P. Camaleya of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences) reviewed the progressive
formation of the theoretical conception of the immune network. Hithin this
framework it is possible to explain a large number of factors, and in particular
those related to high-dose and low-dose immunological tolerance. The report
presented original results on the "fine" immunological mechanism for regulating
the differentiation of target cells. which leads to further elaboration of the
theory [7].

The report entitled "Development of Mathematical and Experimental Models of
Immunological Tolerance and the Mechanisms of Regulation of Adaptive Differen-
tiation Thymocytes and Endocrine Regulation of the Immune Response" by doctors
of biological sciences L. N. Fontalin and V. G. Neaterenko. doctor of medical
sciences B. B. Fuks, candidate of biological sciences G. M. Zhuravel', doctor
of medical sciences E. V. Gyulling, academician V. M. Glushkov, doctor of
physicomathematical sciences V. V. Ivanov, candidate of technical sciences

V. N. Yanenko. and S. N. Garkusha emphasized the important role of regulation
of the redistribution of immune system resources to support the "internal"
function and to perform external (killer. suppressor. and other) functions.

The report reviewed a further elaboration of V. N. Glushkov's mathematical
model [1] for certain problems of modeling immunological tolerance and the like,
introduced new experimental models for the purpose of finding new regulatory
elements of the immune system with conditions for switching the system from the
immune response to immunological tolerance, and presented findings from the
literature that confirm the adequacy of the model.

In his report entitled "Characteristics of Modeling the Blood Formation System,"
candidate of biological sciences A. Ya. Monichev (Gor'kiy. Scientific Research
Institute of Mathematics at Gor'kiy State University) presented a new variation
of the mathematical model of regulation of hemopoiesia [8], proposed possible
mechanisms of regulation, and demonstrated the adequacy of the model.

Candidate of technical sciences V. A. Geodokyan (Institute of Developmental

Biology imeni N. K. Kol'tsov of the USSR Academy of Sciences) gave a report an.

titled "Living Systems and the Conception of Information." The report was
devoted to the search for conceptual models and evaluated the difference between

157

FOR 0F1WCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP UNI)

ordering and organization and the role of information in living system, noting
that the relationship between the zygote and the organism is such that the
mature organism, as the result of information work, possesses a minimum of
information potential and a maximum volume of information.

The Roundtable Discussion "Conception of Intonation"

The problems of describing the origin of biological information were discussed
(D. S. Chernavskiy) and an evaluation was given of different approaches to defin-
ing the probability of random occurrence of a biocode [9]), the latest results
on the hypercycle, and related probablistic assessments of the occurrence of the
translation system [10]. Differentiation models were considered which make it
possible to represent the selection of one biocode owing to the instability of
the states of the system and the accumulation of "ballast" information. In such
models. however, threshold cycles and foreign attractors are also possible
(doctor of physiocomathematical sciences A. N. Holchanov, Scientific Institute of
the Computer Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences) [11], which diminishes the
probabilistic evaluations of the origin of the biocode. The evolutionary
mechanisms of differentiation of the sexes were considered and the causes of
sexual dimorphism under extreme environmental conditions were clarified.

The Section "Modeling Ecological and Economic Systems and Scientific-Technical
Progress"

In his report "The Evolution of the Concept of the Stationary Regime," A. N.
Molchanov showed how the theory developed from the concept of one stationary
stable state toward the concepts of stationary states. The author presented an
analysis of different types of oscillatory behaviors of biosystems in which such
states as quasistochasticity are possible and demonstrated the applicability of
these results to the problems of mathematical ecology and population genetics
[11}.

Candidate of philosophical sciences V. Ye. Khmel'ko (Kiev, Institute of Party
History of the Central Committee of the Ukrainian Comunist Party. Branch of
the Institute of Marxism—Leninism of the CPSU Central Committee) devoted his
report, "The Sociological Approach to Development of Models of the Development
of the Macrostructure of Public Production," to an analysis of the tendency in
development of reproduction evaluation of the change in the dominant factors in
social production of life, and consideration of its character. The report re-
viewed transitory change in the proportion of expenditures of social labor in
the primary spheres of reproduction of life itself (means of existence and human
beings themselves). A trend was identified for the proportion of expenditures
of labor for information production to become paramount, and it is expected in

the future that the reproduction of human beings themselves will be the dominant
factor.

Criticism of several bourgeois conceptions of the development of public produc-
tion was given.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PHI? 0&1"le I'SF 0Nl.\’

r. A. Zhuk's report "One Approach to Purmalization of Purposeful System and
Determining Conditions for Their Progressive Development” presented a general
theoretical consideration of systems of various types of interaction in
purposeful systems which are formed with due regard for a set of permissible
environmental strategies.

Candidates of technical sciences A. A. Yakunin and Yu. A.‘ Yershov
(Dnepropetrovsk, Main Information and Computer Center of the Ukrainian SSR
Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy) presented a report entitled "Integrated Automated
Control Systems of the Ukrainian SSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy," dealing
with the questions of setting up and operating the information base of an auto-
mated control system and evaluating the efficiency of several elements of pro-
duction. The report "Structural Hodeling of Socioeconomic Development of a
Region" by dactor of economic “19““ V. A. Podsolenko (Dnepropetrovsk. IKP
[possibly Institute of Economic Planning] of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of
Sciences) considered numerous issues: methodological questions of setting up
systems for modeling regions, the structure of mathematical and information
software, and the possibility of solving optimization problems involving op-
timal distribution of a region's resources used in industry and to satisfy

social needs. V. V. Ivanov, V. H. Yanenko, and U. Ye. Galiycv (Kiev, Institute
of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian 888 Academy of Sciences. Alma-Ate, AGU

[possibly Alma-Ate State University]) presented a report entitled "Modeling
Scientific-Technical Progress on the Basis of Dynamic Hodels According to

V. H. clushkov." In the report they proposed evaluating the efficiency of
development of systems by the rate of change in productivity. They demonstrated
several patterns of systems in development and give examples of evaluating the
efficiency of development of scientific-technical progress.

Summarizing the above, we feel that the consolidated conference of seminars on
questions of modeling developing systems use mutually Beneficial, that the re-

ports aroused great interest and participants at the conference vere rewarded
with nev, specialized knowledge.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. M. Clushkov, "One Class of Dynamic Macroeconomic Models," UPRAVLYAYUSCHIYB
SISTEHY I MASHINY, 1977, No 2. pp 3-6.

2. V. H. Clushkov, V. V. Ivanov, and V. H. Yanenko, "A New Class of Dynamic
Models and Its Application in Biology. I, II," KIBERNETIKA, 1979, No lo,
pp 131-139; 1980, No 6, pp 109-117.

3. V. H. Glushkov, V. V. Ivanov, and Yu. P. Yatsenko, "Analytic Investigation of
One Class of Dynamic mdels. I. II," KIBBRNBTIKA, 1980, No 2, pp 1-12.

Io. A. B. Vasil'yeva, and V. F. Butuzov, "Asimptoticheakoye Razlozheniye

Resheniye Singulyarno Vozmushchennykh Uravneniy" [Asymptotic Expansion of
Singularly Disturbed Equations], Moscow, "Nauka", 19 la, 272 pages.

5. V. H. Glushkov. V. V. Ivanov, V. H. Yanenko. Yu. P. Yatsenko, S. V. Kakichev,
"Heans of Modeling Developing Systems," Preprint of the Institute of Cyber-
netics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences, No 80-37, Kiev. 1980, 58

pages .
159

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
6.

9.

10.

11.

FOR "I Flt'lil INF "\I \'

c. I. Narchuk, "Matcmaticheskiye Modeli v Innunologii" [Mathematical
Models in Immunology], Moscow, "Nauka", 1980, 266 pages.

V. G. Nesterenko, "Imunological Regulation of the Differentiation of
Somatic Cells," USPEKHI SOVREHENNOY 8101,0011 1980, 90. Vyp 2, pp 211-220.

V. P. Gruzdev, A. Ya. Monichev, and Ye. M. Shcherbovs. "Issues of Mathe-
matical Modeling of the Blood Formation Process (Truncal Cell)" VOPR.
KIBERNETIKI 1979, Vyp 109, pp 610-106.

ZHURNAL VSESOYUZNOGO KHIMICHBSKOGO OBSHCMES‘NA m. D. I. MENDBLEYBVA
1980, No 3, 152 pages; No lo, 152 pages.

M. Eigen, and P. Schuster. "The Hypercycle," 1-3, NAIURNISSENSCMAPTBN 1977,
64, No 11, pp 54-572; 1978, 65, Mo 1, pp 7-37; 1968. 62, No 7, pp 31.1-375.

A. M. Molchanov. and A. D. Bazykin (editors). "Psktory Raznoobraziys v
Matematicheskoy Ekologii i Populyatsionnoy Genetike" [Diversity Factors
in Mathematical Ecology and Population Genetics], Pushchino, Nauchno-
Isseldovstel'skiy Vychislitel'nyy Tsentr SSSR, 1980, 196 pages.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUMKA", "RIBBRNETIKA", 1981

11,176

CSO :

1863/16

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H DR "Fl-11 1 -\l l '31“ UNI .\'

6TH ALL-UNION SEHINAR 'PARALLEL PM All!) HIGH-PROWCTIVITY STRUCTURBS'
Kiev KIBERNBTIKA in Russian No 4. Julv-Aug 81 pp 165-166

[Article by G.Ye. Tseytlin and L. l. Nagornaya]

[Text] Structural Programing in Systems of Algorithmic Algebras

A seminar entitled "Parallel Programing and High-Productivity Structures" was
held in Kiev on 25-26 February 1981. The seminar was devoted to problems of
structural progralmning in systems of algorithmic algebras and was organized by
the section "Homogeneous Computer Systems. liedia, and Distributed Systems" of
the Scientific Council on Computer Technology and Control Systems of the USSR
State Co-ittee for Science and Technology. the section "Computer Technology" of
the All—Union Scientific-Technical Society of Radio Engineering and Tele-
communications imeni A. S. Popov, and the Scientific Council on the Problem
"Cybernetics" of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences. Seventy-three spe-
cialists in programming and computer technology from various organizations in
Kiev. Moscow. L'vov, Dnepropetrovsk. Kasan', Novosibirsk, and other science cen-
ters of the comtry took part in the work of the seminar.

The program of the seminar included a series of plenary survey reports devoted to
the development of inortant areas of programing technology and treating the
general problem area of structural programing.

‘lhe report "The Organisation of Computations on Hultiprocessor Computing Systems"
by V. H. Glushkov. Yu. V. Kapitonova, and A. A. Letichevskiy reviewed the ques-
tions of the development of hardware and software for multiprocessor couputing
systems based on the macroconveyor principle. The report formulated the prin-
cipal results of the algebraic theory of structures of data oriented to
synchronous and asynchronous multiple processing. Significant attention was de-
voted to the method of formalised technical specifications. which is oriented to
the development of parallel programs and to the family of parallel progra-ing
languages being developed for ma [expansion unknown]. The expressive capa-
bilities of the proposed linguistic means were illustrated with examples of
cowuter mathematics problems.

In his report entitled ”Structural Programing and P~Technology," I. V.
Vel'bitskiy described the present state and prospects for development of

161

~.1. . . - roe omau. use on“
FOR (WI-1i Ill US} UNI \

P—tcchnology. a widespread method of designing programs and discussed the con-
ceptual foundation of the technology. The report gave special attention to

the graph form of describing data in comﬁination with analytic representation of
programs in P—metalanguage on standard memory structures using the apparatus of
semantic procedures. A number of practical results obtained from the applica-
tion of P-technology were described and some problems for further research were
formulated.

v. N. Red‘ko‘s report "Universal Program Logic" was devoted to an analysis of
investigation based on program logics which have emerged and are developing at
the boundary between mathematical logic and programing theory. Special atten-
tion was devoted to universal program logic. based on the composition approach.
In the program logic constructed the conclusions adequately reflect the process
of program design. The concepts of semantic structure and semantic program de-
sign are refined on this basis.

The report "Multilevel Structural Program Design" By G. Ye. Tseytlin proposed a
method of program development that combines the apparatus of systems of algo-
rithmic algebras with the theory of formal language models. This method makes
it possible to formalize the structure of the program at each level of design
and also permits switching by levels in the process of detailing it. The report
gavc basic results on the schematology of structural parallel programing

based on the apparatus of modified systems of algorithmic algebras and the
theory of gran-natical and automat language models. The method was applied in
developing the instruments of structural parallel programing. one system of
parallel translation, certain components of the software of homogeneous com—
puting system, minicomputers, and microcomputers. The report formulated certain
open questions within the framework of the further development of this area of
research.

In addition to the plenary sessions there were three topical sessions at which
the following comunications were presented.

The Session "Instruments of Structural Programing in Systems of Algorithmic
Algebras"

- V. P. Zhidakov, "Structural Design of Complex Problems";
- V. P. Critsay and 0. l. Tal'yansltaya. "Realization of a
System That Translates from the Language of Logical

Systems of Algebraic Algebras into Pl-l";

—- Yu. A. Yushchcnko, "Analytic Transformations of Regular

Program Circuits in S-Algebraa on an L28 Base ,

— M. S. Burgin. "Register Transformation, Multidimensional
Statements, and Their Compositions";

- V. P. Panfllenko, "One Effective Algorithm for Testing the
Corrcstness of Parallel Regular Program Circuits."

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Session

The Session

The work of

N N! 0H" 1:“. ! !Sl-' "Ni V

"Processes of Symbol Processing Systems of Algorithmic Algebras“

L. I. Nagornaya, "Structural Description of the PARTRAN
System, a Multilayer Parallel Conveyor-Type Translator";

Ye. P. Batrak, "Multilevel Structured COBOL, the Input
Language of the PARTRAN System";

M. Ye. Berkovich and M. P. Milov, "Realization of Parallelism
Facilities in the ADAM Language";

M. N. Muchnik, "Structural Description of the Software Com-
ponents of Minicomputers and Microcomputers";

V. P. Zhidakov, T. D. Lomidze, and A. A. Vasil'kov, "Infor-
mation Software of a Structured Data Bank";

A. V. Babichev, "Non-Sorting Analysis of KS—Languages."
"Structural Designing of System Control Processes"

N. S. Maksimov, "Algorithmic Models of the Functioning of.
the Display Complexes of YeS [Unified System] Colputers";

A. V. Anisimov, Yu. Ye. Boreysha, and M. V. Nikolayev.
"System for Modeling Multiprocessor Systems";

V. K. Vodop'yanov, "Modification of Linguistic Means
Oriented to Describing Industrial Processes";

M. Ye. Berkovich and I. B. 081P°Vn "Solving Bookkeeping
Problems in a Locally Distributed Computer System”:

1'. K. Terz'yan, "Linguistic and Program Software of
Systems To Automate the Designing of Industrial Process-v
ing."

the. seminar concluded with a discussion entitled "The Role of F’orh

malization in Program Design," which promoted a lively exchange of opinions
and experience in the basic areas of the technology and methodology of struc-
ture parallel programing and further stimulated work to apply the formal
apparatus of algorithmic algebras.

COPYRIGHT:

11.176

IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA DUN". "KIBERNBTIKA", 1981

C80: 1863/16

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIRCHII(I\I Isl "\l\

3RD SEMINAR 'INTERACTIVE SYSTEHS'
Kiev KIBERNETIKA in Russian No 4, Ju1~Aug 81 pp 146.147
[Article by L. N. Nekrasova and H. G. Khoshtarial

[Text] The 3rd seminar was held on 15-21 March 1981 in the Georgian city of
Borzhomi.

The seminar was organized by the Georgian republic seminar "Interactive Systems"
of the Council of Young Scientists of the Central Committee of the Georgian
Komsomol, the Council on Automation of Scientific Research of the Presidium of
the USSR Academy of Sciences. the Institute of Cybernetics of the Georgian SSR
Academy of Sciences. the Computer Center of the Georgian SSR Academy of Sciences,
the Georgian Scientific Research Institute of Scientific-Technical Information,
the Information and Computing Center of the Georgian SSR Ministry of Finance,
and the Institute of Cybernetics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy of Sciences.

The seminar drew the participation of 256 scientists from 28 cities of the

Soviet Union. More than 100 science centers and organizations of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the academies of sciences of the Union republics. the USSR
State Committee for Science and Technology. the State Committee on the Use of
Atomic Energy, and various ministries and departments (including organizations of
the ministries of education of the USSR and the Union republics) were represented.

Twenty-one reports were presented in two plenary sessions and eight lecture
periods. V. V. Chavchanidze, chairman of the organizing committee and aca-
demician of the Georgian SSR Academy of Sciences, gave an introductory talk.
Discussions were held in two sections on the basis of abstracts of 130 reports
that were submitted and published in advance.

Section 1. Problem-Oriented Interactive Systems

This section was led by professors A. S. Vayradyan and V. I. Varshavskiy; L. N.
Nekrasova was the learned secretary.

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (WI-111A! I'SF ”NI \

The issues considered were:

1. Problem-oriented interactive computer complexes. In-
teractive packages of applied programs and organize-
tions;

2. Interactive systems based on microcomputers;
3. Interactive machine graphics.
Section 2. Interactive (Dialogue) Languages

The leaders of this section were professor A. V. Gladkiy and doctor of philo-
logical sciences and professor B. s. Skorokhod'ko; the learned secretary was
candidate of physicomathematical sciences H. G. thovelishvili.

The issues considered were:

1. Question-answer systems for communication with data bases
and natural languages;

2. Interactive programming languages;
3. Linguistic problems of diaglogue (interaction).

A broad range of problems related to the development, realization, and applica—
tion of interactive systems was considered at the seminar. Great attention was
devoted to improving the forms and languages for courunication between the user
and the computer (the report "Interactive Programming Languages" by s. P.
Prokhorov, the report ”Linguistic Means of Interaction in ASAS [expansion un-
known]" by Yu. H. Borodyanskiy. L. N. Nekrasova, I. K. Psikunova, and others);
methodological problems of constructing problem-oriented interactive systems
(the report "Methods of Generating Interactive Routed Systems" by Ye. R.
Yushchenko, V. S. SadoVenko, et al.. "Principles of Construction of Industrial
Systems That Provide Dialogue with the User in a Limited Natural Language" by

B. V. Popov. and “Automated Design of the Structure of a Multiprocessor Computing
System in the Interactive Hode" by A. S. Vaydaryan); P-technology (the report
"Current State of P-Tecbnology and Means of Supporting It in Yes [Unified System]
Computers. SH [Small Computer] Machines, and the sass-6" by I. V. Vel'bitakiy):
questions of their nathematical. program, linguistic. and informational software
(the report "The Linguistic Approach to the Construction of Computer Complexes
To Process Images of the Geometric Drawing Type" by A. L. Sinyavskiy, "The Ideas
of H. N. Dakhtin on Expression and Dialogue and Their Importance for the Formal
Semantics of Natural Language" by A. V. Gladkiy, "Presumptions and Their Role in
Human Interaction with the Machine" by Ye. V. Paducheva. "Linguistic Software in
Contemporary Text Information Processing Systems" by Yu. D. Apresyan. the "DESTA
Interactive Natural Language System" by V. A. Levitskiy. and "Compiling and
Managing Vocabularies in the Interactive Node" by E. P. Skorokhod'ko.)

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (DI-15K 'IAI. IlSl-Z "NIX

work on the use 0! mlnicomputers (the report by A. S. Barinov) and interactive
graphic systems (the report "Basic Software of Machine Graphics for Automating
Scientific Research and Design in Construction Using SM Computers" by A. A.
Lyashchenko) was broadly represented.

In addition to the above-mentioned reports, systems that have been realized in
practice were presented at the seminar (I. V.Sergiyenko, A. s. Stukalo, et al.,
"The ASPP PAP Interactive Automated System for Program Preparation on Yes
Computers"), and the report "Modeling the Transportation Situation in the Inter-
active Mode on the INTRANS—Z System" by V. I. Gritsenko and V. H. Hiroshnichenko).

The following reports were presented at the plenary session: "Some Questions of
Problem-Oriented DlSP [possibly Interactive Planning Information Systemsl" by

V. V. Aleksandrov. "Timely Questions of Dialogue" by V. E. Vol'fangangen,

"Model of Protocol for Exchange in Interactive Systems" by V. I. Varshavskiy,
"Methodology for Structured Design of Interactive Programs" by S. V. Yastahembskiy,
and "The Ideas of H. N. Bakhtin on Expression and Dialogue and Their Importance
for the Formal Semantics of Natural Language" by A. V. Gladkiy.

Within the framework of the overall seminar a special seminar entitled "The Use
of Hinicomputers and Microcomputers in Interactive Systems in the Automation of
Scientific Research" was held under the direction of professor I. I. Halashinin,
chairman of the Commission on Interactive Systems of the Council on Automation of
Scientific Research of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

During the work of the seminar scientists exchanged opinions on timely problems
of human interaction with computers in solving various classes of problems.

The most interesting work and lines of activity were noted, scientific con-
tacts were made among many scientific collectives. and the paths of future
development of interactive systems were outlined.

It can be stated that in the current phase of development of computer technology
and methodological. linguistic, mathematical, program, and information software
withzlurnwlngroleof automated systems and their widespread introduction in many
aields of science and the economy, the question of the human relationship to
computing systems and human interaction with the computer is becoming critical.
Contemporary interactive systems allow human interaction with the computer in
professional languages, limited natural languages. or languages that are close
to natural languages. They greatly broaden the sphere of application of com-
puters, the classes of problems that can be solved, and the range of users.

The seminar, which reviewed the state of research, development, and ac-
eomplishments with respect to interactive systems, highlights the specializa-
tion of many science centers in particular fields of designing interactive
systems and the current level of automated interactive systems being set up.

The resolution of the seminar should play a positive role in coordinating
scientific organizations working on the development of interactive systems and
developing methods to standardize interactive systems in order to raise the
efficiency of use of computer technology in many spheres of scientific research
and the national economy.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was recommended that the loch AllvUnion Seminar he held in the first half of.
1982.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "NAUKOVA um", "KWIKA", 1981

11,176
C80: 1863/16

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. IISF (INI \'

INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION 'COHHUNICATIONS-Bl' IN MOSCOW

Moscow PRIBORY I SISTEHY UPRAVLENIYA in Russian No 8, Aug 81 p 38

[Article by Yu. M. Samoylov, senior editor of Soviet section of international
exhibition "Communications—81," in the section "International and Foreign
Exhibitions"]

iTcxt] This year. our country for the second time (after 1975) will be the site
of an international review of communications systems and equipment. The firms and
organizations of more than 20 of the world's countries will demonstrate models of
their products at the international specialized exhibition "Communications-81"
iSvyaz'-Bl] that will be held from 2 through 16 September in Moscow's Sokolniki

Park.

The USSR has one of the most important expositions. It has more than 3.000 exhi-
bits providing full representation on the achievements and prospects for develop-
ment of communications equipment, beginning with the oldest. mail, and ending with
space. The exposition will have eight thematic sections: "Satellite Camnnucs-
tions," "Radio Communications," "Television and Radio Broadcasting," "Hail,"
"Radio Electronic Components and Materials for Communications Equipment," and

others.

frndurts from the enterprises of'the Ministry of Instrument Making, Automation
aquipment and Control Systems will be widely shown at the exhibition. Thus,
specialists and visitors will see models of data transmission equipment in the
"Terminal Equipment, Channels and Networks for Communications." The Nal'chik
Telemechanical Equipment Plant imeni the 50th Anniversary of the USSR, for example.
will demonstrate signal converters and a subscriber station. The UPS-SOIZOO signal
converter that will be on display is designed for synchronous or asynchronous
serial data transmission over unswitched telegraph networks with four- or three-
wire termination (one wire common) and can be used in various automated control
systems. The unit provides for duplex or half-duplex data exchange at tranmission
rates of 50, 75, 100 or 200 bits/sec in the asynchronous node or up to 200 bits/
sec In the synchronous mode.

The "Modem-lZOOKN" signal converter is used for synchronous or asynchronous serial
data transmission oVer voice-frequency telephone channels and physical lines with
two- or tour—wire termination. It comes in six versions and can be used in vari-
ous automated control systems. The unit transmits data over a private line at

1200 hits/sec in the asynchronous mode, 600 or 1200 bits/sec in the synchronous,

and up to 75 bits/sec over the return channel.
168

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR UFI'1(1.-\l. I'SE ()NI.\'

The UVTK-Kl subscriber station is used to build subsystems for acquisition and
distribution of data in automated control systems. Through modems and terminals
connected to the subscriber station, a number of operators can remotely access a
data processing center computer. Built with the “Blektronika-GO" computer, the
UVTK-KI station provides for data tranmission from remote (to 2 km) teletypes,
computers located nearby and data transmission equipment; it operates over tele-
phone, switched and dedicated, city and intercity, as well as physical lines at
600 and 1200 bits/sec, and over telegraph dedicated lines at 50, 75, 100 or 200
bits/sec.

The L'vov "Hikropribor" Production Association imeni the 60th Anniversary of the
Soviet Ukraine will show in this section the HD—éBOl analog storage unit. It is
used in data processing and transmission units in large analog-digital measuring
systems as well as metrological equipment and systems. The unit features high
speed and low error rate for entry and storage of the momentary value of an
analog signal.

L'vov products will also be demonstrated in the "Radio Measuring Equipment" divi-
siOn. The Shch-48000 general-purpose digital voltmeter, in particular, is on the
standard of the world's best. It is designed to meter voltages of direct and
alternating current, strength of direct current and resistance. It is used both
under laboratory conditions (for checking and repairing electronic apparatus) and
in monitoring and control systems (for converting transducer output signals into
digital code). The instrument is highly sensitive, considerably fast and highly
immune to noise and has a low error rate in metering.

The F-483b digital voltmeter for direct current meters voltage in the range from
S microvolts to 1000 V and is used in a four-channel biochemical automatic analy-

zer as the meter unit in automatic monitoring and control systems; it is also
used as an independent instrument in laboratories and industrial enterprises.

The F-4801 digital voltmeter for direct current meters voltage and the relation-

ship between two voltages of direct current. It is used as an autonomous instru-
ment or combined with meter converters to meter various passive and active para-

meters of electrical circuits. The direct current voltage meter range is 0.1, 1,
10 and 100 V.

The F-4852 digital combined instrument meters the root—mean-square value of alter-
nating voltage and current, direct voltage and current and active power in single-
phase circuits. It is used in information and metering systems and systems for
automatic monitoring of signals of alternating and direct voltage and current.
Compared to similar foreign and domestic models, it features high speed, precision
and general-purpose application.

Models of products from the Zhitomir"Elektroizmeritel'" Production Association
will be demonstrated on the stands of the Soviet exposition. Among them are elec-
tric meter combined instruments, signal and spectrum analyzers and a millitesla-
meter. Compared to similar foreign models, the F-6372 with digital and CRT display

features higher metering accuracy and the capability of metering currents plus an
expanded frequency range. It meters strength and voltage of direct and alternating
current, direct current resistance and frequency of electrical signals, and is used

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIR OFHI l\l. l'Sl-I ()Nl.\

to observe and meter parameters of signals for a CR! screen, analyze amplitude-
frequency characteristics of resonance systems of electronic devices and to
analyze audio frequency devices.

Two other Hinpribor enterprises will be represented at the exhibition. The Special
Process Design Bureau of Process Control Computers (Orel) will invite specialist
attention to its development, an autonomous information recorder; the Omsk
"Blektrotochpribor" Plant will display the F-283 digital voltmeter for metering
voltage in direct current circuits. Compared to similar models, the instrument
features high sensitivity, noise immunity, reliability and broad functional
capabilities.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye".
”Pribory i sistemy upravleniya", 1981

8545
680: 1863/256

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘l-‘K 1M. USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TABLE OF CONTENTS 0? JOURNAL 'KIBERNETIKA', JULY-AUGUST 1981
Kiev RIDERNETIKA in Russian No 6, Jul-Aug 81 p 169

[Table of Contents]

[Text] Glushkov, V. H., Kspitonova, Yu. V., Letichevskiy, A. A.
and Gorlsch, S. P.. "Hacroconveyor Computations of Functions on Data
Structures" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Suprunenko. B. A., "The Ordinal Relation in Permutations and Extremal
Prohlens" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pukhov, G. Ye., "Formulas for Expansion of Differential Transforma-
tion of Functions" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Kotov. V. Ye.. and Cherkasova, L. A.. "Structured Networks" . . . . .

Glushkov. V. M., Tseytlin, G. Ye., and Yushchenko. Ye. L.,
"Multilevel Structural Design of Programs: Formalization of the
Method - Sphere of Applications" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Romanovskiy. I. V., "Analysis of the Concept of 'Service'" . . . . .

Glushkov. V. H.. Hikhnovskiy. S. D., and Rshinovich, Z. L.,
"Computers with Structural Realization of High-Level
Languages"....................-.......-.

Glushkov, V. H., and Holchanov, 1- N., "50“ Problems 0f Problen-
Solving on Computers with Parallel Organization of Computations . . .

Hikhalevich. V. S. Sergiyenko, I. V., and Shor, N. 2., "Inves—

tigation of Methods of Solving Optimization Problems and Their
Applications" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

171

FIN!(NNHCJA1.USE<ONLN
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS FROM JOURNAL 'ELECTRONIC MODELING'. SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER 1981

Kiev ELEKTRONNOYE MODELIROVANIYE in Russian “0 5. Sap-Oct 81 pp 1-2

[Text] Table of Contents Page

Theory of Modeling

0n Simulation Theory of Extended Periodical Systems. A. P. Chaplin and
Yu. I. Cherskiy

0n Implicit Integration Circuits Based on Differential Transformations.
N. I. Ronto

Organization of Structures and Computational Processes in Problem-Oriented

Computers and Syscems

0n Frequency Approach Application to Description of Digital-to-Analog
Conversions. S. E. Saukh and A. M. Yarmolenko

Development of Computation Complexes for Automated Design Systems.
Yu. G. Butkov, Yu. I. Voloshin and V. S. Pochanin

0n Structural Organization of One Class of Multimicroprocessor Systems.
I. N. Voytenkov

Functioning Models of Systems with Arbitrary Dispatching Control Algorithms
under Periodic Service. T. S. Brodetskaya

Analysis. Synthesis, Optimization and Identification of Electronic Circuits.
Media and Systems

Connection of Flow Problems with Extremal Problems of Network Decomposition.
Yu. B. Kutovoy

Structural Synthesis of Nonisomorphous Passive Selective Circuits.
L. V. Grinchenko and E. A. Svirshcheva

Macramodel of a Multiport in Space of Variable State.
P. C. Stakhiv and F. A. Shemuratov

Macromodel of Digital Combination Integrated Microcircuits. A. M. Demirkhanyan

Hardware for Modeling

Autonomous Subscriber Post in a Local Network for Information Exchange.
V. S. Pompushkin, V. V. Spirin, V. N. Tsiplakov and V. D. Shmatkov

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12

16

25

36

60

#6

69
S3

58
FOR OFFICIAL “SF 0N! \'

Digital Computing Devices for Solution of the Predholm Equation of the
Second Kind. V. P. Boyun, L. C. Kozlov and V. G. Trnkay 61

Precision, Reliability and Diagnostics of Electronic Systems

Synthesis of a Linear Sequential Computer Reproducing a Preset Set of Tests.

N. P. Baida and V. P. Semerenko 65
An Efficient Algorithm for Determining Sensitivity of Small-Signal Output
Parameters of Linear Integrated Circuits. Ya. N. 011' 71

Systems Research and Modeling in Power Engineering

System Model of a Power Technological Plant and Its Realization by Electronic
Digital Computer. N. M. Labinova, P. I. Gapon and L. N. Orlova 74

Mathematical Models of Functioning of Power Station Main Generating Equipment
for Reliability Estimation. L. M. Kordon 79

Using Microcomputers to Automate Metrological Testing of Neutron-Physical

Apparatus Based on Digital Simulation of Kinetics Equations for Nuclear
Power Station Reactors. V. N. Sarylov, P. P. Voskresenskiy,

A. N. Corbunov and G. N. Gutman 84

Application of the Methods and Means of Modeling to Science, Technology and
the National Economy

Optimization of Analog Computer Transfer Factors. P. M. Babushkin 87
Modeling Computer System External Storage by Using Decomposition. Z. L. Kruglyy 90

Brief Communications
Methnd of Determining Taylor Transforms of Nonlinear Terms in Differential

Equations. E. P. Semagina and A. V. Stepanov 97

Probability Models of Optimal Flow Distribution Synthesis in Multidimensional
Network Systems. Yu. V. Kulik, V. M. Mikhaylenko and L. I. Turchaninova 99

On the Possibility of Including the MIR-2 Digital Computer in Hybrid Computer

Sysrems. T. N. Malakhova and Ya. M. Shlemenzon 101
On Restoration of Spline Functions. A. A. Shkil' 103
Computer Device for Automated System to Monitor Dumping of Oil from Ships.

Yu. A. Plyushch 105
Chrnnlcle and Information 106
Authors in this Issue 108

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka", Elektronnoye modelirovaniye, 1981

8545
C50: 1863/10

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i“. (”11‘1“ I'SI‘ "NI \

PMBLEHS OP emanates: CONTROL 0? svs'rms mm
Moscow VOPROSY KIBERNETIKI: UPRAVLENIYE RAZVITIYEH SISTEH in Russian 1979 pp 2-3

[Annotation and table of contents from the collection “Problem of Cybernetics:
Control of Systems Development”. Nauchnyy sovet po koupleksnoy probleae "Kibernet-
ika" AN 5538]

[Text] Different approaches to problems of describing developing systens in the
sodium and formalization of the relationships of the determining properties of a
system such as reliability, orderliness. efficiency and optinslity are studied.

The possibilities of organizing character structures and natural language struc-
tures and the possibilities of reducing then are studied. Different aspects of
systems development are considered. Applications of developmnt theory to problems
of creating computer networks that control decision-making processes. coordination
and monitoring with respect to problems of automated design systems devolopuent are
given.

Collection VK-SG is issued as information materials of the Scientific Oomcil on
the Complex Problem "Ojbemeticsf USSR Academy of Sciences.

Contents Page

1. Reutov, A. P., R. G. Savchenko and R. H. Suslov, The System
Model as the Ratio of Generalized Qualities--Orderliness, Peli-

ability and Efficiency 5
2. lvanov. v. v., Problems of studying the hierarchical Organization

of W1 Systems 35
3. Samylenko, s. 1., Computer Networks in Control of Systens Development 47

4. Svirezhev. Yu. H” ﬂathmtical Modelling in Ecology with Incomlete
Information 55

S. Vershin, v. Ye., A System of Physical Estimates of the Functional

Efficiency of Economic Facilities 74
6. Kontorov. D. 5.. Development of Complex Engineering System as a
Development Problem 84
175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

COPYRIGHT:

6521
C50:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nezhmetdinov, T. K., The Mlutionary Aspect of the Efficiency of
Large SYstems

Melik-Shaknazarov, B. 8., The Initial Condition of Control Efficiency
in Large Systems

Savostitskiy, Yu. A. and o. L. Smirnov, Application of the systems
Approach to the Investigation of the Efficiency of Automted Design
Systems

Khetagurov, Ya. A., The Problem of Efficient Design of Digital
Control System Monitoring

Denisov, M. M. and Yu. A. Savostitskiy, Changing the Efficiency of
Hierarchical Systems with mall Disturbance: of Input Parameters

Nikitin, o. A., Estimating One class of Developing SYSCOIIS from
Limited Test Results

186 3/5

-END-

[76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

98

109

115

124

131

135

Nauchnyy sovet po konplekenoy problems 'Kibernetika' AN SSSR, 1979