FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10622
29 JUNE 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 10/ 82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
JP‘RS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. 'dhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sumrired or extracted.

unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itus are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT
(rouo 10/82)

Coursu'rs

COLN'I'RY SBC‘I'IOI
ARGENTINA

U.S. Seen as 'Discordsnt, Inconsistent'

(Andres Bugger-1' SAPORITI, 10 June 82).

Dissident car Official Discusses 110 Conference

(Dru, lo Jm &)oooosoooonooooosooeqoosooooocoo-osooolsotoes

Senior Officers Criticize Military Tactics

(Jim Burns;FIlAlc1ALTIMBS. 16 Jun 82).

CUBA

Isle of Youth School Trains Young Foreigners For Revolution
(Pierre cwml; m. 5 Jul 82)....ooeeOoeeoolssseeooooe-ceoes

MEXIG)

Description of Financial Institutions, Business Groups

(PARIS mm. 19 w &)IOOOOOOOIIOIDOOOOOOOOIIOUOOCIOOOOOO.

IKE: Improving the Trade Deficit
The Promters of Mexican Industry
Private Banks: 3 Necessity

Hermes: An Exceptional Csse

Ali‘s: Prom Steel to Paper

Vitro: Bastion of the Mexican Eoonow
ICA: More Than 3:0 Commies

- a - . [111 - LA - 144 £000:

FOR 0‘71““ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm SECTION ARGENTINA

U.S. SEEN A8 'DISCORDANT, INCONSISTENT'

“101533 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 1200 CHI 10 Jun 82

[Report by Andres Ruggeri]

[Text] Buenoa Aires, 10 Jun (SAPORlTl)--'ihe disagree-ants between U.S.
Secretary of State Alexander Haig and U.S. delegate to the United Nations
Jeane Kirkpatrick have startled the Western world which is watching in
bewilderment the nusber of disagreements [deainteligencias] which. given
the fact that they involve high-ranking representatives of the top Western

power, are extresely worrisoae.

The United States is revealing a serious gap in its foreip policy. Nobody
understands why very well. when a nation reaches the stature of the United

States it is because it has a privileged class of leaders, or at least had
such leaders.

Various diploaatic circles have observed that in Washington a scapegoat is
being sought for so nany disagree-ents in handling the crisis in the South
Atlantic, the conflict over the Halvinas between Argentina and Great Britain
as well as to quell the wave of anger unleashed in Latin Aaerica against
the United States.

Is Alexander Ilaig the culprit. or is it Thom ﬁnders? We met not believe

that they are the only ones whose heads are on the block. Charles Percy,
who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Cousittee and who has always

tried to obtain a carte blanche for Margaret Thatcher from President Reagan,
is also fingered by those looking for culprits in the Latin American con-

frontation with the United States.

The WASHINGmN POST talks about the Latin American collapse, the little or
no influence which as of now the U.S. Govern-ant will have on the countries
south of the Rio Grande. The HASHING'NN POST wonders how difficult it will
be for the U.S. governnents which succeed President Reagan's administration

to restore Latin American faith in the United States. These are questions
asked by U.S. politicians today. those politicians who at some tine in their

lives have seriously considered South America the backyard (geopolitically
speaking) of the United States.

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UH“ IAI. USE. ONLY

In Washington there are many political analysts who try to tune their ears

to hear those muffled predictions which are being cast on the future of
several State Department officials beginning with General Haig. They all

know that President Reagan is very attached to this personality who had
been NATO's chief, though they also know that even the President can be

dragged down if he insists on acting as a barrier or retaining wall against
Haig's collapse.

And to make things worse, in the East a wick has been lit. Instead of

sputtering it is burning bright. At the mount no one wants to know where
will it cause a major explosion, whether in a powderkeg or a nuclear bomb.
But in light of this event which might have very serious consequences,
another question arises: How will that discordant and inconsistent U.S.
foreign policy act?

080: 3010/1697

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUM‘RY SECTION ARGENTINA

DISSIDEN'I‘ CG’l‘ OFFICIAL DISCUSSES 1L0 CONFERENCE
PYlllOlol Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1658 GMT 10 Jun 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 10 Jun (DYN)-Saul Ubaldini (brewery workers), secretary
general of the General Labor Confederation (CG’I‘) «Brasil St--on his arrival
today from Geneva made it clear that "there has been no (disagreement with the
other) CGT--Azopardo St--" and that "on the contrary we have been working on
a priority objective" regarding the defense of Argentina's position in the
Halvinas conflict.

Ubaldini participated in the Geneva 11.0 conference heading a reduced delegation
free the CGT--Brasil St--that attended the meeting separately from the official
. labor group. Ubaldini's delegation included Juan Carlos Godoy (oil workers)
and Albertoi ’l'yhron (bank enployees) .

Uboldini, referring to the harnony that existed between the two groups that are
at loggerheads here, said that "there were not two groups in Geneva, but just

a bunch of Argentines defending, with everything they had, the position of our
Malvinas."

Ubaldini stated at Ezeiza that the result of the 11.0 conference had been
"auspicious" and he stressed that 'Me have carried out the mandate given us
by the board of directors of the CGT—Brasil St--and we are satisfied with the
task that was carried out very well due to the fact that Argentina's position
on our Halvinas was of top priority for this delegation, it was defended on
every possible occasion and we received a great deal of support."

The union leader termed as "truly regrettable" the attitude of the British and
U.S. Government delegates "because they practically cut off the ninister's
(Julio Porcile) speech."

Ubaldini stressed that "the chairman of the conference (Peruvian Labor
Minister Alfonso Grados) was very correct and he put them down completely.

"It cannot be," Ubaldini emphasized, "that in an international forum those who
believe that they currently own everything should carry on in such a way.”

Ubaldini highlighted the fact that "the booing and catcalls against the English
and American representatives was unanimous" and he noted that "it was the

official representatives of" Great Britain and the United States who acted
in this way.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use «a a amuse. yua- v- Cu.

As for the representatives of the British and U.S. workers, he stated that
"they did not address" the conference. 'ﬁhe group of workers," he added,
"were silent. They did not say anything and logically they maintained the
distance that we Argentines currently deserve."

For Ubaldini, another important event at the conference was the "solidarity
of our brother Latin Americans, who have supported us in everything,
including the possibility of another meeting. Countries from other
continents, such as Africa. Oceania and Asia, have supported reason and
reason at this time is on Argentina's side."

Regarding the relationship with the members of the official delegation,

all of them members of the CGT--Azopardo St--he said that "It was maintained
with the courtesy of any Argentine who at this time leaves the country to
defend the priority problems. that of the Halvinas."

'Ve did not attend to contest anyone, we attended in order to give every type
of support to that position and thus we behaved. as all Argentines who were
there behaved, in the same way. There were no problems with anyone. 0n

the contrary. we have been working on a priority objective such as this one."

Regarding Porcile, he stated that 'Ve greeted him in the corridor after he
spoke" at the conference. That was the only contact with this official.

As for union unity, Ubaldini stated that he was "optimistic" and he said

that "when one goes after such clear ideals or objectives such as those we
are defending," they can be achieved.

He stressed that in Geneva "it was not two CGT's that attended, it was a bunch
of Argentines defending, with everything they had, the position of our
Malvinas" and he noted that 'we lean toward unity and we are convinced that
we will achieve it soon, not only for the good of the workers, but also for
Lhe overall good of the country."

He explained that unity cannot be achieved away from the fatherland (Argentina).
but must be achieved within our fatherland, and he said that for the time being

he could give no details regarding the contacts that have been made to achieve
dais unity.

680: 3010/1708

h
FOR 0FF“JA1.USEZONlY
FOR OFTICIAL U83 CULY

COUNTRY SECTION ARGENTINA

SENIOR OFFICERS CRITICIZB MILITARY TACTICS
PH161217 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 16 Jun 82 p b
[Dispatch by Jimmy Burns: "Military Tactics Criticised in Ba"]

[Text] Buenos Aires-An agoniaed military inquest has opened unofficially
in Buenos Aires on the strategy. tactics and equipment used in the Argentine
campaign.

Senior officers are saying that the policy of building a "maginot line"
around Port Stanley, allowing the British forces to advance boldly out of
the San Carlos bridgehead, was a grave error.

His decision [as published] not to throw much greater forces at the British
when they first lauded, not to fight harder for Goose Green and Darwin, and
to sit in what was considered at the time to be a redoubt in Port Stanley
is seen to have been grossly misconceived.

The navy has little good to say for its two modern submarines and their
missiles which had been built in Heat German yards. In the first two
weeks of the conflict a total of four torpedoes are said to have hit the
aircraft carrier Hermes without exploding and a boat stalking the Queen
Elizabeth II had to return to base with defective weapons.

Senior naval officers. rebutting criticism that the naval units played
little part in the fighting, say that submarines often got in among the
British task force only to be let down by Heat German technology.

Army officers, meanwhile. have paid tribute to British army technology,
particularly with regard unequipment for night fighting and communications.

CSO: 3020/136

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

ISLE OF YOUTH SCHOOL TRAINS YOUNG POREIGNBRS FOR REVOLUTION
PA062225 Paris APP in Spanish 1157 our 5 Jun 82

[Report by Pierre Cayrol: "A School for Nevolutionaries"--with APP caveat
"Panorama: Conlete or Partial Reproduction Prohibited Without Prior APP
Consent") '

[Excerpts] Havana, 5 Jun (AFP)--Ns have young people here free nine countries.
They come from different worlds, but these boys, whose ages range from 12 to 20
and who wear Cuban school uniform, speak the same language-«hey proclaim them-
selves to be, above all else, revolutionaries, anti-imperialists, antirscists
and anticolonialists.

Adult politics have placed them together on the Isle of Youth, south of Cuba.
This island is none other than that made famous by Robert Louis Stevenson in
Treasure Island. Its naae before the Castroite revolution was the Isle of
Pines. There are 10,000 such students here. They cone from Hozaﬂvique,
Guinea Bissau. Ethiopia, Namibia, Sahara, Sao Tome and Principe, the Congo,
Angola and Nicaragua, and they are the future executives and leaders of their
countries.

The 18 school buildings that house them share the sale architectural structure.
These buildings are located in an open field. The students dedicate part of
their tine to study and part to peasant work, within a workstudy program.

The students are distributed in accordance with the countries from which they
come. They all have Ouban teachers, along with teachers from their own coun-
tries. In the school for Nicaraguan students, for example, there are 34 Cuban
and 6 Nicaraguan professors.

The program in these schools is similar to that in Cuban schools. But here the
youngsters study geography, history and political education adapted to their
respective countries.

The general rule is that all of the students belong to a revolutionary
political organization. Tony, froa Namibia, is a member of "the youth of the
South Heat African People's Organization." Javier, fron Nicaragua, has a
Sandinist youth identification card.

FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
All of these students, without exception, are on a scholarship from the Cuban
state, which handles all expenses.

Schedules are verystrict, almost like those of the military. The Caribbean
day begins early for these boys. At 0600 the students hoist their national
flags and that of Cuba in the schonlyard, while they sing their national
anthem and the national anthem of Cuba, standing at attention. Thus the day
begins under the sign of proletarian internationalism and of friendship with
Cuba.

After the salute to the flag, the students form two groups; one goes to the
countryside to work and the other goes to school. There are apparently no
discipline-related problems in these schools. "The students are here volun-
tarily and therefore they behave very well," a Namibian professor says with
conviction. "They want to learn, to be able to contribute later to the devel-
opment of their countries," he noted.

There is a problem, though: "They all want to be doctors and engineers. But on
the day we gain our freedom, we will need all sort of professionals-not just
doctors and engineers," the professor cautioned. The school's personnel can
remember the difficult days in Cuba after the revolution, when it was left with
practically no technicians. We have to avoid a skills shortage, the professors
insist.

What causes the biggest impression on foreign visitors is the students'
apparent political determination. They have completely and perfectly assimi-
lated the ideological education courses they take. They have no doubts: there
is one line, and one only, in the struggle against the imperialist enemy, that
of proletarian internationalism.

Slogans like this one, which Nicaraguan students chant in their schoolyard,
testify to this: "A peso for a bullet and a bullet for the tyrant. There
can be no argument over sovereignty, for sovereignty is defended with arms.
(Sandinist) National Directorate: at your orders."

Whatevertheir nationality, all of these boys affirm that they are well-fed and
well-treated and they never miss an opportunity to express their gratitude to
the Cuban state for having freely welcomed them. They seem to be in good shape
and are happy with their comfortable quarters and their pleasant classrooms.
Theychant: "Viva the friendship between Cuba and Mozambique," "Viva the friend-
friendship between Cuba and Angola." This applies to all nine of the coun-
tries that these 10,000 young people represent.

All of a sudden, the groups break up. The time for politics is over and the

kinds go happily to a football field to kick balls, to play games proper for
their nge...we had almost forgotten that.

cs0: 3010/1712
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm? sac-non usxxco

DESCRIPTION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, BUSIIBSS GROUPS
IHCB: Improving the Trade Deficit
Paris PARIS mTCH in French 19 hr 82 p 65

[Text] Ever since 1963, the annual reports of the Bank of Mexico on the
country's economy have stressed the need for closer coordination with com.
mercial export targets to be more effective. For too long Mexican producers
have had trouble creating products that are competitive on foreign markets.
Their ignorance of the technical specifications and quality standards re-
quired on foreign markets and their lack of experience in international
marketing were a strong handicap. At the same time. it was evident that
imports were disproportionately high in comparison to exports, and for good
reason.. The trade deficit, therefore, had to be offset by a more aggressive
export policy. This is what led to consideration of a draft bill to estab-
lish a national export promotion institute responsible for coordinating ac-
tions to deal with the following problems: the promotion of foreign trade;
the lack of unity among decisions made at state level; a lack of information
on tariffs and preferential treatment applied by other countries; and, fir
nally, the lack of experience of export firm.

On 30 December 1970 the law establishing the Hexican Foreign Trade Institute
(INCB) was promulgated. It provided for a decentralized entity to be granted
all the means needed to promote foreign trade, coordinate decisions favoring
exports, and to advise businesses open to foreign markets. "The IMOB is an
institution in which the public and private sectors are equally represented,"
explained Paul Salinas Solano, the Institute's director genera. 'Ve promte
the export activities of the public and private sectors. We serve as ad- '
visers to the federal government in the area of foreign trade." The mcs
has been operating since 1971.

One of the reasons why Mexico’s economy has not developed in a balanced way
in recent years is the success of oil on foreign markets. According to Mr
Salinas Soleno, however, "oil has its own dynamics and has a tremendous
influence on our trade balanceua positive influence so far, to be sure.

But now we have to think about promoting exports of our manufactures, whether
related to industry, agriculture, livestock or services." Export figures
have gone from $3.6 billion in 1976 to $20 billion in 1981. This increase
reflects the oil boom. Oil exports today account for 60 percent of our total

momsussomv
[UK mfILlAI. USE. UNLI

exports. This is why we are concerned about increasing non-oil exports in
the primary sector-coffee, vegetables, fruits, and cattle. Or even manu-
factures such as textiles, shoes, building materials, petrochemicals, auto-
mobiles, and machinery and metals. The DC! director general pointed out
that "serious efforts are being made to diversify foreign markets, since
our proximity to the United States places us in a dependent relationship.
Thus our efforts are focused primarily on Canada, Europe, Japan and the
Orient in general, and of course on Latin American countries."

Trade between France and lbxico has grown remarkably in the past lo years,
minly as a result of oil. The economic relationship between the two
countries has a political and sentimental side. Mexico and France in fact
share a number of common historical and political factors. An example of
this complicity is construction of the Mexican subway using French tech-
nology and also the creation of the large firm, "El Infiernillo," with
French credits. "He believe that there is every reason to develop an
economic relationship with France in a spirit of mutual good will," con-
cluded Mr Salinas. "France is a test market for our products. If we ex-
port pineapple, it has to be excellent pineapple. But if we are able to
sell it in France, then we know that we could sell it on any market."

The Promoters of Mexican Industry

Paris PARIS MATCH in French 19 Mar 82 pp 52-53

[Text] when talking about credit movements in Mexico today, it is impos-
sible to leave out the activities of NAFINSA [National Financial Bank] and
SOMEX [Mexican Industrial Credit Company], which are subsidized by the
federal government to the tune of over 50 percent. AFINSA, whose capital

is more than $190 million, handles assets valued at approximately $10
million through its stock exchange transactions, its private banking ac-
tivities, and its investments in strategic industries which, through their
many branches, enable NAFINSA to cover the entire country. For the past

6 years, SOHBX. for its part, has undergone a sustained, planned growth

that has put it among the five leading financial institutions in the country.
Two-thirds of scnex' stock is held by the government and its growth has been
spectacular in the last a years, going from $1.5 billion to $5.5 billion by
the end of 1981. These are exemplary results.

somx: An Example of a Semi-Public Company

The SMX organization stands out in the Pbxican economy as a model of a
joint publicly- and privately-owned company. The SOle banking group is
made up of the SOFEX Mexican Bank, PROMBX Bank, and the Jalisco Reconstruc-
tion Bank [Banque de Refection]. SOlEX has a financial branch and an
industrial branch. FISOFBX, the sonax industrial development branch,

group» together all the firms in the industrial sector in which SOEX
has holdings.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

According to hrio Ramon Beteta, chairman and general manger of SOPBX, We
are a company that is publicly- and privately-owned but with greater par-
ticipstion by the public sector, and I believe that we have the most posi-
tive features of the (:10 models."

SOHEX' industrial activities mainly involve manufacturing boilers, refrig-
erators and speed reducers. The group is also the largest producer of water
pumps for deep wells and alkali and chlorine. This organization is also
lbxico's leading producer of buses and the only producer of trolleys.

As for its contribution to kxico's self-sufficiency in foodstuffs, the
SOB)! organization is planning to contine the production, storage, indus-
trialization and marketing of farm products and livestock and to engage in
a series of agro-industrial and farming activities. With these projects,
SOEBX is supporting the SAM [minimum wage], creating jobs, promoting farm-
ing, forming agro-food enterprises, channeling private sector funds to the
primary sector, and reducing the pressure on the national transportation
system.

The SOB)! organization has a financial service that goes beyond that of a
pure bank. Aside from the banking sector, it is involved in stock exchange
activities with its own stock exchange. It also owns a warehouse company
and a real estate firm. It is a large shareholder in the country's two
leading insurance companies. We have three banking services," explained
Hr Beteta, [namely] "the bank that provides services for individuals, the
corporate bank that engages in large operations, and the 'social bank,’

which engages in operations of social interest, such as the minimum wage
or the low-income housing program." But Mr Beteta stressed the important

role of income from the tourist sector. "Among the mjor priorities of
national economic policy, tourism is highlighted since it is a source of
foreign currency." "The SOMX mxican bank is directly involved in tourism.
It is a member of the National Hotel-Keepers [Association]. We also play
an important role as promoters. We encourage potential investors in the
tourist sector. We organize and finance hotel construction."

The Mexican banking system is a highly developed system that receives a sub-
stantial proportion of public savings and has evolved from a specialized
bank into a "diversified" bank. According to Mario Ramon Beteta, "our
banking system not only has a guarantee of survival built into its struc-
ture, but also a guarantee of continued growth. Half of the income our
group receives is managed by the private banking sector, but the other half
is administered by the public sector. In other words, we have the structure
of a private bank, a public bank, and a semi-public bank, which provides us
with everything we need to grow and become stronger." In mxico there are
no foreign banks, or no foreign banks that operate as such by collecting
. funds in the country. Bank operations are federal in nature. None of the
States in the Mexican Republic has the pover to legislate in banking mat-
ters. It is a question of national--and thus federa1--interest. Given its
importance, the Investment Law for Foreigners prohibits them from invest-
ing in banking activities. "The only foreign bank that operates in this
area is the National City Bank of New York," stressed Hr Beteta. “It was

10
POI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
PW DEVILIAL Uhl'. ONLY

the only bank that remained in lbxico during and after the Revolution. The
rest of the foreign banks left. A foreign bank can, however, render a
service and contribute to the economic development of the country. About
150 banks from throughout the world have offices in Pbxico. However, they
do not engage in active operations, i.e., loans, and they cannot collect
income from bxicans and invest it elsewhere." Hr Beteta added that this
principle is consistent with their idea of foreign investment. Foreign
investment can play an important role in lbxico, not only in the banking
sector but in others 'as well. It helps reduce our trade deficit.

The National Financial Bank: For Industrial Development

For 50 years the National Financial Bank (NAFINSAI has ensured Mexico's
industrial development by helping to strengthen the country's infrastructure
and contributing to the growth of private and public industrial enterprise.
In 1925 and in 1958, Mexico not only underwent a major transformation but
also slowly formed the basic institutions for its development. It was dur-
ing this period that the Bank of Mexico, the Secretariat of Transportation
and Public Works and the Federal Electricity Comission were established.
These transformations concluded with the nationalization of the oil indus-
try and the creation of FEDEX (Mexican Petroleum). NAPINSA was founded in
1934, on the heels of the revolution, when the country was in the midst of
reconstruction. In the beginning it was involved only in economic develop-
ment activities, but, little by little, it broadened its field of action
by increasing its interests in industrial development and by serving at the
same time as the federal government's financial agent and an institution to
promote industrial development by financing large-scale economic infra-

structure projects. Jorge Espinosa de Los Reyes, general manager of NAFINSA,
believes that "NAl-‘INSA has been one of the most important institutions for
the country's development throughout its 50 years of existence."

NAFINSA obtains its capital on the domestic as well as the foreign market.
On the outside market, it appeals to the World Bank or the Inter-American
Development Bank. ﬂccording to Mr Bspinosa de Los Reyes, "this capital
is channeled mainly into farming, infrastructure projects and industrial
training projects, but a large share of the capital goes to the primary
sector and is used to develop transportation."

You could then say that nearly all the financial revenue NAFINSA obtains

on either the domestic or the foreign financial market is channeled into
major economic activities, and more specifically into industrial develop-
ment, a priority established under President Jose Lopez Portillo'a adminis-
tration as part of the overall develoment plan and the National Industrial
Development Plan. Mr Espinosa de boa Reyes explained that "we want to con-
centrete our efforts primarily on the strategic industrial develoment
sectors in order to create jobs, better coordinate industrial structures

and establish new development centers. He went to curb imports and develop
exports."

The National Financial Bank has recently focused its attention on unused
capital, and it has channeled funds toward creating new companies in the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

engineering and equipment sectors. A lot of money is needed to satisfy the
growing demand for capital essential for the development of other sectors,
such as oil, electricity, mining, the cement industry, etc.

"The most iQortant sector MPINSA is investing in today is the steel in-
dustry," the general manager added. "NAFINSA helped establish the largest
steel complex in the country, the Blast Furnaces of Ihxico, and has con-
tinued to assist in its expansion and growth."

The National Financial Bank's industrial group has about 90 affiliated firms
operating in the chemical, petrochemical, textile, forestry, mining and con-
struction industries. 'Ve have substantial holdings in two large national
copper-mining companies, the Mican Company and the Canalea Mining Com-
pany," Hr Espinosa de Los Reyes added. NAPIRSA mnages about 350 branches
of different types. The ones that take on special importance are the ones
involved in development activities. Hr Bspinosa explained that "develop-
ment funds are used in different sectors, such as tourism, industrial de-
centralization, equity capital investment, and pre-investmnt studies.’
These funds are resources that the federal government has granted to the
National Financial Bank to channel toward priority activities, so the de-
velopment branches are a basic instrument for NAFINSA.

The National Financial Bank, as a national credit institution, has a close
relationship with private bxican and foreign banks, either directly through
MFINSA itself or through its con-arcial bank, the International Bank, in
which MFINSA is a m’ority shareholder. "The International Bank," ex-
plained Mr Espinosa, 'operates as a 'diversified' bank and makes an im-
portant contribution to NAPINSA's developnent activities by collecting pri-
vate savings to be used for economic development." NAPINSA has also com-

pleted an internationalization project and has opened offices in ﬂashington,
London and Tokyo.

Private Banks: a Necessity
Paris mus m-rca in French 19 Mar 82 pp 56-57, 60-61, 6!:

[Text] Private banks are present in so many sectors that it is difficult to
tell the type of industrial project that each prefers. BANCOBBR is a power-
ful institution that figures on the list of the major banks of the world.
As with all large banks linked to industrial groups, MNCOHBR has large-
scale projects and relies on the aid of an extremely important team of
specialists and financiers. When it became operational, BANME! promoted
agricultural developmnt, and it was the first bank that succeeded in
having branches throughout the country. At the present time, mm also
finances industry and, more specifically, the construction industry. The
evolution of hxican banks toward the "multiple" bank system has brought
about a change of attitude. As a result, for instance, Serfin Bank had to
reorganize to meet current needs for services. Modernization was carried
out with new, flexible methods which have enabled it to cope with the new
world economic situation. The Atlantico Bank, establist at the initiative

“WWWLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the National Bank of Paris, has developed a considerable industrial pro-
motion business and has participated in the establishment of semi-public
enterprises combining foreign and Pbxican capital.

BANCOPER: An Institution

BANCOHZR, the leading private lhxican bank, was established 50 years ago
in October of 1932, under the name of Bank of Comerce, Inc. The firm was
founded by Salvador Duarte, who began the venture with only 10,000 lbxican
pesos in capital and 17 employees. The institution expanded in 1955 when
Manuel Espinosa Yglesias came in as general manager of the group. He
established a financial company, an insurance company, a mortgage firm
and a real estate company. Manuel Espinosa Yglesias, chairman of the
board and general manager of MNCOBER, informed us that the group actually
one "37 different institutions besides the affiliated banks. The Bank of
Commerce had its main office in hrico City and there was an affiliated bank
with regional boards in each state."

BANCOMER has not only strengthened its position but also maintained its
place as the leader of the Dbxican financial system, as evidenced by the
665 offices it has throughout the country. "Our institution has succeeded
in combining support for productive activities with the assurarce of re-

muneration for its stockholders and an improvement in the well-being of its
personnel," Hr Bspinosa Yglesias stated.

BANCOMBR has its own management style. At the head of the institution is a
management comittee, established in 1974 and consisting of a group of the
highest-level professionals who are responsible for furthering the develop-
ment of BANCOHER. The ability and experience of the members of the manage-
ment committee is such that they are able to analyze the most important
matters of business with a high degree of objectiveness, consider carefully
short- and long-term implications, and thus make intelligent and timly
decisions. The banking group is divided into several sections: the
Metropolitan Bank, the Bank of the Interior and the International Bank;
and, for specialized operations, the Real Estate Bank, the Development Bank,
Credit and Operations and, to assist, the Personnel Group.

The administration of the group is also made up of a number of divisions:
the Bureau of Auditors, the Cash Division, Financial Analysis, Organization,
Accounting, Corporate Legal Relations, Marketing, Administrative Services,
information Services, Economic Advisory Services, and, finally, the Techni-
cal Real Property Division. The recently established Public Services Div-
ision is responsible for ensuring that all BANCOPER branches maintain qual-
ity and efficiency in their services to customers.

One of the main concerns of Mexico today is the development and transforma-
tion of farming. There are official and private programs designed to in-
crease the land's productivity by encouraging small farmers to develop.
ISANCOER has been no stranger to these activities. The institution has
participated in agricultural development programs, as the president of
BANCOBBR explained to us, by "lending as much money as possible to the

13
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"agricultural sector. He are trying to give the small farmer technical
security. To respond to all the requests, we have experts in all the re-
gional sectors and in all our branch offices." mucom's interest in the
farm sector was demonstrated by "the financing granted to this sector in
1980, that totalled more than $460 million. Once again, we led private
banks to aid to farming of crops, livestock, poultry and fishing," Hr
Espinosa noted.

"As is custmry," he added, "credits were basically directed toward the
productive aspect of the farm sector, and the same was true of the fishing
industry. The agro-industrial sector was also covered satisfactorily, and
we continue to increase our aid to the low-income sector."

For the direct support of basic productive activities, the Group uses re-
sources from various guarantee and developent funds. The overall amount
channeled .by the end of 1980 was $13 billion, a 33 percent increase over
the figure for the preceding year. "The support we give to productive
activities through credits has reached an unprecedented level in recent
years," the BANGOHBR president said. lbreover, our total revenue amounted
to $13 billion as of 31 December 1981, ate-ing from public savings, local
and foreign bank loans, and bank profits.

BANGOI‘BR continued to turn toward the international sector in 1980 and 1981.
One of the most important events in 1980 was the opening of the branch on
Grand Cayman Island, which is on the third financial market in the world.

Thus, this branch is added to the operational offices that BANG“! has
opened in Los Angles, New York and London, and to the agencies it has in
Tokyo, bdrid and Sao Paulo. “Our main transactions are with the United
States," explained Hr Yglesias, "and then in Europe, with England, Spain,
France, Germany and Switzerland. He also do business with Japan."

MNCOIBR has also made promotion trips to all the cmtinents and it has
participated in international meetings with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, among
the major world financial organizations. Last year MNCMR issued $60
million worth of certificates of deposit on the London market. This was
the largest issue made by a Mexican bank abroad. Also in 1981, MNGCHER

affiliated with Visa for traveller's checks.

BANAHBX: The Leader

The National Bank of Mexico, BANAHBX, that will soon be celebrating its
100th anniversary and is regarded as one of the promoters of lbxican de-
velopment, is one of the leading comercial banks in the country today.
Revenue in excess of $12 billion, a total of 15,000 shareholders and over
22,000 employees support this position as a leader in hxican banking
circles. "The National Bank of lbxico was established in 1884 and, up to
1925, there was a series of institutions authorized to print money, in-
cluding our bank. However, when the Central Bank began operations, the
others stopped issuing notes," explained Augustin F. Legorreta, general

1!:
ma OFFICMI. US! ONLY
rum 0""..th we. VI‘LI

null-tiger or the institution since 1971. "As regards the name," Mr Legorreta
added, "I think that far from representing an obstacle, the National Bank
of Mexico today is totally detached from the image of issuing money, and
the name is representative of our operations as a leading conercial bank,
while at the same time it is identified with part of our history." Hr
Legorreta modestly acknowledged that when he talks about 15,000 share-
holders and he compares this with the situation in other countries-mainly
in Europe, the United States and Japan--does not seem to be very many.
However, to have that many shareholders is not commonplace in Phxico.

From the beginning, the National Bank of lbxico has always tried to have

as broad a base of shareholders as possible. "Today, for instance, our
stock is still quoted on the Paris Stock Exchange. From a strictly economic
standpoing, Hr legorreta stressed, "it is important to keep these European
shareholders who deal through the Paris Exchange, while at the same time try
to increase the number of Mexican stockholders."

Turning to the internal organization, Hr Legorreta said that the Board of
Directors of the National Bank of Mexico has a broader base than what is
usually found in other countries. "Our Board of Directors, which primarily
represents the shareholders, is composed of 65 members from different regions
of the country. It also endeavors to represent the most dynamic activities
in different economic sectors. In this way we are trying to establish a
closer rapport with the country's economy, through the Board members and at
the same time to give our shareholders the impression that they are repre-
sented by people whom they know on a local level."

When Augustin Legorreta refers to what has been called the "boom" in
Mexican banking, he is talking about the "development of financial activ-
ities in the country which is nothing more than a reflection of Mexico's
chelomnc over the past few years." However, he does point out that the
increase in savings in Mexican banks is higher than the rate of inflation,
and that savings have increased at a greater rate than the gross domestic
product. For Mr Legorreta, "this indicates that domestic saving has in-
creased in real terms and that is very significant, since financial re-
sources are always scarce in a country in full expansion like lbxico, and
we believe that the increase in real terms in domestic savings is a factor
stimulating development."

Both the increase in domestic savings and the fact that this increase is
proportionately greater than the increase in the gross domestic product

mean that a larger share of income is being saved, and is thus available for
investment.

"This phenomenon," explained Mr Legorreta, "can be attributed to a series
of measures adopted by the fiscal and monetary administration and also to
the decision by the competent authorities to apply interest rates resulting
from and in proportion to the rate of inflation, so that the Mexican saver
is actually receiving positive interest." Hr Lsgorreta added that he felt
that it was for this last reason that savings increased. He went on to
say that "in the specific case of BANMEX, we were able to maintain our

15
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-1C1“. USE ONLY

"proposal [rates] through intervention, and we even increased them by several
fractions of a point. In other words, we profited fras the development of
the local banking market, and we also made our presence felt by stimlating
development in the country." This increase in savings is the result of the
development of a middle class in Mexico. "Our bank relies on the middle
class. He also have corporate depositors, companies, etc. But they com-
prise only a bare 20 percent. Eighty percent of our total savings comes
from the middle class," noted Mr Legorreta.

Today BANAEX has the most extensive network of correspondents in Latin
America. Mr Legorreta spoke further on this subject. "Given the origins
of BANMEX, we have always had a certain predilection to do business with
other countries, perhaps more so than other bxicah banks. From the very
beginning, for instance, we maintained correspondent relations with
virtually the entire world." Since Mexico as a country has enhanced its
importance in the world economy, it is natural that its banking system

should also look toward increasing its role in the international financial
system. "l’his is what we have tried to do for the past 10 years, by open-

ing offices and investing in various banks abroad. We have tried to create
a Mexican presence in international transactions," Hr legorreta added.

INTBW bank, with its main office in London, was established by the
National Bank of Mexico. This is the first international bank in which
Mexico is a majority shareholder. Since 1980, it has spread to California.
"It was logical that we should choose London, headquarters of the major
world market, to launch our international operations," continued the man-
ager. "That led us to set up mm, which is not very large but has
gained a certain reputation on the London market because of the number of
transactions it concludes." In 1980, new handled about $3.5 billion
worth of loans, and it financed Mican exports valued at nearly $23
billion. BANMBX' activities to support Mexican exports are concentrated
in two sectors: traditional exports, including vegetables, minerals, and
farm products in general; and, the manufacturing sector. According to Mr

Legorreta, "it is in part thanks to us thatHexico is able to export manu-
factures."

One problem cannon to developing countries is to increase their capital
markets. It is impossible to imagine that a country could achieve solid
development with its own resources alone. "BANAHBX has had a social inter-
est in developing these markets for a long time," Augustin Legorreta ex-
plained. Therefore, with the new legislation governing the securities
market, RAW forged ahead by making an effort to use the instruments
specified in the new law and thus to find a place on the capital market.
The BANAHEX stock exchange was established."

The BANAHEX-America Insurance [Company] is another investment made by the
National Bank of Pbxico. BANMEX views investment in insurance as an im-
portant adjunct to the group's investment capacity in other sectors, be-
cause of the reserves that insurance companies are required to have. 'Ve
view it not only as a service for customers, but also as a source of

16
mos amass USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"income that makes it possible to develop new investments in other produc-
tive sectors in the country."

No years ago, W announced its decision to move its main office to
Queretaro. Mr Legorreta played a leading role in the creation and develop-
ment of this project. BAMMEX' decision was based on two essential factors:
the possibility of offering part of the personnel working in the bank better
living conditions; and, a desire to help alleviate congestion in the Mexico
Valley. On this subject, Mr Legorreta remarked that this project made it
possible "to get away from the bustle of life in the capital and to become
more efficient and productive in our work, while enjoying a higher quality
of life for ourselves and our families."

Before deciding on the move, B’JAIEX conducted studies on 59 different
cities throughout the country. It was finally decided that the most suit-
able spot was Queretaro, where the bank purchased a piece of government
property known as "Juries." Queretaro is the capital of the state bearing
the same name. It is located 200 km. from bxico City and has a population
of 300,000 inhabitants. MM!!! drew up its "Master Plan for the Move"

so that this change would not be detrimental to ongoing operations and so
that the new location would meet their needs. The employees did not want to
live in a dormitory town. “The operation to move the grand lady nearly

100 years old, i.e., our institution, is essential for its survival and
prosperity. This operation will not only be pursued, but, according to

our calculations based on detailed studies, moving out of our government
capital will give us ways to improve our services," Mr begorreta added.

The central office, which has been declared a "national monument, is now

the office for our transactions in the Federal District. Today, Mexico
City accounts [or 60 percent of our banking business, and there is no rea-
son to believe that this will change in the near future or even over the med-
ium term," Mr Legorreta concluded.

Serfin Bank: 100 Percent Mexican

Serfin Bank, one of the first "diversified" banks in Mexico, is character-
ized primarily by the fact that it is totally bhxican and entirely private,
with no government participation. The origins of this bank go back to

a meeting of eight banks, with one of the main ones being the Bank of tendon
and Mexico, the oldest in the country. The ”Pinanciero Aceptaciones“ came
later, with its main office in Monterrey. These two banking institutions
subsequently absorbed other banks, to create a group of eight. After the
reform of the Mexican Banking law, the Serfin group decided to merge these
eight institutions into a single bank, to be called the Serfin Bank. "The
firm that merged them was the Pinanciero Aceptaciones, and although we
changed the name, the Serfin Bank actually stems from the oldest bank in
Mexico, where, in fact, our main office is located," Jorge Morales Trevino,
general manager of Serfin Bank, explained.

Mr Morales Trevino is responsible for five operational offices and manages
two affiliated firms under his office. These offices, four of which handle

Me: ican operations and one international activities, are scattered throughout

~

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL [SB ONLY

the country, and this decentralization makes it possible to offer better ser-
vices today while at the same time preparing for the future.

When Serfin Bank drew up its balance sheet on 31 December 1981, it knew that
it had met its targets for aid to the various production sectors essential
to the country's growth. The primary and industrial sectors were particu-
larly favored in Serfin Bank's operations. Transactions carried out
through the National Export Promotion Fund (POMS!) and the National Indus-
trial Equipment Fund (FONBI) attained their goals to develop lbxican pro-

duction with a view to reducing imports. But for Mr Morales Trevino, "the
operations carried out through the Farming Pranotion Fund (PIRA) for rural

financing through low-interest loans were equally important. And I would
also mention the Fund for Financing Small and Minn-Sized Firms and the
Tourism Development Fund (mm), whose activities were essential.
Serfin Bank," Mr Morales continued, "used these means to provide mximlum

assistance to the sectors involved, and this helped encourage and motivate
all the parties concerned."

As for the way in which the bank determines the amount of money available
for credit to the public, Serfin Bank's general manager explained: "the
astount of money available for loans to our customers is based on the revenue
collected by our bank, after deducting the reserve requirement. We can

also have discount funds--of FMSE, FORBI, rm and FONATUR. And, we
can use international credits."

The structure of lbxican banking today is regarded as one of the most ef-
fective banking concepts, compared to many other countries. In recent years,
this structure has evolved from a system of "specialized" banks to a system

of "diversified" banks, under which a single bank can offer any service de-
sired.

"Serfin Bank," Hr Trevino indicated, "can, like all the other 'diversified'
banks in the country, offer the services of a cosmercial bank, a mortgage
bank, a financial bank, an investment bank, a savings bank, or a fiduciary .
bank." In this way, customers find everything they need in a single bank.

Among all the advantages of a "diversified" bank, Mr lbrales Trevino high-
lights administrative centralization.

. "In the past, in order to offer varied services to our customrs, we needed
that many different directives and a separate bank for each service, whether

mortgage, investment or savings. Today everything is grouped in a single ad-
ministrative structure."

"Serfinullank has 348 offices scattered throughout the country and three
abroad.

Nothing could have been possible, however, if the personnel did not cooper-
ate. The key to success in services lies in the quality of the persons
rendering them. This is why on-the-job training programs have been set up.
This makes it possible to have qualified and enthusiastic employees.

18
M omcm. “ONLY
FOR‘OF1WCJAI.IEIE(HNLV

Personnel training is a constant concern of the general manager of Serfin
Bank. 'vs have our own training centers, in Mexico City, Monterrey,
Guadalajara, Veracruz, and in other places as well." He also have a team
specialized in instruction, and for specific courses we use a system of
study fellowships to give our staff the possibility of receiving bachelor
degrees and even graduate degrees in various areas. A large number of em-
ployees take their examinations every year."

With the expansion of Serfin Bank, 1,500 new employees were hired last
year, which brings the total to more than 5,000 Mexicans working directly
for our bank."

Towards the end of 1977, the Mexican banking authorities amended the banking

legislation in force to permit banking to internationalise, so that Mexican
banks could do business on international markets and thus develop in the

same way as the major banks in other countries in the world. 'ﬁkfew years
ago, we began exploring the international money and capital markets and the
possibilities of operating on those markets while following our own bank-
ing practices," Mr Morales Trevino told us enthusiastically. The first
Serfin Bank office set up abroad was in Los Angeles, California. The
satisfactory results encouraged them to continue. and in March 1980, a
second foreign office was inaugurated in New York. A third one was opened
in London, and, just a short time ago, a fourth was inaugurated in the
Bahamas. Serfin Bank now has offices in the two most important financial
centers in the world. 'The primary purpose of these offices," added Mr
Morales, "is not to obtain resources on the international markets. We

are there to invest and to operate on the exchange, loan, and international
trade markets, among others." The staff of the international department
show an acknowledged professionalism in their work. In 1980, the Serfin

Bank participated in syndicating some huge loans and served as an investment
agency for some. They also handled $65 million through investments of

certificates of deposit and simple bonds at variable rates. In the case of
certificates of deposit, Serfin was the first latin American bank to carry
out a transaction of this sort in London. These issues proved very success-
ful and were quickly sold in Europe, the Middle East and the Far East.

The Aztec Bank and Serfin Deposits

In 1980, the Aztec bank resumed its operations. It is a subsidiary that
covers the specific needs of a large part of the pepulation of the Federal
District and that now has a personal service specialized in financial mat-
ters. In a few months' time, the Aztec Bank collected large sums that
produced a net income of $142 million. This success shows that the idea
behind this bank meets the needs of the population it serves.

As for "Serfin Deposits," this is an auxilliary credit institution that
'offers deposit and accounting services for credit notes. During the 1980-
81 fiscal year, the demand for deposits was enormous and the infrastructure
of this institution continued growing so that it would be able to meet the
market demand. Serfin Deposits thus consolidated its position as the most

19
IMHICIWWCIAI.IEIE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important private deposit bank in the cities it serves with its branch of-
fices and good market penetration.

lbxican banking legislation allows credit banks to participate actively on
the capital urkets, by supporting corporations directly, but as minority
shareholders. This practice has enabled companies to obtain aid to finance
their development, sanething that would otherwise have been difficult.

In view of this, Serfin Bank decided to set up a specialised unit to devise
the policies and mechanisms that would make it possible to deal with this
important sector of national finance in a professional way. The securities
investment office in the Serfin group participates in the securities
market by managing the stock portfolios of the Serfin Bank. and the
Monterrey-Serfin Insurance Company, the Serfin Stock Exchange and the Arks
Funds, a new investment company in which Serfin Bank is a minority share-

holder. It also owns a company called Pomento Pros, involved in promoting
small and medium-sized industrial firms.

In this case line of work, what they do is to support important economic
activities developed by firms that are unable to obtain funds on the
securities market for various reasons. Through decentralized portfolio
management, they try to arrange it so that incense channeled into corporate
capital will contribute to the company's development and at the same time
be a good investment. Important branches of Hexiw's industry have al-

ready received the croup's backing in this way, through these investment
mechanisms.

In 1980, the securities portfolio of the Serfin Group amounted to $101
million. The Serfin Group has maintained and continues to mintain that
this backing is supplementary in nature, useful to strengthen the companies'
financial structure, but that they in no way intend to replace the spirit
of the founders or to take over management of these companies.

An important service of the securities exchange investment office deals with
the promotion and investment of securities. These activities make it pos-
sible to offer specialized assistance, essential for the later placement

of securities on the market. In view of all these activities, the Serfin

Group is optimistic. It is expecting to see magnificent results in the near
future.

Atlantico Bank: Serving the Nation

Founded on the basis of a decision by the National Bank of Paris (BNP), the

Atlantico Bank, the fifth largest private bank in kxico, was established
in 1951. The objective was to become part of the Mexican banking system so

as to support French exports and to set up joint Franco-Mexican enter-
prises. For Carlos Abedrop, president of Atlantico Bank, "This bank was
basically designed as a metropolitan bank directed toward the international

sector." Despite its original leaning, in 1964-65 its directors observed
that a bank specializing in international trade had a limited field of
action in the Mexican banking system, and so they decided to provide

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national coverage, 'without, however, losing our initial orientation as an
international bank," Mr Abedrop added. "We have maintained our inter-
national activities at a highly satisfactory level and we have also de-
veloped our activities on the Mexican financial market. At the present
time, we have 150 branches scattered throughout the country and total
deposits of more than $200 million. The current capital of the Atlantico
Bank is $26 million, distributed as follows: 75 percent in the hands of
Mexican shareholders; 20 percent subscribed by the National Bank of Paris;

and 5 percent belonging to a Swedish bank, Scandinoiska Enskilda Bank,"
Mr Abedrop explained to us.

The Atlantico Bank's deposits are regarded as highly satisfactory for the
Mexican market-~approximately 100 percent of the country's demand deposits,
checking accounts and savings accounts. "Re have more or less 6.5 percent
of the time deposits," Mr Abedrop said. Moreover, the bank is developing
a considerable industrial promotion business. Not only does it have a
well-qualified service to aid industry, but it also participates in the
creation of joint enterprises combining foreign and lbxican capital. The
institution deals primarily with medium-sized companies, either industrial
or service-oriented. Mr Abedrop confirmed that the Atlantico Bank's
participation in large firms "is generally in the form of credits, to-
gether with other banks." But then when it comes to granting credits,

the bank prefers “smaller companies for which we could become their main
banker." "The sectors where we have the greatest market penetration,"

the president continued, "are spare parts for automobiles and those re-
lated to the construction, pharmaceutical, hotel and tourist industries."

The list of projects in which the Atlantico Bank has played a part is ob-
vious proof of its contribution to developing the Mexican economy. Con-
struction of the "El Infiernillo" hydroelectric power plant was financed
by the French bank, with French technology and experts. The bank has

also participated in starting basic insecticide and fertilizer plants and
in building the national railway, using French technology.

According to Mr Abedrop, "the fabulous achievement of the Maxico City sub-
way is a shining example of the quality of French technology and the co-
operation between the two countries." The bank is currently associated
with the International Wagons-Lita Company in a project to build a hotel
chain in mxico. The project provides in an initial stage for construc-
tion of 10 hotels in different parts of the country with a capacity of
3,000 to 3,500 rooms. "This project is benefiting from Wagons-Lits'
experience in building popular rather than luxury hotels. It is a very
new technology and a number of hotels have been built in France in this
way. They have small rooms which are nicely decorated and well sound-
proofed, to such an extent that when you enter a room, you have the im-

pression that you are in the cabin of a ship. We believe that this tech-
nology has a great future in Mexico, since there is nothing of this sort
here now," the president of Atlantico Bank said optimistically.

But one of the main undertakings of the bank during Lopez Portillo's term
was to contribute to the "Social Welfare Housing Program." We made this

21
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

"decision," Mr Abedrnp indicated, ”following the offer we made to the cur-
rent president to help in solving the housing problem. As a result, we
allocate lo percent of our deposits to building housing for low-income
families. Our participation has made it possible to build 40,000 units a
year." The director added that the bank has contributed $600 million to
renovate irrigation areas. "As regards the SAM [minimal wage], we have
made large am available in the form of financing related to the users'
orientation in relation to credit [‘2] and we are offering interest rates
that are half of those charged by comercial banks. You could say that
we have offered the President between $600 and $800 million.

Hermes: An Exceptional Case
Paris PARIS mTCH in French 19 hr 82 pp 69, 72

[Text] One of the largest and strongest industrial groups in lhxico is the
one established by Hermes Industrial Company. Founded in June 1978 to pro-
mote industrial firms and service industries, it has experienced the great-
est development and expansion of any industrial group. In 1980, the Hermes
Industrial Company succeeded in increasing sales by 122 percent and con-
solidated profits by 85 percent over the previous year. The main protagon-
ist of this industrial "miracle" is the president and general manager, En-
gineer Carlos Hank Rhon. "The Hermes Industrial Company is made up of
several firms operating in five sectors. CH Industries, Inc., manufactures
heavy industrial cranes weighing more than 50 tons, special types of steel,
and tools," Hr Hank Rhon explained to us. Cl! is the leading company on
the domestic market. In 1980, a 35-Son electric furnace was installed and
it substantially increased output. Prom 90,000 tons a year, they are now
producing 210,000 tons annually.

The Hermes Group, before forming a group, began alone in the industrial
sector. ’Ve began about 10 years ago with a truck company. This was our
debut in the industrial field. There have been only two similar moments
in our history: 1976 and now," Mr Hank Rhon explained. The Mexican steel
industry was experiencing difficult times. There were companies that sold
'at very good prices. He bought Campos Hermnos, a firm that was in the
hands of creditors. Our first step was to solve its financial and organi-
zational problems. Together we bought another financial business manage-
ment company, Cerrey. This enabled us to start the Group. He combined
Campos Hermanos and Cerrey with Conan and, in 1978, 2 years later, the
Group was created," the general manager informed us. Only 3 years old,
the Hermes Group has become an exceptional case in Mexican industry.

First because of the sensational 122-percent increase between 1979 and
1980, and second because it is the only private industrial group that has
been classified as a "development company" for the past 5 years, as it has
met the hrican Finance Ministry's requirements. Naturally the Hermes
Industrial Company has many projects, including short-, medium- and long-
term: ones. Among the short-term projects is its entry onto the Stock
Exchange. "Several people have asked whether we are doing this to obtain
new capital or to redistribute the company's stock and assets. In fact,

FOIOFIICIALWEONLY
I'V. Urn-sunny we. VIVA-l

"we are looking for capital. We have developed because we have allocated
more capital to our enterprise. He do not believe in having total control.
Becoming a member of the Stock Exchange is also an invitation to foreign
partners who can bring in another type of technology. This will contribute
to the company's growth."

At the present time, Hermes Group has one industry, "CH? on the Exchange,
"but we do not have all the shares. The public participates in this enter-
prise, because it wants to invest in 'CH,"' Mr Hank explained.

Nineteen hundred and eighty was a key year for the hrmes Industrial Com-
pany. The Investment Division was created, which merged Cerrey, Inc. and

Us Mexican Investment Company to increase production of machinery and equip-
ment. "Cerrey, Inc. manufactures steam boilers, force-feed tanks, regenerat-
ing air pre-heaters, and high-pressure pipe and tube systems. The enter-
prise receives technical assistance from minority shareholders: the U.S.
firm, Combustion Engineering, a 0.8. firm, and Mitsubishi Corporation of
Japan," Carlos Hank explained. The Cerrey plant covers 27,000 square

meters and comprises 6 factories. At present, Cerrey is the largest pro-
ducer of steam boilers on the lbxican domestic market and the only manu-
facturer of Ljungstrom-type regenerating heaters that recover the heat of

combustion gases. The sector that supplies systems and equipment to several
industries in the country is covered by the Mexican firm, "Capital Goods,

Inc.," abbreviated as MBC. Combustion Engineering is a minority shareholder
in the company. "MBC manufactures crude oil and gas separators for the oil
industry. They provide equipment for crushing, sorting and drying to the
cement and nonmetal-ores industries. They also supply industrial equiment
and systems and processes to the food, fertilizer, mining, chemical metal-
lurgy and petrochemical industries. Among MBC's imediate projects is one
to manufacture equipment from processes that were imported up to now.

“That will require a considerable expansion of the business," Mr Hank Rhon
added. ARAW, one of the other firms in the Hermes Industrial Company,
supplies the Mexican market with shock absorbers, MacPherson-type suspension
systems and their spare parts, gas springs and direction stabilizers. The
shock absorbers for cars and motorcycles are ARALPEX's main production line.
"And Boge, its trademark, has become the best-known and most prestigious
brand in the country, garnering over 60 percent of the domestic market,"
Engineer Hank conmented. ARALMBX sales exceeded $25 million in 1980 and its

production amounted to 3.21 million units. “(ALEX holds an important posi-
tion not only on the Mexican market, but also on the international market.

Thirty percent of the company's output is for export to France, the United
States and Germany. "One of our main objectives is to be known as a company
exporting Pbxican products and to make a positive contribution to the bal-
ance of payments. In general terms, the Hermes Industrial Company operates

as a resource-generating group, which enables us to further our development
in the industrial sector."

The newest Hermes firm is Turbo Cargadores de Mexico S.A. [Turbochargers
of Phxico, Inc.]. It has a 10,000 square-meter factory and, in the middle
of the year, it took the lead on the market for diesel engines for trucks,
tractor-trailers, and farm tractors. "One of the main goals of the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"company is to manufacture products that have been imported up to now. In
this vein, there are plans to canplete an integration program with the
help of The Garrett Corporation, a minority shareholder and the world
leader in manufacturing turbochargers." Foreign companies have a 20 to
25 percent share in the firms belonging to the Hermes Group. "With

Mitsubishi, we have 15 percent of shock-absorber production, whereas
General lbtors' share is ‘50 percent." '

This young but prosperous enterprise not only is involved in eight indus-
tries, but also in marketing. The Hermes Connercial Group is involved in
marketing automobiles and trucks. "In the Group we consider ourselves as
industrialists and businessmen. If we look at lbxico as an industrial
plant, we would see that it is very viable, as it has many natural re-
sources. Pishing, oil, farming, minerals are all part of our country's
potential. We have realized that our challenp in lbxico is to organize
and prepare ourselves to lead our country forward. Hermes corporation has

the future before it. We must therefore train our men," Mr Hank Rhon
said.

"He believe in decentralization. Every company Mt be autonomous with its
own general manager. We have tried to keep a small decision-making group
that meets every month. We review the progress of the business, but we
delegate most of our power to our wagers," Mr Hank stressed. Another
characteristic of the Hermes Group is five-year planning. “We believe
that one year is a very little time and that three years would not be
enough--especially for the group's large-scale projects. Important de-
cisions should be given more time, and we think that, as a rule, five
years is the right amount of time. New, however, we are moving toward a
six-year planning process." Currently, the "Capital Goods" production
sector has a lO-percent share of the company's total sales. "Our idea is
to attain 20 percent. This requires a very long gestation period. It is
not like comerce or a textile industry. It is an industry that requires
many years of apprenticeship and also a major decision on the part of the
government, which is the main consumer of "Capital Goods." For instance,
we purchased boilers with a capacity to produce 350 megames, which had

never been done in ibxico. He quickly surpassed 150 and are reaching the
target that we had set."

Thus the possibility of developing our heavy industry has not been re-
jected. "Of course, we have studied other companies and have observed
that it took them 8 or 10 years to begin making money. And, at present,
we really are not large enough and this is where we should be investing
all our resources. We are doing this to the extent possible, but without

going behond our means, as that would kill all our chances to develop,"
Mr Hank Rhon concluded.

2h
“MUSEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alfa: From Steel to Paper
Paris PARIS m'rcu in French 19 Mir 82 p 73

[Text] Change is the main characteristic of lbxico today, a bxico where we
find both tradition and progress, magic and science. The explanation for
this should be sought in the rapid transformation the country has under-
gone. Because of its wealth of energy resources, the country has been ir-
revocably pushed into the sphere of developed countries. The largest group
in the country is the Alfa Industrial Group. This Group was established in
Monterrey in 1976, although its roots go back to the Visa group.

At the present time, Alfa covers the entire country. The Group's current
activities range from steel to paper, consumer goods, industry, fibers,
petrochemicals, food and tourism. There are more than 50,000 employees
working in the Group's firms. The sectors the Group is involved in were
not chosen at random, but on the basis of previously determined industrial
development objectives. "It is precisely for this reason that we have be-
come involved in tourism, because it needs labor," Engineer Juan Morales
Doria, corporate director of the Alfa Group, explained. "We are interested
in the minind industry for the same reason, since, besides needing labor,
it is a source of foreign exchange, even though both sectors are in a state

of recession at present: tourism as a result of the high prices of air
fares, hotels and food; and, the mining industry because of the decline in
international prices for its products."

Alfa is also involved in the food sector, "because it is essential for the
country, and, in the same way, we are participating in the development of
the secondary petrochemical industry, which uses a raw material such as
oil, that we possess in abundance."

The Alta Industrial Group has been regarded by many as a model for Mexican
industrial expansion, or at, least as a possible pattern for structuring an
industry that has produced satisfactory results as much for the country

as for the Group. A dynamic and multifaceted approach is the basis of
Alfa's success. As a result, these last few years--"and despite the fact
that 1981 is regarded as a difficult year"--the Group has resolutely ex-
panded its field of activities. 'Ve own mines in Colima and Jalisco, and
we have a large tourist complex, 'Las Hades,‘ in Manzanillo. When we began

in 1974, we were exclusively involved in steel and paper. The situation to-
day is very difficult: in 7 years, our assets have gone from $156 million
to $3.5 million [sic]. In 1980, the Group was characterized by a fi-
nancing strategy aimed at seeking policies that would enable it to expand.
To this end, the Group reinforced its relations with domestic institutional
sources, and at the same time it entered the exchange markets by selling
cousnercial paper for the first time.

There is no development without technological progress, a fact of which
Alfa is very aware. This explains its interest both in advancing its own

technologies, and in importing and adapting more sophisticated technology.
Although foreign firms, such as the American companies, Ford and Dupont,

25

POIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Japanese Hitachi and the German BASF, are associated in sane of its
enterprises, the Alfa Industrial Group exports its own technology. We
have lots of foreign partners, but we are also very proud of the technology
we export, i.e., the reduction of iron and sponge iron to produce steel,“
Mr Morales indicated. This technology developed in krico by Mexican
technicians is the HYLIII process. "This direct reduction process," the
director explained, "was first used during the war when we were unable to
obtain scrap iron. At that time we began to look for a way" to replace
this import." The technique consists of taking iron ore and putting it
through a process of decomposition using natural gas, that reduces it by
mking the hydrogen react with iron oxide. The iron loses 30 percent of
its weight in the process, making it the equivalent of pure, natural scrap
iron. "This process has proved to be very economical, because we can pro-
duce different-sized units. We have exported this technology to various
gountiiﬁs, including Venezuela, Argentina, Iran, Indonesia, Egypt and
razi .

Vitro: Bastion of the Pbxican Economy

Paris PARIS PATCH in French 19 hr 82 p 76

[Text] In the beginning, Vitro concentrated on producing glass containers.
Seventy years after its founding, its activities have increased and de-
veloped to include a broad range of products and services, as a result of
accinulating know-how and experience in production, industrial technology,
commerce, finance and management. "The Vitro Group was started to meet the
demand for beer bottles," explained Rogilio Sada, the general manager of
Vitro Group. "Its origins go back to the establishment of Vidriera Ibnterrey
[Monterrey Glass Company] in 1909, which improved its technology to go into
other branches in the sector besides containers, such as glassware, and later
fiberglass. This latter product created a need for an infrastructure to

obtain raw materials for the glass industry, as well as machinery and molds,
which finally led to the establishment of a real industry in 1940." More
than 36,000 persons work in the organization which is divided into two main
sectors: banking, represented by BANBKIS, a financial group; and mufactur-
ing, comprising 75 factories grouped together in several divisions. Each
division is responsible for the operations in its sector, but at the same
time it is concerned with maintaining corporate unity by participating in
overall planning and by setting the standards for the productivity of its
companies. Decentralization makes it possible for each group to have direct
contact with its customers and employees, and at the same time to encourage
local initiative. Vitro plays an outstanding role in the national industrial-
ization program and, as Rogelio Sada pointed out, "our contribution is to de-
velop a worthy way to promote Mexico’s industrialization, which we feel
should not only be a technological industrialization but also entail impor-
tant social changes."

The firm has achieved a high degree of diversification, although "our basic
philosophy is to concentrate on the essential part of our operations, namely
glass and its derivatives." Vitro's operations are grouped into divisions.

26
FOIOMCIALUSEONLY
a v» we a as-e-ea-u Unem— as one

as follows. Vitro Containers manufactures glass or plastic containers for
foods, drinks and pharmaceutical products. The first in this division
produce integrally-designed containers for industrial use, and they form
the country's leading industrial complex producing glass and plastic con-
tainers. This division includes 17 companies in strategic locations,
through which it provides complete services aimed at projecting market

unity. It also exports its products, provides technical assistance abroad,
and participates in Guatemalan and Costa Rican firms.

Vitro Crisa produces household, decorative and artistic glassware, articles
in fireproof glass, and stainless steel flatware, and is involved in the

distribution of durable consuaer goods and in department stores. With sev-
eral factories in Ehxico and a joint venture in Brazil, Vitro Crisa's repu-
tation for high quality has gone beyond the country's borders. Today it is

increasingly covering export markets with its products and is also helping
to improve the country's trade balance.

Vitro Window Glass [Vitro Vidrio Plans] produces sheet glass and blown glass
for industrial and architectural use, and safety plate glass and tempered
glass for industries making safety products and products for the automobile
industry. Vitro Window Glass has developed to the point that it is now the
leading producer of sheet and blown glass for a large variety of uses. It

is the largest domestic manufacturer of windshields and windows for auto-
mobiles.

Vitro Basic Industries, activities include investment in the chemical indus-
try, development of technology, and mining. Two umjor services operate in
this division. One is concerned with mining and developing raw materials
for different industrial markets. Its main products are silicious sand,
calcium chloride, sodium carbonate and feldspar. The other manufactures
highly sophisticated automated machinery, molds and other equipnent used in

the glass industry, as well as piastic injection equipment and fluid handling
systems, and is involved in a forging and a smelting plant.

Vitro Fibers and Silicates manufactures fiberglass for the construction in-
dustry, furniture and sports articles, and silicates and metasilicates for
various uses. Vitro Fibers and Silicates is Latin America's leading pro-
ducer of sodium and potassium silicates in their anhydrous and pantohydrous
forms. These products are used in the soap and detergent, textile, paper,
and construction industries, among others. It also produces a broad line

of fiberglass products, including heat insulators, acoustical insulation
mterial and fibers for reinforcing plastic.

The fact that it competes on the international market requires the Vitro
Group to maintain a strength equivalent to that of any other world competi-
tor, which is "the only way of achieving an international scope and the only
way the country can cope with this situation," Hr Sada concluded.

WWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

IGA: lbre Than 40 Companies
Paris PARIS arms in French 19 1hr 82 pp 77, 80

[Text] The ICA [Associated Civil Engineers] Group is a conglomerate of
Mexican companies primarily involved in civil, mechanical and electrical
engineering, but which also extends into the real estate and tourist busi-
nesses. The 1m Group-whose initials stand for Associated Civil Engi-
neers, Inc., the initial company established more than 30 years agoutoday
has a structure that covers more than 40 companies, whose con-non denominator
is to put technology to use in production. In fact, all the companies
forming the IGA Group were established and have been consolidated as a
result of the application of new technologies, by going into unexplored
areas of production in the country, in response to domestic industry's
unanswered needs, and by taking a very broad social view of private
economic enterprise. In 30 years of intensive activities, the IPA. Group
has played a remarkable role in developing Mexico's infrastructure, by
participating in some of the most important projects implemented in the
country in the areas of electricity, irrigation, industrialization, com-
mnications, transportation, and housing and city planning. It was also a
pioneer in the metalworking industry and in developing comprehensive real
estate and urban projects. The history of the group can be viewed as an
organic growth process. 0n ’0 July 1947, the initial cosmeny, Associated
Civil Engineers, was founded with a capital stock of only $1,000. The
corporate charter was signed by 17 young engineers, most of whom had just
graduated from baico's Autonomous University. Their leader was Engineer
Bernardo Quintana Arrioja, who is the Group's Chairman of the board today.
The Group is now composed of more than 40 firms employing more than 5,000
professionals and over 80,000 persons in Mexico and other countries. In
addition, the total assets of the Group amount to $500 million.

For Bernardo Quintana Arrioja, the idea of a ”group" as a specific type of
business organization "is a new phenomenon, dating back 5 years; prior to
that, the trend was different. IGA's background is quite the contrary,
that is we started a company, we saw that it was developing too rapidly
and that it was getting into different specialties that were totally unre-
lated, and then we began to set up new firms by specialties, as by-products
of the first one. In the beginning there was a company that built roads,
another that handled irrigation projects, etc. "these holding companies,"
Mr Quitana continued, "help a great deal in covering parts of the economy
that could not be reached without the tools to stimlste them. Take tour-
ism. This is an investment subject to a series of unpmdictable phenomena:
inequalities in the return on rooms, variations in tourists' affluence,
etc. The holding companies and the promotion companies mite it possible
to deal with these problems, since they protect companies working to meet
the country's development needs." In the view of the manager, the balance
sheet of this type of organization is positive: "Adopting this corporate
form worked out well for the IGA Group, as it has provided good results

and has permitted it to increase its service capacity."

MWLMONLY
I'UI WHLIAL 05f. ONLY

The ICA Group is rooted in the hxican economic model that is based on the
joint publicly- and privately-«med enterprise. According to this economic
model, referred to in the 1917 lbxican Constitution, both the private and
the public sector should participate in the economic development of the
country. For the president and founder of the Group, this means that "the
private sector is responsible for creating all the development sources
that the country needs, but whatever the private sector does not accom-
plish the federal government reserves the right to do.“ Mr Quintana went
on to say that "this economic model has in fact evolved over the years.
Immediately after the victory of the revolution, the private sector became
very active and aggressive, while the government had very limited revenue
and very little involvement in the country's economy. This gradually in-
creased, however, and between 1950 and 1960, the economy began to be
balanced between government investment and private investment, until it
arrived at 49.3 and 40.7 percent shares, respectively."

Hr Quintana points out, however, that today the government is becoming in-
creasingly wealthier, since "aside from the revenue from the firm it has
created, it also has another major resource, oil, and this is an element
that is balancing Our domestic economy today.

The subject of measuring the government's participation has always been
controversial. However, according to the chairman of the board of one of
the largest Mexican consortiums, this is a subject that has been resolved,
and the roles of the two sectors have been clearly defined. In other
words, "the private sector has realized that it cannot handle investments
to build the infrastructure for the country's social and economic develop-
ment at a time when there are so many social needs. The private sector

has realized that the government must make these investments." Hr Quintana
observed that this is not just true for Mexico, but that there is great
similarity between the lbxican and the French economies. "In Mexico, the
railway belongs to the federal government, as it does in France, and the
system of electricity, oil, and communications, such as roads, airports and
ports, all belong to the federal government. However, the so-called normal
consumer sctivities--from investment and consumer goods to services, etc.--
nearly always belong to the private sector, and in some cases they are
shared with the public sector. This is a joint publicly- and privately-
run economy," explained Mr Quintana, who stressed the importance of this
model for the country's growth--"a strong and sustained annual growth of

more than 7 percent in the past few years, which makes the country strong
and stable."

Plansgement of government enterprises has for a long time been a serlOus
problem because of the inefficiency associated with this type of manage-
ment. But according to Bernardo Quintana, an outspoken defender of joint,
public and private companies, "enterprises involved in strategic and social
areas should belong to the government, because there is no private hxican
capital capable of furthering these basic enterprises for the development of
the country. Electricity, oil, and transportation cannot be covered with
domestic private money, and neither do we want to rely on foreign capital

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"for this type of enterprise, as this would make us feel as though the country
belonged to others. rather than to ourselves."

The chairmn of the ICA Group added: "Even though we are not entirely
satisfied, we believe that progress has been reasonable and that it is
important to bear in mind that this type of enterprise has numerous ob-
ligations as a result of being part of the public service." To give an
example, he said "that it is very understandable that electricity would
be sold to small farmers at prices lower than production costs. These
enterprises fulfill a social task in this‘way." "He could say, however,

that too any enterprises were created and that there is not enough ad-I
ministrative personnel to manage them effectively. but this is not just

a phenomenon peculiar to the federal government, as it is also found in
the private sector, and that is our main problem. Whether the federal
government continues to make the investments in basic infrastructure and
leaves the remaining economic activities to the private sector, "Va still
have to cope with all the resulting problems in a positive way," said Mr
Quintana, sunarizing his philosophy.

The Ironworks Enterprises, Inc., a member of the group, deserves a separate
chapter. It was founded 18 years ago by Bernardo Quintana. From the out-
set of their operations in 1963, the Ironworks Enterprises were the first
to start manufacturing metal products, from items as simple as reinforce-
ment for concrete to the most sophisticated articles, such as overpasses,
metal structures for construction and industrial investments.

The firm works in close collaboration with ER! in a variety of areas.

"We manufacture structures and equipuent REX needs for its facilities
and we manufacture large-diameter spherical tanks and fuel storage reser-
voirs to meet their storage needs," Hr Quintana added. Ever since it be-
gan, the Ironworks has used varying technologies of different origins.
when the firm was established, it used French technology, that ”enabled
us for the first time in Mexico to manufacture different products in the
metalworking and machine industry," Mr Quintana consented. He stressed the
cordial and productive relations that they have had with French industrial-
ists, not only in transferring technology, but in the association itself.
Today the Group has developed its own manufacturing and design technology.
"But it is the combination of the two technologies, the foreign one and our
own, that has enabled us to participate in the most important operations,"
Hr Quintana pointed out.

"The main problem here too is personnel training. The 5,000 some techni-
cians we employ were nearly all trained by us. We are members of the Na-
tional Chamber of Industry and Construction, which has set up a training
institute for foreman and technicians," Hr Quintana pointed out.

COPYRIGh'r: 1981 par Cogedipress 3.41.

9805
cso: 3 100/630 END

30
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY