FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10435
2 April 1982

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRs publications contain information primarily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also troll news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ms. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. fines within itens are as
given by source.

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the pol i-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Governnent.

COPYRIQT INS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP 0P
IWIERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P nus PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
CONSUMER Goons AND DOMESTIC TRADE

(2000 1/821

CONTENTS

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

Production, Supply, Quality of Consumer Good.
(Ya. Orlov; VOPROSY EKONMKI, Jan 82) ..........

00900000000

Develop-en: of Machine Building for Light, Food Induotriu
(A. Khodzhayev. 1.. Meyerovich; VOPROSY mum. Dec 81) ..

PERSONAL INCOHE AND SAVINGS

Improved Organization of Credit Syuten Urged
(Yu. Avdiynnta; VOPROSY RONOHIKI, Nov 81) ....... .

- a - [III - USSR - 38b

in»- au—u-v-- .oa— —~~.-
PRODUCTION, SUPPLY, QUALITY OF CONSUMER GOODS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 125-137

£Xrtic1e by Ya. Orlov: "The Expansion of the Production and the Improvement of the
Quality of Consumer Goodsf?

LTenE/ The CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers in the decrees
on the increase of the production of basic necessities and mass demand items, the
increase of quality and the improvement of their assortment in 1981-1985 stress

that the expansion of the production and the improvement of the quality of consumer
goods are acquiring at present paramount importance in the implementation of the
decisions of the 26th party congress on the increase of the well-being of the Sovi-
et people and the most complete and thorough satisfaction of the increasing demands
of the population. This task is urgent for all the sectors of industry, enterprises
and organizations and is a subject of particular concern of party, soviet and eco-
nomic organs.

In the past 15 years the volume of the output of consumer goods has increased 2.5-
fold, their assortment has been updated and the quality is improving. During the
past five-year plan their output increased by 21 percent. including cultural, per-
sonal and household goods by 61 percent. Hundreds of enterprises of light. the
food, the meat and dairy industries were put into operation.

Along with the significant achievements in the area of the development of the pro-
duction of consumer goods and the steady increase of the consumption of foodstuffs,
clothing, footwear, cultural, personal and household there are difficulties in the
supply of the population with some foodstuffs, disruptions in the sale of some mass
demand goods frequently occur. The shortage of some types of products of light
industry has still not been eliminated. The quality of many items often does not
meet the demands of the population.

A definite tightness is being observed in the balancing of the effective demand of
the population and the supply of consumer goods as a whole and with a breakdown by
individual commodity groups. The deposits of the population in savings banks have
increased significantly, and a certain portion of them is due to unsatisfied de-

mand. The effective demand of the population for goods and serVices exceeds their

supply.

FINICHHﬂC1A1.USI(MVLY
Obstacles in the normal realization of the monetary income of the population, which
is received as direct remuneration for labor in social production and from public
consumption funds, decrease the effectiveness of measures on material stimulation
and thereby impede the growth of social production and the increase of its effi-
ciency. The goal of social production determines the decisive importance which
the meeting of the effective demand and the increase of the proportionality in the
link ”income-demand-consumption" have acquired under present conditions. As was
noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, first of all the measures stipulated by the plans

of the economic and social development of our country will be aimed at the accomp-
lishment of this task.

In the Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social Development for 1981-1985 and
the Period to 1990 the demand is advanced "to consider as the most important task
the more complete satisfaction of the consumer demand of the population for di-
verse goods and services." For this purpose an entire system of measures on the
improvement of the most important national economic relations and proportions has
been elaborated in the llth Five-Year Plan. It is envisaged, in particular, to in-
crease the contribution of all the sectors of the economy to the direct solution
of the problems connected with the increase of the production of goods for the
people. In a most generalized form this finds reflection in the change of one of
the most important national economic proportions—the ratio in the distribution of
the national income: the leading growth of the consumption fund, that is, of the
resources being allocated directly for the meeting of the needs of the Soviet
people, has been outlined. As a result, the proportion of the consumption fund in
the national income will increase from 75.3 percent in 1980 to 78 percent in 1985.
(For comparison it is possible to note that previously two decades were required

to increase the proportion of the consumption fund in the national economy by only
2 points.) In terms of 1985, 16.5 billion rubles are being channeled into new meas-
ures on the increase of the standard of living, which are being implemented at the
expense of centralized sources.

A lead; '3 of the growth rate of the output of group B of industry as compared with
group A is planned during the current five-year plan. with an increase of the out-
put of industry as a whole by 26-23 percent, the output of group A will increase
by the same amount, while the growth rate of group B will be slightly greater-
27-29 percent. During the present five-year plan these indicators of the develop-
ment of the production of consumer goods will be higher than during the past five-
year plan. The leading growth rate of the production of consmer goods as con-
pared with the rate of increase of the monetary income of the population is a pecu-
liarity of the five-year plan. It is also planned to develop the retail coucdity
turnover of state and cooperative trade more rapidly as compared with the increase
of the monetary income of the workers of the city and the countryside.

And, finally, the more rapid increase of the output of cultural, personal and house-
hold goods as compared with the production of all consumer items will be character--
istic of the llth Five-Year Plan. Here a significant increase of uhe production of
these types of goods in the sectors of heavy industry is envisaged. Thus, in the
chemical and petrochemical sectors it is planned to increase the volume of basic
output by 30-33 percent, while the production of synthetic resins and plastics,
which are necessary for the production of the most diverse mass demnd goods, should
increase by 1.7-fold. The enterprises of the construction industry with an overall

2 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1.
FOR OFFNJA1.USE(N§LY

increase of the volume of output by 17-19 percent should ensure during the five-
yenr plan an increase of the production of mass demand goods by 1.3- to 1.6-fold.
High assignments on the output of cultural, personal and household goods by metal-
lurgists, instrument makers and machine builders, electronics industry workers and
woodworkers are stipulated by the decisions of the congress.

Special attention during the 11th Pive-Year Plan will be devoted to the more com-
plete satisfaction of the demand of the population for various goods and services,

the increase of the level and the improvement of the structure of the consumption
of foodstuffs.

The level of consumption of foodstuffs, which has been achieved at this time, pro-
vides the number of calories which is necessary to make up for the energy expendi-
tures connected with the labor and vital activity of a person. The number of calo-
riea consumed in a day per person is 3,280, which as a whole exceeds the physiologi-
cal needs of a person. At the same time the diet of the people should be organized
with allowance made not only for the total calorie content of food, but also for the
scientifically sound physiological norms of the consumption of the most important
products.

A higher level of consumption of foodstuffs has been achieved in recent years. The
per capita consumption of meat during 1965-1980 increased by 16 kg, milk-63 kg,
eggs--llé. The consumption of fish increased significantly. For some products
(sugar, fish and fish products. vegetable oil) the consumption is approaching the
scientifically sound norms. The consumption of bread and potatoes is decreasing.
However, the diet continues to remain abundant in carbohydrates, a significant de-
ficiency of vitamins is observed, the mineral composition of food is not balanced,
there are not enough proteins of animal origin. Therefore the improvement of the
structure of foodstuffs is one of the important tasks.

The basic causes of the tightness on the market of foodstuffs, and especially for
the products of animal husbandry, are explained by the inadequate rate of develop-
ment of agriculture, as well as by socioeconomic factors and changes in the struc-
ture of society, particularly the rapid growth of the urban population.1

The demand for foodstuffs, including the products of animal husbandry, has in-
creased in connection with the growth of the monetary income of all categories of
the population with the maintenance of stable retail prices. The wage has risen,
the sizes of pensions, grants and stipends have increased. The level of the real
income of kolkhoz farmers with respect to the real income of workers and euployees
per family member increased from 75 percent in 1965 to 89 percent in 1980.2 The
income of less well-to-do families has increased more rapidly as compared with the
income of the entire population. Whereas in 1965 only 4 percent of the population
had an income of more than 100 rubles a month per family member and in 1970

 

I. Since 1965 the USSR population has increased by more than 34 million, and the
urban population has increased by 65.1 million, the rural population decreased
by 10.7 million.

2. See "SSSR v tsifrakh v 1980 godu" [The USSR in Figures in 19997, Isdstel'stvo
"Pinansy i statistika", 1981, p 170.

3
FOI*0FFKJAI.USI50NLY
18 percent did, by the end of the 10th Piv -Year plan about half of the population

of the country already had such an income. Under these conditions the growth rate
of the production of a number of foodstuffs and several other consumer goods was
inadequate.

The 26th CPSU Congress placed in the forefront the task of improving the supply of
the population with foodstuffs. "The food problem-both economically and politi-
cally-is the central problem of the entire five-year plan. The basis of its solu-
tion is a high rate of agricultural production," L. I. Brezhnev noted in a speech
at the November (1981) CPSU Central Cosmdttee Plenum. A food program.the fulfill-
ment of which is called upon to provide a significant increase of the production

of agricultural products and to link agriculture more closely with the sectors en-

gaging in the storage and processing of its products and in trade in foodstuffs,
is being elaborated for the solution of this problem.

The implementation of the food program should be carried out under the conditions
of the dynamic and balanced development of the sectors of agriculture, the process-
ing industry. transport, trade and procurement, as well as the sectors which pro-
duce means of production for the entire agro-industrisl complex. The utmost in-
crease of the production of grain and fodders is envisaged first of all by means of
the improvement of the structure of the planted areas. the efficient use of mineral
and organic fertilizers, the improvement of meadows and pastures and the increase
of the productivity of livestock and poultry. here the maximum reduction of the
losses of agricultural products and the assurance of the construction in the short-
est possible time of granaries, warehouses and other facilities for the safekeeping
of products in the full amount are of great importance.

The increase of the production of agricultural products will make it possible to
achieve the further improvement of the structure of the diet of the population. By
the end of the five-year plan it is planned to increase the per capita consumption
of meat to 62 kg (in 1960 it was 24 kg, in 1965--6l kg, in l980-57 kg). On a per
capita basis 320 kg of milk and 250 eggs will be consumed. The proportion of vege-
tables and fruit in the diet of the Soviet people will increase.

In the sectors of the food industry with an average increase of the output of prod-
ucts by 23-26 percent the production of resdy-to-use products, convenience foods,
delicatessen items and fresh frozen fruits and vegetables will be developed rapidly.
The output of children's and dietetic food products will undergo leading develop-
ment. For the assurance of a rational and balanced diet of children of early age

it is planned to increase considerably the production of dried milk mixtures and
meat-based canned goods. the assortment of dairy products for children up to the
age of 1 year will be supplemented.

The improvement of the quality and assortment of food products and the increase of
their output in a form. which is enriched with proteins, vitamins and other useful
components, will be conducive to the solution of the problems facing the sectors of
the food industry. In the food industry and trade it is planned to decrease sub-
stantially the losses of products by means of the increase of the output of pack-
aged goods, the extensive use of new packaging materials. as well as the increase

 

3. Ibid.

4
FOIlMﬂﬂIlAl.USE(MVLY
of the completeness of processing and the improvement of the use of raw materials,
the expansion of the acceptance of agricultural products at the place of their
production, the strengthening of the material and technical base of the sectors,

particularly the use of refrigeration during the processing and storage of agricul-
tural products.

Fish is of substantial importance in the diet of the population. In the balance of
food protein of animal origin fish products account for one-fifth. The per capita
production of fish products (including canned fish) in 1980 was 20.1 kg, the con-
sumption was 17 kg with a recommended scientific average per capita norm of 18.2 kg.
Moreover, the fish industry is one of the main suppliers of fodder protein for the
mixed fodder industry and fur farming. During the years of the current five-year
plan the production of marketable fish products (including canned fish) will in-
creased by 10-12 percent, while their consumption will achieve the rational norm.
The Basic Directions envisage to increase the output of fish products, to improve
their quality and to enlarge the assortment. Particular attention is being devoted
to the development of the production of fish in inland reservoirs. At present the
pond, lake and other commercial farms are already providing much fish for the
table. A significant amount of commercial fish is being produced at kolkhores and
sovkhozes.

The production of products at the subsidiary farms of enterprises, organizations and
institutions, on the private plots of citizens, as well as in the horticultural,
gardening and rabbit breeding associations (societies) of workers and employees will
undergo further development; assistance will be given to them in the purchase of
young livestock and poultry, fodders, seed and fertilizers.

The private plots produce a large proportion of various types of products of ani-
mal husbandry and farming. Thus, their proportion in the total production of pota-
toes is more than one-half, while of vegetables, meat. milk and eggs it is approxi-
mately 30 percent. Measures on the creation of favorable conditions for the in-
crease of the production of products on the private plots are specified in the de-
cree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Additional
Measures on the Increase of the Production of Agricultural Products on the Private
Plots of Citizens." The experience of a number of oblasts and rayons attests that
the private plots of citizens can be the source of a substantial addition in the
production of meat, milk, potatoes, vegetables and several other products.

The elaboration of a set of measures on the improvement of the supply of the popula-
tion with foodstuffs: the development of warehouse, including refrigerator, spaces
for their storage, the improvement of the movement of goods, the improvement of the
protection of the quality of products, the decrease of their losses during trans-
portation and storage, is proposed during the preparation of the food program.

Public dining, through which more than one-fifth of the total amount of foodstuffs
is consumed, is playing an important role in the solution of the food problem.
Steps should be taken on the increase of the production in public dining and at co-
operative enterprises of small items, pastries and ring-shaped rolls in the quanti-
ties and assortment, which are necessary for completely meeting the demands of the
population. At the same time sugar and fats must be used economically and effi-
ciently for the production of confectionery items, buns and rolls.

5
FOR1OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
It is important to improve kolkhoz trade, to give the necessary assistance to the
population in the delivery and sale of products and to seek the means for the con-
struction of indoor markets. The workers of consumer cooperatives should improve
the work of cooperative trade organizations in the cities and increase the pur-
chases from the population of surpluses of agricultural products.

Light industry is justly called the industry for all, it supplies thousands of
types of items, which meet the most diverse needs of the population. Each year
about 100,000 descriptions of goods of new types, models and styles are introduced
in production at enterprises of light industry. For example, in the cotton sector
a new assortment of fabrics, which are produced on draw looms with the use of
thread obtained by the spindleless method of spinning, is being created and the al-
ready assimilated assortment is being improved. About half of all the fabrics with
a printed pattern are being produced in a new artistic and color design. The out-
put of fabrics with high quality finishes, which improve their external appearance
and give them new consumer properties, with stable types of a finish-embossings,
silver and silk glossing, with a shrink-proof chemical finish-is increasing.

The increase of the production of wool fabrics is being achieved by the increase of
the output of scarce groups of materials: fabrics for coats and children's items,
pure wool and printed kerchiefs. The group of wool dress fabrics is being enriched
by new tweed items, which are open-woven with the use of unifilar thread, crepe
thread and hard twist thread. The group of suit fabrics is being improved by means
of the use of thread with different external effects and the use of an improved
finish. New fabrics with the use of purewool worsted thread, fabrics of tweed de-
sign and light weight fabrics have been developed.

In the silk industry an assortment of fabrics made from new types of raw materials,
including from modified polysmide filaments of "shelon," from texturized polyester
and blended complex filaments in combination with threads made from reinforced and
nonreinforced triacetate filaments, has been developed and introduced in production.
Fabrics of light weight structures made from synthetic filaments and thread, which
imitate fabrics made from cotton and other natural fibers, have been developed.

The knitwear industry produces millions of items made from cloth with a printed
design. The production of knitwear with the printing of designs in pigment dyes

has been assimilated.

In 1980 746 million pair of footwear were produced as compared with 698 million
pair in 1975. In recent years substantial changes have occurred in its assortment
and quality. The output of new fashionable types of footwear has been assimilated
in the shoe industry.

Eight programs of complete standardization for the most important types of products,
such as footwear, knitwear, garments and several other items, are being implemented
by the USSR Ministry of Light Industry and the USSR State Committee for Standards.
Coordinated demands on the quality of the raw materials, semimanufactures, dyes,
equipment and instruments, which are used in the production process, are envisaged
by these programs.

It is planned to increase the volume of output of light industry by 18-20 percent,

the production of high quality goods, which are in greater demand, first of all
various types of cotton, wool, silk and linen fabrics and clothing made from them,

6
roe omtut use ONLY
knitted underwear and outerwear, hosiery, tulle curtain fabrics, fur headwear,
artificial furs and leather will be increased. Particular attention is being de-
voted to the expansion of the production and the improvement of the quality of
goods of the children's assortment. The development of the textile industry is be-
ing carried out on the basis of the extensive renovation and retooling of produc-
tion. During the current five-year plan two-thirds of the capital investments

going for industrial construction in the sector are being allocated for these pur-
poses.

The strengthening of the raw material base of the sector is of great importance.
Up to 70 percent of the output of group B was formerly produced from agricultural
raw materials. Now along with the development of the agro-industrial complex-the
main supplier of raw materials for the textile, knitwear and leather industry-
measures are being planned on the considerable increase of the production of high
quality goods made from artificial leather, suede and fur.

A detailed program of the rapid increase of the output of a number of goods, of
which for the present there are still not enough, is outlined in the decree of the
CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers "On Measures on the In-
crease of the Production of Basic Necessities in 1981-1985 and the More Complete
Satisfaction of the Demand of the Population for These Goods." Among them are
cotton fabrics and items made from them, knitwear and hosiery, nonwoven materials,
rubber footwear, soap, synthetic powders and other basic necessities. High assign-
ments have been set for the production of goods of the children's assortment. The
production of many basic necessities and mass demand goods will increase at a rate
which exceeds by two- to threefold the rate achieved during the 10th Five-Year Plan.
The development of the production of nonwoven materials and their use for industrial
purposes are a great reserve for the increase of the sale of cotton fabrics and items
made from them. As a result the market and sewing enterprises of light industry
will receive an additional 500 million m2 of cotton fabrics.

The main attention during the llth Five-Year Plan will be focused on the more com-
plete meeting of the needs of the population for goods of high quality and a di-
verse assortment. In the knitwear industry the production of scarce itens--under-
wear made from cotton thread-~will increase at a leading rate, while in the sewing
industry--shirta made from cotton and blended fabrics, overcoats, reincoats and
jackets made from these fabrics, dresses, sun-dresses and robes made from cotton
fabrics. The production of footwear with uppers made from high quality natural and
artificial leathers and fashionable athletic footwear will increase considerably.

The enterprises of machine building and instrument making are making a great con-
tribution to the increase of the production of many cultural, personal and house-
hold itams which are necessary for the development of tourism. During the years of
the past five-year plan about 43 million radios and radio-phonographs, more than
36 million televisions, 313.6 million clocks, 29.5 million refrigerators and many
other goods were produced in these sectors. Color television is becoming firmly
established in daily life. In 1980 2.3 million televisions for the reception of

a color image were produced. The output of small televisions, stereo systems
and microbatteries is increasing. The clock industry is being rapidly developed;
our clocks have won wide recognition abroad, and a significant portion of then
goes for exports. At the end of 1980 the supply of individual durable goods per
100 families is estimated at: clocks-515, radios-86, televisiona--85, refrigera-
tors--84, washing machinea--7l, sewing machines-66 and so on.

7
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
Darin; the current five-year plan it is planned to increase the production of cul-
tural, personal and household items by not less than 1.6-fold-from 43.5 billion
rubles to 61 billion rubles. Here the task is being set to increase their quality
and to steadily update and improve their assortment.

A detailed program of the overcoming of the shortage in a number of cultural, per-
sonal and household goods is outlined in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee
and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n the Boosting of the Production of Mass Demand
Goods. the Increase of the Quality and the Improvement of Their Assortment in
1981-1985." In conformity with these assignments in 1985 the production of color
televisions will have increased 2.3-fold, cassette tape recorders-2.2-fold, auto-

matic and semi-automatic washing machines-l.6-fold, refrigerators with a capacity
of the compartment of 200 dm3 and more-l.7-fold.

The output of electronic quartz watches, reflex cameras, steel enamelware, chinaware
and earthenware, orchard and garden tools, varnishes and paints, items for chil-
dren's technical creative work and other items will increase considerably.

The fulfillment of the assignments of the five-year plan will make it possible to
increase the supply of the population with refrigerators to 95 per 100 families,
washing machines-80, vacuum cleaners-43 and others.

\
It is important to create at the enterprises of group A the necessary conditions for
the increase of the production of mass demand goods and to interest their collec-
tives in this morally and materially. For the present the output of such items is
often unprofitable for enterprises, their economic indicators are decreasing. Thus,
the fund-forming indicator-lsbor productivity--is considerably lower in consumer
goods shops than in basic production. Apparently, enterprises need to plan sepa-
rately the production of the basic output and mass demand items.

The increase of the volume of production of consumer items in the sectors of

group A also adversely affects another important indicator-the proportion of the
output of the highest quality category, since many consumer goods are not liable to
certification for the Seal of Quality. All this is responsible for the need to im-
prove the mechanism of planning, pricing and the system of incentives for the out-
put of high quality consumer goods.

With each year the volume of output is increasing, the asortment is being enlarged
and the quality of consumer goods is improving. Many goods with new consumer quali-
ties are appearing. Among them are standardized transistorized integrated-circuit
color televisions, high quality stereo cassette tape recorders and accessories,
two-compartment refrigerators, as well as a number of other goods. The goods pro-
posed for mass production should have obvious advantages over old goods, should be
characterized by higher indicators of reliability and durability, should be devel-
oped on the basis of advanced design and technological decisions and should be ac-
cessible to a wide range of consumers.

For the purposes of increasing the responsibility for the development, production

and sale of high quality products, as well as for their proper preservation it is

envisaged by the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Hin-
isters "0n Stepping Up the Work on the Economy and Efficient Use of Raw Material,

Fuel, Energy and Other Material Resources" to increase the economic penalties for

the violation of the requirements of standards and specifications and to extend

FOIIOFFNJA1.USE13VLY
FIHR!)FF1(1AI.[EHE(HVLM

them to the following organizations: planning and design organizations, scientific
research organizations, developing enterprises-in the development and production
of products; agricultural, procurement, supply and marketing, wholesale and retail
trade organisations and enterprises-«in the sale of products and their storage;
transportation enterprises-in the transportation of products.

A comprehensive goal program on the production of completely new high class items,
which for the present are not produced in the country, is being drawn up in conform-
ity with the decisions of the 26th party congress and the decree of the CPSU Central
Conedttee and the USSR Council of Ministers on the improvement of the economic
mechanism. For a large group of consumer goods the task is being set to achieve

the level of the best world models. According to the forecasts of specialists, the
demand for furniture (which is connected with the improvement of housing condi-
tions), devices and appliances, which facilitate labor in housekeeping and provide
better conditions for cultural recreation, the pursuit of sports and tourism, will
continue to increase in the immediate future. According to the estimate of the
All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Consumer Demand and Market Conditions,

by 1985 the sales volume of fundamentally new and improved goods will amount to ap-
proximately 25 billion rubles. The great mobility of the demand in connection with
the increase of income and the saturation of the market requires, in the estimation
of specialists, the annual production of new goods in the amount of not less than

5 billion rubles.

Enterprises which produce products from local raw materials and materials, the
waste products of industrial and agricultural production. have great possibilities
for suturating the market with mass demand goods. Perhaps in no other sphere of
the national economy do local resources play such a role as in meeting the everyday
consumer demand and in serving the population. The output of products by enter-
prises of local industry during 1981-1985 will increase by 1.6-fold. It is planned
to accomplish this increase by the more complete utilization of local sources of
raw materials, the development of handicrafts, the extensive use of the labor of
homeworkers, first of all the disabled and retirees. The subsidiary industrial
works and industries at kolkhozes and sovkhozes. which use the labor of the rural
population between seasons, will also undergo further development. The activity of
these works will be aimed at the processing of agricultural products, as well as

at the production of construction materials and the output of consumer goods,
primarily from local raw materials and industrial waste products.

Speaking at a meeting of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, L. I. Brezhnev
stressed: "And it is necessary for the soviets and their executive conedttees to
act with respect to such questions not as the askers, but as stern and demanding
bosses, for them to use better their coordinating and supervisory powers."“ The
recently adopted decree of the CPSU Central Committee, the Presidium of the USSR
Supreme Soviet and the USSR Council of Ministers on the enhancement of the role of
the soviets in the building of the economy should serve as a good stimulus for
this. In this decree it is stipulated, in particular, that up to 50 percent of the
goods produced in excess of the plan by the enterprises located on the territory
subordinate to them are to be turned over to the councils of ministers of the
autonomous republics and kray, oblast and okrug soviets for sale to the population
through the retail network. The organs of the administration of trade and the

 

a. PRAVDA, 2 April 1981.

9
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
workers of wholesale basesand offices are called upon to promote in every possible
way the development of the production of goods from local sources.

increase the production, to enlarge the assortment and to improve the quality of
consumer goods during the current five-year plan. It is envisaged by the outlined
measures to organize the production of items for the population at the overwhelming
majority of industrial enterprises and associations. Paramount importance is being
attached to the improvement of the quality of goods, the assimilation of the produc-
tion of new types of them, including technically complicated types, and the consid-
erable expansion of the production of consumer items of greater demand. The imple-
mentation of these programs will be ensured by the renovation and specialization of
operating enterprises and shops, the introduction of advanced technological proc-
esses, the more efficient use of raw materials, including local raw materials. as
well as production waste. The CPSU Central Committee has approved this initiative.

It is necessary to devote particular attention to the further improvement of the
interrelations of industry and trade and to the enhancement of the role of trade in
the optimization of the supply of consumer goods. The system of plan indicators
and criteria of the evaluation of the economic operations of enterprises producing
consumer goods, as well as their economic stimulation should be aimed at the final
national economic results of the activity, that is, at the more complete satisfac-
tion of public and personal needs and the increase of the efficiency and quality of
work. The fulfillment of the plan of deliveries in accordance with the assortment
and on the dates specified by the contractual relations with trade will first of
all be a reflection of this. The changes outlined in the current five-year plan

in the system of plan indicators are based on the optimum combination of the physi-
cal and value, qualitative and quantitative indicators. A list of indicators,
which are firmly established in the five-year plan (with a breakdown of the assign-
ments by years), has been set for the first time. This will make it possible to
approach closely the use of the indicator of the quantitative evaluation of the

end result of the activity of the sectors producing consumer goods and the meeting
of the demand of the population with a breakdown of the list of goods, on the basis
of scientifically sound rates of consumption. The use of this indicator will play
an important role in the evaluation of the activity of the main ministries on the
production of specific types of products.

The ohligatoriness of contractual relations is acquiring particular importance now,
when the changeover of production associations (enterprises) to direct economic
ties with organizations of state and cooperative trade is being carried out. In
the contracts concluded for a 5-year period (with a breakdown by years), the volume
of deliveries is specified in a group assortment. In the annual plans the assort-
ment is given in detail and specified no later than 1.5 months before the beginning
of the year.

For the purposes of strengthening the economic stimuli for associations, enterprises
and organizations and increasing the material interest of their collectives in the
more complete utilization of industrial waste products, secondary resources and
local raw materials the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council

10
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
of Ninisters "0n Stepping Up the Work on the Economy and Efficient Use of Raw Hate-
rial, Fuel, Energy and Other Material Resources" recognized it to be necessary to
implement a number of measures. It was established that starting in 1982 the profit,
which is actually obtained from the sale of consumer goods and items for production
engineering purposes, which have been produced from production wastes, is left at

the disposal of associations, enterprises and organizations and is included in the
consumer goods fund: in the case of a profitability (as a percentage of the pro-
duction costs) of up to 25 percent-~entirely, while in the case of s profitability
exceeding 25 percent--in half the amount, on the condition that the cost of the

the quality of consumer goods. The USSR State Cummittee for Standards jointly with
the ministries plans to implement a comprehensive program of standardization for the
most important types of consumer goods, having ensured in them coordinated demands
on the raw materials, materials, components and finished products. At enterprises,
which are being newly placed into operation and have been renovated, the output be-
ing produced should conform to the best domestic and foreign models. '

It is necessary to increase the responsibility of trade for the accuracy and sound-
nesa of orders (and of industry, in turn, for their satisfaction), otherwise indus-
try has no guarantee of the sale of goods, while much capital is necessary for the
organization of the production of some product or other. Such an attitude toward

Demand is studied so that in accordance with the orders of trade it would be met by
production. Then there will be no ”iron," "brush," "light bulb" problems and so
forth. The cause of a shortage, as a rule, consists in the fact that considerably
fewer of certain goods or others are produced than is necessary for meeting the
demand of consumers, only 60-80 percent of the orders of trade for many goods are
being satisfied. It is necessary to mention this because there is frequently talk
about an artificial shortage, which the workers of trade ostensibly create or can
create. The production volume, for example, of toothbrushes in 1980 for industry
was set at 30 million less than the actual demand for them; moreover, this plan

11
FOR¢0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
fell short of fulfillment by nearly 9 million. The orders of trade for electric
irons fell short of being met by 500,000.

At the November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenum L. I. Brezhnev noted: "There
is only one way to solve these and other problems. It is, as the party has re-
peatedly indicated, the growth of production, the increase of labor productivity,
the increase of the efficiency of the economy."

lead to the formation of above-standard stocks at some organizations and enter-
prises with their shortage at others. As a result of the inefficiency and irre-
sponsibility of the managers of some enterprises of trade irregularities are occur-
ring in the sale of goods which are available in sufficient quantity.

However, primarily the fulfillment of the plans of sales, and not of the plans of
delivery, is being evaluated and stimulated. Many ministries and departments of
union and union republic subordination establish for their enterprises a high maxi-
mum percentage of the insufficient delivery of goods. The Kazakh SSR Central Sta-
tistical Administration surveyed 146 enterprises. At half of them this indicator
was greater than 5 percent and only at 11 did it not exceed 2 percent. At the
majority of enterprises the maximum (permissible) percentage of insufficient deliv-
ery was 2-3 percent higher than the actual nonfulfillment of the plan. In spite of
the nonfulfillment of the plans of delivery, the bonuses for managers, engineer-
ing and technical personnel and employees were decreased only slightly. The work-
ers are paid bonuses for the quantity, the quality, the economy of water and light-
ing, for the collection of scrap metal and so on, about 20 types of incentives and
all kinds of supplementary payments are envisaged. Antyhing you like is stimulated,
only not the fulfillment of the plans of deliveries, on which both the fulfillment
of the plans of the comsodity turnover and the satisfaction of the demand of the
population depend.

The multiplicity of supplementary payments, markups and bonuses. which are present-
ly being used, in the opinion of a number of economists, makes sense. It seems to
us that this multiplicity does harm, since it provides an opportunity to choose

by means of what results it is possible to obtain a greater reward without the
proper connection with the basic activity, with the interests of the national econ-
omy and the population.

The analysis of the operation of industry during 1979-1981 shows that the number of
enterprises, which do not fulfill the delivery contracts, is large. Some ministries
set for their enterprises unusual preferential "limits" of the nonfulfillment of
the assignments on deliveries, which makes it possible to pay bonuses to the man-
agerial personnel of enterprises even in the case of the interruption of deliveries.
The enterprises of the Moldavian SSR Ministry of Light Industry received from their
department the right to underfulfill the plan of the delivery of goods by several
percent. The USSR Ministry of Light Industry has decreased the amount of the maxi-
mum percentage of underfulfillment of the plans of deliveries. During 1980 the
enterprises of light industry delivered goods worth nearly 2.5 billion rubles less
than stipulated by contracts and orders. At the same time a large amount of

12
IIHICHHHCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOI10FFNJA1.USE(NVLY

unordered goods were produced. It seems that there are no grounds to retain the

right to receive bonuses for the collectives of enterprises, which did not fuliull
the contractual obligations by "only" 1-2 percent. having thereby "kept within" the
established "limits." The loo-percent fulfilllemt of the contracts for the deliv-

ery of goods in the assortment ordered by trade should become the norm for every
enterprise.

It is expedient, in our opinion, to increase the mutual responsibility in the rela-
tions between partners. to punish for the violation of the delivery contract and for
the production of low quality goods not with fines, but with the complete reimburse-
ment of the losses. It is necessary in addition to the material incentive for good
work and for the output of high quality goods for material liability to be intro-
duced for the violation of the assortment end for the output of defective products
for all workers.

USSR Gosplan and USSR Gossnab jointly with other central departments have drawn up
and approved new instructions on the procedure of taking into account the fulfill-
ment of the assignments and obligations on deliveries of products and goods in con-
formity with economic contracts and orders, which are being introduced in 1982.

In them it is envisaged to make more strict the penalties against enterprises which
interrupt deliveries. The strict fulfillment of the new requirements will strength-
en and make more reliable the relations between industry and trade. It is necessary
for the provisions of these instructions to be taken into account when specifying
the economic ties between trade and industrial enterprises for the five-year plan
and when concluding contracts for the delivery of goods.

The utmost increase of the production of goods for the people in all the sectors of
the national economy and the improvement of their quality are the most important
link of the policy of the party. which is aimed at the increase of the well-being of
the Soviet people.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" listerials of the 26th CPSU CongreséT, Moscow,
1981.

2. "Decrees ofthe CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers 'On
Measures on the Increase of the Production of Basic Necessities in 1981-1985
and the More Complete Satisfaction of the Demand of the Population for These
Goods" and "On the Boosting of the Production of Mass Demand Goods, the In-
crease of the Quality and the Improvement of Their Assortment in 1981-1985',"
PRAVDA, 12 August 1981.

3. "Decree of the CPSU Central Commitee and the USSR Council of Ministers 'On
Stepping Up the Bork on the Economy and Efficient Use of Raw Material, Fuel.
Energy and Other Material Resources," PRAVDA, lb July 1981.

A. "Law of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the State Plan of USSR 3co-
nomic and Social Development for 1981-1985," PRAVDA, 20 November 1981.

13
FOI!0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

e we. voo-uu— u...— on n..-

Brezhnev, L. 1., ”Rech' na Plenune Tel! KPSS 16 noyab a 1981 godn" Lgpeech at
the CPSU Central Cornittee Plenum on 16 November 1981 , Politisdet, 1981.

Kostin. L. A., "Proizvodstvo toverov nnrodnogo potrebleniye" ﬁne Production of
Consumer Coodg7, Izdetel'ntvo "nononikn", 1980.

Kostin, L. A., "The Production of Consumer Goods During the 11th Five-Year Plen,"
POLITICHBSKOYE SAHOOBRAZOVANIY'E, No 6, 1981.

Gorehkov, 11., "The Developnent of the Production of Consumer Goods Ie the Hoot
Importent Condition of the Increeee of the Hell-Being of the People," PLANO-
VOYB KﬂOZYAYSTVO, No 5, 1981.

"Khozyeyetvengyy nekhenin ne nova-emo- etepe" [ﬁne Bcononic Mechanism at the
Present Stage], Indetel'etvo "Ekononikn", 1980.

Shinenekiy, V. end Orlov. Ye., ”Torgovlye i blego nerode" Erode end the Good
of the rung, Politizdnt, 1980.

"Statute on the Deliveries of Coneuler Goods." WIMSKAYA cum. No 21,
1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Pravda", "Voproey ekononiki", 1982

7807
CSO:

1827/56

16
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMER GOODS P30000110! AND DISTRIBUTIW

DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINE BUILDING FOR near. P000 WSTRIES
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 12. Dec 81 pp 126-128 - -

[Article by A. lthodahayev and L. Heyerovich: "Development of Production Base for
Consumer Goods27

[text] During a long period the production of consumer goods lagged behind the
production of means of production. 1he report on the directives for the prepara-
tion of the first five-year plan drew attention to the fact that "a more rapid rate
of development of heavy industry in the next few years is totally unavoidable...
However, under our conditions heavy industry can be developed only with a strict
regime... in the area of trade turnover and in individual cases with some shortage
of certain consumer goodies."1

Beginning with the Eighth Five-Year Plan the rates of growth of groups "A" and

"B" begin to come closer together. An accelerated development of light and food
industries required a retooling of their tutorial and technical base. In connec-
tion with this the proportion of means of production for group "B" in the total
volume of means of production increased. In 1970 light and food industries ac-
counted for 13.5 percent of all the deliveries of equipment. By 1975 this indica-
tor rose to almost 2‘ percent. The proportion of the pool of these sectors in the
codained pool of equipment of the USSR industry also increases.

For a long time the rates of growth of the production of equipnent for the sectors
of group "B" lagged behind the rates of development of nchine building as a whole.
However, beginning in 1972-1973 the difference in rates is reduced gradually and
there is a relative acceleration of the output of machines for light and food in-

dustries. Outstripping of the output of equipment for all the subaectors of group
"B," as comared with the production of their on products. is observed. which
creates the prerequisites for the renewal of the production potential accumulated
in these sectors. However, the absolute value of worn out and obsolete capital
functioning in group "B," as before. remains substantial. This is aggravated by
the fact that many light and food industry enterprises operated on an unchangeable
technical basis for a long time. Not long ago 20-year old. mainly inorted. equip-
ment mde up one-half of the pool of the textile industry. merefore. the sharp
increase in the demand for new equipment on the part of consumer sectors in the
last few years is a natural tendency. '

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”0|! OH'IL‘ML USE ONLY

problems of technical retooling of group ' ." priority should be given priurily

to the strengthening of the machine building base itself. ‘Ihe expenditures on the
introduction of measures for new technology in group "B" are noted for relatively
high effectiveness in terns of recovery periods and the scale of disengage-ant of
manpower. Furthermore, both light industry and the food industry have a high level
of profitability exceeding the average industrial level and the level of most other
sectors. Thus. the need to accelerate the technical retooling of light and food
industries is dictated by the tasks of raising the people's Interial standard of
living and the possibility is ensured by the relatively rapid return on the inves-
ted capital.

However, the indicators of the effectiveness of expanditurea on new equipment could
also be higher. in particular as a result of a reduction in the effectiveness of
the introduced equipment. For example, for a long time the possibilities for an
increase in labor efficiency and in output on the basis of the use of the autoeatic
pneumatic needle loom were not utilized fully, because the loos operated with a
productivity 14 percent lower than that in the certificate. It took the mass pneu-

up only 15 percent of the estiuted productivity. Similar data can also be cited
on other types of new equipment. The utilization of the potentials existing in the
area of equipment production will she it possible to obtain a big effect in the
fore of an increase in final output per ruble of capital investments in group "B."

hrsmining such an aspect of retooling as the replacement of obsolete equipment is.
we will note that throughout group ”B" the indicators of the comieeioning of new
equipnent exceed the indicators of withdrawal of obsolete equipment two— to three-
fold, that is, the increase in the availability of technical equipment occurs
minly through an expansion of the corbined pool of equipment. not through an ac-
celerated replacement of withdrawn equipment. At the sane tine. standard with-
drawal (with due regard for the depreciation period) exceeds the actually attained
withdrawal, which points to the insufficient scale of replacenent of equipment.
However, the acceleration of withdrawal is haepered priurily by the shortage of
equipment. Moreover. during the depreciation period not so such the factor in the
obsolescence of equipment as the intensity of its balance throughout the country
is now taken into consideration. that is. the development of the appropriate In-
chine building industries has a direct effect on the periods of operation: of equip-
ment and the possibility of its replacement.

The machine building sector for group "B" was organized in 1965. The new sector
was entrusted with the duty of ensuring the technical retooling of production with
advanced technological equipment for 56 subsectors of the national economy. in
which more than 17 million people are euployed. The difficulties in the sector's
establishment were caused by the fact that. although before 1965 a single econoaic
subdivision oriented toward group "3" did not exist. a vast network of enterprises

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Along with such powerful and well equipped plants as the Podol'sk Mchine Plant.
ineni M. I. Kslinin. the Klimovek Textile Machine Building Plant ineni V. N. Do-
yenin, the Leningrad lhchine Building Association ineni Karl lbrx, the Shehekino
Machine Building Plant and so forth, which produce large-sire products of individ-
ual or small-series production. a number of small enterprises with up to 500 an-
ployees and with s shoplees structure were included in the sector.

Machine building for light and food industries went through a long path of devel-
opment. Prerevolutionary Russia. not possessing its own powerful machine building
base. was forced to iaport basic industrial equipment. At the same tine, the do-
nestle economy was equipped with "modern inlements of production four times worse
than England, five times worse than Geruny and ten tines worse than America."2
Nor were the enterprises of industrial sectors of group "B" an exception in this
sense. For example. despite the fact that light industry occupied a prominent
place in the structure of Russia's industry. equipmt was hardly produced for it.
Only individual plants were oriented toward the output of spare parts for existing
imported machine tools and they also produced the simlest types of equipnent.

The years 1920-1921, when the production of spare parts was organised at 17 large
plants for the restoration of the textile industry enterprises that had been par-
tially destroyed during the years of the revolution and the civil war, can be con-
sidered the beginning of the development of domestic nachine building for light in-
dustry. By 1924 there was a transition from the output of parts to the output of
individual textile machines. The resolution of the 25th Congress of the All-Union
Commanist Party (of Bolsheviks) on the directives for the preparation of the five-
year plan stressed that ”in the area of new industries the following should be de-
veloped or reorganized: the production of equip-ant... for the textile industry."3
In accordance with this the output of 92 new types of textile equipment was las-
tered during the First Five-Year Plan and of 135. during the Second Five-Year Plan.
At the beginning of the war the list of equip-ant for the textile industry in-
cluded 400 itels.

The decree dated 20 May 1925 of the Third Congress of the Soviets following the
report on the state of the USSR industry considered the expansion of fixed capital.
construction of new factories and plants and establishment of new mines. as well
as the expansion and reequipnent of existing ones and the search for the funds nec-
essary for this. the lost iaportant tasks.“ An increase in the output of equipment.
as well as the sstsblishmnt of a scientific research and design base for its de-
velopment. was anticipated. The bureau for the designing of mchines for light in-
dustry was organised in 1925 and the Institute of Textile and Light Machine Build-
ing (VNIILtekmash). in 1932. This played an inportant role in the systematic im-
plementation of the policy of retooling factories with donestic equipment. "It is
necessary to decisively «bark on the path of freeing both existing enterprises
and new construction from dependence on foreign equipment," noted the decree of the
Central Conittee of the All-Union Cos-mist Party (of Bolsheviks) in 1929. "So-
viet textile nachine building. which is being organized. should be developed at a
more intensified rate in strict coordination with the reequipnent and cmstruction
plan in the textile industry and with due regard for the latest inventions and im-
provements. "5

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CV. VI’I'MRI‘ NA"- Vl‘hl

During the war years the develop-ant of machine building for light industry case

to a halt. because most enterprises switched over to output for nilitary purposes.
However, a new upsurge begins to show in this area as early as 1966. ﬁle Leningrad
Special Design Bureau for the Designing of Leather and Footwear Machines was estab-
lished in 1953 and. in practice. the production of donestic equipment for the leath-
er and footwear industry began to develop since that time. Lines for an automated
performance of the industrial process of footwear production by the eel-ant method
of bottoming--PLK-O—were established. Subsequently. they were modernised into a
nuuber of inproved installations.6

1n the early 1950's 37 plants serviced textile industries alone and the output of
various industrial sewing nchines was organized. 'lhe scientific research base of
mchine building was strengthened further.

However. in the early 1960's some plants mufacturing equipnent for light indus-
try changed their specializstion, as a result of which the output of individual
types of equipment was reduced. For exanple. in 1950 approximately 2,200 carding
machines for cotton spinning were produced and in 1958, one-half of this. For spin-
ning nachines these indicators were 2,000 and 1.100 respectively and for weaving

loom, 16.000 and 14.400. At individual enterprises the proportion of specialized
output was lowered to 26-29 percent.7

Despite definite advances nachine building did not neet the needs of the serviced
sectors and its fundamental reorganisation was needed.

With regard to food Inchine building the organization on V. I. Lenin's personal in-
struction of the Mel'stroy Joint Stock Conany (within the structure of the Supreme
Council of the National Bconony). which designed and Innufactured equipment for
mills, elevators and bread and oil plants,can be considered its birth.

In practice. food. like light. anchine building did not exist in prerevolutionary
Russia. Sons experience was accumlsted only in the output of individual machines
for sugar production and bread baking. The greatest significance was attached to
the latter direction during the first years of Soviet rule. The Blektrokhleb Joint
Stock Partnership producing equipnent for bread plants and bakeries was established
in Khar'kov in 1926. However. neat and canning industries remined in a difficult
situation, which limited the possibilities for the growth of neat. fish and vege-
table consumtion. Many meat processing enterprises were prinitive slaughter

houses with a lack of water supply lines. refrigerators and devices for the utili-
zation of the waste of basic production.

in 1931 the appeal by the USSR Soviet of People's Connissars and the Central Com-
mittee of the All-Union Com-mist Party (of Bolsheviks) considered it necessary
"to concentrate the indicated production in the special all-Union association for
food machine building with an isudiate transfer of a nudaer of nachine building
plants and organisations within the structure of this association (within the pe-
riod of 1 month) and of the design bureau for special canned neat machine building
to it."8 In accordance with this decision during the same year Hel'stroy was re-
organized into Soyusprodmshins and then into Glavprodassh and plants, a planning
office and an installation trust were given to it.

'18

FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

As a result of the imlemanted measures the volume of gross output at the enter-
prises of Glavprodmah increased 11.8-fold from 1928 through 19100. which made it
possible to change over to a gradual reduction in the inert of equipment. ﬂiers-
as at the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan about one-third of all the food ma-
chines were imported, in 1932 this proportion was reduced to 13 percent and by 1937.
to 0.9 percent. .

In parallel. food machine building was also developed within the framework of the
food industry. In 1940 the enterprises of Pishcheprom produced twice as math e-
quipment as the plants of Glavprodmash. It should be stated that such parallelism
persisted to some degree until recently. In the early 1970's 47 percent of the en-
terprises of machine building for light and food industries were dispersed through-
out other departments. A total of 29 enterprises were under the subordination of
the USSR Ministry of Food Industry. 18 enterprises. of the USSR Ministry of Meat
and Dairy Industry and ll. enterprises. of the USSR Ministry of Light Industry.9
Although under present conditions the number of such enterprises is not large and
they do not determine the nature of domestic machine building. the duplication per-
sists in the scientific research and design spheres of activity.

During the war years a significant part of the machine building plants for food
subsectors were destroyed. By the end of the war the mchine tool pool and the
numerical composition of the sector's workers did not exceed 30 to 40 percent of
the prewar level. However, by 1950 the sector's gross output increased 2.5-fold.
as compared with 1940. Yet, despite the existing advances. in the early 1960’s
food mchine building enterprises were noted for a low level of technical equipment
and organization of production. The activity of the indicated enterprises was also
affected by the general shortcomings in industrial management. which hampered the
implementation of a unified technical policy according to the aectorial principle.
delayed the introduction of the achievements of technical progress into production
and. therefore, impeded the supply of the necessary equipment for consumers.

In 1965 the sector began to function as a single body gradually forming its struc-
ture and system of production and mnagement. A couple: of production facilities
planned for the needs and requirements of light and food industries began to emerge
in the USSR industry during subsequent years.

During the past 15 years of the sector's work production volumes in comparable
prices increased more than Ins—fold. the list of produced industrial equipment,
more than 3-fold and of articles for cultural-general and economic purposes. 2.5-
fold and the volume of their output in retail prices, more than 10-fold.

The basic paths and directions in the development of the Ministry of Machine Build-
ing for Light and Food Industry and Household Appliances overally encompassing var-
ious aspects of its activity were determined in 1980. Provision is mde for a rise
in the technical level of enterprises and of the products produced by them. strength-
ening of the scientific and design base and improvement in the social working and
living conditions of workers employed in the sector.

' 19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

CV. Ul’l‘lw U“ Vl‘h.

70013101113

"xv s'yezd V00). Stenogrsficheskiy Otchet" [The 15th Congress of the All-
Union Co-mist Petty (of Bolsheviks). Stenogrsphic Reporgl, Part II, Polit-
izdet. 1962. pp 870-871.

V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye Sobreniye Sochineniy" ﬁolplete "01137, Vol 23. p 360.

See "Resheniys Psrtii i Previtel'stvs po nozysystvennyn Voprossn (1917-1967)"

fatty and Govern-eat Decisions on Econonic Problems (1917496717, Vol I, Polit-
izdet. 1967. p 668.

See "Rcsheniya Pertii i Previtel'stvs po Rhozysystvennyn Voprosen (1917-1967)."
Vol I. p 1.88.

"Decree dated 3 Key 1929 of the Central Co-ittee of the All-Union Comist
Party (of Bolsheviks) 'm the State of end Prospects for the Teutile_Industry"'
(see "Resheniye Partii i Previtel'stve po mozysystvennyn Voprossn /1917-l9677."
Vol 2. Politizdet, 1967, p 50). " ‘

The productivity of P'LK-O is 60 psirs per hour. The output of PLK-Z-O lines
of a productivity of 100 peiuper hour was begun in 1970. Such lines have no
world analogs and have been patented in slnoet all the countries.

See 0. A. Shvertsnsn, "Ispol'zovaniye Proizvodstvennykh Fondov v Tekstil'noy
Prouyshlennosti" [ﬁtiliution of Fixed Capital in the Textile Industry]. Izde-
tel'stvo Leghye Industriys. 1971. p 78.

"Appeal dated 29 Septeuber 1931 of the USSR Council of People's Col-issue and
of the Central Co-ittee of the All-Union Co-mist Party (of Bolsheviks) 'm
the Develop-eat of the nest and Canning Industry'" (see "Resheniys Pertii i
Previtel‘stve po ICIozyeystvennyn Voprosen 11917-19617," Vol 2 , Politizdst.
1967, p 358).

S; I. Senin. "Ispol'wveniye Proizvodstvennykh Rezervov v hashinostroyenii"
_/_Utiliution of Production Reserves in hehine Building-7, Izdetel'stvo Msshino-
stroyeniye, 19710. p 46.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononiki", 1982

11.439

C80:

1827/63

20
“MUSE”?
maomcutustomv

PERSONAL INCOME AND SAVINGS

IMPROVED ORGANIZATIW 0F CREDIT SYS‘l'Di URGED
hoscow VOPROSY melanin in Mssian No 11. Nov 81 pp 108-59
ﬁrticle by Yu. Avdiyenta: “Formation and Use of Credit Resourcesl'j

[rexg7 "Planning and scientific-technical and structural policy should be sub-
jected to economic intensification. Hethods of mnagensnt and policy in the area
of administration should also work for efficiency." L. I. Brezhnev stressed at the
26th CPSU Congress. The course for an intensification of public production and in-
crease in the rates of its deve1opnsnt raises the problem of the material and fi-
nancial-credit resources of the national econoly.

Credit resources mobilized by banks in the national econony fern the loan fund of
society. which along with budgetary and internal capital is an inortant source of
financial security for expanded reproduction. For maple. about 170 billion ru-
bles of banking capital. or 58 percent, functioned as part of state financial re-
sources (without taking into account short-tern credit resources), which totaled
about 292 billion rubles (annually) during the 1971-1975 period. During the 1976-
1980 period the anount of banking capital (average annual loan balanies) in rela-
tion to the annual volune of financial resources reached 70 percent.

The significance of the loan fund increases constantly in the systen of the sources
of financing for expanded reproduction. 'me prospects for an increase in the vol-
une and change in the sources of formation of the loan fund create favorable con—
ditions for the developnent of credit relations and for its more efficient use.

At the sane tins, an increase in the role of credit in the econony largely depends
on the solution of problems concerning the formation, distribution and use of the
loan fund. mly with due regard for the patterns in the reproduction of the loan
fund and change in its value and naterial-physical component is it possible to eco-
sonically substantiate the total anounts of financial resources of the national
economy. loan and credit turnover periods. the correlation of extension of short-,
average- and long-tern credit for circulating and fixed capital. the standard lev-
el and differentiation of bank interest and so forth.

The socialist credit syste- organically integrates the loan fund. that is. the
source of economic growth. the sphere of credit relations (object of the credit
system). banks and borrowing economic bodies (subject of the credit system), the
credit mechanism (scans of interaction of the object and subject of the credit sys-
tem and of bank nanagenent of the sphere of credit relations) and the object of the

21
POIOFFICIALUSIONLY
a V0. v. 0.5.... verm- Unu-

credit system. An interaction of objective factors (economic laws of the function-
ing of credit relations) and of subjective factors (bank and economic bodies using
economic laws in economic management) takes place in the credit system. while ob-

Jective factors are of decisive inortance. the subject plays an active. transfor-
ming role in this interaction.

lhe loan fund. which is one of the funds of the national economic resources of so-
cialist society. is the initial link in the forntion of the socialist credit sys-
tem. The loan fund of socialist society serves as an economic form of expression

of resources periodically released in the course of production. which are mobilized
by the bank and by means of credit are drawn into the national economic turnover to

expand the base of socialist reproduction, ensure proportionality. accelerate the
rates of production development and obtain additional savings.

The loan fund as an economic category is characterized by the following significant
features: First, it appears as an economic form of mnifestation (movement) of re-
sources tenorarily released in the national economy and mobilised by the bank on

the basis of repayment.2 Second. the use of the loan fund in the national economy

expands the mterial base of reproduction. accelerating economic development and
the growth of national labor productivity.

The loan fund represents the totality and unity of credit relations in the national
economy in their organic interrelationship and interaction. The study of the re-
production of the loan fund makes it possible to disclose the role of the totality
of credit relations in the formtion of value and physical proportions of socialist
expanded reproduction.

In their economic nature tenorarily released resources participating in the forma-
tion of the loan fund are not uniform. Among them it is possible to single out
capital temporarily released from turnover in material production sectors; tempo-
rarily unused capital of budget organizations; capital temporarily released in the
process of forntion of the population's monetary income and reproduction of the
consuuption fund. In addition to the capital temporarily released in the national

economy, economically accountable bank funds. which comprise about 2 percent of the
loan fund of society. belong to credit resources.

The economic mechanism operating under socialism on the basis of public ownership
ensures savings from the joint use of means of production. These savings belong to
socialist society at large and, in particular, are realized by means of credit.

Therefore, the loan fund appears as an additional source of socialist expanded re-
production.

The financial resources of expanded reproduction are formed from constant and tem-
porarily free monetary resources. creating the internal capital of economically ac-
countable enterprises. budgetary capital and other monetary funds at all the levels

of management of the national economy. Temporarily free monetary resources are in-
cluded in the loan fund used in the fore of credit.

Meanwhile. both in theory and in economic practice the economic role of credit re-
sources is not clarified sufficiently. The interpretation of credit as a simple
factor in the turnover of financial resources and as an intermediary in the tum-
over of constant resources periodically replacing teaporarily lacking internal

22
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLWONLY

capital. which leads only to the saving of bank notes, is basic in modern theory.
It is considered that credit mediates the movement of constant financial resources
in order to "rescue" the enterprise for the period of restoration (or arrival) of
its own capital. -

It is considered that only constant monetary resources (internal and budgetary cap-
ital) manifest their effect and are set in motion by means of credit and the follow-
ing conclusion is drawn: Nothing is added to the economic potential of public pro—
duction. The aisting attitude toward credit is affirmed in the formlated func-
tions of credit. which appear as the means of replacement of money in its function
of circulating capital, redistribution of temporarily free capital for the purpose
of plan fulfillment, bank ruble control over the course of plan fulfillment. orga-
nization of settle-ants of accounts in the national econoq, maneuvering of monetary
reserves. mediation of capital circulation, provision of the ecmomy with monetary
assets and so forth. m. indicates that bank resources are of no independent sig-
nificance. Credit only redistributes teaporarily free monetary assets in the soon--
omy. not increasing financial resources at the level of the entire national economy,
and the resource nature of credit and its role in the expansion of the financial
and, therefore. material base of public reproduction are denied.3

This position, which does not fully disclose the actual role of credit in socialist
expanded reproduction, sets credit against finances. which leads to a denial of the
fact that credit is one of the form of financing and functioning of public resources.

"Soviet finances," notes Prof N. G. $chev, "represent the totality of economic re-
lations. as a result of which.on the basis of the distribution and redistribution
of the social product and national income, the monetary income and funds of mone-
tary resources of enterprises. organizations and the state are formed and used in
a planned tanner for ensuring expanded socialist reproduction, meeting the mterial
and cultural needs of vorkers, administration and defense of the country.“

This definition. with which the majority of Soviet economists agree, encospssses a
nutter of isportant features, which also characterize Soviet credit. Therefore,
any economists include credit (along with the state budget. state insurance and
so forth) in financial relations as a special subdivision having its own specific
features.

The essence of the loan fund as a specific reserve of the economic development of
Public production is disclosed only from the position of the concept linking credit
with the mobilization and use of tenorarily free resources. Therefore, along with
constant financial resources. which are stable monetary reserves. it is necessary
to take into account the loan fund of society as an additional source of the devel-
opment of public production.

In our opinion, the fact that only the increment in resources for short-term cred—
iting is taken into account is the shortcoming of the existing scheme of the con-
solidated balance of financial resources.5

Short-term credit resources mat reflect in full volume the entire amount of ten;
porsrily free resources circulating in the national economy.

23
P0! OFFICIA. IE ONLY
- ~.. uwmoo~ouo~ or... venue

The bank credit plan does not encompass all credit resources. Credit resources
drawn into the national economic turnover for a long time (long-term loans) are
outside its range. In addition to the resources of the loan fund, the credit plan
includes part of the internal capital of econonically accountable associations re-
ceiving credit for the circulation of connodity stocks and wage expenditures, as
well as allocations from the budget. Therefore. along with the bank credit plan.
there is a need for the elaboration of a special balance reflecting the reproduc-
tion of the loan fund in national economic sectors and in the spheres of use. This
balance will nuke it possible to determine the sire and structure of the loan fund
and the credit fund, to disclose the conditions for a balance of the material-phys-
ical and value component of the loan fund and to coordinate the release of resources
in time with credit periods. The balance of reproduction of the loan fund will
serve as the basis for the preparation of the bank credit plan. The basic results
of the balance of reproduction of the loan fund will be included as initial coupo-
nents in the bank credit plan. It is also necessary for an inprovemmt in the plan-
ning of the loan fund (for 5 years with an annual breakdown. as well as for a long-
er period).

The further rise in the role of credit in the intensification of public production
is connected with an inrovement in all the links in the chain of reproduction of
the loan fund. At the present stage in the development of the Soviet economy it
is necessary to stimlate the inflow of temporarily free capital into the loan fund
in all directions and from all sources.

The capital of state insurance also appears as an important reserve of the loan
fund. In connection with this property insurance should develop so that victims
are compensated for material dannge and insurers accumulate capital. 'mis proce-
dure will be an incentive for an increase in the significance of the capital of
the Main Administration of State Insurance in the formation of the resources of
the loan fund.

Furthermore, for a systematic increase in capital from personal insurance it is
necessary to create the appropriate material incentive, that is, the transfer of
insurance sums to deposits in savings banks through the fixing of especially high
interest charges and differattiation of the interest rate depading on insurance
periods. At the same time, the population becomes interested in transferring in-
surance sums to deposits in savings banks, in stabilizing deposits and in keeping
its deposits in savings banks longer. In the future this can also be applied to
property insurance. Thus, there is a need for an interaction between the system
of the Main Administration of State Insurance and savings banks in a planned trans-
fer of insurance sum to deposits on the basis of the fundamental interests of the
national economy.

An increase in the economic accountability interest of associations and enter-
prises in an efficient utilization of their resources. in an acceleration of capi-
tal circulation and in the transfer of temporarily free capital to the loan fmd
of society is an important task.

In the process of reproduction one part of the capital of enterprises is in opera-
tion. while the other is temporarily free. The correlation between capital oc-
cupied in production and temporarily free capital differs from the correlation of

2b
POIOFFICIALUSIONLY
internal capital and bank credit. which reflects the structure of capital of ,enter-
prises. In particular. this is due to the fact that the amount of temporarily re-
leased capital of enterprises does not coincide with the amount of enlisted bank
credit. A disruption in econoaically correct correlations will lead to negative
consequences. In our opinion. in order that the interests of enterprises may meet
the national economic criteria of planned and efficient public production. ”it is
necessary to establish the socially necessary amount of tenporarily released capi-
tal in the financial resources of associations and their standard.

An analysis of the standard and actual indicators of released capital will help to
disclose and study the patterns in the reproduction of the loan fund and to in-
prove the planning and organization of the finances of associations and their rela-
tionship with the bank.

Proceeding from an economically substantiated standard of temporarily free capital.
in the financial and credit plan of sectors. associations and enterprises it is
necessary to establish the appropriate assignments for the volume of resources as—
signed to the loan fund and for the enlistment of borrowed capital. In such a
case the planning of credit investments will be directly coordinated with the for—
mation of bank resources, which will accelerate the transition to the planning of
the reproduction of the loan fund at the level of the national economy and its in-
dividual sectors. A violation of the standard of temporary release of capital
should not lead to the cessation of crediting or to a reduction in the extent of
crediting envisaged in the plan. At the same time. to stimlate the fulfillment
of the plan for the mobilization of the resources of the loan fund by enterprises,
it is more advisable to change the conditions of extension of the planned loans
(to raise interest rates. to more strictly select the objects of crediting accord-
ing to the level of their efficiency and so forth). Moreover, credit interest
should be charged on the amount of bank credit planned for a given economic body.
not on the actual (within the limits of the plan) amount of borrowed capital drawn
into the circulation of an enterprise. At the same time, for unplanned loans pro-
vision is rude for a stricter regime of use. Such a procedure will he an incen-
tive prowting enterprises to more efficiently use the planned bank loans for en-
suring the planned rates of growth and proportions of production.

It is possible to interest economic organisations in observing the standard of
released capital by charging interest on their deposits.

However. incentives should not lead to an excessive release of capital from cir-
culation. It is necessary to establish the mains: extent of participation of
ministries in the use of the internal fund of teaporarily released capital for
the needs of the enterprise itself. At the same tine. it is important to attain
the mximam reduction in superfluous redistribution processes.

It is advisable to codaine the procedure of fixing the interest that the bank
charges economic bodies for keeping capital with a special charge for credit re-
sources paid by the bank to the budget in order to contribute to a better use of
the loan fund and its fuller accumlation. The charge for credit resources de-
ducted by the bank to the budget is an economic category reflecting the relation-
ships of the bank with society in connection with an efficient use of the loan
fund of the socialist state.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘m W'Iuﬂh U30. VI‘LI

‘ihe temporarily free capital of enterprises and associations included in the loan
fund becomes national economic resources. At the same time. the resources of the
loan fund appear as the bank's circulating capital. The bank is economically re-
sponsible for an efficient use of the loan fund. It Inst pay a special charge for
credit resources to the budget. The establishment of this charge will also intensify
the bank's positive effect on the economic initiative of enterprises. prompting

them to use raw materials and supplies efficiently. to better operate fixed capi-
tal and to intensify production.

between the standard rate of interest on credit and the share of interest used to
cover the expenses of the bank system. Through the differentiation of the charge
it is possible to regulate the bank's share in the collected interest for an in-

tensified effect of the efficient use of the loan fund and of the planned nature of
reproduction on its activity. The amount of the charge for the loan fund met be
linked with the effectiveness of credit investments. 'ihe lower the effectiveness.
the higher the charge as a result of a decrease in the share of interest left at

the bank's disposal for the formtion of economic incentive funds. “ten the prof—

itability of credit investments is increased. the charge is lowered in favor of the
bank (per ruble of credit).

resources is an important aspect of the improvement in the mechanism of reproduc-
tion of the loan fund. An evaluation of the preference of internal capital, bank

finances of the enterprise. The correlation of various resources is one of the
financial proportions of expanded reproduction. For the economically accountable
enterprise, according to the degree of advantageousness, financial resources can
now be arranged in the following order: intrasystem redistribution of capital,
budgetary allocations. bank credit and internal capital. At present the national

capital. which will also have a negative effect on the efficiency of use of cred-
it resources and internal capital.

Credit resources are "cheaper" for the economically accountable enterprise than
internal capital. because the average interest rate is lower than the charge for
the enterprise’s own capital paid to the budget. The repayment of bank loans is
ensured from production cost as part of the proceeds from the corresponding out-
put. which has no economic effect on enterprise activity.

Under present conditions. when intensive growth factors have the predominant ef-
fect in public reproduction. the economic accountability evaluation of the prefer-
ence of various financial sources should be revised. The enterprise should be put
in a situation in which it wOuld strive for the use of financial resources in the
following order: internal capital, capital received in the form of intrasystem
redistribution on the basis of observance of economic accountability principles

in economic relations, bank credit and budgetary allocations. Having fully ex-
hausted the possibilities for an efficient use of internal capital, the enter-
prise will be able to enlist bank credit and budgetary allocations.

26

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The role of the credit mechanism in an efficient use of the loan fund is now in-
creasing. ‘l‘his presupposes the need to continue the work on inroving the credit
system. The maximum use of intensive factors in production growth requires prim-
arily an intensification of the differences in the conditions of extension of
short-term credits pertaining to individual groups (planned and above-plan credit.
credit for the elimination of shortcomings in the economic activity of enterprises
and overdue credit) so that economic organizations my strive for the adoption and
fulfillment of stepped-up plans, using mainly intensive growth factors. his was
partially taken into consideration in the introduction of new interest rates by the
decree of the .PSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers on improve-
ment in the economic mechanism. However, even now the differences in the condi-
tions of extension of credits pertaining to individual groups (planned. above-plan
and so forth) are insufficient for economic organizations to avoid plan disruption.

There are also significant potentials for inroving the use of the credit system
in the economic substantiation and mutual coordination of the mechanism of short-.
average- and long-term crediting. They operate as organic parts of a single cred-
it mechanism ensuring the realization of planned proportims between the loan fund
and the needs of the national economy for credit according to the volume and phys-
ical content. according to the periods of release of resources and amounts cf short-.
average- and long-term credit and according to the level of effectiveness of ex-
penditures differentiated with due regard for the economic evaluation of the time
of withdrawal of resources to credit. he correspondence between the loan fund
and public needs for credit is based on a certain norm of effectiveness of the ex-
penditures for which credit is extended as a measure of their relationship.

The conditions of extension of short-term credit are initial for the formation of
the regime of long-term crediting corrected for the length (beyond 1 year) of ad-
vance of resources. For example, interest rates depending on the length of credit
should be differentiated depending on the time of withdrawal of public capital:
The longer the period of withdrawal, the more efficiently it met be used.

Furthermore, the mechanism of extension of credit for one-time expenditures is di-
rected toward the level of long-term national economic profitability and provision
of interconnection of the economic accountability interests of all the participants
in the investment process. that is. the planning organization, contractor. supplier
of equipment and customer. on the basis of credit agreements taking into account
the contained expenditures and the obtained final result.

Nor does the modern practice of utension of credit for circulating capital fully
meet the conditions of intensive management. In particular, the fact that the
proceeds fron the sale of output are the source of liquidation of almost all the
forms of credit (production cost. of credits for nonseasonal production expendi-
tures and credits for the expenditures of future periods) attests to the above.
Additional profit is only the source of liquidation of credits for a teqaorary
cospensation for the shortage of internal circulating capital. Profit is also
used for the repayment of bank interest. Despite the differences in the two basic
forms of extension of credit. that is. for the balance and turnover of cousodity.
stocks (on the basis of the share participation of banking capital and the inter-
nal resources of enterprises). they belong to the same type reflecting the condi-
tions of extensive economic management. The similarity lies in the fact that

27

MWI’EWLY
DUI WPMAL USE. WLI

credit is paid back on the basis of the production cost of the sold output. As is
well known. the capital covering the production of the sold output retains in a
special loan account and is used to repay bank loans. Therefore, there is no di-
rect connection of the circulation of borrowed capital with the profit and profit-
ability of enterprises. Such a situation guarantees a prompt return of credit. re-
gardless of the economic results of production. The enterprise and the bank have
no direct interest in an increase in production profitability. 'merefore, the
mechanism of extension of credit for circulating capital Inst be improved on the
basis of a close connection of credit investments with the profit and profitability
of enterprises. In our opinion, there is a need for a procedure of formation of
circulating capital in which the temporary need for circulating capital would be
reiebursed from the production cost of the sold output and the growth of constant
needs would be secured by bank credit liquidated from profit. 1111s will intensify
the effect of credit on all price elements (both production cost and profit). as
well as the interest of enterprises (borrowers) and of the bank in an increase in
production efficiency. The interconnection of the principles of the economic ac-
countability activity of the bank with the economic accountability of production
enterprises in t'..e solution of problems concerning an acceleration of the rates of
growth of economic development will thereby intensify. This is necessary to ensure
intensive reproduction under the conditions of developed socialism.

The further ilprovement in the mechanism of formation, distribution and use of the
loan fund determined by the interests of intensification of public reproduction
will occur in the direction of development of ecmomic forms creating possibilities

The mechanism of for-tion of the loan fund and the mechanism of its distribution
and use are organic parts of the general, single mechanism of reproduction of the
loan funduthe basis of credit relations in the national economy. This reflects

the assumption on the existence of a profotmd internal connection between the loan
fund and credit investments. The loan fund, which represents temporarily released
resources. and the needs of the national economy for credit investments form two

aspects of one economic relation and their correspondence is necessary. when co-
ordinating the Internal-physical. value and financial proportions of the national

economy, it is necessary to take into account the characteristics of reproduction
of the sectorial structure of the loan fund.

First, the objective limits of credit relations in the national economy are estab-
lished primarily on the basis of the material and physical structure of the loan
fund, which predetermines the possible directions in the distribution and use of
credit resources. Second, a temporary release of capital occurs mainly as a re-
sult of the unused balance of special funds and profit in circulation (about 63
percent).6 Third, one part of temporarily free capital is expressed physically

in the form of the sector's own output (the part of the sector's shipped output
for which credit is not extended and unrealized profit. 40.6 percent) and the oth-
er. in money creating demand for the output of other national economic sectors
(for the output of suppliers, for repairs and for capital construction. 59.6 per-
cent). Fourth. the volume of credit investments in the national economy at the
expense of a given sector is determined by the amounts of the available uterial
resources that can be withdrawn and loaned to other sectors. Fifth. throughout

28
”WW”?
the industry and its individual sectors the amounts of credit investments greatly
surpass the tesporarily released capital transferred to the loan fund. This re-
flects the general situation that exists in the national economy. The loan fund
is created not only from periodically released resources in the sphere of material
production, but also as a result of the enlistment of the populatim's savings and
other financial resources. According to our calculations. on the average, there
are 21.1: Impacts of resources temporarily released in industry per ruble or credit
investments and 3.1 kopecks. per ruble of functioning funds. Sixth, the amount cf
credit extended to the sector itself is not determined by its participation in. the
formation of the loan fund of society. Credit investments in a sector are not ads
from the loan resources that appear in this sector. bu from the capital released
in supplier sectors. Loan resources appear on the side of some sectors and credit
investments, of other sectors. Therefore. the economic limit of the credit extended

to a sector depends on the amount of tesporarily released resources in supplier sec-
tors and on the volume of purchase of output.

However. it is necessary to take into account the effect of the resources drawn
from the budget and the sphere of consunption on the extension of credit to a given
sector. The intersectorial distribution of these external resources occurs in ac-

cordance with the established planned proportions of expanded reproduction on the
basis of the intersectorial planned balance.

The mechanism of formation. distribution and use of the loan fund is to ensure the
necessary unity between the material and value structures of the loan fund in the
process of reproduction and the proportionality between the loan fund and the pt?“
lic needs for credit. ‘Ihe correspondence of the amount of credit investments. to
the public needs for credit throughout the national economy and in individual sec-
tors is one of the concrete forms of nnifestation of the connectim "between the
amount of public work time spent on the production of a certain article and the ex-
tent of public need suhjcct :c satisfaction by means of this article.”7

Therefore. the following appear as the basic principles of the planning and use of
the loan fund: balance between the resources of the loan fund and the needs of
individual sectors for credit investments. which ensures an estension of credit for
the national economy within the resources of the loan fund; coordination of loan
resources according to the periods of their teaporary release with credit invest-
ments in individual objects with various periods of advance and recovery; balance
reached by means of resources drawn from the sphere of cmsuwtion and the corres-
ponding change in the parameters of the mechanism of forution and use of the loan
fund--the standard of efficiency of expenditures for which credit is extended. the
loan period. the level and differentiation of bank interest and so forth.

Under present conditions bank activity is directed tomrd an increase in the ef-

ficiency of expenditures and the attainment of high final national econonic results
through intensive factors in the growth of socialist production.

In the accountability report of the CPS" Central Guinea to the 26th party can-
gress L. I. Bredunev noted that the "utilisation of the possibilities at our dis-
posal largely depends on the level of national economic magenent and on the lev-
el of planning and administration."

29
summon“
eve. wees-ea..- aeo— -eQOIOQ

Advances in managerial activity in the area of increase in the efficiency of use
of resources and acceleration of the rates of expanded reproduction depend on the
degree of a planned use of economic laws. General economic laws (basic economic

law. law of planned development of the national economy. law of time saving and so
forth) are realized through finances.

0n the one hand. finances as an economic category representing distribution and
redistribution relations in the economy reflect an objective contradiction between
the material-physical and value comment of the produced social product and na-
tional income. It permeates the entire set of contradictions connected with the
reproduction of financial relatims and has a significant effect on their nature.
Ch the other hand. finances are a tool for overcoming this contradiction. Owing
to the functioning of finances the initial (production) structure of the social
product is reduced to its final (reproduction) structure.

The law of correspondence (unity) of the nterial-physical and value elements of
the social product fort-slated by K. Marx is basic in the system of economic laws
Operating in the financial sphere. This law uncovers the most significant connec-
tion of the aspects of contradiction as the source and motive force of the devel-
Opment of financial relations. Other connections and corresponding laws charac-
terize only some essential aspects of the general contradiction of financial rela-
tions (repayment of financial resources advanced for production with an increment);
placement of financial resources in specific directions of expenditures—reduction
of current expenditures. isprovemant in the quality of output. metering of new
output and so forth-associated in the process of production; order of drawing var-
ious sources of financing (budgetary resources. internal capital, bank credit and
so forth) into the economic turnover; correspondence between the equivalent (fi-
nances) and relative (price) forms of advance.

General financial laws are concretized in the specific laws of budget financing,
laws of financing from internal capital and credit laws. Credit laws. reflecting
the distinctive features of credit relations. are the form of mnifestation and
realization of financial laws. Credit represents an advance of financial resources
temporarily released in the national economy in the process of public reproduction.
It serves as a form of overcoming the contradiction between a tewomry release of
capital in the process of reproduction and the need for its constant participation
in the circulation of the social product. The basic contradiction of credit is a
distinctive refraction of the general contradiction internally inherent in finan-
cial relations. In the course of reproduction it is disclosed in the regular con-
nections between temporarily released capital and resources utilized in turnover,
between the amount of capital tenporarily released among suppliers and the volume
(limit) of credit extended to consumer enterprises. between credit investments and
the expansion of the material base of public reproduction. between the advanced
credit resources and the econonic yield from their use, between the isme of loans
and their repayment, between the liquidation of a loan and payment of credit in-
terest and the economic results from the use of borrowed resources, between the
enlistment of banking capital and the collection of credit interest. among the
volume and periods of a loan. object of crediting. bank interest, level of effec-
tiveness of credit investments and sources of loan liquidation as elements of a
concrete credit relation taken in a single complex. between credit and the price
of a product and between the physical and value cosmonauts of the loan fund. In

30
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
credit relations these connections are necessary, stable and significant and spe-
cific credit laws appear in them. A certain feature. side. aspect, phase or form
of movement of the min contradiction forming the basis for credit relations is
manifested in every specific credit lav. ally oving to the observance of the en-
tire set of credit laws is the contradiction eliminated prowtly.

General economic laws characterizing the level of develoth of the economic sys-
tem determine the direction in the development of specific financial laws. ‘lheee
changes are transmitted from financial laws to the specific laws of the structure.
functioning and development of credit. The laws of structure characterize the
stability of the stmcmre of credit relations end determine the method of linking
the elements end the structure and organisation of their interconnections. They

tionality of the elements of a credit relation pertain. The laws of functioning
reproduce the structural connections of credit relations. At the same time. the
reproduction of structure is acconpanied by imperceptible quantitative changes in
its individual cosponents. In time, owing to the accumlation of quantitative
changes. the intensity of contradiction between the requirements of the laws of
structure and the requirements of the law of functioning of credit increases. ‘ihese
contradictions are aggravated and lead to the fact that the laws of the structure
of credit relations begin to oppose the laws of their functioning. which is directly
reflected in the role of credit. As a result. a threat of violation of the laws of
credit development—law of credit repayment (basic law in the sphere of credit),
Lee of expansion of the tutorial base of reproduction from credit and law of the
unity of the material and value cowonent of the loan fund—arises. In order to
avoid the negative consequences of contradictions. they are promptly overcome on
the basis of the laws of credit development. outing to vhich the appropriate reor-
ganization of the connections of the elements of structure with due regard for
their state and new economic situation is carried out. The resolution: of contra-

Despite some conditionality of the grouping of credit laws, nevertheless it sakes
it possible to observe the process of emergence of contradictions in credit rela-
tions and the stages in the development and direction of their resolution.

“we present tasks of economic intensification dictate the need to develop economic
forms of use of lava giving scope for the unifestation of the economic enterprise
and stimulation of mnegerial activity of banks.

An expansion of the economic opportunities of banks is connected with the perfor-
ﬁnance in full volume of the functions of planning. msgement. economic stimla-
tion and control over the production and sale of output inherent in them. To in-
crease the efficiency of the managerial activity of banks. it is advisable begin-
ning with the llth Five-Year Plan to establish. on the basis of the assignments

approved in the f ive-year plan, a stable standard of deductions in favor of banks
PU“ WPILIAI. USO. URL.

from the interest incone for compensation for expenses and for the formtion of the
necessary profit. Material incentives for bank workers should also depend on an
improvement in the production and financial indicators of the work of associations
and enterprises if it is attained owing to the economic coapetence of banks. The
bank involved in the profit originating at an enterprise can claim a part of it.

In 1922 v. I. Lenin raised the question of the representatives of the trade divi-
sion of the Gosbank "receiving bonuses in proportion: to the growth of the trade
turnover at the enterprises or territorial regions 'entrusted' to than..."8

laterial incentives from bank profit and fron deductions from the profit of produc-
tion associations in favor of banks will serve as a powerful atimlus for the de-
velopnent of the economic enterprise of banks and of ecmonic accountability in the
bank syste- in the interest of inlenentation of Soviet credit policy. he bank.
striving to fulfill the state plan on the basis of the introduction of econonically
more advantageous variants of expenditures and popularizing the latest scientific
and technical achievements in the national econony, thereby contributes to an ac-
celeration of the rates of developnent of public production and to an increase in
its efficiency and proportionality.

The inprovenent in the credit nschanian and stimlation of the econonic activity
of banks are directed tmrd an efficient use of the loan fund and increase in the
role of credit in the econon of developed socialist society.

FOOTNOTES

1. Calculated according to the following data: "Narodnoye Khoqaystvo 8883 v
1980 Godu" ESSR National Economy in 19827, Isdatel'stvo Statistika. 1981. p
527; FINANSY 8883, No 4, 1981. p 5.

2. Not the totality of temporarily released capital fro. the circulation of enta-
prises and associations enters the loan fund of society. Sons part of it is
retained by enterprises and associations and serves as an intrafinancial source
of coverage of economic expenditures. See 3. N. Agraponov, "Vnutrenniye Pi-
nansovyye Resursy Prod riyatiya i Kredit" ﬁnternal Financial Resources of the
Enterprise and Credit . Izdatel'stvo Pinansy. 1976.

3. See Dm'GI I KREDIT. No 9, 1976. p 82.

lo. N. G. Sychev, "Pinensy Prouyshlennosti" finances of Industry], Izdatel'stvo
Finnnsy, 1971, p 8.

5. This problem is still debatable. See, for exalple. A. H. Volkov. "Perspektiv-
noye Planirovaniye Pinansovykh Resureov" [fang-Tern Planning of Financial Re-
sources-7, Izdatel'etvo Finansy. 1976, p 42; N. 0. Voluyskiy. "0n the Balance
of Financial Resources in the National Economic Plan” (PWOVOYB KROZYAXSTVO,
No 1, 1976); G. K. Shekhovtsov. "Svodnoye Byudrhetnoye Planirovaniya" LConsol-
idated Budget P1snning7. lzdatel'stvo Finansy. 1976. p 70.

32
FOR m1. [SEONLV
m OfﬂCIAL USE ONLY

6. According to tentative calculations, in 15 industrial ministries from 1970
through 1979.

7. K. Marx and P. Engels. "Soch." Eorkgy. Vol 25, Part1, p 205.
8. v. I. Lenin, "Polnoye Sobraniye Sochineniy" [Eowlete Horkg', Vol 54. p 167.
COPYRIGHT: Imtel'stvo "Pravda". "Voproay ekononiki", 1981

11 .4 39
C80: 1827/49 END

33
mmmeouu