FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10198
16 December 1981

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 22/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPES publications contain information primarily from foreign
nevspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information use
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation Has summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OQNERSHIP OP
HATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY

(P000 22/81)

CONTENTS

WOW

Systematic forecasting of Nuclear Power Industry
(318M013 WWW IMO! mmn, 1980)...»

New Book Describes Operation end Maintenance of Veter-
‘h'estnent Pscilities
(Sensn Herkovioh Gurvioh, Yuriy Inksinovich Kostrildm;
0mm vommmn, 1981) OOOOOOOIOOOOO..OOOOOIOOOOODO.

We of Improving mel Consmption at Power Hechinebuilding
Plants
(In. A. Yeti-0v, A. A. Bersbsslcin; WA mm,

&p 81) COCOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIO...DOCOOIOOOOO00.000.00.00...

-s- [III-UBBR-37PO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SYSTEMATIC FORECASTING OP IUCLBAR POWER IIDUSTRT

Hoscow SISTBuIOYE PROGNOZIROVAHIYB TADBRNOT BNIRGBTIKI in Russian
I980 (signed to press 3 lovember 1980) pp 142. 237-239

/5escription. foreword. introduction, and table of contents from
book by 3. Ya. Chernavskiy "Systematic Forecasting of Nuclear Power
Industry". edited by Academician H.A. Styrikovich. USSR Academy of
Sciences' working Consultative Group for Developing New Questions
Regarding the Future Development of Power Engineering, Izdatel'stvo
"lsuka". 1,200 copies. 238 pageg7

Afexty This monograph is devoted to one of the current
pressing problems facing the power industry - the devel-
opment of a theory and methods for estimating the long-
term forecasting of the development of nuclear power en-
gineering as systems. Various aspects of the long-term
forecasting are examined: economic. technical. mathemat-
ical and psychological. the book basically contains the
original developments of the author. A description of
the models to be used for forecasting the development

of the nuclear power industry is provided. Methods for
selecting the optimal strategies in conditions of uncer-
tainty are proposed.

The book was written for specialists in the field of
systems research in power engineering. in forecasting
methodology. and making decisions in conditions of un-
certainty.

FOREWORD

To correctly evaluate the role of the nuclear power industry in the
future power balance of the national economy is a complicated and
difficult scientific task. the practical importance of which, however,
is hard to overestimate. The problem is that the supplies of organic
fuel in the world, while great. are limited. Also. they are distri-
buted unequally throughout the world. The limitedness of the most
convenient kinds of organic fuel - petroleum and natural gas - for

the majority of energy consumers is felt by the majority of the
world's nations even today. In seeking to preserve some petroleum

and natural gas, coal and nuclear power move to the foreground in

1
TOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

future evaluations. In spite of the impressive world supplies of
coal, the rapid rates of increasing its extraction are fraught with
great difficulties. Among the factors preventing the intensive

growth of coal extraction is the relative high cost of mining opera-
tions. the difficulties of large-scale transporting of coal by land.
and the growing requirements to protect the enVironment. And although
there are several counter acting factors. it is highly unlikely that

future power engineering will depend heavily upon coal.

It is more likely that there will be a joint development and use of
various sources of energy - petroleum, natural gas. coal."uranium,
the sun, geothermal heat and so forth. This "cooperation will, ap-
parently continue for some time; however, the role of nuclear power
in the majority of sectors of power engineering will increase, al-

though at a varied pace.

Zven today it is important to understand the qualitative and quanti-
tative changes that will take place during this period of growth.

Two basic factors deternine this prudence: the inert properties of
the nuclear power industry and the many different ways that its struc-
ture can be developed. To develop a new type of nuclear reactor re-
quires, as a rule. two to three decades. To evaluate its effective-
ness it is necessary to look some 30 years into the future. In this
manner the selection of a strategy for the development of the nuclear
power industry must be compared with the need to forecast its devel-
opment for the next 50 to 60 years. At the same time this must be
done while predicting the development of the other power resources.
Hany factors need to be considered by the person doing the forecast-
ing; and two dangers--the Scylla and Charybdie of forecasting--Iie
in wait on the road to a good forecast: whether to try to consider
all the factors or to reject the majority of them. In the

first case the tine for making the forecast exceeds what is permis-
sible; in the second case the model for the development is too

rough to correctly reflect the essence of what has transpired in re-
ality. For this reason the second option is not ‘uitable for fore-
casting.

In order to find the correct path it is necessary to develop a scien-
tific methodology. As this applies to the task of forecasting nu-
clear pcwer this is also important because in addition to being the
newest sector it is also one of the most capital intensive sectors

of the power industry.

There have been many papers devoted to the future of the nuclear po-
wer industry; the majority of them contain quantitative evaluations
of the technical and economic indicators of nuclear electric power
stations and enterprises of the fuel cycle. evaluations of the role
of nuclear power in future power balances. Some of these papers
have been devoted to the development of the methodological aspects,
including the use of the mathematical modeling method.

Soviet literature. however, has been devoid of scientific papers
dealing with systematic descriptions of the theory and methods for
forecasting the development of the nuclear power industry. No such
work has been done in other countries either. This nonograph fills
this gap. It is of interest not only to specialists engaged in fore-
casting the nuclear power industry. The book contains material,

which will be helpful to those whc have an interest in the methodolo-
gical and practical questions concerning the use of a systematic ap-
proach. and for methodological forecasters and also to specialists

in the field of expert evaluations. The book also deals with questions
on the psychology of the forecasting process, questions of selecting
the optimal strategies in conditions of uncertainty and mathematical
models of the developing nuclear power industry. The material used in
the book. nonetheless. is not a conglomerate of developments which are
weakly linked together. 0n the contrary. the book is very rigidly

and logically put together. One central idea of the author can be
seen in every section - :0 develop a practical tool for making fore-
casts. The logic of developing such a tool forces the author to turn
to the methodology of a systematic analysis and psychology of fore-
casting end to methods of optimizing and mathematical modeling, while
subordinating them to the common task of research.

For the most part the monograph contains the original developments of
the author: for this reason several points need to be given special
attention.

Usually, when people speak of the use of the systematic approach to
the power industry they assume that systematic research is characteri-
sed by an examination of objects as systems. Moreover, they ere dis-
trected from examining the role of the subject in the very process of
forecasting and from taking into consideration the role played by the
psychological characteristics of the subject - the forecaster.

The author proposes another concept - not forecasting just the devel-
opment of the system - the object. but the conception of systematic
forecasting, in accordance with which for this purpose in order to un-
derstend the development of the object - the nuclear power industry

in this case. it is necessary to take into consideration the psycho-
logical characteristics of the subject of forecasting. And on this
basis to then construct the work of the prognostic groups. Including
the forecaster within the system from a methodological point of view,
of course. is correct and important; however. the author does not
merely declare a correct methodological hypothesis. but he also demon-
strates how one can take into consideration the psychological features
of the forecasters during the organisation of the forecasting process
in a practical manner.

While doing this the forecaster relies upon the work of psychologists
that was done in specific modeled situations. however. the real fore-
casting activity tekea place in other than modeled situations when

the forecaster is subjected to the influence of numerous and complex
stimuli. It was necessary to move from the modeled to the real situ-
ation; the author has made this move having analysed what is new in
introducing the real situation into the forecasting process. Moreover
it has turned out that the real forecasting situation is richer in

3
FOR 0P?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

content as compared to the modeled situation and that the real situ-
ation gives birth to the existence of various kinda of forecasting
processes. Thus. if in sons cases the control of the forecasting
process must promote the penetration of thought into the substance of
an object. in other cases it is expedient to restrict the fixation of
enpirical data. In this manner. the book gives fresh treatment to
solving the problem of constructing an optimal forecasting system.

In one sense the developing approach contradicts the Delfa method. in
which specific psychological characteristics of the forecasters are
not taken into consideration and the forecaster is viewed like sole
sort of black box.

The book has given much attention to the exposition of the essence of
the concept of uncertainty of the future. In specific examples the
author shows that certain methodoloﬁsts.including Soviet ones, per
ceive the essence of develop-ant mechanically. as just getting
underway. in which nothing new is happening basically and in which
something new is only superficial. an illusion that is seen as a new
consequence of too little knowledge. According to these methodologists.
the uncertainty of the future is the result of inadequate knowledge
about the nature of an object rather than the manifestation of the
substantial properties of an object.

In his book the auther develops another. correct dialectic view of

the substance of development. according to which development is ac-
conpsnied by the appearance of what is truly new. This neans that in
the trsjectories of the development of an object one can encounter
bifurcation points, after which the apriori trajectories branch out.
before crossing the bifurcation point the object is uncertain in the
sense that it is iapossible to say or determine exactly which path

out of a number of possible paths the development process will take.
This uncertainty in the object is overcoae only by crossing the bifur-
cation point. In this manner the author has established that the fore-
caster who has found. or more to the point has predicted, the exis-
tence of a bifurcation point is unable to fully overcome (reveal) the
uncertainty in an object, while improving the process of cognition.
His true task is to study alternative possibilities for development
and not to try to predict exactly which alternative will be realized.

The forecasting "strength" of a subject in the forecasting process is
limited. in this nanner. not only by the possibilities of recognising
the object. but by the object itself and the dialectic of its develop-
nent. In accordance withthasecrucial nethodological hypotheses the
author then proceeds to construct nethods for optimising in conditions
of uncertainty.

However, before proceeding to developing the sore complicated portion

of the forecasting tool. the author provides the development of sever-
al basic nodels of the systea of nuclear power - models for the devel-
opnent of the structure of nuclear reactors and nodels of the develop-
ment of a systen of enterprises of the fuel cycle. There are nsny new
elenents in these designs. I will note two of then. First. the dif-

ferentiation. which the author conducts between forecasting using

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mathematical models and research of mathematical models, which are
only genetically connected with the object of forecasting; however.
in the process of simplifying it turns out that they are quite unre-
lated. The second point is the preposed method of using models to con-
sider the gradualness of improving new technical means. which is of
utmost importance in the power industry. Other aspects of developed
models are no less important; however. the reader would be better off
reading the materials themselves, especially since the author subse-
quently tries to conduct the reader through his logic in the these
developments. thereby simplifying the process of understanding the ma-
terial.

The concluding section is devoted to the development of methods of
optimizing in conditions of uncertainty. In developing these methods
on a solid methodological basis. the author seeks to obtain practical
working methods. without losing accuracy in so doing. This task was
largely met. The examples cited in the book confirm this.

Thus, the reader has before him a book in which he can find not only

a tool for asking forecasts concerning the development of the nuclear
power industry, but also a tooi for determining the optimal strategies
for the development and a tool fo: making a choice.

Of course, one need not expect from this monography an answer to all
questions; but it is a good example of a comprehensive, systematic
research of a very important scientific and practical task.

Libreword written by Academician H.A. Styrikovich?

INTRODUCTION

Everyone knows that energy is one of the most important factors in
the development of man's society. Supplies of energy in man's en-
vironment are unlimited; however, only certain kinds of energy and
only a small part of whet is available can be put to practical use.

At present organic fuel is mankind's basic energy resource. For a
long time to cone organic fuel will be used for various purposes. In
certain spheres of power consumption it would be difficult if not al-
most impossible to replace it. The general purpose motor vehicle is

a good example of this.

There are enormous supplies of organic fuel in the world. which, it
would seem, can meet the needs for energy for hundreds of years to
come. However, the question of meeting mankind's need for energy
is in reality quite a bit more complex.

first, there are not so many ineipensive resources of organic fuel.
the extraction fo which is economically feasible. This limitation is
especially acutely noted in regard to resources of petroleum and na-
tural gas. which are the very forms of fuel most preferred by the
overwhelming majority of energy consumers and for the technical means

for converting the forms of energy.

5
roe ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Secondly. the resources of organic fuel are distributed very unevenly
throughout the world. Sone nations of the world. for example Japan.

have scarcely any at all. Power consunption in nany other countries,
particularly in the majority of West European nations. significantly

exceed their own resources of organic fuel. which forces then to in-

port oil, natural gas and coal. Por example, in I970 France imported
nearly 67 percent of the energy that it needed: by I977 inports in-

creased to 76 percent. (ll6)

And lastly, a relatively small nunber of the world's nations are rich
in organic fuel. The best example of this are the nations of the Per-
sian Gulf.

in and of itself the unevenness of the distribution of energy resources
night not create any problens if the locations of consumption were not
far fron the places where the fuel is extracted. In reality
things stand quite differently: the places where the fuel is consul-
ed are nost often far away from where the fuel is extracted. For this
reason organic fuel in these cases nust be transported to distances
ranging fron a few hundred to several thousand kilometers. The dis-
tance involved in transporting organic fuel affects its cost and con-
suner in different ways. The transport of oil and coal by sea is re-
latively inexpensive and the need to move it several thousand kilome-
ters does not significantly increase its cost to the consuner when
compared with the outlays for its extraction. 0n the other hand. the
transport of natural gas and the shipping of coal by railroad is re-
latively expensive. A distance of several hundreds of kilo-eters is

a serious econonic barrier to transporting both coal and natural gas.
The transnission of electric power over great distances is also ra-
ther expensive, therefore both natural gas and coal that are located
far from the seacoaat. nust be viewed as regional energy resources.
This in turn worsens the problem of supplying energy to those nations
and regions of the world which do not have adequate supplies of ener-
gy of their own.

Finally the key circunstance is the very fact of the dependence of
the inporters of organic fuel upon the conditions of import. The ea-
calation of prices for oil in recent years has rather convincingly
demonstrated the undesirable prospect of such dependence for the eco-
nony of the inporting nations. in this nanner, in spite of the enor-
nous world supplies of organic fuel, there are very sound reasons for
coming up with other strategies for developing the power industry.
which are based not on organic fuel but on other power resources.
This can be the energy that is obtained by splitting the heavy nuclei
of uranius. plutoniun or thoriun (nuclear energy). solar energy and
synthetic thermonuclear energy.

Of course. in any strategies that are being thought out, the switch
in energy resources cannot be instantaneous. This is a long process.
which nay last for nany decades. The nations of the world will ac-
conplish this in various ways. In all likelihood, both the rates of
this shift and the composition of the technical means used for adop-

tion will vary.

6
m orncuu. use ONLY
In discussing strategies for switching the power industry fron organic
fuel to another resource base. we nust not forget that organic fuel
has not conpletely exhausted all of its options. First. nany areas

of the world have not been adequately surveyed for sources of fuel.

It is likely that large deposits of oil. natural gas, and coal will

be found. This is what happened recently in lexico. Secondly, re-
gional organic resources can be nada into products that can nore easi-
ly be transported. For exanple. natural gas can be converted into
annonia or nethanol and coal into synthetic oil. And lastly, it is
possible to use nonconventional (i.e., not ordinarily used) organic
resources in the power industry. This includes, for exanple. oil

that has been separated fron bituninous sands and ahalea. Tertiary
nethods of extracting organic fuel can be used; this can increase
their extraction fron the earth. Nearly all of these and other ad-
ditional possibilities for "extending the life" of organic fuel are
not presently being pursued. In addition. the largest deposits of in-
expensive organic fuel are being discovered infrequently; it appears
that there is a linited nunber of then on the earth. The production
of synthetic oil, gas and coal, just as the essinilation of noncon-
ventional organic fuels. is still relatively expensive. For this rea-
son these additional resources of organic fuel cannot weaken our in-
terest in exenining the abovenentioned alternatives for the develop-
nent of the power industry of the future.

The l960's of the 20th century. when significant progress was achiev-
ed in the field of building nuclear reactors, can be seen as the be-

~ginning of the developnent of one of the noat realistic alternatives

- the nuclear power industry.

The question is whether or not nuclear power is capable of filling
the role of a practically unlinitad resource base for the power in-
dustry. And this is not an easy question. There are various points
of view on this latter.

The problen is that the technology for utilising the energy of fusion
in nuclear reactors is diasinilar. The use of tharnal neutrons in
nuclear reactions nakea it possible to use only I to I.S percent of
the natural uraniun - the basic natural fuel resource of the nuclear
power industry. The known supplies of inexpensive natural uraniun
in the world are not great. At present. according to data (39. 66)
(not counting the CBHA nations and the Korean Peoples' Republic)
there are about 6 to S nillion tons of uraniun. This is the equiva-
lent of $0 to 70 billion tons of conventional fuel when using this
anount of natural uraniun in thernal reactors. Such an anount of
energy. of course. is not enough for nuclear power to play a global
role in neeting the needs of aanhind for energy

There is, however. one other way to extract energy from uraniun. This
involves organizing the nuclear reaction using fast-neutrons. 'A fast-
neutron reactor, or sinply a fast reactor. can extract fron natural
uraniun 60 to 10 tines nore energy than can be obtained fron a thera-
al reactor. "hat is aore, due to the low value of the fuel load the

7
FOR OFFICIAL 083 03L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fast reactor expands the fuel base of the nuclear power industry. by
making it competitive with more costly resources of natural uranium.

In this manner the use of fast reactors in principle is already making
it possible to view the development of the nuclear power industry as

a way to switch from limited to unlimited sources of energy. There
are also several other additional possibilities for solving this task
within the framework of the nuclear power industry. This includes

the use of thorium. Lastly. the development of the nuclear power in-
dustry to a certain extent determines the prospects of developing

a synthetic thermonuclear power source.

These considerations explain why over a rather long period of time
the optimal strategy for the development of the power industry must
be based upon the use of various sources of primary power rather than
upon a single energy resource.

however. all of this is in the future. which underscores the impor-
tance of a systematic study of the future of the power industry, in-
cluding the nuclear power industry.

The science of the future - forecasting - has been developing inten-
sively in recent years. This development is supported not only by
the practical urgency that we noted above. but also by a lively in-
terest in the future per se.

The number of published works describing various aspects of the future
of the nuclear power industry is extremely large; but very few works

which discuss the nuclear power industry as an integral system. There
are even few works which describe the theory and nethods for forecast-
ing the development of the nuclear power industry. There has been no-
thing written in world literstute that deals with this subject.

The systematic approach is gradually finding its way into the method-
ology of forecasting.

Usually. when they speak of the use of the systematic approach, they
are thinking about the need to examine an object of forecasting as a
system. The methodology that is being developed in this manner for
forecasting is becoming a continuation of the science concerning a
given object. If it is a complex object, and the nuclear power in-
dustry is certainly a couple: object. the appropriate methodology of
forecasting becones complex.

The systenatic approach in forecasting. which is restricted by the
franework of just the object of forecasting. is inadequate. The pro-
blen is that if the object is complex. data for forecasting must be
gotten from experts. Such data are of a subjective nature. For this
reason the methodological exanination must include the subject of
forecasting and the forecasting process as the specific interconnec-
tion of the subject and object in addition to the subject alone.

IMV
The methodology that is appropriate to this interpretation of the
systematic approach is called systematic forecasting by the author.
This name underscores the difference between the forecasting of an
object as a system that is most often used. 0n the other hand. he
manages to avoid the very generalized designations such as ”systema-
tic approach" and "systematic analysis" in designating a more specific
methodology. which is developed below.

This book provides no specific forecasts or predictions. It does not
provide an answer to just how the nuclear power industry will develop
in this or that nation.

The book poses another task - to obtain an answer to the question of
how one must forecast the development of the nuclear power industry.
To answer this question means to create a tool for forecasting.

The examples provided in the book must be seen primarily as an illus-
tration of how the proposed tool for forecasting works. Several re-
sults were obtained through the use of mathematical models. The pro-
blem of the conformity of the exogenous (input) data of any real sys-
tem of nuclear power. which were obtained in the modeling procedure.
is not discussed. For this reason the use of modeling results in a
specific applied forecasting task exceeds the framework of the book.

The book is divided into three sections. The first section is devoted
to the thaoretical-methodological analysis of the stated task. The
first chapter examines the basic circuitry of the conception of sys-
tematic forecasting and provides a psychological analysis of forecast-
ing activity. The second chapter deals with the analysis of the basic
properties of the nuclear power industry as a system. This analysis
has made it possible to formulate the basic requirements for a method
of forecasting on the part of the object.

The second section of the book develops the key components of a fore-
casting method - the mathematical models of a developing nulclear po-
wer industry.

The drafting of two basic models is provided - ABS inuclear electric
power station7 systems (chapter 3) and fuel supply systems (chap;er 6).
Examples of ?.:i..z.. on models of A38 system are given in chapter 5.
Chapter 6 examines questions having to do with the evolution and equip-
ment for modeling an A88 system.

The somewhat unusual location of material (a review of known models -
chapter 6 - follows a description of the proposed model in chapter 3)
is explained primarily by a desire to introduce the reader using a
subsequent outline of an ABS system model as a whole. Following this
introduction the reader will find it easier to follow the progress in
analysing various approaches and methods of modeling.

Another reason for this was a desire to shed light on several recent
models. which are described in chapter 3. including that which was in-
fluenced by it.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third section of the book is devoted to the development of a me-
thod for considering the fundanental phenomenon. which which one has
to deal in forecasting - uncertainty.

Chapter 7 examines one narrower class of tasks - the selection of an
optimal strategy when faced with uncertainty in economic indicators of
the work of a system. In chapter 8 there is a description of a common
instance of an uncertain situation. Chapter 7 is illustrated with an
example of using a model to make estimates.

Of course, the list of nethodological questions, which arise during
forecasting. is considerably more extensively examined in the book.
The author did not examine such important questions as the sethods of
forecasting the indicators of technical means; he restricts hisself
to just an examination of systematic tasks.

Everything that is dictated directly by the properties of some speci-
fic system of the nuclear power industry due to the common methodolo-
gical trend. also. of course. is not covered in the book.

The book contains basically original developments of the author. which
he devised personally, under his guidance or in which he participated;
several of the materials in the book were published in journals pre-

viously by the author.

The author is deeply indebted to A. D. Virtser, with whom the author
developed mathematical models of an ABS system and a fuel supply sys-
tem and also methods for optimizing in conditions of uncertainty. The
author sincerely thanks 0. B. Bogoyavlensksya, to whom the author is
largely indebted for the interpretation of the psychological problems
of forecasting. V. L. Lokshin for cooperation in developing a fuel
supply system and Yu. S. Leaner for all the work in developing the

computer programs.

The author is very grateful to the responsible editor. Academician M.
A. Styrikovich. for his considerable assistance in the-preparation of

the book.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword aeeeeoseeesseneseeeeeeseoeeso0.0.000oesoowseeeasesosese

In‘foduc‘ion sosesseaassess-osssseseseeeeseesseseeeeeaeessesssse

«or

Section I: A Methodological Analysis of the Task of Forecasting
in the Nucle.r Po'er Indu.try oeeseeeeseeeeeseeesese '3

Chapter I
Theoretical-methodological bases of forecasting ................ l6
|.I Regarding the structure of the science of forecasting ..... lb
1.2 Forecasting as the interaction between the subject and ob-

j‘lct 000.000..0.00.0.00.00.00.00...00.000.09.000.COOOOCOIOC l9
l.3 The basic properties of the process of developing an object 2|
l.4 The forecasting process and its psychological aspects ..... 28

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2
The nuclear power industry as a system during forecasting .....
2.I Structure of the task of forecasting in the nuclear power

induﬂtfy eseeeeeeeeaeeaeeeeeeseeeeaeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeaeee

2.2 The structure of the system ..............................

Section 11. Mathematical Models of a Developing Nuclear Power

Indu.try oeeaeeesseeaseeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeaeaeeeee

Chapter 3
Development of a mathematical model of a fuel suppy system ....
3.! Modeling diagram of a fuel supply system .................
3.2 Various ways of imitating the use of an ABS in an electric
90"! .y.ten IDDOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOIODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOCI.0
3.3 Consideration of the dynamics of the use of an ABS in an
electric power .y'te' OOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOCOCOO
Fuel balances in a system ................................
Economic indicators of the work of a fuel supply system ..
Composition of a mathematical model for researching the
alternatives in developing an ABS system .................
3.7 Imitating in a model the subsequent development of new
technical means ..........................................

hbh’w
O O O
°\UI&

Chapter 6

The evolution of ideas and equipment in the mathematical model-

ing of fuel supply system for the nuclear power industry ......

6.| Methods of imitating the maximum economy of natural urani-
um in fuel supply system models ..........................

6.2 Methods of modeling imitation of the development in accor-
dance with the criterion of minimal cash outlays .........

Chapter 5

An example of the research of various alternatives in the de-
velopment of an ABS system using a mathematical model .........
5.! Accepted conditions for development ......................
Se: “n.1y.i. of re.ult. Obtllned seeaeeeeeeeseeseeeeasesseeeee

Chapter 6

Development of a model of a fuel supply system for the nuclear
power industry ................................................
6.I Allocation and analysis of basic factors for consideration

in a .0691 eeeeseeeasemeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeaeaeesesseeeaeeees

6.2 Modeling diagram of a fuel supply system .................
6.3 Description of the processes for refining fuel in a fuel
supply system ............................................
6.6 Criteria of efficiency of the development of a fuel supply
lyltelll esseeoseeeaasseeeeeseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseseeeesese
6.5 The method of seeking optimal structures for a fuel supply
sy'te. 0000..O0.000IDOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCIOOOOOD'OOOOOI
6.6 The role of the developed model among other models for the

forecasting of a fuel supply system ......................

11
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

66
66
68
S6
56
57
62
73
79
87
I02

I03

I08
IIO

126

I33
I33
I35

I68

I69
I50

I56
I59
I6I
I66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section III. The Forecasting and Selection of an Optimal Strat-
egy for the Developnent of the Nuclear Power Indua-
try in Conditiona of Uncerteinty ................. I69

Chapter 7
Considering uncertainty in economic indicatora ................. I76
7.I Method of aelecting an optimal atrategy for develop-en:

when there ia uncertainty in the econonic indicatora ...... 178
7.2 Example of eatinating using a nodel ....................... I98

Chapter 8
Conaidering the uncertainty of future conditiona of developnent
in e generalized instance ...................................... 216

ConclIJOion eeeooeeeaeaoooeeaaeeaaaaeeaeeaaaeeaeeeaaeaeaeaeeaaaaa 229

ReerCI'ICG. aeeeeeeeeeeeeooeeoaeoaeeeoaaaaeoaeoeoeoooeoeoooooeooe 23'

COPYRICRT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". I980

8927
C80: I822/18

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN 621.187.12:628.16:658.3-05
NE" SN! DBSCRIBBS OPERATION MID MAINTENANCE OF um-mmr FACILITIES

Moscow OPERA“ VODOPODGOTOVKI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Feb 81) pp 1-5.
301-304

[Annotetion. foreword end table of contents fron book "Heter Treetnent Operetor".
by Sensn Morkovich Gurvich end Yuriy Hekeinovich Kostrikin, Izdstel'stvo
"Energoizdet". 30.000 copies. 304 pages]

[Text] This book presents the sun totel of informtion needed by duty personnel

of voter-treetsent fecilities st electric-power ststions end et industriel end
centrel-heeting boiler plants. It describes the properties of weter end the sethods
for processing it in weter-treetnsnt fscilitiss. The book describes in deteil

those operations which the duty personnel csrry out in conducting snelyses end in
controlling the wetsr-trestnent equipmt. The first edition of the book use pd:-
lished in 1976. The second edition wes revised bessd on the reeders' wishes.

This book is e precticel eid for leborstory workers end shift personnel st power
stations end boiler plents. so well es for heat engineers, nechenice, etc.

Foreword

The necessity for publishing the first edition of the book Winter Treetnent Oper-
ator" was eotivstsd by the feet thet. in the first plece, dowestic literetnre on
inter treeteent hed not touched upon questions concerning the ectivity of the on-
duty operstionel personnel in weter-treetnnt instslletions st electric~power ste-
tions end in the power-production industry: in the second plsce. the duty steff

in wetsr-treetsent instellstions st electric-power stetions is besicelly coqrissd
of persons who hove obtsined the bulk of their educetion in high school end who
hove sons vocetionsl end tecl'nicel treining. This does not provide thee with the
entire sun of knowledge that these personnel need; thirdly. e sizesble contingent
of persons opereting wetsr-treetnent instelletions in industriel boiler plants
frequently do not heve speciel training in weter teclnology. Very often the
operation of such instelletions st slell industriel enterprises is eccoqlished
by sschinists, stokers. etc.. doing double-duty.

Hhils writing the unuscript for the first edition of ”Heter Treetnent Operator,"
the euthors begnn with the following consideretions.

1. It use neceesery to give the book's renders e brief but sufficiently comlete
ides shout the nodern stste of wster-treetnent technology here end sbroed. Addi-

13
”WNW!”
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

tionally. taking into coneideratim the baaic contingent of thie booh'e readere.
it was neceeeary to keep the book's atyle ee underetandable aa poaaible. which.
noreover. would facilitate ita utilization by individuala in other profeaaiona
(heat engineere. nechanica. etc.) for general familiarization with the beeice of
weter~treatnent .

3. In addition to fulfilling the current dutiea entruated to hin by prevailing
inetructione, the water-treatmt operator auet. on the beeie of daily obearvation
and a atudy of the equip-ent'e operation and the technological proceaeea occurring
within it. have the poaaibility of introducing innovative auggeationa with regard
to uproving the operational efficiency of the equipmt and the installation on
the whole. Theae auggeationa contribute to the conaervation of reagente and water
expended for internal water-treatment facility neede and to a reduction in the
coat of the proceaeed water. Therefore, thie book devotee particular attention

to an exanination of the eaeence of the phyaicochenicel proceeaee taking place

in the weter-treatnent inatallation'e equipment. This ahould aaeiat the operational
personnel in their work in improving the effectiveneee and the efficiency of the
equipaent they aervice.

To what degree the content of the firat edition of "ﬁtter ‘l‘reatnent Operator" in-
eured the aatiafactory fulfilleent of the above-atated coneideratione one can judge
by the poeitive reaponaea froa individual readera (ea well an fro. eeveral diatrict
power-oration chenical eervicea) which the publieher and the authore have receiwd.
Moreover. regerdleee of theae reeponaee. one nuat adnit that the first edition

of the popular handbook for operational peraonnel at water-treatment fecilitiee
neede further inprovenent. The book required conaiderahle reviaion and additione,
aince water-treatment tecInology in the large and enall-acale power induetriea

had advanced aignificantly in the period eince the publication of the firet edition.
One nuat also take into consideration the appearance each year of new pereonnel
who require such a handbook. Thue, all the atated coneiderationa preeent a con-
vincing caae for the expediency of republiahing "Hater l‘reatnent Operator."

The noet eubetantial major changea and additiona introduced into the eecond edition
of thin book can be reduced to the following.

New. efficient production proceaaea for water treat-eat and new equipmt which

have appeared in recent years are exanined. Special water-treataent cmditione

and water reginee for etean generatora at atonic electric-power atationa are covered.
The etatue of queetiona regarding the application of the eo-celled oxygen regine

for boilera ie exanined. Detailed queationa concerning the nechaniration of water-
treatnant facilitiea and the value of continoua water-treatnent production proceeeea
are atated. An analyeie ia given of the application of the prevailing drinking
and boiler-water standards by operations personnel at electric-pour stations.

In addition to general questions and the technology involved in disposing of elec-
tric-poser station discharges. the book examines nathods of switching to closed
systans operating with full utilisation of all or at least sost of the vastes.

Certain chapters concerning the scope of operational physicochuical control over
water and stean and touching upon infor-tion relating to basic nathods of quantita-
tive analysis and upon the operations executed in conducting this analysis have
been revised and abridged.

The authors ask that all consume and suggestions regarding the second edition
he sent to: 113116. Moscow. 11-116. Shlyuaovaya naherealnaya. 10. Energoiadat.

Contents Page

Poreuord.......................3
Chapter 1. Bases for the Physicochenical Characteristics of Hater and

Aqueous Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.1. Sons information from physics and chsnistry. . . . . . . . . 6
1.2. Structure of nolecules. . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.3. Aqueous solutions; electrolytes; dissociation . . . . . . . . 26
1.6. hasuring the concentration of solutions. . . . . . . . . . 28
Chapter 2. Electric-Power Stations . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.1. Classification of electric-poser stations . . . . 32
2.2. Pure condensing electric-power stations (K33) and their basic
equip-mt . . . . . 35
2.3. lleat-and-electric generating plants (1'38) providing electric power.
heat and steals. . . . . 60

2.6. lleat-and-electric generating plants providing electric power, heat
and drinking water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
2.5. Atonic power stations (ABS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

Chapter3. Haterinlndustry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
3.1. Hater utilizationinindustry . . . . . . . . . . 68

3.2. Hater utilization in hest-and-pover engineering . . . . . . . 51
Chapter 6. Hater Purification. . . . . . 53
6.1. Coarse-dispersion and colloidal impurities in natural waters . . . 53
6.2. Hater treatnent with coagulating agents . . . . . . . . . . 55
6.3. lsproving the efficiency of water purification. . . . . . . . 59
6.6. Purification apparatus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
‘05. a“: filtr.t1m. O 0 O O C O D I I 0 O O D O O O O 6‘
Chapter 5. Hater Softening. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5.1. Heaning of water hardness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5.2. Methods of precipitation . . . . . . 76
5.3. Apparatus for softening water by the precipitation nethod . . . . 77
50‘. Lm‘ of “ter 0 O I O O O 0 d I I O I O O O m
5.5. Hater softening by cationiaation . . . . . . . . . . . . 81

soaoimlliuumv
Chapter 6. "star Desalinization. . . . . . .

O

O

O

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.1. methods of water desslinization. . . . .

a e e

s s e s
e

e e s e

s e s s

6.2. Ion-exchange Hater desslinisation . . . .
6.3. Filters for ion-exchange water desalinization .
6.10. Ion-exchange water desalinieation installations and their opera-
tional characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5. Theml Hater desalinieation. . . . . . . . . . .
6.6. Electrodialysia method of water desalinisation. . . . . . . .
hapter 7. Hater Deaeretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.1. General aspects . . . . . . . . . .
7.2. Thermal methods of eliminating dissolved oxygen . . . . . . .
7.3. Chemical methods of eliminating dissolved oxygen . . . . . . .
hapter 8. Hechanization and Automation of Hater-Treatment Installations .
8.1. General aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.2. Hechanization and automation of reagent-storage facilities. . . .
8.3. Automation of filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.4. Continuous-operation ionite filters . . . . . . . . . . .
hapter 9. Boiler Hater Regine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.1. General aspects . . . . . . .
9.2. Distribution of feed-aster impurities in direct-flout boilers . . .
9.3. Distribution of feed-water impurities in barrel-type boilers . . .
9.4. Scale-forntion processes in boilers . . . . . . . . . . .
9.5. Steam-quality requirenents . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 10. lleat-and-Blectric Power Station Haste Hater and Techniques for

ItsDegreasing..... .. .........
10.1. General characteristics of heat-and-electric power station wastes
10.2. Harm water. . . . . . . .
10.3. Hydraulic ash-removal water . .
10.4. Hashing water. . . . . . .

10.5. Oil-fouled “t0! 6 s s s e s s e s
10.6. Chemical-purification water . . . .
10.7. Treated solutions tron vashwif and corrosion-proofing of {thermal-

powerequipment............

e e e e

eases
sees
oseeeoe

O 0

Chapter 11. Operations Carried Out During Control of Rater-Chemical Regimes

and the Operation of Hater-Treatment Equipment. .
11.1. Selecting tests for analysis. .
11.2. weighted method . . . . .
11.3. Volumetric method . . . .
11.4. Calorimetric method. . . .
11.5. Plane-photometric method . .
11.6. Technique of certain operations.

6 e

eoesse
sesseo
ooseee
moose.
see-see
assess
oeoooss
sees-e.
assess
sesosss
esssess
eooeeso

Chapter 12. Methods for Determining Basic Hater-Quality Indicators During

Operational Control of Heter-‘l‘reatnent and the Hater-Chemical Regime . .
12.1. 8‘.“ mfomtim I O O O O O O 0 O 0 O 0 O O I I 0
12.2. State of dissolved substances . . . . . . . . . . . . .

summon“

112
112
113
115

117
121
126

125
125
130
134

137
137
160
1“
151

153
153

158
166

171
176

179
179
181
185
189
191
193

195
198
198
201
205

218

'219

230
230
233
12.3. Scope of operational chanical control of atean and water . . . . 239
12.8. Dateraininz water hatches. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242
12.5. Deternining water alkalinity. . . . . . . . . . . 253
12.6. Daurnining hydrogen-ion emcentration in vatar . . . . . . . 257
12.7. Deter-inns carbon dioxide concmtration in water. . . . . . . 259
12.8. Deter-min: phosphate concentration in water . . . . . . . . 271
12.9. botanining iron concentration in water . . . . . . . . . . 282
12.10. Detarnining silica concentration in water . . . . . . . . . 288
Mmdic.‘ O O 0 O I O I 8 O O O O 0 O I 0 O I O O O O 292

mum: Iadatal'atvo ”hergoiadat", 1981

9512
(:80: 1822/26

“WIKIHIJIIMY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POHBR

HAYS 0P IMPROVING FUEL CONSHHPTTON AT POHER HACBTIBBUILDIIG PLANTS
Hoecow PROHYSHLBNNAYA BNBRGBTIKA in Rueeien lo 9,8ep 8| pp Z-b

Lirticle by Yu. A. Yefimov, deputy minieter of power nechinebuilding.
end A. A. Berebeekin, chief of the Idminietretion of the chief neche-
nic end chief power engineer of the 088R ninietry of Power Hechine-
building: “Heye of Increeeing the Efficiency of the Bee of Puel end
Power Reeourcee et Bnterprieee of the USSR Hinietry of Power nechine-
building in the Ilth Five-Yeer rung“!

ifex£7 1n the IOth Pive-Yeer Plen 62.000 tone of conventionel fuel.
neerly 200 million kilowett-houre of electricity end 325.000 Gcel of
thermel energy were coneerved et enterprieee of the USSR Hinietry of
Power Hechinebuilding. Thie wee done by reducing the reletiwe norme
for the expenditure of fuel end energy reeourcee (133) for the pro-
duction of beeic product. theee eevinge were eccompliehed through
orgenieetionel-technicel meeeuree taken by the enterprieee. Theee
meeeuree included: the modernieetion end replecenent of outdeted
equipment, the eliminetion of emell heeting boilere, the ewitching of
boildere to the combuetion of neturel gee end fuel oil. the edoption
of opereting echedulee for boilere, heeting furnecee end thermel fur-
necee, the cerrying out of thetmotechnicel end electrotechnicel teete
of equipment that coneunee lerge emount of energy. All of theee nee-
euree were teken to eeteblieh the optimel expendituree of PEP end
others.

A greet deel of ettention hee been devoted to the uee of eecondery
power reeourcee. Their uee increeeed by 22 percent during the five-
year plan, enounting to 396,000 Gcel in I980. or 8.3 percent of the
ennuel cameunption of thermel energy for production neede-

Por the yeere I98l-l985 the ninietry ie to reduce fuel expenditure
norne by 6.5 percent, electric power by I2 percent. end thermel ener-
gy by 7 percent. The ninietry end enterprieee heve prepered orgeniee-
tionel-technicel neeeuree eined et fulfilling their eeeignnente for

coneerving run.

In the llth Piwe-Yeer Plen work will be continued in improving the
exieting end introducing new, leee power-coneuning technologicel pro-
ceeeee (et preeent neerly 60 percent of the normative fuel coneump-
tion, 70 percent of the electric power end 20 percent of thermel

18
energy are expended for technological needs). the further development

of comprehensive mechanization and automation of production processes.
the adoption in the milling production work of technological processes
which provide a significant improvement in the quality and an increase
in the precision of sizes of the billets that are obtained.

In the mechanical processing work, where 35 percent of all electric
power is consumed. there is an anticipated 2-fold increase in the pro-
ductivity of all kinds of machine tools (lathes, milling tools, drills
and boring tools, polishing tools. and others) and s 2.5- to 3-fold
reduction in the labor intensiveness of mechanical processing. These
indicators will be achieved through an improvement in the structure

of the metal cutting machine tool park and the designs of machine tools.
increasing the precision of obtaining billets (forged pieces. ate-pings.
and castings). and the intensification of cutting nodes.

Hithin the structure of the metal cutting machine tool park there will
be a I5 to 16 percent increase in the number of high-productive spe-
cialized equipment. This will be done chiefly by increasing the num-
ber of computer numerically controlled (CNC) machine tools, including
the machine tools of the "processing center" type. the use of which
will lead to a I.S to 5-fold increase in labor productivity. The end
result of optimizing the cutting modes will be a reduction in the ex-
penditure of electric power per product unit.

In forging production work the existing processes will be improved
and new technological processes for forming, aimed primarily at reduc-
ing the manufacturing cycle of a form and casting, will be developed.

Molding and core blends and coatings will be standardized. It is pro-
posed to provide the small-series and individual production using four
to sir varieties of blends and one to two varieties of paints. By the
end of the five-year plan nearly 80 percent of castings will be pro-
duced using new quick-setting blends, which will make it possible to
save the fuel that is expended in drying furnaces to dry the sandy-
argillaceous blends commonly used now (the amount of fuel consumed in
the drying process accounts for 20 to 25 percent of the consumption
for the smelting of metal).

Improving the smelting processes includes replacing the cupola smelt-
ing of pig iron with electroinductive smelting, which will result in

a savings in the use of coke. In the open hearth production work a
substantial savings of fuel is expected as a result of replacing some
open hearth furnaces with electric arc furnaces (the Production Assoc-
iation "Ishorskiy Zavod" imeni A. A. Zhdanov is projected to carry out
such a replacement).

In the forge and press and thermal production facilities existing
equipment is to be modernized and new. highly productive equipment is
to be adopted. The technological processes of forging, stamping. ther-
mal processing in order to obtain precision in the billets obtained.
and the conserving of materials and energy resources are to be im-
proved. In addition it is.plsnned to adopt highly-productive forging

19
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

and press manipulator units, equipped with high-speed manipulators
with automated control of their work. Such machine units are being
created at the Production Association “Ixhorskiy saved” imeni A. A.
Zhdanov and at the Kramatorsk Plant "lnergomeshspetsstal'" Lspecial
steel for power machinehuildingY. The productivity of the forging in
the automated units is [.8 to .2-fold greater than in free forging.
The quality of the forged pieces is significantly higher. And there
are few margins in size, which results in a savings of metal and
electricity during the mechanical processing of the forged pieces.

In forge and press and thermal production work a large amount of fuel
is expended on heating the metal in the heating and thermal furnaces.
The basic trends in raising the efficiency of using fuel in these
furnaces are: improving the designs. equipping with recovery units
(using exhaust gases to heat the air entering the combustion chamber)
and automatic temperature control systems and systems for maintaining
the optimal correlation between gas and air. equipping with more ef-
ficient burners (for example. when using GTPS burners in place of TSP
burners there is an approximate 5 to 8 percent reduction in fuel ex—
penditure; such burners are used in several thereal furnaces at the
Production Association "Ishorskiy savod").

An effective method of reducing the relative expenditures of fuel in
thermal and heating furnaces is to reduce losses of heat through the
safety structures by using highly-efficient thermal insulating mater-
ials (in place of the traditionally used firebrick) for the lining of
furnaces. for example the fibriforg refractory slabs. which were de-
veloped by the VNIPIteploproyekt LAll-Union Scientific Research and
Designing Institute of Thermal Equipmen£7.

Tests of new designs of linings at the Production Association ”Ishor-
skiy savod" have shown that when using the fibriform slabs there is

a reduction in heat losses and fuel and electric power consumption

of IS to 20 percent. There is an 8 to 10-fold reduction in the weight
of the linings and a 2 to 3-fold reduction in labor expenditures for
constructing and repairing linings; the productivity of the furnaces
rises and there is s ID to IS percent reduction in the thermal proces-
sing cycle.

In accordance with the plan that the ministry devised in the llth
Five-Year Plan the modernisation of existing and the construction of
new thermal and heating furnaces using fibriform refractory materials
will be continued. This will provide an opportunity to significantly
reduce the expenditure of fuel and electric power during heating and
the thernal processing of manufactured articles (in the production as-
sociations "lxhorskiy sewod”, “Atommash”, “Khar'kov turbine plant"
imeni S. H. Kirov, and at the Kramatorsk Plant "Bnergomeshspetsstel'").

The enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Power Kechinebuilding have
their own power generating plants, industrial boilers. a TlTs. coe-
pressor, puep and oxygen facilities. These plants consume a signif-
icant amount of primary energy resources (the boiler facilities and

20
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
TITe. for ere-pie. coneune neerly 60 percent of the totel nornetive
expenditure of fuel end the conpreeeor fecilitiee coneune neerly I8
percent of the electricity expenditure). For thie reeeon e greet
deel of ettention will be devoted to the retionel uee of fuel end
energy et theee plente end to inproving their operation. The trende
for increasing the efficiency of the wee of TBR in the power generet-
ing converter end trenenieeion plente end the pipelinee elong with
_replecing outdeted equipment end networke with new onee include:
noderniretion end rebuilding in order to increeee efficiency end re-
liebility. reducing to e nininun the loeeee of the produced power
cerriere, end optiniring their uee.

The plenned nodernieetion of the enterprieee' boiler equipnent in-
cludee equipping the boilere with eutoneted conbuetion. eutoneted

gee enelyeere for nonitoring the quelity of conbuetion of fuel end
note inproved deeigne of econonieere end bleet heetere. replecing
burnere with new progreeeive deeigne end replecing the convection
heet eurfecee of the boilere with nenbrene eurfecee. Heer-reeietent
coetinge will be epplied to the heeting eurfecee of the pipee of
the boiler unite (thie includee gee-powder eeelting) in order to in-
creeee their eervice life. to cut repeir coete end to decreeee loeeee
of TBR. ceueed by eeergency ehutdowne of the boilere.

During the leet five-yeer plen in eewerel boiler fecilitiee the PTVh-
50 boilere were modernized: the noeelee were repleced. the heeting
eurfecee were rebuilt. edditionel two-light ecreene were inetelled.
end eutoneted burner devicee end gee enelyeere were inetelled. In
addition, opereting node neeeuree were undertehen. Ae e reeult the
productivity of the boilere wee increeeed hy I0 percent end efficien-
cy reeched 89 percent. siniler work will be done during the llth
Five-Year Plen.

A eubetentiel eevinge in electricity will be obteined through the
eodernieetion of the conpreeeor plente end the rebuilding oi the
eir pipee. The coepreeeor plente will be equipped with unite thet
regulete productivity end with devicee for drying end heeting con-
preeeed eir. The replecenent of the circuler velvee of the pieton
coepreeeore with direct-flow velvee will be continued. Thie will
neke it poeeible to reduce the loeeeevof conpreeeed eir end thie in
turn will reeult in e reduction in the erpenditure of electricity.
Replecing the nechine energieere of the conpreeeor enginee with
thyrietor convertere will eneure e reduction in the enpenditure of
electrkﬁty by one cubic eeter of conpreeeed eir.

An exteneive progren ie plenned in orgenieing end inproving the ec-
counting end nonitoring of the expenditure of TIR. The eccounting
end nonitoring ie to be done on en individuel ehop beeie. including
eechine unite thet coneune lerge eeount of energy. At eeverel of the
lerge enterprieee of the power nechinebuilding eector in the llth
rive-Yeer Plen it ie plenned to put into operetion eutoneted inforne-
tion-eeeeuring eyeteee for keeping treck of end monitoring electric
power.

21
’0! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The eutonetion of the regulation of the paraneters of the heat carri-
ers in the thermal networks is to provide considerable savings of ther-
nal energy. Toward this end the Ministry of Power Nachinebuilding

and the Ministry of the Electronics industry have jointly developed

s plan to cooperate in the production of electronic heating regula-
tors. Tests of an experimental nodel of s regulator, which was in-
stalled in 1980 in the adniniatrative building of the Production Ae-
sociation ”Nevakiy zavod" ineni V. I. Lenin demonstrated that when the
temperature of the feed water is suto-eticelly lowered at night in the
sector that is equipped with an autonatic regulator. the savings of
thermal energy anounts to 25 to 30 percent.

One of the trends in censerving thernsl energy at enterprises of the
power nachinebuilding sector is to reduce heat losses of buildings.
For these purposes the plans that are being drawn up call for re-
tional space-planning and design solutions: the sexinun obstruction
of industrial buildings. reducing the perineter of external wells and
the aaount of glass. inproving the insulation of the enclosing de-
signs of the buildings, and adopting nore rational heating systens.
Such neaaures are to be accomplished during the capital repair work
on existing industrial buildings.

In order to use the low-potential heat of the vented discharges at,
several enterprises of the power nachinebuilding sector they are Isn-
ufacturing experimental nodels of revolving regenerative heet ex-
changers.

Several organizational measures aimed at increasing the savings and
the efficient use of TBR are to be taken. Toward these goals at each
enterprise of the power nachinebuilding sector they have crested
pernsnent operating counissions. which are nade up of designers. pro-
duction engineers, netsllurgists. nsteriel-technicsl supply workers,
and representatives fron public organizations. as well as power engi-
neers. The job of these cosnissions is to: look for ways to conserve
fuel. thermal and electric power. to nonitor their expenditure. to
adopt seaaures for their conservation, and to undertake an extensive
education program among the collectives of the enterprises. These
tasks can be successfully solved only with the constant work in this
direction of the entire collective of each enterprise.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdst, "Pronyshlennaya energetiks". I98!

s

8927
C30: l822/28 END

22
you onrcui. us: om: