FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10349
23 FEBRUARY 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as {Text}
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosei in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1034

23 February

REST EUROPE REPORT
(FOUO 11/ 82)

CONTENTS

ECONCMIC

ITALY

Report by Experts on State of Economy
(Nicola Forti; IL MONK), 18 Dec 81)

POLITICAL
ITALY

Commentator Barbieri Analyzes PCI-CPSU Dispute
(Frame Barbieri; LA STAHPA, 26 Jan 82) ...................

MILI TARY

ITALY

Soldiers To Receive Increase in Pay
(ILHONm, 25 M81) 00.000.000.000...OIOOCOtOO'OOCOOOOOO

Disputes, Discontent in Armed Forces
(Stefano Silvestri; EUROPEO, 28 Dec 81) ..................

-a- [III-WE-ISO

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
REPORT BY EXPERTS 0N STATE OF ECONOMY
Milan [L MONDU in Italian 18 Doc 81 pp 31-44

[Article by Nicola Fortl, with contributlons from Rinnllu hocciarrlli
and Paola De hencdrtiij

[Tcxtl Summary

The government's economic game plan for 1982 centers on two objectives:
holding inflation below 16 percent and achieving 2 percent real growth
in the gross internal product. To achieve these two end goals, two
interim goals have been set: a SO-trillion-lire ceiling on total rc~
quirements of the expanded public sector and a 73-trillior-1ire ceil-
ing on total internal credit. What are we to make of this game plan?
All participants in the roundtable underscored the lack of up-to-datc
and complete background information, particularly on financial flows,
upgn which to base an analysis to assess the figures presented for

10‘ 2-

From the international point of view the picture looks fairly promis-
ing. The experts predict a degree of stability in raw materials and
energy sources. The increased prices on Italian imports should there-
for not exceed ll to 13 percent, barring unforeseen changes in the ex-
chnngc rate.

The credit squeeze, made more painful because it has lasted longer than
any in living memory, will have to continue if the government wants to
hold total internal credit below 73 trillion. But is the'financial
picture compatible with the hoped-for 2-percent real growth? So sus-
tained a rate of growth, by comparison with the other industrial coun-
tries, will, can keep from causing problems in the balance of payments
only if the goal of containing inflation is actually achieved.

Containment of the inflation rate will depend on agreement between
labor and industry. However, there are no incentives or penalties
cogent enough to motivate both parties to stay inside the stated goal.
Some of those at the meeting suggested an incomes policy and a price
policy with fiscal incentives and disincentives (TIP).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M)“ ("l-“1:“. lust. UNI.)

The credibility of a SO-trillion-lire requirement for the expanded
public Sector depends piimarily on the accuracy of revenue and expendi-
tnrr predictions. This fact gives rise to two hypotheses: 1. if the
lu-pnrcrnt goal is achieved,reVenues have been overestimated; 2. if,
on the other hand, inflation should increase at a higher rate than pre-
dicted, then expenditures will prove to have been underestimated, be-
ginning with expenditures on interest payments. Other problems may be
expected to arise from the Social Security (INPS) regulations and from
the Ccilluga placed on local government spending.

Public finanCe strategy for IHSZ tends to reduce the large public de—
ficit, aiming at containment of entitlement expenditures through abo-
lition of special funds. Among its positiVe aSpects, therefore, must
be reckoned the restrictions on discretionary spending by parliament
and the new rule that Cuts off carryover of appropriations at 3 years
fol10wing the initial budgeted disbursement. There were two critical
points made, however:

public finance strategy is devised for the short term; and

no slructural measures were adopted to cut down on waste and imprOVr
effirieney in public spending. Sevrral proposals were made for remedy-
in: lhiq situation. One would be to: a. improVr the structure of the
hudgvl, claSsifying items of expenditure according to function, so as
to enable citizens to examine the quality of expenditures in relation
to variations in the tax burden; b. give taxing powers to local ao-
va-rnmrnts and, perhaps later on. give them Control over hunltlu expon-
ditures and then revise the pension system.

Financing the deficit, given the ovrrall state of the money market,
will require new issues of BOTs. Will families and banks keep on soak-
ing up such an enoumous flood of securities? A lot will depend on the
overall economic picture and particularly on the continued habit of
family savings. In fact, with a slowing inflation rate, expectations
at those rates would turn around and the propensity to save should
rise, thrreby relieving the treasury of some of its problems. Should
that not happen, though, and in the event the economic policy goals
should not be reached, the problem or placing DOTS would become more
complicated. The danger of saturating family savings demand for "0T8
would he .wm-tml in part by a broader range of offerings, with greater
diversitieation in govrrnmrnt securities. Our propOsal whOsv soundness
was discussed was one for issuing treasury Certificates indexvd to
prices. should this he the road chosen, there would have to be some
modifications in the regulations to make it easier to place them.

*ﬁ‘l‘

Is the economic policy Giovanni Spadolini's rovernmcnt has come up with
credible? Will there really be some improvement in the public finance
books? und how will the treasury handle the deficit? According to

It MONDO's scientific panel, the government's plan does not aim at par-
ticularly ambitious goals: actually, 10 percent inflation and 2 per-
cent real growth are the absolute minimum needed for any genuine upturn
in 1983. And yet even these modest goals are by no means certain of
achieVement, for two fundamental reasons: the budget poliCy reveals a

ma orm’tu. usr. ONLY
number or incongruities and is based on what are not always realistic
assumptions; in the second place, there has been no change in the
built-in mechanisms that drive the vicious circle: non-productive ex-
penditures, public deficit, and massive BOT issues.

This cry of alarm takes on added dramatic impact in that it comes in
the report published here from some of the most prestigious of Italy's
economists, who every 0 months provide IL MONDO with a careful analy-
sis of the problems of greatest moment at that point. They are:

Mario buldassari, lecturer on political economy at Bologna, Lucio

lsso, professor of political economy at Rome, Mario Monti, lecturer

on monetary theory and policy at the Bocconi in Milan, Franco Reviglio,
professor of the science of finance at Turin University, Luigi Spaventa,
professor of political economy at Rome and an independent leftist dem-
ber of parliament, Angelo Tantazzi, professor of economics at Bologna
and secretary of the Prometeia research center. Dre Marcello De Cecco,
professor at the European Euniversity in Florence, and Innocenzo
Cipollctta, director of the Institute for the Study of Economic Trends
(ISCO), were not able to participate in the preparation of this report.

A Very Iffy Recovery

In 1982 those outside factors which contributed so heavily to the
heating up of inflation abroad over the past 2 years might work in
reverse. We foresee a generalized decline in interest rates, both in
the United States and in Germany: we foresee some advance for the mark
against the dollar, partly as a consequence of Germany's improved bal-
ance of puymOnLH and of the worsening in America's. The persistence

of depressed conditions in the industrial countries would prevent any
major increases in raw materials and energy prices. As a consequence,
according to widespread opinion, the rise in lira prices of Italian
imports should be contained, assuming there are no sudden drops in the
exchange rate, to within 11 to 13 percent. This would seem to indicate
a remarkable chance to reduce Italy's inflation rate, and the lb-percent
target might well look fairly modest. But, even admitting that the
target is not overly ambitious, will we manage to reach it? And can

we reach the other target of 2-pereent growth in the GIP?

in relation to these two end goals, the government has settwo interim
targets: a 50-trillion-lire ceiling on total requirements of the ex-
panded public sector and a cap of 73 trillion on the expansion of to-
tal internal credit (TIC). How are these interim targets to be reached?
The participants in the meeting have divided their analysis into three
parts:

I. The gnnvral outline of the government's proposal and the practical
uqrcvmvnt between the interim targets in public-sector requirements
and (he TIC and the end goals for inflation and growth.

2. Analysis of the moves on public revenues and expenditures, viewed
in the context of the budget and the 1982 finance bill.

1
FOR omciat use ONLY
I‘OR ()FHCIAI. Us: 0th

\

A. The problem of deficit coverage.
I. Economic Policy
a. Lack of adequate background data.

All participants underscored one point: the extreme uncertainty aris-
ing out of the lack of a complete and up-to-date body of background
data. The most serious gap is in data on financial flows: in the gov-
ernment's documents not only is there no forecast of financial flows
for 10b2, but the figures for 1981 are not even cited. On top of the
very grave delay in publication of financial data (as of June 1981), we
get distortions in the monthly statistics on bank loans, due to the fact
that the ceiling forces the banks to engage in some extraordinary acro-
batics in order to stay below it for the month-end audits. Similarly
the annual figure for total internal credit (73 trillion in 1982, al-
though we still do not have the estimate figures for 1981) is not very
meaningful: it is in fact calculated at the end of December, precisely
when the behavior of the banks is even more suspect by reason of their
efforts to inflate their deposits in View of their annual reports.
Hence any comparison between the two TIC figures for year's end is of
mnrcly relative value.

I). 'I iuhl amine Credit Squeeze and Growth Target s

An interim target of 73 trillion implies a generally restrictive finan-
cial situation, witness the drop in the ratio between the rise in TIC
and the rise in CI? in monetary terms (18 percent, according to the gov—
ernment). The effects of the restriction will be made more acute by

the predictable worsening of the financial straits of business and by
the decline in corporate capacity for self-financing as well as by a
curtailed access to risk capital and other financial instruments, such
as acceptances. In addition, the squeeze has proven extremely lengthy -
by comparison with any in the past (earlier experiences lasted 6 to 9
months, while the current phase has been with us for at leastl8 months).
Elsewhere, the absence of data on state transfers to corporations and

on the quantity of foreign loans the public sector can expect to get
makes it impossible to quantify the real availability of financing to
th private sector. It is difficult to judge the degree to which the
luhz financial picture is compatible w‘th the hoped-for real growth of

2 percent: it might he so only on condition that we get a visible
slowing of the inflation rate by comparison with the trends we have seen
this year. Some such reduction in the inflation rate, furthermore, is
also a prerequisite to make certain that 2-percent growth, higher than
any predicted in other industrial countries, does not trigger a third
consecutive year of very high deficits in the operating budget. Some
participants arc of the opinion that, even should inflation be held to
lo perCent, a 2—pereent growth rate would not be compatiblc with the
restraints imposed by foreign exchange. This proportion is based on
two points: the low grewth predictions prevailing in other countries,
most particularly in Germany; and the competitive position of Italian
products a lb-percent inflation rate might entail.

FOR OFFICII‘AL USE ONLY
c. Labor Costs and the 16$ target

Thv government has left it up to labor and management to hammer out an
agreement that will allow incomes and prices to rise by no more than

in percent in 1982. According to the participants, though, the govern-
ment's strategy as of now contains neither adequate incentives to motiv-
ate the parties to stay under the ceiling, nor adequate penalties for
these who may transcend it. The sole reference in this connection, in
the forecast and planning report, is cryptic: should labor and manage-
ment hamper the effort to stay beneath the ceiling, "the government re-
serves the right to use the investments and employment fund (2.5 tril-
lion lire available for 1932) in a compensatory direction." In the

real world, For any recovery maneuver there are far sharper instruments,
particularly financial tools, ready to hand. One assumption suggested
by some participants is that of a genuine tax-based incomes policy (TIP),
which means an incomes and price policy embodying tax incentives and
pvuuliivs. For example in 1982, the government might eliminate the tax
drag on workers' incomes, provided they rise no higher than the planned
rate of inflation: in terms of real income, the average tax load would
be the same as it has for 1931.

Other participants, though, fer] that any fiscal incuntive should be

granted only as part of a structural, rather than a temporary policy on
labor costs and prices. As for the cost-of-living index, it would thus
require substantial adjustment- to the mechanism, rather than freezing
it into the confines of a short—lived maneuver that will end with 1932.

.‘. Budget and Finance llill

11H: likelihood of reaching the interim target of a 50-trillion-lire re-
quirement for the public sector rests to a high degree on the reliabil—
ity of the liquidity level predictions for the national budget. All
our participants voiced strong reservations as to the reliability both
of revenur predictions and expenditure estimates.

In the fi.st placr, the underestimation of the national budget deficit
might stem from the circumstance that the revenue and spending fore-
.ast~ seem to be based on differing estimates of the trend in nominal
inromv. In short: if the inflation-rate containment target is achieVed,
while the nominal HlP rises to lb perCent, it is most unlikely that re-
Vunnus will inerease by as much as called for in the budget forecasts;
if. on the other hand, the inflation rate turns out to be higher than
nvavad and sought, there will be no overestimate of revenues, but
Lhurv may well he an underestimate of expenditures. As for revenues.
in Iaet, it is dilfieult to reconcile growth rates of 40.5 percent in
IKI'Inl‘ lrum income witheld at the source on earnings from regular em-
pluymvnt and of 15 percent from the value-added tax (lVA) with a call
for [3 percent growth in the HIP and with the aim of holding down wage
increases: with reference to that assumption, the figure of 3 trillion
underestimation, which has been mentioned several times, does not look
too far out of line. As for expenditures, should the inflation rate be
such as to justify the revenue forecasts, there should at least be some

5

FOR OFFK‘IM. USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

downward revision in the predicted level of interest payments, which
is posited on declining inflation and taxes.

In Ihv uvcuud pIJrv. it is hard to imagine lhv simultaneous fulfilment
of all lhrm- (zondil hum upon whi eh containment of ('lll'l‘l'lll. expenditure.“
largely depends.

a. State Budget Forecasts

1. there is no provision whatever for wage increases under collectivo
bargaining for government employees, even thougu their contracts are
due to run out in 1982.

2. 1herc is a 5.5 trillion ceiling clamped on Social Security (lNPS)
for advances from the treasury. In 1981, though, that ceiling was
caCurdcd by more than 3 trillion. how in the world is INPS going to
abide by that much tighter ceiling in 1952? As things stand now, 5.5
trillion lirr is considered adequate to finance requirements until
August or September, after which new sources of revenue will have to
be found: they can hardly be expected to come from increased contri-
butions.

3. Another condition laid down by the government is observance of the
cvinuun set for local uovernmentn (a lb-percont rise For the regions,
2.S trillion tor the communes) and for health spending. There is a
risk, though: setting ceilings without first adjusting the mechanisms
that govern spending entails creating hidden spending. A government
with a deficit will in fact be obliged to refrain from paying its sup-
pliers or to resort to bank loans, thus draining resources away from
the private sector; barring that, it will earmark part of its advance
funds for public works to finance its current expenditures. This trend
was already visible in 1981, which means that the 1982 budget may al-
tvady be compelled to deal with the submerged debts from the previous
your. The problem for hralth spending looks particularly serious, in
that there is a very gravo lack of hard data on it and there is no

way at present to maintain any effective control over expenditures by
local health agencies. Some estimates cite underassessments of S to

8 trillion lire for health expenditures. According to othet'observers,
however, there aren't any underestimates for health spending in the

I "5;: budget .

Widrxprvdd cnncvru at underestimates of expenditures might be partially
(hut only purlidlly) allayed by the finding that, for l982, there seem
to he predictions as to availability of appropriations a good deal
highrr than Hunt recorded in previous years. This finding has to do
mainly with expenditures called for in the finance bill. One might of
course reply that, as happened last year, the remainder balances from
last year might be considerably higher than expected. Once again, we
must point out that any analysis is thwarted by the total lack or the
d"plorah1e quality of available data.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It might also he noted that the high level of remainder balances
(available as of the end of 1951 and counted as the difference between
the total available for spending and the estimates on 1981's closing
figures) Justifies the moderate rise in entitlement spending for 1982,
in order to absorb the sharp rise in spending enacted in the past and
consequently to restore some balance to the budget forecasts.

b. Structural Effects of the Budget Strateg'

According to our experts, there are two observations called for with
respect to government spending strategy for 1982, and to some degree
they conflict. On the une hand, the strategy is designed to regain
control over the deficit after the sudden upsurge in the first half of
1081, due to the impact of the massive decisions on increased spending
and rutharks in revenues enacted in [979 and 1980. In 1981 the govern-
ment stepped in primarily on the current budget, drastically reducing
spending authorizations and leaving a heavy inherited burden of nega-
tivv remainder balances for 1952. Now the strategy for 1982 is aimed
primarily at holding down entitlement spending by rescinding all the
special funds in the finance bill, with the exception of monies for
the investments and employment fund and for renewal of fiscalization,
and through cutbacks to the 1982 level of all continuing expenditure
measures. This approach was generally approvod by the experts. partly
because it drastically curtails the opportunities for any more discre-
tionary spending moves on the part of parliament. Practically speaking,
then, there was an attempt to flatten out the big hump in the current
deficit brought about by the decisions of 1970 and [080, thus bring—
ing the growth trend in spending back into line with the 61?. If this
transition measure succeeds, the 1983 budget will not be subjected to
further pressurrs in the direction of bigger deficits.

Another sound innovation has to do with the rule that cuts off remain-
der carryovers after 3 years. Uncalled-for, though, for purposes of
mid-term planning, is article 42 in the finance bill, which cuts off the
option of committing the sum total of multi-year expenditures distri-
buted over several years. On the other hand, though, the government's
strategy is open to two criticisms. In the first place, it is confined
to the short-term outlook, as evidenced by the confused and contradic-
tory tax maneuver coming after the finance bill (see below). The se-
cond criticism has to do with the inconsistency of the decisions taken
to curtail waste and inefficiency in government sprndinu. You certainly
nannnt not the hndgrt back into proper shape by taking little snipe at
H lu‘ru' and (In-re: Llw problem is still that of adjusting the built-in
mechanisms that furl increases in spending.

Ono early proposal in this direction has to do with improving the quali—
tative presentation at public spending. The 1932 budget and finanCe
hills in fact continue to fall short of the intentions of PL 408, inso—
far as concerns the requirement for clarity and comprehensibility in
titling the items under which the figures are entered. The idea was to
come up with a budget structured on the basis of expenditures, in which
it would be quite clear how much is to be spent on health, how much on

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)" omum. l 8}: ON] \

education, how much on energy, and how much on research, so that every-
body could readily understand the government's books.

A second proposal has to do with measures needful to offset the mechan-
isms that underlie waste and inefficiency. In the first place, the
participants emphasized the need for returning taxing authority to lo—
cal governments, granting them the right to assess and collect real es-
tate taxes or, should that prove difficult to implement, to levy an
income tax within a range of percentages to be set on the national le-
Vel and pegged to the IRPEF, which would be simple to manage. In the
long run, the taxing autonomy road might be taken for other sectors as
well, beginning with health expenditures.

Another set of proposals has to do with the pension system: lowering
the index for those pensions with an elasticity factor greater than
unity, careful checking of the combined amount of the pension and other
income, and revision in the terms of disability pensions.

c. Oscillations in Tax Policy

According to all participants in the meeting, tax policy has been marked
of recent months by one-shot measures which have occasionally proved
Contradictory. The government has granted promises of fiscal relief

in the IRPHF and, on its own initiative, abolished the boost in IRPEF
proposed in the wake of the earthquake. immediately thereafter, it
found itself faced with unforeseen deficits (declared as such within
days of the introduction or the finance and budget bills): it there-
fore had to raise the gasoline tax and astring of stamp taxes, and in-
troduce a tax on acceptances. It then retained the surtaxe on the
IKPEU and ILOR, actually proposing to raise it from S to 8 percent.

At the samc time, it introduced a proposal to reassess corporate sour-
ces of income and at the same time exempted small artisan-scale busi-
ncs us from the ILOR. It extended to l9b2 (September 1982, by Senate
amendment) the tax cut on bonds and raiSed the tax on bank interest

to 2|.u percent. It introduced other increases on minor taxes and
aenln inm-vnm‘d Ilu- prepayment requirement for non-withnld (‘c‘ll'llillll‘ rm-
I‘l‘i'l. lly l-hnt puwmlnre: :I) H lost any and all pnlltiuul :«lvmlldllt'
-- and there was no small advantage to he gained -- from ice nut in

the lKPhF; b) it gavr rise to a situation of considerable confusion,
partly with reference to a revenue projection; c) it completely eut-
ted the promise of a fiscal truce. Meanwhile, there was not the least
initiative shown by the government to encourage passage of some very
important measures in the crackdown on tax evasion, such as the elimin-
ation of the prejudicial tax challenge,mandatory use of cash registers,
tax collection, and reform of the Revenue Offices.

The absence of any overall planbecomesparticularly evident when it
comes to the fiscal system regulating financial activities. The pro-
pOHuls of the commission set up to study the problem (uniform treat-
ment, with indexing dcsCending with the distance of the due-date) went
unheeded. while the fiscal measures adopted to cope with the emergency
huvv pushed the prospects for reform still further into the future.

M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. linancing the Deficit
H. Family and Bank Purchases of DOTS

One of the government's announced goals is to hold the internal require-
ments for the state-participation sector below 43 trillion lire, a sum
slightly below the 1981 level. However, bearing in mind the sharp in-
creasein the quantity of loans they plan to repay, and the very large
issues of government securities reaching maturity, we find that the
flow of payments the treasury will have to face will be extremely high.
To finance these disbursements, the treasury will have to rely increas-
ingly on its BOTs, in view of the slowdown in postal savings accumula-
tion and in sales of medium-term securities, and given the commitment,
in which the Bank of Italy has joined, to keep tight limits on the cor-
rency supply so as to keep inflationary expectations in hand. in this
context, the demand for 80Ts by families and banks becomes crucial.
Will it be enough to absorb the flood of BOT issues?

In the view of the participants in our meeting, a great deal depends on
reaching the goals the government has set, particularly those of hold-
ing down the deficit and the inflation rate. The fact is that, in a
secnario calling for public-sector requirements under control and of
declining inflationary expectations, one can predict some firmness or
even a slight rise in the readiness of families to hold financial se-
curities, and hence the possibility that the treasury will be able to
place its BOT issues in private portfolios, even at slightly lower
yields. As for the banks_ is it sound policy to earmark several short-
term DOT issues for them, as was done recently? The treasury's ration-
ale is that creating a double market for BOTH could get bankers back
into buying government paper, thus facilitating the placement of such

a gigantic mass of securities. At the same time, slight saver elasti-
city to “GT yields would facilitate the drop in rates of return on

h- and [2-month hills. On this score, though, there are two puzzling
questions. In the first place, the savers might well react negatively
to any prolonged decline in return. In the second place, the banks'
return on short-term BOTs makes it difficult to shift to less distort-

ing form." of monetary polity. l-or years, as Ult‘ (ill/0P0“ between the
treasury and the Bank of ltnly indicates, government has neen trying
Io sluckrn direct controls OVHF credit based on statutory Ceilings

on commitments, whirh ongondvr distortions and inefficiency, and to
movr Io indirect controls huscd on regulation of the monetary hose and
on bank rosvrves. This goal was also facilitated by the sharp drop in
MOT holdings in tho hanks' portfolios.

It the gayernmont's goals are not met with compliance. the whole prob-
lvm of nor placemenl will become far more complicated, whatever else
hnpprns. With a high deficit and persistent expectations of high infla-
tion. there might not be the expected increase in the propensity toward
thrift, after the drastic decline it has undergone in recent years,

and we might see a continuation of the trend toward shifting invest-
ment away from financial paper toward tangible holdings. Should this
happen, the treasury would have to raise BOT rates of return up again

9
FOR OFFN'IM. l'Sl’Z ONLY
FOR ()l-‘FN‘IM. IDS}? ()NI V

to ward off the danger of mass liquidation, spurred by persistent ru-
mOrs in banking circles about a possible government move to consoli -
date llO'l‘s .

0f retent months, even the spectre of future taxation on government
securities has been raised to discourage their purthasc by families,
carefully failing to point out that any tax could be levied only on new
issues, not on those already in circulation.

From the foregoing picture it seems quite clear that so high a public
deririt will require for its service not only a heavy interest burden
on the state cutters, but also the emergence of a set of increaSingly
prnhlemntical conditions: a high tendency to practice thrift on the
par! ol‘ families, penalties on alternative placements (l'rom houses in
sheltered investments, to bank deposits and investments abroad), rigid
adherence to credit ceilings, the continuance of a tax advantage for
government securities. In practiCe, a whole string of constraints is
mine. into place In force investors to finance that portion of the cur-
rent budget deficit which acts to make transfers to those same inVestors
who use them to buy the securities that will finance their own consump-
lion. To break the vicious circle there is only one thing to do: keep
the lid on public spending, which consists in large part of transfers
to corporations and families.

b. Broadening the Range of Government Securities

0f reCent years the shift in public preference from bank savingstowall
BOTs has gone on steadily, concentrating primarily on the shortest-
term BOTs. This tendency, even though it did make it possible to Ein-
anec the public debt without resorting to monetary means, raises two
kinds of problems. On the one hand, we have that of postponing matura-
tiun dates and containing the cost of the BOTs, so as to avoid succes-
siVn waves of redemptinns and new issues, which are directly affected
by the changing preferences of family investors and hunks. ()n the
other lies the risk ol‘ saturating the demand for 001's, particularly
:Imnnc Family investors -- who might well be interested in dim-rn‘li'yinl.r
their holdings ovur a broader range of government securities. One idea
worth careful consideration as a response to these two problems is to
issue treasury certificates pegged to the price index, as is being done
with increasing frequenCy in the United States and in Great Britain.
Opinion is anything but unanimous on the soundness and advisability of
this innovation: the governor of the Bank of Italy himself, Carlo
Avezin Cinmpi, has come out against it, stating that it would mean sur-
rendering to inflation, but at the same time citing a long list of the
distortions which, if you look at them closely, are partially attribut-
able to the absence of securities tied to any real index.

10
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY
r-b- ' Como V. In cough-Mun: (1)
lCmnmwmu-aumnnaﬁmw

(”mountavunnn

2'30? ‘040 ‘IN
2|!” 160‘ 4020
209“ CW 4094
2'370 ‘5" I”
In“ 0470 $035
2|!!!) 4.2.0 5200
20m 4.l05 52W

(8) Vuumpaw In! WNW.

4.0 7.9 -‘.3
— 0.9 - 4.0 — l I

-?.7 - —7.I
2.0 - 2.0

0.0 - 0.9
_l.2 - SJ
—l.0 — 3.2

—0_J — I00

 

Tuhlr 1 HOW THE ECONOMY 13 DOING

(Quartvrly indicators adjusted for scas
Quarterly averages

Gross Internal Product (GIP)

Imports

Exports

Gross fixed investments

Billions of lirc at 1070 prices

Percentage variations from previous ql

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ego-.7838 iglg.a§§§§§'. 9:5...1-ilg. gig
statisticiqb. sustain-q. ~S‘h..u.~...§.\ ~i.~c§~o~ulﬁosqag.loozs§ Lib .9 CE?! onto-Iiiotocast
a. uxghoﬁcgi

a. 533..
.8. 823!- .3320;

5.9%
a

Sail . 9. 3| .o.ulal<.iao§nou a:
250 I gin-0958
.33 3.9 . 30:. 92630.5...88»:
.2. . 3.2". . .. 1n ol bistiiscglgﬁ
8. «ul ow. o. I «2 8| 8 I 33.....88523
n3... . v: t. . m: n: h.§o:cclt§&:oi.!.ooim.u
Swan . . 3n .n . no. .u 35......

20 a: one o: . ncu an. E 3......- =5=8 I!» .0

I 8; I kagl

a~n 06:” - 8:" oBO-‘SAWIOOOBOISI

a; u 08 . 0.. n .5 ice I
.33. n3 .2 . .2 .1 9.2.3120
088. «3 on. .0. 3. Egg-03:5;
I .. 8. ~ .. In. 9636.. I
ﬁn a2.” 8.: «lung‘s 3198:»..l
nsu . Rx: I I...” 3.: I
l 8N— I 9.320: I
v.n~ «no 8. 58 n! . 03 o. . 350335 .(

I} 8 30:0 “
sin-69.5.! I 5-5 N
6.! 8

3883. o 295...: u
«8.6 5 was. "33:. 98th- 522238 2:. o . no 06... .3

 

0-0: 0:0.- Ouuﬂv 0:08
KEY: TABLE 2 IN THE STATE'S COFFERS

STATE BUDGET: ENTITLEMENT STATE SECTOR: FUND ESTIMATES
(budget & treasury)
1981 (balanced)
.___._________________________________________________________________
l. Billions
3. Percentage variation from previous year

A. Closing revenues
-- other revenues
-- fiscalized coats
-- EEC reserves (outstanding)
-- JRPEF redesign

A. . Actual revenues(1)
u. Current expenditures
—- fisculized costs
-- EEC reServes (outstanding)
-- IRPEF redesign
0. Actual current expenditures (1)
interest
C. Actual current expenditures, not (no interest)
U. Current deficit (A - B)
E. Current deficit, net (no interest)
F. Capital expenditures
0. Return on bank deposits
H. Overall requirement (A - B - F + G)

_________—______————-————-——-———

Gruss Internal Product

Stun-(tux:
Hulunerd IVHJ entitlement budget
I ”-‘2 Finsmm- m ll
Ina: Forecast and Planning Report

(I) not counting outstanding sums for fisculized costs and EEC reserves,
and after charging the 1982 cost stemming from the IRPEF reduction
now before parliament to lower tax revenues (in the official docu-
ments this cost is found in the grand total of current expenditures).

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLI-L 3. HOW MUCH CREDIT FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR?

 

State budget requirements (A) ...........................53,000
Treasury surplus (B) 0000.CotI...looooocoooeulooouooovoIt 1,000

Revenues from new taxes (C) ............................. 1,200

state sector requirements D = (A-B-C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .48,000
Requirements of agencies outside the state sector (3).... 2,000
Total requirements extended public sector F = (n+5). . . . . .50,000

Public sector resort to outside indebtedness,
consnlridut inns and funds transferred to the
lending institutions (6)..................................7,0()()

Internal requirements, extended publ ic. sector H (l-‘ - 6) 43,000

In! m-nul run-«lit. in tlw private sector....................30,000

-l.Ul-o|l ilIl-(‘I'Ha‘l (:I'L“1j‘r 000.coooaoo-ooocooooorooooooooo-ooo73,”0()

 

WW

Table .1. FINDING THE REQUIREMENT

 

Entitlement Funds Fund. ‘
estlmntes
Final budgeted expenditures 205, 790 205,093 197,600
Final budgeted revenues 142, 607 147,291 147,300
Stan: Budget Requirement 03,133 57,802 $0,000
(not to be financed) as follows:
-- Charm-ublv tn (.ln- budgc-l nmlm'
(‘nHLillllillL' Hl -|l.ul.(' 35, 500 33, 572 23,07"
-- (:hm-uuublv Lu provisions in _
LIN‘ I'inuncv [Dill 27,593 24,230 22,230
Repayment. of state loans 20.334 26, 34‘)
Maximum resort to money market 89,517 84,151

 

WW

“I
FHR ()FFI("A'. “SI". ONLY
Putting COLA increases for government

employees on a quarterly basis 950 1,500 1,300
Increasing family subsidies 900 2,400 2.400
Punsiun increases (in deficit) 1,215 1,250 1,300
Contract renewal increases for government
c-mployues 2,000 5, 500 5, 50"
Fiscal izutiun 01' 50c lnl program costs 1, 800 4,00 4, 500
jmrrvusml IRPl-IF withholding 1, 000 2,200 1,000
TOTAL 7,865 10, $50 10,600

__—_—_—__—_——_—————
W
COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981

6182
C80: 3106/86

IS
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

(DHMHNTATOR BARBIERI ANALYZES Fri-CPS" DISPUTE
PMOSlSOl Turin LA STAMPA in ltalian 26 Jan 82 pp 1-2
[Commentary by Frane Barbieri: "The Anathema and the Shield"]

[Text] i have witnessed Tito's excommunication in Belgrade, Mao's excommunication
In Moscow and now Berlinguer's exconnmnication in Italy. I identify the first
difference in the moods: in Yugoslavia Stalin's attack caused apprehension, people
were afraid of being crushed by the Soviet colossus; on the other hand, the break
with Beijing caused fears among the Muscovites, historically hagridden by the
"yellow peril"; in Italy now PRAVDA's anathema is being received almost with relief,
as if the PC! had finally freed itself from an intolerable handicap.

But there are even more substantial differences among the three excommunications.

It wan Stalin who leveled grave criticisms against Tito, and the excommunication
came when the Yugoslav leader refused to accept them. On the other hand Mao accused
Khrushchev first and then broke away on his own, without awaiting the anathema.
Berlinguer has also attacked first. prompted by the Soviet action in Poland,

without worrying about the consequences.

Neither the Comintern nor the Cominform, from which one could be expelled, now exists.
In this instance the excommunication can only be ideological. And if it has
occurred. it has occurred both ways: Berlinguer rejects Moscow as much as Moscow

is reierting Boriinguer.

In fact in the first two instances two states, rather than two parties, were
expelled from the so-called socialist world. They could be exposed to economic,
political and military pressures. subjected to subversion and even strangled with
forcc-—a11 of them means attempted by the USSR both against Yugoslavia and against
China. But the PCI, behind the disputed “NATO shield" (who knows how clear-sighted
Berlinguer was in mentioning it 5 years ago?) cannot be invaded or subjected to
state blockades; it can be opposed only within the framework of a democratic Western
dialectic in which it means are definitely better than those of Moscow's followers.

1hure In ulxn annthcr common feature in the three excommunications: Against Tito.
Stalln appealed to the "healthx forces" in the Yugoslav party. calling on them to
uverthrnw the lender"; against Mao. Moscow expressed the hope that he could be
forced to return to the correct Marxist-Leninist line; in the case of the PCI.

PRAVDA maintains that every italian Communist “cannot fall. of course, to be alarmed
by the course now taken by this party's leaders," and implicitly calls for restoring

to the PCI “the worthy place in the world front of peace and progress" to which
"the stance adopted by the PCI leaders does not contribute at all}

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In tackling thcne problema-—thnt is. in the revolt against the lendership—-pnrty
nrnheru. according to PRAVDA'a incitement. will have “their most certain support

in tlw "SSR. in the CPS". in the socialist community and in the international
anwumnlnt movement." “his implies that the PC! leadership has broken away from all
these mythlcni entitles. What effect this call for a revolt against Berlinguer
could have is not so important. These calls had no effect against Tito and against
Mao, except that of strengthening them. Also if a pro-Soviet mini-party emerged

in italy, this would further highlight the autonomy gained by the PCI, making its
line leas contradictory and ambiguous. In what direction the PCI, freed from the
«ore psychological than ideological and more ideological than organizational handi-
cupa.intends to point its own autonomy is far more important.

1hc PCi has no ambassadors in Moscow to recall; it has a political line to detach
from that of the USSR. it cannot be said that the conflict between Brezhnev and
Berlinguer simply extends the Titoist area in the workers movement. Tito, Mao and
Berlinguer have only autonomy in common. For the rest, the Yugoslav. Chinese

and Italian parties have rather diverse stances in the international framework and
different concepts concerning what socialist society should he like. However, they
havv liiunummni recognition or the fact ihnt dlfrerencen of conception of noclnllnm
do our prenuppuae the disqualification of one or the other. and even Jena do they
entini the supremacy of one over the other. In this sense Titoinm in not the urea-
tlou of a new area or of a new organized intercmnmuiist center: it is the denial

of nil international centers and organizations.

Al lhu ncrlin Pun-Cnmmunlut conference it was hoped (at least the Yugoslavn. the
ltnlinnn and the Spaniards believed) that the Comintern structures nnd ties had been
ended. The Kremlin's attack on the PCI demonstrates that these hopes were illusory.
There are three accusations leveled against Berlinguer, and all three are correct,
from Moscow's viewpoint: the PCI secretary general denies that the USSR is the
principal force of peace; he denies that the gains of real socialism have a signi-
ficance for the workers in the capitalist countries; he repudiates the great
revolutionary doctrine by declaring that Marxisurteninian is outdated.

The conflict lies in the fact that Beriinguer, in asserting all this. believes that
he is opening up new prospects and a new "way" to socialism, while Brezhnev deems
that Berlinguer is thereby breaking away from socialism. giving "direct aid to
imperialism" and "also dealing the PCI a blow."

Replying. hcrlinguer could only note that this is final proof that Moscow does not
accept n dialogue nmong the communist parties. Ne discover» nothing new: Moucnw
cannot accept a diacimslon which calls into question all the USSK'u pant and future
policy. with his critical naiiy concerning Poinnd nerlinguer had virtually opened
up an extreucly big issue: since nobody has yet reached the mythical socialism.

ll must be seen whether the road starting from the developed western societies or
that which pauses through the East bloc countries of so-celled real socialism is
shorrc r .

The Jnuwcr rcmniun to he seen. Hut ll la taken for granted that the roads divcrnv
and that not even the goal appears the name any longer. In many respects Euro-
communism has been born only today. And PRAVDA has paradoaically stood godfather
by excommunicating it.

COPYRIGHF: 1982 Edittice LA STAMPA S.D.A.

(:so: 3104/ 108

1
FOR OFFICIXI. "Si-1 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

MILITARY ITALY

SOLDIERS TO RECEIVE INCREASE IN PAY
Milan 1).. MONDO in italian 25 Dec 81 p 21

[Text] The money has come, and with it a slap in the face for those who did not get
any. It happened after the Council of Ministers approved the military's request for
an increase in pay. In an open letter, the chief of staff of the navy. Admiral
Angelo Mom-391, pointed with pride to the retroactive increase in pay that has been
granted to armed forces personnel at a time of economic crisis which has "caused the
freezing of action on similar requests put forward by other groups of government
employees".

In fact, for the armed forces the country's general difficulties and problems related
to containment of government expenditures were passed over. This increase granted

to remunerate military employees entails a burden for the Treasury amounting to
hundreds of billions of lire (according to some calculations between 600 and 600
billion). In practice. every master of the armed forces should pocket an additional
200,000-500,000 lire. In other words no account was taken of the l6-percent ceiling
placed by the government itself on any increase in pay in any sector.

How was this possible? As IL MONDO has been able to show, it was belio Lagorio,
minister of defense, who explained the news in a letter sent to Chief of Staff of the
Defense Department General Vittorio Santini. In his letter he reported with great
pleasure the approval of the measure by the Council of Ministers. "To finance the
law". said Lagorio, "it will not be necessary to use the military budget". Otherwise
there would have been a further increase in the 1982 military budget, which has al-
ready received a record increase: 35.2 percent with respect to the year that is
about to end.

Lugnrio made no secret to Santiai of the diffiuclties he had to overcome to obtain
approval for the provision granting extra remerstion to military personnel. "The
Council of Ministers", he wrote, "reached a unanimous decision. President Spadolini
exerted himself a great deal to overcome the last reservations of the Treasury De-
partment, and many ministers supported the proposal."

The Minister also revealed the fact that the decision of the Council of Ministers

was preceded by "action on the part of the undersecretary of defense to inform and
gain the understanding of many ministers". Furthermore, Chief of State Sandro Pertini
"made his opinion and his encouragement ’nown, and this was very valuable." ’lhe
President of the Senate, Anintore Panfani, also gave a "favorable opinion" which was
"extremely useful."

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ihus this chorus of agreement was able to overcome the need to keep down government
expenditures. But the increase in compensation to military personnel is bound to
leave a trail of serious discontent in its wake among other groups of government
employees. starting with civilian personnel in the Defense Department. The bonus
was granted only to military personnel, regardless of the type of duties they per—
form; thus it will go to persons performing administrative duties too. Civilians
whn do similar work. on the other hand. will not get anything. The 60,000 civilians
employed by the Delense Department will complain. So will all other state euployees
who. because of efforts to contain government expenditures, see their prospects for
better pay receding.

But there is more. Within the Defense Department there is bad feeling because it was
decided to grant an increase in pay instead of changing salaries. and according to
the {inst reactions. this decision smacks of patronage.

50 [hr government will have to respond to these points and to those which will be
raised by the Federation of Governmental Employees and by the Confederate Secretaries
of the CCIL. the CISL [International Confederation of Free Trade Unions] and the

UIL (Italian Union of Labor], who have asked for meetings for clarification. Clari-
fication will also have to be forthcoming from Parliament, which must pass on the
uwasute (to make it law) to provide this compensation to military personnel.

CU?YR[CHT: 1L MONDO 1981

953)
(Emu: 5106/70

1.“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY ITALY

DISPUTES, DISCONTENT IN ARMED FORCES

Milan EUROPEO in Italian 28 Dec 81 pp 13-15

[Article by Stefano Silvestri: "Ah, if I were not a soldier!" concludes in interview
with Baracetti, leading Communist deputy on the Defense Commission]

[Text] "We are Opposed to the slavery and colonialism which has arisen in our land,
in Friuli. making it impossible for us to be free people and free men. He ask this
quescion: Isn't it true that young people-Yes, young people not in uniform, eminent

Culuncls and generals--go around the streets smashing up our cars, spreading drugs
all over the place...". At this point the hall in the school for carabinieri officials

resounded with shouts: "Shut upl", 'Tou didn't talk like that during the earthquake:
the soldiers were useful then, and howl". Cornelia Puppinl. regional counselor of
Friuli-Vcnezia Giulia, unleashed another storm in the already taut relations between
the armed forces and the civilian population.

The fact is that Lelia Lagorio. minister of defense, decided to try an experiment:
improve relations between politicians at all levels and the armed forces. But the
experiment has led to more headaches than anything positive, and there are people

in the armed forces who are thinking with nostalgia about the good old days. And of
course among politicians there are those who have ended up looking back with nostalgia
on the DC's leadership of the Defense Department: not just that of Giulio Adreotti,
but even that of Attilio Ruffini, usually unanimously considered our most inconsistent
and weakest former Minister of Defense.

‘nm occasion on which Corenlia Puppinl was letting off steam was a conference on
military service, and in fact Friuli, together with Trentino and Veneto, contains

more than half of the territories used in Italy for military exercises and target
practice. But the conference did not convince other regions to take a larger share.
luv arnwd forces themsclves. on the other hand, sent their own mini-torpedo against
lhv ldva ur a redistribution of the armed forces from the northeast to the rear of

rho pennlnsuln: shortly before the conference they published a study by Col Cuultlorn
(brain! whlch contended that this typo of "regionalization" would coal about 1.500

hllliun llrc.

Equal and opposing resistance was apparent later at another conference organized in
the same building of the school in Via Aurelia in Rome: that of those newly elected
to the Coir [intermediate representation councils]--a1ternates of trade union repre-
sentatives. The statements of Corporal Renato Balduzzi and Underlieutenant Pio Bonomo

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
soou tOok on tones of J'accuse: "deaf and blind" orders, repression of liberal can-
didacies, bureaucratic impediments, obsolete structures, the food is bad, the sleeping
accomodations are worse, the pay is too low (not even the 13 monthl). etc.

At the end of the conference, Lsgorio said all this was a sign of political vitality,
but he must have realized that there is a lot of work to do before the newly elected
bodies can really function.

Here, too, the top of the military hierarchy counterattacked, denouncing the inade-
quacy of appropriations and obsolete structures: more than half of the country's
500 military barracks were built before the 1930's, and some were built in the 19th
century. Only 50 new barracks have been built since the war. These structures are
inadequate for controlling soldiers and even for giving them decent living quarters,
to say nothing of rehabilitating soldiers who take drugs--and drug addiction in the
armed forces has been increasing at an incredible rate (in 1980 there was an annual
increase of 200 percent).

All these signs were contained, in condensed form. in the harsh speech made by General
Vlttore Sautini. chief of staff of the Defense Department, at the CASD [Center for
Advanced lmfonse Studies] at the Salvinti Palace in Rome. How could Snntini make such
a speech without Lagorio Opposing it? Basically, because Santini's denunciations are
only the tip of an iceberg which simply must be dealt with now.

Giovanni Spadolini himself—-who severely rebuked the General, reaffirming the con-
tinuity and identity between civilian and military society--admits in private that
this problem of the armed forces has deep roots, difficult ones, which are therefore
cause for serious concern, even more so than one would be led to believe by the
Santini episode alone.

The fact is that Parliament always reacts with the same intolerance. Santini speaks
of a "widespread sense of frustration", of "persecution of the armed forces in certain
circles," and warns that the consequences of all of this "should not be underes-
timated." But Parliament thinks about a defense budget of 10.149 billion for 1982,

a billion more than in 1981. Can the armed forces possibly be blind to the financial

sarrlflce this budget represents?

5n L:Il',\ll'lu has to keep on mediating a sort of race between opposing fronts. And the.
Turin. although they do not prove Parliament wrong, indicate that the armed forces
are not to blame either. because despite spectacular increases in the military budget
in the last 2 years, Italy continues to devote less to defense than it did in the
1960's, and it has one of the lowest military budgets, percent-wise, in Europe.

in most divisions, our armed forces are less than 50 percent operationally efficient
because they lack the necessary means. The modernization plan which was supposed to

be completed by 1985 has been put off to 1990, and many people expect it to be post-
punad again. There are plenty of data about discontent among the men. The navy alone
loses about 200 technical officers of low rank per year, from electricians to
clectro-mechanics, drivers, radio telegraph operators, programmers, etc. Everyone

is aware of the exodus of pilots from the military air force (from 2600 in 1500 in

I) yours). less well known, but more serious, is the exodus of specialized personnel--
lazinly low ranking officers--from all three branches of the armed forces.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand. those skilled technicians get net salaries which, including every-
thing. go from less than 500,000 lire per month to about 750,000, when they have
acquired a certain seniority in service. And they certainly do not have the same
working hours as their civilian counterparts.

uriircro are better paid (but a colonel gets just a little more than a million lire.
and that at the peak of his career). And they have to relocate 15-20 times. moving,
house-hunting. searching for new friends. for new schools for their children. etc.

A colonel in the army was talking to us recently about his growing "proletarization"
due to the fact that the more often you move,theamre often you are pushed out into
the periphery because you can't pay for or find decent housing in the center of town.
The inevitable result of this is that there is no correlation between professional
ability, hierarchical position. and the actual "secisl role'I of officers.

Relations with the civilian authorities are traumatic; an example of this was the
Belice earthquake. Many members of the armed forces tersely refused to comment on
what they saw: the inefficiency. the bureaucratic slowness, the stupidity. the
corruption.

The members of the armed forces feel superior. in fact. Their schools are still
highly selective and competitive, unlike those for civilians. At the military academy
of Hodena. about 160-170 students are chosen out of 1.600 applicants; after two

years they then gain admission to the school of military applications.

Thus a schism is created between the civilian population and the armed forces. In
some countries of the third world (and even in Europe, in Poland), this greater
efficiency on the part of the members of the armed forces leads to coups d'etat. in
Italy. the members of the armed forces themselves are the first to be concerned. An
illuminating example is the analysis made by one of our Alpine officials, Army Chief
of Staff Col Carlo Jean, who talks about the military profession oscillating "between
restoration and trade union inclinations."

Jean states that what it boils down to is "a perception of a gap between theory and
practice. between professional ideals and the reality of professional behavior. 1he
former exalt ideal values; the latter subordinate these values to expediency and
encourage rareerism. pacifism. inertia. and bureaucratisation".

Two camps are born or this tension: that of the restorers and that of the trade
unionists. The former would like to restore the heroic image of the ideal warrior
and feel that they are "smothered" by the P2. by political deviations, by the sub-
gnvernment. They become easy prey to right-wing groups and coups d'etatism, and
exalt the separation of the military and the civilians sectors. The latter are
equally dangerous. however, because they view the armed forces as a large modern
firm and themselves as managers or skilled workers. and end up by losing the politi-
cal and institutional feeling of their mission; they quickly become the defenders of
a corporate sector which is open to all sorts of political and economic compromise.

Naturally these two camps are not so clearly distinct. General Santini's speech
contains echoes of the restoration cult, just as the speeches of his predecessor.
Admiral Giovanni Torrisi, had echoes of the trade union and efficiency cult. In both
cases these tones are moderated, fortunately, by many other factors. Lagprio himself
spoke of his ministry as a firm'hmich produces defense."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1hr minister seems to be trying to highlight a brand of professionalism which should
hr renumerated better, on the one hand (already more than half of the budget goes to
salaries. and allocations for infrastructures are being increased) and which should
be more solid and credible culturally. It is no accident that he would like to trans-
form the CASD into a real military institute for stragegic studies, raising our mili-
tary science at least to the level of that attained in the rest of Europe.

But he must reckon with years of bsckwardneas which have cause politicians to turn

a deaf ear to the armed forces (they are used to treating armed forces as a sub-
government) and to the degeneration of military personnel. As Col Jean quite rightly
points out. "you can't accomplish anything with embittered and frustrated personnel".

interview with Arnaldo Baracetti: “Call for New Citizen—soldier"

In Nontecitorio. both friends and adversaries call him "the Friulian tank: he is
Arnaldo Barncetti, 50 years old, leading Communist deputy on the Defense Commission.
ht gets up so early he enters the House every day by a side door because the main
door doesn't open until 8 am.

[Question] You in the PCI were the first to be alarmed by General Santini's speech.
And yet for a long time, even before Legorlo came to the Defense Department, you have
been receptive to the demands of the military. What 5 wrong now?

[Answer] Of course we were the first to be concerned. just as we were the most
pleased by the subsequent "clarification" given by the president of the Council.
Giovanni Spadolini, in his speech in Livorno. We were alarmed because Santini spoke
calmly of a ”southern front," as did Lagorio. although as far as I know this matter
has not been decided by the government or discussed by Parliament. All this just
means that the Americans are behind it, that they want to turn us into a guard dog
policing the Arab countries in the Mediterranean, since the Soviet threat cannot

be considered consistent in the present circumstances (well—known military experts
say so).

lQucstion] But we cannot forget the matter of the frustration of military personnel.

IAnswvrI ibis is another cause for great concern. Frustration. a feeling of being
shunted U"! to the sidelined. an identity crisis among military personnel...we know
llull llwsv phenomena exist. and we are work lug to 4:1 Iminntt' them. “or the way «ml

is not lhv nun indicated by Snntlni and lagorlo. There is a law on the new principles
of military discipline: that is the beginning of the end of the separation of the
arrwd forces and civilian society. But what has been done, or better left undone.

by the Ministry of Defense and the military hierarchy to create a new personality for

the citizen soldier?

Hurlicc it to note the Inct that in January the House must deal with serious limita—
tions on lhu applications of that law. But General Santini said nothing of this.

lQueStlon] With military budgets constantly growing, why all these complaints from
the top?

[Answer] ﬁve things should be said here. First: it is said that we are at the line
of the Piave as far as our economy goes, so don't people have the right to distrust

23
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IM. I58}: ONLY

the armed forces when they hear that they are spending more on weapons, and the
udlitary has tickets and other cuts in social expenses? Second: why aren't we

getting anywhere with these laws to improve the life of soldiers (housing. promotions.
the draft, etc.)?

lquullvu] 'nlc military hierarchy was also tainted by the P2 arrnlr, the nmrnl
lsrluu'” .

[Answer] 'nxere is undoubtedly a moral issue inVOIVed. it's not just a question of
saying "that's enoug." corruption; There is also a lack of consistency in our public
administration and in the armed forces in particular. Part of the hierarchy supports
moderate and conservative positions which serve other objectives, for example obtaining
the approval of the United States and Reagan. So we must urge the udlitary author-
ities not to listen to the various siren songs they hear. one after another, from the

top of the Ministry of Defense.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzuli Editure

‘lﬂ'l'i
(SH: lliM/l‘b l-ih‘lv

A:
III

FOR OFFICIAI “SF. ONI.\'