FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10649
8 July 1982

Worldwide Repor’r

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

[FOUO i4/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itals are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or cttitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGH' LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/
8 July

WORLMDE REPORT
Tsucomxcmous Poum Resemca AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 14/82)

Coureuts
L633

Assignments for Electrical Commicatione Workers, 1980-1985
(Emmwn'.Apr &)OIO.'OOOOIOOOOOOOOOO 0000000000 OOOOIQI

Method for Increuins Capacity of Satellite Communications Links
(6. M. quburg, 14.8. Haber; WWAZ'. Apr 82)..........

'Moekva' newspaper Transdasion System
(mmeAz', Apr &)OOIIO...0.0.....OOOOOIOOOOOOOUOCOOO.

'8vyaz'-81' International Exhibition Exhibitors Noted
(mmwu" Apr &).OO...0:00.00000000000000000.0.0....

Lone-Distance Commicatione Cables and Cable Fittings
(A.8. Voronteov, et mmmewn', Apr 82).....

City Telephone Cables
(D.L. Sharle; WSWAZ'. Apr 82)......................

'8vyaz'-81'Intematioual Exhibition
(mmwﬂ'. Apr &)0.0C.QOUOQ'Q'OOOOCOO'OOI'C'.00.00.

NET EUROPE

FRANCE

Firm wants 1b Penetrate American Fiber Option, Infrared Market
(Francoise Chimt; Isms. lit-20 HQ 82)..
ASSIGRENTS FOR ELECTRICAL CWICATIORS WORKERS. 1980-1985
Moscow MROSV‘IAZ' in Russian No lo, Apr 82 pp 1-6

[Unsigned article]

[Text] During 1981, the workers of the Soviet Union. in accordance with the reso-
lutions of the 26th CPSU Congress, achieved further growth in the. production and
scientific-technical potential of the country, strengthening of its night and
defense capability and multiplication of material and spiritual values.

The Novelmer 1981 Plenary Session of the CPSU Central Co-ittee nsde specific

plans for establishing a congress for the first half of the 1980s and indicated

the ways to increase the economic potential of the country, improve the efficiency
of the national economy and provide dynamic developnent on the basis of intensive
factors. Particular emphasis was given the requirement of concentrating capital
investments; further aastery of Siberia and the Far East; development of the economy
of each republic; and observation of strict conservation of all types of resources.

This phase has put forth new require-cots which can be met only through an energet-
ic restructuring of nanagenent style. planning nethods and the control systea.

In his speech to the Noveder Plenary Session, comrade L.I. Brezhnev called upon
the State Conittee on Science and Technology, the USSR Acadeny of Sciences. liinis—
tries and depart-ants to carry out the resolutions of the 26th Party Congress to
accelerate the utilization of the achievnents of science and technology nore ener-
getically. He called the slow reduction in manual labor in the present denographic
situation the root of all evil. An increasingly iaportant condition for econo-ic
effectiveness in the light of lore conplicated inter-branch and intra-branch con-
nunications is coordinated work of all branches of the economy.

The social program is also extrenely iaportant today. including supply of foodstuffs
and industrial goods, inprovaent of wages, residential construction, for which
93 billion rubles have been allocated, and satisfaction of the cultural and domestic

requirements of the copulation.

It is from precisely these high positions that we must evaluate the results of the
work of the communications branch during 1981 and determine prospects for further

developments .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main result of the first year of the 11th Five-Year Plan is the fulfillment of
the basic planned assignments: col-unications production volume -- 100.9 percent,
tariff revenues -- 100.7 percent, labor productivity, 101.2 percent (85 percent
of the increase in comnications production volume us: achieved due to increased
labor productivity.

Communication; enterprises have accomplished a significant amount of work: over
0.5 billion telegrams were tramnitted, about 1.5 billion long distance conversa-
tions were held, city telephone exchanges served 16.5 million subscribers, 'while
rural exchanges served 3.6 million, 85 million wired-radio outlets were operating,
8/ percent of the population was able to receive one broadcast television program,
and 67 percent - two or more program.

The assignment to increase the length of long distance telephone channels was ful-
filled by 103.2 percent. As during the 10th Five-Year Plan, more than 70 percent
of this increase was achieved by rehabilitating and reequipping existing trunks.
The collectives of TTslMS-‘I, 8, 16, 16, 17, the Tsu'l‘s, and the Kazakhstan Ministry
of Con-unications worked well in this area.

Automation of long distance telephone comications is the basic way to improve the
quality of services, to save labor resources and to create the unified Automated
Comnications System. By the beginning of 1982, 4!. percent of long distance ex-
changes were automated, which corresponds to the plan assignment. The level of
automation in Latvia, Lithuania, Holdavia, the Kirgiz and the Ukraine exceeds the
national level. The introduction of automation must be accelerated in Turkmeniya,
Azerbaijan and Georgia.

Enterprises of the telegraph subarc ch have been reequipped purposefully in order
to reduce labor consumption, improve the quality of conunications and improve
working conditions for service personnel. The growth plan for the capacity of
channel switching centers in the Nationwide Data Transmission System and telegraph
network was fulfilled by 102.2 percent. Fifteen cities have put automatic direct-
connection telegraph and subscriber telegraphy exchanges into operation, including
Dnepropetrovsk, Krasnoyarsk, Tymen' and Yaroslavl'. TsKS-T message switching
centers have been built in Novosibirsk, Khabarovsk and at TTsUHS-Zl. The five
existing message switching centers are already processing over 600,000 telegrams
per day. The probl- of how to find the means and capabilities to introduce high
efficiency telegraph facilities is now urgent for specialists in all republics.
Telegram processing still takes many stages. Because of the lack of channel capa-
city, the direct connection system is not working efficiently enough at exchanges
in Irkutsk, Tbilisi, Vladivostok, Magadan, Sverdlovsk, Barnaul, Kemerovo, and others.

The newspaper transmission network, which is of great political and economical
importance, includes 41 receiving locations. A grOup of projects involving construc-
tion of locations for receiving newspaper columns over comaunications channels has
been completed in Izhevsk, Cheboksary, Astrakhan', Arkhangel'sk and Tyumen'.
Newspaper columns have been transmitted experimentally to Alma-Ara over the advanced
"Orbits-RV" satellite communications system.

The growth plan for city and rural telephone exchanges was fulfilled by 100.1. percent.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Over 1.2 million telephones were installed in local systems, over 70 percent of
which were for private service, in accordance with the resolutions of the 26th
CPSU Congress. Private branch facilities were constructed, expanded and re-
habilitated at 2180 sovkhozes and kolkhozes. Experience continued to build up
in operating telephone systems using automatic message accounting equipment. The
required decisions have been made, and must be affirmed organizationally and
technically in order to accelerate the switchover of large urban systems (Moscow.
the capitals of the union republics, etc.), to length-of-call payment. A great
deal has been spent on developing local systems, and increasing their profitabil-
ity is an important task facing the subbrsnch.

The Moscow, Leningrad and Tashkent city telephone systems are operating technical
operating centers equipped with cmuters, diamostic and test equipment, which
has made it possible to improve the performance of co-unications and reduce the
amount of labor involved in network service. The team method of servicing city
exchange line and cable structures and subscriber centers (in Chelyabinsk, inter
alia) has made it possible to increase the volume of preventive maintenance on
lines, to increase revenue production from coin operated phones and to prevent
damage to cables by other organizations.

The problem of satisfying the demand for local telephone services continues to be
an urgent one. The enterprises of the subbranch must actively implement existing
reserves, accelerate the activation of existing capacities and continue expan-
sion of the construction of automatic private branch exchanges.

The "Orbita", "Moshe" and "Bkran" coamunications satellite systems were developed
further (especially in the RSPSR and Kazakhstan). By the beginning of 1982 the
total number of earth stations serving these systems exceeded 2000. Relay of the
second television program has been organized at 12 operating TV stations. In con-
junction with traditional terrestrial television facilities, the satellite systems
have made it possible to organize five—zone broadcast of the first national program,
and three-zone broadcasting of the second program.

The capacities of radio broadcast transmitters continued to increase in 1981,

mainly at existing radio enterprises. Synchronous radio broadcast networks expanded,
and radio comunications equipment has been updated. Improving the operating relia-
bility of equipment is an essential task, and is the main prerequisite for reducing
the amount of personnel on duty and to eliminate night shifts. Problems of capital
repair and operation of metal antenna supports at TV and radio stations must be re-
solved optimally.

The wired-radio broadcast network, which is of great significance given the present
international situation, increased by three million outlets. Half of the wired-
radio facilities carry three programs. Over 500 rural radio centers were automated
in 1981.

Industrial comunications enterprises fulfilled the plan for volume of production
by 100.6 percent, and the labor productivity plan by 101.5 percent. All plants

except for Barabinsk, Taldomk and Tashkent completed work in 1981 on introducing
an integrated product quality control system. Production was up by 6.8 percent

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

over 1980. and 87 items of experimental prototypes of new equipment were fab-
ricated. Implementation of the assignments of the five-year plan requires strength—
ening of the production base. improving product quality and reducing the amount

of manual labor.

The plan for the introduction of new equipment has been fulfilled, with an impor-
tant contribution from scientific-research institutes. Among the work done by
the latter, the following should be pointed out: bringing the "Ekran" on line,
and putting the "Hoskva" system into experimental operation; completing development
of the "Orbita-RV" system for transmitting newspaper columns and a large number of
radio broadcast programs over communications channels to radio broadcast centers
far away from Moscow; work on automating control of groups of shortwave receivers
of the "Holniya" type; bringing message-switching centers on line; development of
quasi-electronic and electronic telegraph and telephone exchanges (although the
established deadlines have not been met); expansion of introduction of computers
in technological processes - message accounting, centralized city exchange servic-
ing systems. etc., which is important from the viewpoint of reducing service per-
sonnel and improving network performance. Fundamental research on digital trans-
mission methods and optical cable system is continuing. The branch scientific
organizations must accelerate the rates of development and improvement of new
equipment - this is absolutely necessary for accelerating the development of the
branch. It is no less important to study system problems of comtructing commu-
nications networks, technical-economic aspects, and to plan developnent straight
through from research to assimilation with the goal of accelerating the introduc-
tion of new equipment.

In 1981, communications training institutions trained 7400 engineers and 17000
technicians. More than one million comunicators improved their qualifications
by attending various courses and on the job. Each enterprise must make efficient
use of existing engineering and technical cadres and provide all possible support
to young specialists, which is especially important in light of the scarcity of
personnel.

One good result from 1981 in the area of construction was fulfillment of assignments
concerning the activation of basic funds. This is the result of intensive labor
on the part of all participants in the construction chain, and their ability to
concentrate labor, material and financial resources on facilities which are being
brought on line (more than 702 of the allocated construction and installation work
was aimed in this direction). The mainline REL-800, rehabilitated K-3600 main-
lines, radio broadcast facilities and automatic telephone exchanges handling 1.10
million numbers were put into operation. The 'Tiezhgorsvyaz'stroy" trust completed
the installation. wiring and adjustment of a ZSOO-KH coaxial line along an ammonia
pipeline; all of the participants in this work have received the gratitude of l..I.
Brezhnev, Secretary General of the CC CPSU.

The proportion of allocations directed toward technical reequipping rehabilitation
of existing enterprises increased. The number of new construction starts for the
USSR Ministry of Conunications was reduced by 4.6 percent.

Design institutes fulfilled the planned scope of work.

.'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Technical cooperation with foreign countries continued. In 1981 a USSR-India
troposcatter link was put into operation.

The level of organizational and economic work in the branch was increased. Unified
integrated programs were developed for the most urgent problems of technical pro-
gress, the development of commications facilities and social and economic matters.
The Shchekinskiy method received wider employment.

A nutter of organizations achieved superior results in 1981, including collectives
of the Novosibirsk, Rovno, Volgograd and Zapororh'ye PTUS, the Order of Lenin Cent-
ral Telegraph Bachange of the USSR Ministry of Co-unications, the Vil'nyue Tele-
graph Exchange, TTsUHS-é, 12, 21, the lbscow and Tallinn Post Offices, the mas,
SUE-5, 11, the Leningrad city television exchange, the "Mostelefonstroy" trust,

the Moscow city telephone system, as well as others.

Col-unicators are participating directly in fulfilling the urgent political and
economic task reflected in the resolutions of the 26th CPSU (bngress and the Novem-
ber (1981) Plenary Session of the CC CPS!) - to increase the material potential of
each republic and utilize it maid-ally for harmonic development of the entire
country. All of the union republics contributed to fulfilling the tasks of the
first year of the 11th Five-Year Plan for the development of conunications facili-
ties. Erperience in integrated development of communications facilities was accur-
ulated in Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Armenia; in improving the network of com-
munications enterprises in the RSPSR, Kazakhstan and Georgia; in development of
long distance communications in the Ukraine, in Belorussia and in Azerbaijan.
Turkmen cal-unicators are implementing plans under difficult conditions.

One task for the next few years is to eliminate the territorial disproportion in the
development of coellunicatione facilities, especially city, rural and long distance
telephone systems. In building cable lines and other structures it is necessary to
overcome the local approach and be guided by both regional interests and, primarily,
social and state requirements.

that must be done as a first priority in order to resolve the key question in the
economy of the branch - switching over to a primarily intensive path of development?

in 1981, like during the 10th Five-Year Plan, it was not possible to achieve growth
and stabilization of capital productivity, althougr the reserves and capabilities
for doing this are certainly available. For example, the failure to integrate the
development of automatic long distance exchanges and coeIIunications channels reduced
significantly the level of activation of exchanges, especially for zone communica-
tions. The subbranches must provide a clearer connection between newly constructed
automatic long distance exchanges and their future use, and must make wider use of
Am [Automatic Intraoblast Telephone System] equipment and two-frequency semi-
automatic equipment. The degree of utilization of city telephone exchanges is low.
As much as 20 percent of all rural exchange capacity remains unused, in both RSFSR
and Ukraine. A task has been established to increase the level of city exchange
utilisation to 92-93 percent, and rural exchange to 83-85 percent. Other specific
directions have also been fornulated. By overcoming the force of inertia and
obsolete traditions, co-unicatorevill certainly be able to handle these urgent
assignments.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another path for intensification of work inwlves conservation of labor resources.
In 1981 the rates of growth of labor productivity exceeded the growth rate of
wages. In order to achieve the labor productivity indicators established for the
five-year plan, the plans for introduction and efficient utilization of new equip-
ment, for measures in the area of organization and standardization of labor must
be followed scrupulously; automation of equipment must be accelerated and wider
use must be made of payment for end results of collective labor. Personnel turns
over- is still high at comunications enterprises. Keeping personnel and rallying
of labor collectives are closely associated with creating normal production and
living conditions for workers. These questions require specific i-sdiate solution
everywhere.

The requirement that "economics must be economi " has placed major tasks before
the branch in terms of rational utilization of all mterial resources. The USSR
and union republic ministries of communications have already done definite work in
this direction. Measures have been authorized to conserve resources during the
11th Five-Year Plan. There are provisions to reduce heat and fuel utilization by
3 percent and electricity by Io percent of the calculated funds. Nonetheless, con-
servation is not being observed everywhere by any means. Nonproductive losses are
great, especially at enterprises in the RSPSR, Georgia, Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan.
Some enterprises are submitting increased expenditure requests and reduced efficiency
reports. The assignments to accelerate the turnover of floating funds are not
being fully met.

An important component element of the work is to improve the quality of communica-
tions services and service culture. According to the 1981 results, an improvement
was achieved for 13 and 20 of the quality indicators considered. However, the
number of complaints concerning the work of long distance and local telephone organs.
as well as telegraph communications, increased. The mean time to eliminate one
malfunction increased on both long distance lines and in rural systems.

The problem of improving production quality is a complex one which touches all
aspects of the activity of an enterprise. The introduction of an integrated qual-
ity control system is a powerful means to solve it. An example of this is the
positive experience of the Ministries of Communications of the Ukraine, Belorussia,
Lithuania, as well as a number of ms in the RSPSR. It is now time to disseminate
this experience and to issue normative documents for the introduction of integrated
quality control systems throughout comnications management as a whole.

Management reform is still being introduced slowly within the comunications branch.
A number of methodological documents have been prepared recently on improving the
management mechanism, but there is still no extensive introduction of measures
which should have a significant influence on economy. It is necessary to increase
the economic independence of enterprises, to achieve closer ties between the end
results of their activity and the benefits obtained by labor collectives, and to
create a mechanism under which the enterprises themselves would strive to undertake

intensive plans.

Special attention must be devoted to a fulfill-eat of assignments associated with
large nationwide programs such as the conversion of Nerherna em'ye. the construction

6'
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Iain gas pipelines, the petroleun couple: at Tyunen', etc.

In executing the resolutions of the 26th CPS" Congress and Novenber (1981) Plenary
Session of the CC CPSU during the llth Five-Year Plan, including 1982, the efforts
of co-unicators are aimed at unconditional fulfillment of the planned assignments,
intensification of production, improvement of cmications service quality,
better satisfaction of the demands for services on the part of the economy and the
people, and creation of work to carry over into the 12th Five-Year Plan.

The Unified Autonated Conunications Network is continuing to be developed on the
basis of the latest transnission and switching systems, and the extensive use of

satellites for aultiprogran television and radio broadcast, telephone coamunica-

tions with reaote regions and transnitting central newspaper columns by facsimile
are going forward.

In accordance with the resolutions of the 26th CPS" Congress, the total extent of
long distance telephone channels will increase by a factor of 1.8, and the master

of telephones in city and rural areas by a factor of 1.3, including residential

sets by a factor of 1.6. Color television and stereo radio broadcasting will be
developed further. Conunications production will increase by 210 percent over

1980, and the labor productivity of co—unicatio'ns workers involved in basic activity
will increase by 19.6 percent.

A group of steps will be taken to iaprove planning and nanagement of the econony
of the communications branch, to inprove the manage-ant style and nethods, to
ensure rational utilization of metal, fuel, electricity, raw materials, financial
and labor resources, to ensure fuller utilization of basic production funds and
acceleration of deadlines for assisilating new capacities, to create a reliable
personnel reserve and to expand the network of training courses.

Capital investnents and funds for materials and equipment for starting and priority
construction projects and technical reequipping and rehabilitation of existing
enterprises are being allocated one priority basis. Thanks to the use of new
efficient naterials, inrovenent of organization and nanagenent, inproving the
degree of prafabrication of construction, etc., labor productivity and construction
will increase by 110 percent over the five-year plan.

At least 20 items of construction equip-ant are to be introduced in 1982, and new
quasi-electronic "latch” switching exchanges, as well as 1101-120, K-l920P and
other transnission equipment, are to be mastered.

The technical level of plans lust be improved, and conservation of resources must

be provided on this basis. Preference is given to plans to reconstruct and modem-
ize existing structures; a decision to go ahead with new construction is made only
when it is imossible to achieve the required indicators by rehabilitating existing

facilities.

Urgent problems include fulfillment of plans to introduce advanced technology,
automate and nechanize production processes, colputer technology, the plan to create
new equipnent which is provided for in integrated scientific-technical programs

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and decrees of directive organs and the USSR Ministry of Canonicstions.

Work is continuing to create third-generation "Blektronika-Svyaz'" standardized
radio relay co-unications systems. State testing is being completed, and experi-
mental operation begun, of the "Elektronika-Svyaz'-11Ts" equipment, as well as a
prototype of the "Dozhd'h" four-program radio broadcast station. Tests are under
way on a message switching center in Leningrad and on an experimental model of a
central station serving the GDR-produced Yess ATs unified analog-digital switching
communications systems.

The scientific potential of the conunications V02 must be utilized more effective-
ly in scientific research and experimental design work done in the interests of
the branch.

Long distance telephone communications will be developed further; the level of
automation will be increased to 55 percent by the end of the five-year plan, and
to 107 by the end of 1982. There are plans to construct and expand coordinate
automatic long distance exchanges in Yerevan, Kiev, Baku, Kurgan, Saratov and
Vladimir in 1982, to begin construction on three automatic switching centers and
to install at least 3000 long distance pay telephones. Overall, coordinate,
quasi—electronic and electronic exchanges will be established in 90 cities. Work
is underway to create automated operational management and technical servicing
systems. It remains to reduce accidents on communications links, to ensure that
line damage is taken care of within established deadlines and to reduce communica-
tions channel downtime in 1982 by 5 percent. The level of mechanization of line
service and repair work is to be doubled during the five-year plan.

In order to improve the quality of service received by long distance telephone
subscribers, call waiting time will be reduced and the work of ordering and infor-
mation services will be improved.

New equipment will be introduced in the telegraph network during 1982-1985 which
will make it possible to automate labor intensive processes and to increase labor
productivity; this includes the AVK automatic call concentrator, the ATK hardware-
software complex, OUKS-T, TART, RITH. BLl'r-T and other equipment. Introduction of
the direct connection system will be completed. Subscriber telegraph and low speed
data transmission networks will be developed substantially. The capacity of tele-
graph exchanges will be increased significantly. Telegraph switching exchanges
will be constructed and rehabilitated in 30 cities (including 8 in 1982), and
TsKS-T message switching centers will be built in 12 cities. Receiving locations
for newspaper colums via communications channels will be built in Ashkhsbsd and
Kemerovo in 1982.

There are provisions to accelerate the growth rate of local telephone networks.
Automation of telephone exchanges in cities and rural areas will be completed, which
will involve the replacement of manual exchanges sewing more than 190,000 numbers
in cities, and 150,000 numbers in rural areas. At least 105,000 coin-operated tele-
phones will be installed, including 9,000 in 1982, primarily in regions of new
construction. The network of private branch exchanges is to be developed at accel-
erated rates, which will make it possible to intensify the work of city networks.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to do this, 10 percent of the city exchange capacity brought on line annu-
ally is set aside for the construction of switching centers.

There are plans to introduce the test-correction operation method at all existing
automatic coordinate exchanges and automatic private branch coordinate exchanges
in 1982: this will make it possible to increase the profitability of the networks
and to improve labor productivity in the subbranch.

The following plans exist in the area of radio broadcasting. television, radio coa-
munications and satellite communications. The capacity of radio broadcast stations
will be increased, primarily due to upgrading and rehabilitating existing enter-
prises and installing additional equipment in available spaces. The synchronous
radio broadcast network in the long- and medium-wave bands will be expanded, and
organization of zone radio broadcast of the third program with allowance for time
zones will begin. Hulti-program radio broadcast stations will be installed in 70
cities during the five—year plan, and stereo broadcasts will be organized in 50
cities.

The availability of television broadcasting to the population will increase as
follows: first national program ~ 92 percent, second program - 72 percent.

This will be done by bringing 60 powerful TV stations, 2500 low-power relays, 3000
"Bkran" stations and 600 "Hoskva" stations on line. A five-zone TV broadcast dis-
tributing network carrying two national programs will be organized during 1982-
1985, and four-zone broadcast of the second program will be introduced.

The number of radio relay points will increase by a factor of 1.2 during the five-
year plan. In addition, multiprogram wired-radio broadcasting will be introduced
in 1500 populated areas. including rayon centers.

There are plans to improve the operating reliability and throughput capacity of the
backbone radio conmunications network. Single-sideband transmitters, receivers and
radio channel control equipment will be installed. Automation of nainline trans-
mitter and receiver groups will make it possible to free service personnel.

The industrial enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Communications must provide a
growth in the volume of production of 64.7 percent and in labor productivity of 34.1
percent during the five-year plan. Series production of the K-lOZOS line equip-
ment is to begin in 1982, and series production of type VUT thyristor rectifiers
and other articles is to be prepared.

The year 1982 is filled with major political events. December marks the 60th anni-
versary of the USSR. Trade union and komsomol congresses will be held. Elections
will be held in local Councils of Peoples' Deputies. A new powerful impetus to
the creative activity of the masses is natural. Socialist competition has become
widespread among communications workers: this is aimed toward successful fulfill-
ment of the tasks of the five-year plan, acceleration of scientific-technical pro-
gress, increased labor productivity, improved work performance and better service
to the population and economy, as well as conservation of all resources.

Communications workers have undertaken increased socialist obligations for 1982
and the 11th Five-Year Plan. For example, these provide overfulfilling the plan

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for comunications management profit by 25 million rubles in 1982, overfulfilling
the labor productivity plan, which will provide at least an 85 percent increase in
communications production. Automatic exchanges serving no fewer than 68,000 nunbers
should be put into operation ahead of schedule. No coaxial mainlines will be put
into operation a year ahead of schedule. Rehabilitation of a cable line, replacing
K—l920 equipment with K-3600, should be coupleted ahead of schedule, by l Deceiaer
1982. Broadcasting of the second television progran will be organized in 14 cities
ahead of schedule. Thanks to the introduction of new equipment. scientific
organization of labor, automation and mechanization of production processes, com-
munications have obligated themselves to save the labor of 22,000 workers during
the 11th Five—Year Plan.

It is important in each labor collective that the planned assignments and socialist
obligations undertaken be supported by economic and organizational measures which
will guarantee their fulfillment.

Only in this way can the key problem involved in the development of the branch be
resolved in the light of the requirements of the 26th CPSU Congress and Novewer
(1981) Plenary Session of the CC CPSU, the state plan filled and overfulfilled, and
a good base created for the 12th Five—Year Plan.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Blektrosvyaz'". 1982

6900
C30: 5500/1019

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

USSR

METHOD FOR INCREASING CAPACITY OF SATSLLITB WICATIONS LIES
Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No lo, Apr 82 pp 12-15
[Article by 6.1!. Vayzburg and H.S. Raber]

[Text] The high efficiency of comunications systems using satellites,
especially geostationary satellites [1], has facilitated their extensive
utilization. Serious discussions are now underway on the problem of es-
timating the maxim throughput capacity and the most rational ways to
utilize the geostationary orbit [2]. Some methods which make possible
multiple utilization of the frequency bands allocated for satellite
conunications have already been implemented in certain systems, and
others are in the development stage. The former of these include
economizing bandwidth by using polarization and direction separation
[31, while the latter includes methods of conensating for crosstalk
from adjacent system [lo], as well as conserving the uplink spectrum
through on-board signal processing in which it becomes possible to change
the type of modulation [5].

On-board signal processing also makes it possible to implement the idea
of doubling the downlink capacity for cos-unications between two stations
exchanging digital information using rm [6]. In this case, the pulse
stream from both stations can be demodulated aboard the transponder,
combined in time and multiplied Hodulo 2 bit by bit. Then each earth
station subtracts its own stream, delayed by the sipal propagation time
over the channel. from the total stream.

The present article examines a method which can be used to double the
amount of analog information transmitted over a frequency-multiplexed
relay trunk by codining the spectra of the signals of the two stations
which are working with one another [7]. The bandwidth which is freed
can then be used either for comnieations between an additional pair of
stations, or to increase the amount of traffic exchanged between the same
two stations.

There are two specific ways to implement this method - with and without signal
processing aboard the satellites. Both of these versions are analyzed below.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY

Method not gplozing on-board sigal processing. The transponder operates in

the same mode as in a multiple-access m system in which signals are nultiplexed
without overlapping of their spectra.

Let’ us examine the interoperation of two stations. Let station A enit the signal
Ulcoslult +Auuslft)] and let part of that signal be diverted to a delay line DI.
(figure 1a). Station 3 elite and diverts the signal U;cos[m'1t + Auzsz(t)], where
ml = ”'13 “I - u'l - do is the detuning which always exists between different
transsitters operating at the same frequency; Aw - frequency deviation;

I
5‘“) - ing)“ u s.(() -

l
- S ll] (l)dl,
-T.

where T) and T2 are the times at which the nodulation is activated; I); (t) and 112(t)
are the modulating processes at stations A and B, respectively.

When the amplitude response of the transponder is linear (an analysis of the in-
fluence of nonlinearity will be given below), the following identical signal
arrives at the input of the receiver at each earth station:

u’lcos [(o.+do.) (by) +5015: (t—t) +
+v.l+v;cosl(».+w.w—r)+ (1)
' +AUISsU—ﬂ'1'ﬁIo

where dug and dm'z - fluctuations in carrier frequency caused by Doppler effect
during orbital movement of the satellite; 1 - signal propagation time over the
channels; Y1 and Y2 - phases of signals at receiver inputs. In order to extract
the correspondent's signal at any of the stations it is necessary to coIpensate
for any of the components corresponding to the signal belonging to that station:
this problem can be simplified significantly since the source of the interfering
signal is located in the same station. The problem can be resolved as follows.

The trammitter signal which is diverted and delayed for the propagation time
over the link is input to mixer Hi (figure la), which translates it to the input
frequency range of the receiver. Then adaptive noise compensator ARC, the operat-
ing principles of which are examined in sufficient detail in [lo], suppresses the

local interfering signal. The operating algorithm of the conpensator is such
that it produces a signal which controls the frequency, the phase of the liner
oscillator and the signal delay in the delay line.

This version is close to the case of suppressing noise fron an adjacent system

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEIDNL~

operating in the sane frequency range. The difference is that a special antenna
which is ained at the noise source is used there to obtain the noise copy which

is then subtracted from the input signal nixture, while the noise copy in the
present case is present at the station itself.

 

figure 1

Key: l-transponder; 2-trsnsnitter; 3-delay line; k--adaptive noise compensator;
S--receiver; 6-nixer; 7-oscillator; 8-station A; 9--station B; lO—-internediate

frequency.

The frequency and phase of the receive signal can also be adjusted with the help of
a phased-locked loop system, for which it is fairly simple to obtain control voltage
by coupsring the trans-it and receive signals in a channel set aside specially for

this.

The compensation circuit can also be inplenented in the i.f. range (figure lb):
when this is done the mixer is not needed. but instabilities in the oscillators of
the transmitter and receiver at the station have an additional influence which,
however. can be conpensated in the nanner described above.

The required degree of suppression of the local signal and the received Iixture
which provides a tolerable noise level can be deterldned using the familiar formula

[8]

13
FOI<OFINC1Al.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pn =I 10°".‘I’ A F. K310. (;)2X
Fl 5‘ (9) Al“
x [(2 (5-9) +8: (04-0)] (2)

2 (3)

(notation corresponds to that med in [8]). Given an acceptable value of Pa,

the ratio between the valid and interfering components r should be calculated.
For example, when the modulation is being done by 60-channel group messages with
effective modulation indexes a: - a: - 0.65, and assuming that the noise level
must not increase by more than 3000 p , the noise cowonent of the local signal
must be suppressed by more than 36 dB (r2 = 3-10“). It should be noted that
theoretical and experimental investigations of noise compensation systems (in
which the noise copy can be extracted using an additional antenna) are now making
it possible to obtain 100-50 dB suppression [9]. Unfortunately, the operation of
such devices has not been evaluated under dynamic conditions allowing for varia-
tions in the channel parameters over time. Nonetheless, examination of this
matter is of independent interest, and is beyond the scope of the present article.

The received signal mixture can also be processed using the scheme shown in figure .
2. In this case, a copy of the modulating message 81(t) is delayed by the propa-
gation time and is then input to frequency-modulated oscillator mo and to corre-
lator Cor where it is compared with the output signal of the receiver. Since the
correspondents' messages are uncorrelated, when the receiver completely suppresses
the local signal, there will be no control voltage at the output of the correlator.
If a residue of the message sl(t) is present at the receiver output. a proportion-
al residual control signal will be input to the 1M) and delay line, changing their
responses accordingly.

dD-Es]

f
r:_1|_1 '3 (it:
51“}

7

Figure 2

Key: l--transmitter; 2—delay line; 3v-frequency modulated oscillator; ly—-mixer;
5—11? aaplifier; 6--frequency detector; 7-correlator

me mixer translates the spectra of the input signals to the intermediate frequency
and simultaneously suppresses the frequency modulation corresponding to message

8 (t). In this case only the carrier frequency of the interfering signal remains
uncomensated. Interference of this sort can be controlled using ordinary or

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

adaptive band-rejection filters [6].

In order to estimate the degree of suppression of interference and to control the
operation of the FHO and delay line, it seems best to use a special test channel
fa; each station at the high-frequency end of the message spectrum. By loading it
with a sinusoidal signal, after the sinusoid is extracted it is possible to use
its residue at the receiver output to control the operation of the circuit, and
also to measure any additional noise which has been introduced.

When the amplitude response of the transponder is nonlinear. distortions are formed
which can be calculated using the method in [8]. It should he kept in mind that

in this case the number of signals passing through the cannon section of the trans-
ponder is n - 2; their frequencies are practically the same (fk 9 f1); the third-
order distortion products are formed only fron combination frequencies of the form
ka - f1; the number of these products Nn(k) - 2; the power of this type of dis—
tortion products is 6 dB lower than the power of a distortion product of the for-
f. + fk - f1. Both signals are'nodulated by independent nultichannel messages
with effective frequency deviation bfas and effective Indulatinn index “as; the
effective frequency deviation and noise index is

Aftﬂ -V§A,..e; M,.n-y§ “’3' . Al.z-

" VAR; + An" -V6-A’:.c'
M,;= VO-Ms.t'

 

Considering the above, and on the basis of [8], the fornula used to calculate the
power of the transient noise occurring when the transponder has a nonlinear ampli-
tude response is written as

2 M. K: m
‘—_—‘——" X
1MP.» you... V57: we) (3)

F“_'
X(AF‘ o

p

 

nnp '

where APR - channel bandwidth; 3k - center frequency of channel; K2 - psophonetric
coefficient; 32(0) - pre-enphasis coefficient; (Pg/P3)“ - ratio ofppower of one
signal to power of one third-order distortion product with four input signals.

For example, let each of two signals be modulated by a 60-channel message with fre-
quency deviation Afk . 600 KHz. The nonlinear properties of the amplifier are
characterized by the relationship by (P.1P3)g and P1“ shown in figure 5.11 in

[8). Let us find the ratio P1n/Po for which the transient noise power in the
voice grade channels does not exceed 2000 pH at the relative null level, where Pin
is the sun-nary signal power at the alplifier input; P0 is the power at the
saturation point: x, - 0.75; 32(9) - 2.5; At, - 4.00 m; are, - coo m; an, -

3 KHz; Pk - 250 K81.

15

FOR 0i1ﬂ€1Al.USI:C”ﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5
Substituting these quantities in formula (3), we obtain Pn.n.p. - 1° ,

(Pg/P3)“
and when Pu.“ . - 2000 p" (Pa/P3)“ - 17 dB. It is apparent from the graph in
figure 5.11 [03 that the quantity (Pg/P3)“ corresponds to the ratio of the sumary
power of the signals at the input to the’ power at the saturation point (Pin/P0) .
+0.5 dB, i.e., with given parameters of the transmitted signals there is no need,
in order to provide Pn.n.p. - 2000 p“, to reduce the power of the transmitter of
the transponder in order to create a linear amplifier operating mode.

 

Method glazing signal processigg on board. Bandwidth is saved on the downlink
by coutining the lessagea from different stations in the transponder. This is
done as follows. The signals from stations A and B, respectively

 

U.coa[u.l+Au. [mom] and
(’0)

_r.
l
U,m[m:!+Ao. fauna]
. '7-

are input to the transponder, demodulated separately. comined with the canon
signal input to the transponder modulator, which emits the following signal
toward the earth stations:

Ucosl o. (l—r) -|- An, lu.(!—t)+
_ ._g

(5)

+Mg(!—‘)ld!].

After demodulation, the sun of the messages will be extracted at each earth sta-

tion; the component corresponding to the message belonging to the station in ques-
tion must be subtracted from this am:

“IU—ﬂ ‘I'llrU—ﬂ—UIU—ld)“
=u.(!—r)+6u; (l—r).

where 1d is the delay of the copy of the message from the station in question,
which is equal to the signal propagation time over the uplink and back.

The subtraction can be done in practice using various technical approaches, both
with and without teat signals in special channels to regulate 1d.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us determine the accuracy require-ants for the delay in the line for a given
acceptable channel noise increase. The correlation function of' the noise 601
(t - r) is

R. (1) -2R.(&) — Rut—Al) — Rm +1“).

where R10) is the correlation function of the original message I), (t) and At '-
r - 1d- The spectral noise density

9A!-
c,(n) ndOlOMIn' ———2 .

where 6(a) is the spectral density of the original message, which is the same for

Ul(t) and 02(t). "hen At << 1, which must be the case in the syste- in question,
we have

6.16:) n (no) (cup a (Pair; =-
-(our.

Thus, given the acceptable degradation in the signal/noise ratio, we can find the
required precision of the delay of the nessage over the Link.

As indicated above, the second version saves bandwidth on the downlinh; therefore,
in order to realize a positive effect it is necessary to arrange the transmission
of additional information to the transponder over the uplink. This problem was
solved in [5] for transmitting programs in the broadcast satellite service. The
sane methods can be used in the present case, nsnely. using the additional fre-
quency band (if there is any margin in the frequency band). polarisation and
direction separation on the uplink', etc. For co-Iunications systems with large
modulation indexes it >> 1 it is nest rational to cut the frequency deviation of
the signals on the uplink in half, which cuts the frequency band occupied by

these signals in half; the increase in the chennel noise may be insignificant.
since the noise contribution of these links is relatively snail.

One version of independent interest is that which employs signal processing aboard
the satellite when the co-nnicstions systu is constructed so that the voice
grade channels in one direction correspond exactly to the voice grade channels in
the other direction, i.e., a subscriber occupying, e.g., the first channel on

the link fros station A to station 3 talks with a subscriber who also occupies the
first channel on the link from station 3 to station A. etc. In this case. the
conversation is only going one way in the channel, since one of the subscribers

is listening to the talking party. If we seems that effective echo suppressors
are used on satellite links which disconnect a particular receiving circuit from

- the channel during transmission, it obviously becomes unnecessary to suppress the
local signal further in the earthstation receivers.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL'I

Conclusion. Let us define the relative gain to he achieved from employing the
proposed transponder trunk multiplexing method over the traditional multiple
access PM method without overlapping spectra.

Let us assume that the transponder trunk was fully occupied by a single carrier
which is frequency modulated by the group channel spectrum. Let the modulation
index be high, and the spectral width be determined approximately by the frequency
deviation. In order for the trunk to handle two carriers, each modulated by the
group spectrum of the same number of channels n, it is necessary to employ a fre-
quency deviation which is no more than half as large, and to cut the power of

each carrier at least in half. ‘1he total energy losses in this case amount to

9 dB.

In the proposed method, when the HP spectra of the two signals are combined (with-
out on-hosrd signal processing). the power of each carrier must also be reduced

by at least 3 d8; however, the frequency deviation remains unchanged. If the LP
spectra are cobined (with signal processing aboard the transponder), the effec-
tive carrier deviation of both messages must be reduced by 3 dB, but the carrier
power need not be reduced. With this method of doubling the volume of data trans-
mitted, the energy losses thus amount to 3 dB. Accordingly, the gain over multiple
access Pm! is approadmately 6 dB.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. 'ralyzin, NJ]. et. a1. "Optinl Parameters and Economic Efficiency of Multiple
Access Satellite Com-unications Systens". RADIOTEGINIKA, No. 11, 1969.

2. Kantor, L.Ya. "Estimation of Maximum Throughput Capacity of Geostationary Orbit".
RADIOTEKBNIKA, V01. 3’0, No. lo, 1979.

3. CCIR, XIII Plenary Asseﬁly, Geneva, 1974, v. IV, Report 555, Geneva 2 It), 1975

lo. Uidrou et. a1. "Adaptive Noise Compensators. Principles of Construction and
Applications". TIIER, Vol. 63, No. 12, 1975.

5. Barker, A.8., Boliggbroke, P.L., Barth-to-spece links for broadcasting satel-
lites. - IBB conference of satellite col-nunication systems technology. London,
April, 1975; IKE conference publication 126. London, 1975.

6. Celebiler, 24.. Stette, G. On increasing the downlink capacity of a regenerative
satellite repeater in point-to—point comnication. Proc. 1833, v. 66, 1978, No. 1.

7. USSR Patent No. 797081. Frequency multiplexed satellite coll-mications
system. Vayzburg, 0.11., Plekhanov, V.V., Raber, 11.8., Tsirlin, I.S.

8. Borodich, S.V. Iskazheniya i pomekhi v mogokanal'nykh sistemakh radiosvyazi

s chastotnoy modulyatsiey [Distortions and noise in frequency modulated multichan-
nel radio coununications systems]. Moscow, Izdatel‘stvo "Svyaz'", 1976.

9. The application of interference cancellation to ‘an earth station. H. white,

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N’.Y

D. Brandvood and 6. Raymond. Satellite emulation: cyst-s technology. In
canforcnco publication 126. April. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: ltd-tol'ltvo "and“ 1 nmz'", "Bloktroovyu'", 1982

6900 -
080: 1550/1019

POIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

‘ 'HOSKVA' NEWSPAPER TRANSMISSION SYSTB!
Moscow ELEKTROSVIAZ' in Russian No 10, Apr 82 p 15

[Unsigned article]

[Text] In October 1981 the Scientific-Technical Council of the USSR Ministry of
Communications discussed the NIIR [Scientific Research Institute of Radio] report
entitled "Sntellite Transmission of Newspaper Calms Utilising Simple Receiving
Stations Installed Directly at Printing Facilities". The receiving stations in
the "Moskva" satellite communications system were the subject of discussion here.
Snell receiving antennas are installed directly on the building housing the
printing facility, while the receiving equipment is installed inside the building.

Analog transmission makes it possible to esploy the existing technical treatments
for transmitting newspaper columns over an ”Orbits" television trunk in order to
organize the transmission of newspaper colms in a timely fashion to printing
locations over channels in the "Hanna" system. The Scientific-Technical Council
proposed the following: acceleration of research on digital methods for trans-
mitting newspapers. as well as creation of remote control and remote signalling
equipment to support normal operation of terminal equipment during circular
transmission of newspaper columns to printing locations; employ the remote sig-
nalling and remote control equipment used to transmit newspapers over the "Orbits"
system for the time being; developed coordinated principles for constructing
newspaper transmission systems employing both analog and digital methods. The
"Hoskva" system will make it possible to expand significantly the capabilities of
transmitting central newspapers from Moscow to printing locations.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Radio i svyez'", "Blektroevysz'". 1982

6900
cso: 5500/1019

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

'SVIAZ'-Bl IITRRRATIOIAL EXRIBITIG 313311018 nomad"
Moscow ELEKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 6, Apr 82 pp 1.7-1.8

[Unsigned article]
0

[Text] The success with specialists and the public of the International Exhibition
"Co-snications Systens and Facilities" - 'Svyaz'-Bl" moscow, Sokol'niha, 2-16
Septelber 1981) resulted fron the variety and high degree of sophistication of

the exhibits, which provide a clear idea of the rates of development of coal-mica—
tions which have hecons avalanche-like in recent years, as well as the increasing
universal inportance of coulunications facilities in the social life of our

country. The concept of "electrical cousunications" has been expanded significantly
as a result of the increased scope of production of its nu-erous suhbranches. as
well as the appearance of new types of tramsiasion and data application.

Conunications equip-ent takes full use of the latest achievasents of physics,
crystallography and chemistry to mater increasingly wider frequency bands and to
develop high speed cluents including 1.81, electronic nicrocircuits and processors.
Conunications theory and technology, in turn, enrich adjacent branches of know-
ledge with new principles of transaitting, extracting and recognizing signals.

and provide a wide assortnent of sensitive devices for experiments and specific

research .

Considering the above, we nust recognize as fully justified, the display at the
exhibition of numerous sound and picture reproduction devices, special purpose
testing and neasuring instnnents, control devices, production line equip-eat,
systens for autonating large—series production of printed circuits and domestic
radio equip-ant along with various co-Inications, broadcast and television systems.
The word ”Svysr'" (col-mications) in the title of the exhibition should be under-
stood in its broadest sense, as a codination of facilities for transmitting infor-
nstion along with the required electronic, conputing and technical radio devices.

Industrial enterprises and associations fron seven socialist countries were in-
cluded anong the participants at the exhibition: the Peoples' Republic of Bul—
garia, the Hungarian Peoples' Republic, the Ger-an Democratic Republic, the Polish
Peoples' Republic, the USSR, the Czechoslovakian Socialist Republic and the
Socialist Pederative Republic of Yugoslavia, in addition to conpsnies and organiza—
tions fron Austria, Great Britain, Damsrk, Spain, Italy, The Retherlands, Norway,
the us. Rinland, France, The Federal Republic of Ger-any, Switzerland, Sweden.

morianmomv
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

Japan and West Berlin.

The television and radio broadcasting equipment and apparatus in the largest dis-
play at "Svyaz'-81" - that of the Soviet Union - occupied over 10,000 square meters
in the Main Pavilion of the exhibition complex. Production associations and indus-
trial enterprises of 17 USSR ministries and departments demonstrated over 3,000
exhibits, most of them working.

The exhibition was visited by more than 600,000 people, including 200,000 special-
ists. Visitors included a group of management workers from the USSR Council of
Ministers headed by comrade ILA. Tikhonov, member of the CC CPSU Politburo and
Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, as well as a group of executives of

the CC CPSU apparatus. Foreign specialists present included management personnel
from most of the communications administrations of the socialist countries, headed
by ministers, including Rudolf Shultze, Deputy Chairman of the GDR Council of
Hinisters and Minister of Postal and Electrical Cot-unications of the DGR, l’ando
Vanchev, NR3 Minister of Communications, Vlastimir Chalupa, Minister of the Czech-
oslovakian SSR Federal Ministry of Commications, and others.

Repeated visits to the pavilions at the exhibition were organized so that workers
of operational and production enterprises, scientific-research, design and train-
ing institutes and design organizations could become thoroughly familiar with the
exhibits. A great number of catalogs, prospectuses and descriptions of domestic
and foreign apparatus equipment were disseminated.

During the exhibition a symposium was held at which sore than 60 lectures and
reports were read. About 5,000 specialists took part in creative discussions.

Study of the exhibits at the exhibition and the technical and advertising litera-
ture, plus exchanging information and experience during meetings and encounters
and attendance at lectures and reports made it possible to obtain a great deal
of information in the area of the development of co-unications facilities and to
make an objective evaluation and comparison between the level of development here

and abroad and of the developmental trends of the commications equipment subbranch.

The basic directions in the developnent of communications systems for the near
future can be defined very briefly as the introduction of digital systems for
transaitting all possible types of information over cables, radio relay links and
satellite links; the introduction of quasi-electronic and electronic systems for
switching single and group channels using electronic controllers and nicroproces-
sors, and the use of optical cables as a transmission medium.

Nonetheless, analog systems are not being taken out of production. The same is
the case for obsolescent coordinate switching systems: regardless of the employ-
ment of new systems, these will still be in use for the foreseeable future.

Five con-unications enterprises and organizations participating at the "Svyaz'-81"
International Exhibition - the State Scientific-Research Institute of Radio (NIIR),
the Moscow Department of the Central Scientific-Research. Communications Institute
(HO-NIIS), the Minsk "Promsvysz'" experimental plant and the Moscow and Leningrad
city telephone systems - were awarded Diplomas of the USSR Trade and Industrial

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Board, and 28 co-mications enterprises and organizations were awarded Exhibi-
tion Organizational Conittee Diplonas.

The journal BLEKTROSVYAZ' has published descriptions of may of the type of domes-
tic gear, equipnent and devices which were exhibited at "Svyaz'- 1". These include
the ”Orbits", 'Koakva" and "Khan-am" satellite co-unications system, the
K-3600, x-19zop, x-1ozos, Int-120, LII-30, ms, "Oblast'", and "Blektronika-Svyaz'-
111's" translission systems, ATsV digital broadcasting equipment, the "latch"

Yess ATs switching system, the man telegraph channel formtion equip-eat, the
ELIT-T display-type telegraph terninal, the city telephone system technical operat-
ing center (TsTB) equip-eat, and my others. '

The editors also intend to present the features of domestic apparatus and equipment,
to which special articles will be devoted (under the rubrics "Technology of the
Five-Year Plan", ""Svyaz'-8l" International Exhibition", etc.). For example,
descriptions are now being prepared for publication on the "Orbits-RV" satellite
broadcast system. the 1114-1080 digital transnission systu, the "Kvarts" quasi-
electronic autonatic long distance telephone exchange, equipment for tine-of-

call billing for local toll calls, etc.

Published below are reviews of nainly foreign co-unications equipnent which was
presented at the exhibition. These descriptions are based on studying the exhi-
bits, the handout literature and inforution obtained from the lectures and conver-
sations with specialists. The articles written only from materials available at
the exhibition, of course, do not pretend to exhaustive thoroughness or universal-
ity. However, each review gives an idea about the characteristic features of the
current status of a particular cal-mications subbranch and the typical trends

in its inprovemnt.

Articles devoted to the "Svyaz'-81" International Exhibition will continue to be
published in subsequent . issues.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Blektrosvyas'", 1982

6900
080: 5500/1019

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

LONG-DISTANCE COHIUNICATIONS CABLES AND CABLE FITTIMS
Moscow sLsKmosvuz' 1: Russian No to Apr 82. pp 55-60
[Article by A.S. Vorontsov, K.G. Levinov and S.Kh. Hiftyakhetdinov]

[Text] General developmental trends. The main factors which determine ilprovemant
in traditional communications cable equipment using metal conductors are the con-
stantly growing demand for data exchange, increased requirements for transmission
quality, reliability and economy, and the appearance of new, more sophisticated
technology.

The "Svyaz'-81" International Exhibition demonstrated that the scientific and tech-
nical thinking of specialists in the area of cable equipment during the period
which elapsed since the "Svyaz'-75" exhibition followed these paths:

a) improving cable utilization efficiency by expanding the frequency range which
can be handled and using digital transmission systems;

b) developing a list of cables for various purposes using large numbers of construc-
tion elements;

c) developing and using cable components which are standardized in terms of both
construction and electrical characteristics;

d) iaprovement of existing cable designs of all types in order to inrove their
economy, reliability and stability of electrical characteristics in the spectrum
of wideband analog and digital transmission systems. This is achieved by reducing
the use of, or completely replacing, such expensive, scarce materials as copper
and lead, used respectively to make conductors and jackets, with aluminum, steel
and new, improved plastics; increasing the mechanical strength of cable elements;
using new manufacturing technology;

e) finding new installation methods and improving existing ones; improving the
quality and reliability of connections; reducing the cost of installation opera-
tions and the amount of labor consumed therein;

f) theoretical and experimental investigation of the electrical characteristics

of cables in the wideband analog and digital transmission system spectrum, primar-
ily questions of the effect of nonuniformities in the wave impedance and cross-
effects on the quality the data transmitted, and standardizing them on the inter-
national scale.

Coaxial comunications cables were exhibited by the SAT and LT! companies (France),
Nokia (Finland). was (The Netherlands), as well as the IMO combine (609.). The

2!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exhibits and handout literature indicate that. as before, the basic types of

coaxial cables used in the long distance systems in these countries employ stan-
dard 2.6/9.5 and l.2/6.6 pairs.

The construction of these pairs is standard, and their elements differ little from
one another. For example, the internal conductors are made of signal-conductor
copper wire with a nominal diameter of 2.6-2.65 mm (for 2.6/9.5 pairs) and 1.18-
l.2 mm (for 1.2/6.6 pairs). The outside conductors consist of a cylinder made of
copper band 0.25 In thick (for 2.6/9.5 pairs) and 0.15 or 0.18 m (for 1.2/6.6
pairs) with a single longitudinal "corregation"-type seam and with nominal inside
diameters of 9.5-9.75 mm (for 2.6/9.5 pairs) and 6.6 mm (for 1.2/6.6 pairs).

The insignificant differences in the diameters of the conductors used in the cables
in a number of countries while employing various types of insulation result from
the attempt to obtain a 75-ohm wave impedance (for 2.6/9.5 pairs at 2.5 MHz and
1.6/6.6 pairs at 1 MHz) and to maintain nominal attenuation at 10°C at 1810.3 dB
at 60 an: (for 2.6/9.5 pairs) and 5.3 dB at 1 MB: (for 1.2/6.6 pairs) for a given
frequency dependence.

The shielding is made of two steel bands. except for the French cables containing
1.2/6.6 pairs, where bimetal bands (copper-plated steel) are used.

The polyethylene washers are the main type of insulation used in 2.6/9.5 pairs.
1.2/6.6 pairs use several types of insulation: polyethylene bladders (France),
polyethylene sleeves (CUR); polystyrene cord (Finland), polyethylene washers with
a plastic tube around them (The Netherlands).

The outside insulation on the coaxial pairs usually consists of plastic strips
(1.2/6.6), paper strips (2.6/9.5) as well as plastic tubes, in order to increase
electrical strength.

The electrical characteristics of the pair constructions (cf. table), regardless
of some slight differences, meet the requirements of CCITT Recommendations 6.623
and 6.622.

These cables are produced with the following capacities: 2.6/9.5 - from 1 to 22
pairs, and l.2/6.6 from 1 to 68 pairs, or in combination configurations such as

8 2.6/9.5 pairs and 6 1.2/6.6 pairs. Coaxial cables of varying capacity produced
by the MK? Company are shown in figure 1.

The dynamics involved in increasing the nunber of pairs can be seen using the ex-
ample of French cables employing 1.2/6.6 pairs used in the networks in that coun-
try. The cables made between 1968 and 1970 had an average capacity of 6.5 pairs.
increasing to 16 pairs during 1976-1980. The production of cables with capacity
of up to four pairs practically ceased in 1975 due to the lack of orders for
them. Eighteen-coaxial cable was first produced in 1970, and 26-coaxia1 in

1972. The 68-coaxial cable displayed by the SAT Company at the exhibition was
first produced in 1976. It is used in small amounts in the network, and on

short links.

25
FIM!(NWH(JAI.USE4MHLY
souooz) E

56(952) i
.for uni
:' 50 “BBC

 

I
35,upi
:060!
I
I
I
I
I
a

I
7510.6 [75: Inns '75:1.o 75:0.3 75¢ '7s¢1.o
(1002) [1.0 lper a per 2.5 (1002) 0.3 per
75*0.‘ ' nu; 7510.2 per 2.5 ill:
(95:) I (90:) 2.5
per an: i per 2. HR:
i .‘ m3 - . _
.-... _ .._..._._ ....-. -t.-. 7-..- ‘———
(080009 5 50(10 ‘SCIML 50 (1001) i 50 .50
56(801) i 56(952)’ for i 56 (952) I (10(3)1 (1.0“)
for 1 1 - i font '50nsec 56 5
- so u r1 ! 'p (95!) E (95:)
lab-lo” I for lfor
. for 1' 1
l .11. - $3" “353"
l M .. - ,..- .9? 92¢..-
- - under ' 40, l - 41 :35
' study up to I be- 7 (10(1)
1 60 wen - 38
l . m: I ‘0’ (952)
a j 70 in 4-
' ; E 5 an: 62 H3:
I z I band,
I 30*
. in 20-
; 100
: “at
! ' band;
. 20*
| in 62-
! ; 500
i . HR:
; ' - ' bind
.-.- .. _ ..-:._—..—-—-—- -— ----+- --- .——r——-
MuJ—J____i“°n _L____.___' ..__..‘ J...

 

 

Figure 1

All of the coaxial cables contain balanced pairs, either quadded, or pairs and
quads combined with 0.5-1.4 III copper conductors in conjunction with 1.2/lo.lo co-
axial pairs. and from 0.6 to 1.3 u. in conjunction with 2.6/9.5 pairs.

These coupanies have nainly switched over to the use of aluminu- jackets. either
anooth or corregated. in their coaxial cables. Nonetheless, according to the
prospectus fro- the "It? Company, there is another direction as well - the use
of alminu- polyethylene laminate. Lead jackets are also still in use. Cables
with lead jackets were displayed, for example, by the Nokia Comany.

A promising direction is the use of alumina for the outside conductors of co-
axial pairs. This makes it possible to conserve scarce copper and to increase
the mechanical strength of the pairs and the cables as a whole. and their relia-
bility as a consequence.

Hulti-pair coaxial cables employing 2.8/10.2 pairs with the outside conductor
made of aluminun were displayed by the SAT and HT colpanies. These cables are
already being used extensively in the French system The use of aluninun for

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ufl‘lklﬂlo UOG UWLI

the outside conductor provides copper savings of approximately 602 as compared
with a standard 2.6/9.5 pair, and has identical electrical characteristics. In
conversations, the company representatives expresed the opinion that the 2.8/10.2
pair will become basic and will fully replace the earlier 2.6/9.5 pairs, as well
as the 3.7/13.5 with aluminum outside conductor. The CCITT is considering the
question of standardizing the 2.8/10.2 pair on the international scale, with

the following conductor design dimensions proposed: inside - solid copper with

nominal 2.8 mm diameter; outside - aluminum strips 0.7 mm thick with a longitud-
inal welded seam and nominal diameter of 10.2 mm.

As follows from the prospectuses, technology exists to manufacture cables with
2.8/10.2 pairs and an outside aluninum conductor with capacity of 1-22 pairs.

Figure 2 shows a 12-pair 2.8/10.2 cable produced by the LTT Company.

 

Figure 2

French and Finnish companies exhibited single-coaxial cables with familiar con-

structions in underground and overhead versions which are analogous to the VKPAP
single-coaxial cables produced in the USSR.

It should be noted that overhead cables. not only single-coaxial, are used widely
in these countries. For example, Finland uses four-coaxial overhead cables with

1.2/4.6 pairs. In the opinion of company representatives, the operation of over-
head cables produces no problems.

Microcoaxial cables using 0.7/2.9 mm pairs were not exhibited this time at the
exhibition by even one country. However, recommendation 0.621 was adopted in 1976.
in which their basic design and electrical characteristics were defined: internal
conductor of copper wire with nominal 0.7-mm diameter; 2.9-n- inside diameter of
outside conductor made of 0.1-mm copper strip; shield made of 0.1-mn steel strip:
75 t 2.5 ohm wave impedance and 1 MHz: -36 dB (100!) corrected attenuation of
echos from internal heterogeneities measured by 100-nsec sine-squared pulse;

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORTOFFHJAI.USE(N‘LY

-8.9 dB/km attenuation at 1 HR: at IO'C; -135 dB near- and crosstalk attenuation
in 0.5-20 HM: band.

It is considered technically and economically most advisable today to use l.2/b.b
pairs for analog transmission systems operating at frequencies 0f up to 12 H“:

and for digital systems operating at speeds of up to 140 mbps, and 2.6/9.5 pairs
for up to 60 MM: and up to 140 mbps and higher, respectively. A trend has recently
been noted toward increasing use of digital transmission systems on the coaxial
cables which provide the basis for the long distance communications system in

many foreign countries. For example, there are plans to use digital transmission
on 90: of all long distance lines in France by 1990.

The use of wideband analog transnission systems and high speed digital systems

has forced many companies to improve their technology for manufacturing coaxial
cables in order to ensure stability of the electrical characteristics of the pairs
in the spectrum of these systems.

Instead of press-fitting cut washers, technology has been developed to cast them
directly on the inside conductor, which increases the uniformity. electrical
strength and mechanical stability of coaxial pairs.

New technology is being used to twist the coaxial pairs to form the conductor.
in which the pitch of the twist constantly changes along the length of the cable.
This makes it possible to avoid repeating heterogeneities having the same period
as the pitch of the twist, thus eliminating their strong effect on transmission
characteristics in the high frequency range. Technology has also been improved
in terms of increasing the surface quality of the conductors employed in the
coaxial pairs.

The use of modern technology for manufacturing coaxial cables and the availability
of special instrumentation for testing and evaluating electrical characteristics
of pairs during production allow the companies to guarantee stability. and ensure
precise knowledge of the transmission parameters of the coaxial pairs throughout
the entire spectrum of the analog and digital transmission systems employing them.

Balanced high frgguency communications cables. No new types of balanced HF cables
were presented at the exhibition. The Nokia Company and KHO combine exhibited
familiar constructions of long-distance balanced HP cables analogous to the HMSA
cables produced in the USSR. It follows from the prospectuses of the GDR that

the star-twisted cables with an aluminum jacket produced by the KHO combine are
suitable for use in analog transmission systems with a maximum line spectrum fre-
quency of 522 K32, and in digital transmission systems operating at up to 8488 amps.

Analysis of the prospectuses of the French companies indicated that. for example,
the LTT Company is producing cable of this type with a maximum capacity of 12
star-wound quads with conducting cores 0.9. 1.2 and 1.3 mm in diameter with paper
or porous polyethylene (except for cables with 0.9-mm conductors) insulation.
These cables are designed for use at frequencies of up to 552 K32.

Balanced as cables with star-twisted quads are also used in a broad frequency range

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Ulb UI'I‘ILIRL U5L URL.

in the USSR. For example. the K-lOZOS and lKH-lZO equipment exhibited in the
Soviet division operate over these cables (up to 4896 MHz and 8668 mbps. res—
pectively).

Cable fittings. Sections on cable fittings were presented at the exhibition by
Nokia (Finland), Philips, ECG-Europa and NKP (The Netherlands), Raychem (French
division), CIT-Alcatel (France) and NITTO (Japan). The Nokia Company-demonstrated
a method for joining a 2.6/9.5 coaxial pair which provides uniform wave impedance
at the junction. This method consists of butting the inside connector together
and connecting the outside connector with shaped half-couplings without changing
the inside diameter of the inside conductor. During the installation, the poly-
ethylene discs are replaced with fluoroplastic, and the shield is restored by
winding on pre—straightened seal shielding strips. Both the inside and outside
conductors are joined using high—temperature self-fluxing solder. The inside
conductors are soldered using solder in the form of a sleeve, while the outside
conductors are soldered with strips placed on the edge of the inner surfaces of
the half-couplings. The inside and outside conductors are soldered by means of
universal electrical soldering tongs with copper-graphite electrodes.

The Nokia Company also displayed cylindrical unattended repeater containers for
the IKM-30 system, with 54 repeaters for installation in cable channeling wells
and with 2 and 8 repeaters for installation on towers. The unattended repeater
container for man-hole installation (figure 3) has a removable sealing cover which
is bolted to the housing through a rubber insert, and can be put under autonomous
positive gas pressure. The towerbmounted containers (figure 6) have removable
cap-like covers which are also sealed with rubber inserts. The flanges of the
trapezoidal cross-section of the cover and container base are joined by a sleeve
having the same shape. These containers have an anti-corrosion coating and are
provided with cable stubs approximately six meters long with a factory sealed
end piece.

 

30
IWJR‘OFF1C1A1.lﬂ5EZ(NVLY
The CIT-Alcatel Company displayed a cylindrical unattended repeater container for
oil and gas pipeline communications systems (figure 5). This container is designed
to employ single-coaxial cable. The cable inputs are designed as a pressed poly-
ethylene feed-through from the line cable to the station cable, which is terminated
by a connector. The cable input devices are connected to the container with the
help of rubber inserts with additional special sealing agent poured around the
inlet tube. One design feature of this container is the use of a protective cap
which uses the principle of a diving bell, which prevents water from_entering the
container even if it is fully submerged.

 

Figure 5

The NR? Company showed a method of installing cable connectors and terminating de-
vices for 2.6/9.5 cables. The pairs are joined in the traditional way, by low-
temperature soldering employing sleeves to join the inside conductor and cylindrical
inserts and sleeves for the outside conductor (figure 6). The installation of the
terminating device is singular in that the 2.6/9.5 coaxial pairs are first connected
directly to its small connectors, after which these connectors are secured to the
plate of the termination device (figure 7).

31
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Figure 6

 

figure 7

The Philips Company displayed a container which accomdates unattended repeater
equipment for analog system and one for digital systems operating over coaxial
cable. The container (figure 8) is made of aluminum alloy with a protective anti-
corrosion coating. The design of the container allows connection of cables with
either lead, aluminum or steel jackets. The mainline cable is connected to the
container by joining it with the flexible station cables of the cable input device
using standard mounting parts. The container is sealed by means of a U-shaped
rubber gasket. The air space between the walls of the insert is used for quick
checking of the seal when the lid of the container is closed.

The Raychem, ECG-Europa and NIT'm companies displayed a number of heat—seating
articles: tubes, cable guards, apli‘t couplers for cable mounting made of various
materials - polyolefins. polyvinyl chloride, fluorine-containing elastomer. fluoro—
plastic, etc. The shrinkage factor of the heat-seating articles produced by these
companies is between 1.25 and 6.0. Heat-seating articles with relatively small
diameters - up to 120 III — are made by extrusion or pressure casting. The NITT‘O
Company also produces large-diameter heat-shrink tubing - up to 1200 mm - using a

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 8

new technology: welding heat-shrink file on special forns.

The "Bade 200" heat-shrink cable guard produced by Baychen (figure 9), with a
shrinkage factor of about five, is of interest. The coupling includes the heat-
shrink cable guard, a flexible support tie nade of stainless steel which fixes the
seas: of the guard; a support casing; solvent-impregnated wipers to renove grease
iron the cable; a piece of emery paper for cleaning the cable; silica gel to be
placed in the coupling; aluminum foil for repairing the cable shield; clamps for
installing the split coupler guard: and installation instructions. The guard is
coated with tsqerature-sensitive paint which allows visual monitoring of the
optiaal seating temperature. The attachment of wedge clamps makes it possible to
seal several (two or three) cables.

 

Figure 9

Cable guards used to repair cable jackets with a plastic claap and a shrinkage
factor of three are also produced by the BOO-Europa Coapany. These guards use two
types of glued substrates - one to seal the guard to the cable and the other to

seal the guard around the clamping connection. Tesla (Czechoslovakia). SITEL
(France) and Sedlbauer (no) displayed overvoltage protection devices - spark gaps
and isolation transforners. The spark gaps produced by the 8113!. Company are

glass articles containing radioactive gas e-ploying tungsten leads which are designed

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a van vs a as at... «mu. en‘ul

for ignition voltage of 260 V d.c. and nominal shock current load of up to 20 ILA.
The inherent capacitance of the spark gaps does not exceed 5 pf. The Tesla spark
gaps are of glass-and-Ietal construction and are also designed for pulsed currents
of up to 20 RA. These spark gaps are distinguished by their small dimensions.

The isolation transformers produced by the Sedlbauer Company are designed for protec-
tion against overvoltages occurring in coilunications cables running in the same

channeling as power cables. The transformers are produced with output inpedance
of 600 ohms (for 0.3P6 KHz range) and 150 ohms (tor 6-252 and 6-552 KB: range).

BIBLImRAPHY

l. CCITT Orange Book, Vol. 111.1. Reco-endation 6.623, 6.622, 6.621. Moscow,
Izdatel'stvo Radio 1 svysz', 1981.

2. Commutation et transmission, 1980, No. 2.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 mac”, "Blektrosvyazm. 1982

6900
(:80: 5500/ 1019

3‘.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omnu. use ONLY

USSR

CITY memos: CARES
Hoscow EEKTBOSVYAZ' in Russian No 6 Apr 82, pp 60-63

[Article by 0.1.. Sharle]

[Text] City telephone cables were exhibited at the "Svyas'-81” exhibition by the
foreign companies are (The Netherlands), Nokia (Finland), LTT andSAT (France) and
the mo cowine (60R). These have in col-on, as before, the employment in series-
produced cables of current conducting copper cores 0.0-1.0 us in diameter, primar—
ily 0.6-0.6 -, although we know from the literature that a nusber of countries

are working on replacing copper conductors with conductors made of alunimn alloy
or copper aluminum. In particular, a large portion of the distribution and nainline
telephone systen in Great Britain has been switched over to cable with aluminum

conductors in cities.

As before, there are two types of conductor insulation: air-paper (tubular paper
in the countries named above) and polyethylene - solid and porous (except for the
GDR, where polyethylene-insulated cables are produced almost exclusively).

Some of the countries (for example, The Netherlands) continue to use paired twisting
of conductors into groups. while other countries use quaddsd twisting (60R, Finland,
France). The overall structure of the cables is primarily bundled, with individual
color-coding of all 10 pairs in an elementary bundle, and with each cable pair a and
b clearly distinguished.

The maximum nuﬂier of pairs in the cables ranges from 2 to 2700 (as we know, the
maximum nudero in the US and Japan are 3300-3600). Table 1 gives an idea of the

ranges of pair nulbera which the participating countries use in cables designed
for installation in cable conduits (i.e., unshielded) or directly in the ground
(shielded), as a function of the diameter of the current conductors.

Characteristic tendencies in the development of city telephone cables include the
following: a continuing attempt to replace lead shields in cables with air-paper
insulating jackets of other metals (steel, e.g., in the PKG. and aluminum in Finland)
and even plastic (in The Netherlands): increasing employ-eat of cables with poly-
ethylene insulation - sealed, i.e., with the empty space in the core filled with

'a hydrophobic comound; searches for improved methods of cable sealing - completely

fillins the conductor with petrolatu. (petroleu jelly), partial sealing with

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l
Exhibitor Conductor Cable Number of cable pairs with copper conductors
country Insulation with diameter, 1-

—--“nm 1.0

The Nether- Air-paper 01th and 100-2600 100-1200 100-9H - -

lands without
armor
Finland Air-paper Hithout 00-2600 100-1200 100-4»- - - -
armor
with 00-1600 10-1200 10-600 - 10 -
armor
Polyethy- With and - 3-200 10-100 - 10-50 -
lene without
armor
France Air-paper Without 226-2688 8-896 28-896 - 28-672 2263668
armor
With - 2-668 28-668 - 28-226 226
armor
Polyethy- Without 8-2688 8-896 8-896 - ' 8-672 -
lene armor
GDR Polyethy- without - 6-1000 - 6-600 -
lene armor

*0.63-mm conductor_dianeter

waterproof plugs (The Netherlands). as well as hydrophylic dry powders (France);
universal manufacture of self-supporting cables with built-in support cables
carrying 10-100 pairs (and even 200 in Finland); production of special cables with
group shields for digital trans-ission systems (PKG, Finland); replacement of

shielding in cables with polyethylene insulation with special uninsulated protec-
tive conductors.

Cables with air-pager insulation. Cables with air-paper insulation are produced in
The Netherlands carrying 100 or more pairs. All of the cables are bundle-twisted:

the loo-pair cables are twisted from 10—pair elementary bundles, (200-600)32 cables
are twisted from 50x2 main bundles, and (60042600)x2 cables are twisted from 100x2

main bundles. Seven colors are used for color-coding of the pairs in each elemen-
tary 10-pair bundle (table 2).

36
POI! omcuL use ONLY
Color of conductor
insulation

    
 
  
  

Color of conductor
insulation

 

Nuder of pairs
Number of pairs
in bundle

in bundle

    

  
   
   
   
 

1 blue

2 orange orange
3 green green
a brown brown
5 stay stay

 
 

The primary and most important feature of "KP cables is the cod>ination of air-
paper insulation with an aluminum polyethylene jacket (when necessary the cables
can be produced with a lead jacket). A polyethylene-coated shield made of aluminum
strip is laid lengthwise along the desiccated cable core, with a polyethylene
jacket welded in place during extrusion. A barrier is thus formed which prevents
moisture from penetrating the cable. The weight of the cable is slightly more
than half the weight of cables with lead jackets.

There is no difference in the numbers of pairs carried in armored and unarmored
cables used in The Netherlands. The maxi-um outside diameter of non-armored cables,
which is limited by the conduit dis-eter. is 75 a, while armored cables up to 87 m
in diameter are produced.

The thickness of the polyethylene-aluminum jacket is from 1.6 to 2.6 In (in cables
with strip insulation diameter of 15-70 III). The thickness of the armor strip is
0.5, 0.8 and 1.0 n. The thickness of the protective polyethylene tubing in
shielded cables is 1.8-1.0 an. The mini-n radius of curvature of cables during
installation at teweratures above +S°C is 15 D, where D is the outside diameter

of the cable.

There is a wider range of nominal number of pairs. namely 10-2600, in Finnish
cables. Spiral twisting of the conductors is used with up to and including 150
quads. while bundle twisting is used for 200 or more quads. Cables containing
1000-2500 pairs are twisted from 50on spiral-wound bundles; no elementary bundles
are used. The construction of the conductors in, e.g., a 1600 and MOO-pair
table are thus (1 + 5 + 10)150xh and (/0 + 8 + 12)x50xlo.

One distinguishing feature of the Finnish cables is the use, in addition to the
traditional lead, of a smooth aluminum jacket 0.9-1.2 :- thick with a core diameter

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the strip insulation of approximately 22 mm and corregated aluminum 0.8-1.4 an
with larger diameters. An anticorrosive layer and polyethylene protective tubing
surrounds the aluminum jacket. The nulﬁer of pairs in cables with aluminum and
lead jackets is practically the same. 'lhe maximum outside cable diameter is 78 III.

Cables with aluminum jackets are unarmored. Cables with lead jackets are armored
using steel strips 0.5, 0.8 and 1 mm thick. Cables for river crossings which are
laid at depths of up to 25 meters are produced with conductors 0.5, 0.6 and 0.8
m in diameter, with 10-100 pairs, using a lead shield with round steel wire armor
0.3 mm in diameter, and bituminous-fiber i'npregnated protective sheathing (paper,
jute).

Cables produced in France differ from those produced in other Heat European countries
in that the number of pairs they carry are usually multiples of 14 rather than 10
(mums and (034:0.5 cables are an exception). High capacity cables carrying “8
pairs or more are twisted from 112-pair main bundles, each formed of four 28-pair
elementary bundles. The comtruction of the latter is (4+ 10)::4. Cables carrying
up to 56 pairs use spiral winding by regulation, while 210be (i.e., 112x15) cable

is twisted wing the 6x[lox(7xla)] system.

If we line up the number of pairs of Dutch, Finnish and French cables and domesti—
cally-produced cables and comsre them, it turns out (table 3) that the row of
domestic cables is most heavily concentrated in the 100—1600-pair range — 14°;

The Netherlands row contains 10°, while the most uniform rows - those of the
Finnish and French (8" each) are closest to the rational dimensional series of
preferred numbers.

The cable jackets are made of lead with 0.71 antimony added. The maxim outside
diameter of a cable carrying 2688 pairs is 70 III. i.e., slightly smaller than
the 2400~pair Finish (78 um) and Dutch (75 m) cables.

Polyethylene-insulated cables. This type of cable is produced in Finland with up
to 400 pairs (i.e.. 100x4); cables designed for conduit and trench installation
use the same construction. The core insulation is porous polyethylene, and the
center is petrolatum-filled. 10:6 cables consist of two spirals (2 + 8), cables
with 15, 25 and 50 quads are twisted from elementary five—quad bundles, while 100x10
cables are twisted from 25-quad main bundles using the (“[53:63:10] system. The
strip insulation is surrounded by an inside polyethylene jacket, and a shield made
of aluminum strip coated with a plastic film; the outside conductor is made of
photostabled polyethylene. The following are the nominal inside jacket thicknesses:
1.0 III in cables with diameter of up to 25 III inside the jacket, and 1.2 mm in
cables with diameters of 25-30 an inside the jacket. The nominal thickness of the
outside jacket are between 1.4 and 2.4 II. The maximum outside diameter of the
cable is 37 m.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3

Nunber of cable pairs

The Netherlands

 

Cables for underwater installation and certain conditions of direct burial in the
ground are protected, respectively, with armor nade of zinc-coated steel wire:

round, with 1.4-1- diameter, and 0.81:3.0 !- flat. The cushion beneath the armor
is made of bitumen and iQregnated paper, while the outside tube is polyethylene.

A color-coding systen helps to distinguish all five quads in each elementary bun-
dle. Conductor a uses blue, orange, green, brown and gray; conductors b, c and d
in all quads are colored white, yellow and red, respectively. Bach elementary
bundle in a main 25:6 bundle has a distinctive identifying winding in blue, orange.
green, brown and gray.

French cables use solid polyethylene insulation and an alminun-polyethylene
jacket (called "Alupe" in French). The systen by which the cores are twisted and
the nominal series of pair numbers are basically the sane as in cables using air-
paper insulation. The outside diameters of polyethylene-insulated cables are 5-8
percent larger on the average than cables using air-paper insulation.

In addition, high frequency city telephone cables with 0.5-In conductors and porous
polyethylene insulation are produced with a working capacity of 25-27 nf/km. Quad-
twisted cables with up to 160 star quads are used for lZ-channel transmission
systems in the frequency spectrum up to 120 KHz, or lZO-channel in the spectrum

up to 552 His. Thedistsnce between repeaters is 8 and 6 km, respectively. Pair-
twisted cables with up to 36 pairs are designed for videotelephone systens in the
frequency spectra up to 1 mg.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conductors with diameters of up to 0.5 mm in CUR-produced cables use solid insula-
tion, while 0.7-mm conductors use porous polyethylene. There are constructions with
an aluminum shield and single polyethylene jacket, and with a lengthwise corregated
copper shield placed between two jackets, the inside of polyethylene and the outside
of polyethylene or polyvinylchloride. Cables using the nost recent construction
employ uninsulated protective conductors instead of the shield ("Reductionsadern")
located in the outside spiral of the core and providing the same protective factor
on the average as a shield. The standard for the electrical resistance of the
protective conductors is 7.0 ohms/km for distribution cables carrying 3-100 pairs.
These cables, carrying conductors 0.5 and 0.7 mm in diameter, contain, respectively,
two protective cores 1.26 mm in diameter and one 1.8 mm in diameter. The standard
for the electrical resistance of the protective cores in cables with 100 or more
pairs is 2.6 ohms/km. The number and diameter of these are 631.26 and 3xl.8 mm

in cables with 0.5- and 0.7-nm conductors.

Polyethylene-jacketed cables can be laid at temperatures ranging from -20 to +50'C;
these cables can be held at temperatures between -60 and +60° before and after
installation.

Sealed cables employing an original construction were demonstrated by The Nether-
lands. Instead of filling the entire length of the empty space in the center of
the cable with petroleum jelly, a compound based on silicoorganic rubber is placed
periodically in the core. The compound has low viscosity while being injected,
but the viscosity increases upon injection, so that the compound does not spread
along the cable but rather stays in place and vulcanizes at room temperature. This
results in the formation of waterproof plugs placed at regular intervals along

the cable. These plugs are A = 20 cm long, and are placed every L - 4 m.

The method for forming plugs is suitable for both solid and porous polyethylene
insulation. The interval between the strip insulation and aluminum-polyethylene
jacket can also be sealed by using narrow rings of waterproof material outside the
strip insulation placed in the same locations as the plugs.

The company name of cables using these waterproof plugs is "Aqua Block Cable". we
know that for a given operating capacity, the outside diameters of solid filled sealed
cables 18 approximately 20 percent larger than unsealed cables, and they weigh

45—50 percent more. This can be avoided completely or partially by increasing

the acceptable operating capacity or by employing porous polyethylene insulation
instead of solid. Hhen plugs are used, the outside diameters D and weight M of

the cables is less than filled cables with D and M taken as 100 percent (figure 1).

Cables with plugs have practically the same outside diameters as unfilled cables,
and weigh no more than 10—15 percent more. As a result, savings are achieved

in the filling agent as well as polyethylene and steel (in shielded cables).
Thanks to the low degree of filling of the cable (5 percent), the influence of the
plugs on the transmission and noise protection parameters is insignificant. The
lengthwise sealing integrity of the cable is retained even after stretching and

bending and temperature fluctuations. These cables have successfully undergone
aging tests at +60°C for 300 days. '

ho

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1.

Parameter

Electrical resis-
tance at ZO'C, not
over:

cores

stub

Attenuation at
20'c at 800 a:

Insulation resis-
tance, at least

working capa-
citance at 800
Hz, not over

Test voltage:
between conduc-
tore
between conduc-
tors and
jacket (shield)

Capacitive coupling
coefficient:
average
laxinun

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

-it of
-:asurenent

ohnIIkn

-nn 3 kn

nf/kn

Parameter value in cables

The

.Ietherlandc

93

1.35

5000

52

2000

70/500I
500/500n

kl

Finland

186
1.2

2000

55

500/500-
1000/500-

I‘HICHﬂﬂCIAl.USE¢HVLY

France

186.2
1.35

5000

50

600

2250

100/300.
300/300-

GDR

190
1.19

IOOOO

‘4

2000
FOR OFFICIAL UNI-I 0NI.Y

In the opinion of the representatives of the French SAT Conpany, the employment
of cellulose-based powders applied to insulated conductors by spraying in an
electrostatic field holds promise for core sealing. If moisture should enter the
cable, the hygroscopic powder swells up, fills the emty space in the core and
thus prevents the moisture from moving along the cable.

Table k compares the electrical parameters which are standardized in different
countries for city telephone cables carrying the canon 0.5-— conductors.

The Pelten und Guilleaume Cowany (PRO) is producing special cables for secondary
digital transmission systems (8 mbps). The pairs in both directions in the
2x(34x2x0.65) cable are separated by a Z-shaped shield (figure 2). The tilt-pair
main bundles consist of four elementary bundles (8x2 + 8x2 + 9x2 4- 9x2). In the
lox(3lox2:0.65) cable, each main bundle has a separate D-shaped shield of aluminum
foil (figure 3). The cables are filled with petrolatum.

   

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Paper insulated telephone cables for local networks. NKP catalog.
2. Telephone cables for local networks. Nokia catalog.
3. Telecomunicationa cables. m catalog.
4. Cables telephoniques. Les cables de Lyon catalog.

5. Specification m: L. ‘07, L. 123. (Technical specifications of Conunications
Department-France) .

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Icrnmldchbel. Mederfrequonzhhal at: phctinonerun; md plumancel.
m caulog.

7. Aqua block cable. m catalog.

COPYRIGHT: Izutol'ctvo ”Radio 1 nyu'". "mektroovyu'", 1982

6900
080: 5500/ 1019

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(BSR

'SVYAZ'-81' INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION
Moscow BLEK‘I'ROSVYAZ' in Russian No lo Apr 82 p 66 plus inside back cover.

[Unsigned article]
[Text] Exhibits Displayed in Soviet Division of Exhibition.

1. "Kvant" quasi-electronic automatic private branch end office desigxsd for opera-
tion as part of national unified automated communications network and in depart-
mental systems. Supports automatic long distance co-Iunications and provides 28
additional types of services. Maximum capacity 2068 nmers; maximum nuﬂaer of one-
way intertoll trunks - 3810; number of outside lines - 32.

2. ELI'r-‘l' display-type telegraph terminal designed for data-processing work sta-
tions at terminals on the nationwide telegraph netvorlts; can be installed at tape-
punching positions, telegram format conversion positions, indexing them at the
message switching center, and at locations where telegram are received by telephone.

3. PPR regenerator tester, designed for certifying regenerators and digital trans-
nission systems with respect to three parameters: error coefficient, output signal
amplitude and noise tolerance; and for measuring the error coefficient in digital
transmission systems themselves at the third and fourth level of the hierarchy.

The systen consists of a code generator, error detector and mainline cable attenua-
tion simulator.

lo. "Lugs" receiving facsimile equipment.

5. Moscow city telephone systen technical operations center, serving zoo-500.000
nudzers. Designed for gathering and processing data regarding performance of
technical equipment in city telephone system; provides centralized data acquisition
and status monitoring and analysis of automatic exchange equipment, line equipment
room transmission systems. power supplies and line structures. Also has provisions
for transmitting control instructions to facilities based on the analysis. The
data received is processed on the basis of a standardised su-Io minicowuter.

6. Domestic radio equipment.

7. OUKS-l‘ terminal telegraph installation designed for automating basic technolo-
gical processes involved in processing telegrams at telegraph terminals and ex-

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m
m
m
m
m
"In urrn so“. ems. mun

changes herd-wired to message-switdiing center.

8. ASV time-service equipment used to provide time information in verbal form
upon request to subscribers of large city telephone systems.

9. "Izotop-l" transmitting and receiving facsimile equipment designed to transmit
black and vhite and color images in the form of color-separation signals over voice-

grade and physical lines; the signals are reproduced on photographic film which is
then used to print the pictures lithographically.

10. "Otel'" equipment for message accounting for all types of telephone conversa-
tions direct-dialed from hotel telephones; also used to produce documentation and
provide accounting of conversations held between the hotel guests and administra-
tion and Between the hotel administration and comnications enterprises.

11. KIT pulse-code telegraphy equipment, consisting of multiplexer, intermediate
regenerator set Kit? and subscriber trunk equipment.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'", "Elektrosvyaz'", 1982

6900
(:50: 5500/1019

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

FRAME

we! wms '10 mu AMERICAN i’lBBR OPTICS. mam manner
I

Paris L'BXPRESS in French 14-20 May 82 pp 112-113

[Article by Francoise Chirot: "SAT ls Ambitious'l

[Text] who has heard of ‘i'elecoununications Corporation [SAT]?
In high technology. it is nevertheless a leader. which
despite serious labor problens is trying to pierce the

Nae: ican market.

Teleconunications Corporation--SA‘i‘--A mysterious acronym. a little known cor-
porate nape for this 50 year old first specialising in high technology. Never-

theless, it is one of those leaders fron which the French eoonouy expects a
fresh boost.

A lengthy labor dispute and the purchase of another firs have recently twice
brought this firl, whose legendary discretion has given it the title of "the
lost anonymous telecasuunications corporatiom'I into the limelight.

with the public purchase offer it made in order to takeover Silec. it extended
its hold on the telephone cable market. At the same tine. it strengthened the
638 group of which it is a lesber.

Telecomnications. information systens. aeronautics and space are SAT's areas
of activity. The first designs cowlex and sophisticated instruments intended
for specialists. It does not sake mass-marketing products. Its clients are

powerful and rich, but rather discreet: 40 percent of its production goes to

the m, 35 percent to National Defense. Large crannies and banks purchase
the renainder.

SAT espioys 7,000 people in eight factories; 3,000 engineers, executives.
technicians. enployees. and workers labor in the research departuents and pro-
duction workshops of its Paris establishment. It occupies 50,000 n2 of floor
space in the 13th ward of the capital, in a picturesque district next to the
imnse depots of the Austerlits train station, the tall towers of the renewed
areas near the Italian Gate, and the narrow and winding streets of Old Paris.

”WMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With total sales of 2.3 billion francs, SAT is onlyone piece of a financial
arrangement which resembles a Chinese puzzle. Together with SAGE!!! [Cowany for
General Applications of Electricity 6 Mechanics] and the Signals Company, which
are similarly specialized in aeronautical and maritime equipment, signaling
systems, electronics, and information systems, SAT forms the 638 group: 19.700
emloyees in thirty establishments in France and abroad. Total sales figures:
6.5 billion francs in 1981. The Signals Company holds 40 percent of SAGal's
capital. SAGE! in turn controls 41 percent of SAT...The whole operation is
under the control of 35 Executives, an unusual aspect of this group.

Formed by the executives of the three firms, 3s Executives, which owns 40 per-
cent of the Signals Company, is the real master of 638. To achieve this. some
800 executives broke their piggybanks. In 1978, the minimal capital subscription
was 40,000 francs. payable in i years. 'Thanks to this system, we had direct
access to information and participated in the life of the group.‘ explains Jacques
Dockes, president of 3s Executives and technical planning director at SAT. -

They thus had front-row seats to watch the evolution of their firm. They had
some shaky moments, because to get out of the trouble it was in in 1978, SAT
had to make a double effort to diversify and export.

In the 70's, it had ngn rapidly, thanks to the telephone market. In those
days to get a phoneline, one had to scheme, use ones' connections, and claim pro-
fessional need. Between 1972 and 1977, the PM decided to catch up and equip
the country with new telephone centers. SAT profitted from this. Total sales

climbed 15 percent per year. The firm invested, built six factories, and hired
workers.

However, once the re-equipping was completed, SAT's growth abruptly halted:
"It is never good to depend on a single sector,” admits Georges Plantier, com-
mercial director. 0n the spot, SAT invested up to 20 percent of its total
budget in research. It has thus fine-tuned two processes which will allow it
to re-establish its reputation as an industry leader: fiber optics and
infra-red technology.

Infra-red rays offer the possibility of longer-range detection and are used in
missiles or airplanes: SAT delivers to Dassault and Aerospatiale.

Optical fibers have more peaceful uses. Lighter and more flexible than the
traditional copper wires used for making cables, they allow transmissions of 10
to 20 times more information. Mastery of this technique allowed SAT to capture
the test market of Biarritz. Five thousands inhabitants of this city will be
the first Frenchmen to enjoy "visiophone,’ the new telephone which allows one
to see the party with whom one is speaking. At the same time, thanks to a cable
network they can receive foreign television, several radio programs, consult
data banks or directly inspect their electrical meters. The work which has just
started will keep SAT busy until the middle of 1983.

R8
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 39 hour Detonator

SAT has also pierced the export narket. In Cairo, Qatar, Abidjan, and Budapest.
it has installed multiplex networks or microwave equipment. Located in more
than 50 countries, its export sales figures have reached 500 nillion francs.
Sure of its competitiveness and of its technology it is now trying to pierce the
American market. To achieve this, it is collaborating with General Optronics
and Interconnect Planning Corporation.

Diversification, high technology, and executive participation in capital invest-
nent haven't guaranteed freedom from labor disputes. In fact, SAT has just passed
through a more turbulent period than any it had known before. For two months,
work stoppages multiplied in its Paris establishment. The application of the

39 hour work week was the detonator. In February 1982 management, as in other
firms, tried to gain time and "sweep away“ certain acquired rights. Rather than
quickly negotiate with personnel representatives, it preferred to wait for the
signing of an agreement with the setallurgical industries and mines branch on
which it depends. Next, playing with a system of flexible schedules which it
had applied for a long time, it proposed to its employees a 39 hour 45 minute
workweek, anticipating the recovery of holidays expected during the year,

which recovery had until then been optional. The strike took off from that
point.

In truth, things would have worked out if the workers hadn't used the conflict
to settle an old quarrel. 'It's a fight for our dignity,“ explained one of the
employees, who had come with at least a hundred others to demonstrate in front
of the company's stand at the Components Exhibition on April 2.

Because, on the side of team play, SAT is not a leader. I'They don’t consult us
on anything,’' protested the CGT, CPDT, PO and CGC unions, which seem to practice
within those walls an unbroken unity. In fact, it seems that lawsuits are more
common than collective agreements. Thus, for having posted solidarity tracts
with the Polish movement Solidarity, as it did in many firms last winter, SAT's
CPDT saw itself cited in front of an arbitration tribunal.

The judges will also have to decide, on appeal, the case brought by SAT's manage-
ment against its unions, complaining that they disseminated and sold tracts and
newspapers in the firm's canteen. Beyond these skirmishes, however, it's the
salary policy which causes SAT's workers to grumble. In truth, there is no
agreement linking wage increases to price increases. For several years,
management has favored individual increases rather than indexed increases,
resulting in disparate salary changes. The unions estimate that “For some, it
has lead to a loss of buying power of 2.6 percent ooapared to the cos: of living.“

According to them, this change in labor policy dates back to 1972. At that
time, the firn's founders reached the age limit and were replaced by executives
who were already menbers of the hierarchy. The chief executive officer, 58
year old Jacques Boulin, is a polytech grad more interested ir technological
prowess than in public or labor relations.

F0.‘0’INJAI.UBI¢HNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“It's true that we have favored industrial development over labor policy,‘
says Georges Plantier.

'rhe reorientation of the firm's activities was necessary to insure its future.
New SA? should maintain its new direction. One small cloud remains: in the
electronics sector, it is the only large firm to remain in private hands. If.
for its own purchases, the state does not respect the principle of competition.
and decides to favor the firms it has just nationalized, SAT could pay the piper.
Even if they only murmur about it, the unions and management of SAT have at

least that one worry in' common.
COPYRIGET: 1982 s.a. Groups Express

9939
C50: 5500/2239 ED

50
roaomuumonu