ron omcuu. us: ONLY

JPRS L/10477

22 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 18/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UTE

JPIS publications contain information prinrily fro. foreign
nevspepera. periodicals and books, but also free news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language saurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was amrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaee rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nanaa preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within iteas are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Goverraaent.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WISH” 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(£0110 18/82)

CONTENTS

ASIA

AUSTRALIA

Civil Liberties Council Concerned Over Harihuana Raids
(Elizabeth Johnston; THE AUSTRALIAN, 15 Feb 82) ounces...

riefs
Harihuana Burning

BURMA
Briefs
Opium Crop Substitution Course
Opium Plants Destroyed
Opium Fields Destroyed
HONG KONG

Amendment to Narcotics Lav Permits Full Bath! Search
(mum CHINA Momma MT, 13 Mar 82) OOOOOOOOCCOOICIIIOO

Three Halysians Jailed 9 Years for Smugglin Morphine
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 19 Mar 82?

COOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOI.

Harihuana Haul From Philippines Largest Since 1975
(Donald Cheung; SOUTH CHINA KORNING POST, 20 Mar 82) ....

New Heroin Ring Smashed After Thai Courier Arrested
(SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, 13 Mar 82) ...................

American Gets 2 Years' Imprisonmmt for rting Heroin
(SOUTH CHINA WIN POST, 9 w 82 oooooooooooooooeoooo

-a- [III-W-l3821

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INNNESIA

Two Foreign women Arrested for Harihuana Trafficking
(mm, 12 Feb 82)....ooaooo'oooopooooooosoloseoooogo

Briefs
Narcotics Destroyed

HALAYSI A

Briefs
Anti-Drug Coordinating Body

PAKISTAN

Minister Discusses Eradication Program ﬁlth United btates
Officials

(mm, 21 M81. 82) 000.00.00.00000000000can...COCO-.000!

Drug Trafficking Discussed
(FBItO1’1813HORNING NEWS, 19 Mar 82)....000000000000000

Briefs
Heroin Seized in Islamabad
Heroin Snuggling Bid Foiled
Snuggler Fined
Interpol-PIA Cooperation

PHILIPPINES

Stiffer Penalties for Drug Users
(VISAYAN "mm, 22 “a, 82) IOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOC00.0.00...

Briefs
Warning on Heroin Traffic

SRI LANKA

Briefs
Ganja Plantation Raided

LATIN AMERICA

BAHAMAS
Political Figure Refuses To Blame 0.8. for Drug Problem
(Gladstone Thurston; THE TRIBUNE, 5 Mar 82) ...........

-b-

POROI-‘PICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BERMUDA

Minister Claims Youth Falling Prey to Drug Pushers
(THE MAL GAME, 13m 82) .‘OCIIICOOOOOIOOOCO00....

Two Convicted in Heroin huggling Given lS-Year Terms
(THE mm, 9H‘r 82) C....0...‘................'0’...

BRAZIL

Campinas Police Establish System To Combat Trafficking
(o mems‘opAum’ 1m82) IQOQOOOOOOOIIOOOOOIOOO

Briefs

Record Marihuana Planting Bust
Creation of Regicnal Rug Council
Cocaine Ring Disbanded in Amsterdam

MEXICO

Antidrug Coordinator Describes Zonal Pilot Plan
(n anEsmmA, 19H” 82) 00.0.0000...00.00.0000...

Briefs

Plane with Marihuana Downed
Trafficking Jail Official Sought
Harihuana Shiplent Burned
Trafficker Claims Torture

Warden Charged Hith Escape
Trafficker Found in Custody
Cocaine Shipment Seized

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Crime, Influx of Weapons Attributed to Drug Traffichng
(SUNNY G'lmpm, 21m 82) OOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOI0.0...

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
mm

Opium Smuggled From India Seized
(m mm“ GAsz, 19"”82) IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUO

IRAN

Briefs
March Drug Haul
Opium Seized in Darab

”WIMONLY
ma OFFICIAL US! ONLY

SUB-SAHARA! AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs
Ihgga Seized

HBSTWROPB

DENMARK

Two Turks Arrested in Large Heroin-amggling Case
(Anders "11$; Em 71mm, 23 m 82) eeooeeeeee

‘mrkish Gang Sentenced in Heroin wiggling Case
(Anders “is; Bmmsn Tlmm, 31 m 82) 0.0.0.0...

Briefs
[top in Narcotics Deaths

ICELAND

Morphine Removed From Life Boats; Officials Investigating
(mmumn’ 27 Feb 82) 00......OOIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

ITALY

Four Heroin Smugglers Arrested in Bari
(Ettore Giwgio Poti; MBAZZET‘EA DEL HBZZNIORNO,

2 w 82) so...eoeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeoeeeooeeeeeee

NB‘I'HERLANIB

Progress, Problems in Amsterdam lrug Scene
(LA um BMIQUB, 23 m 82) oucoo-oeeeeeeeooavoooooe

TURKEY

Briefs
Istanbul Heroin Seizure

”WWW?
CIVIL LIBERI‘IES WCIL WGNED OVER MARIJUANA RAIDS

Canberra THE AUSTRALIAN in Diglish 15 Feb 82 p 2

{Article by Elinbeth Johnston]

[Text]

Queensland-

Council {or Civil uberb'
ties is concerned pt the;
increasing number oi
arrests involving unnll
amounts 0! mailman;n

spokesman

policemllrﬂoel
Nunmuidyeoterdv
theremnlooeoncern

over the mt 0!
motorcycle riders.

”The police ere olienet-

go whole generation

with the drug lows." Xv
Nunan aid.

“The number of people

being p
being in postman“, 0!
small mounts oldnm
- lees than ﬁgm- is
suggeﬂn

“these people ne'-
mootly under 35 but
when they tench 30 or as ,
and develop diiiennti
vplueo they can't get in-
volved in public groupo
or run ior
become they hove no
criminoleonviction.”

Mr Nunan sold in one
warning on o. duty sollo-i
liar he lied handled;
eight guilty plea lnvoiv-.

ing the pouesion
moilomoimtsotmi
Juno.

“When you eons!
ihnthtbeexnt'ﬂeno:
om solicitor in I
morningyougetnnt
iettlon of how nu

people one being In
ted.” he told.

Mr Nunan aid on
oi the amt: iolioi
rude on prlvnic 1m
hes which were a to:
of tip-oils 1mm nei
boa or entranced I
iriends.

Heuidmotomych‘
er: were also a. love
tunnel-police.

Sometimes they 1
pulled up. given via!
coiled n "navy ti:
end then given n opt
in: ticket.

“Olten they are pu
over end gonded .
being deiinnt."
Nunon said.

“these aren‘t bill

"they ore yo
people who can't u.
o w or don't need
because they hove
umily to tampon.“
mum

MARIJUANA wmmc—usw Drug Squad detectives swervised the burning yeeterday
of 3000 Iarijuana plants with an eetinated street value of shoot $2 nillion.
The plots, my more than Zn high, had been growing in dense forest north oi
Newcastle. Acting on information they received from a telephaze call, 14
police raided a property near Gloucester earlier this week. In a clearing
eurromded by dense forest they {and a nursery, drying too. and irrigation
equipnent used to cultivate the narijuma plants. Police said noet plate had
been growing for up to three months and the largest sped-ens would have
fetched about $500 eadn. No arrests have been ude, but police are looking
for a man. He is described as about 45, 187 a tell, of solid build with
light brain hair. [Canberra TB AUSTRALIAN in English 12 ab 82 p 2]
BRIEFS

OPIUH CROP SUBSTITUTION COURSE--Lashio, 15 March-multiplier Course No 2/82
on cultivation of cash crops to replace opium poppy of the Peasants Asiayone
and Course No 8 on aninl husbandry and basic veterinary science were opened
at a ceremony at the special high-yield maize cultivation station of the
Agriculture Corporation here this morning. Township Party Unit Chair-Inn

ll San shoe, Township People's Council Secretary 0 San Yu and Township
Peasants Asiayone Chaimn U Sang ‘run Illa spoke on the occasion. The course
on cultivation of cash crops is being attended by 70 trainees from 16
village-tracts in NaQaung region and the animl husbandry and basic vete-
rinary science course is being attended by 16 trainees.--MB [Tut] [Rangoon
rue WORKING PEOPLES DAILY in English 22 Her 82 p a]

OPIUH PIAN'TS DESTROYEnc-Rangoon, 26 HarchnUnder the arrangement made by the
Central Narcotics Control Board, a total of 10,539 acres of opium poppy were
destroyed under Operation Ngayepan Phase II since 19 Decedler 1981. The
opium poppy destroyed by the Tatndeu, People's Police Force and the Security
Units in cooperation with local people under the leadership of the Party Unit
and People's Councils, included 3,099 acres in eastern part of Shan State

and 6,714 acres in northern part of shan State. The Tatudaw, People’s
Police Force and the working people are continuing to destroy the remaining
opium poppy plantations, it is learnt.--MB [Tart] [Rangoon THE maxim
PEOPLE'S DAILY in English 27 Her 82 p s]

OPIUN Hams Dmom-Rangoon, Burns, March 15 (APP-The Burma“ covert-ant
destroyed 336 hectares (830 acres) of opiun fields in eastern Burma. seized
981 kilos (2,163 pounds) of raw opime, 14 kilos (31 pounds) of heroin and 66
kilos (146 pounds) of narijuana between July 1 and Dec. 31 or last year. a
report eutmitted to the Parliament Monday said. Burma is a key producer of
illicit opium from which heroin is refined, and in recent years the government
has stepped up its anti-narcotics activities. The same report said the govern-
nent seized 14 Thai travlere poaching in its waters and 45 Burmese vessels en-
gaged in mgqling. The report said 85 mai cm mabers were arrested during

thzlsix-month period last year. [Rangoon m CHINA P08? in English 17 Her 82
P

C80: 5300/4930
AMENDMENT TO NARCOTICS LA" PERMITS FULL BODY SEARCH

Hong Kong SOUTH CHI

(Text)

rcno

A Bill permitting a
sentch of b?! cavities of.
“treated rug courtot
wit or without consent
was gazetted yestetday.

The Donavon: D'U‘I
(Amendment) Bill I”! Ibo
empower- the detention o! toe
mm until the examination
is a?“ cot.

from civil and criminal um:-
uiet concerning Mann liﬂtl!
notation;

All chic omega acting

Nntootia division
Wanton said there is n

no" uend in dm 3m.
cling“ “mitigate
quantities drop are con-
cealed in body awtiu.

Since Jnnuty tut you.
3) have been arrested
at Kai at nitpon alone with
3:3: concealed inside" theit

m.
The Bill also provides 0
new deﬁnition of “nanotec-
turin" to cover all one; of
the tmtment on dangerous
dru .
ﬁnd it wide. to: prote-
ention in com Where only
small quantities of dnngewtu
drop. not malice or in
themlm table. are found.
ndev the pment deﬁni-
tion. fie cannot be m-
cule o: manor-(twin;

(190 I017I.

there thete but“ Noni
molclemiatm
tionot‘nnothusehunaw

substance. into n Gannon

m. tap-nun. o:

«W muti e an.»

an drug if them" m
V.

M w :2.
tom it u n 0:.

and cheer mg m
”M- well, and
olten «bum

“$21.“ be m 1d
year, I .
Custom and Bach. cabin
nixed 85.4 of herein has
con redto tau-mom

1%; Di" nub: it clear
that my quantities ottom-
ou 12f. Mew-rd. when:
r a nm
13".». porooeei of the «4'?
mm.

France-tin an the: be
instituted in can involving

NA MORNING POST in English 13 Mar 82 p 5

wmbunhk‘

. “Whether no-

thn should ‘tnhn when

an! moi mknnd
doom. dam:

tied at '
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050053-3

THREE MALAYSIANS JAILED 9 YEARS FOR SHUGCLING mRPKINE

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA manna POST in English 19 Her 82 p 19

[Text] rm: mum. utmmAuMKumm
and Ben. Na "in. were yesterday act eateeeed to nine
yeen‘i Mfume ‘nszmﬂlb-ortbd
mot nemﬂeegbekto

Icypleededwltytompincytotreﬂieiedew

dru .
grown counsel CG. Jeeheo told Mr Justice Dena h the
ﬂighCoutthetLi-twhﬂedemto‘ae'

Investigation Unit after India. at Kei Tali trout on
Must 6 when an immigration elﬂeer Med hie lute won
the stopwatch list.

'Asked i! he Md anything to declare. Lin predeeed three
packets eeeteiein l.104.3 veins of eetert of morphine --
one from his abdomen and too "upped to his kg.

Outwtenber.Limteidhemtn ' withtve
at“? Melanin nationals. bet! saying at e Mull

Acting on this Moan-tine. Mm email. em: quo-
tioning two other men. seized 2.16““ an of eaten at
mphinlmeuitmiumetthe ei.

loWWa-MLMWRMW»
saw Ie the drop for e revud e! "83.”. (that
HK .500)plun agreement toheletoﬂedebtteeorred
thile betting on Dorset.

m m reunited in Mel-pie by a men rte-ted Ke Lo
Tm. whobrww the othertvodelutdemtohlbeuee.

They then went toSiuepore eirpart where eedl we: given
on air octet to Bangkok.

_ mdngiweundedovertoUM.intbeprueneeo/the
two other defendants. in e hotel room in Bangkok.

CSO: 5320/9126

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050053-3
NARIHUANA HAUL FROM PHILIPPINES LARGEST SINCE 1975

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNIRG POST in English 20 Mar 82 pp 1, 20

[Article by Donald Chetmgl

[Text]

CSO:

Customs men have uncov-
ered a Phili 'het-haaed drug
synditatef "I the recent
seirate of lo ltg manjuana
at Kai Tat airport

The drags. in unclaimed
ait cargo. would have fetched
SI .6 nullion on the meets.

Detenhcd at "the biggest
haul of marijuana" unee
ms. customs oﬂ'neiak said
the dtu were believed to he
luv lcca consumption.

said it would have
been latrlhaled tnainlv to
Filipina. Sam. and Chi-
aeae atudanta who have
ttudied ahead. through local
bars anddiacca. - _

The )2 paeltets of man-
jaana. each wei hleg hall’ a
tile. nae foe ie a loav-
tom-long metal eylindev. two
feet tn dtametet .

It is the biggest seizure
here at dug» originattng
froth the ”macs Canna-
bis has peev' been una

led into Hoe malay
tom Thatla . India and
Pakistan.

Although a lee pack“
were marlted "Baa‘Phok

Gold. . . Prcduet of ha}-
land." cutouts elf-cert said
they believed it a” all from
the Philippine. _

“A let ct marijuana ta
gtovtt la the notthern pan cl
the Philippines." a cum
Ipolneatnaa said.

They believed the parcela
had been delihetately labelled

5320/9121.

to confuse the dtug'a crigia
because Thal ntari'aatta is of
better quality a Mehea a
whim .

“Marijuana gtoee la
Tame...“ - m
at ' ia a: t
ln the weld.“ aaid Sealer
Supeﬁatutdeet Ks. Tong of
the Cutouts lnvastigatica
llareaa.

Custom even believe l‘cat
aunilat shi have al-
teady been smuggled into
llonglnoag ie the aaaae way
by the tyndieatecvet thapaat

”3:3... they are hallev-

edtohaveheenmchautall-
3.“an four to {he kllca

"Mayhetheyttaadthcaeaa
trial ahtpments and when
they fund that the drugs
could get in tamenlully. the:
decided to have a real :0.
were «2m .M

c all r
ntent amvetl ctt Fanny“?
and a tnan tutaed up at l
Tat: todaim it.

He paid the frelght
charge. but failed to return to

usuuttdllﬂk'uloﬂby
alvline oﬂlciala that custom
etl'lcenwanted weaatnlee lt.

Aimed by thia. chateau
cﬂ'tcen dtilld two hot. ia
the iadet oa Match 5 aad

l he d M‘
,Ssnittmﬁl. m'

Custom men told a pres
conference yeateaday that
they usually eaatatae ia-
hcund cargo “on a aeleetive
but"

“In thia case we laud
thatthecat wenaelgaed
tcattl "Mlmhg‘thaab:
cctttnaey a a t t
a was toughly nada.‘
aa' AaaiataatSanatiatenthat
Davidng

"Th't u to
examine. theme

haeaatada
utethutcaatcataelfleataate
lookleg for thee
3.“. tnelading the one who
mad tocellact thaahlpaaat.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050063-3

NEW HEROIN RING SHASHED AFTER THAI COURIER ARREST-

Hong Kong SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST in English 13 Mar 82 p 5

Text Alert cutonta ofﬁcers The thapecta are «patted

[ l have smashed I newly-found to he charged with who
drug syndicate when they 0‘ ﬂaw dam {at the
mud one ii In of heroin pupae of Ink-(ll mulch-
hnm ldtniTa am, ”4.. h mg. '

New 0- m! 8 Police mm an that
folk top and Mom of t meta-cue" tevu
“ma“ “" ‘° W ‘9 ‘ formed recen y to take
itcyur-old 3‘; “:2" “value of the ll!!!“ of
w n he uni tom u- u m“
lot on Thursday eﬂemoon. . 35:, and the I“ “Oh

The aeiute would have
been wotth 3650.000 on the TM (mm 5,“ II I:
retailmarket.. made ”want? “'9 |
Custom: olﬂcerauaedthe owner ‘3' _ , “W '0
movie: It 'hit“ Ind shl- “9" "W ““0?th
dotted him to a hotel in Mid- recently. som- n .
:1: Rozd. Tallulah-s. “1.1:? mm of the m ”a.
ma 9 contact "" ' ' mm ol’ huge (I shipments
mm to the hotel lobby- by customs «as: theamet
Acmmm".—”‘m' prices of No 3 heroln have
9'! {tom K.” 1:5- 1' lw" ahot up almost Ill) pet ant
emtonet— tent: at ,
the hotel end waived the overthe putthne weeks
suitcata.
The two men and the
woman were then mend
and detained foe (whet in-
qmriea.
A aiatet of the Thai
woman and anothei man
. were alao mated in follow-
tt raids in Kowloon and the
cur Territoda early yester-
day morning.
The ma releaaed on
32.000 1 each pending fu-
thetinveatiutiotu. .
Cutotna acumen aatd last
night that they use still
hunting fot the a te‘t
mastermind. ldentined a I
Chia Choy then who had
been y lmtiutnd
by teen of the Cutouts
Investigation nut-a.
C50: 5320/9126

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050053-3
AMERICAN GETS 2 YEARS' IMPRISONHENT FOR MORTING mom

Hong Kong 5001'? CHINA MORNING POST in English 9 Mar 82 p 10

[Text]

A dent-mute Amerieen
was yetterday sentenced to
two years‘ impruoomertt by
Judge O'Dee et Kowloon Que-
triet Court after pieedm.
guilt to importing heroin
whie won "in merit" from
New Delhi to Loo Annalee.

Edwin Otto-White 46)
vol token nooooteioee rotn
en eircreﬁ Liner-ruined: e
stopover at i e eirpoﬂ
en route to the United Staten
oouFehrtaery I l. the court was
to .

He wee edwttttedto eeo
Eliuheth Hoepitel w ere

three plastic peck? eon-
teiei drtt were oend in

his rig ttoe .

Two deye Inter he regain-
ed conedm and comat-
ed to en oyeretion derin
which 43 more peeing:
drop. including one torn one.
were removed from his
salvo-intestinal tract.

The court was toId the! e
tout or ”596 mm: of I
drop mill-re attaining 162
mate of seite of eeter of
morphine were in the unch-
‘% ‘ Judge

II sentence.
O'Dea "I‘d the! he hed taken
into oeuuid'erntigz m:
plee ”it . '
disability end isoo-opmtioo
with the police.

The 1"“. added that he
bed also considered the dif-
ference in White't use with
thoee of Ioeel poopie who Ited
families to “wort end were
convicted of similar offences.

It wee eeid thet White hee
e wife. who in eho denl‘ end
mortdthreedeuhm

He null her to anon the
two demure.

e elder deuhter

end ”3‘3““ and heale-

on new

rent New Delhi to Ltn An-

;eiee end lied dnoe returned
to the United Stem.

White wee Interviewed In
hoepitel omen of the
Neurotic I on Petro-
:? l1 efler which he e .

et Scott-Kowloon
oneehe ofpoeee-l deo-
gerone p for on wfnl
tanoelting.

Hie cue wee matured
‘é’msm °°"‘ °'

Yeeterdey. the Crown
“MMMJ‘ “being I
person w e dew

wee imported in tren-
wend offered no evidence
mien. hint on the chem of
moo. .
N0 FOREIGN WOMEN ARRESTED FOR MARIJUANA TRAFFICKING
Jakarta HERDEKA in Indonesian 12 Feb 82 pp 1, 1?.

[Text] An Italian woman and an Anerican wouan were arrested last Monday

in Bali for narcotics trafficking, a NERDEKA correspondent learned from
Police Brigadier Soehsrjono, commander of the Principal Narcotics Detective
Unit.

According to Soeharjono, Maria Rosaria Criecones, born in Rona on 2 May 1968,
had, on three occasions, sold drugs brOught from Bangkok via Bong Kong,

Singapore and Jakarta for Isrketing in Den Pasar. 8611.

Maria, who holds passport no. 732877, was arrested by nabere of the Prin-
cipal Narcotics Detective Unit on behalf of the Amtralian Federal Police.
An Interpol report had revealed that a suitcase full of marijuana was being
transported via Garuds flight GA 965. The case was owned by a passenger
nmed Harm, who had disanbarked in Ngurai Rai Airport. Den Pasar.

The Detective Unit alerted Bali Police Regional Caused to watch Garuda.
About 3 February, a woman claimed to Garuda that she had lost a bag. Ber
nane was Maria, and she was Italian.

The trap was set. The bag was turned over to Garuda by the police. Maria
was inbnned, and on Sunday at 1300, she appeared at the airport to claim
the bag she had reported as lost. The Police arrested her. -

Soeharjono told HERDBKA that 100 ganja stalks weighing 600 grmns were con-
cealed in the bag's lining. The ganja had been bromht fras Bangkok via
Hong Kong, Singapore and Jakarta, and she was able to slip away with her
bag to board a domestic Gsruia flight for Den Pasar.

She also bronght a quantity of brown stger, stored in a doll. Accorditg
to Police Major Rusdi, who arrested her, the brown stgar was to later be
dissolved in water, and injected, like heroin.

Marin was not alone in her narcotics dealing. She worked with a young
American woman, who stayed at the Golden Village, Kuta. Claire Ritter,
passport no. a.2754870, born in New York on 2!. October 1947, had traveled
to Indonesia five times on a tourist visa. Frat her, police siered 15
ganja stalks ueighing 15 grains. She claimed the ganja was only for her
own use. But Maria confessed that the two hm:I sold dust to young people

in Bali.

Responding to a METOEKA qtery, Police Major Rusdi, chief of the 1K Sattna
Narcotics Detective Unit, said the Thai sticks they were selling is used in:
smoking, and is of higher quality than other ganja.

The two foreign nationals are now beitg held by the Police Regional Cmand,
Bali. for further investigation and prosecution.

9197
C50: 5300/8320

10
BRIEFS

NARCO‘I‘ICS DBSTROYBD-Jhe Omittee to Bradicate Narcotics (PPR), coupoaed
of elaents of the Departments of Health and Juatice, burned a qmntity of
morphine and opium in a Jakarta cr-utoriul. The drtge included 2.526 kg

of morphine and 49.665 kg of opiul. The m 1a tasked with destroying
confiscated narcotics. Representatives fro- the navy and police attended
the burning. [mcerpt] [Jakarta SINAR WAN in Indonesian 27 Feb 82 p 2]
9197

cso: 5300/8320

11
BRIEFS

ANTI-DRUG COORDINATING BODY-Halaysia and Singapore have set up a coordinating
body that will enable drug enforcing office:s from either side to operate
across their con-on border. This was stated by the director of the Central

Narcotics Bureau in Singapore today. He said the formation of the border
drug committee followed serious concern in the two countries over the possible

influx of drugs after a recent bunper opium harvest in the golden triangle.
He said direct telephone links had been established between the bureau and
the Malaysian police in all state capitals of peninsular Malaysia in conjunc-
tion with the setting up of the committee. Malaysia and Singapore had been
linked by a Joint drug liaison committee for the past 2 years. [BK090202
Kuala Lumpur International Service in English 0800 GMT 7 Apr 82 BK]

650: 5300/5704

12
MINISTER DISCUSSBS ERADICATION mm "11‘?! UNIT!) STATES OPFICIALS

Karachi 0388 in B19118}: 21 MI: 82 p 6

[Text] Washington, Larch 20~Pakistan's Interior Minister, Mr Humoud Barcon
went to the hill again on Friday and exchanged views with the influential
Senator from Texas, Chairman John ﬂows of the Senate Armed Services Comittee.

His visit on Thursday was to the House Foreign Affairs Cauittee where. among
others, he met Congressean Pritchard, who has been to Pakistan several tines
and has steadily supported the Pakistan case.

his discussions on Friday with the US Acting Secretary of State Hr Halter

Stonasel, covered a wide canvas but concentrated more specifically on nutual
collaboration on the eradication of drug - addiction, which is causing deep
concern to nations worldwide.

Mr new aaroon informed Secretary Stoessel that Pakistan was just as anx-
ious as USA to save its youth from the global spread of the narcotic epiduic.
Islamabad was determined to curb the evil not only as a national duty, but
also as a religiOus obligation for. Islam forbade all that causes intoxica-
tion. 1!) that end, Pakistan was co-operating not only with the United States
but also with Norway, Sweden and other countries threatened by the problu.

Inhiriting Factors

At the same time. the Pakistan Interior Minister pointed to certain inhibit-
ing factors, such as the location of most poppy-fields and plants in the far-
flung tribal areas which for centuries had mined outside the pale of nor-
mal law, and unless tribes-en, cultivating poppy, could be tapted into ac-
ceptable alternatives, the probl. could not be checked. Nevertheless, a
major effort was under way not only to offer than a lucrative crop-substitu-
tion but also a conprehensive socio-ecouoaic infrastructure development plan.

1111:, together with the crack-down in the settled areas had already begun to
pay dividends, he added. M years ago. the poppy crop a-ounted to 800 tons:
It has since been reduced to 100 tons and the canpaign has been further
intensified.

13
US Aid Programme

According to P?! Special Correspondent, Ghani Erabi, the United States has
proposed a fiscal 1982 international narcotics control assistance programs
of 2.9 million dollars to be used as under.

l. 35 million dollars to help with design and inpl-sntation of a development
pro ect, intended to support the ban inposed by Islamabad on opium production
by providing farmers with alternative income sources 675,000 dollars do the
Pakistan Narcotics Control Board for training and equipment support for en-
forcement officers, 100,000 dollars for research in drug abuse in Pakistan
and for training in treatment and rehabilitation, 300,000 for general pro-
grams development and support costs and 475,000 dollars for assistance in
enforcement programmes for the port of Karachi.

Prohibition Order

The Congressional staff study mission that visited Pakistan last fall, in its
report has said: “The Goveruaent of Pakistan appear! genuinely committed to

suppressing the illicit production and export of narcotics from Pakistan. It
is also concerned about increasing levels of drug abuse within Pakistani so-

ciety and how to address this problem effectively. Until l9"9 opium produc-

tion was regulated but not illegal (opim poppies were cultivated legally as

an important cash crop under the British.

--Presidsnt Zia-ul-Haq issued the Prohibition (enforcuent of Redd) Order of
February 1979 which essentially codified and applied the strictures of Islan-
ic law to illegal narcotics. The mder prohibits the possession production,
transfer and receipt of narcotics and prescribes very severe penalties. This
was further strengthened by an outright ban on the cultivation of opiua
plants.

Crop-Substitution Plan

At the same time, adds the report, Pakistan recognises that enforcement alone,
will not solve the narcotics problem and with UN assistance, it has been car-
rying out a pilot crop-substitution project providing small farmers subsi-
dised fern inputs in return for their abandoning poppy cultivation. But the
project has not been a complete success. 'lhe Pakistan Government has come to
the conclusion that it must combine the crop-substitution with an entire in-
frastructure of socio-economic develop-ant in target areas."

But it must be recognised, "the Congressional report concludes, "that under-
taking comprehensive development effort of this nature is a caaplex, lengthy
and expensive proposition".

C50: 5300/5693

11:
DRUG WICKING DISCUSS!)
Karachi MORNING NEWS in Biglish 19 her 82 p 6
(Editorial; ”trafficking in Drug“]

[Text] The four-day international Islaaic conference which will begin in the
holy city of Medina from March 23 to discuss threadbare tho dreaded aenace of
increasing use of narcotics all over the world indicates the seriousness of
the problem. The conference will be attended by the Ulana. thinkers and spa-
cialists frost all over the world who will ponder over the problu froa the
Islamic point of view and suggest ways to put down the illicit trade Since
the end of the Second world War, when trafficking in illicit drugs suddenly
increased unceasing efforts by various Govern-ants have continued unabated
without any checking the racket. That is an indicator of the skill in organ-
isation and management of the unholy trade. It also higlights the inadequacy
of the existing laws and methods so far employed to combat the aenace. Ila
hope the conference wuld give special thought to this aspect and cone out
with a plan effective enough to nest the challenge.

addiction to narcotics has now assumed alarming proportions especially in the
West. But in this part of the world including Pakistan, the picture is no
less dismal. A drug addict is pracitically lost as a useful subs: of the
society. Once in the hypnotic grip of the potion, there is no easy way to
wean him away frost it. The increasing supply of the drugs such as heroin.
opium, charaa and other for” of that along with a corresponding rise in adv
dicts is a danger signal to the civilised world. Pakistan in that respect
seems to be acre in danger as the huge consignments of heroin. cpiu and char-
ae caught in the last few aonths shows. The value of the contraband drugs
seized here runs into billions of rupees.

The situation has rightly created an alarm and the Government of Pakistan is
taking all possible measures to limit the area and cultivation of opiua. The
United Nations is also asking its help available in this connection. The po-
lice and custoas authorities in Pakistan have done a reaarkably good job in
seizing huge amount of the drugs and it aust have saved lakhs or aillions of
souls in countries for which the drugs were intended. But there is no way of
knowing if the consign-ants seized were not nerely a fraction of the stuff
that evaded detection.
So far, the law-enforcing authorities have succeeded in catching only the
couriers or unearthing a gang of peOple engaged in manufacturing heroin etc.
But the real bosses remain practically untounched and probably unknown.
Moreover, the punishment awarded to people engaged in the traffick has in no
way deterred others from joining the trade. The Hedina conference last exam-
ine the problem from this particular angle. It would be worthwhile examining
how China eliminated drug addiction from the country or how Iran is combating
the no es. It may appear too drastic a suggestion but how can the menace be
otherwise stamped out? The profits in the unholy trade are too enormous to
discourage those involved in it by merely putting them behind the bars for a
few years or confiscating the contraband consignments. The USA and other Bur-
opean Governments have failed to stamp out the menace because the gangs always
manage to find new couriers and new routes to send the stuff to the intended
markets.

In recent years drug addiction has assumed alarming proportions in Pakistan
also, especially in certain parts of Baluchistan and MP. But the addicts
are not confined to those areas only. In fact there is no city or small town
of the country without its addicts. The situation in other Asian and African
countries is not much better.

The real problem is not to stop trafficking in illicit drugs or rehabilitat-
ing the addicts. although they are no less important. The most urgent need
and really productive, is to put down the production of the narcotics and
catch the real bosses of the trade. It trust be realised that the interna-
tional ramifications of this trader with all their well-knit organisation and
led by them ruthlessly, cannot be eradicated by local or national measures,
neither can they be combated with the conventional laws and methods. One of
the most active organisers of the drug traffick, the Mafia has remained un-
broken even though the most efficient Mexican machinery is geared to fight
it. That shows the strength of the traffickers, and also proves that much
more than ordinary methods are needed to end the menace. We hope the confer-
ence at Medina will thoroughly examine this aspect of the problem and come out
with appropriate suggestions to root out the menace.

C50: 5300/5693

16
BRIEFS

HEROIN sum Ill lsW-The antidrug squad of the custons police at
Islamabad airport seized heroin worth 25 aillion rupees on the international
market on 5 April. The heroin was packed in concealed conpartnents in two
suitcases bound for an overseas destination. [GPlllMO Lahore JANG in Urdu

SApr 82p 1]

WIN 91mm BID pom-nu mutate Drug enforce-ant Cell (DE) arested a
Sri unxen national on Monday for atteepting to snuggle out refined heroin
powder weighing three kilograms at Karachi airport on nonday. Packed in la
packets the heroin worth as. 3 million we concealed in the false bottom of a
suitcase belonging to Ponniah Milwaganan who was intercepted and arrested by
the DEC sleuths ninutes before his departure to Austerdan by a foreign air-
line. Investigations revealsd that his accomplice Babe had left for Holland
three days ago leaving the contraband with hilwaganan. Interpol has been in-
formed of aabu's movement while a search is in progress for local contacts of
the accused persons. [Karachi pawn in mglish 23 Mar 82 p 10]

sawocm Him“!!! Mushuq mini. Dewey Collector of Airport Guam, 1!.
posed a penalty of Rs. three lakhs on German girl Josette Erika Wawrzinek
while adjudicating the case of ‘possession' of two kilogram of heroin. The
passport of the Osman girl would rennin with the Custaas pending payment of
the fine. She was earlier fined Rs. 100,000 by the Special Judge (custom)
Mr Ishtiaq Husain where she pleaded guilty to the charge of snuggling. This
was paid by her father who had arrived froe Gernany. Adjudication proceedings
are still pending against the other accused in the case vis ashamed Rare Mo-
basharfard, an Iranian student, caught with the girl on Oct. 27, 1981, with
2.25 kilos of heroin from his suitcase concealed in the false bottoa. another
Iranian national H. Rare Tagavi (who is said to have narried Erika after she
embraced Islam), and a third Iranian Ghulan Busein Abidsade. Hobasharfard
was convicted for snuggling of 2.25 kilos of heroin by the court for six
months R.I. and a fine of Rs. one iakh, against which he has filed a nercy
petition. [machi DAWN in anglish 26 her 82 p 18]

17
[NTERPOL-PIA COLIABORAle-d'he International Police have joined PIA's
Passport Cell in investigating the drug trafficking case in which a mater
of former airline euployees were involved. The Federal Police seized about
eight kilograms of heroine powder from then. Six dismissed PIA employees
and a serving PIA official was involved in the case. The PIA seized the
passport of accused chafoor Butt, the brother-in-law of a local police
officer from a local travel agent. Meanwhile, search for Nadir Ali Khan
Durrani and one Stephen has started in London by the Interpol. The police
are searching the other links in the national airline and also the business-
man who financed the whole racket. Police have raided several places late
on Monday night to find the absconding accused. [Tut] [Karachi was in
English 25 Mar 82 p 10]

(:90: 5300/5703

18
STIPP‘ER PENALTIES FOR DRUG USERS
Cob“ City VISAYAN HERALD in 33911.)! 22 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] Stiffor ponaltios aro now boing inposod by tho govormont to curb tho
upward trond of drug abuso.

This was dislosod today by Masts: Sgt. Norborto Alvarado of tho Constabulary
Anti-Narcotics Unit (CARL!) botorn unbors of tho Cobu Association of City and
Municipal Public Intonation Offiaors (CAOCMPIO) during its monthly nooting
at tho Office of Modia Affairs (Ol'lh).

Alvarado, who was ono of too am: spoakors, said that violation of tho anti-
drug abuse law may ha in tho {on of salos, administration. dolivory, acting
as broker. transmission, transportation and giving away of drugs classitiod
as rogulatod and prohibitod by tho Dangorous mugs Board.

The CANU official also said that toughar panaltios such as tho incroaso of
prison torus from six to 12 yoars hovo boon inposod on poroons caught possoss-
ing prohibitod or rogulatod drugs.

According to Alvarado, cultivation of narijuana plants as sourco o! prohobitod
drugs is punishablo undo: Soction 9, Articlo 2 of Ropublic Act 6425.

In tho sans seminar, Sgt. notorio Sancho: of cum discussod tho distinguishing
marks apparont among drug dopondonto and tho rohabilitation and troatnont of
the drug addicts at tho Drug Abuso Rohabilitation hatwork (DAR?!) in Toguig.
Hotro Manila.

In his talk. ho urgod dupublic information otticors to dissuinato tho in-
foruation to tho barongoy rosidonto in thoir aroa.

Sancho: also briofod tho CAOCAHPIO unborn on tho sign and synptons of with-
drawal syndrono. which ho said would always follow sitar tho body of drug do-
pondonts would roach to such a high point whoro it could tolorato tho prosonco
of tho drugs.

Tho CANU official pointod out that oono cough syrups takon as subotituto drugs
could not bo confiscatod and would not ho a ground for arrooting tho drug usor
bocauoo thoso aro nova: includo in tho list of tho rogulatod and prohibitod

drugs .

cso: 5300/5699
19
BRIEFS

UARNINC 0N HEROIN TRAPPIc-The dangerous drugs board warned yesterday against
a threatening increase of heroin traffic throughout the country because of
the opium bumper crop in Indochina's golden triangle. The board noted that
heroin traffic is already picking up in Manila, Cebu and Angeles City. The
country is not a lucrative market for heroin, but it is being need as a
transit point in heroin international traffic; 267 grans of highly-addictive
heroin have been seized from 3 carriers since last year. The heroin was
being taken to the United States fron either Pakistan or Thailand when inter-
cepted in the country. The dangerous drugs board also noted an increase in
marijuana cultivation, despite an intensified enforcenent of the anended
dangerous drugs law which provides stiffer penalties for offenders. In

view of this situation. dangerous drugs board executive director (Manuel
Sunit) urged stepped-up preventive neeeures against drug abuse. [Text]
[HK100133 Manila Far East Broadcasting Conpany in English 2330 GMT 9 Apr 82]

080: 5300/5704

20
BRIEFS

GANJA PIANTATION MIDEDnA few officers attached to the Wildlife Department,
Buttala, along with a Police Sergeant attached to the Honeragsla Police have
been successful in raiding a ganja chens 2 and 1/2 acres in extent. The
chcna had been detected with the gene reserve of the Rdmnu Park at a place
ce'led Hubuhgsls. The ganja plants 2 and 1/2 feet in height and nudnring
6,000 were subsequently destroyed b the authorities. [Text] [Colodm

THE ISIAND in English 15 Mar 82 p 2‘

C80: 5300/5701

21
POLITICAL FIGURE REPUSES TO BLAME 0.5. POR DRUG PROBLEM
Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 5 Mar 82 p 1

[Article by Gladstone Thurston]

[Excerpts] When international drug runners make a mockery of Bahamas law en-
forcement agencies, "don't blame the United States. The fault is to be found
right here with us." warned Deputy Speaker of the House of Assembly Henry
Bowen.

"I say, when our young men and young women become hooked on illegal drugs,“
Mr Bowen said, "that is not an American problem. It is a Bahamian problem
and it is up to us to some it."

Mr Bowen, the Member of Parliament for West Grand Bahama and Bimini. was
addressing the Nassau Jaycees last night. The first part of his speech dealt
with the agenda of the House and how it works.

Those who occupy the seats of power in this country, he said. must be prepared
to grab the bull by the horns and “face up to our responsibilities. When we
find chaos in the Ministry of Education. don't tell me it's the UBP's fault.
The U8? has been dead and buried for about 15 years.

"And when international drug runners make a mockery of our law enforcement
agencies don't blame the United States. The fault is to be found right here
with us."

Too many Bahamians. he said, are living in sub-standard housing. Too many
children, he said. are learning their ABC's in overcrowded. ill-equipped
classrooms.

He saw the drug problem as "the single met ruinous element in our society to-
day." A few years ago. he recalled. it could be said with a great deal of
truth that Bahamians were only trading in dope, and in certain circles that
was considered chic and smart.

"Today, the picture has changed radically." Hr amen said. "We have expanded
our involvement from mere traders and handlers and we have now become users as

well.

"I say, when our young men and young women become hooked on illegal drugs,
that is not an American problem. It is a Bahamian problem and it is up to us

to solve it. "

cso: 5300/75 39 22
MINISTER CLAIMS You're FALLING pm 1'0 011116 9058338
Hamilton 1'58 MAL cm in English 13 Mar 82 pp 1, 5

['next) Bermuda's youngsters with time on their hank are easy prey for drug-
pmhers. The House of Assembly was told yesterday.

P.L.P. Shadow Minister of (Jo-unity Affairs Mr. Halter Brag-an told H.P.e
that drug dealers had spread their web to the parishes and were not restrict—
ing their illicit trade to Hamilton as most people thougtt. Hr. Brangman was
stressing the need for the Ministry of Community Affairs to concentrate sue
of its efforts on coordinating activities for yomg people who otherwise might
be drawn into drug because they had nothing else to do.

The House was considering the caning year's budget for the ”department.
Mr. Brangman said:

“ammunity Affairs nust address itself to this problem otherwise it becomes a
farce."

I would like to see it coordinate the a vities of existing organisations
like diurches, P.‘r.A.s and parents and tisens and other clubs to provide
activities for children after sduool.“

'me shadow minister said many young people spent their time idly hanging
around where they became involved with the sort of person who sold drugs.

"they get innocently caught \9 with drug puhers who find them easy prey ,"
Mr. Brangmen said.

He claimed that drug sellers were not going into neighbourhoob where the
Police least expected to find them.

Hr. Brangm also welcomed new measures on noise pollution, whim he felt my
Bermudian would be pleued with. '

But he had some criticism of the way the «unity Services Department hsd or-

ganised the 'Smg for Bermuda" contest, whid: he said ha displayed I'a tresen-
dous lack of creativity”.

23
He urged the speedy setting up of the proposed human Rights Connission, and
then went on to insist that non-Bermudians who came to the Island to work
should learn the local courtesies.

"They should adapt to our customs and p1easantries--that way racial confron-
tations of any sort can usually be avoided," Mr. Brangman said.

Mr. Calvin Smith, P.L.P., expressed his disappointment that the P.L.P. would
have little or no say in the membership of the new amen Rights Concussion.

"I find that odd, because we on this side mainly represent the black popula-
tion and I would have thought it fair to assume that most cases to come be-
fore the Commission would be of a racial nature,“ Mr. Nth said. He hoped
the Commission would not always side with loayl 0.3.P. members and supporters.

And Mr. Smith regretted that Parish Vestries were no longer operating. These,
he said, could have acted as a forum where grievances could be heard without
going to the more formal Comission.

Meetings called by the Pembroke Hamilton Club in Warwick had led to a new
understanding between groups previously in conflict.

"Vestries would be an earlier stage for dialogue than the Omission,“ Mr.
Smith said.

Mr. Lancelot Stan, Parliamentary Secretary for Connunity Affairs, introduced
the debate on estimates for the Ministry.

On Community Services he said the budget estimates were designed to increase
and improve community relations. The estimate of $400,750 was an increase of
more than 10 percent on last year.

”This should improve and add new programs,“ he said.

The Consumer Affairs bureau would continue to give its services to the public
and in conjunction with the two radio stations put out weekly broadcasts with
advice on consumer affairs.

The budget had also allocated $67,000 for heritage Week celebrations and a
further $51,940 for the Hanan Rights Commission.

The names of members of the Col-mission would be announced soon.
The Bermuda Snail Business Development Corporation has been granted no money
in the Budget estimates. Hr. swan said the purpose of the Corporation, at least

initially, was not to loan out mney. It would, however, help small businesses
raise bank loans on the provision of certain information from the firms.

C50 : 5300/75 39
'a'wo LIONVIGTED It: HEROIN SMUIE'JLING GI‘ 3N IS-YEAR TERMS

Nassau THE TRIBUNE in English 9 Mar 82 p 4

l'i‘ext]

HAMILTON, BERMUDA.
MARCH 5. (CANA) - Two
men tound guilty ol‘ operatiu
In internationIl drug
trafficking rachet have each
been ,Iiled for IS years here.

Bermudian Keith Burrows.
36. In unemployed father or
three. Ind Alex Senki, 20. e
British-horn N‘ in who wae
working in ndon II I
telecommunications eutoeer.
were convicted of comptrim in
motion. Jamaica and Bermuda
to import heroin. and of
importing heroin into Bermuda
between December 1980 and
February I98l.

The heavy sentences hmht
teen to the ever of BurrowI'
girlfriend. with whom he lived,
and tonne: Miss World Glee
SwIinson, who were both in
60““.

Both detendante had
pleaded not guilty to the
chance.

Among the promution
witnesses durim the noun
trial in at! the court we '
Kilci. I urtttIh-horn tIIhloa
designer. who is now I
ten-year untenoe here to:
admitting importing heyoin
IMO Bermuda. -

Attorney-General Sed
Froornknt. proeecuthrc. told

the court how Burrowe and
Inother pereon_not beforejhe
court ﬂew to lando- In
December I980 to find I
heroin eup ly eouroe for

Bermuda. found thIt
Iouroe through Serild in the
pereon oi Kitei,he IItd. .

Following that eoaeplrecy,
12 to 13 ouneea o! heroin wee

obtained _ and mailed to
Bermuda. said Mr Froonikin.
Armaments were nude {or
further Ildplnente to Bermuda
between Seriki and the other
person not hetore the court.

In January l98l. Salk! and
xild demo to Bermuda,
M I remote ot heroin
obtained from I JarnIieIn
known Ie “Donny Brown."

"The aceueed Burrowe
ordered more heroin from
Kilci. Kilci and Seriki went to
lemaica’ to obtain another
four-end“ ounoeeoi $2 per
cent pure heroin.” Iaid Ir
Frootnktn.

Kile! wee erreeted It the
Iirport here when he returned
trons larneiee. and eo-opereted
with narcotics equad
detectives. he added.
CAMPINAS POLICE ESTABLISH SYSTEM TO COMBAT TKAPPICKING
Sao Paulo 0 BSTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 1 Her 82 p 22

[Text] Campinas--Throughout the entire sectional police quarters which
includes 16 towns, the Campinas police force is establishing a new strict
system to combat all drug trafficking and drug addicts apprehended in
possession of drugs. District chiefs of police known to be severe and well
acquainted with the sector are being selected as team leaders to prevent

the increase of trafficking, although Campinas is known as a nerihuana
distribution center for South Hines Gerais and several Sao Paulo regions.
Within only a days of enforcing the new system, the Caspinas district police
hendquarters is showing results never before achieved: 30 in custody in the
red-light district and the "dregs of society," 6 small street dealers seized
with a total of 2 kg of aarihuana and deadly night shade in the main
trafficking areas.

In Amandio Halheiros Lopes' opinion. the district chief of police, who is
enforting this strict suppression. the results should be immediate: "The
return to classes was a factor which deeply worried us, for as a rule, it is
at this tine that the traffickers are most active."

This. however. was not the predoainating factor, said chief of police Valter
Otnvio Fario Honteiro, 20 years on the police force and a specialist in the
war on drugs and head of the new team: "Three years ago two district
headquarters engaged inthe work, today a specific sector is needed for this,
for besides marihuana, consumed by the lower class outer fringe, there are
also problems with cocaine used by people with high purchasing power."

For the Campinas police, the main problen, even greater than the lack of
inspectors (there are only 8), is the dearth of data regarding traffickers.
Police delegate Valter Honteiro has therefore made appeals for "informed

citizens to telephone me. even anonymously, to pass along whatever they
know .

"This device," he insisted, "is necessary because investigation, in the
cocaine area, calls for considerable information from people who have
experience and are knowledgeable and informed."

26
The Gambling. Addiction and Narcotics Police Headquarters has a report on 12
main traffickers in the Campinas area. 0! these. only 2. Silvio Gordinho

and Claudio Teodoro Perreira Pestans, are serving time. The others. although
also denounced for involvement with killers, remain at large, but working

in the areas according to reports which reached the police.

According to police delegate Amando Halheiros Lopes, the narcotics network has
sharply increased in the past decade: 10 years ago, mention of drugs was
unheard of in the hinterland. Even in Campinas, there were few cases. The
dissemination spread from the large to the small urban areas, rapidly
developing in modern society."

The cities which present most probleas, the delegate stressed. are Campinas,
Americana. Itapira and Hogi-Hirin.

8870
C50: 5300/2224

27
BRIEFS

RECORD HARIRUANA PLANTING BUST-—Recife-At the end of the week, government
bureau of security police and military police seized 8.5 tons of marihuana
--l7.000 feet--on the Aboboreira farm in Ouricuri Municipioo-aome 619
kilometers west of the capital~-belonging to Joaquin Dias da Silva who
managed to escape. According to Fernando Ribeiro, heed of the department of
judiciary police. this was the largest seizure of marihuana planting in the
past 10 years. On the Aboboreira Perm, the planted land was estimated at
500 million cruzeiros. Between traffickers and planters. they seized six
people. One hundred and twenty men and several trucks and Jeeps transported
the marihuana seized to Ouricuri city where it was burned on the public
square in the presence of authorities and the population. The police believu
that this seizure will enable then to reach other fares in the area. The
marihuana was ready for harvesting for use and would be distributed to
various Brazilian regions. mainly Sso Paulo and in the cities of Salvador
and Recife, where the most buyers are found. [Textl- [Rio de Jeneiro

JORNAL 00 BRASIL in Portuguese 1 Her 82 p 16] 8870

CREATION 0P REGIONAL DRUG COUNCILs--Brasilia--The secretary general of the
Ministry of Justice, Arthur Castillo. who chairs the Federal Council of
Narcotics (COFBN). yesterday said he will ask the states secretaries of
justice to hasten the establishment of regional councils for the repression

of drugs. work is underway similar to that being done in the United States and
Mexico to suppress production centers by destroying marihuana planting areas
and disrupting cocaine distribution operations. Castilho reported that the
regional councils will operate as "executive branches of COPEN policy." At
present, only in Rio de Janeiro is a council in operation similar to the
Federal Council of Narcotics. Now in Sao Paulo, Piaui and Rio Grande do Sul
the existing organizations lack development. Castilho explained that
marihuana is the drug most used in the country "because of the ease with which
the lower classes can obtain it," adding that from January to August 1981,

the Federal Police seized 229 tons of the product. They seized 90 kg of
cocaine during that period. He affirmed that there is no question of
countenancing use of marihuana: Those who uphold this idea base it on an
anachronistic thesis. A recent UN study proved that it is harmful to the
organism and the step toward dependence on other drugs. [Text] [Rio de
Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 26 Feb 82 p 6] 8870

28
(:(XJAINE RING DISBANDED IN AHSTERDAHwYesterday the Dutch police reported in
Amsterdam that the week before they had seized 9 foreigners, among whom were

3 Brazilians and 2 Bolivians (whose names they did not disclose), and with
this they believe they have disrupted a cocaine traffic ring originating in
South America. Although they have found only a stall want of the drug. the
police spokesman said they believed that a drug ring had already brought many
kilos of cocaine into Holland and England. Also according to the spokesman.
the trafficers were discovered when. on Thursday, a 31-year-old Israeli

woman exchanged 300.000 florins (about 16.5 million cruzeiros) in an Amsterda-
bank and, as she appeared very nervous, detectives followed her home. where she
was arrested together with a Brazilian man and woman, 2 Bolivians and a Swiss,
who had 5 gram of cocaine and 600,000 florina. Later, another Brazilian

and 2 Englishmen were seized with 35 grams of drugs. [Text] [Sao Paulo

0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 9 Feb 82 p 16] 8870

C50: 5300/ 2226

29
ANTIDRUC COORDINATOR DESCRIBES ZONAL PILOT PLAN
Culiacan EL SOL DB SINALOA in Spanish 19 Mar 82 pp 1, 10

[Text] A scrupulous inspection is being conducted throughout all of Zone 06
of the permanent campaign against drug trafficking, as part of the pilot plan
that the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has implemented for
the purpose of ascertaining the actual status of the work being done in the
effort undertaken by that offfice to exanine this type of activity.

In making the foregoing statement, Hector Aviles Castillo, coordinator for the
zone, said that Oscar Flores Sanchez, head of the Attorney General's Office,
had decided that, in order to carry out the plan, a larger number of aircraft
would be used in the destruction flights, with the use of special herbicides,
and that, at the same time, an inspection would be made of all sections in

the shortest possible period of tine.

Aviles Castillo explained that approximately 300 poppy, marihuana and mixed
plantations have been detected to date, which will be fumigated within a few
days; owing to the fact that, on 25 March, the deputy attorney general of
justice, Samuel Alba Leyva, located in Mazatlan, will make an evaluation of
the results accrued.

The Zone 06 coordinator added in his report that there will be 10 days of
activity in the program, which will be spent to allow 10 helicopters to

do the fumigation work, while an additional five machines and two snall air-
craft will carry out the general reconnaissance of all sections.

Avilcs Castillo explained that these activities are in addition to the normal
ones being performed by the personnel from the Attorney General'a Office in
the campaign. because there must be no letup in the battle to prevent the
repetition of this type of illegal activity which is detrimental to mankind.

2909
CSO: 5330/74

30
BRIEFS

PLANE WITH MARIHUANA DOHNED--The marihuana seized 3 days ago from a Douglas

DC-6 airplane which made a forced landing 23 kilometers south of Ciudad Juarez
was to be sold among the Yankee underworld for $10 billion, or 65 million pesos.
The grass is of the very top quality, the so-called "gold of Colombia" type,

and came from Bogota. It was brought from there in 300 bales containing a total
ofl7 tons by the pilot, John Patrick Donahue, of New York; the copilot, Brandz
Russell,of Baltimore; and the Panamanian, Julian Nogueira. All three are
"mules" and exclusively shippers. They were hired by the major traffickers of
the United States and Colombia, and were to be paid a total of $125,000 for the
trip, which they began in the Bahama Islands. They loaded the drugs on a farm
in Colombia. and were to arrive in Chihuahua, refueling on a deserted clandestine
airstrip, and presumably continue on to New York. They said: "But we did not
find the signals on the field in Chihuahua where we were supposed to land. He
spent an hour and a half flying between Ciudsd Juarez and Chihuahua, and there
was no signal. Our aviation gas gave out, and therefore we went down where we
crashed." The case served to notify the authorities that, for some tine,

large. fabulous shipments of grass and other drugs have been arriving in the
United States from Colombia via this border port; and that they refuel in the
Chihuahua area and continue their course from there. Not a word could be gotten
from then concerning those who hired them and who were the owners of the ship-
ment. [Text] [Ciudad Juarez EL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 16 Mar 82 Sec 8 p 2] 2909

TRAFFICKING JAIL OFFICIAL SOUGHT--Toluca, Mexico, 16 March (08H)--State Judicial
Police agents from the state of Mexico are searching strenuously for the former
head of the Tlalnepsntla district jail, for being connected with the drug traf-
fic as well as the sale of liquor while he was in charge of that jail. This
morning, several members of the State Judicial Police appeared at the district
jail to question various inmates who would know the whereabouts of Manuel
Nienbro Miranda who, according to accounts given by a friend of his, is at
large in this town. But the Judicial Police are trying to find his in order

to put him behind bars, since he had been trafficking with bottles of liquor
inside the jail for 4 years. Manuel Nienbro Miranda, who established a system
of terrorism and extortion in the district jail of which he was head, was
exploiting the inmates. by making then pay their weekly wages, amounting to

500 pesos per prisoner. The 370 innates, many of whom enjoyed certain privi-
leges, were paying a sum of 3,000 pesos in order to be able to have a prison
block with television and be entitled to miss roll-call. [Text] [Ciudad Juarez
BL PRONTERIZO in Spanish 17 Her 82 Sec 3 p 12] 2909

31
MARLHUANA SHIPMENT BURNED—-Nogales, Sonora, 19 March (PH)--Today, 35 kilogram
of marthuana worth several thousand pesos were burned on the grounds of the
Health Center. The drugs were turned over for destruction by the agency of

the Federal Public Ministry. The burning of the grass was witnessed by the
health authorities. headed by the institution's head, Dr Luis Cervantes Garcia,
in accordance with the Health Code, to file the report which will be sent to
the SSA [Secretariat of Health and Assistance] in Mexico City. When Dr Cervan-
tes Garcia was questioned about the origin of the marihuana. he said that it
had been seized in Hogales by Federal Judicial Police agents from Mr Jose
Romero Cazares Mascareno. He added that, with the destruction of the 35 kilo-
grams today, the agency of the Federal Public Ministry has made the fourth
shipment this year to the institution for immediate incineration. He noted
that this proves that the Federal Judicial Police action against the drug
traffic is becoming increasingly efficient, with several persons arrested
during the first months of the year. Once the confiscated drugs are in the
possession of the health authorities, they are destroyed immediately, he
claimed, remarking that this procedure will continue to be used so as not to
confront any risks. [Text] [Hermosillo EL IMPARCIAL in Spanish 20 Mar 82 Sec

A p 17] 2909

TRAFFICKER CLAIMS TORTURE-Yesterday, Prisciliano Martinez Martinez made his
preliminary statement in the third district court, having been accused by the
agent of the Federal Public Ministry of a crime against health. This indivi-
dual had for some time been engaged as a "mule", in other words, as a shipper
of marihuana from the interior part of the country to the border. He later
undertook the business on his own, with the aid of someone residing in the
United States, to whom he was selling the aforementioned grass for $250 per
pound. When the Federal Judicial Police agents captured him in Miguel Aleman,
this subject had Just moved 65 kilograms, carrying a suitcase which contained
traces. He claimed that it was for his personal use, and also for Juan Cardenas
and his brother, Martin, who were with him at the time of his arrest. He told
all this to the agent of the Federal Public Ministry, but denied it to the
judge. claiming that he had been severely tortured for over 10 days, since the
time of his arrest. [Text] [Huevo Laredo EL MANANA in Spanish 11 Mar 82 Sec 0
p 4] 2909

WARDEN CHARGED WITH ESCAPE—-The warden of the Reynosa jail, Leonel Garcia
Olivares, is being held in the jail in this town, and action is being taken
ngalnst him for the escape of prisoners. Yesterday. he made his preliminary
statement in the second district court regarding the incident, denying that

he participated in the escape of Jesus Carrillo Barraza, a drug trafficker
acknowledged as the vice czar on the border. Members of the Federal Judicial
Police succeeded in arresting this individual in Reynosa on Tuesday night,

and immediately transferred him to this town in order to place him at the
disposal of the pertinent judicial authorities. The second district judge
issued a warrant for the arrest of Leonel Garcia Olivares, and it was executed
on Tuesday night. The case of the escape of Jesus Carrillo Barraza had strong
repercussions throughout the entire region, and there was talk that several
prison officials had been involved in Carrillo Barraza's escape, and that
several million pesos had been paid to allow him to flee. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo
FL HANANA in Spanish 11 Mar 82 Sec D p 6] 2909

32
TRAFFICKER FOUND IN CUSTODY--Antonio Legaapi Quirurte. tho felonious nurdortr
and drug trafficker, fell into the hands of the State Judicial Police. Two
agents from the entity commanded by Mr Hector Mario Varela, Brandy and Jaquez,
visited the Social Rehabilitation Center [CERESO] and they were greatly
surprised to see Tony among the inmates. They had been searching for him

a long time, since 13 January 1978, when that individual shot Luis Vallina
Rodriguez to death with a AS-caliber pistol. Since that date, Legaspi, who

of course is a member of the family whose relatives have been involved in so
much trouble, had been at large, fleeing and hiding. He finally entered the
United States and went back to his old tricks there, becoming involved in
drug trafficking. They arrested him and, after serving a sentence, he was
sent to this town in an exchange of prisoners. It was not learned how long he
had been in the CERESO, but he used a different name. And he would have stayed
for a long time if Brandy and Jaquez had not recognized him. Legaspi said
that, on 13 January 1978, in the El Capitan bar located on the highway leading
to Casas Grandes, he had actually killed Luis Estrada Vallina, or Luis Vallina
Hernandez, who was then 33 years old. They were presumably arguing over drugs;
both the murderer and his victim were trafficking in drugs, and they also
stole cars. At the time that Antonio shot Vallina. Alfonso Garcia Torres was
with them. It was the latter who identified Legaspi as the murderer. Comdr
Varela Mendoza noted that he had been sought since that time. [Text] [Ciudad
Juarez EL FRONTERIZO in Spanish 13 Mar 82 Sec 3 p 2] 2909

COCAINE SﬂlPHENT SBIZED--Hexico City, 6 Apr (NOTIHEX)--A shipment of cocaine
valued at 300 million pesos in the black market was intercepted today by federal
agents stationed at Mexico City International Airport. Homer James Rios. an
American, arrived here on Aeromexico Flight 420 from Venezuela. He was carry-
ing 6 kilos 350 grams of pure cocaine and 22 doses of LSD in a false-bottom
suitcase. The foreigner had made contact at the "OSTAL San Isidor" hotel in
Lima. Peru, with a drug traffiker named "Hike" who gave him about 16 1/2 kilos
of the narcotic. Together with a friend he identified as John Sexton, he
attempted to travel from Lima to Mexico. but as they placed their baggage con-
taining 10 kilos of pure cocaine on the baggage belt they saw they were to be
Inspected with the use of drug detecting dogs. They left the baggage which
was subsequently found by Mexican authorities. The drug traffikers then pro-
ceeded to Chile and later to Venezuela by road. James Rios then boarded the
Mexican airline only to be arrested by Mexican federal agents. [FL071400
Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 0440 GMT 7 Apr 82)

C50: 5300/2259

33
cams. mrwx or masons amm 'no DRUG marrrcxmc
Port-of-Spain sumav 60mm in znglish 21 Mar 82 p 5

[Text] ‘noo much money chasing or trying to buy too few goods. Economists View
this situation as the classical exasple or anunition that fuels inflation.

What they say in effect is that artifically-created or real shortages cause the
price of the needed product to nave upwards constantly.

This even extends to price-controlled goods (like onions, potatoes and chick-
ens) being sold openly and under the counter at black market prices when in

short supply.

In simple language. it brings into play inborn crookedness and the larcenous
streak in your friendly merchant, grocer or wayside vendor.

The motto enacted is to "make as much as possible-money-wise and customer-
foolishnwhile the going is good and the stocks last."

Too much money on the loose leads to another type of painful inflation. It
sets up the stage for the increase in crimeuparticularly violent robberies

and street crimes.

This is the situation today in Trinidad and Tobago. Criminals are striking it
rich preying on people walking around with a lot of oil dollars on their per-
son. along with jewelry and other valuables.

Thriving business places and their bank-depositing couriers and messengers
are prime targets for the whey-hungry bandits.

Aggravated robberies, hold-ups, snatch-and-grab thefts, burglaries and muggings
are being churned out at the alarming rate of an average four-plus crimes a day
for the current year. No lack of productivity in this field with three months
of 1982 not yet completed.

Crime statistics compiled by the Hodus Operandi Bureau of the Criminal Inves-
tigations Department (CID) showed that 324 robberies were recorded up to
mid-March.
What is particularly disturbing is the frequent use of firearms and knives
in the carrying out of the robberies. Figures show that 232 of the 324 re-
ports involved the use of guns or knives.

Guns were brought into play in 74 instances. Knife-toting bandits went into
action on 158 terrifying jobs.

A picture of rapidly spiralling crime emerges from the robbery statistics of
1980-82. There were 760 reports for 1980. jumping by nearly 200 to 937 last

year.

The pattern is consistent in gun-related robberies. This sector climbed by
100 from 245 in 1980 to 345 in 1981. Knife reports almost doubled during the
same period from 197 in 1980 to 364 last year.

Nightmares

Kni fe-brandishing robberies for the two-and-a-half months of this year alone
are fast approaching the overall 1980. It has reached 158-just 39 short of
the 197 in 1980.

The existing situation begs the following questions:
Why the upsurge of violent economic crimes?

Where are the guns caning from since this is not supposed to be the wild West
where every creed and race enjoys an equal place to possess firearms freely?

How are the police faring in fighting and solving crimes?
Who are the people involved and or committing the crimes?

Answers or explanations to these queries entailed discussions with Police Com-
missioner Randolph Burroughs and other law enforcement officers.

Where and how are the criminals getting their arms? This opened up new vistas
of illicit activities that is causing the police endless headaches and night-
marish dreams.

It has to do with the profitable and highly-dangerous indulgence in the drug
trafficking trade. Both soft and hard drugs are involved...mainly marijuana
and cocaine.

Drug traders are flooding the country with arms, mainly for use as a protec-
tive measure in their illegal operations.

A senior police official explained that the multybmillion-dollar drug trade
had a definite Venezuelan connection, with the neighbouring republic being
used as a jump-off or transit point for drugs bound for Trinidad.

he said that the sea-faring suppliers “usually protect their stuff while being

heavily armed. Having disposed of the cargo. they sell or leave their weapons
with their local contacts."

35
The drug problem takes on new dimensions with open gang warfare in which
several people have been killed and others shot or shot at.

why the drug trade battles? It follows a pattern in most metropolitan coun-
tries. One is the question of territorial rights. Operators carve out cer-
tain turfs or jurisdictional areas. They will defend to their om death. and
others, the intrusion of drug-supplying trespassers into their domain.

This explains in part how guns reach the criminal market or underworld. other
sources of supply are concentrated thefts from licensed and authorised fire-
arms holders--not excluding the police and security guards.

There is another aspect to the drug-related gang warfare. It has to do with
a type of robbery that cannot be reported to the police...stea1ing produce
from marijuana plantations.

This has a sort of town-man syndrome. The officer explained: “Despite con-
stant police activities and destruction of plantations, marijuana continues to
be cultivated with loving and profitable. care.

“Some of the dealers from the bright lights and not accustomed to the sort of
hard life in the forests wait until the crop is ready and move in to reap...
this is where the trouble begins and bullets fly.

He added: 'Then again there is the natural inclination of pushers to hold
back on payments to suppliers...that is dangerous business. Trouble also
breaks out when the police intercept or manage to get hold of stocks through
raids.

"The suppliers do not always accept this as a valid reason for non-payment
and sometimes do not believe this really happened."

Crime in Trinidad and Tobago has become too big a problem to be left in the
hands of the police. Crime is a national problem involving all the citizenry-
...whether as criminal, victim or potential witness. So whether you like it
or not. you are involved.

Commissioner Burroughs is pleading for a crime concerned community and public
support.

He was a bit stumped for an answer when I asked him "who is winning the crime
war...the police or the criminals?“

Brutal Acts

1 rephrased the question to inquire what percentage of crimes were being
so-ved by the police. he declined a direct answer, stating that a single per-
son may have committed scores of crimes in say 1980 and 1981 and not caught in
1982.. .so that the ratio solved at a particular time was not a good yardstick
to guage effectiveness.

This to my own thinking was another way of saying that the crooks are on top.
Mr. Burroughs said that the reason why the police was not receiving full
support from the public was the constant portrayal of the police being in-
volved in brutal acts.

He said this creates a lack of confidence in the police which was mostly un-
justified. Every accusation against police officers, he said was investigated
and appropriate action taken..."like every department everywhere there are
good and bad...l would like the public to think of policemen as their friends.“

who are committing the crimes? Another officer said that repeaters or known
criminals are mainly responsible, "but are allowed bail to continue their
activities.

"We can object to bail, which we do...but we still operate under the legal
system that a person is not guilty of an offence until proven in court.

“They usually chalk up a series of crimes-...sometimes looking for money for
their lawyers...and after convicted on offence...plead guilty to the others

and get concurrent instead of consecutive sentences to prison. The hardened
criminals take advantage of this position."

Violent economic crimes in Trinidad and Tobago in the main have nothing to do
with deprivation. It is not a case of the poor and disadvantaged stealing
from the rich to satisfy basic needs.

Victims of hold-ups come in all categories--labourers, salesmen, lawyers and
even thieves.

Jobs are available in abundance even for the unskilled. Despite the avail-
ability of jobs, unemployment runs about 11 per cent of the 400,000-plus work
force.

It is not really unemployment...it is just that young people are picking and
choosing what type of work they want to do whether qualified or not for the
tasks.

They are drawn into crime to satisfy their urge for easy money. It sometimes
turns out to be a painful and hazardous occupation risking police bullets and
prison.

Chances of being caught seem to diminsh daily...so the muggers and hold-up
men take a swing and hopefully come up with dollars and jewellry.

They find it less exhausting to rob a drunk or unsuspecting passerby than
sweat it or even idle on a job for eight hours. It takes less than a minute

to press a knife in the back of a victim and run away $500 and a $1,500
bangle.

Criminals are helped in their trade by the large amount of cash being carried
around casually by ordinary folk.

Does crime really pay? Ask the criminals.

050: 5300/7539
37
OPIUH SHUGGLH) mm INDIA SBIZED
Caimmmmhhﬂiahl9MOZp2

[Text] Opiun worth $3 million was confiscated at Cairo Airport on Wednesday when

police foiled an attewt to snuggle it into the country by an Egyptian annular
coming iron India for the first tine, police sources said.

The opiun was snuggled aboard an EgyptAir jet coaing iron Boday. The mggler was
said to he an assistant of a his drug trafficker in the Batnia, the notorious den
of drug dealers in Cairo. As a cover the smuggler was accoapanied by his wife.

the sources added.

The Police were tipped off that international amgglaro who had contacts with drug
dealers in the Betnia. had resumed their activities in angling narcotics into the

country. They had aet on davicing new nethoda and changed their aource fro- Paki-
stan to India, they said.

Information received by the police revealed that they had planned to amggle a
large anoum of opiun through an accoaplice whoa they had recently recruited. lie
was an antiquities dealer in Khan 31 lhalili who want to India to fetch the con-
signment.

When he returned he was arreated at Cairo Airport with the opium hidden in four
suitcases. He adnitted the attewt and reported to the police his acconplices.--GSS

cso: 5300/5011.
BRIEFS

MARCH DRUG HAUL—ﬁendarnerie officials of breatnn, lboranan. Pars, Zahedon and

Eastern Azerbeyjan seized 6.37 kg of heroin and 51.616 kg of opium during the
past week. [617160567 Tehran JGEURI-YB 381M! in Persian 30 Mar 82 p 2]

OPIUH SEIZED IN DAME—Daub Revolution Guards Corps authors have seized 2.6

kg of opium from one person. [61’160624 Shiraz Donnie Service in Persian
1530 GMT 13 Apr 82]

CSO: 5300/5388

39
BRIEFS

main aim-Durban.-About 30 bag: of dry dagga, worth oovoral-thouoand
rand, mo oolzod by tho polloo oarly yootoxday at a roadblock non: utoourt.
Natal. Tho polico oat up a toad block noa: tho northoxn Natal town shortly
aftot 2 an yootorday. 'l'hoy otgnallod down a light dollvory van travolltnq
troll tho coast towardo Johanna-burg. M ooaxchod tho vohlclo and found tho
dagga ooncoalod in tho back at tho van. ‘rho two Black occupanta of tho vohi-
clo waro mootod. Pollco bollovo tho daqga was cultivatod in tho frontal
and m duo to be oold to tho black norm in Johannooburq. [mt] (Johanna:-
burg m crnm in mouth 30 m 82 p 9)

cso: 5300/5694

ho
THO TURKS ARRESTED IN LARGE HEROIN-SWGGIJM CASE
Copenhagen mucosa: mum in Danish 23 Mar 82 Sec II p 1
[Article by Anders Hiig]

[Text] Two Turkish drug gangsters tell a Ihnish court sitting
with a jury about millions of honor worth of uuggling.

In April of 1980, a lamp and souvenir dealer in the bazaar quarter of
Istanbul was in such serious financial difficulties that he even con-
templated committing suicide. A high rent and the lacking demand among
tourists in connection with the rumors of devaluation had landed him in
debL, so that he saw no way out for himself, his wife. and their two small
children. This story was told by 31-year-old Omer Taskiran yesterday during
a session of a court sitting with a jury in Copenhagen. That is why he
smuggled 3 kilos of heroin into Denmark on 30 April 1980 and participated

in the muggling into the country of ‘0 kilos of heroin on 1 November.

This is also a story about how hrkiBh heroin turned into Austrian cut-
glass pendants which are used for mush chandeliers sold in the bazaars
of Istanbul. The rescuer of Taskiran was his former boss, a manufacturer
of lamps. to whom he was apprenticed before starting his own shop. In
April of 1980, the said manufacturer and his friend were in need of a
courier to take 3 kilos of heroin to Copenhagen. Taskiran accepted the
job as well as the offer of receiving 300,000 lcroner of the 900,000 kroner
which a gang of Turkish drug dealers was to m for the heroin in Copen-
hagen.

Moved to Less Expensive Hotel

Together with an unsuspecting friend, and with the heroin hidden in the
heater of the car. Taskiran started the trip to Denmark, was delayed by
a snow storm for a couple of days in Austria. reached Copenhagen on 30
April, took a room at Hotel Hercur. moved to a less expensive hotel the
next day, found the Turkish club in Viktoria Street, where he asked for
the two fellow countrymen who were to receive the heroin.

bl
They were Yi lmaz Gunes, 36, a waiter and a sort of manager and adviser of
the club as well as the owner of a tobacconist's shop, furthermore Ahmet
Tokmak, 37, a laborer and dealer in Turkish meerschaum pipes. Gunez
arrived a few minutes after Taskiran had asked for him. Taskiran stated
yesterday. They drove to the hotel, where the smugglers pulled out the
black package containing the heroin, put it in a bag with an old shirt on
top of it. and gave it to Gunez. Tasldran had no more money but. the
next day. received "pocket money" from Gunes. Bis co-accomplices in
Turkey told him on the telepm to collect part payment of the 900,000
kroner, to collect the remainder of the money later on and to return home
when all of the money had been collected.

Taski ran went to stew with his friends. the Senyus family in Hamburg.
The police have arrested Ahmet Altan Senyua, 3?, a hiyily educated
businessman, attorney and economist, who has been charged with belonging
to the gang of smugglers. which charge he totally denies. Taskiran him-
self maintains that his friend knew nothing about his shady business
affairs. and that it was entirely out of friendliness that Senyus went
with him to Copenhagen when he had to collect money. And it was a mere
coincidence that they drove back to Turkey together in June.

Tnskiran only succeeded in collecting 580,000 kroner. Part of the money
he collected he spent on his stay. He invested 20,000 German mark in
Srnyns' busi ness in Hamburg, 22.7%? German mark were transferred from a
bank account in Hamburg to his former employer in Istanbul. The remainder
of the 580,000 kroner he cashed when leaving for home. On the way. he
bought Austrian cut-glass pendants for his former boss's lamp production
with part of the money. The out standing 320.000 kroner from the deal in
Copenhagen were. as far as he knew. subsequently transferred to Istanbul.
He states that he himself got the 300,000 kroner out of it which were
promised to him. His participation in the smuggling of another ‘0 kilos
of heroin was not dealt with by the court yesterday.

What happened to the 3 kilos smuggled into the country on 30 April?
Ahmet Tokmak told the court sitting with a jury about that. In the
Turkish club, his fellow countryman Hehmet had stated that a quantity of
heroin would be arriving in town. Tokunk could take that over from their
joint sequaintance. Yilmaz Gunes. As his friend and partner in the im-
port business of meerschaum pipes, Brian Hassig. would like to get hold
of some heroin for resale. and as Hassig had a debt of 20.000 kroner.
for which Tokmak had become surety, Tokmak concluded the deal. He did
not have in mind his own profits. he told the public prosecutor, who
strongly called this statement in question. Tokmak did, indeed. make
300,000 kroner on the deal.

He collected twice 1 :dlo in a plastic bag from Gunes. the waiter. at

his place of work, Dan Hotel. Hassig, who was sentenced to 5 years'
imprisonment in the City Court of Copenhagen. received the heroin in
several lots. partly at the Turkish club and partly at the home of Tolonak
and paid 1.? million kroner for it. The latter tied a rubber band around

1.2
Lhe bundles of banlmotee and gave 900.000 boner. which he carried in his
pocket. to Gunes and Taekiran, the smuggler. .

He does not know what Gunea did with the last idle of the heroin snuggled
from Istanbul. 0. Henge-Jensen. public prosecutor, wanted to know if he

did not think of the terrible harm he would be causing the drug addicts.

Tolouak answered: "I became aware of it when the second kilo was delivered
and I saw how Brian looked when he himself used some of the heroin."

7262
CSO: 5300/2210?

143
TURKISB GANG SENTENCED IN HERDIN SHUGGLING CASE
Copenhagen BERLINGSKE TIDENDE in Danish 3l Mar 82 p 1
[Article by Anders Viig]

[Text] The high court dealt a hard blow when it sentenced a Turkish nar-

cotics gang yesterday to prison terms ranging from 2 to 10 years in length
for smuggling in 7 kilograms of heroin. The six members of the gang were

sentenced to a total of 62 years in prison.

Lamp dealer Omar Taskiran. 31, received the maximum sentence under the law,
10 years in prison. The leader in Denmark, 37-year-old'pipe dealer Ahmet
Tokmak, was given 9 years. Both were involved in two smuggling episodes of
3 and 4 kg respectively. Tokmak was also sentenced for the sale of 300
grams of heroin from another "source." Halter Yilmaz Gunes was given 7
years for receiving and selling 3 kg of heroin in May l980 and his 22-year-
old brother Altan was given 2 years for trying to help Taskiran get hold of
the b-kg shipment in November 1980. It was this shipment that the police
seized en route from the Rodby ferry. The smuggler, Pethi Uzulmez, a 32-
year-old factory worker from Nuremberg who brought the b kg of heroin into

the country, was sentenced to 6 years in prison.

Finally, businessman Ahmet Altan Senyus of Hamburg was sentenced to 8 years
in prison. Despite the flat denials made by him and the other accused men,
the jury decided there was evidence that he had assisted in bringing in

4 kg.

The evidence against Senyus consisted entirely of telephone wiretaps and his
connection with Taskiran. Among other things :ne latter had lived with
Senyus for 6 weeks while he made several trips to Copenhagen to obtain money.
When the evidence was being presented, both men claimed that Senyus believed
these were legal money transactions. in a series of wiretapped phone con-
versations between the two men, the words heroin and narcotics were not
mentioned--the word "materials" occurred in connection with shirt sewing.
Otherwise, judging from the choice of words, the talks appeared to concern
mainly the importation and manufacture of lamps for the existing and legal
shop in Hamburg which the two men own jointly as well as a sudden lack of
liquidity. In view of the sentence, these must be presumed to have been
codes and circumlocutiona. Senyus was sentenced for being one of the
"respectable" men who never touch drugs thmelvee but stand behind heroin
smuggling and obtain money fro. it. This wee eubstantieted in pert by the
fact that he was arrested in Teskiren's hotel room on the very evening when
the gang was waiting for the a kilogram of heroin.

6578
C50: 5300/2253

1:5
BRIEFS

DROP iN NARCOTICS DIATHS--In 1981, 168 Danish drug addicts died as a direct
and immediate result of their habit. The mortality statistics were nade
available yesterday by the Copenhagen narcotics police, but the figure is
for the entire country. In 1980, 165 narcotics deaths were noted and in
[979 the figure was 125. Detective superintendent Bent Hansen: "The
figures are still terribly high, but we can hope that the decline in rela-
tion to 1980 indicates a decline in the number of addicts. And we can hope

that reventive efforts in the schools and elsewhere have had an effect."
[Textﬁ [Copenhagen ammcsxz Home in Danish 31 an 82 p 3] 6578

C30: 5300/2253

h6
HORFHINE REMOVED FROM LIFE BOATS; OFFICIALS INVESTIGATING
Reykjavik HORGUNBLADID in Icelandic 27 Feb 82 p 66

[Text] Officials of the National Nautical Board have
recently ordered morphine and other habit-forming drugs
to be removed from the Icelandic fleet's rubber life
boats. Other drugs, which are not habit-forming, will

continue to be kept on the boats.

"Host doctors have been quite opposed to removing morphine and other addic-
tive drugs from the rubber lifeboats." said Hjslmar R. Bardarson. head of

the National Nautical Board, in an interview with HORGUNBLADID. "But I had
a study done on how frequently it has been necessary to use morphine and
other strong addictive drugs in nautical accidents off our coasts. The
results showed that most probably it would never be necessary to use these
drugs. when this became clear, I thought it was obvious that morphine
should be removed from the boats, since people have always broken into them
to steal the morphine and other addictive drugs. I believe that it is more
important for the boats to go out in one piece than to run the risk that.

because of vandalism. they won't work when we need them."

Bardarson said further. "It made my decision easier when Olafur Olafsson. the
surgeon general, supported me in this matter. Then we had the National

Nautical Board go ahead and remove the morphine and other addictive drugs
from the rubber lifeboats."

The National Nautical Board has recently printed a pamphlet for use with the
rubber lifeboats. This pamphlet is the first in a series of specialised
publications the National Nautical Board intends to publish. The pamphlet
explains the use of the boats in detail. including their contents. These
National Nautical Board pamphlets will be packaged in watertight wrappers
and installed in the rubber lifeboat: so that people will have instructions
on board when they need them.

958a
cs0: 5300/2208

h?
FOUR HBROIN SHUCGLERS ARRESTED IN SARI
Bari LAGAZZETTA DEL HEZZOGIORNO in Italian 2 Mar 82 pp 1, 2
[Article by Ettore Giorgio Poti]

[Text] Brindiai--Another heavy blow has been dealt to the drug trade, that
squalid market which yields such high profits and reaps so many victims. Four
drug dealers were caught in a trap set by agents of the Finance Guard of Rome.
It is not known whether they are big or medium-sized fish, but they are cer-
tainly not small ones: this is clear both from their records, which place
them fairly high up in the underworld, and from the large value (about 1 bil-
lion lire at current prices) of the merchandise they were carrying.

Three of the four who were arrested are from Andria, and belong to that Bari
underworld which has long since made a "qualitative leap" from cigarette
smuggling to the lucrative but abominable drug trade, passing quickly and
almost inexorably from light drugs to heavy ones.

Deputy Prosecutor Dr. Di Bonito has rightly said that the drug trade has been
taking root and spreading in Puglia, too. This prediction was based on two
simple observations: the growing volume of traffic in the port of Brindisi
and the strategic position of Puglia (especially the strip from Brindiei to
Bari), which is almost a crossroads along the way to the various destinaticns
of drugs. Vigilance has been increased and perfected in recent years, of
course, with better training for agents and better methods.

The results of the operation in Brindisi late Sunday night were undoubtedly
important. The news has just come out now. Officers and deputy officers of
the central nucleus of the fiscal police of Rome's Finance Guard were respon-
sible for the action. They came to Brindiei on purpose, which leads one to
believe that this operation was part of a much larger one that may have al-
ready led to important developments and have more in store. This may mean
that a determined offensive is underway against a vast national and interna-
tional organization.

The four men who were arrested were Giovanni Moschetta, 36 years old, and
Antonio Musci, 58 years old, both born and residing in Andria (the former in
the San Valentino district, the latter at 76 Via De 61110); Sabine Convereano,
32 years old, born in Andria and residing in Trani (14 Via c. Coloabo): and
Mauro Rocchetti, 31 years old, a Roman residing at 1 Via Cerisai. False docu-
ments were found in the possession of Hoschetta and Rocchetti: the former

1:8
had an identity card bearing the name Vella, the latter a passport in the name
of Conversnno.

The Roman fiscal police agents evidently knew at least three of the four men
well. Sunday night they stationed themselves opposite the maritime station and
watched from a distance as the passengers got off the "Roles," a ferry coming
from Patras and Corfu. They spotted the three men they were looking for, and
waited while they approached a fourth awaiting them on the pier. The four men
then walked out of the maritime station together. As soon as they left the
cusroms area the fiscal police went into action, blocking their way and lead-
ing then straight to the local headquarters of the Finance Guard. The four

men were carrying two suitcases.

1hey expressed surprise and annoyance. 'Ve have nothing to hide," they said.
But the fiscal police knew what they were looking for and where to look for it.
They Found four large plastic envelopes containing 2.68 kg of very pure and
highly concentrated heroin carefully hidden in a false bottom of one of the
suitcases. Two of the envelopes were even marked "quality brand" and "Doume
voglahe" and hate various Asian hieroglyphics. Considering the fact that every
eras cf this very pure and concentrated heroin yields many doses-—each worth
60,000-7ﬁ,000 lire-~when mixed with various substances. the real market value
of the confiscated drugs was about 1 billion lire. when the heroin was found
the four men, who could no longer deny their guilt, fell silent.

9855
cso: 5300/2242
PROGRESS, PROBLEMS IN AMSTERDAM DRUG SCENE
Brussels LA LIBRE BELGIQUE in French 23 Mar 82 p 5

[Text] The municipality of Amsterdam has decided to asphalt
the Zeedijk, one of the "hot" streets in that Dutch port city,
to prevent illicit heroin peddlers from hiding their inven-
tory under the loose cobblestones. The city has already
barricaded doors and windows in cafes where the drug trade
was flourishing, and after the asphalting is finished, it
will demolish others. A luxury hotel will then be built on
the cleared site. The end of the Zeedijk, where the arrival
of heroin used to be announced in ideograms on the shopwin-
dows of Chinese merchants, will no doubt mark the end of an

era 0

It was 10 years ago that heroin made its mass entry into Amsterdam. But it is
crime, the corollary of drugs, rather than the drug itself, which Dutch author-

ities are trying hard to contain. And cleaning up the Zeedijk, although not
yet completed, should help in that effort. The first result: the heroin trade
has spread to other corners of the city. "in Polak, Amsterdam's top health
official, says: "What else can we do? In any case, foreign tourists will have
to search for 2 or 3 days before they find suppliers. At least we will have
accomplished that much."

In recent years, according to Dutch police, Amsterdam has lost its title as
the capital of easy heroin to Berlin, Rome, and Frankfurt.

But there are still addicts. In The Hague, three ministries (justice, health,
and culture) have set up a Joint force to help the addicts. That group is not
interested in the unknown number of "weekend users," who stock up on heroin on
Friday evenings and seem to avoid the trap of addiction.

The help is concentrated on the true drug addicts who have taken refuge in a

hard drug because they can't stand themselves or because they reject their en-
vironment: society. Those responsible for the policy of helping addicts point
out: "We can't change society. But we are trying to equip our clients better

with psychological and social support."

50
nver Ion consultation and assistance offices are operating throughout the
country. But it is still necessary to attract the clientele, which by defini-
tion is suspicious or rebellious against initiatives taken by "society." Metha-
done is massively used by the city of Amsterdam, which sends dispensary buses

to neighborhoods frequented by addicts, and it is the bait used in fishing for
drug addicts in distress.

Methadone is a medicine that allows the heroin addict to escape the terrible
suffering of withdrawal, although it does not provide the euphoria supplied by
the real drug. When they cannot afford heroin at 200 guilders (about 3,500
Belgian francs per gram)——and big users take more than a gram a day-~some drug
addicts obtain a prescription for methadone at one of the public dispensaries.
Each dose of methadone costs the authorities about as much as a glass of beer,
and clients are required to consume it on the spot to keep them from traffick-
ing in it.

Nearly 3,000 addicts are registered at the methadone diapensaries, where every
effort is made to persuade them to undergo detoxification. The poor results
nhLﬂinud to date have triggered criticism of the system and of the purity of
intention on the part of the authorities, who are accused of "buying the tran-
quillity of the middle class."

Assistant Mayor Polak admits: "It cannot be denied that if he is calmed by
methadone. the addict is going to steal less to buy heroin. But our real ob-
joctivc is deioxiiicntion. After all, we did succeed in conquering tuberculo-
sis."

Treatment centers such as the Jellinek detoxify their patients in 15 days under
strict supervision before preparing them to face the "hard realities of exist-
once."

The apprenticeship begins with punctuality and living in community with other
former addicts. The residents, apparently satisfied with the experience, say:
"we learn to put up with each other and also to write job application letters."

To ease the shock of returning to ordinary life, the treatment center is located
downtown. and outings are organized. But the comparison is a discouraging one
between artificial paradise: and the unemployment and material and emotional
miseries of daily life. One of the patients says: "I have never experienced
anything more wonderful than morphine. After that, reality is hard to take."

11798
CSO: 5300/2269

51
BRIEFS

ISTANBUL HEROIR SEIZURE-~lstanbul, 6 Apr (AM—Customs officiela et latenbul's
Yesilkoy Airport seized l kilogran of heroin hidden in a carton of foreign

cigarettes which two Israeli citizens tried to teke with the: on a flight to
Athens. The Israelis caught uere identified as Sender Mel and Rachel

Jan. The two claimed they were merely carriers for a certein Yoesef Ginati,
for whom police issued a warrant of arrest. Istanbul police said. [Text]

[TA061551 Ankara ANATOLIA in English 1520 cm 6 Apr 82]

(250: 5300/5385 END

52