FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/Iosee
15 June’ 1982

USSR Report

MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY

{FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain inforntion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Tcxt]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Were no processing indicator is given, the» infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itans are as

given by source .

‘Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT IAHS AND REGIMTIONS GOVERNING WRSHI‘P OF
HERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION SE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10588
15 June 1982

USSR REPORT
MATERIALS SCIENCE AND METALLURGY

(POUO 3/82)
Cormams

FERROUS HEIALLURGY

Problem of Iron and Steel Industry Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

FOUNDRY
Advances in Electroslag Metal Technology ........................ 8
MISCELLANEOUS
Fluoride Process for Producing Tungsten.......................... 15
Scientific Fundamentals of Materials Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .l. 19

Interaction of Molten Metal With Cnrbon Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . 22

- a - [III - USSR - 216 881' F(
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FERROUS HBIALLURGY

PROBLEHS OF IRON AND STEEL INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT
Moscow VOPROSY ERONOHIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 56-59
[Article by S. Kadetov: "Economic Problems of Development of Ferrous Hetallurgy"]

[Text] The (250 (hmmlComittee and USSR Council of Ministers decree entitled
"0n Intensifying Efforts to Achieve Economy and Efficient Utilization of Raw
Materials, Fuel-Energy and Other Material Resources" states: "To expend raw
materials and supplies carefully, to reduce waste, and to eliminate losses
means to achieve savings in the labor of millions of people and capital invest-
ment, to increase output, and to protect the environment." The decree focuses
the ferrous metallurgical industry on accoaplishing two principal tasks —- in-
tensification of metallurgical production and efficient utilization of re-
sources.

The USSR contains approximately half of the world's iron ore reserves. 0f the
total quantity of proved reserves. approximately 15 percent are rich ores, con-
taining on the average more than 55 percent iron and not requiring concentra-
tion. 67 percent are ores which are concentrated by sisple processes, and 18
percent are ores requiring complicated concentration methods.

In the USSR the largest iron ore reserves are concentrated in the Ukraine, in
the Central part of the RSFSR. in Kazakhstan, Siberia, and in the Urals, ac-
counting for 85 percent of all iron-ore resources. For the most part rich and
easily—concentrated ores me beig deﬂoped in this country. Rich ores comprise
17 percent of total production. Ores requiring complicated methods of concen-
tration are being utilized in blast-furnace production to an insignificant
degree at the present time. Approximately 90 percent of the merchantable ore
consumed by metallurgical plants is mined locally; the remaining 10 percent is
hauled long distances. Principal growth in iron ore.reserves for the immediate
future is projected in the western areas of the country. In connection with
this, increase in ferrous metals production is to be achieved by expanding the
Starc-Oskol'skiy Electrometallurgical Combine in the area of the Kursk
Magnetic Anomaly (10“), as well as construction of second and third units of
existing plants in the northeast of the European part of the country and in the
Ukraine.

Studies indicate that the economic effectiveness of production of merchantable
iron ore is significantly greater in the western areas of the USSR than in the
eastern.1 Effectiveness is particulary low in the Urals and Uestern Siberia.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main reason for this is the absence of large surveyed ore bodies which can
be surface :ined. The largest deposits in Eastern Siberia in terms of reserves
are the Tagarskoye and the Nizhne-Angarskoye. The economic effectiveness of
commercial iron ore production here, however, is calculated to be lower than

in the western areas of the USSR. The fact is that. in the first place. a
large portion of the ore requires beneficiation; secondly, rail lines must be
constructed; thirdly, because of the harsh climatic conditions. pit transport
vehicles, loading and other equipment must be provided in Arctic models;
urban-type communities must also be built.

As calculations show, all iron ore deposits in the Urals and Siberia which

are presently in operation or scheduled to go into operation have worse economic
indices than ore bodies in the western areas of the country. According to the
method of determining economic effectiveness of capital construction, it is
advisable to build metallurgical enterprises only in the European part of the
country, and the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy has no interest in pushing
industry eastward. In our opinion the existing method is little suited for the
eastern parts of the cauntry. Analyzing the reasons for increase in the cost
of capital construction in the eastern regions and a decline in return on in-
vestment, Academician T. Khachaturov noted that a decline in the capital-output
ratio does not constitute grOunds for a decision not to build new enterprises
in the eastern part of the country.2

The iron ore bodies of the Kursk Magnetic Anomaly are unique among the
country's iron ore deposits. Proved reserves of high-grade ore total approx-
imately 27 billion tons, and AO-SO billion tons including projected reserves.3
The iron ore bodies of the KMA constitute the raw materials base for the
Staro-Oskol'skiy Metallurgical Plant which is under construction. The mining
enterprises of the RNA can meet the iron requirements of the Novo-Lipetskiy
and Novo-Tul'skiy metallurgical plants and plants of Western Siberia. Con-
sidering the enormous reserves of high—grade ores in the KMA, Northern
Kazakhstan and the Ukraine, the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy is planning
to obtain 80 percent ofmemmenuide ore production increase in these areas. of
interest in this connection is the "Long-Range Capital Investment Program for
Development of Ferrous Metallurgy Based on the Iron Ores of the KMA and Coking
Coal of the Kuzbass." This program attempts to provide an economic Substantia-
tion of the feasibility of supplying with iron-ore resources the metallurgical
plants of Western Siberia and with coking coal the plants of the central region
on analogy with the Ural-Kurnetsk metallurgical base. The KMA-Kuzbass
program, however, should be viewed as a reserve program. If large and
economical iron ore deposits are discovered in Western Siberia in the near
future, there will be no need to implement this program.

The percentage share of surface-mined iron ore is increasing at present. From
1970 to 1980. for example, the share of surface-mined production increased
from 79 to 82 percent, while the share of underground-mined production declined
from 20.8 to 16.1 percent. Subsequently the ratio of these two modes of
production will stabilize. Surface mining of iron ore is much more economical.
Specific capital investment per ton of production increase in merchantable are
with underground mining is ll times greater than with surface mining. Conv
tinuing underground mining operations, however, is dictated both by a shortage

2
I‘M!(Nﬁﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ§(ﬂMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of iron ore deposits capable of supplying existing metallurgical plants and by
the conditions of occurrence of natural high—grade iron ores. In the future a
number of surface nines will exhaust reserves at the upper levels and will in
part shift to mixed modes of production. Subsequently there will evidently be
a decline in the percentage share of surface-mined production. This is based
on the assumption that practically all known large deposits where mixed-mode
production will be employed will have been brought into operation. One should
bear in mind thereby that open-pit mining is accompanied by removal from use of
large acreages of fertile land. For example. exploitation of the m iron ore
bodies led to the removal of approximately 15,000 hectares, including 9000 hec-
tares of arable land. A comparison of the acreage occupied by the underground
and surface nines of the RNA shows that only 1200 hectares are required for

the underground Yakovlevskiy and Gostishchevskiy mines for the entire period of
exploitation, while approximately 20,000 hectares are required for the
Stoylenskiy, Lebedinskiy, and Hikhaylovskiy surface mines.

Ferrous metallurgy in the USSR is developing in conformity with the directions
specified at the 25th and 26th CPSU congresses — increasing the unit Output of
metallurgical equipment and intensifying the process of concentration of
metallurgical production, a result of which is an increase in steelmaking at metal-
lurgical plants of a) to 10-25 million tons per year. This ferrous metallurgical
industry growth focuses the iron ore industry toward increasing the percentage
share of large surface-mining operations. In the future the percentage share
of open—pit nines with an annual crude ore output of 20—30 million tone or more
will increase to 60 percent of the total volume of surface-mined ore production.
In spite of this. however, concentration of production in the iron ore industry
still lags behind the demands made by blast—furnace production. At the present
time all metallurgical plants are consuming iron ore from a group of ore bodies,
which involves worsening of the technical-economic indices of pig iron produc-
tion. In addition, there arises the problem of blending the raw materials at
storage sites, which causes additional costs. Existing equipment is unable to
provide proper blending. As a result iron content in the sintered ore fluctuates
:1-2.0 percent. At ore blending facilities abroad this ratio runs as follows:
0.2 percent in Japan, and 0.25 percent in the United States. Providing Soviet
sinter plants with modern blending equipment will make it possible to boost the
productivity of blast furnaces and improve the economic indices of blast-fur-
nace production.

Expenditures involved in mining and preparing ore for smelting are taking up an
increasingly larger share of production cost. Increase in the cost of the
processes of preparing ores for smelting has been caused by objective factors.
In 1958, for example, 1.3 tons of crude ore were required to produce a ton of
merchantable ore, while in 1965 the figure was 1.6 tons, 1.85 tons in 1971, and
1.92 tons in 1980. The increased amount of crude ore required to produce a ton
of merchantable ore is due to the limited reserves of high-grade iron ores and
the uneven geographic distribution of these reserves in this country; the large-
scale utilization of low-grade ores requiring beneficiatlon, and impoverishment
of a portion of high-grade ores as a result of working ore bodies with high-
output mass caving systems, etc. All this inevitably leads to an increase in
the percentage share of beneficiated iron ore in the total production voluae and
to expanded construction of beneficiation plants at practically all surface and

3
PM! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

underground mines coming into production. Similar results are brOught about by
a decline in the percentage content of iron in the mined ores. For example,
the percentage content of iron in the crude ore declined from 37.3 to 35.1 per-
cent from 1970 to 1980.

Improvement inthe gthy of iron ore and increase in the iron content in the
merchantable ore takes place in the process of beneficiation. A trend toward
increase in iron content in concentrate is becoming increasingly more marked,
since the savings achieved in blast-furnace production by smelting high-grade
ore exceeds by severalfold the expenses involved in high-concentration ore
beneficiation and concentrate pelletizing. In addition, beneficiation of iron
ores on the one hand reduces the cost of producing pig iron, while on the
other hand it fosters technological advances in the iron and steel industry.

Iron content in concentrate is higher in the USSR than in the United States.
Plans for new Kursk Magnetic Anomaly mining and beneficiation combines call
for obtaining concentrates with a 67-68 percent iron content. The performance
indices of these enterprises are equal to those of foreign enterprises in
quality of concentrates and fineness of the final grind. Large capital in-
vestment is required, however, to achieve such results. Expenditures on con-
struction of new, renovation and expansion of existing crushing-sizing and
beneficiation plants make up a substantial percentage share of the total
amount of capital spending in the iron ore industry.

Growth in fixed assets at crushing-sizing and beneficiation plants is running
ahead of increase in volume of concentrate, resulting in a worsening of the out-
put-capital ratio at ore preparation enterprises and reduced return on capital.

Employment of high-concentration beneficiation and utilization of the most
modern equipment inevitably raise the cost of beneficiation and specific out-
lays per ton of concentrate. According to the figures of N. Lelyukhina,“ with
a 1 percent increase in iron content in magnetic concentrate within the range
of 60-65 percent, the cost of the concentrate increases by 10-20 kopecks, and
specific capital outlays (figuring mining of quartzites) by 50-65 kopecks. The
savings obtained in producing pig iron, however, exceed by 3-4-fold outlays
connected with increasing iron content.

Increase in the economic effectiveness of beneficiation of iron ores is deter-
mined in large measure by the comprehensiveness of their utilization. Solving
the problem of comprehensive utilization of complex ores will make it possible
to reduce the cost of producing the main product and to obtain a number of
associated constituents. The difficulty here lies in the fact that the iron and
steel industry will be compelled to turn out products of other branches:
sludges for fertilizing soil, rare elements, building materials, etc. The lack
of interest on the part of mining enterprises to produce useful by-product
constituents is due to the fact that this requires additional capital invest-
ment and more complicated enterprise structure and management. In addition,
many scientific and engineering problems pertaining to separating attendant
constituents during extraction of the principal element have not yet been
solved.

1.
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The final process in preparing iron ore for blast-furnace smelting is pelletiz-
ing. In 1980 the percentage share of pelletized ore in blast-furnace charges
exceeded 90 percent. Analysis of future development of the USSR iron-ore base
indicates that the percentage share of palletized iron ore will increase, as
will expenditures on this process.

Pelletizing of iron ore is accomplished by sintering and nodulizing. Sintering
he both positive and negative features. Following are drawbacks of sintering:
high expenditure of fuel; difficulty of producing a strong sinter capable of
standing up under lengthy hauls; poor efficiency of pelletizing finely ground
concentrates. The cost of sinter is also steadily increasing. The USSR is the
world leader in sinter production volume. At the same time Soviet plants are
surpassed by plants abroad in equipment output capacity and product quality.
The increase in cost of sinter is due not only to the fact that obsolete equip-
ment is being used but also is due to objective factors: in recent years the
percentage share of concentrates smaller than 0.1 mm in size in the sinter
charge has continued to rise, which diminishes the productivity of sintering
equipment and increases sinter cost.

Worsening of the technical—economic indices of sintering with employment of
fine concentrates and increase in their production volumes have dictated the
necessity of developing the most promising method of pelletizing fine con-
centrates -- nodulizing. The end product of nodulizing is iron ore nodular
pellets. At the present time we produce for the most part fluxed and unfluxed,
metallized and unroasted pellets. Pluxed and unfluxed pellets are employed in
coke blast-furnace netallurgy, but in producing pig iron employment of unfluxed
pellets is possible only in a combination with basic sinter. Metallized pellets,
depending on the degree of metallization, are used for making pig iron and
steel. Hetallized pellets are one type of pro-reduced iron ore. With a high
degree of metallization, various types of reduced ore are employed in steel-
making. Thus sintering and pelletizing of iron ore are initially supplementing
one another, while subsequently nodulizing will evidently replace blast-furnace
production.

The nodulizing method is more pro-icing than sintering. The sintering process
is developing in the direction of increasing the size of the sintering machines
together with attendant equipment. by parallel improvement in the quality of
the sinter (increasing strength, etc). Its cost is increasing, however, while
the cost of producing pellets is decreasing. In spite of the fact that there
is taking place, as it were, a countermovement of increase in the cost of
sinter and decrease in the cost of pellets. the cost of iron ore pellets is
frequently greater than the cost of sinter. In our opinion this attests to the
fact that there is occurring a not quite correct distribution of scientific,
financial and material resources in the area of scientific and technical
development projects between sintering and nodulizing. Accelerated development
of the more advanced method of pelletizing fine concentrates -- nodulizing --
will prove to be more economical, which will have a favorable effect on the
cost of ferrous metals.

An increase in pig iron and steel production volumes causes an increase in the
volume of ore and rock moved by in-mine transport. In connection with the
fact that the percentage share of outlays on hauling ore and rock will

5
FIHICNWHCJAI.USE(MWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase, efficiency of means of transport determines in large measure in-
crease in efficiency of producing merchantable ore. More than 1.5 billion
tons of ore and rock are hauled in the USSR iron ore industry: 49.3 percent by
rail, 39.6 percent by truck, 10 percent by conveyor, and 1.3 percent by other
modes of transport.

In the United States and Canada the bulk of hauling (80 percent) is done by
truck. Comparing the basic specifications and performance figures of Soviet-
built dump trucks with those built in the United States, we can note that
specific horsepower, speed, and load factor are approximately the same. but u.s.
dump trucks have less downtile. In the USSR the percentage of the surface-
mine truck fleet in serviceable condition is relatively low. A higher per~
centage is achieved in the United States and Canada through maintenance and
maintaining a complete stock of factory-built spare parts. An increase in load
capacity and engine horsepower is the principal trend in the development of
today's surface-mine motor transport in this country.

An increase in the load capacity of Soviet-built surface-nine dump trucks is
in conformity with the world development trend in this mode of transport. As
regards powerplants, one way to improve the efficiency of surface-mine dump
truck engines is to replace diesel engines with gas turbines. A 1200 horse-
power gas turbine engine has been developed in the USSR. The great advantage
of a gas turbine engine lies in the fact that it can use liquefied natural gas
as fuel; this will make it possible to achieve greater economy and to reduce
air pollution around surface nines.

The present iron ore base in the USSR comprises 27.5 percent of total balance-
sheet iron ore reserves and makes it possible to provide a crude iron ore
production volume in excess of 700 million tons, which corresponds to an
annual production of 259 million tons of iron. However. in connection with

a worsening of the quality of the iron ore base (a decline in the percentage
of iron content in the are), increasingly deeper mining levels, and an in-
crease in ore hauling distance to the Customer, the economic indices of
ferrous metallurgy are worsening.

In iron ore beneficiation one should expect changes in technology as a result
of total utilization of iron ores. Scientists and engineers are already
working on processes for recovering secondary constituents contained in com-
plex ores. The iron and steel industry will be putting out a broader product
mix.

Changes are expected in development of methods of preparing ore for smelting.
A substantial quantity of concentrate will be nodulized. One can already

note a trend toward a steady increase in production of pellets. Production of
pig iron will gradually be replaced by a new technique -- direct reduction of
iron froa ore.

This country's iron ore industry is focusing on more economical utilization
of already produced ferrous metals. Up to the present time, however, metal
losses are still quite large along the entire process chain. from mining the
ore to manufacture of the end product. In the 10th five-year plan, for
example. irretrievable metal losses in beneficiation processes totaled

6
FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approximately 130 million tons. which is equivalent to (-00 million tons of

crude iron ore.5 Considerable ferrous metals losses occur in machine building -
tron machinery and equipment Hear, fron shortcomings in organization of col-
lection of scrap metal, poor quality of steels, natal corrosion, etc.

WOTBS
1. See N. D. Lelyukhina, "Bkonomicheskaya effektivnost' razmeshcheniya chernov
metallurgii" [Economic Effectiveness of Distribution of the Iron and Stee.
Industry], Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1973. pp 116. 118.

2. See '1‘. S. Khachaturov, "Intsnsifikatsiya i effektivnost' v usloviyakh
razvitogo sotsializma" [Intensification and Efficiency in Conditions or
Developed Socialism], Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1978, page 233.

3. See "Dolgosrochnyye progra-ny kapital'nykh vlozheniy" [Long-Tern Capital
Investment Program]. lzdatel'stvo Ekononika, 1971., page 76.

lo. Lelyukhina, op. cit.

5. See 1.. Zusman, "The metal (Iron) Balance Sheet in the Nation's Econony,"
VOPROSY EKWOHIKI. No 10, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatal'atvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekononiki", 1982 .

30210
080: 1842/12?

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFK3A1.USE(MVLY

FOUNDRY

UDC: 669.187.26.006.12

ADVANCES IN ELECTROSLAG METAL TECHNOLOGY

Kiev ELEKTROSHLAXOVYY HBTALL in Russian 1981 (signed to press 31 Jul 81) pp 6-
8, 678-679

[Aunotation, table of contents and foreword from book "Blectroslag Metal", by
Boris lzrailevich Hedovar et al.. edited by Academicians B. Ye. Paton and
B. I. Hedovar, Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks”, 2000 copies, 680 pages]

[Tegt] This monograph deals With questions pertaining to the quality of
electroslag metal, that is, metal materials and blanks of metals obtained by
electroslag technology methods: electroslag remelting, electroslag casting.
electroslag working, and all methods of enlarging blanks.

This volume contains information on the chemical composition, structure,
mechanical, physical-mechanical and industrial properties of electroslag metal:
steels of practically all existing classes, heat-resisting alloys, cast irons,

and a number of nonferrous, highly reactive and heavy metals and alloys.

This volume presents data on the technical-economic effectiveness of production
and employment of electroslag metal.

This book contains reference materials which will be of use to specialist
metallurgists and machine builders, designers, students enrolled at higher
technical schools, as well as many other specialists involved in the production,
consumption and processing of metals.

Contents Page

Foreword 5

Chapter I. What Are EShP [Electroslag Remelting] and EShL [Electroslag

Casting]? 9
1. History of Development of BShP Based on the Electroslag Welding
Process 9
2. Blectroslag Metals List 13
3. Types of Electroslag Castings l9
6. Development Prospects of BShP and EShL 25
8

INJR‘OFTﬂCIAI.l£§Ei(HNLY
FOR<DFFKJAI.USEiONlN

Chapter II. Chenical Composition. Structure and Mechanical Properties

1.
2.

3.
A.

5.

of Electroslag Metal

Chemical Composition
Structure

Mechanical Properties
Endurance
Corrosion-Mechanical Strength

Chapter III. Manufacturing Properties of Electroslag Metal

1.
2.
3.
6.

Defornebility
Heldability

Horkability
Hardenability

Chapter IV. Electroslag Ballhearing Steel

Monmetallic Inclusions and Service Properties of Steel
Influence of EShP on Contamination With Nonmetallic Inclusions
and Service Properties of Steel

Mass of an EShP Ingot and Quality of the Steel

Steel for Instrument and Heat Resistant Bearings

Steel for Cold-Rolling Rolls

Chapter V. Electroslag Steel for Merchant Shapes, Forgings, Drop

1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Forgings and Tubes

Tool Steels

Die Steels

Carbon and Low-Alloy Structural Steels
Medium—Alloy Structural Steels
Heat-Resisting Steels

Drill Bit Steels

Transformer Steels

Stainless and Heat-Resisting Steels
Heat—Resisting Alloys

10. Tubes and Hollow Deformed Blanks

Chapter VI. Electroslag Sheet and Plate Steel

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Present State of Production of Sheet Steel
Features of Production of BIectrosIag Sheet Steel
Lou-Alloy Plate Steels

Medium-Alloy Plate Steels

Medium-Alloy Sheet Steels

High-Alloy Sheet Steele and Alloys
Little-Deformed and Undeformed Sheet Steels
Sheet Steels Abroad

9
FIIICMNNCIAI.USE1DNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NHLY

Chapter VII. Electroslag Castings

1.

2.

Mechanical Properties and Characteristics of Castings of
Various Steels
Electroslag Castings Abroad

Chapter VIII. Heavy-Tonnage Blanks of Blectroslag Steel

1.
20
3.
6.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Areas of Applications

Materials Employed in Producing Blanks

Modern Methods of Producing Blanks

Monoblock Blanks of Electroslag Steel

Blanks Obtained by Electroslag Sealing of an Axial Aperture
Blanks Obtained by the Electroslag Casting Method

Blanks Obtained by the Batch Electroslag Casting Method
Blanks Obtained by the EShSB [Electroslag...] Method

Chapter IX. Electroslag Cast Iron

1.
2.
3.

4.

Types of Cast Irons, Areas of Applicztion and Problems of
Improving Quality

Methods of Refining and Heating Cast Iron to Obtain Spheroidal
Graphite

Influence of Electroslag Working of Cast Iron (EShOch) on Its
Quality

High-Purity Electroslag Cast Tron

chapter X. Electroslag Nonferrous Metals and Alloys

1.
2.
3.
4.

Titanium and Titanium Alloys
Aluminum

Copper and Copper-Base Alloys
Refractory Metals and Special Alloys

Chapter XI. Economic Effectiveness of EShP and EShL

1. General Methodological Statements
2. Economic Effectiveness of Production and Consumption of EShP
Metal
3. Comparative Analysis of Technical-Economic Indices of EShP and
Other Remelt Processes
4. EShL —- An Important Direction for Inproving Efficiency of
Producing Blanks
5. Economic Appraisal of the State of Production of Electroslag
Metal Abroad
6. Prospects for Future Improvement in Economic Effectiveness of
Production of Electroslag Metal
Conclusion
Bibliography

10
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬁ(1A1.USE(MMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOBEHORD

Each year many hundreds of thousands of tons of electroslag metal are produced
in this country. The EShP [Electroslag Remelting] metal product list today
embraces practically all types and grades of steels and alloys and all types

of rolled products produced by the metallurgical industry. They include rolled
merchant shapes and wire, plate and sheet, tubes and rings, reilcar tires, etc.
The assortment of electroslag forgings and drop forgings is quite extensive.
More and more varieties of castings, including sectional shapes, are being ob-
tained frOm electroslag metal.

Bearing and tool steels, structural and high-strength steels, stainless and
heat-resisting steels, iron, nickel, nickel-cobalt and iron-nickel-cobalt baSe
alloys, copper and its alloys, transformer steels and alloys, including ferro-
aluminum alloys are subjected to electroslag remelting. In recent years highly
reactive and even refractory metals have been remelted.

Alongside the remelting process, that is, BShP proper of a consumable electrode.
other areas of electroslag technology are also being developed, that is, a
technology which employs as heating source Joule heat released in a synthetic
slag during the passage of an electric current through it.

Blectrosln casting am) is an important new manufacturing process, and particular-
ly such types as shaped and centrifugal casting, based on pouring electroslag
metal into a stationary or rotating mold.

Electroslag processes are being developed in which consumable electrodes are
used only partially or not at all (electroslag casting, including batch casting,
electroslag working electroslag heating, electroslag refining, electroslag
feed, etc).

One new application of the electroslag process is its employment in electric fur-
nace melting of steel of metallized iron pellets, electroslag melting of
synthetic pig iron of products of direct reduction of iron (pellets, sponge
iron).

Whatever one might call a given variation of electroslag technology, its end
product is metal, in the form of an ingot or casting, or in the form of a
forging or drop forging. In all instances this product bears a common name --
electroslag metal.

Electroslag metal is not only a product of ferrOus or nonferrous metallurgy.
Therefore we must say a few words about the term special electrometallurgy,
which until quite recently was defined rather narrowly, applying only to the
production of metal in electroslag and other remelting furnaces. Obviously
the time has come to broaden the definition of this term somewhat, hearing in
mind that special electrometallurgy and its important subdivision electroslag
metallurgy should encompass all those processes in which the electroslag
process is employed to melt solid or refine liquid metal.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F11C1Al.lEHE(NVLY

it should scarcely be necessary here to discuss in detail the great importance
for scientific and technological advances of metal of high quality, high
reliability, homogeneity, with high indicea which are constantly reproduced
from one melt to the next, characteristics which describe electroslag metal.
One cannot even imagine what would have happened in a number of areas of new
technology and the most modern production facilities if metal were the same in
its inalitative indices and level of properties as 15 to 20 years ago. Today
it is well known that the principal result of electroslag remelting of metal,
just as of other refining remelting processes which purify metals of harmful
impurities and nonmetallic inclusions, which improve its structure, is a sub-
stantial improvement in plasticity and toughness indices with a practically
unchanged level of strength properties. This remarkable property of metal
freed of contaminating impurities, metal which is sufficiently dense and
homogeneous, possessing the required structure, makes it possible, utilizing
its margin of toughness and plasticity, appreciably to increase the strength
of a steel or alloy. It is precisely this which has made it possible to
supply modern machine building with steels possessing very high strength (100-
200 kg/mm?) in fairly large sections, with the required margin of plasticity
and toughness. In a number of instances, however, when precisely these two
indicators are of decisive significance for the operating properties, reliabili-
ty and durability of a structural component, machine or machinery part, it
makes sense not to seek to obtain the greatest possible strength but rather

to utilize in full measure the excellent plasticity and toughness properties of

refined metal.

Twenty years ago, during the period of formation of special electrometallurgy,
only costly steels and alloys were remelted. In recent years, initially in
this country and subsequently abroad as well, there was noted a clearly-
marked trend toward employment of EShP in the production of relatively inex-
pensive medium- and low-alloy, and sometimes common carbon steel. EShP has
come into large-scale production, although of course even 10 or 20 years hence
electroslag steel will scarcely comprise more than 1—2 percent of the world's

total metal production.

We know that party and government decisions call for rapid development of
electroslag technology (remelting and casting) in our country. No matter how
rapidly this branch develops, however, it is highly unlikely that in the
foreaable future it will fully satisfy the swiftly growing needs of the economy
for electroslag metal. This metal is not expensive, but at the present time

it is still in short supply. Therefore it should be employed only in those
instances where it is truly essential and produces considerable technical and
economic effect, that is, when electroslag metal is truly indispensable.
Electroslag metal should.be employed when it genuinely increases the durability,
reliability, and efficiency of a structural component or product. It hardly
makes sense, for example, to make engine cylinder liners of EShP metal when
total engine life is determined not by the service life of this liner but
rather the efficiency and life of the crankshaft or the tune to failure of
other engine components. It hardly makes sense to make the rolling contacts
of bearings of electroslag metal if the rings are made of conventional-process
metal. Many such examples could be cited.

12
F08¢HﬂﬂKJAl.USE(MNEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When specifying electroslag metal to be utilized in a given structural com-
ponent, machine or in a given mechanism, designers, process engineers, and
production people should consider not only the performance characteristics of
this metal but also the economic advisability of such a decision. It is very
important here to take the end result into consideration. Frequently the em-
ployment of electroslag metal can and does lead to higher product cost, es-
pecially in those cases where the cost of the metal proper determines to a
significant degree the price of a product. An increase in the service life of
a product or improvement in its performance characteristics, however, caused
by employment of electrosleg metal can and in practice in fact does bring sub-
stantial benefits in the area of utilization of this product (machines.
mechanisms, structures). Only such a comprehensive appraisal of the ef-
fectiveness of employment of electroslag metal will enable us to utilize it
most intelligently in industry and construction.

The Communist Party and Soviet Government devote great attention to the prob-
lem of improving the quality of metal products and efficient utilization of
metal on the basis of adoption of little-waste technology. Electroslag re-
melting is one of the most efficient means of improving the quality of metal.
Other electroslag processes, such as heating, feed, and casting help solve the
problem of improving usable metal yield in metallurgical production, that is,
in the final analysis foster maximum efficient utilization of metal. Such
electroslag technology variants as casting into water-cooled molds, shaped
casting and centrifugal casting help solve the problem of reducing labor
expenditures in the metalworking industry, of relating metal losses in the form
of chips, trimmings, flash, etc.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan emphasis will be placed on intensive development
both of metallurgy and machine building, and on all-out improvement in the
quality characteristics of metal and its economical utilization. A thrifty
attitude toward metal and complete utilization of available reserve potential
and possibilities of achieving metal economies are the business of the entire
party and the entire people, stresses the CPSU Central Committee decree en-
titled "On the Performance of the Metallurgical, Machine Building and
Construction Ministries in the Area of Tmproving Quality of Metal Products and
Efficient Utilization of Metal on the 131s of Adoption of Little-Haste
Technology in Light of the Demands of the November (1979) CPSU Central Com-
mittee Plenum" (see the 8 June 1980 issue of the newspaper PRAVDA).

The many years of experience in the production and utilization of electroslag
metal attest to the great prospects for further development and improvement
of electroslag technology in the interests of our country's economy.

As electroslag metal production increases. the number of publications per-
taining to the quality and properties of this metal is growing both in this
country and abroad. Today we are familiar with many thousands of such
articles. nowhere in the world. however, has there yet been published a study
synthesizing the countless data pertaining to the physical, mechanical and
other properties of steels and alloys which have undergone EShP. This cir-
cumstance significantly hinders the task of achieving correct selection of
metal and intelligent utilization of its potential.

13
INIRIOFI1CJAI.IISE2(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This team of authors, from the Electric Helding Institute (IE8) imeni Ye. 0.
'Paton of the Ukrainian 558 Academy of Sciences and several other organiza-
tions which have taken part in writing this volume, was faced with the dif-
ficult task of critically interpreting and synthesizing a vast amount of in-
formational material, which is fairly conflictive.and sometimes insufficiently
.reliable. Nevertheless this has been accomplished, and we hope that this book
will be of use to the large community of specialists engaged in the production
and consumption of electroslag metal.

The authors decided to depart from the standard arrangement generally employed
in any book dealing with physical metallurgy or metalworking, that is, from
arrangement of the material according to types or classes of steels and
alloys. We adopted what we feel is a more suitable arrangement -- merchant
shapes, forgings and drop forgings, tubes, sheet and plate, castings, and
large-tonnage blanks. within each of these large divisions the material is
arranged according to the traditional scheme - from common and low-alloy
steels to complex and high-alloy steels and, finally, to alloys. The only
exception has been made for cast iron and nonferrous metals and alloys.

Inasmuch as the "Naukova dumka" Publishing House comparatively recently put out
a book entitled "Elektroshniovwepechi" [Electroslag Furnaces], equipment for
ﬁsh? and EShL is treated very briefly in this volume At the same time con-
siderable attention has been devoted for the first time to the general
mechanisms of influence of BShP on chemical composition, physical, mechanical,
and corrosion properties, as well as on such purely process characteristics as
deformability, workability, and weldability.

Chapter I was written by B. I. Medovar, G. A. Boyko and L. H. Stupak; Chapter
II —- G. A. Boyko, A. B. Kuslitskiy, Yu. G. Yemel'yanenko, and N. I. Pinchuk;
Chapter III -- L. H. Stupak, L. V. Chekotilo, B. I. Hedovar, and A. B.
Kuslitskiy; Chapter IV -- A. B. Kuslitskiy, S. A. Lebenzon (deceased), Yu. G.
Yemel'yanenko, and L. H. Stupak; Chapter V -- A. B. Kuslitskiy, S. A. Lebenzon,
A. K. Tsykulenko, L. V. Chekotilo, L. H. Stupak, I. I. Kumysh (deceased),

V. Ya. Sayenko, and V. L. Artamonov; Chapter VI -- V. A. Sayenko and A. C.
Bogachenko; Chapter VII -- G. A. Boyko; Chapter VIII -- A. K. Tsykulenko,

Yu. G. Yemel'yanenko, Yu. V. Latash, A. Ye. Voronin, and V. P. Andreyev;
Chapter IX —- L. H. Stupak and 1. Yu. Lyutyy; Chapter X -- 1. Yu. Lyutyy,

L. M. Stupak, and T. V. Novikova; Chapter XI -- B. I. Hedovar, I. N. Ivanov,
C. V. Bergauz, and A. H. Brechak.

It took more than 2 years from the time the manuscript was ready and the book
was published. During this time numerous new data have appeared in the Soviet
and foreign technical literature, dealing with the quality of metal materials
obtained by electroslag methods.

Of course the authors could not include this data in the text of this volume.
Nevertheless, seeking to assist the readers in gaining their bearings in the
large flow of new information, the authors of this volume felt that it was
necessary to provide at the end of each chapter a bibliography of the most im-
portant supplementary literature on electroslag metal published during the time
it took for this book to be published.

The authors would be grateful for critical comments which they can utilize in
the future.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 1981

3024
cso: 1862/112 1‘

' )R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFF1CJAI.lEﬂE(MNLY

MISCELLANEOUS

UDC: (669.27+542.65):66.021.3l
FLUORIDE PROCESS FOR PRODUCING TUNGSTEN

hoscow FTORIDNYY PROTSESS POLUCBBNIYA VOL'FRAMA: FlZIKO-KHIMICHESKIYB OSNOVY,
SVOYSTVA METALLA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 29 Sep 81) pp 2-4, 259-260

(Annotation, table of contents and introduction from book "Fluoride Process
of Obtaining Tungsten: Physicochemicel Principles, Properties of the Metal",
by A. I. Ixasovskiy, R. K. Chushko, V. R. Tregulov and 0. A. Balakhovakiy,
edited by Academician V. I. Spitsyn, lzdatel'stvo ”Nauka", 750 copies, 261

pages]

[Text] This monograph presents the physicochemical principles of the process
of reduction of tungsten hexsfluoride by hydrogen and the properties of the
obtained tungsten, and examines the physicochamical mechanisms of deposition
of alloys of tungsten with rhenium and tungsten carbides.

0n the basis of the authors' data, citing the results of studies by other
investigators, the authors examine in detail the thermodynamics of the process,
its kinetics and crystallization features.

The authors present in sufficient detail the physical and chemical properties
of tungsten fluoride as well as the properties of H-Re alloys and tungsten
carbides.

This volume is intended for scientific workers. engineers, process engineers,
and faculty members of higher educational institutions specializing in the
field of gas-phase crystallization of metals.

Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter 1. Tungsten ................................................... 5
Physicochemical Properties of Tungsten ................................. 5

Interaction With Elements of the Periodic System .................... 13
Interaction with Chemical Compounds ................................. l7
Obtaining Metallic Tungsten from Tungsten Articles ..................... 18

Chapter 2. Physicochemical Properties of Fluoride Compounds of Tungsten 28

15
ll!!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂl§(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFTCIAL.USE¢NVLY

Fluorides 0....I00....0.0.000...OIOOOOOOUOOOIOOOOIIOOODOIIIOOOIOIICIO.
Tungsten Oxyfluorides ................................................

Methods of Obtaining Tungsten ﬂexafluoride ...........................
Impurities in Tungsten nexafluorids ..................................

Chapter 3. Physicochamical Principles of the Process of Reduction of
Tungsten Hexsfluoride by Hydrogen ........................

Thermodynamic Fundamentals of the Process .L..........................
Kinetics of Deposition of Tungsten Fluoride ..........................

Chapter A. Crystallization of Tungsten Fluoride ....................

General Analysis of the Process of Crystallization ...................
Initial Stage of Crystallation .......................................
Grain Texture of Tungsten Fluoride ...................................
Microstructure of Tungsten Fluoride ..................................
Fine Structure of Tungsten Fluoride ..................................
Mechanism of Crystallization of Tungsten Fluoride ....................

Chapter 5. Cohesion of Tungsten Coatings With Various Substrates ....
chapter 6. Physicocheaicsl Properties of Tungsten Fluoride ..........

Purity of Tungsten Fluoride ..........................................
Corrosion and Erosion Properties of Tungsten Fluoride ................
Diffusion Interaction of Tungsten Fluoride Hith Nuclear Fuel and
Refractory Metals .................................................
Permeability of Hydrogen and Nitrogen Through Tungsten Fluoride ......
Enission Properties of Tungsten Fluoride .............................

Chapter 7. Physical-Mechanical Properties of Tungsten Fluoride ......

mtdness saossoasssssssasassoaososssassassassssaosssssasssssassaaasass

Density ssossoassassssassssosssssassee.saassasossassssssssssssssassoss

Recrystallation and Recovery of Properties ...........................
Temperature Dependence of Mechanical Properties ......................
Plastic Deformation ..................................................

Mechanical Properties of Deformed Tungsten Fluoride ..................
Recovery of Properties of Deformed Tungsten Fluoride .................

Chapter 8. Equip-eat for Producing Coatings, Articles and Seni-
msnufactures of Tungsten Fluoride ........................

Chapter 9. Physicocheaical Principles of Obtaining Tungsten-Rhenium
Alloys of Fluorides and Their Properties """"""""ﬁ

Physicochemical Properties of Rheniun Fluorides ......................
Process Thermodynamics ...............................................
Kinetics of Deposition of H-Re Alloys ................................
Kinetics of Deposition of Rheniun in w-Re Alloys .....................

16
IN]! 0i!1(1A|.lﬂ§EiﬂlVLY
l1)R*0F1ﬂC]Al.lh§E1(NHLY

Kinetics of Deposition of Tungsten in H-Re Alloys ..................... 198
Structure and Mechanical Properties of Alloys ......................... 203

Chapter 10. Synthesis of Tungsten Carbides ........................... 219

Obtaining Coatings .................................................... 219
Obtaining Tungsten Carbide Powders .................................... 229

Conclusion .............................:.............................. 232

Bibliography IOQOCOCOCCOOUICICCOOOOOOOOOO0.0000DOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOCCOOCOO 2“

INTRODUCTION

The swift pace of development of various fields of new technology demands that
we seek and find new technological processes of obtaining coatings and
structural materials capable of operating at high temperatures in active cor-
rosive and erosive environments. Among metals which in many cases meet these
demands, a privileged position is occupied by tungsten as the most refractory
metal, which well withstands variable high-temperature loads and which re-
tains sufficiently high mechanical properties at high temperatures. Another
valuable attribute of tungsten is its electroemissive properties.

Until recently the technology of producing tungsten articles was based solely
on the widely known metal ceramic method.

Methods of plasma deposition, electric arc melting and electron beam melting
are presently being developed. The list of industrial methods of applying
tungsten coatings is even shorter. Methods of applying coatings by
electrolysis of molten tungsten salts, which have been under development for
many years, have failed to produce the desired results, because of high tem-
peratures of the melts on the one hand and their aggressive action on the
coated surfaces on the other. Application of tungsten coatings by methods of
vaporization by electron beam in vacuum chambers or by cathode vaporized
coating produces good results in many cases, but difficulties which arise
when coating large articles of couples configuration considerably narrow the
field of application of these methods.

Methods of deposition of tungsten from vapor-gas phases have recently begun
developing at a rapid pace. As has been demonstrated by the experiments of

a large number of investigators. employment of these methods makes it pos-
sible, with a comparatively simple process, to obtain both high-quality
tungsten coatings and tungsten-coated articles. For this reason there has now
unsen an urgent need to synthesize material on industrial processes of obtain-
ing tungsten and certain of its alloys by the method of deposition from
vapor-gas phase. This is particularly essential because the most promising
method of depositing tungsten by reduction of tungsten hexafluoride by hydrogen,
which has already produced important practical results and which was first
initiated by the authors of this monograph under the direction of Academician
V. I. Spitsyn and Professor Yu. N. Golovanov, has been discussed very

little in the literature.

17
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal aim of this monograph is to acquaint the broad co-unity of
researchers and people in industry working with processes of deposition of
metals and metal compounds from vapor-gas phase with new results in obtaining
coatings and articles of tungsten and with deposition from a mixture of
hexafluoride and hydrogen, and its properties. The naterial on deposition of
tungsten from other volatile tungsten cospounds is presented more concisely

and is necessary for a full understanding of the advantages and drawbacks of a
given method. The description of deposition of a H-Re alloy and tungsten
carbide is justified both by its newness and by a canon initial raw material -
tungsten hexafluoride.

The book consists of 10 chapters. Chapters 1 and 2 synthesize data in the
literature on the properties and methods of obtaining tungsten and tungsten
fluorides.

chapters 3 and lo examine the physicochemical (thermodynamics, kinetics) and
crystallization (structure, grain texture, initial stages of nucleation)
aspects of the process of reduction of tungsten hmfluoride by hydrogen and
the mechanism of crystallization.

Chapters 5-7 present the physicochemical and physical-mechanical properties of
tungsten fluoride, which are of importance for practical utilization of
tungsten fluoride.

chapter 8 deals with the equipment employed in the fluoride process of obtain-
ing tungsten. Chapters 9 and 10 examine the physicochemicsl principles of
obtaining H-Ke alloys and tungsten carbides, which in turn demonstrates the
broad possibilities of the fluoride process for obtaining not only metals but

also for synthesizing metal cowounds.

In a number of instances this volume presents differing opinions of various
investigators on the substance of the fluoride process of obtaining tungsten.
This is due to the newness of the presented material and the authors' desire
to present the readers with the opportunity critically to analyze existing
ideas on the mechanism of the process of hydrogen reduction of tungsten hexa-
fluoride.

Individual chapters of this volume have been written by the following authors:
chapters 1-3 -- A. I. Krasovskiy and V. R. Tregulov; Chapter lo -- K. K. Chuzhko;
chapters 5 and 6 - A. I. Krasovskiy and V. K. ‘l‘regulov; chapters 7, 8 -- 0. A.
Balakhovskiy; chapters 9, 10 -- A. I. Kraeovskiy and K. K. Chuzhko.

The authors will be grateful to the readers for comments and suggestions per-
taining to the presented material and would like to give thanks to their
collegues who took part in work on the individual items discussed in this
volume: I. V. Kirillov, Yu. N. Tokayev, I. L. Sinani, V. P. Kuz'min, Yu. V.
Lakhotkin, H. A. Khusainov, 2. G. Kendeleyev, as well as the following persons,
who were very helpful in preparing the manuscript: Ye. F. Sorokin, T. V.
Rubkin, ‘l‘. K. Titov, 1‘. K. Haksimov, and M. V. Halandin.

A. l. Krasovskiy
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1981

3026
C80: 1862/100

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000: 620.22

SCIENTIFIC HINDAHENTAIS OF MATERIALS scrmcs

Moscow NADCHNYYB OSMOVY MATERIALOVBDENITA in Russian (signed to press 30 Oct 81)
pp 2-1., 252-253

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents from book "Scientific Fundamentals
of Materials Science", edited by USSR Academy of Sciences Corresponding Member
Ch. V. Kopetskiy, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1000 copies, 256 pages]

[Text] This volume deals with the scientific principles of materials science.
The articles present a picture of the various areas of materials science and 0f
the research being conducted in these areas. The articles are written by
leading experts in various areas of materials science. They examine general
problem of materials science, its development prospects, and advances in
investigation of the properties of various materials. '

This volume is intended for a broad group of investigators in various areas of
materials science, faculty and graduate students at physics and technical
higher educational institutions, as well as engineers working in plant labora-
tories.

TABLE OF CONTENTS Page
Foreword 3
I. General Problans of Materials Science. Development Prospects S
M. M. Shul'ts. Contemporary State of Physicochemical Principles of
Obtaining Silicate Materials 5
s. '1‘. Mileyko. Prospects of Heat-Resisting Composites 12
I. D. Tykachinskiy. State and Prospects of Research and Development
of Classes and Sitalls 19

D. S. Rutman, Yu. S.Toropov, Yu. N. Polezhayev, N. M. Permikina, and
S. Yu. Pliner. Direction of Development of the Chemistry and

Technology of Highly Refractory Oxide Materials 27
A. G. Romashin. Radiotrsneparent Materials 39
I. N. Prentsevich. Hays of Studying the Electron Energy Spectrum
and Phase Transition in Refractory Substances 66
S. M. Brelthovsltikh. Scientific Principles of the Taxonomy of
Materials 63
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. Investigation of the Properties of Materials

V. P. Pukh. The Nature of Strength and Prospects for Obtaining High-
Strength Class

V. In. Aristov, Ch. V. Kopetskiy, and I... S. Shvindlerman. Movement
of Large-Angle Inclination Boundaries in Aluaimnn

B. s. Bokshteyn and L. S. Shvindlernan. Effect of Internal Adsorption
in Solids

Ye. M. Savitskiy, K. B. Povarova, P. V. Makarov, and Ye. K. Zavarzina.
Phase Corposition. Structure and Properties of Vacuum-Melted Alloys
H-C-Meur, Hf, Nb, Ta, Re)

A. P. Mokrov and P. M. Zakharov. Diffusion in Multiconstituent Sys-
tens

G. A. Senenov. A. M. Belov, Ye. R. Nikolayev, and K. Ye. Prantseva.
Prospects of Mass-Spectronetric Investigations of the Processes
of Vaporization of ﬂeet-Resisting Oxide Materials

1'. A. Anisimova, V. V. Dem'yanov, Ya. I". Ushatkin, Ye. Ye. Chigryay,
Ye. I. Suzdal'tsev, L. P. Ivanova, A. D. Buravov, and A. G.
Romashin. Frequency Absorption Spectra of Sons Ceramic Materials
in the Superhigh-Frequency and Subnillineter Bands

6. B. Manelis, A. V. Bayevsltiy, L. G. Shcherbakova, and L. P.
Lyashenko. Dislocation Mechanism of Chemical Transformations in
Solid Phase

III. Methods of Creating Materials

A. G. Merzhmov, I. P. Borovinskaya, V. I. Yukhvid, and V. I. Ratnikov.
New Methods of (btaining nigh-Taperature Materials Based on Con- -
bustion

V. Ye. Ivanov [deceased], V. M. Amnenko, and A. s. Tron'. Creation
of Laainated Materials Based on Refractory Metals

M. S. Aslanova. Reinforcing Glass Fibers

K. A. Andriyanov, A. G. Ronashin, V. P. Sokolov, V. P. Paranosenkov.
M. A. Sipyagins, and Ye. I. Voronina. Scientific Principles of
Creating Polyceralic Materials

B. I. Pokrovskiy. Monitoring, bbdeling and Controlling Ceramic
Manufacturing Processes Mloying Computers

M. M. Sychev and L. B. Svatovskaya. Obtaining High-Temperature
Corrosion-Resistant and Heat Resistant Composite Materials by
Condensation of Inorganic Bonding Agents

FOREWORD

As recently as 30-40 years ago the term "materialovedeniye" [materials
science] for all practical purposes neant "netallovedeniye" [physical

76

76
84

115

136

151

167

173

178
193

193

207
209

220

228

239

mtallurgy]. And although t h is voluae does not touch upon even half the
problems and questions pertaining to the scientific principles of materials
science, nevertheless it does give a certain picture of the main features of

development of this science.

20
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJAl.USE(NVLY

First of all, this development is unusually dynamic. The most diversified
materials and netnods of obtaining and processing them are becoming an ob-
ject of investigation. And this diversity is resulting in new materials and
technologies, the growth of which, just through possible combinations. should
take place in a geometric progression.

Secondly, a physical, quantitative approach to the problem. This distinguishes
modern materials science from the descriptive physical metallurgy of the 1930's
and 1940's.

Thirdly, employment of modern and ultramodsrn methods of investigation, the
resolving power of which is today at the atomic level.

Fourth, materials science today is a proving ground where the latest ideas and
advances in mathematics and computer technology, physics (particularly solid-
state physics), physical chemistry, chemistry, and a great many other fields
of knowledge are tested and incorporated. If it is correct to state that one
can expect the most unusual discoveries at the point of juncture between sci-
ences, it is applicable in full measure to materials science. One should mere-
ly consider the fact that the continuous stream of new materials with an amaz-
ing combination of what would seem to benutually exclusive properties (high-
strength and heat-resisting alloys, amorphous metals, hard alloys, cam—
posites, high-strength ceranics, superconducting materials) and methods of
producing and processing them (high-vacuum and zone melting, numerous types of
crystallization, quenching at cooling rates of millions of degrees per second,
rolling in a vacuum, internal oxidation and nitriding, combustion and ex"
plosion, combined heat treatment and mechanical working) has dulled our
ability to be amazed. And finally, we must particularly note that the
successes of modern materials science are to a significant degree due to
development of theory of imperfections in solids. Sequential enthusiastic
interest in vacancies, dislocations and, today, grain boundaries and phase
interfaces has made it possible to concentrate considerable scientific man-
power on theory of imperfections. The picture of an actual crystal has become
considerably more complex, but this does not move us further from the truth
but rather brings us closer to it.

This volume contains articles by leading experts on nunerous aspects of
physical materials science. Considerable attention has been devoted to the
development prospects of materials science of metallic, composite, and
ceramic materials, new methods of producing and studying them, results of ex-
perimental study and theory of imperfections in uolids. This volume contains
papers presented at the 16th Session of "Scientific Principles of Materials
Science," dedicated to the 60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist
Revolution, organized by the Scientific Council on the Problem "Physico-
chemical Principles of Obtaining New Heat-Resisting Inorganic Materials" and
the USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of Solid-State Physics in Chernogolovka
on lk-lb June 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

3024
C50: 1842/124

21
FOR‘OIIWCIAI.U851NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 669.018.6-156
INTERACTION 0P muss METAL WITH CARBON MATERIALS

Moscow VZAIMDEYSTVIYE MBTALLICMBSKIKH RASPLAVOV S UGLERODNYMI MATERIALAMI in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 26 May 81) pp 2-4, 183

(Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book "Interaction Between
Metal Melts and Carbon Materials", by Valeriy Ivanovich Kostikov and Anatoliy
Nikolayevich Varenkov, Izdatel'atvo "Metallurgiya". 1150 copies, 186 pages]

[Text] This volume presents nodern concepts of the processes of interaction
between carbon materials and nolten netals. The authors examine the influence
of carbon on density, viscosity, surface tension and other properties of
liquid netals. They present the fundamentals of theory and results of ex-
perimental investigation of the properties of netsl nelts. They present at

" conteqorary scientific level theory of wetting and flow, as well as factors
influencing the wettability and spread of molten natal on the flat surface of
carbon nateriuls. The authors present experimental data on wetting and spread
of nolten metals on carbon naterials. They exsnine the kinetics and
mechanisms of the processes of interaction of carbon with molten natal.

This volume is intended for personnel of scientific research institutes and
industrial enterprises. It may also be useful to graduate students and
undergraduates specializing in the area of physicochenical investigations of
metallurgical processes and obtaining heterogeneous materials.

Table of Contents Page
Introduction 3
Chapter I. Structure and Properties of Carbon Graphite Materials 5
1. Structure of Carbon Materials. Description of Ideal Structures
of Graphite 6
2. Three-Dimensional Structure of Graphite 9
3. leperfection Structure of Actual Graphite Structures 11
lo. Carbon-Containing Materials, Their Technology and Properties 13
Chapter II. Influence of Carbon on the Structure and Physicochenical
Properties of Molten Metals 21
1. Structure and Physicochemical Properties of Molten Metals 21
22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Density of Molten Metals 27
3. Methods of Determining Density of Molten Metals 29
lo. Effect of Carbon on Density of lblten Metals 35
S. Viscosity of Molten Metals 61
6. Methods of Determining Viscosity of Molten Metals 46
7. Viscosity of Molten Metals and Alloys Based on Molten Metals 53
8. Effect of Carbon on the Viscosity of Liquid Titaniun and
Zirconiu 60
9. Surface Tension of Molten Metals 63
10. Methods of Determining the Surface Tension of Melts 73
11. Effect of Carbon on the Surface Tension of Melts 80
12. Diffusion of Impurity Atoms and Injection Atoms in Liquid Metals 86
13. Carbonization of Molten Metals 89

14. Effect of Carbon on the Melting Point of Some Refractory Metals 98

Chapter 111. Contact Interaction in aCarbon Material-Liquid Metal Systen 105

1. Basic Terms and Definitions of Vetting 105
2. Spread of Liquid Metals Along the Surface of Carbon Materials 117
3. Impregnation of Porous Carbon Materials with Liquid Metals 129
lo. Equipment Employed to Determine Contact Angles of wetting of the

Surface of Carbon Materials by Liquid Metals 135
5. wetting and Flow of Liquid Metals on the Surface of Carbon

Materials 1105
6. Wetting of Graphite Hith Liquid Metals which be Not Form Com-

pounds With Carbon MS
7. Wetting of Graphite by Carbide-Forming Transition Metals of

Groups IV-VI 1106
8. wetting of Graphite by Liquid Metals Containing Carbide-Forming

Elements 150
9. wetting of Graphite by Titanium-Containing Alloys 153
10. Impregnation of Carbon Materials by Molten Metals 160

Bibliography 179
IMTRODUCTION

The last decade has been characterized by considerable intensification of sci-
entific research in the area of development of heterogeneous materials. Such'
materials. which consist of comonents differing in composition and properties,
possess elevated strength, hardness, unit strength, as well as a number of
special properties which enable us to view them as among the most promising

in the development of various structures.

In developing netal-base heterogeneous materials containing carbon material as
one of the constituents, great significance is attached to the physicochenical
processes taking place at the interface between the various constituents of
these materials. ‘lhe most intensive course of such processes is observed under
the condition where liquid metals and metal-base salts, which wet the solid
surfaces of reinforcing materials,are employed as matrix material.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FVHICHHWCJAI.USE(NVLY

with incorrect conduct of manufacturing processes aimed at obtaining hetero-
geneous materials, certain constituents of the composite, which are in contact
with the liquid metal, may partially or completely dissolve in the metal salt.
thus reducing the level of properties of the heterogeneous materials.

Therefore employment of a liquid-phase process for producing heterogeneous
materials requires knowledge of a number of physicochemical characteristics,
as well as the structure and constitution of carbon materials and liquid
metals. Such information is essential for studying and understanding the
processes which take place at the phase interface between constituents of
heterogeneous materials in the process of their manufacture.

Practical experience shows that in order to obtain high-quality metal-base
heterogeneous materials with a carbon filler it is essential to have process
conditions which provide the possibility of occurrence on the phase interface

of processes accompanied by insignificant dissolving of carbon materials in

the liquid metal. The occurrence of such reactions, however, should not be
accompanied by loss of the properties of the carbon filler. Therefore essential
for a directed process is a quantitative estimate of the interaction between

the carbon material and liquid metal, which in large measure is determined

by the physicochemical properties, structure and constitution of the solid and
liquid materials in contact.

This book reflects the results of the research conducted by the authors, and
basic concepts on the structure and constitution of carbon materials and
liquid metals are presented at a contemporary scientific level. The authors
examine general questions pertaining to capillary and contact phenomena at
phase interfaces. Experimental data are presented on the processes of inter-
action between liquid metals and carbon material.

The authors wOuld like to express their deep gratitude to Doctor of Technical
Sciences Yu. V. Naydich, corresponding member of the UkSSR Academy of Sciences,
for reviewing the manuscript.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Metallurgiya", 1981

3024
C50: 1842/125 END

24
INJR‘OFIICIAI.lEﬂE(MVLY